v«<MWITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEWith a Feather on My NosebyBILLIE BURKEWith Cameron ShippAppleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.New YorkCopyright. 1949. byBILLIE BURKE and CAMERON SHIPPAll rights reserved. This book, or partsthereof, must not be reproduced in anyform without permission of the publisher.Copyright. 194S. by Crowell- Collier Publishing Co.PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICATo PatriciaandGeorge Cukor.CONTENTSCHAPTER1 The Clown's Daughter2 Mother Was Ambitious3 The Canoe Song45Sir Charles HawtreyGad! Said Uncle JackC. F.67 Buttons and Bows8 All That Glitters9 Caruso—Barrdz—Maugham10 The Man at the Foot of the StairsPrelude to Fantasia1112 The Golden Helmet13 The First Year14 Menagerle15Follies of 191816 High Stakes17 The Crash18 Good Night, Sweet Prince19 And Now . .AppendixIndexpage114263448576883101114134146161177194207220238247261269ILLUSTRATIONSfacing pageBilly Burke, from a painting by Benton ScottBlanche Beatty BurkeFlorenz Ziegfeld, Jr. and SandowSir Charles Hawtrey and Billie Burke in Mr.GeorgeEarly motoring days in Regent's Park, LondonIn Mrs. Ponderburys PastCharles FrohmanWith John Drew in My WifeMark TwainSomerset Maugham, from a painting by GeraldKelly, R.A.Portrait of Miss Burke by S. de IvanowskiIn Noel Coward's The MarquiseIn The Young in Heart, with Roland Young,Janet Gaynor and Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.With Will Rogers in The TorchbearersBroadcasting with John Barrymore and RudyValleeThe Ziegfelds at Burkely Crest, 1923Patricia, with her children20212152538485116117148149180181212213244245WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE1. THE CLOWN'S DAUGHTERcould hear John Drew harrumphing through hisIdressing-room door at the Empire Theater, givingforth with those highly bred horsy noises which theDrew-Barrvmore clan have so aristocratically madetheir own hallmark.I stood outside, in my new leghorn hat with thelilacs on it, with my hair fluffed out behind, and mylittle lilac checked dress. With me was my newfriend, Mr. Drew's niece Ethel Barrymore, who hadbeen sent to soothe the great man over the embar-rassment of meeting a new leading lady with theimpossible—absolutely unheard-of!—name of BillieBurke.I have always been called Billie Burke, except forthose eighteen improbable, glittering years when Iwas also Mrs. Florenz Ziegfeld, Jr. I find it a per-fectly adequate name. It's an especially nice namefor the skitter-witted ladies I play on the screen to-day, and it suits me too because I might as wellconfess here and now that I am not always sanerthan I seem.We could hear Mr. Drew through the dressing-room door, as I was saying, and among his mutter-ings was the complaint that Charles Frohman woulddo anytxiing so dreadful, absurd, and outrageous to12WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEhim as give him a new leading lady named BillieBurke. A chorus girl name. Bound to be a bouncingBritish blonde with buck teeth.Ethel grinned at me and I grinned back, uncon-cerned. Why, it didn't mean a thing. I was onlytwenty-one. I had come over from London to playa season in the provinces. I was fluffing my hair andpreparing a theatrical smile for Mr. Drew whenEthel suddenly threw open the door."Uncle Jack," she said in that wonderful throatyvoice of hers, "Uncle Jack, here is the little girl youare afraid of!"Uncle Jack turned and fixed me with his famousglare. I believe it is a fact that the Drews and theBarrymores were born with built-in glares and soundeffects, which they can switch on and off, like theSignal Corps. Mr. Drew glared. Then he opened hiseyes wide. He said, "Why, come here, my dear child."And that was that, and that was how I started beingan actress in New York.I thought I had better explain about my name inthe beginning because so many persons have askedme how I got it. Let me introduce myself properly:my whole name is Mary William Ethelbert AppletonBurke, I was born a few years ago, I have been anactress for quite a while, since Edward VII wasKing of England, and how do you do?I acquired my full name, which certainly soundsas if it ought to wear a lorgnette, through a bit ofecclesiastical connivance with a British curate whenI was twelve years old. This was the Rev. SamuelTHE CLOWNS DAUGHTER6Kirshbaum, rector of St. Margaret's, WestminsterAbbey. He was a kind man and also a dazzlinglyhandsome man so naturally I wanted to please him.I told him the story of my father, who was a clownwith Barnum & Bailey's circus. His name was BillyBurke.Billy Burke was a handsome clown. I am temptedto say a "pretty" clown, because he had a round,open, generous face with sparkling blue eyes, alwaysshining, and beautiful bright red hair. He did notwear tramp clothes or make himself up to look ridic-ulous. Instead, he was impeccably costumed in whitewith a gorgeous white ruff around his neck, a chalk-white face, and a widely smiling pink mouth. BillyBurke was a singing clown. He sang in a strong, highbaritone such songs as "Brannigan's Band," "Dancewith the Girl with the Hole in Her Stocking," "PaddyDuffy's Cart," and "Clara Nolan's Ball," and when hesang the trapeze artists sat carefully listening ontheir wires, the roustabouts gathered around thering, and the brass band muted its harsh blare. Andoh! how the girls listened to that man sing! He hadthe same effect that Sinatra and Bing Crosby haveon the impressionable female today, and he was everso much prettier.My father was born in Knox County, Ohio, in 1844.When the first Burkes came to America I am notsure, but I gathered from Billy—who always livedexuberantly in the present and seldom discussed thepast—that they came over from Ireland very early.I am certain they were not wealthy, and until my4WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEfather came along, I doubt if they were distinguished.Billy Burke first set out to be a chemist. I do notsuppose he got very far with his scientific career forI find by consulting the records that he enlisted inthe Union Army on August 11, 1862, as a drummer.He was eighteen years old at that time.I also find that he fought in the Battle of Chicka-saw Bayou, but although I bedeviled him as a childwith that classic demand: "Tell me about when youwere a boy, Daddy/' he seldom mentioned the CivilWar, and he told me no stories about it. Possibly hedisapproved of it. Possibly he wished to avoid of-fending my mother, whose people fought on theConfederate side. But more than likely Billy skippedthe whole thing because he could not remember any-thing amusing about a war. He was discharged in St.Louis on April 4, 1863, on a surgeon's certificate ofdisability, but as to that I know nothing at all. Henever sat around like an old soldier predicting theweather by aches in his wounds.At any rate, I do know that the study of chem-istry palled on my father, and that his extrovertnature responded to the bravura of being a drummerboy. As a little girl, I used to imagine him bravelyleading the Boys in Blue into battle, sounding a com-mand to "Charge!" on orders from General Granthimself, and I always imagined him being killed inaction, still bravely thumping his drum. How hecould have perished almost thirty years before I wasborn was a question I never examined closely.Billy Burke's hero was not a soldier but a clownTHE CLOWNS DAUGHTER5named Dan Rice, who died at about the turn of thecentury, a derelict. Dan Rice was the most cele-brated circus entertainer of his day. Probably he wasthe greatest clown that ever lived. He was accus-tomed to making, or losing, more than $100,000 ayear as a circus owner, and as a performer his salarywas $35,000. He started as a jockey, became a profes-sional strong man, and wound up as a clown, aShakespearian jester who would exchange witticismswith the audience and answer any questions withapt quotations from the Old Bard of Avon.Dan Rice undoubtedly made an enormous impres-sion on my father. To some extent, he modeled hisclowning after him, and the habit of quoting Shake-speare followed him all his life. I doubt if Billy Burkeever excused himself to run down to the tobaccoshop without avaunting in Elizabethan terms. OnceI heard him astonish a real-estate man with a noblerecitation from Julius Caesar, Act III, beginning "Seewhat a rent the envious Casca made," and on anotheroccasion, when my express wagon overturned as hepulled me down a London side street, the neighbor-hood was treated to:"O! what a fall there, was, my countrymen;Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us."It is quite possible that Charles Chaplin and otherscan quote a few lines from the classics, but I suggestas an understatement that few of our entertainerstoday are either pundits or poets.6WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEThere were some special clowns in my father'sday, and I want to say a word about them. I do notmean the ordinary, run-of-the-circus Joey, the red-nosed, pantalooned tramps who scamper around thering as a stopgap between numbers. In the seventiesand the eighties and, indeed, for some time afterthat, clowns were the aristocrats of the circus. Andthe creme de la creme of the clowns were the singingclowns, the talented artists like Tony Pastor, AlMiaco, and Billy Burke.Circuses in those days were one-ring circuses, notthe vast affairs we know now, and audiences undercanvas never surpassed four thousand persons. Thusthere was an opportunity for wit and pantomime tohave full play, and Billy Burke's voice, which wasclear and big, could fill the entire tent and then some.Clowns, I have heard, owe their origin to thereligious plays of the Fourteenth Century when rov-ing troupes of players, like the famous Lupinos, IdaLupino's direct ancestors, used to travel Europe; theclowns of today spring from the Devils in thoseplays. At least, that is what Billy Burke thought, al-though more precise historians may trace the an-cestry of clowns much farther back than that.I suppose it is only because circuses have becomeso large that the great pantomimists and singingclowns are no more; but even so their traditionsremain. A beginning clown is still a "First of May,"and becomes a "Johnny Come Lately" in his secondyear. If he hopes for a permanent place in theTHE CLOWNS DAUGHTERhierarchy, he must eventually become a ProducingClown, with his own props and scenery.When I was a big girl of thirteen or fourteen, troup-ing with my parents through Europe, the clown thatimpressed me the most was a truly astonishing gentle-man with the Babusios troupe who could make watersquirt six feet high from his skull. In Moscow, whereBilly Burke took his act to play in an enormous park,the great clown was Durow, who was with the StateCircus and whose acid remarks from the ring wereso effective that he could actually drive office holdersfrom the government. Perhaps they need a ComradeDurow in Moscow today. I wonder what became ofhim.And what became of William Olschansky, whojested in eleven languages, or of a japester namedSherwood? This Sherwood once pranced across thering in all his paint and foolishness, made a low andcomic bow, and reached up graciously to permitQueen Victoria to shake his hand. P. T. Barnum wasnear apoplexy, but Victoria was amused and had toretire to control her laughter.Billy Burke was one of these international clownswho could play in any country in any language. Sofar as I know, he never bothered his head at anytime in his life to study German, French, or Spanishor Italian, but on stage he seemed perfectly at homein them. Perhaps like the late great Otis Skinner,who purported to speak all languages and actuallyspoke only English—but that magnificently—Billywas merely adept at making foreign noises. But the8WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEpeople seemed to understand clowns in any language.It was the custom to play Paris in the spring, Ger-many in the summer, Russia in the autumn, andLondon in the winter.Billy came to Pittsburgh with P. T. Barnum in1883 and sang his funny songs. I am told that hewas witty and clever with satirical pantomime. Allthe girls thought he was perfectly wonderful and hewas invited to many parties. One of the young wo-men who was smitten by Billy was a widow namedBlanche Hodkinson from New Orleans, who had fourchildren by her first marriage and who, as I remem-ber so well, had a very firm chin and inelastic willpower.She was a small person with a charming, lithebody, beautiful white skin, silky chestnut hair, greeneyes with straight, black eyebrows, and an unmistak-ably haughty mien. Indeed, she had a Look—animperious Look which matched her patrician face,and which was hers by every right of inheritance:Blanche came from a proud New Orleans family, theBeattys, who had great wealth before the Civil War.She was in her early forties at this time. Her chil-dren by her early first marriage were grown. Blanchewas working in the Treasury Department in Wash-ington and had come to Pittsburgh to visit friends.And so it was a surprise, this love affair betweenMrs. Hodkinson and the singing clown. I know littleabout their actual courtship except that they met ata party given for Mr. J. A. Bailey, P. T. Barnum'sTHE CLOWN'S DAUGHTER9partner; when the circus left town, Blanche was Mrs.Billy Burke.Marrying a clown was, of course, an astonishingidea both to the Hodkinsons and to the Beattys. Itwas a very long time before they cautiously acceptedhim into the family, and even then they invariablyaddressed him as "Mr. Burke."They went on tour with the circus, first to NewOrleans, where Billy was cooly "Mister Burked" bythe Beatty cousins and uncles, and then turned Eastwhere, in a few months, it became apparent that itwould not be wise for Blanche to continue travelingwith a circus.We still have the telegram Billy Burke, who wason tour, sent the day I was born. He wired to mymother: i don't care whether it's a boy or a girl,BUT DOES IT HAVE RED HADR?Mr. Bailey, who adored my father, was almost asexcited as his chief clown. He wired from New York:I WELL MAKE YOU A FTRM OFFER OF ONE MILLION DOL-LARS cash for the baby. One of my earliest memoriesis of Mr. Bailey's catching me up in his arms, ticklingmy nose with his great red beard, and calling me"Little Billie."During the next eight years we were in Wash-ington and New York, Mother and I, with BillyBurke traveling most of the time. We frequentlywent to Washington for long visits with my grand-mother, a most remarkable old lady, whose traditionswere far removed from sawdust and tanbark. Thiswas Mother's mother, Mrs. Cecelia Flood Beatty,10WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwho had been a great beauty in New Orleans, a ladywhose lively interest in the present never obscuredher appreciation for tradition. Grandmother Beattywas, at that, a considerable paradox.In the days before the war (always the WarBetween the States, if you please) when she was theyoung mistress of a great plantation, she had orderedher fine clothes, her writing paper, her perfumes, herlinens and her elegant gloves from France as a mat-ter of course. She maintained her box at the operaand lived in that atmosphere of ease and noblesseoblige peculiar to the Louisiana and Mississippi cot-ton planters, a gracious and feudal kind of culturewhich, I suppose, has never been precisely matchedanywhere else in this country.On Christmas day it was the habit of her husband'sbrother to send Mrs. Beatty a pair of matched slaveswith his greetings—and here's the paradox: Grand-mother always instantly manumitted them, set themfree, and immediately set about writing anothertorrent of letters to the press denouncing the wholeinstitution of slavery. She wrote both in prose andin verse and was one of the first supporters of Mrs.Harriet Beecher Stowe.In her old age, when I knew her briefly as a child,she was a bright and busy little woman who seemedto have read everything, who had an obsession forseeing that small girls pronounced the English lan-guage immaculately, and whose interest in publicaffairs was so intense that she would sit for longhours in the gallery of the Senate taking notes on theTHE CLOWNS DAUGHTER11debates of the day. She was also rather sarcastic.Once, when a convention of politicos came to Wash-ington, she arched her nose (never mind that; thereare people who can arch their noses ) and proclaimedthat "They came with one shirt and a dollar andnever changed either for two weeks/'Part of the time during this period, up to the timeI was eight years old, Billy Burke was touring thecountry with his own circus, a small affair, but thecrowds and the girls stayed away and the enterprisefolded. I remember vaguely that we had frugal daysin New York, that my father worked small-timeengagements, and then, with incorrigible optimism,organized a new troupe and headed for London. Iwas eight years old then.I recall that we sailed second class, not verygrandly, that it was bitterly cold, that I wore littlered mittens, and that for the entire voyage I wasmiserably seasick. I arrived in London a bedraggledmite, shivering, disgusted, and vastly disappointed bythe British; I had dreamed of Kings and Queens andPrincelings, of glitter and panoply, and instead, therewas merely the - chill smudge of Waterloo Stationand the crisp cackle of Cockney voices.But we were a Success. That is to say, Billy was.Of course, Mother was always a Success because shewas that kind of a woman. She was a managing type;everything she did and said was predicated on thehypothesis that, if arrangements were only left toher, everything would naturally turn out all right.Billy's entertainment was calledBilly BurkesWITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE12Barnum & Great London Circus Songsters. It wasbilled as "Containing a Collection of the Latest andBest Songs of the Day as Sung by America's GreatestClown with a Vast Collection Set to Music Expresslyfor this Work," but it did not last long. Billy was soonplaying the music halls, singing his songs. I think hedid pretty well, but he was never a star.It was during this period, when we had diggingson Kensington Road in one of those dreary Londonflats in which the landlady fetches your mutton on atray and your bath in a bucket, that I met the Rev.Mr. Kirshbaum at St. Margaret's. What with traipsingaround the United States after the circus and movingto London, my religious education had been ne-glected. I had not been baptized or even officiallynamed. I told the handsome curate that I wanted tobe named "Billie," for my famous father.There are so many things I like about the British.Most of all, I think, I admire their sense of humor. ABritisher will underplay you always, dead pan asa stage butler, but laughing inside all the time. TheRev. Mr. Kirshbaum, who must indeed have beenastonished already by the improbable child that Isurely was, with gilt-red hair swirling around myshoulders and my little piping voice, accepted meand my request blandly. I explained that I was afraidof going through life as "Ethelbert," or "Bertha," or"Thelbert," all of which I thought were absurd namesfor a red-headed child, and couldn't I please becalled "Billie" after my father?The Rev. Mr. Kirshbaum put his tongue in hisTHE CLOWN'S DAUGHTER13cheek and asked me for all the names in my family. Itold him. Then he said, "6ut won't you be named'Mary/ just for me?" Why, I was delighted, of course.I would have been named Gorgonzola, just for him.And that is how the name of Mary William EthelbertAppleton Burke is registered at Westminster Abbey,solemnly attested by the Bishop of London. I wishJohn Drew had known all that.2. MOTHER WAS AMBITIOUSIondon was cold and harsh in winter. Trying toj make your way through the fog was like pawingthrough hanging damp blankets. But ah! when Junecame, when the hedgerows were green in the sub-urbs, when the boys and girls punted on the Thames,when Piccadilly and Kensington Gardens blossomedwith flowers and nursemaids, and those frabjous, pink-cheeked, clear-eyed British girls! There is somethingabout fetching up a girl in a fog, scrubbing her in atin tub, and feeding her on mutton. It makes herbeautiful.We walked in Chelsea on Sundays, looking at thebig houses. I remember that Billy Burke said thatthis was the section of London where everybodylived and nobody was ever born. He said even thedogs barked with a British accent. I snubbed mynose on the windows of the smart shops in Mayfair,followed the lamplighters around as dusk fell, lis-tened nightly for the crashing peal of the great bellsof St. Paul's, where I was later confirmed. Therewere no planes overhead in those days to frightena London child, not even an automobile to run herdown.In the evenings sometimes, or on holidays, Billy14MOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS15Burke would take me on his knee in his great swivelchair and we would gyrate wildly around, singing"Paddy Duffy's Cart" at the tops of our voices. Hetold me endless stories, made little jokes, and mim-icked all the great figures of the day. I know nowthat I owe him a great deal. It was all fun andclowning, but unconsciously I was learning how tomake people laugh.I went to the Misses Baillie's School where Istruggled to pin my fanciful mind down to a littlelearning. In mathematics I was the dullard of theworld, totally bereft of the commercial viewpointwhich can figure out how to paper a room at somuch per yard. In music I did fairly well, but mymusic lessons were terrifying experiences. Our school-rooms were invariably as cold as dungeon cells. Tokeep warm, my teacher wore fingerless mittens. Butout of one of these mittens protruded an instrumentof torture, a cold, raw, red finger, long and bony,which she used as if it were a club to batten downmy small and trembling fingers whenever I hit awrong note. I played with one eye on the keyboardand one on the finger, which direly hovered overme, ready to smite.All of the rooms at that school were chilly. Also,we never seemed to have enough to eat. Often, wewould fill up with prunes and drink water to achievea satisfactory sense of fullness. I suppose, though,that we were as well off as most school children inGreat Britain. The English are not only long onfundamental book larnin' but dedicated to the propo-16WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEsition that the small character is better formed if itendures a certain amount of Spartan discomfort.Sometimes I went back stage on Friday nights tosee Father work with a comedy mule. It seems verycurious to me now, but I was never stage-struck.Not in the least. I was not even interested as a childin going to the theater. I was a shy, wistful sort ofmoppet who never in this world would have gotahead if it had not been for my mother.She decided that I was going to be an actress.Now, Mother had no theatrical background whatso-ever. She paid little attention to the circus or to thestage when Father was working. I showed abso-lutely no precocity or talent—except, perhaps, for atrick of mimicry which I inherited from my father.But this determined woman decided that I was go-ing to be a great actress. Or a great opera star. Ora famous dancer.It distressed Billy Burke. I remember that I hud-dled on the sofa, frightened and whimpering whilethey quarreled about whether I should become acelebrated actress or not."She doesn't want to, she hates it, she is shy andretiring, you will ruin her," Billy Burke argued. Butmy mother stuck out her firm, small chin and an-nounced firmly that I was going to become a star.She wasn't sure what kind. Apparently, it made smalldifference to her. As for my father's objections, shetreated him precisely as she always treated me—asa child.It occurs to me that someone ought to do a pieceMOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS17of scholarly research on the number of girls whohave become stage and movie stars because theirmothers pushed them. Often this is the result of abroken home, with an ambitious mother shoving adaughter into the career she herself always wanted.Even more often it is the cause of broken homes.But that is another story.Trying to inspire me, Mother dragged me to seeEllen Terry and Sir Henry Irving act in a great pro-duction of Robespierre. I was as apathetic as a cab-bage. And I dreaded the notion of getting up on astage and speaking a piece.Oh, some fantastic things have happened to me,some amusing things, glamorous things, happythings—mostly happy things. And some sad and tragicthings—very tragic things—but I might as well faceit. Even today I am the clinging vine type. I'm notan enterprising woman. I enjotj clinging.But to school I went, to learn how to act. I had asympathetic singing teacher, Madame Louise Daustede Fortis, who called me "an enchanting little per-son" and offered to finance half the expense if Motherwould send me to Italy to study for opera. But bythis time Mother wanted quicker action, so my grandopera career was tossed overboard. Possibly Motherhad a definite goal. If she did, she never divulged it.I studied elocution from Rosina Philippi, balletdancing from Professor D'Aubin, who finally dis-carded me because I never could get up on mytoes. He was very sweet and never made love to me.Yes, I began to experience that kind of thing18WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEearly. I suppose my mother saw it—that most menare impelled to reach for a red-headed girl if she isreasonably pretty, and shy to boot; and I supposeshe set about capitalizing this thing by turning myfeet toward the stage. I have no false modesty aboutit; a good many men have reached for me from timeto time. Some didn't when I hoped they would.At any rate, I crossed London by bus in thosedays to take my lessons, with dank, muddy straw upto my knees in the horse-drawn vehicles, bumpingalong sadly to learn how to be an actress. SometimesI went by cab when we were flush. The hansomcabs were wonderful, and the bus drivers were thecomedians of the world. They had their lap robes,flowers in their buttonholes, and held their whipslike scepters, condescending to the multitudes. I re-call one old fellow who often drove me. On one ofthe rare, sunny days when I could sit on top, heyelled an especially gay greeting to a confrere, loop-ing his long whip into a noose and waving it at him."Do it to cheer 'im up," he chortled, leering at me."You see th' noose? Is brother was 'anged the otherdye. Cheers 'im up, y'know." And he would grin athis friend and waggle the noose.My formal education, such as it was, was con-stantly interrupted by tours. We went to France,Germany, Austria, and Russia. Billy was quite suc-cessful, an elegant with a flower in his buttonhole,his merry blue eyes sparkling. The year we weremost prosperous he bought Mother a sealskin coatand himself his first Prince Albert and top hat—MOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS19which he wore with the careless eclat of one whohad been accustomed to them all his life.Mother, who managed both my father and me asif we were delinquents likely to drop a bomb orsquander the family fortune if we were not con-stantly supervised, made us travel with dozens ofwicker baskets, which were our luggage, for sheliked our own things around us whenever possible.As soon as we had registered at a continental hotel,Billy Burke and I fled as fast as possible. It was mymother's habit to tie a cloth around her head andscrub every piece of woodwork in our quarters, andshake and air out the elephant-sized puffs, dustingand cleaning our rooms with concentrated fervorbefore we were allowed to occupy them. She in-sisted upon good hotels for the sake of prestige, butwe got our own breakfast, often sallying forth at in-credible hours of the morning to reach the marketsearly to buy coeur de fromage, and little rolls whilethey were fresh and warm.I doubt if there is a museum in all Europe that Idid not doze in during my adolescence. I was draggedto all of them, and I stared with dull eyes at centuriesof history and of art. A Florentine tapestry was arug hung on a wall to me, a painting was nothingunless it told a story, and statuary always seemed soembarrassingly naked and cold.I would have you know, of course, that I am anextremely sensitive and artistic person today, but theplain truth is that in my childhood the great treasuresof Europe bored me to tears—as I suspect they bore20WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEmost children as they are dragged through museumswith their warm little fists in their parents' handsand their cold legs hurting.Often, I wandered about moldy cathedrals ornapped in a drafty corner while Billy Burke sketched.I am under the impression that he was quite goodwith quick charcoal drawings, but unfortunately hisclown's-eye views of Europe were not preserved.On one occasion when it was necessary for Fatherto travel all over Europe, Mother went with him andleft me for almost two years to continue my educa-tion in London. I stayed at the home of the BeattyKingstons. Mr. Kingston had been music critic ofthe London Times, and it was in this home that Ihad my first real introduction to British family life.There is a thing about the English that people ofno other nationality seem able to manage, and it isthis: the British set the most formal standards fortheir living but themselves are able to toss themaside and achieve a mixture of formality and laissezfaire which baffles and bewilders everybody else.Mrs. Kingston, who was a large, auburn-hairedlady, ran her household as if she were conducting asalon, and her butler was as distinguished as a majorgeneral on parade. But she sat regularly at table withan enormous fat pug dog under her arm, and thetwo daughters each had a dog, a French poodle anda little white scampering dog of some undistinguishedbreed, who also ate with us. At teatime, moment ofhigh ceremony in any British home, each dog wasserved a saucer of milk by the butler, who fetchedFaxonMy father. Billy Burke, in his clown costume, from a paintingby Benton Scottr^g>^CD -m% 5Z ^3^a <vMOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS21their refreshments with a high-nosed look of disgust,as if he smelled a sour apple.There was also in this menage a large parrot whichused to screech at the son of the house, who was anoversized grown man with a vast, blossomy redmustache: "Boysie! Boysie! Good morning, Boysie!"Whereupon Boysie would swear expertly at the birdand throw muffins at it.The Kingston house was enormous, with two pianosin the drawing room, one bearing a little silver plaqueannouncing that it had been played on by Liszt. Irecall that a lady with a magnificent silver voicecame often to sing for the Kingstons and their guests.I seem to have taken it as a matter of course that hername was Adelina Patti.At another time I lived for a long while at thehome of the Theodore Roussels, who were in someway related to Dickens. Mr. Roussel was a studentof Whistlers, and when I knew him, an artist ofgreat distinction. He was one of the pioneers in thetechnique of copperpoint, which was new at thattime. This family lived in a charming Adams housewhich had been designed for a king's mistress. It hadbeautiful gardens and a mysterious, shadowy studio,and the Roussels had beautiful afternoon partiesthere. They took me often to previews of picturesdestined for the annual shows at the Royal Academy.These were lively, gay affairs attended by peoplewho could paint pictures and people who could buythem.Through the Roussels I was introduced to many22WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEof the leading artists in London then, and more thana dozen of them painted pictures of me—chiefly be-cause of my red hair, which was abundant and hungto my waist. Sad to say, for me, none of those pic-tures so far as I know became famous and I do notknow today whatever became of them. Surely theremust be at least several very red-headed Billie Burkessomewhere in London today.My education, as I have been trying to indicate,was not always formal, but it was highly varied. Ihad a quick ear. Through my music lessons andthrough travel, I picked up French and spoke itglibly, as, indeed, did almost everyone else I knew.I did not learn the quantum theory or much aboutphysics, but so far that handicap has not alarmedme. And nowhere, to this day, have I encountereda better mind than my mother's.She introduced me to good books by reading tome when I was small. We had, of course, all ofDickens, Scott, and Thackeray, the standards of thatera; and Tennyson, Keats, Shelley and Byron by theyard. As for Shakespeare, we never needed to studyhim. There was never a day of my early life thatBilly Burke did not quote him, usually with gestures.My mother was a many-sided woman who, I amsure, might have accomplished a great deal on herown if it had not been nearly impossible for womento have careers in those days. Sometimes I think thatmothers who want their daughters to be actressesare merely carrying out a wish fulfillment, but in myMOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS23mother's instance I am not sure it was as simple asthat. I suspect that she pushed me toward the stagebecause she saw in it then the only possible oppor-tunity for a woman to distinguish herself.Possibly I have drawn a little too hard a pictureof her. She was firm but not domineering. She wasimperious at times—most of the time—but she wasgracious. And she was certainly romantic, else shecould not have run away with a clown. Also, she wasenormously fetched and delighted by British pompand ceremony, a sure sign of sentimentality.Mother often railed against what she consideredthe shabby manner in which American presidentswere inaugurated. She compared our businesslikearrangements for inducting a head of state with thepageantry of English coronations and felt that Amer-ica suffered by comparison. One of her favoriteremarks in this connection was: "God deliver mefrom Jeffersonian simplicity!,,In the summers, when my parents were with me,we would often go up to Westgate for a little holiday,and here, I think, is something that may surprise you:one-piece bathing suits were no novelty in 1900. Thebeach was coveted with sharp pebbles, as all Englishbeaches are. In order to reach the water, which wasalways icy cold, it was necessary to hire one of thelittle horse-drawn carts and be pulled across thebeach out into the water. You then descended fromthe privacy of your cart directly into the ocean.Actually, you could have swum in your birthdaysuit. There were some modest ladies who wore stock-24WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEings and long, billowy bathing gowns, and the gen-tlemen donned long, wretched-looking pants knownas "sea drawers," but the rest of us were skimpilyone-pieced.As I say, at this time, when I was thirteen andfourteen years old, going on the stage was the lastambition I had. As a matter of fact, I cannot recallthat I had any ambition. I was a docile child whodid as she was told, taking piano lessons in the Italianmethod and singing lessons in French and Italian,elocution, fencing and all that—all part of a schemeof my mother's to make me an actress. But I neverdreamed of being a great lady on the stage, or ofbeing an opera star. The dream was entirely mymother's.My first opportunity to be an actress on the stagecame when Mother wangled me a chance to singsome little songs—"coon songs," they were calledthen—at Birkenhead. I was fourteen. I did a fewpoor little imitations, sang my ditties in a dejectedchirp, and tottered to the wings. My first audiencehooted at me. "Let's 'ave it a little louder, dearie!"they called. It was so awful and scary.I didn't cry. I didn't brood about it. I was simplyfrightened and glad to get out of it. But my indomi-table mother took me in hand, taught me the nextafternoon to put my songs over with full voice (myvoice was always small) and made me go on again.I wish I could report that my first real taste oftheatrical success, a full burst of approval, inspiredme to reach for the heights. It didn't. I was merelyMOTHER WAS AMBITIOUS25a willing little girl, not so badly scared now, doingwhat her mother told her. I did not want to be anactress, even when the audiences applauded andcalled me back for bows and encores.3. THE CANOE SONGMy next engagement was in Sheffield at someforgotten drafty theater where all I had to dowas lie on a rock with my red hair carefully arrangedto look careless. The act was billed as "The SleepingBeauty and the Yellow Dwarf" and I was no con-tribution to the drama.Then I worked at the London Pavilion for tenpounds a week. I cannot imagine at what cost ofbeseeching, promising or threatening my astutemother got me this engagement, but this time I sangmy small songs with confidence and had enoughsense to smile at the audience. Indeed, I was gettinga little mischievous, learning to flirt with the people,now that my terrors were gone. It was a lucky thing.Leslie Stewart, who had done the great and be-loved Floradora, which opened in London and wasan enormous success in New York—remember "TheFloradora Girls"?—was writing a new show, TheSchool Girl, and he sent word that he had a smallpart for me. My mother accepted before he couldcatch his breath, although the salary this time wasonly five pounds. Stewart took me to see GeorgeEdwardes the producer, and immediately these twobegan to mutter and to build up a mystery. It was26THE CANOE SONG27something about a song I was to sing, called "Mamie,I Have a Little Canoe."Charles Frohman, who was as celebrated in Lon-don as he was in America, joined forces with GeorgeEdwardes to produce The School Girl. This was, Itake it, largely because those famous beauties, EdnaMay and Pauline Chase, were under contract to Froh-man, while Marie Studholm, the English star, be-longed to Edwardes. Violet Cameron, who had amagnificent voice, was another Edwardes star, as wasGeorge P. Huntley, one of the most popular come-dians at that time.I understood soon enough but I did not know atthe beginning why there was a mystery about mylittle song in this production. Show-wise Frohmanand Edwardes knew, of course, that the "CanoeSong" was unusual; the game was not to let eitherMiss May or Miss Studholm know that the best songin the show had been given to an unknown girl.I was not allowed to sing it until the dress re-hearsal. It was a simple but catchy tune, done withpantomime, as if four of us younger girls were pad-dling a canoe. Inexperienced show girl that I was,I hadn't the slightest notion how it would affect theMisses May and Studholm.These sophisticated ones instantly recognized thesong for what it was—the hit tune of the production.Both threatened to resign immediately, sulking intheir dressing rooms like offended queens. Whatconniving went on back stage at the Prince of WalesTheater, what cables popped across the Atlantic28WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEbetween Frohman and his beloved star I neverlearned, but there was a bitter controversy. Still,Edwardes and Stewart won out and the showopened the next night.Do not tell me that the English are cold, im-passive people. They roared their applause, stamped,yelled, and whistled for the canoe song. It was likea tidal shock smashing across the footlights after myrather quiet number. I fled, forgetting to curtsy,bumping into guy ropes, and fell gasping into thearms of our stage manager, Pat Malone."They hate me!" I sobbed. "It's awful! What arethey doing?"Pat grabbed me by the wrists and jerked me onmy feet like a doll."Get on stage. Sing it again," he ordered. Igasped that I couldn't.Pat took charge. "Stop it, you silly little redhead,"he said. "Get out there before I slap you." He raisedhis big hand and was about to do it, too, when I ranback on stage. We discommoded that whole open-ing night with bows and encores.The School Girl ran for more than two years, andto my astonishment and delight, and thanks to PatMalone, I was a celebrity. I remember my excite-ment when I discovered that Ellis & Walery's, themost fashionable photographers of the West End,had their windows full of my pictures—and that theywere selling right along with those of Lady Ran-dolph Churchill, Queen Alexandra, and the beauti-THE CANOE SONG29ful actress Gertie Millar. I was eighteen years oldand the year was 1903.That was the year in which the Wright brothersmade the first successful airplane flight from KillDevil Hill on the North Carolina seacoast, fourmiles from Kitty Hawk. We marveled in Londonthat such things could be and freely predicted thatflying through the air was an absurd American no-tion. The news out of America that interested usmost was the account of the Iroquois Theater dis-aster in Chicago, five days after Christmas, in which602 persons perished. That was theatrical news andmore like reality.Instead of being called "Copper Knob," an earliernickname, I was now dubbed "The American Flap-per." I have not consulted Mr. H. L. Mencken, butI think this is the origin of the term flapper. Cer-tainly, my red hair flapped, not by theatrical designbut because I was too lazy to fasten it up. I ratherliked it that way, too.London was enchantment then, and I was deli-ciously aware, too, that it was full of interesting Sin.But during my first year in the business Mother cameto fetch me at the theater every night, and herapron strings, to which I was firmly attached, wereexceedingly short. Still, with my little friend Polly,who sang in the "Canoe Song" number with me, Iused to indulge in a vast amount of speculative andtechnically incorrect chitchat. We told each otherrisque stories, too, tittering and hiding our facesbehind our hands to build up the enormity of anec-30WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEdotes we didn't half understand. Some of the fancygoings-on we couldn't help but see.Edna May's dressing room was a salon to whichmany beaux and admirers reported. We would scut-tle down from our quarters, which were attic-high,and peep over the handrails to see what was goingon, and on occasion Miss May would catch us andgive us some of the candy her friends had brought.All the beauties of the day were in The SchoolGirl. I remember Clarita Vidal, famous and smick-smack, who posed as if she were made of wax, withjust one expression of sheer beauty. The Maharajahof Cooch Behar came nightly through the fog in anelegant electric brougham, with a cluster of jewelson his great white turban and his hands full ofgems as he paid court to Edna May. He was hand-some and suave, and reminded me somehow of aleopard. The toffs of London stood at our stage doorand escorted my friends to the Savoy, to Romano's,or the Cafe Royal for a hot bird and a cold bottleand who knows what sophisticated revelry. But Inever saw it. I went home with Mother, wondering.Sin in the theater, I can observe now, is compa-rable to education in a university: it is there for thosewho wish to take advantage of it, but fewer do thanyou might suspect. Still, as I grew older, I poppedmy eyes at a good deal of dalliance. I must say, nowthat I can be as prim as I please, that it does notseem to work out very well for girls. I will go so faras to say flatly that I do not recommend it.My love life when I was sixteen and seventeenTHE CANOE SONG31years old was nothing to write purple passagesabout. I was spared most of the schoolgirl pangs andpassions for matinee idols, for I was always close tothe theater and took it as a matter of course. And Idid not then admire young men simply because theyhappened to be good actors. My first real beau wasan Irish lad, an officer of the British Navy who hada resounding title and an estate in Devonshire. Iam not being coyly mysterious about him, but be-cause he is today a gentleman of some eminence inthe Empire, and a man of family, I think it mightbe poor taste to name him.Our love affair was fun. We laughed at the samethings. We went up the river to lunch at Skindles',we rode horseback in the Row, we spent Sundayevenings at the Savoy or the Carlton, and there weremany fine weekends for Mother and me at the placein Devonshire.On trips up the river by train,, it was our pleasureto seize a compartment and to keep intruders outof it by posturing and making alarming faces as ifwe were dim-wits whose keeper might return at anymoment. The British suspicion of anything strangealways rose to the jape and would-be fellow passen-gers retreated hastily. Riding in the park, we alwaysbowed elaborately to total strangers, who wouldbow back, hastily, with blank expressions on theirfaces while we laughed.To tell the truth, so many of my beaux about thattime were such sweet boys that I actually hesitated,tempted as I always was, to get engaged to them be-32WITH A FEATHER OX MY NOSEcause there always arrived for me a moment of sad,high romance in which I decided that it would bewicked of me if I grew tired of them and ruinedtheir lives. I was quite sure that the life of any ladwho received the mitten from me would be irrev-ocably blighted.There was another rather special young manabout that time, shortly after The School Girl It isfun to recall these tall voung men, and this was areally tall one, a captain of the Tenth Hussars whowore a busbv which £ave him a dashincr a jj anclemphasized his fine eves. Once when he was sta-tioned at Hampton Court some of us attended atea in his quarters, and I was enchanted bv his ideasof decoration: he had a shelf around the four wallsof his sitting room and even- inch of that shelf wasoccupied bv a different picture of me. But then, Ifancy he changed this gallery from time to time,depending upon his visitor.In that era, the voung men were all in some landof military service, there being, of course, no otherpossible occupation for their class to take up. Thegavest blades bought their seats at the theater foran entire season and occupied them only when theirfavorite °irls were on sta°;e. It was no noveltv toopen the first act with great gaps in the audience,like missing front teeth, then to have Standing RoomOnly for the second.You could always go to lunch with a young man,but to supper with liim. after the theater, only if youwere verv sure of him. "We went to Prince's forTHE CANOE SONG33lunch, to the Carlton for supper, usually in the boys'electric broughams. Always, in the evening, theyoung men wore full dress. Anything else wouldhave been unthinkable. Always, when vou sot toknow a bov well, vou met his familv and were in-vited to his countrv home for week ends.Mv Devonshire friend was tall and blond. tvpi-callv Irish-British. I might have married him. It *a near thing. For some three years I never said Iwouldn't, but then I never quite said defmitelv thatI would, either. It would have been difficult, withmy career in mind. He was a Catholic, and thoughhis religion was not the only barrier in mv mind, itwas one of them.His countrv home was a delightful place to 20.but during the many weekends Mother and I spentthere I was always taken a little aback by the bath-in z habits of the British nobility. There was one tubwhich was lu££ed around from room to room, bvappointment only, bv maid servants who pouredmeager buckets of tepid water into it while voushivered in a dwindling glow from a small fireplace.Even to this day. considering their cavalier attitudeabout plumbing:. I think it is a grand compliment tothe English people that thev bathe at all.More than likelv the story is apocryphal, but Iam told that when Adele Astaire married LordCharles .Arthur Francis Cavendish, son of the Ehikeand Duchess of Devonshire, she was taken to livein a castle with two hundred rooms— and one bath.4. SIR CHARLES HAWTREYItwas while I was working in The School Girl thatI became aware of some of my possibilities andsome of my limitations.I knew by then that I could never become anopera star, or even a musical comedy star, in spiteof Mother's vaulting ambitions. My voice was notlarge enough. I looked enviously at Alexandra Car-lisle, a beauty who played light comedy, the kindof warm and human thing that Kit Cornell was todo a few years later. I went to Leslie Stewart andhe encouraged me, but he had no new play in whichI might have a chance.Most successful comedians of that day eventuallywent into pantomime, always called "pantos" by theBritish, a form of entertainment unknown in Amer-ica. There were several pantomime companies alwaysplaying in London, and each big city, such as Liver-pool and Manchester, had its own company. Theplots of these productions were highly stylized, asI recall, with the leading comedian generally play-ing the hilarious part of an old woman, with a younggirl in tights as a boy. The new songs of the daywere often introduced in pantomime, the showswere always suitable for children, so that wholefamilies used to attend, and the pay was therefore34SIR CHARLES HAWTREY35excellent. I was offered pantomime but I knew itwas not for me. Watching Alexandra Carlisle con-vinced me that the one thing in the world I wantedto do more than anything else was straight comedy.Meantime, while I fretted, my best friend Pollyand I were enormously wicked in The School Girl.We used to take orange peels, slice them into cres-cents to represent teeth, and when our chance came,turn our backs to the audience, stick them in ourmouths and grin foolishly at Edna May while shesang her song. Also for sheer cussedness, we wouldstep out of our shoes during a number and leavethem on stage for other players to trip over. MissMay complained sweetly but ineffectively.PatMalone would grin and threaten to suspend us. Butwe were the hit of the show and we knew it, andwe continued to make orange-peel faces at poor dearEdna, who endured us somehow and had long sincegenerously forgiven me for the "Canoe Song."I dreamed of fashionable gentlemen drinkingchampagne from my slipper, but if this tribute wasactually ever paid to an actress I never saw it. Inonly a few years, however, my red slippers werebeing collected for souvenirs.I had a queer little meeting with Charles Froh-man, who was to mean so much to me later in NewYork. He was going to take The School Girl to Amer-ica, and I wanted to go with it.One day I was lunching at the Carlton Grill withmy Devonshire beau. We were talking, as usual,about getting married, but I put him off gently and"36WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEsomewhat abstractedly wondering what I couldmake out of myself, and what my success would doto him if I attained it. Then Charles Frohman camein with a friend. I barely knew him, but withoutstopping to think I abandoned love for career, trot-ted over to his table, and stood humbly by until henoticed me.Mr. Frohman was a small, round little man witha strong, protruding lower lip and extraordinarilybeautiful seal-colored eyes. He had almost no systemof communication. He spoke in unpunctuated tele-grams. Actually, he made his wishes known as muchwith tight little jabs of his forefinger and his eyesas he did with words, and yet Somerset Maugham,Sir Arthur Wing Pinero and Sir James M. Barrieadored him and wrote their best plays for him. Itwas years before I understood why.I guess I quavered when I spoke to him."Mr. Frohman," I said, "I hear you are taking TheSchool Girl to New York, and I would like to gowith it, and I thought I would ask you, and .Mr. Frohman stopped me with his finger."You may go," he said. "But Edna sings 'Canoe.".Song/I went trembling away, for The School Girl with-out my song would be no opportunity at all for me.My agent was Arthur Hart, an industrious andgentle soul who did all he could to help me, but Idoubt ifofMother's vigorous exertions. She was convinced ofthe efficacy of the handwritten note, and would toilefforts represented a tithehisallSIR CHARLES HAWTREY37for hours penning the most correct and impressivemissives to producers, telling them about the mani-fold virtues, charms and talents of her offspring. Myapproach was more direct. I went everv day to var-ious offices where plays were being considered andannounced myself as a comedienne who should berescued immediately from musicals.Peter Pan, which had opened at Christmastime in1904, was often revived during those years. MaudeAdams usually plaved it during the holidavs. butmanv other actresses owe their chance to the delight-oful bov role, and I thought this might be for me.Dion Boucicault, who was invariably so kind, didoffer to let me play one of the twins, but he was seton Pauline Chase for Peter and that opportunityfailed me.Meantime, and I am thankful that Mother keptme at it, I went on with my music and elocutionlessons. I also took fencing, which was considereda requisite for all players then but is almost for-gotten in the theater today.In order to work, and not because I thought I wasadvancing my career a great deal, I plaved in twomusical comedies, Blue Moon, and The Duchess ofDantzic, with Holbrook Blinn, who took the part ofNapoleon. These shows did me more good than Irealized at the time because they paved the way fora third musical which turned out to be of the utmostimportance to me.Edna May was starring in an amusing show calledThe Belle of Mayfair at the small but famous Yaude-38WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEville Theater in the Strand. She had enjoyed a longand successful run, needed a holiday and wanted tobe replaced, so when The Duchess closed, I wentalmost immediately into this show opposite the de-lightful Farren S outer, son of one of England's great-est dancers, Nellie Farren.The Vaudeville Theater was owned by the GattiBrothers, two Greek gentlemen who were alsohighly successful restaurateurs. I am sorry, BrothersGatti, if you should read this and conclude that I amungrateful, but I cannot quite remember whichGatti brother was which, although interesting thingsbegan to happen as soon as I began to work in theVaudeville Theater.First, my dressing room, which had been occu-pied by Miss May and was already fresh and charm-ing, was refurnished and redecorated, and this wasimmediately followed by a succession of flowers andlittle gifts from the management. This was followedby a Gatti in person with offers of marriage. Theproposing Gatti was, I recall, dark and handsomeand voluble, but dear Mr. Gatti, please forgive me,I cannot remember which one you were!At any rate, a Gatti proposal once a week and asuccessful show made life exciting and it was, in theend, one of the Gattis who brought about the oppor-tunity which was a turning point in my young butsomewhat stalemated career.In the back of the balcony was the theater office,and from this the Gattis would often watch per-formances of The Belle of Mat/fair. One of theirSIR CHARLES HAWTREY39frequent guests was Charles Hawtrey, who wouldcome often to the theater not at all to see me actbut because he was making a deal with the Gattisto lease the theater for his next production. SirCharles was one of the magnificoes of the Londonstage, an actor-producer of really great distinctionwho at one time or another managed sixteen theatersin London and put on more than a hundred plays.Off and on stage he was a charming man. He wasexpert at cricket and golf, but his chief interest out-side the theater was racing, an interest he inheritedfrom his redoubtable father, the Rev. John WilliamHawtrey, whose High-Church principles by nomeans forbade enthusiasm for improving the breed.His son began betting at Eton, and once after hehad become a successful actor won fourteen thou-sand pounds at Epsom Downs on a single race.Mr. Hawtrey—he was not Sir Charles at that time—saw The Belle of Mayfair so often as a result ofhis interest in the Vaudeville Theater as a real-estateventure that he finally noticed me. He had to. Henot only saw me night after night, but he heardabout me at length from the Gattis. One evening ashe was watching the show he muttered that "Thereis a little girl who might be able to do somethingbesides musical comedy/'The Gattis emphatically agreed with Hawtrey,and the upshot was that Hawtrey sent a messageasking me if I would like to have a talk with himafter the next day's matinee.40WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI saw him in the office, having run upstairs sothat I arrived breathless and gasping instead of cooland sophisticated as I had planned. He dropped myfuture in my lap with his first remark:"Well, Miss Burke, would you be interested instraight comedy?"It was as simple as that, after two years of waitingin producers' outer offices, after the innumerablecareful notes Mother had written, after all the dis-appointing interviews and half promises which al-ways lead the ambitious young on, in any profession.When the turning point comes, it invariably seemsto happen very simply, never the expected greatvictory with banners waving and trumpets blaring.I told Mr. Hawtrey how very much I would beinterested in straight comedy. I told him very em-phatically, and I told him I could do it, too.He smiled generously at my enthusiasm, but hewarned me."You will miss your dancing and singing," he said."You may not think so now, but comedy is dry, hardwork. There isn't much excitement, like the excite-ment of all those young men in the same seats in thefront rows night after night."I assured Mr. Hawtrey that young men meantabsolutely nothing to me, a statement which wasperfectly true at that moment."Then, if you really mean it, I will put you oppo-site me in my new play, Mr. George. In this theater.We had better begin rehearsals right away."Hawtrey taught me to act. We worked from 11 toSIR CHARLES HAWTREY411:30 then from 2:30 to 4 every day to start with, andin the beginning it must have been for him consid-erably like trying to teach a puppy. There is a sharpand enormous difference between playing musicalcomedy and playing straight comedy, and I think Ican explain it best by putting it this way: in a musi-cal comedy, you direct everything to the audience;in comedy, in a play, you know the audience is thereand you play to it, but you direct yourself to yourfellow players and act as if you were in a room, notin a theater.Hawtrey began the tedious process of teaching meto place a phrase, almost as it is done in singing. Incomedy you lift your points, setting up lines for theplayer opposite you. It requires the most exact tim-ing and pacing to do this skillfully, and I was lucky:of all the actors I have ever known, I believeCharles Hawtrey was by far the best teacher.Also, I was fortunate in the play. I was supposedto be an American girl freshly come to England.The surprise to the British family which took me inwas that "Mr. George" turned out to be a girl. Al-most all of my scenes were with Hawtrey himself,so I learned then and there— I had to learn—to "liftmy lines" so that he could pick them up and tossthem back to me.Hawtrey taught me the drawing-room manner asagainst the more flamboyant musical-comedy man-ner. He taught me to swing my arms naturally whenI walked across a room. He taught me to sit downgracefully, as if I belonged in a drawing room, as if42WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI were a lady in a drawing room instead of a ladyon a stage.And so, after a month of exhausting rehearsal weopened, to the especial delight of the Gattis and ofmy mother. I wore quilted taffeta skirts with velvetpanniers and some soft material at the throat. Asalways, Hawtrey had mounted this production withdistinction, selecting each property, each piece ofchina, every piece of furniture, with the most metic-ulous care.Hawtrev was a large man with big, beautifulbrown eyes, onlv forty-five years old at that time, butthis was a period play and costume was not espec-ially flattering to him. And so it turned out that Mr.George was a spectacular showcase for me but adisappointment for Hawtrey himself. The play wasnot a success, but glory be! I was. I was an actresson the stage—a comedienne, at last.Charles Hawtrey was a man with a brilliant, drollmind. He was polished and suave and at the sametime benign, a precisionist in his art but exceedinglycavalier about all affairs which did not contributedirectiy to that art. He was always in trouble aboutmoney, he was always involved in debt, but he ac-cepted his predicaments with the utmost savoir-faire. I recall that at one time he spent so muchmoney and owed so much that he found it impos-sible to pay his taxes. He owed the equivalent oftwenty-five thousand dollars and was almost with-out a farthing in his pocket.SIR CHARLES HAWTREY43His manager came to him and put it pretty baldly."Charlie," he said, "there is no more time and nomore excuses. They are going to put you in jail fordebt tomorrow.""Ah, me, that would be uncomfortable," saidHawtrey. "I shouldn't like that at all. I say, who isChancellor of the Exchequer now?"The manager told him, and Hawtrey walked to thetelephone and asked to be put through to His Lord-ship."I say, old boy," he said cheerfully, "there seemsto be a little inconvenience about my taxes. Sorry tobother you, tedious detail and all that, but couldyou spare a moment?"His Lordship could and did, and Hawtrey calledon him, charmed him, and did him a favor by notpermitting the government to clap him in jail.We saw something of London society in those days,Mother and I. One day, a half dozen girls werepicked from various musical comedies to be pre-sented to their Majesties, King Edward and QueenAlexandra, and I was one of the fortunate ones. Wepracticed our curtsies for several weeks, learned thatwe were to say "Ma'am" if the Queen addressed us,and arrived at the garden party in a dither in fluffydresses and floppy hats. When I was presented, Icurtsied so low that I could have picked dandelions,and I tottered away from the royal presences underthe impression that they were the most godlike andbeautiful human beings in the world."How was my curtsy?" I asked my friend Polly.44WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"It was all right, dear," she told me, "except, dear,that I doubt if it was really necessary for you to getdown on all fours/'Dinner parties in the great London houses wereformal and formidable, and cold, but the Britishovercame such small handicaps as the lack of cen-tral heating with a practical gesture: at the door asyou entered would stand an impressive footman withlittle rugs which you could spread across your kneesto keep them from freezing while you smiled at yourhostess over the silverware.It was not all gaiety during these years. BillyBurke was ill, living most of the time in a littiecottage at Bath, where he could take the waters, andcoming into London only infrequently. He saw mein The School Girl and in The Duchess of Dantzic,but Father died before Mr. George. He was con-fident, though, after he had finally resigned himselfto the fact that I was going to be an actress. "I willsee my baby's name in lights on Broadway yet," heused to say. He never saw those lights, but for hisdoting eye I think he saw enough to satisfy him. Hewas supremely confident that I would become a star.At Christmastime in 1906 Charles Frohman was inLondon and he sent for me. His notes were as terseas his conversation and always written in blue pen-cil. He summoned me with a scrawl:"Would you come to see me?—C. F." was all hesaid.Recalling his rebuff when I wanted to sing mycanoe song when The School Girl went to NewSIR CHARLES HAWTREY45York, I called on him at his office, expecting nothingmuch. His greeting was warm. He asked me to sitdown. He began to talk about his plans.He told me that My Wife, a play he was interestedin, had not been a success in London but that hethought it would go well in New York. "Would youlike to go to America?" he asked me."Mr. Frohman, I don't suppose you rememberthat I was in The School Girl and wanted to go toAmerica then?"He nodded. I told him that I was with Hawtreyand that Hawtrey had plans for me, had done agreat deal for me, and that I thought I owed himan obligation. I was still a little miffed with Mr.Frohman.Frohman nodded. He understood perfectly. Hissense of fairness, of obligation, of the right thing,always, was implicit in him and in everything he did."I know, I know all about it," he told me. "Maybeyou will be interested, say, by August. Hawtrey. Upto Hawtrey."I think that is what he said. He might have saidit with his eyes, or with one of those characteristiclittle jabs with his forefinger. At any rate, he toldme that in some manner, using his abbreviated com-munications system.Of course, I went to Hawtrey at once, asked himto see me that night after the performance."I don't know what to say," he told me. "I wantyou for the new play, Mrs. Fonderbemjs Fast, be-cause I think it would be a wonderful thing for you.46WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEBut I want to be fair to you, because Ponderberrymight not be a hit. Suppose, then, you start in thenew play, and well see how things work out. How'sthat?"I cannot tell you, without being immodest, whata fine attitude this was for Charles Hawtrey to take.He had developed a new, young leading lady whoknew his techniques, who had learned the intricatebusiness of playing opposite him, and who was pop-ular with audiences. It was generous of him to giveme up.We opened Mrs. Ponderberrys Past. It was ahighly amusing play with good lines for me and,again, those beautiful, smart costumes. I had dreamy,expensive clothes, organdies with lace set in, pastelblue taffeta around my shoulders, and a parasol anda big dashing hat. I was learning fast, and underHawtrey's continued tutelage, always so precise yetalways so kind, I was a success again.But there were times during the run whenCharles Hawtrey frightened me a little, in a not un-pleasant way. He was as attractive as a man couldbe, had a handsome reputation for success with girls,and there was a scene in Mrs. Ponderberry's Past inwhich the curtain was fetched down as Hawtreyunwound my wide Greek scarf, leaving me in a littlechemise, in the dark.My maid always stationed herself in the wings,like the Marines off stage in a melodrama, ready torush to me with a dressing gown."Never you fear, dearie," she would promise me,SIR CHARLES HAWTREY47night after night. "Never you fear, 111 always getthere first."I would stand there, shivering and curious andblushing all over, wondering what would happen ifHawtrey did get there first. He never did, but Iused to think he tried.Charles Frohman waited to hear from me untilPonderberry closed for the summer, and when Iwent to him, we made an agreement for me to go toNew York to act in My Wife opposite John Drew.The salary astonished me. Frohman offered to payme $500 a week, an unheard-of sum on the Britishstage, and Mother and I joyfully accepted.We accepted with our fingers crossed, in a way.So far as we knew, the stage, the real Stage, existedonly in London. Anything else was an outpost. Play-ing outside of London, wherever it was, was playingthe provinces."I'll be back by spring," I promised Hawtrey."I think you are going to be a very fine come-dienne," Hawtrey told me, patting my hand, his richbrown eyes warm with approval. "You go to Amer-ica and make a hit there and make the money, thencome back to me and we will find something fine todo together."And so Mother and I sailed for New York. I neverplayed with Charles Hawtrey again.5. GAD! SAID UNCLE JACKWhen Mother and I arrived in New York thathot August, 1907, 1 was taken at once by EthelBarrymore, as I have told, to meet John Drew, andthen rehearsals for My Wife began immediately.At our first session, I turned to Mr. Drew and said,"Is that the way you want me to make my en-trance?""My dear child, do it any way you like," UncleJack drawled. He was a little astonished, and so wasI. In London, my every action and gesture had beenguided by Hawtrey. I was amazed to discover thatthe great John Drew was actually taking directions,and very patiently, from a man I had never heardof, Willie Seymour, who seemed to know all aboutthe theater.Frohman perched in the orchestra pit, behind theconductor's stand. He was hiding behind it, really,because he wished the cast to forget he was there.He would sit there with his fingers interlaced acrosshis middle like a kewpie, peeping up at the actors.When we looked his way he would busy himselfwith the music rack, running his fingers around theedges, absorbed by its design—anything to createthe illusion that the play was going on without hisattention. But he was directing it. He spoke in quiet48gad! said uncle jack49asides to Seymour. Or he would nod to a player andmake his ideas known after a scene, in private.He was never specific, and yet, somehow, youunderstood precisely what he wanted. He wouldmerely say to me: "She's madder than that. She'sawful mad."Or: "Look, she's left her husband. Sorry now. Verysorry. Awful sorry. Do it."He would punctuate these instructions with wagsof his head or jabs of his forefinger and you wouldgo back on stage knowing what he wanted. But hewas a martinet. He demanded long hours of re-hearsal, work all day and every evening, and he drovehimself, rehearsing as I have said, four or five playsat the same time.I was coached by another martinet, my mother.As always she went over my lines with me at home.She gave me my "readings," showed me the nuancesof inflection she thought proper, never of course in-terfering with the interpretation of the director butinsisting that I be letter-perfect. Indeed, she taughtme so imperiously, tossing the script back to me indisdain when I faltered, that I virtually knew mylines for every play upside down and sideways. Ihad little trouble memorizing, having had to do itsince I was a child.It would be both modest and more dramatic toreport that my debut in New York was nervous andexciting and that improbable things happened. ButUncle Jack Drew regarded one more opening nightas lightly as he looked on running over to the Players50WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEfor a game of billiards, and his savoir-faire infectedme, and all the cast.He threw me absurd asides all through that firstperformance.I had dimples in my elbows and John Drew wasamused by them. He would put his hands under myelbows and fumble around, trying to locate them.Between our declarations of love he would mutterto me: "Gad! Where are they?"I would whisper: "Higher!""Gad! They're gone!" Uncle Jack would complain.At the end of the scene I would have bitten halfthrough my cheeks to keep from laughing out loud.I always got off stage as quickly as possible to doubleup in the wings.I had a little way of getting even with him, al-though Uncle Jack was imperturbable on stage andcould not be thrown by the most unlikely ad-libs.We had a scene in which we sat opposite each otherat a table while I dipped into my handbag for anote. Instead of producing it, I collected every pos-sible knickknack I could lay hands on, cotton rab-bits, gallywogs, or an angry poodle no bigger thana minute, or a little red ham, and would extract themone by one, laying them out in front of him, hopingto make Uncle Jack laugh."Gad! What's coming next?" Uncle Jack woulddemand.As the foolishness went on, he would ad-lib allover the place."Where did that get dug up from?" he would askgad! said uncle jack51as a baby kangaroo would emerge, "Well, and it'sthe note we are looking for, aren't we?"But in the end it was always Mr. Drew who mademe fight really hard for my control. In the midst ofour tenderest scene he would murmur, almost loudenough for the audience to hear:"I see a human dink in the front row. Second fromthe left." Or he would pretend that one of my beauxwas out front. "What now, I observe young LordDundreary is in the house, waving his buck teeth at>»you.And so with this kind of tomfoolery, and someribaldry on Uncle Jack's part, he waltzed throughthe three acts and took twenty curtain calls—maybethirty—bowing and smiling at the audience, beforeI realized that my first night in New York was overand accomplished. By degrees it was borne in on methat My Wife had made me a star, but to tell thetruth I was rather stupid about it: I honestly didn'trealize what had happened, it had all been so muchfun and all so easy with the skillful direction I hadhad and the gracious japery of John Drew. UncleJack was surrounded by the royalty of the theaterand of society the moment the curtain came down.Among his admirers was the lovely and statuesqueMargaret Illington, who was then married to DanFrohman and later became Mrs. Edward (Major)Bowes, and who I sensed was a little amazed at myusurping her place as Uncle Jack's leading lady. Offthey would go with the Drew family in a whirl ofperfume and fur. I was petted and congratulated,52WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEand my heart was pounding with the joy and excite-ment and sheer warmth of having pleased an Amer-ican audience—my own folks. I was home.This play built up into a rather amusing curtain.The mother and father in our drama were under theimpression, as was everyone else, that Mr. Drew andI were living together as man and wife in name only.But just as the parents entered at the last of the thirdact, the butler announcing them, Uncle Jack unctu-ously read the final line: "Mr. and Mrs. Eversleyhave retired."This surprised the audience—pleasantly, I think.My Wife opened August 31, 1907, and ran for 129performances at the Empire Theater. This playmeant so much to me, since it started me as an ac-tress in America, a circumstance which eventuallyled to a number of strange and wonderful things,that I want to make my bow now to the players whoworked so skillfully in it and were so kind to me. Iregret to say that I have lost track of most of them,but I shall never forget them and I have not hadto refer to the playbill to name them. Wherever theyare, still on the stage, retired, or no longer with us,my gratitude goes to Ferdinand Gottschalk, FrankGoldsmith, Morton Selten, Mrs. Kate Pattison-Sel-ton, Albert Roccardi, Axel Bruun, Rex McDowell,Dorothy Tennant, Walter Soderling, Mario Majer-oni, L. C. Howard, Hope Latham, Herbert Budd,May Gayler, E. Soldene Powell, Bob Schable, andHoraceIdaGreeley, a beautiful water-nymph kind of girl.granddaughterGreeleySmith,ofSir Charles Hawtrey and Billie Burke in Mr. George(London, 1906)Alfred Ellis b WaleryEarly motoring days in Regent's Park. London, with my mothergad! said uncle jack53Morton Selten, bless him, treated me as if I werea baby. It was one of his special delights to fetchme amusing trinkets for my handbag to astonishUncle Jack on stage and inspire one of his superb"Gads!"It was a friendly cast, with none of the petty bick-ering and jealousy that often makes a productionuncomfortable. We liked our director, Willie Sey-mour, and teased him. In rehearsing Ethel Barry-more for another play, he had come on stage onceto read the lines of an actress who was tardy. Willieapproached Ethel and declaimed tenderly:"I am going to have a baby."Miss Barrymore turned her full incandescent glareon Willie and brought up her huskiest tones."My God," she said.After that, we usually greeted Mr. Seymour withan astonished eye and a "My God."Shortly after our opening, William Gillette, thegreat aristocrat of the theater, also opened at theCriterion in The Morals of Marcus, sl Frohmanplay with Marie Doro, C. Aubrey Smith, and Bea-trice Forbes-Robertson. I met Mr. Gillette at a littlelunch C. F. gave in his office, the predecessor ofmany little lunches, for C. F. introduced me to NewYork quietly, avoiding publicity stunts, strictly for-bidding me to appear in public or even to see otherplays. It was Frohman's Napoleonic principle thatthe illusions of the theater would be shattered if thepublic saw too much or knew too much about his54WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEstars—and in spite of the effectiveness of modern-day press agentry, I still believe that he was correct.Gillette was full of fun. We often dined at the oldHoffman House before the theater, and many timesI went with Mother or with C. F. to his countryplace where he maintained a miniature train whichwas fun to ride. He was a gay and gallant gentlemanwho, it seemed, was always returning from Kissing-ton, his cue to kiss your shoulder.The one Frohman star that we hardly ever sawwas Maude Adams. Ethel and John Barrymore, whohad met her years before she became famous, werethe only persons aside from Frohman who seemedto know her well. When she would arrive at theEmpire for a conference with Frohman, Peter, thesentry who stood outside the stone doorway, wouldflash the news like a commander announcing aqueen, and minions would run to guard the way lestMiss Adams be jostled or approached. C. F. spokeof her as if she were a princess in an ivory tower.His fine eyes would light up with worship that wasalmost religious.My Wife thrived against competition which, itseems to me as I look back fondly on those fine days,would be hard to match on Broadway now. MaxineElliott, the most beautiful woman I ever knew, wholater did me an unexpected favor, was playing withCharles Cherry in Under the Greenwood Tree. E. H.Sothern was solemnly but successfully acting in TheFool Hath Said There Is No God, a dramatizationof Dostoevski's Crime and Punishment. Otis Skinnergad! said uncle jack55was holding forth nightly in The Honor of theFamily. (Cornelia did not make her debut untilBlood and Sand, a few years later.) Mrs. MinnieMaddern Fiske was having a serious year withIbsen's Rosmersholm, and the sensation of the Met-ropolitan Opera was a Russian basso who was thenspelling his name "Schialiapine," later changed toChaliapin. David Warfield was trying to hold thevast following he had enlisted with The Auctioneerin The Grand Army Man, and Donald Brian andEthel Jackson were waltzing as no pair had everwaltzed before in The Merry Widow.Mabel Taliaferro was playing in Polly of the Cir-cus. A young man from Maryville, Missouri, famedlocally as a college debater, was then in New Yorktrying to get on the stage. He finally got a small partin the road company of Polly of the Circus, butnever turned out to be a good actor. He also failedas a novelist and short-story writer before he beganteaching people how to get along with people. Hisroommate was another young actor who wrote un-successful plays. Their names were Dale Carnegieand Howard Lindsay.C. F. was a busy man the season of 1907. He hadother fish to fry aside from My Wife, for that yearhe also produced When Knights Were Bold withPauline Frederick, The Ranger with Dustin Farnumand Mary Boland, The Toymakers, in which Ray-mond Hackett made his debut, Her Sister, starringstarring MaudeEthelAdams, and Father and the Boys by George Ade.Barrymore, The Jesters,56WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEDavid Belasco took a chance on a new star thatseason when he produced The Warrens of Virginia.Her name was Mary Pickford.And down the street from the Empire Theater,in the Jardin de Paris, also called the New YorkRoof, a new producer who up to this point had beennoted chiefly for promoting French actresses andprofessional strong men offered something brand-new and glittering in the theater. This was a musicalrevue in two acts and thirteen scenes with HarryWatson, Frank Mayne, James Manley, Lillian Lee,Grace La Rue, George Bickell, Emma Cams, andFlorence Tempest. The revue ran for seventy per-formances and was called The Ziegfeld Follies.I did not see the Follies or meet the produceruntil seven years later. Indeed, when I did meetFlorenz Ziegfeld, Jr., I was astonished. I had con-fused him with Hammerstein and thought he wasa venerable gentleman with a beard.6. C. F.He was a little man. When he sat at his smalltable-desk in his cloisterlike Gothic office in theEmpire Theater Building, in a leather upholsteredarmchair, he would sometimes kick off his Congressgaiters and his feet would dangle in the air, nottouching the floor. He was a thick little man, solidlyrounded like a top, always spinning from one projectto another, walking up and down rapidly as hetalked, nodding, jabbing with a pudgy forefinger,leaving sentences trailing in his wake, but sometimessnapping them like a whip with pungent, sharptwists of tongue.He never carried a watch. A watch was too muchtrouble. It would have to be wound and would botherhim. Somebody could always tell him the time. Henever wore shoes that had to be laced, and never,his brother Daniel Frohman said of him, did any-thing at all that somebody else could do for him.This included carrying money. As long as I knewCharles Frohman I never knew him to have a centin his pocket. He tipped waiters with bills quicklyslipped to him by his friends or his aides, handingover the money with a great gesture, as if he weresurprised and pleased suddenly to have such wealthto distribute.5758WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEHe never said "Good morning." It annoyed himwhen other persons said it, and he would grumble"Is it?" or "I doubt it" when anyone greeted himthus. Most of the amenities of life annoyed him, in-cluding Christmas, which he tried to ignore. Occa-sionally, however, he gave a Christmas present.When this happened, we always suspected that hehad hastily rewrapped a gift someone had sent him.Frohman wore beautifully tailored suits and hislinen was fine and costly, but he managed, somehow,the way he wore things, to give the impression thathe was disdainful of clothes.He never carried a timepiece but lived by theclock, invariably arriving at his office in the morningat the stroke of nine and keeping appointments pre-cisely on the minute. There was a clock in his office,a chime clock, which tolled the hour in snatches ofsong from the various shows he was producing. Whenthe hour for appointments struck, Frohman wouldleave whatever visitor was with him at the momentwithout excuse or good-by, whirling into his slippersand trotting off. Often as not he was rehearsing fouror five plays on the same day—rehearsing them, ofcourse, in his own odd, inarticulate way, leaving theroutine to his directors and stage managers butactually aware of every detail and inflection, com-municating his wishes to his players through signlanguage and telepathy.In his rages, which I saw often enough, for someof them were directed at me during the seven yearsI worked for Charles Frohman, he seemed a giant.c. f.59He would inflate himself, pigeonlike, turning red andpurple in the face, but the inflation did not seemsoft: rather, he seemed suddenly to grow and tower,Neanderthal-like.Thousands of persons in the theater had never seteyes on Charles Frohman. He managed his businessas if he were a commander in chief, with a generalofficer in charge of musicals, one in charge of drama,one in charge of scenery, electricians, and so on. Yethe was a quaintly romantic person whom I have seenchoke with emotion. He produced all together be-tween five and six hundred plays, but he never couldsleep on the night before an opening. Finally he be-came so nervous that his managers would lead himaway from the theater on opening night itself, estab-lish him in a quiet restaurant, place a large glass ofsomething very sweet for him to sip, and leave himthere until the play was over.So far as I was ever able to learn, he never readbooks unless he thought they might become plays.Once a reporter asked him what his favorite bookwas. Frohman replied: "Roland Strong's The BestRestaurants of Paris."But he knew Alice in Wonderland thoroughly. Hewas fascinated by Lewis Carroll's make-believe world,which suggested endless numbers of scenes and stagegroupings to him. He used these in his plays: the MadHatter's tea party was likely to suggest a scene in amodern drawing-room comedy.C. F. was always concrete, never abstract aboutanything. He used to say that the best story schemes60WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwere contained in the old nursery tales, and he likedto point out that Monsieur Beaucaire and Cyrano deBergerac were actually variations of Prince Charm-ing.Once when we were discussing plays he told mesome of his rules. "Americans love to see women tri-umph," he said, "triumph over men. That's why theylike The Lion and the Mouse and Within the Law.Also, you have to make each person in the audiencebelieve something. Believe that he could save a situ-ation, prevent a tragedy, or help a likable thiefescape if he could only step over the footlights andcry out."He said his favorite scene in any play was thescreen scene in A School for Scandal, in which thereare three persons on stage, one of them hidden. Theaudience knows all the actors know and a little more.They're just enough ahead of the plot to hope it willwork out their way. "In such case," C. F. would say,"unhappy ending would violate wishes already im-planted."He had few words, barely a working vocabulary.He was amused by persons who paraded their lan-guage. But he could be sharp. Once he gently offereda suggestion to Mrs. Patrick Campbell. The greatlady turned on him."Pardon me, Mr. Frohman," she said, "but you for-get that I am an artist.""Mrs. Campbell, I'll keep your secret," C. F. re-plied.Once when I was rehearsing Sir Arthur Wing"C. F.61Pinero's The Mind the Paint Girl, he suggested thatI was not reading my lines correctly. Now I alwaysprided myself on having my lines letter-perfect."I know my lines, Mr. Frohman," I remonstrated."I don't doubt that, Bill," C. F. said. "But youdon't seem to know Pinero's.C. F. had an uncanny sense of what audienceswould appreciate. One day he was talking aboutthe difference between British and American theater-goers."Look," he said. "Suppose Americans hear some-one in a British play mention Battersea Bridge. Theynever heard of Battersea Bridge. But they say, 'Well,all right, Battersea Bridge, what about it?' But youmention Tammany corruption to a British audienceand what happens? You lose your audience. Theywill stop watching the play. They will sit all nightand worry about what 'Tammany corruption' is."He seldom paid any attention to a play after ithad opened. When he did see it he fetched along abag of peanuts or chestnuts and cracked them whilehe watched. People would complain, but C. F. neverpaid them the slightest attention. He would be en-tirely lost in the story unfolding on stage.When I came to New York, leaving our little housein Queens Road, St. John's Wood, with every inten-tion of returning to it next season— I had a 48-yearlease on that house in London—Charles Frohman wasforty-seven years old. He was, with the possible ex-ception of the spectacular David Belasco, the most"62WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSErenowned and certainly the most important producerin the world. He controlled an empire, producingboth in London and in New York. He had virtuallyinvented the star system. He had the most gifted andthe most celebrated actors and actresses under con-tract to him, including Maude Adams, who was mak-ing more money than any woman in the world hadever made on the stage. If his legs had been just alittle longer, someone said, Frohman could havewalked across America on the theaters he controlled.Bernard Shaw once said about him: "He is the mostwildly romantic and adventurous man of my ac-quaintance. As Charles XII became a famous soldierthrough his passion for putting himself in the wayof being killed, so Charles Frohman has become afamous manager through his passion for puttinghimself in the way of being ruined."And yet—and yet, this man was a pixie. He wasplayful. His close friend was Sir James M. Barrie,surely the most whimsical literary genius of anyday, and Frohman himself, in many of his moods,was Barriesque. He said little, always hurrying offunceremoniously. Conversation with C. F. was likeplaying Indications. But somehow, you knew whathe meant.How he induced Barrie to give up novel-writingfor plays is a mystery, but he did just that. After hecame under Frohman's influence near the turn ofthe century, Barrie never wrote another book; but atFrohman's request, emphasized with his little trun-cated gestures—"You write me play—Maude Adams—c. f.63he produced The Little Minister, What Every WomanKnows, Peter Pan, and all the other fondly remem-bered Barrie plays.Somehow these two small men, one a Scot, theother the son of a Jewish emigrant peddler, under-stood each other. Barrie saw in Frohman an integrityand care for artistry unmatched, so far as I know,by any other play producer of that time. They enjoyeda rapport, a wry, almost wordless kind of humorwhich enabled them to be together for hours withscarcely a word of conversation. Also, they madeenormous sums of money for each other.Up to 1896 it hadn't occurred to Barrie that hemight be a playwright. We all read My Lady Nico-tine, A Window in Thrums, Sentimental Tommy(how I wept over Griselda!) and The Little Min-I suppose today that a great many peopleister.have forgotten that The Little Minister, one ofMaude Adams's most celebrated plays, ever was anovel, but in '96 it was a best seller. One day ascenario for the dramatization of the book was sub-mitted by a literary agent to the late A. N. Palmer.Mr. Palmer saw little in the story for dramatic pro-duction, but on account of the great popularity ofthe book wrote a cautious note to Barrie asking forhis terms.Barrie, ever the Highlander, replied that he wantedthe usual advance and the usual royalties, but thatsomeone else would have to write the play, he him-self being a novelist. Barrie said he was sorry thathe couldn't "take a hand in it" himself, but never-"64WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEtheless, he demanded a playwright's commission.Palmer balked at these terms and it seems quite pos-sible that The Little Minister mi^ht neyer haye be-come a play at all if Charles Frohman, then onlythirty-six years old, had not been at that exact timesearching for the proper yehicle for his unusual star,Maude Adams.C. F. might ha\e contributed an important noteto dramatic history if he had ever told how he in-duced Barrie to become a playwright. So far as Iknow there is no record. All that Frohman eyer gaveme when I asked him was one of his abrupt littlesentences:"Sent him cables.At any rate, Frohman didn't haggle. He neverhaggled. He persuaded Barrie to make his owndramatic version, and The Little Minister had 3,000performances in America alone, earned a half a mil-lion dollars for Barrie and 8600,000 for Frohman. Alltold, Barrie earned 8175,000 a year through his as-sociation with C. F. They became firm friends.Barrie used to say that he had only one quarrelwith Charles Frohman but that it lasted sixteen years."He wanted me to be a playwright and I wanted tobe a novelist. All those years I fought him on that.He always won, but not because of his dozedness,only because he was so lovable one had to do as hewanted. He also threatened, ifI stopped, to re-produce my old plays and put my name in largeelectric lights over the theater."But Frohman appreciated Barrie as the great artistc. f.65he was. In his eyes, Barrie could do no wrong. OnceSir Herbert Tree hurried to Frohman and told himthat Barrie had gone crazy."You ought to know about this," he told Frohman."We are both so fond of him. He has gone completelyout of his mind. He has just read me a play and heis going to read it to you, so I'm warning you. I knowI'm not gone woozy in my mind for I've tested my-self since hearing the play, but Barrie must be mad.He has written four acts all about fairies, childrenand Indians, running through the most incoherentstory you ever listened to. And what do you suppose?The last act is to be played in the tops of trees!"Frohman hurried to Barrie, heard the play, andagreed to produce Peter Pan at once.I have set out to explain the paradox of this aston-ishing man Charles Frohman, who was my manager,friend, protector, adviser and my absolute boss forseven years, but perhaps I have succeeded only indeepening the mystery. He lived alone. Few seemedto know him intimately, though he had many friends.At one time he controlled in New York the Empire,Garrick, Knickerbocker, Lyceum and Savoy Theaters,and in London the Duke of York's, the Globe, theComedy, the Vaudeville and the Empire. He wasaccused, and rightly so, of creating a theater trustin America, of gobbling up theaters to confoundcompetitors, and certainly he was the leading prac-titioner of the "star system," which George JeanNathan and other critics attacked as pernicious longbefore Hollywood began to place such inartistic em-66WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEphasis on photogenic personalities. And yet thisNapoleon of the drama was on the most intimateterms, quite aside from financial considerations, withthe two rarest spirits of the theater—probably the tworarest spirits of the times—James M. Barrie andMaude Adams. Frohman was the catalytic aeent thatbrought them together, combined their talents, andexploited them. I am certain, though, that he loyedthem both. And he was in loye with Maude Adams.When I came to New York that was the report,and it was eyen belieyed bv many that they weremarried. But I do not know about that, and I suspectno one knew. C. F. certainly adored Miss Adams,but he adored her in a special way; I think CharlesFrohman loyed Maude Adams as a hungry spiritlo\es music and poetry and as a fine boy loyes hisheroes and their ideals. Miss Adams was to Frohman,I imagine, what she was to eyeryone else: a sprite.Paradox heaps on paradox when you try to pindown Charles Frohman. All who worked for himquickly learned to have a protective feeling abouthim. You felt his integrity and his fineness, voutrusted him, and you wanted to please him. It wasodd to have this feeling about a man who was con-sidered ruthless in business. And if he looked onBarrie and Maude Adams as out-of-the-worldlings,he also took pains to arrange things very much totheir practical advantage.Barrie and Maude Adams he made millionaires.Under C. F.'s guidance Miss Adams, who seemed tohave little more use for money than a child, earnedc. f.67upwards of half a million dollars a year. When shetoured in What Every Woman Knows, the Barrieplay, she was paid $20,000 a week— and the tour made$125,000 for Barrie and Frohman. From her plavs inthe Empire Theater in New York alone Miss Adamsis reported to have harvested more than a millionand a half dollars. When you consider today's taxes,perhaps her income was sreater even than that ofour highest paid motion picture stars.I can think of no parallel to this. Is there, or wasthere ever, such a man as Charles Frohman. whocould deal so adroitly with whimsy and so firmlv withMammon?7. BUTTONS AND BOWSNew York amazed me. I was amazed every nightwhen I came out of the stage door of the EmpireTheater to look up and see the dark blue of the skyand the clear stars. This was so new to me. I had beenused to groping may way through the London fog. Iwas amazed to see so many women drinking whisky,often too much of it. Perhaps because I preferredabsinthe frappe and had been brought up on Guin-ness' stout. And there were other surprises in storefor me. But my social life in New York was on thewhole rigidly circumscribed by my duenna, Mr.Charles Frohman. Both C. F. and Mother were ob-sessed by the notion that I might be gobbled up bysome wicked young man—never mind if he was rich,handsome and Social Register and with the most im-peccable intentions. It was their firm intention tokeep their little flower both unsullied and unmarriedfor as long as possible. Meantime, of course, I corre-sponded fervently with my Devonshire beau and fellabsent-mindedly in and out of love with this one andthat one about as regularly as I washed my hair.But for quite a while, under all this tender surveil-lance, most of my male companions were distin-guished gentlemen many years my senior. WilliamGillette, for instance, and Mark Twain.68BUTTONS AND BOWS69Gillette, to repeat, was the great gentleman of thetheater. He was also a wit, capable of more searchingthrusts, it seems to me, than what passes for reparteein today's tedious cafe society. Once he was discussinga middle-aging actor who had married a young wife."Yes," he said, "poor So-and-so, he has a youngwife who loves him passionately and annoys him inother ways."When I saw Mark Twain, just three years beforehis death on the night that Halley's comet rose again,our greatest novelist was in the turmoil of spirit andmind which followed the death of his wife, the be-loved "Livvy," and the death of his favorite daughter.He wrote, I have been told, some three or four hun-dred stories and unfinished novels during his last tenyears, none of them good, according to his standards,and he seemed to have come to the conclusion thatall the world was a dream, all was futile.According to Dixon Wecter, who is now at theHuntington Library studying a vast collection of un-published stories and letters by Mark Twain duringthis period, almost nothing he left showed the gaietyand humor that marked his earlier works. He spenthours composing the most scathing kind of com-plaints to theater managers and traction companieswhose employees, he claimed, had not shown propercourtesy to his daughters. He threatened to use allhis influence to hound and destroy offending streetcar conductors and theater ushers. He complainedviolently against bank presidents—but, having got70WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEthe venom out of his system, he filed these lettersand never mailed them.But with me, in 1907 and 1908, he was gay andamusing. I did not understand his tragedy until yearslater.He loved the theater, often occupying a box withfriends to see our play, and he enjoyed coming back-stage to visit Mr. Drew and me. It was always excitingand enjoyable to see him. He would shake that beau-tiful shock of snowy white hair and lean his wonder-ful head against mine to say, "Billie, we redheadshave to stick together."I thought nothing of making a trip to New Yorkfrom either Boston or Philadelphia after the show ifhe had invited me to one of his charming little Sundaynight dinners. He used to give these at that dear oldhouse on lower Fifth Avenue, about Ninth Street,which had a quaint dining room of the period withsliding doors which pushed back into the walls afterdinner; then one found oneself rustling with the ladiesinto the drawing room which looked out on the Ave-nue. Washington Square and the lower part of FifthAvenue, it always seems to me, still holds so muchromance of old New York.I remember the Favershams, Julia and Willie, andtheir adorable house, where at a soiree I first metMary Garden. When I was presented to her by thelovely Julia, who said I was a little American girlwho had returned to her own land, Miss Garden gaveme a rather cool reception, a mere nod of her mag-nificent head set on those beautiful, famous shoulders.BUTTONS AND BOWS71Though I was slightly chagrined I was deeply im-pressed by her regal personality. Her sweet sister andher father later made up to me any indifference theopera star may have exhibited.Mark Twain seldom said anything funny in thosedays, but one line of his I shall never forget. He saidit to me, then inscribed it on a photograph:"Truth is the most valuable thing we have, Billie.Let us always economize it"Both Frohmans, Dan and C. F., used to play bil-liards with Mark Twain at the Players and althoughDr. Clemens had been a billiard player all his lifeand considered himself an expert he was not goodenough to compete with these Broadway masters.But they were kind."He doesn't win enough, he's unhappy," Dan toldC. F. "Let's let him win every third game." And theydid just that, in spite of the fact that Mark Twainwas meeting them every day in court in a bitterlycontested lawsuit.Besides these amiable companions, I soon foundmyself being introduced to another kind of society,that of the Goulds and the As tors. One of my mentorswas the renowned Frederick Townsend Martin,"Freddy" to his friends, a small man with a kind ofwalrussy moustache, very fussy but really a darlingand an expert with the ladies. Freddy was the kindwho purrs over you, arranging everything in theheight of elegance. All very impersonal, mind you. Hegave beautifully arranged parties at his Newportplace and at his big house on Fifth Avenue. My first72WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEimpression of New York society will always beflavored with the peculiar fragrance of rum andchrysanthemums. Freddy's house was always pro-fusely decorated with these flowers and others fol-lowed suit. The favorite entertainment was a teabetween 4 and 7 at which the refreshments consistedchiefly of hot tea into which you poured a little rumfrom a carafe. It may not sound particularly appe-tizing now, I know, to a generation of cocktaildrinkers, but we thought it was very special then.On the few occasions when we went to restaurants,Bustanoby's, Sherry's or Delmonico's were the properplaces to go. So far as I know there was no such thingin New York as a "night club" until, say, 1910 at least.These restaurants catered to big private parties,providing several rooms and three- or four-pieceNegro orchestras for dancing. Duck a la presse wasthe thing to eat, and the avocado was a luxuriousrarity.In England, for some reason, it was commonly be-lieved that all oysters were poisonous. It was de-creed that you had to remove the curly end andhard lump and eat only the fat, white part, and thiswas called "bearding the oyster." In London theheadwaiter did this for you, but in New York, wherethey didn't, where you were supposed to gulp theentire oyster, I used to try to "beard" mine, alwaysmaking an unattractive mess of things.One of my escorts looked at me in nauseatedastonishment one evening as I performed this opera-tion.BUTTONS AND BOWS73"For Heaven's sake, Bilhe, I will have to walkaround the block while you do that," he announced,and he did.I met Minnie Maddern Fiske once or twice butnever really knew her, though she must have been aremarkable woman and magnificent actress. Mrs.Fiske belonged to the Society for the Prevention ofCruelty to Animals and once called on me to enlistme in a campaign of hers against wearing furs orfeathers. Mrs. Fiske was one of the first women Ihad seen smoke. She did it in spite of her veil, whichshe raised and dropped like a second-act curtain.She would lift the veil and puff, making long the-atrical gestures with her cigarette, drop the veil, liftit again, smoke and gesture, puff and gesture, dropthe curtain. This act so enchanted me that I failedto get up much enthusiasm for not wearing chin-chilla.As for furs, we all wore them. They were muchcheaper then, perhaps a third of what they costnow. Our coats were chinchillas, long, to the ankles,and our hats were invariably decked out with long,sweeping plumes over one side, aigrettes, I think.We had little corsets ( never mentioned ) , fine silkstockings, very thin, and evening hose with laceinserts. (Never a word about them.)My five hundred a week, a commonplace forsupporting actors in the theater a few years later,kept Mother and me in elegant style. We had anItalia car, beige-colored, beautifully appointed in-side, and a uniformed chauffeur named Rivet in74WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEblack livery. His salary, I believe, was eighty dollarsa month, and Thurston my English maid, receivedsomewhat less than that.Cloth coats were lined with fur, squirrel, babysable, mink even, although mink was not the glam-orous fur it has become today. Sable jackets werereasonable, as was ermine. Most of the men worefur coats then. They used mink for the lining.Some years later when Flo Ziegfeld used to cometo my dressing room, he found one night that an-other suitor was ahead of him. This gentleman wasregarding himself in a mirror, arranging his coat,when Flo arrived. Flo walked past him, threw openthe door and frowned at me."Of all the damn fools I ever saw," he growled."Who is that guy out there primping his mink?"But after we were married, the first thing Ziegfelddid was buy himself a mink coat.I was a contented little thing. I had my work,which was easy, pretty clothes, security and ap-plause. I wish I could report that I was ambitious,battling for opportunity, trying to learn. But it wasnot so. I have always enjoyed reading biographiesand I read them with a questing eye for helpfulhints when I started this book. Almost always, Idiscovered, the heroes and heroines of these self-told tales suffered in their youth, yearned, struggled,dreamed of future greatness and met crisis aftercrisis with character and skill. Sometimes they ac-knowledge disastrous mistakes, but they are alwaysBUTTONS AND BOWS75deciding between this course and that course ofaction. The pattern is so pat that I am inclined towink at it.Few of us, I suspect, even the great ones, everhave the opportunity to plan our careers. Usuallywe do not even recognize the crossroads when wecome to them. These crossroads are, unfortunately,laid out like the streets of Los Angeles, confused,hurried, crowded, and with the signposts placed sothat no light ever shines on them. I can point outthe turning points in my life now but when I firstsaw them I did not recognize them. I believe thatmost people do what they have to do at the time.What I had to do was be as pretty as I could andas gay as I could on the stage, so I did that.Nothing happened at this time of my life, in-deed, to inspire me with the notion that I might oneday become a great actress. Certainly, the criticsdid not encourage me. Percy Hammond, whose criti-cisms were likened to "venom from contented rattle-snakes," thought that I was "pretty," "beguiling" and"lovable" but that I amounted to nothing in a his-trionic way. He wrote that when he looked at allthe silly faces packed to the roof to see me act hewas baffled for an answer. Another famous critic ofthat time, Alan Dale, came to interview me once andwrote a rather charming piece. But he confessed thathe approached the interview with dread, convincedthat I would perch on the arm of his chair.Throughout my entire career up to now I cannotrecall any critic who completely approved of me.76WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEThey paid me compliments, but even then they wereexceeded in grace by the weather reporter for theSt. Louis Post-Dispatch. When I played there inMy Wife with Mr. Drew, he wrote:"Forecast for today: as fair as Billie Burke."We went on tour in January and played until latein the spring. Throughout this trip, which took usall the way to San Francisco and back, Uncle Jacklabored to trip me into uttering a Britishism on stage,but by this time I had learned to cope with him. Heturned then to antic comment about my luggage.Mother and I always traveled with odd hampers,boxes, wicker trunks, things which fell to pieces andrevealed our underclothes every time they weretossed around. Gradually we learned that solid ex-pensive American luggage is the best thing for trans-continental tours.Uncle Jack amused the entire company, enter-tained us lavishly with dinner parties, orderedcavalcades of carriages for us to go sight-seeing in,and introduced us to his friends in every large andsmall city en route. In San Francisco we were oftenthe guests of the officers of the Pacific Fleet, whichhad put in there as a respite from the round-the-world cruise ordered by Theodore Roosevelt. Wecould go out daily in the captain's barge, bouncingover the choppy waters, and Uncle Jack would in-variably become seasick. But he never missed a trip.Mother particularly enjoyed this tour becauseshe could walk into stores and look over the BillieBUTTONS AND BOWS77Burke curls and dresses which had become a fadafter our hit in Xew York. My hair was always long,but in order to save time in make-up I had had madein London a handful of little red curls which Iattached to the back of my head and which bobbedas I walked, always looking as if they were about tooff. Hepner the hair man. close friend of sofallmanv important theatrical people, had the franchisefor the sale of these curls and he offered them ineverv department store in America. Parents boughtgirls much as they boughtthem for their littleShirley Temple dresses in a somewhat later dawMother would walk into a store in Atlanta orDallas, call for the curls, then swell with pride andpoint to me. "That ts Billie Burke," she would sawThe stores also sold dresses with flat collars and lace,"Billie Burke dresses," and these too became quitepopular.I had fun. In Minneapolis it snowed. I sot awavfrom the company, bought a small sled, and plavedon the street taking belly-whoppers with the kidsfor one whole afternoon. Our company manager washorrified, pointing out how disgraceful if the pressgot hold of the story of this undignified behavior ofa Charles Frohman actress. Todav, of course, pressagents beg their stars to do unusual things and whenthev don't, pretend they do.In San Francisco we plaved in the Van Ness The-ater, which had been hurriedly built after the fire.This was the fire (never called anything but a firein San Francisco, which vou mustn't call "Frisco,"78WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEeither) that destroyed the tall buildings and inspiredUncle Jack's remark that it took an earthquake toshake his nephew John Barrymore out of bed an3put him to work. Our theater had a corrugated tinroof which shook and rattled and thundered duringevery performance but we were seasoned troupersand didn't mind. There were always those beautifullyuniformed Naval officers out front to play to andthey were used to noise.Two more John Drew anecdotes are worth settingdown, I think. Once when he was touring the Southwith E. H. Sothern (Uncle Jack said), a strangerstopped Sothern on the street and complimented himon his acting. "Mr. Mansfield, I am very glad to seeyou here. I am going to see every performance. I thinkyou are our greatest actor, Mr. Mansfield.""Why didn't you say something?" Uncle Jackasked Sothern."What was there to say?" Sothern asked."He doesn't know that Mansfield is dead," UncleJack said."Well," said Sothern, "that doesn't hurt me much.I'm sorry about Mansfield, but that man doesn't evenknow Vm alive."Joseph H. Choate, who had been our ambassadorto the Court of St. James, stopped Uncle Jack on thestreet one day."Good God, it's Drew!" he said.Drew admitted he was Drew."But you look just the same," said Choate. "Whydon't you ever grow any older?"BUTTONS AND BOWS79"I don't know, Mr. Choate," Uncle Jack said,"unless I can explain it in the words of Adam inAs You Like It: 'Never in my youth did I applyhot and rebellious liquors in my blood/"Choate looked at Uncle Jack quizzically."Now look, Drew, how much truth is there inthat?""None at all, sir," said Uncle Jack. "But it's a goodquote, isn't it?"When we returned from the tour I had attained—how shall I say it? It wasn't fame. It was a certainkind of niche of my own. I was a new kind of actress,carefree and red-headed and I had beautiful clothes.The clothes, of course, were as important as any-thing else at the start of my stage life. They attractedattention in London and Charles Frohman sawthat they attracted attention in New York and onthe road.The styles of 1907 were in general quite ugly.Women wore heavy dark clothes. But I always ap-peared on stage in light, close-fitting things, withpoint cfesprit lace, white with a rose sash, a hatruffled with Valenciennes and crushed ribbons. Be-fore I knew it, I was setting styles. It was done thisway:My dressmaker was Madame Hayward of London,who made lovely gowns for a very few people.Madame Hayward used to run over quickly to Parisand anticipate what the great fashion houses wereup to there. She would return to London and designWITH A FEATHER OX MY NOSESOnew frocks for me and I would appear in New Yorkwith all my things at least a season ahead of thestyle in America.All of this was paid for by C. F. His managersused to quibble, to be sure, when I would turn inexpense accounts for dozens of white gloves at atime."Why can't you wear the gloves you wore lastweek?" they would demand."Thev're a little gray," I would reply. "They haveto be pure white or I don't feel fresh." And so wewould purchase another dozen pairs of white kidgloves, arm length.But as I was saying when I was interrupted byMadame Havward, we returned from the tour, C. F.called me in, patted my hand, and said, "Going togive you your own company next year."He meant that in my next play I would be starred.I have been asked a good many times about themake-up that women used before there was a beautyparlor on every corner. On stage, of course, we usedfairly heavy make-up generally supplied by Germanexperts, who were the world's best then. But for streetand evening wear, our make-up was extremelv sim-ple. Girls with blonde eyebrows and eyelashes, likeme, were forced to use a little burnt cork in orderto keep from looking like rabbits, but mascara wasnever used except on stage.We used no lipstick or rouge at all. Only poor lostBUTTONS AND BOWS81ladies wore that, and one of the most damning thingsvou could say of a woman was "She paints."But we took tender care of our skin. We used araw cucumber lotion made with milk and the whiteof an egg. When we were very tired we would putthe white of an egg on our faces, then rub it off inwarm water.For colds or bronchial ailments we applied hotonion poultices, and always for our baths we inserteda little bag of vellow bran meal. This made the waterwonderfully soft and refreshing.We took the greatest pains with our hair but didnot wash it as often as nowadays. No matter howtired we were, our maids had to brush that hair forhundreds of strokes morning and night. For washingwe used castile soap and sometimes put a little lernonjuice in the rinse water. It was not until a few yearslater that I learned from a certain interesting gentle-man that a pint of champagne is more effective forhighlighting the golden glints.There was a kind of French chalk, a powderMother used ; which she crushed and made herself.She used to put a tiny dab on the end of my nose,then carefully wipe it off.If these unguents make me sound too much likea vegetable plate I can only say that they were effec-tive and that most of the actresses and society womenI knew then used thern. There were no elaboratebeautv salons with electric massages and fan maga-zines in those days.The chief thing we did then for beauty aid wasS2WITH A FEATHER OX MY NOSEexercise. And this is something I have never ne£-lected all my life. Today I begin my every morningbv standing on my head. Then I turn somersaults,then take a cold shower. Coffee drinkers will not be-lieve me, of course, but this is a fresher and betterway to start the day than with caffein.As a young girl I worked with Indian clubs everymorning and with a bar bell. This keeps you thin inthe waist. Always, whether I was on Broadwav or ontour, I walked my five miles a day. I seldom arrivedat a new hotel with the rest of the company, but tooka cab out to some country club about an hour's walkaway and trudged into town leading mv dog;. Thishad a double advantage, for by the time I reachedmy hotel Mother and my maid would have done allthe unpacking.Eating at night is always one of the great dangersfor players. You don't want to eat before a perform-ance and you are invariably famished afterwards andinclined to pile on too many calories. I might as wellconfess: I have always had a tendencv to be roly-poly. I have dieted carefully all my life. Eight yearsago I gave up meat and although my friends accuseme of subsisting on rabbit food I feel better for it.8. ALL THAT GLITTERSAnd then I saw my name in lights.LAs I have admitted, I was not an ambitiousgirl. I had not hankered for fame or visualized myselfas accomplishing great things. But when CharlesFrohman told me that I was to have my own com-pany I was delighted and a little awed by the notionof seeing my name shining on Broadway in companywith such distinguished players as Mrs. PatrickCampbell, Mrs. Minnie Maddern Fiske, MaudeAdams, Lillian Russell, and Maxine Elliott. I huggedthe idea to me and thought that my first glimpse ofglory would be as profound a thrill as Cortez's in theschoolboy classic when he first saw the Pacific.Towards the end of rehearsals of Love Watches Iwas hurrying back to the Lyceum Theatre on footfrom the Knickerbocker Hotel nearing 47th Street.My eyes were attracted by the lights over the theaterentrance—and there it was—Billie sitting on top ofthe Burke, all spelled correctly in electric lights astall as myself.To make this a better story I should invent somefable about having run sobbing to Charles Frohman,dropping to my knees by his chair and crying, "Ah!My dear, dear friend !" That would be in the theatri-cal tradition and you might even believe it.83S4WITH A FEATHER OX MY NOSEBut all I did was to stop a moment, my heart skip-ping a beat, and just gaze. Then somewhere out ofthat other world we call the subconscious came avoice in my ear. a dear, whimsical voice saving,'"Someday 111 see my baby's name on Broadway inlights bigger than she is." And there it was! I'm sureBillv Burke saw them too from a pinnacle far higherthan we can measure: and for a second I couldimagine a gay chortle and see a merrv face balancinga feather on his nose with sheer delight.Persons more experienced than I was then know,of course, that these expected moments of triumphare always disappointing. We all work up to ourlittle or big successes gradually, so that when we domanage them they are usually merely part of thework at hand. As a matter of fact, it is my notionthat our fairest experiences are seldom the dramaticones. You do not have to be Xapoleon at Austerlitzor a Democrat who has humbled the pollsters totaste the best triumphs in life: nothing could makeany of us more arrogantly proud than when our chil-dren suddenly say something intelligent. And nofinancier ever exulted over a staggering Wall Streetcoup with the warm delight I feel when I find adollar in an old coat pocket. We may not be poetsbut we can enjoy a country road after a spring rainas much as thev, and who knows? Perhaps we smellit better.Which is to saw my friends, don't envy the peoplewho get their names in lights. They don't get as muchIn Mrs. Ponderbury's Past (London. 1906)Dover Street StudiosCharles FrohmanWhiteALL THAT GLITTERS85kick out of it as you may think they do. They justworry about how to keep their light shining.For my 1908-09 season I had the best play I wasever in: Love Watches, sl comedy in four acts fromthe French of R. de Flers and G. Caillavet, theParisian collaborators who were writing so many suc-cesses. It had a wonderful cast, and again, thosesmart ahead-of-the-fashion clothes. We played foralmost two years with 172 performances in NewYork. Of course, there have been great theatricalseasons in New York before and since, but these earlyones naturally seem to me to have been the grandestof all. There are always giants in your extreme youth.Love Watches lingers in my memory as one of mymost delightful plays. It was about a young wife inher first year of marriage and might well have beencalled The First Year, but unlike that fine Americanplay of a few years later, my vehicle was written withGallic insouciance, with more emphasis on romancethan on the budget.As an example of what smart direction can do fora play, we had a scene in which I as the distressedbride fled to my friend, played by Ernest Lawford,after my first quarrel with my husband. Ernest en-acted a bookish character and met me in his library,where I was supposed to become rather frightenedof him. When Charles Frohman saw us rehearsingthis scene he directed me to run up the library lad-der, which went around the books on a little track,and refuse to come down. It was rather an engaging86WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEbit of business which I enjoyed doing and whichseemed to please audiences.This was the year of an amusing contretemps inwhich Harrison Grey Fiske and Henry W. Savageboth produced Ferenc Molnar's The Devil, eachclaiming to have a prior agreement with Molnar'sagent. Neither company was particularly successful,but the Savage company helped the career of GeorgeArliss, a young man who had come to America withMrs. Pat Campbell, expecting like me to returnquicklv to London. Mr. Arliss staved twenty-twoyears before he played on the British stage again.Lillian Russell was playing in Wildfire. I met herfirst—and it seems entirely appropriate—in Tiffany's,a perfect background for her, with her eves so peri-winkle blue, full of mirth and so beautifully set inher lovely head. Oh, yes, she was just as marvelousas they say.Not far from us Uncle Jack began his season witha Somerset Maugham play, Jack Straw, in which heintroduced a new leading lady to succeed me. Hername was Mary Boland. James K. Hackett was act-ing in The Prisoner of Zenda and Walter Hampdenwas appearing in Charles Rann Kennedy's The Serv-ant in the House.Maude Adams was the greatest hit in town, natu-rallv. She was starring in Barrie's What Every WomanKnows, the kind of thing I wish I had been cleverenoudi to have merited.The most important debut that vear was not thatof an actor but of a new playwright, Edward Shel-ALL THAT GLITT,s:Xeddon—enormously talented, kind. wise. lo\ -Sheldon who meant so much to me and to all hisfriends. In 190S Xed was fresh out of ProfessorWge Pierce Baker's Workshop at Har.wr;: wi:h ;.nM. A. in one pocket and his first play in the other.The drama was Salvation Sell, in which Mrs. MinnieMaddern Fiske starred, the first of a long successionof brilliant plavs until Ned's ill-starred but beautifuldeath onlv a few years ago.Eva Tan sua v joined the Ziegfeld Follies that vear.So did Norah Baves. I heard about their being therebut I never saw them, or Ziegfeld either, for thatmatter, because I did not see a Ziegfeld Follies untilsome years later.My leading man in Love Watches was CvrilKeightiev. He was a handsome bov with waw hairparted in the middle, looked like a young WalterHuston, and was a highly competent actor to boot.But one night I saw the strangest idling, j W as pass-ing his dressing room and his door was slightly ajar.I will admit I alwavs look in doors that are slightlyajar.There stood Cvril in his shorts and a top hat. Thatwas all. Shorts and a top hat. I skidded to a stopand trotted back."Well, sir/"' I said, pushing the door all the wayopen. "You are awfullv prettv but I never saw suchan astonishing setup."Cyril tipped his hat to me and went right on look-in; at himself in the mirror."My hair.'"' he said.88WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"Your hair?""It's like this," said Cyril, patting make-up on hisface. "My hair is too curly. It kinks up. So I have touse stuff on it. I have to do that before I start mymake-up. I have experimented with every kind ofdevice to set my hair after I put the stuff on it andI have discovered that the best of all possible thingsis my top hat. So I wear the top hat to set my hair.Do you set your hair, Billie? I recommend a top hat."All actors are a little mad, as possibly you alreadyknow.As for leading men, I believe every actress willagree with me that this is true: you are either in lovewith them or you despise them. You explore make-believe romance with them night after night, you letthem make love to you—and vice versa—on stage,you travel with them and you succeed or fail withthem. All told I have worked with a great numberof leading men and my average is pretty good: Ionly hated about half of them. In all justice to thesegentlemen, however, I have to admit I was luckyenough, always, to get excellent actors. I owe somuch to them and so much to the carefully selectedcasts that Charles Frohman always gave me. In LoveWatches we had Ernest Lawford, Cyril Keightley,W. H. Crompton, Stanley Dark, Horace H. Porter,William Claire, William Edgar, Maude Odell, KateMeek, Louise Drew, Isabel West, Ida Greeley Smith,Annie Bradley, Laura Clement, Maude S. Love, andCharlotte Shelby. I ask each one of them to stepforward now for a little curtain call, especially Char-ALL THAT GLITTERS89lotte Shelby, who had two little girls with blondecurls, one of them afterwards known as Mary MilesMinter.If my acting did not set the Hudson afire, my newclothes did fetch the audience. There was always agasp and a little flutter of surprise on my entrance.I played that entrance to the hilt, you may be sure.In the second act, in the scene in which I left myhusband, I wore a large hat, a long stole, and a muffof pure white swan's-down. The stole was lined withturquoise velvet. At any rate, this was a buoyantgetup, either for the stage or for bidding a husbandfarewell.And in the last act Madame Hayward had madefor me a shell-pink dress in lame embroidered indiamonds and pearls, with geraniums at my waistand in my hair—an interesting effect, since it hasalways been argued that red-headed women couldnot wear red.I honestly think I dressed more to please womenthan to please men. Chiefly I dressed to make myselfseem as attractive as possible on stage. But as LadyDuff-Gordon told me once after she had moved overfrom London to set up shop in New York as a high-fashion dressmaker, "A girl should always dress withlots of little bows and ribbons so that a man willwant to undo them one by one."We began our second season of Love Watches witha tour of New England, and on our way to BostonI met with what seemed to be a very trivial accident.I pricked my finger on a thorn of a rose. But this90WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEturned into a little swelling, a small red line startedinching up the back of my hand, and then another.In Hartford I was feverish and sick and a doctorpainted my hand with something painful. I went onstage with my arm in a sling and read my playfullines through gritted teeth. My temperature was104°.We had a really wonderful doctor in Northampton.He stayed up all night poulticing my arm with flax-seed. In the morning he called in a specialist fromBoston, a cold little man who examined me, con-ferred with my doctor, and announced firmly that theonly hope of saving my life was amputation. Astrep infection had set in. My entire arm was swollenand red, at least three times normal size.My own doctor and I looked at each other. "Wewill work something out," he said calmly.I was sure then, as I am sure now, that my guard-ian angel sent this wonderful man to me. All mylife I have never ceased to bless his name. I havenever once forgotten. But I have been advised thatbecause of his devotion to his profession he wouldconsider it unethical for his name to be in print, soI reluctantly omit it.My Northampton doctor gave me something morethan medical attention. He gave me Faith. I prayed,and I had complete Faith because he brought meFaith. I have never had the slightest doubt that myrecovery was a complete demonstration.Mother, bless her, had faith too. Mother, of course,always had faith. She was indomitable.:ALL THAT GLITTERS91"Billie will never be any good without her arm,"she said. "She would be miserable the rest of herlife.""We will work something out," my doctor said.We knew that he would.We lost the four weeks Boston engagement, ofcourse. Frohman was generous about that, though.He closed the show at once, sending one of his tersetelegramsCANCEL BOSTON THERE ARE MANY PLAYSTHERE IS ONLY ONE BILLIE BURKE.They would dress me in the morning and take meto the park to get fresh blood in me. Amazing strideshave been made in medicine since, I know, espe-cially in the sulpha drugs, but they had nothing likethat then. It was touch and go for twenty-four hourswhile the poison mounted toward my heart. Bothmy nurses were skeptical and continually urged meto call for the surgeon, with his knives, but I said"No."Finally, my doctor performed a minor surgeryhimself, finding that the time had come to drain offsome poison, and slowly I began to get better. Wewent to Atlantic City to take in the bracing air fora week and I was trundled up and down the board-walk. Charles Frohman never let me see the bills.He paid not only my salary during this layoff, butthe salaries of the entire company.When Love Watches resumed again we went ontour. We traveled a la Blanche Burke, of course,92WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwith dozens of silk pillows to prop us up, severaldogs, our personal maid, and our myriad numbersof trunks and boxes. From then on we seldom stoppedat hotels. Our advance man (we had a wonderfulpress agent named Francis Reid) would engage ahouse or apartment for us and it would be complete,spic-and-span and bright for us when we arrived. Iwas treated like a little princess on a cushion. Mydressing room was always done over, even for a shortengagement, with fresh draperies, and all my ownelaborate things were always established there be-fore I arrived. Yes, beyond any question at all, Iwas spoiled.But then, so were many other actresses. This wasthe era of spoiled actresses. Maxine Elliott once ex-pressed astonishment and horror that I traveled inPullman cars at all."My dear," she said, ' riow do you stand it? Thoseterrible coaches. I wouldn't dream of moving fromNew York to Philadelphia, even, unless it was in myprivate car."When we played in Washington we had a delight-ful visitor. This was a little, old, wrinkled, sweet-faced Negro woman whom we always addressedrespectfully as "Cousin Lucy." She had been a servantof Mother's and before that had worked for mygrandmother, all her life having worked with justtwo families, but now she was too old for toil. Imanaged to make arrangements for her to have ahome for the rest of her life, and left some moneyso that she would always be cared for.ALL THAT GLITTERS93Cousin Lucy came to lunch with me at the Willard,and after she had embraced me and petted me andbabied me, I asked her what she wanted most."Well," she said, "you is mighty pitty, baby chile,you is mighty pitty, but yo' Mother, now, she wasplum* beautiful. I use* to iron her petticoats, and deywas so stiff when dey rustled as she walk, you couldjes hear em saying 'Dollar a yard, dollar a yard,dollar a yard/ Yes'm, dey is somethin' I wants. Iwould des love to have me a nice pair of windin'sheets."One of the fine cities in which I did not arrive inmy private car was Charlotte, North Carolina. Anamazing thing happened there. I became a mother.I cannot explain these facts of life to you satisfac-torily. I was busy seeing America and busy with myacting. All I know is that my mother, who was alwaysarranging and always managing, in some mannermet an old friend, May Watson; a lady whose hus-band seemed to have wandered away. Mrs. Watsonhad a small daughter and was having a hard time,so when we left Charlotte we arranged for them tomeet us at our house in Yonkers.This was near the end of our 1910 season and wewere due to sail soon for London. Halfway over wereceived a wireless that Mrs. Watson was ill, andbefore we docked came the shocking news that shehad contracted pneumonia and had died, leaving herlittle girl alone.Frantically we cabled back and forth, had thehouse closed, put the child in care of a purser, and94WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEstarted her on her way to join us in Paris. She wasabout ten, very pretty, very delicate, and very thin.She was horribly seasick, and on top of this made themistake of trying to eat artichokes, leaves and all."I put them in my mouth," she sobbed, "but Ireally couldn't swallow them."Mother legally adopted Cherry Watson but shebecame my child, lived with me, attended Tewkes-bury School above Hastings, and has been my closefriend all my life. Cherry was married in 1916, hasa delightful house in Bronxville, is the mother oftwo fine boys, and—what becomes of years I can'timagine, I must misplace them somewhere—recentlybecame a grandmother.As always, C. F. enormously enjoyed the distinc-tion of producing his plays in London and he wasenthusiastic about the chances of Love Watches atthe Haymarket; but this turned out to be an unfor-tunate venture. Instead of bringing over the Ameri-can company, he substituted very fine British playersfor the small parts and the London public took excep-tion to this. They did not like French adaptationsand they thought the play was without chivalry andwithout merit. The critics had retained a certainaffection for me, but all told they hurt us so cruellythat we did not linger long.I think this was the season that the Ballet Russehad its sensational premiere in Paris. Diaghileffbrought over Nijinski and we saw the premiere ofDebussy's The Afternoon of a Faun at the Chatelet,ALL THAT GLITTERS95that vast, magnificent opera house, and Pavlova andIda Rubinstein danced.At this time I met my playwrights M. de Flersand M. Caillavet, very delightful people indeed, butI must say that I was most particularly fetched bythe portly and realistic Madame Caillavet, who tookme into her bedroom one afternoon and casuallypointed to a picture of a very pretty woman on herdressing table. It was a photograph of her husband'smistress."Marie," she said, indifferently. "My husband'slittle belle amie, you know."Ah, the French.And it was on another trip returning from Paristhat we had the adventure with the hotel fire inLondon.We were staying at the Carlton, getting ready tosail for New York, when there was a great uproarone night, an orchestration of yelling, shrieking, andexcitement, along with the jangle of the fire wagonspulling up at the front doors. Almost everything wehad was packed, we were dining out that night, itwas about six o'clock, and Mother was taking herbath.I grabbed the things I thought were most valuable,bundled Mother into a coat, dripping as she was,while she fumbled around for what she could save,and we fled down the corridor, down three flights ofstairs, out into the street, and into the car of a littleGrand Duke who was waiting for us, fire or no fire.96WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"Great Heavens, I left my jewelry box upstairs!"I complained when we were in the automobile."No, I brought that," Mother said calmly, handingit to me. But then, with enormous distress in hervoice: "But I forgot my corsets."I examined what I had saved."Here they are," I said.Whereupon we embraced each other and congratu-lated each other on our presence of mind in rescuingour most valuable possessions. A touching scene.As it turned out my trunks, all packed, had beenhurried over and carefully kept on the stage of HisMajesty's Theatre next door and were sent over bythe next boat. But I boarded the steamer in high-heeled pumps, a foulard outfit with a light travelingcoat, no hat, and nothing whatsoever to sleep in. Iwas quickly taken care of, though, by Dorothy Don-nelly, who starred in Ned Sheldon's The PrincessZim-Zam, and by another helpful actress, LouiseClosser Hale, who lent me the things a girl needs andwhich she cannot purchase at the ship's barbershop.We had lived in rented houses in Yonkers sincearriving in New York. I would go back and forth toNew York "by motor," as we said then. Now Motherdecided that we should live even farther out in thecountry. We suddenly acquired thirty-five acres andan old house near Hastings, and Blanche for a whileceased to be a watchful mother and dramatic coachand turned engineer.She planned roads, bridges, and walls. She hadALL THAT GLITTERS97in contractors and Japanese gardeners by the platoon.When they gave her prices on things she insistedthat the work could be done for half as much, andabout half the time she was right. It wound up asBurkely Crest, with a teahouse facing a tennis court,a swimming pool, Japanese bridges, apple trees andspacious lawns. I did not know it then, but BurkelyCrest was to be the scene of my happiest and mymost sorrowful moments.Meantime, my salary with Charles Frohman con-tinued at $500 a week. This was an excellent salary,far more than I had made in London. It providedMother and me with all we could want, especiallysince C. F. paid the bills for my long gloves andgave me carte blanche with Madame Hayward.Then Maxine Elliott came to tea one afternoon.This lovely woman had been my ideal and my idolsince the first time I saw her, and the fact that shetook me into her life was a joy to me.In after years, when I was not playing, I wouldtrot all the way over to Brooklyn and wait dutifullyuntil she was through on the stage, just to see her.Through her I knew Gertrude Elliott and the Forbes-Robertsons and so many other interesting and lovelypeople.Maxine was vivid and witty and wise. WhenForbes-Robertson first came over to work in TheThird Floor Back with her, she examined his con-tract, scornfully tore it up, and tossed it in Lee Shu-bert's lap—and Lee immediately rewrote the contractat Maxine's figure. She was like something beautiful98WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEout of a picture, with lovely hair and raven-wingedeyebrows, but she was so astute that when she en-tertained at her house in London she was able with-out the slightest effort to control the conversationand keep the ball rolling amiably between guests ofall kinds of political beliefs. She even managed withyoung Winston Churchill, no mean feat.In London she was bid to all the most distin-guished dinner parties. "I may sit below the saltsometimes, dear, but I'm there," she would say.And so Maxine came to tea one afternoon.There was a purpose in Maxine's call on me thatday. She was under contract to the Shuberts, thoseremarkable brothers Jake and Lee who had come toNew York out of nowhere and challenged the dy-nasties of Frohman and Belasco and the theatercombine controlled by Klaw and Erlanger.Maxine was pussyfooting, but she was also direct.She began by telling me how wonderful it was towork for such an astute and generous employer asLee Shubert."By the way, Billie," she said. "What kind of con-tract do you have with Frohman? Good contract?"I had no contract. I had agreed to come over for aseason. The season had turned into a tour, anotherplay and another tour and had lasted three years.But I didn't want Maxine to think I was a completefool about business."Oh," I said, "I have the same arrangement asMaude Adams has."Maxine persisted.ALL THAT GLITTERS99"And what is that?""No contract," I confessed.Maxine said that under certain circumstances thatmight be an advantage."But the money, dear, what does Frohman payyour"Five hundred a week," I said proudly.Maxine gasped."Five hundred! Why Billie, that's terrible! Now,just for your information, I happen to know that Leewould be happy to give you fifteen hundred dollarsa week and ten per cent of the gross."Miss Elliott then departed graciously, leaving mewith the unhappy conviction that I was a financialidiot. I was at the Frohman office first thing nextmorning.C. F.'s manager in charge of money was Alf Hay-man. I said to him: "Alf, I have been thinking thatI should get a little more money. Living expenses aregoing up.""Why, Billie, aren't you satisfied?""Oh yes, Alf, I'm satisfied, but living expenses aregoing up-""Who's been talking to you?""Oh, nobody at all, I was just thinking. Livingexpenses are going up and—""Who's been talking to you?""Well," I said, "everything is getting so muchmore expensive, and Maxine Elliott said—""So that's it," Alf said. "A Shubert spy. So they'retrying to get you away. How much did they offer?"100WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI gulped."Maxine said," I mumbled, "Maxine said that theShuberts would give me fifteen hundred a week andten per cent of the gross."Alf began to rant around with a face as red as ageranium. In addition to Ziegfeld whom they de-spised and Belasco with whom they were quarrelingat the moment, the Frohmans also hated the Shuberts."I'll talk to C. F," Alf finally said. "Meantime,you stay away from the Shuberts—and Maxine El-liott."I stayed away. Pretty soon C. F. sent for me."This is how we do it," he said. "Give you fivehundred a week to live on. You live on that. Then weput away a thousand a week for you. Put it in bonds.Then we give you ten per cent of the gross. But weput that away too. You will get notification of thiswithholding every week."And that is how I began to make money, thanks toMaxine Elliott, the most beautiful woman I everknew.9. CARUSO-BARRIE-MAUGHAMit the end of this book, conveniently arrangedXjL for skipping, I shall put down the casts of theplays I was in between 1906 and 1930.At the drop of a hint I will always tell in detailall about these productions. But it has always seemedto me that there is nothing so bleak as theatricalbiography play by play; total recall is a good thingin a Brownie No. 2 or an adding machine but it is adoubtful quality in an actress. Still, just as all of ussentimentally respond to certain songs, so do werecall moments in the theater, sometimes fondly andsometimes romantically. So I shall set down the playsfor your inspection.The plays were comedies. Many of them weretaken from the French. Others were by SomersetMaugham and Sir Arthur Wing Pinero. All of themwere fun for me to do—indeed, I always have fun onthe stage and in the movies and on the radio, andnow comes television, somewhat alarming but prob-ably more fun than ever. I think my best plays inthose early days were Love Watches and Mrs. Dot,but Pinero's The Mind the Paint Girl was the mostimportant. It was a comedy, naturally, but withtongue in cheek it seriously criticized the socialstructure of Great Britain where, at that time, it was101102WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEa scandalous thing for an upper-cruster to think ofmarrying a girl from musical comedy.I can describe my roles to you almost in one breath.Take a lot of my plays. Take sixteen of them. Herewere my stage names:MamieTrixieJacquelineDotColetteEloiseLilyTommyNoraJerryIsabelRoseVioletAnnieLauraand SuzanneNot one of these girls could have murdered herhusband.It hardly seems possible that Trixie, Jacquelineor Colette could have had husbands, or any othersuch routine impedimenta. They were gay girls whomoved lightly through society with bright lines tosay, expensively gowned and accompanied alwaysby the handsomest and most skillful leading menCARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM103Charles Frohman could buy. These plays were forfun, but they were produced very seriously: C. F.superintended every detail. Once when he was unableto walk he had himself carried into the theater ona stretcher day after day to make sure that every-thing was done with the eclat he demanded, and ingood taste. I went from town to town and from playto play, an exceedingly happy young actress.After the trouble with my arm, we returned toBoston with Love Watches. I met an extraordinaryman. He was the great romantic tenor of theMetropolitan Opera and his name was EnricoCaruso.Caruso began coming to the theater every nightwhen he was not singing in the opera, and everynight there would come hurtling down from hisgilded box a vast bouquet of American Beautyroses which were the fashion then, to the amusementof the audience. I suspect that if our play had notbeen a good play those proper Bostonians would havecome anyway, just to see Caruso throw the roses.Enrico would send back notes almost as floweryas his bouquets, but I avoided meeting him for awhile. It was not long, though, before we were in-troduced at a luncheon thoughtfully arranged by amutual friend. Immediately after that he began tocall on me at the old Touraine and to fall on oneknee and ask me to marry him. That man, I promiseyou, was very impetuous. He not only played inopera, he lived it.104WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"Leesten, leetle ba-bee," he would plead. "I seengyou the most lovely aria in all music." And he wouldfill his great chest and pour forth golden notes insuch crescendo that the whole apartment trembled.He would sing anywhere. Once, when he was smittenwith overwhelming passion for an unknown andconsiderably startled girl in the midst of Grand Cen-tral Station, he opened up with an aria there andcaused many commuters to miss their trains.We often took long walks along the Charles. ThereCaruso would declare his adoration; but first, hewould test his "Mi-mi." He had to know if his "Mi-mi"was there before any other consideration.Then he would announce:"Ah, my Mi-mi she is there. Billee, I love you."We had many suppers together. Caruso lovedspaghetti, of course, and delighted to arrange partiesat which he would consume enormous quantities be-tween his declarations of passion. Caruso was alwaysaccompanied by his entourage, like European royaltyor an American crooner, and his people were, ofcourse, mostly Italian. My entourage would consistchiefly of Harvard boys, embryonic brain-trusters,who would object violently to my going out withanyone else; they had their own ideas about parties.But Caruso insisted, volubly brushing aside objec-tions as if they did not exist, and away we would go.Our patient special waiter would beam at us. "Ah,I see we are fourteen tonight," he would grin. Four-teen or forty, it made no whit of difference to EnricoCaruso. He made love and ate spaghetti with equalCARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM105skill and no inhibitions. He would propose marriageseveral times each evening.Naturally, I did not take him seriously. I treatedhim as if he were a great, mischievous baby and said"Pouf" to his rather overpowering brand of love-making. I am afraid that I mistreated this great artist.My! Suppose I had taken him seriously!But I was giving marriage no place in my life atthat time. In after years, though, I have thoughtvery fondly of Caruso for proposing it.After Love Watches, C. F. gave me my choice oftwo plays, both of which he had planned for MarieTempest. There now, my friends, was an actress, andan actress of the really elegant tradition. Marie wasthe first actress dressed by the famous Madame Hay-ward, and she was the kind for whom, literally, redcarpets were laid from carriage to stage door so thatnot one fleck of city dust might touch her slippers.The Marquise, a play I did years later, was alsowritten for the beautiful red-headed Tempest.Of the two plays, I chose Mrs. Dot, and I haveforgotten what the other one was. With Mrs. Dotcame those three fine gentlemen and fine actors,Julian L'Estrange, who later married Constance Col-lier, Basil Hallam, and Frederick Kerr. Julian was,I am sure, the handsomest leading man an actresscould wish for, with his beautiful small head, blackhair, and arrogant chin. And Basil was an Apollowho was also excruciatingly funny. C. F. took myHallam away from me after the first year of Mrs. Dotbecause he feared the truth of rumors that Basil and106WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI were planning to leave him and do our own playsin London.Basil was the one who so shocked the ladies ofthe hotel when we were stopping in Boston. Everymorning he would get up early, don his runningtrunks and sweater with the wide Charterhouse col-ors and descend by the elevator to the public parks,where he would trot for miles. The ladies were in-censed, and reported to the management that theywould not ride in the same elevator with this shock-ing young man attired only in his underclothes; andso our Basil was banished to the freight elevator.After that he made his entrances and exits with thelaundry.I am sure that many playgoers remember BasilHallam. He was an exceptional actor and would berenowned today, I am confident, but he was killedin World War I when his parachute failed to openover enemy territory.Frederick Kerr performed a brief scene in this playthat almost drove audiences out of their minds. Withenormous gusto, he used to prepare a Rhine winecup on stage, using silver things ceremoniouslyfetched by the butler, peeling a lemon carefully,hanging it just so on the flagon, examining the labelof the bottle, and pouring the wine with a tantal-izing gurgle. After a few moments of this, audienceswould gulp and perish of thirst.Fred wore a Prince Albert in the play and was in-ordinately proud of the fact that he had owned itfor forty years. Before every entrance he wouldCARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM107stroke its lapels affectionately and call on the com-pany to witness what a marvelous frock coat he pos-sessed. During scenes in which we sat together ona sofa while other actors said their lines, we wouldcarry on a make-believe conversation, the burden ofwhich was always Fred's complaints about his dinneror Fred's diatribes against thieves who snatchedbulbs from his dressing room. But he invariably man-aged to make these complaints appear to be gallantpersiflage to the audience. Actors, I always say, areunusual people.With Mrs. Dot I met Somerset Maugham, its au-thor. Today, Mr. Maugham lets on that he is a "veryold party," but judging from the few happy timeswhen I have been fortunate enough to see him thesepast years, he is still a very handsome man. He wasknown and is known now as a British writer, but tome he has always seemed French. Indeed, he wasborn in France and learned French before he spokeEnglish; and he was Parisian instead of Bond Streetin elegance: always with his swallowtails and stripedtrousers, piping on his coat, smart gloves, a stick,beautifully made shoes, a gray top hat with a blackband, and his briskly clipped mustache. And he hadgreat smoldering brown eyes. Ah yes, Mr. Maugham,so you had, and I was a little in love with you, sir.Later it was Willie Maugham who took me by thehand literally, and led me to my fate. But at thattime I was chiefly grateful to him for a fine play—which, incidentally, he had written somewhat cyni-cally.108WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEMr. Maugham, as you probably know, has lived awell-planned career, turning from one form of litera-ture to another with deliberate skill. He began withnovels, then did a few light plays which made hisfortune. His next move was to write more seriousplays, but London producers feared these would beunpopular. In protest, Maugham wrote Mrs. Dot asan audience-pleaser, custom-made and tailored forMarie Tempest. I appreciated my good luck in get-ting this play and in following the celebrated MissTempest in it, but on the whole I was lightrheartedabout it; possibly it was my very lightheartednessthat contributed to our success. Our play was a hit.We ran for something more than two years inAmerica.Sometime later when I was in London, Willie gaveme luncheon at his delightful home in Mayfair. Whenit was over he took me to the fireplace in the halland showed me a small framed picture, one we hadmade as a souvenir of the two-hundred-and-fiftiethperformance of Mrs. Dot."Do you know who that interesting young womanis?" he asked. "Well, let me tell you. That is thewoman who bought me this house."I am told that he enjoyed this joke and frequentlypointed to my picture as "the woman who boughtme a house." Mrs. Dot, of course, did make a greatdeal of money for all of us.During these trips to Europe, which we madeevery summer, I always took Mother to a spa forseveral weeks for her rheumatism or whatever in-CARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM109teresting ailment she had collected during the winter.We went frequently to Carlsbad, that beautiful spotwhere we would walk in the park and buy thosedelicious little biscuits from the biscuit man, or nib-ble the Carlsbad ham—food for the gods. If C. F.happened to be in London he would often run overto Paris, if only for a lunch or dinner, while I wasthere.Often, James M. Barrie would accompany him andwe would dine at some charming spot, C. F.'s pref-erence being Armenonville in the Bois, supposedto have the most delicious food in the world. C. F.loved sweets with an uncontrollable passion. In NewYork he and Clyde Fitch used to eat pastries inone another's apartments, being ashamed to con-sume as many as they wanted in public. In the Bois,C. F. would often pile one delicacy on top of an-other—watermelon, ice cream, strawberries, musk-melon and cantaloupe, for instance. But the realinspiration of the trips to Paris with Barrie was agame they played.Barrie, whom I had just met at this time, was aScot, of course, but without the brogue of the pro-fessional Scotsman. He talked in a soft drawl, almosta purr. He was shy and sweet, always, but he playedthis odd game with Charles Frohman.We would line up in chairs at our table on thesidewalk, stationing ourselves strategically just wherethe ladies alighted from their carriages, and there wewould sit, staring at the ladies' legs. The gentlemenwould pull their large black hats low over their eyes,110WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEvisorlike, and fix their view on the curb where thegirls alighted from their fiacres. They could see nohigher than their ankles and the object of the gamewas to guess from this evidence whether they wereladies, cocottes, blondes, brunettes, show girls, ordowagers. Mr. Frohman, that worldly-wise observer,seldom missed. But poor Barrie, with all his sym-pathy and deep understanding of the feminine heart—when it came to judging women by their ankleshe never seemed to get things right.There is another incident with James M. Barriewhich I shall always cherish. One afternoon aftera walk we returned to his study, that small, tidy,book-lined and somewhat darkish study where somany fine books and plays had been written, for acup of tea. After a short talk, he was helping me onwith my jacket when all of a sudden, but very quietly,he said, "May I kiss you?""Why yes, of course," I said. I was not used tobeing asked.So Barrie kissed me, gently and quickly, about aninch south of my left ear. It was a peck, a frugallittle Scotch kiss.Then he pulled me to the door and before I knewit I was in my brougham and on my way home andBarrie had scurried back to the safety of his studyand his books.The Mind the Paint Girl by Pinero had not beena success in London. Just the reverse. And in lookingback I am surprised that Mr. Frohman consideredCARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM111doing it in America. But it was a magnificent part fora girl and, of course, there was no objection here, asthere had been in London, to a chorus girl's marryinginto the peerage. Here it made just an excellentvehicle, with a chance to wear ravishing clothes.This play is very strong, with a strong theater atmos-phere; the second act is supposed to take place backstage at the Gayety Theater in London, and one ofthe chief characters is supposed to be George Ed-wardes himself. All the girls and their beaux weretake-offs of popular people in what would be calledcafe society today.All the young men were brought over from London,and that magnificent actor, H. E. Herbert, played thefaithful man who loved Lily Parradell, the chorusgirl—me. Incidentally, one of the pretty young ac-tresses in my play was Jeanne Eagels, to whom noone paid much attention then except to observe thatshe was lovely to look at and pleasant to have around.A few years later we heard a great deal about herin Somerset Maugham's Rain.Our leading man left us shortly after the opening.He was replaced by Shelley Hull, a delightful per-son. Shelley was a graceful actor, lithe and hand-some, one of the first to play with the light andnatural touch. He was whimsical, sometimes faun-like, much like a young, blond Faversham. With himwas his wonderful young wife, a girl who was happyjust being his wife, giving no indication of her greatmastery of the art of acting that she later discoveredand made known to the theater as Josephine Hull.112WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI think it was the year of The Mind the Paint Girlthat something dawned on me, something of whatthe theater could really mean. Perhaps it was justthat I was becoming more experienced, a little older,or perhaps working with Dion Boucicault, who di-rected us, started a flame kindling, an urge to playsome of the finer, harder, more glorious parts. Myrise to stardom had been so sudden, and—believeme, I am a modest woman and I say this in all mod-esty—so easy, everything gay and joyous and fun,that I had not considered what I might do later, orif I could make great progress, or if I had talentsworth trying to develop as an artist. C. F. pickedmy plays for me. They were always right and I didthem without question.I think a great deal of this was inspired directlyby Dion Boucicault himself. I saw in Boucicault thesame artistic integrity, the same care for detail, thesame respect for the drama, that I had known inHawtrey. Boucicault was a master craftsman inevery department of the stage, and a wonderfullyattractive person in his own right. His wife, IreneVanbrugh, was one of the best comediennes of theday, incidentally. Another thing inspired me. I hadenjoyed a great success as Lily, and I had beenaccepted for the first time as a dramatic actress. AsI have admitted before, up to now the critics hadregarded me as a cream puff. Now, with an adultplay by a wise and witty author, I had accomplishedsomething really worthwhile. I became aware that Iwas more highly regarded in professional circles.CARUSO—BARRIE—MAUGHAM113Alfred Sutro, one of England's finest playwrights,saw the opening night of The Mind the Paint Girl,in which Boucicault had made me work and repeatand rehearse just as Hawtrey used to do with me,and he was impressed. Boucicault's method wasquite different from Frohman's, with all Frohman'sattention to detail, for with C. F. the star herselfcould never do wrong.And so when the great Sutro immediately an-nounced that he wanted to write a play for me andcouldn't get at it quickly enough, I was enormouslyset up and encouraged and determined to do thebest I could from that minute on.10. THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THESTAIRSThe Mind the Paint Girl was my most importantplay and I would like to have shown myself init all over America and parts of Canada. But thevery care with which Charles Frohman mounted thisproduction made this impossible. C. F. had importedheavy wooden scenery from London, very beautifulbut impossible to take on tour and set up in differenttheaters. So we played our fine run of 136 perform-ances in New York, made a few out-of-town engage-ments, warehoused the handsome scenery, and closedthe show.I was eager of course, now that I could make someserious representations about being a dramatic ac-tress, to do another worthwhile play. It was impor-tant for me then, and I knew it, to attempt anotherjob of hard, exacting work under a director like DionBoucicault. But this was impossible. Charles Froh-man simply did not have that kind of play for me.He called me in and explained this, offering me afrolicsome comedy called The Amazons.I argued with C. F. for the first time in my life,but Frohman was sincerely offering me the best hehad at that moment and it seemed wiser to accept it114THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS115than be idle. And. of course, we had a great deal offun with The Amazons.This was all about a family of girls who had dis-appointed their father by not beins boys. MiriamClements was brought over from England to plavthe older sister, which she did elegantly, and wewere— I think—very say and cute in our £\tu suits,hoydenish and scampering, pretending to be bovs.Jerome Kern wrote the music for The Amazons.and often he would drop in to sit at a small pianoin the wings strumming a special arrangement whichsounded like mandolin music while Shellev Hullpretended to play on stage and while I sans "MyOta Hiti Lady." We enjoyed each other, the playwas frothy and apparently what audiences expectedof Billie Burke, and it made money. But it did notadvance me one inch in the direction in which Iwanted to go dramatically.So I was elated when C. F. save me The Landof Promise for next season. This was a serious playby Somerset Maugham. All of us thought that itwould be extremely good for me and Maugham him-self came over from England in the fall to superviserehearsals.In The Land of Promise I played the part of acompanion to an elderlv ladv. Upon her death thegirl is left penniless. She seeks employment in Can-ada, and in order to set work she marries, as house-keeper and wife in name only, a hard-bitten youngfarmer whose crop is destroyed by mustard weed,which was then the scour se of Canadian farmers.)116WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSElike locusts or grasshoppers in some sections. In theend, as you have anticipated, the farmer chooses notto respect the wife-in-name-only clause of the em-ployment contract.This was a beautifully written but dreary kind ofplay for me. My costumes were not fetching—oneblack dress and another of a particularly ugly blue—and the problems of Canadian farmers did not in-terest New York audiences. It was full of integrityand all that, largely because Somerset Maughamrefused to be awed by Charles Frohman when C. F.wanted to lighten the second act, and it was not,in box-office terms, a failure. But the change ofcharacter was perhaps too sudden for me. PossiblyCrystal Heme or some other established dramaticactress could have carried this play, but I could not.( Many years later, to be sure, I starred in the motionpicture version made by Famous Players-Lasky, withThomas Meighan, and still later Tom made anotherhighly successful motion picture from it starringhimself.I was dismayed and saddened by this experience,but C. F. was cheerful as usual. He never mournedover spilt theatrical milk."Do another one," he said, and immediately trottedout the script of Jerry, a grand play by CatherineChisholm Cushing, who wrote Topsy and Eva forthe Duncan sisters, among other talented works.We started rehearsals immediately, even before theclose of The Land of Promise. But Jerry, for all itsmerit, was another lightweight comedy. It was good,THE MAX AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS11,but as;ain I was disappointed, and this time I wasbeginning to feel completely frustrated and bewil-dered.I had seen a great deal of Somerset Maughamdurins; the run of Mrs. Dot. He enjoyed dancing, andwe would go out often on small parties with MarineElliott and the Forbes-Robertsons. Forbes-Robert-son was famous for one of the wisest Hamlets everplayed, but he danced the fox trot expertly, and sodid Willie Maugham. Willie was in New York duringdie holidays, during the fall and winter of 1913, andso of course he was a guest at a partv I gave onNew Years Eve for the Forbes-Robertsons, whowere about to sail for Europe. As a matter of fact,Willie was my escort.As my party broke up. someone suggested— I thinkit was Victor Kiraly. my personal manager, thatshort, extremelv charming and exceedingly faithfulfriend—that we drop in at the Sixtv Clubs costumeball. We were not members and it was late, about2 a. m.. 1914. but Victor made a telephone call andreported tiiat our friends would be glad to see us.So over we went to die party at the Hotel Astor.One of die guests at tiiis ball, I learned later, hadarrived m his favorite costume, a fantastic trampgetup with a false nose, whiskers, and a batteredbicycle. He had had a dispute with Lillian Lorraine,who had gone home. He had then taken off his cos-tume, dressed in evening clothes, and had been trv-ing to get Miss Lorraine on the telephone. This hadhappened just before we came in, and die ex-tramp)118WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwas standing at the foot of the red-carpeted grandstaircase of the Hotel Astor ballroom when weentered.Possibly I can permit myself to say "made an en-trance," for no actress in her right mind would at-tempt less in descending a great staircase on the armof Somerset Maugham.At the foot of the stairs stood this man.I mistook him for an Italian at first and glancedquickly to see if he wore a purple riband across hisshirt front, or a decoration in his buttonhole, like adiplomat. He had a Mephistophelean look, his eye-brows and his eyelids lifting, curved upward, in themiddle. Slim and tall and immaculate in full eve-ning dress, he was in black and white contrast tothe rest of the costumed party, and so—and for whoknows what other reasons— I noticed him at once.Willie Maugham and I swept on and began to dance.Freddie Zimmerman, a society figure whose fatherwas important in show business because he ownedso many theater buildings, was marshaling the PaulJoneses and he called one almost immediately, afterWillie Maugham and I had danced together for afew minutes. At the moment when Freddie calledthe Paul Jones, there was my tall dark man. He tookme in his arms and began to dance, expertly andvery smoothly, while I chattered. (Perhaps I shouldI alwaysin before, long before.have put thischatter."Lovely party," I said.THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS119"Mmmmm," said mv partner.I was convinced now that he was a foreigner, onewho probably spoke very little English, so I mademore conversation. He responded in monosyllables,apparently unable to talk. He never said a word, buthe touched me with his knee, a little signal to turn.I thought this was an odd thing to do but I ratherliked it.There was another Paul Jones very soon and therewas my dark man again. Another Paul Jones and myman. Without a word. I cannot be sure, but it seemsto me that I never found my escort again. We seemedto dance Paul Joneses for the rest of the evening.As it grew later, Victor found me, though. Hekept trotting up to whisper, "Matinee tomorrow. Gotto go. Late. Miss Burke! Please!"Victor would pull out his watch and point, butwe kept on dancing.Finally, someone spoke to my partner in passing."Why, hello, Flo," a man said. "Say, I thoughtyou'd gone home."I had never seen Florenz Ziegfeld, Jr., before. Ihad never seen his Ziegfeld Follies, the first of whichhad opened the same year I came from London todo My Wife with John Drew. By now his shows wereworld-famous, with such stars as Xora Bayes, SophieTucker, Mae Murray, Leon Errol, Anne Pennington,Fannie Brice, Bert Williams, and George White. AndI had somehow gathered the impression that FloZiegfeld himself was a dour man with a beard.120WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI understood then why the guest who was madeup as the Empress Josephine had been staring at us.She was utterly beautiful, this Empress, strange anddark, with enormous jealous eves which followedus around the floor. She was Anna Held, who hadbeen Ziegfeld's wife for fifteen years and had justdivorced him.As I say, I had never met Flo Ziegfeld, but Iknew all about him. Everybody in New York knewabout him. His reputation with women was ex-tremelv dangerous. Flo was, I shall put it, cavalierabout women. He was as famous for this in NewYork, I suppose, as he was for his Follies. He hadjust left Anna Held and he was supposed to be inlove with Lillian Lorraine.To my confusion about everything else was nowadded a new kind of complete and bewildering con-fusion inspired by Florenz Ziegfeld, Jr. I was, and Iknew it instantlv, desperately and foolishlv falling inlove with this strange man. I felt a sudden envelop-ing oneness with him. It seemed that he had dancedme into a glimmering world of swirling emotion, anew countrv full of awe and delight for me, yet un-known and frightening.Yes, let me put it down again, of course I knewFlo Ziegfeld was a dangerous man. I had known thatbefore I met him, and I felt the impact of his threatand his charm at once. But even if I had known thenprecisely what tortures and frustrations were in storefor me during the next eighteen vears because of thisman, I should have kept right on falling in love.THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS121During mv next matinee I received some flowersfrom him. Thev were not like the elaborate and con-ventional flowers I was used to getting, for they weredelicatelv and smartly boxed in a cone shape byThorley in a way I had never seen, and they formeda tiny Colonial bouquet, showing the utmost tasteand care in their selection. The man who orderedthat bouquet was, of course, probably the most skill-ful man in the world in all the arts of good tasteand grace. And so I invited Flo to a small party Iwas giving within a few days and we began to getbetter acquainted.A day or so later I met him on Fifth Avenue. Iwas getting out of my car, wearing a sable jacketand dragging a chinchilla coat.Flo's eyes glinted."Well, Miss Billie Burke," he said, eyeing the furs,"I see you are the most extravagant person in thewrorld, next to me.""I understand, sir, that you once upon a timehitched four zebras to a cart and drove them downthe Champs Elysees, scattering flowers and bottlesto the midinettes. Is that correct?" I asked."Even- word of it," Flo said. "But I never carriedtwo fur coats at once."The next time I saw Flo was when he called onme at Burkely Crest one Sunday afternoon. Mv but-ler, a most proper person who alwavs looked downhis nose at everybody, looked down it at Flo, andafter his visit had extended until darkness stalked122WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEinto the living room and inquired grandly: "Andwill the gentleman be staying for supper?"It turned out that the gentleman would be staying.Later, Flo said to me, "When that guy came inand asked me if I was staying for supper, I madeup my mind then that I was going to stay atHastings."During the run of The Land of Promise Motherand I would frequently have Saturday dinner afterthe matinee with Flo in his apartment at the An-sonia. Flo was totally different from anyone I hadever met, so easy and relaxing, serving his little din-ners with such charm that I was always a littlestartled by him, if that isn't too much of a paradoxto accept. He did everything gracefully. For onething, he concentrated on courting my mother in-stead of me."I am going to take your mother to see someoneelse," he would announce, and off the two would goto the theater—a whirl for Mother, and she was com-pletely captured. Flo would send her gifts, a dozenpint bottles of pink champagne, or pate de foie gras,or out-of-season fruit. He was a connoisseur of allbeautiful and rare things.He made it difficult for me to act in The Landof Promise because in this play I was supposed to bevirtually a starveling. And there I was, coming onstage nightly, replete and about to burst from Flo'spressed ducks, wines, and sauces. In some ways, Ihold that my performance as a hungry girl that seasonwas one of the great tours de force of the theater.:THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS123Mother's attitude toward Flo? You have begunto guess it. But Mother faced up to everything. Shesaid to me"I think you have to weigh his reputation andconsider how much it would bother you afterwards.Frohman is against this, but certainly the Frohmanoffice has been pretty dictatorial about it all. I thinkyou are going to have to make up your mind aboutwhat you want to do with the rest of your life. And7 think Flo could do things quicker for you than theFrohman office."Frankly, I did not agree with that last sentence.But I was lost, hopelessly in love, and I was frus-trated about my career. I had dreamed of myselfas a new Rejane, but now she had disappeared be-hind a screen. I never saw her again. But Flo wasthere instead.Flo would say: "Marry me. Marry me now."Flo would say: "I can make you happy, and I canmake you happy in your work."But I had a feeling that this was something I hadto control. I felt that I could not go on seeing himconstantly, for something weakened within me everytime he proposed. And I had two things to consider,my own happiness and my career. You learn, aftera while, when you begin to grow up, what an enor-mous difference there is between mere happiness andyour career.It is at times like this, to be sure, when the prob-able and improbable, the important and the trivial,line themselves up out of focus, and a woman is124WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSErushed and confused, that desperate and unlikelythings are almost certain to take precedence overjudgment and caution. It does not matter that youthink things through with the utmost logic. Possibly—and I think I shall suggest this quite seriously—possibly this is a provision of Nature in the make-upof women. A time comes. They fall in love. I fellin love with Flo Ziegfeld.But all the same, I was trying to comply withFrohman's wishes. C. F. bitterly and consistentlyopposed my seeing Flo. Moreover, it was certainlyunwise to become involved, with a new play in prep-aration—Jerry—but Flo Ziegfeld kept turning up aswe finished our New York run of The PromisedLand, went on the road with it, and began rehears-ing the new play.Flo played the ardent admirer to the hilt, but Ibelieve he was as amazed as I was. This was a dif-ferent setup, something new for the adventurer.Charles Frohman called me to his office as soonas he heard I was seeing Ziegfeld."Stop it," he said. "Ruin your career. Mustn'tmarry. Drop you if you do. Bad man. Also, he can'tproduce plays."Oh, I laughed it off."I haven't the slightest intention of marrying any-body," I promised Frohman that spring.But we continued to see each other, althoughmost of our meetings were clandestine. Some of themwere in Grant's tomb.Now, I suppose other sweethearts have met andTHE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS125kissed in the General's sepulcher, Columbia Uni-versity and the Barnard College girls being nearby,but I dare suggest that this was the first time thata producer and the star of a Broadway play everhad to meet there. I would drive down from Hastingsin the late afternoon and there would be Flo impa-tiently stomping up and down inside the chilly ren-dezvous, glarings because he was sure Frohman'shenchmen were lurking in the bushes.Charles Frohman muttered even- invidious thinghe could think of about Flo, but although Ziegfelddespised Frohman just as bitterly, I recall only onethins; he ever said about him."Ha," he said, "did you ever see Frohman eatovsters?"oHarassed as we were, trying to escape newspaperreporters and Charles Frohman, Flo and I finallyfound that Sherry's was almost deserted by the timeI grot out of the theater and that we could meet thereunnoticed. I hadn't decided to marry him, but I wasvery close to a decision then. One evening when wewere having a little supper we were interrupted bya Philadelphia publisher, an old friend of Flo's whowas feelino; no inhibitions. He came uncertainly overto our table, Flo courteously introduced us, and thiswretched creature said:"Man, oh man, Flo, I gotta say this—vou certainlycan pick 'em, and bov, do you know how to dressem!I was never so furious in my life. I got up, rushedfrom the room, flew out the door to mv car, leaving126WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEFlo without a word, hurried home and refused totalk to him for a week.Both Charles Frohman and Alf Hayman werefirmly determined to stop me from seeing Flo Zieg-feld. One afternoon in midwinter, when snow cov-ered the ground, both of them came to see me atBurkely Crest. (I am not sure they actually cameto see me. I think they came primarily to learn ifFlo was there.)I was upstairs. My butler showed them into thesun parlor, where they declined to remove theircoats. Frohman was short and round and bulgingin a great black coat down to his ankles, and Hay-man, tall, heavy in his long black coat down to hisankles.As they leaned on the billiard table smoking theirlarge cigars and tossing the billiard balls slowly backand forth by hand my mother came down and askedif they had come to see me."Oh, just passing by. Dropped in," said Frohman."Very well, I will call Billie," Mother said."I think you had better come down, dear," shetold me. "I think there are two detectives down-stairs. Named Frohman and Hayman," she added.When I came down to the sun parlor they werestill leaning over the table slowly clicking the bil-liard balls, still wearing their enormous coats. In thesunroom were palms and ferns and flowers and adozen or so cockatoos, parrots and canaries in cagesor on perches, and these two angry men in their hotcoats made an incongruous scene in this tropicalTHE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS127setting, with the bright white snow shining inthrough the windows."You think Flo is here, don't you," I said.Frohman spun a ball viciously across the table."This has got to stop," he said.In moments like this Charles Frohman was notmy warm and understanding friend. All humor wentout of his eyes. His shoulders hunched forward andhe glowered.The billiard balls were going back and forth rap-idly now."He is still in love with Lorraine," Alf Haymansaid."He still sees Anna Held," said Frohman. "Butthey are not divorced."They were throwing the balls hard now. One ofthem dropped to the floor. The canaries were al-ready chirping hysterically. A cockatoo began toscreech and two of the parrots began to yell."Not divorced from Held. And he still sees LillianLorraine. Both those women live at the same hotel.What do you think of that?" Alf Hayman demanded.I did not know what to say and I don't know nowwhat I did manage to say. But as Charles Frohmanscolded me and attacked me, angry and red-faced,with the birds screeching and those balls knockingagainst the table, I defended Flo and I defendedmyself the best I could and I knew that whateverthey thought and whatever they said my love forFlo was none of their concern. This was somethingthat was mine.128WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"And do you understand that if you marry Zieg-feld Mr. Frohman will produce no more plays foryou? The Frohman office will have nothing to dowith you. You will be ruined." This from Alf Hayman.They told me Ziegfeld had no money.They said that he would make love to a womanfor six months, then drop her and break her heart.They said I was a fool to go on with Ziegfeld. Theysaid they had another good play, two good plays,coming up, and they reminded me that this wouldmake up for our bad luck the past season.But I said, "You won't let me see Flo Ziegfeldnormally. I have to sneak around and see him. IfI could go to luncheon with him or to a matineewith him like any other girl, things might be dif-ferent. But you make all this fuss. You make memeet him in odd places. If you treated this as youhave some of my other flirtations that never meantanything, perhaps I would be what you call moresensible about it."I reminded Frohman and Hayman that I had keptmy word. I had promised them that I would work forfive years without getting married and I had done it.I told them I had a right to do now whatever Iwanted to do.I told them that I wasn't at all sure I wanted tobe married to Flo Ziegfeld. I told them I would listento all they had to say when they were calmer andthat I would bear in mind whatever they suggested."But your coming here today, sneaking out herelike this just to see if Flo is with me, is an awfulTHE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS129thing and a frightful thing. Here are your hats, gen-tlemen. You already have your coats on."The billiard balls stopped clicking and they left.It was warm and peaceful inside and the birds werequiet.I think this strange argument told me much moreclearly and much more convincingly what it mighthave taken me far longer to think out for myself. Ittold me how deeply I wanted Flo Ziegfeld.But I did, with puzzled tears, make one final at-tempt to break off with him. During the run of TheMind the Paint Girl I had had some blue notepaperprinted up with in my dressing room in darker bluein the upper right-hand corner. This was for fun, buton this stationery I wrote Flo three short letters tell-ing him we had to stop. In the third I said, "I haveto go on with my play. I think above all things thatI have to be true to my work in the theater. I wantso terribly to be a good actress. This is my last good-by."After that note Flo came to the theater back stagethe next night, probably after bribing his way in, andwaited until I consented, prim and frightened, tosit straight-backed in a gilt chair and listen to whathe had to say. It seemed, he argued, that I owed hima more extensive explanation. He took me out forsupper."I got your note," he said. "This seems pretty defin-ite.He reached in his pocket and showed me hissteamship ticket.130WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"I have my reservation and I am sailing tomorrow."I was blank for a moment and then I stammered."Oh, you don't have to sail so soon. Sail next week."Flo narrowed his dark eyes at me. "But you saidthis was good-by," he said.And then he added, "I would like to get marriedtomorrow."I fluttered and made the usual objections. I saidI had no clothes, and I said I would have to ask mymother."We'll talk to your mother," Flo said.So we drove up to Hastings after the performance^his car trailing mine, and awakened my patientmother.That remarkable woman regarded us both as acouple of children."Now what have you two decided?" she askedcalmly."We want to be married," I squeaked."I gathered that," she said. "It's the best thing foryou to do. I think Flo will be a wonderful husbandand I think you will be a very happy girl. And Iknow it will make me very happy."I was frantic and frightened the next day. We hadagreed to meet at Sherry's and drive over to Hobokenafter the matinee for the ceremony, all with greatsecrecy. We were eloping, actually eloping, alongwith my mother—from Charles Frohman.Between every scene of that Saturday matinee Itried on dresses from Lichtenstein's while my twomaids fumbled and squealed. At one point I at-THE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS131tempted to get Flo on the telephone to call it all off,but I kept right on trying on dresses. Flo, that wilyperson, hid himself so successfully that I never couldreach him to cancel the wedding.And so according to our hastily made arrangementsMother picked me up at the theater after the mat-inee as she had done hundreds of times before, andwe drove down the Avenue to Sherry's, and therewas Flo looking quite serious and enormously re-lieved. We drove over to Hoboken and were marriedin the little back room of a parsonage. It was whatwas known in those days as the rummage room,crammed and disorderly with baby carriages andcribs, old paint buckets and stepladders.Our minister was as confused as we were. "Andnow, Flo," he would say to me, "you stand here.""He's Flo, I'm Billie," I would say."Oh, all right, then, you stand here, Bill," he wouldsay to Flo. And Flo would correct him."I'm Flo, she's Bill— I mean Billie."But he married us and I am quite sure it was legal.I never knew that a ferry boat churning its solemn,drifting way across the Hudson River could be themost romantic thing in the world. The air was still,the sun was setting, its burnished glow silhouettingthe dark skyscrapers, and a little man with a concer-tina played Neapolitan love songs in counterpointwith the lapping wavelets of the Hudson and themellow hoots of the tugboats. And we leaned overthe rail and Flo put his arms around me and said,"Is my wife happy?"132WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEWe were back in the rush and clangor of Manhat-tan by six o'clock and had our wedding dinner partyat the old Brevoort Hotel. Of course, I had to makeFlo leave me before I returned to the theater, andhow I got into my costume for the first act is still aninsoluble mystery to me. How I read my lines forthat performance is another mystery. But I remem-ber one detail.A few weeks before my marriage Charles Frohmancame into my dressing room and hung his soft grayhat on a hook. It was a funny little hat which heliked to fold up and carry in his pocket."I am going to London/' he said. "I am going toleave my hat. To remind you not to get married.Don't be foolish while I am gone."Between the second and third acts that evening Ilooked up and saw Charles Frohman's funny little hatstill hanging on its hook, and I was sad for a moment,hoping that I hadn't hurt him too much.For our honeymoon we went to Long Beach, andmy mother and Flo's father and mother accompaniedus. For the life of me I cannot possibly recall how itwas that our parents were with us. Flo's father andmother were not at our wedding, unless I was com-pletely bemused, but I think they had dinner withus at the Brevoort and I know they went with us toLong Beach. It was Easter Sunday and we were allgay and happy and confused together.The story of our marriage did not break in theNew York papers until two days later, Monday morn-ing, April 13, 1914. We shared the front page withTHE MAN AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIBS133an account of the execution at Sing Sing of LeftyLouis, Gyp the Blood, Dago Frank and WhiteyLewis, who murdered the gambler Rosenthal."You see what an important man you are marriedto," Flo said. "Not even gangsters keep me off thefront page."Charles Frohman heard about our marriage atonce. He sent me a cable, the last word I ever hadfrom him. His message said: send me my hat.I never saw him again. Frohman had returned toNew York once more after leaving me his hat, buthad then sailed again for Europe. With the end onlya few moments away he quoted the great line hisold friend Barrie wrote in Peter Pan: "Death must bean awfully big adventure."C. F. had sailed on the Lusitania.11. PRELUDE TO FANTASIAWe began our married life between a matinee andevening performance, honeymooned over aweek end, and made our first home in a hotel. Manya fine marriage, of course, has been founded witheven more haste and with fewer resources, but ourway of life from then on was almost a dramatizationof the troubles and doubts that attend nearly alltheatrical unions. I mean to say that it is an ex-ceedingly difficult thing for two careers to occupythe same bedroom.I have read somewhere that marriage is the quick-est way to get acquainted—but this is surely anaphorism coined by a hopeful spinster. Marriage,I should say, is a relationship beginning with loveand passion which if persisted in may eventuallyripen into understanding and even into enduringfriendship.Be that as it may, I was in love, and at the sametime I was awed. I knew at once that as Mrs. FlorenzZiegfeld, Jr., I would never again completely controlanything in my life; but this did not seem to matter.I knew that my friends, all of them, disapproved ofthis marriage. I discovered, to my surprise, that Flohimself was somewhat taken aback and subdued. Icannot be sure, of course. I can only surmise, but my134PRELUDE TO FANTASIA135impression is that his first marriage to Anna Heldhad been built on the uncertain foundations of ex-treme youth, the excitement of Paris, too muchmoney, and the carefree theatricalism of those times.At any rate, Flo now felt most fully and most respon-sibly married, and to a girl hardly more than half hisage. This was no adventure. He was gentle andthoughtful, but often puzzled.I set myself to know this man better.His father was Dr. Florenz Ziegfeld, who was bornin Germany where he studied music under variousteachers of his day. He came to the United Statesin 1863 and in 1867 founded the Chicago MusicalCollege. This became one of the largest music schoolsof its kind in America. At one time it had between sixand seven thousand students.His mother was Rosalie de Hez of France. Shewas a great-granddaughter of General Gerard, oneof Napoleon's commanders. Flo was born in Chicagoon March 21, 1867. As a young man he was supposedto assist his father with the musical college and hedid, at that, learn some music.He always enjoyed sitting down at a grand piano,adjusting his chair carefully, and beginning a crash-ing crescendo of arpeggios with all the flourish of amaestro. Then he would sigh and stop, not in themood for great music, while his friends begged himto go on. He never went on. Those few chords con-stituted his entire repertoire.In the great Chicago fire of 1871, the one supposed136WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEto have been started by a Mrs. O'Leary's cow, theZiegfelds were trapped and scattered like many an-other distressed family. Flo, who was about fouryears old then, hid with his mother and the twoother children under a bridge while Dr. Ziegfeldsearched for them for two days. It was an excitingvantage point for a small boy to view the holocaust,one of the greatest spectacles of the times, and Floliked to tell about it. Perhaps—well, I do not suggestthis seriously, but the psychiatrists claim everythingthese days—perhaps this staggering show had someinfluence on Flo Ziegfeld. Certainly, it became hishabit in later years to create the vastest and mostcolorful spectacles possible, whatever the cost.As a young man he paid more attention to amateurtheatricals and to the cotillions, germans, and ballsthan to the musical college. He was a great favoritein Chicago society in his twenties, squiring amongothers the daughters of the fabulously wealthy Pull-man family. He was handsome and gay and not veryserious.Flo's first venture into show business occurredwhen he took over the management of the Trocaderoduring the World's Fair. This was supposed to be anesthetic musical presentation under the direction ofDr. Ziegfeld, who was chairman of the board ofjudges of musical exhibits at the fair. Dr. Ziegfeldwas by this time a celebrity in musical affairs; hehad brought Johann Strauss to America and he hadbeen the first to negotiate with the MetropolitanOpera for performances in Chicago. He had also dis-PRELUDE TO FANTASIA137tinguished himself as Assistant Inspector Generaland Colonel in the Illinois National Guard.But his Trocadero music drew no box office andin desperation he handed it over to young Flo. UnderFlo there immediately appeared a mysterious troupecalled the "Von Biilow Military Band and Orchestraof Hamburg," which turned out to have no connec-tion whatever with the famous German conductor,and a number of vaudeville performers. Flo addedRussian dancers, eccentric English dancers, jugglersand pretty girls so rapidly that the serious musicsoon disappeared. From then on, the show mademoney.It must have been at about this period that Flobegan to go west. He spent a great deal of time onranches in Arizona and Wyoming learning to shootand to ride. In later years he used to astonish hisfriends with the amazing accuracy of his marksman-ship with pistol or rifle, and even taught me to handleguns, but I think these skills were not all he acquiredin the west. I suggest that he was greatly influenced,though he may not have known it then, by the bold,bright colors of the West. Curiously enough, someof his brightest effects on Broadway were reflectionsof western sunsets he had seen as a very young man.After the Trocadero incident Flo became an im-presario in his own right, although from time totime he was commissioned to go to Europe for hisfather to consult with various musicians and orches-tral leaders. In New York one evening between theof Henry Dixey's musical comedy successacts138WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEAdonis, he saw a strong man perform against a blackvelvet backdrop. The backdrop emphasized thebeauty and power of his enormous smooth muscleswhile he easily hoisted great weights and supporteda platform over which three horses were driven.Eugene Sandow, the strong man, was not then astar performer. Flo instantly saw what might be donewith him, but Sandow's agents, Abbey, Schoeffel andGrau, demanded $1,050 a week for him. Flo hadonly $2,000, but he suggested a percentage of receiptsinstead of a flat salary and he talked so long and soconvincingly that the agents let him take Sandow toChicago.The enterprise succeeded because Flo called inall the society ladies he knew and permitted themthe thrill of feeling Sandow's muscles.And Sandow was beautiful. Sandow was not anogre of a strong man, as legend seems to have ittoday, but a great, gentle, blond Austrian whosemuscles rippled like ropes under velvet. After thesociety ladies had touched him a few times, successwas assured. Sandow earned $3500 the first week inChicago and continued to make money at that ratefor three months.Later, when Flo took Sandow on tour, he soughtother means of getting publicity. Once he announcedthat Sandow would fight a lion, and arranged for oneto be provided by Colonel Boone's animal show.But the lion, whose claws had been carefully clipped,became confused, backed away from Sandow, andacted so kittenish that the battle was branded aPRELUDE TO FANTASIA139fake by the angry audience. Flo, wise man, was con-veniently out of town at the time, with the gatereceipts. Sandow was greatly disappointed, he said,by the cowardice of the lion.Another time Flo took advantage of a freight wreckand had twenty men carry a heavy wheel into San-dow's compartment. He showed this to reportersand alleged that Sandow had picked it up as a sou-venir of the excitement. And the New York ship newsreporters were delighted one day when they sawSandow seize the window of a porthole with hishands, wrench it loose, and toss it into the waterwhen he was sailing for Europe. Of course Flo hadhad men loosen the screws before Sandow enteredthe stateroom.These shenanigans went on for four or five yearsand established Sandow as the strongest man in theworld. Indeed, I suppose he was, and beautiful toboot. But probably he would never have attainedhis fame without Flo's exuberant showmanship. Itis an odd thing, come to think of it, that in lateryears Flo completely reversed this theory of exploita-tion. He never indulged in stunts with his Follies,but always sought distinction.I have come to the point now where I must tellyou about Anna Held. Miss Held, unlike certain otherbeautiful women with whom my husband was asso-ciated, was never my enemy and never, so far asI know, attempted in any way to do me a disservice.But you will understand my reluctance: I shall do140WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEthis as well as I can, but it does not make me happyto make a report on the actress who was married toFlo Ziegfeld for fifteen years before I met him. Noris this a happy story. It ends tragically.Flo was married to Anna Held from 1897 to 1913.He met her in London when he went to Europe withHarry Evans, who had leased the Herald SquareTheater. Miss Held was born either in Paris of Polishand French parents or she was born in Warsaw, thedaughter of Jewish parents. At any rate, when shewas a young girl she endured hardship and poverty,worked in restaurants, curled ostrich feathers andsewed buttonholes to get a living. She and her mothercame to London when the father died, seekingrelatives whom they did not find. Anna began herremarkable theatrical career in the chorus of thePrincess Theater, progressing gradually from thereto Paris and other capitals of Europe. She became amusic-hall singer of great popularity on the con-tinent.When she finally returned to London to make herreal debut she sang translations of popular Germanand French songs. The well-remembered "Won'tYou Come and Play Wiz Me?" was the song thatmade her famous.Flo saw her at the Palace in London. Several othermanagers were trying to get her. Among these wasAlex Aarons, who represented Oscar Hammerstein.As I always understood the story, Anna demanded athousand dollars a week and ten weeks payment inadvance for going to America, but Flo Ziegfeld, whoPRELUDE TO FANTASIA141hadn't a farthing at that time, so charmed her in oneinterview that she put herself under his managementwith no financial arrangements whatsoever. For mypart, I can well believe that.Miss Held was at that time married to MaximoCarrero, a South American tobacco planter, and hada daughter, Liane. Sefior Carrero was much olderthan Anna, who was twenty-two when Ziegfeld firstsaw her, and he was devoted to her. Apparently, hewas a man of extremely reasonable disposition forhe admitted that he was too old for Anna and lether go to Flo, whom he called "the lucky American."Carrero died soon after that and his friends said itwas of a broken heart.Her first New York engagement in a piece calledA Parlor Match by Charles Hoyt was nearly a failure,and her French music and songs at first fell flat.But soon the little song "Won't You Come and PlayWiz Me?" which is actually no more than a childishinvitation from a small girl, began to catch on—andFlo's magnificently brassy publicity began to tell.You know, of course, the celebrated story of themilk bath. There were other arrangements, equallyas phony. In one of these stunts Anna chased a run-away horse on her bicycle and rescued a formerBrooklyn magistrate. Not even the extroverted pressagents of Hollywood would dare expect a city editorto believe one like that now, but at the turn of thecentury it went over grandly.In another contribution to gaiety, Flo arranged awell-publicized bet with Julius Steger, who later142WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEbecame a movie director, in which Steger wageredthat he could kiss Anna two hundred times withoutlosing his zest. The contest ended at one hundredand fifty-two kisses, Anna pale with exhaustion andSteger wobbly—or so the story went.From then on, Anna was a hit in The FrenchMaid in 1898, in Papas Wife in 1899, The LittleDuchess in 1901, Mile. Napoleon in 1903, The Pari-sian Model in 1906, Little Miss Innocence in 1909,and other such provocative productions.Anna wanted to be a singing actress but in thisshe failed. In the first show he staged in the Weber-Fields Music Hall after he separated from LewFields, Weber took in Flo as a partner and produceda musical, Higgledy-Piggledy, starring Anna Held.But Flo startled burlesque-minded Weber with hiselaborate notions about girls and costumes, gownsand ballets, and the association was quickly brokenoff.After a succession of other failures, including aReginald de Koven operetta called Red Feather,Anna and Ziegfeld went to Europe and stayed fortwo years.Later, Flo dealt with the Shuberts about starringAnna in a musical piece at the Casino, wound up ina disagreeable lawsuit, and met Lillian Lorraine. Ofall the girls in Flo's life, I think I was most jealousof Lillian. I believe he loved her.A large part of Anna's and Flo's time was spent inEurope, where Flo took part in various theatricalenterprises—and gambled. The era was carefree. TheyPRELUDE TO FANTASIA143traveled from one pleasure spot to another by tallyho,often accompanied by Lillian Russell and Sandow.I suspect that Lillian was in love with the giant.Flo, of course, would disappear for weeks at a timeleaving Anna alone, and this distressed her. He wonand lost large sums of money at Monte Carlo andspent whatever he had lavishly at the great hotels.Freddie Zimmerman told me, much later, aboutan incident at Monte Carlo. Freddie and Flo weretraveling together and arrived at the principalitydead broke. Freddie wired his father for money andreceived by return cable an order for five thousanddollars which he cashed at once and gave to Floto hold.They hurried to the chief casino, where Freddiepaused for a brief moment to check his coat and hat.Flo preceded him into the gambling halls.As Freddie entered, he met Flo coming out."Let's go," said Flo."But we haven't even started," said Freddie."Oh yes, we have. We lost it all," said Flo.But I did not know Flo then. These things affectedAnna, not me, and they affected her tragically. Sheloved Ziegfeld, I am sure. But to teach him a lessonand to fetch him back to his senses, she offered todivorce him—and he took her up on it. She had everypossible reason, of course. Both Liane and her mothercomplained that he did not show Anna the attentionshe had a right to expect from him. He stayed awayfrom home, and he did not talk much when he wasthere. He was exhibiting that "withdrawn" quality144WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwhich later became so familiar to me, and which Ifinally understood. Anna would rail at him about it."For heaven's sake, say 'damn' if nothing else/'she would plead.She did not expect that Flo would permit thedivorce, but he did permit it and it broke her heart.She collapsed five years later of pernicious anemiabrought on by dieting in an effort to recapture hergreat beauty. Liane said that in her last hours shecalled for Flo, who was sent for but arrived a fewhours after she had died. She loved him sincerely tothe end.But this was not, as I have suggested, a soundmarriage. I think that Flo was attracted by Annabut never wholeheartedly in love with her. And inspite of her enormous acclaim as a wicked Frenchactress who performed naughtily on the stage, Annawas a Hausfrau. She was frugal, domestic, and ma-ternal. I am afraid that it was, perhaps her finestqualities which eventually divorced her from Flo,for this was a man who lived in a dream-world inwhich petty bank accounts (Anna had banked hersavings since she was fifteen and was terrified ofpoverty) and domestic economy were wretchedbores.But Flo owed almost everything to Anna. He owedher his life work, the Ziegfeld Follies. This I saybecause it was Anna who first suggested the Follies.Not by that name, of course, but by advising him todisplay young and beautiful girls in lavish costumes.nPRELUDE TO FANTASIA145"As in France," she said. "But you will do better.The American girls are so much prettier."But when the first Follies glorified the Americangirl in August, 1907, Anna Held was not in it.Anna Held died in 1918. She was forty-five yearsold then, and still in love with Flo twenty-three yearsafter she first met him in London. Flo had not for-gotten her. We were living at Burkely Crest then,surrounded by all the opulence and beauty that Flofound necessary for simple existence, when he cameto me to say that Anna was desperately ill."Will you send her things?" he asked.I did. I was glad to.I sent fresh eggs, babybroilers, fresh vegetables and butter from the placedaily, and my own doctor. But it was too late.12. THE GOLDEN HELMETFlo Ziegfeld was a surprising, contradictory per-son in every possible way. There was a scenein my new play Jerry which contained among otherfoolishness two amusing bits of stage business. Inthe first, after long rehearsal, I had learned to pullup the covers at the foot of a bed, pop my head in,and emerge among the pilows. Flo enjoyed this.He always liked to watch me act, chuckling especiallyat any unusual tricks, but his reaction to the secondscene surprised me.In this one I stood behind a screen, completelyhidden from the audience, and tossed my pajamas tomy sweetheart."Now, I don't think a nice girl would do that,"said the producer of the Follies.It was fun for me, as a bride, to begin to discoverhim: fun, for instance, to discover that he wore longwoolen underwear. Oh, they were interwoven withsilk, to be certain, of a delicate shade of peach, butwoollies they were nevertheless, and Flo grievedwhen I threw them away and replaced them withmore fashionable shorts with initials. He was surethat he would freeze to death.These trivialities, of course, merely begin to limnthe full picture of a strange and remarkable man.146THE GOLDEN HELMET147Flo was a person of triple or quadruple personality,a bewitching person when he wanted to be, a trouble-some, fascinating lover, but he possessed a world ofhis own to which he could and to which he often didretire. There were times, many times, in my presenceor in any company, in which he would utterly with-draw. Suddenly, he would not be there.This world of his own was completely removedfrom what was going on about him. Flo formed hisown plans, considered his own ambitions, and re-vealed to no one what was going on in his mind. Itwas impossible, too, to discover whether he de-liberately cultivated the rather severe, unemotionalpersonality he presented to the world, or whetherthis aspect was the true one. I think it was not thetrue one. To me the whimsical, teasing man whoaffected a dry, tired, small voice and whose smilerippled across his face and up into his eyes when hemet someone he loved or was interested in—to methis was the real man.He could withdraw, but he was not unaware. Hiseyes were as searching as swords' points. Once,shortly after we were married, I came into the sun-room wearing an entirely new outfit, from shoes tohat. Flo was lying down, reading a script. He didnot look up. I know that he did not look up becauseI watched him closely, waiting for his reaction tomy new clothes. But without once taking his eyesfrom the page he began to comment on every detailof my costume, naming each color precisely.Flo's apartment at the Ansonia, where I quickly148WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEdiscarded the too opulent French furniture with allits gilt, was our first home, but I hurried to remodela wing of my house at Hastings to make room for ahusband. Now I had always associated with menwho were impeccably groomed. Billy Burke, myfather, was a scrubbed and tidy gentleman whoseboots I was delighted to polish when I was a smallgirl. Willie Maugham, Hawtrey, Freddie Martin,Caruso—to name a few—were all men who wereprecise about their barbers and about their linen.But I had never seen anyone quite like my Flo.Flo, I discovered, seemed to purchase all the toiletwaters, hair lotions, and beautiful bowls of bathsoap that he could lay hands on. He had quantitiesof delicate bath powders which he used with a largeswan's-down puff, leaving the bathroom in the morn-ing looking as if Gaby Deslys, rather than a man, hadused it. Also, Flo required the roughest of towels,a shower that shot water at three times the usualstrength, a large electric vibrating machine withbelts and straps, a massage table, and a battery ofsun-ray lamps. His private barber arrived everymorning to shave him before he left for the office.He looked, as I have said, slightly Italian. Hishair was dark brown, turning slightly gray at thetemples at forty-five. He always brushed it tight,close to his head, and parted it in the middle. Hetook as much care of his hair as any debutante. Itcame to a widow's peak quite far back on his fore-head.He always wore white pajamas, either of theSomerset Maugham, from a painting by Gerald Kelly. R. A.Paul LathPortrait of Miss Burke bv S. de Ivanowski. now in the EmpireTheatre. New YorkF.ddTHE GOLDEN HELMET149finest china silk or white percale with a small stand-ing collar, buttoned at the side in the Russian fashion,and for lounging he had extremely soft gay satinthings from Paris in bright combinations, with redpants and black jacket, or green and red and yellow,or all flame color, and very colorful dressing gowns.His hands were exceptional, noticeable at gamblingor cards or when he was standing in a dark theaterdirecting players on stage. They were long and slen-der and graceful, with well-kept nails, but neverhighly polished or pretentiously manicured.Recall, now. plavs odd tricks with vou. It is curioushow often our first memory of friends, or of somelovely, tragic, or important experience, is of the high-light instead of the substance. ^When I try to visu-alize Rembrandt's astonishing masterpiece "The Manin the Golden Helmet," I always see first the glitteron his right shoulder instead of the brooding face.At the moment, the scene that comes to me atBurkely Crest is that of my husband and my mothersunning themselves by the swimming pool and argu-ing about the beauties of their respective feet.They did indeed have beautiful feet, remarkablysmall feet. They took care of them most carefullyand frequently compared them, debating betweenthem the individual merits of their toes and ankles.My husband's small feet supported a man who wasmagnificently fashioned, lean-hipped, broad-shoul-dered, thin-waisted, and tautly muscled. This maycome as a surprise to many persons who were underthe impression that they knew him intimately: Flo150WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwas an athlete of almost professional skill in manyfields. Under the influence of Eugene Sandow, hehad learned to use bar bells and Indian clubs dailyand to take a special delight in building a strongbody and keeping it strong. I suspect that few of hisclosest acquaintances realized what a powerful manphysically Flo Ziegfeld was. He was interested inevery form of outdoor sport, was a skilled and en-thusiastic horseman, a fancy ice skater, an expertgunman, and an angler of real prowess with eitherbig-game fish or fighting trout. These, of course,were aspects of Ziegfeld that Broadway never had anopportunity to observe. He was a dancer of notablegrace, a boxer, and was one of the first men of histime to race high-speed automobiles. You must be-lieve me: this was an exceptional man. These weresome of the qualities that made him exceptional.When he was about forty-five he began to wearreading glasses for the first time in his life. He didthis as he did everything else: he wore more glassesthan anybody. He had, I suppose, fifty pairs. Thesewere cached away around the house and in his office,wherever he might require them. But he always car-ried two in his pocket.When he had it, which was far from always, heliked to have large sums of money on his person.But not in an expensive wallet. His money, alongwith bits of paper, notes, and checks, for enormoussums, sometimes, were rolled into a wad about whichhe twisted a rubber band. He carried a small elephantfor luck, but never encumbered himself with keys,THE GOLDEN HELMET151walking stick, or umbrella. He would, if he liked oradmired the donor, wear gold or star sapphire cufflinks. Luggage annoyed him.I was astounded, literally shocked, the first timeFlo came to see me from New York when I was ontour with Jerry. He had wrapped his toothbrush, hispajamas, and change of linen in the morning paper,and that comprised his entire traveling equipment.I remonstrated."Couldn't find a bag," he said. "Too much trouble.I discovered that he usually traveled that way. Hewould order a private railroad car for a trip to Cali-fornia at a cost of thousands of dollars, but he himselfwould arrive at the station with his possessions ina newspaper.,,Flo was imperturbable. One of his associates atthe Ziegfeld Theater insisted that you could have setoff cannon crackers under his desk without gettinga flicker of response. Once I returned home justahead of a driving storm to find that all our curtainsand draperies were flapping themselves to tatters inthe wind, and the rain beginning to splatter throughopen windows throughout the house. As I scamperedfrom room to room slamming windows and callingfor help from the servants, I came on Flo, luxuriouslystretched out on a divan near a window, reading."Windy, ain't it?" he said, using his high voice. Ilashed out at him. He went on reading without cock-ing an eye away from his playscript.Flo's voice is always imitated by everyone whoknew him. Eddie Cantor and Fanny Brice, for in-152WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEstance, are especially good at burlesquing the tight,dry, somewhat nasal way in which Flo usually spoke.As a matter of fact, I can imitate it pretty well my-self, and often do. He spoke in that small, tired voiceas if the effort of articulation was too much for him.But this was a trick. Flo got an effect with that voiceand he knew it. He retired behind it, or he employedit as you employ the dryness of a Martini for flavorand kick. Actually, he had a large resonant voice, asanyone who ever talked to him on the telephoneought to remember. Or anyone at whom he was everangry. There should be many thousands of peoplein those two categories. When he was angry, heshouted.When Flo was not immediately engaged in a pro-duction he went into one of two moods: either hewas overcome with utter lethargy or he wanted toplay vigorously and always expensively. Once in pro-duction, he called in his assistants and let them fightand compete among themselves to discover what hewanted, and he was indefatigable, ready to standfor twelve or fifteen hours at a stretch without sittingdown during rehearsals, ready to work days andnights without sleep. Then he forgot play completely.But he had to drive himself to work. He neverwanted to work. Away from the theater, away fromthe pulse and drive of Broadway, he seemed ambi-tionless.WTien we were first married Flo used to appearin coonskin coats and shirts that were somewhat toogay. He took my advice about apparel and, of course,THE GOLDEN HELMET153went completely overboard. He acquired a remark-able collection of hats, and a wardrobe of dark andgray business suits and dozens of light suits for PalmBeach. Oddly enough, he despised full eveningclothes and quarreled about his collars, in which helooked handsome, as noisily as if he had not all hislife been used to proper evening dress.When Flo came home to the country after a dayin Manhattan he invariablv arrived with his carjampacked with boxes, bags, firkins, baskets andbottles, rare flowers, out-of-season fruit, and unusualcandies. He would unload nectarines, green almonds,hothouse grapes, brandies, Corona-Coronas, steaks,chickens—whatever expensive and unusual foodstuffor condiment he had happened to clap eyes on atthe fanciest grocery stores. He drank little whisky,but was a master in the preparation of mint juleps,Sazaracs, Manhattans, Old Fashioneds, and otherdrinks. He also admired himself as a salad makerand could preside over a vast wooden bowl withoils and wines, chives and cheeses, with all the skilland quivering appreciation of a maitre d'hotel.Some weeks before we were married, before hecould load his car with all the astonishing things heliked to fetch home, Flo sent me a cow. I gatheredthat this seemed to him a highly appropriate gift.We lived in the country; therefore we should havea cow. And it was a beauty, naturally, a smick-smackand flawless animal, as carefully selected as a Folliesgirl. But we were not in the cow business, had noplace for a cow, didn't know what in the world154WITH A FEATHER OX MY Nto do with a cow. I asked Flo if I could lend the ani-mal to a friend to keep, to break in for me. and hereluctantly consented, deeply puzzled.>Ipossibly, that after his years on Broad-and in Paris a cow seemed like an exotic thingto Flo. She was, I learned, only the forerunner of amenagerie. Next we got a monkey.He was small and playful, a rather charming fel-Flo insisted that its name was Charles Frohir..but this, of course. I refused to countenance. Our petused to sit most of the day spitting on his fingers andpolishing a penny. The rest of the time he amusedhimself by filling his cheek pouches with pins. Flowould return from a masterful day on Broadway andspend half the eyening holding the monkey's headbetween his knees to extract those dangerous pins.I used to think that the monkey did this a-purpose.just to get Flo's attention. All animals loyed him in-stantly.In addition to the surprising gifts Flo would bringhome, he also brought every newspaper and mag-azine published, which he read from first to lastpage, and all the detective stories he could find. Now.man who had been given a classical edu-he:cation, who had heard the greatest music, had metpainters and musicians fromcelebrated writers,childhood, but his taste in literature never includeda classic. He never read poetrv or quoted it. As formusic, aside from his parlor trick of the interruptedarpe~:. ;>. he was barelv able to carrv a tune. Herather croaked when he attempted to hum one ofTHE GOLDEN HELMET155the great melodies he had driven composers franticto get, say, for Sally or Show Boat. I do not know-how he knew, but he did know when a tune wasgood, as the blazing list of his successes reveals.He loved jewelrv, but chiefly as something to giveaway. He completely understood the almost childishsense of joy and triumph that most people experienceupon suddenly receiving an expensive bauble as agift. In his younger days he was once guilty of keep-ing someone waiting in a carriage for an unfor-givable time at Monte Carlo; Flo beat his fistsagainst the doors of every jeweler in town, finallyrouted up a drowsy and disgruntled proprietor,startled him with an extravagant purchase, and madehis amends with the lady, stopping all argument witha gleam of gold. He liked to give away money, too.Gold coins were the craze then. Flo enjoyed mak-ing presents of little bags full of coins, often twenty-dollar pieces.But he could not endure to have his gifts wrapped.He did not want to be kept wr aiting while his bene-ficiary7 tore the paper. He wanted to enjov thesurprise instantlv. And so most of his Tiffanv triflesappeared in his hand, straight from his pocket.Flo liked to have beautiful and amusing personsaround him and was alwavs thoughtful in his at-tentions to them. He was a skillful host. Among hisparticular pleasures were fancv dress parties. Hewould go to no end of trouble for his friends' cos-tumes or for his own, but his favorite was the trampoutfit with ragged hat, beard, red nose, red bandanna156WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEhandkerchief, old shoes, and baggy pants. Most ofthe original ragtags of this costume had been wornby a clown named Watson in the Follies.He sought beauty everywhere. His love and devo-tion to his Follies girls was, for this reason, a specialand outstanding thing, quite aside from whateverinterest he might see in them as women. He groomedtheir beauty as a horticulturist tends rare orchids,gave each one of them great personal interest andaffection. Naturally, there was a fine and cautiousline drawn between his home, by which I mean me,and his adoration for beautiful show girls. I shallhave to say a great deal about that later. But I willsay this now: Flo did endeavor to be fair, did try,always, to prevent jealousies, many of them so oftenunnecessary.Of another thing I am confidently certain. Ziegfeldhas been portrayed as a man who pursued women.I have even come across a word which, in regard tohim, is not only vulgar but incredibly inaccurate.The word is "chaser." By all the pink-toed prophets,Flo Ziegfeld was never that! Flo never pursued anywoman. He was cool and aloof and difficult. Butthere were times, more times than I prefer to recall,when he made a woman eager for his approval by amere look, or a small expression, or by a slight graspof her elbow, a low mumbling request to dance.That was all the effort he ever had to make. Thestory of one noted dancing girl about how Flo Zieg-feld used to batter down her door is a confection ofsheer poppycock. I tell you: I know better.THE GOLDEN HELMET157Flo was the kind of person who inspires story -tellers. I have heard of a great many that were apoc-ryphal, harmless enough, funny mostly, but manyof them were exaggerated and did not revealanything about Zie^feld except that he was extrava-gant or demanding. Here are a few anecdotes thatI know are true.He enjoved practical jokes and would go to anyenormous expense and to any amount of detailedtrouble to fetch off a jape. Once he gave a dinnerfor Diamond Jim Bradv in his apartment at the An-sonia, mcluding in his guest list Henry Dazian, themost important theatrical costumer in New York.Bradv, as everyone knows, was a remarkable gour-met. He was also remarkable for the incandescenceof his jewelry. This evening, he set himself downin a blaze of anticipation in Flo's magnificent diningroom and looked about eagerly for the feast.When the waiters appeared, each was dressed ina precise copy of Mr. Brady's dinner clothes, withshirt front bedecked with imitation jewels, and withthe stripes of their trousers and the lapels of theirjackets braided in rhinestones.And when they opened up their silver dishes witha flourish, instead of food there were imitationjewels.Brady took it all right, but demanded his dinner,which Flo then served.During the long runs of the Ziegfeld Follies in thehot summer months (the Follies alwavs opened inJune) Flo would instruct his company manager to158WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEserve ice cream to everyone back stage. He wasgenerous about things like that. But at the same timehe would have a notice put on the call board whichread:ANY MEMBER OF THE COMPANY SOILING HIS COS-TUME WILL BE FIRED.I have often seen him standing in the back of thetheater, leaning against a post, with his invariablecigar tilted upward, watching a performance. Hecould detect it instantly if any one girl in the linehad varied her costume or tilted her hat. If he dis-covered such a calamity, he would hurry back to hisoffice and dictate a telegram to the company man-ager:ANY GIRL WHO CHANGES OR TWISTS HER HAT WILLBE FIRED.He sent thousands of telegrams back stage. It washis favorite means of communication with peoplehe could have summoned in one minute.He had a phobia about keeping nonpaying guestsout of his theater, and about holding his dress re-hearsals in secret. His attaches would be instantlydismissed, he threatened, if they violated his pass-list rule.But he would ignore this rule himself, invitetwenty or thirty prominent society people to a dressrehearsal—and then forget all about them. He man-aged to inspire considerable embarrassment with thistrick.THE GOLDEN HELMET159His eye for beauty, as precise as a sextant, in-cluded his own family as well as his shows. A friendonce complimented him on his daughter's beauty.Flo answered, in the small voice: "Inch too largearound the hips."He was superstitious about his productions. In allof them he managed to insert some kind of animal,his good luck talisman. He had horses, bears, cats,chimpanzees (That's right; the chimpanzee was inSally), or elephants in every big show he produced.His love for animals was so intense that in hisbusiest production moments he would keep JosephUrban waiting in the hall while he spent an hourwith a man who wanted to sell him a dog.At the end of the first week of a production heenjoyed presenting gold coins to the members ofthe cast along with the salary checks. The boys re-ceived ten dollars—but the girls got twenty.Of all the comedians he developed, including WillRogers, Fannie Brice, Ed Wynn, W. C. Fields, WalterCatlett, and Eddie Cantor, I suppose that he hadthe most affection for Cantor. It was a fatherly kindof affection, quite different from the admiration andreal love he felt for Will. But I have a copy of atelegram he sent to Cantor one Christmas. It says:MERRY CHRISTMAS TO YOU AND YOURS. MAY WEREMAIN TOGETHER AS LONG AS WE BOTH REMAININ SHOW BUSINESS ALTHOUGH PROFITS ON "KIDBOOTS" HAVE BEEN FAR LESS THAN ON "SALLY."160WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEFlo never nudged you with his humor. He droppedit, flatly, leaving you never quite sure whether hewas laughing at you or at himself. I am certain thatthe smile in the Cantor telegram was not unconscious.Flo Ziegfeld, as I have been at some pains to setforth for a number of pages, was a highly-seasonedpersonality for a young bride to begin to know. Asmy new play began and then went on tour, as wemoved from the Ansonia to Burkely Crest, and asHollywood beckoned to me, and other ladies beck-oned to Ziegfeld, I found that our first year togetherwas pretty difficult.13. THE FIRST YEAROne of the embarrassments about being an actressis that in the midst of your honeymoon yourplay is likely to move out of town or your picture islikely to go on location. Jerry opened quite success-fully late in March, but the Frohman office, whichno longer regarded me as its dumpling, almost im-mediately sent the play to Chicago. I stayed at theBlackstone, never out of earshot of the telephone.The first time that Flo came in from New York tosee me I met his train at an unconscionable hour inthe early morning after sitting up the entire nightbeautifying myself, but la! what bride wouldn't havedone that! With youth on your side, you can do any-thing, but these days I am inclined to agree with Mr.Shaw's well-known conviction that youth is such asplendid thing that it's a shame to waste it on youngfolks.Dr. and Mrs. Ziegfeld received me simply andgraciously as a member of the family. Flo's motherwas a tiny person, the exquisite kind of little old ladyone wants to put on a whatnot and she charmed mecompletely, although she embarrassed me. Mrs. Zieg-feld brought out her special recipe book crammedwith instructions handed down for generations on themaking of hundreds of French and German sauces161162WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEand viands. She took it as a matter of course that herson's wife would enjoy preparing with her own handsthe strudels and soups, pot roasts, fritters and pastriesher son had relished as a boy. I play-acted the best Icould, but Mother Ziegfeld soon discovered, to herchagrin, that Flo had married a frivolous actress whoneeded the assistance of a butler to brew a pot oftea.Flo and I had the summer together in New Yorkafter the Chicago run. "Now that I am a marriedwoman," I said, "now I can go to Claridge's," namingthe smart restaurant I had never seen because CharlesFrohman kept me under such close wraps. "Aw, whowants to go there? We go fishing tomorrow, ,,said Flo.And so we went fishing, to Montauk Point and toFire Island, and although there is nothing I moresincerely detest than fixing a worm to a hook or un-tangling a struggling bass, I thought it was all specialand romantic and divinely ordained. But one eveningon the return by boat from Fire Island, when the fogmoved over us in glamorous shrouds and the wavestossed us with some hint of danger as we picked upthe lights of New York in the distance, I sighed andembraced the world in all its loveliness and mur-mured to my husband: "Darling, isn't it all wonder-ful?"Flo did not reply. He was fast asleep. I began tosuspect that perhaps the honeymoon was drawing toa close.Hastings, I learned, was making him nervous.THE FIRST YEAR163"Maybe you don't like living in the country," I sug-gested, fearful that he would agree with me.He did. "Oh, I dunno, stone walls around me, andthat big iron gate out front. I feel locked up," he said.Later, he came to love Burkely Crest, especiallyafter he had begun to transform it according to hisown extraordinary scale and whim, but all during ourfirst year Mr. Ziegfeld was restless. For one thing, hewas broke. I realized this for the first time by thepresent he gave me on my first birthday with him.He went out into the garden and plucked a single redrose, wrapped two one hundred dollar bills aroundthe stem, and presented this to me at breakfast withan apology. "All I got," he mumbled.At that time his income was derived chiefly frompercentages on the talents of Anna Held, LillianLorraine, Bert Williams and other players under per-sonal contract to him. Ziegfeld earned millions buthe never saved a ha'penny. Money had no meaningfor him as capital or investment. It was somethinghe used, like scenery or music, with which to pro-duce shows, or something he played with when hegambled. Many times, to my precise knowledge, hedeliberately spent more on a production than it couldpossibly return even as a smash hit with all seats soldout for a full season.But one day I received a notice from a bank thatI had overdrawn some nine hundred dollars. It wasnot serious. I had money in other banks. But Flopurported to be astonished."Don't you know about keeping check stubs?" he164WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEsaid. His own financial arrangements, involving hun-dreds of thousands of dollars, were as casual as "How-do-you-do" but he was amazed by any one aroundhim who was not a precisionist.To add more confusion to our already scrambledhoneymoon, the Frohman office now decided to pun-ish me for marrying Ziegfeld. Up to this time I hadoften played important one-night stands betweenlonger engagements of three to four weeks in bigcities on the road, but now, with Jerry a hit, theFrohmans and Alf Hayman deliberately scheduledme in September for seventy-two one-night standswith hardly a breather between jumps. I had to ac-cept this with what grace I could muster or lose myplace in the theater—or so I thought then. This timeMother could not accompany me and, obviously, FloZiegfeld could hardly make a nationwide tour withme under the Frohman banner.Flo prepared a map for mother with little flagsshowing my itinerary and joined me when he could.We met in Philadelphia, Galveston, San Antonio, LosAngeles. Flo would arrive, as I have said, with histhings wrapped in a newspaper, then reach in hispocket and hand me a diamond and sapphire collar.At Galveston I saw him trap himself with a typi-cal Ziegfeld gesture. We had hired a car to take ussight-seeing and came across an interesting-lookingMexican peddling hot tamales. "Let's have one," Isuggested."A dollar's worth," Flo said to the man. There wasno such thing as "one" of anything for Flo. I supposeTHE FIRST YEAR165he did not know, either, that there were denomina-tions of money in sums less than a dollar. He was abaffled man when the peddler left him with fifty hottamales in his lap.I went on to San Francisco and Flo returned to theAnsonia in New York. I had begun to hear, fromvarious friends who thoughtfully told me things formy own good, certain rumors of Flo's attentions toother girls. One night I had been disturbed at a hotelto see him emerging from the room of an attractivelittle dancing girl. But he had easily explained that.It was a matter of business, and interviews betweendancers and producers in hotel rooms were not, afterall, uncommon. I had some misgivings, but it wasnot difficult to brush them aside.In San Francisco I received several telephone callsfrom Flo. Transcontinental conversations were anovelty then, requiring great patience and waiting,a great deal of shouting, and many inquiries of "Canyou hear me?" There is a story in these telephonecalls.Immediately after our marriage I met one of Flo'sprincipal aides, an extremely amiable young manwhom Flo was immensely fond of. This was GeneBuck, in whom Flo placed more confidence, I think,than anyone else in his organization. Gene was a per-son of great integrity and great talent, a song writerof real distinction, and an assistant with exactly thehigh level of good taste that Flo always demanded.He was good-looking, good-natured, and possessedof charm—but to my shame I have to report truthfully"166WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEthat I was a bit on the lofty side at this time. In short,I was snooty. I think that women who are jealous oftheir husband's business friendships are inane andwretched women, but I was guilty of that kind ofjealousy. Gene Buck, who became president of ascap,has undoubtedly forgiven me long ago.Be that as it may, Gene was in Flo's office all thetime for the two whole days that it took him to getme on the telephone in San Francisco. Time aftertime he would hear Flo grumble or shout, "Hello?San Francisco? Hello, Frisco? Hello—Frisco—And the result was a song, one of the hits of asubsequent Follies. That's how "Hello Frisco" wasinspired.My tour ended in Los Angeles where the first greatmovie-makers, Ince and Lasky and De Mille and D.W. Griffith, had opened studios in barns and vacantlots in a pepper-tree-lined village which had beguna few years before as a suburb for retired Iowans.This town was called Hollywood, if you can call ita town. It was a village.But Thomas H. Ince, one of the great pioneers ofthe screen, had a fine studio out in Santa Monica andhe immediately set about to convince me that I oughtto become a movie star. I was attracted by his offerbecause it meant an enormous amount of money,about three hundred thousand dollars for one picture,which, since it was free of income tax, compared agood deal more than favorably with what most starscommand today. I also met Jesse L. Lasky, who madeinteresting overtures. I still have, dated June 18, 1915,THE FIRST YEAR167a letter signed by Mr. Lasky and think it might amuseyou to read it in full. The letterhead listed Mr. Laskyas president, Samuel Goldwyn as general manager,and Cecil B. De Mille as director general of the "J esseL. Lasky Feature Play Company," of 6284 SelmaAvenue, Hollywood, California. Here it is:This is simply to let you know that I have writtento Mr. Goldwyn, our general manager, at our NewYork office, and have repeated to him our conversa-tion over the 'phone. He now understands that if youshould suddenly decide to close with any firm otherthan ourselves, before doing so, you will wire me,thus giving us a chance to compete for your servicesshould we desire to do so. I also have told him thatyou will probably leave the entire matter rest untilyou reach New York about the first of August whenMr. Goldwyn can meet you and Mr. Ziegfeld to-gether. I feel that this would be the best plan forall concerned as you will then be able to ascertainjust how many weeks you can devote to pictures, thesituation concerning your new play, etc.In the meantime, allow me to thank you for givingmy firm the consideration as expressed above. I havea feeling that before long, you will be occupying thepretty dressing room which I showed you and weshall be busily engaged in helping to preserve forfuture generations of theatregoers Miss Billie Burkeat the height of her career.The newspapers immediately published storiesabout these negotiations and the result was a fasttelegram from Hayman:168WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEIF YOU SIGN UP WITH PICTURES BEFORE WE SEE YOUAGAIN WE WILL NOT CONTINUE WITH YOU FORANOTHER SEASON.I replied, just as fast:I HAVE DONE NOTHING UP TO NOW WAITING TOHAVE TALK WITH YOU ABOUT PICTURES. BUT ANYMORE IRATE TELEGRAMS FROM YOU AND I WILLSIGN IMMEDIATELY.This reply indicates, you will please observe, con-siderable development in me. Even a few months agoI should not have dared send such a wire to Hayman.But Hayman's character had not developed at all.He replied:WE WILL HAVE NONE OF OUR PEOPLE IN PICTURESAND THIS MEANS YOU.When I reached New York, unheralded and un-met by the Frohman office, I was astonished to findthat Flo had leased a yacht. He had this beautifulthing moored up in the Hudson and from circumstan-tial evidence there had been any number of gayparties on it. I was a little suspicious, but the mainthing on my mind then was the possible conflict be-tween our careers. It was apparent that the Frohmanoffice was not charmed by the notion of providinginteresting employment for me for quite a while. Anactress is a woman who acts. I was not fetched bythe prospect of devoting myself permanently to beingchatelaine of Burkely Crest, even as the wife of FloTHE FIRST YEAR169Ziegfeld. I decided in the end that the best coursefor me was to make some movies. I told Flo that Ithought I should go with Ince.Such a move was a good business deal for thefamily. Flo, as my manager, would make a consider-able sum of money too. He was not eager to see meleave for California. We both understood the dangersof such a separation, but we were show folks. Floapproved the plan. I trotted down to the Frohmanoffice, was grudgingly admitted to the presence ofthe great Alf , and I made my announcement firm andterse."I am through. I am going to do a picture," I said.It was as simple as that. It might never have hap-pened if C. F. had been alive.Just before I left, Flo announced a new plan ofhis own. He said he was going to open a roof gardenwhere people could have dinners and late supperswhile they watched entertainers on the stage. I washorrified."And you, I suppose, will walk around like a waiterwith a napkin on your arm," I told Flo. "Why, it'sthe silliest thing I ever heard of. The great Ziegfeld!"The venture became Flo's world-famous "ZiegfeldRoof," and it taught me a handsome lesson. Neveragain did I offer a word of advice or criticism aboutmy husband's business.My salary from Thomas H. Ince was ten thousanddollars a week, but when I arrived in October I foundthat Mr. Ince was nowhere near ready to start shoot-ing. He hadn't a story, even, and he was as uncon-170WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEcerned as if he were keeping his cook waiting. Thishabit of employing people at extraordinary salariesand then forgetting about them was born early in themotion picture business and is today, of course, oneof the most time-blessed traditions of a factory townwhich prefers to do everything by rote. Ince disap-peared into the Catalina hills for three months, un-ruffled about my salary and about other mountingexpenses.I brought Mother out for this adventure, alongwith Cherry and my little cousin Dudie, a cook, ahousemaid, and a chauffeur. We took a fine house inSanta Monica with a view of the ocean, and finallyI went to work in a picture called Peggy.William Desmond was my leading man. I playedthe part of a girl from Scotland who, for some plotmotivation I cannot for the life of me recall, dressedas a boy. Ince built an entire fishing village near theocean, erected a beautiful little chapel—it stood untilfour or five years ago where the road winds downfrom Topangah Canyon to the Pacific—and used back-ground music for the first time in motion picturehistory.Before I completed Peggy, Ince made me an offerwhich unquestionably would have changed my lifepattern from then on. He offered me a five-year con-tract. I would have become one of the first motionpicture stars, and under the brilliant guidance ofThomas H. Ince I have every reason to think that Ishould have gone onward and upwards with themotion picture arts, and might have been well estab-THE FIRST YEAR171lished in both romance and comedy by the time thecinema found its voice in 1928; and then, of course,I think I would have been better off than ever. Sofew actors or actresses at that time had had stagetraining. After all, reading lines was one of myspecialties.This was a turning point in the road and this timeI recognized it. I saw the possibilities—some of them,at any rate—and I weighed them. This was the in-evitable conflict that at some time or another mustbe faced and decided by all women who have a pro-fession or a career. I thought this through. If I stayedin Hollywood, the result was as predictable as to-morrow's sunrise. I could not hope to remain Mrs.Florenz Ziegfeld, Jr., and at the same time become amotion picture star. To stay in Hollywood meant thatmy marriage had little chance of enduring. And so Imade the immemorial decision that has been happilymade by so many other women. I chose my husbandover my career. Not, however, without prayer andtears, and not without several troublesome scenes.While I was working on Peggy I began to hear dis-turbing news. This news came, as it always comes,from the best-intentioned friends. It is not a fact, inmy opinion, that "the wife is always the last to hear."Not if she knows at least two other women. They willhasten breathlessly to back fence or to Western Unionand tell you what you should know for your owngood.Some of my friends wired me the name of Olive1i 2wim a FEATHER on \n NOSEThomas. Some asked me point-blank when I woulddivorce Flo.Miss Thomas, whom Flo had featured on his roofgarden, had a beautiful little (ace, a heart-shapedIrish face, with shadowy dark hair and deep blueeyes. She was one of the girls Flo rolled twenty-dollargold pieces with on the roof. The girls always won.My friends told me, true or false. Interesting anec-dotes about yachting parties, and under the impetusof these dispatches my rapidly developing charactertook a new turn which surprised even me. I found agood deal of unsuspeeted salt in my make-up andenjoyed a thorough-going lit of blazing, red-headedjealousy. 1 sulked, wept, and wailed. Part of my dis-tress o( course, was sheer curiosity, but chiefly Isuffered from a sense oi bitterly outraged justice. Awoman who has decided to give up a career for aman is not the most tolerant person in the world whenanother woman is mentioned, especially when theother woman is a famous beauty.When Peggy was finished I fled to San Franeiseoto hide my head. Finally, 1 wired Flo to come outand talk things over. I had worked myself into a stateoi temper that demanded expression. 1 was pretty1 pla\ed the scene big, with ges-dramatic about it.tures, and 1 covered a lot of territory.Flo sat in my hotel room quietly smoking. Finallyhe said, "Look. Billie, you can't believe all you willalways hear about me and various girls. You arealways going to hear that kind of thing. 1 have trustedTHE FIRST YEAR173you. I always trust you. Now you have got to giveme the benefit of the doubt."I quarreled at him for two days. He was a dreadfulman to quarrel with. He just sat there puffing hiscigars, saying nothing. But one late afternoon whenI had almost exhausted my vocabulary he arched aneyebrow at me and used the little voice to mumble,"The trouble with you, Billie, is that when you accuseme you always pick the wrong girl."This was my cue to tear the draperies off the win-dows and throw the chinaware, all of which I didenergetically, bringing down the curtain to that scenein a tantrum. I doubted at the time if Mrs. Fiskecould have done it better. But there was no applause.I returned to New York but not with Flo. I wantedvery much to return to Flo. I wanted him to beg meto return, but Mr. Ziegfeld, who never uttered a hardword to me in all our quarrels, was infuriatingly pa-tient and as cool as if he had written the script. ButI found reason for my return—and so did he—in anarrangement for me to star in a picture called GloriasRomance by Rupert Hughes, which was to be filmedin Florida. There were three hundred thousand dol-lars in it for Mr. and Mrs. Ziegfeld and we used thisas our excuse.In New York I got word that Miss Thomas hadrevived her interest in Jack Pickford, Mary's brother.And Flo after a month came to me and announcedquite calmly, with no explanations, excuses, or repre-sentations of being sorry, that everything was nowstraightened out, that we had nothing more to worry174WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEabout. The telltale quirks at the corners of his mouthwhich always announced when Flo was being cava-lier with the truth were absent this time. I felt thatmy marriage was safe for a little while.But the facts of life with Flo Ziegfeld now revealedthemselves to me plainly. I perceived that I was des-tined to be jealous of the entire Follies chorus as wellas the Follies star list for the rest of my married life.I primped my curls, powdered my nose, and set my-self to the chore, a rather staggering assignment. ButI was young. Still, one of the first things I did wasto discover a brand-new girl.I first became aware of her during Glorias Ro-mance in Florida, but I did not meet her until Octo-ber 23, 1916, at the Ansonia in New York. She had athatch of red hair, a beautiful body, and blue eyes—a real Ziegfeld girl. She weighed nine and a halfpounds and we named her Patricia Burke Ziegfeld.Irving Berlin was my first caller after Patricia'sarrival and Flo was late. He wandered in looking alittle sad."What do you know," he said. "Lorraine got mar-ried. Imagine that!"I was not amused.At about this time Flo and Charles Dillingham hadcombined their resources to take over a new theaterand to put on a ginormous production called Miss1916, starring Marie Dressier and Leon Errol. Thismeant that Flo was busy and late almost every night,so that on the few evenings when I felt free to leavemy baby I could arrange small parties of friends forTHE FIRST YEAR175dinners and the theater. Actually, even as a newmother, I began to see more plays than I had everbeen accustomed to before. One of these was TheShow of Wonders, with music by Sigmund Romberg.And there danced onto the stage the most refresh-ing, smilingest, delightful child I had ever clappedwide eyes upon."She's marvelous," I whispered. "Who is she?"One of my theater-wise friends told me."Used to be known as 'Miss Sugarplum.' Realname's Mary Ellen Reynolds. Comes from Louisville.Been in vaudeville all over the world with her sisters.Known now as Marilyn Miller."I was so charmed with this confection of a girl thatI told Flo about her at once, full of enthusiasm."But she does her hair all wrong," I remember say-ing. "She isn't costumed properly. She has a sweetvoice but not much of it and I've seen better danc-ing-""So you want me to look at a girl who can't dress,99 Flocan't dance, and can't sing? For the Follies?grinned."But she makes the most enchanting effect. A de-lightful thing happens when she comes on stage. Hersmile—"But Flo would not walk around the block to dis-cover a new star and he discounted my report. Almostinvariably, he preferred to wait until a player hadbeen made famous by someone else or had movedcloser to the New Amsterdam Theater. Then hewould cheerfully pay a thousand dollars more a week176WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEto get that star under contract to him. He put me offabout Marilyn Miller for almost two years. MissMiller did not appear in the Ziegfeld Follies until1918.Eventually, I suppose, she would have made theFollies without any recommendation from me, but itis a passing strange thing that I worked so hardtrying to introduce Marilyn Miller and FlorenzZiegfeld, Jr.14. MENAGERIEWhile I was concerning myself with hesitant ges-tures toward a career, and with that livelyproduction of my own called Patricia, my disturbinghusband took over Broadway as if it were a provinceand he a sovereign with banners. He became "TheGreat Ziegfeld," and "Follies Girl" entered the lan-guage as the ultimate synonym for glamor. He putmoney into his shows—his own, or Charles Dilling-ham's, or anybody's—with the prodigality of a richchild at a candy counter, always seeking doublehandfuls of richness, sweetness or novelty. But then,whether he had spent a quarter of a million or threehundred thousand dollars on one production, he in-variably belabored and drove all his associates to thepoint of yearning for straightjackets until he achievedin the end the magnificent, funny, tasteful spectaclesthat were the Ziegfeld Follies of those amazing years.In 1914 Flo starred Anne Pennington, Vera Michel-ena, Ed Wynn, Leon Errol and Bert Williams, buteven these ripe personalities were not enough. In1915 he added Olive Thomas, Mae Murray, W. C.Fields and Ina Claire. In 1916 came Frances Whiteand Lilyan Tashman, and in 1917 there appearedEddie Cantor, Will Rogers and Peggy Hopkins Joyce.During the season of 1915-16 Will Rogers made his177178WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEfirst success in the legitimate theater (he had been avaudeville roper before that) in Hands Up. A too-hastily lowered drop which persisted in catching onhis rope, causing the audience to refuse to let theshow go on until Will finished his trick, had some-thing to do with increasing Will's reputation. As aresult, Flo engaged him for his roof show, where healso tried out Eddie Cantor before promoting themboth to the Follies.Then Flo turned his attention to Burkely Crest andmade a production out of that. We moved there whenPat was three weeks old.Burkely Crest by this time had been expanded bya number of acres in Hastings-on-Hudson, partly dueto Mother's enterprise; in many ways she shared withFlo the conviction that if a thing were good, thenmore of the same was essential. Flowers grew every-where, in hothouses or in rhythmically arranged rows,like plumed chorus girls, but hundreds of thousandsof blossoms burgeoning outdoors were not enoughflowers for Flo. He ordered in addition great arm-loads of fresh cut flowers from professional nurseries,always including battalions of American Beauties,often with stems two yards long. And the moment apetal wilted, they were thrown out.He planted the meadow through which the roadwound from gate to house with a constellation ofhyacinths and daffodils, set twenty-four toweringblue spruces, purchased at a mighty price from Ben-jamin Duke, on each side leading up to the house,MENAGERIE179and at the gate planted English box which becamehis special pride.During some of our quarrels he would change intothe high voice and regard me plaintively."All right, Bill," he would say. "But who gets mytrees?"Then the animals began to arrive. We became theproprietors of a herd of deer, ten head in all, and thenof two bears which lived with us until they becamedangerous nuisances and departed for the zoo. Wealso had two lion cubs, a regiment of partridges andpheasants with their own special preserve of severalacres, innumerable cockatoos and parrots, an ele-phant, and later a pony that had been ridden by thePrince of Wales.The elephant arrived in charge of a keeper with acostly howdah, or saddle. He was a baby, weighingonly two hundred and fifty pounds, was the pet ofeverybody on the place, and enjoyed strong chewingtobacco or cigarettes to eat. He became a nuisanceafter he discovered the kitchen, trumpeting andstorming the doors to get in, and on one occasiontrapped our cook Delia Leonard and almost squeezedthe life from her in his passion for Uneeda biscuits.Eventually, our elephant had to join the circus.Then we had buffaloes. Flo had been doing a showP. McAvoy, with whomwith the talented writerFlo did not get on so well. One of the reasons whythey did not agree, it turned out, was that in this pro-duction, which was labeled Americana, Flo ardentlydesired to have two buffaloes. Even after he hadJ.180WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEpurchased the animals he could not persuade Mr.McAvoy to accept them on stage—a strange, unrea-sonable prejudice, Flo thought. So he brought thebuffaloes home instead.Almost at once, one of them had a baby. I recallthis especially because on that day there was aneclipse."This," I said, "does not seem like the Flo ZiegfeldI know. How does it happen that you are not havingtwo eclipses? One eclipse for ordinary folk, but surelytwo for Burkely Crest!"After a Follies tryout in Atlantic City, the house-hold was gifted with seven dwarf ponies. These hadthe run of the place, preferring to eat flowers butoften nibbling ears if they could catch you readingin the garden.Charlie Dillingham kidded Flo continually aboutthe pheasant preserves."Flo likes to go into that enclosure," he said, "be-cause it gives him the same feeling of bravery that alion tamer experiences when he goes into the lions'cage."Also there were geese, lambs, ducks, three hundredchickens, parrots, and fifteen dogs.Flo had a playhouse built for Patricia that wasa replica of Mount Vernon, authentic in every detail,equipped and furnished like the original, but thiswas not enough. Flo had three hundred geraniumsplanted around it and established on the front porcha great white cockatoo with a golden crest. GeneralWashington, I think, would have been astonished.In Xoel Coward's The Marquise (New York. 1929)Underwood d~ Underwood2 CCzfCtfMENAGERIE181One afternoon I returned home late to find Sidney,Flo's valet, and Delia whispering and grinning in thelibrary. Sidney was as proper as an engraved invita-tion and always called me "Madam." He straightenedup and addressed me solemnly."Madam," he said, "Mr. Ziegfeld has done it again."I did not know whether to expect zebras or a minkfarm, but they led me to the dining room. We had arather large dining room which had been carefullydecorated and furnished with the correct formalthings, but now it looked as if the Imperial RussianCourt had launched a give-away program with theImperial crockery. Every sideboard and table, as wellas the floor, was covered with chinaware, all markedwith the coat-of-arms of the late Emperor NicholasII, formerly used for state banquets. There were doz-ens of tall vases and other pieces "for pretty" only,each of them so large that two men were required tolift them.All told, there was a complete service for onehundred guests.Flo came in."What in the world is this?" I demanded. "Whatcan I do with all this magnificence? Flo— it wouldtake twelve footmen just to handle it, and it needs adining room as large as Madison Square Garden. Flo,are you crazy! How much did it cost?""Just a little present I picked up for you," Flo said."How much?" I said."Oh, not much. I got a bargain."As it turned out, he had got a bargain. He had paidL82WITH A FEATHER OX MY NOSEonlv thirty-eight thousand dollars for this little gifthe just picked up for me. He was very sad when Imade him send it back.Later, when I was in Palm Beach, he saw a set ofhand-decorated plates at Marshall Field's, boughtthem on the spur of the moment and had themshipped to Florida. They were unusual and useful.Flo was always likely to make a too-lavish gesture onhis first impulses, but before he was through hewound up in good taste. Xo matter what the expense,of course.Every gesture he made was large, at home or inthe theater, but the key to Flo's enormous successeswas, I have always thought, his love of color and hisimpeccable skill in using it. He had discovered JosephUrban toiling in a Boston attic and promoted himovernight to design Follies sets because he saw in-stantly that this man was no more abashed by colorthan Tintoretto or Matisse. But Flo had some pecu-liarities about color. He admired pink and white,despised violet, and always insisted, whatever thescene, that his girls "come on" bathed in pure whitegleaming light, which after all was only commonsense. The colors were background. The girls wereto be seen.We began to entertain at Burkelv Crest on a scalewe had not imagined before. I suspect that I amessentially the tea-cozy type of hostess, but not Flo.One day when I had been ill Flo took over, called inDelia, and planned a dinner party."How manv, Mr. Ziecfeld?""Small party, Delia. About forty."Delia and I knew that this meant sixty."Hois d"oeuvres T Mr. Ziegfekl?*'"Yes, something unusual. And let's have terrapin.May be none here. IH get 'em by plane. And betterhave some baby lamb and brook trout Mrs. ZiegfeldwvOi !;/-;"i rrr- ;: ~i:r>sed season, Mr. ZiegfeH.*er mind. IH attend to that And Delia, IrvingBerlin will be here. Better have frogs' legs for him.ii-r r. ;>:.r ;r r-:EIt was Irving s birthday, we learned, so Deliaordered a special cake. So did Mr. Ziegfeld and wehad both. Flo s was about the size of a small ke-^rmr.y rim: mi " m :r:;;,:r: •- :';. m --.e: m ::Irving s "Alexander's Ragtime Band.9We had motion pictures every night, all prodncersrmmr :i"v;:: :; E-mi mm- rimi m :;; Z:mmO :inspection^ and although we frequenth' invited largemmmmE ;: mE rm rm :.mr r;m:E :; sm mmm Kmchief concern always was that every servant on theplace found a comfortable chair to see the entires >.;-.•• Or. >m ::-:::: mmim m :r-cr ml rm :rm: :;-.••';: rm N-r'." Ammmmm mmmrirm :;; ; m :mr r/;Em: rmm :; rm r ,-rr: m Erym ir Ermim m:E rmvm.E rri::;:.: "mm i^riir. Emmmm: :rrvrwith them, but they understood him and loved himmi mm EmrmI him v. rm rmm: -mmm ::: m: m.r:rrmrEErOr :;r rrm mi; mymmi 0; 1:::;^:'rr ;rr rm r;ri". mm :; Ci.::'.n;.i v: Fmrmm m;184WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEnow found that the only possible way to travel wasby private car. I had weaned him away from carryinghis belongings in a newspaper and now he used fine-grained leather suitcases and boxes, usually fillingone end of the car with his personal belongings. Onone trip to the Coast I recall that he took in additionto our own coach an entire Pullman for Delia, Sidneyand the other members of our personal staff at anadded cost of eleven hundred dollars. When Deliabecame ill he moved out of his private drawing roomand insisted that she take it.Flo's ideas of entertainment were sometimes star-tling. Once, when we had taken a big house in PalmBeach on Jungle Road, I planned a formal dinnerparty for a number of guests of the so-called inter-national set—formal Britishers and epicurean Latinsmixed with Philadelphia society. When dinner wasserved, it turned out to be not what I had orderedat all but fifty pounds of corned beef and cabbagewith yellow turnips and Irish potatoes especially pre-pared by Dinty Moore in New York and flown downsteaming hot. I was horrified as our guests began tosniff this strange food—but some of the ladies ate somuch that they had to be assisted to their cars. Flowas right, as he always was; he cared little for con-vention but he knew what people liked.Life with Ziegfeld included not only the beautyspot that he made Burkely Crest, but camping.Camping a la Ziegfeld in nowise resembled outdoorlife as practiced by those rugged young men, the BoyMENAGERIE185Scouts of America. Ziegfeld in the backwoods ofCanada more closely resembled a rajah on safari withcarpets, ices, cooks, and distinguished guests.Our camp, called "Patricia," on "Billie BurkeIsland" was at the end of a chain of lakes some 125miles northwest of Quebec. It seems to me that Floonce casually mentioned the sum of one hundred andfifty thousand dollars as the cost of setting it up.Item: two thousand dollars for blankets; item: a spe-cial chef imported by arrangement with DintyMoore; item: eight guides; item: a carload of char-coal.There were six cabins at Camp Patricia, electricity,and modern plumbing. Charles Dillingham, who al-ways insisted that I bought only crystal glasswarefrom Tiffany's for Pat's bottles, also alleged that ourlight bulbs were designed by Cartier's. Other friendsinsisted that our electricity was handmade by ThomasA. Edison. But possibly these were exaggerations.From our camp we saw the Aurora Borealis nightlyas it flared in the sky, like a ruffled flounce, and fromour main cabin and commissary, where differentcolored oilcloths were laid on the tables for everymeal, we relaxed in the serene view of lakes, pines,birches, and our chaste, cool beach.We enjoyed imported cheeses, fresh trout, and car-loads of special delicacies sent up from New York byFlo. He was the mighty hunter stalking the woodslike an Iroquois, fishing all day, resting himself byspending enough energy to power a small yacht. Pat,186WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwhen she was old enough to sit up, went with herfather in canoes, learned to fish, later learned toshoot. I have always been especially happy that mvdaughter had those summers at camp with her fatherand knew him in that outdoors mood. The accoutre-ments were expensive and complex, but in the woodsFlo was simple and relaxed, completely old-shoe, andfather and daughter were close, warm friends.But woods or no woods, the telegrams flowed insteady staccato, delivered at who knows what cost,for Flo without means of communication was as pent-up as Boulder Dam without a sluice. He plannedShow Boat at camp, and strange as it may seem, con-sidering the loveliness and sentiment of that mostbeautiful of all musical plays, Flo produced it almostentirely on Western Union blanks. And here is an-other odd thing:Among the talented young people who came sofrequently to us at Burkely Crest, at Palm Beach, orat the camp, was a wistful young fellow named IrvingBerlin. Irving may not enjoy these adjectives, butwhen he was a boy in his twenties he appealed to meas shy, gentle, and sweet. He had just come througha great sorrow, the loss of his young wife, when wefirst knew him. It was years before he met EllenMackay and added a chapter to romantic Americana.Irving, as I have said, saw our baby just afterPatricia was born. He worked for Flo on the 1915Follies, I believe, and did the new Century show thatFlo and Dillingham put on next year, Miss 1916.MENAGERIE187But to my story: when Flo discussed with Irvingthe possibilities of Show Boat as a musical, to betaken from Edna Ferber's great novel of the Missis-sippi, Irving missed the point entirely. He discour-aged Flo and argued that Show Boat would never bea success! Well, Mr. Berlin will have to forgive mefor reporting that one. So far as I know, he has neverbeen wrong about anything else.Rudolf Friml also visited us at camp, bringing allhis talent with him, but no woodcraft. Flo wouldnever trust him near a gun for fear he would aim itin all directions, but he did one day permit him to usehis favorite fishing tackle. Rudy promptly dropped itinto eighty feet of lake water.George Gershwin, to the best of my knowledge,never wandered far from a piano in his life, so wedid not see him at camp. But he came to BurkelyCrest often. He was fresh from a tidal wave of hom-age in London and in his early twenties was alreadyone of the distinguished composers of the day, but hedid not require large audiences to inspire him. Hewould drop in before dinner, play without beingasked, and I would sit for hours listening. And, Iwant to remind myself, fully conscious of the rareexperience I was enjoying.There were moments of serenity and fulfillment,and moments of great fun. One of the funniest wasthe time we received word at Camp Patricia that theDuke of Atholl, then visiting the Dominion, had re-quested permission to visit us.There was a tremendous scurrying around, a great188WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEpolishing and policing, and all kinds of twitter-patedpreparations by me getting ready to meet the blueblood whose wife was sister of the Queen of England,and finally, with fanfare, the Duke arrived. He wasimpressive. He wore Scotch kilts and a full beard, andhe regarded us benignly. All the ladies in camp, ledby me, hurried up to present ourselves, almost curt-sying in our eagerness, and finally Flo stepped for-ward. He had been keeping himself oddly in thebackground and it did not seem like him to be shy inthe presence of any kind of royalty.Suddenly he brushed us all aside, stepped in frontof the Duke, and kicked him in the stomach.The Duke sat down hard.We were amazed and embarrassed, and we gazedat Flo for an explanation.He glowered down at the stricken Duke."Take off that beard, you old faker," he said. "Gladto see you, Jerry."Our Duke was Dr. Jerome Wagner of New York,friend and physician of so many theatrical folk, andhe had made the mistake of attempting a practicaljoke at Flo Ziegfeld's expense. Dr. Wagner may befound on Fifty-seventh Street today and if you are apatient of his, you might ask him how it feels to bea kicked duke.Flo sent him out on the lake in a leaky canoe thenext day and almost drowned him.But the spirit of Camp Patricia is best expressedby Miss Pat herself. Here is a letter she wrote to Flowhen she was about twelve years old. It is unedited:MENAGERIE189Dearest Daddy;My, but a week has flown by and I meant to writeyou every other day. A lot has been going on andmost of it has been fun. Although I got into a bit ofa fix the day after you left. Mummy has always beensaying how wonderful castor oil was for the hair, putit on a day before you wash it, well I thought if castoroil was good, butter would be that much better. So Iproceeded to nip a cup when Wesley wasn't looking,and went to work—I guess it wouldn't have been sobad if I hadn't gone down to the lake to wash myhair. The cold water hit the butter and boom, you canimagine what happened. It took mummy an hour andevery bit of her good disposition and all the hot waterin camp to unbutter me. I shan't try that again.Dr. and Mme Couillard came by tuesday and wewent down the Jeannotte after some trout. It was aperfect day, we went down two portages to the smallpool, the good one where you got the two and a halfpounder. We took lunch not as elaborate as whenyou're here but I made the fried tomato with the eggson top and the creamed corn mixed with baked beans.We had no birds, but Dr. is going to bring Flip nextSunday and we'll go after some. Tom Thumb is goingto look just like Flip, I hope we can bring him homewith us, please! We miss you very much aren't youcoming up soon. We got seventeen trout and I amgoing to see if Mr. Rowley can send some to you.The bears seem quite happy, Cracker loves to playwith Dempsey but I am afraid he'll get hurt, then hecan't go hunting with us. Bridget still sits in the waterWITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE190half the day, she doesn't hark at all just sits. Mummyis afraid she'll catch cold, but she wont stay out. Thebears had colic last night and today they are on adiet of cinnamon and rice. Willie gave them too muchsugar and water. He likes to see them stand on theirhind legs and drink it out of a pop bottle. Shot half adozen frogs yesterday, but I don't think they are anyof the ones you had shipped from New Orleans.Onazim wouldn't clean them but Willie did and hecut them around the waist and pulled the skin insideout and it made a perfect pair of pants. Mummycouldn't look when he did it, but she did think thepants were pretty.We are going to make a movie but its going to behard without any hero, mummy said we can't haveany of the guides as a hero, they are a bit old anyway, so I guess we'll have to make up Blacky or MissNick to be one.We went down to see Mrs. Rowley and I picked allher pansies, Mummy was horrified but Mrs. Rowleysaid they'd bloom all the more so I picked them all.We went up Rat River, but I think Mr. Sauer beatus to it. We didn't get a rise. How long do you thinkit will be before you come up we miss you don't startthe other show right away. Jack sent us some records,but I cant say much for them he and Mother likeall that dreary stuff. We are sending some of themback and some we already have.I'm glad Whoopee is a success. Write me a letterand I'll write again soon. Hope we have good hunt-ing. Mummy won't walk in with us, she just sits inMENAGERIE191the canoe and cries when she hears us shooting. Idon't understand it, she can shoot a target just swell,and she loves to eat the partridge especially friedwith the quince jelly the way you do them. The mailboat is just docking and I'll give this to Emile, Ar-mand is going back with him and come back to-morrow there is going to be a party in the villageand we wont be using the boat. I drove it yesterdayand docked it too, and I didn't hit a thing. I can't goout in my canoe by myself, won't you wire mummythat its all right, Tm just getting so I can paddlewithout changing sides.all my love and kissesPattyThose were the fine days. They did not come alltogether. They never came consecutively for me: Ihave telescoped several years in the foregoing ac-counts of Burkely Crest and the camp. For in spiteof the wonderful things we had and enjoyed, "Gonewith the Wind" pleasures I now realize they were,whims and parties and extravagances of an era thatwas actually not so long ago, only a handful of years,but which now seem to belong in another century.For there was always in my mind the convictionthat I was not being true to myself, that I had notyet attempted the tasks that I must try in the theater.I was gnawed constantly by the realization that Imust be an actress now or never at all.Motion picture work I did do. The Famous Players-Lasky studio was on Fifty-seventh Street in those192WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEdays, with another studio in Astoria. I starred, I sup-pose, in about a dozen silent pictures. Thomas Mei-ghan was one of my leading men. Montagu Lovewas another. Walter Wanger was one of our vervyoung executives. I recall the work, six or sevenweeks on a picture, locations on Long Island, atRupert Hughes' country place for ice-skating scenes,and in various New York lofts for interiors. But ifserious students of the cinema wish to examine thosepictures, or even to discover their names, they willhave to go through Jesse Lasky's oldest files. I barelyremember them.Flo, to be sure, had an interest in pictures too.It was his notion, so abundantly borne out years toolate to profit him or me, that musical shows wouldbe fine screen fare. He tried to market a productionof Glorifying the American Girl, but producers ofthat time turned away from it.Flo tried to help me. He sought a young matineeidol named Douglas Fairbanks to do a play withme, but was disconcerted to learn that Fairbankshad left for Hollywood. Flo was really puzzled."Gone to California. I wonder why?" he complained.Finally, that elegant actor and astute producerHenry Miller, who was a kind of neighbor of oursin the country, found a play for me. Henry's chiefstar and virtually his coproducer then was RuthChatterton, but Miss Chatterton was on the roadin a highly successful show and Henry wanted togo right ahead with his new costume play, Marriageof Convenience.MENAGERIE193At weary last it seemed that I was headed back,importantly, for the theater. I thought for a whilethat Flo's career and my career could gallop suc-cessfully side by side and that at the same time wecould be good parents.15. FOLLIES OF 1918Marriage of Convenience was the revival of acomedy in four acts by Sidney Grundv andwas one of the most handsomely produced plays Iever had. It was the first period play that New Yorkhad seen for several years and my own costumeswere so fine and so elaborate that once again I en-joyed that warm, good sensation of hearing burstsof applause on my entrances—no matter if they wereapplauding the new dress and not me. We had quitea time with our wardrobes for that production.Mr. Miller gave me carte blanche, never sniffingat expenses, not even when I spent one hundredand twenty-five dollars for a lace handkerchief."What a nice kerchief," he said dryly, fluffing itwith a forefinger. "Just carry it, dear, don't use it."But Miss Chatterton had undertaken to supervisecostumes and as a result, although her taste was im-peccable and her theatrical instinct invaluable, therewere several interesting arguments. Miss Chattertonhad a special interest in the costumes because shewas going to do the play later on the road. Unfor-tunately we were not precisely the same type. ThenMr. Miller had a complaint.In designing his costume, Miss Chatterton span-gled him with diamonds until his shirt front shim-194Follies of 1918195mered like a waterfall. Henry protested but Ruthwas adamant. Finally, complaining that he wasblinded by his own gems, he connived with Flo,whom he asked to sit in the front row for dressrehearsal."How'd it go, Flo?" Henry asked when the finalcurtain had dropped."Good show, good show, Henry," said Flo, readinghis lines like a well-rehearsed actor, "but my God,man, those sparklers! Are you supposed to be Dia-mond Jim Brady?"Miss Chatterton overheard this as she was meantto, and for opening night Henry was allowed toremove most of the jewelry.Henry Miller, as I say, never objected to expenses.He was the amateur farmer who maintained a largedairy upstate, producing milk "that ought to begood; it costs me two dollars and fifty cents a glass."It was a good play with Lowell Sherman, LucileWatson and Frank Kemble Cooper in the cast. Weopened cold in New York, drew excellent reviews,and it seemed to me for a while that I had againestablished myself where I thought I belonged— asan actress in well-written, high-comedy plays. Nine-teen-eighteen was a good year all around: Flo hada magnificent edition of the Follies, George Arlisswas playing Hamilton with Jeanne Eagels as his lead-ing woman; Lionel Barrymore was a hit in The Cop-perhead, Pauline Lord was acting in The Deluge,and Teddy Roosevelt, as good an actor as any of us,was appearing all over town, starting tumults in196WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEtheaters merely by sitting in the orchestra. Whenpointed out, he would make a speech.Old-timers of the theater often insist that theFollies of 1919 was the best of all. Indeed that wasa fabulous show, so well integrated, so preciselytimed, and so colorful. But the 1918 edition is theone that crowds my memory. This was the Folliesin which Marilyn Miller first appeared, walking downthose long, glorious stairs in a mock minstrel cos-tume and displaying legs that I believe have neverbeen matched for sheer slim, provocative beauty.Miss Pennington was famed for the pretty knees,and Mistinguette had wonderful ankles, but Marilyn—I think Marilyn had everything. Now, an ordinaryshow, I believe, would have stopped there, lettingthe audience revel in the surprise of this new anddelightful girl, but Flo, who they said despised com-edy, inserted Fannie Brice into that act, placed herin an aisle seat as if she were part of the audience,and turned her loose to make zany comments. Theeffect was staggering. Audiences were exhaustedbetween the double impacts of beauty and laughter.Unless memory fails me, it was for the 1918Follies that Irving Berlin wrote one of his most fa-mous songs. The point is not the date, but how hehappened to write the song. Irving had completedhis score and, like everyone else who worked forZiegfeld, was in a state of total collapse, determinedto retire to a cave in the hills. But Flo insisted, ashe always insisted, on a little more.Follies of 1918197"Just one more song, Irving," he wheedled. "Alittle song/'"No more," said Irving. "I'm written out.""Oh, I just want a small one, just a snatch to bringthe girls on."That was Ziegfeld. They said he paced his wholeshow around getting the girls on.Badgered and weary, Irving retired to his roomand wrote a little song to bring the girls on and itwas, of course, that great tune, "A Pretty Girl IsLike a Melody."Booth Tarkington, the gay and very gallant gen-tleman from Indiana, came into our lives at aboutthis time, enriched it with his wit and kindness, andgave me two fine plays, The Intimate Strangers andRose Briar, both of which Flo produced in associa-tion with A. L. Erlanger and Charlie Dillingham.But what happened was that the three producershanded over the production to Tarkington. Never-theless, Erlanger used to wander in during rehearsalsand make small suggestions. These were harmlessand Booth always amiably pretended that he hadbeen greatly helped in his work.For The Intimate Strangers we included in thecast those excellent actors Alfred Lunt and GlennHunter, Elizabeth Patterson, a most gifted actress,and the lovely Frances Howard, who played the partof a flapper. Miss Howard had unusually fine hairand was immensely distressed about it during thetryout period. She used to come to my dressing roomand weep about it.a198WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSE"Mr. Tarkington wants me to cut my hair short forthe part," she would say, "and I'm afraid to do it, Imay not be good enough, I may not get the part, andthen I shall be ruined." But Frances did cut her hair,did get the part, and played it wonderfully well.Today she is known as Mrs. Sam Goldwyn, one ofHollywood's most gracious and most beautiful host-esses.Tarkington was as happy as a clam at high tide (phrase he taught me) when he was allowed to pro-duce plays. So many fine writers never reveal theirhumor in ordinary conversation, but Tarkington al-ways did, never holding back a good line because hethought he could sell it in manuscript the next week.He was a Beau Brummel, thoughtful and kind toeveryone. He directed his plays expertly, claimingto have learned how at Princeton, and we had a finerun of 91 performances with The Intimate Strangersin New York in addition to a good road tour.When I went on tour I was accompanied by Pat-ricia, a nurse, two maids, three dogs, and a car withmy faithful chauffeur Ernest. Since we spent twoweeks to a month in each city we played in, I alwaysengaged an apartment or a house. By now, thesethings seemed normal and routine. How else, indeed,should an actress travel? Today I almost blush to setdown the facts, but they are part of the era, a glit-tering era now vanished like a dream. But it was agood thing at that that I took my own cook. Shemanaged somehow to keep Alfred Lunt alive.Mr. Lunt was in love with Lynn Fontanne. As aFollies of 1918199result of his passion he did not eat. My cook, who wasextraordinarily sympathetic with romantic passions,determined to feed Alfred if it killed him, and in theprocess of sustaining him she accomplished almostprecisely that. My kitchen was teeming and steam-ing at all hours with special delicacies intended totempt our loyer to nourish himself.Sometimes he nibbled, but for the most part Alfredwas concerned hourly with preparations for his wed-ding. His trousseau was a matter of the yastest im-portance to him. He stayed up late at night examininghis new socks, shirts and dressing gowns, hoping thatMiss Linnie would like them, and frequently arousedme at odd hours of the early morning to plead forapproyal of some new piece of haberdashery. Oh,that man was really in loye! As I shall prove to you.His trousseau ready at last and arrangementsmade, Alfred married Miss Linnie in Atlantic Citybefore the matinee performance. Lynn was as poisedas she always is, but poor Alfred barely managed tomutter a "yes" to the parson. We can attest that hegot that out, for we overheard it, but that was thelast word that Alfred said until the next morning.His voice left him immediately. His eves took on aglaze, and he walked in silence. He worked his jaw,but no sounds emerged.We got him to the theater and pushed him onstage, but still our Alfred could not utter. His lipsmoved, he went through his pantomime, but hisvocal chords were paralyzed. During the variousscenes our stage manager was compelled to hide200WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEbehind the stove or crawl under couches to readAlfred's lines, a procedure that got me slightly dizzy.It was like working with a ventriloquist. I neverknew where the voice was coming from.Of course there are instances, many of them, inwhich husbands have lost their voices immediatelyafter the marriage ceremony, and some have neverrecovered, but this is the only time anything likethat ever happened to an actor.Alfred has been famously articulate ever since. Hewas a delightful man to play opposite. His distin-guished voice never failed him again, and his lu-minous brown eyes, with theiralways-startledexpression, positively seemed to brighten the stagewhen he came on.My other Tarkington play, Rose Briar, seemed tome to be a charming production; it had a distin-guished cast with Frank Conroy and Julia Hoyt, anda song, "Love and the Moon" by Jerry Kern whichgained considerable popularity, but somehow thisproduction missed the mark. Still it was not a finan-cial loss. We played 88 performances in New York.I have been unusually lucky in the theater, neverhaving had a play so poorly received that it had tobe closed within a week, as so often happens toeven the best actors and producers, but some of myshows, let us say, were better than others.Annie Dear, which Flo also produced, was one thatwas not so good, although even this one played 103performances. Flo had gone to great pains to con-trive an amusing musical around "Good Gracious,Follies of 1918201Annabelle." a story by Clare Kummer. but he wasrestricted bv the terms of the contract and was notable to add anv scenes or musical numbers savethose written b\- Miss Kummer. A Ziegfeld showwithout added scenes and added numbers is simplynot a Ziegfeld show at all. And in addition to that,the plain truth of the matter is that I did not haveenough voice really to do mv share musically. Icould sins; smaller songs successfully enough, butthe burden of carrying a big musical with whoppingbig song numbers is a burden that can be hoistedonly by professional singers with voices like pipeorgans. And so. in spite of the skillful foolishness ofErnest Truex and a big. fine cast. Annie Dear cannotbe set down as a milestone in the theater.The Rescuing Angel was another attempt bv Floto be mv producer. We sot bv. but this one cameclose to being a real failure. Caesar's Wife, a newSomerset Maugham play in which Flo presented me.with Norman Trevor as leading man. was consider-ably better due. I think, to Willie Maugham's wit.but it was not significant in my search for the properplays. I began to spend a great deal more time atBurkelv Crest.As my star flickered. Flo's activities in the theaterassumed even greater importance. He was so busyand his enterprises were so enormous that mv inter-rupted career, although he occasionally tried to setit straight, began to swing exclusively in a tight littleorbit around his. And two other things kept me awayfrom the theater.202WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEAs a small child, Pat was not strong. She requiredconstant attention. That is why I took her on severaltours with me and not because of theatrical careless-ness. And Mother was not well. I shall always blessFlo for his kindness to her. They were the closest offriends, completely understood each other, and wereentirely alike in that both were so easy to please ifyou only understood what they wanted: they wantedthe best.Since Mother could no longer go up and downstairs, we provided another house for her on theplace, where she lived with her own cook and twonurses. She suffered from diabetes, for which littlecould be done in those days; that remarkable Cana-dian researcher had not yet come across insulin. Ioften think today how much more fortunate invalidsare now than they were a comparatively few yearsago. Today they can be entertained by radio, records,television, and even motion pictures projected onceilings. But in the late 'teens and twenties, therewas only the Victrola and the player piano. Never-theless, Flo exerted himself constantly with gifts andjokes and little kindnesses. I am so very grateful tohim for making Mother's last days such happy days.He always made her birthday a sparkling thing.Hundreds of colored balloons would arrive for theparties he gave in her honor, and on several occa-sions he sent out the full orchestra from his roof toplay for her.Mother died while I was playing in The IntimateStrangers in Baltimore. We closed for three days andFollies of 1918203then I resumed my tour, not eagerly but gratefulthat I had something intense to do. It is the bestthing, always. My thoughts went back then, as theydo now so often, to the days when I was dependentfor everything upon this fine woman who might havemade so much of her own life but preferred to giveherself to me. I have seen mothers seem to give them-selves to their children completely, in what appearedto be noble self-sacrifice, while what they were reallyaccomplishing was the binding of offspring to themwith suffocating hoops of selfishness. I need not em-phasize that my mother did not do that. She wasfirm and wise and let me go my own way when thetime came.At Burkely Crest we revolved like little moonsaround Flo's sun, avoiding the heat when we could.Flo enjoyed doing business at all hours and from aneminence. The eminence was his large bed, which hehad placed on a dais. From there he would telephoneeverybody on whom he could make a demand inshow business, driving his composers and designers,badgering his writers at 4 a. m., and bedeviling hispress agents. He made thousands of notes at highspeed, jabbing his pencils so fiercely that he invar-iably broke them, then hurling them across the roomin anger. The pencils flew so fast that they sometimesresembled flights of arrows unleashed by a companyof yeomen. All of us, the servants and whoever wasin the house at the time, scurried to provide more pen-cils.204WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEFlo was always intensely mortified when anymember of his staff had the effrontery to leave him.Bernard Sobel, now a distinguished public relationscounsel in New York, once resigned and Flo im-mediately set about wooing him back with vitupera-tion and flattery. He sent him this telegram:I FORGIVE YOU FOR LEAVING ME PERHAPS NEXTTIME YOUR WORD WILL BE GOOD I WILL TRY TO DOALL MY OWN PRESS WORK HEREAFTER AS I HAVENOTHING TO DO AND CAN THUS SAVE THREE SEVENTYFD7E WEEKLY PLUS FIFTY DOLLARS FOR EACH SHOWIN ALL FOUR TWENTY FIVE WEEKLY THAT IS WHATI HAVE ASKED KINGSTON TO PAY YOU I HOPE YOURPOOR NERVES WILL SOON GET RESTED AFTER YOULEAVE ME I SUPPOSE YOU ARE ALREADY EATINGNOTHING BUT MATZOTH PLEASE SEND ME SLX BOXESON 6:40 TRAIN TONIGHT WHEN DO YOU MOVE TOYOUR ABIE'S HUSH ROSE QUARTERS IN THE BRONXGOOD LUCK MY POOR MISGUIDED BEST PRESS AGENTIN THE WORLDZIEGFELDI think Bernie stayed away anyway, wise man.But he has always been my fine and helpful friend.Flo took as much interest in my clothes as I didand was difficult to keep out of my dressing room.He knew, it seemed, all about beauty aids and likedto supervise. One of his prescriptions was entertain-ing, if not effective.Follies of 1918205Flo insisted that the only proper way for a red-head to rinse her hair was in imported champagne.Since this was so, he purchased cases of the bestsparkling wine, which he himself would pour on myhair after my shampoo. So far as I know, this remark-able treatment was no more beautifying than AnnaHeld's fictitious milk baths, but it was fun to lick upas much as I could as the champagne dripped downmy chin.My chance to return to the theater in a play ofmajor importance in a role that I could have actedto my credit came suddenly during one of my quietseasons, with an offer from Gilbert Miller. I hadbeen waiting and hoping for something like this. Irecognized it, and I knew beyond any question thatI should accept. The play that Mr. Miller had inmind was The Swan by Molnar."I must do this," I told Flo."No good. No," he said. But he knew. He knewwhat this Molnar play, under the meticulous produc-tion that Miller would give it at the Empire Theater,would mean for me. He knew, too, that I understoodhis reasons for objecting. He had produced playsfor me, and although none of them had failed, noneof them had advanced me. He was jealous of GilbertMiller.Our arguments about this were athletic. I brokesome china. I swept a whole sideboard bare ofchinaware and I shrilled about my career.But Flo was calm and sullen. I did not get to doThe Swan. Instead, Eva Le Gallienne did it in a206WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEmagnificent production which added significantly toher laurels.This was my chance and I lost it. Immediatelyafterwards, Flo admitted that he had been wrong.This is the only instance I know in which he everadmitted to anybody that he was wrong about any-thing, and the measure of his wrong-headednessabout this can be judged by the admission.16. HIGH STAKESBetween 1927 and 1930 I did three plays, TheMarquise, Happy Husbands, and The TruthGame. I did them with pleasure and I won, perhaps,a little acclaim, and I made a little money, but I wasa part-time actress, a part-time artist, a part-timeprofessional. The very terms contradict themselves,of course, for there is no such thing as a part-timeartist. An artist is a person who devotes himselfruthlessly, even selfishly, to his craft or his skill, for-getting every other consideration, and the measureof his integrity as an artist is, I think, not whetherthe critics find his works well done but whether hehas given his art his full devotion. And the hard linesof that definition are the barriers which make itsupremely difficult for women to be artists. I wantedto be an artist then, as I do now, but in those years Ihad another job. It was simply to hold my husband.For some time now, as I have told my story, I havesaid nothing about this, but it was always there. Itwas always there, this swelling uncertainty, some-times casual, sometimes merely amusing—Flo Zieg-feld could make almost anything amusing—butsometimes bleak and frightening. Someone, Mr.Shaw probably, once said that marriage is attractivebecause it provides the maximum of temptation plus207208WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEthe maximum of opportunity; an astute observation.But I had not been married for many months beforeI came to consider that the entire Follies possessedboth maximums so far as my husband was concerned.After a few years went by I learned to pigeonholethe Ziegfeld girls. In some instances I had nothing toworry about. On the whole, I fretted more aboutcertain society women, cool, wealthy women withpale, beautiful hands, lovely houses, and Indianservants to pass around the coffee. Flo, I am com-pelled to report, preferred these women, cocked hiseyes appreciatively at their elegant possessions, andeven learned to play expert bridge in order to enter-tain them. But the Misses Olive Thomas and MarilynMiller were the ladies I had to be emphatically con-cerned with. Miss Miller is part of the story, part ofthe record, and I have promised to be frank.She was, I think, the vision of perfection, repre-senting in beautiful flesh all the things that all his lifeFlo Ziegfeld had sought to dramatize. She summedup and symbolized the grace and joy which, forget-ting details, were what he reached for in everythinghe staged. She was, as every male with reasonableeyesight knew, extraordinarilyspecial.Moreover, and do not think that this too did notappeal to Ziegfeld, she was willing to work the eight-een hours every day that were necessary to keepenticing,that perfection special.Flo recognized this and every night she dancedhe provided a brand-new costume at one hundredand seventy-five dollars per costume. He recognizedHIGH STAKES209it when he had her dressing room done over by thesame decorator who did my home, only in MissMiller's instance the entire room was in point d'espritover satin.I should prefer to think that Flo was merely fasci-nated by Marilyn Miller, but something else was thefact: he idolized her, and before long everybodyknew it.Flo sailed for Europe in the summer of 1922,Marilyn went out on tour, and I returned from travel-ing with The Intimate Strangers to find my frontlawn swarming with reporters."What about the divorce?" they said. "Did yousee Miss Miller's statement?"Marilyn had given out an interview in Boston. Shesaid that she had to lock her dressing-room door atall times to keep Flo out. She said that he was des-perately in love with her and would marry her if Iwould step aside. She claimed that all that held himwas Patricia."She waves her baby at him like George M. Cohanwaves the American flag," they quoted Marilyn.Now that was a smart line, but I never believedMarilyn thought it up herself.Booth Tarkington stood by me in Kennebunkport,Maine, that summer while everyone waited for meto divorce Flo. Booth steadied me, and I made upmy mind. I had to make it up in spite of newspaperstories and in spite of many advisers who at onceset themselves up as domestic relations counselors.I decided that I did not want a divorce.210WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI hope I can make myself clear about this. Therewere several things I knew for certain then and Ihave never changed my mind. One of the things Iknew was that Flo loved me, and that he loved hishome and his family. He was what he was. And Iknew that he did not love Marilyn Miller. He adoredher—as a perfect actress.Moreover ( and this will seem like curious thinkingto anyone not in some close way associated with thetheater), I knew what a valuable asset MarilynMiller was to Flo. I did not want him to lose her asan actress.And those are the reasons, debated for so manyyears by so many persons, I am sorry to say, why Idid not leave Flo. I have never before said a wordabout this, certainly not in print, and not even tomy closest friends. But that is how it was.I cabled to Flo in Europe, told him all I had heardand all that I knew, and demanded that he returnhome at once so that we could make a plan. I said tohim when he arrived, "Let's not try to make thisthing up if there is only a slim chance. Unless youknow in your heart that you want to go on with ourmarriage—"This was as serious a moment as we had ever facedtogether, but my husband was Flo Ziegfeld and hestayed absolutely in character. He reached in hispocket and handed me a twenty-thousand-dollardiamond bracelet from Tiffany's. Unwrapped, ofcourse.I snatched the bauble from him and flung it intoHIGH STAKES211a corner. Flo did not flick an eyelash to see where itwent, but I was not that daft. I saw where it went,and today Patricia wears it occasionally.This was not the first time or the last time that wehad violent scenes. Once before, when Flo returnedto Burkely Crest at 5 a. m., I crept downstairs to findhim calmly raiding the icebox. He declined to explainwhere he had been, which was probably just as well,and as I quarreled at him my eye lit on an enormoussilver soup tureen and ladle. I seized the ladle andbelabored him about the head and shoulders withit. Flo merely laughed, took the ladle away from meand carried me upstairs in his arms. I think he ratherliked being hit with a jealous soup ladle.But it was not my cunning or my charm or mycourage that disposed of the Marilyn Miller miragefor good and all. In fiction, in Hollywood, in thevignettes composed by Broadway columnists, thingsend completely and dramatically with some violentor pathetic episode. I think this is seldom so in actu-ality. The truth about me is that I went on, hopefulbut unsure, and the truth about Marilyn Miller isthat with all her fairylike beauty she lived a tragiclife. Her story is not my story to tell, but I supposemost persons recall that her first husband was killedin an automobile accident, and that she was divorcedfrom Jack Pickford. She missed important rehearsalsfor Smiles, Flo's great show which should have beena hit in 1930, and she became less and less—and veryquickly less and less—the joyful sprite that Ziegfeldidolized. His interest waned.212WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEIf Marilyn had been a success in Smiles, whichFred and Adele Astaire tried so gallantly to save,there is no telling how matters would have workedout for her, and for me, and for Flo.I never met her. That was because I planned itthat way. Once Flo tried to invite her to a party inPalm Beach but I blocked that invitation with anultimatum. For that matter, I never met OliveThomas or Lillian Lorraine or Anna Held, and forobvious reasons. But they were beautiful women, noman could be blamed for loving them, and certainlyI bear them no grudge now.I'm inclined to think women make a lugubriousmistake when they assume that the questing male'schief aim in life is the key to their boudoir. A manoften prefers a cold bottle of beer, or a war. And somelike gambling.During the twenties we began to go to Florida.We were influenced by Charlie Dillingham, who hadbuilt a fine home at Palm Beach for his witty Irishwife, the beautiful Aileen, and who introduced usaround. At first we took a small cottage, mostly forPat's benefit, for she was a delicate child with oneof those acidosis ailments which the medicos seemto cope with so successfully now. During our firstseason in Florida the long, droning, sun-lit days inand out of the water were peaceful and healthful,and Pat improved, grew ruddy and rugged, andeventually was a buxom little girl with red croppedhair.C/5C—o<0OHIGH STAKES213Nodded to by society, through Charlie's introduc-tions and through families we knew in New York,we went to the beautiful estates that graced PalmBeach so lavishly in the twenties, before the crash,to parties at which ninety guests would be askedfor a sit-down dinner. The most interesting was thehome of the gracious Mrs. Stotesbury, queen of PalmBeach and Philadelphia society.The Stotesbury parties were gay and splendid.Everyone had handfuls of money to spend, the worldwas a place created just for fun, and Flo Ziegfeld, ofall people in the world in this peculiar era, was thebest-equipped man for having that fun. A hostessoften brought down a famous opera singer for aprivate concert at a fee of ten thousand dollars andthought no more of that fee than we did of patron-izing the best bootlegger. There was fishing on agrand scale, safari by water comparable to big gamehunting, there were treasure hunts, dances andmusicales.There were no tedious reformers in our circle toremind us that in China thousands of human beingswere struggling for a handful of rice a week, or thatmass man was responding to ugly new ideologies inJapan and Russia and Germany—or even to suggestto us that some of our American notions of grab andexploit were based on shaky logic. We would nothave believed it anyway. But I cannot truthfully saythat I am sorry I was there. The Roaring Twentieswere very pleasant if you did not stop to think.214WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI recall a birthday party we gave for Flo. This, ofcourse, was after we had moved from our first modestcottage, had taken a vast house on Jungle Road, hadacquired large boats and expert crews to run them,and had swung into the swirl of Palm Beach enter-tainment. We had elaborate costumes sent downfrom New York and selected eight groups of friendsto represent one of Flo's productions: the Follies, KidBoots, Sally, Rosalie, Show Boat, The Three Musket-eers, Rio Rita and a production he had in mind forMarilyn Miller, to be called Joan of Arc.The sumptuously costumed mummers made theirentrance into a patio at the Everglades Club. Mar-jorie Post Davies, in Show Boat, was by far the mostbeautiful person in the pageant. I was one of theThree Musketeers with Joe Webber on one side andthe handsome Tony Biddle on the other. We ap-peared as Athos, Pathos, and Bathos.Even at today's remarkable prices I suspect thata large family could eat steak for a year on what thatparty cost, with all its champagne, Scotch, caviar andspecial dishes flown down from New York. I amashamed to say it.And now our Mr. Ziegfeld began to find that Brad-ley's, the most elegant and carefully conducted gam-bling salon in the world, was a most attractive place.Mr. Bradley ostensibly conducted an establishmentopen to the public, but he supervised it so thought-fully that any shrinking lady could gamble there allafternoon without fear of being annoyed or of beingpublicized. But Flo gambled at night. All night.HIGH STAKES215His were the most spectacular stakes, naturally.He would win or lose fifty thousand dollars in anevening, sitting dour-faced and silent at the roulettewheel hours after everyone else had gone home,determined to break the bank, determined to be thebest.This would often happen when we had guests andI would be embarrassed, for like an alcoholic, Flowas just about impossible to reason with when thesegambling moods were upon him. In an effort to becasual—that is, to appear casual about it— I wouldride over from our house on my bicycle, stand timidlyat the door until I caught his attention, then pleadwith him in whispers.Flo could see me without glancing up. "Go away,dear," he would say. "I'm busy. I'll come home later."Usually, he did not come. Usually, I pedaled shak-ily back home, tears dropping, lurching from side toside, often running into ditches, sobbing as I triedto balance. I was annoyed and hurt and I was alsostruck by the irony of having survived all I hadsurvived only to lose my husband to a roulette wheel.Irving Berlin, who was often our guest in PalmBeach, wrote a ballad celebrating my plight. It wascalled "The Gambler's Bride," but the words, I amsorry to say, have now been forgotten both by Irvingand by me.I did not take this excessive gambling lightly. In-deed I did not. I stormed and wept and I threw athing or two, but Flo had got so he liked my tempers;216WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEfor the sheer perverse, husbandly humor of it, hewould often incite me just for the sake of a reaction.And so he smoked and smiled and made infuriatingsmall remarks and went right on gambling.I came closer to leaving Flo on account of Brad-ley's than for any other reason. After one of our mostoutrageous scenes, I engaged a suite in a hotel inSt. Augustine, informed my cook, nurse, upstairsmaid and parlor maid that we were going, and toldthem why, warning each of them that if I saw onetear in anybody's eye there would be ructions. Theyall played their parts beautifully and pretended theywere pleased at giving it all up, and so we werepacked and on our way when the most persuasiveman in the world insisted that we take a little walkon the beach to talk things over.I knew immediately that I had made a mistake.I didn't want to leave. Flo could gamble away theNew Amsterdam Theater, Burkely Crest and every-thing we owned and I did not care. But I had mademy move and I had, apparently, learned a little fromFlo about the art of gambling. I knew that I couldnot let him call my bluff. I told him flatly, firmly, andwith all the finality that I could summon, calling onmy skill as an actress, that he had to stop gamblingor this was the end of everything. I told him that hehad to stop now, no matter whether he was winningor losing, and that he had to stay stopped.It must have been one of my best scenes. I musthave played it with conviction. Flo promised and Ihad no more trouble with him that year.HIGH STAKES217In 1930 our agenda included going from PalmBeach to California by way of New Orleans. Flo andSam Goldwyn had made an arrangement for theproduction of Whoopee as a motion picture. Withsound so new, musicals were not yet important inHollywood and few persons there had any experi-ence in making them. It would seem, then, that aproducer of Ziegfeld's stature would have been wel-comed, especially since he was concerned with hisown show, but the Hollywood point of view wasthat no outsider knew anything about making pic-tures. Sam produced a lavish, beautiful version ofWhoopee without Flo's advice, and Flo thereuponlost interest in pictures. He was badly advised at thistime. Looking back from the wise vantage of todayit is easy to see that Flo Ziegfeld should by all meanshave wooed Hollywood. Still, we had fun.Jack Harkrider, who designed costumes for Flo,had found us a cottage in the Outpost district, butFlo, with his sure instinct for the lavish, immediatelydiscarded this and established us in the MarionDavies villa across the tennis court from the baronialWilliam Randolph Hearst mansion on the beach atSanta Monica. And then began a round of entertain-ment. There was Norma Shearer and her brillianthusband Irving Thalberg, who seemed so youthfulto be head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, but then,Norma herself seemed little more than a child. Andthere was Paulette Goddard, who had played on theroof for Flo, and Harpo Marx, and Clara Bow andHoot Gibson, Kay Francis, the glamorous Constance218WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEBennett—and Frances Goldwyn, who had worried soabout cutting off her hair for the Tarkington play.But Flo when asked by Louella Parsons picked SallyEilers as the prettiest girl in Hollywood.Everybody gave parties, Mr. and Mrs. Louis B.Mayer were neighbors, William Randolph Hearstwas a charming host, Marion was lovely and thought-ful, Jerry Kern and Joseph Urban were on hand, WillRogers was in residence at his ranch and invited usout often to ride, and we enjoyed the Louis Brom-fields, although Mr. Bromfield was a harassed mantrying to fit his particular free genius into the tightrequirements of motion pictures.Lilyan Tashman was in high fettle, quite as beauti-ful as when she had played at the Century Theaterfor Flo, and Nita Naldi was equally lovely. Frankly,I was terrified of all these world-famous people, andI was frightened of them even when we entertainedthem at home at "little" luncheons of forty or fiftyguests. My greatest pleasure was Will Rogers' ranchwhere I could escape to the hills, and where we en-joyed lots of fresh vegetables and good Oklahomafood. We would sit in their great living room when itgrew cold outside in the evenings. Will would talka little and fiddle with his rope, and the childrenwould laugh.Those family moments with the Rogers were thebest of all.Of my plays during these three seasons, The Mar-quise was by Noel Coward, which means that it wasHIGH STAKES219smart, but The Truth Game was the most importantto me. It came at a time when I felt more than everthat I needed to get back to the theater. It was madepossible for me bv those two brilliant, excellent oldfriends, Constance Collier and Ivor Xovello, and itmarked the first time that I played a character part.Oh, tiiat sad and bewildering moment when you areno longer the cherished darling but must turn thecorner and try to be funny! This was when I turneddie corner. It was an imposing corner for me. becauseI have had to trv to be funny ever since.I had enjoyed knowing Ivor for years, and I hadseen a lot of Constance during her brave fight toproduce Peter Ibbctson. the play that no one wouldtouch for twenty years. She finally put it on withJohn and Lionel B anymore and made a tremendoussuccess of it. Constance helped Ivor stage The TruthGame and did it beautifully. We opened at the EthelBarn-more Theater. I plaved a gay little lady, ourshow was well received, and suddenlv. for the firsttime my earnings became vitally important to theZierfeld family.As vou will recall if vou are one who knew thatbleak Depression, the stock market went out of handin '29 and oO. I had got Flo out of Bradlev's bvstrategy and tears. But Wall Street was somethingI knew utterlv nothing about. Flo was in it far deeperthan I had anv idea.17. THE CRASHFlo's Wall Street speculations, like his show busi-ness affairs and like his gambling, were mattersI never understood. It was hard to tell the differenceand I doubt, really, if there was any difference. Flonever, to my knowledge, invested in anything, wasnever concerned with yield. He was interested onlyin coups. I did not know what was going on for tworeasons: first, he did not tell me, and second, I havenever been able to understand statistics, or doubleentry bookkeeping, or financial statements any morethan I apprehend the fine print in insurance policiesor the asterisks in timetables. Here, for instance, isa cash statement between Flo and E. L. Erlangersetting forth the costs of the Ziegfeld Follies of 1927.It shows that the Urban Studios were paid$25,031.06; that $123,096.23 was spent for costumes;that salaries before the opening came to $15,828;that "tights from Paris" amounted to $2,329.40. Andthe total before a seat was sold was $289,035.35. Sothat is what it cost to produce a typical ZiegfeldFollies, not including the salaries of between $1,000and $5,000 a week he paid his principals. At the timethese sums were being spent I was less aware of themthan I was of our laundry bills. It cost us, not includ-ing entertainment, travel, Palm Beach and such ex-220THE CRASH221tras, about $10,000 a month to operate BurkelyCrest.Flo's stock-market operations were on the pro-digious side too. He never discussed them with me,but I have a statement from E. F. Hutton & Companyas of April, 1928, in which I see that Flo bought andsold Chrysler Motors, Eaton Axle, and Mexican Sea-board Oil in lots of from 200 to 1,000 shares and thathe wound up the month with a credit balance of$167,031.23. So for a while, at least, he seemed to bemaking money on the market.And I had made money. In spite of not havingachieved all that I had set out to do in the theater, Ihad laid something by. Although I knew nothingabout speculations or even about investments, mymanagers bought municipal bonds and governmentsecurities for me. So that on a smug afternoon in1929, after one of my counselors had gone overthings with me in kindergarten terms, I hugged my-self with the realization that I had half a milliondollars, all from my own earnings. It seemed a tidy,round, unassailable fortune and I took comfort in theconviction that with that kind of money we werealways safe, and my child's future was secure.I always waited up for Flo when he had beenworking at the theater. One night he came in ex-tremely late and sat down heavily on the edge ofmy bed looking utterly wretched and weary. I hadnever seen Flo Ziegfeld like this before. I pulled hishead down and took him into my arms."Well, poor old darling, what is it?"222WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEFlo sobbed. They were great, struggling sobs."I'm through," he said. "Nothing can save me."The next afternoon I watched him walking in thelovely garden he had planted with such care andtaste. His shoulders sagged and his step was uncer-tain. I knew then that the next step was up to me,that I must find another play and get back to work,that I must help my husband. I gave my money toFlo and it staved off debacle for a few months. Thenwe mortgaged Burkely Crest.Flo lost something more than a million dollars inthe Wall Street unpleasantness of 1929-30. Smiles,which should have made a great deal of money,went into debt more than three hundred thousanddollars.That last summer with the flowers freshly cut forevery room every day, with the birds, the elephants,the little monkey and the porcelain antiques whichFlo loved, was a brave show but it was a travesty.There were times when Flo, sitting late at night inhis great bed on the dais, sending five-hundred-wordtelegrams to men he would see first thing in themorning, reading scripts and maintaining his pres-tige as the telephone company's most exhaustingclient—there were times when it seemed that hemight get his hand in, might take command andmight again produce the enormous, glittering fun-shows which made fortunes and reputations. He didproduce one more Follies, he revived Show Boat, andhe put on Hot Cha! and these were great shows. Butthey did not save him. And Flo was ill. He was ill,THE CRASH22 3and I shall always think that at this time, in many ofhis enterprises, he was badly advised by some of hisnew associates.This was a big man. a large, vital, passionate man,and it was a terrible thine—not pitiful, but terribler—to see him ill and to see the dissolution of what infact was a kind of empire. True, he seemed to re-cover himself occasionally but the elan was gone,the power was temporarilv turned off.PCantor went off to Hollywood with Flo's full ap-proval. Indeed. Flo voluntarily turned over Eddie'scontract to Sam Goldwvn because it was obviousthat Eddie's future lay in Holl\~wood. but it was aloss: an entertainer of the caliber of Eddie Cantoris worth literallv millions of dollars to the man whoholds the exclusive contract for his services.Flo was cutting the prices of his Bitter Sweet andSimple Simon, trying to attract more business. Thenhe was ordered to Florida for a short rest to preventa complete nervous breakdown. And the trouble withSmiles began when Vincent Youmans tried to takehis music out of the show and had to be restrainedbv a court order.I remember the odd. small things that happenedthose last few months. It was as if a great tree weretoppling and I was counting stray leaves. Schneider-Anderson sued Flo for S 17.000 for costume billswhich he had owed for three years. There was a suitover $721 worth of roses. And another florist suedfor about SI. 000 worth of flowers which, it seemed,224WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEhad been delivered to me, Lili Damita, and beauti-ful Gladys Glad.There was a bright spot in 1931. I was in Phila-delphia with The Truth Game, doing what I couldto bolster the shrinking family income, when Patty,who was fourteen, came down from the HalsteadSchool, Yonkers, for the Easter holidays. Ethel Bor-J. Borden Harrimans, was play-den, daughter of theing her first professional engagement, a little part asa maid, and she fell ill.We gave Patty her lines quickly. She learned themat a glance, and went on as the maid for the rest ofthe week, distracting the audience with her brightred hair in a part that was supposed to be unob-trusive. Flo came down to see her act, applaudedher, and took her back to school. This was mydaughter's first and last appearance on any stage.Flo never once wanted her to be on the stage.I have been asked so often why, with all the back-ground and opportunity she had, she never becamean actress. Well, she just didn't want to be an actress.She saw the dross behind the glitter, saw her fatherwork himself to death, and she never gave a fig foracting.Flo fell ill of influenza in Pittsburgh on March 3,1932, when Hot Cha! was playing there with BertLahr and Lupe Velez. Patty and I had gone to Cal-ifornia months before, I to work in The Vinegar Tree.In after years I often wondered whether I had donethe right thing. It is foolish conjecture, because youcan never know what some other course would haveTHE CRASH225led to. But my heart was heavy, trying to weighthe sharp blows that had begun to fall on us. My in-stinct was to stay with Flo, to try to make his burdensomewhat lighter, perhaps just by being with him.Still, he was putting on a new Follies, could not behome much in any case, and in the end I made mydecision to take a new play. It was an unhappy de-cision and I later regretted it.But ill and harassed as he was, Flo had not lost hisgenius for arranging things. By remote control hegot us a fine house in Santa Monica, a house with aliving room so large that Will Rogers said all itneeded were goal posts at each end, and it had aswimming pool and tennis court. It had been built byM.G.M.'s Cedric Gibbons, who is after all famousfor his designs, and it was both beautiful and com-fortable.I have to thank Ivor Novello and Constance Col-lier for putting me on the road to earning my livingagain, for it was the role in The Truth Game whichinspired David Belasco and Homer Curran to giveme The Vinegar Tree. And it was a well-done play,with Edgar McGregor as our director, Warren Wil-liams making his debut on the coast, William Janneyand Julie Dillon playing the young folks, and Wil-liam Morris. I was a little fearful about taking a playthat Mary Boland had performed in so successfully,but Los Angeles liked us, we had a pleasant run, andthen took the play up to San Francisco for a month.Flo had seen us off in Chicago, and this was thesaddest parting of all. The rain was beating down226WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEsorrowfully, the station was chill and dirty, and Floheld my hands in both of his and said: "It's all goingto come out all right. I'm going to do another Fol-lies, and everything will be fine." But we had closedHastings and I could imagine his creeping up thereon lonely weekends, with no servants, with all thebirds and the china and the silver and the animalsgone. Many of these things were taken by personswho simply moved in on us and grabbed when ourtroubles came.I believe in premonitions. I knew that nothingwould ever be all right again. I violated my instinct,overriding my heart with what I argued were prac-tical considerations when I went away from Flo thattime. I had never thought of the difference in ourages, but when I left him that damp day in theChicago station I realized that all our hopes weredreams, and the dreams were gone.Flo went to Pittsburgh to struggle with his newFollies, which he was trying to get ready for the NewYork opening. But you could never feel too far apartfrom Flo Ziegfeld if he could lay hands on a tele-graph blank. The wires started coming immediatelyand I shall put some of them down, for they tell astory:At 11:17 A. M. he caught me with his first telegramat Chillicothe, Illinois:HOPE MY TWO DARLINGS ARE ALL RIGHT IT WASVERY HARD TO LET YOU GO DO TRY GET SOME REALREST ALL MY LOVETHE CRASH227That afternoon he was in Toledo and his telegramfound me in Kansas City, Missouri:GOODNIGHT DEAR I MISS MY TWO BABIES PERHAPSEVERYTHING WILL TURN OUT SUCCESSFUL AND IWILL SOON BE WITH YOU LOVE EAT AND SLEEPThe next day, May 31, he was in New York andI was in Albuquerque, and he wired:BACK IN NEW YORK ALONE WITH A HARD FIGHT TOWIN I DO HOPE YOU WILL BOTH FIND COMFORTAND NO WORRY AND I ONLY WISH I COULD BE WITHYOU PERHAPS SOON HOPE YOU ARE HAVING A FINETRIP ALL MY LOVEOn June 12, troubled as he was with all the detailsof his new Follies, he was not too busy to see thatPatty's dog Chloto had the best of everything whenhe shipped him to California. This wire came fromHastings, addressed to Patty:CHLOTO WILL ARRIVE ON THE CHIEF SUNDAY FIVEOCLOCK CHAPERONED BY JAKE THE BARBERS SONALL DINING ROOM STEWARDS HAVE BEEN NOTIFIEDTO SUPPLY THE BEST OF FOOD AND ROOM CHLOTOWILL BE TAKEN OUT AT EVERY IMPORTANT STOPMANAGER OF THE RAILROAD WILL ESCORT HIMFROM THE DEPOT IN CHICAGO LOVEAgain from Hastings, he wired on the same day;228WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSECHLOTO ARRIVES SUNDAY PROPERLY CHAPERONED,TONY RIDDLE AND MARGARET SCHULTZ CARLEDTHEY WERE MARRIED IN LONDON TODAY. HOPEEVERYTHING IS ALL RIGHT WE ARE READY TO LEAVEAT TEN TONIGHT RUT I HAVE PLENTY TO DO REFOREWE CAN. WILL RE AT NIXON THEATER WILLIAMPENN HOTEL PITTSRURGH LOVEThen he hurried into New York and sent anothertelegram, same date:ALL OFF WITH TWO HUNDRED PEOPLE HOW I MAN-AGED IT IS A MIRACLE LETS HOPE FOR THE RESTWILL RE AT NIXON THEATER PITTSRURGH I MAYWALK RACK SEND PATTY FDRST SONG PURLISHEDLOVEThe next day, June 13, Flo awakened us in SantaMonica with a message from Pittsburgh:GOOD MORNING DARLING ARRIVED WITH TWO HUN-DRED AND TWO PEOPLE IT WILL RE THREE TERRIFICDAYS NOW UNTIL THE OPENING MONDAY WE AREENTIRELY SOLD OUT FOR THE WEEK I WISH I WEREOUT WITH YOU WHEN I FIGURE WHAT I WILL HAVETO GO THROUGH. FRONT PAGE IN ALL PAPERS ALLMY LOVEThree days later he thought his new Follies wasthe best show he had ever done. He wired fromPittsburgh:THE CRASH229DARLING IVE HAD AROUT THREE HOURS SLEEP INFORTY EIGHT HOURS RUT FROM FINAL REHEARSALI THINK IT WILL PRORARLY RE WORTH IT TERRIFICRIG SHOW RIGGER THAN ANY I HAVE EVER HAD INMY ENTDRE CAREER MATERIAL LOOKS GOOD RUTYOU NEVER CAN TELL WHATS GOING TO HAPPENTONIGHT ALL MY LOVE WISH YOU WERE HEREThe same show was falling to pieces seventy-twohours later:DARLING I TRIED TO GET YOU ON PHONE LAST NIGHTTWO OCLOCK PITTSRURGH TIME RUT YOU AND PA-TRICIA WERE OUT WE ARE WORKING NIGHT AND DAYTO PULL THE SHOW TOGETHER I AM ALL IN RUT ITWDLL SOON RE OVER ALL MY LOVEFlo felt better on June 27:WELL THE MOST TERRIRLE TWO WEEKS ARE OVERTHINGS LOOK PRETTY GOOD NOW HOPE YOUR SHOWALL RIGHT LET ME KNOW WHEN YOU ARE ROTH ATSANTA MONICA LOVE I MISS YOU ROTHFrom New York July 5:DARLING IT IS VERY LONESOME HERE TODAY AND IFELT LIKE CALLING YOU EVERY FP7E MINUTES ISTAYED IN RED ALL DAY TRYING TO GET OVER WHATI WENT THROUGH THE LAST SIX WEEKS IN THE230WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSETERRIFIC HEAT GRATIFYING TO SELL OUT ONFOURTH OF JULY THE WORST DAY OF THE YEARKISS PATTY I MISS YOU BOTH TERRIBLY LOVEBy July 16 he knew that his new show was a hit:DARLING I WOULD LIKE TO CALL YOU UP EVERYMINUTE HEAT TODAY IS TERRIFIC YET WE TURNEDHUNDREDS AWAY AT THE MATINEE YOU NEVERHEARD SUCH APPLAUSE IN A THEATRE NINE DIFFER-ENT THINGS IN THE SHOW STOP THE SHOW COLDSO THE NEXT PERSON CANT GO ON WITHOUT RE-PEATED BOWS UNFORTUNATELY MY COMEDIANJACK PEARLS MOTHER DIED LAST NIGHT HE IS OUTFOR THE MATINEE. TONIGHT WE HAVE THE WORLDFLYERS AND IRVING THALBERG AND HIS WIFE ARECOMING HAVING A TERRIBLE TIME GETTING SEATSFOR THEM. WHEN YOU SEE WELL ROGERS TELL HIMI EXPECT HIM TO GO IN THE SHOW IN THE FALLHOPE YOU ARE BOTH WELL ALL MY LOVEFlo was lonely on July 20:DARLING I AM TRYING TO ARRANGE MY AFFAIRSSO AS TO MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR ME TO GET AWAYEVEN IF ONLY FOR A SHORT TIME TO COME OUTAND SEE MY TWO BABIES I DONT KNOW HOW IT ISGOING TO BE DONE BUT AM TRYING TO ARRANGEIT IN SOME WAY ALL MY LOVEWe had been separated longer than we had everbeen apart before. On October 29 Flo found me atTHE CRASH231the Broadway Theater, Denver, Colorado with thistelegram:MISS MY TWO DARLINGS I BELIEVE YOU SHOULDBOTH FIGURE ON A REST AT PALM SPRINGS I MAYGET A BREAK AND ABLE TO MEET YOU THERE PAT-TIE CAN THEN SEE MOTHER GETS PROPER FOODI THINK THEY HAVE LITTLE BUNGALOWS THERE IHATE TO FACE NEW YORK ALL MY LOVEAnd for the first time in our eighteen years of mar-ried life we were not together on Christmas Day.I wired to Flo:DARLING TRY NOT MIND D7 YOU JUST KEEP YOURCOURAGE AND LOVE US AND LOOK TO A HAPPIERFUTURE WE CAN GET BY THIS AWFUL TIME. PATTYHAS A NEW FLAME COLORED LITTLE EVENING DRESSAND IF WE HAD YOU I THINK THATS ALL SHE WOULDASK. HOLLY AND MISTLETOE IS SO LOVELY HEREGREAT FRESH BUNCHES FOR FIFTY CENTS WE SENTOFF TWO NICE THINGS THAT ARE GOING TO BRINGYOU LOTS OF LUCK WE THINK AND WISH FOR YOUCONTINUALLY SURELY OUR LOVE WTJLL HAVE SOMEPOWER TO HELP YOU OVER THESE BUMPS DEVOTEDLYI think he refers to Hot Cha! in this one. It camefrom Pittsburgh on February 23 and we had not seeneach other since May:DARLING THE SHOW WENT FINE LAST NIGHT NO-TICES ARE TERRIFIC BUT WE KNOW WHERE IT ISNT232WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSERIGHT EVERYBODY WORKING NIGHT AND DAY TO GETIT RIGHT FOR NEW YORK MARCH 8. SORRY MISSEDYOU ON PHONE LAST NIGHT I SUPPOSE WILL ROGERSIS BACK TODAY AND WILL TELL YOU ALL ABOUT THESHOW. I THINK YOUR DRESS WILL BE SHIPPED TO-MORROW ALL MY LOVEOn April 22 he wired me from Yonkers. I was atSanta Monica:MY DARLING YOURE NO DIFFERENT THAN ANY ONEELSE ONLY YOU DONT KEEP STUBS TO YOUR CHECKBOOK. WHEN I LAY HERE ILL AS IVE BEEN YOUCHANGE YOUR MIND AND COME TO CONCLUSIONSNO MATTER HOW BAD THINGS ARE ITS GREAT TO BEALIVE AND I DONT KNOW HOW IM GOING TO GETTHROUGH. THINGS IN AMERICA ARE GETTING WORSEAND WORSE BUT DONT WORRY ALL MY LOVEIn the next telegram Flo refers to the magnificentradio show he put on for Chrysler Motors. Few peoplerealize today that Flo Ziegfeld was a pioneer in theproduction of big radio shows and this was a verybig one indeed, worth about twenty-five thousanddollars a week. I could listen to it at five o'clock onSunday afternoons from Santa Monica and it seemedto me as Flo's voice came vibrantly over the air thathe was again on his feet and that all would be well:GOOD MORNING DARLING I FELL ASLEEP LAST NIGHTAND IT WAS TOO LATE TO CALL YOU WHEN I AWAK-THE CRASH233ENED IM AFRAID WE WILL HAVE TO MAKE IT EVERYOTHER NIGHT HEREAFTER THE WAY THINGS ARE BUTI MISS SO TERRIBLY TALKING TO YOU AND PATTY.EVERYBODYS RAVING ABOUT LAST NIGHTS RADIOPROGRAM YOU MUST GET WITH ROGERS IMMEDI-ATELY AND LET US KNOW IF YOU AND HE WDLLHAVE AN IDEA FOR THE EIGHTH ALL MY LOVEFor his Chrysler Hour, Flo took Al Goodman,then his musical director at the Follies, Jane Froman,Art Jarrett and Jack Pearl, and put together a per-fect show using music, scenes, and stars from his vari-ous productions. He himself spoke for three minutes,and although he was nervous at first, being a pro-ducer, never before a performer, he soon began toenjoy talking on the air. He set a standard for radioequal to his standard for stage shows and he recog-nized that radio was on its way to becoming thegreatest medium of entertainment outside the theater.But his health was bothering him for the first timein his life. He was trying to do a new show for theZiegfeld Theater, Hot Cha! was running, and his radiorehearsals were long and arduous.I should have been with him. I know that now. Ithink I could have taken care of him. But I couldn'tget to him and he couldn't get to me. What started asa bad cold during his radio experience wound up inthe end as pleurisy.One night as I was listening in Santa Monica Iheard his voice falter. It was only a little break, un-noticed by everybody else, but over three thousand234WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEmiles I caught the weariness and the sickness of it.I hurried to find Homer Curran and I begged him toclose the play we were trying out.I pay my everlasting tribute to Homer Curran. Hedid not hesitate. He understood. He closed at onceand I was on my way to Flo.George Cukor had come to see us work that weekand had asked me if I would be interested in doingthe part of the mother in his picture A Bill of Divorce-ment, with John Barrymore and a new actress calledKatharine Hepburn. This was an offer straight fromHeaven, for the picture was not to start until sum-mer. And so I met David O. Selznick, signed the con-tract, and knew that I could go home, look after Flo,and bring him back to California for a rest, free fromhis creditors.Having the picture to come back to meant that Icould keep my house and my faithful Mildred, wholooked after me, and that Flo could be comfortable.And so, when I met him in New York and felt hisarms around me I thought that nothing could gowrong ever again. But Flo was thinner and my heartsank to see him walk. The elasticity was gone andhis broad shoulders were hunched and tired.I realized that I must take over now. Still, therewere things to do, and there were moments whenFlo seemed all right. He opened the revival of ShowBoat, for instance, a theatrical chore that might haveexhausted a strong young man. And one evening wesaw Will Rogers' daughter Mary off for Europe. Butthe evening we tried to be gay and went to the Penn-THE CRASH235sylvania Hotel to hear Buddy Rogers' band, Flo col-lapsed and had to have a room there for the night.Buddy arranged this for us quietly and was fine andwise in seeing that everything was done for us.The Show Boat revival was a hit, but all the moneywent to creditors. The theater, all the theater, wasdying that summer of 1932, and Flo was ill, mentallyexhausted as well as physically ill, and leaning onpersons for counsel whom he would have laughed atin the old proud days.Burkely Crest had lost its charm. It was still andsad, like a house long neglected, like a home wherethere is no more love. I realized what Flo had beengoing through in his mock home with dozens, evenhundreds of people pecking at him every day, credi-tors banging, and members of his staff scurrying backand forth, each delivering a new crisis. One night Iput my hand on his wrist at the dinner table to feelhis pulse. It was beating alarmingly and erratically.I called Dr. Wagner."Rest," was all Jerry could say. "That will do it.Rest."He might as well have said, "Find him a milliondollars."The next morning I went into town by myself, gotmy tickets and reservations, arranged with the rail-road people for permission to take Flo onto the trainat Harmon, just above Hastings, and swore to secrecythe few I could trust, like Alice Poole, who guardedFlo's switchboard for so many years, and our ownfaithful Sidney, Katheryn of Flo's office staff who236WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSElooked so competently after my secretarial chores,and "Goldy," Flo's remarkable secretaryIt was July and agonizingly hot. There was no cool-ing system or air conditioning on the train. We tnedto comfort Flo with pillowcases packed with ice, butit was almost useless. His nerves were shattered, andhe suffered from pleurisy and exhaustion. He washalf-conscious, writing with his fingers on the air, stilltrying to dictate telegrams as we began our journeyto California.We had evaded the reporters in New York and Iwas able to take Flo from the train at Barstow, Cali-fornia, so that no one knew that he was in a stateof collapse.On the way out another blow fell. I received awire that Dan Curry, Flo's manager for many years,had died. From then on, many important affairs werein strange hands. But I could not tell Flo.When Flo could talk, he worried about his enter-prises. He wanted to be back in August for his Chrys-ler show. His revival of Show Boat, everybodythought, was more beautiful than the original, but asbusiness fell off that hot July he fretted himself sickabout the salary list. Mostly, Flo wanted to see WillRogers—but Will was in Europe.Joe Schenck, one of the few who knew Flo's con-dition, generously offered us his ranch as a rest home,but Flo wanted to wait for Will. "He will tell us whatto do," he kept saying.I took him first to Santa Monica and there, to thelast, we had fresh-cut flowers every day. I could doTHE CRASH237that, at least. Nothing wilted was ever allowed to staylong enough for Flo to see it.And Flo rallied for a while."Baby, I know it's expensive, but I do love to tele-phone," he would say to me, and I would nod, andhe would make his long-distance calls. Most of themcost about eighty dollars each, and our telegraphbill for that month was six thousand dollars. I neverpaid for anything so gladly.Then, for the first time in my life, I interferedwith Flo's business. The Show Boat revival was be-coming ruinous. There was a fortune in this magnif-icent production, but the hot weather was beatingaway business and we needed twelve thousand dol-lars more a week for salaries. In this emergency Icalled on A. C. Blumenthal, who had worked withFlo before. He guaranteed the salaries and ShowBoat continued. But it was a bad summer.Finally, as Flo grew weaker, I had a consultationwith two of the finest doctors in Los Angeles. Theyadvised taking Flo to a hospital for a completecheckup, and this we did, one Sunday morning. In afew days he seemed refreshed and relaxed. I took aroom at the hospital near him and began to work onmy picture.18. GOOD NIGHT, SWEET PRINCEA Bill of Divorcement had started a few daysbefore I brought Flo to California and so I hadwork to do. Patty brought in flowers to the hospitalevery day, fresh from our garden, Flo began to enjoythe little delicacies we prepared for him at home,the doctors said after a few days that all the poisonwas out of his system, and we began to plan with himall the things he wanted to do. George Cukor, ablessed person, went about overcoming my nervous-ness before the microphones— I had never spoken infilms before—and for this short while everythingseemed hopeful and all right.I was frightened about the picture. I was afraid tomove away from the camera boom and wanted tostand rooted wherever I was to speak my lines. JohnBarrymore, a gallant man, crossed over whenever hecould so that I would not have to move. He was stillmagnificent, acting brilliantly, not as he was a fewyears later when, sick and tired but still struggling topay his debts, he had to resort to words written onblackboards to remember his lines.Miss Hepburn seemed a strange girl at first, withher hair in a tight sausage and her schoolmarmclothes; that is, until one day I saw her really act.238GOOD NIGHT, SWEET PRINCE239Somehow her eyes caught fire and there was a glow,and I have seen ever since how beautiful she is.Then I had a break. For a week or ten days,George said, I would not be needed. I could devotemyself to Flo.On the morning of July 22, 1932, I had breakfastwith Flo. Patty came in later with a lunch she hadprepared for us at home. All the strain and nervous-ness were gone. I still lacked the courage to tell himabout A. C. Blumenthal and Show Boat, but it seemedto me that he was almost ready to take charge again.Still, I waited.In the afternoon George called. He said he wassorry to cut into my holiday but that I was needed atthe studio any time in the afternoon or evening Ipreferred, to make a short test with a new actor whowas being considered for A Bill of Divorcement. Iasked for an evening test so that we might tuck Floin for the night. After dinner at his bedside I left forthe studio. It was the happiest day we had had to-gether for a long, long time, and my heart was light.At the studio I was made-up for my test withWalter Pidgeon, who might have played the part ofthe man I was supposed to marry in the picture. Butthe test was interrupted and when the film was re-sumed, Paul Cavanaugh was in the role. Walter, Iam sorry to say, had to wait several years before hefound the part which started his fine Hollywoodcareer.We had rehearsed our scene and the camera was240WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEgrinding when George stopped the action and di-rected me to a telephone. It was Sidney."What is wrong, Sidney?" I asked."Come quickly, madam, come quickly/' was all hecould say.I met Sidney in the corridor outside Flo's room andhe told me."Madam, too late. He just died in my arms, walkingacross the room. One short gasp was all. ..."I crumpled. I had arrived in all my studio make-up,in a long dinner dress, with heavy mascara on myeyes. I did not know anything until I found myselfon a bed with the nurses trying to get me out of thedress, which for some reason had been sewn onto me.Betty and Will Rogers, by a miracle, were thereand they took Patty and me to their ranch where westayed for two weeks until I could return to workin my picture. Their love and the quiet of the hillswas strengthening, but I could not for a long timeshake off the illusion that if I could only run downthe world far enough, somehow I would find Floalive and waiting for me.I do not know how I got through the picture, butI know that it is good to have these compulsive thingsto do in times of sorrow. And I shan't forget, ever,the kindness and tactfulness shown to me by George,by Jack Barrymore, Katie Hepburn, and by ErnWestmore, the make-up expert, who started me onmy days those early mornings, dried my tears, andgracefully said so little.GOOD NIGHT, SWEET PRINCE241Sam Goldwyn immediately offered to provide aprivate car if I wished to take Flo back to New York.Flo had spoken, years before, of wishing his ashesscattered over the Roof, his Roof, and it might havebeen an appropriate gesture; but in the end I de-cided upon a simple and inexpensive crypt in ForestLawn, hoping that someday I could provide a moreimpressive resting place for him. But this I havenever been able to do, and the grave of the greatestshowman is the simplest, least notable of them all.Only by little vases of fresh flowers twice a week,which we have never failed to provide, can Pat andI pay our tributes to this man who loved beauty sopassionately.But I know that his memory shines on in the memo-ries of beauty that he created. The standards he estab-lished are respected and the heritage he left themusical comedy world is still fresh and joyful. Couldthere be a prouder boast in the theater than "I workedfor Ziegfeld"? And "Ziegfeldian" and "Glorified" arewords that Flo left as on a banner above his accom-plishments.If he left creditors, and he did, let us say thattheir debts were partly lightened by the knowledgethat they were part of what went into creating alegacy of the theater where there is no more thrillingplace in the world for talent and genius to lay anoffering.Flo was buried by Will Rogers. "Flo loved me,"he said. "Let me do this," and he did it, with dignity.Possibly you recall what Will said in his column in242WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEThe New York Times the next day. I have alwaystreasured these lines: "Good-by, Flo, save a spot forme. You tvill put on a show up there someday thatwill knock their eye out."I think that with all his fame, Flo has never beengiven proper credit for two things in which he pio-neered. It was he more than any other producer whobrought the loveliness of ballet into musical comedy.One of his first attempts to do this was close to theturn of the century when he presented Adeline Geneein The Kiss Waltz, in which she performed ballet inriding boots—a stunt, to be sure, but the forerunnerof the charming, Degas-like ballet scenes which Flolater used so often in his musicals. He was also thefirst, or one of the first, to recognize and to appre-ciate the theatrical genius of the Negro race. BertWilliams was his star at a time when no other man-agers had promoted any Negro stars, and his pres-entation of Negroes in Show Boat needs no emphasisfrom me. Except this: Flo was as meticulous in hiscare for his Negro players, including the least im-portant girl or dancer, as he was with his most impor-tant white stars. He provided fine dressing rooms forthem, costumed them beautifully, and lavished moreattention on them, it often seemed to me, than hedid on some of the others.The things Flo cherished as a showman were color,music, spectacle, and fun. I am sure that his greattalent was color, but his genius was his toweringability to play one against the other, matching hisGOOD NIGHT, SWEET PRINCE243palette to his music, his comedy to his spectacle, stir-ring and mixing the whole until he produced out ofutter conflict that unique work of art, a great musi-cal comedy. No one, indeed, ever knew how heaccomplished it, for he went at his productions likea painter who starts drawing at some unexpectedpoint, adding here, splashing color there, changinghis mind, erasing, making a bold stroke here—andpossibly entirely unable to explain in advance thesum total effect that he felt and aspired to.Flo's special taste, and his special skills in color,music, and mass spectacle have always been clearlyunderstood, but his point of view about comedianshas been misrepresented. No producer before or sinceever developed so many funnymen or ever exploitedso many of them in so many shows to such advan-tage; yet a curious legend persists. This is that Flohated comedians. It is still said in the bistros wherecomics gather to spiel about old days that Flo usedhis comedians merely as intervals in which the girlschanged their clothes.This is untrue. The fact is, and I insist that I amin the best position to know, that Flo loved hiscomedians better than any other performers in hisproductions. Actually, they were his most intimatefriends. Actually, he was more lavish in presentingthem, offering four top-name comics in productionsthat could have been carried by one, than any othermanager. His close friends and the ones who lovedhim best were Will Rogers, Eddie Cantor, Bert Wil-liams, Leon Errol, and Fannie Brice.244WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI remember when Will Rogers first started to workfor Flo on the Ziegfeld Roof. His act was a ropingact, a clever roping act, and that was all, not a wordspoken. But when Flo sat at his small table off to oneside, near the stage, Will could not resist talking tohim. He called him "Mister Zig Field," and he madesly, sotto voce comments to him on prominent peoplein the audience."Go on, say 'em out loud," Flo would urge him, butWill would stammer and grin and twirl his rope, andmutter, "Aw, Mr. Zig Field, they wouldn't think itwas funny."It required several months before Flo had himtalking to audiences.Flo never laughed at his comedians. He neverlaughed much anyway. And certainly, being a pro-fessional, he did not chuckle at Cantor and Fields andRogers and Errol and Fannie Brice any more, I sup-pose, than Bob Hope howls today at Jack Benny.But then I never saw Flo applaud the girls, either.Will once told me that after he had made a successin the Follies he told Betty, his wife, that he thoughtFlo should give him a raise of $200 a week. Theydebated whether he should dare approach the bossabout this, fearing that Will would get fired. Finally,Flo sent for him."I won't mention money," Will said to Betty. "He'sgoing to bawl me out about something or other andmoney is the last thing we'll talk about today."Will appeared shyly at Flo's office and Flo openedthe conversation. "Will," he said, "the season starts—cwGOOD XIGHT, SWEET PREVCE245pretty soon, so I thought I'd better tell you I am goingto raise vour salary by a thousand dollars a week/'Will couldn't sav anvthincr. He fumbled with hishat and looked at the floor from under his forelock."Well, isn't that enough?" Flo asked. "Do you thinkI ought to make it mortWill says he turned and ran out of the door with-out being able to say a word. But he added: "Vknow,Billie. if Id stood there and stammered a minutelonger, I believe the ole boy might have give anotherraise."Flo found such comedians as Leon Errol and Fan-nie Brice in vaudeville and save them their greatchance bv displaving them in the showcase of theFollies. Of all the women who ever worked for him.Fannie Brice was his best friend.Once Fannie left the show to have a babv. Flo sentfor her and addressed her in what seemed like a tow-ering rage, walking up and down his office."Of all people in the world. Fannie." he com-plained, "for you to do a thing like this to me!"It was lines like that, delivered with such a straightface, that convince me that Flo himself was a come-dian at heart.Fannie's great triumph in the Follies was. of course.the well-remembered "Mon Homme" ("Mv Man"which she sang with such remarkable pathos. It «one of Flo's pet numbers: he save it to her. showedher how to sing it and costumed her for it.Fannie was a lovely girl in those Follies days, witha beautiful figure and wonderful hair, golden-chestnut246WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEcolored. She thought she ought to do the number inan evening gown, with sophistication and polish.Flo came out from the wings."This goes," he said, and ripped Fannie's beautifulgown at the shoulder. "And this," tumbling her coif-fure, and poor Fannie had to stand there and take it.The result, as millions remember, was the tattered,hole-in-the-stocking costume in which Fannie sangher greatest song.So much for song and comedy, spectacle and color.I wanted to say these things in fairness to Flo, butwith a smile, as he would have liked it.My father, Billy Burke, would have rememberedWill Shakespeare's lines from Venus and Adonis:For him being dead, with him isBeauty slain;And Beauty dead, black chaosComes again..19. AND NOW ..As I look about my small, compact house on quiet. evenings when I am free from being that sillywoman in the movies or on the radio, I perceive thatI am somewhat overrun with elephants. There areelephants in my library, elephants on my dressingtable, and there are two big old fellows, gleamingwhite and about eighteen inches high, who live inthe garden and are accommodating about holdingflower pots. Some are of porcelain, some of china,some of jade, silver, gold, or amber. They are all fatand optimistic creatures with their snouts held highfor good luck.The elephants were Flo Ziegfeld's and there wasnot much else to save when he was gone, after all thelittle people came and took things.There were six lawsuits against the estate beforeour tears were dry. They were complicated becauseFlo's loans and agreements and plans were alwayscomplicated, and I do not pretend to understandthem. All told, there were debts of a half milliondollars. These were paid off, eventually, through thefew resources we could lay hands on. Over the yearsI have managed to contribute a hundred thousanddollars. I wish it could be more.In 1932 I was a small, bewildered comedienne247248WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwho for most of her life had been advised and pro-tected, and often pampered. I had enjoyed more thanmere professional advice. I had had, in my mother,in Charles Hawtrey, Charles Frohman, Victor Kiraly,and in Flo himself, of course, not mere guidance butloving guidance. Now for the first time I was onmy own.But not entirely. There were Sam Goldwyn andWill Rogers and George Cukor, and there was mydaughter. I think I should say a word about Pat herein simple justice. By long odds, because of the tutors,servants, private movie shows, elaborate playhouses,and trips she had as a small girl, and because of thecompliments she received from celebrities as she wasgrowing up, Pat should have turned out a spoiledbrat. She did not at all, and I am still in awe of her.She turned out red-headed but level-headed, forth-right and good-humored. When our troubles cameshe was sturdy and comforting beyond her years—and she has been so ever since. There it is, Pat, dear.You have been wondering all along when I wouldsay something to embarrass you, haven't you?And Sam Goldwyn. I hope that Frances, who, Ihear, is doing a book about her husband, explainshim at long last, for Sam is a man of taste and imag-ination and isn't understood by his contemporaries.So many truly wonderful jokes have been made abouthim and his cavalier disregard for the peculiar rulesof English grammar that his dedication to art andto distinction is all too often ignored. I think that hewill agree with me when I suggest that much of hisAND NOW .. .249inspiration for perfection came from his associationwith Flo. Flo was, after all, the first of the greatAmerican showmen who demanded perfection re-gardless of cost and regardless of whose heart broketo attain it.Sam said, "Billie, let me act as your agent and yourclearinghouse. I will get you parts in pictures andlook after you, and whether you are working or notI will give you $300 a week so you won't have toworry."And so, with Sam's wisdom, George Cukor's pa-tience and skill in handling me in my first picture,Will and Betty Rogers' warm friendship, and Pat'scourage, we made out.I have often been asked to explain why, in spite ofhis financial debacle, there was not more of a legacyfrom Flo. There was the Follies name, the pictureeventually made from his life story, and the greatZiegfeld properties— Sally, Rosalie, Show Boat, andso on— all of which eventually became successfulmotion pictures. I am sure that no one will be inter-ested in the details if I could explain them, which Icannot, but as things turned out these things meantvery little financially to Pat and me.The right to produce another Follies was legallyinvolved. I was able to buy Flo's interest, but Mr.Erlanger's share was purchased by the Shuberts.There were two productions eventually, the secondstarring Milton Berle, but the season was too short.I was severely criticized at the time for my presump-tion in trying another Follies, but I am sure that Flo250WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEwould have wanted it like that; why wouldn't hehave wanted his name and his show to benefit hiswife and his daughter when they needed help? As amatter of fact, it is my hope that ZiegfekTs daughtermay one day take her place as a producer. She hasthe flair, the quick recognition of talent, and theacumen. Who knows?The Ziegfeld biography, produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as The Great Ziegfeld, netted usvery little, because it, too, was tied up in variousinvolvements of splits and shares and commissions,but out of it came a welcome contract for me atM.G.M. I was sorry for the final impression this pic-ture left of Flo: it left him hopelessly ruined. Actu-ally, although he was in difficulty at the time of hisdeath, it is certain that, with his radio show, with thegreat properties he controlled, with the plans fornew shows that he had, and with Hollywood's reali-zation that musical comedies were enormously profit-able, Flo would have recovered and would have beena greater showman than ever. That he missed thischance was the real tragedy.I could not control the motion picture rights toSally or Show Boat or any of the other Ziegfeldproductions. It would have taken a great deal ofmoney to hold those rights and I did not have this.Eventually, great movies were made from them, butI had no claim to the profits.Now, of course, I know what I should have done.I should have returned to Broadway. Disregardingmodesty for the moment, I think I can say that I hadAND NOW . . .251a name in New York, I know that I could have foundgood plays and good producers, and I am reasonablysure that I could again have been a star on the NewYork stage. But New York with all its associationswas unthinkable. My immediate need was to make alittle money and to look after my daughter. I didwhat I had to do at the moment, and who can saythat doing that is ever wrong?Dinner at Eight was the plum that George nextdropped into my lap. He gave me a first picturewhen I needed it, and he gave me my second. I amone of many who say a little prayer every night forGeorge: I am sure that I have never known in any-one a greater capacity for helping others help them-selves, and he has brought so much of the best inthe theater to the best in the screen in his apprecia-tion of what is beautiful.Perhaps I can do him one small favor here andnow in a whit of recompense for his goodness to me.His name is pronounced "Kew'-kor."In my next picture as I went back to work as hardas I could I was fortunate to be with Katie Hepburnagain. This film was Christopher Strong and wasdirected by a remarkable person indeed, DorothyArzner, the one woman director in Hollywood whosegreat understanding and artistry added so muchluster to the names of Clara Bow, Ruth Chatterton,Anna Sten, Sylvia Sidney, Rosalind Russell, andmany others when she first presented them on thescreen.252WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEI moved quickly from pictures to a play, with arevival of The Marquise, which Henry Duffy andMatt Allen produced with David Burton, who didthe original in New York, as director, and with thelovely Anita Louise playing the daughter. We hadAllan Mowbray as the Spaniard. We enjoyed heartysuccess in Los Angeles, and followed this with adelightful run in San Francisco where they alsoappreciate Noel Coward.By now Patty was in a good school, and becauseshe had begun to love California so much I keptputting off the inevitable time when I should returnto New York and Broadway. I thought my daughtershould be attending school in the East, but sheformed strong friendships here, I was fortunate ingetting work, and I did not want to be far away fromher. That is why I am a Hollywood actress today. Doyou suppose that anybody, even the strongest per-sonality with the firmest intentions and the mostlogical ambitions, ever controls his destiny? I thinknot. At any rate, I cannot say that at any givenmoment in my life I ever seemed to have both handson mine.And so I began to do my silly women. Thesecharacters, these bird-witted ladies whom I havecharacterized so often that I presume you know them—how could you escape?—derive from my part inThe Vinegar Tree. I am neatly typed today, of course,possibly irrevocably typed, although I sincerely hopenot, for I should like better parts. I could do betterparts better, for those were the roles that I wasAND NOW ...253trained in—the gay but intelligent, well-written,funny but believable roles that I had in The Mindthe Paint Girl, and in Jerry, and in Love Watches. Ishould like to attempt to make those interestingyoung women grow up. But if people will laugh atmy work and keep a sound roof over my head, whoam I to complain? And California, after all,is awonderful climate for geraniums and actresses.In addition to the little comedies I did at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer I then made a number for HalRoach. Mr. Roach, who now pioneers in televisionon film, was one of the most active people in theworld in those days too, in production, on the polofield, and socially. I made the Topper pictures forhim with Roland Young, who was always dry andfun to work with, and I had the joy of getting toknow, years before he became so famous, a shiningyoung man with a British accent who had just comeout from musical comedy. This was Cary Grant. An-other youngster who was fine to watch was ClarkGable, who had not yet moved out of gangster parts,but I remarked at the time that he had a beautifulhead. Now, in some picture or other, Mr. Gablepicked me up and kissed me. I cannot tell you whatpicture it was. All I recall is the deftness with whichyoung Mr. Gable could pick up a lady and kiss her.Sometimes, on the Metro lot, something swiftwould pass me by, I would feel a tingling, and lookaround to see that it was Garbo, but I never met her,only her shadow. Myrna Loy, Anna Nagle andNorma Shearer were kind to me as I started again,254WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEand so were Madeleine Carroll and Katharine Hep-burn. Kindness is a great attribute, of course, butgreat kindness in motion pictures is a special andrare thing, difficult to find. Movie stars have so muchdone for them, are hoisted to such uncontrollableheights, are bowed to as infallible by so many, that itis a wonder indeed when any one of them retainskindness. Katie has it. The girls I have mentionedhave it. Ann Sothern, Fannie Brice and Greer Gar-son possess it in rich, warm quantities. And just theother day I found it when I was working in TheBarkleys of Broadway, in a new friend, GingerRogers. But I have no complaint against any ofHollywood. Everybody has been good to me hereSuddenly, as I went on with my picture work,suddenly I realized that my small girl had grownup. Suddenly, one day, to my astonishment and tomy chagrin, for all actresses in their hearts believethey are only twenty-four, Patty was twenty-oneyears old. She had been promised a coming-out party,and she turned out to be a true Ziegfeld daughterwhen she planned that party. All she wanted wasHal Kemp's orchestra!We had it. It cost a tidy penny, it scraped thesugar bowl to pay for it, but I thought to myself,A fine thing if Flo Ziegfeld's only daughter cant turntwenty-one and present herself to society with cas-cades of chrysanthemums and a first-rate band! Sowe took over Victor Hugo's restaurant with our hun-dreds of balloons and our orchestra and asked all ourfriends and had ourselves a party. I know Flo wouldAND NOW ...255have liked it, only in his case, of course, he wouldhave considered nothing less than two bands.By the time Patty was almost grown up therearrived at my door, knocking hard, another oppor-tunity. This was in the form of a play which ZoeAkins had adapted from one of Mrs. Edith Wharton'snovels, and it was called The Old Maid. GeorgeCukor emphatically advised me to take the part. Itwas a play with the kind of beauty and character init that I had always hoped to bring to the theater,with whatever talents I had, and for a few weeks itseemed that I might have the chance. It was plannedto open in Los Angeles. But when this was changedto New York, at my old, beloved Empire, where Ifirst worked opposite Uncle Jack, my courage failedis always ame. I dared not take the risk, for itchanceful, expensive thing to leave your secure em-ployment in the theater to undertake the adventureof a new play, with its long weeks of rehearsal andits problematical run. Alas, one must get used tolaying aside one's hopes and dreams; take up some-thing made of tin instead of something made of gold,not because one admires tin, but because tin is amuch more useful metal and does not hurt the eyes.And so I turned down the play and went back totrying to balance a feather on my nose.But then, lest you think for a split moment thatthis is a sad account, Hollywood is an easy place tolive in. I make my bow to the climate, even thoughIlka Chase did liken it to a blonde girl running inand out of a Turkish bath, either too hot or too cold,256WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEnever able to make up its mind. Here there aregroups of people who can be gay, artistic, violent,creative, trivial, serious, or kind; there are fine writ-ers here, great musicians, producers, owners of fa-mous horses, big ranches, mines, oil wells, fruitranches, cafe society that once graced the Coted'Azur—just about everything. If you can swim, youcan swim with this society. And I have learned toswim.A few years ago I began to be a radio actress aswell as an actress on the stage and on the screen. Itwas an entirely new field, and I enjoy it. This beganwhen Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer had a program onwhich I frequently worked when I was under con-tract there. It was produced by a nice young manwho was, I thought, just a kid, but he was also agood actor. I asked for him especially when I hada skit to do in which I played a zany woman whowanted the bookie to give her a horse that wasguaranteed to win. My young friend was bashful,laughed off the idea, and so did not make his radiodebut with me. Not so long ago he found himself acharacter named Archie and now you know him wellEd Gardner of Duffy's Tavern.Another radio program gave me an opportunityto work with Jack Barrymore. This was a show I thinkwill be long remembered, the wonderful nonsenseof the Rudy Vallee show when John Barrymore madehis last bid. At this time Jack was involved matrimo-nially, he was miserably in debt, and his health wasfailing rapidly. But he rose in the stirrups, so to speak,AND NOW ...257with all his grandeur and charm, and made fun ofhimself on the air. I think this was the great lessonwhich taught good actors that they can be amusingat their own expense. Jack Barrymore did it gallantly.ill as he was. because he was a man of honor whowanted to meet his obligations. Few would have hadthe skill or the wit to accomplish it.Often I met him in the corridor at NBC. thoselast days, with his thumbs in his belt, his coat overhis shoulders like a mantle, casting his sidewaysglance. And for these moments vou could see again,brieflw that he was still John Barrymore.I did. finally, venture back to Xew York, some-what timidly, with another Zoe Akins play. It shouldhave been a success; it had all the ingredients, but ithadn't the spark, so let us leave it in peace and notdisturb it. After that quick failure I hurried back toradio and pictures. I had. as you may remember, myown morning show for quite a while, and I adoredthat show as much as I admired the girl who wroteit: Nancy Hamilton, who has since given the theatermany fine things. On the air I also talked aboutServel gas refrigerators and later about Listerinetooth paste, both of which I still highly recommend.Then came the Eddie Cantor radio shows whichare always so much pleasure to do. working withthe comedian Flo used to call his son. And now tele-vision. I tried that only a few months ago and Imust sav I liked it. Obviouslv. it is the coming thing.but whether it will replace motion pictures and thestage is an argument I shan't enter. So far I have258WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEbeen faithful to all the arts associated with actingand I intend to remain faithful in this inclusivefashion.I think I could, without any trouble at all, recitea complete list of all my plays and give most of thecasts, many of the playing dates—even to recallingthe college boys who battled in the audience whenI kicked off my red slippers in Jerry (are there anystaid middle-aging businessmen today who recallwhatever they did with Billie Burke's slippers?) —but I go blank when I try to remember the picturesI have done so far. There have been, I would reckon,about forty. My favorite role was in The Wizard ofOz, directed by the great Victor Fleming, in whichI played Glinda, the Good Fairy. I never playedsuch a being on stage, but this role is as close as Ihave come in motion pictures to the kind of parts Idid in the theater.I recall Ray Bolger in that film. He was the Scare-crow. Day after day as the shooting went on I waitedfor Ray to dance. Finally I asked him when."Dance?" he said, amazed. "Dance? Why, I'ma professional dancer. That's what I do. I'm adancer. So of course I don't dance."And he didn't. My parts in pictures have beensomething like that.But there were some good ones at that: SheCouldn't Take It, Girl Trouble, Doubting Thomas,My American Wife, The Bride Wore Red, MerrilyWe Live, Eternally Yours, Irene, Topper (a series),Becky Sharpe, Everybody Sing, Forsaking All Others,AND NOW ...259The Man Who Came to Dinner. In This Our Life.They All Kissed the Bride. Hi Diddle Diddle. Break-fast in Hollywood, and The Cheaters. That seems tobe enough.My home today is in West Los Angeles, a smallcomfortable, compact house jam-packed with me-mentos, especially elephants, pictures of actors andactresses, Follies programs, hats and drums fromZiegfeld productions, books about the theater and—at last coimt— eight highly articulate canaries. Ilook out from my sitting room on a small walledgarden behind which is a plavfield and a playhouse.The playhouse is occupied bv large dogs, small dogs,several cats, and three children.Grandchildren!They are Florenz. who is nine, Cecelia, who isseven, and Bobbv. who is going-on-three, and theyare bv all possible odds the finest Ziegfeld produc-tions yet. Pat with her husband and family live nextdoor to me. separated only by a garden gate. She ismarried to a voung Virginian, an architect. WilliamStephenson, who calls me "Billie" and picks me up.It is a good life, a generous, happv life, though asI look back to London and Charles Hawtrey. Broad-way and Charles Frohman, Flo Ziegfeld and Burk-elv Crest, I can see that there would have beenscant reason for predicting it would all turn out socozilv.On clear moonlight nights I walk down the hill-side that looks across the sea to Avalon over a span-gled array of sparkling lights,like gold nuggets260WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEdropped on a dark shawl, and I see the magic city ofLos Angeles. This is a golden city, with black goldin its oil, star gold in its Hollywood, air-borne goldon its vast flying fields; and it startles me to remem-ber how I first saw it thirty years ago, when I madepictures for Tom Ince, when the coastline was spat-tered with small fishing shacks, and cattle grazedwhere now we have traffic jams. I should like toknow for sure that those I love will grow up and findit always free and bright and offering fulfillment.And in the town off to the left, the town with thecountry-village name of Hollywood, there are young-sters coming along who will travel much the samepath I have traveled. They will know wealth, hap-piness, heartaches, and they will lose dreams andrecapture dreams. Good luck to them! Let me saythis to them: "It's worth it, boys and girls."This is as much philosophy as I feel up to. I'm abusy woman, you know, with that feather to keepbalanced. My father Billy, I think, "did it with moregrace, but I do it more natural."APPENDIXYou may easily skip the next few pages, but then—youmay find some old friends in these casts:LONDON PERFORMANCES, 1903-1907THE SCHOOL GZKL-Musical play by Henry Hamiltonand Paul Potter. Music by Leslie Stuart. Produced at thePrince of Wales Theatre, London, May 9, 1903. Castincluded:Edna May, Marie Studholm, Violet Cameron, ReginaldSomerville, G. P. Huntley, Billie Burke, George Graves,Pauline Chase, Clarita Deval, Norma Whalley, ArthurRoberts.THE DUCHESS OF DAZVTZZC-Romantic light operain three acts by Henry Hamilton, by arrangement withM. Sardou. Music by Ivan Caryll. Produced by RobertCourtneidge at the Lyric Theatre, London, October 17,1903. Cast:Evie Greene, Clare Greet, Irene Edwards, Mea Winfred,Monica Sayer, Marjory Gray, A. Marchand, E. Labare,Pearl Hope, Lawrence Rea, Philip H. Bracy, HolbrookEvelyn, Frank Greene,Blinn, Denis O'Sullivan, A.Henry J.Ford, Barry Neame, Claude Dampier, FordHamilton, Cecil Cameron, Nellie Souray, Kitty Gordon,Violet Elliot, Adrienne Augarde, Rose Rosslyn, BillieBurke.J.THE BLUE MOOZV-Musical play by Harold Ellis andPercy Greenbank. Music by Howard Talbot and PaulRubens. Produced by Robert Courtneidge at the LyricTheatre, London, August 28, 1905. Cast included:261262WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEFlorence Smithson, Courtice Pounds, Billie Burke, WalterPassmore, Willie Edouin, Carrie Moore, Fred Allandale,Harold Thorley, Clarence Blakiston, Eleanor Souray,Ruth Saville.THE BELLE OF MAYFA7R-Musical comedy by C. H.Brookfield and Cosmo Hamilton. Lyrics by Leslie Stilesand George Arthurs, music by Leslie Stuart. Producedat the Vaudeville Theatre, London, April 11, 1906. Castincluded:Louie Pounds, Courtice Pounds, Farren Soutar, EdnaMay, Billie Burke, Camille Clifford.MR. GEORGE-Comedy in three acts by Louis N.Parker. Produced at the Vaudeville Theatre, London,April 25, 1907. Cast included:Billie Burke, Charles Hawtrey, O. B. Clarence, AliceRusson.MRS. PONDERBURTS PAST-Farcical comedy in threeacts by F. C. Burnand (from the French). Produced byA. and S. Gatti at the Vaudeville Theatre, London, June18, 1907. Cast:Charles Hawtrey, Marie Illington, Billie Burke, MonaHarrison, Ernest Graham, Edward Fitzgerald, CharlesTroode, Wilfred Draycott, Henri Laurent, L. Williams,Percy R. Goodyer, Gwynne Herbert, Mirabel Hillier.NEW YORK PERFORMANCES, 1907-1944MY WIFE (129 perf.) -Comedy in four acts by MichaelMorton, from the French of Messrs. Gavault and Char-nay. Produced by Charles Frohman at the Empire Thea-tre, New York, August 31, 1907. Cast:John Drew, Ferdinand Gottschalk, Walter Soderling,Morton Selten, Albert Roccardi, Mario Majeroni, AxelBruun, Herbert Budd, Rex McDougall, E. SoldenePowell, Frank Goldsmith, L. C. Howard, Billie Burke,APPENDIX263Dorothy Tennant, Ida Greeley Smith, Hope Latham,Kate Pattison Selten, May Galyer.LOVE WATCHES (172 perf. ) -Comedy in four acts byR. De Flers and G. De Caillavet, adapted by GladysUnger. Produced by Charles Frohman at the LyceumTheatre, New York, August 27, 1908. Cast:Cyril Keightley, Ernest Lawford, W. H. Crompton,Stanley Dark, Horace Porter, William Claire, WilliamEdgar, Billie Burke, Maude Odell, Kate Meek, LouiseDrew, Isabel West, Ida Greeley Smith, Anne Bradley,Laura Clement, Maud Love, Charlotte Shelby.MRS. DOT (72 perf .) -Comedy in three acts by W.Somerset Maugham. Produced by Charles Frohman atthe Lyceum Theatre, New York, January 24, 1910. Cast:Julian L'Estrange, Kate Meek, Fred Kerr, Anne Mere-dith, A. Lionel Hogarth, Edgar MacGregor, Basil Hallam,Billie Burke, Annie Esmond, Ernest Cossart, P. E. McCoy,Mildred Barrett.SUZANNE (64 perf.) -Comedy in three acts by FrantzFonson and Fernand Wicheler. Adapted by C. HaddonChambers. Produced by Charles Frohman at the LyceumTheatre, New York, December 26, 1910. Cast:Julian L'Estrange, George W. Anson, Conway Tearle,Billie Burke, Harry Harwood, David Glassford, C. Har-rison Carter, C. J. Wedgewood, P. E. McCoy, G. H.Beverman, E. R. Sheehy, M. B. Hendel, N. K. Leavitt,Rosa Rand, Alison Skipworth and Jane Galbraith.THE PHILOSOPHER IN THE APPLE ORCHARD(35 perf. )—Play by E. Harcourt Williams from AnthonyHope's story. Produced by Charles Frohman at theLyceum Theatre as a curtain raiser to Suzanne, begin-ning January 20, 1911. Cast:Billie Burke and Lumsden Hare.THE RUNAWAY (64 perf .) -Comedy in four acts byPierre Veber and Henri De Gorsse. Adapted by Michael264WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEMorton. Produced by Charles Frohman at the LyceumTheatre, New York, October 9, 1911. Cast:C. Aubrey Smith, George Howell, Henry Miller, Jr.,Morton Selten, H. A. Cripps, Edwin Nicander, HarryBarfoot, Emily Wakeman, Josephine Morse, Isabel West,Jane Evans, Alice Gale, Aline McDermott, Roma De-vonne, Adelaide Cumming, Lettie Ford and Billie Burke.THE MIND-THE-PAINT GIRL (136 perf.) -Comedy infour acts by Sir Arthur Wing Pinero. Produced byCharles Frohman at the Lyceum Theatre, New York,September 9, 1912. Cast:William Raymond, H. E. Herbert, Edward Douglas,John Morley, Arthur Fitzgerald, Barnett Parker, BernardMerefield, Arthur Luzzi, Jeanette Lowrie, Carroll Mc-Comas, Edith Campbell, Hazel Leslie, Jeanne Shelby,Anna Rose, Marie Fitzgerald, Morton Selten, Leo Coo-per, David Hawthorne, Louis Massen, Kenneth Lee,Cecil Newton, Erskholm E. Clive, Louis H. Geist, BillieBurke, Mabel Frenyear, Ruth Boyce, Vera Mellish,PalmerJeanne Eagels, Lydia Rachel, Louise Reed, J.Collins and Ernest W. Laceby. Staged by Dion G. Bou-cicault.THE AMAZONS (48 perf.) -Comedy in three acts bySir Arthur Wing Pinero. Revived by Charles Frohmanat the Empire Theatre, April 28, 1913. Cast:Shelley Hull, Morton Selten, Ferdinand Gottschalk, FritzWilliams, Thomas Reynolds, Arthur Fitzgerald, DorothyLane, Barnett Parker, Annie Esmond, Miriam Clements,Billie Burke, Lorena Atwood.THE LAND OF PROMISE (76 perf.) -Play in four actsby W. Somerset Maugham. Produced by Charles Froh-man at the Lyceum Theatre, New York, December 25,1913. Cast:Billie Burke, Lumsden Hare, Lillian Kingsbury, ShelleyHull, Norman Tharp, Thomas Reynolds, Barnett Parker,APPENDIX265Marion Abbott, Henry Warwick, Gwladys Morris, Mil-dred Orme, Leopold Lane and Selma Hall.JERRY (41 perf.)-Play in three acts by Catherine Chis-holm Cushing. Produced by Charles Frohman at theLyceum Theatre, New York, March 28, 1914. Cast:Gladys Hanson, Billie Burke, Allan Pollock, ThomasReynolds, Alice John, Shelley Hull, Lumsden Hare,Bernard Thornton.THE RESCUING ANGEL (32 perf.)-Play in three actsby Clare Kummer. Produced by Florenz Ziegfeld andArthur Hopkins at the Hudson Theatre, New York, Octo-ber 8, 1917. Cast:Billie Burke, Claude Gillingwater, Marie Wainwright,Elmer Brown, Walter Schellin, Dana Desboro, RobertMcWade, Richard Barbee, Roland Young, FrederickPerry and Rhoda Beresford.A MARRIAGE OF CONVENIENCE (53 perf.) -Com-edy in four acts by Alexandre Dumas. Adapted by Syd-ney Grundy. Revived at the Henry Miller Theatre, NewYork, May 1, 1918. Cast:Henry Miller, Billie Burke, Lowell Sherman, LucilleWatson, Frank Kemble Cooper, Frederick Lloyd, LewisSealy and Lynn Hammond.CAESAR'S WIFE (81 perf.) -A drama in three acts byW. Somerset Maugham, produced by Florenz Ziegfeld,Jr., at the Liberty Theatre, New York, November 24,1919. Cast:Norman Trevor, Ernest Glendenning, Harry Green, T.Wigney Percyval, Frederic DeBelleville, Margaret Dale,Hilda Spong, Mrs. Tom A. Wise, Billie Burke.INTIMATE STRANGERS (91 perf.) -A comedy in threeacts by Booth Tarkington, produced by Florenz Zieg-feld, A. L. Erlanger and Charles Dillingham, at theHenry Miller Theatre, New York, November 7, 1921.Cast:266WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSECharles Abbe, Alfred Lunt, Billie Burke, Frances How-ard, Glenn Hunter, Frank J.Kirk, Elizabeth Patterson,Clare Weldon.ROSE BRIAR (88 perf.)-A comedy in three acts byBooth Tarkington. Produced by Florenz Ziegfeld, Jr., atthe Empire Theatre, New York, December 25, 1922. Cast:Billie Burke, Allan Dinehart, Frank Conroy, Julia Hoyt,Richie Ling, Paul Doucet, Florence O'Denishawn, EthelRemey, Louis Darclee, Mark Haight, Frank McCoy.ANNIE DEAR (103 perf.) -Musical comedy in threeacts. Book, music and lyrics by Clare Kummer. Producedby Florenz Ziegfeld at the Times Square Theatre, NewYork, November 4, 1924. Cast:John Byam, May Vokes, Florentine Gosnova, EdwardAllan, Ernest Truex, Bobby Watson, Billie Burke, Spen-cer Bentley, Phyllis Cleveland, Mary Lawler, Jack Whit-ing, Alexander Gray, Spencer Charters, Gavin Gordon,Frank Kingdon, Marion Green, Marjorie Peterson.THE MARQUISE (80 perf.) -Play in three acts by NoelCoward. Produced by Kenneth MacGowan and SidneyRoss at the Biltmore Theatre, New York, November 14,1927. Cast:Arthur Byron, Madge Evans, Theodore St. John, Regi-nald Owen, Rex O'Malley, Harry Lillford, Billie Burke,Dorothy Tree, William Kershaw.THE HAPPY HUSBAND (46 perf.) -Comedy in threeacts by Harrison Owen. Produced by Gilbert Miller atthe Empire Theatre, New York, May 7, 1928. Cast:Billie Burke, A. E. Matthews, Lawrence Grossmith, IreneBrowne, Walter Connolly, George Thorpe, John Wil-liams, Ilka Chase, Mackenzie Ward, Nancy Ryan, AliceMoffat.FAMILY AFFAIRS (7 perf.) -Comedy in three acts byEarle Crooker and Lowell Brentano. Produced by ArthurAPPENDIX267Hopkins and L. Lawrence Weber at the Maxine ElliottTheatre, New York, December 10, 1929. Cast:Joseph McCallion, Elaine Temple, Cecil Clovelly, FrankElliot, Billie Burke, Edmund George, Leona Boutelle,Audrey Ridgwell, Bruce Evans.THE TRUTH GAME (107 perf.)-A comedy in threeacts by Ivor Novello. Produced by Lee Shubert at theEthel Barrymore Theatre, New York, December 27, 1930.Cast:Phoebe Foster, Ivor Novello, Gerald McCarthy, GwenDay Burroughs, Billie Burke, Burton McEvilly, JeanFullarton, Dorothie Bigelow, Viola Tree, Albert GarciaAndrews, Forbes Dawson.THIS ROCK (37 perf. ) -Comedy in three acts by WalterLivingstone Faust Produced by Eddie Dowling at theLongacre Theatre, New York, Feb. 18, 1943. Cast:Harlan Stone, Joyce Van Patten, Joan Sheppard, ZacharyScott, Alastair Kyle, Roland Hogue, Jane Sterling, BillieBurke, Nicholas Joy, Everett Ripley, Lucia Victor, EthelMorrison, Malcolm Dunn, Gene Lyons, John Farrel, Ma-bel Taylor, Victor Beecroft, Lorna Lynn, Gerald Mat-thews, Suzanne Johnston, Louis Volkman, Patsy Flicker,Buddy Millard, Dickie Millard, Richard Leone.MRS. JANUARY AND MR. X (43 perf.)-Comedy inthree acts by Zoe Akins. Produced by Richard Meyersat the Belasco Theatre, New York, March 31, 1944. Cast:Helen Carew, Edward Nannary, Phil Sheridan, BillieBurke, Frank Craven, Roderick Winchell, Robert F. Si-mon, Mile. Therese Quadri, Barbara Bel Geddes, BobbyPerez, Henry Barnard, Henry Vincent, Dorothy Lambert,Nicholas Joy, Susana Garnett.268WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSECALIFORNIA PERFORMANCES, 1931 and 1934THE VINEGAR TREE-Play in three acts by Paul Os-borne. Produced by David Belasco and Homer Curranat the Belasco Theatre, Los Angeles, June, 1931. Cast:Billie Burke, Warren William, William Morris, WilliamJanney, Fulie Dillon and Dorothy Blackburn.THE MAD HOPES-A comedy by Romney Brent. Pro-duced in Los Angeles, 1931.HIS MASTER'S VOZCE-Play in three acts by Ivy Low.Produced at the El Capitan Theatre, Hollywood, 1934.PERFORMANCES ON TOUR, 1932 and 1941:THE MARQUISE-Toured in California, 1932. Cast;Alan Mowbray, William Stack, Billie Burke, Anita Louise,Morgan Farley, Reginald Sheffield, Herbert Bunston,Cyril Delevanti, Virginia Howard.THE VINEGAR TREE-On tour, 1941.INDEXAdams, Maude, 37, 54, 55, 62,63ff, 83, 86Alans, Zoe, 255, 257Amazons, The, 114-115Annie Dear, 201Arliss, George, 86, 195A., 8, 9Bailev, J.Bamum, P. T., 7, 8Barrie, Sir James M., 36, 62-65.66, 109-110, 133Bam-more, Ethel, 1-2, 48, 53,54, 55Barrvmore, John, 54, 78, 219,234, 238, 240, 256-257Barrvmore, Lionel, 195, 219Beattv, Mrs. Cecelia Flood, 9-11Belasco, David, 56, 61, 98, 100.225Belle of Maijfair, The, 37-39Berlin, Irving,174, 183, 186-187, 196-197, 215Bill of Divorcement, A, 234Blue Moon, 37Blumenthal, A. C, 237, 239Boland, Mary, 55, 86, 225Bolger, Ray/ 258Boucicault,' Dion, 37, 112-113,114Bradleys, 214ff, 219Bradv, Diamond Jim, 157Brice, Fannie, 119, 151,243. 244. 245-246. 254159.Bromfield, Louis, 218Buck, Gene, 165-166Burke, Billv, 3-9, 11-12, 14-15,16, 18-20, 22, 44, 84, 148,246, 260Burke, Blanche Beattv(Mrs.Billv), 8-9, 11, 16-18, 19, 22-25. '36-37. 49. 76-77. 90ff, 95-122-123,96,132,202-203, 248130-131,Caesar's Wife, 201Caillavet, G., 85, 95Caillavet, Mme., 95Cameron, Violet, 27Campbell, Mrs. Patrick, 60, 83,86Cantor, Eddie, 151. 159. 177.178, 223, 243. 244. 257Carlisle, Alexandra, 34, 35Carnegie, Dale, 55Carrero, Liane, 141, 143, 144Carrero, Maximo, 141Carroll, Madeleine, 254Caruso, Enrico, 103-105, 148Chase, Pauline, 27, 37Chatterton, Ruth, 192, 194-195.251Choate, Joseph H., 78-79Churchill, Winston, 97Clements, Miriam, 115Clowns: the Babusios, 7; Du-row, 7; Al Miaco, 6; WilliamOlschansky, 7; Tonv Pastor,6: Dan Rice, 5; Sherwood, 7219,Constance,105,Collier,225Cooch Behar, Maharajah of, 30Coward, Noel, 218, 252269270WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSECukor George, 234, 238ff, 248,Frohman, Daniel, 51, 57, 71249, 251, 255Curran, Homer, 225, 234Curry, Dan, 236Cushing, Catherine Chisholm,116Dale, Alan, 75Dazian, Henry, 157Dillingham, Charles, 174, 177,180, 185, 186, 197, 212Dinner At Eight, 251Drew, John, 1-2, 13, 48ff, 76,78-79, 86, 255Duchess of Dantzic, 37-38Eagels, Jeanne, 111, 195Edwardes, George, 26ff, 111Eilers, Sally, 218Elliott, Maxine, 54, 83, 92, 97-100, 117Empire Theater, 1, 52, 56, 57,65, 67, 255Erlanger, A. L., 98, 220, 249Errol, Leon, 174, 177, 241, 244,245Faversham, Julia & William, 70Fields, W. C, 159, 177, 244Fiske, Minnie Maddern, 55, 73,83,87Fitch, Clyde, 109Flers, R. de, 85, 95Follies of 1918, 196-197Follies of 1919, 196Fontanne, Lynn, 198-200Forbes-Robertson, Sir Johnston,97, 117Friml, Rudolph, 187Frohman, Charles, 1-2, 27-28,35-36, 44-45, 47, 48-49, 53ff,57ff, 68, 79, 80, 88, 94, 97ff,103, 109-110, 112, 113, 114-116, 124, 125, 126-129, 130,132, 133, 162, 169, 248, 259Gable, Clark, 253Garden, Mary, 70-71Gardner, Ed, 256Garson, Greer, 254Gatti Brothers, 38-39, 42Genee, Adeline, 242Gershwin, George, 187Gillette, William, 53-54, 68-69Goldwyn, Samuel,217,241, 248-249Mrs.Goldwyn,Samuel167,(seeHoward, Frances)Grant, Cary, 253Great Ziegfeld, The, 250Hallam, Basil, 105-106Hamilton, Nancy, 257Hammerstein, Oscar, 56, 140Hammond, Percy, 75Happy Husbands, 207Harkrider, Jack, 217Hawtrey, Sir Charles, 39-43, 45-47, 48, 113, 148, 248, 259Hayman, Alf, 99-100, 126-129,164, 167ffHayward, Madame, 79-80, 89,97, 105Held, Anna, 120, 127, 139-145,163Hepburn, Katharine, 234, 238-239, 240, 251, 254Howard, Frances (Mrs. SamuelGoldwyn), 197-198, 248Hull, Josephine, 111Hull, Shelley, 111, 115Huntley, George P., 27Ince, Thomas H., 166ff, 260Intimate Strangers, The, 197-200, 202, 209Jerry, 116, 146, 16lff, 253, 258INDEX271Keightley, Cyril, 87-88Kem, Jerome, 115, 200, 218Kerr, Frederick, 105, 106-107Kingston, Mr. & Mrs. Beatty,20-21Kiraly, Victor, 117, 119, 248Kirshbaum, Rev. Samuel, 3, 12-13Mr. George, 40ffMy Wife, 45, 47, 48ff, 76Nagle, Anna, 253Nathan, George Jean, 65Novello, Ivor, 219, 225Old Maid, The, 255Land of Promise, The, 115-116,122Lasky, Jesse L., 166-167, 192Lawford, Ernest, 85, 88L'Estrange, Julian, 105Lindsay, Howard, 55Lorraine, Lillian, 117, 120, 127,142, 163, 174, 212Love Watches, 83ff, 101, 103,253Loy, Myrna, 253Lunt, Alfred, 197, 198-200Lupinos, The, 6P., 179-180McAvoy, J.Malone, Pat, 28, 35Marquise, The, 105, 207, 218;Palmer, A. N., 63-64Patti, Adelina, 21Pinero,101Sir Arthur Wing, 36,Rescuing Angel, The, 201Roach, Hal, 253Rogers, Betty (Mrs. Will), 240,244, 249Rogers, Ginger, 254Rogers, Will, 159, 177-178, 218,225, 236, 240, 241-242, 243,244-245, 248, 249Rose Briar, 197, 200Rousel, Mr. & Mrs. Theodore,21-22Russell, Lillian, 83, 86, 143revival, 252Sandow, Eugene, 138-139, 143,Marriage of Convenience, 192,148194-195Martin,FrederickTownsend,71-72, 148Maugham, Somerset,86,101, 107-108, 115ff, 148, 201May, Edna, 27-28, 30, 35, 36,36,37-38Mayer, Louis B., 218Miller, Gilbert, 205Miller, Henry, 192, 194-195Miller, Marilyn, 175-176, 196,208-212, 214Mind The Paint Girl, The, 61,101, 110-111, 113, 114, 253Mrs. Dot, 101, 107-108Mrs. Ponderhurys Past, 45-47Schenck, Joe, 236School Girl, The, 26-36Sherry's, 72Selten, Morton, 53Selznick, David O., 234Seymour, Willie, 48, 49, 53Shaw, George Bernard, 62, 207Shearer, Norma, 217, 253Sheldon, Edward, 86-87, 96Shubert, Jake, 98ff, 142, 249Shubert, Lee, 97ff, 142, 249Skinner, Otis, 7, 54Sobel, Bernard, 204Sothern, Ann, 254Sothern, E. H., 54, 78Steger, Julius, 141-142272WITH A FEATHER ON MY NOSEStephenson, William, 259Stewart, Leslie, 26ff, 34Studholm, Marie, 27-28Sutro, Alfred, 112Tarkington,200, 209Booth,197-198,Tempest, Marie, 105, 108Thomas, Olive, 172, 173, 177,208, 212Tree, Sir Herbert Beerbohm, 65Truth Game, The, 207, 219,224, 225Twain, Mark, 68, 69-71Urban, Joseph, 159, 182, 218Vinegar Tree, The, 224ff, 252Wagner, Dr. Jerome, 188, 235Westmore, Ern, 240Williams, Bert, 119, 163, 242,243Wizard of Oz, The, 258Young, Roland, 253Ziegfeld, Dr. Florenz, 132, 135,136-137, 161132;203;and130-132;Annaand148-150,Held, 139-145; firstFollies,145; and Billie Burke: meet-ing, 117-120; courtship, 121ff;honey-marriage,Blanchemoon,Burke, 122-123, 130, 202; ashost, 182-183; and animals,153-154, 159, 179-181; andballet, 242; and Negro artists,242; at Camp Patricia, 184-191; work in Hollywood, 217;and Marilyn Miller, 175-176,208-211; and Olive Thomas,172-173;losses,143, 214-216, 219; stock mar-ket crash, 220ff; telegrams of,204, 226-233; radio produc-tions, 232-234; illness, 234ff;death, 240; Will Roger's trib-ute, 241-242;gambling56, 74, 87, 100, 118ff, 133,Ziegfeld,161ff,146-160,134ff,195,200-201, 204-206, 207ff, 213,242-246, 247ff, 254-255, 259Patricia Burke, 174,177, 178, 180, 185-186, 188-191, 202, 209, 211, 212, 224,226ff, 238ff, 248, 249, 250,252, 254-255Ziegfeld, Florenz Jr., birth, 135;boyhood, 135-136; early the-136-139;atricalphysical118,appearance,ventures,Ziegfeld, Rosalie de Hez (Mrs.Florenz, Sr.), 132, 135, 136,161-162Zimmerman, Freddie, 118, 143