11

The Great and Foul Stain

Although the controversy over Louisa’s refusal to visit
congressional wives persisted for a while, she gradually calmed
the social storm by turning her house into a coveted social
destination with elegant receptions for illustrious friends from
Europe. Washington’s ladies (and their men) soon sought
invitations to Louisa’s Tuesday evening receptions more than to
any other social event in Washington. And most gossip about
their “alien” tastes ended abruptly when the Adamses hosted a
New Year’s ball in January 1818 for three hundred guests, who
called it the finest Washington festivity in memory. Louisa
sparkled in a magnificent gown and emerged as a gracious and
ebullient hostess. John Quincy, on the other hand, was a bit of a
grouch. Although brilliant at serious gatherings and
conferences, his face turned sour when the music began to play
and those around him chitchatted and immersed the scene in
badinage.

“T am a silent animal,” he grumbled4—although he usually
exuded cheer with his immediate family in private. After the
last guests had left one Christmas ball, he broke into a grin and
even danced a reel with Louisa and his sons, who were home
for the holidays from college.

At the State Department, John Quincy asserted firm authority
over his department from the moment he entered. State
Department papers had been in disarray since the War of 1812,
so he ordered clerks to create an index of diplomatic
correspondence and cross-reference every topic in every
dispatch and letter to and from overseas consulates and
ministries, foreign ministers, and foreign consuls. He then
organized and expanded the State Department Library, which

became one of the world’s largest collections of references and
other works relating to foreign affairs. He also assumed an
1817 congressional mandate that directed the secretary of
state to report on the systems of weights and measures of
various states and foreign countries and to use these to
propose a uniform system for the United States. His Report on
Weights and Measures would take three years to complete, but
it became a classic in its field and led to the establishment of
the Bureau of Weights and Measures and was the basis for the
uniform system that still exists in the United States.

When he finished the tasks of office management, he turned
to foreign affairs policies. Always careful to obtain presidential
approval, he issued a standing order that all U.S. ministers
abroad adhere firmly to the alternat protocol he had
championed in London, ensuring that the name of the United
States appeared ahead of the other nation on alternating

copies of international agreements.

Despite peaceful relations with the world’s great powers,
many stretches along the United States’ frontiers seemed at
war. Pirates repeatedly attacked American shipping from
encampments on Amelia Island in the Atlantic Ocean on the
Florida side of the Florida-Georgia border and on Galveston
Island in the Gulf of Mexico off the Texas coast. In addition,
runaway slaves and Seminole Indians encamped in Spanish
Florida were raiding and burning farms and settlements across
the border in Georgia. In the North, the British had blocked
American access to rich fisheries in and about the Gulf of Saint
Lawrence between Newfoundland and the Canadian coast.
Other unsettled issues between Britain and the United States
included impressment and Britain’s compensation for slaves
who had fled to the West Indies at the end of the Revolutionary
War.

John Quincy Adams as secretary of state, an office considered
“the stepladder to the presidential chair.” (AFTER THOMAS
SULLY AND GILBERT STUART, NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE,
ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

By the time John Quincy was ready to return to America, he
and Lord Castlereagh had grown closer and learned to trust
each other enough to discuss most remaining issues between
their two nations—and both were eager to reach agreement.
Britain wanted to focus on European affairs without fear of
friction with the Americans, and the United States, in turn,
needed to deal with the Spanish menace in the south without
fear of a British attack in the north. After several months of
complicated give-and-take on both sides, John Quincy Adams
and Richard Rush, the new American minister in London,
finally worked out an agreement with the British that solved a
few things, postponed others, and, most importantly, produced
lasting peace between the two nations.

Under the agreement signed in 1818, the British agreed to
ban impressment for ten years, restore American inland fishing

rights along the Canadian coast, and allow Czar Alexander I of

Russia to mediate the slave-compensation issue.® The historic
treaty also fixed, for the first time, the American-Canadian
frontier from the Great Lakes to the Rocky Mountains, giving
the United States undisputed sovereignty over the so-called
Adams Strip. By extending the boundary line along the Forty-
ninth Parallel westward from the northwesternmost tip of Lake
of the Woods in northern Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains,
the Americans acquired a 150-mile-wide strip across northern
Minnesota, North Dakota, and Montana. (See map on page
134.) Recognition of the Adams Strip as American territory
established a precedent for eventually extending the northern
border line to the Pacific Ocean, giving the United States
sovereignty over Puget Sound and the mouth of the Columbia
River. In the meantime the Oregon Territory west of the
Rockies would remain open to both English and Americans, to
trade with each other freely and come and go as they pleased,
with neither nation claiming sovereignty over them or their
lands.

In a subsequent discussion with John Quincy, however,
Stratford Canning, the British minister to the United States,
seemed to dismiss the agreement by claiming British
ownership of the mouth of the Columbia River. When John
Quincy disagreed, Canning replied sharply, “Why? Do you not
know we have a claim?”

“T do not know what you claim nor what you do not claim,”
John Quincy snapped back. “You claim India, you claim Africa

“Perhaps,” Canning interrupted, “a piece of the moon.”

“No,” John Quincy replied angrily. “I have not heard that you
claim exclusively any part of the moon; but there is not a spot
on this habitable globe that I could affirm you do not claim, and
there is none which you may not claim with as much color of
light as you can have to Columbia River or its mouth.”

“And how far would you consider this exclusion of right to
extend?” Canning asked.

“To all the shores of the South Sea [Pacific Ocean],” John

Quincy asserted.2

In the end, the British Foreign Office disavowed Canning’s
claim of British sovereignty at the mouth of the Columbia River,
thus ensuring peace along the U.S. frontier with Britain. Free
to turn its attention to the conflict with Spain, the Monroe
administration ordered Secretary of War John C. Calhoun to
organize two military expeditions—one to crush pirates on
Amelia Island and another to pursue and attack Indians and
renegade slaves in Florida.

Two weeks later, General Edmund P. Gaines led troops to
Amelia Island, while Tennessee militia commander General
Andrew Jackson led a campaign into northern Florida, with
President Monroe exhorting Jackson that “great interests are
at issue, and until our course is carried through triumphantly . .

. you ought not to withdraw your active support from it.”3 The
President made it clear that he considered acquisition of the
Floridas essential to the security of the United States. With the
Spanish army attempting to suppress wars of independence in
Chile, Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama, President Monroe did
not believe Spain would be able to spare enough troops to
defend the Floridas.

Aware that his mission was a de facto declaration of war,
Jackson at first refused to violate the Constitution by warring
against another nation without a congressional mandate.
Before setting out for Florida, he demanded a letter from the
President clarifying his mission, but he never received one and
invaded Florida without it. After seizing Spanish posts at St.
Marks, about forty miles south of the Georgia border, he and
his men swept eastward to the Sewanee River, where he
captured the Seminole village of Bowleg’s Town and burned
three hundred houses. He then marched his force westward
across the panhandle, leveling every Seminole fort and black
village he could find. To terrify the population into submission,
he hanged two captured Creek chieftains.

“They will foment war no more,” Jackson declared.4
On May 24, Jackson’s troops marched into Spanish-controlled

Pensacola, on the Gulf of Mexico near the Alabama border,
effectively taking control of the entire Florida panhandle. He
also captured two British traders, one of them a shipowner, and
accused them of aiding the enemy. He hanged the shipowner
from the yardarm of his own ship in front of a group of terrified
Indians and ordered a firing squad to execute the other. On
June 2, Jackson sent a message to Monroe that he had won the
Seminole War, and if the President would send him the Fifth
Infantry, he would march his men eastward to deliver Fort St.
Augustine. “Add another regiment and one frigate,” he boasted,

“and I will insure you Cuba in a few days.”2

“The President and all the members of the cabinet except
myself,” John Quincy was surprised to find, “are of opinion that
Jackson acted not only without, but against his instructions;
that he has committed war against Spain. The question is
embarrassing and complicated, not only as involving an actual
war with Spain, but that of the executive power to authorize
hostilities without a declaration of war by Congress.” John
Quincy stood alone in disagreement, arguing that Jackson’s
actions were “justified by the necessity of the case and by the
misconduct of the Spanish commanding officers in Florida.”
John Quincy insisted that Jackson “was authorized to cross the
Spanish line in pursuit of the Indian enemy” and that the
Constitution authorized the executive to wage “defensive acts
of hostility” without notifying Congress.

Although John Quincy failed to convince the rest of the
cabinet, he convinced the President that Jackson had actually
strengthened America’s international standing by
demonstrating a will to defend national interests. Switching to
John Quincy’s position, Monroe rewarded Jackson by naming
him governor of Florida—to the cheers of the overwhelming
majority of Americans. The Spanish king, of course, protested,
as did English and European government leaders and
newspapers, all condemning Jackson’s invasion of Florida as
brutal, runaway imperialism.

On June 13, Speaker of the House Henry Clay added his voice
to the chorus of criticisms, charging Jackson with undermining

the constitutional authority of Congress to declare war. “Efforts
were forthwith made in Congress,” John Quincy explained, “to
procure a vote censuring the conduct of General Jackson,
whose fast increasing popularity had, in all probability excited
the envy of politicians . . . but the President himself, and Mr.
Adams .. . warmly espoused the cause of the American

commander.”&

With President Monroe now giving him free rein on the
Florida issue, John Quincy sent instructions to the American
minister in Madrid to present the Spanish government with an
ultimatum: cede Florida or act decisively to prevent further
attacks on American territory by Florida-based renegades. John
Quincy then called Spanish minister Don Luis de Onis y
Gonzales to the State Department. He did not like the fifty-five-
year-old Spaniard, called him “wily Don” in private, and
disparaged him as “cold, calculating ... supple and cunning. .
. overbearing . . . careless of what he asserts or how grossly it
is proved to be unfounded.”

I had an hour’s conversation with him. . . . I mentioned
the hostilities of the Seminole Indians upon our frontiers,
and I urged that if we should not come to an early
conclusion of the Florida negotiation, Spain would not

have the possession of Florida to give us.Z

President Monroe then prepared to go before Congress for
his second annual address, in which he planned to answer his
critics. He instructed John Quincy to prepare a single policy
statement that would respond to the king of Spain, to critics in
England and Europe, and to the American Congress. John
Quincy had no sooner started working on a draft, however,
when a letter arrived from his son John II that left him all but
prostrate with shock and grief: Abigail Adams had died on
October 28, 1818, two weeks short of her seventy-fourth
birthday.

“Oh, God!” he cried out, tears streaming down his face. “Oh,
God! My mother, beloved and lamented more than language
can express, yielded up her pure and gentle spirit to its

creator.”

Oh, God! Never have I known another human being the
perpetual object of whose life was so unremittingly to do
good. ... There is no virtue in the female heart. . . [that]
was not the ornament of hers. .. . She had been, during
the war of our Revolution, an ardent patriot, and the
earliest lesson of unbounded devotion to the cause of

their country that her children received was from her.8

After recovering his composure, he wrote to his “Ever Dear
and Revered Father”:

By a letter from my son John, I have .. . been apprised of
that afflictive dispensation of Providence which has
bereft you of the partner of your life; me of the tenderest
and most affectionate of Mothers. . . . How shall I offer
you consolation for your loss when I feel that my own is
irreparable? ... Let me hear from you, my dearest father,
let me hear from you soon. And may the blessing of that
God whose tender mercies are over all his works still
shed rays of heavenly hope and comfort over the
remainder of your days.

He signed it, “Your distressed but ever affectionate and

dutiful son.”2

Although President Monroe was deeply sympathetic, only a
few days remained before he would have to justify the attack
and seizure of Florida to the world and obtain retroactive
approval from Congress. As Thomas Jefferson had predicted of
the Monroe-Quincy relationship, John Quincy’s “pointed pen”—
despite the sorrow of its holder—prepared a response that
articulated the President’s thoughts better than the President
could have done himself. Using John Quincy’s carefully
considered words, the President hailed Jackson’s attack as “an
act of patriotism, essential to the honor and interests of your
country.” Brushing aside constitutional issues, Monroe declared
that

the United States stand justified in ordering their troops
into Florida in pursuit of their enemy. They have this
right by the law of nations if the Seminoles were
inhabitants of another country and had entered Florida to
elude pursuit. It is not an act of hostility to Spain. It is the
less so, because her government is bound by treaty to
restrain .. . the Indians there from committing hostilities

against the United States.10

The message scoffed at the Spanish king’s portrayal of
Jackson’s assault as an outrage and Jackson himself as lacking
“honor and dignity.” Monroe then quoted a letter from a
survivor of one of the Indian attacks on settlers.

There was a boat that was taken .. . that had in it thirty
men, seven women, and four small children. There were
six of the men got clear, and one woman saved, and all
the rest of them got killed. The children were taken by
the leg and their brains dashed out against the boat... .
Should inquiry be made why .. . after this event the
savage Hamathli-Meico [the Creek chieftain] upon being
taken by the American troops was by order of their
commander immediately hung, let it be told that that
savage was the commander of the party by whom those
women were butchered and those helpless infants dashed

against the boat.11

President Monroe went on to cite the law of nations [le droit
des gens] as drafted by Swiss jurist Emmerich von Vattel, who
wrote, “When at war with a ferocious nation which observes no
rule and grants no quarter, they may be chastised by the

persons of them who may be taken.”!2 As for the Englishmen
that Jackson ordered hung, John Quincy’s response for the
President called them “accomplices of savages, and, sinning
against their better knowledge, worse than savages.”

General Jackson, possessed of their persons and of the
proofs of their guilt, might, by the lawful and ordinary

usages of war, have hung them both without formality of
a trial... . He gave them the benefit of trial by a court-
martial of highly respectable officers. .. . The defense of
one consisted .. . of technical cavils at the nature of part
of the evidence against him, and the other confessed his

guilt.13

John Quincy’s text then addressed Henry Clay’s criticisms:
“The President will neither inflict punishment nor pass a
censure on General Jackson for that conduct, the motives of
which were founded in the purest patriotism ... and the
vindication of which is written on every page of the law of
nations as well as in the first law of nature—self-defense.”

And finally, the presidential address referred to John Quincy’s
negotiations with Don Luis de Onis, saying that the restoration
of Florida to Spanish sovereignty was based on the President’s
confidence that Spain would

restrain by force the Indians of Florida from all hostilities
against the United States ... that there will be no more
murders, no more robberies . . . by savages prowling
along the Spanish line, seeking shelter within it to display
in their villages the scalps of our women and children and
to sell with shameless effrontery the plunder from our
citizens in Spanish forts and cities. . . . The duty of this
government to protect the persons and property of our
fellow citizens on the borders of the United States is
imperative. It must be discharged. And if, after all the
warnings Spain has had .. . the necessities of self-
defense should again compel the United States to take
possession of the Spanish forts and places in Florida...

restoration of them must not be expected. 14

Faced with revolts across South America and terrified of
again confronting the man they called “the Napoléon of the
woods [Jackson],”12 the Spaniards capitulated. In the
negotiations that followed, John Quincy let the Spanish
government save face by asking the secretary of war to

withdraw American troops from Florida and restore nominal
sovereignty over the Florida panhandle to Spain. Spain then
ceded both East and West Florida to the United States and
renounced all claims to both territories. The United States, in
turn, renounced all claims to Texas and used the $5 million
owed to Spain for the Florida acquisition to settle claims of
American citizens against Spain for Indian depredations. In
addition to ceding the Floridas, the Adams-Onis agreement, or
Transcontinental Treaty, defined the western limits of the
Louisiana Territory, with the Spanish ceding all claims to the
Pacific Northwest and extending nominal U.S. sovereignty to
the Pacific coast.

Cowed by the President’s annual address, Henry Clay and the
Senate approved the Adams-Onis treaty. Together with the rest
of the Louisiana Purchase and the Florida conquest, the treaty
expanded the small, East Coast nation that George Washington
had governed into a vast, rich, and powerful empire, within a
relatively impregnable wall of natural defenses.

On February 22, 1821, George Washington’s birthday, John
Quincy Adams effected the exchange of treaties ceding Florida
to the United States—a transaction he called “the most
important of my life... an event of magnitude in the history of
this Union.”

Let my sons, if they ever consult this record of their
father’s life .. . remark the workings of private interests,
of perfidious fraud, of sordid intrigues, of royal treachery,
of malignant rivalry, and of envy masked with patriotism .
. . all combined to destroy this treaty. Under the petals of
this garland of roses ... Onis had hidden a viper .. . and
all the calculations of my downfall by the Spanish
negotiation has left me with credit rather augmented ...

by the result.16

Stung by their attempts to censure him, Jackson rode over
the mountains to Washington City to confront his congressional
challengers. An adoring public intervened. “Whenever the
General went into the streets,” one newspaper reported, “it

was difficult to find a passage through, so great was the desire
of people to see him. ... Among the people... his popularity is

unbounded—old and young speak of him with rapture.”1Z
Congress responded to the public euphoria by overwhelmingly
defeating Clay’s proposed censures, and when Clay went to
Jackson’s hotel to apologize, the general had already left for
New York.

In addition to silencing Clay, John Quincy’s masterful policy
statements silenced the British press and government.
Jackson’s execution of two British subjects would, a few years
earlier, have provoked a British naval attack, but after reading
John Quincy’s paper, Lord Castlereagh agreed, “It is impossible
not to admit that the unfortunate sufferers . . . had been
engaged in unauthorized practices of such a description as to
have deprived them of any claim on their own government for
interference in their behalf.” He ordered the British minister in

Washington not to take “any further step in the business.”18

In the fall of 1819, John Quincy and Louisa returned to
Quincy to visit John Adams—only to find that John Quincy’s
beloved brother Thomas Boylston’s occasional drinking had
become chronic. Not only had his law practice deteriorated, he
had allowed John Quincy’s affairs to fall into disarray. Although
Thomas promised to reform, John Quincy had no choice but to
transfer his estate to another firm. By 1820, its attorneys had
restored enough order to his investments for him to buy a large
new double-house in Washington—on present-day F Street at
Thirteenth, at the time within view of the White House. It came
with a second-floor ballroom for Louisa’s huge Christmas
assemblies, and its proximity to the Potomac allowed John
Quincy to add a swim to his regular regime of daily walks.
Bathing suits having not yet been invented, he simply left his
clothes on a rock at the shore and waded in stark naked—and
no one paid attention.

To break the routine of diplomatic paperwork, John Quincy
returned to his old reading habits—Tacitus, Alexander Pope,
scientific journals, and, of course, the Bible. He became

president of the American Bible Society and, in 1820, president
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which his
father had helped found.

To John Quincy’s dismay, the Adams-Onis treaty he had
negotiated created almost as many problems as it solved.
Although it opened the West to settlement and promised an
unprecedented period of growth and prosperity, it also
extended the problem of slavery far beyond the confines of
southern slave states. At the end of 1819, the Missouri
Territory applied for statehood, provoking a motion in Congress
to exclude slavery from new states. Although John Quincy had
despised slavery since his first encounter with it in Germany as
a youngster, he had never before involved himself politically in
disputes over the issue because it was virtually nonexistent in
his native New England and seldom a topic of discussion there
—certainly not in Quincy.

“T take it for granted,” he now realized, “that the present
question [of slavery] is a mere preamble—a title page to a great
tragic volume.” As he further studied the issue, he concluded,
“This is a question between the rights of human nature and the
Constitution of the United States. Probably both will suffer by

the issue of the controversy.” 12

The controversy divided Congress—and, indeed, the nation—
for political and economic reasons as well as moral. The North
feared Missouri’s entry into the Union as a slave state would
alter the free-state/slave-state balance in the Senate, where a
succession of northern vice presidents had invariably tilted tie
votes in favor of northern interests. When Alabama—a slave
state—won admission as the twenty-first state, the admission of
Illinois—a free state—restored senatorial balance. There was
no semblance of balance in the House of Representatives,
however. In the years since ratification of the Constitution, the
population of the North had grown faster than that of the
South. Free states counted about 5.2 million people, with 105
House votes, by 1819, while the population of slave states
totaled about 4.5 million, with only 81 House votes. With
Missouri’s admission, the South saw the opportunity to gain a

one-state majority in the Senate to compensate for its minority
status in the House of Representatives.

Monroe had formed his cabinet with members from each
region, and he ordered them not to involve themselves—or him
—in the controversy. The dispute over slavery in the Missouri
Territory, however, grew too widespread to ignore, and the
more John Quincy heard cabinet members from the South
defend slavery, the more convinced he became that it was
“false and heartless.” Slavery, he asserted, made “the first and
holiest rights of humanity depend upon the color of the skin.”

It perverts human reason . . . to maintain that slavery is
sanctioned by the Christian religion, that slaves are
happy and contented in their condition, that between
master and slave there are ties of mutual attachment and
affection, that the virtues of the master are refined and
exalted by the degradation of the slave; while at the same
time they vent execrations upon the slave trade, curse
Britain for having given them slaves, burn at the stake
Negroes convicted of crimes for the terror of the
example, and writhe in agonies of fear at the very
mention of human rights as applicable to men of color...
. The bargain between freedom and slavery contained in
the Constitution of the United States is morally and
politically vicious, inconsistent with the principles upon

which alone our Revolution can be justified 22

Cabinet members William H. Crawford, from Georgia, and
John C. Calhoun, from South Carolina, were both slaveholders,
as was the President. Hardly a champion of manumission,
Monroe steered clear of the issue—not because of indifference
but because the Constitution gave only Congress jurisdiction
over the admission of states, and it gave territories the right to
become states without restrictions or preconditions. As for his
personal views, Monroe had no strong objections to slavery,
saying only, “The God who made us, made the black people,

and they ought not to be treated with barbarity.”21

Apart from morality, both sides used the Constitution to press

their arguments. Although its power to regulate interstate
trade gave Congress the right to prohibit interstate traffic in
slaves, the Constitution did not give either Congress or the
states powers to abolish slavery in states and territories where
it already existed or to establish slavery in states where it did
not exist. Although it was not his purview as secretary of state,
John Quincy had enough standing as a constitutional scholar to
step into the debate to help the President and Congress resolve
the issue as it affected Missouri. While admitting he despised

slavery as “a sin before the sight of God,”22 he said his role
was not to debate the pros and cons of the institution but solely
to determine whether the Constitution gave the federal
government power to abolish it without a _ constitutional
amendment. Clearly, it did not.

“For the admission of a state where no slavery exists,” John
Quincy explained, “Congress may prescribe as a condition that
slavery shall never be established in it, as they have done to
the states of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois. But where it exists, as
in Missouri and Arkansas, the power of extirpating it is not

given to the Congress by the Constitution.”23

John Quincy’s pronouncements, like those of a judge on high,
silenced the debaters for a while, and before the end of the
year, an opportunity for compromise materialized with a
petition from Maine to separate from Massachusetts and join
the Union as a new state. When the Sixteenth Congress met in
mid-February 1820, it needed only two weeks to admit Maine
as a free state and Missouri as a slave state. It then drew a line
across the rest of the Louisiana Territory, excluding slavery in
all new states above latitude 36°30’ and permitting slavery in
new states below that line. (See map on page 214.)

The Missouri Compromise solved the problem of admitting
new states but postponed the question of abolition for nearly a
decade, at which time John Quincy Adams would have no
choice but to confront it head-on. “Slavery,” he declared
presciently,

is the great and foul stain upon the North American

Union, and it is a contemplation worthy of the most
exalted soul whether its total abolition is or is not
practicable: if practicable, by what means it may be
effected .. . at the smallest cost of human sufferance. A
dissolution, at least temporary, of the Union as now
constituted would be certainly necessary, and the
dissolution must be upon a point involving the question of
slavery and no other. The Union might then be
reorganized on the fundamental principle’ of

emancipation.24

The Missouri Compromise of 1820 estabilished a dividing line
between free territory and slave territory,with slavery illegal in
any new states in the lands above the line and legal states
formed below the line.

wh
=

S
oa
eo
ns
zo
we
<=

 

The Missouri Compromise seemed to settle America’s future,
and when James Monroe stood for reelection at the end of
1820, no one opposed him. Of 235 electoral votes, Monroe
received 231, with three abstentions and only one elector
casting a dissenting vote to prevent Monroe from matching
George Washington as the only President to have won

unanimously. “And that vote, to my surprise and mortification,
was for me,” John Quincy Adams _ recounted with
embarrassment. He was, however, pleased with the election
results. “Party conflict has performed its entire revolution,” he
said with satisfaction, “and that unanimity of choice which
began with George Washington has come around again in the
person of James Monroe. In the survey of our national history,
this latter unanimity is much more remarkable than the

first.”292

Monroe’s unopposed reelection, however, marked the end of
the Federalist Party and left his own Republican Party in
disarray, with leaders in each state casting greedy eyes on the
President’s chair if and when Monroe decided to vacate it. John
Quincy warned the President that “as the first term... has
hitherto been the period of the greatest national tranquility...
it appears to me scarcely avoidable that the second term will
be among the most stormy and violent. I told him that I thought
the difficulties before him were thickening and becoming

hourly more and more formidable.”26

In 1821, a rising tide of populist sentiment swept in from the
West, where, in a monumental clash of generations,
frontiersmen and settlers rejected property ownership as a
qualification for voting and holding office in the new states
they founded. A concept that dated back to eighteenth-century
colonial rule, when land ownership depended on royal grants
from Britain, property qualifications for voting were alien to
young, free-spirited, nineteenth-century frontiersmen.
Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and other western states, therefore,
rejected the concept in writing their constitutions, providing
instead for white manhood suffrage. Although New Jersey had
expanded suffrage in 1807 and Maryland in 1810, Connecticut
waited until 1818 to eliminate property requirements for
voting, with Massachusetts following in 1820 and New York in
1821.

In addition to demands for greater democracy at home,
western populists embraced the spread of democracy abroad,

with Speaker Henry Clay asking Congress in 1818 to recognize
the growing number of revolutionary governments in Spanish
America. The House expressed its sympathy with the Latin
Americans and pledged to support the President if he
recognized any of the new regimes. Inspired by America’s
Revolutionary War, South America’s wars of independence had
broken out in 1810, but James Madison’s administration, and
Monroe himself during his first term in office, had treated the
conflicts as civil wars and, in the tradition of George
Washington, kept the United States neutral.

In March 1822, President Monroe was ready to assert
America’s voice as a world power and asked Congress to
recognize Latin American republics that had declared
independence from Spain. It was, he said, “manifest that all
those provinces are not only in the full enjoyment of their
independence, but . . . that there is not the most remote
prospect of their being deprived of it.” The new governments,
he asserted, “have a claim to recognition by other powers” and
the United States “owe it to their station and character in the
world, as well as to their essential interests,” to recognize them

27 Led by Speaker Henry Clay, Congress supported the
President, and the United States recognized Colombia and

Mexico as independent nations.t

Although Monroe believed Spain unable “to produce any
change . .. in the present condition” of its former South
American colonies, French king Louis XVIII led an alliance of
absolute monarchs in pledging to send troops to his Bourbon
cousin, Spanish king Ferdinand VII, to help him recapture his
rich South American colonies. After decades of war against
Napoléon to prevent French expansion, Britain threatened to
resume her war with France rather than tolerate French
military expeditions to South America—and asked the United
States to join her.

When they learned of the European threats to suppress South
American independence movements, former Presidents
Jefferson and Madison intruded into the political picture by

urging President Monroe to accept England’s invitation, as did
Secretary of War Calhoun and Speaker of the House Clay and
his legion of congressional war hawks. John Quincy stood
alone, arguing against any American ties to England or
entangling alliances with any other foreign nation, for that
matter. Like his father, he believed that even the slightest
subservience to a foreign power represented a loss of
independence—symbolically if not materially, but probably
both. Still the champion of George Washington’s policies, John
Quincy called “the principle of neutrality in all foreign wars
fundamental to the continuance of our liberties and of our
Union.”

So far as [South Americans] were contending for
independence, I wished well to their cause, but I have
seen and yet see no prospect that they would establish
free or liberal institutions of government. They are not
likely to promote the spirit either of freedom or order by
their example. They have not the first element of good or
free government. Arbitrary power, military and
ecclesiastical, was stamped upon their education, upon

their habits, and upon their institutions.28

Proclaiming a policy the President would later claim as his
own, John Quincy urged the President to disclaim any intention
of “interference with the political affairs of Europe” so that the
United States could hold the “expectation and hope that
European powers will equally abstain from the attempt to
spread their principles in the American hemisphere or to

subjugate by force any part of these continents to their will.”22

No sooner had he spoken than his friend Russian czar
Alexander I extended his nation’s claims along the Pacific coast
of North America to the Fifty-first Parallel in the middle of the
Oregon Territory and closed the waters of the Bering Strait to
commercial fishing by other nations. John Quincy urged the
President to “contest the right of Russia to any territorial
establishment on this continent” and to “assume .. . the
principle that the American continents are no longer subjects

for any new European colonial establishments.”22

Just at that time, John Quincy learned that Britain intended
claiming Graham Land, an island rich in seals that American
hunters had discovered off the northern section of the
Antarctic Peninsula. At John Quincy’s urging, President Monroe
ordered a U.S. Navy frigate to sail around Cape Horn to claim
Graham Land before the British. With the Russian attempt to
claim the Oregon coast, he ordered a second warship to join
the one at Graham Land and sail to Oregon. Although Monroe
once again flirted with an unconstitutional de facto declaration
of war, the Russians relented and agreed to move the boundary
of the lands they claimed three hundred miles to the north and
to remove all maritime restrictions on the surrounding seas. In
effect, President Monroe successfully extended the United
States’ sphere of influence beyond its western boundaries into
the rich Pacific Ocean fisheries.

With American warships showing the flag in all parts of the
world—from the Mediterranean coast of North Africa to the
Pacific coast of North America—the President decided to
explain America’s intentions to the world. He asked cabinet
members for written and oral suggestions for a _ policy
statement that he would include in his annual message to
Congress. “The ground I wish to take,” he told them, “is that of
earnest remonstrance against the interference of the European
powers by force with South America, but to disclaim all
interference on our part with Europe, to make an American

cause, and adhere inflexibly to that.”31

John Quincy submitted a proposal that “the American
continents by the free and independent condition which they
have assumed, and maintain, are henceforth not to be
considered as subject for future colonization by any European

power.”32 The President included it verbatim in his annual
message, later called the Monroe Doctrine.

In his two-hour address—aimed at foreign leaders as well as
Congress and the American people—Monroe embraced John
Quincy’s political philosophy and formally closed the Western

Hemisphere to further colonization. He explained that
America’s political system differed substantially from Europe’s
and that the United States would consider any European
attempts to extend its system anywhere in the Western
Hemisphere as a threat to the United States. From its origins,
he said, the United States had sought nothing but peace—for
its citizens to fish, hunt, and plow their fields unmolested. The
United States had never interfered in Europe’s internal affairs
and would not do so—indeed, it wanted no part of Europe’s
incessant wars. To that end, he pledged not to interfere with
Europe’s existing colonies in the New World. But he declared it
to be “a principle in which the rights and interests of the
United States are involved” that “the American continents, by
the free and independent condition which they have assumed
and maintain, are henceforth not to be considered as subjects
for future colonization by any European powers.” He warned
that the United States would view “any interposition ... by any
European power ... as the manifestation of an unfriendly
disposition toward the United States”—in effect, a declaration

of war.33

Monroe’s new “doctrine” drew universal acclaim across
America. Although much of the European press and some
European leaders condemned it, few European powers had not
learned the lessons of the British in the American
Revolutionary War and, more recently, of the French in Russia.
As the Duke of Wellington had warned, no nation on earth was
powerful enough to sustain military supply lines long enough to
challenge American hegemony in the Western Hemisphere.
With the Monroe Doctrine, most European leaders realized it
would be far less costly to trade with Americans than to try to
subjugate them.

“T went to the President’s,” John Quincy described the hours
following delivery of the Monroe Doctrine, “and found Gales,
the half-editor of the National Intelligencer, there. He said the
message was called a war message and spoke of newspapers
from Europe announcing that an army of twelve thousand
Spaniards was to embark immediately to subdue South

America.”

John Quincy all but laughed in the half-editor’s face, calling
the reports absurd. “The same newspapers,” John Quincy
scoffed, “announced .. . the disbanding of the Spanish

army.” 24

As the Monroe Doctrine quelled European ambitions for new
conquests in the Americas, it also dispelled American fears of
imminent attack by foreign powers and unleashed a surge of
popular energy that strengthened the nation economically and
militarily. State governments worked with builders and
visionaries to cover the Atlantic states with networks of canals,
free roads, and toll roads, or turnpikes, that generated
revenues from user fees to pay the costs of maintenance and
expansion. The Lancaster Pike tied Philadelphia to Gettysburg;
the Boston Post Road connected Worcester to Springfield and
Boston to Providence; and work began to extend the great
Cumberland Road—then often called the National Road—from
Baltimore to the Mississippi River. Speaker Henry Clay
envisioned its eventual extension to the Pacific Ocean. In New
York State, continuing construction on the great Erie Canal
extended the link between Rome and Utica westward to Seneca
Lake. Already tied to the Atlantic Ocean by the Mohawk and
Hudson Rivers, the canal’s western tip stood only 120 miles
from Buffalo and the entrance to the Great Lakes. Plans for
other roads, turnpikes, and canals were legion. One proposed
canal was to stretch from Boston to Savannah, while a turnpike
out of Washington was to reach New Orleans.

Economic expansion spurred advances in the arts and
education, as well as industry and agriculture. The works of
American writers—Washington Irving, James Fenimore Cooper,
and others—replaced English literature as the most widely read
in the United States. In addition to female academies, free
schools open to all children sprouted in New York,
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and Connecticut. Boston opened
the nation’s first “high school” in 1821, and Massachusetts
passed a law requiring every town of five hundred families to
establish a high school for their children. Institutions for adult

education appeared as well, with 3,000 “lyceums” in fifteen
states offering adult education and self-improvement courses.
The apparent end to threats from abroad and the boundless
opportunities at home left the Monroe administration with few
major projects to pursue in the time it had left in office, thus
freeing cabinet members to pursue personal ambitions. In the
naive assumption that his cabinet and other government
leaders would serve the nation as selflessly as he, Monroe
emulated his presidential predecessors and announced early in
his second term that he would limit himself to two terms in
office. With the exception of John Quincy, cabinet members all
but renounced their oaths of office and personal pledges to the
President and launched a bitter struggle for political power
that left the President impotent—and ended what a Boston

newspaper had labeled the “Era of Good Feelings.”32

The frenetic activity of the Monroe years had left John Quincy
exhausted and without the physical, let alone emotional, energy
to seek the presidency himself. Although based in his native
country after so many years overseas, his time as secretary of
state had left him few moments to spend with his wife and
family, and he was simply too tired and, in effect, lonely for
family life to concern himself with the forthcoming elections.
Not so the other cabinet members and presidential aspirants.

When budget restrictions forced a reduction in the number of
army officers, Treasury Secretary Crawford pressed Monroe
not to dismiss any Crawford confederates. When the President
ignored the request, Crawford went to the White House in a
rage, calling the President an “infernal scoundrel” and raising
his cane as if to assault him. According to Navy Secretary
Samuel L. Southard, who witnessed the confrontation, “Mr.
Monroe seized the tongs and ordered him instantly to leave the
room or he would chastise him, and he rang the bell for the

servant.”36 Realizing how closely he had flirted with treason,
Crawford left and never again set foot in the White House
during Monroe’s presidency.

In Florida, meanwhile, Andrew Jackson, whom President

Monroe had = appointed governor, embarrassed _ the
administration by violating the outgoing Spanish governor’s
diplomatic immunity and arresting him for failing to surrender
documents needed in a legal proceeding. The arrest caused a
furor in the press, which assailed Jackson as a would-be
dictator. Jackson resigned in a rage, went home to Tennessee,
won election as senator, and returned to Washington to wreak
havoc on his political enemies.

As cabinet members and other presidential aspirants turned
on the President or on each other, the vicious rhetoric created
political schisms in Congress not seen since the days of the
Confederation of American States. “I have never known such a
state of things,” Monroe lamented to his predecessor in office,
James Madison, “nor have I personally ever experienced so
much embarrassment and mortification.”

Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford of Georgia had
ambitions to succeed James Monroe as President but suffered a
paralytic stroke before the _ elections. (LIBRARY OF
CONGRESS)

 

Where there is an open contest with a foreign enemy...
the course is plain and you have something to cheer and
animate you to action, but we are now blessed with
peace. ... There being three avowed candidates in the
administration is a circumstance which increases the
embarrassment. The friends of each endeavor to annoy
the others. . . . In many cases the attacks are personal,

directed against the individual.2Z

Only one candidate remained silent and above the fray. John
Quincy, the most obvious and logical choice to succeed
President Monroe, refused to state whether he even wanted the
office. Raised in a society where the ignorant deferred to the
educated propertied class, he hewed to what his grandson

Henry Adams would later call “the Ciceronian idea of
government by the best,” selected by an elevated class of
educated, propertied professionals who “chose men _ to
represent them because they wanted to be well represented
and they chose the best they had.” Those selected did not
accept “pay” for their services but “honoraria.” Those who
accepted public office were “statesmen, not politicians; they

guided public opinion but were little guided by it.”38

Clearly alarmed by John Quincy’s reticence, former
congressman Joseph Hopkinson, a close family friend and
prominent Philadelphia lawyer, wrote to Louisa,

I think our friend Mr. A. is too fastidious and reserved on
a certain subject as interesting to the country as it is to
himself . . . . His conduct seems to me, as it does to
others, to be calculated to chill and depress the kind
feeling and fair exertions of his friends. They are
discouraged when they see a total indifference assumed
on his part... . Now, my dear madam, this won’t do. The
Macbeth policy—“if chance will make me king, why
chance may crown me”—will not answer where little is
left to chance or merit. Kings are made by politicians and
newspapers, and the man who sits down waiting to be
crowned, either by chance or just right, will go

bareheaded all his life.22

Louisa, of course, showed Hopkinson’s letter to her husband
and urged him to campaign more aggressively. “Do for once
gratify me,” she pleaded. “Show yourself if only fora week...

and if harm comes of it I promise never to advise you again,”40
But John Quincy was adamant, insisting that the presidency “is
not in my opinion an office to be either solicited or declined. . .
. The principle of the Constitution in its purity is that the duty
shall be assigned to the most able and the most worthy.”

 

The law of friendship is a reciprocation of good offices.
He who asks or accepts the offer of friendly service
contracts the obligation of meeting it with a suitable

return. He who asks or accepts the offer of aid to
promote his own views necessarily binds himself to
promote the views of him from whom he receives it... .
Between the principle .. . that a President of the United
States must remember to whom he owes his elevation
and the principle of accepting no aid on the score of
friendship or personal kindness to him, there is no
alternative. The former . . . I deem to be essentially and
vitally corrupt. The latter is the only principle to which no

exception can be taken.41

For one of the few times in their marriage, Louisa decided to
ignore her husband and take matters into her own hands.
Aware of his ambitions and fearful of the effects of a loss on his
spirit, she decided to compete with wives of other candidates
by expanding the scope of her popular Tuesday evening
receptions. “My Tuesday evenings appear to have some
attractions,” she realized.

At least they afford the probable certainty of giving
opportunity for amusement throughout the winter and in
this consists the charm. .. . If Mr. A instead of keeping
me back when I was a young woman had urged me
forward in the world I should have better understood the
maneuvering part of my situation. But instead of this I
find myself almost a stranger to the little arts and

intrigues of the world in which I move.42

Louisa learned quickly, however, realizing that “wine maketh
the heart glad” and gradually enlarging the number of guests
she invited. One party drew one hundred guests; another, “one
hundred and thirty odd persons all very sociable and good
humored. The young ladies danced, played, and sang and were
very merry. ... 1am very willing to show that I am the public
servant.” As she enlarged her parties, she hired the Marine
Band for a fee of “five dollars to each performer plus wine and
supper.” She then organized a party for 252—“ladies being a
much larger proportion than we have had this winter.”

Although William H. Crawford’s wife, Susanna, sent six
hundred invitations to a ball she sponsored, Louisa, not
surprisingly, found it “dull and uncomfortable, and we left

before ten o’clock.”43

Consciously or unconsciously, John Quincy refused to help
Louisa plan the parties she hosted for his campaign, acting
disinterested at times and even failing to appear at some
events. She, in turn, suppressed her growing irritation at her
husband and simply threw herself into organizing her
entertainments. Her ambitions seemed to surpass those of her
husband. “My whole morning was occupied with visits and
writing cards of invitation,” she smiled. “We have had forty or
more members of Congress already here and all who call I
invite to my evenings. If I can help it I will invite only those
who call, lest it should be said I am courting them to further a

political purpose.”44

With the approach of summer, Louisa curtailed her campaign
work, and John Quincy left for Cambridge to enroll their
youngest son, Charles Francis, in Harvard—and to attend the
graduation of his oldest son, George Washington Adams. Once
at his beloved alma mater, however, he met with nothing but
disappointment. Although George did graduate, he finished
only thirtieth in his class of eighty-five. Then, to John Quincy’s
dismay, he learned that his middle boy, John II, in his next-to-
last year at the school, ranked even lower—forty-fifth in a class
of eighty-five. To compound John Quincy’s disappointment,
fourteen-year-old Charles Francis did so poorly on his Latin
entrance examination that the college granted him only a
conditional admission. He had spent years teaching Charles
Francis his Latin and erupted in anger, storming into President
John Kirkland’s office charging that his son had been unfairly
treated. In no mood for a confrontation with the man likely to
be the next President of the United States, Kirkland ordered
Charles Francis retested, and to every one’s relief, the boy
passed and gained unconditional entry into his father’s alma
mater.

John Quincy sensed, however, that his troubles with the boys
were just beginning. “I find them all three coming to manhood
with indolent minds, flinching from study whenever they

can.”42 He could not and would not allow what he deemed the
indolence of the boys to go unpunished and told them they
could not return to Washington for Christmas. Instead of
enjoying holiday balls and lavish White House dinners, they
would have to spend Christmas and New Year’s in the somber
mansion of their grandfather in Quincy—studying. Not until
they ranked among the top ten students in their classes would
he allow John II and Charles Francis to enjoy holidays with
their parents. In the meantime, he sent George to study law
with Daniel Webster in Boston.

A few months later, John Quincy’s discipline produced the
opposite of its intended effects: John II joined a student riot,
Harvard expelled him, and he returned to his parents in total
disgrace. The boy could not have returned home at a worse
time. The Adamses were already caring for Louisa’s sister’s
three orphaned children—two boys, Johnson and Thomas, who
were proving more difficult than the Adamses own sons, and
the flirty Mary Catherine. John Quincy had paid for Thomas to
attend Phillips Academy at Exeter, New Hampshire, then
Harvard, but he dropped out and returned to Washington to
loaf in the Adams home—without a degree, a skill, or a job. His
older brother, Johnson, did not even bother enrolling in
Harvard. From the first, he preferred loafing.

Young Charles Francis, meanwhile, fell in love with Mary
Catherine, but the two were both too young to marry, and when
Charles Francis went off to Harvard, their relationship cooled.
When George Washington arrived for a visit, however, he took
his brother’s place in Mary Catherine’s heart. John Quincy put
a quick end to the relationship, sending George back to Boston
to finish his legal studies with Daniel Webster.

Depressed by his sons’ failure at Harvard, John Quincy
resigned himself to failure in the presidential race and
returned to his boyhood home in Quincy to spend time with his
aging father and to look at farming as a possible occupation

after he retired from public office. Not only his father but three
previous generations of the Adamses had farmed the land in
Quincy successfully, and he concluded that, once out of
government, he might have to do the same. He soon realized,
however, that a life in diplomacy had not prepared him for the
physical demands of farm life. His only skills lay in the law, but
he feared he had made too many political enemies in Boston’s
powerful Federalist community to ensure much success.

A run for the presidency was clearly the most logical next
step in his career, but he stubbornly refused to demean himself,
the American people, or the office of the presidency by actively
campaigning. He believed that merit alone, not party or
political campaign rhetoric, should determine the choice of the
American people—a unique concept voiced only once before, by
George Washington, but never since.

“My career,” John Quincy proclaimed, “has attached no party
to me precisely because it has been independent of all party...
and the consequence has been that all parties disown me.”

I have followed the convictions of my own mind with a
single eye to the interests of the whole nation... . If I am
to be a candidate, it must be by the wishes . . . of others,
not by mine. If my countrymen prefer others to me, I
must not repine at their choice. Indifference at the heart
is not to be won by . . . the loudest trumpet. Merit and
just right in this country will be heard. And in my case, if
they are not heard without my stir, I shall acquiesce in

the conclusion that it is because they do not exist.46
As his opponents resorted to every ruse they could invent to
win votes, John Quincy refused to compromise his values and

political beliefs—even if, as seemed likely, those values doomed
him to defeat in his lifelong quest for national leadership.

