3

The Land of Lovely Dames

For the first time during his extensive travels, John Quincy
found his 2,000-mile midsummer journey from Holland to St.
Petersburg free of threats to life or limb. Although he missed
his father and brother, he seemed composed, wore a pleasant
expression, and proved an amiable companion to Francis Dana,
who, at thirty-eight, was twenty-four years older than his
“secretary.” The journey proved instructive for both.

“The tradesmen always ask the double of what a thing is
worth,” John Quincy complained, “and if you have anything
made, you will certainly get greatly cheated if you do not make
the bargain beforehand.” In Catholic Palatine, he found that
“Protestants can not own houses or farms,” and across the
Rhine from Cologne, he fell on “a village inhabited by Jews. A
nasty, dirty place indeed... . In Frankfurt am Mein .. . there
are 600 Jewish families who live all in one street which is shut

up every night and all day Sundays, when the gates are shut.”
On July 25, he reached Berlin, which he called “the

handsomest and the most regular city I ever saw,”2 but he
criticized the king, who “treats his people like slaves.” They
found conditions worse when they crossed into Poland, where,
for the first time in his life, John Quincy encountered slaves.
“All the farm workers are in the most abject slavery,” he noted
with disgust. “They are bought and sold like so many beasts,
and are sometimes even changed for dogs or horses. Their
masters have even the right of life and death over them, and if
they kill one of them they are only obliged to pay a trifling fine.
[The slaves] may buy [their freedom], but their masters .. .
take care not to let them grow rich enough for that. If anybody

buys land, he must buy all the slaves that are upon it.”3

Panoramic view of St. Petersburg, where fifteen-year-old John
Quincy Adams spent the winter of 1782 as secretary and
translator for American minister Francis Dana. The palatial
buildings in the center include the famed Winter Palace and the
then new Hermitage, in which Catherine the Great housed her
art collection. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

On August 27, 1781, John Quincy and Dana reached St.
Petersburg and settled in the luxurious Hotel de Paris, near the
Winter Palace. “The city of Petersburg,” he wrote to John
Thaxter in Paris, “is the finest I ever saw. It is by far superior to
Paris, both for the breadth of its streets, and the elegance of
the private buildings.”

To Dana’s dismay, Russian foreign ministry officials refused
to receive him or even recognize his presence. His notes went
unanswered, and sentries refused him entry through the palace
gates. In frustration, he turned to the French chargé d’affaires
for help, but Foreign Minister Comte de Vergennes at Versailles
had sent instructions not to aid the Americans. The French

diplomat exuded warm words and pledged to help, but stunned
Dana by suggesting that the American’s reliance on a child as
his secretary and interpreter might compromise his status.

Massachusetts-born and MHarvard-educated Francis Dana
served at Valley Forge with George Washington before
becoming an American diplomat and the first American envoy
to Russia. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

Not long thereafter, stunning news arrived of George
Washington’s remarkable victory at Yorktown. Although Dana
was certain the American triumph would open doors at the
Winter Palace, weeks passed without success. As winter’s
paralyzing deep freeze enveloped the Russian capital, John
Quincy had nothing to do but study. Although their lodgings
were warm enough, temperatures outside dropped to levels
that made venturing into the fresh air foolhardy. “The

thermometer at night,” John Quincy noted in early February
1782, “was 15 degrees below freezing.” It fell to twenty-five

below, then twenty-eight below. “Stayed at home all day. “4

By then, his diary entries had shrunk to a sentence or two,
noting only the temperature and his decision to remain inside
and read. Both he and Dana were idle most of the time, with no
diplomatic work or contact with Russian authorities. It was
fortunate that St. Petersburg had at least one bookshop with
English-language works, and both John Quincy and Dana
purchased an enormous quantity. Before the end of winter, John
Quincy had read—among other things—all eight volumes (more
than five hundred pages each) of David Hume’s History of
England, Catherine Macaulay’s eight-volume The History of
England from the Accession of James I to that of the Brunswick
Line, William Robertson’s three-volume The History of the
Reign of Charles V, Robert Watson’s two-volume The History of
the Reign of Philip the Second, King of Spain, Thomas Davies’s
Memoirs of the Life of David Garrick, and the two-volume
landmark work in economics by Adam Smith, An Inquiry into
the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. He also
restudied Cicero’s Orations and John Dryden’s Works of Virgil,
copied the poems of Dryden, Alexander Pope, and Joseph
Addison—and learned to read and write German.

“T don’t perceive that you take pains enough with your hand
writing,” his father growled in response. “When the habit is
got, it is easier to write well than ill, but this habit is only to be
acquired in early life.” Adams ended his letter more warmly,
however: “God bless my dear son and preserve his health and
his manners from the numberless dangers that surround us
wherever we go in this world. So prays your affectionate father,

J. Adams.”2

Crestfallen at his father’s response to his studies, John
Quincy did not reply for a month, and when he did, he wrote in
French to make it difficult for the elder Adams to read. Adams
answered acerbically, “It is a mortification to me to find that
you write better in a foreign language than in your mother

tongue.” Adams was, however, worried about his son—an
adolescent, all but alone in a foreign land, with no companions
but a middle-aged man and a pile of books.

“Do you find any company?” John Adams wrote. “Have you
formed any acquaintances of your own countrymen? There are
none I suppose. Of Englishmen you should beware... . My dear

boy, above all preserve your innocence.”© He grew more
anxious as the winter progressed without John Quincy’s gaining

any substantial diplomatic experience. “I am... very uneasy
on your account,” he wrote in mid-May. “I want you with me. . .
. | want you to pursue your studies at Leyden... . Your studies I

doubt not you pursue, because I know you to be a studious
youth, but above all preserve a sacred regard to your own

honor and reputation. Your morals are worth all the sciences.”2

John Quincy finally admitted to himself—and to his father—“I
have not made many acquaintances here.” Although he had “as
much as I want to read,” he longed for companions his own
age. In addition, the crushing poverty, deprivation, and lack of
freedom in Russian life—and the oppressive slavery he
witnessed—left him depressed. “Everyone that is not a noble,”

he lamented, “is a slave.”

His father responded by urging John Quincy to return to
Holland. Adams had succeeded in winning Dutch recognition of
American independence and had moved to The Hague as
American minister plenipotentiary.

Although eager to rejoin his father, John Quincy was enjoying
his independence and took a long, circuitous route back to
Holland through Scandinavia and Germany. After three weeks
exploring Finland (then a part of Sweden), he reached
Stockholm, and ignoring his father’s exhortations on the
importance of preserving his innocence, John Quincy Adams
plunged into Swedish life for nearly six rapture-filled weeks.

“T believe there is no country in Europe,” he exulted, “where
the people are more hospitable and affable to strangers or
more hospitable .. . than the Swedes. In every town, however
small it may be, they have these assemblies [dances] . . . to

pass away agreeably the long winter evenings. ... There, one
may dance country dances, minuets or play cards, just as it
pleases you, and everybody is extremely polite to strangers.”
Years later, he recalled, that “the beauties of the women...
could not be concealed. . . . The Swedish women were as
modest as they were amiable and beautiful. To me it was truly
the ‘land of lovely dames,’ and to this hour I have not forgotten

the palpitations of heart which some of them cost me.”2

While he was sampling Sweden’s wine and women, his
parents grew frantic. “I hope our dear son abroad,” Abigail
fretted to John, “will not imbibe any sentiments or principles
which will not be agreeable to the laws, the government and
religion of our own country. He has been less under your eye
than I could wish. . . . If he does not return this winter, I wish
you to remind him that he has forgotten to use his pen to his

friends upon this side of the water,”L0 John Adams feigned
nonchalance in replying to Abigail but sent inquiries to French
consuls in Germany and Scandinavia about his son’s
whereabouts.

John Quincy had reached Goteborg on the west coast of
Sweden with every intention of remaining, when the French
consul reported his father’s anxieties and set the boy
scrambling to make travel arrangements to Holland. He took a
final fling at a masquerade ball where “the men dressed as
sailors and the women [as] country girls. . . . I stayed there till
about 4 o’clock this morning. When I returned to my lodgings, I
threw myself upon the bed and slept till about 7 o’clock, then

packed my trunks and set away.” LL

In the weeks that followed, John Quincy traveled to
Copenhagen, Hamburg, and Bremen, finally rejoining his father
in The Hague on July 22—noticeably more mature than when
he had left.

“John is every thing you could wish,” Adams explained to
Abigail without revealing the obvious changes in _ his
personality or probable causes. “Wholly devoted to his studies,
he has made a progress which gives me entire satisfaction... .

He is grown a man in understanding and stature as well... .I
shall take him with me to Paris and shall make much of his

company.”12 Even Abigail was impressed after reading John
Quincy’s first letter to her upon his return to Holland. “The
account of your northern journey,” she conceded, “would do

credit to an older pen.”13

Adams was more than delighted with his son, and early in
August, the two left The Hague for Paris, where John Adams
joined Benjamin Franklin and John Jay in negotiating a peace
treaty with England—and elated John Quincy by recruiting him
as a secretary to edit and transcribe documents. John Adams
now accepted his precocious sixteen-year-old son as a man, a
friend, and a pleasant, sophisticated companion, not only at
concerts, the opera, and museums but at luncheons, dinners,
and other functions with some of Europe’s most distinguished
figures. They, in turn, also accepted the young man as an equal.
“Dined at . . . the Dutch ambassador with a great deal of
company,” John Quincy reported in his diary in mid-August
1783. “Dined at the Duke de la Vauguyon .. . the French
ambassador at the Hague... the Baron de la Houze ... the

minister of France at the court of Denmark.”!4 With each
encounter, he listened carefully, gradually learning the
language of diplomacy in which spoken words seldom matched
their literal meanings. An “interesting concept” often meant
“unacceptable,” while a “different approach” could well mean
war.

With France a center of scientific advances, John Quincy also
witnessed astounding new processes and inventions and
developed a deep interest in science. “My Lord Ancram,” he
recounted in his diary, “has undertaken to teach people born
deaf and dumb not only to converse . . . fluently but also to
read and write.” Another entry described his having witnessed
“the first public experiment... of the flying globe.”

A Mr. Montgolfier has discovered that if one fills a ball
with inflammable air much lighter than common air, the
ball of itself will go up to an immense height. It was...

14 foot in diameter ... placed in the Champs de Mars.
At 5 o’clock, two great guns fired from the Ecole
Militaire. ... It rose at once, for some time perpendicular
and then slanted. .. . If it succeeds it may become very

useful to mankind.15

The launch of the first balloon set off a mania in France, with
Joseph de Montgolfier and his brother Etienne sending balloons
into the atmosphere in Versailles and elsewhere. “The
enthusiasm of the people of Paris for the flying globes is very
great,” John Quincy noted with excitement. “Several
propositions have been made from persons who, to enjoy the
honor of having been the first travelers through the air, are
willing to go up in them and run risks of breaking their

necks.”16

In the midst of the whirlwind of social and_ scientific
activities, John Adams worked out the final stages of treaty
negotiations with Britain, with John Quincy helping prepare
copies of the final documents. On September 3, Adams,
Franklin, Jay, and British minister David Hartley met on the rue
Jacob, on the Left Bank, to sign a treaty of peace between
Britain and the United States, with Britain recognizing the
United States of America as a free and independent nation.

In the months that followed, John Quincy and his father
traveled back and forth between France, England, and Holland.
They spent the autumn of 1783 in Britain, where John Quincy
visited London’s wonders—Westminster Abbey, St. Paul’s
Cathedral, and so on. He tramped through great museums and
libraries, attended opera at Covent Garden, and saw
productions of Hamlet and Measure for Measure at the Drury
Lane Theatre, where the legendary Sarah Siddons starred each
night. Benjamin West, the Pennsylvania-born Quaker artist who
had moved to London, took him to see the art collection at
Buckingham Palace and several art galleries, and he went to
the opening of Parliament to hear the King’s Speech from the
Throne and the debates between Edmund Burke, Lord North,
William Pitt, Charles Fox, and other great figures in the House

of Commons.

At the end of the year, the Adamses returned to The Hague,
where John Adams sought new loans for the United States,
while John Quincy resumed his studies. In the spring, Abigail
announced that, after a separation of four years, she was
coming to Europe “in the joyful hope of soon holding to my

bosom the dearest, best of friends.” 1Z John Adams was elated,
saying his wife’s letter “has made me the happiest man upon
earth. Iam twenty years younger than I was yesterday.” And he

signed it, “Yours, with more ardor than ever.”18

A month later, Abigail arrived in England with her daughter,
Nabby. Not long after they checked into their London hotel, a
servant knocked at the door to announce, “Young Mr. Adams is
come.”

“Where, where is he?” Abigail and Nabby screeched in
unison. Abigail described the scene in a letter to her sister:
“Impatient enough I was, yet when he entered... I drew back
not really believing my eyes—till he cried out, ‘Oh, my momma!
And my dear sister.’ Nothing but his eyes at first sight
appeared what he once was. His appearance is that of a

man.”12
Moved to tears as she wrote, Abigail told her sister she felt
“exceedingly matronly with a grown up son on one hand and

daughter upon the other.”22 And to husband John she wrote, “I
was this day made very happy by the arrival of a son in whom I
can trace the strongest likeness of a parent in every way dear

to me.”21

John Quincy rented a coach and took his mother and sister
for a reunion with his father in Paris, where the whole family
moved into a luxurious home in Auteuil, six miles west of the
city in the Bois de Boulogne. Thomas Jefferson and his
daughter—both lonely for family life after the death of his wife
two years earlier—frequently came to dinner. Following Paris
custom, Jefferson enrolled his daughter in a convent school,
and he compensated for her absence by bonding with John
Quincy, taking him to theater, concerts, and museums, and

becoming an important figure in the young man’s life. The two
formed such close ties that John Adams remarked to Jefferson
that John Quincy “appeared to me to be almost as much your

boy as mine.”22

The Adamses also spent time with the Lafayettes, who
entertained Americans with huge buffet dinners at their home
every Monday. After Queen Marie Antoinette gave birth to her
first son and heir apparent, France rejoiced, and Adrienne
Lafayette invited the Adamses to accompany her to the Te
Deum at the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, where both
King Louis XVI and the Marquis de Lafayette were to
participate. “What a charming sight,” John Quincy wrote in his
diary, “an absolute king of one of the most powerful empires on
earth and perhaps a thousand of the first personages in that
empire adoring the divinity who created them and
acknowledging that he can in a moment reduce them to the

dust from which they sprang.”23

By now, John Quincy was as much a celebrity in Paris as his
father—treated as an equal by the likes of Jefferson and
Lafayette, addressed as “Mr. Adams,” and referred to as
“young Mr. Adams” to differentiate him from his father. He had
seen more of Europe than many of them and knew more of the
social conditions and politics of distant lands—Germany,
Poland, Russia, and Scandinavia. When artist Benjamin West
arrived, he went to see John Quincy Adams, not his father, to
arrange introductions to Jefferson and Lafayette. John Quincy’s
diary describes his winter in Paris: “Dined at the Marquis de la
Fayette’s .. . dined with Mr. Jefferson [and] Captain John Paul
Jones ... Dined at Dr. Franklin’s. . . . Walked into Paris to the
Marquis de la Fayette’s to go with him to Mr. Jefferson’s upon

the subject of importation of our whale oil into this country.”24

The Swedish ambassador, who had known John Quincy in
Stockholm, invited him to bring his family to dinner. “Mon dieu
que mademoiselle vétre soeur est belle,” he whispered of
Nabby’s beauty to John Quincy, saying he had seen few as

lovely as she. “J’ai vu peu d’aussi jolies femmes qu’elle.”2 John

Quincy apparently did not translate for Nabby. “He thought
doubtless that I should tell her what he said,” John Quincy

noted in his diary later. “He is a very agreeable man.”22
Abigail was less sanguine about dining with celebrities,
saying she was “astonished” when “this lady I dined with at Dr.
Franklin’s ... gave him a double kiss one upon each cheek and
another upon his forehead. ... She carried on... . at dinner,
frequently locking her hand into the Dr’s.. . then throwing her
arm carelessly upon the Dr.’s neck. . . . I must say I was highly

disgusted and never wish for an acquaintance of this cast.”26

In the course of the winter, John Quincy drew close to his
mother and sister as never before, taking them to theater,
concerts, operas, and museums—and introducing them to such
celebrities as the heroic Jean-Pierre Blanchard, who only two
weeks earlier had been the first person to cross from Dover to
Calais in an air balloon.

The following spring, John Adams received word that
Congress had named him America’s first ambassador to
Britain. By then, John Quincy recognized that he could no
longer “loiter away my precious time in Europe”—that the time
had come for him to enroll full time in university, finish his

formal education, and choose a profession. 27

Abigail Adams II (“Nabby”), the oldest child of John and Abigail
Adams, came with her mother to join her father and younger
brother John Quincy in Paris in the summer of 1784.
(NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL
HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Although Harvard seemed a backward country school
compared with the University of Leyden or England’s great
institutions at Oxford and Cambridge, the pathway to
professional and political leadership in America began in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, not Cambridge, England. “Harvard
rendered her sons fit to serve their country,” historian Samuel
Eliot Morison explained, “not by practical courses on politics
and government, but by a study of antique culture that
broadened their mental vision, stressed virtue, and promoted ..
. the character appropriate to a republican. . . . American
revolutionary leaders, both North and South . . . could never
have rendered their distinguished services to the young
republic without that classical learning which is denied to most

 

Americans today. 28

Intent on his son’s rising to American leadership, John Adams
wrote to Reverend Joseph Willard, who had awarded John
Adams an honorary LL.D. at Willard’s first commencement as
Harvard’s president in 1781. Adams assumed Willard would
automatically admit John Quincy, given the boy’s studies at
Leyden, his mastery of two classical and three modern
languages, and his command of an enormous body of classical
and modern literature, philosophy, and science. As Adams
described his son, “He has translated Virgil’s Aeneid . . . the
whole of Sallust and Tacitus’ [s] Agricola . . . a great part of
Horace, some of Ovid, and some of Caesar’s Commentaries .. .
besides Cicero’s Orations... .”

In Greek his progress has not been equal; yet he has
studied morsels of Aristotle’s Politics, Plutarch’s Lives,
Lucian’s Dialogues. . . . In mathematics I hope he will
pass muster... . We went with some accuracy through
the geometry in the Preceptor, the eight books of
Simpson’s Euclid in Latin. . . . We went through plane
geometry .. . algebra, and the decimal fractions,
arithmetical and geometrical proportions . . . the
differential method of calculations . . . and Sir Isaac

Newton.22

Under no circumstances, Adams told the Harvard president,
would he permit his son to enter Harvard as a freshman or
sophomore, but if Willard admitted him as a junior or senior, “I
should choose to send him to you rather than to Leyden.”
Adams also suggested that his own services to the nation
warranted Harvard’s waiving all expenses other than tuition.

Willard responded curtly, saying he would admit the boy
subject to examination.

On May 12, 1785, a cabriolet! pulled up to the Adams home
in Auteuil to take John Quincy to Lorient and a ship bound for
America. He embraced his family and “took leave of my parents
and my sister ... at half after twelve with such feelings as no

one that has not been separated from persons so dear can

conceive.”29 He had said his good-byes to Lafayette and
Jefferson the previous day and carried letters from each to
deliver to America, along with a pack of hunting dogs that
Lafayette asked him to take as a gift to George Washington. He
also carried jars of whale oil that Jefferson had asked him to
offer New York merchants as a commercial opportunity for
illuminating the streets of Paris. For Jefferson, John Quincy’s
departure was wrenching, and when the rest of the Adams
family left Paris for London, Jefferson lamented in a letter to
John Adams, “The departure of your family has left me in the
dumps.” Without John Quincy’s companionship, he admitted,

“My afternoons hang heavily on me.”31

Nine days later, on May 21, 1785, John Quincy Adams
boarded one of the first four passenger ships to sail the Atlantic
between France and America—the ninety-six-foot-long Courier

de l’Amérique. “Every passenger pays five hundred livres! for
his passage. .. . You live at the captain’s table and have a small
apartment on board to yourself. You must provide whatever
refreshments you may be in need of and must bring your own
sheets and pillows and napkins [towels].”

On the morning of July 18, the ship reached New York—the
American capital at the time—and Adams went directly to
Secretary of State John Jay’s magnificent Broadway residence,
where he was to stay. Recognized as a celebrity in New York as
much as in Paris, John Quincy dined with Jay, then went with
him to meet Elbridge Gerry and Rufus King, the two
Massachusetts delegates to Congress. “I was introduced to the
President of Congress [Richard Henry Lee],” he wrote of his
first evening in New York, “and Mr. [James] Monroe of the
Virginia delegation. I went to [New York] Governor [George]
Clinton, but he was not within. ”32 The next morning, he
breakfasted with Gerry and King. “The President of Congress
who was there was so kind as to offer me a room in his

house.”23 As president of the Confederation Congress, Richard
Henry Lee was, in effect, President of the United States, and he

invited John Quincy to the weekly formal dinners he gave for
American notables and visiting dignitaries.

After his experiences in Scandinavia and the long trip across
the Atlantic, John Quincy was quick to note the characteristics
of every attractive young lady he met. “Miss Jarvis,” he
remarked in his diary, “is very fair, but Miss Ogden is a beauty.
... There are five or six young ladies in the family, one only is

handsome.”2“ And on another afternoon, John Quincy went to
see the eighteen-year-old widow of the nearly seventy-year-old
British officer Jacob Wheate. Lady Wheate, as he called her, “is
one of the most reputed beauties in the town. I own I do not
admire her so much as I expected to before I saw her. She is

like too many of the handsome ladies here: very affected.”35

In mid-August, John Quincy set off for Boston, stopping in
New Haven, where Yale College president Ezra Stiles—a hero
in the defense of New Haven against the British—greeted the
boy on what was then a tiny hilltop campus. Adams was
unimpressed, writing Nabby that the Yale library “is neither as
large nor as elegant as your pappa’s.” His comment on Yale
was but one installment of a letter written over a ten-day span
that began in New York, where, he reported to Nabby that one
afternoon, “I dined in company with Mr. [Thomas] Paine, the

author of Common Sense, and [Rev.] Dr. [John] Witherspoon‘ Ls
. I have been introduced at different times to almost all the
members of Congress.” Young Adams was apparently tiring of
his celebrity status, however, and told Nabby that “wherever I
go I hear a repetition of the same questions[:] . . . ‘How do you
like Europe?’ What country do you like best?’ ... anda
hundred other such. I am almost wearied to death with them,
and I sometimes think of writing a list of the questions with the
answers, and whenever a person begins to make any questions,
I would give him the paper. . . . Since my arrival here, every
moment of my time has been taken up and yet I have had little
or nothing to do.”36

From New Haven, he went to Hartford and, finally, to Boston
and his childhood home at Braintree. “No person who has not

experienced it,” he told his diary, “can conceive how much
pleasure there is in returning to our country after an absence
of six years, especially when it was left at the time of life that I
did when I went last to Europe. The most trifling objects now

appear interesting to me.”22 His aunt Mary, Abigail’s sister,
and her family greeted him in what proved a deeply emotional
reunion for them all.

“We sat and looked at one another,” John Quincy wrote to his
mother. “I could not speak. ... How much more expressive this
silence than anything we could have said.” After dinner, John
Quincy and his uncle went to Cambridge to see John Quincy’s
brother Charles, who had enrolled in Harvard six weeks earlier.
In the days that followed, John Quincy visited his grandparents,
aunts, uncles, cousins—as well as such illustrious family friends
as former Massachusetts governor John Hancock. He
impressed them all—with his height as much as his erudition.
He had left Massachusetts as a boy and returned a young man
of five feet seven and a half inches—a half inch taller than his
father and far thinner.

“Cousin John is come,” his Aunt Mary wrote to her sister
Abigail after his visit, “and brought with him in his own face
such a resemblance of his papa and mama as I never before
saw blended in one. And I am happy to perceive that it is not
only in his person that he bears such a likeness to his parents. I
have already discovered a strength of mind, a memory, a
soundness of judgment which I have seldom seen united in one
so young. His modesty is not the least of his virtues. . . . If his
application is equal to his abilities, he cannot fail of making a

great man.”38

Eventually, John Quincy had to face the inevitable, and on
August 31, 1785, he went to Harvard to see its president,
Reverend Joseph Willard. Although Harvard boasted America’s
largest library, with 12,000 volumes, the jaded young Adams
found the latter only “good, without being magnificent.” 39 He
had, after all, studied in the Bibliotheque du roi, in Paris, with
its more than 1 million books and 80,000 manuscripts. He was

less than impressed, as well, with the president’s office and,
indeed, with President Willard himself.

Raised in poverty after losing his father at the age of two,
Willard was a mathematician with little appreciation for the
romance of opera, music, and the grand arts that had formed
so much of John Quincy’s education. He was a serious man—
dour, with a deep distaste for the boy’s elegant clothes, his
confident, worldly ways, and the ease with which he addressed
older men as if they were social equals. Willard ran Harvard
like a military institution, demanding that all who approached
him—tutors and students alike—doff their hats when they
passed. He banned wearing silk and limited student dress to
coarse brown, olive, or black cotton jackets and pants called
“homespun.” From the first, he resented John Quincy’s
effervescent demeanor, enthusiasm, and joy. Even more, he
resented the boy’s assumption that, as John Adams’s son, his
admission to Harvard was a mere formality.

After asking John Quincy a few questions in Latin, then
Greek, Willard scowled, then stunned the boy by telling him he
was ineligible for admission to Harvard. It was the harshest
blow he could possibly have delivered to the son of a Founding
Father. Every man of note in Massachusetts history had gone to
Harvard since its founding in 1634; eight of the fifty-six signers
of the Declaration of Independence were Harvard graduates,
including John Quincy’s father and his cousin Sam Adams Jr.
And now, with a few words, an undistinguished pedagogue,
who had contributed nothing of note to his nation’s freedom,
had shattered the hopes of a Founding Father’s son to complete
his higher education, obtain a law degree, and assume the
leadership of his country. He had crushed John Quincy Adams’s
career before it could begin.

