14

Freedom Is the Prize

Washington’s oppressive summer heat forced Congress to
recess before proceeding against John Quincy Adams in 1839,
and he was able to return home to the cool breezes of Quincy
Bay with Louisa and their two “angelic” granddaughters, the
children of their son John II. What should have been a summer
of joy, however, proved a season of heartbreak, when the older
girl, nine-year-old Fanny, contracted diphtheria. Often
shrieking from the pain gripping her throat, she spent weeks in
agony before dying in the fall. Her death devastated John
Quincy and left him pessimistic about his own future, as he
faced expulsion from the House. “I fear I have done little good
in the world,” he moaned, “and my life will end in
disappointment of the good I would have done had I been

permitted.”1

After burying Fanny, the Adamses returned to Washington
and brought their surviving granddaughter and her mother to
live in their house on F Street. Their presence brought new joy
into Louisa’s otherwise drab life and even sparked a smile or
two on John Quincy’s often dour face—especially when Mary
Louisa turned to her “Grandpappa” for help in algebra and
logarithms. He often encouraged her to copy poems—one of
them a favorite of his by Scottish poet William Russell, whose

“Ode to Fortitude”2 asked, “Can noble things from base
proceed?”

“Not so the lion springs,” John Quincy often answered his
grandchild, “not so the steed; Nor from the vulgar tenants of
the grove, sublimed with pageant-fire, the strong-pounced bird

of Jove.”3

In addition to Mary Louisa, the Adamses had grandsons to
fuss over. One of them, Charles Francis Adams II, would long
remember his’ grandfather’s continually herding’ the
grandchildren through a canyon of books into his study, and his
younger brother Henry Adams would remember his
grandfather as “an old man of seventy-five or eighty who was
always friendly and gentle, but .. . always called ‘the
President,’” while Louisa was “the Madam.”

Author of the renowned autobiography The Education of
Henry Adams, Henry Adams passed summers with his
grandparents at Quincy until he was twelve years old and
would remember throughout his life “the effect of the back of
the President’s head as he sat in his pew on Sundays.”

It was unusual for boys to sit behind a President
grandfather and to read over his head the tablet in
memory of a President great-grandfather who had
pledged “his life, his fortune, and his sacred honor” to
secure the independence of his country and so forth....
The Irish gardener once said, “You’ll be thinkin’ you'll be

President too.”4

When Congress reconvened in December 1839, elections had
divided the House evenly, and disorder attended every effort to
establish committee memberships. Deadlocked and facing
legislative paralysis, Congress turned to the only man every
member trusted, regardless of what they felt about his politics
or him personally—and some genuinely hated him. But John
Quincy Adams was the man who represented the whole nation,
and above all else, they knew him to be that rarest of
colleagues: an honest man and patriot. Astonished by the
sudden—and almost universal—embrace, John Quincy accepted
the invitation and served as Speaker pro tem long enough to
work out committee memberships. When he suc-ceeded to
everyone’s satisfaction and stepped down from his leadership
role, they immediately turned on him again, reimposed the Gag
Rule, and overrode his angry demands to repeal it.

John Quincy and Louisa Catherine Adams’s grandson Henry
Adams, seen here as a Harvard undergraduate, had warm
memories of his grandparents that he _ related in his
autobiography, The Education of Henry Adams. (NATIONAL
PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Just then, however, his friend Ellis Gray Loring, a prominent
Massachusetts attorney and outspoken opponent of slavery,
drew John Quincy’s attention away from the turmoil in
Congress with some startling legal documents. In January
1840, a federal district court in New Haven, Connecticut, was
about to hear the case of thirty-six Africans who had been
prisoners on the slave ship Amistad off the coast of Cuba. Led
by a Congolese chief named Cinque, they had broken their
chains, killed the captain and three crewmen, and overpowered
the white crew. Knowing nothing of navigation, they ordered
the white crew to sail them to Africa, and by day the crew

complied. At night, however, the crewmen reversed course and
eventually sailed into American waters, where an American
frigate seized the ship and took it to New London, Connecticut.
Officials there arrested the Africans and charged them with
piracy and murder, but a number of legal questions
complicated the case: Were the Africans property—that is,
slaves—to be returned to their owners? Or were they people, to
be released on habeas corpus and later tried for piracy and
murder? And finally, did the United States have jurisdiction? Or
should U.S. authorities release the prisoners to Spanish
authorities to do with as they wished under Spanish law?

Killing of the captain of the Amistad by a band of free Africans
kidnapped by slavers and transported to Cuba to be sold as
slaves. John Quincy Adams pleaded for their freedom before
the U.S. Supreme Court. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

The district court pronounced the Negroes to have been free
men, whom slavers had kidnapped and transported to Cuba
illegally—under Spanish as well as American law. It deemed the
killings justified as legitimate acts of self-defense against the
kidnappers and ordered the Africans turned over to the
President of the United States for transport back to their native
land at American government expense.

Having already alienated southerners by rejecting Texas
annexation, President Van Buren was unwilling to provoke his

southern constituency further and ordered the district attorney
to appeal the lower court order to the circuit court. The circuit
court upheld the district court and forced government
prosecutors to take the case still higher to the U.S. Supreme
Court. By then, however, abolitionists who had paid for the
legal defense of the Amistad Africans ran out of funds, and all
but two attorneys quit. Only Loring and Roger Sherman
Baldwin, grandson of Revolutionary War hero Roger Sherman,
agreed to remain on the case pro bono. They turned to John
Quincy to join their appeal to the Supreme Court—also without
a fee—and he agreed.

“Gracious heavens, my dear Sir” an outraged Virginian
exclaimed in reaction to John Quincy’s embrace of the Africans’
defense. “Your mind is diseased on the subject of slavery. Pray
what had you to do with the captured ship? .. . You are great in
everything else, but here you show your weakness. Your name
will descend to the latest posterity with this blot on it: Mr.

Adams loves the Negroes too much, unconstitutionally.”2

Before the case reached the Supreme Court, seventy-three-
year-old John Quincy won reelection to the House by a two-to-
one majority, while sixty-eight-year-old General William Henry
Harrison, hero of the Indian wars, defeated President Martin
Van Buren in the presidential election.

“The life I lead,” John Quincy grumbled to his diary as he
returned to Washington for double duty in Congress and before
the Supreme Court, “is trying to my constitution and cannot be
long continued.”

My eyes are threatening to fail me. My hands tremble
like an aspen leaf. My memory daily deserts me. My
imagination is fallen into the sear and yellow leaf and my
judgment sinking into dotage. . . . Should my life and
health be spared to perform this service .. . then will bea
proper time for me to withdraw and take my last leave of

the public service.®

Before the Amistad appeal began, John Quincy received a
letter from one of his new African clients, a member of an

obscure tribe, the Mendi. He had had no knowledge of English
before languishing in Connecticut jails for two years:
“Dear Friend Mr. Adams,” the letter began.

I want to write a letter to you because you love Mendi
people and you talk to the Great Court. We want you to
ask the court what we have done wrong. What for
Americans keep us in prison. Some people say Mendi
people crazy dolts because we no talk American
language. Americans no talk Mendi. Americans crazy
dolts? ... Dear friend Mr. Adams you have children and
friends you love them you feel very sorry if Mendi people
come and take all to Africa. ... All we want is make us

free.Z

Congolese chief Cinque masterminded the killing of the
Amistad captain but knew too little about navigation to prevent
the crew from sailing into American waters, where the Africans
on board were captured and brought to trial as escaped slaves.
(LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

On February 22, 1841, John Quincy walked from his house to
the Supreme Court, which sat in the east wing of the Capitol
beneath the Senate floor. It was George Washington’s birthday
—the Founding Father whom John Quincy most revered after
his own father and who had launched John Quincy’s career in
public service. Uncompromising southern slaveholders made
up the majority of the nine judges, and John Quincy knew them
all. In the minority were Joseph Story of Massachusetts, a
former Harvard law professor, and Chief Justice Roger B.
Taney, a Maryland slaveholder who would later free his slaves.
After the prosecution demanded that the government return
the Amistad Negroes to the Spanish minister for restoration to
their “owners,” Roger Baldwin argued for the defense: “The
American people,” he declared, “have never imposed it as a
duty upon the government of the United States to become
actors in an attempt to reduce to slavery men found in a state
of freedom by giving extraterritorial force to a foreign slave

law.” The prosecuting attorney replied that slaves “released
from slavery by acts of aggression” do not lose their status as
the property of their rightful owners “any more than a slave
becomes free in Pennsylvania who forcibly escapes from
Virginia.”

The next day, February 24, John Quincy rose to address the
court. “The courtroom was full, but not crowded,” he noted,
“and there were not many ladies. I had been deeply distressed
and agitated till the moment when I rose, and then my spirit
did not sink within me. With grateful heart for aid from above .
. . I spoke four hours and a half, with sufficient method and

order to witness little flagging of attention by the judges.”2

“Justice,” he began, “as defined in the Institutes of Justinian
nearly 2,000 years ago .. . is the constant and perpetual will to
secure every one his own right.”

I appear here on behalf of thirty-six individuals, the life
and liberty of every one of whom depend on the decision
of this court. . . . Thirty-two or three have been charged
with the crime of murder. Three or four of them are
female children, incapable, in the judgment of our laws,
of the crime of murder or piracy or, perhaps, of any other
crime. ... Yet they have all been held as close prisoners

now for the period of eighteen long months. 10

John Quincy told the justices of his distress in prosecuting
the government of his own nation before the nation’s highest
court and, indeed, “before the civilized world.” But, he said, it
was his duty. “I must do it.”

The government is still in power... . The lives and
liberties of all my clients are in its hands. ... The charge
I make against the present executive administration is
that in all their proceedings relating to these
unfortunates, instead of that justice which they were
bound not less than this honorable court itself to observe,
they have substituted sympathy!—sympathy with one of
the parties in this conflict and antipathy to the other.

Sympathy with the white; antipathy to the black—and in
proof of this charge, I adduce the admission and avowal

of the secretary of state himself.11

John Quincy went on to read the letter from Secretary of
State John Forsyth of Georgia to the Spanish minister in
America, citing the owners of the Amistad as “the only parties
aggrieved”—that all the right was on their side and all the
wrong on the side of their surviving, self-emancipated victims.

“T ask your honors, was this justice?” 12

Far from any “flagging of attention,” the judges sat transfixed
for more than four hours—until other needs forced them to
adjourn until the next day. That night, however, one of the
justices died, and Chief Justice Taney postponed resumption of
John Quincy’s argument for a week.

The court reconvened on March 1, with John Quincy
summarizing his previous argument, then standing for three
more hours, reiterating the argument that the Amistad Negroes
had been free men, seized against their will on their native soil,
abducted onto a ship, where they defended themselves and, in
doing so, killed their kidnappers. “What .. . would have been
the tenure by which every human being in this Union, man,
woman, and child, would have held the blessing of personal
freedom? Would it not have been by the tenure of executive
discretion, caprice, or tyranny... at the discretion of a foreign
minister, would it not have disabled forever the effective power
of habeas corpus?”

Then he came to the end of his presentation. Eschewing
secular, legalistic appeals, “Old Man Eloquent” reached into his
rhetorical reservoir for spiritual principles he believed he
shared with every decent human being. In a moment that
ensured his standing in the history of Congress and the
Supreme Court, John Quincy Adams told the court that “more
than thirty-seven years past, my name was entered and yet
stands recorded on both the rolls as one of the attorneys and
counselors of this court.”

I appear again to plead the cause of justice, and now of

liberty and life, in behalf of many of my fellow men... . I
stand before the same court, but not before the same
judges. ... As I cast my eyes along those seats of honor
and of public trust, now occupied by you, they seek in
vain for one of those honored and honorable persons

whose indulgence listened then to my voice 13

After a dramatic pause, John Quincy turned his eyes toward
the heavens, calling out the hallowed names of the court’s early
justices—John Marshall, Bushrod Washington, and Thomas
Todd of Virginia, William Cushing of Massachusetts and Samuel
Chase of Maryland, William Johnson of South Carolina, and
Henry Livingston of New York. “Where are they?” he cried out,
turning to focus on the faces of each of the justices. “Where?”
he paused before lowering his voice to a near whisper.

Gone! Gone! All Gone! Gone from the services which...
they faithfully rendered to their country. .. . I humbly
hope, and fondly trust, that they have gone to receive the
rewards of blessedness on high. In taking leave of this
bar and of this honorable court, I can only . . . petition
heaven that every member of it may . . . after a long and
illustrious career in this world, be received at the portals
of the next with the approving sentence, “Well done, good
and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of the

Lord.”14

As tears flowed down spectators’ faces, the prosecuting
attorney shook his head in disbelief. He had no idea what John
Quincy’s closing had to do with the facts of the case, but
members of the court understood that by recalling the names
of the legendary justices who had helped establish the nation’s
federal judiciary and, indeed, the nation itself, John Quincy was
asking them to abide by standards higher than man’s law.
Accordingly, the court voted unanimously to give its senior
member, Joseph Story, the honor of reading their monumental
decision on March 9:

“There does not seem to us to be any ground for doubt that

these Negroes ought to be free.”15

“Glorious!” Roger Sherman Baldwin congratulated John
Quincy. “Glorious not only as a triumph of humanity and
justice, but as a vindication of our national character from

reproach and dishonor,”16

John Quincy was equally elated and wrote to his last
surviving son, describing his courtroom triumph as one of the
most notable events in the family’s illustrious history: “The
signature and seal of Saer de Quincy to the old parchment [the
Magna Carta],” John Quincy told his son, “were... almost my
only support and encouragement, under the pressure of a
burden upon my thought that I was to plead for more, much

more than my own life.”1Z John Quincy’s plea for the freedom
of the Amistad captives marked more than six centuries during
which he and his forbears had led man’s quest for freedom.
“Well done, good and faithful servant,” he said to himself.

A flood of anonymous hate mail awaited John Quincy when he
returned home. “Is your pride of abolition oratory not yet
glutted?” asked a Virginian. “Are you to spend the remainder of
your days endeavoring to produce a civil and servile war? Do
you ... wish to ruin your country because you failed in your
election to the Presidency? May the lightening of heaven blast

you... and direct you... to the lowest regions of Hell!”18

While John Quincy continued his daily walks and public
swims unmolested, abolitionists paid the price for sending the
Amistad captives back to their homeland. After they left, a
shipload of 135 slaves mutinied aboard the ship Creole, bound
from Hampton Roads, Virginia, to New Orleans. After killing
one of the owners, they directed the crew to sail to Nassau,
where British authorities hanged those identified as murderers
and freed the rest.

Although John Quincy had promised himself that if his life
and health were spared to defend the men of the Amistad, he
would “take my last leave of the public service,” his Supreme
Court triumph so elated him that he decided the time had not
yet come to keep his promise. “Fifty years of incessant active

intercourse with the world,” he now said to himself,

has made political movement to me as much a necessary
of life as atmospheric air. This is the weakness of my
nature, which I have intellect enough left to perceive, but
not energy to control. And thus, while a remnant of
physical power is left to me to write and speak, the world

will retire from me before I retire from the world.22

President John Tyler of Virginia was a_ slaveholder who
defended slavery as a quintessential American institution and
supported efforts in the House to censure and expel John
Quincy Adams. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

A few days later, on April 4, 1841, President William Henry
Harrison died of pneumonia after only a month in office. Vice
President John Tyler, a fervent defender of states’ rights from
Virginia and champion of slavery, succeeded to the presidency.
With Tyler’s warm approval, slaveholders in the House
prepared to censure and expel John Quincy Adams.

Too elated by his Supreme Court triumph to notice the
puerile antics of his congressional enemies, John Quincy
pursued his interests in the sciences, using his chairmanship of
the committee on the Smithson bequest to promote
establishment of astronomical observatories—his famous
“lighthouses of the sky.” He not only ignored the ridicule of
political foes but gave his alma mater, Harvard, $1,000 to help
build its own observatory and loaned $13,000 of his own money
to Columbian College, the institution “for the general diffusion
of knowledge” that George Washington had helped found with
a bequest in his will. It would grow to become George
Washington University.

His constant glorification of the benefits of astronomical
observatories to expand man’s knowledge encouraged the
Navy Department, the University of North Carolina, Williams
College, Western Reserve College, Miami College (Ohio), and
the United States Military Academy to build observatories.
Even Philadelphia’s high schools built one—the Philadelphia
High School Observatory, which opened a John Quincy Adams
“Lighthouse of the Sky” to the citizens of the city. Ridiculing
those who had scoffed at John Quincy’s advocacy of such
observatories, enlightened communities across the nation
turned his vision into reality.

John Quincy’s broad interest in science included insatiable
curiosity about every new invention. As a boy, he had witnessed
the first balloon flights in Paris and public demonstrations of
Franz Mesmer’s then new technique, mesmerism, later known
as hypnotism. In 1839, another French inventor, Louis-Jacques-
Mandé Daguerre, a scene painter for the Paris opera,
developed a process that used sunlight to make permanent
pictures on metal plates. By 1842, John Plumbe Jr, a civil

engineer, had opened the Daguerrian Gallery in Boston, which
John Quincy visited in September 1842, becoming the first
American President ever to be photographed live.
Unfortunately, the Plumbe photos of John Quincy were lost,
with much of that pioneering photographer’s works, but the
following year, engraver Philip Haas opened another
daguerreotype studio, and John Quincy Adams asked him to
take another photograph. By then, sixteen portrait artists, five
sculptors, and one medalist had captured John Quincy’s

likeness. Haas produced the first surviving photograph.22

The Amistad case touched John Quincy in ways different from
any previous experience, pushing him firmly into the
abolitionist camp. Although they had failed to organize a full-
fledged political party, northern abolitionists had nonetheless
formed a powerful Select Committee on Slavery and rejoiced
when John Quincy accepted their long-standing invitation to
join. He did so on condition that they accept his leadership in
matters concerning the House of Representatives, and the first
thing he made them do was change their name to the
Committee of Friends of the Right of Petition. The change
cloaked their divisive abolitionist goal in the mantle of
constitutional rights and broadened their appeal to defenders
of the Bill of Rights by calls to defend the rights of all
Americans to petition and to free speech.

Daguerreotype of John Quincy Adams is the first surviving live
photograph of an American President. Taken by Philip Haas, a
pioneer in the process.

 

When Congress convened in January 1842, John Quincy
hoped his Supreme Court victory had covered him—and the
Constitution—with enough laurels to convince the House to
repeal the Gag Rule. As he had at the beginning of every
session since its imposition six years earlier, he opened the
January 1842 session of Congress by assailing the Gag Rule as
a clear violation of his own constitutional right to free speech
and the right of his constituents to petition government for
redress of grievances. To these, he added the questionable
constitutional right of uninterrupted free debate in Congress.

In renewing the Gag Rule, each session of Congress had
extended its scope, so that instead of simply banning the
mention of the word “slavery,” the rule now stated, “No

petition, memorial, resolution or other paper, praying for the
abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia, or any other
state or territory, or the slave trade between the states and
territories of the United States where it exists shall be received
by this House, or entertained in any way whatsoever.” The
increased strictures offended many congressmen unopposed to
slavery in the South but concerned only with its spread into
other states and territories. The new Gag Rule seemed too
restrictive. Far from the overwhelming majority that had
instituted the rule in 1836, it passed by only four votes in 1841,
and John Quincy sensed victory near as he honed his rhetorical
weapons for 1842. He picked what he knew “would set them in
a blaze”’—a petition from “the citizens of Haverhill, in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts .. . that you will immediately
adopt measures peaceably to dissolve the Union of these

States.”21

As he knew it would, the parliamentary lynch mob from the
South gathered about him, with cries of “Order!” “Stop him!”
He raised his voice and continued above the din.

“Old Nestor,” said an eyewitness at the scene, “lifted up his
voice like a trumpet, till slaveholding, slave trading, and slave
breeding absolutely quailed and howled. ... The old man
breasted the storm and dealt blows upon the head of the
monster. Scores . . . of slaveholders [strove] constantly to stop
him by... screaming at the top of their voices, ‘That is false!’ .

.. ‘I demand that you shut the mouth of that old harlequin.’”22

Kentucky congressman Thomas Marshall, a nephew of the
deceased chief justice John Marshall, moved to censure John
Quincy for having “committed high treason when he submitted
a petition for the dissolution of the Union.”

“Sir,” John Quincy shot back, “what is high treason? The
Constitution of the United States says what high treason is... .
It is not for the gentleman from Kentucky, or his puny mind, to
define what high treason is and confound it with what I have
done.” John Quincy then ordered the clerk to read the first
paragraph of the Declaration of Independence. When the clerk

hesitated, John Quincy repeated his demand, shouting, “The
first paragraph!”

“When in the course of human events it becomes necessary
for one people to dissolve the political bands which have
connected them with another and to assume among the powers
of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws
of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to
the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation—”

“Proceed!” John Quincy thundered. “Proceed! Down to ‘right’
and ‘duty’!”

The clerk continued: “It is their right, it is their duty, to throw
off such government.”

“Now, Sir, if there is a principle sacred on earth and
established by the instrument just read, it is the right of the
people to alter, to change, to destroy, the government if it
becomes oppressive to them. There would be no such right
existing if the people had not the power in pursuance of it to
petition for it....

“T rest that petition on the Declaration of Independence!”
John Quincy boomed.

When the House had quieted down, he then challenged its
right to charge him with high treason, a crime for which, he
said, “I could only be tried by a regular circuit court, by an
impartial jury.”23

Virginia’s Henry Wise stood to contradict John Quincy but
made the tactical mistake of talking too much and digressing
into a defense of “the principle of slavery” as “a leveling
principle .. . friendly to equality. Break down slavery and you
would with the same blow destroy the great democratic
principle of equality among men.” Wise had built a reputation
as a staunch defender of slavery, which he said was
‘Interwoven in our political existence . . . guaranteed by our

Constitution ... resulting from our system of government.”24
After catcalls from northern congressman subsided, Wise got
back on track, pretending to mourn John Quincy’s having

“outlived his fame. .. . To think of the veneration, the honor,
the reverence with which he might have been loved and
cherished... . I thank God that the gentleman, great as he was,
neither has nor is likely to have sufficient influence to excite a
spirit of disunion throughout the land. . . . The gentleman is

politically dead.”25

Far from politically dead, John Quincy found new life across
the nation, as tens of thousands in the North and parts of the
West rallied to his side. “When they talk about his old age and
venerableness and nearness to the grave,” Ralph Waldo
Emerson responded, “he is like one of those old cardinals who,
as quick as he is chosen Pope, throws away his crutches and
his crookedness and is as straight as a boy. He is an old roué,
who cannot live on slops, but must have sulphuric acid in his
tea.”25

When the time came for John Quincy’s final defense against
the attempt to quiet him, he challenged the southern
parliamentary lynch mob, daring them to punish him for having
presented the Haverhill petition. “If they say that they will
punish me, they must punish me. If they say that in grace and
mercy they will spare my expulsion, I disdain and cast their

mercy away. ... I defy them. I have constituents to go to who
will have something to say if this House expels me. Nor will it
"27

be long before gentlemen will see me here again.

John Quincy then turned and pointed to Virginia’s Henry
Wise, whom the House had blandly readmitted after his
participation in a duel that was tantamount to murder. Crack
shots and swordsmen from the South had used dueling as a
weapon to silence political opponents who lacked shooting
skills and feared uttering even the slightest criticism that a
southerner might interpret as an insult and thus grounds for a
challenge. John Quincy’s son had faced just such a challenge,
and Wise had been a second in such a duel between two other
congressmen. When both had survived the first round and
would normally have left the field with their honor—and bodies
—intact, Wise insisted that they keep firing, until the third

round left one duelist dead. John Quincy Adams was so
outraged at the spectacle that he sponsored a landmark bill—
the Prentiss-Adams Law—to ban dueling in the District of
Columbia. In proposing the ban, John Quincy called dueling a
form of slavery that allowed trained killers to blackmail the less
skilled marksman or swordsman into suicidal combat or face a
loss of honor.

“That far more guilty man,” John Quincy pointed at Wise,
“came into this House with his hands and face dripping .. .
reeking with the blood of murder.” Turning, he then pointed at
Kentucky’s Thomas Marshall, urging him to “go to some law
school and learn a little of the rights of the citizens of these

states and the members of this House.”28 John Quincy’s public
scolding sent Marshall scurrying back to Kentucky humiliated,
with his intellectual tail between his legs, never again to return
to national politics.

With John Quincy luring more House members to his side,
one southerner offered to withdraw the petition of censure if
John Quincy would withdraw the Haverhill petition for
disunion.

“No! No! I cannot do that,” John Quincy replied in the
deepest tones he could find to add to the drama of the moment.
“That proposition comes to the point and issue of this whole
question .. . the total suppression of the right of petition to the
whole people of this Union. .. . If I withdraw this petition, I
would consider myself as having sacrificed ... every element of
liberty that was enjoyed by my fellow citizens. ... Never more
would the House see a petition presented from the people of
the Union expressing their grievances in a manner that might
not be pleasing to the members. . . . There is the deadly

character of the attempt to put me down.”22

The debate continued for two weeks, with John Quincy’s
eloquence stirring the nation to petition Congress. Day after
day, he held the floor, as petitions flew through the door
protesting congressional attempts to censure him. On February
7, he tried holding back a smile as he announced he would

need another week to complete his defense, to which a member
of the Virginia delegation moved to table the censure motion
and end the matter. When the House agreed, John Quincy
responded by presenting two hundred more petitions and
addressing the House with one of the most momentous
speeches he would ever deliver. Indeed, his words would later
serve as the constitutional basis for Abraham Lincoln’s
Emancipation Proclamation.

“Under this state of things,” he spoke, staring at the
southerners, “so far from its being true that the states where
slavery exists have the exclusive management of the subject,
not only the President of the United States but the commander
of the army has power to order the universal emancipation of

the slaves.”30

Years later, Henry Wise would characterize John Quincy as
the “acutest, astutest, archest enemy of southern slavery that
ever existed .. . and his prophecies have been fulfilled . . . far

faster and more fearfully .. . than ever he anticipated.”31

John Quincy’s triumph in the House provoked the usual hate
mail, but the number of his supporters swelled across the
nation, with one Pennsylvanian writing, “You are honored, old
man—the hearts of a hundred thousand Pennsylvanians are
with you.” Another called him “the only public man in the land
who possesses the union of courage with virtue.” Poet John
Greenleaf Whittier prayed, “God bless thee, and preserve

thee.”32 Even those who had opposed the aggressive tactics of
abolitionists now wrote, “I am no abolitionist, yet I am in favor

of the emancipation of the colored race,”33

His popularity exceeded that of the President, and had he
defended his beliefs as aggressively when he was President, he
would certainly never have suffered the humiliation of defeat in
his run for reelection. Few Americans knew or understood him
as President; almost every American now knew and understood
him—indeed, revered him—after his battle in Congress, and
millions now listened to every word of the Sage of Quincy.
Hundreds lined up to see him, to hear his words, to try to talk

to him as he walked about Washington, striding to and from the
Capitol each day. Luminaries from all parts of the United
States, Britain, and Europe called at his home. Charles Dickens
and his wife stopped for lunch, and Dickens asked for John
Quincy’s autograph before leaving. John Quincy had emerged
as one of the most celebrated and beloved personages in the
Western world.

In 1843, his son Charles Francis, by then a member of the
Massachusetts state legislature, introduced a resolution calling
for a constitutional amendment abolishing the right of slave
states to count five slaves as equal to three white men in
determining representation in the House of Representatives.
With deep pride, John Quincy in turn introduced his son’s
amendment in the House—which ignored it. After he won
reelection in 1844, however, the House could not ignore his
resolution abolishing the Gag Rule. Indeed, it passed it
immediately, 105-80, ending the great battle he had fought for
freedom of debate in Congress, freedom of speech generally,
and the right of citizens to petition their government. It was
the first victory the North would win against the South and the
slaveocracy.

“Blessed, ever blessed be the name of God,” John Quincy

exulted afterwards.34

Riding his wave of popularity, he set off to promote national
interest in science and education by accepting an invitation to
speak at ceremonies laying the cornerstone of the Cincinnati
Astronomical Society’s observatory. It was an arduous trip for
an old man, but one with opportunities to promote science
education—especially his “lighthouses of the sky”—across a
broad territory.

He had no sooner received his invitation to speak in
Cincinnati when another invitation arrived—this one to attend
the long-anticipated completion of the Bunker’s Hill
Monument, commemorating the battle he had witnessed as a
seven-year-old with his mother in 1775. When, however, he
learned that President John Tyler “and his cabinet of slave-
drivers” would also attend, he refused. “How,” he asked, “could

I have witnessed this without an unbecoming burst of
indignation or of laughter? John Tyler is a slave-monger.”

With the association of the thundering cannon, which I
heard, and the smoke of burning Charlestown, which I
saw on that awful day, combined with this pyramid of
Quincy granite and John Tyler’s nose, with a shadow
outstretching that of the monumental column, I stayed at
home and visited my seedling trees and heard the
cannonades, rather than watch the President at dinner in
Faneuil Hall swill like swine and grunt about the rights of

man. 35

Celebration at the completion of the Bunker’s Hill Monument in
Charlestown in June 1843. Invited to be the principal orator,
John Quincy Adams refused to attend because of the presence
of President John Tyler, a Virginia slaveholder and fierce
opponent of abolition. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Shortly after the Bunker’s Hill ceremonies, John Quincy left
for Cincinnati, fulfilling his every lust to experience the latest
scientific advances in transportation—steam-driven trains to
Albany, New York, and across New York State to Buffalo, then
steamboats across Lake Erie to Cleveland and down the Ohio
Canal to Columbus. At every stop, cheering crowds welcomed
him as a hero. The “firing of cannon, ringing of bells .. . and
many thousand citizens” greeted him in Schenectady, New
York; thousands more—and the governor—waited in Albany. A
torchlight parade led his way through Utica, New York,
climaxing with a photographer taking a daguerreotype of him

with General Tom Thumb. “Multitudes of citizens” cheered in
Cleveland, and in Columbus, he confessed, he had never
witnessed “so much humanity.” In Dayton, two military
companies awaited to escort him, along with “an elegant open
barouche in which I took a seat and thus in triumphal
procession we entered the city,” where “a vast multitude”
awaited. He reached Cincinnati on November 8 and, to his
enormous Satisfaction, learned that the city had named the hill
on which its new observatory would stand Mount Adams.

His last major stop was in Pittsburgh, which gave him a
“magnificent reception” before he helped lay the cornerstone
for still another astronomical observatory “to promote the
cause of science.” He returned to Washington in November,
after traveling across Pennsylvania, with brass bands, public
officials, and huge crowds cheering his visit in every
community. Speaking at every stop, however, took its toll, and
he contracted a debilitating cold, complete with sore throat,
cough, and other symptoms.

“My strength is prostrated beyond anything that I ever
experienced before,” he moaned. It was, after all, his first
“campaign.” He had refused to campaign in 1824 and 1828
when he ran for the presidency, and now that he was not even
contemplating that office, he finally learned what campaigning
was like—and he rather enjoyed it.

After President Tyler declined to run for a second term,
former Speaker James K. Polk of Tennessee won the
Democratic nomination for President in 1844 and the
presidency itself, defeating the perennially ambitious Henry
Clay. As loser, Clay nonetheless shared one distinction with his
winning opponent: news of the presidential election results
had, for the first time in history, traveled over the wires of a
new invention, the telegraph.

During his last month in office, President Tyler asked
Congress again to approve annexation of Texas, and although
John Quincy had blocked two earlier attempts, the House
finally approved it in February 1846. As John Quincy had
predicted, war with Mexico followed Polk’s assumption of

power. Only ten members of the House joined John Quincy in
voting against the war.

In November 1846, John Quincy suffered a stroke while
visiting his son Charles Francis in Boston. Rendered speechless
and confused, his right side paralyzed, he seemed close to
death; his doctors gave Louisa little hope for her husband’s
recovery. As she kept vigil in his room each day, however, he
gradually recovered his speech, then his mind and memory, and
by early December, he laughed off his illness, snapping at his
friends that he had suffered only vertigo. But when he tried to
stand and walk, he fell; he could no longer support himself.

By Christmas, however, he was talking about returning to
Congress, and on New Year’s Day, he set out for a ride in his
carriage. A month later, on Sunday, February 7, sheer
willpower held him upright as he walked from his son’s house
to both morning and afternoon church services to take
communion. Despite protests from his wife and son, he and
they, and a nurse, left for Washington the next day, reaching
the Adamses’ F Street home in February 1847, in time to
celebrate Louisa’s seventy-second birthday. The following
morning he walked slowly, but magisterially, onto the floor of
the House, and as he took his seat, the members rose as one—
North, South, East, and West—to cheer him. Among those
celebrating his return was a tall, lanky, unkempt freshman
congressman from Springfield, Illinois—Abraham Lincoln.
During his short tenure in the House, Lincoln would prove one
of John Quincy’s strongest supporters—not just in the cause of
abolition but regarding Adams’s proposals for federal
initiatives in highway and canal construction and other forms
of national expansion. Echoing the words of James Monroe and
John Quincy Adams, Lincoln asserted that “Congress has a
constitutional authority . . . to apply the power to regulate

commerce... to make improvements.”25

After Congress recessed in 1847, John Quincy insisted on
returning to Quincy for the summer. Friends and relatives
staged a gala eightieth birthday party for him on July 11, and
two weeks later, they feted John Quincy and Louisa’s golden

wedding anniversary. John Quincy overwhelmed Louisa by
giving her a beautiful bracelet that his son Charles Francis had
purchased for him.

Congressman Abraham Lincoln won election to the House of
Representatives in 1847 and served during John Quincy
Adams’s last days in Congress. He is seen here in a
daguerreotype probably taken in Springfield, Illinois, in 1847.
(LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

On November 1, Louisa and Charles Francis took John
Quincy back to Washington, but the trip exhausted him—left

him palsied, his entire body shaking. Too weak to speak audibly
or to write, he walked unsteadily; he was nearly blind. He
nonetheless insisted on taking his seat at the opening of the
House on December 6, and Louisa conceded, “The House is his

only remedy.”3/

Although he gave up all but one of his committee obligations
and rode instead of walking to the House, he appeared for
every roll call every day thereafter. He cast one of only four
votes in favor of a resolution to withdraw U.S. troops from
Mexico. Even Lincoln voted against it. And his face, if not his
body, came to life when he heard a resolution supporting a
Spanish government demand that the United States pay the
Amistad ’s owners $50,000 for the loss of their ship and its
“cargo,” which the Spanish minister characterized as a band of
assassins. Although he lacked the spring that once shot him to
his feet, he nonetheless accomplished the same result and
assailed the Spanish minister for having wanted the Amistad
captives “tried and executed for liberating themselves.”

“There is not even the shadow of a pretense for the Spanish
demand,” John Quincy growled after the laughter subsided.
“The demand, if successful, would be a perfect robbery
committed on the people of the United States. Neither these
slave dealers, nor the Spanish government on their behalf, has

any claim to this money whatever.”28 The House agreed and
rejected the proposal. He then presented two petitions for
peace with Mexico, and the House rejected them both.

By mid-December, he had grown too weak to continue writing
in the diary he had kept for sixty-eight years, and, indeed, he
had to refuse a treasured invitation to speak at the laying of the
cornerstone of the Washington Monument on December 10.

On New Year’s Day, he wrote to his only surviving son,
Charles Francis, and, with an unsteady hand, wished him “a

stout heart and a clear conscience, and never despair.”22 On
February 21, 1848, President Polk sent the Senate a treaty of
peace with Mexico for ratification. In the House, supporters of
the war proposed sending the thanks of Congress to the

American generals for their victory. When the echoes from the
roar of “ayes” had faded, a single, shrill voice startled the
Congress. In a last, desperate effort to punish those engaged in

what he called that “most unrighteous war,”40 John Quincy
Adams sounded a firm, unmistakable “No!” It was his last word
to the Congress he cherished.

When the clerk read the next resolution and called his name
—his was third on the alphabetical roll—he tried to stand, his
right hand gripping his desk as he rose. Then he slumped to his
left—fortunately, into the arms of a fellow congressman who
had been watching him.

The death of John Quincy Adams in the Capitol he loved, with,
presumably, his former secretary of state Henry Clay holding
his right hand. (FROM A NATHANIEL CURRIER LITHOGRAPH,
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

“Mr. Adams is dying,” cried a congressman nearby. “Mr.
Adams is dying.” The words passed from member to member.
Other members found a couch that they brought onto the
House floor and helped their stricken colleague stretch out.
Someone thought to ask for a formal adjournment. Both the
Senate and Supreme Court followed suit when they learned of
John Quincy’s collapse. A group of congressmen carried the
sofa and its occupant into the rotunda to give John Quincy
more air, but they eventually moved it into the Speaker’s office,
where they barred every one but physicians, family, and close
friends. John Quincy revived enough to thank those around him
and to ask for Henry Clay, who arrived weeping. He clasped his
old President’s hand, unable to say a word before he finally left,
inconsolable.

“This is the end of earth, but I am composed,” John Quincy
whispered, then lapsed into a coma. Louisa arrived with a
friend and looked down at her husband, but his eyes showed no
sign of consciousness. Eighty-year-old John Quincy lay in a
coma for the next two days, and at 7:20 p.m., on February 23,
1848, he died in the Capitol he adored.

The next day, House members appointed a committee with
one member from each state to escort John Quincy home to
Massachusetts for burial. In the Senate, one of his bitter
political foes, Thomas Hart Benton, stood to proclaim,
“Whenever his presence could give aid and countenance to
what was useful and honorable to man, there he was... .

Where could death have found him but at the post of duty?”4L
The nation mourned as it had not since the deaths of George
Washington and Benjamin Franklin. John Quincy lay in state in
a committee room in Congress for two days after his death;
thousands filed by silently, often not knowing why exactly, but
somehow realizing they had lost a champion of their rights—a
representative of no single constituency, state, or region but of
all Americans and of the whole nation. He was an aristocrat of
an earlier generation, raised in an age of deference, who spoke
a rich language that ordinary people could seldom fathom, but
in the end, they sensed that he spoke for their greater good

and to protect their rights and freedoms.

A single cannon blast awakened Washington on Saturday
morning, February 25; another boom shook the city a minute
later and every minute until noon. Again, the multitude
reappeared, filling the streets like a great river flowing to the
Capitol. At 11:50, the bell on Capitol Hill began to toll, and the
President of the United States led the justices of the Supreme
Court, high-ranking members of the military, the diplomatic
corps, and members of the Senate into the House chamber.
John Quincy lay in a silver-framed coffin on an elevated
platform in front of the rostrum, his eloquence still resounding
in the silent chamber:

My cause is the cause of my country and of human liberty
... the fulfillment of prophesies that the day shall come
when slavery and war shall be banished from the face of

the earth.42

With the President seated at the Speaker’s right, the vice
president at his left, and the portraits of Washington and
Lafayette looking down on them all, the chaplain of the House
prayed and set off what Charles Francis Adams called “as great
a pageant as was ever conducted in the United States.” Choirs
sang to the gods, and orators lifted their voices to men,
repeating the appeal for John Quincy’s precious “Union.” When
the assembly had intoned its final hymn, pallbearers carried
the former President out of the Capitol to a silent multitude
that stretched to the edge of the city. The great casket emerged
from the Capitol, surrounded by an official committee of escort
and followed by Charles Francis Adams and his wife, then John
Quincy’s closest friends from the legislature. In the procession
that followed, the Speaker of the House led members of that
body, the Senate, then President Polk, justices of the Supreme
Court, the diplomatic corps, and an interminable line of
military officials, state officials, college students, firemen, and
members of craftsmen’s organizations and literary societies. . .
. It was endless—a collective outpouring of love and veneration
the nation had rarely seen.

John Quincy lay in rest at the Congressional Cemetery for a
week before the congressional committee of escort—a member
from each state—came to take him aboard a train to Boston.
Thousands lined the tracks northward to bow their heads as
the train passed slowly, one car draped in black bearing John
Quincy’s coffin. The train stopped at various stations and
crossings to allow citizens to climb aboard and say their good-
byes as they filed past him. Churches sang his praises;
newspapers expounded his glory and cited and published his
oratory and poetry. Thousands awaited his arrival in Boston,
filling the streets and all but blocking passage for his coffin to
Faneuil Hall for a massive funeral ceremony before members of
the state legislature and other prominent citizens. With the end
of the eulogy and last prayer, the congressional committee
delivered the body of their colleague, John Quincy Adams, to
Mayor Josiah Quincy, John Quincy’s cousin and former
president of Harvard, for transport to the family vault in
Quincy. A lifetime of friends and neighbors had gathered with
his relatives and family to place John Quincy beside his father.
As they laid John Quincy to rest, a small troop fired rifles in a
last salute from nearby Penn’s Hill, where John Quincy and his
mother, Abigail, had watched the Battle of Bunker’s Hill and
the beginning of the Revolution that spawned a new nation.

Day of my father’s birth, I hail thee yet.

What though his body moulders in the grave,
Yet shall not Death th’ immortal soul enslave;
The sun is not extinct—his orb has set.

And Where on earth’s wide ball shall man be met,
While time shall run, but from thy spirit brave
Shall learn to grasp the boom his Maker gave,
And spurn the terror of a tyrant’s threat?

Who but shall learn that freedom is the prize
Man still is bound to rescue or maintain;

That nature’s God commands the slave to rise,
And on the oppressor’s head to break his chain.
Roll, years of promise, rapidly roll round,

Till not a slave shall on this earth be found.

—JOHN QUINCY ADAMS,
THE WHITE HOUSE, 1827.43

A little more than twelve years after John Quincy died—on
December 24, 1860—South Carolina’s legislature proclaimed
without dissent that “the union now subsisting between South
Carolina and the other States, under the name of the ‘United
States of America,’ is hereby dissolved.” Early in 1861, ten
other states followed suit, and in April 1861, the civil war that
John Quincy Adams had predicted was under way, eventually
costing the lives of more than 275,000 Americans.

Louisa Adams died four years after John Quincy, on May 15,
1852, in Washington, DC.

She and her husband now lie together next to John and
Abigail Adams in a granite crypt in the church in Quincy,
Massachusetts, where Charles Francis had them all transferred
after escorting his mother’s body from the capital. Although no
subsequent members of the Adams family ever followed John or
John Quincy Adams to the presidency, no American family ever
surpassed the Adamses in accession to national prominence in
so many fields. Beginning with his son Charles Francis Adams,
who served as American ambassador to Britain and twice ran
unsuccessfully for vice president, John Quincy Adams spawned
an august line of American scholars, teachers, historians,
authors, legislators, jurists, diplomats, lawyers, doctors,
business leaders, and other professionals who upheld—and
uphold—the principle of their distinguished ancestor:

You must have one great purpose of existence ... to
make your talents and your knowledge most beneficial to
your country and most useful to mankind.

—JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, “TO MY CHILDREN.”44

Notes

Explanatory note: John Quincy Adams kept his diary from
November 1779 to December 1847, accumulating a total of
14,000 pages. The early diaries, from November 1779 to
December 1788, were published in book form as Diary of John
Quincy Adams (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 1981). The rest of the diary—fifty-one
volumes in all—is only available digitally, over the Internet, by
logging on to “The Diaries of John Quincy Adams: A Digital
Collection,” on the website of the Massachusetts Historical
Society (www.masshist.org/jgadiaries). In this book, notes
referring to extracts from the first two published volumes of
the diary will show the appropriate volume and page numbers.
When extracted from the Internet, the notes will simply show
the appropriate date and the initials MHS (Massachusetts
Historical Society).



