5

Never Was a Father More Satisfied

The entire world seemed aboil as John Quincy Adams’s ship
bounded into the dark Atlantic toward Europe. As he and his
brother saw their native land slip over the horizon, war and
revolution engulfed the world. Behind them in America, rebel
torches had set skies aglow in western Pennsylvania to protest
a federal tax on whiskey. Congress had imposed it without the
consent of the states—much as Parliament had imposed the
stamp tax without the consent of the colonies thirty years
earlier in 1765. Adding to the turmoil, Indian tribes had swept
across Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, attacking white settlements.
Although Britain had ceded the territory to the United States
after the Revolutionary War, British troops had remained and
fostered the Indian attacks to harass the new American
government and provoke its collapse.

In Europe, meanwhile, the revolutionary zeal of Maximilian
Robespierre’s Jacobins had metamorphosed into insanity, with
Robespierre striding into the Convention, or national assembly,
and demanding the arrest and execution of every member. By
then, the number of widows and orphans created by the
guillotine had reached staggering proportions; they and tens of
thousands of ordinary citizens who had gone into hiding to
escape the blade suddenly emerged en masse and marched to
the Convention doors roaring, “A bas Robespierre!” (“Down
with Robespierre!”). Facing the same fate on the guillotine
whether or not they continued to shy before Robespierre’s
schizophrenic screams, a handful of Convention delegates
summoned the courage to demand his arrest and that of each
of his terrorist confederates. To the surprise of all, the rest of
the Convention stood and shouted their agreement. Puzzled

soldiers in the Convention hall looked at each other, then sided
with the delegates and led the psychotic Norman lawyer away
in chains. The following day, July 28, 1794, troops loyal to the
Convention carted Robespierre, his brother, and twenty of his
political allies to the guillotine for execution. The guillotine
claimed the heads of seventy more Robespierre confederates
the following day. Although the French people celebrated by
massacring hundreds more Jacobins across the nation, the
slaughter did not end the famine that gripped the nation, and
the new revolutionary government that took over from
Robespierre—a five-man Directory that included Corsican
general Napoléon Bonaparte—proclaimed an end to private
property.

“The earth belongs to no one; its fruits belong to every one,”
declared Francois Noél Babeuf. “There is but one sun, one air
for all to breath. Let us end the disgusting distinctions between
rich and poor .. . masters and servants, governor and

governed.” As the poor rose in rebellion and joined equally
deprived soldiers in rioting, Napoléon rallied them to his
banner, assuaging their anger and hunger with promises of rich
pastures across French borders: “You have no shoes, uniforms,
shirts and almost no bread,” he called out to his followers.

Our stores are empty while those of our enemies are
overflowing. I will lead you into the most fertile plains in
the world. Rich provinces and great cities will be in your
power. There you will find honor, glory and wealth. It is

up to you to conquer. Marchons! 2

At Napoléon’s command, French revolutionary armies poured
into neighboring Dutch, Austrian, German, and_ Italian
territories, pillaging farmlands, villages, and towns. Royal
armies seemed helpless.

“The war has not been very favorable to the glory of

sovereigns,” John Quincy said, observing the obvious.2
Thomas Adams wrote to his mother to calm her fears.
“Holland will negotiate the most favorable terms with the

French that they can, but it scarce admits a doubt that the
French will be able to impose what terms they please. It will
not be a pleasant thing to reside in that country at this period,

but... we may chance to escape molestation.”4

Meanwhile, the French navy warred with Britain on the high
seas and provoked the British to attack and seize ships they
suspected of trading with their enemy—neutrals as well as
belligerents. Apart from preventing arms and ammunition from
reaching France, the British intended to halt the flow of
foodstuffs and starve the French into submission. With each
American ship the British seized, they impressed dozens of
English-speaking seamen into the Royal Navy, and without a
navy of its own to protect her merchant fleet, the United States
could not retaliate.

A month before John Quincy Adams left for Europe, President
Washington acted decisively to end the turmoil on American
soil. He ordered Major General “Mad” Anthony Wayne to attack
Indians in the West, and on August 20, Wayne’s legion of 1,000
marksmen crushed the Indian force and sent surviving warriors
reeling westward. Buoyed by Wayne’s victory, President
Washington ordered Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton to
assemble a fighting force to attack the whiskey rebels outside
Pittsburgh. On September 19, with John Quincy two days out to
sea, nearly 13,000 troops from four states converged on
Carlisle and Bedford, Pennsylvania, and at 10 a.m. on
September 30, Washington took field command of the army—
the first and last American President to do so. Only at the last
minute did he cede command when aides warned him he was
too important to the nation to risk injury or death in battle.

At Washington’s side was Hamilton, who had first served
Washington as a twenty-two-year-old captain seventeen years
earlier during the Revolutionary War, which also began as a
protest against taxes. Now, as secretary of the Treasury,
Hamilton had imposed—and Washington had endorsed—a tax
that provoked a similar rebellion, which the two old comrades
in arms were determined to crush. The irony was not lost on
either man.

By early December, an elated vice president wrote to his son,
“Our army under Wayne has beaten the Indians and the militia
have subdued the insurgents, a miserable though numerous
rabble.” Abigail Adams was equally enthusiastic: “The
insurgency is suppressed in Pennsylvania . . . [and] General
Wayne’s victory over the savages has had a happy effect upon
our tawny neighbors. . . . The aspect of our country is peace
and plenty. The view is delightful and the more so when
contrasted with the desolation and carnage which overspread a

great proportion of the civilized world.”2

Both parents enthused over their son’s career. “Your rising
reputation at the bar,” John Adams wrote to his son, “your
admired writings upon occasional subjects of great importance,
and your political influence among the younger gentlemen of
Boston sometimes make me regret your promotion and the loss
of your society to me.” He signed it, “With a tender affection as
well as great esteem, I am, my dear son, your affectionate
father John Adams.” Abigail ended her letter with the hope that
“you will not omit any opportunity of writing to her whose
happiness is so intimately blended with your prosperity and
who at all times is your ever affectionate Mother Abigail

Adams.”&

Although John Quincy’s ship developed leaks “like a water
spout,” he and his brother landed safely in Dover on October
14, less than a month after leaving Massachusetts. As their
coach from shipside reached London Bridge, however, “we
heard a rattling . . . a sound as of a trunk falling from the
carriage. My brother immediately alighted and found the trunk
of dispatches under the carriage. . . . Our driver assured us
that the trunks could not have fallen unless the straps had been
cut away.” The incident left John Quincy shaken:

Entrusted with dispatches of the highest importance...
to negotiations between the two countries, with papers
particularly committed to my care because they were
highly confidential by the President of the United States .

. with what face could I have presented myself to the

minister for whom they were intended? . . . The story
would be resounded from one end of the United States to

the other.

John Quincy Adams, at twenty-nine, sailed to Europe to assume
the post his father had once held as American minister to
Holland. (AFTER A PORTRAIT BY JOHN SINGLETON COPLEY;
NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL
PARK)

 

His memoirs go on interminably, as he relived the incident
and postulated how “the straps were cut by an invisible

hand.”8 Adams was immensely relieved to deliver the trunk to
John Jay’s quarters the next morning, along with papers for
Thomas Pinckney, the American minister plenipotentiary in
Britain.

Far from being in “a situation of small trust and confidence,”
as he had feared when he accepted his assignment in Holland,
John Quincy Adams spent the next three days helping to
determine the fate of his nation with Chief Justice John Jay and
U.S. ambassador to England Thomas Pinckney, former governor
of South Carolina. Together they put the finishing touches on a
treaty that would set the course of Anglo-American relations—
and, indeed, much of the Western world—for the foreseeable
future.

Jay had arrived in London four months earlier, on June 6, and
obtained the British government’s agreement to exclude
noncontraband goods from the ban on American trade with
France and the French West Indies. He had also won three
other major concessions: withdrawal of British troops behind
the Canadian border from the Northwest Territory, limited
resumption of American trade with the British East and West
Indies, and establishment of a most-favored-nation relationship
between the two nations, with preferential tariffs for each.
Both sides agreed to set up a joint commission and accept
binding arbitration to settle British and American financial
claims against each other. The treaty made no mention of two
issues that had long provoked American anger toward Britain:
impressment of American sailors into the British navy and
failure to compensate southern planters for thousands of slaves
the British had carried away during the Revolutionary War. The
slave issue lay behind the fanatical southern support for France
and the willingness—indeed, eagerness—of southerners to join
France in war against Britain.

Although Jay had hoped to win concessions on both issues, he
recognized that Britain had little incentive to yield on either.
Aside from her economic and military power, Britain had
scored an important naval victory over the French fleet that
left British warships in full command of the Atlantic Ocean,

with no need to cede privileges to weaker nations.

“As a treaty of commerce,” John Quincy concluded, “we shall
never obtain anything more favorable. .. . It is much below the
standard which I think would be advantageous to the country,
but with some alterations which are marked down .. . it is
preferable to a war. The commerce with their West India

Islands .. . will be of great importance.”2

John Quincy left with his brother for Holland on October 29,
arriving in The Hague two days later and settling into their
official quarters. He had effectively established himself as
American minister by January 19, 1795, when General Charles
Pichegru, commander of the French Army of the North,
marched into the Dutch capital with a contingent of 2,000 to
3,000 soldiers. Their arrival caused so little disruption that
John Quincy’s brother Thomas went to theater the following
evening with the American consul general, Sylvanus Bourne. A
day later, John Quincy went with Thomas and Bourne to the
French authorities, who told them “they received the visit of
the citoyen ministre of a free people, the friend of the peuple
francais with much pleasure. That they considered it tout a fait

une visite fraternelle.”!

The substance of the business was that I demanded
safety and protection to all American persons and
property in this country, and they told me... that all
property would be respected, as well as persons and
opinions. .. . They spoke of the President, whom, like all
Europeans, they called General Washington . . . that he
was a great man and they had veneration for his

character,l0

General Pichegru had served with French forces in the
American Revolution and was true to his word, doing nothing
to interfere with John Quincy’s activities or those of other
Americans in Holland. Despite the presence of French troops,
The Hague proved to be exactly what Secretary of State
Edmund Randolph and President Washington had anticipated—

a listening post in the heart of Europe, and for John Quincy
Adams, it proved the perfect first post in the diplomatic
service. His academic training combined with his knowledge of
languages and an extraordinary memory to accumulate names,
descriptions, and thinking of dozens of diplomats from
everywhere in Europe, along with invaluable military and
political intelligence from warring parties and other sectors of
the continent. “Dined with the French generals Pichegru, Elbel,
Sauviac,” the pages of his journal disclose, “and a Colonel...

“ . the Dutch general Constant and a colonel Comte
d’Autremont...

“.,, the minister of Poland Midleton...

“,. the Prussian secretary Baron Bielefeld...

“.,, the Russian minister...

“The French made use of balloons during the last campaign
in discovering the positions of their adverse armies .
Pichegru and the other generals assured us on the strongest
terms that it was of no service at all. ... ‘Oh! yes,’ said

Sauviac, ‘the effect was infallible in the gazettes.’”11

John Quincy spent as many as six hours a day writing reports,
which included twenty-seven letters to the secretary of state
from November 1794 to August 1795 and ten long, explicit
letters to his father, the vice president. He emerged as one of
Europe’s most. skilled diplomats and America’s finest
intelligence gleaner. He prophesied that while Britain and
France wore each other down in war, America would grow and
prosper. “At the present moment, if our neutrality is
preserved,” he predicted, “ten more years will place the United
States among the most powerful and opulent nations on

earth.”12

John Quincy’s reports elated his father. “Never was a father
more Satisfied or gratified,” Vice President John Adams wrote
to John Quincy in the spring of 1795, “than I have been with
the kind attention of my sons.”

Since they went abroad, I have no language to express to
you the pleasure I have received from the satisfaction you

have given the President and secretary of state, as well
as from the clear, comprehensive, and masterly accounts
in your letters to me of the public affairs of nations in
Europe, whose situation and politics it most concerns us
to know. Go on, my son, and by a diligent exertion of your
genius and abilities, continue to deserve well of your

father but especially of your country.13

In addition to visits, dinners, and other social events with
diplomats and French officers, John Quincy continued his
studies, reading histories of every European state while adding
Spanish to the three other languages he was able to read and
speak. “The voice of all Europe,” he discovered, had hailed
President George Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation.
Although it had not attracted much attention initially, it quickly
established a new principle of international law as well as
American constitutional law. Although rules abounded
governing relations between warring nations, the world had
ignored the rights of neutrals until George Washington raised
the issue.

“The nations that have been grappling together with the
purpose of mutual destruction,” John Quincy wrote, “are feeble,
exhausted, and almost starving. Those that have had the
wisdom to maintain neutrality have reasons more than ever to
applaud their policy, and some of them may thank the United

States for the example from which it was pursued.”14

As the end of his first year in the diplomatic service
approached, John Quincy was quite content with his new
career. Although he called Holland “insignificant” in
comparison to diplomatic posts in Paris and London, he told his
father that it was “adequate to my talents . . . without being
tedious or painful . . . and leaves me leisure to pursue a course
of studies that may be recommended by its amusement or
utility. Indeed, Sir, it is a situation in itself much preferable to
that of .. . a lawyer’s office for business which .. . is scarcely
sufficient to give bread and procures more curses than

thanks.” 15

To his surprise, John Quincy’s next set of State Department
orders emanated from a new secretary of state—Timothy
Pickering of Massachusetts, whom Washington had named to
replace John Randolph. Randolph had resigned following
charges he had accepted bribes from the French government.
For John Quincy Adams, the appointment was not unpleasant.
Born in Salem, Pickering was a Harvard graduate and lawyer, a
staunch Federalist who had served with distinction in the
Revolutionary War and as postmaster general before becoming
secretary of war early in 1795.

Pickering asked John Quincy to travel to London in the
absence of American minister Thomas Pinckney to execute the
formal exchange of signed copies of the Jay Treaty with the
British government. Pinckney had gone to Spain to negotiate a
treaty giving Americans navigation rights on the Mississippi
River.

When the terms of the Jay Treaty became known in America
in March 1795, Washington loyalists hailed Jay for averting
another brutal war with England and forcing Britain to deal
with the United States for the first time as an equal and
independent sovereign state. But as Washington and Jay both
knew it would, the treaty provoked a storm of controversy over
what it did not accomplish—especially among advocates for
states’ rights, Francophiles, and Anglophobes, all of whom
attacked the treaty as pro-British. Washington loyalists in the
Senate, however, outnumbered opponents, and the Senate
ratified the treaty on June 24—ironically, just as Jay himself
slipped away from the fray over foreign affairs by winning
election as governor of New York.

By then, the savagery of the French Revolution had eroded
popular support for the French in America, while the Jay Treaty
with Britain was producing economic benefits. In the West,
Britain’s troop pullback into Canada had ended the flow of
arms to hostile Indians. Without British military support, the
Indians ceded most of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan to
the United States, ending Indian forays in the West and
opening the vast Ohio and Mississippi river valleys to American

settlement. Meanwhile, Thomas Pinckney won _  Spain’s
agreement to free Mississippi River navigation for Americans
and to allow them to deposit goods in New Orleans for export
overseas. Elated by the prospects of a western economic boom,
Americans quickly forgot their objections to the Jay Treaty.

Although John Quincy had set out for England on October 20
to exchange copies of the signed treaties, ill winds and a
variety of dockside misunderstandings prevented his reaching
London until November 11, by which time Pinckney’s secretary
had completed the transaction. All that remained was the
ceremonial presentation of the document to the king. Early in
December, British undersecretary of foreign affairs George
Hammond, a cunning and vicious anti-American whom John
Quincy knew from the 1783 Paris peace talks, summoned
Adams to his office. Although Hammond had been England’s
first minister to the United States in 1791 and had married a
Philadelphian, his efforts to undermine the American
government seemed to know no bounds. He lost no time trying
to trap John Quincy in an indiscretion by asking if he had heard
of the President’s “intending to resign” in the wake of the
Genet affair.

“No!” John Quincy replied simply and sharply.

“What sort of a soul does this man suppose I have?” John
Quincy confided to his diary that night. “He talked of
Virginians, the southern people, the Democrats, but I let him
know that I consider them all in no other light than as
Americans.” He asked whether Pinckney had worked out an
agreement with Spain, then hammered John Quincy with
rumors of a political revolt against George Washington. John
Quincy deftly parried Hammond’s thrusts.

“All governments have their opposition who find fault with
everything,” John Quincy said nonchalantly. “Who has better
reason to know that than you in this country?” he smiled
condescendingly. “But in America, you know, opposition speaks
in a louder voice than anywhere else. Everything comes out; we
have not lurking dissatisfaction that works in secret and is not
seen, nothing that rankles at the heart while the face wears a

smile so that a very trifling opposition makes a great show. 716
“Hammond is a man of intrigue,” John Quincy reported in his
diary. “His question whether Mr. Pinckney has signed the treaty
in Spain, implies at least that he knows there was a treaty to
sign. ... If I stay here anytime, he will learn to be not quite so

impertinent.”1Z Adams surmised that Hammond was either
intercepting his mail or having him followed. He determined to
be more discreet in what he did, said, and wrote.

In fact, Hammond’s intelligence was better than John
Quincy’s—and even better than that of Vice President John
Adams. On January 5, a month after Hammond had met with
John Quincy, John Adams wrote to Abigail, “I have this day
heard news that is of some importance. It must be kept a secret
wholly to yourself. One of the ministry told me that the
President was solemnly determined to serve no longer than the
end of his present period. . . . You know the consequence of this
to me and to yourself. Either we must enter into ardors more
trying than any ever yet experienced or retire to Quincy,
farmers for life. I am .. . determined not to serve under
Jefferson. .. . I will not be frightened out of the public service

nor will I be disgraced in it.”18
Far from expressing joy at her husband’s thinking, Abigail
quoted a warning from Charles Churchill’s epic poem Gotham:

You know what is before you: “the whips and scorpions,
the thorns without roses, the dangers, anxieties and
weight of empire’—and can you acquire influence
sufficient as the poet further describes: “to still the voice

of discord in the land”?22

The day after meeting with Hammond, John Quincy
presented his credentials to King George III before addressing
him with prepared remarks: “Sir. To testify to your majesty the
sincerity of the United States of America in their negotiations,
their President has directed me...” and he went on to give
the king a copy of the Jay Treaty along with a letter from
President Washington.

“To give you my answer, Sir,” the king responded with a
typically noncommittal royal reply, “I am very happy to have
the assurances of their sincerity, for without that, you know,

there would be no such things as dealings among men.”22

In France, however, the Directory responded angrily to the
Jay Treaty, insisting it was a violation of “the alliance which
binds the two peoples.” The French recalled their ambassador,
and when the American government retaliated by recalling
ambassador James Monroe, the French ordered seizure of all
American ships sailing into French waters, with confiscation of
all cargoes and imprisonment of American seamen for ransom.

While waiting for Pinckney’s return to London, John Quincy
went to hear debates at the House of Commons and visited
Joshua Johnson, the wealthy Maryland merchant who lived near
the Tower of London in a lavish brick mansion, where he also
served as American consul. Staffed by eleven servants,
Johnson’s home was a center of opulence and hospitality for
visiting diplomats and other dignitaries. John Quincy had first
met Johnson in 1781 as a fourteen-year-old, when he and his
father were in Nantes, awaiting passage to America after John
Adams’s first diplomatic assignment in Paris. Johnson’s three
oldest daughters—barely more than infants when John Quincy
first met them—had blossomed into attractive young ladies.
Burdened with four other, younger girls and a young son, the
Johnsons were eager to marry off their three oldest, and they
welcomed the son of America’s vice president with great
warmth. They invited him to their oldest daughter’s birthday
ball, where John Quincy “danced till 3 in the morning” and
found “Mr. Johnson’s daughters pretty and agreeable. The
oldest performs admirably on the pianoforte; the second,

Louisa, sings; the third plays the harp.”21

Evidently enchanted by the three girls, he spent part of
almost every succeeding day or evening in January with the
Johnsons, playing cards, walking in the park, and
accompanying them to theater, concerts, and balls. Although
the Johnsons expected he would marry their oldest daughter,

John Quincy surprised the entire family on February 2, 1796, by
telling twenty-year-old Louisa Catherine, the Johnsons’ second
daughter, that he intended to marry her.

Louisa was beautiful, cultured, and fluent in French, the
language of diplomats. Musically talented, elegant in dress,
bearing, and manners, she was quiet and respectful in the
presence of gentlemen and a lively conversationalist when
appropriate. And she was comfortable among the rich and
powerful. For John Quincy, a rising star in the diplomatic world,
Louisa Catherine Johnson, the English-born daughter of an
American diplomat, seemed a perfect match.

In his letters home, John Quincy only hinted of a liaison at
first, without identifying Louisa. Fearing her son’s intended
was English and would destroy his prospects for political
success in America, Abigail fretted, “I would hope for the love I

bear my country, that the siren is at least half-blood 22 With
memories of Bunker’s Hill and the Boston occupation swirling
in her head, Abigail still despised the British. John Quincy’s
father was more philosophical than his wife, however. “Alas!
Poor John!” he remarked to Abigail. “If the young man really
loves her, I will not thwart him. . . . Ambition and love live
together well... . Aman may be mad with both at once... . His
father and his mother too know what it is. . . . Witness Caesar

and Anthony with Cleopatra and many others.”23

Twenty-year-old Louisa Catherine Johnson, the English-born
daughter of the American consul in London, caught John
Quincy Adams’s eye, and he proposed marriage to her in
February 1796. (PORTRAIT BY EDWARD SAVAGE, NATIONAL
PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

A letter from John Quincy eventually calmed both their fears:

Your apprehensions as to the tastes and sentiments of my
friend [were] perfectly natural, and all your observations
on the subject were received by me with gratitude, as I
know them to proceed from serious concern and the
purest parental affection. . . . But she has goodness of
heart and gentleness of disposition as well as spirit and
character and with those qualities, I shall venture upon
the chances of success and hope you will find her...

such a daughter as you would wish for your son.24

Moved by his letter, Abigail answered contritely, “I consider
her already as my daughter.” She went on to ask for a
miniature portrait and lock of her future daughter-in-law’s

hair.22 John Adams also sent his blessing, telling his son, “You
are now of age to judge for yourself; and whether you return
[to England] and choose her or whether you choose elsewhere,

your deliberate choice will be mine.”26

Although Louisa had wanted to marry immediately, John
Quincy refused, insisting he could not consider marriage until
he was financially secure. His salary, he insisted, was not
enough to afford proper lodgings for a minister and his wife, let
alone a wife used to luxuries. His plan was to finish his three-
year assignment in Holland and, in 1797, return to
Massachusetts, reestablish his law practice, and then marry. A
month after John Quincy had proposed, he spent one last
“evening of delight and of regret, and I took my leave of the

[Johnson] family with sensations unusually painful.”2Z
“On my return from England,” he wrote in his diary, “I
determined to resume a life of applications to business and

study,”28 and, indeed, he reveled in the calm and relaxation of
intense, solitary study. “To improve in the Dutch language, I
have usually translated a page every day. . . . My progress in
Italian is slow. .. . The language is enchanting. .. . To keep
alive my Latin, I have begun to translate a page of Tacitus

every day... into French.”22

His official duties seldom required more than a few hours a
day. He wrote to the Leyden Gazette, for example, protesting
an article asserting that “disgust at the ingratitude of the
American people had induced General Washington to retire
from his eminent station.” John Quincy asked the editor to
“Nave the goodness to correct... an imputation both injurious
to the President and people of the United States.”

The reasons assigned by the President himself for
declining to be viewed as a candidate for the approaching
election are his time of life, his strong inclinations
towards a retired life, and the peaceable, calm and
prosperous state of affairs in that country. . .. The
imputation of disgust to General Washington and of

ingratitude to the Americans is merely the calumny of
English spirits beholding the felicity of the Americans.22

As summer neared its end, John Quincy learned that George
Washington had promoted him from minister to minister
plenipotentiary, with a new assignment in Lisbon, Portugal, to
begin in the spring of 1797. His salary would double to $9,000
a year and allow him an additional $4,500 a year for expenses
—enough to marry Louisa and take her with him to his new
post. The promotion was not only a reward for his good work
and steadfast loyalty to the President’s policies; it was the
President’s way of publicly demonstrating his confidence in
John Quincy’s diplomatic skills. Although reluctant to postpone
his return to America by another three years, John Quincy
agreed to take the post after his brother Thomas promised to
go as well.

“T am still delighted with your facts, your opinions, and your
principles,” Vice President John Adams wrote to his son. “You
need not be anxious about the succession to the presidency... .
No man who has been mentioned or thought of, but has a just
value of your merits. Even if your father should be the person,
he will not so far affect a disinterest as to injure you. If
Jefferson, Henry, Jay, Hamilton or Pinckney should be elected,

your honor and promotion will be in no hazard.”31

On September 19, 1796, the American Daily Advertiser
published President Washington’s Farewell Address stating
emphatically that he would not serve after his second term in
office. He also warned Americans of the dangers of divisive
political parties at home and urged them to unite in a “fraternal
union.” In foreign affairs, he urged keeping the United States a
perennially neutral nation, out of foreign wars and with no
long-term ties to any foreign nations.

In the vicious election campaign that followed, Federalists
supported Vice President John Adams, who pledged to continue
Washington’s policy of rapprochement with Britain within the
context of neutrality in foreign conflicts. Adams’s chief
opponent was former secretary of state Thomas Jefferson, who

called himself a Democrat-Republican, supported the French
Revolution, and sought closer ties to France, regardless of the
effects on trade with England.

French minister Pierre August Adet tried to influence the
election with pamphlets urging Americans to vote for Jefferson
but only succeeded in provoking widespread revulsion against
France and eroding the influence of Francophiles in America.
Federalists demonized Adet and warned that a Jefferson
presidency would be “fatal to our independence, now that the
interference of a foreign nation in our affairs is no longer

disguised.”32 The Connecticut Courant warned that the French
minister was trying to “wean us from the government and
administrators of our own choice and make us willing to be
governed by such as France shall think best for us—beginning

with Jefferson.”23 Even Republicans were offended by Adet’s
meddling, with one of them railing that Adet had destroyed
Jefferson’s chances for election and “irretrievably diminished
the good will felt for his government and the people of

France.”34

In the end, John Adams eked out a victory over Thomas
Jefferson by three Electoral College votes, by rule relegating
Jefferson to the vice presidency.

In the days before the election, Abigail Adams had repeatedly
warned her son not to demand any special consideration if his
father won, and John Quincy had responded accordingly: “I
hope my ever dear and honored mother .. . that upon the
contingency of my father’s being placed in the first magistracy,
I shall never give him any trouble by solicitation for office of
any kind.”

Your late letters have repeated so many times that I shall
in that case have nothing to expect that I am afraid you
have imagined it possible that I might form expectations
from such an event. I had hoped that my mother knew me
better; that she did me the justice to believe that I have
not been so totally regardless or forgetful of the
principles which my education has instilled, nor so totally

destitute of a personal sense of delicacy as to be
susceptible of a wish in that direction.32

President John Adams, America’s second President, ignored
charges of nepotism and, on the advice of George Washington,
retained his son John Quincy Adams in America’s foreign
diplomatic corps. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

Deeply touched by her son’s letter, Abigail Adams sent it on
to her husband, who shared it with Washington. The President
had, in fact, worried that John Adams’s revulsion at nepotism
might lead him to dismiss his son from the diplomatic corps,
and, indeed, Adams had planned to do just that. After
Washington read John Quincy’s letter, he told Adams, “The
sentiments do honor to the head and heart of the writer, and if
my wishes would be of any avail, they should go to you in the
strong hope [his italics] that you will not withhold merited

promotion for Mr. John [Quincy] Adams because he is your
son.”

For without intending to compliment the father or the
mother .. . I give it as my decided opinion that Mr.
Adams is the most valuable public character we have
abroad, and that he will prove himself to be the ablest of
all our diplomatic corps. . . . The public, more and more
as he is known, are appreciating his talents and worth,
and his country would sustain a loss if these are checked

by over delicacy on your part.36

“Go to Lisbon,” the President-elect wrote to reassure his son,
“and send me as good intelligence from all parts of Europe as

you have done.”3Z

After John Quincy told Louisa of his new appointment—and
the enormous increase in his salary—they saw no reason to
postpone their marriage. He and Thomas packed up their
things and shipped everything to Lisbon before sailing to
London for the wedding. To their consternation, however,
unexpected letters arrived from the secretary of state and from
John Quincy’s father, the new President, directing him not to
proceed to Lisbon but to wait for a commission to the Prussian
court in Berlin. Although Berlin was a far more important post
than Lisbon, neither John Quincy nor Louisa (nor Thomas, for
that matter) was pleased about foregoing Portugal’s sunny
climes for the long, grey, dismal winters of northern Europe.
And John Quincy was livid about having spent $2,500 to ship
most of his and Thomas’s clothes, furniture, and books—
especially his books—to Lisbon.

John Quincy Adams married Louisa Catherine Johnson in an
Anglican service in London on July 26, 1797, with his brother
and her parents and sisters attending. Two weeks earlier, John
Quincy had turned thirty; his bride was twenty-two; and in the
course of three idyllic months honeymooning in the English
countryside, they wrote to his “Dear and Honored Parents” to
share their joy: “I have now the happiness of presenting you
another daughter,” John Quincy wrote, “worthy as I fully

believe of adding one to the number of those who endear that
relation to you. The day before yesterday united us for life. My
recommendation of her to your kindness and affection I know
will be unnecessary.”

Louisa Catherine appended her own appeal for the Adamses’
parental support:

The day before yesterday, by uniting me to your beloved
son, has given me a claim to your parental affection, a
claim I already feel will inspire me with veneration to
pursue the path of rectitude and render me as deserving
of your esteem and tenderness. ... To be respected...
and to meet the approbation of my husband and family is
the greatest wish of my heart. Stimulated by these

motives .. . will prove a sufficient incitement never to
sully the title of subscribing myself your Dutiful
Daughter.38

The joys of their honeymoon suddenly vanished, however,
when they returned to London. They knew, of course, that they
faced three years of northern European winters in Berlin and
enormous difficulties recovering John Quincy’s possessions in
Lisbon. What they did not—could not—expect was an angry
mob at the front door of the Johnson mansion in London,
screaming for John Quincy to pay thousands of pounds in
overdue bills.

