2

The Seeds of Statesmanship

From the first, the Boston seemed doomed.

“The wind was very high,” John Adams noted as they lost
sight of the Massachusetts coastline. “The sea very rough...
the snow so thick the captain thinks he cannot go to sea... . All

is yet chaos on board. His men are not disciplined.” With
British gunboats poised on the horizon, the Boston rolled
almost helplessly and threatened to send Adams sliding across
the deck. He kept a tight grip on the rail with one arm and
wrapped the other around his ten-year-old son.

“T confess,” he said to himself, “I often regretted that I had
brought my son, [but] Mr. Johnny’s behavior gave me a
satisfaction that I cannot express. Fully sensible of our danger,
he was constantly endeavoring to bear it with manly patience,
very attentive to me and his thoughts constantly running in a

serious strain.”2

Adams looked at the oncoming gunboats and wondered how
they would survive if the British overtook them—until the sting
of a crashing wave made him question how they would survive
if the British did not overtake them. “The constant rocking and
rolling of the ship made us all sick. Half the sailors were sick. I
was seized with it myself this forenoon. My servant Joseph
Stevens and the captain have both been very bad.” Adams
waxed philosophic for a moment and analyzed the causes of
“mal de mer” as stemming from “the effect of agitation
combined with a variety of odors from coal, stagnant water, and
those parts of the ship where sailors slept—often unwashed for
days. There is the same inattention to the cleanliness of the
ship and the persons and health of the sailors,” Adams
complained, “as there is at land of the cleanliness of the camp

and the health and cleanliness of the soldiers. The practice of
profane cursing and swearing .. . prevails in a most

abominable degree.”3

Adams and his son slept together in a small space in the
tween decks” on the double mattress he had brought aboard,
beneath their own sheets and blankets and using bolsters for
pillows.

“mo

As the main deck was almost constantly under water, the
sea rolling in and out at the ports and scuppers, we were
obliged to keep the hatchways down—whereby the air
became so hot and so dry in the ’tween decks that... I
could not breathe or live there. Yet the water would pour
down whenever a hatchway was opened, so that all was

afloat.4

Although the Boston was “overmetalled”—that is, the weight
of her guns (five twelve-pounders and nineteen nine-pounders)
was too great for her tonnage—the captain ordered her “to sail
with the guns out,” Adams explained, “in order to be ready, and
this .. . made the ship labor and roll so as to oblige us to keep
the chain pumps as well as the hand pumps almost constantly
going.” The weight of the gun barrels extending off the sides
made the ship “wring and twist in such a manner as to

endanger the masts and rigging.”2

Father and son had sought shelter in their bunk, when the
storm slammed the ship with explosive wind bursts and they
heard the terrifying crash from above. An officer appeared
almost immediately “and told us that the ship had been struck
with lightening and the noise we had heard was a crash of
thunder . . . that the large mainmast was struck. . . . We lost
sight of our enemy, it is true,” John Adams’s shaky hand penned
his diary the next morning, “but we found ourselves in a
dreadful storm....

It would be fruitless to attempt a description of what I
saw, heard and felt during these next three days. To
describe the ocean, the waves, the winds, the ship, her

motions, rollings, wringings and agonies—the sailors,
their countenances, language, and behavior is impossible.
No man could keep his legs, and nothing could be kept in
its place. A universal wreck of everything in all parts of
the ship, chests, casks, bottles &c. No place or person
was dry. On one of these nights, a thunder bolt struck
three men upon deck and wounded one of them... . He

lived three days and died raving mad.&

Just as calm settled over the surrounding sea, a boy about
John Quincy’s age—the son of Connecticut merchant Silas
Deane—approached John Adams with a note that startled
Adams by asking him to “take care of the child in his situation
as you would wish to have done to a child of your own. It is

needless to mention his youth and helplessness.” In effect, the
note told Adams he was now the boy’s guardian. Although
taken aback, Adams was well aware of the bonds that tied
members of New England’s Christian elite to each other—
especially their minor children. Even if unrelated and
unacquainted, all felt a deep kinship through their common ties
to Puritan founders, whose intermarriages left many, if not all,
somewhat related—even when they did not know it.

Silas Deane’s brother, Barnabas, saw Adams’s departure as a
good opportunity to divest himself of responsibility for raising
his brother’s son Jesse, and he simply put the boy on board
with a note charging Adams to deliver him to his father in
France.

John Adams had no sooner read Deane’s presumptuous letter
when another boy—eighteen-year-old William Vernon—handed
him an even more presumptuous missive from a member of the
Continental Navy Board. “I presume it is unnecessary to say
one word in order to impress your mind with the anxiety a
parent is under in the education of a son... . Therefore I have
only to beg the favor of you, Sir, to place my son with such a
gentleman whom you would choose for one of yours.” He asked
Adams to find a merchant “either at Bordeaux or Nantes, of
Protestant principles,” to teach him “general and extensive

business,” and he enclosed “a gratuity of one hundred pounds
sterling that may be given to a merchant of eminence to take

him for two or three years.”8

“Thus,” Adams puzzled in his diary, “I find myself invested
with the unexpected trust of a kind of guardianship of two
promising young gentlemen, besides my own son.” It was
fortunate for all the boys that Adams had _ started his
professional life as a teacher and found “few things that have

ever given me greater pleasure than the tuition of youth.”2 As
it turned out, Jesse Deane was only a year older than John
Quincy, and the two, each grateful to have found someone his
own age, became inseparable shipboard companions.

Between storms and other crises at sea, Adams himself read
French literature and put his son and Jesse Deane in the hands
of the ship’s French surgeon, Nicholas Noél, who agreed to
teach the boys French. To ease tension among the seamen, the
captain allowed them to stage “frolics,” with all the men
dousing each other with flour then dancing on the main deck.
Adams suspected the captain ordered such “whimsical

diversions in order to make the men wash themselves.”12

A more prized diversion came a month after they left
Massachusetts, when “we spied a sail and gave her chase...
and came up beside her.” To Adams’s shock, “She fired upon us

. . So that the ball went directly over my head.” Adams’s ship
immediately turned broadside with her big guns aimed
squarely at the other ship, which immediately surrendered,
yielding a prize Adams estimated at £80,000. Half went to the
owner of the Boston, 12 percent to the captain, and shares
ranging from 1 to 6 percent to the ship’s officers and crew,
depending on rank.

On March 29, 1778, six weeks after they had left
Massachusetts, John Adams and his son sailed into the estuary
leading to Bordeaux, when a pilot came aboard and announced
that France and England were at war. On April 1, the Adamses
set foot on shore with Jesse Deane, eighteen-year-old William
Vernon, and Dr. Noél. Two American merchants, who regularly

checked incoming cargoes, took the famed John Adams and his
friends for a sumptuous lunch and a tour of the town, a visit to
theater before tea and the opera in the evening. Adams
marveled at the splendor of French grand opera. “The scenery,
the dancing, the music,” he gasped. “Never seen anything of

the kind before.”11

Adams placed young Vernon with one of the merchants, and
on April 4, he set off with his son by carriage for Paris, along
with Jesse Deane and a small retinue. Covering 150 miles in
only two days, they reached Poitiers in west-central France.
“Every part of the country is cultivated,” Adams remarked.
“The fields of grain, the vineyards, the castles, the cities, the
parks, the gardens, everything is beautiful. Yet every place

swarms with beggars.”12

From Poitiers, they rode north to Tours, then east to Orleans
and finally Paris, where they checked into an expensive hotel
and John Adams put two tired little boys to bed. “My little son,”
he wrote in his diary, “has sustained this long journey of nearly
500 miles at the rate of an hundred miles a day with the utmost

firmness, as he did our fatiguing and dangerous voyage.”13

After meeting Benjamin Franklin in Paris, John Adams
learned to his distress that Jesse Deane’s father, Silas, had left
for America to present himself to Congress and dispute the
charges made about him. Adams would now have to care for
Jesse indefinitely.

Putting servants in charge of the boys, Adams followed
Franklin on a whirlwind tour of diplomatic receptions at the
Palais de Versailles and the chateaus of the ruling French
nobility—the Duc de Noailles, the Marquis de Lafayette’s
father-in-law; Prime Minister Comte de Maurepas; and Minister
of Foreign Affairs Comte de Vergennes, who took Adams to
meet King Louis XVI.

To eliminate the high cost of lodging, Adams moved into a
furnished apartment in the Hotel Valentois, a chateau that
Franklin was renting in Passy, then a small town between Paris

and Versailles.© Franklin charged Adams no rent and gave him

the use of his nine servants as well as his elegant carriage and
coachman. Adams enrolled his son and Jesse Deane with
Franklin’s grandson, nine-year-old “Benny” Bache, in a private
boarding school that was near enough to allow John Quincy to
spend Sundays with his father. Hardly an intimate occasion,
Sunday dinners chez Franklin saw a small army of celebrated
figures in the arts and government feasting on a galaxy of
delicacies and fine wines from Franklin’s cellar of more than
1,000 bottles from renowned French vineyards.

“He lives in all the splendor and magnificence of a viceroy,”
John Adams wrote of Franklin after one Sunday feast, “which is

little inferior to that ofa king.”14

In addition to Latin and French, the boys learned music,
dancing, fencing, and drawing, and within a few weeks, John
Quincy spoke fluent French, the universal language of the
European upper classes and diplomats everywhere. Not as
harsh as many such schools, Monsieur Le Coeur’s Pension
began the school day at 6 a.m. and ended at 7 p.m. but
included frequent periods for play to ease the strain of
academic discipline.

“Tt was then that the idea of writing a regular journal was
first suggested to me,” John Quincy recalled. As he wrote to his
mother at the time, “My pappa enjoins it upon me to keep a
journal or diary of the events that happen to me, and of objects
that I see and characters that I converse with from day to day.”
All but breathing his father’s thoughts and words, he told his
mother,

I am convinced of the utility, importance & necessity of
this exercise . . . and although I shall have the
mortification a few years hence to read a great deal of my
childish nonsense, yet I shall have the pleasure and
advantage of remarking the several steps by which I shall
have advanced in taste and judgment and knowledge. I
have been to see the palace and gardens of Versailles, the
Military School at Paris [Ecole Militaire] . . . & other
scenes of magnificence in and about Paris... .

I am, my ever honored and revered Mamma, your
dutiful & affectionate son John Quincy Adams

Benjamin Franklin invited John Adams and his eleven-year-old
son, John Quincy Adams, to live in his chateau on the outskirts
of Paris after Adams’s arrival as one of the American
commissioners soliciting financial and military aid from the
French government. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

His father’s mission to Paris would prove short-lived,
however. After barely a month, John Adams wrote to Congress
urging the appointment of Franklin as sole American envoy to
France, saying that commissions inevitably generate too many
internal frictions to make them effective in international
diplomacy.

The Palais de Versailles, where Benjamin Franklin took John
Adams to meet French foreign minister Comte de Vergennes.

ie ate Saget
~ EY

 

“The public business has never been methodically
conducted,” he grumbled, “and it is not possible to obtain a

clear idea of our affairs.”1© He found his fellow commissioner
Arthur Lee argumentative, sharp-tongued, and disagreeable,
with a violent temper, and he considered Franklin a dissipated
“charlatan,” posing as a philosopher without ever having

studied philosophy or the great thinkers. Although Franklin
was exceptionally generous, he was a confirmed sybarite,
rising late in the morning and, according to Adams, “coming
home at all hours.” Franklin, Adams concluded,

has a passion for reputation and fame as strong as you
can imagine, and his time and thoughts are chiefly
employed to obtain it, and to set tongues and pens, male
and female, to celebrating him. Painters, statuaries,
sculptors, china potters and all are set to work for this
end. He has the most affectionate and insinuating way of
charming the woman or the man that he fixes on. It is the
most silly and ridiculous way imaginable, in the sight of
an American, but it succeeds to admiration, fulsome and

sickish as it is, in Europe..Z

With Franklin pursuing his rich social life, few diplomatic
reports had flowed from Paris to Congress, and Adams
assumed the burden of combing through hundreds of
accumulated documents and condensing them into a series of
reports that left him with too little time to enjoy Paris or, for
that matter, get enough sleep. All but dismissed by a loyalist
acquaintance as “a man of no consequence,” the work-oriented
Adams seemed “out of his element” in the world of diplomacy—
especially in Paris.

“He cannot dance, drink, game, flatter, promise, dress, swear
with the gentlemen and talk small talk or flirt with the ladies.
In short, he has none of the essential arts or ornaments which

constitute a courtier,” one of his friends remarked.18 Adams
himself admitted, “I am wearied to death with gazing wherever
I go at a profusion of unmeaning wealth and magnificence.
Gold, marble, silk, velvet, silver, ivory, and alabaster make up

the show everywhere.”!9

In March 1779, eleven months after they had arrived in
France, John Quincy and his father were elated to begin their
trip home to America, taking a coach from Paris to Nantes,
where the Loire estuary empties into the Bay of Biscay and the

Atlantic Ocean. Franklin agreed to care for Jesse Deane and
relieve John Adams of that responsibility.

Few ships sailed or docked on schedule in a world at war, and
their ship, the Alliance, was not in port. The two Adamses spent
the next seven weeks seeing the countryside, reading books,
writing letters, attending theater, concerts, and operas, and
visiting the castlelike home of Maryland merchant Joshua
Johnson, his English wife, Catherine, and their three little girls.
Adams had befriended Johnson’s brother, Maryland governor
Thomas Johnson, at the Continental Congress, establishing a
tie that would bind the two families for the rest of their lives.

On April 22, the Alliance arrived at Nantes, and the Adamses
all but leaped aboard—only to be told to disembark. The vessel
would not sail to America because the French government had
assigned it to John Paul Jones’s squadron to harass British
shipping in the English Channel. “This is a_ cruel
disappointment,” Adams railed in his diary.

A few days later, the Adamses traveled westward along the
southern shore of Brittany to the port of Lorient, where they
were told they were more likely to find a ship bound for
America. What they found were weeks of boredom in a town
devoid of culture. The highlights of their stay were several
dinners with John Paul Jones and a visit to his ship, the
Bonhomme Richard—once a decrepit French ship that Jones
had refitted with forty-two guns and renamed in Franklin’s

honor.2

On June 17, three months after leaving Paris, John Quincy
and his father boarded the French frigate Sensible in Lorient,
along with the first French ambassador to the United States,
the Chevalier de la Luzerne, and his aide, the Marquis Francois
de Barbé Marbois. In what proved a smooth, uneventful
crossing, John Quincy Adams displayed both his language skills
and his pedagogical skills absorbed from teachers at his French
school, as he succeeded in teaching the two French diplomats
to speak serviceable English—in just eight weeks.

“The Chevalier de la Luzerne and Mr. Marbois,” John Adams
beamed, “are in raptures with my son.”

I found them this morning, the ambassador seated on a
cushion in our state room, Mr. Marbois in his cot at his
left hand and my son stretched out in his at his right—the
ambassador reading out loud in Blackstone’s Discourse . .
. and my son correcting the pronunciation of every word
and syllable and letter. The ambassador said he was
astonished at my son’s knowledge; that he was a master
of his own language like a professor. Mr. Marbois said
“your son teaches us more than you. He shows us no

mercy. We must have Mr. John.”29

The Sensible reached Boston at the beginning of August
1779, and John Adams had no sooner stepped ashore than his
friends, neighbors, and family elected him to a _ special
convention to draft a constitution for Massachusetts. The
convention, in turn, asked him to draft the document himself,
and drawing from his brilliant Thoughts on Government, he
wrote most of the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780.
Beginning with a bill of rights, it placed all political power in
the hands of the people and guaranteed such “natural,
essential, and unalienable rights” as free speech, a free press,
and free assembly. It also guaranteed free elections and the
right of freemen to trial by jury and to protection against
unreasonable searches and seizures, the right to keep and bear
arms, the right to petition government for redress of
grievances, and “the right of enjoying and defending their lives
and liberties” and “of acquiring, possessing, and protecting

their property. 21

When John Adams had blotted the ink at the end of his draft,
word arrived from Congress that, based on _ his
recommendations, it had dissolved the commission in Paris in
favor of a single ambassador, but instead of Franklin, it voted
unanimously to appoint him, John Adams, to fill the post.

Seventy-one days after landing in Boston, Adams and his son
boarded the same ship that had brought them home, the
Sensible, and sailed for France for the second time in a year.

“My habitation, how disconsolate it looks!” Abigail raged at

her husband. “My table, I set down to it but cannot swallow my
food. O why was I born with so much sensibility and why

possessing it have I so often been called to struggle with it?”22

Adams, however, had not hesitated to accept the
appointment, which he believed would allow him to negotiate
peace with England and_ recognition of American
independence. “Let me entreat you,” he pleaded with Abigail,
“to keep up your spirits and throw off cares as much as
possible. . . . We shall yet be happy. I hope and pray and I don’t
doubt it. I shall have vexations enough. You will have anxiety
and tenderness enough as usual. Pray strive not to have too

much.”23

Knowing he would no longer live in Franklin’s orbit and being
more familiar than before with Parisian life, John Adams
brought his middle boy, ten-year-old Charles, as a companion
for John Quincy, and Abigail’s cousin John Thaxter as a tutor
and part-time guardian for both children. Thaxter had tutored
John Quincy once before, while studying law at John Adams’s
Boston law offices. Also traveling with Adams aboard the
Sensible was the new legation secretary, Francis Dana, a
Harvard graduate like Adams and a successful Boston lawyer. A
Revolutionary War veteran, he had served five months at Valley
Forge with George Washington. All were elated by the prospect
of life in Paris except John Quincy, who had wanted to prepare
for Harvard. Setting aside her own disappointment, Abigail
tried to lift her son’s spirits: “These are the times in which a
genius would wish to live,” she told him. “It is not in the still
calm life . . . that great characters are formed. ...Whena
mind is raised and animated by scenes that engage the heart,
then those qualities which would otherwise lay dormant wake
into life and form the character of the hero and the

statesman.”24

Having only just turned twelve, John Quincy saw no
advantages to being either a hero or a statesman, but his
parents were raising him to be both, and he knew he had little
choice but to try to fulfill their ambitions. Although he had

made several false starts at keeping a diary, he now began
again in earnest. He had no way of knowing then, but his new
diary would become an addictive, lifelong pastime and evolve
into one of the greatest personal histories of the times ever
recorded by an American. He left no doubt of its design on the
title page:

A
Journal by Me
JQA

His journal’s opening words were far more prophetic than
either he or his mother could realize at the time: “1779
November Friday 12th. This morning I took leave of my

Mamma.”22

Three days of savage storms in the North Atlantic split the
ship’s seams, and as water seeped through the hull, the captain
ordered all adults to take turns working pumps, each of them
enduring four hour-long shifts per day. Even twelve-year-old
John Quincy manned a pump until he fell to the floor
exhausted. On December 9, 1779, the ship came within sight of
the northwestern coast of Spain, and abandoning plans to sail
to Bordeaux, the captain put into the tiny port of Ferrol. Less
than an hour after the men stopped pumping, seven feet of
water had filled the hull of the ship.

“One more storm would very probably have carried us to the
bottom of the sea,” John Quincy wrote to frighten his mother
and demonstrate his heroism in having manned the pumps.

Although they were safely ashore, gale-force winds and
relentless rain made further travel by sea impossible—on any
ship. They now faced crossing the all-but-impenetrable
Pyrenees to reach France, over dangerous roads and mountain
trails where highwaymen lurked behind every bend, ready to
assault unsuspecting travelers. John Adams organized a mule
train with thirteen mules and three old carriages that John
Quincy said had been “made in the year one.” Adams hired two
local muleteers, one to guide them, the other to take up the
rear, and he bought himself a set of pistols.

“We set out like so many Don Quixote’s and Sancho Panza’s,”
John Quincy scrawled in his diary at the end of the first day.
When they reached Coronna near the base of the Pyrenees,
they dined at the house of the French consul, then lodged at a
local inn. Heavy rains pinned them down until the day after
Christmas, when they began their trek through the Pyrenees
and what John Quincy called “the worst three weeks I ever
passed in my life.”

The roads in general are very bad. . . . The streets are
filthy and muddy. . . . The lodgings I will not try to
describe, for it is impossible . . . chambers in which
anybody would think a half dozen hogs had lived there six
months. ... As for the people, they are lazy, dirty, nasty,
and in short I can compare them to nothing but a parcel

of hogs.26

Making their trip even worse, they all contracted “violent
colds,” developed fevers, and, according to John Adams, “went
along the road, sneezing, coughing in all that uncomfortable
weather . . . and indeed were all of us more fitted for the
hospital than for travelers. . . . The children were sick. Mr.
Thaxter was not much better. ... I was in a deplorable
situation. I knew not where to go or what to do... . I had never
experienced anything like this journey. ... In my whole life, my

patience was never so near being totally exhausted.”2Z
Although rain and snow slowed travel, it apparently
discouraged highwaymen as well as ordinary travelers. The
Adamses encountered none and escaped the Pyrenees on
Sunday, January 15, 1780, when Adams, his sons, and his aides
reached the Spanish port city of Bilbao—and the luxurious
home of merchant Joseph Gardoqui. After several days
recuperating, they set off in comfortable carriages and reached
Paris on February 9, settling into the posh Hotel de Valois on
the rue de Richelieu, in the heart of the city. A day later, Adams
enrolled both boys in a boarding school, where John Quincy
resumed his studies of Latin and Greek, geography,
mathematics, drawing, and writing. To his delight, he reunited

with Jesse Deane, whom Franklin had taken under his care

while the boy’s father, Silas Deane, was in America.£
Once Abigail Adams learned that her son was safe and in
school, she wrote pleading for a word from him.

My dear Son,

Writing is not a la mode de Paris, I fancy, or sure I
should have heard from my son; or have you written and
have I been so unfortunate as to lose all the letters which
have been written to me for this five months. ... Be

dutiful my dear son.28

John Adams, meanwhile, took up his duties as American
ambassador, writing Foreign Minister Comte de Vergennes at
Versailles, “I have now the honor to acquaint you that... the
United States Congress did me the honor to elect me their
Minister Plenipotentiary to negotiate a peace with Britain and

also to negotiate a treaty of commerce with that kingdom.”22

To Adams’s consternation, Vergennes responded to his every
effort to promote peace negotiations with objections couched in
diplomatic niceties. Although Adams could not know it at the
time, Vergennes had no intention of fostering peace between
the Americans and their former overlords. Intent on weakening
Britain enough to permit French reconquest of Canada,
Vergennes planned on providing the Americans with enough
military aid to prolong the American Revolution indefinitely
and sap the military strength of both sides—without allowing
either to win. As an autocratic monarchy, France had no
interest in promoting the rights of man or independence for
Adams’s self-governing republic.

Frustrated by Vergennes’s diplomatic obstructions, Adams
decided to go to Amsterdam to enlist financial help from the
Dutch government “to render us less dependent on France,” as
he explained to Congress.

Once there, Adams enrolled the boys in the city’s famed Latin
school, but the headmaster found their inability to speak Dutch
too great an impediment, and Adams withdrew them. At the

suggestion of a friend who was studying medicine at the
University of Leyden, Thaxter took John Quincy and Charles to
that city, rented lodgings, then enrolled in the university
himself and took the boys with him to lectures. He tutored
them intensively until each of them—first John Quincy, then
Charles—acquired enough knowledge to enroll in the university
as full-time students, despite their ages.

“You have now a prize in your hands indeed,” the proud
father told his older son, who had turned thirteen. “If you do
not improve to the best advantage,” he cautioned the boy, “you
will be without excuse. But as I know you have an ardent thirst
for knowledge and a good capacity to acquire it, I depend on it,
you will do no dishonor to yourself nor to the University of

Leyden,”22

Abigail was equally proud. “What a harvest of true
knowledge and learning may you gather from the numberless
varied scenes through which you pass if you are not wanting in
your assiduity and endeavors. Let your ambition be engaged to
become eminent, but above all things, support a virtuous
character and remember that ‘an honest man is the noblest

work of God.’”2! Still a mother, however, she did not neglect
maternal concerns: “I hope, my dear boy, that the universal
neatness and cleanliness of the people where you reside will
cure you of all your slovenly tricks and that you learn from

them industry, economy, and frugality.”32

Slovenly though he may have been, thirteen-year-old John
Quincy was scholarly to a degree that astonished many
accomplished university professors and caught the attention of
Jean Luzac, a prominent lawyer, history scholar, and editor of
the influential Gazette de Leyde. He became great friends with
the boy, who scored his first diplomatic triumph by introducing
Luzac to his father. Their encounter turned Luzac_ into
Holland’s most outspoken advocate of Dutch financial aid to
the Americans and produced substantial loans to the Americans
and eventual recognition of American independence.

In early summer 1781, Congress appointed Francis Dana

minister to the court of Empress Catherine II in St. Petersburg
to seek Russian recognition of American independence. Though
a fierce autocrat, Catherine pretended to embrace social
progress, when, in fact, she had reduced Russia’s free
peasantry to serfdom. Some members of Congress hoped
commercial interests might encourage her to establish
diplomatic ties to the New World and encourage other neutral
nations to follow suit. Oddly, the otherwise brilliantly educated
Dana spoke no French, which was the language not only of
international diplomacy but of everyday social inter-course
among the Russian aristocracy. Taken by John Quincy Adams’s
erudition, social maturity, and language skills, Dana invited the
boy, who was still fourteen, to serve as his secretary and
interpreter, and John Quincy, eager for independence and in
awe of working with a veteran of Valley Forge, accepted. It was
an incredible choice, but Dana—like most people who talked
with John Quincy—often forgot he was talking to a mere boy.
John Quincy was remarkable, and Dana believed it would take
too long to find and transport to Europe another American—of
any age—to serve as a more effective secretary of legation.

John Quincy Adams, seen here at sixteen, a year after having
gone to St. Petersburg, Russia, as American minister Francis
Dana’s translator and legation secretary. (NATIONAL PARKS
SERVICE, ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

“This morning, brother Charles and I packed up our trunks,”
John Quincy wrote in his diary on June 28, 1781, “and I went to
take leave of our riding master.” Unlike his older brother,
Charles had been unhappy in Europe and was returning to his
mother in America. John Quincy Adams was about to turn
fifteen and begin life on his own—in the service of his country
as a foreign diplomat. A devoted scholar by then, he would not
leave without copying some of his favorite works to take with
him. In the days before his departure, he copied Alexander
Pope’s “Ode for Music on St. Cecilia’s Day” and “Universal
Prayer,” as well as “Mr. Addison’s Tragedy of Cato.” American
patriots—none more than George Washington—cherished the
Roman statesman Cato’s noble sentiments: “What pity is it that
we can die but once to serve our country. 733

On the day of his departure, John Quincy made this entry in
his diary: “Saturday, July the 7th, 1781: This morning we

packed up everything to go on a journey.” The boy diplomat
closed his journal, slipped it into his coat, and embarked on the
beginning of what would be a lifelong adventure of service to

his country.34

