4

“He Grows... Very Fat”

Harvard president Joseph Willard so infuriated and humiliated
John Quincy Adams that the boy would not even write about the
interview in his diary, noting only that Willard “advised me to
wait till next spring.” In fact, Willard had arbitrarily declared
the boy unprepared for Harvard and urged him to study with a
tutor over autumn and winter and to reapply in the spring.
Willard told John Quincy that if he then passed the
examinations, he could join the junior class in time for the last
trimester of the academic year in April 1786.

John Quincy had never confronted arbitrary power before.
Willard’s was not the face of evil as much as it was the face of
unbridled authority over men’s lives, and John Quincy Adams
despised it, would never forget it, and would fight it for the rest
of his life. “Few men live long in the world,” he concluded,
“without having suffered from baseness and wickedness in

others.” 1

Recognizing his impotence, Adams knew he had no choice
but to obey Willard’s directive if he wanted to study at
Harvard, and he went to live and study with his uncle,
Reverend John Shaw, the Congregational minister in Haverhill,
Massachusetts. Married to another of Abigail’s younger sisters,
Shaw was a recognized scholar and approved tutor who had
prepared many students for Harvard.

Harvard College, the “school of the prophets,” where John
Quincy Adams, his father, grandfather, brothers, and sons
received their higher education. Founded in 1636 as America’s
first college, the original buildings burned and were replaced
by Harvard Hall in 1675 (left), Stoughton Hall in 1699 (center),

and Massachusetts Hall in 1720. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

“My journal till now,” John Quincy realized, “has almost
entirely consisted in an account of my peregrinations. .. . The
events for the future will probably be a continual repetition . . .
and will contain nothing that even I myself may desire to
remember, but I shall surely have observations to make upon
diverse subjects which it may be proper to commit to paper.

And I can again employ the resource of sketching characters.”2

After years in Europe’s marbled halls, John Quincy found
small-town New England social life unimpressive. “The way we
have here of killing time in large companies appears to me
most absurd and ridiculous,” he scrawled in his diary. “All must
be fixed down in chairs, looking at one another like a puppet

show and talking some common-place phrases to one

another.”2 After dinner one day, the shallow conversations left
him particularly annoyed:

I wonder how it happens that almost every kind of
conversation that may be of any use to persons is
excluded from polite company everywhere. Is it because
the children of ignorance and folly are so much more
numerous than those of thought and science that these
must submit to imitate them?

“By the tyrannical law of custom,” he concluded, otherwise

intelligent people “were obliged to talk nonsense.”

John Quincy divided his time during the six months that
followed between making notes in his diary about the girls he
met and rereading Latin and Greek classics he had already
studied in Europe. “I began this day to translate the Ecologues
of Virgil,” he noted one evening—then added, “Peggy is about
20 years old and is called a beauty. Her face has a great deal of
dignity . . . but when adorned with a smile is extremely

pleasant.” 2 A few days later: “Miss Williams is tall and pretty .
..,” and “Nancy is only 17. ... Her shape is uncommonly fine
and her eye seems to have magic in it... . Her heart is kind,
tender and benevolent, and was she sensible of the pain she
causes she would be the first to condemn herself.” He
apparently dismissed all thoughts about girls the next day,
spending “the whole day at my studies. . . . I read Watt’s
Logic.” There was little in the curriculum—Latin, Greek,
English, or French—that he did not absorb: all the available
works of Homer, Plato, Virgil, Cicero, Horace, Juvenal, and
Terence, as well as John Locke and Alexander Pope—and the
Bible.

As the end of his stay in Haverhill approached, he plunged
into his first political controversy, confronting a group of
Baptists and their minister who sought to end the town’s
assemblies, or dances. “Superstition of some kind will prevail
with mankind everywhere,” John Quincy raged.

Mr. Smith, the minister of the Baptist Society in this
town, is violently opposed to dancing. It is in his mind of
itself a heinous sin... and there are many people here so
warped in prejudice that they are really persuaded they
should incur the divine displeasure, as much by dancing
as by stealing or perhaps committing murder... . How
one of the more innocent and rational amusements that
was ever invented can find so many opposers is
somewhat mysterious. . . . There are many who are
envious to see others amusing themselves. . . . However,
the subscribers wisely take no notice . . . but go on their

own way and despise all these senseless clamors.&

Several days later, he made a point of attending an assembly
of more than twenty couples, all but daring the Baptist minister
to interfere. “I might make a number of sarcastic reflections
upon the manner of dancing,” John Quincy reflected, “but I do
not think it a matter of sufficient importance .. . to laugh ata

person who cannot show the elegance of a dancing master.” 2

On March 14, 1786, John Quincy left Haverhill to take his
entrance examinations at Harvard. Three professors, four
tutors, and the librarian—the entire Harvard faculty—joined
President Willard in examining Adams to eliminate presidential
prejudice as a factor. After he displayed his skills in Latin,
Greek, mathematics, and philosophy, the frowning Willard
conceded, “You are admitted, Adams.”

John Quincy Adams spent the next fifteen months at Harvard
learning little he did not already know from a faculty he found
haughty and “hard for me to submit to.”

It seems almost a maxim among the governors of the
college to treat students pretty much like brute beasts.
There is an important air and haughty look that every
person belonging to the government assumes, which,
indeed, it is hard for me to submit to. But it may be of use
to me, as it mortifies my vanity and, if anything in the
world can teach me humility, it will be to see myself
subjected to the commands of a person that I most

despise.8

His father had a much different perspective on Harvard:
“Give me leave, my dear son, to congratulate you on your
admission into the Seat of the Muses, our dear Alma Mater,
where I hope you will find a pleasure and improvements equal
to your expectations. You are now among magistrates and
ministers, legislators and heroes, ambassadors and generals; I
mean among persons who will live to act in all these
characters. If you pursue your studies and preserve your
health, you will have as good a chance as most of them, and I
hope you will take care to do nothing now which you will in any

future period have reason to recollect with shame or pain.”2
Harvard students did not impress John Quincy, however. One
afternoon, he watched a group of sophomores turn wild from
drink, then smash their tutors’ windows. “After this sublime
maneuver,” he remarked, “they staggered to their chambers.
Such are the great achievements of many of the sons of
Harvard. .. . About two-thirds of the class are behind hand, and

the rest are obliged to wait for them till they come up.” 10

Harvard presented John Quincy with few _ intellectual
challenges, and he graduated second in his class in July 1787,
often skipping lectures to go fishing and occasionally dancing
so late with Cambridge girls that he overslept and missed
classes the next morning. He made friends with a few of the
most academically advanced members of his class, learned to
play the flute, joined the Handel Sodality, and oversaw the
progress of his two younger brothers, Charles, a sophomore,
and Thomas Boylston, a freshman.

In London, meanwhile, his older sister Nabby had married,
and to John Quincy’s pleasant surprise, his mother reacted to
the absence of small children in her household with newfound
warmth and empathy for her adult offspring. “It is not in your
power to remedy the evils you complain of,” she said in
response to her son’s irritation with the Harvard faculty.
“Whilst the salaries are so small, it cannot be expected that
gentlemen of the first abilities will devote their lives to the

preceptorship.”

Get all the good you can, and beware you do no ill to
others. You must be conscious of how great importance it
is to youth that they respect their teachers. Therefore
whatever tends to lessen them is an injury to the whole
society. . . . If you are conscious to yourself that you
possess more knowledge upon some subjects than others
of your standing, reflect that you have had greater
opportunities of seeing the world and obtaining a
knowledge of mankind than any of your contemporaries,
that you have never wanted a book, but it has been
supplied to you; that your whole time has been spent in
the company of men of literature and science. My paper
will allow me room only to add my blessing to you and

your brothers from your ever affectionate A. Adams.11

As a principal speaker at his class graduation, John Quincy
earned plaudits from alumni as well as classmates; even
President Willard conceded in a letter to John Quincy’s parents,

“T think he bids fair to become a distinguished character. 12
Although college life had isolated him, news of Shays’s
Rebellion in Springfield, Massachusetts, permeated every
corner of the land and awakened John Quincy to the woes
facing American society. “The people are said to be
discontented and to complain of taxation, of the salaries of
public officers, and of debts public and private,” he wrote to his
mother. “I suspect that the present form of government will not
continue long. ... The poor complain of its being oppressive. . .
. The men of property think the Constitution gives too much

liberty to the unprincipled citizen,” 13

The “Constitution,” as John Quincy called it, was, in fact, the
Articles of Confederation, which the states had signed during
the Revolutionary War. The Articles recognized each state as
sovereign and independent and left the Continental Congress
impotent, with no power to levy taxes—even to pay its troops.
Still unpaid at war’s end and beset by property taxes, farmers

in western Massachusetts had rebelled. A former captain in the
war, Daniel Shays, a farmer struggling to keep his property,
convinced neighbors that Boston legislators were colluding
with judges and lawyers to raise property taxes and foreclose
when farmers found it impossible to pay. With that, he exhorted
farmers, “Close down the courts! ”—and they did. Farmers
marched across the state and shut courthouses in Concord,
Worcester, Northampton, Taunton, Great Barrington, and,
finally, Cambridge, where John Quincy and other Harvard
students watched from the safety of their classroom buildings.

Hailed by farmers across the nation, the shutdowns ended
foreclosures in most of Massachusetts. Determined to expand
his success and seize control of state government, Shays led a
force of five hundred men to Springfield to raid the federal
armory. About 1,000 more farmers joined him, but as they
approached the arsenal, soldiers unleashed a few artillery
blasts that fell short of the approaching farmers but
demonstrated the advantages of cannonballs over pitchforks. A
militia from Boston then chased the farmers to their homes and
captured most of their leaders, although Shays fled to safety in
what was then the independent republic of Vermont.

As John Quincy had predicted, fears that Shays’s Rebellion
would ignite a national uprising spurred Congress to urge
revisions in the Articles of Confederation to strengthen federal
government powers. On May 25, 1787, delegates from twelve
of the thirteen states met in Philadelphia and began writing a
new constitution that created a new, more powerful federal
government.

In the meantime, John Quincy went to Newburyport, about
forty miles northeast of Boston, to study law with the renowned
New England attorney Theophilus Parsons, who would later
become chief justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Court. One
of five Harvard men under Parsons’s tutelage, John Quincy
enthused at first about “frolicks” with his friends, often
serenading as “the bottle went round with unusual rapidity,
until a round dozen had disappeared.” Nor did women escape
his attention, although he rebelled at the popular pastime of so-

called kissing games. “Tis a profanation of one of the most
endearing demonstrations of love,” he railed in his diary. “A
kiss unless warmed by sentiment and enlivened by affection
may just as well be given to the air as to the most beautiful or

the most accomplished object in the universe.”14 He said he
much preferred singing “good, jovial, expressive songs such as

we Sang at college.”15

While studying law he began writing poetry, a pastime that
quickly became a passion—indeed, one so serious that he
considered abandoning his studies and returning to Paris to
study literature and become a full-time poet.

“Around her face no wanton Cupids play,” he wrote in a poem
he called “A Vision”—part of a collection of satirical portraits of
nine of his women friends.

Her tawny skin defies the God of Day.
Loud was her laugh, undaunted was her look,

And folly seemed to dictate what she spoke.16

He did, of course, study some law, but a prodigious reader
like John Quincy consumed so much law so quickly that he
filled the rest of his time reading history, including “about fifty
pages a day” of Edward Gibbon’s six-volume epic The History
of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Although his
studies of law proved satisfying, ordinary practice—wills,
deeds, and bankruptcies—bored him to distraction. “God of
heavens!” he complained poetically. “If those are the only terms
upon which life can be granted to me, Oh! Take me from this

earth before I curse the day of my birth.”12Z

After John Quincy’s parents learned of their son’s growing
disenchantment, John Adams felt it was time for him and
Abigail to resume their roles as parents, and he wrote to
Secretary of State John Jay to end his assignment in Britain. In
fact, both Adamses were homesick and missed their boys. They
had not seen John Quincy in three years. Four years had passed
since John Adams had last seen Charles—then a boy of fourteen
—and nine years since he had seen Thomas, who was seven at

the time. Charles was now eighteen, Thomas sixteen, and both
were in trouble for participating in student riots at Harvard.

On June 17, 1788, John and Abigail Adams landed in Boston.
John Adams had not set foot in America for nine years, and
Governor John Hancock led Boston—indeed all of America—in
welcoming him. Next to George Washington himself, and
perhaps Benjamin Franklin, Americans held John Adams in
highest esteem. Hancock invited him and Abigail to stay at
Hancock House, his lavish mansion on the summit of Beacon
Hill overlooking the Common and the rest of Boston. Charles
and Thomas rushed over from Harvard to join them, and John
Quincy arrived from Newburyport for their first family reunion
in nearly a decade.

Offered every public office but the presidency itself—along
with many lucrative opportunities in private practice—John
Adams made it clear he wanted to serve as the nation’s first
vice president under George Washington. Accordingly, on
January 7, 1789, the Electoral College elected George
Washington first President of the United States and John
Adams as the nation’s first vice president. Three months later,
on April 20, 1789, Adams climaxed a weeklong trip from
Massachusetts and crossed the bridge onto the northern end of
Manhattan Island, where throngs of well-wishers lined the
roads to welcome him to New York, the nation’s temporary
capital. A troop of New York cavalry awaited with Foreign
Affairs Secretary John Jay and congressional leaders to escort
him southward to the city and his temporary lodgings at Jay’s
magnificent mansion. The next morning, the Senate’s president
pro tempore greeted him at Federal Hall and showed him to his
chair in the Senate chamber, where he assumed the presidency
of that body. A week later, on April 29, Adams witnessed the
presidential swearing in and George Washington’s first
inaugural address.

A year after his father’s inauguration, John Quincy passed his
bar exams, and on August 9, 1790, he opened a law office in
Boston and waited for his family’s name and fame to draw a
stream of clients to his door.

He waited in vain.
“Very busy with nothing to do,” he wrote in his diary. “Long
walk, but solitary,” he wrote a day later. “Little to do. Reading

Cicero.”18

More than a month later, he found a few clients at the
courthouse—all indigent petty criminals who paid him nothing.
By mid-November, he had handled fewer than a dozen cases,
none of which had yielded a penny, leaving him completely
dependent on the £9-per-month allowance that his father had
been sending him since his days at Harvard.

“T have a profession without employment,” he lamented to his
sister Nabby. “The hope of supporting myself [is] probably

somewhat distant.”12 A month later, he wrote to his mother,
saying that “there would not be a happier being in the United
States . . . could I have just enough business to support my
expenses, so as to relieve me from the mortification of being, at

my time of life, a burden to my parents.”29

His father tried to cheer him up: “It is accident commonly
which furnishes the first occasions to a young lawyer to spread
his reputation.”

I remember it was neither my friends nor patrons among
the great and learned: it was Joseph Tirrel the horse
jockey who first raised me to fame. . . . Some odd
incident, altogether unforeseen and unexpected, will very
probably bring you into some popular cause and spread
your character with a thousand trumpets at a time. Such
a thing may not happen in several years. Meantime,

patience, courage.24

John Adams tried lifting his son’s spirits by giving him power
of attorney and control of the family’s financial affairs in
Braintree and Boston, including management of several
income-yielding properties, with a retainer of £25 per quarter.
Early in 1791, John Adams and Abigail gave their son another
morale booster by inviting him to the national government’s
new seat in Philadelphia. The visit threw John Quincy back into

the midst of the powerful and famous and restored his
conviction that he was bound for greatness. He heard debates
in Congress, attended Supreme Court proceedings, and dined
with such illustrious figures as Elbridge Gerry. He climaxed his
visit by joining his parents at dinner with George and Martha
Washington at the presidential mansion.

John Quincy returned to Boston with a new sense of
excitement. Although his law practice showed no signs of
improvement, life in the federal capital had enthralled him, and
he decided to force his way into the national political picture.
Early in June, he wrote the first of eleven essays he called
Letters of Publicola, assailing two icons of the American
Revolution—Thomas Paine and, of all people, his friend
Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration
of Independence. Paine’s pamphlets Common Sense and The
Crisis had roused Americans to fight for independence from
Britain, and to these he had just added another work, The
Rights of Man, which called for a similar uprising in England to
overthrow the monarchy. After Jefferson endorsed it, The
Rights of Man received widespread distribution in America.

“His intention,” John Quincy complained to Boston’s
Columbian Centinel , “appears evidently to be to convince the
people of Great Britain that they have neither liberty nor a
constitution—that their only possible means to produce these
blessings to themselves is to ‘topple down headlong’ their
present government and follow implicitly the example of the
French.” John Quincy blasted Paine’s assumption that the
majority of the English people opposed monarchy. “It is
somewhat remarkable that, in speaking of the particular right
of forming a constitution, Mr. Paine denies to a nation . . . [the]
right to establish a government of hereditary succession ....
He supposes the essence of a free government to be the
submission of the minority to the will of the majority, [but] in a
free government the minority never can be under an obligation
to sacrifice their rights to the will of the majority. "22

John Quincy’s attack on Paine caused a furor—in Europe as
well as America, coming as it did when the French Revolution

was reaching a peak of savagery that sent emotional tremors
across the United States. Radicals had seized control of the
National Assembly and imprisoned King Louis XVI and his
family in their own palace. Two years earlier, most Americans
had hailed the French Revolution as an extension of America’s
own revolution and the spread of democracy to the Old World.
Jefferson, the American minister to France at the start of the
revolution in July 1789, called it “an illumination of the human

mind.”23 In the two years that followed, however, widespread
drought combined with national bankruptcy to produce famine,
mass unemployment—and mob action. Rioters raged through
cities, towns, and villages, looting and burning manors,
chateaus, and any other structure that smacked of aristocratic
plenty. Although Jefferson dismissed the violence as an
unfortunate consequence of social progress, Vice President
Adams said the French revolutionaries “make murder itself as

indifferent as shooting a plover. 24

The slaughter appalled President Washington and other
American statesmen. Secretary of Treasury Alexander
Hamilton condemned radical leaders of the French Revolution
as “assassins reeking with the blood of murdered fellow

citizens.”22

The American press reflected the divisions in the cabinet.
Philadelphia’s Gazette of the United States condemned French
atheism, anarchy, and mass slaughter, while its rival, the
National Gazette, reminded readers how France had ensured
America’s victory over British tyranny in the struggle for
liberty and independence. As groups gathered outside
newspaper offices to read the papers, the French Revolution—
and Paine’s defense—divided the American people.

“Perhaps the strongly excited passions of the hour. .

contributed to the result,” John Quincy concluded, but the
Publicola essays “at once attracted great attention, not less in
Europe than in America. They were reprinted in the papers of
New York and Philadelphia ... and elicited numerous replies. .

. The reputation of Publicola spread far beyond the confines of

the United States. No sooner did the papers arrive in England

than they were collected and published in London... . Another
edition was .. . published in Glasgow .. . and still a third at
Dublin.”26

As he had hoped, fame thrust John Quincy onto Boston’s
political stage, giving him more than enough to do to occupy
his time. Although his law practice did not expand, government
officials across the region appointed him to citizen committees
—to improve Boston’s police procedures, to recommend
redistricting, and to look at so-called blue laws. Braintree
asked him to convert its legal status from a parish to a town,
which he promptly renamed Quincy, after his great-grandfather
Colonel John Quincy. He thrust himself into every major
political controversy. After Boston voted to permit theaters to
open and perform plays, the state legislature defied Bostonians
and banned theatrical productions. After police arrested an
actor, “a mob of about two hundred people collected together .

. to pull down the theater,” and John Quincy wrote three
newspaper essays that heaped scorn on the legislative majority
and opponents of theater. In contrast to his previous stand
against anarchy, he called on supporters of theater to commit
civil disobedience—urging actors to continue to perform and
audiences to attend. “No obedience is due to an
unconstitutional act of the legislature,” he declared—in effect,
espousing a concept of nullification of laws that he would later
despise.

John Quincy’s essays put his name before Boston’s public just
as a banking collapse was producing a windfall of legal work
from investors trying to recoup their losses. “The bubble of
banking is breaking,” he wrote to his father. “Seven or eight
failures have happened within these three days, and many
more are inevitable in the course of the ensuing week. The
pernicious practice of mutual endorsements upon each other’s
notes has been carried . . . to an extravagant length and is now
found to have involved not only the principals, who have been
converting their loans from the bank into a regular trading
stock, but many others who have undertaken to be their

security.”2Z

“The late failures in Boston,” Abigail beamed as she wrote to
her husband after visiting John Quincy, “have thrown some
business into the hands of our son. He is well and grows very
fat.”28

John Quincy Adams grew fatter in the days that followed. By
early 1793, events overseas—and their repercussions in
America—had intensified the divisions between Americans who
supported the French Revolution and its opponents. President
George Washington pleaded for national unity, saying it would
be “unwise in the extreme .. . to involve ourselves in the

contests of European nations.”22 When newspapers ignored
his pleas, Washington considered a formal proclamation of
neutrality to ensure American independence from both English
and French influence.

In France, Jacobin extremists had seized control of the four-
year-old revolution, overturned the monarchy, sent King Louis
XVI to his death on the guillotine, and discarded the
constitution. On February 1, 1793, France declared war on
Britain, Holland, and Spain. Under the Franco-American
alliance of 1778, each nation had pledged to aid the other in
the event of an attack by foreign enemies, and France now
demanded that the United States join her war against Britain.
In April, Edmond Genet, the new minister plenipotentiary to
the United States, bypassed normal diplomatic protocol and
appealed to the American people to pressure the President and
Congress to join the French war against England.

French ambassador Edmond Genet arrived in the United States
with secret plans to incite rebellion against the Washington
administration and install a government that would join France
in war against Britain. (FROM A NINETEENTH-CENTURY
ENGRAVING)

 

“In the United States,” the French minister cried out, “men
still exist who can say, ‘Here a ferocious Englishman
slaughtered my father; there my wife tore her bleeding
daughter from the hands of an unbridled Englishman,’ and
those same men can say, ‘Here a brave Frenchman died
fighting for American liberty; here French naval and military

power humbled the might of Britain.’”30

Secretary of State Jefferson hailed Genet’s arrival. “The
liberty of the whole earth depends on the success of the French
Revolution,” Jefferson exulted as he urged Washington to
support the French. “Nothing should be spared on our part to
attach France to us. Failure to do so would gratify the
combination of kings with the spectacle of the only two

republics on earth destroying each other. 31

Outraged by Jefferson’s embrace of French revolutionaries
“wading through seas of blood,” Treasury Secretary Hamilton
argued against American participation, calling it self

destructive. He reminded the President that Britain remained
America’s most important trading partner, buying the majority
of her exports, producing the majority of her imports, and
yielding most of the government’s revenues through import
duties. To war beside France against Britain, Hamilton
asserted, was not only economically suicidal but morally
indefensible. Riding a wave of popularity in Boston, John
Quincy marched into the fray to support the President: “To
advise us to engage voluntarily in the war,” he declared, “is to
aim a dagger at the heart of this country.”

We have a seacoast of twelve hundred miles everywhere
open to invasion, and where is the power to protect it?
We have a flourishing commerce expanding to every part
of the globe, and where will it turn when excluded from
every market on earth? We depend upon the returns of
that commerce for many necessaries of life, and when
those returns shall be cut off, where shall we look for the
supply? We are in a great measure destitute of the
defensive apparatus of war, and who will provide us with
the arms and ammunition that will be indispensable? We
feel severely at this moment the burden of our public
debt, and where are the funds to support us in the
dreadful extremity to which our madness and iniquity

would reduce us?32

John Quincy’s words anticipated those of the President. With
the United States all but defenseless, without a navy and only a
minuscule army in the West fighting Indians, the President
knew he could not risk war with England—or any other nation,
for that matter. As John Quincy had noted, the powerful British
navy could easily blockade American ports and shut coastal
trade, while the British military in Canada could combine with
Spanish forces in Florida and Louisiana to sweep across the
West and divide it up between them. Washington agreed with
Hamilton that France had embarked on an offensive, not a
defensive, war and that the Franco-American treaty of 1778 did
not apply. He also saw the economic good sense of seeking a

rapprochement with England and issued the _ neutrality
proclamation he had been considering.

“It behooves the government of this country,” the President
told Congress, “to use every means in its power to prevent the

citizens . . . from embroiling us with either of these powers
{England or France] by endeavoring to maintain a strict
neutrality. I therefore require that you will . . . [take] such

measures as shall be deemed most likely to effect this desirable

purpose... without delay.”33
John Quincy seconded the President, stating that “an
impartial and unequivocal neutrality ...is prescribed to us asa

duty.”34

Genet, however, responded differently, buying boldfaced
newspaper advertisements that called on “Friends of France”
to ignore Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation and enlist in
the French service to fight the British. “Does not patriotism call
upon us to assist France?” his advertisements asked. “As Sons
of Freedom, would it not become our character to lend some

assistance to a nation combating to secure their liberty?”35
Francophiles across the United States rushed into the streets
to protest the President’s stance and demand that Congress
declare war against Britain. An estimated 5,000 supporters
rallied outside Genet’s hotel in Philadelphia and set off endless
demonstrations that raged through the night into the next day
—and the next. Vice President Adams described “the terrorism
excited by Genet . . . when 10,000 people in the streets of
Philadelphia, day after day, threatened to drag Washington out
of his house and effect a revolution in the government or
compel it to declare war in favor of the French Revolution and
against England.” Adams “judged it prudent and necessary to
order chests of arms from the war office” to protect his

house.36 Fearing for the safety of his wife and grandchildren,
Washington made plans to send them to the safety of Mount
Vernon.

Adding to the turmoil was the sudden arrival of the French
fleet from the Antilles. Genet ordered gangways lowered and

sent French seamen to join Jacobin mobs in the crowded
streets. “The town is one continuous scene of riot,” the British
consul wrote in panic to his foreign minister in London. “The
French seamen range the streets by night and by day, armed
with cutlasses and commit the most daring outrages. Genet
seems ready to raise the tricolor and proclaim himself
proconsul. President Washington is unable to enforce any

measures in opposition.”32Z

As pro-French mobs formed on street corners demanding
Washington’s head, Genet sent the President an ultimatum “in
the name of France” to call Congress into special session to
choose between neutrality and war. Genet warned Washington
that if he refused to declare war against Britain, Genet would
“appeal to the people” to overthrow the government and unite
with France. “I have acquired the esteem and the good wishes
of all republican Americans by tightening the bonds of
fraternity between them and ourselves,” Genet ranted. He
predicted that Americans would “rally from all sides” to
support him and “demonstrate with cries of joy ... that the
democrats of America realize perfectly that their future is

ultimately bound with France.”38

Infuriated by the Frenchman’s behavior, John Quincy assailed
Genet’s “political villainy.” In a series of articles, he condemned
the Frenchman’s activities in America; he labeled as “piracy”
and “highway robbery” the attacks on British ships by
privateers sponsored by Genet. Writing under the pseudonym
“Columbus,” John Quincy called Genet “the most implacable
and dangerous enemy to the peace and happiness of my
country.” He called Genet’s conduct “obnoxious” and urged the
President to demand his recall. “In a country where genuine
freedom is’ enjoyed,” John Quincy declared, “it is
unquestionably the right of every individual citizen to express
without control his sentiments upon public measures and the
conduct of public men... . The privilege ought not, however . .

. to be extended to the conduct of foreign ministers.”22
John Quincy’s articles “attracted much attention in the

principal cities of the continent and drew forth many
comments,” he recalled in his memoirs. “It fell under the eye of
Washington, then . . . anxiously considering the very same class
of questions in a cabinet almost equally divided in opinion. He
seems to have been impressed by the proof of Mr. Adams’s
powers to such an extent as to mark him out for the public

service at an early opportunity. 40

John Quincy’s articles generated national and international
comment, with Boston Federalists embracing him—and even
naming him the city’s official July 4 orator, the highest
nonelective honor Bostonians conferred on one of their own
each year. With his oratory, John Quincy pleased Federalists
and Antifederalists alike by predicting that American liberty
would soon inspire oppressed peoples in Europe to mirror the
American Revolution.

In the weeks that followed, President Washington reacted
fiercely to Edmond Genet’s activities, demanding—and
obtaining—his recall by the French government. Washington
also accepted Jefferson’s resignation. To Washington’s relief, a
new French ambassador, Jean-Antoine-Joseph Fauchet, arrived
in Philadelphia at the beginning of 1794—with a warrant for
Genet’s arrest and a guillotine aboard ship to punish him for
his indiscretions as French minister. Genet pleaded with the
new secretary of state, Edmund Randolph, not to enforce the
warrant, all but sobbing that a former Paris police chief was
waiting below deck on Fauchet’s ship, sharpening a blade to
sever his neck. A former Virginia governor and close friend of
Washington, Randolph turned to the President for guidance.

“We ought not to wish his punishment,” Washington decided
generously, granting the Frenchman political asylum and the

protection of the government he had tried to overthrow.41

Fearing Fauchet’s agents would kidnap him, Genet sneaked out
of Philadelphia during the night and found his way to a
secluded hideaway on a friend’s farm in Bristol, Connecticut,
where he temporarily disappeared from public view. With
Genet’s disappearance, the Francophile press in the East

ended its provocations, and rioters all but vanished from the
streets of eastern cities.

Although John Quincy’s articles attacking Genet had
impressed President Washington, they apparently did not
please John Adams. Worried that his son was focusing less on
building his law practice than writing newspaper essays
without recompense, John Adams admonished John Quincy and
reiterated his ambitions for his son’s rise to national leadership
and the presidency. “The mediocrity of fortune that you profess
ought not to content you. You come into life with advantages
which will disgrace you if your success is mediocre. And if you
do not rise to the head not only of your profession but of your
country it will be owing to your own Laziness, Slovenliness and

Obstinacy” (his italics and caps).42

President George Washington appointed John Quincy Adams
American minister to Holland and set the young man on the
path to a life of public service. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)

 

John Adams had no sooner posted his letter when news
arrived that made him regret having written it, and trembling
with excitement, he quickly scratched out a second letter to his

son:

President Washington is determined to nominate you to
go to Holland as Resident Minister... .

The salary is 4500 dollars a year... . Your knowledge of
Dutch and French, your education in that country, your
acquaintance with my old friends there will give you
many advantages... . It will require all your prudence
and all your other virtues as well as all your talents. It
will be expected that you come here to see the President
and secretary of state before you embark. I shall write
you as soon as the nomination is made and advised by the

Senate. Be secret. Don’t open your mouth to any human
being on the subject except your Mother.43

Impressed by young Adams’s writings, Washington had first
considered naming him U.S. District Attorney for New England,
but after reviewing the young man’s early experiences with his
father and Francis Dana in Europe and recognizing his
command of French, Dutch, and German as assets possessed
by few Americans in government, he decided to send John
Quincy to Holland. The assignment would not require critical
decisions, but it would put John Quincy in a key listening post
in Europe’s swirling diplomatic cosmos—a perfect assignment
for a young diplomat with John Quincy’s credentials.

At first, John Quincy believed that his father had arranged
the appointment, and he writhed with anger, disgust, and
shame. He soon learned, however, that his appointment “had
been as unexpected to him [his father] as to myself and that he
had never uttered a word upon which a wish on his part could
be presumed that a public office should be conferred upon me.”
Indeed, the elder Adams knew nothing of Washington’s
decision until notified by Secretary of State Randolph three
days before the Senate confirmation. After reassuring himself
that Washington had appointed his son solely on the basis of
the young man’s qualifications, John Adams let his pride pour
onto the pages of a letter to his son, saying that the
appointment was “the result of the President’s own
observations and reflections .. . as proof that sound principles
in morals and government are cherished by the executive of the
United States and that study, science and literature are
recommendations which will not be overlooked.”

It will be a serious trust. . . . It ought to make a deep
impression. . . . Such trusts are sacred. ... The law of
nations and diplomatic researches should engage his
early attention as well as the Dutch language, but
especially every thing relative to the interests of the U.S.
A few years spent in the present grade will recommend
him to advancement to higher stages and larger spheres.

The interests, views and motions of the belligerent
powers will engage his constant attention and employ all
his sagacity. He must consult with the President. ... He
must attend a little to his dress and person. No man alive
is more attentive to these things than the President... . I
shall drop hints from time to time for I have many things

to Say. 44

When he had emptied his mind, heart, and soul of advice,
Adams concluded,

It is a serious trust that is about to be committed to you. I
hope you will reflect upon it with due attention, collect
yourself, let no little weakness escape you, and devote
yourself to the service of your country. And may the
blessing of heaven attend you.

So prays your affectionate father, John Adams. 45

Her son’s appointment moved Abigail as much as it had her
husband, and, unable to contain her excitement, she wrote to
Martha Washington “acknowledging the honor conferred . . . by
the President.”

I have the satisfaction to say to you, Madam, perhaps
with the fond partiality of a parent, that I do not know in
any one instance of his conduct either at home or abroad
that he has given me any occasion of regret, and I hope
from his prudence, honor, integrity and fidelity that he
will never discredit the character so honorably conferred
upon him. Painful as the circumstance of a separation
from him will be to me, Madam, I derive a satisfaction
from the hope of his becoming eminently useful to his

country.46

John Quincy Adams closed his law office and plunged
headlong into the world of diplomacy and government. To his
delight, he found himself mixing, as he had in his youth, with
some of the world’s most celebrated political figures, at one
moment engaged in discussions with the President of the

United States and the secretary of state; at another, meeting
with Treasury Secretary Hamilton or Secretary of War Henry
Knox; then sharing tea with such visiting dignitaries as the
enigmatic Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord, or more
simply Talleyrand.

Born an aristocrat, Talleyrand had been a French Catholic
bishop before discarding his clerical robes and renouncing the
church in favor of secularism and revolution. A member of the
revolutionary National Assembly, he went to England as a
special emissary of the Jacobins but paid a few too many visits
to the lavish London quarters of the Duc d’Orléans, pretender
to the French throne. When Talleyrand returned to France,
Jacobins accused him of royalist collaboration, and he fled the
guillotine for America, having only just arrived when he met
John Quincy. Although he fully expected a_ presidential
reception worthy of his aristocratic lineage, Washington
refused to see him because reception of exiled aristocrats
might be seen as a public rebuff of the French revolutionary
government. Talleyrand twisted the President’s rejection into a
deep hatred of all things American—even the women, whom he
described as “adorable at fifteen, faded at twenty-three, old at
thirty-five, decrepit at forty or forty-five, losing their shape,
their teeth and their hair.” He would soon direct his hatred for

America toward John Quincy’s father.42Z

John Quincy spent the rest of the summer of 1794 studying
State Department documents and meeting with Secretary of
State Randolph. Randolph told John Quincy to stop in London
on his way to The Hague and deliver a trunk load of documents
for former chief justice John Jay, the former secretary of state,
who was negotiating a new treaty with Britain. Relations
between the two nations had soured since they had signed the
1783 peace treaty, whose terms both Britain and the United
States had openly violated. American state courts were first to
violate them by blocking collection of prerevolution debts by
British merchants and payment of compensation to loyalists for
confiscation of their properties and estates. The British, in
turn, retaliated by refusing to abandon military posts in the

Northwest Territory in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois and, worse,
inciting Indian attacks on American settlers in the area.
Relations between the two nations deteriorated still more after
the outbreak of war between England and France provoked the
British navy to seize neutral ships trading with France and the
French West Indies. By April 1794, when Washington sent John
Jay to England, the British had seized more than 250 American
ships and impressed hundreds of American sailors into the
British navy.

Unnerved by the prospect of being alone and all but
friendless in Holland for three years, John Quincy asked his
brother Thomas Boylston—the youngest of the three Adams
boys—to come to Europe with him as an aide. Thomas had
graduated from Harvard, studied law, and passed his bar
exams in Philadelphia, where he had planned to open a law
office. Their mother Abigail was delighted with John Quincy’s
offer to his younger brother. “I have always wished that your
brother might have an opportunity of going abroad,” she wrote
to John Quincy, “and as you are inclined to have him
accompany you, I think... you may be mutually beneficial to
each other, and it will not be so solitary to you. I will not take
my own personal feelings into the question. Whatever may be
for the benefit of my children I acquiesce to.” Abigail began to
cry as she pleaded, “Let me hear from you by every... “She
then crossed out the word “every” and wrote “post”—“Let me
hear from you by the post.”

Shaken by the prospect of losing her oldest and youngest
sons, she added, “I have a request to make of you and your
brother. If there is a miniature painter ... sit for your
likenesses ... and give them to Mr. Anthony to set with a lock
of each of your hairs to be put on the back together with your

names. ... You must spare time for it if possible.”48

John Quincy attended to every detail but the portraits as he
prepared to leave for Europe. His father sent him one last
message of advice. “The post at the Hague,” he enthused to his
son, “is an important diplomatic station which may afford many
opportunities of acquiring political information and of

penetrating the designs of many cabinets in Europe.”

In three or four years you may be promoted to the rank of
minister plenipotentiary—possibly in less time if you
discover to the President talents and principles for so
high a trust. . . . I would not advise you to fix any
unalterable resolutions except in favor of virtue and
integrity and unchangeable love to your country... .
Endeavor to obtain correspondences with able men in the
southern and middle states as well as the northern ones
and these will inform and advise you. If my life should be
spared, I hope to be one of them and will give you my
best opinions and advice as circumstances occur. I wish
you a pleasant voyage and much honor, satisfaction and
success in your mission. I am with constant affection,

your friend and father, John Adams.42

On September 17, 1794, twenty-seven-year-old John Quincy
Adams, an independent man at last, departed for Europe. His
father sent him and Thomas a farewell note:

I once more wish you a prosperous voyage and a happy
life. Remember your characters as men of business as
well as men of virtue, and always depend on the affection

and friendship of your father 20

Strengthened by his father’s blessing, John Quincy sailed off
to help guide his nation’s destiny as one of the first ministers of
its embryonic foreign service, but the storms of war blackened
the seas ahead and seemed to bode ill for his mission to keep
America free of foreign intrigues and war.

