7

A Profile in Courage

On July 4, 1803, Louisa Catherine Adams gave birth to her
second child, John Adams II, named for his illustrious
grandfather. Two months later, John Quincy sold their house in
Boston, and the family started for the nation’s new capital in
Washington. The move did not go smoothly. After carting their
trunks to New London, Connecticut, they boarded the packet to
New York, only to have two-year-old George Washington Adams
behave like a two-year-old and throw his shoes overboard, then
scamper away giggling with a bundle of keys to the family
trunks, which promptly followed the little boy’s shoes into the
sea.

When they sailed into Newark, New Jersey, the inns were full
—indeed overflowing—with hysterical New Yorkers fleeing a
yellow fever epidemic. The Adamses huddled in a room at a
tavern until Thomas Adams, still practicing law in Philadelphia,
learned of their plight and sent a carriage to bring them to
Philadelphia and then to Washington.

The city of Washington remained, at best, a developing
outpost of civilization, its streets mostly mud tracks that often
disappeared from view into fetid swamps. In fact, the city was a
gigantic marsh, perforated by islands of reclaimed land topped
with shabby boardinghouses, inns, taverns, stables, and,
occasionally, government buildings—most of them still under
construction. There was no church, hospital, museum, or park.
Snakes slithered in and out of low-lying houses; a heavy rain
turned muddy streets into raging torrents, and rats competed
with pigs for footing and food on the few slime-coated islets of
high ground. Clouds of insects surged through the air; disease
was rampant; influenza reached epidemic proportions every

winter. Clots of shacks—largely slave quarters—added to the
horror. As John Quincy’s grandson Henry would put it years
later after visiting his grandmother Louisa in Washington for
the first time, “Slavery ... was a nightmare, a horror, a crime,
the sum of all wickedness. . . . Slave states were dirty,
unkempt, poverty-stricken, ignorant, vicious!”

The two wings of the Washington Capitol stood all but
isolated on a hill above the city’s mire, connected by a long,
unpainted wooden shed and devoid of the domed central
structure that would one day tie them together. According to
one New England visitor, Pennsylvania Avenue was a mile of
“rough road, bordered here and there by Congressional
boardinghouses, with veritable swamps between” that led from
the Capitol to the President’s house, which stood “in the midst
of rough, unornamented grounds. Then another stretch of

comparative wilderness till you came to Georgetown.”

“We want nothing here,” the witty Senator Gouverneur
Morris liked to tell visitors, “nothing but houses, cellars,
kitchens, well-informed men, amiable women, and other little

trifles of the kind, to make our city perfect.”2
British minister Anthony Merry lacked Morris’s sense of
humor:

I cannot describe . . . the difficulty and expense which I
have to encounter in fixing myself in a habitation. By dint
of money I have just secured two small houses on the
common which is meant to become in time the city of
Washington. They are mere shells of homes, with bare
walls, and without fixtures of any kind, even without
pump or well. . . . Provisions of any kind, especially
vegetables, are frequently hardly to be obtained at any

price. So miserable is our situation.2

A French diplomat was no kinder in his appraisal: “My God!”
he lamented. “What have I done to be condemned to reside in

sucha city?”4

Washington had only about seven hundred houses, of which

one-third were brick and the rest wood. Paid only $6 a day in
the House and $7 in the Senate, members of Congress often
had to live as bachelors in squalid, cheaply built
boardinghouses—usually, if they could, with friends from the
same state or political party. Affluent government officials
avoided the city as much as possible, preferring to live with
their families in more substantial homes in nearby Georgetown,
where Louisa Adams’s brother-in-law Walter Hellen, a wealthy
—and generous—tobacco merchant and speculator, owned an
enormous mansion. Hellen, who had married Louisa’s older
sister Nancy, had housed his mother-in-law and her offspring
after Joshua Johnson’s death, and he now invited John Quincy
Adams, Louisa, and their two children to fill a nest of unused
rooms in his spacious home, even giving John Quincy a quiet
corner of his own for reading.

Senate life put no constraints on the family at first. It sat for
less than three hours on weekdays—from noon until 2 or 3
p.m., and John Quincy enjoyed the forty-five-minute walk—
about two and a half miles—to and from the Capitol, always
getting home for the family’s 4 p.m. dinner. “At eleven this
morning,” John Quincy wrote in his diary on his first day in the

Senate, “I took my seat... after delivering my credentials...
and being sworn to support the Constitution of the United
States. . . . There was little business done, and the Senate

adjourned soon after twelve.”2

When the Senate adjourned early enough, he often stopped
to hear debates in the House of Representatives before walking
home. With no churches in Washington, John Quincy made do
with the two nondenominational services in the Capitol and at
the Treasury—the first on Sunday morning, the second in the
afternoon. Already well known by the city’s leading figures,
John Quincy and Louisa were instant favorites on the social
scene, attending dinners and balls at the President’s House, as
the future White House was then called. When Louisa was not
with him, John Quincy often retired to a quiet corner with
Secretary of State James Madison to play chess. The two had
not liked each other when they first met, but their deep

interest in history drew them closer, and their encounters over
the chessboard cemented their friendship. Unlike other
southern political leaders, Madison had gone north to
Princeton for his higher education and shared much of the
same academic background as John Quincy.

The easy Senate routine allowed John Quincy to enjoy life at
home as he had seldom done before, drawing closer to Louisa,
who grew so robust she learned to ride and joined her husband
on horseback excursions. The short Senate days left him ample
time to resume his voracious reading and to read to his sons.
Occasionally, he simply “passed the evening idly with George . .

_ or with the ladies.” During his first days in Washington, his
time on the Senate floor produced nothing but bonhomie with
his thirty-three colleagues, including the other senator from
Massachusetts, former secretary of war and secretary of state
Timothy Pickering.

As envisaged at the Constitutional Convention, the Senate
was “to consist of the most distinguished characters,
distinguished for their rank in life and their weight of property,
and bearing as strong a likeness to the British House of Lords

as possible.” 2 For this reason the framers of the Constitution
gave state legislatures, rather than the people, the power to
elect senators.

It was not long, however, before John Quincy found himself
disagreeing with most of his colleagues—Federalist as well as
Republican. Several weeks after he first took his seat, the
Senate considered the Louisiana Purchase. Comprising an area
of about 1 million square miles, Louisiana was the largest
territory any nation had ever acquired peacefully from another
in recorded history—larger than Great Britain, France,
Germany, Spain, and Portugal combined. The United States had
agreed to pay about $15 million—or about four cents an acre,
compared with the average price of $2 an acre for which the
U.S. government then sold federal lands to settlers. The
acquisition would offer prospects of untold wealth to hundreds
of thousands of Americans waiting to claim lands in the

western wilderness.

Until his military setbacks in Egypt, western Europe, and
Santo Domingo, Napoléon had intended sending 20,000 French
troops to organize new French settlements in Louisiana, but a
blast of Arctic air late in 1801 froze the fleet of troop
transports in thick ice that prevented its departure. Frustrated
by his incredible streak of misfortune, Napoléon exploded in
uncontrollable rage:

Senator John Quincy Adams championed Senate approval of
the Louisiana Purchase, an area of about 1million square miles
that offered prospects of untold wealth to hundreds of
thousands of Americans waiting to claim lands in the West.

 

 

THE UNITED STATE:

 

TERRITORIAL GROWTH 0

 

“Damn sugar,” he shouted at his god. “Damn coffee, damn
colonies. .. . I shall cede Louisiana to the United States.”

Although New England Federalists called the Louisiana
Purchase too costly for the nation, their opposition actually
stemmed from regional political, social, and economic issues.
Virginia had emerged from the Revolutionary War as the

largest, most powerful state in the Union, with the most
territory, the most people, and the richest economy. With
Thomas Jefferson as President and Madison likely to succeed
him, Virginia had drained New England of much of its political
power and influence; many New Englanders feared that the
new states emerging from the Louisiana Purchase would ally
themselves with Virginia and leave New England little more
than an impotent commercial backwater. Adding Louisiana to
the nation would extend slavery across the entire West, end all
hopes of abolishing slavery in America, and allow western
settlers to use slave labor to create vast new farms that would
undersell and bankrupt small New England farms. The
Mississippi River valley to New Orleans would become the
primary artery for American international trade and destroy
New England’s banking and shipping industries.

Boston’s Columbian Centinel led New England opposition,
calling the Louisiana Territory “a great waste, a wilderness
unpeopled with any beings except wolves and wandering
Indians. .. . We are to give money of which we have too little
for land of which we already have too much.” But a euphoric
Tennessean wrote to President Jefferson, “You have secured to
us the free navigation of the Mississippi. You have procured an
immense fertile country: and all those blessings are obtained

without war and bloodshed.”

Initially, Jefferson was equally elated, saying the Louisiana
Purchase had ensured “the tranquility, security and prosperity
of all the Western country” and had permanently united East
and West. But the President’s enthusiasm had limits. A strict
constructionist, he knew the Constitution did not grant the
government authority to buy foreign territory, let alone govern
it, and that the Louisiana Purchase required a constitutional
amendment. Federalists immediately grasped at the President’s
reservations as a mechanism for rejecting the purchase. The
President’s reservations appalled expansionists, who warned
that the acquisition would be null and void if the Americans did
not sign it within six months.

“Be persuaded,” American minister to France Robert

Livingston warned Jefferson from Paris, “that France is sick of
the bargain, that Spain is much dissatisfied, and that the

slightest pretext will lose you the treaty. “9

With the Louisiana Purchase facing rejection, John Quincy
Adams, alone among Federalists to favor the acquisition, acted
to save it. As he told his parents, he believed deeply that the
United States was

destined by God and nature to be coextensive with the
North American continent . . . and become the most
populous and powerful people ever combined under one
social compact . . . speaking one language, professing
one general system of religious and political principles,
and accustomed to one general tenor of social usages and

customs 10

To ensure what others called the nation’s “manifest destiny,”
he studied the Louisiana Purchase agreement, then moved for
the addition of a simple phrase: “with the assent of the French
government.” John Quincy argued that the phrase converted
the document from an unconstitutional purchase agreement
into a formal—and constitutionally sanctioned—treaty. Whether
or not his assertion had any legal or constitutional justification,
he was so eloquent a lawyer that he convinced the Senate it
did. Despite fierce opposition from Federalists, the Senate
approved his motion and ended the furor (and Jefferson’s
misgivings) over whether the government could acquire

Louisiana.2
A Republican newspaper predicted that “the Hon. John
Quincy Adams_ will certainly be denounced = and

excommunicated by his party,”11 and, indeed, _ the
denunciations came like cannon shots. “Like a kite without a
tail,” one Boston Federalist leader snapped at John Quincy. “He
will pitch on one side and the other, as the popular currents
may happen to strike.” A Federalist newspaper charged John
Quincy with “political patricide” for supporting President
Jefferson, who had unseated John Quincy’s father from the

presidency. But Aurora editor Benjamin Franklin Bache, the
avowed political enemy of the Adamses, called John Quincy’s
political courage “gratifying, coming from a high New England

Federalist.”12

President Thomas Jefferson found Senator John Quincy Adams
a valuable ally in consummating the Louisiana Purchase, but an
implacable foe in efforts to pack the Supreme Court. (LIBRARY
OF CONGRESS)

 

John Quincy was quite prepared for the attacks, writing in his
diary that he had fully expected “the danger of adhering to my
own principles.

The country is so totally given up to the spirit of party
that not to follow blindfold one or the other is an
inexpiable offense. . . . Between both, I see the
impossibility of pursuing the dictates of my own
conscience without sacrificing every prospect not merely
of advancement, but even of retaining that character and
reputation I have enjoyed. Yet my choice is made, and, if I
cannot hope to give satisfaction to my country, I am at
least determined to have the approbation of my own

reflections.13

Federalist Timothy Pickering, the other Massachusetts
senator, responded to the Louisiana Purchase by stepping up
efforts to unite New England states with New York—and
perhaps Nova Scotia—in a Northern Confederacy that would
secede from the Union under the aegis of the British Empire. “I
gave the first warning to Mr. Jefferson,” John Quincy asserted,
“to be upon his guard against the intrigues of the British
government through the governor of Nova Scotia with the

disaffected party in New England.”14

John Quincy’s father also learned of the Pickering conspiracy.
“Mr. Plickering],” John Adams wrote to his former political
opponent Thomas Jefferson,

carried with him from his friends in Boston a project of a
division by the Potomac, the Delaware, or the Hudson,
i.e., as far as they could succeed, and communicated it to
Gen. Hamilton. There can be little doubt. . . that there is
a party in New England . . . who wish to urge the nation
to war with France and to shelter themselves and their
commerce under the wings of the British navy. I have
long opposed these people in all such projects... and the
consequence will soon be, if it is not already, that I and
my sons and all my friends will be hated throughout New

England.12

John Quincy compounded Federalist outrage by attending
with Louisa President Jefferson’s private family dinners at the

presidential mansion—and then joining seventy congressional
Republicans at a dinner the President hosted with his cabinet
to celebrate the Louisiana Purchase. “Scarcely any of the
Federalist members were there,” John Quincy noted. “The

dinner was bad and the toasts too numerous.”1&

But just as Jefferson thought he had lured John Quincy into
the Republican fold, the New Englander proved him wrong by
voting with Federalists against giving the President power to
tax the people of Louisiana and appoint territorial officials.
John Quincy argued that both bills violated the Constitution by
depriving the people of Louisiana of their right to self-
determination, and he introduced three resolutions—“which
produced a storm as violent as I expected”:

Resolved, That the people of the United States have

never ... delegated to this Senate the power of imposing
taxes upon the inhabitants of Louisiana without their
consent.

Resolved, That by concurring in any act of legislation for
imposing taxes upon the inhabitants of Louisiana without
their consent, the Senate would assume a power
unwarranted by the Constitution and dangerous to the
liberties of the United States.

Resolved, That the power of originating bills for raising
revenues being exclusively vested in the House of
Representatives, these resolutions be carried to them by
the secretary of the Senate.

“After a debate of about three hours,” John Quincy shook his

head sadly, “the resolutions were rejected.” 1Z

Despite his defeats on the Senate floor, John Quincy
remained a consummate constitutional scholar and applied to
become, and was sworn in as, an attorney and counselor in the
U.S. Supreme Court. He made a point of spending an hour or
two a day listening to court proceedings, and, a week after his
swearing in, on February 16, 1804, it was his turn to stand and
argue his first case—and lose.

Notwithstanding his status as a constitutional lawyer, John

Quincy continued outraging both Republicans and Federalists
at every turn. He even opposed an inoffensive resolution for
senators to wear black crepe arm bands for a month to
memorialize the deaths of three patriots, including his father’s
cousin Samuel Adams, a signer of the Declaration of
Independence.

“T asked for the constitutional authority of the Senate to
enjoin upon its members this act,” Adams wrote in his diary.
Told it was not binding upon its members, “I then objected
against it as improper in itself, tending to unsuitable
discussions of character and to an employment of the Senate’s
time in debates altogether foreign to the subjects which
properly belong to them. This led to a debate of three hours.”
Adams lost not only the debate but the goodwill of most of his
Senate colleagues, who now viewed him as an unconscionable
turncoat and chronic malcontent.

“The agency of party is so organized in our country,” he
groaned, “that the undertaking to pursue a course altogether
independent of it as a public man is perhaps impracticable.
However this may be, I do not regret having made the attempt
and, whether in public or private life, it is my unalterable
determination to abide by the principles which have always

been my guides.18

John Quincy even aroused the ire of his chess mate,
Secretary of State Madison, by opposing a new treaty with
Britain fixing the boundary between Canada and the United
States from the Great Lakes to the Pacific Ocean. Left open by
the 1783 treaty of peace ending the Revolutionary War, the
line, by convention, had run along the Forty-ninth Parallel.
Madison’s treaty would have dropped it southward and ceded
Britain a strip of land about 150 miles wide, including Lake of
the Woods in northern Minnesota and Puget Sound in
northwestern Washington. Adams roared his opposition and
cowed the Senate into rejecting the treaty, leaving the lands in
the so-called Adams Strip in the United States.

Despite the friction John Quincy’s unpredictably independent
voting engendered, Senate membership was too small, the

number of committees too large, and John Quincy Adams’s
knowledge of the law and the foreign world too vast to
ostracize him. He soon found himself on more than a dozen
committees, conducting himself on each with total disregard to
party. On one he revised the articles of war, on another he
helped acquire books for the Library of Congress, and on a
third he helped revise Senate rules. His work on one committee
included writing legislation for the Louisiana Territory and laws
for the District of Columbia; on still another, he proposed
building a network of roads across the Appalachian Mountains
to connect Atlantic coast ports with the Ohio River valley—a
scheme originally proposed by George Washington when the
states were still a confederation.

John Quincy Adams ensured the inclusion of the 150-mile-wide
“Adams Strip” on the American side of the Canadian-American
border.

 

Resolved, That the secretary of the treasury be directed
to prepare ...aplan for... opening roads, for removing
obstructions and making canals . . . which, as objects of
public improvement, may require and deserve the aid of

government. 19

Washington’s—and Adams’s—scheme would have allowed

western crops, pelts, furs, and ores to travel directly to Atlantic
sea-lanes to Europe instead of following the circuitous route
down the Mississippi River and across the Gulf of Mexico.
Deemed by most senators to be an unconstitutional federal
intrusion in state prerogatives, Adams’s proposal for domestic
improvements went down to defeat without even a word of
debate. “I have already seen enough,” he responded, “to
ascertain that no amendments of my proposing will obtain in

the Senate as now filled.”22 He believed Senator Pickering and
other Federalists “hate me rather more than they love any

principle.”21

John Quincy proved far more popular at the President’s
House than he did in the Senate. His language skills and
overseas travels as a diplomat combined with his erudition to
make him a favorite among diplomats who dined with Jefferson.
And whenever ladies attended such functions, Louisa attracted
as much attention as her husband or more, being as fluent in
French as he but far more extroverted.

Despite her son’s status in Washington, Abigail Adams was
far less able than her husband to accept him as other than her
little boy. “You must not let the mind wear so much upon the
body,” she warned her thirty-seven-year-old senator-son as
Christmas approached in 1804. “You eat too little and study too

much.”22 And fully two years later, as he approached his thirty-
ninth birthday, she cautioned,

I hope you never appear in the Senate with a beard two
days old or otherwise make what is called a shabby
appearance. Seriously, I think a man’s usefulness in
society depends much upon his personal appearance. I do
not wish a senator to dress like a beau, but I want him to
conform so far to the fashion as not to incur the
character of singularity nor give the occasion to the

world to ask what kind of mother he had.22

Over the winter, the Adamses learned of the failure of a
London bank where John Quincy had placed a sizable portion of

his father’s European accounts, and to prevent his parents
from sustaining any losses, John Quincy filled “the chasm

created by this circumstance.”24 To compensate for his loss, he
looked for ways to cut his own spending and decided that
moving the family back and forth between Washington and
Quincy twice a year had become a luxury he could no longer
afford. In a bitter confrontation with Louisa, he told her she
and the boys would have to stay put the year around—either in
Washington or Quincy; her choice. When the Senate adjourned
in the spring of 1804, John Quincy was ready to leave for his
parents’ home in Quincy, and after an angry exchange with her
husband, Louisa chose to stay with the boys in Georgetown at
the comfortable home of her sister and brother-in-law. If they
were to be separated half the year during each of the six
remaining years of his Senate term, she told John Quincy she
“preferred passing the summer months with my family to living
alone in Quincy through five dreary winters.”

When John Quincy accused her of disloyalty, she snapped
back, “I do not think, my beloved friend, you do me justice. I
prefer a separation from you rather than separation from them.
I don’t think my affection for you admitted of doubt.” To add to
his guilt after he had left, she wrote to him that three-year-old
George “is very angry with you. He says you are very naughty
to go away and leave him. . . . John calls everybody Papa he
sees. Poor little fellow was too young when you left us to
remember you.”

Without his father, however, George, at three, became
ungovernable, chasing the chickens and ducks unmercifully
whenever he was left to himself. And Louisa grew miserable
without her husband. “Life is not worth living on such terms,”
she admitted. She was wretched in Washington and realized

that without him, “I must be wretched everywhere.”22

Their separation left him equally distressed. He missed his
children and longed for the comfort of Louisa by his side at
night. True to form, he turned to poetry to effect a
reconciliation, sending her some playful eroticism from John

Donne’s To His Mistress Going to Bed (1669):

Your gown going off, such beauteous state reveals.
Licence my roving hands.

Full nakedness! All joys are due to thee.

As souls unbodied, bodies uncloth’d must be

To taste whole joys.2

John Quincy promised to dip into capital if necessary to end
their separation and prevent their ever again being apart.
Before he returned to Washington, Harvard’s overseers invited
him to stand for the college presidency, but he was too intent
on rejoining his wife and children and declined in favor of
returning to Washington. He arrived in time for the presidential
election.

On July 11, 1804, while John Quincy was _ still in
Massachusetts copying Donne’s erotic verses for Louisa,
Senate president Aaron Burr Jr., the vice president, shot and
killed former Treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton in a duel.
Fifteen years in the making, their enmity had reached a climax
earlier in the year during the New York gubernatorial election
campaign, when Burr called for “a union at the northward”
between New York and the New England states to thwart the
assumption of power by Jefferson, Madison, and Virginia’s
political dynasty. Fearing civil war, Hamilton all but ensured
Burr’s defeat in the gubernatorial election by calling the vice
president “a dangerous man who ought not to be trusted with

the reins of government.” 27 Jefferson had already rejected
Burr as a potential running mate in 1804, and Burr’s defeat in
the gubernatorial race effectively ended his political career. As
Hamilton’s barbs struck, the editor of the American Citizen
added to their sting by calling Burr the “most mean and
despicable bastard in the universe . .. so degraded as to permit

even General Hamilton to slander him with impunity.”28 Burr
sued the editor, then challenged Hamilton to the fatal
confrontation.

After the duel, outraged Hamilton supporters posted

handbills bearing the words “Hang Burr!” on walls across New
York City. A grand jury indicted Burr for murder, but he fled to
a hideaway on a Georgia plantation. When the Senate
reconvened on November 5, however, John Quincy joined other
members in a collective gasp as Burr stepped through the door
and strode down the aisle to his accustomed chair as president
of the Senate.

“The coroner’s inquest,” John Quincy wrote in disbelief,
“found a verdict of willful murder by Aaron Burr, vice president
of the United States. The grand jury . . . found a bill against
him for murder. Under all these circumstances Mr. Burr
appears and takes his seat as president of the Senate of the

United States.”22

John Quincy grew even more annoyed when the Senate voted
to go into executive session—and promptly left the Capitol to
go to the horse races. And they repeated the exercise for the
next ten days. “The consideration of executive business,” John
Quincy fumed, was “merely for the sake of having on the
printed journals an appearance of doing business though there
was really none to do. This vote passed. . . . Mine was the only

voice heard against it.”30

Earlier in the year, an effort by President Jefferson to alter
the Federalist bias of the Supreme Court came to fruition when
he coaxed his political allies in the House of Representatives to
impeach Associate Justice Samuel Chase. A signer of the
Declaration of Independence and appointee of President
Washington, Chase had, at times, displayed outrageous political
bias in his rulings, but he crossed a particularly dangerous
political line by attacking the adoption of universal white
manhood suffrage in his native state of Maryland. Until then,
only property owners had been able to vote. Chase argued that
the “constitution will sink into a mobocracy, the worst of all
possible government,” and he cited as “a mighty mischief ” the
doctrine “that all men in a state of society are entitled to enjoy

equal liberty and equal rights.”21
Calling his words an improper political address in a judicial

proceeding, the House of Representatives charged him with
sedition and treason—both of them “high crimes and
misdemeanors” and a basis for impeachment under the
Constitution and removal from office. With John Quincy
howling his objections, Chase went on trial before the Senate
the following February. In one of the most important trials in
American history, the House of Representatives threatened to
convert the American republic into an autocracy' by
criminalizing political dissent. Although John Quincy did not
like Chase, he argued that the constitutional phrase “high
crimes and misdemeanors” referred to indictable criminal acts
—not political statements—and he convinced the Senate to
support him. On March 1, 1805, after the Senate had voted,
Vice President Burr announced, “There not being a
constitutional majority who answer ‘guilty’ to any one charge,
it becomes my duty to declare that Samuel Chase is acquitted
upon all the articles of impeachment brought against him by

the House of Representatives.”32 In what was then the most
significant defense of the First Amendment ever mounted, John
Quincy had prevented the American President and the House of
Representatives from criminalizing free speech.

“This was a party prosecution,” John Quincy reflected
afterwards, “and has issued in the. . . total disappointment of
those by whom it was brought forward.”

It has exhibited the Senate of the United States fulfilling
the most important purpose of its institution, by putting a
check upon the impetuous violence of the House of
Representatives. It has proved that a sense of justice is
yet strong enough to overpower the furies of faction... .
The attack on Mr. Chase was a systematic attempt upon
the independence and powers of the Judicial Department
and, at the same time, an attempt to prostrate the
authority of the National Government before those of the

individual states.33

Just before the Chase trial, the Electoral College had
announced the results of the presidential elections, with

Thomas Jefferson the overwhelming victor over South Carolina
Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, winning 162-14. With
Aaron Burr out of the picture, former New York governor
George Clinton, an ardent Republican, easily won the vice
presidency. Republicans gained control of both houses of
Congress. With their own seats secure until 1809, John Quincy
and one-third of his colleagues had not faced reelection, but he
now stood alone in the Senate, shunned by Federalists and
Republicans alike because he invariably put preservation of the
union and the nation’s independence from foreign influence
ahead of party interests.

The day after the Chase trial, Vice President Burr announced
his retirement from the Senate, and with his resignation, the
Eighth Congress adjourned. The following day saw the
President return to the Capitol for his second inauguration,
and, perhaps chastened by his setback in the Chase case, he
“delivered an inaugural address in so low a voice that,”
according to John Quincy, “not half of it was heard by any part

of the crowded auditory.”34

After the inauguration, John Quincy’s sons contracted
chicken pox, but the Adamses nonetheless managed to go to
Quincy for the summer, where they took up residence in what
now seemed the somewhat crude old farmhouse in which John
Quincy had been born.

It stood at a distance from, but on the same land as, the
newer, more luxurious retirement “mansion” where John and
Abigail had installed themselves and where John Quincy spent
evenings discussing politics with his father. After renovating
the old house into a comfortable summer retreat, John Quincy
took up gardening as a new hobby that allowed him to spend
more time in the fresh air.

Early in June, Harvard named John Quincy professor of
oratory and rhetoric, a chair created by a bequest in 1771 from
Nicholas Boylston, a first cousin of John Quincy’s grandmother.
John Quincy worked out terms that would allow him to lecture
when the Senate was out of session, with payment of $348 per
quarter. Although he would not begin until the following year,

in June 1806, he snapped up copies of Cicero’s Orations ,
Thomas Leland’s Demosthenes, and works by Aristotle to
prepare his first lectures.

During the next session of Congress, John Quincy dined
frequently at the President’s House with Jefferson and
Secretary of State Madison, and after an uneventful winter
session, he returned to Massachusetts to prepare his Harvard
lectures and open his Boston law office. Too far along with
another pregnancy, Louisa again remained with her family in
Washington and, in early July, lost another child. John Quincy
wrote to her, repeating his thanks to God “for having preserved
you to me through the dangers of that heavy trial both of body

and mind which it has called you to endure.”32

In 1806, the endless Anglo-French conflict spilled into the
Atlantic again. The British reversed course and _ seized
American ships, confiscated cargoes, and impressed hundreds
of seamen. Early in 1807, John Quincy proposed—and the
Senate passed—three resolutions, two of which assailed British
actions as “unprovoked aggression” and “a violation of neutral
rights.” The third resolution authorized the President to
embargo all U.S. exports. Jefferson, Madison, and John Quincy
believed that ending the flow of essential American goods to
both England and France would force those countries to end
their war with each other and their depredations on American
ships. The embargo would not prevent imports from entering
American ports, but ships carrying such goods would have to
leave port empty, and few shipowners could afford such one-
way trade. John Quincy was the only Federalist in either house
of Congress to vote for the embargo, which he believed was a
middle ground between a suicidal naval war with Britain and
passive acquiescence to British rule over international sea-
lanes.

John Adams built this lavish “mansion” as a retirement home
for himself and his wife, Abigail. See illustration no. 2, page 10,
to view the entire Adams family farm. (PAINTING BY G.
FRANKENSTEIN, 1849; NATIONAL PARKS SERVICE, ADAMS

NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK)

 

Political isolation in Congress only intensified his loneliness.
After the Christmas holidays, Louisa had remained in Boston
with John II to be near George’s boarding school and see him
on Sundays. Though surrounded by in-laws, John Quincy longed
for his wife and children. At the end of a particularly cold
winter day in Washington, he wrote to Louisa before going to
bed, “I will not say I can neither live with you nor without you;
but in this cold weather I should be very glad to live with

"36
you.”22
Increasingly obsessed by thoughts of his wife, he spent his
lonely evenings writing poems, dedicating A Winter’s Day “To
Louisa”:
Friend of My Bosom! would’st thou know
How, far from thee, the days I spend.2Z

In another poem, he pleaded with Louisa to

Fling the last fig leaf to the wind
And snatch me to thy arms!38

She replied playfully, calling his words “the sauciest lines I
ever perused” and asking whether he would like her to publish

them.39

When Congress adjourned in the spring of 1807, John Quincy
returned to Massachusetts to find Louisa pregnant again, and
in mid-August, she gave birth to their third son, Charles
Francis Adams, whom John Quincy named for his dead brother
Charles and for Francis Dana, the diplomat John Quincy had
served as an adolescent in Russia.

As Boston Federalists demanded reconciliation with Britain,
the British stepped up their outrages against American vessels
on the high seas, with the worst occurring on June 22, 1807,
when the British frigate Leopard hailed the USS Chesapeake
just outside the three-mile territorial limit off Virginia’s Norfolk
Roads. As the American ship slowed, the British commander
demanded permission to search the Chesapeake for four men
he claimed were British deserters. When the American
commander refused, the Leopard fired without warning, killing
three Americans and wounding eighteen. The British boarded
and, stepping over the dead and wounded on the deck, seized
four men they claimed were British deserters. They hung one
of the men from the yardarm and impressed the three others.
The attack convinced President Jefferson and John Quincy that,
short of war, the only effective way to prevent British attacks
was to withdraw American ships from the oceans, impose the
congressionally sanctioned embargo, and try to undermine the
British economy.

When Britain refused to pay reparations for the Leopard
attack, Congress converted John Quincy’s resolution into the
Non-Importation Act, which effectively ended all American
foreign trade in December 1807. Although aimed at punishing
Britain, the act punished Americans more. Within weeks, the
embargo had shut New England’s shipbuilding industry, its
shipping trade, and its fishing fleet. With export outlets closed,

farmers—north and south—found their produce a glut on the
market. By spring, a wave of bankruptcies had shut businesses
and farms across New England and New York—quite the
opposite of what Jefferson, Madison, and John Quincy had
expected. All three believed the United States could survive as
a self-sufficient economy, abandoning imports in favor of home
manufactures and mitigating the effects of the embargo while
the U.S. government built a larger navy and armed her cargo
ships. The huge farm surpluses overwhelmed the internal
economy, however, and plunged the nation into economic
catastrophe.

Although most of the nation blamed Jefferson for the
country’s economic plight, Federalists and, it seemed, all of
Boston blamed John Quincy Adams. “I would not sit at the same

table with that renegade,” declared one Federalist.42

“Most completely was I deserted by my friends in Boston and
in the state legislature,” John Quincy admitted. “I can never be
sufficiently grateful to Providence that my father and my

mother did not join this general desertion.”41

In January 1808, he added to Federalist anger by attending
the Republican caucus in Congress to witness the nomination
of his good friend from across the chessboard, Secretary of
State Madison, to succeed President Jefferson. In the balloting
for vice president, John Quincy received one vote, which
effectively ended his ties to the Federalist Party. John Quincy,
however, now viewed Federalists as the party of secession,
disunion, subservience to Britain, and the end of American
independence. “To resist this,” he declared, “I was ready, if
necessary, to sacrifice everything I have in life, and even life

itself.”42

In May 1808, Massachusetts Federalists met in Boston, their
“principal object,” according to Republican governor James
Sullivan, being “the political and even the personal destruction
of John Quincy Adams.”43 Then and there—nine months prior
to the expiration of John Quincy’s term—the Federalists elected
his successor, then passed resolutions instructing their

senators—Pickering and Adams—to vote to repeal the embargo.
On June 8, 1808, John Quincy “immediately resigned what
remained of my Senate term.”

They had passed resolutions in the nature of instructions

. which I disapproved. I chose neither to act in
conformity with those resolutions nor to represent
constituents who had no confidence in me. .. . [They]
required me to aid them in promoting measures tending
to dissolve the union and to sacrifice the independence of

the nation. I was no representative for them. 44

As usual in times of distress, John Quincy turned to his father
for advice and consolation. “Your situation you think critical,”
the former President counseled his son.

You are supported by no party; you have too honest a
heart, too independent a mind, and too brilliant talents to
be sincerely and confidentially trusted by any man who is
under the dominion of party maxims or party feelings. ...
In the next Congress .. . you will be numbered among the
dead, like .. . the brightest geniuses of the country... .
Return to your professorship, but above all to your office
as a lawyer. Devote yourself to your profession and to the

education of your children.42

His father had made it clear: John Quincy Adams’s career in
public service had come to an end, his dream—and the dream
of his parents—to ascend to national leadership shattered.

