XII.

THE OATH THAT HENRY TOOK IN THE CATHEDRAL OF
AVRANCHES IS DECISIVE EVIDENCE AGAINST THE BULL
ATTRIBUTED TO POPE ADRIAN IV.

(1172.)

AFTER waiting five months, Henry II., at the end of

March, received in Wexford a favourable message. He

set out forthwith on Easter Monday, crossed England and

the Channel with great haste, and rcached Normandy.

In the Cathedral of Avranches—the Sunday previous to
the Assumption—before the Icgates, bishops, barons, and
people—his hand on the Book of the Gospels—he solemnly
swore that he was innocent in word and deed of the murder
of the Archbishop.

The silence observed in this oath with regard to Ireland
shows that Pope Adrian had not given the island to the
King of England, and, conscquently, that the Apocryphal
Bull was not yet invented.

In point of fact, Henry, doing homage for the kingdom
of England to the Holy See, and placing his kingdom
under the Pontifical Sovereignty, would not have neglected
to join Ireland with it, if this land had lawfully belonged to
him by Pontifical concession ; the double offering would
have facilitated the reconciliation, the absolution, thc re-
hahilitation of the prince.

The following is the formula of the oath, such as Baro-
nius and. Muratori give it, from documents in the
Vatican : —

‘““T, H., swear on these Holy Gospels of God that I did
not premeditate the murder of Saint Thomas, that [ did
not know of it, and that I did not command it ; that, on
recciving information of this crime, I felt a sorrow as
acute, a sadness as great, as if I had heard of the murder
of my own son. But what I cannot excuse in myself is

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 31

that he was put to death by occasion of the resentment and
anger that I had conceived against the holy man. I appear
therefore to have given occasion to his death ; for this
fault I shall send, at my expense, and without delay, two
hundred knights to Jerusalem, for the defence of Christen.
dom, and I shall maintain them for one year. I shall take
the cross for three years, and | shall sct out for the Holy
Land, unless the Sovereign Pontiff dispenses me. All the
illicit customs that during my reign | have introduccd into
all my land I entirely make void, and forbid their observ-
ance henccforth. I shall allow full liberty to carry appcals
to the Apostolic See, and shall not prevent any person in
this matter. Moreovcr, I, and my eldest son, the King,
swear that we shall receive and hold the kingdom of Eng-
land from the Lord Pope Alexander and his Catholic suc-
cessors, and we and our successors in perpetuity shall not
regard ourselves as true Kings of England until they them-
selves hold us for Catholic Kings.”’

_ The oath of Henry II. is found among the letters of
St. Thomas of Canterbury (v. 88. 89), and in those of
Salisbury (200), but without the last articlc, relating to
feudal subjection. The Legates, it is believed, promised
that this article should be kept secrct.

Baronius published the oath and the additional article
from the Acts of Pope Alexander II1:, which he found in
the archives of the Vatican. Muratori published them
again, during the last century, in Rerum Italicarum Scrip-
tores (tome 111, first part, p. 463). | Here is the text of
the article :——“‘ Piceterea ego. et major filius meus rex
iuramus quod a Domno Alexandro Papa, et ejus catholicis
successoribus recipiemus et tenebimus regnum Anglie,
et nos, et nostri successores in pcrpetuum non reputahi-
mus nos Anglize reges veros donec ipsi nos_ catholicos
reges tenuerint.”

At the end of the same year, Henry II. wrote to Pope
Alexander III. in order to implore his help regarding a
war that his eldest son, having rebelled, was waging
against him. In the letter he recognised the sovereignty
of the Holy See over the kingdom of, England, as a thing
perfectly understood between him and the Pope. The
letter being among those preserved by Peter de Blois,!.

* Secretary to Henry I1.—Trans.

32 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

there is no reason to suppose that the extra article was an
after insertion in the oath of Avranches. “ Vestre juris-
dictionis est regnum Anglia, et quantum ad feudatarii
juris obligationem vobis dumtaxat obnoxius  teneor et
astringor. Experiatur Anglia quid possit Romanus Pon-
tifex, et quia materialibus armis non utitur, patrimonium
B. Petri spirituali gladio tueatur.’’ (Petrus Blesensis,
epist. 136 ; Baronius, 1173, No. 8; Lingard, History of
England, Henry II., note 164.)

The silence that in this letter King Henry II. observed
with regard to Ireland is particularly remarkable. At the
period in question, the dominion of the prince in Ireland
seemed almost cntirely lost. The castles fortified in
Meath had been burnt down. Dublin endured scveral
assaults, and the governor of the royal possessions found
himself obliged to take refuge in the castle of Waterford.

Now, if the King had received Ireland from Pope
Adrian, and if he had been a feudatory of the Holy See in
this land, as he was in England, would he have neglected
to beg the protection of Pope Alexander against the Irish
rebels ?

 

