IX.
THE WELSH ADVENTURERS.

It is scarcely possible to attempt an expedition into Ire-
land without first occupying Wales, whose hostility would
constitute a real danger for an invading army. Henry II.
did not entirely subdue the principality of Wales until
1156, the third year of his reign. This fact, established
by all the chroniclers, renders it more and more improbable
that the King, from the first year of his reign, asked Pope
Adrian, either through John of Salisbury or any other mes-
scnger, for permission to undertake the conquest and sub-
jugation of Ireland. Adrian, an Englishman by birth,
could not be unaware that an invasion of Ireland is
strategically impossible for anyone who is not master of
Cambria. ;

A long time afterwards, some adventurers from Wales
disembarked on the shores of Iteland, and established
themselves at a few points along the coast. Thus, in our
own days, Garibaldi made his expedition from Marsala

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 2

in company with a thousand volunteers, so as to prepare
the way for Victor Emmanuel.

According to some chroniclers, Henry ff. ordered the
expedition of the Welsh adventurers. Other annalists
assure us that at first he showed himself very angry on
account of their piracy—to such a degree that he confis-
cated the property of the adventurers in England and
Normandy ; but that afterwards, on hearing of their suc-
cess, he removed the sequestration, requiring, however,
that they should yield to him all their conquests in Treland.

William of Newbridge, a canon regular of St. Augustin,
whose chronicle reaches to 1198, says that Henry, on learn-
ing of the capture of Dublin and some other stations along
the seaboard, confiscated the property of Richard,! the
leader of the troop, and did not restore it until he had
extorted (extorsit) Dublin and the other most important
possessions. Here is what the Chronicle of Newbridge
says 1 —

“ Treland, which had remained inaccessible to thc
Romans, although they occupied the Orkneys, was never
conquered, or subjected to any foreign power. . . . When
Earl Richard (chief of the troop) was preparing to depart,
a messenger came to him from the King, forbidding the
embarkation. But Richard, caring little for what he
possessed in England, embarked in spite of the prohibition.

. He came down on Dublin with irresistible impetu-
osity, and compelled many persons, who, seized with fear,
remained at a distance, to enter into a compact with him.
. . . When news of such happy success came to the King
of England, this prince, angry that Richard should have
undertaken such a great affair without consulting him, and
even against his prohibition, and that he had usurped the
glory of an illustrious conquest, which ought rather to re-
vert to the King, Henry, I say, confiscated the patrimony
of Richard in England ; and to prevent all help that might
be brought to him from England, he forbade the depar-
ture of ships for Ireland. Moreover, by a threat of the
greatest punishments, he brought Richard to repentance
—yjust at a time when a throne seemed to await him. Thus
did he extort from him the city of Dublin, and other prizes

1 Commonly called Strongbow.-—-Trans.

22 POPE. ADRIAN IV.,

that seemed best in the eonquest, and obliged him to be
eontent with what remained, besides his English patri-
mony, whieh he restored in full. After this, the Earl, who,
having a little while previously wasted his patrimony,
seemed to possess nothing else but the name of nobility,
found himself laden with English and Irish riehes, and
enjoyed the greatest happiness, whieh he lost however in
a few years by a premature death. ... A short time
afterwards, the King of England passed into Ireland.”’
(Lib. 2, e. 26.)

Benediet of Peterborough, on the eontrary, relates in
his ehroniele that the expedition to Ireland was under-
taken by the formal orders of King Henry IJ., and that the
restitution of property preeeded the departure of the Earl.
‘““The King restored to the Earl of Chester all the castles,
lands, and domains that belonged to him on this side and
the other of the sea (in England and Normandy). He then
eommanded (preecepit) him to go into Ireland, in order to
subdue that island for the benefit of the King.” (Recueil
des historiens de France, tome 14, p. 169.)

If we are to believe Robert du Mont, Henry II. was
already treating with his barons about a departure for
Ireland, when he received messengers from Riehard, whoa
said on the part of the Earl that he would transfer to the
King Dublin, Waterford, and other castles that he pos-
sessed in right of his wife, daughter of the previous King
of Dublin, now deceased. In reply, Henry IJ. promised
to restore to Earl Riehard his domains in England and
Normandy, and the land that came with his wife in Ireland.
He made him constable and senesehal for the whole island.
(Robertus de Monte, in Patrologie, tome 160, p. 513.)

Apart from variations and contradietions, the ehronielcrs
agree that a bargain between Henry I]. and Earl Riehard
was the starting-point for English domination in Ireland.

Had Richard a right to yield to the King Dublin, Water-
ford, and other plaees that belonged to his wife, who was
daughter and heiress of the petty King of Dublin? It
seems to me that Riehard had no right to transfer to the
King of England any political authority over the County
Dublin, to the prejudiee of his wife and her ehildren, or her
near relations, and in opposition to the laws that prevailed
in Ireland.

A FRIEND OF IKELAND. 23

It would be dithcult to appeal to a right of conquest ;
for the aggression of the Norman and Welsh adventurers,
not having been provoked by any openly declared causes,
was unjust, and, from a legal point of view, was simply an
act of piracy.

Moreover, according to William of Newbridge, whom I
have quoted above, the cession made by Earl Richard, far
from being free or spontaneous, was forced—was extorted.
Richard, the Seneschal of all Ireland—this was the height
of audacity ! Henry could not give what he did not
possess.

