NXVI.

THE PONTIFICAL COURT OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY KNEW
NOTHING ABOUT THE FALSE BULL OF ADRIAN IV.

] ASSEMBLE in this chapter various acts of John XXII.,
which concur to show that the Pontifical Court had no
knowledge of Adrian’s Bull from its own archives, or from
chronicles, or from public rumour ; so that writers of the
lives of Popes passed over in complete silence the pretended
donation of Ireland.

SECTION I.

In 1316, a little after the clection of John XXII., King
Edward II. sent three knights to the Pontifical Court as
ambassadors, to offer the tribute of a thousand marks
sterling, promised by John Lackland, and to excuse him
with regard to arrears, which cxtended to twenty-four
years. The Continuator of Baronius has published the
letter by which Edward accredited these ambassadors.
Now, this prince makes no distinction between England
and Ireland for the tribute. He did not at all say that
seven hundred marks were for the kingdom of England
and three hundred for the seigniory of Ireland, conformably
to the diploma of King John : ‘“‘ Ad excusandum nos super
solutione annui census mille marcharum, qui a nobis per
sacrosanctam Romanam Ecclesiam exigitur, non facta.”’ |
ought, however, to say that the ambassadors made this
distinction. As the arrears extended to twenty-four years,
they promised to pay a fourth during the next four years.
(Annals of Baronius, 1316, num. 24.)

The Holy See, which had not granted the investiture of
Ireland, could not expressly recognise that a part of the
tribute had reference to this island. Moreover, the King
of England had at this period only a very small portion of
the country, and the Pope should, from a sense of justice,
guard the right and the independence of the national
chiefs. In reality the offering of King John seemed rather
to be regarded as a snarc that hc had laid for the Pope,
with a view of obtaining for himself a title of sovereignty
over Ireland,

Q4 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

SECTION 2.

If the Pontifical Court had known the Bull of Adrian IV.,
a most favourable occasion for turning it to account
occurred when John XNNII. asked King Edward to rcnder
liere-homage, and to take the oath of fealty, as a vassal of
the Holy See. The pontifical letter, dated from Avignon,
the sixteenth of the calends of April, in the first year of the
pontificate, may be read in the Continuator of Baronius.
(An. 1317, num. 43.)

John XXII. took nothing as the foundation of his claim
but the diploma of King John. He passed over in silence
the promise of Henry II. and the pretended Bull of Adrian.
An cxplanation is offered in strictness that the Pontiff ab-
stained from mentioning the oath which Henry took in the
cathedral of Avranches, supposing that truly it was then
agreed to keep secret the clause relating to the feudal sub-
jection of England towards the Pope. Asa matter of fact,
the Holy See makes it a point of honour to keep conscien-
tiously the secrets confided to it. But this motive did not
exist for the Bull of Adrian IV., nor for the diplomas
attributed to Pope Alexander III. This is the reason why
John XXII., if he knew this Bull and these diplomas,
should naturally make use of them, and recall to the
memory of King Edward that his power over Ireland was
derived from a pontifical grant long anterior to the times
of King John.

Thus, John XXII., so decply informed in things of the
Holy See, and so well assisted by intelligent searchers,
such as Bernard Guidonis (or Di Guido), found in the
pontifical archives no trace of Adrian’s Bull or the pre-
tended diplomas of Alexander. He did not even know
them by rumour or by chronicles.

For after reminding King Edward that John Lackland
gave his kingdoms to the Roman Church with their rights
and dependencies (cum omnibus juribus et pertinentiis
suis), and promised that his successors would render
homage and pay an annual tribute, under pain of for-
feiture, John XXII. says that all this is proved by rumour
and by chronicles : “ Prout hac omnia fama notificat, et
chronicarum inspectio manifestat.” It follows logically

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 95

that the Pontifical Court had never hcard mention of
Adrian’s Bull, and that it knew nothing of the English
chronicles which give it. Therefore, Giraldus Cambrensis,
Raoul de Diceto, Roger de Wendover, Matthew Paris,
and others, who had written their chronicles more than a
century before, were unknown at the Pontifical Court in
1317. In the absence of the minutes of Adrian and
authentic registers, John XXII. might have had recourse
to public rumour (fama notificat) and to the chronicles of
historians (chronicarum inspectio manifestat). Since the
Pontiff does not speak of them in his letter, his silence
leads us to suppose his complctc ignorance in regard to
the documents of which there is question.

Although King John had promised that his successors
would render homage and take the oath of fealty, it
appears that the Kings of England did not fulfil exactly
their obligation. The letter of March 17, 1317, proves
that if the Kings paid the tribute, they neglected the
homage and the oath. ‘‘ Aliqui tamen ex successoribus
ipsis, et prasertim tu ac genitor antedictus, prestare
fidelitatis hujusmodi juramentum, ct recognoscere memo-
ratum homagium eisdem prezedecessoribus nostris Romanis
Pontificibus omisistis.” (Loc. cit.) The Pontiff exhorted
Edward II. to place the homage and the oath in the hands
of the two Cardinal Legates who were in England.

Did the King yield to the exhortation? The Continu-
ator of Baronius says that it is not certain: Obsecutum
pontifictis jussis Eduardum non constat. (Ibid.) How-
ever, the annalist gives another letter in which John XXII.
says to the King that he would gladly, for the moment,
close his eyes to the question of homage: Ut de recogni.
tione taceamus ad presens. (Year 1318, n. 28.)

SECTION 3.

So true is it that the Pontifical Court knew nothing of
the Bull attributed to Pope Adrian that the Irish them-
selves felt obliged to send a copy of it to the Cardinal
Legates and to the Pope ; but John XXII. took good care
not to believe in the genuineness of the document :
“ Quas (literas) preedictus Adrianus predecessor noster
eidem Henrico regi Anglie de terra Hiberniew concessisse

g6 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

dicitur.’’ The Pope therefore knew the Bull of Adrian
only by the complaints of the Irish, who, on their side,
brought forward the Bull as an argument ad hominem
against the King of England.

Here are the circumstances. Unable to bear the heavy
yoke that the English laid on them, the chieftains and the
people of Ulster took up arms, and called to them Edward
Bruce, brother of the King of Scotland. To justify their
revolt, they sent to the two Cardinal Legates of England
a. complaint of which I shall speak further on. They
added to their memorial a copy of the Bull, in order to
show that the English could not take their stand on this
document, since they had constantly eluded or violated its
clauses and conditions.

The Continuator of Baronius precedes the reply of
John XNII. with the following remarks :—‘‘ The Irish
addressed to the Cardinal Lcgates some letters full of very
grave complaints, and declared that it was this intolerable
tyranny which had compelled them to.take up arms against
Edward, and that this prince had violated the laws under
which Pope Adrian had given Ireland to England. In-
formed of all this by the Cardinals, John XXII. exhorted
Edward to lift the yoke off the people, and to let them see
his clemency.” (An. 1317, n. 43.)

The annalist tells us that the letter to King Edward is
preserved in the first volume of secret Icttcrs, No. 56; in
publishing it he suppresses two passages. It is also found
in an old Roman Bullarium, edition of 1588, and in some
historians, but falsified in a part of considerable import-
ance.

“ John, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to
Edward, the illustrious King of England, health and
apostolic benediction. The earnest exhortations that we
address to you, most dear son, in order that you may do
what pleases the Judge truly just, preserve peace in the
lands and among the subjects of your kingdom, and pro-
vide for what may contribute to your renown and your
glory, come from that paternal love with which we desire
the exaltation of your highness. You ought therefore to
receive them affectionately, and to show yourself willing
and ready to comply with them. Behold, son, we have
received letters that the magnates and people of Ireland

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 97

sent lately to our dear sons, Gaueelin, Cardinal Priest of
the title of Saints Marcellinus and Peter, and Luke, Car-
dinal Deaeon of the title of Saint Mary in via lata, nunctos
of the Apostolic See—~letters that they have enclosed to us
in their own. We have read there, among other things,
that Pope Adrian, our predecessor, of happy memory,
granted, under a eertain manner and form expressed in
apostolie letters, the dominion of Ireland to your aneestor
Henry, King of England, of illustrious memory. This
King and his sueeessors, the Kings of England, even to
our own times, not observing the manner and form afore-
said, have, on the eontrary, transgressed against every
rule ; and, by eruel vexations, unheard-of oppressions,
insupportable burdens, and inhuman tyrannies, erushed
the Irish people to the dust, so much the more miserably
and intolerably as these afflietions have lasted longer. Nor
was there any person who would remedy these evils, or
eorreet these disorders. No person seemed to take pity
on their misfortunes, although they had reeourse to you
regarding them, and the loud ery of their distress burst at
times upon your ears. Wherefore, no longer able to en-
dure sueh wrongs, they have felt obliged to withdraw
from your house, and to invite another prinee to be their
ruler. If these eomplaints are grounded on truth, most
dear son, they are so much the more painful to us as we
more ardently desire to see all your affairs prosper. You
ought to bring to them all your care, and promptly
earry into effeet all that may please your Creator. Be-
ware of all that might provoke against you the Lord God
Himself, to whom revenge belongeth, who doth not de-
spise the groans of the unjustly afflieted, and who, on
aeeount of injustiees, rejeeted His own speeial people, as
we see in Holy Seripture, and transferred kingdoms. At
a time so troubled as this, we still more earnestly desire
that you should enter into those dispositions whieh are
most proper to gain affeetion and submission in the hearts
of the faithful, and that you should avoid everything ealeu-
lated to detaeh them from your serviee. Beeause, there-
fore, son, it is your own greatest interest to avoid the
risks of ehange, and to oppose the beginnings of dis-
turbanee, lest they dangerously inerease and remedies
eome too late, we beg your royal highness, at the same
time persuading with wise eounsel, to refleet seriously on
uN

98 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

the aforcsaid gricvances, and to provide, by all suitable
ways and means, for their due and prompt redress. You
will thus please Him by whom you reign ; and, faithfully
accomplishing your duty, every cause of complaint against
you will ccase. Through these measures the said Irish,
le¢ by a more wholesome counsel, may submit to you as
lord, or if (which we hope will not be the case) they wish
to remain in rebellion, they will turn their cause into
a manifest injustice, and you will be excused before God
and men. In order that you may know thoroughly the
grievances and complaints on which the Irish rely, we
enclose in the present letter that which the aforesaid Car-
dinals have sent us, and also a copy of the letter which
the aforesaid Adrian, our predecessor, is said to have
granted to Henry, King of England, regarding the land of
Ireland. Given the 3rd of the calends of July.”!

I do not consider it necessary to point out the severity
with which John XXII. brands oppressions condemned by
the Divine law and by conscicnce, and gives the King to
understand that thce.cause of the Irish would be perfectly
just if the prince did not hasten to banish iniquities too
long committed. But, I ask, is the language of John XXII.
that of a sovereign? If, in the mind of the Pontiff, Adrian
had made a donation of Ireland, or if Pope Innocent III.
had accepted the sovereignty of the island that King John
offercd him with that of England, would John XXII. have
bcen able to appear so disinterested in the matter? Would
he have limited himself to speak only in the name of justice
and conscience? It seems to me that, in the hypothesis of
a political sovereignty, the Pope would have charged the
Legates to procced to an investigation, and to judge be-
tween the King, a pontifical feudatory, and his vassals,
who were at the same time vassals of the Roman Church.
He would have written dircct to the Irish, in order to
promise them a redress of their grievances, and to stay
the progress of the conflagration. As he did not do so,
his letter furnishes a new argument against the Apocryphal
Bull of Adrian.

Let us now come to the falsification of which I spoke
above. It occurs in the last article of the letter of
John XXII. As a matter of fact, according to the Con-

129th of June,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 99

tinuator of Baronius, who cxamined the original register,
John XANII. expressed himself doubtfully regarding the
Bull of Adrian: concessisse dicitur. Now, English writers,
falsifying the passage, have uscd these words: <Adrianus
Henrico regi Anglia de terra Ibernia concessit. Aeeord-
ing to them, John NXII. would have admittcd without
dispute the genuineness of Adrian’s Bull. Irish historians
themselves, not suspecting that any one would have dared
intentionally to alter the text, have adopted concessit.
Thus, Peter Lombard, Archbishop of Armagh, reprcsent-
ing the Irish at Rome under Clement VIII., has followed
the interpolated text in his book of the Annals of Ireland
(p. 260, Louvain edition, 1632). McGeoghegan, who
published his Histoive d’Ivlande at Paris in 1758, eopied
fiom Peter Lombard. He would have discovered the
fraud if he had consulted the Annals of Baronius, which
give the truc text in these terms : ‘‘ Ut autem de predictis
gravaminibus et querelis, quibus predicti innituntur
Iberniei, tuis sensibus innotescat ad plenum, predietas
litteras missas cardinalibus antedietis, tum formam littera-
rum quas preedietus Adrianus predecessor noster eidem
Henrico regi Anglizw dc terra Hiberniz CONCESSISSE. DICI-
rur,! tuz magnitudini mittimus preesentibus interclusas.”'
(Annals of Baronius, ycar 1317, n. 43-)

The eircumspcction of John XNII. is so much the morc
remarkable, as the Irish who made thc complaint appear
to have believed in the genuineness of the Bull of Adrian,
while protesting that it had been obtained by false repre-
sentations. This is proved by a passage in the Irish
Memorial : ‘‘ Adrianus, papa, preedeeessor vester, non
tantum origine, quantum affeetione et conditione Anglicus,
anno Domini 1170 (sic) ad falsam et plenam iniquitate
suggestionem Henrici regis Angliz, sub quo et fortassis
per quem sanctus Thomas Cantuariz eodem anno pro
justitia et defensione Ecclesia mortem sustinuit, sieut
scitis, dominium regni nostri, sub quadam certa verborum
forma, eidem, quem potius, ob dietam eulpam, proprio
debuit privasse regno, de facto et contulit indebite, ordine

‘Pope John, in his letter to the two Cardinals, uses the same words
“ concessisse dicitur.’’ See Theiner. Vetera monumenta Hibernorum, &c.,
p. 201. If, therefore, Pope Adrian did not make the grant, every argu-
ment built on a contrary supposition falls to the ground.—T rans.

x09 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

juris omisso omnino, anglicana affcctione, pro dolor! ex-
cecante tanti pontificis intuitionem.1 Hec pauca de
generali progcnitorum nostrorum origine, et de miserabili
in quo romanus Pontifex statu posuit, sufficiant ista vice.”

On the other hand, it is known that the Irish constantly
rejected Adrian’s Bull as falsc and apocryphal. Herc is
a remarkable proof of this fact. The Barberini Library in
Rome possesses a manuscript of the fourtcenth century,
which is a collection of original documents relating to the
pontificate of John XXII., at the very timc of which we
speak. We find there a letter from the lord justiciary and
council of Dublin, accusing thc Irish of various misdeeds,
in particular of generally maintaining that the King of
England employed false pretcnccs and Apocryphal
Bulls to support his pretended right to the dominion of
Ireland : ‘“ Asserentes etiam dominum regem Angliz ex
falsa suggestionc et ex falsis bullis terram Hibernia impe-
trasse, ac communiter hoc tenentcs.’’? It follows hence

1 The statement here made in the Memorial is truly extraordinary,
when we remember that Pope Adrian IV.died in 1159. It says that, as
Pope John XXII. himself knows, Pope Adrian, in 1170, having received
a petition full of falsehood and injustice from Henry, King of England,
under whom, and perhaps by whom, St. Thomas of Canterhury met
his death that very same year, transferred the dominion of Ireland to
Henry, when he ought rather to have deprived him of that of England,
and he did this without regard to the usual course prescrihed hy law,
heing blinded by love of country, for he was an Englishman, not only
hy hirth, but even more hy affection, Pope John, observing a prudent
silence, takes no notice of the anachronism here set forth, or of the
knowledge attrihuted to himself.

Mr. Laurence Ginnell, in his’very ahleTand learned essay on"the
Bulls, regards this Memorial as {(with or without the knowledge of
Donald O’Neill) the work of the Ulster Scotch, full of hatred against
the English, and desirous of ohtaining Ireland[for themselves and
Robert Bruce. It is found in Scotichronicon, a Latin History? of
Scotland, hy John de Fordun, It does not appear in old Irish works.

The Scotchmen likely thought that if Pope Adrian IV. had given
Ireland to the English, his successor Pope John XXII. might very well
follow such a good precedent, hy giving it to them, now that the English
had heen shown to have so grossly ahused their trust.—T vans.

7 «Moreover, they assert that the King of England, under false pre-
tences and by false bulls, ohtained the dominion of Ireland, and this
opinion is commonly held by them,"' An attempt has been made to
show that by these words, which are thosefof. one of our highest
authorities, the above Latin passage has not been “ fairly and properly
translated.” The critic says that impetrasse means ohtaining by
request—as if he were entitled to say that it has no other meaning.
He then throws overhoard the words ex falsa suggestione et

A FRIEND OF {RELAND. 101

that the Mcmorial addressed to John XNII, could not be
the work of all Ireland ; for it expressed a conviction that
the Bull, though null by having been obreptitiously or
surreptitiously obtained, really emanated from Pope
Adrian.

In point of fact, this Memorial was scnt by O’Neill,
King of Ulstcr, who took the title of heir of all Ireland,
aS we read in the superscription: ‘‘ Sanctissimo in
Christo Patri domino Johanni, Dei gratia Summo Ponti-
fic1, sui devoti filliit, Donaldus O’Neill, rex Ultoniz, ac
totius Hiberniz hzreditario jure heres, necnon et ejusdem
terre reguli et magnates ac populus hibernicus, cum sul
recommendatione humili, devota pedum oscula beatorum.’’
O’Neill believed that he could speak in the name of Ire-
land. This does not prove that every assertion in the
Memorial ought to be attributed to the whole nation,! of

ex falsis bullis, and gives as his concise reading that Henry obtained
Ireland by arequest. Wedoubt very muchif this is a fairand proper
mode of translation.

Du Cange, who is such a great authority on old Latin words, tells
us that suggestio is another name for rogatorie litter@, or a letter of
petition, The courtly Dublin writer, being a scholarly man, employed
ths specific or official term suggestio, and added faisa.

The expression ‘false bull” is sometimes applied to a true bull,
obtained by false pretences; but it is oftener used to denote a forged
bull, The context generally shows in which sense it is taken. If A
says that he has received a letter from King Edward VII, and B says
that it isa false letter, what does B mean but that the letter was never
' written or sent by the King ?

'The facts are well accounted for by the above hypothesis
regarding the Scotch.

Referring to this time, Dr. Mat. Kelly, in his notes to Cam-
brensis Eversus (vol. ii., 622), says: ‘‘ With the exception of the
period of Edward Bruce’s invasion, therc do not appear any
evidences of the popular belief that Ireland was a fief of the Holy
See.’ He did not suspect that the Memorial might have been
a Scotch}forgery, in which the sentiments of the Irish people as
a body were misrepresented. A very correct tradition prevailed
among the Irish regarding the fief-title of Adrian’s Bull. Let us
hear a few further remarks regarding this Bull from Dr. Lynch,
author of Cambrensis Eversus (vol. ii., 563) :—

“At all events, it is certain that King Henry cither did not
believe the authenticity of the Bulls of Adrian and Alexander,
or the validity of the claim which they purported to give to the
sovercignty of Ireland. For we find him distrusting them, and
labouring to extort from Pope Lucius III, successor of Alexander,
a grant similar to the preceding. Yct, though he had deserved
well of Pope Lucius, and sent him a large sum of money in 1183,

102 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

which the great majority, 1 repeat it, never had any faith
in the Bull of Adrian.

The Memorial confirms what I have said above on the
vexations, opprcssions, spoliations, dcccits, outrages,
mudrers, bloody persecutions, that the Irish suffcred from
the English. The document is in John de Fordun, volume
the third of the Scotch chronicle. McGcoghegan has given
most of it in thc second volume of his Histoire d’Irlande.
Dr. Lingard has made an exact and very complete analy-
sis of it. We also meet fragments of it in O’Callaghan’s
notcs to Macarie@ Excidium.

he was disappointed in his expectations. The Pope refused the
request, probably, as well as we can conjecture, because, after an
attentive examination of the whole affair, he discovered either
that the bulls had never been issued or that they were fraudulently
obtained. Hence we find Henry still restless, from the conviction,
perhaps, that the preceding bulls had been unjustly procured,
and were therefore invalid. Again, he applies to Urban III, the
successor of Pope Lucius, and begs a new grant of the kingdom
of Ireland. ‘In the year 1185, Henry, King of England, sent his
ambassadors to Urban and obtained many favours, which had been
stern!y refused by Pope Lucius. One of the concessions was that
he was empowered to have any of his sons crowned King of Ireland,
and the Pope confirmed that right to him by a bull, and sent to
him, as a token of his will and approbation, a crown of peacock’s
feathers, wreathed with gold.’ (Hoveden, p. 631) As merchants
of slendcr means cannot get goods on credit, but must pay down
ready money, even so this writer has no more claims to the assent
of his readers than what his authorities can command. Would it,
I ask, have been more troublesome to give a copy of that bull
than to make this passing notice of it ? Can there be any possible
reason for suppressing it but the conviction that it had not really
been granted by the Pope? In the very first year of his ponti-
ficate, before he was under the least obligation to Henry, could
Urban be so indecorous, so flexible, as to grant thus readily what
neither the most pressing solicitation nor the choiccst favours
could extract from his predecessor? Surely he could not take
such liberty with the property of others, as to make a present
of a whole kingdom to a foreigner, without even communicating
his design to the inhabitants, or hearing their defence. Surely
he would send some more respectable pledge of his libcrality than
a hunting cap of peacock’s feathers, which would gird, with more
propriety, the temples of some stage king in a theatre than the
head of a trne and real monarch,”

In Migne’s collection of the letters, etc., of Pope Urban IIT,
there isno such bullas that micntioned above. (Patrolugie, vol. ccii.)
The passage from Hoveden may be found in the edition of his works
brought out under the dircction of the Master of the Rolls, vol. ii.,
p. 306.—Tyrans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 103

SECTION 4.

The pretended Bull of Adrian madc so little impression
on the Pontifical Court that the historians of the time did
not think it worth their while to mention it.

Two Lives of Pope Adrian IV. were written about this
very period by men residing at the Pontifical Court. The
first had for its author the learned Dominican, Bernard
Guidonis, who died in 1331. The other, a largcr work,
was prepared by Cardinal D’Aragon, whom Pope Inno-
cent VI. raised to the purple in 1359.

Now, in neither is any mention made of the pretendcd
Bull of Adrian IV., giving Ireland to the King of Eng.
land. However, in the Life of Alexander III., which
comes afterwards, Cardinal D’Aragon gives the oath of
Henry II. in the cathedral of Avranches, and some other
documents. Since hc kecps silence on the Bull of Adrian,
it is apparently because he found no trace of it in the pon-
tifical archives.

SECTION 5.

The land of the King in Ircland was very far from com.
prising the whole island. In 1319, John XXII. forbade
the invasion of the land of the King in Ireland. If hc had
been convinced that all Ircland belonged to the King of
England by a donation of Pope Adrian, he would have
hurled his censurcs against the aggressors of Ircland in
general. Wishing to favour Edward II., who showcd
good dispositions for the Crusade, and was preparing to
set out, John XXII. thought it a duty to protect the
dominions of this prince : ‘‘ Fide digna relatione percepta,
quod nonnulli nobiles et magnates regem ipsum et regnum
ac terram suam Hibernie invadcre ausu temerario et
illicite nitebantur.’’ This chicfly regarded the Scotch.
The Pope inflicted excommunication, and recommended
the two Cardinal Legates of Engand to promulgate the
sentence, especially in places near the sea: ‘ Precipue
in locis maritimis, seu mari vicinis.’’ For the Irish
dominions of the King of England were situated along
the coast. Notwithstanding all this, some Scotch nobles
attacked England, and the land of King Edward in Ire-
land, and did much mischief there. The Pope then wrote

TO4 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

a circular to the Archbishops and Bishops of England
(but did not address himself to Irish prelates). He recom-
mended them to denounce publicly the aggressors as ex-
communicated, especially in maritime districts—and this
every Sunday (candelis accensis) until repentance.

This circular of John XXII. proves against the pre-
tended donation of Adrian. It is in the Roman Bullarium
(vol. 3, part 2, p. 177). Also in Rymer (vol. 3, P. Sir).

SECTION 6.

In 1327, revolt and disorder spread throughout all Ire-
land. An ordinance of King Edward, 12th July, 1327,
shows the deplorable condition of the country: ‘‘ Hiber-
nici inimici et rebelles nostri, terras nostras, et diversorum
magnatum qui terras habent in Hibernia, et in Anglia
commorantur, devastarunt, ct devastant multipliciter in-
dies.” The King ordered the castles to bec fortified.
(Rymer, iv., 294.)

Having resolved to go to Ireland, in 1332, the King
sent William Burke, Earl of Ulster, before him.

The lords who had domains in Ireland were to accom-
pany the King. The Parliament had decided on this
journey for the pacification of the country and for the
suppression of the rebellion. Soon, however, the visit of
the King was countermanded. Edward offered an amnesty
to the chief rebels, English as well as Irish, and appointed
as his plenipotentiary Roger Outlaw, prior of St. John of
Jerusalem in Ireland. (Rymer, iv., 503, 507, 526.)

As the war with Scotland caused heavy expenses and
required strong soldiers, Edward addressed a friendly re-
quest to the Bishops of Ircland: ‘“ Vos affectuose re-
quirimus et rogamus, quatenus de tantis hominibus ad
arma validis, armis compctentibus bene munitis, quantum
facultates vestree commode permiserint, et instans nostra
necessitas exegerit, absque excusationis diffugio, subve-
nire.”” This occurred in 1335. (Rymer, iv., 642.)

SECTION 7.

_ Edward III. was too much occupied with domestic mis-
fortunes, and the third of his wars with Scotland and
France, to concern himself greatly with the affairs of Ire-

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 105

land. The old Irish, by repeated efforts, sueceeded in re-
ducing the English territory to the narrowest limits. If
they had united then in one common effort, they would
have been able to drive the invaders into the sea. Their
hostilities were only the sudden result of some particular
provocation, not of any general plan of deliverance.
Several tribes did not hesitate to receive an annual pen-
sion from the English Government, as the reward of the
services that they rendered, by protecting the colonists of
the seaboard against such of the Irish as showed them-
selves more hostile.

The territory occupied by the English presented a
seene of anarchy and confusion. The colonists were
divided into two classes, the English by race and the Eng-
lish by birth. The former were the descendants of the
ancient aggressors, and considered themselves as the law-
ful heirs of the lands and revenues acquired by the swords
of their ancestors. The second class consisted of persons
whom the King had sent over from England to various
employments in Ireland, and a multitude of adventurers
whom poverty or crime banished every year from their
own country. To the old colonists they were objects of
special jealousy and hatred. The Government protected
and advanced them, in order to make use of them as a
defence against the discontent of the others.

SECTION &.

In 1341, the King married his son Lionel to Elizabeth,
daughter of the Earl of Ulster, in the hope that this union
would confirm his authority in Ireland. (Rymer, v., 247.)

A few years afterwards, Edward, having need of troops
for the war with France, besought the Irish chiefs to send
him men, in the name of that regard which they had for
him: ‘‘ Ad Magnates Hiberni#, de veniendo ad regem,
cum hominibus ad arma et hobelariis. Specialiter vos
rogamus, quod ad nos venire velitis. . .. Et hoc sicut nos
et honorem nostrum diligitis, nullo modo omittatis.’’ The
letter is of the 10th July, 1344. (Rymer, v., 417.)

Two years afterwards, Edward Icarns that disorder con-
tinues, because the country is without defence. He sees
no other remedy than to have recourse again to the Arch-
bishop of Armagh, and he begs of him to take such

106 PUPE ADRIAN IV.,

measures as are necessary for the defence of the country
and the restoration of pcacc. (Rymer, v., 669.)

SECTION Q.

The English by race lived in continual contradiction with
the laws of the colony. Many of them adopted the dress,
the manners, the language, and the laws of the old Irish.
Not a few were thus gradually transformed from English
barons into Irish chiefs.

At the time when Lionel, Duke of Clarence, governed
the English province, a Parliament was assembled ; it
made the famous statute of Kilkenny. This statute was
not dirccted against the old Irish, but against the descen-
dants of English colonists who had rejected the laws of
England for those of Ireland. It enacted that marriage,
fostcring, and gossipred with the Irish should in future
make the delinquent subject to the penalty of high treason,
and that any Englishman who adopted an Irish name or
custom should be compelled, under pain of imprisonment,
to give bail for his willingness to return to the customs of
his own country.

The old dissensions among the English still continucd,
and the Irish continued to extend their conquests.

SECTION 10,

So imminent was the danger with which English power
in Ireland was threatened in 1353, that the King forbade
prelates, religious, earls, barons, knights, all men fitted
for military service, to Icave the country, when they
should contribute to its defencc. The chancellor received
orders to arrest and imprison fugitives, cum equis ct her-
nests suis. (Rymcer, v., 748.)

As matters grew worse, Edward called a grcat Council,
to deliberate on the state of Ireland. He brought together
the lords who held domains in the country. The letter of

convocation provcs that Ireland was almost lost for the
King of England. (Rymer, vi., 318.)

SECTION I1.

Edward III. forbade that any of the old Irish should be

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 107

appointed to the office of mayor or bailiff—in general, to
any employment. He ordered that canonries, parishes,
benelices, should be conferred only on Englishmen.
(Rymer, vi., 211.)

In 1362, he made a new appeal to the lords who had
domains in Ireland, urging them to come forward in per-
son, with their men of arms, to defend the country, which
was in danger of being entirely lost. (Rymer, vi., 350.)

Six years afterwards, a new command to the lords to set
out for Ireland, in order to defend the country, under pain
of the forfeiture of their lands, which the King would dis-
pose of to others. (Rymer, vi., 594.)

SECTION 12.

Richard II. spent six months in Ireland, from October,
1394, to May, 1395. Rymer does not mention any act of
the King about Irish affairs. (Rymer, vil., 782.)

What strikes us in the various matters cited above, is
the eomplete oblivion into which the Bull attributed to
Pope Adrian had fallen in the fourteenth century. The
Kings of England employed the foree of arms to main.
tain their domination ; but in times of the greatest peril,
they never appealed to a pontifical donation—nor to an
offering of King John—nor to the sovereignty of the Holy

See—nor to Roman investiture, which, in truth, had never
been given.

