NXN.
BRIEFS OF THE IIOLY SEM ON THE WAR OF IRISH INDEPENDENCE,

SEVERAL briefs of Gregory XIII., and two other briefs by
Clement VIII. twenty years later, approved of the rising
of the Irish against the English, to recover the national
independence, and freedom of worship for the Catholic
religion.

‘Even at the present day, it seems that three-fourths of the
farms are crowded on one-fourth of the land.—Tvrans.

* If, at the time our esteemed author wrote, the History of
Ireland in the Eighteenth Century, V.vols., by William E. H. Lecky,
had been published, he would likely have had a great deal more to
say on the reigns of William, Anne, and the Georges. The good
clauses of the Treaty of Limerick held but for a very short time.

Abbé McGeoghegan shows from French official documents
that between 1691 and 1745 more than 450,000 Irishmen died in the
service of France alone, to say nothing of Spain or Austria. Life
in Ireland had been rendered next to impossible for them.—Trans,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. I2y

In point of fact, the champions of independenee appealed
to the Sovercign Pontiff, and the Popes often sent them
peeuniary and military aid, and exhorted the Irish, by
letters or by messengers, to shake off the English yoke,
and to free their country from eivil and religious bondage.

The bricf of Gregory XIII. on the 13th of May, 1580,
mentions another, anterior by a few years, which had likc-
wise exhorted the Irish to take up arms for the defence of
the Catholie Faith. The Pontiff granted the indulgences
of the Crusades to all who should favour the good cause,
by supplying either ammunition or food. The brief has
been published by historians. It may be found in the
Histoire d’lreland, by McGeoghegan, with the following
remark: ‘* Behold the remedy that Gregory XIII. would
bring to the evils of Ireland, which one of his predecessors,
Adrian IV., had caused!” (LT. 2, p. 1139.)

The first brief of Clement VIII. is dated the 16th of
April, 1600. After the dcath of James Geraldine and his
relatives, the army took as its leader Hugh O’Neill, Earl
of Tyrone.t The Pontiff renewed the indulgences of the
Crusades for men in the army, and for all others who
Should assist in the cause of independence and the defcncc
of religion.

The Irish formed a national association against deserters
from the Church. Clement VIII. highly approved of their
zeal ; reeommended eoneord, a good understanding, to
them ; promised to write earnestly to Catholic princes ;
and announeed the sending of a Nuneio, who would reside
among them, and contribute to the maintenance of union.
This brief, dated the 30th of January, 1601, was addressed
to the Captain-General of the Catholie army.

In 1603, two cases of eonscienee were laid before the
University of Salamanca. Prince Hugh O'Neill wages war
against the Queen of England for the defence of the Catho-
lic religion, that the Irish may be permitted to profess it-—
a liberty that the Queen wishes to take from them by force
of arms. Can Irish Catholics in conscience, by arms and
all other means, help Prince Hugh in this war? And can
Irish Catholics, without mortal sin, enlist in the enemy’s

1¥t will be observed, that, notwithstanding what has been said
at p. 121, the name O’Neill still survives.—Tvans.

E

130 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

army, fight against Prince Hugh, and favour the English
by arms or in any other manner?

The Spanish Doctors answered the first question affirma-
tively, the sccond negatively.

The resistance of the Irish was just, because they de-
fended religion, which the English cndeavoured by force of
arms to abolish. On the side of the Irish, it was a defen-
sive war ; they wished to preserve themselves from a reli-
gious persecution and a most tyrannieal oppression. For
the same reason, the war that the English made being un-
just, an Irishman could not in eonscience fight in their
ranks, against his fellow-countrymen.+

The Bull of Adrian IV. was never brought forward in the
briefs that I have cited. Is it not truly significant that this
Bull was never mentioned in any official document ?

The Irish, bravely risen against England, earnestly de-
sired that the Pope should take thc temporal sovereignty
of the kingdom, and be declared its lord and master. Peter
Lombard, the representative of Hugh O'Neill with
Clement VIII., believed in the genuineness of the Bull, as
may be seen in the ‘‘ Annals of Ireland,’’ whieh he pub-
lished at Louvain. Frequently admitted to a Pontifieal
audiencc, according to a promise given in the brief of 1601,
he had many an opportunity of speaking of the Bull, and
probably he urged the Popc to rcly upon this ancient proof
of pontifical right. But Clement VIII., resisting all impor-
tunity, took good care not to admit the genuineness of the
Bull.

¥Don Philip O’Sullivan, in his Historie Catholice Hibernie
Compendium, has given much blame to some Anglo-Irish priests,
who, through culpable or inculpable ignorance, taught a contrary
doctrine :—‘‘ Cujus mali maxima culpa in aliquot Anglo-Ibernos
sacerdotes jure transferenda est, qui tartareum dogma ab orco
in Catholicorum perniciem emissum non negabant, licere Catholicis
contra Catholicos et suam patriam pro hereticis gerere arma, et
dimicare. Quod si sacerdotcs isti sand mente, et cum cceteris in
hercticis oppugandis unanimes et concordes extitisscnt, et Iberni
alii allis non obstitissent, facili ncgotio potuissent hzreticorum
jugum ccrvicibus discutere, ut ex omni nostra historia fusius et
assertius constat.” Edited by the Rev. Dr. Matthew Kelly,
Pp. 339.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, I35I

