XIX.
DIPLOMA ATTRIBUTED TO ALEXANDER II’.

GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, who, it seems, was the first to
publish the diploma of Pope Alexander, in Hibernia Ex-
pugnata, disclaimed it afterwards in another work that he
published towards the close of his life, entitled De Instruc-
tione Principis. Some assure us, he says, or pretend to
believe, that the diploma was obtained ; but others deny
that it was ever obtained. Sicut a quibusdam impetratum
asseritur : ab aliis autem unquam impetratum fuisse nega-
tur. There is no chance of making capital out of this
document.1

Like the Apocryphal Bull, this diploma is without date ;
neither does it express the name of the King to whom it is
addressed. O’Callaghan has not failed to publish it, ob-
serving, with Dr. Lanigan, that ‘‘ the attempts to dis-

guilty of injustice. The conviction will grow on the reader’s mind that
Adrian, being a native of England, knew better than others what to
think of the Plantagenets, and that probably he never even once in his
life wrote to Hepry.—Tvans.

1 Migne gives over 1,500 letters attributed to Pope Alexander III.
He then adds two under the heading ‘‘Spuria.” One of these is
addressed to Henry II., and is specially interesting as giving him
authority over the Bishops of England: “Insuper, fili charissime, si
episcopi tui regni in nostro mandato apostolica et archiepiscopatu
nimis negligentes, quod absit! exstiterint, volumus quod manus
adjutrices extendas ad sustentandam Romane Ecclesiz libertatem ;
et sic obtinebis apostolicam benedictionem; quia post sententiam
latam si incorrigibiles perstiterint, sacrosancta Ecclesia non potest
ultra facere nisi invocare brachium seculare.” Henry II. in his desire
to be Head of the Church, and in several other respects, bore a great
resemblance to Henry VIII. Both had a furious hatred for St. Thomas
of Canterbury. Henry VIII. summoned the dead Archbishop before the
royal tribunal on a charge of high treason. The writ was hung up
at his tomb. As the holy man did not appear on the day of trial,
sentence was passed against him. His name was blotted out of the
calendar of the saints, the memory of him totally condemned, his
bones burned, his ashes thrown into the river, and all the precious
ornaments-—gold, silver, jewels, &c.—of his shrine, said to have been
the richest in Europe, were carried away to the royal coffers.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 65

prove the authenticity of Alexandcr’s, as well as Adrian’s
Bull, have been equally unsuccessful.”

I turn to the document in the recent edition of the
works of Gilraldus Cambrensis. (Vol. v., p. 318.

It is unnecessary to discuss at any great length the value
of a diploma that, as I have said above, has been dis-
claimed by the very inan who was most deeply interested
in maintaining it.

1. How strange that Alexander III., who knew nothing
of Adrian’s Bull when he wrote the three letters of which
I have spoken above (Chapter XIII.), now comes forward
to confirm a donation of Ircland to the King of England,
without naming this prince.

2. One might say that Pope Alexander confirmed
Adrian’s Bull, without ever having seen it. As a matter
of fact, the pretended authority given by Adrian to enter
Ireland, and the recommendation to welcome him as lord,
are transformed by Alexander into a grant of the dominion
of the Irish kingdom: Concessionem ejusdem super Hiber-
nici regni dominio vobis indulto ... ratam habemus et
confirmamus. Was Ireland a kingdom, or did it bear
this title in any public acts? The plural vobis takes us by
surprise : the forger would have us believe that Ireland
was given to all the Kings of England in perpetuity.

3. The mention of Peter’s Pence shows beyond ques-
tion the falsity of the diploma, as I have established in the
preceding chapter. It is inadmissible that Popes Adrian
and Alexander should have authorised or accepted a tri-
bute which was never paid, and which the Holy See never
asked.

4. Although Lanigan belicved in the genuineness of the
diploma, he exclaims against the charge of barbarism and
infamous morals with which the Pontiff is supposed to
reproach the people of Ireland. The Pope, he says,
“seems to have known nothing of the state of the Irish
Church, except what he heard from the lying accounts of
the enemies of Ireland.’”’ (Macarie Excidium, p. 247.)

5. We find in the diploma the same confusion between
the two powers, ecclesiastical and secular, as I have noted
in the Apocryphal Bull. It is not to bishops, but to a
worldly prince, that Pope Alexander is seen to confide the
mission of working the moral reformation of a barbarous

F

6 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

people, Christian only in name—of reforming the Church,
heretofore without order in Ireland—of making the nation
really Christian.!_ Are such ideas tolerable?

Henry Il., at the time of his dreadful eonfliet with
St. Thomas of Canterbury, asked much less than Pope
Alexander is here supposed to grant him. He submitted,
no doubt, but he reserved to himself the taking of revenge,

' Archdeacon Lynch, in his valuable work Cambrensis Eversus,
subjects the alleged Bulls of Adrian and Alexander to a long and
learned examination. ‘‘I am confident,” he says, ‘‘that these Bulls
are full of errors, and that most of their statements are utterly ground-
less, an assertion which can be more easily substantiated by examining
their blunders in detail.” He scouts the idea of a Pope employing
such an agent as Henry II., a man full of evil propensities, for a
great and difficult work of moral reformation; of writing letters so
different from the true papal style, so abusive, so devoid of all
paternal tenderness for the Irish people; and of departing so far
from the spirit of the Holy See as to treat the Irish Bishops with
an utter want of ceremony—reducing them to a rank of secondary
importance in presence of an English King, at the head of an invading
army. ‘' Tyranny of that kind,’ he says, ‘‘ was never known under
the mild government of the Popes, whose pious and learned delegates
employed gentle and persevering persuasion, not violence and platoons,
to civilise the hearts of men, lighting by admonition the path for
voluntary obedience, not goading them against their will at the point
of the sword. When the Apostles went forth to propagate the faith,
they were not allowed to carry even a staff; and can it be lawful for
their successors in that sacred duty to force by arms some nameless
sort of reformation on men eminently instructed in religion? Arms
rather barbarise than civilise man. War destroys learning and law,
levels cities, burns houses, devastates lands, tramples the corn fields

. in a word, throws everything intodisorder. A most contemptible
fool the man must be, who first invented the story of the adoption
by the Apostolic See of so preposterous a mode of reforming the morals
of any nation.’”” Dr. Lynch thus goes on to prove by innumerable
arguments that the aforesaid Bulls were mere forgeries. Vol. ii.,
chap. 22-25. Ed. by the Rev. Dr. Mat. Kelly.

If the English translation of Cambrensis Eversus by Dr. Kelly,
which is done in very good style, were published in one volume by
itself, it would be a great boon; for few readers can be expected to
take up the three large volumes, containing both Latin and English
texts. Unfortunately, however, the notes attached by Dr. Kelly,
though according to the views held by many persons in his day, are
usually out of all harmony with the remarks made by the Author.
A correcting or reconciling hand would therefore be required, and
this would entail trouble, but far less than that of making another
translation. Considering the many new lights thrown on history
during the past fifty years, a great advance towards truth might be
expected.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRFLAND, 67

thanks to the diplomas which he would one day have
forged under his eyes.

