XVI.
PREPARATIONS FOR THE FRAUD.
(1180.)

I HAVE said (Chapter VIII.) that it was not possible, dur-
ing the life of Louis VII., King of France, who had re.
ceived the true letter of Adrian IV., containing a distinct

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 4I

refusal to authorise the expedition to Ireland which this
prince had proposed to undertake in alliance with Henry II.
—it was not possible, I say, to allege a Bull of the same
Pope Adrian IV., making a present of Ireland to the King
‘of England, permitting him to invade the land, and enjoin-
ing on the Irish to submit to him as their master. For the
fraud would have been immediately discovered and un-
masked by an irrefutable witness.

Hence, we have been unable to discover any trace of the
Apocryphal Bull in records previous to the year 1180,
which was that of the death of Louis VII. The Bull was
passed over in silence, even at a time when Henry II.
-would have had the greatest interest in producing it, and
availing himself of it.

It was only a good many years after the death of
Louis VII,, and about thirty years after that of. Pope
Adrian IV., that Giraldus Cambrensis, Chaplain of the
English Court, first inserted the false Bull in his history
of the conquest of Ireland.

After the death of Louis VII., there was no longer any
inconvenience in speaking of a Bull from Adrian. How-
ever, before producing it, it was necessary, first of all, to
reveal its existence, and gradually to prepare public
opinion for the reception of the apocryphal document.

Behold a difficult question: was John of Salisbury
charged to announce the Bull? Is he really the author of
that chapter in his Metalogicus which says that, at his re-
quest, Pope Adrian IV. granted the Bull?

Let us first see if Salisbury’s antecedents place him be-
yond the reach of a ‘suspicion of complicity in the fraud.

I have said (Chapter VIII.) that John of Salisbury
spent a great many years out of England, and that the
publication of his Polycraticus, in 1159, drew’ on him the
attention of Thomas Becket, then Chancellor, who attached
him to his service, and gave him several employments.

It is generally believed that he had been secretary or
‘chancellor to Theobald, the predeccssor of Saint Thomas
in the primatial See of Canterbury. In point of fact, we
remark in Salisbury’s voluminous correspondence a very
large number of letters that he wrote to Pope A. in the
name of Archbishop T. Unfortunately, these initials apply
equally well to Pope Alexander and Archbishop Thomas
as to Pope Adrian and Archbishop Theobald.

42 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

There is room to doubt if, after 1159, Salisbury acted as
secretary to Theobald. Could he be in the service of this
prelate, and at the same time be attached to the Chancellor
Thomas Becket? We have no other guarantee that the
last chapter of the Metalogicus, written perhaps at a time
when it was a matter of interest to make people believe
that in the closing years of Theobald, say 1160 or 1161,
Salisbury wrote that chapter in his work which mentions
the donation of Ireland to King Henry II. and the Bull of
Pope Adrian IV. ,

What is certain is that Becket attached Salisbury by
several employments, and, from the time of his nomination
to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, took him as secretary.
I do not like to see that Salisbury (letter 150) confided to
his friends that he neglected no means of moderating the
zeal of the prelate, warning him that his ardour would
cause him to lose the friendship of the King.1 However,
he did not abandon his protector in the hour of disgrace.
He shared proscription with him, and sought a refuge in
France. After five years of exile, he rejoined Thomas
Becket in England, and was, a little while later on, a
witness of his tragic death. John of Salisbury continued to
be attached, as a simple cleric, to the church of Canter-
bury, until, in 1176, King Henry II. nominated him Bishop
of Chartres. I am not unaware that the clergy and people
elected him according to the canonical forms then in use,
and that Louis VII. wrote him a Ictter, which is still pre-
served, to overcome his hesitation ; but are not these very
incidents of a nature to rouse suspicion, and make us sup-
pose that there was a desire to disguise the true cause of
the unexpected elevation of Salisbury to the episcopal See
of Chartres?

It would be a sad question to ask if the Bishopric of
Chartres was the price of a bargain between Henry II. and
Salisbury, the latter taking on himself the obligation of
favouring the King’s views regarding Ireland ; and that he
did so by writing the famous chapter of the Metalogicus
which has been so oftcn adduced to accredit and authenti-
cate the false Bull of Adrian IV. - oO

1 It must be admitted that Salisbury occasionally showed himself
rather loose-tongued. Examples are easily found in his letters.—
Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 43

In the edition of the Metalogicus printed at Leyden in
1639, ex officina Joannis Maire, 1 find a_ biographical
notice borrowed from the Protestant writer, John Bayle,
De Scriptoribus Anglie, part iv. Needless to say that I
disavow beforehand the headstrong ravings with which the
editor reproaches St. Thomas of Canterbury in regard
to ‘‘the best of kings.’’ His words are :—‘‘ Archiepis-
copo Thome quandoque familiaris fuit, et in exilio comes:
sed non propterea omisit suas illi objicere pervicaces in
regem benignum dementias. Factus demum ob recondi-
tam eruditionem ab Henrico rege Carnotensis episcopus,
in provincia Senonensi, ultima doctrine monumenta illic
reliquit. Obiit celeberrimus vir, anno a salutifero dive
Virginis partu 1182, et episcopatus sui anno sexto, sub
Henrico rege praedicto.”’

Among various hypotheses, the last is that which I
prefer, for the honour of religion, and for the honour of
Salisbury himself.

It is not impossible that Salisbury wrote Chapter XLII.
of the Metalogicus in 1176, beforc quitting England for
Chartres, and left the manuscript with Henry II., who, in
this hypothesis, would have engaged to publish it at a
suitable time.

It may be, absolutely speaking, that Chapter XLII. was
written at Chartres after the death of Louis VII., especially
if Salisbury really lived to 1182, as Bayle says, contrary
to the general opinion, which places the prelate’s death in
1180, according to his mortuary inscription.!

Although these hypotheses are not without foundation, I
prefer to say that Chapter XLII. is an extra work, for
which Salisbury is not responsible, because this pretended
Chapter XLII. was likely added to his treatise some years
after his death.

In point of fact, Chapter XLII. has not the slightest re-
lationship with the subject of the book, whose object is to
defend logic, metaphysics, dialectics, the categories of
Aristotle, and philosophers themselves, Peripatetics as well
as Platonists, against the attacks of the ignorant. Hence
it is that Chapter XLI. naturally ends the work, with

1 The death-register of the monastery in which John of Salisbury

was buried, says that he died on October, 25, 1180, (Patrologie, Vol.
excix, pref. xi.)—Trans,

44 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

a conclusion truly Christian,.and very remarkable on the
lips of one who had formerly been a listener to Abelard.!

“ Certain things,’’ says Salisbury, ‘‘cannot be known,
because of their eminent dignity. Others are not within
the capacity of man, within the reach of his flighty and
inconstant mind. To what then must he chiefly attach
himself? What thing is most useful? Ecclesiasticus
teaches, saying : Seek not the things that are too high for
thee, and search not into things above thy ability. ...

_And as the senses as well as the reason of man frequently
wander, the first foundation of the understanding is faith.
Hence the maxim of the Wise Man: They that trust in
God shall understand the truth, and they that are faithful

in love shall rest in Him.” . ;

Candidly, after a peroration so philosophical and so
Christian, is it natural that in Chapter XLII., tears should
flow over the evils of the time, the siege of Toulouse, the
rupture between the Kings of France and England, the
death of Pope Adrian, and the schism threatening the
Church? Then, taking occasion from the death of the
Pontiff, the author relates, in terms altogether out of place
and ridiculous, the kindness that Pope Adrian had mani-
fested for him, so far as to eat from the same plate and
drink from the same cup as his friend! These trivialities
are followed by an article. of paramount importance,
nothing more or less than a donation of Ireland in favour
of King Henry II. In fine, the author repcats to satiety

2 An able and admired writer in prose and verse, almost equally
eloquent in Latin and.in Greek, John of Salisbury was just the man of
his times whom a forger would use to say something advantageous for
Henry; and the end of a maruscript was just the place where a forger
could most safely carry out his design, by adding a new chapter
without any signs of erasure or interpolation. Unfortunately, the test
of handwriting cannot now be applied, as none of the earliest MSS.
exist.. Those in the British Museum are marked “ copies.”.

That some forgeries were really committed in John’s name, we are
solemnly assured by himself, when he says ina letter to Henry,
regarding some letters that the King had received :—Ecce, Domino

_inspectore et judice, loquar in auribus vestris quod verum est. Litteras
istas nec scripsi, nec scribere volui, nec ab aliquo meorum scriptas
novi. Falsae sunt, et eis ad delusionem vestram, et sui damnationem,
solus falsarius scienter usus est. _

His Polycraticus, Metalogicus, and other works, may be found in
Migne’s Patrologie, Vol. cxcix.—Trans

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 45

what he had said in the preface, regarding the occupations
with which he was overwhelmed.

Have we had enough of inconsistencies and fooleries?
Was Salisbury capable of putting his signature to things
so silly? We must also make account of differences in
style, which literary connoisseurs have remarked between
Chapter XLII. of the Metologicus and the undoubted
writings of the prelate.

