V.
POPE ADRIAN’S LETTER.

ALTHOUGH the ambassador had announced that the ex-
pedition to Ireland would be undertaken by the two Kings
acting in concert, the Pope addressed his answer only to
the King of France. Henry was given a secondary place.
He had not written to the Pope, doubtless because he
feared that the Pontiff would refuse an authority which
might be regarded as a concession from the Pontiff in
favour of his native land.

“ Adrian, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our
most dear Son, Louis, the illustrious King of the Franks,
Health and Apostoliq Benediction.

‘“‘ Very laudably and profitably your Highness seems to
think of propagating the Christian name on earth, and of
laying up an immense reward in eternal beatitude, when,
with a view of extending the limits of Christendom, over-
coming the barbarism of pagans, and reducing apostate
nations, which reject the truth of the Christian Faith, to
the yoke and power of Christians, 'you make ready to set
out for H,! with our most dear son Henry, the illustrious
King of the English, and you apply yourself assiduously

1 See next chapter.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 7

to bring together an army, and all things, necessary for the
expedition, in such manner that the enterprise may be
crowned with success. And the more effectually to accom-
plish all this, you seek the counsel and favour of the most
holy Roman Church, your Mother. This proposal is so
much the more pleasing and acceptable to us, and we com-
mend it as much as it deserves, because we believe that
your praiseworthy intention and desire came from the
purest root of charity, and that your project had for its
source the greatest zeal for the faith and the greatest love
for religion.”

Thus Pope Adrian IV. received in perfect good faith the
assurances that the ambassador gave him regarding the
exclusively religious character of the expedition to be made
into Ireland.t However, the Pontiff immediately draws
altention to the danger and imprudence of such an enter-
prise. The Pontifical Letter continues :—-

‘* But your Excellency, distinguished moreover by
maturity of counsel and the light of wisdom, seems to
hasten very much in this matter. Hence, many persons
have been astonished and perplexed, because the good that
is done at a proper time and in due order is always pleasing
to the eternal Creator ; but, if done otherwise, it cannot be
conformable to the Divine Will.”

After this, Pope Adrian IV., going deeper into the sub-
ject, shows that, before undertaking the expedition, the
sentiments of the country ought to be known, the disposi-
tions of the clergy and people ought to be ascertained,
there ought to be no foreign intervention unless it is desired
and requested.

“ Add to all this that it does not seem prudent or safe to
enter another land, unless counsel has first been taken with
the princes and the people of that land. But you, as we
have heard, without consulting the Church of the land, or
its princes, make haste to go thither, when such a thing
you should on no account attempt, unless you have first

1It is easily seen that when the Pope refers above to pagans
and apostates, he does not brand the Irish as such. He merely
repeats the statement that has been laid before him, in order to make
his comments on it and give his answer to it. The repetition shows
that he has correctly understood the case submitted to him. Official
replies at the present day follow on the self-same lines.—T rans.

8 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

known the need of it from the princes of the land, and been
invited by them. Wherefore, because we have at heart
your honour and prosperity, and do not wish to see you
undertake anything but what a reasonable cause would
justify, we recommend your Highness by this present
letter to learn first the needs of that land from its princes,
and to inquire diligently into the wishes of the Church
there, as well as of the princes and the people, and, as 1s
becoming, take their advice. Later on, if you see an im-
perative necessity, if such be the counscl of the Church,
if, moreover, the princes of the land ask the aid of your
Majesty, and approve of the expedition—then you may
decide according to their demand, and, with the divine
assistance, proceed to the accomplishment of your laudable
desire. If you should act otherwise, there should be reason
to fear that your journey would be fruitless, or that it
would not come to a happy end. If perchance there were
no necessity for the invasion, the princes and the people
would be aggrieved by such a great military display, and
we ourselves, on many accounts, might seem to have acted
very lightly in a matter of grave importance.”

Adrian IV. could not have employed any arguments more
convincing to put Louis VII. on his guard against the
pressure of the King of England, who tried every means
imaginable to extort his consent and to engage him in the
enterprise. In order to show the danger of rash and in-
considerate expeditions, the Pontiff recalls the crusade of
1147, in which Louis VII. had taken part, and which had
led to a dreadful catastrophe.

‘Your Highness ought to remember how, at a time not
very remote, when Conrad, of good memory, then King of
the Romans, and yourself, without consulting the people
of the country, incautiously took the road to Jerusalem,
you did not attain the succcss that you expected, and what
detriment and disaster followed for the Church of God, and
for nearly all Christian people. In truth, the Roman
Church itself, which had given you its counsel and favour
for the expedition, was deeply compromised, and all cried
out against it with lively indignation, saying that it had
been the cause of such a great misfortune.”

Reflecting on the dangers of an expedition to Ireland,
Adrian believed it his duty to defer the publication of the

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 9

encyclical which the ambassador, the Bishop of Evreux,
asked in the name of the King, in order to prepossess. the
minds of the people of France, and to stimulate them, in
the name of the Pontiff, to take part in the expedition.

“* As the most serious reflections have shown us all that
is to be feared in this matter, we have considered that the
apostolic admonition and exhortation to the people of your
kingdom, such as our venerable brother R., the Bishop of
Evreux, has on your part proposed to us, ought tc be
deferred. Seeing that what is deferred for a time is not
wholly denied, we shall transmit to you hereafter, if it so
please God, the admonitory and exhortatory letter for the
remission of sins, according to our desire of your glory,
when, by the advice and invitation of the princes and
people of that land, as has been said above, you wish to
undertake the journey, and that you prudently and laudably
prepare, through real necessity, to carry out the design
conceived in your mind ; for it may be that, at the present
moment, there is no immediate necessity.”

Louis VII. had asked the Pope to receive the kingdom
under the protection of St. Pcter and his own, while he
should be waging war in Ireland. Adrian IV. decided not
to publish at that moment the Bull of protection ; but he
declared himself willing: to do all in his power for the
honour and exaltation of the King, without there being any
need of soliciting him. If the Pontiff had granted the Bull
of protection, this concession would have been interpreted
as implicitly authorising the expedition against Ireland.

“ As for the letter by which, according to the petition of
your Royal Highness, we should take your kingdom under
the protection of the Blessed Petcr and our own, threaten-
ing the apostolic anger and indignation against those who
should presume to attack the kingdom in your absence,
we do not feel able to grant it at present. But even with-
out your solicitation, the lively regard that we have for
your Majesty would lead us to do spontaneously, and with
all the zeal and efficacy possible, whatever would be of a
nature to promote your honour and exaltation, and the
Prosperity of your kingdom.”

Adrian ITV. was convinced that he had excellent reasons
for dissuading the King from an expedition against Ireland.
At the close of his letter he urged the prince to reflect

re POPE ADRIAN IV.,

seriously on the motives that led him to hasten his
departure.

The Pontiff could not more clearly decline all responsi-
bility in the project of invading Ireland. As we have just
seen, he not only advised the King to wait—to inform him-
self of the true state of the country—to consult the bishops,
princes, and people ; but, lest he should be suspected of
connivance in a foolish and unjust enterprise, he refused an
encyclical of exhortation for the people of France. He
would not even take the kingdom under the pontifical pro-
tection, during: the absence of Louis.

All this shows us that the negotiation of Rotrodus was a
complete failure. However, that its ill-success might not
be attributed to the ambassador, Adrian bore witness that
the prelate had acted with all the zeal and prudence desir-
able ; and to prove the consideration in which he held
Rotrodus, he confided to him some verbal communications
for Louis. This is what we read in the last paragraph of
the pontifical letter, which, given on the 18th of February,
is, according to the most ancient manuscripts, thus dated :
Datum Laterani XII Calendas Martii.

I have been obliged to divide the Pope’s letter into
several parts, so as to draw the reader’s attention to those
points which deserve to be brought out in relief. I shall
give it in full (No. 2) among the Documents at the end.

