1.

 

MEANS THAT HENRY TOOK TO OBTAIN AUTHORITY FOR
CONQUERING IRELAND.

THE proximity of Ireland to England, and the inferiority
of the Irish in the art of war when compared with knights
clad in iron armour, suggested the idea of conquest to
William the Conqueror and Henry I. This project, which
they abandoned, was resumed in 1156 by Henry II., after
he had completely subdued the Welsh.

To justify his invasion of a free and inoffensive people,
Henry set forth religious interests. He considered that a
moral reformation and a higher civilisation would be
benefits that tha Irish would gladly purchase at the cost of
their independence.

Unfortunately, Pope Adrian IV., precisely because he
was an Englishman by birth, was obliged to be on his
guard more than any other pontiff, so as not to incur, in
the eyes of contemporaries. and of posterity, the grave re-
proach of having sacrificed to a predilection for his native
country the independence of a neighbouring nation, which
had furnished no pretext for war or revenge.

Henry II. understood how useful it would be for him to
have an ally, if not to share in a military expedition, at

B

2 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

least to negotiate matters with Pope Adrian, and obtain
his consent for the conquest of Ireland. Louis VII., King
of France, was the only prince in a position to lend effica-
cious help. Above all things, therefore, it was necessary
to gain King Louis to the project.

All the annalists have mentioned the unexpected recon-
ciliation that took place between Louis and Henry, after
years of conflict and war. The two princes met at Rouen,
made peace, and concluded a marriage of their children,
yet very young ; the girl was little more than six months,
and the boy may have been about three years old.
Adrian IV. wrote to Henry, Chancellor of the King of
France, to congratulate the two princes on their recon-
ciliation.

Robert du Mont, the Continuator of Sigebert, expressed
his profound surprise on seeing the two kings give each
other such great testimonies of friendship. I believe that
I ought to quote an extract from this contemporary
chronicler. He speaks thus : —‘‘ In the year 1158, Henry,
King of the English, having subdued Wales and made it
all tributary, being come to Rouen, conferred with the
King of France, on Thursday, the 31st of August, be-
tween Gisors and the New Market, and also treated with
the prelates of Holy Church and the barons of two pro-
vinces. Then, justice shining from the height of heaven,
Louis, King of France, gave his daughter, born of Con-
stance, his second wife, who was little more than six
months of age, to Henry, second son ‘of the King of Eng-
land, who was about three years. The bishops of the two
parties became guarantees for the compact. In the month
of September, Henry went to Paris, to conduct into Nor-
mandy the King’s daughter, whom he had accepted for his
son. The King of France came forth to meet him, and
rendered him great honours in the royal palace. . . . Next
day, the King of France accompanied him, with his
daughter, as far as Mantes. What a wonder, truly un-
heard of, to see the Kings of England and France united
in such great affection ! In the month of November,
Louis VII. went on a pilgrimage to Mount Saint Michael.
Henry accompanied him everywhere.” (Patrologie, Migne,
t. 160, p. 484.)

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 3

