XIV 


THE BALKAN WAR 

I GOT a clue of the coming of the Balkan troubles 
while visiting my father in Yanina, through a 
Turkish officer called Sabit Bey, who himself died 
in the Balkan war. He was one of those simple big 
dark Turks, with the innate sense of justice and good- 
ness of his race. He was a very close friend of my 
father and very anti-L’^nionist at the time, on account 
of the drastic measures of the Unionists in putting down 
an insurrection in Albania. He hated tyranny, and 
during his visit to Albania he was shocked by the se- 
verity of the Unionist regime in Albania. Macedonia 
and Albania were the fields where the seeds of war 
were sown, not only by the external policies of the 
powers hut also by the contradictory national desires 
of the inhabitants. 

In the meantime the Unionists were having their 
own internal difficulties in 1911, especially within the 
parliament. They were not oidy losing their majority 
in the parliament, but the popular feeling against them 
as freemasons and radicals was such that their prospects 
of success in a new election were very doubtful. The 
immediate if short-sighted solution of the difficulty 

329 



MEMOIKS OF HALIDE EDIB 

was the dissolution of parliament, and the use of the 
sultan’s power to consolidate their position; both of 
these courses were reactionary according to the prin- 
ciples the Unionists had professed in the constitutional 
revolution of 1908. 

The first step was to strike out the thirty-fifth clause 
of the constitution, which had been added in 1908 in 
order to modify the thirteenth article of the constitution 
of 1876, the article which gave the sultan the right of 
dissolution, by means of which Abdul Hamid had dis- 
solved the parliament of 1876. Now the Unionists 
wanted to give back the right of dissolution to Sultan 
Mehemmed Reshad, who was playing safely in their 
hands. The parliament refused to vote the abolition 
of Clause 35, and so the Young Turks had to persuade 
the senate to step in and take advantage of the dif- 
ference between the government and the parliament, 
which seemed insoluble, and to use their prerogative 
of voting the dissolution. The first Young Turkisli 
parliament was dissolved on Jaunary 5, by the Young 
Turks themselves, but the result of this first reactionary 
step was destined to recoil upon themselves. For l)e- 
fore three months had passed over their new parlia- 
ment, a semi-revolutionary and military organization 
called the Saviors of the Nation gathered in jMaltepe 
and demanded the dissolution of the new parliament 
and the formation of a cabinet composed of impartial 
men. The senate once more dissolved the parliament, 
and what is called the Great Cabinet was formed under 
Gazi Mouhtar Pasha, with a large number of old 

330 



THE BALKAN WAR 


grand vizirs and other members known for their hatred 
of the Unionists. 

The Great Cabinet, as well as that of Kiamil Pasha 
which succeeded it, representing the opposition, the 
Entente Liberate, retained power about six months. 
It was a period of utter disillusion. They repeated 
every single misdeed of their political rivals, and the 
only motive which seemed to dominate them was their 
hatred and mistrust of the Unionists. I believe that 
it was their utter incapacity and lack of ideals and their 
repetition of courts martial and imprisonment which 
made the best of the Turkish world cast in its lot with 
the Union and Progress. 

In June I once more went to visit Miss Isabel Fry 
in England, and it was during this visit that I wrote 
the “New Turan.” 

iVs Miss Fry left for Dublin before the end of my 
visit I took a flat in Cambridge Terrace, where Dr. 
Kiza Tewfik had lived before me. In tlie solitude and 
the discreet lialf-Iight of the English atmosphere I 
worked well. The noise whicli one may expect of the 
great traffic of London is so smooth and even, and the 
life of the great city is so softly tuned down to a strange 
order, as if all passed through a padded screen before 
it reached you, that it throws one entirely into oneself. 
No atmosphere is more restful and favorable to crea- 
tive work than that of I^ondon f\&gt;r an unknown and 
.voung writer. The isolation is so complete that one 
is forced to dig into one’s inner resources. 

Every day about noon I walked out into the streets. 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

It was my only plunge into the city, and it made me 
feel like a drop of oil on the surface of an ocean, always 
apart and unassimilated despite its infinitesimal size. I 
was much criticized, mostly by the allied press, because 
of “New Turan,” and I have often smiled to think of 
the place where I wrote it. No book has been more 
misunderstood. In the outer world it has been held 
largely responsible for the faults of the Unionists, while 
in Turkey it was taken to represent a formulated doe- 
trine of nationalism. 

The book is a political and national Utopia, but not 
so far away from possibilities as one may suppose 
a Utopia to be. It looks forward to a New Turkey 
where a chastised and matured Union and Progress has 
taken the reins of power, where women have the vote, 
and where women work with the (qualities of head and 
heart which characterize the best Turkish women. The 
simplicity and the austerity^ of their lives have become 
different since the magnificent days of the Ottomans, 
with the unhealthy luxury and parasitic tendencies of 
a class of women which only a high but degenerate civili- 
zation like the Ottoman creates. The highest ideal is 
work and simplicity. There is not only a Turkey that 
is nationalized in its culture, but there is also a Turkey 
that is liberal and democratic in politics. Above all, 
there is no chauvinism in the administrative system. 
The book, which has the usual love-story, has not much 
pretension to art, but its practically worked out ideals 
will, I firmly believe, be at least partly realized. 

About the end of August, 1912, Turkey entered the 

332 



THE BALKAN WAR 


Balkan war. The splitting up of the internal control 
and the loss of Turkish prestige in Albania hastened 
the Balkan alliance, and Turkey received the famous 
ultimatum. The war was declared by the Great 
Cabinet. 

Mr. Asquith’s government officially declared that the 
status quo would be respected, whatever the results of 
the war should be. 

The result was one of the greatest defeats in Turk- 
ish history, with the massacre of three thousand ISIace- 
donian Turks and Moslems — one of the greatest mas- 
sacres of the last hundred years. 

The declaration of Mr. Asquith’s cabinet was evi- 
dently a simple precaution in case of Turkish victory, 
and the massacres did not arouse one quarter of the 
indignation which the Armenian massacres had done. 
These facts spoke bitterly in Turkey against Europe, 
and in the Islamic worlds in Asia. I believe that the 
two different measures meted out by Europe to the 
Moslem Turks and to the Christian peoples in Turkey 
keenly intensified nationalism in Turkey. They also 
aroused the feeling that in order to avoid being extermi- 
nated the Turks must exterminate others. As the Bul- 
garian victory made the w'orld overlook the crimes of her 
revolutionaries — crimes of Avhich the Bulgarians them- 
selves surely did not approve, for they are a kindly race 

so any other nation in the East could hope to have all 
her massacres forgotten, so long as she could impose 
respect with her victorious force. T am sorry to put the 
case so brutally, but I am only relating the effect on the 

333 



MEMOIRS OF H^VLIDE EDIB 

Turks of the European diplomacy of those days, and its 
responsibility for the bloodier development of later 
years. 

On the other hand, there has never been a worse 
mana^ged war than the llalkan war. The lack of sani- 
tary organization, the badness of the service behind the 
lines was deplorable. The sheep starved in the cars, 
and the flour rotted at the depots, while less than a mile 
away men died of hunger. When the Turkish refugees 
flocked in panic to Constantinople to escape from mas- 
sacre, when cholera broke out among the immigrants 
and in the army, when one saw an entire population 
dying in the mosque yards under the icy grip of winter, 
the sight of the misery in Constantinople seemed too 
grim to be true. 

Granny went over to Scutari, which she considered 
holy ground, being on the Asiatic continent, where 
Mecca is. My servants left for their own country, and 
I sent my children to Broussa. The march of the Bul- 
garian army on Constantinople seemed more than prob- 
able. My sister arrived among the refugees from 
Adrianople and passed on to Scutari. Most of the 
families left Constantinople. I stayed in Fatih at 
Nakie Hanum’s house and worked with the women of 
the Taali-Xisvan Club for relief and nursing. 

We, with some teachers and some educated Tui’kish 
women, had formed that first women’s club. Its ulti- 
mate object was the cultivation of its members. It had 
a small center where the members took lessons in F rcnch 
and English. It also opened classes for a limited nuni- 

3;j4 



THE BALKAN WAE 


ber of Turkish women to study Turkish, domestic 
science, and the bringing up of children. We had Mrs. 
Marden, of Guedik Pasha school, and ]\Irs. Bowen, 
who helped us in the teaching of English, as well as 
in lending us the Hall of Guedik Pasha school, where 
we opened a series of lectures for women. There was 
a feministic tendency in the club, but as a whole it kept 
within the bounds of usefulness and philanthropy, and 
w'e tried to maintain a quiet tone, avoiding propaganda, 
which becomes so ugly and loud and offers such an 
easy way to fame for any one who can make sufficient 
noise. 

The club organized and opened a small hospital with 
thirty beds in Istamboul. A young surgeon and a 
chemist, both husbands of club members, volunteered 
to help; the beds and equipment were provided by the 
members; and one member lent a house. We took only 
privates. As the Balkan war saw Turkish Avomen 
nursing men for the first time, any little human incident 
became a tremendous scandal. 

I came every moniing from Fatili and returned to 
it late every evening. The streets were deserted except 
for the refugees shivering in the mud, and sick or 
wounded soldiers who had arrived late, staggering, or 
leaning against the walls or each other for support. 

I realized then the extent of my affection for my 
people and for my land. I camiot make out wffiich I 
loved best, but I felt my love was j)crsonal ami incurable 
iind had nothing to do with ideas, thoughts, or politics, 
that in fact it was physical and elemental. Very often 

33.'&gt; 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I was the only woman crossing Sultan Ahmed Square. 
I had on my loosest and oldest charsTiaf, and often i 
would stand in the middle of the square and think with 
infinite sadness of an alien army marching toward it. 
I had a foolish desire to stoop and kiss the very stones 
of the place, so passionately did I love it. No force 
could have dragged me away from Constantinople. 
I belonged to the place, and whatever its fate, I meant 
to share it. 

I bought the newspapers every morning, though they 
reported nothing but a series of national di.sasters. Hut 
I had to go to the hospital with a calm face. I knew 
beforehand how those Anatolian eyes would look at me, 
proud in spite of the tragic curiosity and anxiety in their 
childish depths. 

“Good morning, sister. How are you to-day?” I 
knew w'hat it meant, but I went on with the usual work, 
the early visit of the doctor, and the painful dressing 
of wounds which followed. 

There was an jiVngora man who stayed in my mind 
rather as a sjmibol of the Anatolia of those days. lie 
must once have been a fine specimen of manly beauty, 
hie had those dark greeni.sb eyes and long lashes and 
the tall physique of bis region, l)ut now be had turned 
into a huge skeleton. He had g«)ne from .^Vlbania to 
Yemen, and after seven years of it he had been sent 
home three months ago, broken with malaria and luird- 
ship, his intelligence aImo.st extinguished. Hardly had 
he arrived in Constantinople when he was sent to the 
Balkan front. He was wounded in both legs, and both 

336 



THE BALKAN WAR 


were in danger of gangrene. He had to be isolated, 
and the surgeon meant to go through a series of opera- 
tions before giving him up to amputation. His heart 
was not in a state to bear chloroform, and he had to go 
through it all as best he could. 

Then I saw how an ordinary Turkish soldier who has 
lost all except his sense of manhood bears pain. He 
had almost forgotten his mother-tongue in the desert 
and had not learned much Arabic; somehow he had 
ceased to need speech. The doctor made him under- 
stand that he was not to move his leg during the op- 
eration. 

He remained rigid, as if he were a piece of unyielding 
iron. He closed his eyes, clenched his teetli, and lay as 
still as a dead man, crushing my hand, which he always 
humbly asked to hold in his. 

In a week the danger of gangrene was over, and we 
transferred him to the common room, where we fought 
against his malaria. During the last days of his con- 
valescence he recovered his memory and interest in life 
to a certain degree, and got me to write his letters to 
his village. He was going back and wanted his fields 
got ready for barley sowing. 

Another case which twined around my heart was of 
a Macedonian. Ilis legs were both Avounded, and his 
arm had been broken in great pain after what was 
probably a bad setting. He asked to be allowed to 
sit up in bed, and he would rock himself to and fro. 
I soon found out that the rocking and the hardly audi- 
ble moans were not for the arm. He had left a little 

337 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

girl and a wife in Sketche, and the place had been taken 
by the Bulgarians. The usual stories about the mas- 
sacres and atrocities had been circulated, and his people 
had not turned up yet. There was an immigration 
commission in the municipality, and to it I used to send 
some one regularly to find out about the baby named 
Hadije, aged four, and the woman called Emine, aged 
twenty-five. Each morning I had to go into the room 
and face the dumb despair in that man’s eyes. Some- 
times I said: “It is a long way off. They may turn 
up yet. She could not walk like the others with a 
child.” 

“She has an ox-cart,” he would say through clenched 
teeth and go on rocking. 

The resigned and pathetic patience and the dumb 
dignity of the suffering of these men was past belief. 
They were so much ashamed of their defeat that they 
received every bit of kindness, even nursing, with 
apologetic gratitude. 

Every evening as I left the hospital I heard tlie news- 
paper boys shouting their special editions, which always 
contained a new Turkish disaster. That desolate march 
of the defeated Turkish army through hostile races, 
hunted and starving, freezing, only a few of its members 
reaching the capital, seemed like a nightmare without 
end. 

It was on one of those gloomy evenings when I felt 
well nigh at the end of my tether, that a letter arrived 
from Derne in Tripoli. It was a letter from six 
officers, in our one and only machine-gun detachment. 

d.-18 



THE BALKAN WAE 


It was written by their chief ofBcer, who called himself 
Ishildak, and all the six signed as the officers of the 
New Turan, 

It was a delirious declaration of love, but love to 
their land and people. They were feeling that supreme 
emotion which one feels at the suffering of a very much 
beloved being. It was the same sort of thing which 
made me want to kiss the muddy streets of Istamboul. 
They had come back to the defense of the mainland of 
Turkey after their hardships in the desert. The letter 
was so wonderful that I used it in the story which I 
wrote dul-ing the Gallipoli period called “The Dream of 
Ishildak.” Although the name “New Turan” had 
become the rage, and some shops already called them- 
selves by it, and I had letters from Kazan and Tash- 
kend on the subject, still I shall always love the book 
most, because it supplied those isolated young soldiers 
with the enthusiasm which makes men forget their 
suffering. 

I found out that Ishildak was one of the first members 
of the Ojak, but I never met him. 1 followed his 
career, which was a series of battles. He wrote one 
last letter from Mesopotamia asking me to give ten 
copies of “New Turan” to ten graduating officers, in- 
stead of giving prayers for bis soul, in case he died. 
And he died in Mesopotamia. 

Izzet Pasha’s return as well as that of the young ele- 
ment from Tripoli added a new strength to the defense 
of Chatalja, and the Bulgarian army after heavy losses 
saw the impossibility of entering Constantinople. 

339 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

But the event which soothed the national pride, writh- 
ing under the shame of a sweeping defeat, was the 
raid of the HamidiCj the adventures of the phantom 
ship, as the European press at the time called her. The 
Turkish crusier Hamidie had been to Varna and had 
bombarded it at the beginning of the Balkan war. 
After receiving a severe wound on her side, she had 
come back. Although her return to Constantinople 
in her sinking state was considered a great naval feat, 
no one had dreamt of seeing her emerge from the docks 
in the Golden Horn and venture out again for fighting 
purposes. 

Hardly four months had passed, and when every one 
was discussing the gathering of the Greek fleet in the 
Dardanelles we heard of the Hamidie bombarding the 
island of Shira. 

It was a miracle how she had slipped out in the dark 
through the Dardenelles and through the Greek fleet 
which was closely watching at the mouth of the straits. 
Then the Turkish as well as the European press began 
to revel in the real or imaginary ex])loits of the phantom 
ship. The Greek fleet went in immediate pursuit, hut 
the Hamidie went on her way, bombarding the coasts 
of the Adriatic and the chief Cireek islands, sinking 
Greek transports, but saving the lives on the sinking 
ships with scrupulous humanity, and leaving the rescued 
on any coast which the Hamidie could approach with- 
out risk. In technique, in chivalry, and in fantastic 
feats of courage, it is perhaps the most perfect episode 
in the fighting annals of the Turkish sea battles. The 

340 



THE BALKAN WAE 


great modesty of the commander, Captain Reuof, did 
not allow him to pose as a hero. On the contrary, his 
strong belief that all the glory was due to the high 
courage of his men, and that the Turkish people are 
always the victims of hero worship, especially in military 
affairs, made him fight down his own popularity in 
Turkey. 

In the meantime an organization of a semi-official 
character was trying to raise money to help the refugees 
and the hospitals. The Taali-Nisvan organized a meet- 
ing of women in the University Hall in Istamboul, 
both to help the refugees and to send a protest to the 
(jueens in Europe asking them to use their influence 
to stop the massacre of the non-combatant Turks and 
^Moslems in INIacedonia. 

There w'cre about six women speakers, and the hall 
was more than crammed. Before the meeting was over 
women were throwing their jewelry to the pulpit, tear- 
ing their furs off to be given to the refugees and the 
sick. The meeting chose tw'o women delegates to go 
to the embassies in Pera, to ask them to convey the pro- 
tests to the queens. 

On January 2, 1913, I was so weak and reduced by 
heart-trouble that I was obliged to go to the German 
hospital. On January 10 1 w'as wakened by the head 
sister, who entered my room in a hurry and ran to the 
l&gt;aleony which overlooked Istamboul. She was so much 
excited that she was waving her hands and talking 
aloud to herself. 


341 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

“What it is?” I asked. 

“The Unionists have carried out a coup d* Hat" she 
said. “They have taken the Sublime Porte by force, 
and there has been shooting; Nazim Pasha, the war 
minister, his aide-de-camp, and a Unionist called Mou- 
stafa Nedjib are dead.” 

The circumstances of the coup d’etat were these: 
The powers had presented a collective note to the Porte 
demanding the cession of Adrianople to Bulgaria. The 
cabinet of Kiamil Pasha decided to accept the allied 
demand on January 9. Adrianople, however, had not 
yet fallen, and its long and gallant defense made the 
public bitter against abandoning the city while its con- 
tinued defense was still possible. The Unionists took 
up the popular side and proposed at all costs to prevent 
Adrianople’s surrender. They came to an understand- 
ing with Nazim Pasha, the minister of war, who was 
opposed to the cession of Adrianople, promising him 
the office of grand vizir. On January 10, Enver and 
Talaat led three hundred men to the Porte, meaning 
merely to quietly ask Kiamil Pasha to resign. But in 
the general excitement two of the Union and Progress 
party, Yacoub Djemil and Moustafa Nedjib, fired, and 
Nazim and Pasha and his aide-de-camp and Moustafa 
Nedjib were killed. This is the Unionist version. 
The opposition insisted that Moustafa Nedjib had 
orders from Enver to fire. As Moustafa Nedjib him- 
self died in the general firing it is difficult to verify 
either version. Mahmoud Shevket Pasha’s cabinet was 
then formed. 


342 



THE BALKAN WAE 


Adrianople fell very soon after, and the London con- 
ference on May 30, 1913, saw the Young Turks sign 
the cession of the fallen city for which they had carried 
out their coup d’etat. Their excuse to public opinion 
was that they had ceded it after its fall, whereas Kiamil 
Pasha was going to cede while it was fighting. 

On June 2, 1914, Mahmoud Shevket Pasha was as- 
sassinated by the opposition.' lie was a man of really 
high principles, great honesty and capacity, as well as 
a moderate and kindly man. lie was mostly attacked 
by the opposition for faults of his party for which he 
was not responsible. 

Djemal Bey, the military commander of Istamboul, 
arrested the murderers as well as the conspirators. 
About twelve men, among them a pasha the son-in-law 
of the sultan, were executed, and a large number were 
exiled to various parts of Anatolia. 

Djemal Bey had called on me with his wife, whom 
I already knew', after the publication of “New Turan” 
and had warmly declared himself a New Turanist who 
would try for the reali’/ation of the ideal. lie appeared 
so delicate and sensitive that it was imj)ossible to foresee 
the ferocious energy he was to put forth in reducing the 
opposition. I must confess that I did not like the 

^ The op])o.'?ition hud planned a roup d'rtat similar to that of the Unionists 
which had been carried out on January 10, HUB. They meant to assassi- 
nate a large number of Unionists, but the immediate and severe measures of 
the Unionists after the assassination of Mahmoud Shevket Pasha broke the 
opposition in its organization. Hiza Nour liey, then an influential member 
of the opposition, and now^ the deputy from Sinope, speaks of the plan of 
the opposition in his book called “Tlic Inner Secrets of the Entente Lib- 
erale,” published in 1918. 


343 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

drastic measures which were taken to punish the political 
offenders. Djemel Bey (afterward Pasha) gives his 
reasons for all his political acts in his Memoirs. 1 
asked him at the time to do something for Tewfik, the 
son of my old friends in Beshiktash, who had been ar- 
rested as one of the conspirators. He promised to (!» 
something, and he accordingly helped Tewfik to return 
from exile. 

Taking advantage of the differences which had risen 
between the governments of the Balkan states that had 
fought against Turkey, the Turkish army marched once 
more on Adrianople in July, 1913, and recovered it 
without much difficulty. Thus ended the Balkan war. 


844 



