II 


WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

T he brown childish orbs, brilliant and troubled 
in some unfathomable way, looked at me won- 
deringly. The next moment I had put a small 
hand over the mirror and covered those .painful 
interrogation-points, leaving visible only the unformed 
round chin and the patch of red lips of the little girl. 
I realized then for the first time that this face, which 
people as a rule considered something unusual and un- 
like its environment, was mine. If I try to draw the 
portrait of the soul that belonged to the little face, I 
would describe it as two liquid, reddish brown eyes 
full of tragic anxiety and painful wonder at the funny 
species she belonged to, or asking such wordless ques- 
tions as these: Who are they? Who am I? This 
white-faced woman whom I call granny and who is in- 
dispensable to me at night when I go to bed — she is a 
stranger; so are the others, so am I. What is a face? 
And what are eyes and these funny sensibilities? 
Does everybody feel the same? I have this internal 
smile which, translated into grown-up language, means 
humor. It makes me strangely aloof at times, and 
arouses a tiresome childish contempt, of which, only 
later, I learn the value and proper use. There is this 

30 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

internal catch too which squeezes one’s throat and 
brings the water into one’s eyes which people call tears. 
There is no reason why I should have these yet, for life 
is almost stagnant in its outside repose and quiet ; noth- 
ing but the beautifully familiar setting and the famil- 
iar faces with their familiar looks. 1608 X) 

Another vague feeling is taking shape and becom- 
ing dominant. It is the feeling with which I have had 
to fight the hardest and longest. It is fear. I cannot 
yet explain it in human terms, for in some way I feel 
that we share it, more than our other feelings, with the 
other kinds of creatures which people call animals. It 
defined itself for me first of all in a cemetery where 
one of our men-servants took us to play one morning. 
The low moan, the somber velvety sound, and the 
strange uncanny movements of the cypresses were all 
round us. We were playing in a hollow place with 
some other children, holding each other’s hands, when 
the servant suddenly called out, “It is coming!’’ 
What was coming? I did not know, yet I felt dis- 
tinctly the cold creepy tremor down my back and the 
dampness on my palms and head which coincided later 
with what we call fear. The children scattered and 
ran wildly about. The servant himself seemed verj’’ 
much upset and told us stories on the way home about 
the cypresses. “Although they look like trees,” he 
said, “at night they turn into holy men in green turbans 
who haunt the gardens and rubbish-heaps. I just felt 
them move. I am sure they did not like our playing 
among their trimks.” 


31 



Mj&amp;Moms OF halid:^ edib 

I can trace the distinct emergence of these two feel- 
ings, fear and — later on — pity, besides that other queer 
twitch of the soul, or the internal smile. But this last 
sensation is interwoven with a great many others. 
Whenever I have had spiritual tension, extreme sub- 
jective consciousness, especially in the form of anxiety, 
then this smile has become an internal expansion and 
has prevented petrifaction. Otherwise I should have 
turned into a stone long ago on this uphill road of life, 
where, apart from my own loads to carry, a new people 
was being born; and the birth of any living thing, ani- 
mal or human, is the supreme pain and the one signif- 
icant event in this dried-up old world. 

The story of the little girl is my own henceforth. As 
I go on painting my life at that time as sincerely as I 
possibly can, I realize that the me inside the almost 
strange body of mine is giving place to the external me, 
the flesh and blood me, and I am passing gradually out 
of that early inward consciousness into the common 
reality of life. I am no longer so distinct from other 
people. I am a part of the huge congregation of hu- 
man beings, and I am doing as they do. So I may as 
well transfer the story entirely to the first person. 

The wisteria-covered house in Beshiktash stands on 
one of the many bare hills which are now more or less 
built over. At that time they presented a large expanse 
of ground of many colors — the somber green of the 
vegetable-gardens and orchards, which took the place of 
parks, where women and children went to eat plums 
and cherries and cucumbers beside dark pools under 

82 




'Mil i 1 M 1 M iM N\ 11 1 K 1 I ri \^ ri‘ X"' \ &lt;1111 n 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 
cool trees; the brilliant coloring of the hyacinth and 
tuberose gardens, stretching in brilliant patches of pur- 
ple, yellow, white, and rich pinks and sending their rich 
perfumes in waves all over the place, while the dark 
shades of the pine-groves stood behind them as a natural 
background. 

On Fridays the place would be full of children in 
bright-colored silk dresses, boys in long pantaloons, 
some ridiculously decked out in miniature generals’ uni- 
forms with golden epaulettes and driving about in 
grand carriages; the toy-sellers of Eyoub, carrying on 
their backs toys of the most glaring gilt and colors; 
the sweetmeat sellers shouting, and the water-carriers 
tinkling their glasses — whistles, rattles, bells — an in- 
fernal noise and the characteristic dust-cloud in which 
they all moved. 

I think I should have enjoyed the bright dresses and 
the general gaiety of color and sound, although it was 
so vulgar, if an incident had not stamped the whole place 
and the whole show with a horrible memory for me. 

Just as we were leaving the crowd one day, dragged 
by the man-servant along the winding road behind the 
hyacinth fields, we heard a long howl of a strange quality 
— so strange indeed that it made me shiver — and the 
servant looked right and left furtively, trying to locate 
it. Finally he plunged with us into a thorny by-path, 
pulling me and my sister so fast that Ave almost tore our 
clothes in the prickly bushes. I remember so well the 
unwholesome human curiosity he showed, just as crowds 
do at certain times for some spectacle of suffering. At 

33 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

the end of the path there was a ditch, and on the other 
side of the ditch an old wall had fallen on a dog, crushing 
half of its body under the stones. 

It is full thirty years if not more since I saw and felt 
that scene. But I still distinctly see that yellow dog, 
with its clear yellow eyes, trying to get out with its fore 
paws, quivering, struggling in agony, and looking with 
that wonderful dumb appeal in its almost human eyes; 
while at intervals a pitiful howl escaped from its jaws, 
sending an incredibl)’^ painful note into the air, wolf 
fashion. The servant looked amused, while a few hoys 
threw stones at it, delighted to see its helpless wriggle 
and to hear its howl. 

This was a symbolic and ominous revelation for me of 
the ugly instinct which stains the human species. I 
hated to belong to it, in my chil(li.sh and unconscious 
way, and I have realized since that no brute beast causes 
pain and commits cruelty for the simple pleasure of 
watching it. The cruelties which animals may commit 
in the course of their struggle for existence are too often 
done by us as a mere pleasure spectacle. 1 have seen 
this repeated in other times and in other ways, and each 
time it has given me the same physical horror and the 
same sickly pain as if a knife were cutting my body in 
two through my stomach. I hated the boys, the man- 
servant, and the new revelation of life, which simply 
saturated me with an aching pain. My other self, the 
one who is distinct, and usually trying to make out the 
meanings of things intellectually, in such grave moments 

34 



WHEN THE STOIIY BECOMES MINE 

becomes one with my physical self. If Allah had had 
mercy on me He would have stopped my life after this 
glimpse and spared me that queer, sharp, cutting pain 
so often repeated, that I have longed again and again 
to he anything except a human being. It is strange that 
whenever I have gone through this sensation of being cut 
in two, my dual personality has ceased, and I have be- 
come one raging revolting soul. This first glimpse, 
however, was too much for me. I don’t know to this 
day how we got home, but I know that I was ill for a 
long time afterward. I lay quietly on granny’s white 
sofa and she said to people: “She has been frightened 
by a dog. We are calling in the hodjas to cure her.” 
I could not explain that it was not fright ; I hardly knew 
what it was myself. I patiently lay where I was and 
let the holy men in green turbans come and read the 
Koran in undertones and breathe its holy virtue into 
my face. 

It is now that I realized Arzie Ilanum ^ for the first 
time. She burnt incense in my room, made queer ges- 
tures, and begged the fairies (peris) to set me free. 

In the meantime father called daily, and, quite indig- 
nant at all this superstitious show, he brought in the 
famous German doctor called the old Miilich, who 
stuffed me with all .sorts of disagreeable medicines. 

With due respect to microbes and scientific explana- 
tions of human diseases, I must confess that most of 
my illnesses have coincided with some moral shock and 

• Ilanum is lady and corresponds approximately to either Mrs. or Miss. 

35 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 


that physical weakness has come with temporary loss 
of interest in life, while any new attachment or interest 
has made me leap back into life like a living arrow. 

The long, dreary illness, with the vision of the misery 
of that half -crushed dog and its solitary howl of pain as 
well as the fiendish boys throwing stones at it, gradu- 
ally receded before the more intimate initiation into the 
human atmosphere around me. People and scenes be- 
came more real, and I was grasping at meanings and 
groping for contacts. 

I was having my first playmate too at this time. In 
fact perhaps she was the last also, for I never had any 
other friends in the same sense till my college years. 
She was the daughter of a tablaker.'^ She was the same 
little girl who had made my mother play on that horrible 
instrument ever so long ago. Mother had somehow be- 
friended the family, consisting of the mother, Ayesha 
Hanum, a Cssarean woman who spoke a thick Anato- 
lian dialect, her three daughters, one son, and her nice 

^ Tablakir means tray-bearer. Hundreds of them belonged to the royal 
kitchen. One saw them moving about in great numbers in Yildiz, carrying 
enormous round trays, covered with black cloth, on their heads. Each tray 
was destined for some royal lady or some official or attendant of the 
sultan’s. Although these men had low salaries, yet they were well to do; 
each had built himself a house in Beshiktash (a village on the Bosphorus 
near Yildiz) and kept their families in Constantinople. All this was done 
by selling the surplus food to Beshiktash people. Most of the houses 
bought their food from the royal kitchens through these people. As the 
royal kitchens were behind the bureau wh&lt;*re rny father worked in Yildiz 
Palace, I used to watch its colossal proceedings with inten.se delight. The 
enormous barrels of butter which they used to roll in, and roll out again 
when they were empty, attracted me most. 1 wondered how many little 
girls could he put in and allowed to play inside one of them; ami to my 
childish imagination it seemed as if thirty small people could comfortably 
sit inside and do as they wished. 

.36 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

simple husband. The second daughter, who was always 
ill, came to be tended by my mother, who had lots of 
home-made medicines with which she helped the neigh- 
bors very generously, and she had a great reputation for 
household accomplishments and for her charitable aid. 
Shayeste, the youngest daughter of this family, was a 
hard, healthy, and somehow servile little girl, and my 
reasons for choosing her as a playmate seem selfish and 
almost ugly as I analyze them now. It is curious how 
the vain and the futile parts of a woman appear uncon- 
sciously in a little girl. She was the darkest little girl 
I knew, and having acquired an impression from my 
stepmother’s relations that it is only fair people with 
blue eyes who are beautiful, and suffering from the be- 
lief that I was not fair enough for this, Shayeste’s con- 
trast to me gave me a foolish pleasure. Her neck was 
so dark, so like leather, her hands so brown, that I used 
to think she had never washed. I used often to put my 
hands near hers and feel a queer joy. The two looked 
like ivory and nutshell together. In fact there was 
something so much like a nutshell in her coloring alto- 
gether that my sister called her the Xut-rat (Funduk 
Faresi, i. e., the mouse) . 

She had a pictures(iue way of chattering, her small 
black eyes looking in all directions like a rat, and her 
hands moving violently. I hardly listened, but she went 
on all the same. One of her virtues was that she never 
questioned me, for there was nothing in life which put 
me out more than being questumed. Internally I was 
so locked up and so walled in by my own self that 

37 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

questions were an intrusion, a forcing open of the door 
of my soul against my will. Years later when I have 
been interviewed I have often thought of my childish 
days with sad amusement. Another reason for this sen- 
sibility was perhaps a timidity carried to a morbid de- 
gree. I felt, and still feel, spiritually undressed when 
some one is trying to peer into the inner life of my 
thought and feelings, although I can freely give myself 
at times to other people or to the public without being 
asked. Later, when I have been brought into promi- 
nence by the papers, either in the way of exaggerated 
praise or of attack, I have felt that Allah must certainly 
have an ironical turn of mind to enjoy striking people 
thus in their weakest points. 

Shayeste’s other virtue perhaps was her stupidity. 
Intellectual companionship is indispensable to me like 
food at intervals, but the constant presence of a highly 
active mind is a constant fatigue. One is conscious of 
another life too intensely all the time. IJttle Shayeste 
and I certainly did not tire each other. I hardly talked 
to her, and I remember our housekeeper constantly say- 
ing, “Halide Ilanum, have n’t you got a tongue? Why 
do you only shake your head ?’’ But I did talk to myself 
a great deal when I was alone, and Shayeste was the 
only person in whose presence I lived on as if I were 
entirely by myself. 

We played in a large rectangular marble hall which 
opened upon the garden on one side and the selamlik 
on the other. From the middle of it old-fashioned 

38 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 
double flying staircases went up to granny’s apartment, 
and on the stairs enormous windows, all wisteria-muffled, 
opened on the neighbors’ gardens. The light through 
the purple blossoms, and through the garden door from 
which vines crept up to the top windows, combined and 
made a delicious and cheerful sense through the place. 

I had another companion, an imaginary one, whom I 
called Alexi. It is a Greek name, and perhaps it was 
a reminiscence of Kyria Ellenie days. I talked mostly 
to this personage, sang to him sometimes so sadly that 
I had a lump in my throat and tears in my eyes, some- 
times so cheerfully that 1 laughed and danced in pure 
glee. The memory of those strange performances 
makes me think that if I had been born in a European 
country I might have been an actress, although I should 
have been a queer sort of actress, performing only when 
the spirit moved me and when I was free from self- 
consciousness and was persuaded that I had some beau- 
tiful message to give to the audience. 

Shayeste took no notice of my antics. When I went 
from the acting mood into the contemplative and silent 
one, I would sit on one of the steps and think to myself, 
while she quietly went on playing with my dolls on an- 
other. If it were cold we would go into the housekeep- 
er’s room, where I kept all my toys. Dolls I loved; not 
the European-looking ones which my father brought 
me from the Pera shops hut only those I made myself in 
my own way. With these I played till I was “too old 
to play” and had to do it in secret. It was in a way my 

39 



MEMOIBS OF HALIDil EDIB 

embryonic novel-writing, for I made elaborate plots 
which the dolls enacted, all inevitably of a tragic and 
melancholy turn. 

Shayeste was I believe being haunted by the dim 
realization of sex brought about by the marriage of her 
eldest sister, who gave rather full descriptions to her 
friends, especially to my sister, who was nine years old 
at the time. Shayeste talked of marriages all the while. 
Marriages frightened me because my uncle Kemal 
would sa}' whenever I was sullen or stubborn (my per- 
sonal method of being naughty), “Fikriyar, go and call 
the imam” (the priest) ; “I will marry her.” 

Another charm of Shayeste’s was her strength and 
energ)', in contrast with which I was painfully delicate 
and physically lazy in the extreme. She did all the 
fetching and carrying for me. I so disliked any kind 
of physical movement that I almost objected to having 
a body at all. I did not see any necessity for it, and no 
physical movement in those days did I do voluntarily, 
not even eating or drinking. Xe.xt to timidity, this 
physical laziness was my dominating trait. Kven now, 
although I work hard — often almost furiously — I feel 
this tendency very strongly. 

After dinner at sunset granny used to sit in her corner 
and read translated novels of adventure, while we were 
.sent down to Hava Hanum’s room to pass a few hours 
before we went to bed. 

Those were the evenings which gave me glimpses 
into the inner lives of the people around me. 

The central figure was Hava Hanum, my grand- 

40 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

mother’s housekeeper and helper. Although she did the 
cooking she would never allow herself to be called a 
cook. “I cook because I love the lady,” she would say. 
But she was regularly paid as long as granny could 
afford it. 

Her face was like wrinkled leather, but she had very 
bright energetic eyes and wore the trimmest and cleanest 
head-dresses and gowns imaginable. She affected 
slightly granny’s pretty touch in dress and tried to imi- 
tate her grande dame manners, but in her heart she 
detested anything that was not bourgeois, and her real 
self was worth watching. 

In social standing she would be below granny, who 
had an old aristocratic family name, Xizami-zade, which, 
though she never used it, she was nevertheless proud of. 
She had married grandfather, who was below her in 
.social status but who was both rich and honorable. 
II ava Ilanum was of different origin. She was a mer- 
chant’s daughter and a merchant’s wife. They were 
very w'ell to do till, according to her account, her hus- 
band married for the second time the widowed wife of 
his brother, and .said that it was out of kindnc.ss. Polyg- 
amy being rare in the families who had no slaves, this 
brought bad luck to the household. Their house too was 
burnt down soon after in one of the big fires in Istam- 
boul, and he lost his money besides. Hava Hanum 
never told us if she was jealous of the .second wife, but 
she had withdrawn her wise and thrifty management 
from her husband’s house. All of that belonged to the 
past now. He had divorced his second wife after his 

41 



MEMOIES OF HALIDE EDIB 

final misfortune and retired to a Turkish monastery 
with his son, who was delicate. He asked Hava Han- 
um’s forgiveness and confessed that all his domestic 
calamity was due to having made her suffer. This she 
told with a certain triumph in her voice. After this she 
had drifted into poverty and loneliness. It was now 
that Arzie Hanum, who had known her previously, 
pitied her and took her to her own house, promising to 
find something for her to do which would not injure her 
self-respect, 

Arzie Hanum had a story of her own too. When- 
ever Hava Hanum spoke of her I felt a lively curiosity, 
for Arzie Hanum was in Istamhoul circles what Ma- 
dame Thebes is in Parisian ones. Besides I have vivid 
memories of her at our sick-beds. 

Arzie Hanum had been initiated into seeing the fu- 
ture at the birth of her first-born. When a Turkish 
woman had a baby in those days it was well known that 
for forty days she was dangerously exjjosed to peri in- 
fluence. In fact it was not safe for her to be left alone 
for a moment, and if she was poor and had no servants 
a neighbor would come in to stay in her room and would 
leave a broom behind the door if called out in an emer- 
gency; this keeps the spirits away. The woman has a 
Koran on her pillow ami wears a red ribbon on her hair, 
and every evening incense is burned beside her to keep 
the evil ojies at a distance. 

Some of these necessary details must have been 
omitted in Arzie Hanum’s case, for she had a fit and 
the peris took possession of her spirit and she became a 

42 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

clairvoyant and went to all the fashionable houses, as 
well as the poor ones, in sickness, childbirth, or other 
calamity, such as when people were under the influence 
of witchcraft, sorcery, or the evil influence of those who 
are called Themselves. She seemed familiar with 
Riikiish Hanum, the chief young peri woman, and Yav- 
rou Bey, a sort of jeune premier of the peris and prob- 
ably the lover of Riikiish Hanum. 

Arzie Hanum lived in a charming tumbledown 
wooden house in a lost quarter of Scutari surrounded by 
a wild garden. She received her patients, or those who 
wanted her opinion on different things, in this house. 

She had a round good-natured face, with two brilliant 
black eyes which twinkled with humor and squinted 
when she went into a trance, that is, got in contact with 
Themselves. She would sit on a low cushion on the 
floor, incense burning in a silver cup before her, her 
fingers hurriedly going through a rosary, and her eye 
fixed on one particular spot of the ceiling. 

She talked and winked at the ceiling as natiually as 
she would to some familiar person. 

“Thou art not going to keep that child in thrall. 
No, don’t be nasty now. Thou shalt have thy cock and 
a nice one. Get out of the way, Riikiish. Let me have 
it out with him.” This to the ceiling. 

Now to the patient: 

“The man in question is living in a blue house. The 
street is narrow. Poor fellow, he bumps his head 
against the eaves. He is tight in the clutches of Yavrou 
Bey. He must have defiled some haunted rubbish- 

43 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

heap.® Let me see — no, it is a haunted fig-tree that he 
has offended. Yavrou! Now, now, you bring a cock 
that will appease him. And Rukiish will be pleased 
with red sugar in a red scarf.” 

The demands of these young peris went up to lambs 
or gold pieces according as the station of the family be- 
came higher in the social scale. Marriages, divorces, 
family grievances and secrets all came to Arzie Ilanum’s 
house. A throng of people waited in the garden taking 
their turns patiently. She would do all this sometimes 
for nothing for the poor, and she helped old and be- 
reaved people and orphans in her quarter. She must 
have given sound and reasonable advice I presume, or 
there would have been more divorce cases among her 
clients than there were. 

Whenever granny went there, which was often in 
those days, I used to go with her to have Arzie pray 
over me and breathe her healing breath into my face. 
Then 1 would be sent out into the garden. Out there 
I alwa}"s felt a tremor down my back, 'riicre used to 
be a dumb child with wild eyes, an orphan protege of 
hers. It had a shaven head and wore girl’s clothes, so 
I could not make out what its sex was. It looked after 
the lambs which were always about in the garden, 
marked with red henna to please Yavrou Bey, to whom 
they were ostensible offerings, ^\nd there were beauti- 
ful cocks too which the queer child ran after, making 

3 Uubbish“heaps and fig-tret*.s were the special haunts of the peris and 
one did well to avoid them entirely, but more especially at night. If one 
were obliged to intrude it was be.st to murmur, “May They be in good 
hour” ; i. e., may this be a time when They arc in good mood. 

44 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

all kinds of gestures and producing unearthly sounds. 
To me it was really Yavrou Bey’s child, and the lambs 
were bewitched as well as the whole garden. Nothing 
would induce me to go under a fig-tree or upon a 
rubbish-heap in the place, lest I might step on the in- 
calculable jeune premier and get a crooked mouth or 
a paralyzed tongue. Apart from her professional rela- 
tions and her professional life Arzie Hanum seemed a 
sincere and friendly person with admirable discretion 
and an understanding heart. Was her kind heart per- 
haps pitying the credulity and ignorance of those who 
came to her ? I cannot to this day be sure whether she 
entirely believed in what she was doing or whether she 
was consciously playing a part. 

She had befriended old Hava Hanum and had kept 
her in her house till granny came across her there. She 
'".dst have spoken to granny in this sort of way: 

• “You know, Hanum Effendi, she is a real lady and 
could not be a servant. But she is an excellent house- 
keeper ; she cooks well, and you need not tell the world 
that you pay her and buy her clothes and her tobacco. 
She will do well and mother the children tenderly.” 

And granny, who could not afford a man cook any 
longer and had married all her old slaves off. needed a 
housekeeper. Very probably she who had seen such 
much grander days was able to understand the pitiable 
condition of another who had come dowi in the world ; so 
she always treated her with consideration and indul- 
gence. 

“I met your granny,” Hava Hanum used to say, 

. t.) 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

“when she was looking for a suitable ladylike old lady 
for your father’s house. Having refused to take her 
son-in-law in her house, your grandmother wanted him 
to have proper care. She asked Arzie Hanum’s advice 
about this, and she finally took Giilly Hanum, who was 
in the same position as I. When a little later I got to 
know your granny and told her all about myself, she 
immediately took me and has been like a sister to me 
ever since. May Allah reward her!” 

She felt real gratitude to granny, but nevertheless it 
was through her evening discourses that 1 learned of 
granny’s weak points. Hava Hanum dined with the 
family, received granny’s guests, and always took care to 
sit in the place of honor, actually in a higher place than 
granny herself. But granny ignored all this benev- 
olently and always maintained her charming manners 
toward her. 

Hava Hanum used to tell a vivid story about the first 
night of her marriage which I can never forget. She 
would forget that her audience consisted of two little 
girls and a foolish Circassian slave, and would get into 
a dramatic mood. 

“We used to have our hair plaited and left hanging 
down our backs in my young days,” she would begin. 
“I had forty plaits; they were like a fringed shawl 
reaching from one shoulder to the other.” (In fact, 
old as she was, she still had two thick plaits, henna- 
colored, wound over her .soft head-dress.) “I had such 
beautiful teeth !” (Her mouth was like an empty black 
hole, but she ate wonderfully, managing the hardest 

46 



WHEN THE. STORY BECOMES MINE 

morsels.) “My cheeks were like two bright peaches.” 
(They were loose wrinkled leather now.) “My hus- 
band when led to my bridal chamber saw everjdhing 
through my veil. He asked me three times to lift my 
veil/ but of course he opened it himself, offering me the 
face-seeing present.** But he had hardly looked at me 
before he called in the woman attendant. 

“ ‘Undo one of these plaits,’ he ordered her. 

“ ‘0 Effendi, her hair has been plaited by the profes- 
sional bath hair-dressers. She only goes once a fort- 
night because it is such a tremendous business each time. 
How can I undo it?’ 

“ ‘Undo it quickly. It cannot be real hair. It is n’t 
possible she should have such a quantity. I must be 
sure that it is not false.’ 

“Two professional hair-dressers from the bath she 
used to go to were accordingly called in, and they undid 
my plaits while he wetted his handkerchief in his mouth 
and rubbed my cheeks.” 

“Why did he do that, Hava Hanum?” I would ask. 

And my sister nudged me angrily for interrupting the 
story. 

“To see if the paint would come off of course, you 
stupid!” 

Well, finally the gentleman made sure that none of 
the beauteous attributes of his wife were false, and he 
shook his head over the possibility of such hair and such 
coloring. 

*'rhis is the ceremonial performance of old Turkish marriages. 

^ A bracelet, necklace, etc., according to the wealth of the bridegroom. 

47 



MEMOIBS OF HALlDi: EDIB 

For years and years the first night ceremonial of mar* 
riages meant for me a repetition of this particular scene. 
As I had not acquired a femininistic turn of mind, I did 
not in the least object to any gentleman who tested the 
physical virtues of his wife as if he were examining any 
other property such as slaves or cows. I made a moral 
out of this story, after I had heard other versions of 
first night ceremonies from other ladies, which were 
more or less alike; and I concluded sadly that a bride 
could never cheat a Turkish husband by paint or false 
hair if her hair was thin and her cheeks pale. The eve- 
nings in Hava Hanum’s sitting-room were in their way 
as instructive as a French salon before the Revolution. 

Every evening we found her fire-brazier in the middle 
of the room with floor-cushions and her coffee-tray 
round it. With her cigarette in her mouth she would 
make her first cup of coffee, taking pains that it should 
be as frothy as possible, and then she would sij) it boil- 
ing hot, her old eyes squeezed up ecstatically before she 
opened the evening’s proceedings. After an hour’s in- 
terval .she would repeat the pleasant operation, some- 
times giving me a little in a tiny .saucer, which I licked 
up like a kitten. 

My sister, hardly nine years old, already smoked in 
secret, but here in Hava Hanum’s room she enjoyed her 
cigarette openly, bringing the smoke out from her nos- 
trils like a grown-up; and feeling proud of this per- 
formance, she would begin fiercely to order me about, 
to which I so much objected that I would threaten her 

48 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

with, “I will tell granny if you make me fetch your 
things.” 

“Wilt thou?” she would blaze. “Come along then. 
It is I who will tell. Dost thou think I am afraid of 
any one? Besides we all know thou art a telltale. 
Thou hast Gipsy milk.” 

The accusation of having Gipsy milk and mixed 
milk was a common one in those days. As my mother 
had been too delicate, father had hired wet-nurses for 
me. It was believed that the milk a baby drinks affects 
its character, making it like the woman who nurses it. 
My first milk-mother, as we call a foster-mother, was an 
Albanian, and my sullen moods were put down to her. 
Granny would say, “Now it is the milk of that cross 
Albanian which is working in thee.” The next was the 
wife of an onion-seller, a supposed Gipsy. Hence any- 
thing in me different from a conventional Turkish child 
was her fault. For three months fortunately a good 
and beloved person had nursed me, and this gave the 
explanation of certain good traits. Whenever I w’as 
docile, gentle, or unselfish it was attributed to my 
Nevres Badji,” a black slave of my granny’s who had 
married in Istamboul. In spite of her hlack face she 
had a milk-white heart and had really nice manners. 
She had a respected position, and granny visited her 
often and allowed her to take us one at a time to her 
house for long visits in Ramazan. This holy month 
was a wonderful time in those days. The quarter where 

Badji is the appellation for a negro nurse. 


49 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

it was most brilliantly celebrated was Istamboul, near 
the famous mosques; and Nevres Badji’s house was in 
Suleymanie in the very center of this part of the city. 
But of these wonderful doings I have more to tell later, 
and for the moment I must return to our evenings in 
Hava Hanum’s room. 

We did not often have these little skirmishes, for most 
of the time she kept our minds absorbed in highly sea- 
soned gossip about the inmates of the house. In some 
subtle way she liked to criticize granny, and mostly as 
regards her weakness for the palace lady. This sub- 
ject was wickedly enjoyed by my sister. 

“I can’t understand,” Hava Ilanum would say, “her 
weakness for palace women. From what I can see the 
creatures have no sense. First she must needs have 
Haire Bey (my grandmother’s eldest son) — may 
Allah’s grace be on his soul! — marry that consumptive 
palace woman, Trigiil Hanum. Everybody round 
about still remembers how fair and tall and stout he 
was; just like your granny herself, and not a bit 
like your uncle Kemal Bey or Kiitchuk Hanum.” 
(Kutehuk Hanum means young lady, and every one 
belonging to granny’s household always s])oke of my 
mother in this way.) Although Trigiil Hanum was tall 
and fair and very beautiful according to Kava Ilanum, 
still she was so thin that she had her legs padded with 
cotton-wool, especially when she went out with the lady 
who had such beautiful plump legs, that is, granny. 
After giving birth to a boy, Ilefet, she liad died. ‘‘Who 
knows?” Have Ilanum would continue with shrewd dis- 


50 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

cernment; “it may be true that consumption is con- 
tagious, for Haire Bey got ill too. But, poor fellow, 
he did not escape from palace ladies on his death-bed. 
He was married to Nevber Hanum, that frightful- 
looking woman who often comes to the house, when he 
was almost dying. It is true that she was a good nurse, 
but each time she left the room he used to say to his 
mother: ‘Do marry me to a pretty woman. That 
woman’s face makes me miserable.’ Very soon after 
he died, and he was soon followed by his lov'ely boy — 
such a favorite as he was with Biiyiik Effendi” (the 
gentleman of the house, my grandfather) . “But it was 
not in your granny to learn a lesson from this. Xow 
she is trying to get Kemal Bey to marry that palace 
lady, who must be at least thirty, while he is only twenty- 
two. You see how stern and sad he looks. I know he 
will never marry her; never!” 

Then the palace lady’s Circassian slave would 
chime in: 

“He locks his door whenever he goes into his room, 
and the blinds of his back windows opposite the red brick 
house arc always drawn. Such a good ^loslem as he is! 
If he were to smile at times you could n’t find fault with 
him.” 

Then sister would snap out, “He doesn’t smile be- 
cause he hates your lady.” 

“What has my lady done to himr’ 

“They want him to marry her, and she wants it too.” 

“She does not.” 

“She does, you idiotic Circassian! Why does she 

51 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

wear those hard, starched, embroidered dresses one after 
the other, that make a crackly noise like a toad, so that 
every cat runs after her? She tries to swell up and look 
fat, and I know she paints her face white and red.” 
(Beauty consisted in those days for the most part in 
plenty of white flesh.) 

“But those are her palace dresses. Are n’t they beau- 
tiful? Each one takes three hours to starch and iron.” 

“What do you say to her false tail of hair then?” 

“It is not false, Vallahi" 

Hava Hanum would stop them both. “It ’s no use 
talking. He would n’t marry her even if she were the 
youngest and loveliest woman in the world. I will tell 
you why not; but swear that you won’t repeat it.” 

After due oaths from my sister and Fikriyar she 
would begin. ( She did not think me important enough 
to make me swear. ) 

“The red brick house opposite his room was taken by 
a Circassian family last year, and there was a pretty girl 
there.” 

A wonderful incident flashed into iny mind as she told 
the story. One morning my uncle Kemal had called 
me into his room. He was very stern-looking and had 
a he-never-smiled-again expression on his face. A 
regular and hard-working secretary in the finance min- 
istry, living as quietly as an old man, he was in reality 
perhaps older than his old father in heart and tempera- 
ment. His leisure time he spent shut up in his room, 
drawing and making all .sorts of bright-colored l)irds out 
of silk and wool, making models of houses, wonderfully 

.52 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

designed down to the smallest detail, and doing lovely 
paintings. He had had no education and was obliged 
to hide all this from his father, who would have consid- 
ered it heathenish. But no doubt he needed self- 
expression, as all of us do, and probably he had a talent 
for drawing. My sister’s son, who is a painter and de- 
signer, probably has his talents from the same source. 

Anyway, Uncle Keinal enjoyed this childish art, and 
enjoyed too our frank admiration of his work, the only 
admiration and sympathy he could get. 

It was one of these Friday mornings in his room, and 
the blind of the back window was up. The window 
opened upon a row of tall acacias in our back garden, 
behind which one could see bits of the red brick house. 
Betwee!! the white flowers and the green leaves I caught 
sight of a dazzling something, like a golden fringe or a 
yellow shawl hanging from one of its windows. From 
this patch of bright gold catching the rays of a blazing 
sun leaned a round, freckled, white face, red lips, and 
the same gold over the head. That splendid shawl I 
discovered to be her hair let loose, for the reason Avhich 
I can only now make out. I'lie face was gazing right 
into the golden glory of the sun, catching its vivid 
splendor. The sheer blinding color and the animal 
magnificence of the picture dazzled me. I have never 
been so strangely and emotionally surprised by any face 
since. 

“Ah!” I gasped. “How beautiful! Look, Uncle 
Kemal!” 

I felt two nervous arms catch me by the shoulders 

53 



MEM0IB8 OF HALIoi EDIB 

and pull me in with a jerk, as he closed the blinds hur- 
riedly. 

“It is rude to look at people like that. Fikriyar must 
have left the blinds up, I am afraid.” It was half emo- 
tion and half apology for being found with an open 
blind with that apparition just opposite. 

After that morning I very often stood under the 
acacias and watched the windows of the red brick house 
till my eyes ached. Only once again did I see the beau- 
tiful vision. It was probably another Friday morning, 
and she was once more looking at the sun in the same 
attitude and with the same loose hair. 

Hava Ilanum’s story completed for me the meaning 
of the golden image and its apparently intentional pose. 

“He called me to his room one evening when the ladies 
were out at the neighbors’,” she said. “He was very 
sad, almost crying. ‘I am dying for the girl in the 
red brick house,’ he said. ‘I entreat you to save my life.’ 

“ ‘What can I do, Kemal Eey?’ I said. 

“ ‘You must go and ask her in marriage for me. 
Auntie Hava.’ 

“ ‘And your mother’s con.sent, my son?’ 

“ ‘You are never to tell my mother. She will never 
consent.’ 

“He kissed my hands and begged so hard that I prom- 
ised, but after I left his room 1 began to think it over 
and be afraid of your granny. She might very likely 
dismiss me if she found me out doing anything without 
asking her consent. It might be disastrous for me, I 
knew. So late in the night I went to her room and woke 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

her. She had her heart so set on that palace lady as a 
daughter-in-law that it was impossible to persuade her. 
But after a lot of talk she said to me, ‘Don’t say any- 
thing to him for a few days, and then pretend that you 
have been to her house and that she is already engaged.’ 

“The next few days my conscience kept pricking me. 
He passed the kitchen door with an expressionless face 
and never asked me once about the affair which he 
seemed to have had so at heart only a few days ago. 
Finally, however, I went to the young woman’s house 
and inquired about her. There were only Circassians, 
and not one of them could talk decent Turkish, but they 
made me understand that she had been married to the 
swarthy, bearded man whom we used to take for her 
father, and only very recently. 

“That very night I went up to his room and told him 
the news. He took it quietly and was in such a hurry 
to get me out of liis room that one might have believed 
lie did n’t care if one did not know him. Before a fort- 
night liad passed your granny called me to her room. 
He had grown so pale and despondent that she was at 
last anxious about him. ‘Hava Hanum.’ she said, ‘go 
and ask that girl’s hand for Kemal; he is simply fading 
away.’ Then 1 told her that I had already been there 
and that it was too late.” 

“Well, that young man won’t last mucli longer,” a 
German doctor at his si.ster’.s funeral said. “He ’ll die 
before he ’s twenty-five.” 

As a matter of fact I%ele Kemal died before he was 
twenty-four. But there is something else to tell before 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I come to that unhappy event which made such a 
turning-point in my childish history, for after it granny 
left the wisteria-covered house and never entered it any 
more. 

We were getting ready for Ramazan, the “unique 
sultan of eleven months,” as the watchman used to sing 
of that holy month in his street perambulations. 
Grann}' was in the kitchen most of the time making 
jams and syrups for Ramazan, an art in which she really 
excelled. Her father had been the chief sw'eet-maker of 
Sultan Abdul JMedjid, the Dweller of Heaven. He 
could make syrups of three colors, white, red, and yel- 
low — so she woulfl tell us — and put them all in the same 
bottle without letting them mix, which sounded little 
short of miraculous to me in those days. I realized as 
she told us such exploits that granny did not care for 
her dead father as much as for her mother; one realized 
that his position must have been something like my own 
grandfather’s in the house, a rich man but inferior in 
station to his wife, herself the daughter of a learned and 
holy personage. 

“My father was not even virtuous like your grand- 
father,” she would say. “Wliy, even before mother 
died he was after all the pretty slaves I used to buy. 
I had so many pretty white slaves, but Effendi” (her 
own husband) “never looked at one of them out of the 
corner of liis eyes.” 

She sat on a chair stirring in regular order the three 
boiling and steaming dishes on braziers before her, Hava 
Hanum moving about and grumbling all the time. 

.50 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

This was a spring Ramazan J and Hava Hanum was in 
the habit of making all sorts of health-reviving and 
youth-restoring lotions for herself, boiling black cur- 
rants and queer spices together in earthenware dishes. 
As she was disturbed by all this bustle and noise in the 
kitchen, she criticized granny’s extravagance, saying 
that the time for such fancies had passed. But granny 
did not heed her. She was determined to have a proper 
Ramazan with feasts and good things to eat in plenty. 
Every evening in those thirty days things looked some- 
what sad. Uncle Kemal was losing flesh and color and 
grandfather getting cross and moody, always talking of 
debts and unpleasant happenings. 

Uncle Kenial came into the kitchen on his return from 
the office, watched his mother’s jam-making for a time, 
but escaped hastily if grandfather or the palace lady 
appeared on the scene. He did not get on with either, 
though for different reasons. 

'Fhe difference between my grandparents’ tempers 
and characters 1 also began to note at this period. She 
was refined, jjolite to the extreme even with the servants, 
never raising her voice or losing her temper. When- 
ever she was intensely annoyed the strongest language 
she used was, “What mint-honey art thou eating?” 
while in similar cases grandfather’s ])owerful voice would 
roar out in its thickest Kemah accent, “What abomina- 
tion art thou eating?” But he oidy scolded the servant 
and never interfered in the harem ])art of the house, and 

7 Turkish months, being* lunar, do not eonstantly recur at any fixed part 
of the solar year. 


57 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

his quarrels with his wife probably took place when the 
rest of the house was sleeping. 

If my grandmother suffered from her stomach she had 
mint-leaves and lemon-peel boiled together and drank 
them; if she had a headache she used rose-leaves steeped 
in vinegar. He in the first case ate raw onions, break- 
ing them with his fists, for he believed that a knife 
spoiled their juice; in the second case, he applied peeled 
potatoes to his forehead, tying them up in a white cloth. 
There was something varied and strong and very full- 
bodied about everything he told us. His voice was re- 
markable, a real sound of nature, with wonderful color 
and volume, and entirely expressive of the emotion he 
felt at the moment. Somehow I was more attracted by 
his onions and .swearing than by my granny’s mint- 
honey and perfumed vinegar. 

He must once have loved granny with a wild passion, 
and he evidently loved her .still ; while she, although very 
feminine and sweet, did mot .seem to care for her hus- 
band in the way that most other women did. She was 
the only woman in my childhood who never spoke of 
sexual relations, and .she scemc&lt;l indeed utterly uncon- 
cerned with the other sex. Evidently she was a woman 
without passion, but sbe could be attached to people to 
such a degree that it often made one pity her; such de- 
votion and unselfishness as .she showed without ever ask- 
ing any return or heeding the ridicule of the world. She 
never kissed or caressed any one so far as I can remem- 
ber, not even the children of the palace lady, for whom 
she had the kind of attachment that is difficult to ac- 


.58 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

count for. There is only one caress of hers which I re- 
member. She was on her death-bed, and she called me 
to her with her eyes, patted me with the one hand which 
she could still use a little, and delicately drew in her 
breath, as her lips touched the cheek which I laid against 
hers to be kissed. She did it longingly, tenderly; and 
this single touch of love physically expressed by her has 
left something like an open wound of memory which 
aches sweetly whenever I think of it. She gave herself 
quietly to those she loved, with no demonstration, no 
need of contact. I, who for years had grandfather’s 
boiling nature and could have kissed my children con- 
tinually and carried them in a pouch attached to my 
body like a kangaroo, often felt a childish irritation at 
her apparent lack of temperament. 

Yet she undoubtedly influenced me, and I recognize 
that I have inherited from both my grandparents to an 
extraordinary degree. Undoubtedly my writing is 
hers. Her little education and her time had not al- 
lowed her to express herself in public, but her happiest 
moments were those when she could sit down and write 
crude love-stories and very old-fashioned verse. Yet 
all that she wrote was so silly and contrary to her own 
nature that it is evident she was led to write by the 
same internal motive as I was, namely to free herself 
from her dull existence. After the publication of my 
novel “Handan,” which undeservedly took the public 
fancy almost to the point of hysteria, she came to me 
with an old copy-book under her arm and asked me 
timidly if she could publish the stuff and get some 

,59 



MEMOIRS OE HALIDE EDIB 

money out of it. She was badly in debt and harassed 
by her creditors. I read the whole crude story, so silly 
and sentimental and so different from her own humor- 
ous and original talk. When I tried to make her un- 
derstand the impossibility of offering her book to a pub- 
lisher she looked pained. 

“Why,” she said, “yours sell more than any one’s.” 

“It is rather different, granny.” 

“Different? Where is the difference? It is all love 
stuff. I have tried to put moi-e love in than you have. 
I have even put in a piano, and the lovers talk through 
the window, which is as far as I could possibly go; I 
could not make them make love to each other in a room 
like yours, even for the sake of my creditors or the pub- 
lishers.” 

She had found out “Handan” in a way which no critic 
had. One story was as silly as the other, although for 
different reasons : hers because of its w'eak sentimental- 
ity, her refined nature not being able to recognize the 
sins of the flesh; while the silliness of “Ilandan” came 
from the over-strong dose of passion. It recked w’ith 
passion indeed, and grandfather was surely responsible 
for its physical side. Vet it is those silly ty])es who 
have such long lives in literature. If granny had known 
how to use her hidden desires slie wa)uld have produced 
a Turkish “.lane Eyre” not one bit less silly or senti- 
mental than the English one. \Ve somehow love to 
create the ty])cs farthest aw'ay from us. the types which 
our sense of humor or lack of a certain kind of courage 
prevents us personally from ever becoming. 

00 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

Those interviews with granny have left regret and 
shame in my heart. I used to finish by lecturing her on 
her habit of running into debt. How crude and futile 
I must have appeared ! 

“Why make debts, granny?” I used to say. “You 
need not give presents to so many people.” 

“Child,” she would answer, “shall I not buy the 
Bairam ® clothes for my old slaves’ children? So few 
are alive. I have ceased to do so for my friends’ chil- 
dren. I have no personal desire, no more ferajes “ ac- 
cording to the color of the flowers of the seasons, no 
more feasts. No, I have only three more days to live, 
and I ’m not going to change now, debts or no debts.” 

“What would you do if you had your old fortune?” 

“Do the same things over again.” 

She would have tears in her eyes in the end and repeat 
that she had onlj' three days more to live, and stick stub- 
bornly but sweetly to her last extravagance. 

On the whole, however, it is clear to me that granny 
really did restrict her lavish tendencies somewhat as she 
grew older. The legends of the great doings before I 
was born pointed to something e\ en more splendid than 
anything I was familiar with. As far as I am able to 
judge, her really last extravagant period, something 
like the old days, was the Ramazan I have already re- 
ferred to — the Ramazan after which her last child and 
the old husband, who had sweated himself to death to 
have her wishes realized, grumblingly but loyally, died. 

^ Festival after Ramazan, when every one has new clothes. 

^ An out-of-door mantle, worn formerly hy Turki.sh ladies. 

&lt;&gt;1 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE FJDIB 

When the cellar was looking like the hyacinth-fields, 
all yellow, red, and purple, but with syrups and jams 
in transparent glass jars instead of flowers; and when 
it had a smell as pungent and as varied as the spice- 
market, when the house blazed with dazzlingly white cur- 
tains, white divan-covers, and clean windows, and two 
women were working at two machines making new 
dresses for us children, my Nubian milk-mother Nevres 
Badji appeared on the scene. 

As she kissed granny’s dress, and when the mutual 
inquiries after the families’ healths were over, she re- 
spectfully intimated that she had come to take me for 
the promised Ramazan visit. Sister’s turn would come 
next, but this time it was thought better for her to go 
to another married slave of granny’s, a tall and fair 
Circassian, whose forcible nature made her more able 
to control Mahmoure than the mild Nubian. 

So on this memorable day before Ramazan I started 
with Nevres Badji on my way to Istamboul. 1 don’t 
know how we got to the bridge, but the indignity she 
exposed me to after we had crossed it is branded as with 
fire in my memory. She evidently thought the steep 
hill from iNlerjan to Suleymanic would he too much for 
my childish legs, and so she hired a porter to carry me. 
The shame of it! The insult of it! It is true that I 
was not a stout walker, hut it was cither a carriage or a 
tram which granny always took when we went on ex- 
peditions of this kind, and the sight of the children of 
the poorer classes carried by porters had always filled 

62 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 
me with disdain. From that day they had my full 
sympathy. 

It was a tall Kurdish porter with a dark face and a 
tender heart, as they all usually have. He caressed my 
hair, patted my cheeks, laughed and tried to be friendly, 
tried his best to make me speak. He wanted to stop 
and buy me sweets out of bis own poor purse if Xevres 
Badji had allowed such familiarity. Such an unpleas- 
ant penetrating smell attacked my nostrils from his 
body, and his face was so fond and foolish, and I was 
in such an irritated state of mind, feeling the Istamboul 
crowd to be an audience gathered to watch my humilia- 
tion, that I hated him violently at that moment; but I 
have changed my mind since, and I love him and his 
kind. 

The first night at Xevres’s house was not pleasant. 
The first night anywliere is unpleasant for a child, but 
it was more so in her house for two special reasons: 
first she made me sleep in her bed, and she had the in- 
curable smell of colored people, so hard for a sensitive 
white nose to bear, however that nose may love the 
owner of the smell. Secondly she put out the light, and 
I was used to sleeping with an oil-lamp, a soft shaky 
light which bathed the furniture, as well as granny’s 
face, in a dim and golden haze; whereas this darkness in 
Nevres Badji’s room seemed to thicken so as to solidify 
Nevres Badji into a hard black mass, so hard that one 
could bite it, as Hark Twain says, hut never he able to 
chew it without breaking one’s teeth. I perspired with 

63 



MEMOIRS OF HALlDi: EDIB 

anguish and felt that the unmoving time too was solidi- 
fied and fixed like the darkness. 

But morning did come, as it always does. I heard 
her mild voice, mixed with the wonderful bass of a man 
making fond efforts to tone his voice down to the softest 
whisper; though somehow I felt that really he very much 
wanted me to wake up. It was Ahmet Aga, my milk- 
father, Xevres’ second husband, a blond giant from 
Trebizond with a leonine red head, all hair and beard, 
and two delightful blue eyes — a captain of a custom- 
house launch which pursued smugglers at sea. lie and 
his launch must have worked havoc in the hearts of the 
law-breakers, yet his heart wa« perhaps more childish 
than mine. As he had come in late the night before, I 
only found him on the sofa in his gcjeJik in the morn- 
ing, waiting for me like a little hoy for his playmate. 

I would spring from the floor-bed into his lap, and 
locking me in his arms, he would kiss my hair and call 
out playfully, “Milk-mother, bring our coffee and milk.” 
Then with the coffee-cup on one of his knees and me on 
the other, we would drink our coffee and milk together, 
lie began the morning with a joyful song. Although I 
have a poor ear and memory for music, I still hear the 
songs — both words and music — that I heard in my child- 
hood, as sung by the people dead so long ago : 

“My girl, my girl, my henna-])ainte(l lamb, a hodja 
wants to marry thee; what answer shall I say?” 

“Mother, O mother, he ’ll make me wind his turban. 

10 A long padded coat worn as a .sort of negligee, wlielher in the bed- 
room, house, or even mosque. 


64 





\ M I 



WHEN THE STOBY BECOMES MINE 

Oh, tell the hodja, mother, thy daughter says him nay I” 

“My girl, my girl, my henna-painted lamb, a soldier 
wants to marry thee; what answer shall I say?” 

“The soldier has a cruel sword which he may use to 
kill me. Oh, tell the hodja, mother, thy daughter says 
him nay.” 

Thus the song went on, with proposals for marriage 
with every kind of profession, but the girl refuses till 
it comes to a scribe, whereupon she accepts with joy. 
Scribes were the favored husbands and lovers in those 
days, at least so said a multitude of people’s delightful 
songs. Ahmet Aga always wanted me to sing the an- 
swers, and he sang them with me, so we must have 
sounded rather queer. 

Meanwhile Nevres Badji used to move about the 
room, softly tidying everything with her eternal and 
internal smile which seemed to make no facial disturb- 
ance on her broad, bland, black face. 

“Come, milk-mother, sing thou too,” he used to roar, 
and she hummed the same thing in her sweetly humorous 
tones : 

“I look at the meat in the butcher’s shop and the 
melons on the stall, but never dost thou give me one 
thing to eat at all. Nor art thou fair and handsome, 
hast no good looks at all. A fine strong husband I 
could love, but thou art dwarfish small. So if I go and 
leave thee, make love to some poor black, and thou canst 
keep my nikah; I will not ask it back.” (The nikah is 
the sum the husband has to pay the wife in case of 
divorce. If she demands the divorce, she usually gives 

65 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

up her right to the money in order to persuade him.) 

They would wink at each other and enjoy some fun 
the meaning of which I did not catch, but I have never 
seen a happier and more loving couple since. They 
had a perfect mutual understanding and mutual con- 
tentment. 

The second night in Nevres Badji’s room was pleas- 
anter. The young moon which started the Ramazan 
rejoicings had been seen by some one late in the night. 
Just as I was feeling innnured by the rocky hardness 
of the lightless room, soft lights from outside lit up the 
white curtains as hoys and men passed along the street 
with lanterns in their hands, singing and beating a tre- 
mendous drum. This made milk-mother get up, make 
a light, and begin to bustle round, getting ready for the 
first sahur (the night meal which is eaten after midnight 
in Ramazan in preparation for the next day’s fasting), 
which every one would begin the next day. 

The next morning when 1 woke, milk-father was snor- 
ing in his bed. Only milk-mother was up, probably to 
prepare my morning milk; and I had to have a lonely 
meal listening to the extraordinary silence which seemed 
to fill the house as well as the streets. It was only at 
three in the afternoon that the world began to wake up 
and we got ready for the visit to the mosques. 

This part of Istamhoul is a vast burnt waste, islanded 
with patches of charming dark wooden houses with 
shadowy eaves. Betw’een these we passed, she holding 
my hand fast, that I might not get lost. The streets 

66 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

were full. Groups of women, in charshafs of many 
colors, moved along, the young with thick veils but the 
old with their faces uncovered, all with rosaries in hand 
and tight lips occasionally whispering a prayer. Every 
one carried a rosary, beautifully and fancifully colored, 
each mosque having had a fair where one could buy 
rosaries, pipes, women’s trinkets, dried fruit, and all 
imaginable delicacies, especially spices. Men from all 
over the empire stood there, picturesquely dressed, cry- 
ing their goods in musical tones and in their own lan- 
guages. Arabs predominated in numbers, their stalls 
full of henna and kohl in pretty red leather tubes, which 
they pretended to hav'e brought from Mecca, and which 
made their goods considered almost like holy relics and 
therefore to be much sought after. Besides holy tradi- 
tion said that it was pleasing to iMohammed for women 
to dye their eyes with kohl and their fingers with henna. 

Finally Suleymanie mos(]ue was reached, where we 
were to hear preaching or mukabclc.^^ The sight of 
that gray and imposing group of buildings made me 
almost drunk with pleasure. I seemed to be composed 
of myriads of open cells through which penetrated this 
gray mass rising in the blue air. The feeling inside me 
was of a fluid motion, flooding and moving in a divine 
harmony through my little body. I have often thought 
since that a child’s perception of beauty is superior to 

" Every family had a hafiz, a man who knows the Koran by heart and 
the musical rules of the chantinp. He has to chant the Koran for the soul 
of the dead. One heard them in every mosque, some being famous and 
more sought after for beauty of voice or rendering. 

67 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

that of a grown-up. It is not a beauty of words. It is 
color; it is sound, it is harmony and line all combined 
yet producing a single sensation. 

A moment’s pause at the door to give one’s shoes to 
the old man,^“ the lifting of the corner of the huge worn 
curtain, beside which one looked like a tiny rabbit, and 
then the entrance! 

A gray endless upward sweep of dome, holding a hazy 
gray atmosphere in which hung the constellation of the 
tiny oil lamplets.^® The light through the colored win- 
dows must have added a rosy hue, hut the warmth of 
its pinkish shade was rather felt than seen. It was 
diffused in that gray air and added a faint tone which 
prevented the gray from being sad and somber, as it 
usually is on sea and sky. The magic of genius has 
given the mosque of Suleymanic the proportions which 
make one fancy it the largest building one has ever seen, 
so imposing is the sense of space and grandeur reduced 
to its simplest expression. Xear the mihrah,^* under 
different groups of lamps, sat various men in white tur- 
bans and loose black gowns, swinging their bodies in 
rhythm with the lilt of their minor chants. Kverything 
seemed part of the simple majestic gray space with its 

12 So one may pollute a inosque by walking in it witli .shoes dirty with 
the impurities of the street. Huge padded curtains hang over the mosque 
doorways. 

13 Until reer»ntly all mo.squc.s were lit by tiny lamps, eaeh lamp consist- 
ing of a small, cup-like glass filled with oil on which floated a wick. From 
the ceiling of the dome an iron framework was hung by heavy chains, and 
in this framework the lamps were placed; but so slight and delicate was 
it that when the lamps were lit the framewmrk was un.seen and the im- 
pression was of stars hanging in the sky of the dome. 

1* The part of a mosque which shows the direction of Mecca. 

68 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

invisible rosy hue and its invisible pulsations. In the 
pulpits sat men in the same dresses as the chanters. 
They Were preaching and waving their arms in more 
passionate rhythm than the chanting ones, but every- 
thing became toned down and swallowed up in the con- 
quering silence, in the invisible pulsation of the air. 
Nevres sat down where she could listen to some man who 
was chanting for the souls of the dead. Some of these 
chanters were old and some young, but all had the trans- 
parent amber pallor and the hectic eyes of those who 
are fasting. In no time I felt caught up into the gen- 
eral sway and began moving my body unconsciously to 
and fro in the same harmonious manner as the rest. I 
became a part of the whole and could not have moved 
otherwise than under the dominating pulsations of the 
place. No false note, no discordant gesture was pos- 
sible. 

There were more groups of women than men around 
the preachers, and as Badji always went to listen to the 
chanters, I quietly sneaked away and knelt before a 
preacher’s pulpit. A pale man with eyes of liquid flame 
was speaking, condemning every human being to eternal 
fire, since his standard for a good Moslem was such that 
it was quite impracticable to get to heaven. As the 
natural dwelling-place of jMoslem mortals therefore, he 
described all the quarters of hell — the place where peo- 
ple are burned, the place where they are tortured in all 
sorts of ways. It seemed to be a case of either endless 
suffering in this world or the next; that at any rate is 
the effect which has stayed in my memory as being what 

69 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

he wanted to impress upon us. His arms in their long 
loose black sleeves had prophetic gestures; his voice had 
a troubling tone, something so burning, so colored lend- 
ing itself to the wonderful rhythm and beauty of the 
verses of the Koran which he read and interpreted. It 
was really sublime nonsense, rendered in most artistic 
gestures and tones. I sneaked back to Badji and hid 
my face in her ample cliarshaf. I was frightened and 
troubled for the first time with a vague sense of re- 
ligion. 

In the evening the great guns were fired, signaling the 
time to break the fast, and we gathered about the round 
low tray on which jams, olives, cheese, spiced meats, 
eggs, and all sorts of highly flavored pastries were ar- 
ranged. Milk-father got back his good humor as he 
ate. In Ramazan the Moslem spoils his stomach as one 
spoils a beloved child, even the poorest allowing himself 
variety and plenty. 

Our evening prayers received only scant observance 
that night, for we had to hurry out for the Ramazan 
prayer, milk-father leading with a lantern in his hand; 
but turning back he soon lifted me on his shoulders, and 
swinging the lantern in his other hand, he walked by 
Badji’s side, talking and joking. The streets were 
lighted by hundreds of these moving lanterns. Men, 
women, and children flickered forward like a swarm of 
fireflies, drums were sounding in the distance, and from 
every minaret the muezzin was calling, “Allah Ekber, 
Allah Ekber. . . The grand harmony came nearer 

16 God is great — the beginning of the usual call to prayer. 

70 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

or grew more distant as we moved on. Then suddenly 
above the dimly lighted houses, above the mass of moving 
lights, a circle of light came into view high over our 
heads in the dark blue air. The tiny balcony of some 
dim minaret was now traced out as though by magic in 
a slender illusive ring of light. These light circles mul- 
tiplied into hundreds, standing out in the bluish heaven, 
softly lighting up the picturesque masses of the wooden 
buildings below them, or the melting lines of the domes. 
And now in the same air, hanging in fact between 
minaret and minaret, otlier beautiful lines of light as if 
by a miracle interlaced and wove themselves into 
wonderful writing: “Welcome, O Ramazan!” Bel- 
shazzar’s surprise when he saw the invisible fingers writ- 
ing on the wall differed from mine only in quality. I 
was on the shoulders of the tallest man in the crowd. 
Below me the lights of the lanterns swung in the dark 
depths of the long winding mysterious streets. Above 
me light circles and gigantic letterings, also in light, 
hung in the blue void, while the illusive tracery of 
tlie minarets, the soft droop of the domes, appeared 
dimly or disappeared in the thickness of blue distance 
as we walked on. And so once more we reached Sul- 
eymanie and plunged into the great crowd gathered in- 
side. 

The gray space was now a golden haze. Around the 
hundreds of tremulous oil lights a vast golden at- 
mosphere thickened, and under it thousands of men sat 
on their knees in orderly rows; not one single space was 
empty, and this compact mass, this human carpet 

71 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

presented a design made up of all costumes, ages, and 
ranks. The women prayed in the gallery above. 

Nevres Badji left me to watch it all while she found 
herself a proper place in a regular row. Suddenly came 
the unique grand call — " Sal-li-a-la MoJiavimed!" and 
then the rise of the entire human mass. The imam stood 
in front of the mihrah, his back to the people, and opened 
the prayer. It is wonderful to pray led by an imam. 
He chants aloud the verses you usuallj’' repeat in lonely 
prayer. You bow, you kneel, your forehead touches 
the floor. Each movement is a vast and complicated 
rhythm, the rising and falling controlled by the invisible 
voices of the several muezzins. There is a beautiful 
minor chant. The refrain is taken up again and again 
by the muezzins. There is a continual rhythmic thud 
and rustle as the thousands fall and rise. The rest be- 
longs to the eternal silence. 

It seems as if we should go on rising and falling, ris- 
ing and falling for the rest of our lives, till all of a sud- 
den people remain longer on their knees than before, 
and a chorus of, ‘‘Amin, amin," sets the pulsing air into 
an almost frantic rhythm. 

Then we leave the mosque. 

I have often prayed in most of the mosques of Istam- 
boul, but I have never entered Suleymanie again, al- 
though I have walked many times around it and visited 
the museum which used to be its soup-kitchen in earlier 
times. I did not want to alter the memory of the divine 
and esthetic emotion which I had had in the days of 

I® Pray in the name of Mohammed. 

72 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

my early childhood, and I knew it was not possible to 
repeat it without destroying the intensity of that first 
impression. 

Whatever my feelings are toward some parts of the 
Ottoman past, I am grateful to its conception of beauty 
as expressed by Sinan in that wonderful dome. The 
gorgeous coloring of the Byzantines, the magic tracery, 
and the delicate, lace-like ornament of the Arab in- 
fluenced him in many ways, but he surely brought that 
flawless beauty of line and that sober majesty in his 
Turkish heart from its original home in the wild steppes. 
There is a manliness and lack of self-consciousness here 
which I have never seen in any other temple, yet the 
work is far from being primitive or elemental. It eom- 
bines genius and science, as well as the personal sense 
of holy beauty which is characteristic of the Ottoman, 
and it can hold its own with the architectural triumphs 
of any age. 

Before Ramazan was over I went home to granny’s. 
iMy sister, whom I called Mahmoure Abla,'® met me at 
the door with a red and excited face. She was very glad 
to see me back, evidently, and full of news. First she 
gave me some j)retty shells carefully tied up in her 
pocket-handkerchief. She had been to the seaside in 
Scutari and had gathered these for me. In generosity 

Sinan is the celebrated Turkish architect who lived in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries and built endless mosques, bridges, tiirbahs, foun- 
tains, and kitchens for the poor. 

is the title given to an elder sister by her younger. Mahmour&lt;^ 
is her personal name. 


73 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

and open-handedness she was unsurpassed. I inunedi- 
ately felt very much disappointed at not having been 
to the seaside myself. I forgot my own beautiful nights 
and remembered only the unpleasant time when I had 
been carried by a porter. I was almost ready to cry, 
but I was developing a conscious pride which did not 
allow my old outbursts of temper. And sister never 
noticed people’s moods, while I was like a thermometer 
for feeling jjeople’s inside discomforts. 

“We are having great if tars” (Ramazan invitations) , 
she said; “grandfather in the selamlik and Granny in 
the harem. We have got a new man cook and an Ar- 
menian woman-servant for Ramazan, and Ilava Hanuni 
is all dressed in her grandest things and is receiving the 
visitors. To-night we are going to have a children’s 
party. Thy Xut-rat is coming. All tlic girls in the 
quarter are coming. iVuntie Vaslic is bringing that 
newly circumcised hoj" of hers, that monkey-faced child 
Avho sits at the window' in a girl’s blue dress and the cap 
covered w'ith a nazar takimi.” 

This was news indeed, and I began to forget my re- 
sentment in my interest in the ])reparati()ns for the eve- 
ning. The grown-ups w’ere having their tables laid up- 
stairs in the saloons, and we were to tline in the ordinary 
dining-room and use Ilava llanum’s room afterward as 
our parlor. Mahmoure .i\hla feverishlj' controlled all 
the table arrangements, counted the tiny iftar dishes to 

Every older woman wu.s called “auntie” !)y little children. Boys who 
had just nvently been circuiiiei.sed wore blue dres.ses and caps, and 
dangling down from their caps they had an ornament, nazar takimi, mad** 
of blue beads and pearls to keep off the evil eye. 

7t 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

see if the same choice of jam, cheese, and other delicacies 
was being given to us as to the grown-ups. She 
wrangled with the slave-girl Fikriyar because the green 
olives were forgotten. She got the syrup-glasses ar- 
ranged just as she wished on the tray, while I walked at 
her heels bathed in the glory of her power and impor- 
tance. 

Shayeste’s family arrived first — ^her one-eyed sister 
looking as cross as ever — and the other invited neigh- 
bors one after another, followed with their offspring. 
Our sitting-room was filled with young visitors all sit- 
ting uneasily in a row on the divan and looking at their 
toes as the grown-ups do, when Auntie Vasfie arrived 
with the boy in blue and his ornamented cap. 

“You must make Riff at play the servant in your 
games,” she said. “He will be a good slave.” 

The boy Riff at had a dark, sickly face and was evi- 
dently perfectly ready to play the slave, so eagerly 
and meekly did he fall in with all our plans. Up to 
now I had hated boys and feared them so much that this 
timid and lowly specimen was a surprise to me. Before 
long I found out that he was suffering from shyness of 
the others almost more than myself, although he was 
older, and I felt obliged to befriend him. 

The meal was a failure. I felt out of place and fool- 
ishly different from the rest of the little company, just 
as in later years I have often felt at grown-up dinner- 
parties. Mahmoure Abla was all eyes, darting fire and 
reproaches at Fikriyar, wdio was waiting on us. For- 
tunately there was Bedrie, a slender and beautiful girl 

75 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

of twelve, the oldest child who in the assembly was al- 
ready wearing the veil out of doors and got married 
very soon afterward. 

After dinner we all sat together on the same divan and 
pretended to drink coffee out of dolls’ cups. Then we 
sat down in a circle on the floor and played “The young 
mouse runs from the holes.” Finally Mahmoure 
Abla said, “This is idiotic; let us play weddings!” 

Every one got excited, and every one suggested who 
should be the bride and bridegroom, while each was hop- 
ing to be one or the other of these happy persons. No 
one thought of the little boy. “Thou shalt be the 
dowry-slave,” they said finalh% and he was content. 

Binnaz was the bride and Bedrie the bridegroom. 
She pinned her skirts and made them look like a man’s 
pantaloons. She put some black soot from a candle on 
her lips to make a mustache, and Mahmoure Abla 
fetched the man-servant’s fez from the selamlik. Bin- 
naz simply covered her face with the white muslin veil 
which Hava Hanum used to put on her head at her 
prayers. Now the game of weddings always starts 
when the pair passes among the assembled visitors arm 
in arm and every one calls out “Mashallah!” Then 
they enter the bridal chamber and sit on the sofa. 

“What is your name?” asks the groom. 

No answer. 

“Please open your veil.” 

20 The Turkish form of “Hunt the slipper.” 

21 Well-to-do families give a slave who is called the dowry to the bride 
before she is married. 


7(i 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

This is repeated three times, and no answer is given. 
But just when we are expecting the bride to comply, as 
she properly should at this point and open her veil 
and complete the play she is acting, Binnaz lifts up her 
voice and wails. The face-seeing present Bedrie offers 
is a match-box with a “pretend” ring inside. But the 
match-box is in vain. The wail develops into a regular 
and very unpleasantly loud howl. 

“You are making fun of me; I won’t be the bride; I 
won’t be the bride,” she cries. None of us at the time 
could understand the reason of the outburst, but I be- 
lieve that it was her sensibility as to her blind eye, per- 
haps even a sudden conviction that this would never 
happen to her in reality, which had roused her against 
every one. Our surprise was complete. Mahmoure 
vVbla began shaking her. The others pulled her off the 
sofa and begged her to stop crying lest the grown-ups 
should think we were quarreling. It was no use. 
Ilava Hanum came down and scolded her, while Mah- 
nioure Abla rushed out. Her return with Fikriyar 
carrying a tray full of ruby-colored pomegranate- 
syrups restored order. 

Our evening was not exactly a success, but w'e had 
gained a new playmate in Riffat. After this he often 
joined us with Shayeste in the marble hall. He was as 
humble as he could be, and queerly enough I tolerated 
him best after Shayeste. Once indeed I told Hava 
Haninn that I wanted to play the wedding game with 
him, and at that stage I had no idea that there was any 
difference between the game and the reality, both alike 

77 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

being completely unreal. But when Riffat later 
changed his girl’s blue dress for a primary military 
school uniform, I classified him with the wild species of 
humanity, viz., boys, and dropped him immediately. 

But to return to our famous Ramazan of that year. 
As Bairam approached, the sewing-machines went on 
working even more busily, and granny went out every 
day buying presents. The handkerchiefs, the shirts, 
and the children’s dresses were piling up on granny’s 
divan. Her married slaves came with their children, 
stayed a few nights, got their presents, and went away 
again. 

The night before Ramazan ends there is such a sleep- 
less feverish sense of waiting and preparation that the 
day never actually fulfils one’s expectations. We be- 
gan the day by kissing the hands of all the old people in 
the house. Grandfather was the first person. At 
Bairam he was especially sad and restless. lie had 
never got over the death of his beautiful grandson 
Reffet. He wandered round or shut himself up in his 
room, looking like an old wounded lion in a cage. 

But he smiled sweetly at us when we entered and was 
unusually tender and caressing. He made us sit on his 
funny corner divan, and roasted bread on the little 
mangal ~~ which he always kept in his room for his coffee, 
and he offered us delicious cheese that had just arrived 
from Kemah, very .salty and creamy. He gave us 
dried cream and mulberries too, both Kemah products. 
Then he pre.sented us new handkerchiefs and kissed me 


22 A manual is a brazier. 


78 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

several times. “Come every day, Halik,” he said. 
“Thou shah have some more cheese, and I will buy thee 
red apples.” I found out afterward that his calling 
me Halik was due to the boy Reffet’s having always 
called me by this funny name, a thing of which, however, 
I had no remembrance. 

Auntie Teize, as we called the palace lady, was at her 
best also. She offered us beautiful loukoum and gave 
us silk handkerchiefs. Rut what makes me remember 
the day especially was her bringing out picture-books to 
show us during our visit to her apartments. It was a 
strange sensation to me, those signs and the pictures out 
of which a new world suddenly spoke. The book was 
a collection of African travels, perhaps translated; I do 
not know. Rut she actually sat on the floor and read 
to us the descriptions and explained the pictures. She 
liad not been a teacher in the palace for nothing, for, as 
granny said, she could make a stone understand things. 
From that moment I gradually began to find the palace 
lady very attractive. An uncontrollable desire to learn 
to read began with the iVfrican travels that day. 

iMahmoure Abla told me that learning from Djavide 
Manum was not a thing for cowardly little girls who 
feared Halim Kadin. This was very insulting. Halim 
Kadin was an imaginary w'oman whom they had in- 
vented to frighten me. She was supposed to live some- 
where in the old stables, or in the large wood and char- 
coal store-places and cisterns round our house which 
were no longer used. As Ilava Hanum believed that 
each child had to be in awe of something in order to be 

79 



MEMOIBS OF HALlDi EDIB 

properly handled, she had created this image for my 
benefit. Mahmoure Abla sometimes hid in one of the 
numerous cupboards and produced unearthly sounds 
which were meant to be Halim Kadin calling, and these 
sounds always made a creepy feeling down my back. 

“I won’t be afraid of her any more,” I said bravely. 

“But thou canst not bear beating, canst thou?” 

This made me serious. 

“You must be able to bear beating,” she went on. 
“No child can learn without being beaten. Beating has 
come out of heaven.” 

This was Djavide Hanum’s pedagogics it seemed, and 
father’s was quite a different system. He only scolded 
me twice in all my life and took every measure to pre- 
vent me from being harshly treated, even when it was a 
matter of education later on. 

Anyhow shortly after this my sister tried to apply 
Djavide Hanum’s system to me, and I began learning 
with her in secret. But it did not last for more than 
two lessons, I believe, for I did not care to learn a la 
Djavide Hanum. 

But I have wandered again. 

Father naturally made a point of arriving at granny’s 
house as early as he could. He had, however, first been 
obliged to attend the Bairam ceremony at the Dolma 
Bagtche Palace, and from there he came straight on to 
pay his respects to his old parents-in-law. He was still 
wearing his court-dress — a uniform of a long, tight, 
black coat, buttoned to the throat, embroidered in real 
gold down the front, a large decoration on his breast, his 

80 






WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

ornamental sword, kid gloves, and shiny shoes. He 
cannot have been more than twenty-eight at this time, 
having married my mother very young. To me as I re- 
member him that day, his slender figure, delicate face, 
with very fair mustache, his wonderful eyes, his well 
shaped hands, he seemed a very handsome figure. He 
gave us shining money — all new coins — out of a red silk 
purse. 

After this we children went to kiss the hands of the 
old ladies in our quarter. Our own house was mean- 
time like a beehive; men came into our selamik for 
their Bairam visits to grandfather, while all the young 
were received by granny also, and each would have as 
a present, after they had kissed her hands, a shirt, a 
handkerchief, or a tie. Mahmoure Abla did not like 
these hand-kissing visits. “It is like begging for hand- 
kerchiefs,” she said. 

But we went nevertheless, were given sweets, and re- 
ceived our handkerchiefs, wdth the same remark every- 
where, “You can wipe your mouths with them, dears.” 

That afternoon father’s groom came to fetch me to go 
with him to Yildiz; and perched on the tall bay horse, 
sitting in front of the man, I started for the palace. I 
remember the conv^ersation we had, perhaps on account 
of the queer coincidence which followed it that very day. 

“You give me your hair, little girl,” he said face- 
tiously. My unfortunate hair drew out teasing re- 
marks from every one because of the funny way it was 
done. After some bad illness, probably the one at the 
Kyria Ellenie school, my hair was cut short; and as it 

81 



MEMOIRS OF H^VIJDE EDIB 

grew very fast and granny hated untidy hair (she her- 
self always wore her hair short), she had niy hair done 
in four plaits, one on the top of my head, one on each 
temple and one at the back, the four being all tied to- 
gether on the top of my head with some bright-colored 
ribbon. The ends escaped and stood out like a squir- 
rel’s tail, and the unusual shades of fair and dark gave 
it a strange appearance. The plaits were so tight that 
they screwed up my temples and eyebrows, and I had 
perpetual pains in my head on that account, but I never 
complained. I was naturally ready to give up my hair 
to any one. When the man .saw that he could not tease 
me about my hair, he called me a little slave-girl and 
swore that he had seen me bought from a slave-dealer 
and actually knew the price that was paid for me, al- 
though he kept a mysterious silence on this point. 

This was the identical nonsense with which every 
little girl was teased in Turkey in those days. Vet 
every little girl minded it terribly, and some .stupid ones, 
like me, almost believed it. So by the time we were 
climbing the final Royal Road at a gallop up to the 
palace door I had deep mi.sgivings. I’assirjg through 
the portals, I saw a man carryirjg a white cockatoo in 
his hand. “Happy Rairam,” screeched a voice, inhu- 
man and startling, but I had never lieard a bird talk 
before. 

The groom w'hispered: “That bird knows about you 
too. Shall I ask it?” I was not anxious for more in- 
formation and I hurried into father’s bureau. It was 
in one of the pavilions on the left of the road with a 

82 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

few steps leading up to it. He was not in. He hardly 
ever had any holidays. On ceremonial days he was 
busiest, for all the royal presents and decorations passed 
through his hands. The head servant told me to wait 
in father’s room; he had been called away as usual by 
the first chamberlain. But the servant promised to 
bring me sweets if I would be a good girl. 

There in father’s room, in front of his writing-table 
and sitting in his chair, was a eunuch. As these people 
were familiar sights in the palace, the circumstance was 
not in itself strange, but this eunuch was different from 
the stately black men I was accustomed to. His face 
was a light milk and coffee color; his features were more 
regular than my own; his eyes were big and of the 
troubling kind — sad, humorous, and very beautiful. 
Ilis large handsome head was set on a crippled body 
with an enormous hunch on the back. I began walking 
round him in order to get a good view of the hunch, and 
then I .stood and stared at him fascinated. I believe 
there was the curve of a smile, in fact there were many 
smile-curves, in the corners of his mouth, but he kept 
them under control and returned mv ^aze seriously for a 
time. Then he sighed and rolled his eyes, his face tak- 
ing on an extraordinary look of real suffering. 

“Ah, I am waiting for my father!’’ 

“Who is thy father?” 

“Aly father?” He looked astonished. “My father 
is Edib Bey, of eoursc.” 

“He is my father.” 

“Well, I ’m talking of Edib Bey too, but he is my 

h;j 



MEMOIRS OF halide: EDIB 

father. At least he was. I was his son, his first-born, 
till thou, a black foundling from the streets, came and 
bewitched both of us. I became crippled and black and 
thou white and took my place, and I was turned into the 
street.” 

His face crumpled into lines; his voice sobbed, his eyes 
became full of tears, yet Avatched me furtively. I have 
never been torn betAveen so many different sensations: 
belief in niy Avicked Avitchcry, fear lost I might be found 
out and sent into the streets and become a negress once 
more, j)ity for his miserable fate, and hatred toAA’ard him 
for making me feel all this. I have seen many great 
actors on the stage since, but, it seems to me even noAV, 
neA*er one Avith such sincere and artistic poAver of ren- 
dering emotion. I Avas trying hard to sAvallow the pain- 
ful lump in my throat to hold back the tears that already 
stood on my lashes. I needed the strength of a dozen 
buffaloes to keej) my mouth from trembling in ever .so 
many directions. 

He crawled toward me, gazed at me, and tried to kiss 
me. 

“Thou dear black Aviteh.” he said as father entered 
the room. 

hat tricks are you playing (m my little girl, Agaf’ 
he said. 

“Telling her not to steal the fathers of such poor or- 
phans as I,” he ansAvered. 

Father laughed and took me on his knees, but did not 
trouble to explain AV’hat seemed a tragic dilemma to me. 

84 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

I carried a misgiving in my heart about this until its 
absurdity gradually made itself apparent to me. 

That Bairam night I had my first experience of a 
theater. There was a French troupe in Pera, and 
father, with the two inseparable friends of his, Sirry and 
Hakky Beys, had taken a box. I loved Sirry Bey best 
of all father’s friends. Besides his many services to the 
country and his undeviating honesty, whicli had stood 
the test of Hamid’s corruption, he was gentle and highly 
cultivated. He used to translate Shakspere and read 
his translations aloud. I did not understand the mean- 
ing then, but I liked the sound. “The Merchant of 
Venice” and “A Comedy of Errors” were his two first 
published translations. 

During the play Sirry Bey took the greatest pains to 
make me understand what was happening, hut it was 
useless. I was wholly fascinated by the lady in blue 
with wonderful coloring, who sang, her mouth taking 
imj)ossible .shapes and giving out high and unbelievable 
sounds. I must have gone to sleep watching her mouth, 
for I found myself in father s l)e(l the next morning. 
Abla was in her bed. and they were whispering over me. 
I called mv stepmother Abla, for 1 could not call her 
mother, as father thought that it would hurt granny. 

One night about this time I begged granny to allow 
me to learn to read, “'riiy father does not want thee 
to learn before thou art seven." she said. “It is stupid 
of him. / .start(*d at three, aJid in my days children of 
seven knew the Koran by heart.” In spite of this I 

8 .&gt; 



MEMOIRS OF HAI.IDE EDIB 

kept bothering her and even speaking to father about it, 
so that he at last consented, although I was not fully 
six yet. Thereupon the house began to get ready to 
celebrate niy hashlanmak, my entrance into learning. 

Little children in Turkey started to school in those 
days with a pretty ceremony. A little girl was dressed 
in silk covered with jewels, and a gold-embroidered hag, 
with an alphabet inside, was hung round her neck with a 
gold-tasseled cord. She sat in an open carriage, with 
a damask silk cushion at her feet. All the little pupils 
of the school walked in procession after the carriage, 
forming two long tails on cither side. 'I'hc older ones 
w'ere the hymn-singers, usually singing the very jmpular 
hymn. “The rivers of })aradise. as they How, murmur, 
'.iMlah, Allah.’ The angels in panidise, as they w'alk, 
sing, ‘Allah, Allah.’ “ At the end of each stanza hun- 
dreds of little throats shouted, "Amin, amin!” 

They went through several streets in this wav, draw- 
ing into the procession the children and waifs from the 
quarters they passed through until they reached the 
school. In the school the new j)upil knelt on her damask 
cushion before a .scpiare table, facing the teacher. Kiss- 
ing the hand of the instructor, she repeated the al[)hahef 
after her. Some sweet dish would then he served to the 
children, and each child received a bright new coin giveti 
by the parents of the pupil to he. After this .sort of 
consecration, the little one went every day to school, 
fetched by the half a, an attendant who went from one 
hou.se to another collecting the children from the dif- 
ferent houses. 


8(5 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

The ceremony was as important as a wedding, and 
fond parents spent large sums in the effort to have a 
grander ceremony than their neighbors. Each family 
who could afford a costly bashlanmak would arrange 
for a few poor children of the (quarter to share the cere- 
mony and would thenceforward pay their schooling, as 
well as that of their own child. The old systematic 
philanthropy of the Ottomans, although fast disappear- 
ing. was not entirely dead yet. 

The sight of a children’s procession with the grand 
carriage had always caused me certain excitement, 
mixed, however, with a longing to he the little girl in the 
carriage and a fear of being the center of attraction in 
public. 

Father luul arranged that I was not to begin by going 
to school, but a hodja was to come and give me lessons 
at home. The has-lildumak too in mv case was not to be 
the usual one. 'I'licrc was to be a big dinner at home 
for the men, and the ceremony was to take place at 
home after the night prayers. 

(Iranny had her own way about my dress for once. 
She could not bear to have me begin my reading of the 
holy Koran in a blue serge dress. 1 remember well the 
champagne-eolored silk frock with lovely patterns on 
it, ami the soft silk veil of the same color, that she got 
for me instead. 

A large nund)er of guests arrived, both from our 
own neighborhood and als(» from the ])alacc. 

Some one held a mirror in front of me after I was 
dressed, and I looked .strange with the veil over my 

87 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

hair and bedecked with the really beautiful jewels of 
the palace lady. Fikriyar was moved to tears. “Thou 
shalt wear a bride’s dress and I will hold thy train one 
day,” she said. She was wishing me the one possible 
felicity for a Turkish woman. 

Then hand in hand with Mahmoure Abla, who was 
unusually subdued, I walked to the large hall where 
every one had assembled for the ceremony. A young 
boy chanted the Koran while our hodja sat by the low 
table swaying himself to its rhythm. Mahmoure Abla 
had already been to school, and so she only knelt, while 
I had at the same time to kneel and to repeat the first 
letters of the alphabet, frightened to death at the sound 
of my own voice. As 1 rose I forgot to kiss the hand 
of the hodja, but some tender voice whispered behind 
me, “Kiss the hodja’s hand.” All ceremonies in Tur- 
key, even marriages and Bairams, tend to take on a sad 
and solemn tone: always the women with wet eyes and 
the men in softened silent mood. What makes other 
people rejoice makes the ’I'urk sad. 

My lessons took place in the same room in the sclam- 
lik, before the same table and in the same kneeling atti- 
tude as at the Jxislihinmak. iVIy teacher, who was a reg- 
ular schoolmaster and busy with his own school in the 
daytime, could only come to our house in the evenings. 
Two candles therefore were placed on the table and 
burned undci- green .shades, while I struggled with the 
Arabic writing of the holy book.** Of course it was 

23 All Moslem children used to learn to read from the .Anihic Koran, of 
which not a word would naturally he underst(H&gt;d hy a Turkish child. In 

88 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

difficult to go on without understanding the meaning of 
the words one read, but the musical sound of it all was 
some compensation. 

Our hodja and his wife were recent immigrants from 
Macedonia and had built a tiny house behind our own. 
She taught little girls at home, while his school was in 
one of the poor quarters of lleshiktash. 

Mahmoure Abla, who had been under the severe dis- 
cipline of Djavide Hanum, soon took advantage of a 
state of affairs where there w'as no rod and no ear- 
pulling. She joined iny lessons, but she never studied, 
she never repeated any lesson uidess she wanted to, and 
when she found out that our teacher’s threat, in his 
funny Macedonian accent, “Mimure, thou shalt eat it” 
(“thou shalt eat the rod,” or, “I will w'hip thee”), 
“Mimure, I will pull thy ears,” were only a form of 
speech, she went to inueh greater lengths than idleness 
and noise. She actually played, and not only with her 
doll hut with a ball as well. 

As often as I could now. I went up-stairs to Teize’s 
apartment when Fikriyar was dusting her books. I 
woidd beg her to take out the book of .\frican travels 
and open it for me on the floor. It was too large for 
me to handle, and when she bad laid it doAvn I stretched 
myself on the floor and tried to decipher it. In this 
position, resting on my elbows. I woulil struggle on 
till my eyes ached. It was so dill’erent from the Koran, 
and the words, even when I could make them out, w'ere 

the higher classes they would go on applying their alphabetic knowledge to 
the reading of their own languag&lt;*. 

89 



MEMOIRS OF HALID]^ EDIB 

such that I did not understand.®* Meanwhile, Fikriyar 
was very happy to have some one to talk to. She 
started each time from the very beginning, telling me 
about her childhood, Caucasia, the great emigration, the 
settlement in Adabazar, and how the chief of her clan 
sold her in Constantinople to an Egyptian palace. 

Her adventures I hardly listened to. but she always 
ended up with the Circassian youth, my father’s j)ro- 
tege. “lie must buy me when lie gets rich and make 
me his concubine. We are both Cireassians.” 

But what I rememher best of all her stories is a par- 
ticular Circassian jieri who controlled the growth of 
corn in her country. 'I’lie peri came on moonlight 
nights. Fikriyar had seen her standing in their fields, 
measuring the young corn. “ HtiJxijaki, rakijnki" the 
peri said, measuring some to her t'lhow which were to 
be the largest. “Mcjkus, Mcjkus,” she said, measur- 
ing Avith her tiny fingers those which were to be the tiny 
shriveled ones. 

“What did she look like?” I used to ask. 

“She had such large breasts that she threw the right 
one oA'er her left shoulder and the left one over her 
right.” 

From the jioint of view of comparative folk-lore, this 
surprising trait has interested me since. It is a charac- 
teristic of our Turkish women giants; Devkarise also. 
But this part 'cular peri had, besides, flowing hair, wav- 
ing in the wind anti catching the rays tif the moon. But 

24 LitiTJiry Turkish of tho.sr day.s wa.s a thinjr apart from the .spokrti 
language, and largely unintelligible except to the initiated. 

W) 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

I cannot be sure whether it was Fikriyar who told me 
this detail or whether I have added it from my childish 
fancy. 

Before I could read the African travels, Mahmoure 
Abla brought from Te'ize’s library a little book in manu- 
script. I do not know how she obtained it, but I think 
Tei’ze did not think much of it. As it had the Arabic 
vowel signs inserted in the text, I could read it for my- 
self, and most unfortunately for me I did read it. It 
was called “The Adventures of Death.” 

My mind has a habit of making far too reali.stic pic- 
tures of its impressions — sometimes to my delight, but 
often to m\' torture. If I had had the talent of a 
painter to put these on canvas, it would have eased my 
mind, but there is no clumsier human being with the 
pencil than 1. My mind has also an inner capacity for 
idealizing, harmonizii\g, and synthesizing sounds into 
wonderful musical combinations. If I bad had any tal- 
ent in this direction, the proper kind of throat, I might 
have given some happy moments to my kind. As it is, 
both pictures and sounds, as well as the gestures of 
life, which are still more exju’essive than the first two, 
have accumulated in me in a million shapes and forms, 
as a music which, on account of its compression, has 
hecome a thundering harmony inside me. I cannot get 
rid of it sufKciently to ease my mind and heart. !My 
struggle to give out some of it with my poor pen has 
neither cased me nor enabled me to externalize all that 
I have in me. But as my pen is my only outlet, I have 
to go on with it. 


91 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

The writer of “The Adventure of Death” must have 
been a remarkable person although very crude. He had 
the imagination of Dante without his genius; and his 
attempt to ease his burdened soul by describing the fan- 
tastic pictures which were torturing his imagination had 
a far greater success over me than Dante’s. It began 
at the very moment when the angel of death, Azrael, 
takes one’s soul away from the body. His manner was 
gentle with the good, so that death is an ecstasy of be- 
coming one with Allah; hut the pain of wrenching away 
a sinner’s soul is agony beyond words. 

He tells the tale as if he had been personally through 
it, so authentic does it sound. On the first night in the 
grave the examiners of faith arrive. 'Phev stand at the 
head of the grave and ask; “Who is thy creator' 
W^ho is thy prophet'” Now although an imam stays 
elose to the grave after the body is buried and every one 
else has retired and though the imam repeats the proper 
answers to refresh the memory of the dead person, yet 
he will infallibly forget them if lie is a sinner, no matter 
how carefully he has committed to memory the articles 
of the Islamic faith. And when he stammers and fails 
to answer, the iron knobs of the rrxls which the angels 
carry in their hands will fall he.avily on his head, beating 
it relentlessly. Theji the author tells tlic story of bodily 
decay in forcible and realistic terms, and the dead suf- 
fers and feels in his prisf)n in the earth every detail and 
accompaniment of the gruesome dissolution, the suffoca- 
tion, the damp earth, the eternal darkness, the scorpions 
eating into his brain and destn»ying his beauty of face, 

02 



WHEN THE STOKY BECOMES MINE 

the snakes crawling through his skull and the holes of 
his decaying skeleton. For years I had to fight this 
image of the grave every night. I would wake up in 
the middle of my sleep, jump up in my bed, and move 
my arms wildly around me, feeling for the earth, which 
I thought was covering me. In every attack of fever 
that I had I dreamt of snakes coiling all over my body. 

When the angels at last blew the bugle, according to 
the writer, men rose from their graves and marched to 
the last judgment. This march to the other world was 
vivid beyond anything; each class of sinners marched 
under the sign of its jjarticular sin. Tliere was one class 
to which Mahmoure Abla drew my attention, the tell- 
tales. They had their tongues sticking out from the 
napes of their necks. This .she told me to secure her 
smoking from being reported to the grown-up people of 
the house. 

Vet she committed the sin of telling tales herself in 
those days most treacherously and did not seem troubled 
by it in the least. 

Seeing that “'riic Adventure of Death” has brought 
us into the gloomy region of sins, 1 may as well deal 
with one of mine here. It would take, of course, more 
than a book to tell about any jierson’s sins, and I am no 
exception, but there are two of mine which I am most 
ashamed of, one committed at six and the other at 
twenty-five. I shared my first con.scious and despicable 
sin with Shayeste. 

One day she told me in secret that she had begun 
smoking, and she praised its delights to the height of her 

93 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

powers of language. In answer to my question as to 
how she obtained the tobacco, she told me that she got 
it from her father’s tobacco-pouch when he was not in 
the room. Pride rather than moral considerations often 
keeps people from doing things in secret, and I am 
afraid I was proud to a sinful degree. Nevertheless I 
went with Shayeste when grandfather was not in his 
room and took some of his tobacco. It was the nastiest 
sensation I ever experienced in my childhood, .so much 
so that no amount of persuasion would make me rejieat 
it and go back and fetch the tobacco-paper which we for- 
got to bring too. I told Shayeste that I would roll the 
cigarettes with ordinary ])aper. But we had no time to 
smoke that day, and we simply hid the stuff among my 
dolls. 

The next morning, ^lahmoure Abla called me from 
our play-room telling me that father was waiting for me 
in the garden. 1 found him i)aeing up and down under 
the acacias. lie motioned Mahmoure Abla back to the 
house and kej)t his hands behind his back, ignoring my 
attempt to kiss them. Tie looked at me stertdy, sadly, 
and then began to tell me why he liad sent for me aial 
why he did not want any one in the world to know 
what he was going to tell me. I do not remember his 
exact expressions. 'I'liey were solemn, they were seri- 
ous, and I remember rather my state of acute suffering 
than his words. I neither cried nor answered; I did 
not try to kiss his hands any more. I walked back to 
the house in the misery and humiliation whieb is mueli 
the hardest to bear when f»nc has really been guilty of 

04 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

a mean act. I felt sure that it was Mahmoure Ablu 
who had told, but 1 was too miserable to care. I did 
not tell any one about her smoking in revenge, but it 
has left a certain feeling of disillusionment about her, 
which I know is ridiculous, but which I cannot even now 
get rid of. It had a good effect on me ; I never smoked 
till I could do it before every one. This feeling of 
shame although not so violent was still deeper than my 
fear of “The Adventure of Death.” 

It was during the summer of the same year when one 
evening, in our garden, I realized for the first time my 
charming old great-uncle, Vely Aga. 

AU of us had assembled in the garden, as we usually 
did on summer evenings. Grandfather was smoking, 
walking up and down under the long vine-trellis, 
(iranny and Teize were gardening, while Fikriyar, bare- 
footed, was watering, filling her watering eans from the 
lions’ mouths. 

Warm, balmy, and sweet was the garden, Avhile in the 
liquid blue of the twilight sky trembled one single star in 
a silvery haze. [ must have seen the sky many times 
before, but this was my first impression of a star. As 
I was looking uj) through the leaves at the sky Vely 
Aga slowly came nearer and patted my head softly, 
lie was dressed in those pieturescpie blue embroidered 
loose j)antaloons and the ve.st of the Anatolian notable, 
and over his fez he wore a soft eream-eolored silk turban. 
He had the large eyes of the Eastern Anatolian, the 
hooked no.se and the white bearil. Ilis mild air, soft 
gestures, and the low. quiet voica* were as different from 

9.5 



MEMOIRS OF HALID^: EDIB 

grandfather’s as the windless summer air is from a 
storm, yet both had their personal charm for me. He 
had come from Kemah partly to visit his eldest brother, 
and partly to buy presents for a son of his who was to 
be married after the Kurban Bairam. He set me on his 
knees and looked at my face, saying that I had the eyes 
and the eyebrows of my Kemah relatives. “So much 
like Kezban she would be, if she only had pink cheeks,” 
he said to granny. Whoever Kezban was, every one 
from Kemah told me that I was a city reproduction of 
her. I asked Uncle Vely about the star. He looked 
puzzled but could not say what it was. “I don’t know 
what it is,” he said. “I know' that Allah has created it 
and the rest of the heavens for us.” How incompre- 
hensible it seemed to me! Allah, who created the angels 
to beat the heads of the dead with iron-knobbed rods, 
and who kept eternal fire and .shut the dead up in earthly 
prisons, this Allah had also created this most beautiful 
light. Such a combination of love and torture made me 
think that Allah had after all as many aspects and at- 
tributes as we poor human beings. 

Uncle Vely stayed with us a fortnight. He occupied 
a room in the selarnlik. He brought with him a subtle 
refinement, a balmy atmosphere; and the feeling in the 
house, W'hich was becoming distraught by the contimi.'d 
ill health of Uncle Kemal, by the fear of the old people 
that they might lose their last child, and by their mone.\ 
troubles, was .soothed into an interval of happy peace. 
He bought all kinds of beautiful silk vests, blue cos- 
tumes, printed kerchiefs, and ivory combs, and lie 

06 





WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

started for Kemah sometime before the Kurban Bai- 
ram.“® I think I missed him most of all, but I was be- 
ginning to decipher the book of African travels, which 
consoled me more or less. 

It was about this time that our hodja begged granny 
to allow us to go to a bashlaninak ceremony in his school. 
Mahmoure Abla was placed with the hymn-chanters and 
I with those who repeat the amin. We walked to the 
boys’ house in two long rows, and he, the son of humble 
parents and with no hired carriage, merely walked in 
front of the procession. The little girl near me in the 
j)rocession had a yellow print dress and a bright head- 
kerchief of the same color. I was so distracted b}' this 
color that I was never in time with the general amin, 
and each time I was late the little yellow girl nudged 
me in the ribs, vigorously reminding me of my duty. 
When I heard my own ridiculous scpieak all alone, I felt 
hot and cold with shame, all the length of that long, 
humble Ouzounjova Koad with the cool vegetable gar- 
dens on one side and the little newly built houses on the 
other. So the little procession marched on in the dust- 
cloud it raised, chanting, “'Fhe rivers of Paradise, as 
they flow, murmur, ‘Allah, Alkali!’ ” 

When the little ones arrived at the school, a watery 
dish, meant to be sweet, was served with rather greasy 
wooden spoons. As the children sat hapjiily round it, 
Mahmoure Abla pulled my sleeve and said I was not 
to touch it. The pained look of the hodja and my 

Kurban Balrani is a four days’ festival about two months later than the 
Shek^r Balram. This one i.s celebrated with th&lt;' killing“ of sheep. 

97 



MEMOIRS or HALIDE EDIB 

sudden sense of our spiritual separation from the poor 
children hurt me keenly. 

I have a sad feeling about this time in general. My 
nebulous life was clearing away, and more distinct forms 
of thought and perception were assailing me, so that I 
was turning gradually into a tortured interrogation- 
point. 

The day before the Kurban Bairam, granny took me 
for our annual visit to the tiirbch of Kyoub.‘“ Before 
my birth, it was very much hoped that I should be a boy, 
and father had vowed that be would name me, after the 
saint in Eyoub, Halid. Wlien 1 disappointed them by 
turning out to be a girl, they persisted in giving me the 
feminine form of Halid, whieh is Halide; and every }’ear 
cither father or granny took me to the Holy Tomb and 
sacrificed a sheep for the poor of Eyoub. 

As we were driving this year to Eyoub, granny 
stopped at Hadji Bekir’s and bought loukoum. 
“The softest you have,” she said. “It is for an old lady 
of a hundred and ten.” 

“Who is she?” I asked, as the carriage drove on. 

“My teacher,” she said. “1 have not been to see her 

Eyoub, the Turki.^^h form of Job, is a sulairb of Constantinople jlJ^t 
outside the city walls on the (lolden Horn. It is said to have been thus 
named to comiiiemorattr th^* fact that I'.yonb, or Halid (as he was aEo 
called), one of the most devoted of Mohammed's followers, made a raid ;uul 
entered the Hyzantine eity .some hundreds of years before its final fall la* 
fore the Turkish armies in J toll. The Mosque of Eyoub is one of the mod 
sacred. A furbeh is a small building round a tomb, often of |&lt;reat archi 
tectural beauty. 

2' The great sweet-shop in Istuinbuul. specially renowned for its Tiirkidi 
delight. 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

for some time, and I need her blessing, “ especially just 
now.” 

So that year we called on the oldest lady in Eyoub, 
living in the oldest house in the place. Her face was 
like old white crumpled parchment, her eyes blurred 
and indefinite in color like those of a new-born baby; 
and she wore a snow-white muslin veil over her head. 
As she sat there propped up with pillows, her body 
looked tiny and dried. Somehow she made me think of 
Ilava Hanum’s stock description of the pope of the 
Christians : ever so many hundreds of years old, wrinkled 
and parched like yellow w'ax, and always kept in cotton- 
wool. Not but that this old lady appeared very ener- 
getic in her own way, spoke sweetly, remembered every- 
thing, and had none of the ugliness of old age, w'hich I 
perceived in after years in others. She made one think 
of a precious caudle slowly going out because the oil is 
all used. She called granny “my child,” asked me to 
come close uj) to her, and then prayed for the happiness 
of granny’s house, giving us all her blessing in clear 
tones. A younger old lady who was her daughter-in- 
law waited on her. 'Phe old house, its furniture, and the 
two old ladies make a regular Rembrandt picture in my 
mind. 

Then ive went to the mosque for granny's afternoon 
prayers and passed on to the Holy Tomb through the 
wonderful mosque-yard, with its old birches full of 

A teacher’s blessing is especially res]u*ctcd. One of the sayings of Ali 
is; “If some one teaches me one letter, I am his slave for life." 

99 



MEMOIHS OF HALIDE EDIB 

cooing pigeons, and the blind beggars sitting in a row. 

In the green, cool silence of the tUrbeh, the guardian 
made me go three times through his large black rosary ; 
he gave us sacred water and fragments of the broom 
with which the tiirbeh was swept. This was to be 
burned, and I was to inhale it, as it had healing quali- 
ties. 

At the foot of the tomb, granny knelt, clutching the 
iron railings. Her lips moved, and a few drops fell 
from her eyes and slid down her wrinkled white cheeks. 
I have never seen granny look as lovely as she did that 
day. As we walked backward keeping our faces rever- 
entially toward the tomb, I asked her in whispers why 
she had cried. 

“I don’t want Kemal to die,” she said simply. 

When Kurban Bairam actually came, the sad and sol- 
emn feeling 1 had had at Kyoub had lost its intensity. 
That morning I saw eight big sheep, henna-j)aintcd. all 
bleating in the stables. In one corner of the garden 
some holes had already been dug, and grandfather wa.s 
still bu.sy with the preparations. He showed me each 
.sheep one after the other, ‘‘This is Kemal’s. This is 
thine. This is Reffet’s, the child who is in heaven.” 

I w'as heartbroken at the idea r)f killing the.se beauti- 
ful animals and asked whether it was necessary to kill 
them all. 

“How wilt thou cross the bridge Sirrat to heaven?’ 
he asked, “It is finer than a hair and sharper than a 
sword, but those w'ho have killed their sheep in obedience 

100 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

to the holy commandment pass over it on the back of 
these sheep, who go up to heaven and wait for us by the 
bridge.” 

Then he told me the story from the Koran, identical 
with the Old Testament account of Abraham’s sacrifice 
of Isaac, except that Isaac is replaced by Ismail in the 
Islamic tradition. lie looked like Abraham himself, 
his white beard blowing in the wind, his powerful dark 
arms digging the pits. 

'riiere was a little discussion at dinner-time between 
him and Uncle Keinal. Every male ought to sacrifice 
his own sheep, but Uncle Kemal, hating the sight of 
blood, had always refused to do it, and grandfather’s 
Anatolian soul was wrathful at such Constantinopolitan 
s({ueamishness. 

Marly next morning I woke up to hear deep manly 
bass voices chanting. "Allah Kkhcr, Allah Ekher,” to 
the incomparable Turkish melody. I sat up in my bed 
and wondered for a time what was hap])ening; but* I 
soon realized that the sheep were being killed. Once 
again 1 felt that slanting cut go through my whole body; 
and, closing my cars. 1 lay on my face, my head covered 
with the (juilt. How I hated it. :md all the bloody in- 
human side of religion, which commands ])eople to shed 
blood and hurt helpless creatures! 1 was carried in 
Eikriyar’s arms ilown-stairs. Every one was in the 
kitchen, busy eutting uj) the sheep for the poor. Every 
one had a blood sign on the forehead from the sheep 
sacrificed for him, and 1 was signed with the same sign 
too. 


101 



MEMOIRS OF HALID;]^ EDIB 

About this time father took a house in the neighbor- 
hood of Beshiktash for his younger family and left the 
house in Yildiz. He used to ride up to Yildiz on his 
big bay horse, and in the evenings he usually called in 
at granny’s and took a cup of coffee. I often rode on 
the horse with the groom and played in the Yildiz gar- 
den. The pompous brilliant selamliks of Abdul 
Hamid I could watch from the 'ferrace of the Ambas- 
sadors just ojjposite the Yildiz mosque. Abdul Hamid 
had this mosque built so as not to have to risk his life 
by taking the longer drive to an Istamboul mosque. 
Every Friday the place was set out like a grand thea- 
trical stage. Abdul Hamid’s Albanian body-guard in 
bright red, his Tripolitan black guards in green and red. 
his numberle.ss aides-de-camp in gilt uniforms, the gen- 
erals, the officers, the royal sergeants (chosen for their 
good looks) in blue jackets with long hanging sleeves 
lined with red, the incredibly beautiful horses pawing 
the ground impatiently, or .ste})ping in time to the lively 
“March of 1 1 is Majesty,’’ the grooms in blue and red 
covered with real gold embroidery, the lovely music, the 
ambassadors in their grand uniforms, the numerous 
court officials in their elegant tight long black coats em- 
broidered in front, all elegant men with harmonious and 
soft gestures and salutations . . . and I, lifted on the 
shoulders of Ahmet .Slievket Hey (an old ])asha now, but 
a royal sergeant and brother-in-law of the sultan then) 
— we all waited for his Majesty to come out from the 
great portals in his (carriage and make that momentary 

S'* The Friday oereriiony &lt;&lt;f the .sultan prayer. 

102 



WHEN THE STOKY BECOMES MINE 

passage to the mosque, saluting right and left as he 
flashed by. Opposite him sat Osman Pasha, the old 
hero of Plevna and of many popular songs too, his hands 
folded on his lap. The public favorite was thus ex- 
hibited in an almost humiliating position, in an enforced 
attitude of respect and subserviency to the sultan whom 
every one feared and many hated. I did not realize 
then that the man with the imposing nose and shifty eyes 
was the last Turkish emperor at his highest ascendancy. 
Yet thirty-odd years later I rode through the same door, 
opened by a half-blind porter, probably a man who had 
often seen me playing about the place in former days. 
Everything at ^’’ildiz was and is still in decay, as all vain 
and wrong exhibitions of power should be. . . . There 
are indeed lots of these decaying palaces which used to 
be the scenes of j)om]) and royal ceremony. They are 
(loomed, yet other human symbols of the same wrong 
conception of power, though embodied in different 
forms, rise over the old decay. Sometimes it makes 
one feel hopeless to watch the dull human intelligence 
which refuses to learn from the experience of the past. 

A baby had been born in my fatlicr's house about this 
time, a beautiful little girl called Xciliifer. She was my 
sister they said, and she. as well as her dadi, who came 
often to granny’s, drew me to my father’s house very 
often now. The dndi was a Kurdish woman, a tall slen- 
der person dressed in very picturcscpie native costume. 
She wore red shalvars and a dress over these, which 
was opened at both sides and in front, these pieces being 

IxK&gt;SC trOUSlTS. 

108 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

lifted and pinned to her belt. Over her head, she wore a 
long soft printed material of many colors, which floated 
in the air as she walked with the particular pretty swing 
of Kurdish girls. Her dark eyes squinted when she 
sang, and she often sang the following lullaby, rocking 
the baby on her knees. 

“The pears shake on the branch and get sweeter as 
they shake. If the boy is a vizir, he has to beg the girl 
. . . nanni, nonni . . .” She was the original of the 
Kurdish heroine in my novel. “Kalb Arise” (heartache), 
and her popularity with the public I believe is due to 
the pleasure I had in putting her into a book. 

I got my second and last scolding from my father 
about this time, and I am glad to be able to say that on 
this occasion if I was guilty it was unconscious guilt. 

Swearing attracted me very much as a child. Every 
one around me talked in a more or less refined manner, 
and, as it seemed to me, with a stuj)idly tame and dull 
])oliteness. Even grandfather, who had ii touch of the 
common people, did not swear at all as the me»i and boy 
porters and the cabmen In the streets do. I used to 
stop and repeat to myself whatever I heard them say, 
quite unaware of the meaning. 'I'hese |)hra,se.s had a 
kind of flavor that was excluded from my own home. 
So one evening while dining at my father’s house I re- 
jjcated to hii.i a whole .series of these violent oaths. 
Knowing their meaning, 1 eaimot repeat them now. 
Father’s face was crim.son, a/)d lifting his knife he .shooh 
it at me angrily. In a moment I felt wronged and hurt, 
and pu.shing my plate away I began to cry silently. At 

104 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

first he waited for my tears to cease, but they did not. 
They went on falling, falling quietly. I felt a nasty 
scar somewhere inside me which hurt so that it made my 
tears flow on. Father, finally, must have suffered even 
more than I, for he began to caress me and give me 
bright coins. lie tried to play with me, but in vain. 
It was the greatest childish humiliation I remember, 
^^ears later I saw a parallel case of suffering in my 
(log, and 1 am tempted to tell the story. 

'riic dog before it belonged to me was with the revolu- 
tionary hand of the C'ircassian Kdhem, and had been 
evidently trained to catch shoe]) from the flocks and 
bring them to the hand. The dog was the manliest and 
noblest creature 1 have ever known, and certainly did 
not reali'/e the moral wrong of this clever feat. 

I had ordy had him for a few days, hut we were learn- 
ing to love each other. In my long lonely rides he al- 
ways ran after my horse and used to make signs of de- 
light at the sight of every flock of sheep. One day. my 
orderly eaine in and told me that Voldash had dragged 
a sheep out of a lloek and brought it to him. I hastily 
ran out. 'Fhere he was. sitting and wagging his tail, 
laughing his broadest and jolliest dog laugh. I walked 
up to him and whipped him hard. 

'Fhe .sur])rised ])ain of the dog and the suffering ex- 
pressed in his harks at my ineomj)rehensihle cruelty re- 
minded me of my own state of mind when I saw my 
father’s knife held up and 1 kiu'w that he was ashamed 
of me, though I could not understand the reason. Yol- 
dash will never know why masters or mistresses he loves 

Id.&gt; 



MEMOIRS or HALIDE EDIB 

are so different in their conceptions of wrong, as I have 
learned in later years. 

This is the way the great sorrow began which ended 
forever our life in granny’s wisteria-covered house. 
Granny w'as making syrup for us in the dining-room, 
and the day was very hot. Uncle Kemal came back 
from his office and joined us, asking for some of the cool 
drink. Things seemed perfectly normal to me, when 
all of a sudden granny hastened out and fetched a howl 
of cold water. Dipping a handkerchief into it, she put 
it on Uncle Kemal's head, and then she, with Hava 
Ilanum, hel])e(l him to walk up to his room. 

A silent house, people moving about on tiptoe, Mah- 
moure Alila continually getting scolded for making a 
noise, which only produced worse or more frecpient out- 
bursts of anger from her. 

How long this oppressive silenee lasted I cannot tell, 
(xranny was always up-stairs, ’rei'ze seldom appeared 
below. She was nursing Uncle Kemal. ((Jranny’s 
sons were destined to be nursed by palace ladies on their 
death-beds.) Grandfather grumbled and wandered 
aimlessly about, and we were forgotten, left to ourselves. 
1 used to sit down-stairs and feel the heavy air laden with 
mysterious warnings. .Something in the air had grf)wu 
as hard as the darkness in Nevres Hadji’s room, and it 
seemed to be actually pressing upon me and hurting me 
physically by its weight. A silent child by nature, and 
no longer with .Shayeste to talk to, even occasionally. 
I was forgetting the sound of my f)wn vf)iee in ordinary 

I0« 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 

talk. I remember the surprise with which T heard my- 
self repeating the Koran aloud to the hodja, and I can 
even tell the very sures I was learning at the time. 

One morning we woke and found granny’s bed empty 
and unused. Fikriyar came into the room and began to 
dress me hurriedly. Father was standing at the door, 
which quieted Mahmoure Abla. He was the only one 
in the house whom she loved and respected. 

We went straight to father’s house. Xo explanation 
was given us, and the same heavy air and the same pain- 
fiU exiiectation seemed to follow us there. But I found 
a new comfort. Once more I took refuge in the sweet 
friendship of a dog. Her name w’as Flora, and .she be- 
longed to a valuable breed, so they said. She had ex- 
tremely delicate paws, and a short-haired coat, brown, 
shiny, and .soft as velvet; with light brown eyes, very 
large and reddish rays of vivid light shooting from their 
depths at times. .She was miserable in that house, al- 
though for very different reasons from mine. Xo one 
wanted her except father and me. (riilly Ilanum 
would not let her into her room, because she ])rayed five 
times a d.ay, like a good Moslem, and she did not be- 
lieve that angels came to places freejuented by dogs. 
Abla did not want her iti her room, for .she tore the bed- 
covers and (juilts. Bosa, the Armenian woman-.servant, 
with a bosom larger than me and h'lora piit together and 
a regular black mustache. &lt;lid not want Flora anywhere 
in the house. The oidy places where she was allow’ed 
to go were the small marble hall and the terrace. But 

Svrft arc verses of the Korun. 

107 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDJE EDIB 

even there she was often scolded. The poor creature 
whined and cried at this cruel treatment so sadly that 
each time she was hit by Rosa I felt that same old slant- 
ing pain through my body. As it was a cold autumn I 
was forbidden to go out to her, but I escaped all the 
same and played with her and kissed her enough, as I 
hoped, to make up for Rosa’s hard treatment. 

In the mornings father used to have us all in his room. 
Mahmoure Abla was allowed to hold the baby on her 
lap, while Flora and I sat on father’s knee. Flora was 
caressed as much as I, and he used to say, “They have 
the same eyes, Flora and Halide.” I believe we had. 
Roth had the same sadness and the same wonder at what 
we found in tliis world, where we felt lonely and home- 
sick, though for what precisely 1 don’t know — probably 
for a kindlier state of things altogether. Flora must 
be dead and happy in a dog’s jjaradise by now, but I 
have had to go on from one stage to another, seeing the 
same tame and apparently harmless human specimens 
of my childhood act in such a way that 1 have felt not 
only the sadness and wonder of a dog but a dog’s rage 
as well. 

The foreboding atmosphere came to a climax one eve- 
ning. I slept in Giilly Ilanum s room, and that par- 
ticular night I woke up with a nameless anxiety and 
fear. I could sleej) no longer, (iiilly Ilanum tried in 
vain to soothe me. I mention this particularly, for since 
that occasion, which was j)erhaps my first telepathic ex- 
perience, 1 have felt telej&gt;athically every real sorro"' 
which has affected any one I loved. 

108 



WHEN THE STOEY BECOMES MINE 

Early the next morning there was an unusual commo- 
tion in the house. Father came down dressed, and whis- 
pered distinctly to Gully Hanum that we were not to 
leave the house that day, and 1 was not to go to the 
rooms which opened on the main road. 

I stayed in the room with Giilly Hanum, daring the 
angels to keep Flora with me. Flora seemed as much 
oppressed as I was and whined continually. I heard 
everybody trying to keep Mahmoure Abla from going 
out. “I saw the caldron and the icneshir” she 
screamed. “They are for him.” Finally I heard the 
door slam and knew she had escaped, and I asked no 
(juestions. 

Two daj's later father took me up to granny’s house. 
\Ve went through the selanilik door and walked up the 
selamlik stairs. In the middle of the guest-room there 
was a Hoor-bed,'^ and grandfather was sitting up in it, 
leaning against Suleiman Aga, a new servant and a dis- 
tant relative of his from Kemah, whom I now saw for 
the first time. He was breathing heavily, and his eyes 
looked intently at me. A depth of sorrow and the sud- 
den realization of the mystery of the hereafter seemed 
to he in them. 'I'liev were bloodshot, wide open, im- 
pressive. He motioned father to bring me to his bed. 
I leaned over toward him, and he ])atted me on the head 

Kiu’h Moslotn quarter Ita.s a eaUlron anti a ffins/nV (^stretcher,) which 
arc u.sctl r&lt;*s|u*elivf!y to htat the water ft&gt;r washinir, anil to lay the dead 
out. Men and women are .specially hired to do the wa.sltinp: of the dead. 
Those who follow this profession keej) it a secret, for it is looked upon as 
&gt;ioiiiethinj,C very dejjrading. 

^ ‘ The usual old-fashioned Turkish bed was merely a mattress laid 
un the floor. 


109 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

for a while, then motioned again to father to take me out. 
I returned immediately to father’s home, 

A few days later Mahmoure Abla and I came back to 
granny’s house. There was neither Uncle Kemal nor 
grandfather. The old man had followed his last child 
to the grave in three days. 

Granny sat in her usual corner. Her face looked 
stupid, expressionless, and empty. But as the human 
body reacts against disease, so does the human soul 
against sorrow. Granny’s em])ty face, dry eyes, and 
the listless hands, which I had seen without work only 
during this sliort interval, were getting a fresli j)urpose. 
She was going to leave the scene of her sorrow and take 
a new house on the other side of the Bosphorus, in 
Scutari. As soon as she had foiiTid the place she 
wanted, the old wisteria-covered house began to he 
broken up, most of the furniture was sold, and the things 
we were to take were collected together and packed. 

The morning of our (le{)arture and the night l)eff)re it 
are marked by two childish memories. Playing with 
granny’s canary in Ilava Ilanum’s room, Mahmoure 
Ahla dro])])cd a box of blocks with which we used to 
make pictures, and killed the bird. “We Mill pretend 
that Mc found it dead. Do thou go and tell granny 
and cry a little.” I, mIio Mas too timid to express tlic 
most natural desire of my om'u, could not possibly bring 
myself to do such a thing as this, needing as it did a bold- 
ness M’hich I totally lacked. I must have refu.sed her, 
for .she said, ‘‘Wet thy eyes from thy mouth then and 
come with me.” She ran ui&gt;-stair.s dragging me by the 

110 



WHEN THE STORY BECOMES MINE 
hand. She darted into granny’s peaceful room with a 
showy grief. 

Granny, reading a Turkish translation of one of the 
Dumas types of novel so charming and so distinctive a 
product of French genius, was sitting on her bed. Her 
lamp was on a low table, and she was reading aloud to 
herself as was her habit. She looked over her glasses at 
us, and 1 think that her face had got back some expres- 
sion into it, for she smiled, as she said: “Come here, 
Halide. Tell me if it is true.” But I must have looked 
pitifully distressed, for she changed the subject sud- 
denly. “It is time for you to go to bed. We have to 
start early to-morrow.” she said. iVs Fikriyar un- 
dressed me, I listened to the story granny was reading. 
It was about a kidnapped girl and two brothers, one 
blue-eyed, standing for goodness, and the other black- 
eyed, standing for wickedness. Since then I have read 
ever so many novels of this kind, hoping to find the rest 
of the story, but 1 have never succeeded. .iVs for 
granny, though I asked her, she had forgotten its name, 
and so my curiosity as to the fate of the poor girl has 
never been satisfied. 

The next morning I got up with a .sore feeling against 
Mahmoure Abla. I had a dim idea that granny knew 
about the canary and that we had nuule ourselves very 
ridiculous to the grown-ups. I hid a few earthworms 
in my hands and walked uj) to Mahmoure Abla. who was 
packing the dolls' beds. “.Shut thy eyes and open thy 
mouth,” I .said, and .she did as I told her, hoping for the 
usual sweet which wc offered each otlicr in this manner. 


Ill 



MEMOIRS OF HALU&gt;i: EDIB 

Throwing the wriggling creatures into her mouth I ran 
away. I cannot to this day think or explain how I 
planned such a disagreeable revenge. 

Thus closed the first period of my life, in the wisteria- 
covered house, at Beshiktash. 


112 







