XI 


REFUGEE FOR THE FIRST TIME 

T he name of my boat was Ismailie. Two berths 
were found with difficulty in a second-class cabin 
containing in all six berths. I was again 
heavily veiled in an ample and old-fashioned charshaf of 
granny’s, and my sons were disguised in the old suits 
of the gardener’s boys. In this guise we were smuggled 
into the boat by Miss Prime and the cavass of the Rus- 
sian consulate. The anarchy of the city had made the 
police careless, and so I do not think it was as difficult 
as we supposed it would be. Miss Prime gave me a 
sewing-bag which she herself had made for me, con- 
taining all kinds of sewing-material. In the whole 
course of my life I have never received a more useful 
gift. The stockings and frocks I have darned and 
mended with its contents are beyond counting. I still 
keep it almost reverently. A large box was also smug- 
gled into the depths of the boat. I myself could only 
carry a bundle which would be in keeping with the class 
to which my dress made me appear to belong, and which 
would therefore arouse no suspicion. Salih Zeki Bey 
gave me a letter from an Armenian professor addressed 
to some Armenian revolutionaries in Alexandria, and 
the boat started. 


285 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

I sat on my berth, the boys clinging close to me. It 
was smelly and dark with a large amount of queer lug- 
gage piled up everywhere. For a long time I did not 
trust myself to think of anything but the immediate 
present. With two babies and but little money, I 
thrown into the unknown, leaving my people behind 
me to an uncertain fate, I cannot deny that there was 
also a sense of the relaxation of tension. No more 
should I have to face the probability of being torn to 
pieces before the very eyes of my little ones; no more 
might the little ones be trampled under the feet of the 
furious mob of Istamboul. It was soon dark in tlie 
cabin, and before the light was lit the plump figure of 
a woman stood by the door of the cabin and said in 
English, half to herself and half to me: 

“What is that black bundle?” 

I was the black bundle. I opened my veil and re- 
moved the long upper mantle of the charshaf; I felt 
much comforted by the friendliness of the voice. 

“Good evening,” I said. 

I remember the joy in her face as she found that 
I spoke English. When the light was on I saw to iny 
surprise that my new friend was a chocolate-colored 
American negress, with a round face, the friendliest 
imaginable, and very fashionable clothes. What she 
saw was a figure of a woman sitting cross-legged on 
the lower berth and bending her head to prevent it 
from knocking against the low ceiling of the upper 
one. 

I must have looked like a vision from the grave after 

280 



REFUGEE FOR THE FIRST TIME 

the misery of the preceding week. Thinking that my 
long hair would be a hindrance to me as a refugee 
woman, I hud cut my hair, and it was my short hair that 
brought her to me with a spring. Kneeling down be- 
fore my berth she looked hungrily at my face: 

“Oh, oh!” she said, “you are Susie’s very image. She 
is just like this — the thin face and the eyes and the 
hair. She is my daughter, Susie is, but she is white” 
— this with pride — “her father was a Frenchman.” 

After some intimate details about Susie’s white father 
and Susie’s fairness, the mother put her plump arms 
around me and kissed my cheeks over and over again. 

In ten minutes 1 knew all about her. She was an 
“artist” from a place in Pera called Cataculum, per- 
haps a night bar. Whatever else I forget I shall never 
forget that funny name. The terror of the revolution 
was driving her away. She was throwing up a profit- 
able contract, she told me, and flying from Constan- 
tinople. She had in America the sixteen-year-old 
(laughter who looked like me, according to her descrip- 
tion. llesides that w'arni passion (which spent itself 
in hugging me constantly) she loved another French- 
man called Monsieur Nickol. I am afraid Susie’s 
father had been dead for some time. The man had 
promised to marry her. She herself was thirty-two, a 
tine smart colored w'oman of the stage and as gay and 
coquettish as she could he. She seemed to have Reshe’s 
color and Nevres Radji’s affectionate heart; and her 
odor was very different from either, for she used Pari- 
sian scents of the strongest sort, which, mixing with 

287 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

the unpleasant odors of the cabin, took on a strange 
quality. The dirty stuffy place brightened up with hu- 
man affection and gaiety, and the little boys laughed aiul 
kissed her and treated her with affectionate but slightly 
condescending familiarity, in the selfish manner of little 
white boys who have black nurses. Reshe used to l)c 
haughty and had succeeded in making herself respected 
by the little ones, while this one, despite her fashionalile 
clothes, rings, and ear-rings, spoiled the boys, running 
about and playing with them like a little girl, 'flic 
second day she fell rather badly in love with the head 
waiter, but in spite of this she did not neglect the hoys, 
taking them daily on the deck. 

The morning took an eternal time to come in that 
cabin, and no sleep was possible amid the snoring and 
the smell, but when it did come the first note of bright- 
ness was struck by the colored lady. She began her 
toilet with a song in the half-pathetic half-humorous 
tone peculiar to her race, and .she used a great deal 
of eau de Cologne, which at least was familiar. Pow- 
dered and rouged, she apj)roached my berth and began 
again to tell me about Susie, and going on to Monsieur 
Xickol, imitating with a (juccr .&lt;Vincrican negro accent 
his French jokes, after which she finished by helping 
me to dress the boys in that dirty little hole — no easy 
task. 

The journey to Alexandria took five days, and as the 
the days passed I became increasingly conscious of her 
vulgarity' and wondered what people would think if 
they saw me with a bar artiste from Cataculuin. fbi 

288 



REFUGEE FOR THE FIRST TIME 

the fourth day I accidentally saw her being kissed twice 
by the handsome Italian head waiter, which not only 
shocked me but also made me shrink a little. 

The Armenians, who had received a telegram from 
the professor in Constantinople, came to the boat to 
fetch me, and they took me to a hotel in Mohammed 
Ali Place, owned by a motherly Frenchwoman called 
]\ladame Bonnard. Shinorkian, one of the Armenians 
wliose name I well remember, had the refined manner 
of the gentlemen of the Tanzimat period, which has 
left its mark on all the racial elements of the empire, 
lie had left Turkey during Armenian troubles in the 
time of Abdul Hamid and bad never returned. What- 
ever his sentiments were, he had the perfect manner of 
the Turkish gentleman, which soothed and comforted 
me. 

In the square before my hotel the hurdy-gurdies 
played the same tune again and again, and I can hear 
that tune now. Italian girls with white or colored 
kerchiefs over their heads sang and gathered money in 
a little plate; Arabs, in silk gowns, shining shoes, im- 
mense gold chains over their jackets, and rigid fezzes 
with tassels on one side, filled the place. Some sat on 
the benches; others walked up and down the street. 
On the right of my window stretched a European street, 
and on the left the blue sea wmshed the shores. The 
noises reached their climax as night drew’ near. 

The color and noise of Egypt, so different from Tur- 
key, the mixed crowd with its lively tunes and perpetual 
gestures, affected me strangely. 

289 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

After the strain of the last weeks in Constantinople, 
the novelty of the place charmed the boys; and if niy 
visits to the American consulate, where I hoped to 
receive letters from home, had not been fruitless, the 
new atmosphere would have made me very happy. 
The Arabic I had learned from books did not help me 
much, and no one spoke English, but I soon discovered 
to my gi-eat surprise that Greek was the language most 
spoken in Alexandria. 

The city was going through an epidemic of scarlet 
fever and measles, and there was a very high child mor- 
tality. On the fifth evening of my arrival in Egypt 
as I undressed Hassan I found him hot, and on closer 
examination I saw red spots on his body, which put 
me in a panic. A Greek or Italian doctor who was 
in the hotel told me that it was scarlet fever (it proved 
afterward to be measles) and said I must send Ilassan 
to a hospital. I remember sitting on a chair and star- 
ing at him stupidly, as if he had struck me a blow on 
the head. My utter despair must have touched the old 
man, for his fat face kindled with pity and he said: 
“Corimoti [my daughter], I will not declare it. Don’t 
let any one come to the room, and keep the other hoy 
away from the bed of the sick one. I will call it 
influenza.” 

How terrible — -‘and cut off from every one who be- 
longed to me! Still there was this kind old man, who 
was doing a thing which would have brought him pun- 
ishment if it had been found out. 

I had an ugly week of anxiety. As I had not heard 

290 



refugee foe the first time 

from home I was afraid to spend money, and I daily 
washed all the clothes myself. I was wondering whether 
all who belonged to me had been killed, and how 
long I and the children would be able to live with the 
little money I had brought with me. I washed on 
clumsily, rubbing the skin off my hands, and thinking 
hard. Ali Ayetullah tiptoed about, hanging the clothes 
on the rails of the beds, and putting things in order 
in the wardrobe, standing on a chair to do so. As his 
little body moved round the room, his large eyes never 
leaving my face, I felt a strange sense of dependence 
on him. Every day just for a little while I took him 
out into the fresh air, but he pulled my hand all the 
time, wanting to go back to his sick brother. He had 
a queer way of squatting on a chair at a distance and 
telling stories to Ilassan. 

When Hassan was better again I walked to the con- 
sulate in the hope of letters; there were none. As the 
secretary walked with me to the door, the black lady 
of Cataculum wdth a white gentleman entered the room. 

Was it the presence of the man, or the exaggerated 
rouge on her cheeks, or my bourgeois soul of those 
days? I cannot tell, but I know that I walked out of 
the room without giving any sign of recognition. The 
strange and startled look in her eyes as they flashed at 
me seemed to say, “No longer so miserable or so 
thankful for human kindness!” Before I reached the 
streets, I was longing to run back and make reparation 
for the cowardly feeling which made me act as I did. 
I knew it would be a long remembered shame of my 

201 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

soul. But I did not go back somehow, and the memory 
still haunts and hurts me. 

It was about three weeks afterward when I got a 
letter from home, but I was so miserable that I wired to 
Salih Zeki Bey and asked him to come to Egypt at 
once, telling him about Ilassan’s illness. 

He arrived about May 1 ; but by that time, although 
Hassan was still in bed, he was out of danger, and Ali 
had not caught the measles. 

Salih Zeki Bey brought news from Constantinople, 
An army from Macedonia under the command of 
Mahmoud Shevket Pasha had marched on Constan- 
tinople and entered it. There had been little fighting 
between the Macedonian forces and those of the sultan. 
Abdul Hamid was dethroned, and Mohammed V had 
ascended the throne. Ahdul Hamid was exiled to 
Saloniki. The new cabinet was formed mostly of the 
old elements. Hussein Ililmi Pasha was the prime 
minister. Talaat and Djavid Beys were the first 
Unionist members who entered the cabinet, one for the 
interior and the other for finance. IVlartial law was 
declared, and there were a great many executions; the 
reaction was di’owned in blood. 

In the meantime I received a letter from Miss Isabel 
Fry inviting me to England, and Salih Zeki Bey urgetl 
me to accept the invitation. Although I was interested 
in England, I could not bring myself to be separated 
from my sons, and the idea of traveling alone to Eng* 
land frightened me not a little. 

Salih Zeki Bey not only urged me to accept the invi- 

292 



REFUGEE FOE THE FIRST TIME 

tation, but he also undertook to be personally respon- 
sible for the boys in my absence. So after a rather 
happy fortnight spent in sight-seeing and getting used 
to wearing a hat I started from Egypt all alone for 
England, and embarked at Port Said direct to Til- 
bury. 

If I were to go over the details of that voyage, even 
a little Turkish girl of twelve would laugh at me. I 
was utterly upset with timidity and misery. The jour- 
ney passed somehow, and I landed safely on the Eng- 
lish shore. The dear little house of i\Iiss Fry in 
Marylebone Street stands out as the first familiar im- 
pression. She had prepared a full and interesting 
program for a Turkish woman who had as yet no 
public experience. 

I will speak only of the impressions which stand out in 
greatest relief during that visit. One is a scene of Mr. 
Masefield’s “Pompeii,” which he read to me in Miss 
I'ry’s farm-house at Hampden. It Avas not published 
then, and I have not read it since, but it impressed me 
!is most forceful. xVnother impression is of Mr. Dillon 
speaking on Irisli Home Rule; I heard him in a debate 
in Cambridge, thanks to the kindness of Professor and 
^Irs. Rrowne, who took me there. The sincerity and 
personal charm of the old man stirred me strangely. 
I remember leaning over the railing of the gallery 
to hide my tears, so deeply was I moved, and I have 
elsewhere publicly OAvned that his speech Avas one of 
file emotional causes Avhich started me on the road of 
nationalism. The British parliament Avas the next 

29.3 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

thing, and it inspired me almost with pious emotion. 
As the oldest parliament, it had been a symbol to us 
in our bloody struggle and effort for representative 
government. 

Mr. Nevinson perhaps is the last but the strongest 
figure that stands out in my memory. He struck me 
as one of the few true idealists I have met in life. No 
philosophy is lonelier, no principle so fruitless as ideal- 
ism from the material and personal point of view, and 
I have sadly learned to (piestion the personal motives 
of most men who profess an ideal or a principle, but 
Mr. Nevinson’s I have never questioned. 

In October I returned to Turkey. 


294 



