V 


COLLEGE FOR THE SECOND TIME 

T he influence of the college on my life was so 
strong that I must give a brief analysis of its 
general and particular effects upon me. 
After the first period of my life in the wisteria- 
covered house I was no longer a child in mind and was 
very far from living the natural and normal life of a 
child of my age. I was permeated and colored by the 
pains and the daily troubles of my environment. These 
took so much space in my heart and thoughts that my 
already timid and somewhat dumb nature recoiled into 
itself to an abnormal degree, and the free development 
of personality, which demands a certain amount of self- 
ishness and an uninterrupted view of one’s own soul in 
calm intervals, was in danger of being seriously 
thwarted. 

As a whole, college had a liberating effect upon me, 
giving me a much greater balance and opening up to me 
the possibility of a personal life with enjoyments of 
a much more varied kind. Some of the already strong 
tendencies of my thought also now found new vistas 
into wider paths. 

I was most concerned with matters of religion, and 
I was in a questioning and critical mood in that respect. 

190 



COLLEGE FOR THE SECOND TIME 

The reverent and emotional tendency of my soul, and 
its absolute need of a spiritual reality higher than the 
human realities I had so far touched, was foremost. 
I had been hitherto a faithful Moslem in heart and 
practice, but I was not orthodox in mind. Somehow the 
Sunni ^ teaching did not satisfy me; and I believed, 
like Gazali, that the door of ijtihad ^ could not be closed 
against any one and that the mind could not rightly 
be required to accept any barriers in its continual search 
for higher truths, which should properly strengthen 
rather than weaken its faith. I had an infinite long- 
ing for the infinite, in religious thought as in every 
other thought activity, and I was ready to refuse a 
salvation and felicity in which all mankind could not 
share. I would plunge into any kind of knowledge 
the pursuit of which was recommended by the extra- 
ordinarily free and tolerant spirit of Islam, which I felt 
to be struggling against the conventions and the sec- 
ularization of the Sunni church. The simple saying of 
Mohammed, “Search knowledge though it be in China” 
(the most improbable and remote region to an Arab’s 

1 The orthodox division of Moslems, to which most Turks belong. 

2 The accepted ways of verifying the divine truths according to Islam 
were; the writings of the Koran; the interpretation of the imams, that is, 
the four great fathers of the Moslem churches; the sayings of the Prophet; 
the logical and free interpretation of the human mind based on the given 
data, which is called ijtihad^ This last was not accepted by the church 
fathers, who claimed to have said the last word on divine truths. Gazali, 
the great Arab philosopher and religious teacher, contended that the doors 
of ijtihad cannot be closed, that the logical and free interpretation of the 
human mind cannot be forbidden, and that no interpretation is absolute. 
The persecution and the excommunication of the Gazali school, which is 
called the Mutezile, led the teaching of Islam to a narrower and more 
fanatical path. 


191 



MEMOIRS OF HALloi; EDIB 

mind), I always regarded with reverence. I plunged 
into a passionate study of religious creeds, and strangely 
enough I felt charmed and soothed by my reading of 
Buddha. This seemed to me to be the creed which came 
nearest to promising a universal happiness. In a later 
stage of mental suffering, when the greatest ill seemed 
to me the continuance of consciousness, I should have 
been cured if I had still been in my Buddhist phase. 
To cease to be appeared to me as the highest felicity. 
Yet it is strange to me to recall at this earlier period 
the action and reaction of my soul and of my thought 
as distinctly dual personalities. While I was free from 
all material and past influences in moments of unre- 
pressed thinking, some other part in me, a strange and 
distinct part, claimed to be an outcome of Islamic cul- 
ture, a product of mosques, candles, cemeteries, and set 
prayers. With strange insistence I held on to the 
outward aspect of Islamism, and in some mysterious way 
I struggled to fit all the new outlook of life, acquired 
through my education in the college, into Islamic exper- 
ience and belief. 

My contact with Christianity gave me a sense of its 
hard intolerance as a directing influence in the lives 
of its devotees, while the historical developments 
through which it has passed seemed to me almost con- 
trary to the teaching conveyed by the life of Christ him- 
self. Individuals excepted, Christianity set up har- 
riers which shut out non-Christians from a possibility 
of ultimate bliss more than did any other religion. 

It was Miss Fensham, one of the ablest teachers in 

192 



COLLEGE FOR THE SECOND TIME 

the college, who, although she was by no means exempt 
from this exclusiveness, represented for me the highest 
type of Christianity, especially in its intellectual aspects. 
She gave us Bible lessons, and her intellectual and some- 
what imaginative presentation of the Bible intensified 
its artistic qualities and helped me to appreciate fully 
the tendencies in European literature and art which 
cannot be explained by classical influence. 

The college at this time had two distinct tendencies, 
separately embodied in two distinct personalities, Miss 
Fensham and Dr. Patrick. IMiss Fensham, with her 
marvelous power of speaking and her firm Christianity, 
stood for the purely Christian side, while Dr. Patrick 
seemed more universal in spirit; she had wide sym- 
pathies and represented altogether a freer line of educa- 
tion based on a human international understanding. 
Had Miss Fensham prevailed, the college would have 
been a missionary institution, intense, but particular and 
limited in its appeal. Dr. Patrick struggled to give a 
larger scope and significance to all its works. 

Of the great qualities of Miss Fensham as a speaker 
I have a very vivid recollection connected with a Christ- 
mas night. Strangely enough, perhaps the hardest way 
to get a spiritual message to people is through speaking. 
It is much easier to convey thought and sentiment by 
Writing, acting, music, even by dancing. Artistic pow- 
ers, intellectual and physical equipment, all combined 
lail sometimes to make a good speaker for the purposes 
spiritual teaching, while an intangible capacity of pre- 
senting oneself in naked sincerity to a public makes one 

193 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

supreme over the souls and minds of audiences. Miss 
Fensham had this power. She merely told the story 
of Christ’s birth and his mission in the simplest possible 
language, just as she felt it herself, and it was like a 
marvelous spiritual flame which passed from her into 
one’s heart, purifying and warming and arousing in- 
tense emotion. Down my back I felt a series of strange 
tremors; on my cheeks my tears fell as long as she 
spoke. My highest religious emotions hitherto bad 
come to me from the Song of the Birth of Mohammed. 
The poem, to which I have already referred, is by a sim- 
ple Turkish poet, and I know nothing more beautiful in 
literature than that unpretentious and unconscious rev- 
elation of a great soul in the throes of pain for suffering 
humanity. Miss Fensham by giving a parallel pic- 
ture of Christ aroused the same emotion in me, sincere 
Moslem though I was; and I believe this to be the true 
form of emotional teaching, which arouses the best and 
the highest in every one according to his own lights. 

I had reentered the college as a sophomore. Al- 
though I was ahead in literary subjects I wms very far 
behind in mathematics. This was a good juoral dis- 
cipline for me. I had a disagreeable sense of superi- 
ority to the girls of my age, and even to grown-ups, 
which is an ugly thing in youth. I represented to my 
inner scrutiny a very complicated portrait of an un- 
evenly taught and strangely brought-uj) girl. IMy 
sorption in the problems of my home life in a Avay de- 
veloped my heart so that it had an understanding ot 
older people, but it did not prevent me from having a 

194 



COLLEGE EOE THE SECOND TIME 

considerable quantity of intellectual conceit. The ab- 
sence of any companions of my own age and the habit 
of living intensely within myself had left me ignorant 
of the joy of simple and every-day contact with other 
girls. Before I went to college I was almost unaware 
of having physical powers, nor did I dream that the free 
development and movement of a young body is one of 
the important elements of happiness. College, with its 
healthy young people, its sober and tasteful environ- 
ment, immediately acted on me. My simpler self, the 
self that had been smothered after the first j'ears of my 
childhood, reawakened. I experienced as it were a lev- 
eling both uj) and down of my under-developed and 
over-developed faculties respectively. I was aston- 
ished to find myself playing and en joying play like a 
child of eight. This part of me, which had hitherto been 
dormant, now had full scope, and I passed my playtime 
among the little ones of the preparatory department 
with complete satisfaction. I was feeling like a numbed 
limb which has recovered its normal movement in life. 

Beyond the little ones in play I mostly looked to the 
teachers for my friends. There was a rhetoric teacher 
who treated me like a grown-up, and we spent many 
delightful times together in the old haunts of Scutari. 

Granny and Nevres Badji came often to see me in 
the college, bringing delightfid Ilaji-Bekir loukoums 
with them. But the entrance, on one of these occasions, 
of the groom, the old Natcho, who came into the 
reception-room to speak to a teacher, and the unveiled 
condition of my head at the time, disgusted my poor 

lO.') 



JVIEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

milk-mother so much that she never came to see me at 
college again. Her sense of propriety was hopelessly 
shocked to think of my appearing openly before a man 
and a Christian. “Let my eyes not see thee again in 
that sinful way,” she said. 

I was so much absorbed in my many personal interests 
that at my first monthly holiday I realized with surprise 
to how great an extent I had already escaped from the 
oppression of other people’s lives and troubles. My 
first interest was in an Armenian girl considerably older 
than myself, a brave dark Anatolian who struggled with 
English heroically. The mocking attitude of the other 
girls at her bad accent made me take to her in the first 
instance. She was a fervent Protestant, evidently new 
in the faith. She was very much concerned about my 
soul and did her best to convert me. More tlian wliat 
she said, however, her old Anatolian Turkish, twisting 
itself into quaint phrases to convey her theological 
thoughts, amused me and attracted me. 

Among all the different nationalities those natures 
which exercised the most vital influence over me were tlie 
Bulgarians. j\Iy most passionate liking was for one 
of them whose name was Pesha Kalclieff. She was tlic 
only girl senior in my class and took many of her lessons, 
especially the electives, with me. i\ftcr two years of 
camaraderie we all of a sudden developed a short hut 
very strange and warm attachment for each other. 

I have often wondered why my liking for her was 
so exceptionally strong, and I find it very difficult to ac- 
count for. It is true that she had the characteristic 

196 



COLLEGE FOE THE SECOND TIME 

Slavic physique, which always attracted me. She had 
those deep-set eyes, the high cheek-bones, and the 
dominating expression of strength of character. She 
had a clear and penetrating mind as well as an intensity 
in her likes and dislikes, and all of these had their share 
in drawing me to her. She had a dramatic way of ex- 
pressing herself too, which was all the more forcible be- 
cause it was so unconscious and simple. Somehow this 
attachment, which I cannot class with any other I have 
had, I think of with reverence. I cannot say that it was 
clue to admiration of any kind and still less to a foolish 
sentimentality. And yet there was something pecul- 
iarly perfect about it which seemed to arise out of her 
power of satisfying my soul’s claims at the time. 

We made a great many plans together for the future; 
she was to be a doctor and I a violinist, and we would 
study in Paris. I am sure that she knew as well as I 
that all this was foolish and impossible; but we enjoyed 
the illusion of lengthening our friendship into years. It 
was one of the ejuiet bays of contentment, an escape and 
a refuge from my somewhat tiresomely stormy nature; 
and all my attachments of this kind have given me a 
similar sense of sudden rest. 

1 got to know Philip Brown in my last year, meeting 
him in one of the social gatherings of the college. lie 
took a great interest in the Turks and in Turkish life, 
as well as in Oriental poetry, which drew us together 
for a time. This charming friendship unfortunately 
lasted only for a few months, as he was only a passing 
visitor in the place. He was one of the very few who 

197 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

showed a friendship and interest for my coimtry and 
people when the entire world treated us as outlaws. 
I think of the occasion almost tenderly. He first 
drew my attention to Fitzgerald’s translation of Omar 
Khayyam, and it was a source of delight to me for 
years. 

College had not only taken me away from home and 
family worries; its free atmosphere, with normal and 
intellectual people around me, had put out of my 
thoughts the suspicious, smothering, and over-oppressive 
machinery of absolutism to which my home life was 
constantly^ exposed. So when ISIiss Prime proposed to 
take me with her to visit some people on an iVmerican 
yacht that was anchored in the Posphorus I went with 
her as naturally as an American girl. 

The yacht belonged to an American gentleman named 
Armour, and he had a Mrs. Mott and her family as his 
guests. We took tea wdth them and were returning 
with our caique ji about sunset, hut before we had gone 
far some one from another cai(jue shouted authorita- 
tively to us to stop in the name of the law. 

In a flash I felt rather than judged the situation. 
The other caique had been sent, on the information of 
spies, to prevent a Turkish girl from going aboard a 
foreign ship. I saw us taken by the police, passing the 
night in some horrible hole, with no end of diabolical 
questioning, and above all the shame and humiliation of 
having to go through this before INIiss Prime, an iVnier- 
ican. We must escape and get to the college at any 
price. Then I felt for the fir.st time that complete mas- 

198 



COLLEGE FOR THE SECOND TIME 

tery of will and nerve, that power of making an instant 
decision and acting upon it, which at similar moments 
since in later life has taken possession of me like some 
strange being, so different is it from the timid, clumsy, 
and undecided personality of my every-day existence. 
I leaned forward and explained to the rower that if he 
reached Scutari ahead of the police and landed us be- 
fore we could be caught, 1 would find some means to 
justify his conduct and to save him and us. He was a 
single rower, while the police-boat had two, but the mo- 
ment he took in the situation he passed into action. Our 
man was middle-aged but wiry and thin, and the muscles 
of his neck and shoulders stood out like those of a figure 
in the Laocoon group. Drops fell regularly from his 
face, which became purple all over, but he rowed on 
calmly though with gigantic effort. The police were 
following us. It was an interesting chase as I think of 
it now; but then I was conscious of every second as if it 
were an interminable and indefinite race against time. 
I remember noting the wonderful ruby blaze filtering 
into the purple dusk of the evening which bathed the 
minarets in its glow, but I was also vividly aware of 
the changing size of the flag on the police caique, 
growing big now as it drew nearer to us and merci- 
fully smaller as we gained in distance. We reached 
Scutari and jumped into a carriage before my pursuers 
could land. 

In twenty-four hours a distorted version of the affair 
went round Istamboul asserting that Kdib Bey’s daugh- 
ter had fled to Europe on an American yacht. It was 

191 ) 



MEMOniS OF HALIDE EDIB 

a hard job to save the caique ji, who was arrested the 
same night. Finally some good friends of father’s ex- 
plained to his JNIajesty that I was hardly sixteen and 
had only been paying a visit and had no intention what- 
ever of attempting to run away from Turkey. 

In the year 1900 I remember only one single event of 
interest in our home life. A lady whom we called the 
sheik’s wife arrived from Macedonia and stayed with 
us in Sultan Tepe as father’s respected and much loved 
guest. She had adopted father when he was a very 
small orphan boy and had brought him up. She and 
her husband Slieik Mahmoud were very well known per- 
sons in Saloniki. Father had come to Constantinople 
with Mehemed Bey, a high official from Saloniki, and 
after some more schooling he had entered the palace as 
a secretary with the j'ounger brother of Meliemed Bey. 
The sheik’s wife, whom we saw only once, and Mahi- 
nour Hanum, an old Circassian woman wlio always 
came to the house, were the only persons we have ever 
known from father’s past. 

I saw her for the first time, as I came home for a 
monthly vacation, sitting in the pine-groves with father, 
taking coffee and talking about father’s gentleness and 
goodness as a little boy. She had come all the way from 
Macedonia to visit him in his family. Hie things I re- 
member well about her were her round, old, but healthy 
face shining with constant washing and her black eyes, 
which looked out with that decisive strength peculiar to 
Macedonians. I did not see her as much as I wanted to. 

200 



COLLEGE FOE THE SECOND TIME 

for when I came back home a month later for the vaca- 
tion she was gone and father was extremely sad. 

The visits of two interesting and famous speakers to 
the college and the coming of Salih Zeki Bey into my 
life as my professor of mathematics blur the home and 
college events of 1900 for me entirely. 

The first was the coming of Pere ITyacinthe and his 
stay as a guest in the college. He was a famous F rench 
priest who had started a universal religion which could 
unite the followers of every other creed, a Christian 
parallel of Bahaism. His sincerity, intellect, and bril- 
liance of speaking had gained him a considerable number 
of followers. The Vatican was furious and watched 
him suspiciously. It was through the representative of 
the pope that an imperial irade was issued forbidding his 
speaking publicly in Turkey. 

He spoke only to the students of the college, and it 
was a privilege to hear him. Strange to say, I, who in 
those days could hardly speak freely before even a few 
j)ersons, already took an immense interest in public 
speakers and the psychology of their performance. 
Pere Hyacinthe was a short stout person with a round 
jovial face, small benevolent eyes, and curly white hair, 
whom one could hardly imagine as an imposing figure in 
the pulpit. Yet the power of his soul, the sincerity of 
his thought, the artistic triumph of his language made 
him a living figure in my memory. Pei'haps his mouth 
too is “stopped with dust” now like those of so many 
other great speakers, hut the echo of his voice will be 
with me to my grave. 


201 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Swami Vivicananda, a celebrated Brahmanist, also 
visited the college and gave one of his famous speeches, 
which had the reputation of hypnotizing his audience. 
The dark slender man was clad in a loose robe, the thin 
hands moving with a life which seemed distinct from the 
rest of his body; the expressiveness of his graceful phy- 
sique, and the mystic charm of Asia’s voice, these were 
evident in him. 

I was captivated by his artistic manner, but even at 
that age I could feel that he had a cei’tain quality of 
make-up and that he appealed to one’s senses rather than 
to one’s head and heart — the opposite of all that was so 
evident in Pere Hyacinthe’s addresses. 

At the end of the year I had to think of making up 
for my backwardness in mathematics if I meant to 
graduate, and I had to do this as quickly as I could. 
So it was decided that I should have a special mathemat- 
ical tutor. 

When I received father’s note at college saying that 
Salih Zeki Bey had undertaken to coach me for my 
mathematical course I was surprised, curious, ajul 
afraid. As children we had been l)rought up to respect 
his fame as that of a great intellectual light. At this 
time he was director of the observatory (a meteoro- 
logical one) and professor in two of the highest schools 
in Turkey. 

He was about my father’s age, hut his face still gave 
evidence of an intense intellectual life and a keenness 
far above the ordinary. The two set of ex])ressions 
which characterized respectively the lower and upper 



COLLEGE FOR THE SECOND TIME 

parts of his face gave it a striking aspect. His mouth 
and long thick chin had hard, mocking, almost sneering 
curves whieh made people uneasy in his presence, while 
the upper part of his face had a personality and force 
rarely seen. He had two long, thick, straight eyebrows 
rising slightly at their meeting-point, half questioningly, 
half thoughtfully over the sober and calm eyes which 
betrayed a dominating intelligence. If the human face 
is ever a symbol of the inner man the upper part of 
Salih Zeki’s symbolized the deep mental effort which he 
constantly made, and which he embodies in a large num- 
ber of books on science and philosophy. 

At college hitherto I had never worked for approba- 
tion or marks. I had been left perfeetly free to read, 
think, and work on the subjects that I loved, and I had 
been allowed simply to scrape through in the subjects 
for which I did not care. Hut my new teacher made me 
feel that I wanted to do more than well in a subject 
which was not my strong point ; the mocking challenge 
of his face irritated me. I worked myself into bad 
headaches, but before the end of the month the sneer 
around his mouth relapsed and he began to show the in- 
terest a teacher feels for a promising ])upil. 

In the vacation I had four lessons a Aveek, and each 
of us tried hard to help and j)lease the other. Salih 
Zeki Hey was an intellectual aristocrat. For him the 
only real world was that of the savants who opened the 
way for what was otherAvise a savage existence. For 
the ideals of the physical Avorld he maintained a sneer- 
ing and cynical attitude, and he kept the two sides of 

203 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDi: EDIB 

life completely apart, letting himself live both, however, 
to their full. In this way he overdid or over-lived life 
so much that his great natural bodily and mental health 
gave way under the strain, and he died in an asylum, a 
very sad and ruined man, before he was sixty. 

He opened entirely a new life for me. It was a posi- 
tive world, a world where no half lights and shades wei e 
allowed. He was a gi’eat admirer of Auguste Comte 
and published a great deal about him in Turkish. I 
had belonged to a world of mystical and spiritual ab- 
sorption. This new phase was therefore of great edu- 
cative value to me and acted as a counterpoise to my 
natural bent. He had an absolute mastery over tlie 
abstruse subjects he treated, and he illumined them with 
a sharp and blinding clarity when he explained them to 
the pupils who gathered round him in the manner of 
disciples. This blinding clarity and simplicity are 
usually characteristic of the real mastery of a subject, 
but .such a treatment was so different from my own 
somewhat dreamy ntental temperament that I fell coin- 
pletelj'^ under its sway. Though it gave my mind a new 
direction and helped it in its development, it also 
blurred for me for a time the value of spiritual things, 
and I became in a mental sense enslaved to anotlier 
mind. I always indeed retained the humble attitude 
of a child and a student toward liim, and his evident in- 
terest in me induced me to make an extra effort to ap- 
preciate scientific values. So now once again I put 
away from me the outburst of simple childishness whieli 
college life had awakened, and I consciously imitated the 

204 



COLLEGE FOE THE SECOND TIME 

attitude of an older person. I remember with, sad 
amusement that before he would come to give me my 
lessons I used to run out into the garden beforehand so 
as to have a little fun before going in and taking on the 
serious work which his teaching entailed. Life never 
again offered me the chance of being free and young. 
My own personal experiences, which have involved me 
in all sorts of intimate tragedies and crises, and my 
public career in the midst of suffering peoples have 
carried me on their overwhelming torrent. 

For years I had to suppress tlie youth which wanted 
its life. If the passion of my poor art has appealed 
strongly to the Turkish public it is I believe because it 
was a virgin force, and its only outlet was the pages in 
which I have given it vent. The struggle to keep 
these human outbursts within myself, or within the limits 
of imaginative w'riting, has maintained in my heart 
a childhood and youth still emotionally intense and 
sincere. The self-imposed facts of a passionate nature 
have doubtless their effect in after-life, and in my own 
case I think they have kept me younger than my years. 

After a time of successful mathematical study I w’ent 
hack to college, hut the following year developed my 
knowledge of Salih Zeki liey through the correspond- 
ence we carried on. lie wrote long and serious letters 
on philosophical subjects. In spite of the abstract char- 
acter of the matter, he had a simple and effective style, 
full of original eharm. I keep his letters of the period 
for his sons, who may sometime write his biography; for 
I feel I can nev^er write it, although I once promised to 

20 .&gt; 



MEMOIRS OE HALIDE EDIB 


do SO. Too near a perspective gives as wrong an im- 
pression as a too distant one. 

I graduated in June, 1901, and I married him at tlu; 
end of the same year. We had a delightful apartment 
with a lovely view in Sultan Tepe. We furnished and 
prepared it together. No little Circassian slave bought 
from the slave-market at the lowest price could have 
entered upon our common life in such an obedient spirit 
as I did. 


206 



