XIII 


PHASES AND CAUSES OF NATIONALISM AND 
PAN-TURANISM IN TURKEY 

1 CONSIDER the time from 1910 to 1912 as a pre- 
lude to my final plunge into nationalism which took 
an intense form after the disaster of the Balkan 
war. The campaign in Tripoli and its chivalrous spirit 
had vaguely and almost agreeably flattered the national- 
istic tendencies which had hitherto been nebulous. Per- 
haps if the unfair treatment we received from without 
after the disaster of the war had not knocked us so hard, 
we might never have been awakened and developed into 
very enthusiastic nationalists. 

It was the beginning of my acquaintance with Yous- 
souf Akchoura and Keuk-Alp Zia which led me for the 
first time to our racial past, and distinctly further away 
from the Ottoman past. I had been always strongly 
drawn to folk-lore and to the unpretentious hut ele- 
mental beauty of the jiopular literature, and so the early 
days of the race allured me as perhaps the purest sources 
of the unwritten poetry and stories of the nation. Cul- 
tural curiosity as well as the tyranny of external events 
was throwing most intellectual Turks hack into an in- 
tense study of the beginnings of the race. 

Nationalism in Turkey has more than one phase and 

312 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TUBANISM IN TUEKEY 

name as well as definition; besides, taken as a whole, it 
presents the key to important events in recent Turkish 
history, so that it is necessary to give a short survey of 
some of the phases of the movement. 

Turkish nationalism unconsciously and culturally be- 
gan with the simplification of tlie language long before 
1908. But it was a movement belonging distinctly to 
the Ottoman Turks. In writings of Riza Tewfik and 
jVlehemmed Emin, who first began to use the Turkish 
meter in poetry and to adopt simple language of the 
Anatolian Turk, one saw that they felt clearly the dif- 
ference of the Ottoman Turk from the other Turks in 
general. Nationally analyzed, the Ottoman Turk ap- 
pears entirely different. He came to the Near East 
and Europe, and there he acquired in his blood and in 
liis language, as well as in every particle of his ego, some- 
thing new, something special. Although one may tr}"" 
to go deep into the elemental force and character of his 
race, one is obliged to recognize that things have been 
added to his spirit and physique which have altered him 
from what he was when he had first come to the land 
which is called Turkey to-day. In short he was the 
Ottoman Turk and had to he considered as such, and 
everything contrary to his individual development in 
language and culture could not he lasting. To force his 
language hack to Chagatay would he as artificial as for- 
cing it into Persian or into French. Hence his simplifi- 
cation and nationalization woidd take the line of his own 
national genius. 

During the last twenty-five years the Ottoman Turk 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

has been reviewing his language and evolving it toward 
a subtler, richer, and more comprehensive capacity, con- 
taining expressions and possibilities of an advanced lan- 
guage, a language which can create and propagate sci- 
ence and philosophy. The Turkish dictionary had al- 
ready been consciously simplified on these lines by 
Shemseddine Sarny Bey and Professor Naji. From 
1910 forward another conscious effort was put forth by 
the Turkish writers on similar lines. They tried to 
stabilize scientific expressions, and they simplified the 
Turkish grammar, separating it from the Arabic and 
Persian. Keuk-Alp Zia, Naim, and Fiza Tewfik Beys 
may be mentioned among the foremost who worked to 
find the scientific and philosophical terms, while Hus- 
sein Jahid wrote the modern Turkish grammar which is 
now taken as a model. This was creating a language, 
a national spirit, and a comprehension of culture belong- 
ing to the Ottoman Turks. 

Arrived at this point, nationalism in Turkey, with 
its vastly mixed and acquired characteristics and blood, 
could only be cultural and social in the truly popular 
sense so long as the nationalist Ottoman Turks were 
definitely bound to be democratic in their political ideal. 

Pan-Turanism was a larger understanding and defini- 
tion of the nationalism expressed by Keuk-Alp Zia and 
some well known writers from the Russian Turks, such 
as Ahmed Agayeff and Youssouf Akchoura Beys. M 
first it was purely cultural, but it was developed into a 
political ideal by some leaders of the Unionist party, es- 
pecially when the Turkish arms passed into old Russia 

314 



NATIONALISM AND TAN-TUBANISM IN TURKEY 

during the World War. But politically speaking Pan- 
Turanism never had a clear boundary or a crystallized 
expression or an explanation. Talaat Pasha pleasantly 
and humorously remarked at times, if any one criticized 
it, “It may lead us to the Yellow Sea.” What was the 
real basis of Pan-Turanism? Was it the political unity 
of all the Turanian people? Had the Christian Turks 
any place in the Pan-Turanism expressed by the Otto- 
man Turks? Or was it only meant for the Moslem 
Turks, which would he some form of the Pan-Islamism 
of Enver Pasha, who would add racial unity to the reli- 
gious unity he vaguely imagined to bring forth, and 
failed. 

I differed from Keuk-Alp Zia in his political concep- 
tion for uniting the Turks. I believed and believe that 
nationalism is cultural and regional in Turkey, and that 
it would not be possible to unite the Turks in Russia to 
us politically in the way we then thought was possible. 
They themselves follow distinct and national lines, and 
differ from us very much. Besides they would ob- 
ject to being interfered with by the Ottoman Turks, 
however much they may admire our literature. The ele- 
ments and influences which are building their culture are 
distinctly Russian, while those of the Ottoman Turk are 
distinctly Western. The utmost possible and perhaps 
the most desirable political connection in the far future, 
between the Turks up to the Caspian Sea and the Ot- 
toman Turks, would be that of federal states, giving a 
large and free margin to both elements to realize their 
individual culture and progi'ess. But if such a time 

31.5 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

ever comes, I am not sure that Armenia and Georgia 
and even Persia will not be ripe to join the Turkish 
United States and form a strong whole to protect their 
integrity from Russia, as well as from European inva- 
sion and domination. 

Keuk-Alp Zia was really one of the great thinkers of 
the Unionist regime. Although it is difficult to say who 
really effected the passage of Pan-Turanism to a polit- 
ical ideal, whether it was Zia himself or the leading 
politicians of his party, it is clear that Zia at first be- 
gan it as a purely cultural ideal. He was trying to 
create a new Turkish mythology which would bridge 
the abyss between the Ottoman Turks and their Tura- 
nian ancestors. He wrote a great many charming 
stories and poems for children; he tried to popularize 
his knowledge of the origin of the Turk, and the new 
ideal of life which he was trying to bring into being. In 
some of his first works he used words which were archa^- 
ologically Turkish, but which sounded dead and artifi- 
cial. He soon realized his mistake, and in his last works 
he uses the popular Turkish of the country. 

He became the patron of many young writers and 
caused a large number of books on sociology and philos- 
ophy as well as on history to be translated into Turkish. 
Fuad Kuprullu, the scholarly young writer, owes his 
great compilation of historical data on Turkish ances- 
try to Zia’s influence, and it was Zia who caused the 
ministry of public education to buy and collect most of 
the available publications on Turkology. 

316 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TURANISM IN TURKEY 

It was in the beginning of 1911 that Zia came to Con- 
stantinople from Saloniki, bringing his literary and phil- 
osophical activities with him. He started an intellec- 
tual movement in Saloniki with the review called the 
“Young Pens,” and he had a talented staff. Zia was a 
member of the central committee of the Union and 
Progress, which had been transferred from Saloniki to 
Constantinople. F or the time being he used his influ- 
ence for the best in the Unionist party. He very often 
came to visit me in my house in Fazli Pasha, and we 
enjoyed an intellectual friendship till 1915, after which 
differences in educational as well as in political prin- 
ciples drew us apart. 

He was originally from a well known family in Diar- 
bekir, a family which has produced learned men and 
poets. In his early youth he had worked on the origin 
and the grammar of the Kurdish language which had 
given him in some quarters the reputation of being a 
Kurdish nationalist. But he had come to Constanti- 
nople for higher schooling in the time of Abdul Hamid, 
where he became a very ardent Young Turk, and he was 
arrested several times as a student who read the works 
of Namik Kemal. He was in Saloniki during the or- 
ganization of the Union and Progress and became a 
highly honored member of this political society. 

He was a fat, short, and very dark man, with a mark 
like the sign of the cross on his forehead which caught 
one’s attention at once. It was the freak of a bullet 
which he had tried to lodge in his brain at twenty, but 

317 



MEMOIES OF HALIDE EDIB 

whose effect he had somehow survived. He had strange 
eyes looking beyond and away from the people and 
things that surrounded him. He had the air of a 
stranger, who patiently submits to a strange environ- 
ment, yet he was easily influenced and changed his ideas 
through intercourse or reading much more than people 
who seem outwardly absorbed in their environment. 
His chief interest was fixed in sociology and philosophy. 
He held it to be his mission to guide the social reform 
more than the political reform of the Turks, according 
to the historical data he could gather from the social and 
political institutions of the Turks in their pre-Islamic 
stage. He believed that Islamism, as founded by the 
Arabs, could not suit us, and that if we would not go 
back to our pagan state we must start a religious ref- 
ormation more in keeping with our own temperament. 
He was a warm admirer of the Protestant Reformation, 
whieh perhaps truly began the nationalization of the 
European peoples. He published the “Islamic Re- 
view” in which he gave rather a good translation of 
the Koran in Turki.sh. In his ideas of religious reform 
he was greatly influeneed by IMoussa BikiefF, the Tartar 
Moslem religious reformer in Kazan. 

His most eharming work at the time was the “Chil- 
dren’s World,” a paper for Turkish children, the first 
simple attempt of its kind in Turkey. The “Review” 
translated a great many stories about animals and fairies 
from English successfully. lie published at the same 
time his simple Turkish stories, taken from the unwrit- 

318 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TURANISM IN TURKEY 


ten lore, and put into every popular Turkish verse. 

As I think of him now/ sitting under the green shade 
of my lamp, smiling mildly and indulgently at the sharp 
jind rather sarcastic remarks of Youssouf Akchoura, 
dreaming of a better state in religion, in literature, in 
moral beauty, for a better state for Turkish women and 
ebildren, I can hardly believe that he tolerated and even 
developed the materialistic philosophy of the Union and 
Progress during the last years of the World War. 

In spite of his opposition to hero worship which he 
expressed in a line, “No individual, but society,” he j-^et 
Avrote epics to the military and civil leaders of the Union 
and I’rogress, and in later years to those of the Na- 
tionalists. These epics are quoted as among his incon- 
sistencies. 

lie was very much under the influence of German 
])liilosophy, especially under Durkhcim. But his last 
oracle Avas Bergson. He A\'as, hoAveA^er, very consistent 
in one point, and that Avas about the direction of Turkish 
progress. He believed that the Turk must he Western- 
ized at any cost. Among the many definitions Avhich 

T He influenced me not a little in my writings during those days. So 
f«‘ir my novels had been dominated only by the ordinary psychological prob- 
lein.s of life. In IfllO T published “Ituined Temjiles," and in 11)11 ‘‘Handan." 
Allhoiigh I could without false modesty say that “Haiulan" achieved the 
greatest success of its kind. I was far from being satisfied. However im- 
iiiiiualure and unsatisfactory I now consider it, I am doomed to live as its 
dathor. Keuk-Alp '/An told me that he did not like it, and added smilingly, 

She lives too much in Ivurope.” I was perfectly miserable the moment it 
in the hands of the publisher. “New Turan” soon followed and was 
^&lt;&gt;1 only an outcome of events and thought trends of the day; it was also 
largely affected by the apostolic sincerity and austerity of Keuk-Alp Zia. 

319 



MEMOIRS OF HALID]^ EDIB 

he tried to give the Turks, the best is his last one: “I 
am of the Turkish race, Moslem religion. Western civi- 
hzation.” His book called “Turkization, Islamizatioii, 
Westernization,” contains his philosophical and sociolo- 
gical ideas. 

Parallel to Keuk-Alp Zia’s Pan-Turanism was the 
Pan-Islamic ideal of Enver Pasha and his followers. 
If in the late years of the World War they seemed Pan- 
Turanistic it was because the Turanians whom they 
thought of uniting with Turkey were Moslems. Put 
the ideal had as little influence as Pan-Turanism, polit- 
ically speaking. The separatist tendencies of the ^los- 
lem units such as the Arabs and the Albanians discred- 
ted Pan-Islamism. Besides, the young and the reform- 
ing elements feared it as an element of reaction and 
fanaticism. An intelligent understanding of the asj)!- 
rations and the needs of the Moslem minorities niifrht 
have helped to justify Enver Pasha’s Pan-Islaniism. 
As it was, only the Moslems outside of Turkey showed 
any interest at all. The fear of the Allies about Pan- 
Islamism was quite groundless, and their attribution of 
aU movements of self-assertion among their own Mos- 
lem subjects to Turkish influence was and, above all. is 
groundless. It has amused me not a little to see how 
the movement in Hedjaz by Ibn-Saoud is considered in 
the “London Times” (in one of the April numbers of 
1925, I believe) as being encouraged by Angora. It 
would please Enver’s soul, but it would seem irony to 
the almost fanatically secularized Turkish government 
of to-day. 


320 





KATIONALISM AND PAN-TUEANISM IN TUEKEY 

Nationalism found its first external organization in 
Turk Yourdu, a kind of literary and cultural clufc- 
formed by the Turkish students in Geneva in 1910, As 
it had some fine students from among the Russian 
Turks, its spirit was Pan-Turanistic, at least culturally. 
It issued non-periodical reviews and continues to do so, 
some of which contain unusually fine literature and 
studies on Turkology. The club passed a resolution 
calling me the Mother of the Turk, a tender tribute 
of the Turkish youth, which not only touched me but has 
also molded me in the respopsibility of a real but humble 
mother to my people. I am glad of this opportunity 
which allows me to own the godfathers of the title, 
which was generally attached to my name in the Turk- 
ish world, and which is the greatest recompense I would 
have asked, had I been given my choice, for my insigni- 
ficant services to my people and country. 

Another Turk Yourdu was founded a year later by 
older research students, among whom was the eminent 
jurist and statesman Youssouf Kemal. 

The capital soon followed the example. The found- 
ing of Turk Yourdu in Istamb{)ul was chiefly and 
primarily one of the many intellectual undertakings of 
the Union and Progress, but men who belonged to it 
confess that although they endowed it with funds they 
never tried to make a political tool of the organization. 
Tlie organization published a weekly which goes on to 
this day. It was edited by Youssouf Akchura, who was 
openly and decidedly anti-Unionist, although an avowed 
and sincere Pan-Turanist. He made a great success of 

321 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

the paper, and it had perhaps more readers among the 
Turks in Russia than in Turkey. Akchura, a believer 
in the superiority of the Russian Turk to the Ottoman 
Turk, advocated warmly the necessary cultural unity 
of the Turks. He wrote interesting articles on this 
subject, but it was amusing to note that the Turkish 
he uses was that of the Ottoman Turk of an older period 
rather than that of the very recent nationalistic Ottoman 
Turk. Keuk-Alp Zia, Mehemmed Emin, Ahmed 
Hikmet, Riza Tewfik, as well as the nationalists of the 
later and younger school, contributed to it. 

The external expression of nationalism went one de- 
gree deeper and propagated itself among the younger 
generation, especially the students. It first originated 
among medical students. The medical faculty has the 
historical honor of starting almost every new movement, 
especially when it is directed against personal tyranny 
of despots and regimes, or the tyranny' of reaction and 
ignorance. It had given the greatest number of victims 
to Abdul Hamid’s tyranny. But it would be interest- 
ing to note in this instance how and why the Turkish 
student has thought of himself as something separate 
and different from the other Ottoman students of the 
empire. 

After 1908 all the non-Turkish elements in Turkey, 
Christian and Moslem, had political and national clubs. 
When the Turkish students of the universities saw their 
fellow-students, whom they had so far identified with 
themselves, belonging to separate organizations with 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TURANISM IN TURKEY 

national names and separate interests, they began to 
wonder. The non-Turkish youth were passing into 
feverish activity about their national affairs, as some- 
thing different from that of the Turk. 

The Ottoman Turk so far had been a composite 
being, an Ottoman citizen like any other, his greatest 
writers writing for all the educated men of the empire, 
his folk-lore and popular literature passing from one 
generation to anotlier, 'unwritten by the educated, but 
j)owerful in the minds and memories of all the simple 
Turkish-speaking Ottomans. For the first time re- 
duced to his elements and torn from the ensemble of 
races in Turkey, he vaguely faeed the possibility of 
searching, analyzing, and discovering himself as some- 
thing different from the rest. How was he different 
from the others i Where was he being led in the accu- 
mulation of other desires and interest? Cast out or 
isolated in his own country, he not only saw himself 
different, but he had also the desire to find out wherein 
lay the difference. 

The first separate organization formed by the Turk- 
ish youth in this sense was called the Turk Ojak 
(Turkish Hearth). So it was in 1911 that the first 
national club was founded. The founders were a few 
medical students who kept their names secret. The 
fundamental spirit of equality and fraternity of the 
Ojak was an established ti'adition then. No member 
allowed himself to feel superior to any other. The club 
Was helped by some writers and famous doctors as well 
as by the Union and I’rogress. 

323 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

Two dominant clauses which were never allowed to 
be altered by the general congress, and which show the 
tendencies and the spirit of the Ojak are: first, the Ojak 
will help the cultural development of the Turk ; second, 
the Ojak is not a political institution. 

To those clauses the old members of the Ojak have 
been fanatically faithful from 1911 to 1924. Neither 
the extreme Unionists during the ascendancy of tlic 
Unionist regime, nor the anti-Unionists after the de- 
cisive downfall of the Unionist regime in 1918, could 
alter these clauses and drag the Ojak into party politics. 

The most active period of the Ojak began when 
Hamdullah Soubhi Bey became the president. By his 
great oratorical powers he obtained tremendous in- 
fluence over the youthful members, and his tenacity 
and diplomatic ability made him persuade all the great 
men and all the governments to come to his aid either 
with funds or in some other way. Besides the majority 
of young students, the majority of Turkish writers 
and leading men also belonged to it, and worked with 
admirable idealism for the cultural development of 
the Turk. Lectures and free lessons were opened to 
the public by well known men, among whom Keiik- 
Alp Zia was the most prominent. Men belonging to 
all shades of political creeds and ideals gathered in 
sincere understanding under its roof. 

The clubs helped the Turkish students from all over 
the Turkish world to obtain their education in Istain- 
boul. The Ojak, which showed Pan-Turanistic tend- 
encies culturally, was against Pan-Islamism, but in a 

324 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TUEANISM IN TURKEY 

few years Pan-Turanism also gave way to a regional 
nationalism, which can he defined as belonging to 
Turkey proper and the peoples who live in it. 

In 1912 the general congress elected me as its only 
woman member. It was in 1918 that another congress 
chose a council of eleven to modify its constitution. 
I was in the council, and we modified the constitution 
with a new elause which made women members eligible. 
JMany Ojaks have risen all over the country since then. 
Tlie situation of the Ojaks in the present time, after the 
alteration of their constitution in 1924 in Angora, wants 
an entirely different treatment. 

As nationalism is considered a narrow ideal by those 
who aim at the welfare of humanity and hope to obtain 
it through internationalism, I have often been re- 
proached by my international friends. And as I have 
not ceased to work for the happiness of my kind, es- 
pecially of those who are nearest to me, I have honestly 
tried to analyze the inner meaning of my nationalism, 
whether it can hurt others who are not Turks, whether it 
can hurt in the long run the family of nations in the 
world to which Turkey also belongs. 

The individual or the nation, in order to understand 
its fellow-men or its fellow-nations, in order to create 
beauty and to express its personality, must go deep 
down to the roots of its being and study itself sincerely. 
The process of this deep self-duty, as well as its results, 
is nationalism. I believe with all earnestness that such 
a national self-study, and the exchange of its results, 

325 



MEMOIRS OF HALID^: EDIB 

is the first and right step to international understanding 
and love of the peoples and nations. It is after I have 
loved my own people and tried to understand their 
virtues and their faults with open-minded humility that 
I begin to have a better understanding of other people’s 
sufferings and joys, and of their personality expressed 
in their national life. 

I will also admit that there is a narrow, negative, and 
destructive nationalism in the world, which has deluded 
itself with the belief that a nation can only grow and 
thrive by exterminating and oppressing the peoples 
under its rule, or by coiupiering and suppressing the 
nations around it. Both are forms of wrongly under- 
stood nationalism which can be called by the names of 
chauvinism and imperialism. And the peoples who 
exercised them have themselves suffered materially and 
morally more than the peoples whom they have tried to 
hurt. One must admit at the same time that chain in- 
ism and imperialism are not tlie only outeomes of na- 
tionalism. The internationalism of .Soviet Russia has 
shown itself both chauvinistic and imperialistic in cer- 
tain ways. 

The leaders of a nation — and the philosophers, who 
are perhaps more effective in the long run — have dis- 
torted principles by following the good or the evil of tlie 
very first man. There are those who believe in the posi- 
tive action of the good, and try to adjust the good of 
their own people with that of the other nations and get 
their support from the best and the highest interest in 
human nature. It is this idea which is bringing into 

320 



NATIONALISM AND PAN-TUHANISM IN TURKEY 

existence the League of Nations, and gathering na- 
tionalistic people as well as international ones around it. 

There are those who believe in the domination of ma- 
terial interest only and seek their ends by exciting the 
worst in their fellow-men, and by leading them to per- 
petual conflict within and without. I shall repeat here 
a conversation I once had with a leader. I shall 
not mention his name, hut he will recognize himself if 
lie reads these lines. My readers will also recognize the 
methods of tho.se great men and regimes who use all 
means and ways in order to retain their power. 

He was the brother of the chief of the most power- 
ful revolutionary band in 1920 in Turkey and was an 
extremely intelligent man. As we had not then been 
able to organize a regular army, that particular band 
was supreme and held the destiny of the revolution in 
its hands. I asked him the methods by which he and 
his brother got so much power over their men. 

“The essential and dominating motive of man is self- 
interest and fear,” he said. “Wherever you govern, 
you must have a strong minority^ whom you hold by 
those forces.” 

“How do you do that ?” I a.sked. 

“The spoils are mostly divided among those, and they 
nmst be so much involved and so much richer and more 
powerful than the majority' that they' must be ready to 
go to any length of sacrifice, and fight for the chief 
against the majority whenever it is necessary. They' 
must know that the community' will not tolerate them 
if they lose the favor of the chief.” 

327 



MEMOIRS OF HALIDE EDIB 

In Paris only some months ago, a Rumanian youth, 
whom I accidently met, told me about the interior 
politics of Rumania, the banks, the corruption, the 
monopoly of national riches by the political party in 
power. It sounded exactly like the ruling methods of 
the revolutionary band, but on a larger scale. 

My own conclusion is to teach to all the coming 
generations the love of our kind, the constant struggle 
for a higher state of national morality, a better adjust- 
ment and greater equality among all peoples ; these are 
the only fundamental conditions which can make life 
possible and lasting on the globe. It was the selfish and 
materialistic philosophy of the latter part of the nine- 
teenth century which brought the greatest of human 
disasters in the form of the World War. Its conse- 
quences are not yet at an end. The hypocrisy and 
personal unworthiness of many of the world’s leaders, 
whether national or international, can lead to a com- 
plete and final destruction of all that has been the out- 
come of infinite suffering and experience for thousands 
of years. The renaming of ideals, which is too often 
a mere political game in the hands of unscrupulous 
leaders, is not enough; it is the rules of the game that 
must be changed. 


328 



