Pope Adrian IV a Friend of IrelandPOPE ADRIAN IVA Friend of IrelandFROM THEANALECTA JURIS PONTIFICIIA MAGAZINE ONTHEOLOGY, CANON LAW, LITURGY, AND HISTORYtlranslatet) from tbe ffrcncbBYThe Rev, W. McLOUGHLINMouni Melletay Abbey, near CappOqutn^ Co, WaierjordDUBLINBROWNE AND NOLAN, LIMITEDAND AT BELFAST AND CORK191.6L.V.7noBKOVVNI-; AND KOLAN, LTD., PRINTERS, DUBLIN.TRANSLATOR'S PREFACEPeter. HisPope Adrian IV. was the only Eng^lishman that ever sat inoriginal name was Nicholasthe Chair ofBreakspeare, and he was born (we may suppose in theearly part of the twelfth century) at Lang-ley, near St.Alban's, in Hertfordshire. He was inured to hardshipsfrom his youth, for his parents were of lowly condition.The history of his career, from a state of extreme povertyof Supremeto the highest dignity in the world,Pontiff, is so fully sketched by his Eminence CardinalMoran in Document No. i of the Appendix at the end ofAsthis book, that the matter need not be repeated here.is usual in such cases there are always a few points ofdifference among historians.For instance, some say thatit was in Paris the young Nicholas studied under Maria-Others say that his mother survivednus, an Irishman, ihim, and received alms from the Church of Canterbury. ^But these are matters which need not detain us at present.What is certain is that Pope Adrian IV. was a staunchdefender of ecclesiastical rights, so that he did not hesitatethatThis is theto curb the pride even of a fierce Barbarossa.man who has been so long calumniated as one of thegreatest of Ireland's enemies.Cardinal D'Aragon, who, in the fourteenth century,wrote a Life of the Pontiff, paints his character thus : —" He was a man of great benignity, mildness, and patience,1 Camhyensis Eversus, ii., p. 400.' Rohrbacher, t. xvi., p. 32.VItranslator's preface.well skilled in the English and Latin tongues, graceful inhis conversation, eloquent in his arguments, an eminentleader in sacred song, and a distinguished preacher, slowto anger, quick to pardon, a cheerful giver, bountiful inalms, and in all his ways most admirable. "^The reader of the following pages will find a most inter-Bull by whichesting discussion on the meritsPope Adrian IV. is said to have authorised Henry II.,King ofThis essay orEngland, to invade Ireland.theoftreatise, written in French by the Rev. Louis Chaillot,first appeared in 1882 in the Analecta Juris Pontificii, alarge folio magazine devoted to important questions onTheology, Canon Law, Liturgy, and History, and whosecentral office was in Rome.^ A knowledge of it is of greatpersons who would wish to beimportanceof PopeAnd yet how few per-The Analecta was a workAdrian IV. in regard to Ireland.sons have ever heard of it !thoroughlysentimentsacquaintedwiththealltolittle read, or even known, inthesecountries,beingwritten chiefly in Latin, with an article occasionally inItalian or French. The author of the essay was an expertin examining difficult points of history.His frequent re-ference to the writings of Dr. (now Cardinal) Moran, Dr.Lingard, Mr. O'Callaghan, Xc. , shows that he was familiarIt would be a pity thateven with the English language.the memory of so valuable a treatise, opening up so many1 " Erat enim vir valde benignus, mills, et patiens. in Anglia et Latinalingua peritus, in sermone facundus, in eloquentia politus, in cantilenaprsecipuus et prasdicator egregius, ad irascendum tardus, ad ignoscen-dum velox, hilaris dator, in eleemosynis largus, et in omne morumcompositione prasclarus."— (Muratori, Rerum Ttatlcarum Scriptores,2 The Analecta Juris Pontificii was succeeded in 1893 by the AnalectaThis new magazineEcclesiastica, \yith a large staff of eminent writers.is printed in Rome, and bears the Imprlinatur of the Master of theSacred College. The chief manager is the Rev. Felix Cardene.iii., i., 441.)translator's FRKFACE.Vllnew views, should be lost, or that Eng'lish readers shouldnot have an opportunity of weighing its arguments. I havetherefore considered it a useful task to translate it iptoEnglish, so that it may take a permanent form, and be asource of reference for all persons interested in the sub-Its division into chapters is the same here as in theject.Analecta. The notes that I have added are generally in-tended as side-lights from contemporary history, for theassistance of younger readers.In my opinion. Irishmen all over the world owe a greatdebt of gratitude to the Rev. Father Chaillot, who went toso much trouble in investigating a subject that may oftenhave perplexed their minds, and who drew up such aclear statement of a very complex case.His argufnentsare usually strong ; if any one of them may be consideredweak, it ought not to lessen the instrinsic force of theothers. A specialist in the study of historical problems,he astonishes by the ingenuity with which he pursues thetruth, however obscured or disguised. He is quite familiarwith all the chief original sources of information in regardto his subject. The honesty of his motives is apparent onevery page.matters, saysi:The learned Benedictine Abbot Dom Francis Gasquet, aman of acknowledged critical acumen, speakings of these" It was only in the year 1872 that thefirst indictment of the evidence upon which the ' Bull ' hasbeen accepted as genuine was drawn up by Dr. Moran,and published in the pages of the Irish EcclesiasticalRecord. To the arguments against the ' grant ' stated inthat article, the editor of the Analecta Juris Pontificii hasadded fresh and almost conclusive evidence of the forgery'Dublin Review, July, i8'8jVUlTRANSLATOR S PREFACB.of what has been so long left unquestioned and accepted asgenuine by historians. "Again, this distinguished scholarsays that through the labours of the writer in the Analectait is now " possible to show with reason that Adrian IV.,so far from giving any encouragement to Henry in hisdesigns on Ireland, in reality refused, when asked, to bea party to the enterprise, and pointed out the injustice ofit." He believes it " impossible that the letter of Adrian,addressed to the two Kings (Louis VII. and Henry II.)can have any reference to Spain, while every circumstancein it tending to fix the special country gives weight to theopinion that it was Ireland about which the Pope wrote."According to the rulesinternational copyright, aofwork published in Italy or France may after ten years betranslated and published without any restriction in anothercountry, if no authorised translation of it has appearedthere during the ten years. More than twenty years havenow elapsed since the French Essay was published, andyet no English version of it has appeared.But as regards books in the English language, and evenEnglish articles in magazines, the term of copyright iseither forty-two years, or the author's life and seven years,Hence, not wishing to encroachwhichever is the longer.upon the legal rights of his Eminence Cardinal Moran, bytransferring his Essay bodily from the Irish EcclesiasticalRecord of November, 1872 (sec Documents), I asked hispermission to use it, and received from him the followingkind letter : —" St. Mary's Cathedral," Sydney, 28th June, 1904." My Dear Father McLoughlin," In reply to your letter of the i8th May, I am happy toTRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.IXgive you every permission you desire regarding my paper,on Adrian the Fourth's famous Bull." You may not be aware that I reprinted that paperwith some additions in our Australian Catholic Record.send by post the volume with the two articles embracingIthat essay.'' As regards the French Essay in the Analecta, I fearthat it rests on an unsound foundation, perhaps I shouldStill there are some usefulsay on a false assumption.remarks in it.W^'" Professor Thacj^er, of Chicago, in the United States,has published a volume on the same subject. You will not,f think, agree with his theory, but his criticism of the Bullof Alexander III. is interesting and valuable." Presenting my kindest remembrance to the Most Rev.Father Abbot, I beg to remain yours faithfully and affec-tionately,"iff Patrick F. Cardinal Moran," Archbishop of Sydney."In the volume of the Australasian Catholic Record (1897)which his Eminence was so good as to send me, he gives, itmay be said, a new essay, embodying the old one of 1872.This version of his treatise on the subject of Adrian'sBull is so much the more valuable, as it contains all themost important remarks that his Eminence has to addIt will be found theafter twenty-five years of reflection.first among the Documents at the end of this book.As the reader will observe, the Cardinal fears that theFrench Essay rests on an unsound foundation. He doesnot say positively that such is the fact ; he modifies hisXtranslator's preface,view so far as to express only a fear. He considers thatthe initial H. in Pope Adrian's letter to Louis VII. mayrefer to Hispania (Spain), and not to Hibernia (Ireland).Of course, the greatest possible respect is due to theopinion of such a high authority ; but still no one, I amconfident, would be more ready than his Eminence, whoseobject is truth, to acknowledge that an opinion derives itschief force from the strength of the arguments that canAlthough the cares of his Emin-be adduced in its favour.ence in Australia must be very numerous, it i§ to be hopedthat he will yet find leisure to favour the public with hisreasons for holding the above opinion. They will be grate-fully received ; and we may be sure that, on his side, hewill be well pleased if it can be shown by competent criticsthat any one of them rests on a misapprehension.Grant-ing, however, that such cannot be done, the publication ofthe present work will not be considered a waste of time,since, in regard to several important points of Irish his-paths of exploration for future writers.tory, it places the reader in possession of the most reliableIt may also be useful in suggesting newviews up to date.On the mainpoint of all—what is to be thought of the alleged Bull ofAdrian IV. to Henry II.— His Eminence is fully convinced,with the author of this essay, that it was nothing but aforgery. The Only difference is in the manner of proof.ofThe titlethis book would naturally be " PopeAdrian IV. and Ireland," but for some years oast there hasbeen another book before the public with this very name.No one can fail to see what confusion would be caused byhaving in circulation two books of the same name, thoughof quite a different character : a purchaser might oftenfind himself in possession of a volume very unlike thatwhich he expected,I have, therefore, presumed to nameTRANSLATOR'S PRfiVACE.Xithis treatise " Pope Adrian IX., a Friend of Ireland,"which exactly expresses its tenor from the first to the lastpage.I carinot help thinking that there is great need ofsuch a book at the present time, if the rising generationare to be directed aright in regard to historical questions.Sttange to say, the author of the book to which Ihave alluded, maintains that there is no fact in historybetter established than Adrian's grant of Ireland to Henry.Useless to exclaim : a monstrous imposture ! an explodedfiction ! He maintains it.Having seen the article in theAnalecta, he speaks of its theory thus : —" This extraor-dinary theory has been lately broached and defended by theeditor of the Analecta Juris Pontificii in a treatise whichOfextends to 125 folio pages, and double-columned.course, there can be no objectionto have the learnededitor maintain his honest opinion on a free question, butthere is a strong objection to the grounds of his theory.For it rests on the assumption and assertion that Irelandwas a nation of pagans and apostates." How the vener-able writer could have passed such a severe censure on thetreatise as is expressed in the words that I have just under-lined, it is not easy to comprehend ; but the reader of thefollowing pages may safel)' be left to judge for himselfwhether or not it is deserved- Pope Benedict XIV., in hisConstitution to the Index, tells us that a book is not to bejudged by some one proposition torn from its context, butthe different parts of the book are to be compared, and itmay be found that what is obscurely expressed in one placeis clearly explained in another. How full of reason is suchAn author has even been known to quote aa remark !his Summa,as stated by St. Thomas inpropositionalthough the Saint stated it only to refute it.The celebrated preacher and lecturer, Father Thortias,xutranslator's preface.Burke, O.P. , having- had occasion, in his refutation ofFroude, to treat of the Bull attributed to Pope Adrian IV.let us see how he regarded it. "I have studied this ques-tion as well as I could," he says, in a discourse at Brook-lyn, " and I do not believe that the Pope ever gave theEnglish monarch a commission to invade Ireland." Hethen goes on to argue that there was no man in Irelandthat Henry II. feared more than St. Laurence O'Toole,who, as a lover of his country, was an implacable enemyof English domination ; and that if Henry, when he cameto Ireland in 1171, had such a letter from the Pope as wasstated, he need not have brought so many thousands ofmen with him—he had only to show the letter to St.Laurence, who, as a faithful son of Holy Church, was amodel of humility and obedience, and instant submissionvyould have followed throughout the country.But therewas not so much as a whisper of such a letter during theFather Burke argues further that if RomeKing's visit.had given the alleged authority to Henry, then, when St.Laurence went to Rome for the Third Lateran Counci' in1 179, the Pope, Alexander III., would have called him toa severe account for opposing the wishes of the Holy See,and attempting, as it were, to throttle Henry II.Theeloquent Dominican adds that, so far from being blamedor reproved, of all the Bishops who came to the Councilthere was not a single man who received so much honourfrom the Pope as did the Archbishop of Dublin-ThePope, he says, put him in the highest place, gave him thepallium of Archbishop, ordered the Bishops of Ossory,Glendalough, and other places, to be subject to him, madehim his own Legate Apostolic, and sent him back, crownedwith glory, to Ireland.Nor has Father Burke any faith in a confirmatory BullTRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.XUltheIII.,successorAdrian IV.from Popeof PopeAlexanderIn another discourse (New York, November1872), 1 he remarks that Alexander had a betteri2th,knowledge of Henry that Adrian had ; for Henry sup-ported the antipope Octaviannus inn 59, and the antipopeHistory even tellsGuido in 1166, both against Alexander.that Henry obliged every man in England—from the boyof twelve years up to the old man— to renounce his allegi-ance to the true Pope, and go over to an antipope.likely, then, asks Father Burke, that the Pope (Alexander)would give Henry a letter to settle ecclesiastical mattersIs itin Ireland?panegyric onThe great Bossuet, tutor to the DaUphln of France, andafterwards Bishop of Meaux, had not a higher opinion ofLet us quote a few wordsHenry than Father Burke had.St. Thomas of Canterbury.from his" Henry II., King of England," he says, " declares him-He attacks her both inf,elf an enemy of the Church.spirituals and in temporals—^in what she holds from GodHe openly usurps herand what she holds from men.power. He thrusts his hand into her treasury, which con-tains the sustenance of the poor- He lessens the honourof her ministers by an abrogation of their privileges, andRash and ill-crushes their liberty by restrictive laws.advised prince ! How is it be does not foresee from afarthe terrible convulsions that the contempt of ecclesiasticalauthority will one day cause in his kingdom, and the un-heard-of excesses into which the people will h^- carried,when they have shaken off that necessary yoke?"2Surely, in the judgment of every impartial reader, it1 Sermons and Lectures in America, pp. 94, 155.Bosguet's Complete Works, Migne, vii., p. 11 50,XIVtranslator's preface.ought to appear more probable that Henry was capable offorging any document suited to his purpose, than that hereceived special honours from the Holy See as its agentor representative in Ireland.Although the authority of Giraldus Cambrensis is gener-ally of little account, still, as he was intimately acquaintedwith Henry H., and had rare opportunities of studying hischaracter, it is interesting to hear what he says, and whathe took good care not to say until long after Henry waslaid in his grave. Among many portraits that he presentsof the King, we fake the following : " From beginning toend, an oppressor of the nobility ; weighing right andwrong, lawful and unlawful, by his own interest ; a sellerand a delayer of justice ; changeable in speech, and full ofguile ; readily breaking, not only his word, but even hispledged honour and his oath ; an open violator of hismarriage obligations ; an ingrate towards God, and with-out devotion ; a hammer of the Church ; and a burn son ofperdition." Again : "Ascribing all to his own airm, likeanother Pharao, he hardened his heart, and plunged into" Such was theyet greater depths of vice." Elsewhere :perverse nature of King Henry that to his utmost he ex-cited and fomented dissensions among his sons, hopingonly from their discord to obtain quiet for hirriself. "Infine, Giraldus points out, as a terrible judgment of HeaVen,that Henry, who so much neglected his duties during life,had not at his last hour the assistance of a priest, anddied without the sacraments. ^It may not be out of place to remark that the deplorablestate of religion and morality in England during the lastfew centuries, and especially at the present day, whenmillions of persons never enter a house of worship, and' Giraldus Cambrensis, viii., pp. i6o, 165, 176, 260, 283, 304.TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.XVthe daily newspapers horrify by their record oi crimes,may justly be traced to the rebellious action of Henry andsome of his short-sighted successors against the Church,which alone is qualified to remedy the evils of society.Even Guizot, a French Protestant historian, treating ofthe Middle Ages, acknowledges the great and salutaryal'" In the midst of that deluge ofinfluence of the Church-material force which at this period overwhelmed society,"he says, " there was an immense benefit in the presenceof a moral influence, a moral power, a power which derivedits force from convictions, from belief, from moralHad there been no Christian Church, thesentiments.vvhole world would have been abandoned to mere materialforce. The Church alone exercised a moral power.Shedid more—she kept up and diffused the conviction of arule, a law, superior to all human laws.that belief so essential to the well-being of mankind, thatthere exists, above all human laws, another law .. some-times called reason, sometimes the divine law, but whicheverywhere and always is the sarne law under differentnames- "^She professed.theothers, who violateRulers, as well asreligionestablished by the mercy of God for the salvation of man-kind, offend grievously against public order. How differentis such conduct from that of the great Emperor Constan-tine, who, zealous for the best interest of his subjects,favoured the Church in so many ways, especially by hisprotective laws and his munificent gifts ! The number andthe variety of the latter, though not :of such extent in re-gard to territory as was falsely alleged about five centuriesPassing over many,after his death, were really immense.' Quoted by the Abb6 Gosselin in his admirable work on thePower of the Pope in the Middle Ages; translated by the Rev. M.Kelly. St. Patrick's College, Maynooth, i., p, 43.bXVITRANSLATOR S PREFACE.such as " patrimonies " or estates to churches in differentplaces, at least one example may be given. The weight ofthe chalices, patens, cruets, basins, censers, vases, chan-deliers, statues, and other ornaments that he bestowed onthe splendid Basilica which he built in Rome near hisLateran palace, ^ on the spot where he received baptism,amounted to 685 pounds of gold and 12,943 pounds ofincludes one lamp of the purest gold,silver.weighing fifty pounds, but it does not include the superbgilding of the whole ceiling, which was 500 feet in length.It also omits the value of the emeralds, hyacinths, andother 'precious stones set in the sacred vessels, and the costThis listof workmanship. 2We might speak in similar terms of another illustriousWalking in the footsteps of hisEmperor, Charlemagne.illustrious father, Pepin, he gloried in rendering servicesto the Church, which both of them regarded as the bestpossible instrument for the spread of true civilisation overIt was by their powerful arms that the Lom-the world.bards were compelled to restore to Rome the rich pro-vinces that they had usurped ; for the inhabitants of theseprovinces, finding themselves abandoned, and left a prey,by the Emperor of Constantinople, had united for theirown defence, and put themselves under the protection of' This palace, which formerly belonged to a rich Roman senator,named Flautius Lateranus, came to Constantine by his wife Fausta.Adjacent to the church, Constantine also built a baptistery in honourof St. John the Baptist, with a second altar in honour of St. John theEventually, the church, though dedicated in honour ofEvangelist.Our Holy Saviour, came to bear the name of St. John Lateran.It hasa pre-eminence over all the other churches not only of Rome, but ofChristendom.In the time of Constantine, it contained a wooden altaron which .St. Peter and his successors were said to have celebratedMass.All other altars were to be of stone.^ Power of the Pope, etc., already mentioned, i., p. loi. (Taken fromAnastasius, an author of the ninth century, who wrote the Livesof the Popes.)translator's preface:.—xviithe Pope, their best friend on all occasions.Then, andafterwards, great authority was often placed in the handsof the Pope, who, by hisrank, learning, and virtue,seemed so worthy of it ; and he, consulting for the welfareof society, could not refuse it. How much he was on hisguard against injustice, or the very shadow of it, appearedin all his acts, which were usually distinguished by aThe Lombards or Longobardsconsummate prudence.were so called because they shaved the back of the head,and allowed the hair in front and the beard to grow longso that their very appearance was enough to excite horror.A fierce and rapacious people, originally from Sweden,they disturbed the peace of Italy for more than two hun-dred years, until at length Charlemagne put an end to theirVisiting Rome, he ordered a new and mostkingdom.ample deed of " restitutions," sometimes called " dona-tions," to be drawn up, and, having signed it with hisown hand, it was also signed by the Bishops, Abbots,Dukes, and Counts, who accompanied him.He. then laidit on the Altar of St. Peter, for whose primacy he had somuch reverence.As a confirmation of these proceedings,he and all his French lords swore to preserve for the HolySee all the territories mentioned in that deed.iReferring to England in particular, we may well sa} •What wonders it might have done for the amelioration ofthe human family, if it had always remained faithful to theChurch ! What benefits it might have conferred on somany nations of the earth, which, though having a rightat least to be well governed, now groan beneath its sway !If its zeal had always been wisely directed, poor Ireland,for example, which might support twenty millions of in-habitants in peace and plenty, would not to-day havePower of the Pope, etc., i., p. 232.—xviutranslator's preface.so many causesofsee allthe energycomplaint.How lamentable toand wealth squandered year afteryear by its hundreds of contending sects in propagatingtheirdifferent systems ofreligion—mere shadows,orrather counterfeits of Christianity !Will it never under-stand the spiritual misfortunes brought on it chiefly by theperfidious conduct of Henry VHI., and his daughterWill it never recover from the illusions ofElizabeth?Its temporal or material success ? Will it never, in turningover the pages of history, recall with grateful mind thedays when it rejoiced in the blessings of a supernaturalfaith, free from the possibility of error?Will it never,when pi'iding itself on the glories of Oxford and Cam-bridge, remember that most of the colleges there hadCatholic founders, whose rich legacies are now distributedamong officials for duties totally at variance with thoseWill it evermore shun, with obdurate heart,intended?that sacred and divine light— the light of eternal truthwhich, through the apostolic pity and piety of St. Gregorythe Great, was brought to its shores by jt. Augustineof Canterbury?But it is time to draw to a close.That reference to any point may be made as easy aspossible, I have added a Table of Contents and an Index.If the " Bull of Adrian," which has during so many agestarnished the memory of an illustrious Pontiff, still findsfavour with any, it is to be hoped that this treatise fromthe Analecta, accompanied with a variety of Documeiits,may help to give it a long quietus.Mount Melleray Abbey,November i^th, 1905.AUTHOR'S PREFACEThere is no historical document that has given rise to somany controversies as the letter of Pope AdrianIV.,authorising-, as we are told, Henry II., King of England,to undertake a conquest of Ireland, and commanding theIrish to submit to him as their lawful ruler.For seven hundred years, the Irish have been callinginto doubt the genuineness of this Pontifical letter. Theycannot be persuaded that the Common Father of Chris-tians, without consulting the clergy or the people of thecountry, without being S'ure whether the intervention of anEnglish prince was asked or desired—that the Pope, Isay, should, on an imperfect and inexact report, havecondemned a nation, distinguished by its attachment toChristianity, to lose its independence, and become a preyto fierce and plundering Anglo-Normans.These ideas have been developed with much warmth andbitterness by McGeoghegan, who says : — " Behold a sen-tence pronounced against Ireland, by which the right ofnations and the most sacred laws are violated, under thespecious pretext of religion or a reformation of manners.The Irish are no more to have a country :this nation,which has never submitted to a foreign yoke, nunquamis condemned, without being. We may say that never hasheard, to lose its liberty. .any Pope, before or since Adrian IV. , punished a nation. We have seenso severely without having deserved it,externa subjacuit ditioni,....XXAUTHOR S PREFACE,excommunications hurled ag'ainst Emperors and Kings,and interdicts laid on their States, for crimes of heresy orother causes, but here we behold innocent Ireland deliveredup to tyrants, without having- been summoned before any(McGeoghegan,tribunal, or convicted of any crime."Histoire d'Irlande, tom. i, p. 449, 451-)Moreover, Irish writers have observed that the originaldocument of Pope Adrian IV. has never been seen orshown by any person, not only at the time when it wasfirst alleged, that is to say, about the end of the twelfthcentury, and about thirty years after the death of Adrian,but even in the course of time no annalist or historian hasbeen able to lay his hand on the original letter.This is sotrue that Rymer, who, at every document of the Fcedera,&:c., is always careful to mention in the margin Ex TurreLondunensi, or some other official depot—Rymer, I say,in what concerns the letter of Adrian, is unable to offer anyguarantee but Matthew Paris, who lived almost a centuryafter Adrian !It is true that Cardinal Baronius gives in his " Ecclesi-astical Annals " the letter attributed to Pope Adrian ; butthe manner in which the learned annalist expresses himselfshows clearly that he had not the original diploma beforehis eyes, and consequently that this diploma, at the time ofBaronius, did not exist in the archives of the Vatican.Other writers have dated it from Rome, while it is provedthat, during the period in question, Adrian was at Bene-ventum, where he resided for a long time.But Baroniusdoes not supply any date : now would he have neglecteda clause so essential if he had before his eyes the officialregister of Adrian \Y, or at least an authentic copy of theThis shows that he had nothing at his disposalbut a private copy, without any seal of authenticity. Theletter?author's preface,XXIadvocates of the letter agfrcc in saying- that it was writtenin the year 1155, a few months after the election of Adrian.Baronius, on the contrary, has placed the document at theend of the Pontificate, and has declined all responsibilitywith regard to its date.Far from attaching any import-ance to the document, Baronius says that he inserts it so asto omit nothing attributed to the illustrious Pontiff. "More^over,'* he says, " lest anything should perish from thememory of, so great a Pontiff, we shall here transcribe fro^ma manuscript in the Vatican the diploma given to Henry,King of England, regarding the affairs of Ireland, broughtto a more religious state."A^d hcBC insuper, ne quid ex-cidat de tanti Pontificis memoria, hie describemus ex co-dice Vaticano diploma datum ad Henricum AnglorumRegem. de rebus Hibernice in m.eliorem statum. religionisincertum.restitutis,(Baronius, Annates Ecclesiastici, torn. 12, p. 531, Mogun-sed quota suipontificatusannotiae, 1608.)Thus Baronius abstains from pointing out the politicalof the letter that is set forth as the act bycharacterwhich Ireland was given to an English King. The anna-list seems to remark nothing but an improvement inmatters of religion.The defenders of the apocryphal letter, attributed toPope Adrian TV. , imagining doubtless that all the manu-scripts kept in the immense library of the Vatican areoriginal diplomas and officialcollections, have assertedthat it was from the Vatican itself, and from a Vaticanmanuscript (ex Codice Vaticano), that Baronius took theBut these champions ofdocument under discussion.authenticity do not know that the Library of the Vaticancontains thousands of manuscripts which assuredly haveno official or authentic character. The original registers ofXXUAUTHOR S PREPACK.the Popes are preserved, not in the Library, but in theArchives of the Vatican. Now the series of registers beginsonly at the year 1198, that is to say, forty years after thedeath of Pope Adrian IV,What then is tlie Codex Vaticanus in which Baroniusfound the letter attributed to Pope Adrian I\'. ?nothing- else but a copy of the work of Matthew Paris !ItisIn 1872 the Irish Ecclesiastical Record published a veryInteresting and substantial article on Adrian IV.., and hispretended donation of Ireland for the benefit of England :I shall have occasion more than once to refer to it inthe course of my remarks. The writer of the article saysthat, residing in Rome a few years ago, he wished to knowexactly what might have been the Vatican Manuscript{Codex Vaticanus) from which the copy of Adrian's letterthat Baronius gave in his Annales was borrowed. Now thearchivist of the Vatican, after many searches in the im-mense Library, assured him that Baronius had absolutelynothing at his disposal but the Historia Major of MatthewIt follows hence that the testimony of the CodexParis.Vaticanus, and of Baronius, who made use of it, is identi-cal with that of Matthew Paris, that is to say, of an his-torian who never saw the original letter, and who wrotenearly a century after Adrian.This proves once more that Cardinal Baronius did notfind anywhere in the Vatican the original letter of PopeAdrian, with its date and other characteristics of genuine-ness.It remains for me, in this introduction, to solve anotherdifficulty, arising from the fact that the diploma attributedto Pope Adrian has been inserted in some editions of theRoman Bullarium.Well-informed people know that the collectioncalledAUTHOR S PREFACE.XXUlBullarium Romanum was a private, individual compila-tion, whose authenticity was never guaranteed by theIt may, therefore, have happened that apocryphalPopes.documents glided in. When Pope Gregory IX., in 1234,published the Decretals, he placed at their head a Pontifi-cal Diploma which authenticated the collection.Boni-face VIII. and Clement V. did the same for other canonicalauthentic anAt a later date, Leo X.declaredcodes.edition of the acts of the Fifth Council of Lateran. Pius IV.followed his example with regard to the decrees of theCouncil of Trent, an edition of which was printed atRome in 1564.Some years afterwards, Gregory XIII.likewise authenticated a Roman edition of the CorpusUnder the Pontificate of Paul V., a largejuris Canonici.edition of the General Councils appeared at Rome, but inthe preface it was declared that there was no intention ofguaranteeing its official or juridical authenticity.The Holy See has never taken on itself any responsi-bility for the various editions of the Roman Bullarium thatHence, Bulls andhave been published from time to time.Briefs found there acquire no legal value, unless copies areproduced in authentic form. The same rule is observed inregard to the sentences of tribunals, and the acts ofministerial officers.The four volumes of the Bullarium of Benedict XIV. areauthenticatedthe only exception, because thisthem by a diploma placed at the head of the work.PontiffLingard, in his History of England, has not thoroughlyexamined the question of genuineness : he is content withscattered among thebringing together some details,chroniclers, Gervase, William of Newbridge, and especi-After referring to a Councilally Giraldus Cambrensis.held, it is said, about the year 1175, and in which theXXIVAUTHOR S PREFACE.false letter of Pope Adrian IV. was read, Lingard makesthe following reflection : How far this letter served toconvince the prelates that the" King of England was thelegitimate Sovereign of the island, we are left to conjec-Such a consideration would seem to betray in theture.mind of the historian but little confidence in the genuine-ness of the letter.The curious work Macarice Excidium, edited by O'Cal-1850, and published in Dublin by the Irishlaghan inArchaeologicalSociety, contains, in theeditor'snotes,everything most specious that has been said to establishthe genuineness of Adrian's Bull.Lastly, I mention the article of the Irish EcclesiasticalRecord, which appeared in 1872, and to which I havereferred above. Thanks to modern editions, far superiorto former ones, especially in what concerns the study ofmanuscripts, and considering also the progress of histori-cal criticism, the author has made some judicious remarksthat confirm our reasons for doubting the genuineness ofthe letter attributed to Pope Adrian. He seems to me tohave so completely, though succinctly, exhausted the sub-ject, that one can scarcely hope to offer any new views.I should not, however, take up my pen, if I had only torepeat what has been said before me.But through studiesto which I have devoted myself, I hope that I shall be insome measure able to draw the attention of serious men toa few points that seem imperfectly cleared up, and to afew historical documents that have not hitherto beenutilised.Here are the conclusions on which I believe I can rely,and which, taken together, form the historical thesis thatI propose to develop : —I. Adrian TV. never gave the King of England authorityAUTHOR S PREFACE.XXVto invade Ireland. On the contrary, he positively refusedall concurrence in this enterprise, the danger and the in-justice of which he pointed out.2. The letter commonly attributed to Pope Adrian isfalse—is apocryphal. This conclusion follows directly fromthe preceding one, independently of all other reasons thatcombine to show the falsity of the document.3. The true letter of Adrian, refusing to let Ireland beIt has been preservedinvaded by the English, is not lost.by irreproachable authorities.4. The tenor of the true letter does not permit us toBesides, extrinsic proofs agreesuspect its genuineness.in confirming it.5. This true letter of Pope Adrian IV. gives, alone, thekey to a multitude of facts that have remained obscure,enigmatical, inexplicable up to this day.It reveals themotive of that mysterious silence which was kept for morethan twenty years on the existence of a document fromIt explains why Henryfirst caused this country to be attacked by adventurers,because the refusal of the Pope did not allovt- him toAdrian IV., relating to Ireland.attempt a public and direct expedition.6. The false letter was framed on the true.Henry 11.preserved in the apocryphal Bull the preamble of the trueletter, but completely changed the concluding enactment.Instead of a refusal, he announced a donation of the island,with an exhortation to the Irish to recognise the King ofEngland as their lord and master.The falsificationisflagrant.7. None of the succeeding Popes confirmed the pre-In the treatise of Giraldustended donation of Adrian IV.Cambrensis called Expugnatio Hibcrnia we find a Briefattributed to Pope Alexander III. ; but in a subsequentxxviauthor's preface.work the historian evidently considered that this IJiief hadbeen designedly forged.Such are the chief points that I propose to establish.I may be permitted here to say a word of the occasionthat decided me to undertake this work.' An Irishman, residing in Montreal,Canada, wrote tome a few years ago, calling my attention to Adrian IV.,and his pretended donation of Ireland in favour of theEnglish. He pressed me to treat of this important ques-tion, for the honour of the Holy See, and for the characterof Adrian, on whose memory a grave accusation has lainfor so many centuries.At this time I was travelling ; but, having to make adelay at a city in which there were rich libraries, I begansome researches, and carried them pretty far.Obliged tocontinue my journey, I entrusted my papers to the keeperof a library. On my return, after thirty months of absence,I learned to my great regret that the keeper had died,and that all my notes had disappeared.I should conse-quently begin all anew ; but this mishap has been amplycompensated for by an unexpected discovery, that ofAdrian's true letter.TABLE OF CONTENTS.P^gcChap.III. What the Ambassador asked of Pope Adrian1. Means that Hbnry iookJto obtain authorityFOR Conquering Ireland .... iXI. Mission of Rotrodus to Rome ... 3........ 4. .5V. Pope Adrian's T^etter ..... 6IV. Objections of Pofe Adrian to the IrishExpeditionIV.....VI. Pope Adrian's Letter concerns IrelandVII. It is not possible that the Letter of Pope.Adrian relates to Spain ....1013......15VIII. How King Henry II. received the Decisionof the PopeIX. The Welsh Adventurers .... 20King of England ..... 27X. Departure of Henry II. for IrelandXI. If the Bishops of Ireland submitted to theXII. The Oath that Henry took in the Cathedralof Avranches is decisive evidence againstTHE Bull attributed to Pope .Adrian IV. .XIII. Three Letters attributed to Pope Alex-ander III. ...... 32XV. Cardinal Vivi.\n ...... 38XIV. Henry II. had only a Nominal Power in Ireland23353..1..XVI. Preparations for thi; Fraud •XVII. Disagreement between thf. Pseudo-Meta-i.oGicus and the False Bull of Adrian IV....XVIII. Examination of the Apocryphal Bull .XIX. Diploma attributed to Alexander III.XX. Appearance of the Apocryphal Bull inEnglish Chronicles .... 6764..XXI. Authority of Giraldus Cambrensis..72'404551TXVUlChap.TABLE OF CONTENTS.PageXXII. The English Chroniclers appear to have allTAKEN THE APOCRYPHAL BltLL FROM GiRALDUSCambrensis ...... 74XXIII. Peter's Pence ...... jyXXIV. John Lackland ...... 78Bull of Adrian XV. ..... 93XXV. State of Ireland in the Thirteenth CenturyXXVI. The Pontifical Court of the FourteenthCentury knew nothing about the false85XXVTI. Of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries,with the Beginning of Protestantism'XXVIII. Erection of the Kingdom of IrelaniS-D BY.107Pope Paul IV"3120128131136161igc195jn^iggXXIX. Confiscation of Lands in IrelandXXX. Briefs of the Holy See on the War of' IrishIndependenceXXXI. Emancipation of the IrishXXXII. CriticsXXXIII. The Fate of Apocryphal Documenx.'j.DOCUMENTS.No.1. Contains article from the Irish Ecdesiastwal Record,November, 1872, by the Most Rev. Dr. Mqran, Bishopof Ossory—afterwards Cardinal Moran, -Archbishop ofSydney— (embodied in a new article written by HisEminence in 1897)..,...2. Letter of Pope Adrian IV. to Louis VII. King of France,dissuading him from an Expedition to Ireland.3. From Chapter XLII. of Ihe Metahgicus,.4. Apocryphal Bull attributed to Pope Adrian IV, .5. Remarks of Mr. Brewer and IJev. Mr. Diniock onGiraldiis Cambrensis.......Adrian6. "Remarks of Giraldus Camlirensis on the Bull of Pope7. Diploma from Clement III. (ir88) .... 2032028. Letter of Pope Innocent HI. on Peter's Pence in England(1213).......... .203.199TABLE OF CONTENTS.No.9. Letter of Pope Innocent III. to the Bishops, Barons,and People of Ireland (121 3)....10. Letter of the King of England to the Bishops of Ireland(1275)........1 1. Letter of Pope John XXII. to King Edward II. (1317) .12. Letter of King Edward III. on the Troubles of Ireland(1353)XXIXPage20420420520613. Convocation of a great State Council in Ireland (1361) .14. Command given to the Barons by Edw.ard III. to set outfor Ireland (1368) ...... 207Ireland {1547) ....... 20715. Brief of King Edward VI., "Head of the Church" in20616. Brief of King Edward VI. against the authority of thePope (1551).....'..17. Consistoriai Decree on the Erection of Ireland into aKingdom (1555).......18. Bull of Pope Paul IV. erecting Ireland into a Kingdom'"(i?5 5)19. Conference of Pope Paul IV. with the Ambassadors ofQueen Mary (1555) ...... 21021. Brief of Clement VIII. (1600) ..... 211... 21220. Brief of Gregory XIII. on the Irish In?urrection {1580)22. Irish National Associatioxi (1601)21020923. Decision of the University of Salamanca regarding theIrish War (1603) .'20820824. Strange Story told bj' Bzovius ..Index......213215..217Pope Adrian IV. the Friendof IrelandCHAPTER 1.MEANS THAT HENRY TOOK TO OBTAIN AUTHORITY FORCONQUERING IRELAND.The proximity of Ireland to England, and the inferiorityof the Irish in the art of war when compared with knightsclad in iron armour, suggested the idea of conquest toThis project, whichWilliam the Conqueror and Henry I.they abandoned, was resumed in 1156 by Henry II., afterhe had completely subdued the Welsh.To justify his invasion of a free and inoffensive people,Henry set forth religious interests. He considered that amoral reformation and a higher civilisation would bebenefits that the! Irish would gladly purchase at the cost oftheir independence.Unfortunately, Pope Adrian IV., precisely because hewas an Englishman by birth, was obliged to be on hisguard more them any other pontiff, so as not to incur, inthe eyes of contemporaries and of posterity, the grave re-proach of having sacrificed to a predilection for his nativecountry the independence of a neighbouring nation, whichhad furnished no pretext for war or revenge.Henry II. understood how useful it would be for him tohave an ally, if not to share in a military expedition, atBPOPE ADRIAN IV.least to negotiate matters with Pope Adrian, and obtainhis consent for the conquest of Ireland. Louis VII., Kingof France, was the only prince in a position to lend effica-cious help. Above all things, therefore, it was necessaryto gain King Louis to the project.All the annalists have mentioned the unexpected recon-ciUation that took place between Louis and Henry, afteryears of conflict and war. The two princes met at Rouen,made peace, and concluded a marriage of their children,yet very young ; the girl was little more than six months,and the boy may have been aboutyears old.Adrian IV. wrote to Henry, Chancellor of the King ofFrance, to congratulate the two princes on their recon-ciliation.threeRobert du Mont, the Continuator of Sigebecrt, expressedhis profound surprise on seeing the two kings give eachother such great testimonies of friendship.I believe thatI ought to quote an extract from this contemporarychronicler. He speaks thus : —" In the year 1158, Henry,King of the English, having subdued Wales and made itall tributary, being come to Rouen, conferred with theKing of France, on Thursday, the 31st of August, be-tween Gisors and the New Market, and also treated withthe prelates of Holy Church and the barons of two pro-Then, justice shining from the height of heaven,vinces.Louis, King of France, gave his daughter, boim of Con-stance, his second wife, who was little more than sixmonths of age, to Henry, second son of the King of Eng-land, who was about three years. The bishops of the twoparties became guarantees for the compact.In the monthof September, Henry went to Paris, to conduct into Nor-mandy the King's daughter, whom he had accepted for hisThe King of France came forth to meet him, andson.rendered him great honours in the royal palace. .. Nextday, the King of France accompanied him, with hisdaughter, as far as Mantes. What a wonder, truly un-heard of, to see the Kings of England and France unitedin such great affection !In the month of November,Louis VII. went on a pilgrimage to Mount Saint Michael.Henry accompanied him everywhere." [Fatrologie, Migne,t. 160, p. 484.).A FRIEND OF IRELAND.CHAPTER II.MISSION OF ROTRODUS TO ROME.The choice of a negotiator enables us to understand thatthe aifair which Rotrodus went to treat of at Rome con-cerned England more than France.The biography of this prelate is found in Gallia Chris-tiana, tome XI.—as Bishop of Evreux, p. 557, and asIn 11 58 he was Bishop ofArchbishop of Rouen, p. 48.Evreux.He was an Englishman, son of the Earl of Warwick,and brother of Roger, likewise Earl of Warwick, sind ofHe was consecrated Bishop ofRobert of Newburgh.Evreux in 1141, at Rouen. Having assisted at the Coro-nation of Henry II., he fulfilled various missions for thisIn 11 57 he signed the charter of Sylvester, Abbotprince.of Canterbury, who acknowledged the jurisdiction of theArchbishop over his monastery. In 1163 he assisted at thetranslation of the body of St. Edward to Westminster.Archbishop of Rouen in 1164, he continued to live in theIn 11 72 hagreatest intimacy with the English court.crowned, at Winchester, Henry III. and his wife, Mar-garet, daughter of the King of France. Two years after-wards he was present at the treaty of peace between Henryand his sons.(Rymcr, Fcedera, tome i, p. 37.)Rotrodus was so much the better suited for the missionwith which the two Kings intrusted him to Pope Adrian,as he had just been one of Henry's representatives at thepeace negotiations of 1158. We are thus informed by theGallia Christiana, in these terms : " Circa id tempus, unusfuit e legatisi regis Anglise in negotio pacis tractandae, utliquet ex duabus epistolis Hugonis episcopi Guessionensisad Ludovicum regem apud Quercetanum." (Tome IV.,pp. 633 et 635.)—POPE ADRIAN IV.,CHAPTER III.WHAT THE AMBASSADOR ASKED OF POPE ADRIANTHE FOURTH.Arrived in Rome about the end of 1158, or the beg-inningof 1 159, Rotrodus made known the object of his missionto Pope Adrian IV.He therefore announced to him that the King of Francewas thinking of going to Ireland, in company and in con-cert with Henry, King of England ; and that for this pur-pose he was continually occupied in mustering an army,and collecting all things necessary for the elxpedition.The object of the two princes was religious. 1Theywished to extend the limits of Christendom, to overcomethe barbarism of pagans, to subject to the yoke and powerof Christians apostate hordes who rejected the truth of theCatholic Faith.In order the more convertiently to carry out his design,the King sought the counsel and favour of the RomanThis is why the ambassador begged an encyclicalChurch.exhorting the people of the kingdom to join in this kindof crusade, as also a pontifical diploma by which Adrianwould take the kingdom under his protection during theabsence of the King.What was. the Pope's answer to such a strange com-munication ? This is what it is important for us to note.' The Abbd Vervorst, who supposes that Henry sent a specialpetition, speaks of his manoeuvres thus :—" He wished to annex Irelandand hoped with the help of the Holy Father to succeed.Whatmotives does he set forth ? The interests of the Church, and even ofIreland itself. Henry was a pious monarch, of whom no one spokewithout tenderness of heart, and eyes raised to heaven.Others wereambitious, seeking their own personal advantage ; but he had nothinein view except the glory of God, and sighed only for the extension ofthe Church.— What a happiness for Ireland if it conld only find itselfunder the sceptre of such a monarch I "Migne's Histoire EccUsias-Trans.tique, xxi. 293.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.CHAPTER IV.OBJECTIONS OF POPE ADRIAN TO THE IRISH EXPEDITION.Adrian begani: by eulogising the zeal and the pious in-tentions of the King. He admitted that the project had forits principle the purest root of charity, the fervour of faith,and the love of religion.But he could not avoid expressing his surprise to see awise and prudent prince shovsr so much eagerness for such" In fact," says the Pope, " it does notan enterprise.appear prudent or safe to enter a foreign land, if one hasnot first of all sought the consent of the princes and thepeople of that land."The Pope novir learns that the King, not having con-sulted the Church or the princes of the land, is preparingto depart without the least delay, while he ought on noaccount to make the attempt,unless convinced of itsnecessity by the advice of the princes of the country, andinvited by them.This is why Adrian recommends the King to ascertainthe needs of the country through the princes, and to informhimself of the wishes of the Church there, as well as of theThen, if a necessity be found toprinces and the people.exist, if the bishops of the country approve of the expedi-tion, if the princes themselves desire the intervention of theKing, and urge it, in that case the King can decide accord-ing to their counsed and request, and accomplish hisOtherwise, there should be reason tolaudable design.fear that the expedition would be fruitless, and that theThe princes and the peopleend would not be attained.would be aggrieved by an interference not required, andthe Pope himself would with some justice be taxed withletvity.This is why Adrian thought proper to withhold theapostolic exhortation, sought for in the King's name, witha view of stimulating the people tO' share in the expedition.He refused the diploma of protection for the kingdom inthe King's absence.—6POPE ADRIAN IV.,The Pontiff believied that he had excellent reasons fordissuading: the) King- from his project. He exhorted theprince to reflect seriously on the motives that induced himto set out without the least delay.Such were the objections that Pope Adrian made to theThey pre-eminently indi-project of conquering Ireland.cate the great circumspection of thei Pontiff, as well as hisdeep attachment to the rules of justice and the principlesof Christian charity.Not content with verbally expressing these objections toRotrodus, Pope Adrian IV. thought well to formulate themin a letter addressed directly to Louis VII.CHAPTER V.POPE Adrian's letter.Although the ambassador had announced that the ex-pedition to Ireland would be undertaken by the two Kingsacting in concert, the Pope addressed his answer only tothe King of France. Henry was given a secondary place.He had not written to the Pope, doubtless because hefeared that the Pontiff would refuse an authority whichmight be regarded as a concession from the Pontiff infavour of his native land." Adrian, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to ourmost dear Son, Louis, the illustrious King" of the Franks,Health and Apostoliq Benediction." Very laudably and profitably your Highness seems tothink of propagating the Christian name on earth, and oflaying up an immense reward in eternal beatitude, when,with a view of extending- the limits of Christendom, over-coming the barbarism of pagans, and reducing apostatenations, which reject the truth of the Christian Faith, tothe yoke and power of Christians, you make ready to setout for H,i with our most dear son Henry, the illustriousKing of the English, and you apply yourself assiduously' See next chapter.Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.7to bring together an army, and all thinga necessary for theexpedition, in such manner that the enterprise may becrowned with success. And the more effectually to accom-plish all this, you seek the counsel and favour of the mostholy Roman Church, your Mother.This proposal is somuch the more pleasing and acceptable to us, and we com-mend it as much as it deserves, because we believe thatyour praiseworthy intention and desire came from thepurest root of charity, and that your project had for itssource the greatest zeal for the faith and the greatest lovefor religion."Thus Pope Adrian IV. received in perfect good faith theassurances that the ambassador gave him regarding theexclusively religious character of the expedition to be madeHowever, the Pontiff immediately drawsinto Ireland. 1attention to the danger and imprudence of such an enter-prise. The Pontifical Letter continues : —" But your Excellency,distinguished moreover bymaturity of counsel and the light of wisdom, seems tohasten very much in this matter.Hence, many personshave been astonished and perplexed, because the good thatis done at a proper time and in due ordeir is always pleasingto the eternal Creator ; but, if done otherwise, it cannot beconformable to the Divine Will."After this, Pop© Adrian IV., going deeper into the sub-ject, shows that, before undertaking the expedition, thesentiments of the country ought to be known, the disposi-tions of the clergy and people ought to be ascertained,there ought to be no foreign intervention unless it is desiredand requested." Add to all this that it does not seem prudent or safe toenter another land, unless counsel has first been taken withBut you, as wethe princes and the people of that land.have heard, without consulting the Church of the land, orits princes, make haste to go thither, when such a thingunless you have firstyou should on no account attempt,' It is easily seen that when the Pope refers above to pagansHe merelyand apostates, he does not brand the Irish as such.repeats the statement that has been laid before him, in order to makehis comments on it and give his answer to it. The repetition showsthat he has correctly understood the case submitted to him.Officialreplies at the present day follow on the self-same lines.Trans."OPOPE ADRIAN IV.,known the need of it from the princes of the land, and beenWherefore, because we have at heartinvited by them.your honour and prosperity, and do not wish to see youundertake anything- but what a reasonable cause wouldjustify, we recommend your Highness by this presentletter to learn first the needs of that land from its princes,and to inquire diligently into the wishes of the Churchthere, as well as of the princes and the people, and, as isLater on, if you see an im-becoming, take their advice.perative necessity, if such be the counsel of the Church,if, moreover, the princes of the land ask the aid of yourMajesty, and approve of the expedition—then you maydecide according to their demand, and, with the divineassistance, proceed to the accomplishment of your laudableIf you should act otherwise, there should be reasondesire.to fear that your journey would be fruitless, or that itwould not come to a happy end.If perchance there wereno necessity for the invasion, the princes and the peoplewould be aggrieved by such a great military display, andwe ourselves, on many accounts, might seem to have actedvery lightly in. a matter of grave importsmce.Adrian IV. could not have employed any arguments moreconvincing to put Louis VII. on his guard against thepressure of the King of England, who tried every meansimaginable to extort his consent and to engage him in theIn order to show the danger of rash and in-enterprise.considerate expeditions, the Pontiff recalls the crusade of1147, in which Louis VII. had taken part, and which hadled to a dreadful catastrophe." Your Highness ought to remember how, at a time notvery remote, when Conrad, of g-ood memory, then King ofthe Romans, and yourself, without consulting the peopleof the country, incautiously took the road to Jerusalem,you did not attain the success that you expected, and whatdetriment and disaster followed for the Church of God, andIn truth, the Romanfor nearly allChurch itself, which had given you its counsel and favourfor the expedition, was deeply compromised, and all criedout against it with lively indignation, saying that it hadbeen the cause of such a great misfortune."Christianpeople.Reflecting on the dangers of an expedition to Ireland,Adrian believed it his duty to defer the publication of the"A FRIEND OF IRELAND.Vencyclical which the ambassador, the Bishop of Evreux,asked in the name of the King-, in order to prepossess theminds of the people of France, and to stimulate them, inthe name of the Pontiff, to take part in the expedition." As the most serious reflections have shown us all thatis to be feared in this matter, we have considered that theapostolic admonition and exhortation to the people of yourkingdom, such as our venerable brother R. , the Bishop ofEvreux, has on your part proposed to us, ought to beSeeing that what is deferred for a time is notdeferred.wholly denied, we shall transmit to you hereafter, if it soplease God, the admonitory and exhortatory letter for theremission of sins, according to our desirei of your glory,when, by the advice and invitation of the princes andpeople of that land, as has been said above, you wish toundertake the journey, and that you prudently and laudablyprepare, through real necessity, to carry out the designconceived in your mind ; for it may be that, at the presentmoment, there is no immediate! necessity.Louis VII. had asked the Pope to receive the kingdomunder the protection of St. Peter and his own, while heshould be waging war in Ireland. Adrian IV. decided notto publish at that moment the Bull of protection ; but hedeclared himself willing to do all in his power for theTionour and exaltation of the King, without there being anyneed of soliciting him.If the Pontiff had granted the Bullof protection, this concession would have been interpretedas implicitly authorising the expedition against Ireland." As for the letter by which, according to the petition ofyour Royal Highness, we should take your kingdom underthe protection of the Blessed Peter and our own, threaten-ing the apostolic anger and indignation against those whoshould presume to attack the kingdom in vour absence,we do not feel able to grant it at present.But even with-out your solicitation, the lively regard that we have foryour Majesty would lead us to do spontaneously, and withall the zeal and efficacy possible, whatever would be of anature to promote your honour and exaltation, and theprosperity of your kingdom."Adrian IV. was convinced that he had excellent reasonsTor di.?,suading the King from an expedition aerainst Ireland.At the close of his letter he urged the prince to reflect—10POPE ADRIAN IV.,seriously on the motivesdeparture.that led him to hasten hisbility in the project of invading Ireland.The Pontiff could not more clearly decline all responsi-As we have Justseen, he not only advised the King to wait—to inform him-self of the true state of the country—to consult the bishops,princes, and people ; but, lest he should be suspected ofconnivance in a foolish and unjust enterprise, he refused anencyclical of exhortation for the peoplei of France. Hewould not even take the kingdom under the pontifical pro-tection, during the absence of Louis.All this shows us that the negotiation of Rotrodus was aHowever, that its ill-success might notcomplete failure.be attributed to the ambassador, Adrian bore witness thatthe prelate had acted with all the zeal and prudence desir-able ; and to prove thei consideration in which he heldRotrodus, he confided to him some verbal communicationsThis, is what we read in the last paragraph offor Louis.the pontifical letter, which, given on the i8th of February,is, according to the most ancient manuscripts, thus dateid :Datum Laterani XII Calendas Martii.I have been obliged to divide the Pope's letter intoseveral parts, so as to draw the reader's attention to thosepoints which deserve to be brought out in relief.I shallgive it in full (No. 2) among the Documents at the end.CHAPTER VI.POPE Adrian's letter concerns Ireland.The officers of the Roman Chancery who transcribeddiplomas were in the habit, sometimes rather annoyingfor us, of giving only the initials of proper names. ^This' The following is an example from Pope Adrian's letter No. 31 :" Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei, venerabilibus fratribus ELugdunensi et H Bisuntino archiepiscopis, salutem et apostolicamIn the body of the letter, the Pope says :—" Dilectusbenedictionem."siquidem filius noster P Abbas Trenorciensis monasterii sua nobisnarratione raonstravit, quod nobilis vir G comes Matisconensis itaterras ipsius .. aggravet," &c.The compiler believes that E is used for Eraclio, H for Humberto,Trans.P for Petrus, and G for Girardus..A FRIEND OF IRELAND.IIis constantly to be remarked, even in the registers kept inthe Archives of the Vatican.In what concerns the letter of Pope Adrian to which Ihave just referred, the old manuscripts that have preservedfor us this important piece of history do not mentionthe country that it concerns except by the initial letter H.It is the very tenor of the document that traces the charac-teristics proper to make known beyond question the countryto which it refers.I say that the letter of Pope Adrian IV. concerns Ireland(H being-of which Louis VII. andHenry II. wished to make the conquest, and that it is im-possible to apply the document to any other county or to.any other affair.Hibernia),forIn point of fact, what is to be remarked in the PontificalLetter?1. The country of which there is question is not a king-dom, a political society possessed of this eminent dignity.Adrian IV. repeatedly calls it by the name of land—theprinces of this land, the inhabitants of this land, &c. Suchis the official title that Ireland bore through all antiquity,and kept until the sixteenth century, when it was erectedinto a kingdom.2. This same country has a Church of its own, that isto say, an episcopal hierarchy regularly constituted, andAdrian IV. recommends thatfree to hold deliberations.this Church should be consulted, that inquiry should bemade regarding its opinion of foreign intervention.Thisindicates that the Church is not under any hostile domina-tion, which might hinder its assemblies.Clearly, thisChurch exercises a preponderating influence, even in poli-tical affairs ; for the Pope requires that it should be con-sulted on the proposed intervention.3. The country that Pope Adrian wishes to preservefrom foreign Intervention is not under a single chieftainor a single king ; we remark several princes, who, inde-pendently of one another, govern the districts of the coun-Can it be doubted that this is Ireland? Adrian IV.try.recommends that these princes should be consulted, andthat their consent should be obtained for the intervention rbut he gives no names—neither their personal names, northe titles of the districts in which they rule.At the period—12POPE ADRIAN IV.,in question, the internal state of Ireland was little knownon the continent. Rome was undoubtedly acquainted withthe episcopal hierarchy, which had been reconstituted inIreland a dozen years before ; but it had only imperfectinformation of the divisions of the country, and of thenames of the reig^ning princes or chieftains. The Englishthemselves knew no more, though living in proximity toErin.to express4. Adrian IV. wishes that the people should be con-sulted, and should be allowed freelytheirThis supposes thatopinion on the utility of intervention.the people, far from being oppressed by tyrants, enjoy theliberty that is necessary to meet in public assemblies, toand to takedeliberate on matters of general interest,Christians, bowed under thepart inaffairs.yoke of infide)s, would not have the power of expressingtheir ideas on an expedition proposed with a view to theirIt follows from the Pontificaldeliverance from bondage.Letter that these people, far from being plunged in Bar-barism, have, on the contrary, a considerable degree ofculture or civilisation ;1 no one thinks of consulting bar-^barians or beasts.political5. The great majority of the inhabitants profess Chris-It it were otherwise, the Pontiff would not men-tianity.tion the Church of that land ; for this supposes that theecclesiastical hierarchy comprises the whole country.However, there still remain some pagans ; but they do not'form a body, a society, a government, occupying largeThere are also some bad Christians, who con-districts.duct themselves like apostates, and, by their impious be-haviour, disgrace that religion of which they make pro-This state of affairs explains and justifies thefession.terms used in the preamble of the Pontifical Letter ; butthese expressions do not imply that there is question of acountry ruled by infidels, against whom a crusade oughtto be preached.6. In regard to infidels oppressing Christian provinces,the necessity of an expedition to expel them admits of nodoubt ; it only remains to calculate the forces that can beHere, Pope Adrian IV. continually calls intoemployed.' A point well worthy of being noted.Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.IJdoubt the opportuneness, the utility, and the necessity ofthe enterprise, although two powerful kings propose tounite all the forces of France and England.It followsthat the country viewed in the Pontifical Letter was notone of those oppressed by Moors or other infidels.7. There is no example in all history that any Pope hasever refused to take under his protection, and defend fromattack, the kingdom of a prince setting out on a crusadeIn the present case, Adrian IV. refusesagainst infidels.the Bull of Protection which Louis VII. asks of him ; he-does not permit the preaching of a crusade.I have said above that the title of Land was the official!and political denomination for Ireland through all anti-quity, and on to the sixteenth century. Among thousandsof proofs, one need only consult the collection Fcudera, byRymer, in which, at almost every page, there is mention;of the Land of Ireland.CHAPTER VII.IT IS NOT POSSIBLE THAT THE LETTER OF POPE ADRIANRELATES TO SPAIN.In the preceding chapter I have mentioned seven charac-teristics attributed by Pope Adrian IV. to the country thatis the subject of his letter. Now, not one of these charac-teristics can be applied to Spain.!it vvould consequentlybe absurd to maintain that the Pontifical Letter concernedan expedition that Louis VII. and Henry II. wished toundertake in concert against the Moors who were oppres-sing part of the Peninsula.I. Adrian speaks of a land. On the contrary, Spain, inthe twelfth century, had the dignity of a kingdom.In-deed, it counted three kingdoms :Castile, Aragon, andGalicia. As the King of Castile was the most powerful, hetook the title of Emperor.Robert du Mont, the Continuator of Sigebcrt, relates' Taking H for Hisfania.letter H of Spain.See Chap, xxxii. § 3.Trans.Bongars was the first to interpret the-14POPE ADRIAN IV.,(1153) that Louis VII., King of France, having repudiatedEleanor of Guienne, married Constance, the daughter ofThe annalist says thatAlphonsus, King of the Spains.Toledo is the capital of the kingdom ; and as the King ofCastile is much stronger than the minor Kings of Aragonand Galicia, he is called Emperor of the Spains.In ii54)Louis VII. made a pilgrimage to St. James of Galicia,and was well received by his father-in-law, the Emperor of(Robertus de Monte, in Migne's Patrologie,the Spains.t. 160, p. 478.)then "Emperor" of Spam marriedOnEleanor, daughter of Henry II., King of England.this occasion, Robert du Mont remarks again that ToledoAs the prince at that time wasis the capital of Castile.only fifteen years of age, he was presented by the King ofGalicia and the King of Navarre, who were his near rela-tions.{Ibid., p. 511.)II 70,, ^theIn.,If the expedition proposed to Pope Adrian IV. had con-cerned Spain, would Louis VII. have omitted to speak ofthe Emperor of Castile, his father-in-law, who asked hisintervention? Would not a Castilian ambassador haveaccompanied Rotrodus to Rome, in order to remove everydifficulty?2. The country of which Adrian IV. speaks in his letterhad a Church, an Episcopate, and the Pope required thatit should be consulted on the proposed expedition. Now,Spain was divided into two camps.In the oppressed part,it would have beenno Church, no Bishops.somewhat absurd to require that the advice of any Bishopsthere should be taken on the subject of an expedition pre-pared against their oppressors.At least,3.IfthePontificalLetterSpain,Adrian IV. would without doubt have recommended actionin concert with the Emperor of Castile, and the Kings ofAragon, Navarre, and Galicia, who were known all overEurope.had concerned4. As for the people, it is needless to speak of theMoors, who filled the country.But the unfortunate Chris-tians who were under their yoke—had they any opportu-nity of expressing their sentimentsexpeditionhaving their deliverance for its object? We should attri-bute great silliness to Adrian IV., if we applied to Spainon an—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I5the letter in which he requires that the people, having beenconsulted, should ask for foreign intervention.5. Spain does not realise a fifth characteristic any betterThe Moors, having- massacredthan the previous four.many Christians, were the great majority in the provincesMoreover, not being idolaters, did theythat they held.present the quality of pagans, to which Pope Adrian refersin the preamble of his letter? Where shall we find inSpain the apostates whom Louis VII.and Henry II.wished to subject to the power of Christians ?6. Adrian would certainly not have shown so muchhesitation, if the real matter at issue had been an expedi-tion against the Moors of Spain.7. Lastly, he would not, in such a case, have refused toallow the preaching of a crusade, and he would have beeneager to receive the kingdom of France under the protec-tion of the Holy See during the time of the expedition. ^I consider it useless to insist further on these reflections,and I regard as henceforth admitted for an historicaltruth that the letter of Pope Adrian IV. exclusively con-cerns Ireland, and the project of its conquest that KingHenry II. entertained.CHAPTER VIII.HOW KING HENRY II. RECEIVED THE DECISION OF THE POPE.The immediate effect of the check met by Rotrodus atRome was that Henry II., having no longer any need of analliance with Louis VII. for an expedition to Ireland, threwoff the mask ; and that extraordinary affection which hehad been showing towards the King of France for about' The number of reasons to show whether H was intended forHibernia or Hispania is not limited to seven. The reader may findothers for himself, of greater weight or greater difficulty. Nor is hebound to admit that every reason here given, however applicable insome respects, is perfectly valid in all.One good strong reason isworth a dozen weak ones.Trans.61POPE ADRIAN IV.,six months vanished as if by enchantment. A little afterthe return of the ambassador, Henry, forgetting his pro-mises of friendship, laid siege to Toulouse ; but Louis VII.obliged him to retire before he could gain possession of thecity.It was during the siege of Toulouse that John of Salis-bury finished his Polycraticus. He dedicated it to ThomasBecket, Chancellor of England, who was present at theto whom thesiege of Toulouse with Henry.author was already known, hastened to engage him invarious employments, and presented him to the King.Becket,Now, if Henry scarcely knew Salisbury in 1159, how isit to be explained that four years previously he shouldhave sent him on a diplomatic errand to Rome—to askof Pope Adrian IV. the investiture of Ireland?And if, on the other hand, Adrian gave Ireland to KingHenry in 1155, how could he, four years afterwards, re-fuse him permission to undertake an Irish expedition?The biography of Salisbury shows us the improbabilityof his fulfilling a diplomatic mission to Rome in 1155. Hehad then been absent from England for a great manyArrived in Gaul about 11 37, he studied at Parisyears.the dialectics and categories of Aristotle ; but, being inpoor circumstances, he was obliged to earn a livelihood byacting as tutor to students. He found in the friendship ofPeter de Celles, Abbot of Moutiers, some consolation inhis troubles, and means of returning to England, whichhe revisited after an absence of twelve years. Having re-ceived Holy Orders, he hastened back to Paris, whitherthe desire of seeing his friends and resuming his lessonson dialectics called him.Can anyone comprehend how Henry II., a few daysafter his coronation, should have chosen for a diplomaticmission to the Pope a teacher of categories, who had spenthis life abroad, and who, moreover, was perhaps almostunknown to the prince?Henry did send ambassadors to the Pope at the begin-ning of his reign, which coincided with that of the pontifi-But he chose for this mission three Bishops, and thecate.Abbot of the Monastery of St. Alban. The name of a manso obscure as Salisbury was at that time could not figurein an embassy of prelates.A FRIEND OF IKELAN'D.1']Rotrodus, Bishop of Evreux, who later on treated of theIrish expedition, as I have said above, was one of theambassadors of 1155. He had for his colleagues the cele-brated Arnoul, Bishop of Lisieux, the Bishop of Mans,and Robert, Abbot of St. Albans.The authors of Gallia Christiana, speaking of Rotrodus,say : "As messenger from the Kings of England andFrance, he went to the Sovereign Pontiff in 1155, withRobert, Abbot of St. Alban's, and the Bishops of Lisieuxand Mans.'' From the article concerning Arnoul, Bishop ofLisieux, in the Gallia Christiana, we learn that " heassisted at the coronation of Henry IL, King of England,who, a few days after, sent him to Rome with several(Tome 11, pp. 557,others, on some important affairs."77^-)the chroniclers ofIf we are to believe some oftheperiod, especially Brompton, and William of Newbridge,the object of this embassy was to consult the Pope on aGeoffrey, father of Henry II., had, on hissingular case.barons and prelates whodeath-bed, required of theattended him to swear that they would not let his body beburied until Henry had sworn to fulfil the secret conditionsof his will. Henry consented to take the oath ; but he re-pented of it when he learned that his father had bequeathedAnjou, a patrimony of the family, to Geoffrey, his secondson.Henry asked absolution from this imprudent oath, onthe ground that he had sworn through undue influence,and witho'Ut foreseeing the consequences.Adrian grantedthe absolution.But what connection has this storv. more like romancethan history, with the conquest of Ireland, with the dona-tion of the island to a Plantagenet?theeditorI remark in the acts attributed to Adrian IV. , a letter,whichdated1155,addressed to the Bishops of Scotland, in order to notify tothem that they should henceforth belong to the ecclesiasti-cal province of the Archbishop of York.(Migne's Patro-logie, T. 188, p. 1391.)February,27thhasIt is unnecessary for me atpresent to examine theIt suffices to observe oncegenuineness of this diploma.more thai the English ambassadors sent to Rome in 11 55c—l8POPE ADRIAN IV.,never treated of Ireland, nor of the conquest that King'Henry II. wished to make.^In the Polycraticus addressed to Thomas Becket and theKingf during- the siege of Toulouse in 1159, as I have saidabove, John of Salisbury related that he had spent threemonths at Beneventum with Pope Adrian, who admittedhim to some great familiarities ; but he took good care inthis work not to make the slightest allusion to Ireland, orto a pretended Bull that authorised its conquest.Indeed,it would have been too bold and rash if, a few weeks afterthe return of Rotrodus, who had just announced the formatrefusal of Pope Adrian in reference to the conquest of Ire-land, any one had dared to appeal to a Bull giving thisisland to the King of England.In the meanwhile, Adrian IV. died.It seems to methat John of Salisbury, if he had not heard of this death,would not have alluded in the Polycraticus to those familiarchats whicli he claimed to have had with this Pontiff pndelicate matters affecting the honour of the Holy See andthe Roman Court.What is certain is that it was impossible to speak of afalse Bull during the lifetime of Louis VIL, who had re-ceived the true and genuine letter of refusal to authoriseThis is why we find so muchthe conquest of Ireland.silence regarding the Apocryphal Bull before the year1 180, the time of the death of the King of France.Let me here mention two facts which perhatos have somerelation, and which it is not absolutely forbidden to referto the same period.Robert du Mont says that, about Michaelmas, Henry 11.held a Council at Winchester, and treated with his baronsregarding a conquest of Ireland, in order to give it to hisbrother William, but that, the project not being relishedby tha King's mother, the expedition was postponed tillanother time.(Patrologie, tome 160, page 479.)On the other hand, it was in the same palace of Win-chester that Pope Adrian's privilege was deposited, if we_' The author seems to imply that an object of the embassy was tobring the Church in Scotland under the authority of an EnglishArchbishop, or else that the bull to this effect was a forgeryIn eithercase the result was to be an extension of spiritual authority forEngland.Trans.A FRIliXD OF IRELAND.IQare to give credit to John of Salisbury, in the chapter ofthe Metalogicus, to which I shall refer later on.In likemanner, Giraldus Cambrensis says that Adrian's diploma,and the ring for the feudal investiture of Ireland, wereplaced in the archives of Winchester : In archivio Win-{Giraldus Cambrensis, 5th vol.tonice. repositus fuerat.of new edition, by the Rev. Mr. Diniock, p. 316.)I suspect that this was the real letter of Pope Adrianwhich King Henry II. buried in the secret archives offirst, that it might remain unknown ; andWinchester :secondly, that it might serve as a pattern for forging afalse Bull.However, the secret of the negotiation carried on byRotrodus was not so strictly kept that Pope Adrian's re-fusal was entirely unknown.In effect, the annalist ofAnchin, who continued Sigebert, speaking, at the year1 171, of the preparations that Henry II., was making foran expedition to Ireland, says that this prince arrogatedto himself things not granted, and ambitioned what was" Henry, King of England, rising up in hisnot his due.pride, usurping things not conceded, and aspiring to whatwas not his due, prepares ships, and musters the soldiersof his kingdom, to subdue Ireland."This passage furnishes a two-fold argument : the first,for the true letter of Adrian IV. ; and the second, againstthe Apocryphal Bull.The Continuatio Aquicinetina was published intheIt was from this sourceMonumenta GermanicB of Pertz.that Migne took it.(Patrologie, tome 160, page 307.)The refusal of Adrian IV. was a bitter disappointmentto Henry II., and checked him for a long time in realisinghis projects against Ireland. Hence it was that he allowednearly ten years to elapse before permitting the Welshof hostilities worthy ofadventurers to begin a seriespirates and brigands, of which he should reap the profit.If one single time in his life he went to Ireland, he sur-rounded himself with a cloud of secrecy, in order thatnews of the expedition should not transpire on the conti-In the fear of being excommunicated for his com-nent.plicity in the martyrdom of St. Thomas of Canterbury,he; fled precipitately from Normandy and England, andtook refuge in Dublin, after having ordered that all ships20POPE ADRIAN IV.,should be stopped and passengers arrested, as I shall re-It was therefore a necessity for him tolate further on.make the expedition, and the great armament with whichhe landed on the coast of Ireland was intended for hispersonal security, not for the conquest of the country, ofwhich, moreover, he took only a few places near the shore.He never again prepared such an armament.In 1 177, having been chosen arbiter in a case betweenthe King of Castile and the King of Leon, Henry II. tookin his decree the titles of King of England, Duke of Nor-mandy, and Earl of Anjou, but he did not call himselfLord of the land of Ireland.(Rymer, tome i, p. 48.)After the death of Louis VIL, which occurred in 1180,Henry II. no longer felt himself bound to such great re-For the momentserve.I have wished to bring together some facts and signswhich show that Pope Adrian refused to authorise the con-quest of Ireland by the King of England.But let us not anticipate events.CHAPTER IX.THE WELSH ADVENTURERS.1 56, the third year of his reign.It is scarcely possible to attempt an expedition into Ire-land without first occupying Wales, whose hostility wouldHenry II.constitute a real danger for an invading army.did not entirely subdue the principality of Wales untilThis fact, established1by all the chroniclers, renders it more and more improbablethat the King, from the first year of his reign, asked PopeAdrian, either through John of Salisbury or any other mes-senger, for permission to undertake the conquest and sub-jugation of Ireland.Adrian, an Englishman by birth,could not be unaware that an invasion of Ireland isstrategically impossible for anyone who is not master ofCambria.A long time afterwards, some adventurers from Walesdisembarked on the shores of Ireland, and establishedthemselves at a few points along the coast.Thus, in ourown days. Garibaldi made his expedition from MarsalaA FRIEND OF IRELAND.21in company with a thousand volunteers, so as to preparethe way for Victor Emmanuel,According- to some chroniclers, Henry II. ordered theexpedition of the Welsh adventurers.Other annalistsassure us that at first he showed himself very angry onaccount of their piracy—to such a degree that he confis-cated the property of the adventurers in England andNormandy ; but that afterwards, on hearing of their suc-cess, he removed the sequestration, requiring, however,that they should yield to him all their conquests in Ireland.William of Newbridge, a canon regular of St. Augustin,whose chronicle reaches to 1198, says that Henry, on learn-ing of the capture of Dublin and some other stations alongthe seaboard, confiscated the property of Richard,! theleader of the troop, and did not restore it until he hadextorted [extorsit) Dublin and the other most importantHere is what the Chronicle of Newbridgesays : —possessions.....toinaccessible" Ireland, which had remainedtheRomans, although they occupied the Orkneys, was never. Whenconquered, or subjected to any foreign power. .Earl Richard (chief of the troop) was preparing to depart,a messenger came to him from the King, forbidding thefor what heBut Richard, caring littleembarkation.possessed in England, embarked in spite of the prohibition.. He came down on Dublin with irresistible impetu-osity, and compelled many persons, who, seized with fear,remained at a distance, to enter into a compact with him.. When news of such happy success came to the Kingof England, this prince, angry that Richard should haveundertaken such a great affair without consulting him, andeven against his prohibition, and that he had usurped theglory of an illustrious conquest, which ought rather to re-vert to the King, Henry, I say, confiscated the patrimonyof Richard in England ; and to prevent all help that mightbe brought to him from England, he forbade the depar-Moreover, by a threat of theture of ships for Ireland.greatest punishments, he brought Richard to repentance—just at a time when a throne seemed to await him. Thusdid he extort from him the city of Dublin, and other prizes' Commonly called Stxonghovj.— Trans."2 2POPE, ADRIAN IV.,that seemed best in the conquest, and obliged him to becontent with what remained, besides his Enghsh patri-mony, which he restored in full. After this, the Earl, who,having a little while previously wasted his patrimony,seemed to possess nothing else but the name of nobility,found himself laden with English and Irish riches, andenjoyed the greatest happiness, which he lost however ina few years by a premature death. ... A short timeafterwards, the King of England passed into Ireland.(Lib. 2, c. 26.)Benedict of Peterborough, on the contrary, relates inhis chronicle that the expedition to Ireland was under-taken by the formal orders of King Henry II., and that therestitution of property preceded the departure of the Earl." The King restored to the Earl of Chester all the castles,lands, and domains that belonged to him on this side andthe other of the sea (in England and Normandy). He thencommanded [proecepit) him to go into Ireland, in order tosubdue that island for the benefit of the King."[Recueildes historiens de France, tome 14, p. i6g.)If we are to believe Robert du Mont, Henry II. wasalready treating with his barons about a departure forIreland, when he received messengers from Richard, whosaid on the part of the Earl that he would transfer to theKing Dublin, Waterford, and other castles that he pos-sessed in right of his wife, daughter of the previous Kingof Dublin, now deceased.In reply, Henry II. promisedto restore to Earl Richard his domains in England andNormandy, and the land that came with his wife in Ireland.He made him constable and seneschal for the whole island.(Robertus de Monte, in Patrologie, tome 160, p. 513.)Apart from variations and contradictions, the chroniclersagree that a bargain between Henry II. and Earl Richardwas the starting-point for English domination in Ireland.Had Richard a right to yield to the King Dublin, Water-ford, and other places that belonged to his wife, who wasdaughter and heiress of the petty King of Dublin?Itseems to me that Richard had no right to transfer to theKing of England any political authority over the CountyDublin, to the prejudice of his wife and her children, or hernear relations, and in opposition to the laws that prevailedin Ireland.A FRIEND OF IRELAXU.23It would be difficult to appeal to a right of conquest ;for the aggression of the Norman and Welsh adventurers,not having been provoked by any openly declared causes,was unjust, and, from a legal point of view, was simply anact of piracy.Moreover, according to ^^'illiam of Newbridge, whom Ihave quoted above, the cession made by Earl Richard, farfrom being free or spontaneous, was forced—was extorted.Richard, the Seneschal of all Ireland— this was the heightHenry could not give what he did notof audacity !possess.CH.APTER X.DEPARTURE OF HENRY II. FOR IRELAND.St. Thomas of Canterbury was martyred on the 29thPope Alexander III., on hearing ofof December, 1170.this tragic event, excommunicated the murderers, and alsotheir counsellors, accomplices, and protectors. The Pon-tiff commissioned two Cardinals to inquire into the matter,and to find out the guilty. Henry II. seemed to show someHowever,satisfaction at these proceedings of the Pope.as he did not know what might be the instructions of thelegates, or their intentions, he judged it prudent to leaveNormandy before their arrival.Gervase, w^hose chronicle De Regibus Anglice extendsto the year 1199, relates that Henry II. did not await thearrival of the legates in Normandy. " The Roman Court,"says the annalist, " decided on sending two legates to Nor-mandy, in order to inquire into the murder of the holymartyr, and to punish the authors of this great crime.Henry, having heard the news, hastened to pass into Eng-land, leaving orders with the cismarine and transmarinegovernors^ of ports to watch most diligently all passen-gers, and to arrest, and keep in prison, any man who boreletters of interdict. He also commanded them not to letany cleric pass, unless he swore that he would not causeany hurt or harm to the King or his kingdom. He forbade' That is, on both sides of the Channel.24.POPE ADRIAN IV.,Henrythat any letter should be allowed to reach him.landed at Portsmouth on the 3rd of August.Rog-er of Hoveden, a native of Yorkshire, and chaplainto the Royal Family, wrote some annals, which begin in731, at which date the work of Bede ends, and come downto the third year of King John, in 1202. We do not knowthe date of the annalist's birth or death ; we know, how-ever, that he was alive in 1204.thethatThis" InhistorianconfirmsstatementKingHenry II. withdrew to Ireland, so as to escape the justthe meanwhile," saysseverity of the Holy See.Hoveden, " the two Cardinal Legates a latere, sent bythe Sovereign PontifT Alexander, namely, Gratian andVivian, arrived in Normandy, and showed themselves veryready to proceed to vexations of divers kinds ; for theyTo shelterproposed to lay an interdict on the country.himself before their arrival, the King of England made anappeal to the Sovereign Pontiff in person, and by thisHowever, fearing themeans prevented their procedure.apostolic severity, he drew near to the sea, and passedfrom Normandy into England, commanding that no per-son of whatsoever rank or dignity, carrying a PontificalBrief, should be permitted to enter Normandy from Eng-land, or England from Normandy, if he did not givesecurity that he would not cause any evil or vexation tothe King or the kingdom."Gervase adds : " In my opinion, the chief cause of thishasty departure for Ireland was that the King wished moreeasily to escape the sentence of the interdict if the Cardi-nals published it, or more secretly there than in any othercountry to conform himself to it."(Ut sententiam inter-dicti, si forte daretur, facilius declinaret, vel occultius oh-The suspension of communications shows toservaret.)what a degree Henry feared the spiritual weapons of theLegates.It is therefore certain that Henry H. went into Irelandto hide himself, or to be out of reach—not at all to con-quer the island.Indeed, during the five months that hespent in Ireland, he never quitted the seaboard. When atlength, towards the end of March, 1172, he received atWexford a favourable message, he set sail for England,through which he passed with all speed, and, crossing theA FRIEND OF IRELAND.25Straits, arrived in Normandy, to be near the CardinalLeg^ates.Henry II. could not expose himself to be made a prisonerin Ireland. He should therefore be accompanied to Dub-lin by an escort of knig-hts for his personal security ; but Ifind it difficult to believe that this escort had the importanceattributed to it by Eng-Iish chroniclers, and by Irish his-torians themselves, too much prepossessed by the idea thatif their fellow-countrymen did then really submit, theyFor, I repeat, Henry did not goyielded to superior force.to Dublin with a vievi? to conquer Ireland. He had neithertime nor opportunity for such an attempt. At any momenthe might be obliged to return to Normandy, in order totreat about his reconciliation with the Church.In choosing Waterford or Dublin as a place of refuge,Henry showed by the very fact that Ireland did not at allbelong to him. He feared that a canonical interdict wouldbe laid on his States ; to escape the interdict, he fled to acuimtry in which, it is true, he had some domains, but noBesides, his Irish possessions being ofpolitical power.little importance, he doubtless supposed that Rome andthe Cardinal Legates were unaware that Earl Richard hadmade him a surrender of his conquests.By the same fact it is shown that Pope Adrian IV. hadnot made him a donation of Ireland ; whence it followsthat the Apocryphal Bull had not yet been imagined.We may believe that the Cardinal Legates learned ofIndeed, the blockade com-the King's flight to Ireland.manded by the prince could not close the straits hermeti-cally, and be an inviolable hindrance to every communica^tion between the island and the continent.This, perhaps,was the reason that prevented the Cardinals from launch-ing an interdict on the States of the English King-. Theyrcllected that he alone in his realms might escape from theeffects of the sentence.I return to the thread of events. Henry arrived in Eng-land at the beg-inning; of August, spent two months in thepreparation of an imposing escort, and in October wasaccompanied to Waterford by a fleet—forhis personalBecause the prince couldsecurity, I say it once more.not prudently expose himself to the danger of being sur-prised by the Irish, or by Norwegian or Danish pirates."POPE ADRIAN IV.Must we admit as a fact historically certain that onOctober 17th, 1171, Henry embarked with five hundredknights, their esquires, and a numerous body of archers,in a fleet of four hundred transports? These data seem toLingard himself, who givesme suspicious, exagg-erated.acknowledges that Kingthe above figures,Henry If., five months after disembarking with his fivehundred knights, and many archers, left Ireland withouthaving added an inch of territory to the acquisitions of theReign oforiginal adventurers.Henry II.)(History of England,candidlyOn November 12, Henry II. took ship at Waterford,and directed his course to Dublin, where a temporaryThehouse of timber had been prepared to receive him.Irish were invited to his table, and were taught to admirethe magnificence and affability of the prince. Some of theIrish chiefs accepted the invitation, but the Ulster princeswould not so much as visit the King.other dominions.Raoul de Diceto says that during twenty weeks from thearrival of the King in Ireland, no news reached him of his" Ab ingressu regis inkingdom orHyberniam viginti continuis ebdomadibus, de regno suo,vel de aliqua parte dominationis suae quae tam longe lafequediffunditur, ad ipsum rumor aliquis minime pervenit, neeadversabatur,etiam,(Tome I. p. 350.)quia ventuspenetrarepotuit.He says :Lingard confirms the fact." During fivemonths, from the day of his landing at Waterford till theend of March, it was observed that not a single vessel fromEngland or his territories on the continent had arrived onSo unusual a suspension of intercoursethe Irish coast.was attributed to the tempestuous state of the weather ;the real cause was the policy of the King, w^ho even athat distance dreaded the spiritual arms of the Legates."(History of England, Henry II.)Such was the fear the King had of excommunication,that he would not let any one have the material means ofnotifying the sentence to him, of giving him informationIt was with this view that he commanded an in-about it.terruption of all communications, making no exception butfor the ship that should bring him a favourable message.When he received this message, he set out at once forEngland and Normandy.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.—27Behold how Henry II. occupied himself in conqueringIreland, and in receiving the submission of its chiefs andbishops !CHAPTER XI.IF THE BI3HOPS OF IRELAND SUBMITTED TO THE KING OFENGLAND..A.S the news of the murder of St. Thomas of Canterburyhad made a great noise in tlie world, did the Bishops ofIreland, who could not be unaware of this tragic event,gladly consent to communicate incivil and religiousmatters with a prince whom the public voice denounced asthe instigator of the crime? We cannot without evidentproof suppose that the Bishops of Ireland chose such amoment to recognise the political authority of this prince,and to submit to him as their lawful sovereign and master—and this without the force of a conquest obliging themto submit, without any advantage for religion or country.The mystery with which the King surrounded himselfthe strict blockade that he caused to be kept along the sea-side—the suspension of communications with England,with the continent, with Rome—all were of a nature to in-Between the crime at Can-crease distrust and suspicion.terbury and the landing of Henry at Waterford, tenmonths had elapsed.It cannot be supposed that theBishops of Ireland, who had frequent correspondence withthe Holy See, knew nothing of Pope Alexander's feelings,the mission of the two Legates into Normandy, and theopening of judicial proceedingsauthors,abettors, and accomplices of the murder. As the blockadeestablished by Henry II. began only in the month ofAugust, communication with the continent had remainedopen and free during the previous moqjths.againsttheAnd yet it is pretended that the Bishops of Ireland tookthis very moment to submit to a prince who was under thestroke of excommunication, and perhaps threatened withthe loss of his Crown ! Would not this inexplicable sub-mission have! been, under the circumstances, a true dere-liction of duty, a baseness inconsistent with ecclesiasticalhonour?——28POPE ADRIAN' IV.,This is why I am led to regard as mere fables what Eng-lish chroniclers, a long time after the event, have relatedof the submission of Irish Bishops and Chieftains.I put aside Giraldus Cambrensi.s, whose credulity^ ex-ceeds all bounds, and who cannot be regarded as a grave,judicious historian ; but what obscurities, what improba-bilities, and what contradictions among annalists whoseem the most approved !Thus, while Roger de Hoveden places an assembly ofIrish Bishops at Cashel, Raoul de Dlceto assures us thatit was held at Lismore.Chroniclers generally agree insaying that at least Ulster refused to have any communica-tion with Henry. On the contrary, Raoul de Diceto tellsus of the eagerness, the perfect and universal unanimityof bishops and people, vying with one another to submit" Passim omnes unanimi volun.to the King of England.tate, communi assensu, pari desiderio, regis imperio sesubjiciunt. Omnibus igitur hoc ordine consummatis, in con.cilio habito apud Lismor," &'c.' Giraldus tells us in all seriousness that there is a very curiouskind of grasshoppers in Sicily, which, it is said, sing more sweetly withtheir heads cut off than when whole, and better dead than aliveStorlis in Ireland, he says, spend the winter at the bottom of rivers, andcome up On the return of fine weather in spring.In Germany, heassures us, where there are plenty of beavers, their tails, as having thenature of fish, are eaten on fast-days. The willow-trees, he says, roundthe cemetery at Glendalough, although their leaves and branchespresent no change, bear apples every year.At the right side of achurch door on an island near Cork, there is a hollow stone, he tellsus, in which is found a supply of wine every morning, according to thenumber of priests who will celebrate Mass there that day.There is amill in Ossory, we are told, that will not work on Sundays, nor grindanything stolen.(Vol. v., pp. 53, 52, 59, 113, 118, 133.)Catholics are always ready to believe in real miracles, but it doesnot follow that they are to believe every improbable, unconfirmedGiraldus had no sense of the ridiculous. We can hardly doubtstory.that the stable-boys of the Pale who knew how to spin a yarn hadHe seemed no moremany a laugh at the Welshman's gullibility.able to see through a joke than through a stone wall.Could such aman, so easily imposed on, be a judicious historian ?Yet we meet a writer who has a high estimate of Giraldus.Speak-ing of the publication of Adrian's Bull, he says, " So much importancedo I attach to Gerald Barry's statement, that I give up Irish authorities{Sea Dublin Review, April, 1884, p. 340.) The statementsfor him."of Irish authors must be very unreliable indeed if they cannot comparein veracity with those of Gerald Barry.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.29It is unnecessary for me to discuss the contradictions ofEnglish chroniclers ; such an examination would lead metoo far away from my subject.I pause, therefore, at onepoint, which furnishes an argument against the ApocryphalBull, too long attributed to Pope Adrian IV.Hoveden speaks of a Council held by the Archbishopsand iBishops of Ireland. He names them all, together withtheir Sees, to the number of thirty-two.Four were Arch-These figures seembishops and twenty-eight Bishops.surprising for a country which some people are pleased torepresent as sunk in barbarism ; according to GiraldusCambrensis, an innumerable number of monastic abbotsHoveden then speaks asassisted at the same Council.follows : —" All these, Archbishops and Bishops, to thenumber of thirty-two, receive Henry, King of England,and his heirs, as kings and lords in perpetuity, and confirm. The King of Englandtheir act by their charters. .of the Archbishops andsends a copy of the chartersBishops of Ireland to Pope Alexander ; and the Pontiffconfirms to him and his heirs the kingdom of Ireland,according to the form of the charters of the Archbishopsand Bishops of Ireland.".These charters of the Irish Bishops, nobody has everseen ; no forger has ever tried his hand on them.But if,in 1172, Henry 11. had no other titleto send to PopeAlexander than the voluntary submission of the Bishops,this is a proof that the Apocryphal Bull of Pope Adrian IV.was unknown, and that the idea of inventing it was yet tocome. A good number of years should still elapse beforethe appearance of this Bull in English chronicles, as I shallsay further on.For the rest, Hoveden ends by acknowledging thatHenry II. made no conquest in Ireland, and did not addan inch of land to that acquired by the first adventurers."Before quitting Ireland, Henry gave, and confirmedby charter, to Hugh de Lacy, all the land of Meath,with its dependencies, to hold in fief and succession, forhimself and his heirs, by the service of a hundred soldiers.And he committed to his care the city of Dublin, andAnd he confided toappointed him Justiciary of Ireland.the care of Robert, son of Bernard, the city of Waterford30POPE ADRIAN' IV.,and the city of Wexford, with their dependencies, and heordered strong castles to be buih there."Such were, accordingf to the English chronicler, the onlydisposals made by Henry II., who came, it is said, to sub-due all Ireland !CHAPTER XII.TH'EOATHTHAT HENRY TOOK IN THE CATHEDRAL OFAVRANCHES IS DECISIVE EVIDENCE AGAINST THE BULLATTRIBUTED TO POPE ADRIAN IV.(1172.)After waiting- five months, Henry II., at the end ofMarch, received in Wexford a favourable message. Heset out forthwith on Easter Monday, crossed England andthe Channel with great haste, and reached Normandy.In the Cathedral of Avranches—the Sunday previous tothe Assumption—before the legates, bishops, barons, andpeople—his hand on the Book of the Gospels—he solemnlyswore that he was innocent in word and deed of the murderof the Archbishop.The silence observed in this oath with regard to Irelandshows that Pope Adrian had not given the island to theKing of England, and, consequently, that the ApocryphalBull was not yet invented.In point of fact, Henry, doing homage for the kingdomof England to the Holy See, and placing his kingdomunder the Pontifical Sovereignty, would not have neglectedto join Ireland with it, if this land had lawfully belonged tohim by Pontifical concession ; the double offering wouldhave facilitated the reconciliation, the absolution, the re-habilitation of the prince.The following is the formula of the oath, such as Baro-it, from documents in theand - MuratorigiveniusVatican : —" I, H., swear on these Holy Gospels of God that I didnot premeditate the murder of Saint Thomas, that I didnot know of it, and that I did not command it ; that, onreceiving information of this crime, Ifelt a sorrow asacute, a sadness as great, as if I had heard of the murderof my own son.But what I cannot excuse in myself is"—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.3Ithat he was put to death by occasion of the resentment andanger that I had conceived against the holy man. I appeartherefore to have g-iven occasion to his death ; for thisfault I shall send, at my expense, and without delay, twohundred knights to Jerusalem, for the defence of Christen-dom, and I shall maintain them for one year.I shall takethe cross for three years, and I shall set out for the HolyLand, unless the Sovereign Pontiff dispenses me.All theillicit customs that during my reign I have introduced intoall my land I entirely make void, and forbid their observ-I shall allow full liberty to carry appealsance henceforth.to the Apostolic See, and shall not prevent any person inMoreover, I, and my eldest son, the King,this matter.swear that we shall receive and hold the kingdom of Eng-land from the Lord Pope Alexander and his Catholic suc-cessors, and we and our successors in perpetuity shall notregard ourselves as true Kings of England until they them-selves hold us for Catholic Kings."The oath of Henry H. is found among the letters ofSt. Thomas of Canterbury (v. 88.8g), and in those ofSalisbury (200), but without the last article, relating toThe Legates, it is believed, promisedfeudal subjection.that this article should be kept secret.Baronius published the oath and the additional articlefrom the Acts of Pope Alexander HL, which he found inMuratori published themthe archives of the Vatican.again, during the last century, in Kerum Jtalicarum Scrip-Here is the text oftores (torne iii, first part, p. 463).the article : —^" Ficeterea ego. ct major filius meus rexiuramus quod a Domno Alexandro Papa, et ejus catholicissuccessoribus recipiemus et tenebimus regnum Anglise,et nos, et nostri successores in perpetuum non reputabi-mus nos Anglise reges veros donee ipsi nos catholicosreges tenuerint.At the end of the same year, Henry H. wrote to PopeAlexander HL in order to implore his help regarding awar that his eldest son, having rebelled, was wagingIn the letter he recognised the sovereigntyagainst him.of the Holy See over the kingdom of England, as a thingperfectly understood between him and the Pope.Theletter being among those preserved by Peter de Blois,iSecretary to Henry II.Trans.32POPE ADRIAN IV.,there is no reason to suppose that the extra article was an" Vestrse juris,after insertion in the oath of Avranches.dictionis est reg-num Anglias, et quantum ad feudatariijuris obligationem vobis dumtaxat obnoxius teneor etExperiatur An-glia quid possit Romanus Pon-astringor.tifex, et quia materialibus armis non utitur, patrimonium(Petrus Blesensis,B. Petri spirituali gladio tueatur."epist. 136 ; Baronius, 1173, No. 8 ; Lingard, History ofEngland, Henry II., note 164.)The silence that in this letter King Henry II. observedAt thewith regard to Ireland is particularly remarkable.period in question, the dominion of the prince in Irelandseemed almost entirelyinMeath had been burnt down.Dublin endured severalassaults, and the governor of the royal possessions foundhimself obliged to take refuge in the castle of Waterford.The castlesfortifiedlost.Now, if the King hadIreland from PopeAdrian, and if he had been a feudatory of the Holy See inthis land, as he was in England, would he have neglectedto beg- the protection of Pope Alexander against the Irishrebels ?receivedCHAPTER XIII.THREE LETTERS ATTRIBUTED TO POPE ALEXANDER III.(1172 OR 1173.)In 1728, Thomas Hearne published at Oxford the BlackBook of the Exchequer [Liher Niger Scaccarii)^ in whichthere are three letters, said to be of Pope Alexander III.—one to the King- of England, one to the Archbishops ofIreland and the Bishop of Lismore, and one to the KingsThe three letters bear the sameand Princes of Ireland.date : Tusculum, the 12th of the calends of October, thatIt is believed that they may beis, the 20th of September.referred to the year 1172—in which case they would havebeen written about a month after the reconciliation atAvranches.I need not discuss the genuineness of the three letters.Although they have come to us only as copies, and havenot seen the light for five hundred and fifty-six years after—A FRIEND or IRELAND.33the time at which they were written ; although they cohttain invectives against the Irish people such as are nevermet with in Acts of the Holy See, at least as regards ex-pression and form ; although they state facts evidentlyfalse or controverted, which would allow the charge oftheir having been surreptitiously or obreptitiously ob-tained, supposing that they were really genuine,— I amwilling to grant that the three letters are true, and I em-ploy them to prove that the false Bull of Adrian still re-mained unknown. 1In point of fact, not one of the letters mentions the Bull,or makes any allusion to it.Alexander III. recommendsKing Henry II. to preserve the rights of the Holy See inIreland, and to extend them, if possible ; but he takes ashis ground that all islands belong more particularly to thePope than continents.a donation ofthe Emperor Constantine, which the Decree of Gratian,published about 1151, had made known everywhere. Thepassage is as follows : —This refersto" And since, as your Highness knows,the RomanChurch has a different right over an island from that whichit has over a vast mainland, we confidently hope fromyour devotedness that, not only will you preserve the rights' Inl a theological sense, a grant is usually said to be surreptitiouslyobtained when something that ought to be manifested is concealed inpetition, and obreptitiously obtained when something false istheasserted.Nothing can be more absurd than to assert that if the Pope, ingranting a dispensation or any other favour, makes no comment on thestatements that accompany the application for it, therefore every oneof those statements is admittedly true.A bull is so called from its leaden or golden seal (bulla), having onone side an image of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and on theother the name of the Pope, and made pendant by a hempen or silkenstring. A brief is signed by the " Secretary of Briefs," and, as it bearsa red wax seal, having an image of St. Peter fishing, it is said to begiven under the Rin^ of the Fisherman.Bulls are issued on mattersof great importance ; briefs on affairs of less serious character.The Roman Bullarium is a large collection of bulls.It has beencompiled by learned, virtuous, diligent men, greatly assisted by others,and accordingly much reliance may be placed on it ; but still it is onlya private collection, not authenticated by the Holy See. How foolishtherefore to argue that because a document is found in the RomanBullarium, it is therefore undoubtedly genuine ! We may say the likeof other valuable works on ecclesiastical matters, for which the HolySee is"in no way responsible.Trans.34POPE ADRIAN IV.,of this Church, but you will also labour to extend them ;and where tliere are none, you will think of establishingthem, in such manner that we may return ample thanks toyour Highness, and you may be seen to offer to God thefirst fruits of your glory and your triumph."The allusion to a donation of Constantine renders thisI have not remarked in the fortyletter very suspicious.volumes of the Roman Bullarium a single certain diploma,declaring that all the islands of the world belong to theUrban II,, it is said, gave the investiture of Cor-Pope.sica to the Pisans, on the ground of the universal sover-eignty of the Holy See with regard to islands ; but theBull attributed to Pope Urban II. on this matter is apocry-phal, as I shall show further on, when I examine the falseBull of Adrian IV., which rests on the same pretension.In the Apocryphal Bull, Adrian ordered the establish-ment of Peter's Pence in all Ireland, such as it existed inEngland. Can anyone imagine that Pope Alexander III.,some twenty years after Adrian, has no knowledge of thispontifical right, and does not recall it when he is recom.mending the King to preserve the rights of the RomanChurch in Ireland ? This proves evidently that the Apocry-phal Bull of Adrian continued unknown as well at Romeas in England and Ireland.The second letter, as I have said, is addressed to the fourArchbishops of Ireland, and the Bishop of Lismore, whowas perpetual Legate to the Holy See. Now, Pope Alex-ander founds the obligation of obedience to the King ofEngland not, assuredly, on a donation of Pope Adrian, butsolely on the voluntary acknowledgment and spontaneoussubmission that the bishops and princes have testifiedtowards this prince.The chronicler of Anchin, who continued Sigebert, saysthat King Henry II. failed in Ireland.I have quoted asage in full : — " Henry, King of England, rising up withfragrnent of the annalist above. The following is the pas-excessive pretensions, laying hands on things not con-ceded, and aspiring to what was not his due, preparedships, and assembled the soldiers of his kingdom, to sub-due Ireland ; and, in the hope of wearing the royal diadem,he penetrated into Ireland-But learning that the peopleof the country were much inclined to rebellion, and, on the—"A FRIEND OF IRELAND.——35Other hand, fearing- a want of bread that threatened thecountry, as also lest, when comingf back, there should bestormy weather at sea, he returned with confusion into hisown kingdom."! (Patrologie, t. i6o, p. 307.)CHAPTER XIV.HENRY II. HAD ONLY A NOMINAL POWER IN IRELAND.(1173-I180.)LiNGARD, always moderate in his estimates and statements,says of Henry H., that he " left the island without havingadded an inch of territory to the acquisitions of the originalHis nominal sovereignty was, indeed, ex-adventurers.tended over four out of five provinces, but his real authoritywas confined to the cantreds in the vicinity of his garri-sons. There the feudal customs and services were intro-duced and enforced ; in the rest of the island the nationallaws prevailed, and the Irish princes felt no other changein their situation than that they had promised to a distantprince the obedience which they had previously paid to theKing of Connaught.2 .. The castles which had been for-tified in Meath were burnt to the ground : Dublin was re-four English knights, and four hun-peatedly insulted :dred Ostmen, their followers, fell in a battle in Ossory ;3and the governor himself was compelled to seek refugewithin the castle of Waterford..Far from thinking of conquering Ireland, Henry II.' The character of Pope Alexander III. is thus described byVoltaire, an unexpected admirer, in his Essay on General History :' Perhaps the man who, in those gross times, called the Middle Ages,deserved most of the human race, was Pope Alexander III.It was hewho in a Council of the 12th century abolished slavery, as far as wasIt was this same Pope who, by his wisdom, triumphed inpossible.Venice over the violence of the Emperor Barbarossa, and who compelledHenry II., King of England, to ask pardon of God and men for themurder of Thomas Becket. He upheld the rights of peoples, and put. If men entered again into their rights,down the crimes of Kings. .it is chiefly to Pope Alexander that they are indebted for them.It is(x., 998.) And is itto him that so many cities owe their splendour."to be said that to him Ireland owes many of her misfortunes?Trans.'The historian does not. examine whether the story of this sub-mission is true or false.Trans.' In 1174.,—36POPE ADRIAN IV.employed all his forces to subdue theWelsh, who had re-belled. Lingard says : " Henry exercised his vengeance onhis numerous hostages, the children of the noblest famiKesin Wales. ... By his orders the eyes of all the males wererooted out, and the ears and noses of the females wereamputated."{History oj England,.)According to Roger de Hoveden, Henry O., in 1175,held at Windsor a great Council, at which the Archbishopsof Tuam and Dublin—Cantordis, Abbot of St. Brendanand Master Laurence, Chancellor of Roderic, King ofThe record of the chroniclerConnacht, were present.supplies me with a new proof against the genuineness ofthe Bull attributed to Adrian IV. ; for this Bull was notmentioned a single time, and the English never availedtherriselves of it in these solemn negotiations of peace.Still more, the clauses of the Bull were violated by theIn effect, Adrian IV. had, in thearticles of the treaty.Apocryphal Bull, twenty yearsthatevery house in Ireland should contribute to the Peter'sPence, as in England. Henry II. did not say a word of itin his treaty with Connacht: he claimed for himself atenth cowhide or sheepskin.If the Bull of Adrian hadbeen published in a Council of Irish Bishops, as GiraldusCambrensis assures us, would the Archbishops of Dubhnand Tuam have allowed this treaty to pass over the ponti-fical contribution in silence ?prescribedbefore,At this time, Henry 11. and his barons possessed nothingin Ireland but Dublin, Wexford, and Waterford. We mayso conclude from the stipulation of the treaty, as relatedby Hoveden.(Page 312.)GiralduschaplainCambrensis.The King'sThis annalist is useful, because he serves as a checkondid,not depend on thecredulous Welshman, well as heknew the work Hibernia Expugnaia, which was pub-lished years before the death of the English chronicler.Giraldus relates that the Bull of Adrian was sent intoIreland—carried by William Fitz-Aldelm, and Nicholas,Prior, of Wallingford ; and that it was publicly read in aCouhcil of Bishops at Waterford, by John of Salisbury,who was sent to Rome for it, and who had also broughtthe ring of investiture : a ring deposited, with the Bull,in the archives of Winchester.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.37We might accordingly suppose that John of Salisbury,arriving from Rome at this moment, published in a Coun-cil of 1 175 the Bull which he had just obtained from PopeAdrian IV. , who died about fifteen years previously.The ancient annals of Ireland have not recorded anygeneral assembly of bishops in 1175.It is improbable thatthe bishops would have chosen the city of Waterford as aplace of meeting, because it was in the power of Welshand Norman adventurers. ^' A certain learned writer, who is an earnest advocate for Adrian'sgrant, admits that St. Laurence O'Toole, who became Archbishop ofDublin in 1161, was a " persistent opposer of English rule in Ireland."Now, can any one suppose that the Saint would have been such, if hebelieved that Henry had any authority from Rome to rule in Ireland ?And if any man in Ireland knew the sentiments of Rome, surely it wasIn point of fact, St. Laurence, when com-the Archbishop of Dublin.missioned in 1171 to make terms with Strongbow, required that heand his followers should surrender all the places they had taken, andquit the island by a certain day.As wonders will never cease, the aforesaid writer contends that inthe whole domain of history there is no fact better proved than Adrian'sYet, preferring a more mild and euphemistic term, he con-grant.tinually speaks of it as Adrian's Privilege—the privilege, shall we say,of robbing and killing the Irish, under the Christian plea of civilisingThus, he informs ,us that Henry, implicated in the murder ofthem ?St, Thomas, and hastening out of reach of the Legates, " in order todo something to propitiate Rome, and at the same time gratify hisambition, prepared to go in person to Ireland, and carry out the refor-mation for which he had obtained a privilege from Pope Adrian."High time indeed to set to work in 1171, if the privilege was receivedin 1 155, and a strange method indeed of appeasing that Pope who, ifwe may believe Voltaire himself (a man not likely to give unduepraise to a ! Pope), "put down the crimes of Kings and upheld therights of peoples !" We now learn that this royal reformer (who hadsuch need of reforming himself) was accompanied by a fleet of 400vessels, carrying " mail-clad knights in hundreds and tens of thousandsof archers." Though puzzled somewhat by the numbers here given,and amazed at the novelty of the plan, we look about for the magnifi-cent reformation to follow. Do we find it ?Alas, the words of AbbeMcGeoghegan, the distinguished French historian, immediately occurto us, " A bad Christian makes a bad Apostle."Far from finding anyreformation, we find only the beginning of a long-continued andatrocious deform'ation, ruinous alike to the spiritual and the materialwelfare of the Irish people. And is it possible that any Pope could beso wanting in prudence as to sanction such an enterprise, or not toforesee the dire results that should certainly be expected from it ?(See Dublin Review, April, J884, p. 318.)—Trans.38POPE ADRIAN IV.,CHAPTER XV.CARDINAL VIVIAN.The old Irish annalists mehtion in 1177 the arrival ofCardinal Vivian, who convoked a council of bishops andabbots, and made various ordinances, which are now un-I borrow from the Rev. Mr. Dimock, the mostknown.recent editor of Giraldus Cambrensis, the following note :"The Four Masters, a.d. 1177, say: Cardinal Vivianarrived in Ireland. A synod of the clergy of Ireland, bothbishops and abbots, was convened by this Cardinal on thefirst Sunday in Lent, and they enacted many ordinancesnot now observed." (Works of Giraldus, vol. v., p. 345.)Giraldus pretends, on the contrary, that Cardinal Vivian,in the council, publicly (but verbally) proclaimed the rightof the King of England over Ireland, and the confirmationof the Pope, with a strict precept, as well for the clergy asthe laity, under pain of anathema, to be faithful to theKing.(Ibid.)this is evident from his works.A verbal command, a precept sanctioned by anathema,is a thing very strange ! Yet Giraldus had studied canonlaw :Moreover, theassertion has no guarantee but the word of the author,which cannot be admitted without a most strict examina-tion. He also says at the same year (i 177) that two impor-tant regions of Ireland, namely, Ulster and Connacht,had remained inaccessible to the English, whose attackswere constantly repelled.It is difficult to suppose that theinhabitants should submit to the King of England by orderof the Cardinal.Vivian spent a great many years in England, in Scot-land, and in Ireland, as Fontifical Legate.Giraldus un-doubtedly calumniates him when he accuses him of a covet-ousness that made him very eager for money and other giftsHoveden speaks of Cardinal Vivian, and his voyage toFar from mentioning a pretended coun-Ireland in 11 77.cil in which the right of England over Ireland was pro-claimed, and sanctioned by anathema, the annalist relates" The same year,"the misadventures of the Cardinal.he says, " Vivian, named above, Cardinal Priest of the—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.:3gtitle of Saint Stephen, on Mount Celius, Legate of theApostolic See, spent the festival of Christmas in the Isle ofMan, with King Guthred.After the Epiphany, he set sailfor Ireland, and landed at Down, in Ulster. As he wasgoing along to Dublin by the seaside, he met the troops ofJohn de Courcy, who stopped and held him ; but John deCourcy delivered him and let him go his way.Before thePurification of Saint Mary, John de Courcy besieged andtook the city of Down, the capital of Ulster, where rest thebodies of the holy confessors Patrick and Columba, andalso that of Saint Brigid, virgin. On hearing this, Roderic,King of Ulster, assembled a great army of Irishmen, andgave battle to John de Courcy, who lost a considerablepart of his army, but gained a complete victory, .. TheBishop of Down was taken in the combat, but John deCourcy delivered him at the petition of the Cardinal."(Hoveden, p. 320.).Behold how Henry II. was lord and master of Ireland !In reality, the King had power only in the district of CorkHoveden relates, about the end of 1177,and in Meath.that the King gave Meath to Hugh de Lacy, and also dis-posed of the district of Cork, except the city. He offeredthe kingdom of Limerick to William and Herbert, brothersof Reginald, Earl of Cornwall. He afterwards offered it toJocelyn de la Pomeroy, their nephew.As all refused it,the King applied to Philip de Breusa.In the meantime,a relative of the deceased ruler possessed himself of theplace, and governed it, without making any submission tothe King of England or his ministers, because of theirduplicity, and the evil they had done without cause to thepeople of Ireland.(regisMonoculi occisi a regalibus), vir potens et fortis, regnumde Limeric invasit, cepit, et potenter rexit, nullam subjec-tionem faciens regi Angliae ; nee suis obedlre voluit, prop-ter infidelitatem eorum, et mala quae faciebant populoRex vero Corcensis et alii multiHiberniae sine merito.divites Hibernise insurrexerunt in regem Hibernise,^ etet erant novissima eorum pejora prioribus, et sesuos :mutuo interfecerunt. "(Hoveden, p. 324.)" Quidam de progenie illius' This word is evidently a mistake.Angliae is the word in theedition of Roger de Hoveden, by William Stubbs, M.A. LondonLongmans, 1869.Vol. ii., p. 136.Trans.OPOPE ADRIAN IV.,a littleBut inI have named Hugh de Lacy : his tragic death revealsthe proceedings to which Henry H. had recourse in orderHere is what weto extend his domination in Ireland.read in William of Newbridge, at the year 1 183 : —" Hughde Lacy was regarded as the principal and most powerfulof the barons of the King of England that were in Ireland.After the death of the valiant Earl Richard, the King hadgiven him vast possessions, and entrusted him with theadministration of his domains.whileDe Lacy so extended his limits, and so increased his richesand his forces, that he made himself feared not only by hisenemies, but even by his own companions, that is to say,the other barons of the King ; for he ill-treated them, ifthey did not obey him in everything. He seemed to labourin Ireland for himself rather than for the King of England,and it was positively asserted that he was aiming at aroyal diadem. When the King was informed of this, herecalled Hugh to England, but De Lacy despised the com-mand.Shortly afterwards, fortune favoured the King ofEngland ; De Lacy was assassinated through the perfidyof a young man whom he had made his friend, and whobelonged to a band of confederated Irish.Henry thenhappened to be at the extremity of England. On hearingof the rnurder of De Lacy, he manifested extraordinary joy.Affairs in Ireland soon received from him a more circum-spect organisation." (William of Newbridge, lib. 3, c. 9.)All these facts, attested by English chroniclers, and evenby those who were dependent on the Court, show the pre-carious state of English rule in Ireland under Henry II.They cannot be reconciled with the hypothesis of a Ponti-fical Bull that had made a donation of the land of Irelandto the King of England.CHAPTER XVI.PREPARATIONS FOR THE FRAUD.(1180.)I HAVE said (Chapter VIII.) that it was -not possible, dur-mg the^hfe of Louis VII., King of France, who had re-ceived the true letter of Adrian IV., containing a distinctA FRIEND OF IRELAND.4^refusal to authorise the expedition to Ireland which thisprince had proposed to undertake in alliance with Henry II.—it was not possible, I say, to allege a Bull of the samePope Adrian IV., making- a present of Ireland to the Kingof England, permitting him to invade the land, and enjoin-ing on the Irish to submit to him as their master.For thefraud would have been immediately discovered and un-masked by an irrefutable witness.Hence, we have been unable to discover any trace of theApocryphal Bull in records previous to the year 1180,which was that of the death of Louis VII. The Bull waspassed over in silence, even at a time when Henry II.would have had the greatest interest in producing it, andavailing himself of it.It was only a good many yearsdeathofthat of PopeLouis VII., and about thirty yearsAdrian IV., that Giraldus Cambrensis, Chaplain of theEnglish Court, first inserted the false Bull in his historyof the conquest of Ireland.after theafterAfter the death of Louis VII., there was no longer anyinconvenience in speaking of a Bull from Adrian. How-ever, before producing it, it was necessary, first of all, toexistence, and gradually to prepare publicrevealopinion for the reception of the apocryphal document.itsBehold a difficult question : was John ofSalisburycharged to announce the Bull?Is he really the author ofthat chapter in his Metalogicus which says that, at his re-quest. Pope Adrian IV. granted the Bull?Let us first see if Salisbury's antecedents place hirri be-yond the reach of a suspicion of complicity in the fraud.I have said (Chapter VIII.)Salisburyspent a great many years out of England, and that thepublication of his Polycraticus, in 11 59, drew On him theattention of Thomas Becket, then Chancellor, who attachedhim to his service, and gave him several employments.that John ofIt is generally believed that he had been secretary orchancellor to Theobald, the predecessor of Saint ThomasIn point of fact, wein the primatial See of Canterbury.remark in Salisbury's voluminous correspondence a verylarge number of letters that he wrote to Pope A. in thename of Archbishop T. Unfortunately, these initials applyequally well to Pope Alexander and Archbishop Thomasas to Pope Adrian and Archbishop Theobald.—42POPE ADRIAN IV.,There is room to doubt if, after 1159, Salisbury acted asCould he be in the service of thissecretary to Theobald.prelate, and at the same time be attached to the ChancellorThomas Becket ? We have no other g-uarantee that thelast chapter of the Metalogicus, written perhaps at a timewhen it was a matter of interest to make people believethat in the closing- years of Theobald, say ii6oor 1161,Salisbury wrote that chapter in his work which mentionsthe donation of Ireland to King Henry II. and the Bull ofPope Adrian IV.What is certain is that Becket attached Salisbury byseveral employments, and, from the time of his nominationto the Archbishopric of Canterbury, took him as secretary.I do not like to see that Salisbury (letter 150) confidied tohis friends that he neg^lected no means of moderating- thezeal of the prelate, warning- him that his ardour wouldcause him to lose the friendship of the King.l However,he did not abandon his protector in the hour of disg-race.He shared proscription with him, and sought a refuge inAfter five years of exile, he rejoined ThomasFrance.Becket in England, and was, a little while later on, awitness of his tragic death. John of Salisbury continued tobe attached, as a simple cleric, to the church of Canter-bury, until, in 1176, King Henry II. nominated him BishopI am not unaware that the clergy and peopleof Chartres.elected him according to the canonical forms then in use,and that Louis VII. wrote him a letter, which is still pre-served, to overcome his hesitation ; but are not these veryincidents of a nature to rouse suspicion, and make us sup-pose that there was a desire to disguise the true cause ofthe unexpected elevation of Salisbury to the episcopal Seeof Chartres ?It would be a sad question to ask if the Bishopric ofChartres was the price of a bargain between Henry II. andSalisbury, the latter taking on himself the obligation offavouring the King's views regarding Ireland ; and that hedid so by writing the famous chapter of the Metalogieuswhich has been so often adduced to accredit and authenti-cate the false Bull of Adrian IV.1 It must be admitted that Salisbury occasionally showed himsel^Examples are easily found in his letters.rather loose-tongued.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.43afindIn the edition of the Metalogicus printed at Leyden in1639, ex officina Joannis Maire, Ibiographicalnotice borrowed from the Protestant writer, John Bayle,De Scriptoribus Anglice, part iv.Needless to say that Idisavow beforehand the headstrong ravings with which theeditor reproaches St. Thomas of Canterbury in regardto "the best of kings."copo Thomae quandoque famiUaris fuit, et in exiHo comes:sed non propterea omisit suas illi objicere pervicaces inFactus demum ob recondi-regem benlgnum dementias.tam eruditionem ab Henrico rege Carnotensis episcopus,in provincia Senonensi, ultima doctrinae monumenta illicObiit celeberrimus vir, anno a salutifero divaereliquit.Virginis partu 1182, et episcopatus sui anno sexto, subHenrico rege praedicto."His words are : —" Archiepis-Among various hypotheses, the last is that which Iprefer, for the honour of religion, and for the honour ofSalisbury himself.It is not impossible that Salisbury wrote Chapter XLII.of the Metalogicus in 11 76, before quitting England forChartres, and left the manuscript with Henry II., who, inthis hypothesis, would have engaged to publish it at asuitable time.It may be, absolutely speaking, that Chapter XLII. waswritten at Chartres after the death of Louis VII., especiallyif Salisbury really lived to 1182, as Bayle says, contraryto the general opinion, which places the prelate's death in1 180, according to his mortuary inscription. 1Although these hypotheses are not without foundation, Iprefer to say that Chapter XLII. is an extra work, forwhich Salisbury is not responsible, because this pretendedChapter XLII. was likely added to his treatise some yearsafter his death.In point of fact. Chapter XLII. has not the slightest re-lationship with the subject of the book, whose object is todefend logic, metaphysics, dialectics, the categories ofAristotle, anid philosophers themselves. Peripatetics as wellHenceas Platonists, against the attacks of the ignorant.is that Chapter XLI. naturally ends the work, withitThe death-register of the monastery in which John of Salisbury{Patrologie, Vol,was buried, says that he died on October, 25, 11 80.cxcix, pref. xi.)^Tro»s.—44POPE ADRIAN IV.,a conclusion truly Christian, , and very remarkable on thelips of one who had formerly been a listener to Abelard.^" Certain things," says Salisbury, " cannot be known,because of their eminent dignity.Others are not withinthe capacity of man, within the reach of his flighty andTo what then must he chiefly attachinconstant mind.himself? What thingEcclesiasticusteaches, saying ; Seek not the things that are too high forthee, and search not into things above thy ability. .. And as the senses as well as the reason of man frequentlywander, the first foundation of the understanding is faith.Hence the maxim of the Wise Man : They that trust inGod shall understand the truth, and they that are faithful, in love shall rest in Him."is most useful?..Candidly, after a peroration so philosophical and soChristian, is it natural that in Chapter XLII., tears shouldflow over the evils of the time, the siege of Toulouse, therupture between the Kings of France and England, thedeath of Pope Adrian, and the schism threatening theChurch?Then, taking occasion from the death of thePontiff, the author relates, in terms altogether out of placeand ridiculous, the kindness that Pope Adrian had mani-fested for him, so far as to eat from the same plate anddrink from the same cup as his friend !These trivialitiesare followed by an article of paramount importance,nothing more or less than a dpnation of Ireland in favourof King Henry H.In fine, the author repeats to satiety^ An able and admired writer in prose and verSe, almost equallyeloquent in Latin ar)d jn Greek, John of Salisbury was just the man ofhis times whom a forger would use to say something advantageous forHenry ; and the end of a manuscript was just the place where a forgercould most safely carry out his design, by adding a new chapterwithout any signs of erasure or interpolation.Unfortunately, the testof handwriting cannot now be applied, as none of the earliest MSS.exist. , Those in the British Museum are marked " copies.".That some forgeries were really committed in John's name, we aresolemnly assured by himself, when he says in a letter to Henry,regarding some letters that the King had received :— Ecce, Domino, inspectore et judice, loquar in auribus vestris quod verum est.Litterasistas nee scripsi, nee scribere volui, nee ab aliquo meorum scriptasFalsae sunt, et eis ad delusionem vestram, et sui damnationem,novi.solus falsarius scienter usus est.His Polycraticus, Metalog-icus, a.aA other works, taay be found inMigne's Patrologie, Vol. cxcix.TransA FRFEND OF IRELAND.'45what he had said in the preface, regarding the Occupationswith which he was overwhelmed.Have we had enough of inconsistencies and fooleries?Was Salisbury capable of putting his signature to thingsso silly? We must also make account of differences instyle, which literary connoisseurs have remarked betweenChapter XLII. of the Metologicus and the undoubtedwritings of the prelate.CHAPTER XVII.DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PSEUDO-METALOGICUS ANDTHE FALSE BULL OF ADRIAN IV.I TRANSCRIBE Chapter XLII., or rather, I translate it. TheI shall add my observa-Latin text is sufficiently known.tions." I conclude. At this moment it would be more properto weep than to write ; and I learn by sensible experiencethat the whole world is subject to vanity. We have hopedfor peace, and lo ! trouble and tempest burst on Toulouse,and everywhere rouse the English and the French ; andKings, whom we have seen united, pursue each otherwithout a moment's intermission.Moreover, the death ofthe Lord Pope Adrian, which has alarmed all the peoples ofChristendom, has caused still greater grief in our England,of which he was a native, and evoked more abundant tears.Good people deplore this loss, but no one should lament itmore than I.In fact, although he had his mother and auterine brother, he loved me more than them. He declared,in public as well as in private, that he had a greater affec-tion for me than for any other person in the world. Hehad formed such an opinion of me that he was delighted toopen his heart and conscience to me, as often as oppor-tunity offered. Though Roman Pontiff, he was pleased tohave me as guest at his table ; in spite of my reluctance, herequired that one plate and one cup should be in commonAt my request he gave Ireland to the illus-between us.trious King of England, Henry II., to be possessed byFor aillhereditary right, as his letters prove to this day.,"46POPE ADRIAN IV.islands, in virtue of a very ancient law, are considered tobelong to the Roman Church, through a donation of Con-More-stantine, who founded and endowed this Church.over, Pope Adrian sent by me a gold ring, adorned with amost beautiful emerald, by which investiture with theright of governing Ireland should be made ; and this ringis preserved by order in the public archives of the Court.I should never be done if I were to relate all the virtues ofBut that which pierces all heartsthis illustrious Pontiff.most is the schism, which, in punishment of our sins,afflicts the Church, so great a Pontiff having been taken. Independently of the pubhc sorrow, I feel anaway, .For my father and lord,inward sorrow which is no less.who is also yours, the venerable Theobald, Archbishop ofCanterbury, has fallen sick, and what will be the course ofthe illness is uncertain. No longer able to attend to affairs,he has laid on me a hard duty and an insupportable burden,the care of all the ecclesiastics. My spirit everywhere findspain, and the tortures that I endure I am unable to ex-The only recourse left for me is to pray to thepress.Man-God, the Son of the Immaculate Virgin..This strange passage claims some serious remarks.Ishall divide them into several points, so as to give moreclearness to the subject.First Observation. The part that mentions the siege ofToulouse imitates a part in the preface of the Polycraticus.If John of Salisbury, about this period, entered the serviceof Becket, could he be at the same time chancellor andsecretary to Theobald?Second Observation.In the preface of the Metalogicus,Salisbury speaks of the duties that he fulfils in regard tothe ecclesiastical causes of all England, by order of hislord ; but he does not name the Archbishop, he does notpassage from the prologue : —" Placuit itaque sociis, utsay that he speaks of Theobald.Here, in short, is thehoc ipsum tumultuario modo dictarem : cum nee ad sen-tentias subtiliter examinandas, nee ad verba expolienda,studium superesset, aut otium.Necessariis enim occupa-tionibus vix ahquid amplius deducebatur quam refectionishora, vel somni : cum ex mandate Domini mei, cui deessenon possum, sollicitudo totius Britannia, quod ad causaseoclesiasticas, mihi incumbat.leifamlliaris, et curiales nugae, studium excludebant : amico-Ad haecsollicitudoA FRIEND OF IRELAND.47rum interpellatio me fere totum absorbuerat. .. Et quialogici suscepi patrocinium, Metalogicon descriptus estliber.".All this agrees very well with the first days of SaintThomas, before the conflict with Henry II.Accordingly,the Metalogicus would have been written about that period.I do not see any motive that could have induced theauthor to repeat in Chapter XLII. what he had said in thepreface, namely, that he was absorbed in his duties, over-Besides, whatwhelmed with the cares entrusted to him.is clear in the Prologus becomes ambiguous in ChapterXLII.Sollicitudo totius BritannicB,quod ad causas ecclesiasticas.This is the exercise ofIn Chapter XLII.,metropolitan or primatial jurisdiction.on the contrary, there is no longer any question of theaffairs of England ; there is mention only of ecclesiastics,which seems confined to persons: Omnium ecclesiasticorumsollicitudo. We should say that it was a mere glance overthe moral conduct of the clergy.The preface says :What is truly new in Chapter XLII. is the name ofTheobald, which is not in the Preface.As it is very doubtful whether Salisbury was ever inthe service of Theobald, this circumstance increases sus-picion against Chapter XLII.ofvisitwriter relatesthe Lord PopeThird Observation. What thethefamiliarity with which Pope Adrian treated him is trulyunworthy of the pontifical majesty.Salisbury expressedhimself more modestly in the Polycraticus : —" I remem-ber that I set out for Apulia, toAdrian, who had admitted me to a special familiarity.Iwith him at Beneventum for nearly threeremainedWhile we were oftenmonths.differentmatters, as is usual among friends, and he questioned mefamiliarly and diligently, to know what men thought ofhim and of the Roman Church, I took the libertyofopenly representing to him what I had learned in variousprovinces."Salisburyhere wander from the respectconstantly due to the Sovereign Pontiff. But it is quite adifferent case in Chapter XLII.(Poly., 1. 6, c. 24.)does notWho will believe that Pope Adrian took pleasure insaying publicly that he loved Salisbury more than anyspeakingof;48POPE ADRIAN IV.,Other person in the world—more than his own mother orhis own brother?It is known that the Pope eats alone. The Roman cere,monials of the twelfth century mark the days on wjiichIt wouldthe Cardinals are invited to the Pontifical table.be a strange thing- that Salisbury should have been a con-tinual guest with the Pope for nearly three months ; butthat the Pope should absolutely have wished to eat fromthe same plate and to drink from the same cup as hispretended friend—this is an enormity which ought toappear sufficient for the rejection of the whole passage asNothing would remain to be added but thatapocryphal.Salisbury was a sharer of the Pope's bed.Fourth Observation.It is most extraordinary that the forger did not seethat these monstrous exaggerations would take away allcredit from what he was soon going to say about Ireland.If it is true that Pope Adrian IV.gave Ireland to the King of England at the request ofSalisbury [ad preces meas), this naturally means that theKing did not ask this gift, which was spontaneous on thepart of the Pontiff. Now this circumstance is contra-dicted by the Apocryphal Bull, which mentions a letterIn any case, it is very strange that thefrom the King.donation of a kingdom should have been obtained by aprivate individual, who had no official character.Thefalse Salisbury of Chapter XLII. does not give the leasthint in the world that Henry II. had charged him withthe mission of soliciting, in his name, authority to invadethe land of Ireland, and to compel the inhabitants to re-cognise him as their lord and master. On the other hand,the Apocryphal Bull does not name Salisbury ; it men-,tions no ambassador who has made a petition in the nameOne might believe that the affair had allof the King.been arranged by correspondence.Fifth Observation.Salisbury, in the -PoZycraticMS, fixesthe time of his interview with Adrian IV., when saying<that he met him at Beneventum.Adrian IV. sojourned atBeneventum for seven months, from November 21, 1155,to July 10, 1 156.If the concession in regard to Irelandiwas made during the three months that Salisbury spent atBeneventum, how explain the silence that he kept aboutit in the Polycraticus, published three years afterwards,'A FRIEND OF IRELAND.49in 1 159? On the other hand, if the donation of Irelandis to be referred to another journey of Salisbury's, theauthor of Chapter XLII. ought so much the more justlyto have fixed its time, as the Apocryphal Bull is withoutdate in Giraldus Cambrensis, who, it seems, was the firstOther historians and compilers haveto publish this Bull.put : Datum Romw, etc. According to this, the Bull couldnot be referred to the sojourn of Adrian at Beneventum,nor to the journey that the Polycraticus makes known.Sixth Observation.The authorof Chapter XLII.announces a letter of Pope Adrian IV. regarding Ireland ;but he did not know its tenor, he never had it beforeIf he had known it, he would not have assertedhis eyes.that the Pope gave Ireland to the King of England andhis successors by right of succession and inheritance :Ad preces meas illustri Anglorum regi Henrico secundoconcessit et dedit liiberniam jure hereditaria possidendam,sicut litercB ipsius testantur in hodiernum diem. What amisfortune that the writer did not describe more definitelyIn the Apocryphal Bull, on the con-this dies hodiernus !trary, there is no question of investiture, and still less of aperpetual investiture, that passes to heirs and successors,without there being need to have it renewed and confirmeda!t the beginning of each new reign.In fact, the Bullfor KingsimplypersonalHenry II., that he may engage in reforming morals andIt is only for the accomplishment of thisrepressing vices.temporary mission,moral,that the Pope permits the King to be received honour-ably by the people of Ireland, and to be revered as theirlord.announcesconcessionexclusively" We therefore " (this Is what theApocryphal Bullsays), '' receiving with due favor your pious and laudabledesires, and graciously grantingour consent to yourpetition, declare that it is pleasing and acceptable to us,that for the purpose of enlarging the limits of the Church,setting bounds to the torrentevilvirtue, and increasingmanners, planting the seedsChristian faith, you should enter that island and carryinto effect those things which belong to the service of Godand .to -the salvation of that people ; and that the people ofthat land should honourably receive and reverence you asvice, reformingreligiousandofofaE!—,POPE ADRIAN IV.All this is essentially different from feudal50their lord. "^investiture.Seventh Ohservation. The sending- of a ring as a signof investiture is a thing unexampled in history, if thePope does not at the same time appoint a delegate to per-form publicly the ceremony of the imposition of the ring.The pseudo-Salisbury tells us gravely that Pope Adriansent a gold ring, in order to proceed to the investiture :Annulum quoque per me transmisit aureum, smaragdoOptimo decoratum, quo fieret investitura juris in gerenda^idemque annulus in curiali archive publicoHibernia,I look for the Pontifical delegate.custodiri jussus est.It certainly was not Salisbury, a simple priest.The Apocryphal Bull itself does not speak of a ring orring except inI find no trace ofof investiture.Giraldus Cambrensis, whom I have quoted above.thisEighth Observation.Hereditary investiture is withoutexample in the Pontifical diplomatique of the twelfth cen.. tury. The Pope, granting that investiture should pass toheirs and successors, required a renovation and confirma-tion of it at each change of reign or pontificate.TheNormans of Naples and Sicily submitted to the commonlaw : their diplomas are met everywhere in the annals ofBaronius and other historians.According to the pseudo-Salisbury, Adrian IV., treating the Normans of Englandmuch more favourably, would have granted perpetual in-vestiture by the magic virtue of a ring kept in the royalarchives of WinchesterNinth Observation.Salisbury was too enlightened tosay that the Emperor Constantine founded the RomanChurch ; for foundation goes back to Jesus Christ, or tothe times of the Apostles.It is not even quite true thatthis Emperor endowed the Roman Church :in the veryera of the persecutions, it owned property, which, confis-cated under Diocletian, was restored by order of Con-stantine.If John of Salisbury really wrote in 1160 that all islandsbelong to the Holy See, he did not perceive that this1 To preserve uniformity of translation, the words of this sentenceare borrowed from the translation given by Cardinal Moran, No, 1amone; the Documents at the end.Trans,^s Regeitdq. ?—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.5^maxim would apply directly to England. We shall meetagain with this inconsistency in the Apocryphal Bull.^CHAPTER XVIII.EXAMINATION OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL.Was Henry II. incapable of forging a Bull? Would hehave shrunk back with horror at a crime of falsehood?He feared excommunication very much, it is true.Hisflight into Ireland in 1171 showed the terror with whichthe thunders of the Church had filled him.But in histime, the Bull In coena Domini notthefalsifiers of acts of the Holy See did not incur excommu-nication by the very fact.existing,yetUnder a deceitful exterior, Henry concealed a heartcapable of descending to the vilest artifices, and of sport,ing with his own honour and veracity. No one could be-lieve his assertions or .trust his promises. He justified hishabits of duplicity by the maxim that "it is better to re-pent of words than of facts, to be guilty of falsehood thanto fail in a favourite pursuit."(Lingard.)Giraldus Cambrensis, on the subjectduplicity, says : —" Naturali quadam inconstantia, verbiof theKing'sspontaneus plerumque transgressor.inarctum res devenerat, do dicto malens quam facto poeni-Nam quoties^ It is likely that John of Salisbury was one of the greatest letter-Although more than 320 of his letters are preservedwriters of his day.in the Migne collection, they are said to be only a few. The Rev. W.B. Morris, of the Oratory, London, thinking that if Salisbury hadreally obtained a grant of Ireland for Henry II., as related in ChapterXLII, of the Metaiogicus, he roust have alluded to it in some of theseletters, examined them all. He found twenty-seven letters addressedto Pope Adrian IV., eleven to King Henry II., and twenty-three toPope Alexander III—but in none of them a single word about a dona-tion of Ireland, or anything bearing on such a subject.Is it nottherefore morally certain that Salisbury is not the author of ChapterAgain, as Cardinal Moran remarks, Salisbury, after the deathXLII ?of Adrian IV., having fallen into disgrace at Henry's court, wrotemany letters setting forth his merits, and defending himself against thedispleasure of the King, but in none of them did he refer to a signalservice that he had rendered in obtaining a grant of Ireland.Is it notthus evident that he had never rendered any such service, and thatChapter XLII. is a mere forgery ?Trans.——^52POPE ADRIAN IV.,tere, verbumque facilius quam factum irritum habere."(Vol. v., p. 304.)Cardinal Vivian, after a long conversation with theKing-, remarked that he had never seen a man tell lies withsuch a brazen face.(Epist. S. Thorn., 3, 6.)His angfer was that of a madman ; his fury, that of aEst leo, aut leone truculentior, dum vehemen-(Peter of Blois, Epist. 66, 75.)A page having presented a letter to him, the King triedto pull out his eyes, and it was only with wounds that the{Epist. S. Thom., i, 45.)youth escaped.Pride and anger, cunning and duplicity, were the chiefwild beast.tius excandescit.traits in his character.The falsity of the letter attributed to Pope Adrian hasalready been proved by extrinsic arguments, set forth atA document that islength in the preceding chapters.produced only thirty years or so after the date given it,while one had the greatest interest in using it if it existed,necessarily falls to the ground by a presumption so over,whelming against it.It is time to examine the ApocryphalBull in itself—in its intrinsic characteristics.SECTION I.Above all I remark that the document, such as GiraldusCambrensis gives it and most chroniclers repeat it, doesnot express the name of the princeisaddressed : Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei,carissimo in Christo filio illustri Anglorum regi, salutemet apostoUcam benedictionem.to whom itI search in vam for the initial H. at the very least. 2Ought we to suppose that the forger took care not tomention the name because he could not foresee the timewhen somebody would be in a position to utilise the Bull?SECTION 2.The preamble is copied almost word for word from thetrue letter of Adrian IV., that whichtoLouis VII., King of France, in 1159, in order to pointwrotehe1 For a full translation of the apocryphal Bull, see DocumentNo. I at the end of the book.' To denote Henry.Trans,Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.;53out to him the injustice and the danger of an expeditionto Ireland. A comparison of the two preambles sufficesIt happens moreto demonstrate the falsity of the Bull.than once that Pontifical Letters begin with three or fourwords identically the same, as in other diplomas, especi.ally if they are of different years ; but that ten or fifteenlines, substantially the same, should appear in two dis-tinct letters— I do not think that an example of it can befound in the whole Roman Bullarium.inintuarege,coelis,CatholicseThe true letter of Adrian IV.thus :—Satis laudabiliterbeginset fructuose de christiano nominepropagando in terris, et aeternsebeatitudinis prsemio tibi cumu-landovideturmagnificentia cogitare, dum addilatandos termiaos populi chris-tiani, ad paganorum barbariemdebellandam, et ad gentes aposta-trices, et quaefideirefugiunt nee recipiunt veritatem,christianorum jugo et ditioni sub-dendas, simul cum charissimofilio nostro Henrico illustri Ang-lorumproperareintendis, et studes assidue (ut opushoc felicem exitum sortiatur) exer-citum et quae sunt itineri neces-saria congregare. Atque ad id con-venientius exsequendum, matristuae sacrosanctae Romanse Eccle-siae consilium exigis et favorem.Quod quidem propositum tantomagis gratum acceptumque tene-mus, et amplius sicut commen-commendamus,dandumquanto desinceriore charitatisradice talem intentionem et votumtam laudabile processum credi-mus, ac de majori ardore fidei etreligionis amore propositum ettuumprincipiumdesideriumhabuerunt.H.est,te,bullThe apocryphalbeginsthus: — Laudabiliter satis et fruc-tuose de glorioso nomine propa-gando in terris, et Eeternae felicita-tis praemio cumulando in coelis,tua magnificentia cogitat ; dumad dilatandos Ecclesiae terminos,ad declarandam indoctis et rudi-bus populis christianae fidei veri-et vitiorum plantaria detatem,agro Dominico extirpanda, sicutcatholicus princeps intendis; etad id convenientius exsequendumconsilium Apostolicae sedis exigis,In quo facto, quantoet favorem.altiori consilio et majori discre-tione procedis, tanto in eo felicio-rem progressumpraestanteDomino, confidimus habiturumeo quod ad bonum exitum semperet finem solent attingere quaa deet religionis amoreardore fideiprincipium acceperunt .Sig-nificasti siquidem nobis,inChristocarissime, te Hiberniaeinsulam, ad subdendumiliumpopulumvitiorumplantaria inde extirpanda, velle. Nos itaque, pium etintrare .laudabile desiderium tuum cumfavore congruo prosequentes, etpetition! bonae benignum impen-dentes assensum, gratum et accep-tum habemus, ut pro dilatandisEcclesias terminis, pro vitiorumrestringendo decursu, pro corri-gendisvirtutibusinserendis, pro christians religio-illamnisingrediaris,augmento,moribus.insulamlegibus,'filletet...' Addend, forsantuts vel christianii.,54POPE ADRIAN IV.The counterfeiting is so close that it is amazing howit has not awakened the suspicions of historians.Itmight be said that not one of them had gone to thetrouble of comparing the two documents, or of readingOther passages imitated fromthem over with attention.the true letter may be seen in the Apocryphal Bull.. velle intrare .The true letter says : In H. properare intendis.^ OnSignifi-the contrary, we read in the Apocryphal Bull :casti nobis te Hihernim insulam .ingrediaris.Gratum habemus ut .These expressions seem to mean that there is question ofpenetrating into the interior of Ireland, and suppose thatthe King of England occupies a few points along theIt was only a dozen years after the death of Popecoast.Adrian that the adventurers and the King took Dublin andIt is therefore impossible that the Bull shouldWaterford.be from Pope Adrian.. insulamillam...... exercitum, et qucBIt is said in the true letter that Louis VII. was prepar-ing an army, and such things as were necessary for thesuntvoyage : Studes assidue .itineri necessaria, congregare. An expedition on the con-This goestinent requires little more than a good army.to prove that the expedition on which Louis VII. andHenry II. consulted Pope Adrian related to Ireland, andnot to Spain, as I have shown (in Chapters VI. and Vll.).How surprising that Pope Adrian should raise no objec-tion against the conquest of Ireland—he who, in his letterto Louis VII., weighed with so much wisdom and circum-spection the difificulties of the enterprise, and the injusticeof an intervention that was not asked for by the Church,the princes, or the people of the land !section 3.The forger makes Pope Adrian IV. say that Ireland,and in general all islands enlightened by Christ, the Sunof Justice, that is to say, those which have received theteachings of Faith, belong to thePeterand to the Roman Church : Sane Hiherniam, et omnesinsulas, quibus sol justitim Christus illuxit, et qucB docu-menta fidei christiance ceperunt, ad jus beati Petri etsacrosanctcB RomancB Ecclesioe, quod tua etiam nobilitasApostle SaintA FRIEND OF IRELAND.55. recognoscit, non est duhiuni pertinere.Thus, the King ofEngland, writing to the Pope in order to ask Ireland,would have admitted that all islands belong to the HolySee.1. The power of Constantine, from a political point ofview, was the same in pagan islands as in those which hadI see no reason for limiting theembraced Christianity.concession to Christian countries. Had Ireland receivedChristianity at the beginning of the fourth century?2. At the most, Constantine couldonly have givenNow, the Romans, farislands dependent on the empire.from conquering Ireland, always left it outside their fron.Constantine could not be unaware of this fact-^he.tiers.who spent a great part of his life in insular Great Britain.3. The Popes did not avail themselves of a donationfrom Constantine for Rome, nor for the Italian continent,Consult the letters of Codex Caroli-nor even for islands.nus, whose authenticity cannot be doubted ; examine theregister of St. Gregory the Great ; study the imperialdiplomas from the ninth to the fifteenth century : you willalways see that, if Constantine gave some territorial pos-sessions or patrimonies, political authority had an originquite different, which was nothing but the piety of Pepin,Charlemange, and other emperors, who established theNow, these solemn, authentic,Pontifical Sovereignty.and official diplomas never make any allusion to a dona-tion of Constantine.4. Among the notes that Mr. O'Callaghan has added tothe MacaricB Excidium, I remark one (p. 246) relating tothe donation of Constantine, and in it I find, to my greatregret, some unjustifiable prepossessions, which cannotbe reconciled with the truth of history. He speaks thus ;" Upon the famous apocryphal donation of Constantine,on which the request of Henry the Second's envoy for agrant of Ireland from Adrian IV. was based. Gibbon, whothe eightii century, says : — ' This memorable donationassigns the elate oi that fabrication to the latter end ofWas introduced to the world by an epistle of Adrian theFirst, who exhorts Charlemange to imitate the liberalityand revive the name of the great Constantine.Accord-ing to the legend, the first of the Christian emperors, .healed of the leprosy ... by St. Sylvester, .. declared...,56POPE ADRIAN IV.his resolution of founding a new capital in the East, andresigned to the Popes the free and perpetual sovereigntyof Rome, Italy, and the provinces of the West. ... Sodeep was the ignorance and credulity of the times, thatthe most absurd of fables was received, with equal rever-ence, in Greece and France, and is still enrolled amongthe decrees of the canon law.In the revival of lettersand liberty, this fictitious deed was transpierced by thepen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of an eloquent critic, anda Roman patriot.His contemporaries of the fifteenthcentury were astonished at his sacrilegious boldness ; yetsuch is the silent and irresistible progress of reason that. the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians..and poets."I am going to show that these assertions contain asmany errors as words.(a) Gibbon is mistaken.The supposition of a grantfrom Constantine reaches back much farther than theeighth century ; but it is right to add that the Popes didDid St. Gregory the Greatnot avail themselves of it.pretend to be the sovereign of Rome or of Italy? WhenBelisarius and Narses reconquered the peninsula from theGoths, I do not see that the Popes of the time cried out inthe name of Constantine's donation. On the contrary, theimperial exarchs, during several centuries, governed, inthe name of the emperor, not only Rome and Ravenna,but even the islands.toand not(b) If Pope Adrian I. advised Charlemagne to imitatethe generosity of Constantine, he referred to territorialpossessions, to fruitful domains,politicalsovereignty, which this emperor never conferred on theFor the rest, what more could Adrian I. askHoly See.of Charlemagne, who had already, with his father, Pepin,either bestowed on the Holy See or restored to it the exar-chate of Ravenna, from Spezia and Plaisance as far asRimini and Ancona, and then Rome and its provinces ;besides a great part of central and southern Italy, andmany islands lying near Italy, Corsica among the num-ber? Could the Popes have desired more?(c) It matters little if some writers are mistakeh abouta grant of Constantine—^believing it to be authentic andtrue. The essential point is that the Popes did not availA FRIEND OF IRELAND.57themselves of this apocryphal title-deed.In point offact, they derived their political sovereignty from the resti-tutions, donations, and confirmations of Pepin, Charle-magne, and their successors.St. Gregory VII. nevermade use of the donation of Constantine, although St.Peter Damian employs it in his arguments against theTeutons, followers of the anti-Pope Cadolaus. The dona-tion was also cited in a letter of Leo IX. to MichaelCerolarius.(Patrologie, tome 143, p. 752.)(d) O'Callaghan insists on a pretended diploma of PopeUrban II., grounded on a donation of Constantine, to dis-" This non-pose of Corsica in favour of the Pisans.sense," says the writer, " of the Pope's being the headowner ofpartiallyannounced to the world in a Bull of Urban II., datedA.D. 1091, in which, on disposing of the island of Corsica,he said that the Emperor Constantine had given theislands to St. Peter and his vicars."(See Fleury, lib. 64,sec. 8.)ChristianislandsbeenhadallI answer that the diploma attributed to Urban II.isapocryphal.It is not in the Roman Bullarium.Urban II. could not be unaware that Corsica was in-cluded in the donation of Charlemagne, and that the con-firmatory diplomas of all the emperors expressly desig-nated it as belonging to the Holy See : what need thenof relying on a title so uncertain as a donation of Con-stantine ?In reality, the Roman archives possessed from thattime, and preserve to this day, those imperial diplomas ofthe ninth an^ tenth centuries which attest the donation ofCorsica by Kings Pepin and Charlemagne—notably Manu-The celebrated diploma inscript 1964 of the Vatican,gold letters, on an azure ground, of the Emperor Otho,A.D. 962, kept in the same archives, mentions Corsicaamong the pontifical dominions.Likewise, a diploma ofthe Emperor Henry II. in the year 1014.fifteenyearsScarcelyPopeGregory VII., preparing for a crusade, had the strongcastles of Corsica surrendered to him, and appointed agt)vern6r of the island, as representative of the RomanChurch.beforeUrbanII.,Could Urban II. be unaware of these public and recent,58POPE ADRIAN IV.Moreover, prudence forbade the substitution offacts?feudal investiture for an immediate governor, at a timewhen the strategic position ol Corsica was of supreme im-portance for the security of the " grand army " of theCrusaders, and for the freedom of maritime communica-Urban II. consequently took caretions with the East.not to partially alienate Corsica, by yielding it to investi.It is a real mockery to place a donation of Constan-ture.tino on the lips or on the pen of the Pope in such circum.Therefore, the diploma of 1091 is apocryphal.stances.It has been known only to the annalists of Pisa, interestedin making us believe that the Pope gave to their peopleDal Borgo^ andthe investiture of Corsica.Tronci,2 Such are the sources of the diploma !saySo(e) O'Callaghan objects, with Gibbon, that the falsedonation of Constantine was inserted in the canonical col-lection : "Is still enrolled among the decrees of the canonlaw." Now the famous donation is found, certainly notin official codes or in pontifical decretals, but only in thecompilation of the monk Gratian, which is a work in allrespects private, which the Popes have always taken carenot to authorise or to authenticate, and- whose contentshave no other value than what they carry per se.^EveryIt is surprising that menstudent of theology knows this.so studious as Gibbon and O'Callaghan should be ignorantof a fact so elementary.(/) Considering that the Popes abstained from makinguse of a donation of Constantine, and that the example ofUrban II., the only one adduced to the contrary, is forgedand false, it is not possible that Pope Adrian IV. took, asthe foundation of a grant of Ireland to the King of Eng-land, the said donation of Constantine.It follows thatthe Bull Laudabiliter satis, attributed to Pope Adrian IV.,is apocryphal.1 Raccolia di diplomi Pisam, p. 31.' Memorie di Pisa, p. 31' Gratian was a Benedictine monk at Bologna in the twelfthHis work was not simply a collection of canons, but aIn spite of his good intentions, it containedcentury.treatise^on canon law.many mistakes.— Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.59SECTION 4.After the oath of Avranches, which recognised the feudalsove.reignty of the Pope over the kingdom of England,Henry II. could naturally say that islands belonged to theBut in the case of the Apocryphal Bull, which,Holy See.as is pretended, was written seventeen years previously,the King could not without inconvenience acknowledgeislands, because he wouldth^ right of the Pope overthereby have engaged and conpromised the independenceof the kingdom of England itself.Hence, it follows, thatthe Apocryphal Bull was drawn up aftertheofAvranches, which was taken in 1172—consequently a longtime after Adrian IV., who died in 11 59.argument against the genuineness of the Bull.This is anotheroathO'Callaghan quotes approvingly a conjecture from Dr.Lanigan, who thinks that Pope Adrian hinted to the Kingthat the kingdom of England, being in an island, belongedto the Holy See, like other islands." ThetheandDoctorfollowingcitescriticisespassage in the Bull : —Sane Hiherniam et omnes insulasquibus sol justiticB illuxit, et qua documenta fidei Chris-tiance ceperunt, ad jus heati Petri et sacrosantcB Romanceecclesia [quod tua etiani nobilitas recognoscit) non estdiihium pertinere." By the words in the parenthesis, re-marks the Doctor, the Pope probably meant to hint toHenry that also his kingdom of England, as being in anisland, belonged to the Holy See ; and we find that, in theyear 1173, Henry declared himself a vassal of Pope Alex-ander III.tohisBut since the King recognised inletter (whichthe Pope over allnobody has ever seen) the right ofislands, what need had Pope Adriansuggestthismaxim to a prince who was the first to formulate it? Onthe other hand, if the Pope intended an allusion to Eng-land, we must admit that he expressedaIn fact, Henry allowedmanner not to be understood.seventeen years to roll by before acquitting himself inregard to feudal subjection., It is natural to suppose that the King put the maximinto the Apocryphal Bull, with a view to availing himselfof it against Ireland, and perhaps against Scotland, thehimselfin,60POPE ADRIAN IV.At theIsle of Man, and other islands that he coveted.time of the fabrication of the Bull, Henry had nothing tofear for England, seeing the engagements that he hadtaken by the oath of Avranches.The forger tells us that the King promised to establishSECTION 5....Peter's Pence through all Ireland : Significasti nobis .. velle intrare ; et de singulis domi-te Hibernice insulam .bus annuam unius denarii heato Petro velle solvere pen-Adrian IV., on his side, authorises the King tosioiiem.penetrate into the country, and orders the people to wel-come him with respect, on condition that the rights ofthe churches will be safeguarded, and that Peter's Pennywill be paid annually from every house :Salva beatoPetro, et sacrosanctcB Romanes ecclesicB, de singulis domi.So we read in thebus annua unius denarii pensione.Apocryphal Bull.I.If all this is true, the Pope and the King made anunworthy bargain. Henry bought Ireland, and Adrian IV.,to gain a pecuniary pension, sacrificed the independenceof a nation.of3. Diplomasusuallyinvestitureprescribedanannual payment, in recognition of sovereign dominion ;but this payment was exceedingly small, one ortwocrowns a year.Here, on the contrary. Pope Adrian re-quired an enormous contribution ; for the Anglo-Normanpenny was worth four or fiveof our presentThanks to these data, we can approximatelymoney. 1calculate the annual income.It would have a'mounted toa sum truly unexampled in the history of pontifical inves-titures.shillings3. The Kings of Naples paid a pretty high tribute, be-cause it included the revenues of some ancient patrl-1 That is, a penny in former times would purchase as much asthree or four shillings in our day.England has often used debased coin in Ireland, by which theThis method of cheating is much the samepeople suffered heavy loss.as to take good silver from a mah and give him its weight in pewter.It is not very long since two values were given to money in theseislands. Thus up to 1825 the English shilling passed in Ireland forthirteen pence, and the English guinea for £1 2s. gd.—Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.—6lmonies which Constantine gave to the Roman Church,and which were wasted by the Saracens.4. In Eng-Iand, the Peter's Pence came from ancientusage, from the spontaneous offering that princes andpeople had formerly made of the tribute.5. Peter's Pence were not established in Ireland : noPope claimed them. The clause of the Apocryphal Bull isGiraldus Cambrensis, who be-therefore false and forged.lieved bona fide in the genuineness of the Bull, attributedthe misfortunes of the English Kings in Ireland to theviolation of their promise regarding Peter's Pence, as Ishall say further on.6. Henry II.really possessed some towns along theIrish coast, and his barons subjected some adjacent coun-ties. How is it that he did not establish Peter's Pence atIn the treaty of Wind-least in these towns and counties ?sor, of which I have spoken above, supposing the factto be authentic, Henry II., required of the King of Con-nacht to promise an annual tribute of one cowhide orsheepskin on every ten beasts ; but there was not a word ofPeter's Pence promised to Pope Adrian.7. Henry II. had the clause inserted in the ApocryphalBull, probably to furnish a pretext for penetrating intoIreland, and exacting tributes for himself, not for theInnocent III. claimed Peter's Pence from thePope.lEnglish bishops ; but, I repeat it, no Pope ever askedPeter's Pence from the Irish bishops, or from the Irishpeople.SECTION 6.St. Stephen of Hungary received from Rome a kindof apostolic legateship for the propagation and advance-ment of religion in his kingdom, as we see in the RomanBreviary, at the date September 2nd : Vere propter ingensdilatandm fidei studium, illius gentis Apostolus nuncu-paius, facta a Romano Pontifice ipsi posterisque regibusIt is an analogous missionprmferenda crucis potestate.' The flaunting of Peter's Pence would seem to have been a kindNeitherof hypocritical bribe, employed to gain credence for the Bull.Henry nor his successors ever established Peter's Pence in Ireland.Trans.62POPE ADRIAN IV.,that the false Bull attributes to Henry II. ; but this kindof moral delegation has no connection with political in-vestiture. Having treated of this point in a previous chap-ter, when I examined an addition to the Metalogicus, Ineed not return to it.Henry 11. simply wished to penetrate into Ireland, andAs forto see himself welcomed there without distrust.the rest, he took it on himself, hoping very much thatonce he had entered the sheep-fold, he would never comeout again.This is the reason why the Apocryphal Bull allows anentrance into Ireland, and recommends the people to re-ceive the King with respectful and submissive behaviour.it does not extend toThis mission is purely personal :the successors of the King of England.The most surprising thing of all is that the Bishops ofFor theIreland are never mentioned in the false Bull.King alone the pre-eminently religious mission of propa-gating the faith, repressing vices, and planting virtues !We might suppose that Ireland at the time had not oneBishop, or one clergyman !The pseudo-Adrian concludes by giving the King fullpower to regulate by himself, or by his agents, whateveris of a nature to procure the glory of God, an increase ofWhat other secularfaith, and the salvation of souls.prince has ever received ecclesiasticalin amanner so complete?jurisdiction" Let it be your study to form that people to goodmorals, and take such orders both by yourself and bythose whom you shall find qualified in faith, in words,and in conduct, that the Church there may be adorned,and the practices of the Christian faith be planted andincreased ; and let all that tends to the glorv of God andthe salvation of souls be so ordered by you that you maydeserve to obtain from God an increase of everlasting re-ward, and may secure on earth a glorious name through-out all time."If Henry had succeeded in causing his false Bull to beaccepted, he would have recovered in Ireland that supre-macy which the labours and the martrydom ofSaintThomas of Canterbury had compelled him to abandon inEngland,—2A FRIEND OF IRELAND.63SECTION 7.The forger contented himself with writing an ordinaryletter in the name of Pope Adrian IV. He did not go tothe trouble of fabricating a solemn diploma, a Bull pro-perly so called, with thetheRoman Chancery.Yet the transaction deserved a Bull.Adrian answered Louis VII. with an ordinary letter, be-cause he granted nothing, and was satisfied to point outthe dangers of an Irish expedition ; but the case is verydifferent for an act of the kind here considered.formalities employed byThe Bulls of the grant of investiture^ were consistorialacts, which should be furnished with the signatures ofcardinals. The forger, fearing perhaps that some one ofthe signatories might still be in the world and raise a pro-test, judged it prudent to name no other person than PopeAdrian, who had died about thirty years before.What must be my conclusion ?I shall not formulate it.I prefer to leave it to the judgment of the reader.' The following will show the manner in which the Pope andIt is taken fromCardinals usually added their names to documents.Pope Adrian's letter No. 98.Ego Adrianus catholicse Ecclesia; episcopus.Ego Guide presb. card, tit, Sancti Chrysogoni.Ego Julius presb. card. tit. Sancti Marcelli.Ego Octavianus presb. card. tit. S. Ceciliae.Ego Gerardus presb. card. tit. S. Stephani in Coelio Monte.Datum Beneventi per manum Rolandi, sanctae RomanaeEcclesiae presbyteri cardinalis et cancellarii, Kal. Junii, indict. IV.,Incarnationis Dominicas anno 1156, pontificatus vero domniAdriani papae IV. anno secundo.The Cardinal Roland here mentioned as Chancellor became PopeAlexander III. in 11 59, after the death of Adrian IV., and reigned till1 181. He had doubtless learned from Pope Adrian what to think ofHenry II.Trans.^ In Migne's collection there are 258 letters (including bulls,privileges, &c.) attributed to Pope Adrian IV., and all appear to beGenerally found withoutgenuine except No. 76 Laudabiliter satis.any clear mention, at the beginning, of the person to whom it isaddressed, or, at the end, of the place or the date at which it wasIf we had no otherwritten, it is said to be "without head or tail."evidence in regard to the qualifications of Pope Adrian IV., any one,examining this collection, will readily see that he was a man of realmerit, great wisdom, and calm moderation—not at all likely to——;64POPE ADRIAN IV.CHAPTER XIX.DIPLOMA ATTRIBUTED TO ALEXANDER II".GiRALDUs Cambrensis, who, it seems, was the first topublish the diploma of Pope Alexander, in Hibernia, Ex-pugnata, disclaimed it afterwards in another work that hepublished towards the close of his life, entitled De Instruc.Some assure us, he says, or pretend totione Principis.believe, that the diploma was obtained ; but others denySicut a quibusdam impetratumthat it was ever obtained.asseritur : ab aliis autem unquam impetratum fuisse nega-There is no chance of making capital out of thistur.document.!Like the Apocryphal Bull, this diploma is without date ;neither does it express the name of the King- to whom it isO'Callaghan has not failed to publish it, ob-addressed.serving-, with Dr. Lanigan, that " the attempts to dis-guilty of injustice. The conviction will grow on the reader's mind thatAdrian, being a native of England, knew better than others what tothink of the Plantagenets, and that probably he never even once in hislife wrote to Henry.Trans.Migne gives over 1,500 letters attributed to Pope Alexander III.He then adds two under the heading " Spuria." One of these isaddressed to Henry II., and is specially interesting as giving himauthority over the Bishops of England : " Insuper, fili charissime, siepiscopi tui regni in nostro mandato apostolica et archlepiscopatuexstiterint, volumus quod manusnimis negligentes, quod absit !adjutrices extendas ad sustentandam Romanse Ecclesise libertatemet sic obtinebis apostolicam benedictionem; quia post sententiamlatam si incorrigibiles perstiterint, sacrosancta Ecclesia non potestultra facere nisi invocare brachium seculare." Henry II. in his desireto be Head of the Church, and in several other respects, bore a greatresemblance to Henry VIII. Both had a furious hatred for St. Thomasof Canterbury. Henry VIII. summoned the dead Archbishop before theroyal tribunal on a charge of high treason. The writ was hung upAs the holy man did not appear on the day of trial,at his tomb.His name was blotted out pf thesentence was passed against him.calendar of the saints, the memory of him totally condemned, hisbones burned, his ashes thrown into the river, and all the preciousornaments—gold, silver, jewels, &c.—of his shrine, said to have beenthe richest in Europe, were carried away to the royal coffers.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.65prove the authenticity of Alexander's, as well as Adrian'sBull, have been equally unsuccessful."I turn to the document in the recent edition of theworks of Gilraldus Cambrensis.(Vol. v., p. 318.)It is unnecessary to discuss at any great length the valueof a diploma that, as I have said above, has been dis-claimed by the very man who was most deeply interestedin maintaining it.1. H/jw strange that Alexander III., who knew nothingof Adrian's Bull when he wrote the three letters of whichI have spoken above (Chapter XIIL), now comes forwardto confirm a donation of Ireland to the King of England,without naming this prince.that2. One might sayPope AlexanderconfirmedAs a matterAdrian's Bull, without ever having seen it.of fact, the pretended authority given by Adrian to enterIreland, and the recommendation to welcome him as lord,are transformed by Alexander into a grant of the dominionof the Irish kingdom: Concessionem ejusdem super Hiber.. ratani habemus etnici regni dominio vohis indulto .confirmamus. Was Ireland a kingdom, or did it bearthis title in any public acts? The plural vobis takes us bythe forger would have us believe that Irelandsurprise :was given to all the Kings of England in perpetuity..3. The mention of Peter's Pence shows beyond ques-tion the falsity of the diploma, as I have established in theIt is inadmissible that Popes Adrianpreceding chapter.and Alexander should have authorised or accepted a tri-bute which was never paid, and which the Holy See neverasked.4. Although Lanigan believed in the genuineness of thediploma, he exclaims against the charge of barbarism andinfamous morals with which the Pontiff is supposed tohe says,reproach the people ofIreland." seems to have known nothing of the state of the IrishChurch, except what he heard from the lying accounts ofthe enemies of Ireland."[Macarice Excidium, p. 247.)5. We find in the diploma the same confusion betweenthe two powers, ecclesiastical and secular, as I have notedin the Apocryphal Bull.It is not to bishops, but to aworldly prince, that Pope Alexander is seen to confide themission of workin;af the moral reformation of a barbarousThe Pope,F—OPOPE ADRIAN IV.,people, Christian only in name—of reforming the Church,heretofore without order in Ireland—of making the nationAre such ideas tolerable?really Christian. iHenry II.,at the time of his dreadful conflict withSt. Thomas of Canterbury, asked much less than PopeAlexander is here supposed to grant him. He submitted,no doubt, but he reserved to himself the taking- of revenge,' Archdeacon Lynch, in his valuable work Cambrensis Eversus,subjects the alleged Bulls of Adrian and Alexander to a long andlearned examination. "I am confident," he says, "that these Bullsare full of errors, and that most of their statements are utterly ground-less, an assertion which can be more easily substantiated by examiningtheir blunders in detail." He scouts the idea of a Pope employingsuch an agent as Henry II., a man full of evil propensities, for agreat and difficult work of moral reformation ; of writing letters sodifferent from the true papal style, so abusive, so devoid of allpaternal tenderness for the Irish people ; and of departing so farfrom the spirit of the Holy See as to treat the Irish Bishops withan utter want of ceremony—reducing them to a rank of secondaryimportance in presence of an English King, at the head of an invadingarmy. "Tyranny of that kind," he says, "was never known underthe mild government of the Popes, whose pious and learned delegatesemployed gentle and persevering persuasion, not violence and platoons,to civilise the hearts of men, lighting by admonition the path forvoluntary obedience, not goading them against their will at the pointof the sword. When the Apostles went forth to propagate the faith,they were not allowed to carry even a staff ; and can it be lawful fortheir successors in that sacred duty to force by arms some namelesssort of reformation on men eminently instructed in religion ? Armsrather barbarise than civihse man. War destroys learning and law,levels cities, burns houses, devastates lands, tramples the corn fields... in a word, throws everything into disorder. A most contemptiblefool the man must be, who first invented the story of the adoptionby the Apostolic See of so preposterous a mode of reforming the moralsDr. Lynch thus goes on to prove by innumerableof any nation."arguments that the aforesaid Bulls were mere forgeries.Vol. ii.,Ed. by the Rev. Dr. Mat. Kelly.chap. 22-25.If the English translation of Cambrensis Eversus by Dr. Kelly,which is done in very good style, were published in one volume byitself, it would be a great boon ; for few readers can be expected totake up the three large volumes, containing both Latin and EnglishUnfortunately, however, the notes attached by Dr. Kelly,texts.though according to the views held by many persons in his day, areusually out of all harmony with the remarks made by the Author.A correcting or reconciling hand would therefore be required, andthis would entail trouble, but far less than that of making anotherConsidering the many new lights thrown on historytranslation.during the past fifty years, a great advance towards truth might begxpected.Trans.——A FRIPND OF IRFI.ANn,67thanks to the diplomas which he would one day haveforged under his eyes.CHAPTER XX.APPEARANCE OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL INENGLISHCHRONICLES.It seems to me certain, and I shall prove it in the courseof the following- chapters, that the English chroniclerstook the Apocryphal Bull from Giraldus Cambrensis, who,first of all,i published it, in his history of the Conquest ofIreland.Hibernica, which contained theGiraldus composed a great many works. Being in Rome,he presented copies of them to the Pope, and to other per-sonages ; but he took care not to let them see the Expug-natioofThus, having gone to Rome in 1199, heAdrian IV.2presented six of his works to Pope Innocent III.—amongothers, the Gemma Sacerdotalis : the conquest of Ireland(Works of Giraldus, new edition.does not figure there.Brewer, 1861, vol. i, p. Ixx.)falseBullIn the Sym,bolum Electorum we sec a letter written byGiraldus to the Dean or Chancellor of the Roman Court.He sent him the Topography of Ireland and the Descrip-tion of Cambria, but no History of the Conquest.(Ibid.,As Giraldus, revising his Expugnatio, made of it, during' Itis likely that Giraldus, being a courtier, accepted withoutany question any document supplied to him by Henry, and gladlyinserted it m his book.It is likely also that the King regarded thepublication of the book as a golden opportunity for the introduction ofa forgery, and considered himself fortunate in meeting with such acredulous author as Giraldus, who always thought himself twice theman he was, and expected everybody to believe him.Trans.' This would seem to imply that Giraldus himself had somesuspicions regarding the Bull, and was afraid to bring it under thenotice of the authorities at Rome, lest some more scrutinising glanceBut then he would no longer be inshould reveal its true character.bona fide. We may therefore suppose that his motive was not to drawany attention to the doings of trie English in Ireland, which were socontrary to the intentions of the Pope, and which, if known, mightlead to a revocation of the supposed Bull.Trans.68POPE ADRIAN IV.,his lifetime, two or three different editions, of which thelast, dedicated to King John, seems to have been in i2og,I cannot dispense myself from a notice of the author's lifeThis task is now easy, thanks to the laboriousand works.studies of Mr. Brewer and the Rev. Mr. Dimock, whohave published the most recent edition.Born about 1150, Giraldus went to study in Paris, andreturned to England at twenty-two years of age.In 1175,the Archbishop of Canterbury confided to him a missionin Wales, and appointed him Archdeacon of Brecknock.It seems certain that Giraldus returned to Paris about theend of 1176.It was only in 1184 that King Henry II. brought him toGiraldus rendered him allCourt, in quality of chaplain.the services he could, in Ireland and in Wales, by his actsNevertheless, Henry bestowed noand by his writings.favours on him, because he was related to some of thechief families among the Welsh.Giraldus complainedbitterly of this neglect, especially in his biography (Derebus a se gestis), written about 1204 : " Cum ergo pluri-bus annis curiam sequendo fideliter servasset, et ad Wal-liam pacificandam et in pace tenendam profecisset ; tamenpropter parentelam qua Resum filiumaliosWallise principes contingebat, nihil a rege (Henrico) quitot ditabat et promovebat indignos, prseter vacua verispromissa suscepit. "GriiSni(Vol. 1., 57.)etSent into Ireland in 1185, as tutor and counsellor ofKmg John, he there found materials for his Topography,and for the History of the Conquest, which he wrote in thetwo or three years following.In I i8g he was in France.After the death of Henry II.,Richard Coeur de Lion sent Giraldus to put Wales into aThe same year Giraldus was namedstate of defence.assistant to the supreme justiciary of England, the Bishopof Ely.The fixed idea of Giraldus, that which filled his life, wasto withdraw his country, Cambria, from the metropolitanjurisdiction of Canterbury, and to erect an archbishopricWith this view, he hadin the Cathedral of St. David.placed himself at the service of the Court. From the samemotive, he constantly refused the bishoprics that were—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.69offered to him : Bangor, in 1190 ; Landaf, in 1191 ; andso of others.Having abandoned the Court in 1192, he retired to Lin-coln, and remained there seven years,withstudies, and with the writing of various works : such asthe Life of Galfridus, Archbishop of York, written in 1193.and the Gemma Sacerdotalis, about 1 197.occupiedThe next year saw the beginning of the troubles of Gir-aldus, as a candidate for the Bishopric of St. David's.Postulated by the Chapter, with three other subjects, in1 198, he was the only one at the commencement of thefollowing year. On the 29th of June, he obtained, noHavinglonger simple postulation, but canonical election.set out for Rome to pursue the matter, he arrived thereabout the feast of St. Andrew, 1199, and found PopeInnocent III. disposed to restore the metropolitan right ofSt. David's. The Pontiff, however, asked for the vouchersGiraldus could not present them, andof ancient erection.after a suit of four years, he had to yield before the im-placable opposition of the King of England and the Arch-bishop of Canterbury.Discouraged and embittered, he returned to England,and resigned his archdeaconship to his nephew William.During the years 1204 and 1205, he wrote a Description ofCambria, Symholum Electurum, Speculum, Duorum,, In-vectiones, the Life of St. Regimus, and his own Auto-About 1209, he prepared the last edition ofbiography.Hibernia Expugnata, with a dedication to King John.About 12 18, he wrote the Dialogues De jure MenevensisEcclasicB. About 1220, he completed De Principis Instruc-Alex-tione,ander III. ; afterwards the Speculum Ecclesice, andasecond edition of the Dialogues. The year of his death isnot known.in which he disclaimeddiploma oftheThe first edition of the Conquest, dedicated to RichardCceur de Lion, Earl of Poitiers, could hardly have beenfinished before 1188I—previously to the death of Henry II.As regards the last edition, the time is fixed by its dedica-' If it contained Adrian's Bull, this would be thirty-three years afterthesupposed date (1155) of the Bull. Pope Adrian IV,, King Louis VII.,and John of Salisbury, being long dead, Henry might now have theBull spoken of, in public as well as in private, with little fear,Trans,70POPE ADRIAN IV.,tion to King John, about 1209.Therefore, between thesetwo dates we must place the divulghig of the Bull attri-is not easy to be morebuted to Pope Adrian IV.precise.ItIn the manuscripts that have come down to us, we re-mark some important variations and considerable sup-pressions. We also find there some parts inextricablyThus, some manuscripts leave out the diplomaconfused.of Alexander III., and do not even allude to it.Scribeshave, in consequence, modified the preamble ; and by aninconceivable mistake, they have represented Henry II. assoliciting- in 11 72 a privilege from Adrian IV., who diedThen, by a confusion no less strange, they re-in II 59.present John of Salisbury, who, it is said, obtained aprivilcg:e in 11 55, as sent in 1172, not to Ireland, but toRome, with the view of publishing- the diploma at Water-(See the judicious observations offord in 1the Rev. Mr. Dimock, vol. v., p. xlii.-li.)1 74 or 1175.thatIn the last edition, finished about 1209, the suppressionsare more considerable than in the previous ones.Dimockresentment which Giraldussees in it a trace ofnourished against the royal family, who, instead of re-warding his services, had opposed his most ardent wishesfor the religious independence of Cambria.[Ihid., p. xlv.)Camden, in his compendium : Anglica, Hibernica, &c,followed the manuscripts which show considerable suppres-sions, and which have caused the greatest confusion in re-gard to pontifical diplomas connected with Ireland.(Ibid.,P- 315-)What may lead us to believe that the pretended Bull ofAdrian IV. was pretty late in being divulged is that neitherWilliam of Newburgh nor Roger de Hoveden appears tohave had any knowledge of it,Giraldus seems to have believed bona fide in the genuine-ness of the Bull. He inserted it anew in his autobiography[De rebus a se gestis), written about the year 1205 ; but hecited the Bull only with a view to show that the reverses ofthe English in Ireland came from the fact of their nothaving observed the conditions prescribed by Pope Adrian,especially in regard to Peter's Pence.(Ibid., p. 61.)In the autobiography, the diploma of Alexander III. iscompletely omitted, as well as all reference to a pretended——A FRIEND OF IRELAND.71publication of the two Bulls in a Council at Watcrford, re-These suppressions and contra-lated in the Expugnatio.dictions leave everything in confusion and uncertainty.About 1209, all Ireland v^-as in revolt, 1 and the EnglishIn a letter accom.prince lost nearly all his possessions.panying a copy of the last edition, Giraldus represented toKing John that these misfortunes ought to be attributedto a violation of the promises made in regard to Ireland." Your father," he says, '' wisely providing for himselfand his posterity, promised two things to Pope Adrian IV.,in order to obtain authority to invade the land of Irelandand make a conquest of it.This aggression, so terribleand so bloody against Christians, was sanctioned by thehighest authority on earth, on condition of exalting theChurch in that region, and of giving to the Blessed Peterthe annual penny for every house, as is done in England,according to the privilege of the said Pope, which yourfather asked with prudence and circumspection, and whichis faithfully kept^ in the archives of Winchester. ... It iswithout doubt by reason of these two promises, not yet ful-filled, that the advantages of the conquest and the goodeffects that it ought to produce have been so long delayed,and that the chief men among the conquerors of Ireland .have not deserved to leave any legitimate descendants.Nor is this surprising.In point of fact, the clergy of theisland, impoverished, are plunged in the deepest misery.The cathedral churches mourn the loss of the extensivelands and domains with which, in former days, they werepiously and devoutly endowed ; they have been despoiledof them by the first conquerors, or by their companionsAnd thus an exaltation of the Churchand successors.there is changed into a spoliation of the churches. .That God may share in something of this conquest whichhas cost so much blood, it will be necessary to give hence-...' At this period, the Irish had learned by sad e.\perience what werethe real objects of the invaders, and could not but be filled withindignation at such a record of hypocrisy, treachery, and villainy.The motto of the English in plundering Ireland would seem to havebeen " Quocunque modo."Trans,°I£ "faithfully kept," as of the utmost importance, how is it thatno trace of it can now be found, or indeed has ever been seen, while wehave other documents, both genuine and forged, of the same period ?The reason seems to be that it never existed.Trans.,72POPE ADRIAN IV.ItItis a very small, a veryforth the promised Penny.frees everybody, and burdensmodest contribution.I add with the same earnestness that, to preservenobody.the memory of the conquest of Ireland by the English, itwould be well to establish firmly an annual tribute of gold,of game, or even of trees, as a perpetual testimony thatthe kingdom of Ireland is bound by an inviolable chain tothe Crown of England."(Giraldus, v. 408.)Hence result several important facts,i. In 1209, Peter's2. The families of thePence had never existed in Ireland.3. The Irishfirst conquerors were destroyed, annihilated.4. Theclergy were reduced to a state of extreme poverty.property of churches had been pillaged by the English.5. The false Bull of Adrian was preserved, according torumour, in the archives of Winchester.6. Giraldus, itseems, continued in good faith, sincerely believing in the7. The advice that Giraldus gavegenuineness of the Bull.to establish an annual tribute as a perpetual testimony ofthe subjugation of Ireland to the Crown of England, seemsto have been followed by King John, when, four yearsafterwards, he offered to Pope Innocent III. to pay to theHoly See an annual quit-rent of three hundred markssterling, in the name of Ireland.Later on, I shall saywhether the Pope accepted this token of sovereignty.CHAPTER XXI.AUTHORITY OF GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.It must be admitted that in these latter times, thanks tothe conscientious labours of Mr. Brewer and the Rev. Mr.Dimock, the authority of Giraldus, as a veracious historian,has fallen very much in the learned world.Mr. Brewer, whose first volume appeared in London in1861, is not afraid to reproach Giraldus with his credulity,and his continual references to old prophecies, as well asto his own visions ; again, with the discourses that thehistorian places on the lips of Norrnan and Welsh adven-turers, and of Irish chieftains, in which they make quota-tions from Greek and Latin authors—Julius Csesar, Virgil," They leave us to regret,"Horace, Ovid, and others.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.,73adds the editor, " that a quality of mind so valuable hadnot been strengthened and improved by a more sober andregulated judgment. "(Vol. I., p. xlvi.)According to the Rev. Mr. Dimock, Giraldus was toopassionate to be impartial. The picture that he draws ofForgetful of St. Malachy, he main-the Irish is unjvist.tains that since the days of St. Patrick, no Irish bishophas acquitted himself worthily of the pastoral charge.Little caring to find out the truth, he easily accepts the" I think,"Dimock,statements of others." I have said enough to justify me in refusing to acceptGiraldus's history of the Irish and of their English invadersas sober, truthful history."(Vol. v., p. Ixix.)saysMr.Truth was not the main object kept in view by Giraldus.He acknowledges that he took up his pen to glorify KingHenry II. : Topographiam Hibernicam .. in patris ves-tri laudem triennii Idbore digessi.[Ibid,, p. Ixx.).The history of the Conquest of Ireland is certainly, in agreat measure, a poetic fiction, rather thantrue andUnfortunately, it is not always possible tosober history.distinguish where the poetry ends and the prose begins.This is another remark made by the same editor.[Ibid.p. Ixxi.) Nor does he believe that anything can elsewherebe found so absurd as the orations which Giraldus putsinto the mouths of his heroes.It is the mountain bring-poem.iing forth the mouse.[Ibid., p. 'Ixx., note 4.)Giraldus made anepic^ The Rev. Mr. Dimock, in his preface to Vol. v., says : " Fromhis wide acquaintance with the first invaders of Ireland, and his closeconnexion with several of their principal leaders,— from the time also' that he spent there in his two visits,—we may be inclined to concludethat Giraldus's means of information about Ireland, and its people, andits conquest, as he much too grandly calls the English invasion, mustBut there are several circum-have been abundant and authentic.stances which render such a conclusion a very unsafe one ... As tohis history of the English invasion, it must have been wholly derivedfrom the English themselves, and in great measure, no doubt, from hisown near friends.If Giraldus had been the most cool, and fair, andunbiassed of writers, still a history so derived could not well have beenanything but one-sided ; it would be almost impossible that the Englishand their doings should not be more or less represented in colours toobright, and the Irish and their doings in too dark colours, and more-over, that the English, his own near friends, should not be undulyBut Giraldus was replete withexalted to the disparagement of others.—74POl'k ADRIAN IV.CHAPTER XXII.THE ENGLISH CHROMCI.KKS APPliAK TO HAVE ALL TAKliX THEAPOCRYPHAL BULL FROM GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.The greater number of Eng-lish annalists make little useof Giraldus, and are content, as regards the affairs of Ire-land, to draw on the little information supplied by Rogerde Hoveden and William of Newbridge.However, Hig-dcn, in his History of Henry II., appears to have employedthe treatise De Instructione. Principis, and perhaps also theBrompton seems to have takenExpugnatio Hibernica.from Higden what he says on the same facts...the exact qualities the very reverse of what are needed to form animpartial historian. A man of marvellously elastic self-confidence thatnothing could put down, an overflowing self-conceit that would bedeemed a mere absurd caricature if any one but himself had depictedhimself, he looked down with sublime contempt upon everyone andeverything that did not agree with his own notions ; he bad not an ideathat anything he thought or said could by any chance be wrong.. He was the man of all others whose nature rendered it simply im-possible for him to write a fair history of any sort, and least of all ofIreland, and the Irish, and the English invaders, with so many of hisown near relations among the latter " (pp. Ijti. Ixiii.)Mr. Edward A. Freeman, in his continuation of the preface toVol. vii., says; "In estimating the historical value of any work ofGiraldus Cambrensis, we must remember the two-fold character of theman with whom we are dealing. We are dealing with one who was vain,garrulous, careless as to minute accuracy, even so far careless as totruth as to be, to say the least, ready to accept statements which toldagainst an enemy without carefully weighing the evidence for them.We are dealing with one who was not very scrupulous as to consistency,and who felt no special shame of contradicting himself "(p. liii.)Mr. George F. Warner, in his introduction to Vol. viii., says ofGiraldus: " His character was marred by grave defects.His egotism. He was passionate, prejudiced, and vindictive.was unbounded. .No one, king or subject, who crossed his schemes, or whom he choseto regard as his enemy, could hope for his good word" (p. xxi.).These volumes were brought out by the Lords Commissioners ofthe Treasury, at the expense of the State.In some respects, Giraldus was really a clever man. He had agreat command of the Latin language, both in prose and verse,Hisfrequent quotations show that he had read much and rememberedmuch. But everywhere throughout his works, it is apparent that therewas more than one screw loose. We are told in Rome and England, bythe Rev. Luke Rivington, M.A. (p. 76), that he was sometimes calledGeraldthe Savage.Trans.—A FRIEND Of IRELAND.—75(I., 300.)(likeIn 1876 Mr. Stubbs published a new edition of Raoul deThe Apocryphal Bull ofDiceto, Imagines Historiarum.As the annalist madeAdrian is found in the first volume.no observation on it, the editor adds a note to the follow,ing effect : — It is very possible that this copy of the BullLaudabiliter was taken from Giraldus Cambrensis, Expug.natio Hibernica, II., 5, which should have been publishedat the time when Raoul wrote.theAt the year 1171 Raoul relatesremaining'crowd of English annalists) that the Bishops of Ireland andthe Kings of Limerick and Cork submitted to Henry II.,but that Roderic, King of Connaught, did not. On thislast point, he contradicts Giraldus, who assures us thatRoderic submitted like the others.(Page 346.)Roger de Wendover, a monk oflikeMatthew Paris, gives a large portion of the Bull of Adrian,with a preamble saying that King Henry sent messengersto Rome with great solemnity, in order to ask authority toon theinvade Ireland.contrary, that Salisbury alone treated of the affair withAdrian IV., and Giraldus confirms this story.The Pseudo-Metalogicus says,Alban's,St.Above all, it was Matthew Paris who contributed to thediffusion of the Apocryphal Bull.It is to be regretted thatsome respectable -historians have thought themselves justi-fied in referring to an author so decried as the monk ofAlban's, who makes mistakes every moment, andSt.gives as historical facts a number of fables that have noauthenticity.!Luard, who published in 1874 the Chronica Majora ofMatthew Paris, refers to Raoul de Diceto in what con-cerns the false Bull of Adrian IV. He doubtless thoughtthat such was the source from which Matthew Paris tookthe document.In the preamble, Matthew draws thelong bow by1 " There is one witness whom I have learned profoundly to dis-trust, who has been a prolific source of misstatement in our Englishhistorical literature, and that is Matthew Paris. Long ago Dr. Lingardpointed out, and in certain cases proved, the untrustworthiness of thg. His summaries, where they can be comparedmonk of St. Alban's, .with originals, are quite untrustworthy; and his own comments arealmost worthless, except for those who prefer the ebullitions of spleento a statement of facts."Trans.Rome and England, Rivington, p. xxvii.,,—^76POPE ADRIAN IV.Iadditions that are not at all in the Apocryphal Bull." Per idem tempus rexItalicise these exaggerations :Anglorum Henricus nuncios solemnes Romam mittens,rogavit Papam Adrianum, ut sibi liceret Hibernise insulamatque homineshostiliter intrare, etillos bestiales ad fidem et viam reducere veritatis, extir-patis ibi plantariis vitiorum ; quod Papa regi gratanterannuens, hoc sequens ei privilegium destinavit. "(II-, 300.)The editor, by his own authority, has put in the margin.Anno 1 155. Now, the Apocryphal Bull is without date inGiraldus and others, as I have often remarked.terrain subjugare,asI have saidMatthew Paris says no more of Ireland till the year1171. He gives nothing new, or little known, unless thathe formally contradicts Giraldus in reference to the Kingof Connaught. We must deny that Henry penetratedhostiliter into Ireland ; for he thought only of providingfor his own personal security,above.Matthew does not refer to the Bull of Adrian again ; hetakes good care not to a.ssert that it was notified to theIrish, or that it determined the pretended submission ofbishops and chiefs. Here is all that the annalist writes of thejourney in 1171 : " Per idem tempus rex Anglorum Hen-ricus decimo quinto kalendas novembris hostiliter Hiber.niam intravit, ubi archiepiscopi et episcopi ipsum in regemet dominum receperunt,juraverunt.etRegulus de Limeric, et regulus de Chor, et regulus quiMonoculus dicebatur, ei homagium juraverunt.Roderi-cus autem regulus de Connat, quia regio quam inhabitabatpaludibus nimiis interjacentibus, ininaccessabilisquibus nee vada commoda, nee pontes pervii, nee navigatiotuta habetur, regi occurrere supersedit. "fidelitatem[Ibid., p. 284.)est,ei' It has been the interest of England during the last seven centuriesto disguise and misrepresent the origin of its dominion in Ireland.Ifone writer tells us that John of Salisbury obtained the grant fromAdrian ; another that Henry petitioned for it ; another that Adrianwell pleased with the English King, conferred it spontaneously ; anotherthat the Irish princes, anxious to end their quarrels, besought Henryto accept the crown of Ireland—we know what to think of them allWe may not always be able, in a confused heap of impostures todiscover the exact truth, but we do not go far from it,Trans.,77A FRIHND OF IRELAND.CHAPTER XXIII.I'KLIU-t's I'ENCK.We come to a new presumption against the Bull of Adrian.Innocent III. claimed Peter's Pence from the Bishops ofEngland, but he never asked the tribute on account ofThis is evidence to us that the Bull of Adrian,Ireland.though entered from that time in chronicles, was not re-garded in any serious light.Thus, Pope Innocent wrote to Cardinal Nicholas, Bishopof Tusculum and Legate of the Apostolic See in England,and to Pandolphus, sub-deacon, and one of the Pontiff'shousehold, in the following terms : " Since every house inEngland, as you know very well, ought to give a pennyyearly for the tribute of the Blessed Peter, the prelates ofEngland, who have collected the tribute in our name, havedisposed of it against the will of the master, and have notbeen afraid to keep the greater part of it for themselves ;they have sent us only three hundred marks, and havekept more than a thousand in their own hands.Wish-the Church may being, therefore, that the right ofguarded, wc recommend the matter to your circumspec-tion, by the authority of these presents, and we expresslycommand you to receive at once from their hands thePenny,. as they have hitherto paid it, and to oblige them toit, if necessary, by ecclesiastical censure, without appeal.You will then formally enjoin upon them from us to paythe remainder in full. We do not see what title they canallege in excuse ; they are unable to show a concessionmade to them by the Holy See, or to prove a prescriptionof a hundred years against the Roman Church, especially(Rymer, Foedera, &c.if the times of schism are left out."I., 189.)78POPE ADRIAN IV.,CHAPTER XXIV.JOHN LACKLAND.King John, in 12 13, seeing himself almost lost withoutresource, on the brink of a precipice, placed his person andThehis kingdom under the sovereignty of the Pope.iGolden Bull, dated the 3rd of October, is in Rymer, vol. I.,p. 176.)" Neither determined by force, nor constrained by fear,but of our own good and spontaneous will, and with thecommon counsel of our barons, we offer and give freely toGod, to His Apostles Peter and Paul, to the Holy RomanChurch our Mother, and to our Lord Pope Innocent III.and his successors, the whole kingdom of England and the. We have publicly madewhole kingdom of Ireland. .liege-homage into the hands of the said Legate.".The prince promised to pay to the Pope a thousandmarks^ sterling every year, seven hundred for the kingdomof England and three hundred for Ireland, under pain offorfeiture, as well for himself as for his successors.SECTION I.The offering of his kingdom to the Holy See furnishedKing John with the happiest occasion in the world forrecalling the Bull of Adrian IV., who, seventy years be-fore, as was said, had made a donation of Ireland toHenry II.The prince was acquainted with the Bull.GiraldusCambrensis, four years previously, had dedicated to himthe third edition of the Expugnatio Hibernica, in which itwas recorded.The dedication alone would have drawnthe special attention of the prince to this pontifical act.' Whatever may be said of the jurisprudence of the Middle Ages,or the consent of nations, the Pope was supposed always to act withwisdom and prudence, according to reason and religion ; and if he foundhis authority abused, he had the remedy in his own hands. Romehowever, is proverbially slow in making a change. — Trans.The ancient piece of money called mark was equal to 13s. Ad.Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.79If, then, King John believed in the genuineness of theBull, could he have omitted to say anything of this oldOught he not rather to have shown that he wasgrant?already a feudatory of the Pope in Ireland, as successorand heir to his father, Henry II. ?Nevertheless, King John alleges no old title. He ex-presses himself as making a new concession, as offeringspontaneously his kingdom to the Roman Church.Hence it follows that the Bull of Adrian IV. had, in theeyes of this prince, no worth, no value. He thought pro-bably that silence was what suited him best, and that pru-dence imposed it.Neither does Innocent III., in his answer, say a singleword of the Bull of Adrian, or the briefs attributed bychroniclers to Pope Alexander HI., or to other Pontiffs.This circumspection is so much the more striking as theRoman Chancery delights in adducing old examples orprecedents, and saying that the Pontiff walks in the foot-steps of his predecessors, and that he continues what theyhave done : Prcedecessorum nostrum vestigiis inhcerentes,eoninique concessionem approbantes et confirmantes, &c.The occasion was unique for recalling the Bull of Adrian,It is evident that Pope Innocentand putting it in vigour.knew nothing about such a Bull.SECTION 2.Did Innocent accept the sovereignty of Ireland?I donot think so.On the 27th of October, the same year (12 13), the Pon-tiff addressed a letter to the Irish, which is in Rymer.l(Tome I, p. 179.)The Pope speaks of the kingdom of England, but heHe calls Johnnever mentions the kingdorn of Ireland.King of the English, without adding that he isalsoKing of the Irish. He says that the kingdom of England,by a donation of this prince, belongs to the Church, whichhas a special right over it.Will Ireland be henceforth in'Thomas Rymer, an English antiquary, became historiographerroyal in 1692. He made a large collection of treaties, public letters,etc., under the name " Fosdera,"It was published in London, inwenty volumes folio,Trans.8oPOPE ADRIAN IV.,like condition with England as regards feudal subjection?Innocent III. does not say so in any manner, explicit orimplicit. The pontifical letter may be found (No. 9) among-our justifying documents at the end.Thus Pope Innocent III. abstained from relating thatKing John had given to the Roman Church not only thekingdom of England, but also the kingdom of Ireland :Totum regnum AnglicB et tolum regnuni Hibernite, as theprince himself had said in the Golden Bull of the previous3rd of October.Fidelity and devotedness are all that the Pope recom-mends to the Irish ; he does not speak to them of submis-In other words, he exhorted the Irishsion and obedience.to show benevolence and friendship towards the King ofEngland.Could Innocent III., who must have been aware that thegreatest part of Ireland preserved its independence—couldhe have had the idea of imposing on the bishops, nobles,and people of the whole island the obligation of submittingpolitically to King John and his successors? The sup-Moreover, facts would belie it ; forposition is absurd.the national kings went on peacefully in their course, andthe districts unoccupied by the English retained their fullindependence.If one wishes to make out at all costs that the pontificalletter commanded submission to King John, this regardsonly the towns and counties along the coast which theEnglish held from the time of the coming of the adven-turers.If PopeInnocentIII. had acceptedpoliticalsovereignty of Ireland, he would have granted a solemndiploma to invest King John, a diploma provided with theinvestiture. Now, thisclausesdiploma never existed for Ireland.diplomasusual intheofBefore everything else, in the hypothesis made, the Popewould have raised Ireland to the rank of a kingdom. Now,it is beyond doubt that the Kings of England did not takethe title of King of Ireland, except at a much later period.I do not remark the least trace of it in the voluminouscollection of Rymer. Henry VIII. himself, three centuriesafter King John, dedicating his work against Luther toPope Leo X., entitled himself in his letter King of Eng-—A FRIEND OF IRELAND."01land and Lord of Ireland :" Sanctissimo domino nostrodomino Leoni X. Pontilici Maximo, Henricus Dei gratiarex Angliae, dominus Hiberniae, perpetuam felicitatem.All the world knows, moreover,that Pope Paul IV.erected Ireland into a kingdom in 1555, three hundred andforty-two years after Pope Innocent.Lastly,I observe that Pope Innocent III. abstainedfrom making known to the Irish the annual tribute ofthree hundred marks sterling which King John hadpromised. 1SECTION 3.The promise of an annualtributecriesoutloudlyagainst the Apocryphal Bull of Adrian IV.Giraldus Cambrensis, as I have said above, had repre-sented to King John, four years previously, that one of thecauses of the reverses experienced by the English in Ire-land was that they had neglected to establish Peter's Pencethere, contrary to a formal promise of Henry II., and con-trary to an express clause in theIV,Giraldus recommended his royal pupil to establish thePeter's Pence as soon as possible—which would serve asof AdrianBulla perpetual testimony of the indissoluble union of Irelandwith the Crown of England.Conformably to this solemn and advantageous counsel,King John should naturally propose and promise to PopeInnocent III. that he would establish Peter's Pence inHe might fear to see ill-received at Rome theIreland.promise of a tribute less than that of the Peter's Penceimposed on the houses of Ireland, in execution of theBull of Adrian.But King John learned, perhaps, that the Bull of Adrianwas regarded by the Romans as a mere fable. On thisaccount he would think it proper to avoid all mention ofPeter's Pence, and to promise a tribute of a thousandmarks sterling, of which seven hundred should be forEngland, and three hundred for Ireland.Rymer relates several receipts oftheofaBut the Popes never made anytributethousand marks sterling.^ This is a very interesting analysis of the Pope's letter, which mightof itself be misunderstood.Trans.POPE ADRIAN IV.,distinction between a portion for England and a portionfor Ireland. We may say that the Holy See abstainedfrom acknowledging- explicitly that it received any tributefor Ireland.In 1235, the Cardinals wrote to the King- of England, toclaim a half of the tribute. The answer of King Henry III.It says that at the time of theis dated 25th of February.first concession of this tribute, it was stated in the charterof King John, his father, that the sum should be given tothe Roman Church in an undivided manner.The Kingpaid it into the hands of the Pope ; but whether it all re-mained with the Holy Father, or was divided, he neverknew ; accordingly he advised the Cardinals to have re-" Universitati vcstrEe^ signi-course to the Pope himself.ficamus quod in prima concessione illius census, insertumfuit in carta Joannis patris nostri inde confecta, quodsanctae Romanas Ecclesiae redderetur census memoratus. penitus ignorantes hucusque utrumproindiviso .domino Papae integre(Rymer,aut divise.remaneret,.t. 1., P- 337-)In 1276, Pope John XXI. claimed from Edward I. thearrears of the tribute for eight years. The letter is datedfrom Viterbo, the eleventh of the calends of January, thatis, the 22nd of December.(Rymer, II., 77.)SECTION 4.When King John offeredIreland to the Pope, he.followed the tactics of Henry II., who, at the beginningof his intervention, while as yet he had only a few townsor districts near the shore, boldly appointed a constable,seneschal, or justiciary for all Ireland. Thus did a Roman-Teuton Emperor call himself master of the whole world !Henry II., in 1177, giving judgment in an arbitrationcase between the King of Castile and the King of Leon,did not take the title of Lord of Ireland. He availed him-self, however, of it in some diplomas regarding the in-terior of the kingdom.Richard Coeur de Lion never used this title. We areassured of it in Rymer. (T. I., p. 63, 64, 65, 99.)1 The acred College of Cardinals.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.83John, from the time of his coming- to the Crown of Eng-land, added to his ordinary titles that of Doniinus Hiber-However, I do not remark that he took it in lettersnice.which he wrote to Pope Innocent III.Ill 1204, having; need of money for the war againstFrance, he wrote to the clergy of Ireland, begging thatthey would be so good as to help him in this grave neces-sity, promising to cherish an undying gratitude for theiraid, and never again in his life to ask anything of anybodywho should now refuse him.auxilium. Et certis-faciatis in hoc necessitatis nostrae articulo. .sime sciatis quod nunquam nobis ab illo auxilium fieripostulabimus qui nobis in hac tanta necessitate auxilium(Rymer, I., 136.)(noH ?) denegabit."" Efificax nobis.The national kings still preserved their power.KingJohn, in 1208, wrote to them collectively : " Rex Joanneset magnatibusregi Conacife, et omnibus aliis regibus,Hiberniae, salutem."(ibid., p. i8g.)By a diploma of the 23rd of August, 1214, John tookunder his protection Cathal, King of Connaught, and hisdominions. He wrote to the Archbishop of Dublin to buyescarletias, as much as he believed sufficient, in order tomake a feast for the Kings of Ireland and other clients ofthe King.[Ibid., p. 189.)In i2ig, the King of Man made a donation of his islandto the Pope, declaring that he possessed it by right of in-heritance, and owed service to no one. He wished that heand his heirs should become vassals of the Holy See, andoffered twelve marks sterling of annual tribute. The Pon-tifical Legate accepted the donation in the name of Pope" ActumHonorius. The act was signed even in London :London-, in dome militia; Templi kal.Octo' ris, 1219."(Rymer, t. I., p. 234.)A few years afterwards, Henry III.theKing of Man (pontifical feudatory), the guardianship of thecoast of England and of the King's dominions in Ireland,paying annually forty marks, a hundred measures of wheat,and five tuns of wine deliverable in terra nostra HibernicB.{Ibid., p. 341.)confidedtoBehold how the King was master and lord of all Ire-land !84POPE ADRIAN ly.SECTION 5.What surprises me very much is that, in the acts stipu-lated between Innocent III. and King^ John in 1213, allremembrance seems to have been lost of the oath thatHenry II. took in the cathedral of Avranches forty yearspreviously. What signifies therefore the donation of King-John, if the kingdom of England became a fief of the HolySee in 1172? Henry II. then engaged himself in the nameYet it does not appear that Richardof his successors.As for KingCceur de Lion asked pontifical investiture.If, at the beginning of hisJohn, the case seems clear.reign, he had obtained Roman investiture, there wouldhave been no need to renew the donation of the kingdomof England in 12 13.At all events, it is very strange thatthe submission of 12 13 should be regarded as a new con.cession, when in reality there was nothing new about it,except the annual tribute of a thousand marks sterling,and the promise of renewing investiture at every change ofreign.thethatserviceIt might be said that the Anglo-Norman princes criedout for the pontifical sovereignty when they saw themselvesalmost lost, but that very soon, the danger over, they for-the Pope had rendered them.gotHenry III., the son of John, took the oath of fealty andhomage to the Holy See.But Edward I. exempted him-self from it, and his son Edward II. followed this example.The Normans of Italy showed a more true and practicalDuring the two centuries of their sovereignty atfidelity.Sicily, they obtained more than twentyNaples and inThe princes of the house of AnjouBulls of investiture.had ten of them, for the 168 years of their sway.As re-gards the Kings of Aragon and Spain, from 1443 till 1700,the year of the death of Charles II., I count thirteen Bullsthe Twoof pontifical investiture for the kingdom ofSicilies.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.85CHAPTER XXV.SIATIC OV II^ICLAND IN THE I'HIRTiniNrir CliNTlTl-JY.Irel.\nd was divided between two races of men, differentin language, in manners, and in laws, and animated witha deadly hatred against each other. ^ The most moun-' A good deal of this ill-feeling continues in the twentieth century.It is not exactly a hatred of the English that the Irish have, but rathera hatred of a certain perversity in the character of the English whichhas made and still makes them inflict many wrongs on Ireland, as ifthey had no proper sense of justice or humanity. Of course it findsexpression in different ways. We cannot be surprised if Sir HoracePlunkett, in his book Ireland in the New Century, remarks: "Uponthe England that sowed the wind was visited a whirlwind of hostility fromthe Irish scattered throughout the globe." This writer has no small shareof blame to lay on the Irish for their defects, but surely many allow-ances ought to be made for a people so heavily and so unjustly handi-capped for centuries. The Irish know pretty well what was the causeof those defects, for which none have suffered more than they ; andperhaps in their sufferings they have shown more moral fibre than theirAlmost every path to prosperity was closed againstpitiless oppressors.them. To say nothing of bad laws, wealthy Protestants were unwillingto invest their capital in Irish labour, and few Catholics, of any wealth,knew how to employ labour in the development of trade, to profitof improvements in machinery, or to engage in safe business on anHence, the masses of the people, struggling to earn aextensive scale.poor subsistence from land, could not rise above poverty and misery.Such was not the case in other countries, where the upper and lowerclasses were in good accord.Besides, every nation of Europe, exceptIreland, had consuls or agents abroad, who could give informationregarding the products of their respective countries, and thus find newmarkets for them.To ask now that Irish history should be buried in oblivion ismuch the same as to ask that England should be unmolested in herShe has indeed made some con-various methods of fleecing Ireland.cessions to Ireland, but to say that the England of to-day is not theEngland of former days, or even of fifty years ago, sounds ratherstrange, while we hear ministers of the Crown coldly telling us that theGovernment has no intention of granting a Catholic University, or whilewe look at that monstrous anomaly, Trinity College, existing to thisday in our midst, with its ;f55,ooo a year, derived chiefly from the con-fiscated property of Catholics. Is this to govern with the consent of the" with a full and con-governed, or, as a Lord Lieutenant lately said,stant regard to the traditions of the country " ?It must, however, be admitted that, with some very regrettable les-sons, savouring rather much of " amateurishness," Sir Horace has givenus a large number of useful ones. He is Vice-President of the Department86POPE ADRIAN IV.tainous districts, and the g;reater part of Connaught andUlster, were occupied by the old Irish natives. The Eng-lish were settled along the eastern and southern coasts.By English we understand a medley of adventurers fromdifferent parts of England, Wales, and Guienne—menwho, despairing of any fortune in their own country, re-lied upon their swords to make it elsewhere.Theyhad sworn fidelity to the Crown of England, but this fidelityof Agriculture and Technical Instruction, which was founded in :90c,with an annual income of /i65,ooo, derived in almost equal parts fromIrish and Imperial sources, and with a starting capital of /2oo,ooo.Practical men like him, diligent students of social problems at homeand abroad, might do much to improve a country, as Belgium, Holland,Switzerland, Denmark, etc., have been improved.But if the Depart-ment would justify its existence, it should merit the confidence of theIt should not be turned into an engine of ascendency, itIrish people.should not be made a new means of multiplying situations for a smallsection of the community, and the public should be supplied with a fullrecord of its annual expenditure.In short, it should be an honestinstitution for the general welfare of Ireland.The great changes with regard to local government that have takenplace within the last few years, may be considered as some partialmeasure of Home Rule.But, alas ! how far are we still from havingIt is a most lamentable reflection thatobtained anything like justice !while the population of Ireland between 1871 and 1904 has fallen bymore than a million, the taxation (for British purposes) in the sameperiod has risen from £6,923,402 to £9,748,500, that is by nearly threeIn the present year (1905) it is estimated atmillions, or 70 per cent.In 1894, when it was only ^7,568, 649, the Financial^10,378,000.Relations Commission decided that this amount was at least 2| millionsIf restitution were to be made by England, what an enor-too much.mous sum would be due to us !It seems that during 1903 there were£14,000,000 of taxation, imperial and local, raised in Ireland, and thatlarge suras thereof were most wastefuUy expended. The cost of DublinCastlegovernment went up from £5,970,0:0 in 189510 £7,214,000 in 1902.Yet Belgium, which has four times the trade of Ireland, and a muchlarger population, is governed at about half the cost. The law andpolice charges in Ireland arp three times as great as they are in Scotland.Aiid all the while, innumerable wants, which no Department can reach,As regards education alone, the Cathohccall loudly for a remedy.Bishops lately declared : " The first condition of a radical reform of Irisheducation is the establishment of a University system that the vastUntil that is done, we shallmajority of the Irish people will accept.regard all this talk about co-ordination and local control and educationalprogress as insincere."Englishmen sometimes say that they are unwilling to endow aBut we do not require a fraction fromCatholic University in Ireland.them, if only we are allowed to use our own money, and not to have ittaken away in millions from us, or if the wealth of Trinity College,A FRIEND OF IRELAND.was only a name.Since the expedition of King John, theysaw among- them no sovereign.Far from the Court,dwelling in a land regarded as foreign, they despised theauthority of the King of England.Within the precinctsof their strong castles, they defied the severity of the laws.If we except the neighbourhood of Dublin, in which thegovernors of the English colony resided, the remainder oftheir territory was divided among a crowd of petty tyrants,gathered from propeity in eighteen counties, and the thousands wastedon Queen's Colleges, be properly distributed for the educational welfareof the Irish people.Catholic education in Ireland being so very incomplete without aUniversity to give a tone to all its parts, and to animate youth inrunning along the various paths of industry, the energies of an immensenumber of citizens areparalysed, the channels of prosperity areblocked up, and a heavy cloud of despondency rests upon the land.The just claims of Catholic taxpayers, who form the great majority ofthe nation, are ignored, and their money squandered on the advance-ment and enrichment of the ascendancy garrison, The interests ofone-fourth the population are consulted ; those of three-fourths ne-glected. How unreasonable and unfair is such a misapplication of thepublic revenues ! No wonder that the Most Rev, Dr. Walsh, Arch-bishop of Dublin, addressing a large audience lately, should point outthe grounds of complaint that Irish Catholics have against the Govern-ment for the highly unsatisfactory manner in which it has treated theUniversity question during the last nineteen years. They had first, hesaid, the assurance of Sir Michael Hicks-Beach in 1885 ; secondly, in1889, the promises of Mr. Balfour in reply to resolutions of the hier-archy ; thirdly, in the following month, Mr. Balfour's promises to Mr.Parnell; fourth, in the December of the same year, the promises con-tained in Mr. Balfour's great speech at Partick ; fifth, I^ord Cadogan'sspeech at Belfast in 1896 ; sixth, the assurances given by Mr, GeraldBalfour in the House of Commons; and seventh, the assurances con-tained in Lord Cadogan's speech to the deputation of the Senate of theRoyal University, which waited on him in connection with the appoint-Yet all has come to nothing.ment of the late University Commission.How quickly would these matters be settled, and how many millionsof money would be saved or profitably spent, if we had an Irish Parlia-ment, of which, according to many great authorities, we were illegallyand unconstitutionally deprived !Indeed the history of the means by which the Union was carried,shows that it was not the deliberate choice or act of the Irish people,but more like a great swindle effected by the enemies of Ireland.Ifjustice has any place among men, so grievous a wrong ought to berighted with all speed. As the learned Bishop of Limerick has re-marked : " Aliens can never rightly rule any people. No matter whattheir intentions or dispositions, they are working against nature whenthey take into their own hands the power and the responsibility whichthe manifest Providence of God shows should be exercised by the inha-88POPE ADRIAN IV.,who knew no other law than their own interest.Unable todeny that they had been aggressors against the indigenousIrish, they regarded them as their natural enemies.Allthose whom they found within the limits of their district,they reduced to the most abject servitude, and the othersthey continually harassed by military excursions.In 1275, King Edward wrote to the Bishops of Ireland,and besought them to labour for the restoration of peace.What is there in Ireland to condemn her tobltants of every nation.a servitude that would not be heard of in Belgium, or Holland, orDenmark, or amongst any other people ?"The Rev. P. J. Dowling, CM., Cork, writing some time ago in theIrish Ecclesiastical Record, mentioned a number of books that would beinstructive for those interested in Irish industries, and desirous to knowsomething of industrial progress in foreign lands. He is a great admirer" In somewhat over thirty years," he says, "theirof the Germans.system of technical training has made such a change in the industriallife of that country that it is only rivalled in swiftness, completeness,and beneficence by what we read in fairy tales.Starting with a popu-lation mostly agricultural, Germany to-day is turned into a vast hive ofindustries, where the farmers cannot supply the wants of the workers."Many persons will be glad to learn from him that " the more remark,able technical and commercial colleges, the greatest industries, are tobe found in the Rhineland, which, as every one knows, is the mostCatholic part of Germany." He speaks of the Exhibition of Dussel-dorf, where the Catholics are seven to one, as an extraordinary success—one of the most wonderful exhibitions that the world has ever seen.The machinery hall covered five acres ; and the main industrial hall,seven. He says that wages in Germany have increased three, and, insome cases, four-fold; and that " the German workman of to-day, withhis retiring pension at 65, is the envy of his comrades the world over."If this important article were re-published among the penny booklets ofthe Catholic Truth Society, it would be very useful in Ireland. Wemay confidently expect that the tide of emigration will be stemmed,when people see that they can prosper well enough at home, thoughtheir standard of living is not high, without exposing themselvesto the heavy toils and unhealthy climates of foreign countries.A series of small books on all the different trades and other in-dustries that might be largely developed in Ireland, would alsoNot the least advantage of it would be that itbe very useful.would help young people to select an occupation for which theyseemed to have most taste and talent.In treating of any subject,the author should give the names of the chief tools used, and asimple explanation of the manner of using them.Every lessonor chapter might be limited to a page or two.An industry fully developed may come to something very great.Thus, the immense, magnificent shirt-factories everywhere to beseen in Derry, in which machinery is turned to the highest account,show what a fortune-making business this must be. In like manner,we learn that a distinguished Prelate, lately visiting the Deaf andA FRIEND OF IRELAND.89" Rex venerabilibus patribus archiepiscopis et episcopisQualiter terra praedicta, perterrse Hibernise, salutem.discordias et guerras ibidem diu habitas, depauperata ex-istit fide perpenditis oculata ; unde cum super hoc sumus,nee immerito, anxiati animo et turbati ; et totis desideriisaffectamus quod hujusmodi controversise et guerrse paci-ficentur, vobis et fide et dilectione quibus nobis teneminimandamus, rogantes quatcnus, de consilio justitiarii nostriDumb Institution at Cabra, Dublin, was told by the good DominicanSister in charge of the lace manufacture among the girls (over 200)Ofthere, that it would lake four years tn complete the orders on hands.course, we may presume that the purchasers were notified of thisdelay, and' that, satisfied with the prospect of excellent work,though done by poor girls both deaf and dumb, they expressed theirwillingness to wait.It would seem that, after the land of Ireland, the water might bemade a source of innumerable advantages. The quantity of water-power unemployed is very great, equal to more than two million horse-power; whereas in England and Scotland scarcely a drop is lost.It iscalculated that the expense of water-power in working machinery isonly about one-fourth that of steam-power, so that if it takes ;^2o toproduce one-horse-power for a year by steam, it takes only £^ to pro-duce the same by water. But even if we raise this £} to ;^8 or /lo,a large margin is still left. As for uniformity in the supply of waterduring the year, it may be regulated in a great measure by reservoirsWater power may also be utilised to produceand by turbine wheels.electric power. And even bogs, it seems, may be turned to accountFor, according to Monsignor MoUoy, Rector ofin like manner.the Catholic University, who is a great authority on scientificmatters, there is an absolutely unbounded source of energy in thebogs of Ireland, which is capable of being brought into action byelectrical engineering ; so that the Bog of Allen alone could supplymotive power more than sufficient to work all the railways of Ireland.What a reduction in rates of transit would then follow !At presentwe are told that turf-inould required in Dublin can be broughtmore cheaply from Germany than from Galway, and that, onaccount of carriage, coal from Roscommon is dearer in Galway thancoal from England.Another point, not unworthy of attention, is the necessity among usof acquiring good bu.siness habits. Many Irishmen are, no doubt, irre-proachable in this respect ; but it is to be feared that a considerablenumber are still wanting in the promptitude and courtesy essential tosuccess. The facilities now offered, not only of transmitting samples,but of making sales, by letter and parcel post, are very difterent fromwhat they were some eighty years ago.At that time the postage of aletter, weighing a quarter of an ounce, from Dublin to London wasIS. 3rf. ; to France, 2s. ^d. ; to America, 2s. 'jd. ; to Italy, 35. ; and toPackets were charged at the same rate, every ounceSpain 3s, 3d.counting as four letters of a quarter ounce each. And all this withgoPOPE ADRIAN IV.,terrse prasdictse et aliorum fidelium nostrorum partiumillarum, taliter ad invicem provideatis, quod per divinumadjutorium et vestram circumspectam devotionem, hujus-modi controversiEe et g"uerr8B pacificentur et sedentur. .Teste rege apud Wodestolk 12 die Augusti.(Rymer, II.,..S6.)Five Irish Kings and the Duke of Anderken (?) had ad-vised the King of England regarding this rebelHon, and thetroubles raised by two chiefs. This shows that the nationalKings retained their dignity.(See Rymer, II., io5i.)The Irish chiefs did not swear fidelity to the King ofEngland. The King employed request or invitation, notcommand, when he wished for any service.At the begin-ning of a war with Scotland, Edward II. asked the twenty-six kings who were at the head of Irish tribes to send himtroops ; but they made no account of his petition. Rymerhas published the King's letter, dated 22nd of March, 1314.(T. III., p. 476.)In the invasion of Ireland by the English, we do notfind the nature, or the characteristics, or the necessaryHenry II. did not employconditions of a true conquest.the force of arms to subdue the Irish, since he did notengage in a single battle with them.The effect of a conquest is to change the language, thelaws, the manners, and the customs of the conquered peo-ple. The characteristics of sovereignty are to give laws toa people, and, by the appointment of various ministers, tosee them observed ; to punish or pardon the guilty ; and tomake peace or war.No King of England before James I. enjoyed any pre-rogatives of power in all Ireland.Two-thirds of the peoplewere governed by their own princes, without any changegreat delays. The enormous increase in postal work at present requiresgood correspondents, to whom a knowledge of modern languages isIt is well known that numbers of young menoften of great service.are sent over from England to France, Germany, Spain, &c., and viceversa, that they may learn the language and business methods of thecountry, and perhaps settle there as agents of import or export.Everytransaction of business ought to be conducted on business lines, in aIt would be a lamentable case if peoplefrank and honourable manner.throughout Ireland, writing over to a London house, found themselvestreated more satisfactorily than if they wrote to a Dublin house.Thereis much to be gained by punctuality and urbanity. United with honesty,they make many friends and no enemies.— Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.QIin their laws, their customs, or their form of government,only that they had not one Supreme King to unite them all.These princes, in whom even the Kings of England re-cognised the character of Kings indifferent charters,appointed their own magistrates and officers of justice.They made peace or war with all freedom, during the spaceAlthough some of these princesof four hundred years.became tributaries to the Kings of England, they were notproperly subjects ; they enjoyed all the other prerogativesof sovereignty, and, by paying a certain tribute for havingpeace, they were at liberty to pursue any affairtheyThe English Government had neither the rightpleased.nor the power to levy taxes off them, or to disturb theirIt is therefore necessary to fix this conquestsubjects.within its just bounds, and to say that it regarded onlyThe sovereignty of the Kings ofthe English province.England was unknown outside the limits of that province,although they took the pompous title of Lords of Ireland.This view corresponds to that of Pope Clement III., fromthe time of Richard Coeur de Lion, as appears by the termsof the commission that he gave to his Legate, of exercisingjurisdiction in England, in Wales, and in that part of Ire-land which was ruled by John, Earl of Morton : In Anglia,^Wallia, ac illis HibernicR partibus in quibus Joannes More-tonii conies potestateni habet et dominium.(Mat. Paris,an. 1188.)Up to the time of Protestantism, England never sentinto Ireland the forces necessary to extend the conquest,and things remained in the state in which Henry II. hadleft them. A few hundred men, ill paid and ill disciplined,sent from time to time into Ireland, could not suffice tosubdue the natives. The adventurers were mere brigands,Though encouraged by thelured by the hope of gain.Kings of England, who liberally granted them whateverthey could take by arms from the Irish, they could hardlydefend the frontiers of the English province.Although King John and Henry III. had extended toIreland the laws and customs of England, and had madeviscounts or sheriffs, and other ministers, to govern thepeople, it is certain that only the English colony, and afew Irishmen enfranchised by special charters, were takenAll the others were re-under the protection of the laws.garded as aliens, as enemies of the Crown, in such manner,92POPE ADRIAN IV.that the murder of an Irishman was not considered acapital crime, and it was permitted to kill him, even in timeIf, on the other hand, it was proved that aof peace.murdered man was of English birth or origin, the murdererwas subject to all the rigour of the laws.The Irish could not take an action against those who haddone them an injury.It might be said that the intentionof those who governed in Ireland for the King of Englandwas to maintain a perpetual separation between the twopeoples, so as to be in a way of enriching themselves withimpunity—an advantage of which they would have beendeprived, if the Irish had been received under the protec-tion of the laws, because then no one could despoil themThe English were strictly forbidden toof their goods.make marriages with the Irish, or to have any connectionBehold how they had come to reform thewith them.manners of the old Irish !toThe Romans did not thus treat the peoples whom theyThey gloried rather in polishing and re-had subdued.fining nations than in gratifying a sordid desire of wealth.They communicated their lawstheir new subjects,whose interests were thenceforth sure of protection ; andso many different provinces formed only one single empire.The state oi Ireland during the thirteenth century seemsIrreconcilable with the hypothesis of a pontifical donation.If Popes Adrian and Innocent had given possession of theisland to the Kings of England, Rome would surely haverecommended submission on the part of the Irish, who,in their steadfast adherence to the Holy See, wouldat the very least have represented the reasons that pre-vented them from accepting English domination.Theofficial diplomas of the Kings of England do not make theslightest allusion to Bulls of Popes or to a donation of theHoly See.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.93CHAPTER XXVI.THE PONTIFICAL COURT OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY KNEWNOTHING ABOUT THE FALSE BULL OF ADRIAN IV.I ASSEMBLE in this chapter various acts of John XXII.,which concur to show that the Pontifical Court had noknowledge of Adrian's Bull from its own archives, or fromchronicles, or from public rumour ; so that writers of thelives of Popes passed over in complete silence the pretendeddonation of Ireland.SECTION I.In 1316, a little after the election of John XXII., KingEdward II. sent three knights to the Pontifical Court asambassadors, to offer the tribute of a thousand markssterling, promised by John Lackland, and to excuse himwith regard to arrears, which extended to twenty-fourThe Continuator of Baronius has published theyears.letter by which Edward accreditedthese ambassadors.Now, this prince makes no distinction between EnglandHe did not at all say thatand Ireland for the tribute.seven hundred marks were for the kingdom of Englandand three hundred for the seigniory of Ireland, conformably" Ad excusandum nos superto the diploma of King John :solutione annul census mille marcharum, qui a nobis persacrosanctam Romanam Ecclesiam exigitur, non facta."Iought, however, to say that the ambassadors made thisdistinction. As the arrears extended to twenty-four years,they promised to pay a fourth during the next four years.(Annals of Baronius, 1316, num. 24.)The Holy See, which had not granted the investiture ofIreland, could not expressly recognise that a part of theMoreover, the Kingtribute had reference to this island.of England had at this period only a very small portion ofthe country, and the Pope should, from a sense of justice,guard the right and the independence of the nationalIn reality the offering of King John seemed ratherchiefs.to be regarded as a snare that he had laid for the Pope,with a view of obtaining for himself a title of sovereigntyover Ireland,,94POPE ADRIAN IV.SECTION 2.If the Pontifical Court had known the Bull of Adrian IV.,accounta most favourable occasion foroccurred when John XXII. asked King- Edward to renderliege-homage, and to take the oath of fealty, as a vassal ofthe Holy See. The pontifical letter, dated from Avignon,the sixteenth of the calends of April, in the first year of thepontificate, may be read in the Continuator of Baronius.(An. 1317, num. 43.)turningtoitJohn XXII. took nothing as the foundation of his claimbut the diploma of King John. He passed over in silencethe promise of Henry II. and the pretended Bull of Adrian.An explanation is offered in strictness that the Pontiff ab-stained from mentioning the oath which Henry took in thecathedral of Avranches, supposing that truly it was thenagreed to keep secret the clause relating to the feudal sub-jection of England towards the Pope. As a matter of fact,the Holy See makes it a point of honour to keep conscien-But this motive did nottiously the secrets confided to it.exist for the Bull of Adrian IV. , nor for the diplomasThis is the reason whyattributed to Pope Alexander III.John XXII., if he knew this Bull and these diplomas,should naturally make use of them, and recallthememory of King Edward that his power over Ireland wasderived from a pontifical grant long anterior to the timesof King John.toThus, John XXII., so deeply informed in things of theHoly See, and so well assisted by intelligent searchers,such as Bernard Guidonis (or Di Guido), found in thepontifical archives no trace of Adrian's Bull or the pre-He did not even knowtended diplomas of Alexander.them by rumour or by chronicles.P'or after reminding King Edward that John Lacklandgave his kingdoms to the Roman Church with their rightsand dependencies {cum omnibus juribuset pertinentiissuis), and promised thatsuccessors would renderhishomage and pay an annual tribute, under pain of for-feiture, John XXII. says that all this is proved by rumourand by chronicles :" Prout haec omnia fama notificat, etchronicarum inspectio manifestat. "It follows logicallyA FRIEND OF IRELAND.95that the Pontifical Court had never heard mention ofAdrian's Bull, and that it knew nothing of the EnglishTherefore, Giraldus Cambrensis,chronicles which give it.Raoul de Diceto, Roger de Wendover, Matthew Paris,and others, who had written their chronicles more than acentury before, were unknown at the Pontifical Court inand1317.authentic registers, John XXII. might have had recourseto public rumour {faina notificat) and to the chronicles ofSince thehistorians [chronicaruin inspectio manifestat).Pontiff does not speak of them in his letter, his silenceleads us to suppose his complete ignorance in regard tothe documents of which there is question.In the absence of the minutesof AdrianoftheoathAlthough King John had promised that his successorswould render homage and takefealty, itappears that the Kings of England did not fulfil exactlyThe letter of March 17, 1317, provestheir obligation.that if the Kings paid the tribute, they neglected thehomage and the oath." Aliqui tamen ex successoribusipsis, et praesertim tupraestarefidelitatis hujusmodi juramentum, et recognoscere memo-ratum homagium eisdem prsedecessoribus nostris Romanis[Loc. cit.) The Pontiff exhortedPontificibus omisistis."Edward II. to place the homage and the oath in the handsof the two Cardinal Legates who were in England.ac genitor antedictus,Did the King yield to the exhortation?The Continu-ator of Baronius says that it is not certain : OhsecutumHow-pontificiis jussis Ediiardum nnn constat.ever, the annalist gives another letter in which John XXII.says to the King that he would gladly, for the moment,close his eyes to the question of homage : Ut de recogni.tione taceamus ad prcBsens.(Year 1318, n. 28.)(Ibid.)SECTION 3.So true is it that the Pontifical Court knew nothing ofthe Bull attributed to Pope Adrian that the Irish them-selves felt obliged to send a copy of it to the CardinalLegates and to the Pope ; but John XXII. took good carethe document :not to believe 'in the genuineness" Quas (literas) prsedictus Adrianus praedecessor nostereidem Henrico regi Angliae de terra Hiberniae concessisseof,96POPE ADRIAN IV.The Pope therefore knew the Bull of Adriandicitur."only by the complaints of the Irish, who, on their side,brought forward the Bull as an argument ad hominemagainst the King of England.Here are the circumstances.Unable to bear the heavyyoke that the English laid on them, the chieftains and thepeople of Ulster took up arms, and called to them EdwardBruce, brother of the King of Scotland. To justify theirrevolt, they sent to the two Cardinal Legates of EnglandTheya complaint of which I shall speak further on.added to their memorial a copy of the Bull, in order toshow that the English could not take their stand on thisdocument, since they had constantly eluded or violated itsclauses and conditions.The Continuator of BaroniusJohn XXII. with the following remarks : —"The Irishprecedesreplytheofaddressed to the Cardinal Legates some letters full of verygrave complaints, and declared that it was this intolerabletyranny which had compelled them to take up arms againstEdward, and that this prince had violated the laws underwhich Pope Adrian had given Ireland to England.In-formed of all this by the Cardinals, John XXII. exhortedEdward to lift the yoke off the people, and to let them seehis clemency."(An. 1317, n. 43.)The annalist tells us that the letter to King Edward ispreserved in the first volume of secret letters, No. 56 ; inpublishing it he suppresses two passages.It is also foundin an old Roman Bullarium, edition of 1588, and in somehistorians, but falsified in a part of considerable import-ance.servants'' John, bishop, servant of theof God, toEdward, the illustrious King of England, healthandThe earnest exhortations that weapostolic benediction.address to you, most dear son, in order that you may dowhat pleases the Judge truly just, preserve peace in thelands and among the subjects of your kingdom, and pro-vide for what may contribute to your renown and yourglory, come from that paternal love with which we desirethe exaltation of your highness. You ought therefore toreceive them affectionately, and to show yourself willingBehold, son, we haveand ready to comply with them.received letters that the magnates and people of IrelandA FRIEND Ol'- IRELAND.97sent lately to our dear sons, Gaucelin, Cardinal Priest ofthe title of Saints Marcellinus and Peter, and Luke, Car-dinal Deacon of the title of Saint Mary in via lata, nunciosof the Apostolic Sec— letters that they have enclosed to usN\e have read there, among other things,in their own.that Pope Adrian, our predecessor, of happy memory,granted, under a certain manner and form expressed inapostolic letters, the dominion of Ireland to your ancestorHenry, King of England, of illustrious memory.ThisKing and his successors, the Kings of England, even toour own times, not ohserving the manner and form afore-said, have, on the contrary, transgressed against everyrule ; and, by cruel vexations, unheard-of oppressions,insupportable burdens, and inhuman tyrannies, crushedthe Irish people to the dust, so much the more miserablyand intolerably as these afflictions have lasted longer. Norwas there any person who would remedy these evils, orNo person seemed to take pitycorrect these disorders.on their misfortunes, although they had recourse to youregarding them, and the loud cry of their distress burst attimes upon your ears.Wherefore, no longer able to en-dure such wrongs, they have felt obliged tO' withdrawfrom your house, and to invite another prince to be theirIf these complaints are grounded on truth, mostruler.dear son, they are so much the more painful to us as wemore ardently desire to see all your affairs prosper. Youought to bring to them all your care, and promptlycarry into effect all that may please your Creator.Be-ware of all that might provoke against you the Lord GodHimself, to whom revenge belongeth, who doth not de-the unjustly afflicted, and who, onspise the groans ofaccount of injustices, rejected His own special people, aswe see in Holy Scripture, and transferred kingdoms.Ata time so troubled as this, we still more earnestly desirethat you should enter into those dispositions which aremost proper to gain affection and submission in the heartsof the faithful, and that you should avoid everything calcu-lated to detach them from your service.Because, there-is your own greatest interest to avoid thefore, son, itrisks of change, and to oppose the beginnings ofdis-turbance, lest they dangerously increase and remediescome too late, we beg your royal highness, at the sametime persuading with wise counsel, to reflect seriously onIIgSPOPE ADRIAN IV.,the aforesaid grievances, and to provide, by all suitableways and means, for their due and prompt redress. Youwill thus please Him by whom you reign ; and, faithfullyaccomplishing your duty, every cause of complaint againstThrough these measures the said Irish,you will cease.lee by a more wholesome counsel, may submit to you aslord, or if (which we hope will not be the case) they wishto remain in rebellion, they will turn their cause intoa manifest injustice, and you will be excused before GodIn order that you may know thoroughly theand men.grievances and complaints on which the Irish rely, weenclose in the present letter that which the aforesaid Car-dinals have sent us, and also a copy of the letter whichthe aforesaid Adrian, our predecessor, is said to havegranted to Henry, King of England, regarding the land ofGiven the 3rd of the calends of July.''iIreland.I do not consider it necessary to point out the severitywith which John XXII. brands oppressions condemned bythe Divine law and by conscience, and gives the King tounderstand that the. cause of the Irish would be perfectlyjust if the prince did not hasten to banish iniquities toolong committed. But, I ask, is the language of John XXlI.that of a sovereign?If, in the mind of the Pontiff, Adrianhad made a donation of Ireland, or if Pope Innocent III.had accepted the sovereignty of the island that King Johnoffered him with that of England, would John XXII. ifiavebeen able to appear so disinterested in the matter? Wouldhe have limited himself to speak only in the name of justiceIt seems to me that, in the hypothesis ofand conscience?a political sovereignty, the Pope would have charged theLegates to proceed to an investigation, and to judge be-tween the King, a pontifical feudatory, and his vassals,who were at the same time vassals of the Roman Church.He would have written direct to the Irish, in order topromise them a redress of their grievances, and to staythe progress of the conflagration.As he did not do so,his letter furnishes a new argument against the ApocrvohalBull of .Adrian.:vph'Let us now come to the falsification of which I spokelastarticlethe letter ofAs a matter of fact, according to the Con-above.John XXII.occurstheofinIt' 29th of June,A FRlIiND OF IRELAND.—"99tinuator of Baronius, who examined the original register,John XXII. expressed himself doubtfully regarding theBull of Adrian: couccssissc diciiur. Now, English writers,falsifying the passage, have used these words: AdrianusHenrico regi Anglia: de terra Ihernim concessit.Accord-ing to them, John XXII. would have admitted withoutdispute the genuineness of Adrian's Bull.Irish historiansthemselves, not suspecting that any one would have daredintentionally to alter the text, have adopted concessit.Thus, Peter Lombard, Archbishop of Armagh, represent-ing the Irish at Rome under Clement VIII., has followedthe interpolated text in his book of the Annals of IrelandMcGeoghegan, who(p.published his Histoire d'Irlande at Paris in 1758, copiedfiom Peter Lombard. He would have discoveredthefraud if he had consulted the Annals of Baronius, which" Ut autem de praedictisgive the true text in these terms :gravaminibusinnitunturetIbernici, tuis sensibus innotescat ad plenum, prsedictaslitteras missas cardinalibus antedictis, tum formam littera-rum quas praedictus Adrianus praedecessor noster eidemHenrico regi Anglise de terra Hiberniae conceississe. dici-TUR,1 tuae magnitudini mittimus praesentibus interclusas.(Annals of Baronius, year 1317, n. 43.)260, Louvain edition,querelis,prasdictiquibus1632).The circumspection of John XXII. is so much the moreremarkable, as the Irish who made the complaint appearto have believed in the genuineness of the Bull of Adrian,while protesting that it had been obtained by false repre-This is proved by a passage in the Irishsentations." Adrianus, papa, praedecessornonMemorial :tantum origine, quantum affectione et conditione Anglicus,anno Domini 1170 (sic) ad falsam et plenam iniquitatesuggestionem Henrici regis Angliae, sub quo et fortassisper quem sanctus Thomas Cantuarise eodem anno projustitia et defensione Ecclesiae mortem sustinuit,sicutscitis, dominium regni nostri, sub quadam certa verborumforma, eidem, quem potius, ob dictam culpam, propriodebuit privasse regno, de facto et contulit indebite, ordinevester,' Pope John , in his letter to the two Cardinals, uses the same words"concessisse dicitur." See Theiner. Vetera monumenta Hibcrnorum, &c.,p. 201. If, therefore, Pope Adrian did not make the grant, every argu-nient built on a contrary supposition falls to the ground.Trans.—100I'OPE ADRIAN IV.,tantiHsecpontificisintuitionem.ijuris omisso omnino, anglicana affectione, pro dolor ! ex-pauca decsecantegeneral! progenitorum nostrorum origine, et de miserabiliin quo romanus Pontifex statu posuit, sufficiant ista vice."On the other hand, it is known that the Irish constantlyHere isrejected Adrian's Bull as false and apocryphal.a remarkable proof of this fact. The Barberini Library inRome possesses a manuscript of the fourteenth century,which is a collection of original documents relating to thepontificate of John XXII., at the very time of which wespeak. We find there a letter from the lord justiciary andcouncil of Dublin, accusing the Irish of various misdeeds,in particular of generally maintaining that the King ofApocryphalEnglandBulls to support his pretended right to the dominion of" Asserentes etiam dominum regem Anglise exIreland :falsa suggestione et ex falsis bullis terram Hiberniae impe-It follows hencetrasse, ac communiter hoc tenentes."^employedpretencesfalseand^ The statement here made in the Memorial is truly extraordinary,when we remember that Pope Adrian IV. died in 1159.It says that, asPope John XXII. himself knows. Pope Adrian, in 1170, having receiveda petition full of falsehood and injustice from Henry, King of England,under whom, and perhaps by whom, St. Thomas of Canterbury methis death that very same year, transferred the dominion of Ireland toHenry, when he ought rather to have deprived him of that of Eiigland,and he did this without regard to the usual course'prescribed by law,being blinded by love of country, for he was an Englishman, not onlyby birth, but even more by affection. Pope John, observing a prudentsilence, takes no notice of the anachronism here set forth, or of theknowledge attributed to himself.Mr. Laurence Ginnell, in his' very ableEand learned essay on"' theBulla, regards this Memorial as E(with or without the knowledge ofDonald O'Neill) the work of the Ulster Scotch, full of hatred againstthe English, and desirous of obtaining Ireland^or themselves andis found in Scotichronicon, a Latin History?' ofRobert Bruce.Scotland, by John de Fordun.It does not appear in old Irish works.The Scotchmen likely thought that if Pope Adrian IV. had givenIreland to the English, his successor Pope John XXII. might very wellfollow such a good precedent, by giving it to them, now that the Englishhad been shown to have so grossly abused their trust.ItTrans.' "Moreover, they assert that the King of England, under false pre-tences and by false bulls, obtained the dominion of Ireland, and thisopinion is commonly held by them." An attempt has been made toshow that by, these w;ords, which are thosejjof one of our highestauthorities, the above Latin passage has not been " fairly and properlyThe critic says that impetrasse means obtaining bytranslated."request—as if he were entitled to say that it has no other meaning.He thenwords ex falsasuggestione etoverboardthrowsthe—A I'KIEND or IRELAND."lOlthat the Memorial addressed to John XXII. could not bethe work of all Ireland ; for it expressed a conviction thatthe Bull, thouy^h null by having been obreptitiously orPopesurreptitiouslyreallyAdrian.emanatedobtained,frominIn point of fact, this Memorial was sent by O'Neill,King of Ulster, who took the title of heir of all Ireland,as we read" Sanctissimo inthe superscription :Christo Patri domino Johanni, Dei gratia Summo Ponti-P.ci, sui devoti filii, Donaldus O'Neill, rex Ultonise, actotius Hibernise hsereditario jure hseres, necnon et ejusdemterras reguli et magnates ac populus hibernicus, cum suirecommendatione humili, devota pedum oscula beatorum.O'Neill believed that he could speak in the name of Ire-This does not prove that every assertion in theland.Memorial ought to be attributed to the whole nation, ^ ofex faUis buUis, and gives as his concise reading that Henry obtainedIreland by a request. We doubt very much if this is a fair and propermode of translation.Du Cange, who is such a great authority on old Latin words, tellsus that sxiggestio is another name for rogatoricE litterm, or a letter ofpetition. The courtly Dublin writer, being a scholarly man, employedth: specific or official term suggestio, and added falsa.The expression " false bull " is sometimes applied to a true bull,obtained by false pretences ; but it is oftener used to denote a forgedIf Abull. The context generally shows in which sense it is taken.says that he has received a letter from King Edward VII, and B saysthat it is a false letter, what does B mean but that the letter was neverwritten or sent by the King ?' The facts are well accounted for by the above hypothesisregarding the Scotch.Referring to this time, Dr. Mat. Kelly, in his notes to Cam-" With the exception of thebrensis Eversus (vol. ii., 622), says :period of Edward Bruce's invasion, there do notappear anyevidences of the popular belief that Ireland was a fief of the HolySee." He did not suspect that the Memorial might have beena Scotchjforgery, in which the sentiments of the Irish people asa body were misrepresented. A very correct tradition prevailedamong the Irish regarding the fief-title of Adrian's Bull.Let ushear a few further remarks regarding this Bull from Dr. Lynch,author of Cambrensis Eversus (vol. ii., 563) :" At all events, it is certain that King Henry either did notbelieve the authenticity of the Bulls of Adrian 'and Alexander,or the validity of the claim which they purported to give to theFor we find hiin distrusting them, andsovereignty of Ireland.labouring to extort from Pope Lucius III, successor of Alexander,Yet, though he had deserveda grant similar to the preceding.well of Pope Lucius, and sent him a largo sum of money in11S3,—102POPE ADRIAN IV.,which the great majority, I repeat it, never had any faithin the Bull of Adrian.spoliations,oppressions,The Memorial confirms what I have said above on thevexations,outrag-es,mudrers, bloody persecutions, that the Irish suffered fromthe English. The document is in John de Fordun, volumethe third of the Scotch chronicle. McGeoghegan has givenmost of it in the second volume of his Histoire d'Irlandc.Dr. Lingard has made an exact and very complete analy-.sis of it. We also meet fragments of it in O'Callaghan'snotes to MacaricB Excidium.deceits,he was disappointed in his expectations.The Pope refused therequest, probably, as well as we can conjecture, because, after anattentive examination of the whole affair, he discovered eitherthat the bulls had never been issued or that they were fraudulentlyHence we find Henry still restless, from the conviction,obtained.perhaps, that the preceding bulls had been unjustly procured,and were therefore invalid.Again, he applies to Urban III, thesuccessor of Pope Lucius, and begs a new grant of the kingdom' In the year 11S5, Henry, King of England, sent hisof Ireland.ambassadors to Urban and obtained many favours, which had beenstern!y refused by Pope Lucius. One of the concessions was thathe was empowered to have any of his sons crowned King of Ireland,and the Pope confirmed that right to him. by a bull, and sent tohim, as a token of his will and approbation, a crown of peacock'sfeathers, wreathed with gold.'As merchantsof slender means cannot get goods on credit, but must pay downready money, even so this writer has no more claims to the' assentof his readers than what his authorities can command. AVould it,I ask, have been more troublesome to give a copy of that bullthan to make this passing notice of it ?Can there be any possiblereason for suppressing it but the conviction that it had not reallybeen granted by the Pope ?In the very first year of his ponti-ficate, before he was under the least obligation to Henry, couldUrban be so indecorous, so flexible, as to grant thus readily whatneither the most pressing solicitation nor the choicest favourscould extract from his predecessor ?Surely he could not takesuch liberty with the property of others, as to make a presentof a whole kingdom to a foreigner, without even communicatingMs design to the inhabitants, or hearing their defence.Surelyhe would send some more respectable pledge of his liberality thana hunting cap of peacock's feathers, which would gird, with morepropriety, the temples of some stage king in a theatre than thehead of a true and real monarch."(Hoveden, p. 631)In Migne's collection of the letters, etc., of Pope Urban III,there is no such bull as that nientioned above.{Patrolugie, vol. ccii)The passage from Hoveden may be found in the edition of his worksbrought out under the direction of the Master of the Rolls, vol. ii,,p. 306.Trans.A FRJEND OF IRELAND.IO3SECTION 4.The pretended Bull of Adrian made so little impressionon the Pontifical Court that the historians of the time didnot think it worth their while to mention it.Two Lives of Pope Adrian IV. were written about thisvery period by men residing at the Pontifical Court. Thefirst had for its author the learned Dominican, BernardGuidonis, who died in 1331.The other, a larger work,was prepared by Cardinal D'Aragon, whom Pope Inno-cent VI. raised to the purple in 1359.Now, in neither is any mention made of the pretendedBull of Adrian IV. , giving Ireland to the King of Eng-However, in the Life of Alexander III., whichland.comes afterwards, Cardinal D'Aragon gives the oath ofHenry II. in the cathedral of Avranches, and some otherdocuments.Since he keeps silence on the Bull of Adrian,it is apparently because he found no trace of it in the pon-tifical archives.SECTION 5.The land of the King in Ireland was very far from com-prising the whole island.In 1319, John XXII. forbadethe invasion of the land of the King in Ireland.If he hadbeen convinced that all Ireland belonged to the King ofEngland by a donation of Pope Adrian, he would havehurled his censures against the aggressors of Ireland inWishing to favour Edward II., who showedgeneral.good dispositions for the Crusade, and was preparing toset out, John XXII. thought it a duty to protect thedominions of this prince : " Fide digna relatione percepta,quod nonnulli nobiles et magnates regem ipsum et regnumac terrain suam HibernicB invadere ausu temerarioetThis chiefly regarded the Scotch.illicite nitebantur. "The Pope inflicted excommunication, and recommendedthe two Cardinal Legates of Engand to promulgate the" Prsecipuesentence, especially in places near the sea :Irishindominions of the King of England were situated alongNotwithstanding all this, some Scotch noblesthe coast.attacked England, and the land of King Edward in Ire-land, and did much mischief there. The Pope then wrotesen mari vicinis." For themaritimis,locis104POPE ADRIAN IV.,a circular to the Archbishops and Bishops of England(but did not address himself to Irish prelates). He recom-mended them to denounce publicly the aggressors as ex-communicated, especially in maritime districts—and thisevery Sunday (candelis accensis) until repentance.This circular of John XXII. proves against the pre-It is in the Roman Bullariumtended donation of Adrian.(vol. 3, part 2, p. 177).Also in Rymer (vol. 3, p. 811).SECTION 6.In 1327, revolt and disorder spread throughout all Ire-land. An ordinance of King Edward, 12th July, 1327," Hiber-shows the deplorable condition of the country :_nici inimici et rebelles nostri, terras nostras, et diversorummagnatum qui terras habent in Hibernia, et in Angliacommorantur, devastarunt, et devastant multiplicitter in.fortified.dies."(Rymer, iv., 294.)The King ordered theto becastlesHaving resolved to go to Ireland, in 1332, the Ivingsent William Burke, Earl of Ulster, before him.The lords who had domains in Ireland were to accom-The Parliament had decided on thispany the King.journey for the pacification of the country and fortheSoon, however, the visit ofsuppression of the rebellion.the King was countermanded. Edward offered an amnestyto the chief rebels, English as well as Irish, and appointedas his plenipotentiary Roger Outlaw, prior of St. John ofJerusalem in Ireland.(Rymer, iv., 503, 507, 526.)As the war with Scotland caused heavy expenses andrequired strong soldiers, Edward addressed a friendly re-'' Vos affectuose re-quest to the Bishops of Ireland :quirimus et rogamus, quatenus de tantis hominibus adarma validis, armis competentibus bene munitis, quantumfacultates vestrae commode permiserint, et instans nostranecessitas exegerit, absque excusationis diffugio, subve-nire. "This occurred in 1335.(Rymer, iv. , 642.)SECTION 7.Edward III. was too much occupied with domestic mis-fortunes, and the third of his wars with Scotland andFrance, to concern himself greatly with the affairs of Ire-A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I05land. The old Irish, by repeated efforts, succeeded in re-ducing the English territory to the narrowest limits.Ifthey had united then in one common effort, they wouldhave been able to drive the invaders into the sea.Theirhostilities were only the sudden result of some particularprovocation,of deliverance.Several tribes did not hesitate to receive an annual pen-sion from the English Government, as the reward of theservices that they rendered, by protecting the colonists ofthe seaboard against such of the Irish as showed them,selves more hostile.not of any general planThe territory occupied bythe English presentedascene of anarchy and confusion. The colonists weredivided into two classes, the English by race and the Eng-The former were the descendants of thelish by birth.ancient aggressors, and considered themselves as the law-ful heirs of the lands and revenues acquired by the swordsof their ancestors. The second class consisted of personswhom the King had sent over from England to variousemployments in Ireland, and a multitude of adventurerswhom poverty or crime banished every year from theirTo the old colonists they were objects ofown country.The Government protectedspecial jealousy and hatred.and advanced them, in order to make use of them as adefence against the discontent of the others.SECTION 8.In 1341, the King married his son Lionel to Elizabeth,daughter of the Earl of Ulster, in the hope that this unionwould confirm his authority in Ireland.(Rymer, v., 247.)A few years afterwards, Edward, having need of troopsfor the war with France, besought the Irish chiefs to sendhim men, in the name of that regard which they had forhim : "Ad Magnates Hibernise, de veniendo ad regem,cum hominibus ad arma et hobelariis.Specialiter vosrogamus, quod ad nos venire velitis. .. Et hoc sicut noset honorem nostrum diligitis, nullo modo omittatis." Theletter is of the 10th July, 1344.(Rymer, v., 417.)Two years afterwards, Edward learns that disorder con-tinues, because the country is without defence. He seesno other remedy than to have recourse again to the Arch-bishop of Armagh, and he begs of him totake such.,I06FOfE ADRIAN IV.measures as are necessary for the defence of the countryand the restoration of peace.(Rymer, v., 669.)SFCTION g.The Eng^Hsh by race Hved in continual contradiction withthe laws of the colony. Many of them adopted the dress,the manners, the lang^uage, and the laws of the old Irish.Not a few were thus gradually transformed from Englishbarons into Irish chiefs.At the time when Lionel, Duke of Clarence, governedthe English province, a Parliament was assembled ;itmade the famous statute of Kilkenny.This statute wasnot directed against the old Irish, but against the descen-dants of English colonists who had rejected the laws ofEngland for those of Ireland.It enacted that marriage,fostering, and gossipred with the Irish should in futuremake the delinquent subject to the penalty of high treason,and that any Englishman who adopted an Irish name orcustom should be compelled, under pain of imprisonment,to give bail for his willingness to return to the customs ofhis own country.The old dissensions among the English still continued,and the Irish continued to extend their conquests.SECTION' 10,So imminent was the danger with which English powerin Ireland was threatened in 1353, that the King forbadeprelates, religious, earls, barons, knights, all men fittedfor military service, to leave the country, when theyshould contribute to its defence.The chancellor receivedorders to arrest and imprison fugitives, cum equis et her.nesiis suis.(Rymer, v., 748.)As matters grew worse, Edward called a great Council,to deliberate on the state of Ireland. He brought togetherthe lords who held domains in the country. The letter ofconvocation proves that Ireland was almost lost for theKing of England.(Rymer, vi., 318.)SECTION II.Edward III. forbade that any of the old Irish should beA FRIEND OF IRELAND.IO7appointed: to the office of mayor or bailiff—in general, toHe ordered that canonries, parishes,any employment.Englishmen.be conferredshouldbenefices,(Rymer, vL, 211.}onlyonIn 1362, he made a new appeal to the lords who haddomains in Ireland, urging them to come forward in per-son, with their men of arms, to defend the country, whichwas in danger of being entirely lost.(Rymer, vi., 350.)Six years afterwards, a new command to the lords to setout for Ireland, in order to defend the country, under painof the forfeiture of their lands, which the King would dis-(Rymer, vi., 594.)pose of to others.SECTION 12.Richard II. spent six months in Ireland, from October,1394, to May, 1395. Rymer does not mention any act ofthe King about Irish affairs.(Rymer, vii., 782.)What strikes us in the various matters cited above, isthe complete oblivion into which the Bull attributed toThePope Adrian had fallen in the fourteenth century.Kings of England employed the force of arms to main-tain their domination ; but in times of the greatest peril,they never appealed to a pontifical donation—nor to anoffering of King John—nor to the sovereignty of the HolySee—nor to Roman investiture, which, in truth, had neverbeen given.CHAPTER XXVII.OF THE, FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES, WITH THEBEGINNING OF PROTESTANTISM.Facts give an absolute proof that the Bull of Adrian didIn point ofnot contribute to the preservation of Ireland.fact, it was not known, nor even invented, at the timewhen King Henry II. and his Norman-Welsh adventurersmade their first settlement, to \vhich an inch of territorywas not added. The greatest part of the island, therefore,Protestantism^—be-preserved the national i-ndependenee.hold the true enemy, the true culprit !Catholic kingsI08POPE ADRIAN IV.,would never have had the thought, much less the power,of having recourse to the cruel gibbets and the frightfulconfiscations that crushed Ireland.Rebellion continued to desolate the English colonyduring a great part of the fifteenth century.King Henry IV., in 1403, appointing his son, Thomas,Lord Lieutenant, allowed him subsidies for the conquestof the country, and the suppression of rebels and enemies :" Proexpugnatione,tarnrebellium quam inimicorum nostrorum partium prsedicta-rum."(Rymer, viii., 293.)conquesta,resistentiaetTwenty years afterwards, Henry V. gave the Earl ofMarch full power to amnesty English and Irish rebels.(Rymer, x. , 282,)In 1430, an Act of Parliament strictly prohibited Irishpeople from residing in England, and commanded them toreturn to their own country cum omni celeritate.Somedispensations were granted to chaplains and others, onthe payment of twenty pence. We note, in passing, thatEnglish policy sometimes swarms with contradictions.Atthe present day, England is full of Irish people.If theywithdrew, the manufactories and other industrial estab-lishments could not be carried on.(Rymer, x., 467.)Henry VII., in a patent of 1494, bears witness to therevolts that frequently occurred : " Universos et singulostarn Anglicos rebelles quam Hibernicos dictse terras nostrse,eamdem terram nostram in futurum invadentes, et ipsamterram nostros subditos ejusdem depraedare, guerrare seualio modo destruere sive devastare nitentes," etc. (Rymer,xii., 558.)Thus, very far from making conquests, the Englishwere hardly able to defend their own territory.During the War of the Two Roses, the Irish of the Palewere deeply attached to the House of York.Henry VII.turned his attention to the pacification of the colony. Heconferred the nominal government of it on his second son,Henry ; but as this prince was only four years of age,Poyning was given him as Lieutenant.The revolt ofO'Hanlon, an Irish prince, soon obliged this ofificer to takeAt his approach, the indigenous Irish retired tothe field.their woods ; and thence, by sudden and frequent sallies,caused great damage to their adversaries.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.OQroyniiigs assembled a Parliament, which made severalstatutes to deliver the lower classes from vexatious taxes,to reduce the power of the great lords, to maintain Eng-lish influence, and to secure the gfood administration ofEnglish territory. The statutes of Kilkenny were revived,but not that forbidding the use of the Irish language,which is hereby shown to have been generally adopted bythe English colonists.re-establish tranquillity in the Pale, the English province.These measures helpedtoIn 1522, Francis I., at war with Henry VIII., raised upHe ad-enemies against him in Ireland and Scotland.dressed himself to the chief of the house of Desmond, afamily that had always refused to submit to anything morethan a nominal dependence on the Crown of England.The Earl of Desmond, dazzled by the hopes of aggran-diseniehf that were held out to him, signed a treaty bywhich he engaged, in return for an annual pension, to jointhe French army as soon as it should land in Ireland, andnot to lay down arms until he had conquered a part of thecountry for himself, and the rest for Richard de la Pole,But Francis I.the representative of the house of York.soon forgot his engagements with Desmond : the armynever appeared, and the pension was never paid.When Henry VIII.ascended the throne, the royalauthority in Ireland was confined within the narrowestIt did not extend beyond a few seaports, and one-limits.half of the five counties, Louth, Meath, Dublin, Kildare,The rest of the country was divided be-and W^exford.tween sixty chiefs of Irish origin, and thirty of Englishorigin, who ruled therespectiveregions, and made war as freely as if they were indepen-To check these hereditary quarrels,dent sovereigns.Wolsey now resolved on confiding the government of thecountry to an English nobleman. 1 During two years theEarl of Surrey restrained the turbulence of the lords by thevigour of his administration ; but, on his retirement, itwas an Irishman, the Earl ofthegovernment.Kildare, who tookinhabitantstheirofThe innovations of Henry VIII. in regard to relie^ionwere received with equal horror by the indigenous Irish,Instead of the Earl of Kildare,Trans,—noPOPE ADRIAN IV,,Lord Grayand by the descendants of English colonists.convoked a Parliament (May, 1536), and, to nullify theopposition of the clergy, these powerful members, whohad heretofore voted in Parliament, were, by a declaratoryact, termed simple assistants, whose advice might beasked, but whose consent would not be required.The statutes adopted in this Parliament were copiedfrom those which had been passed in the English Parlia-TheThe authority of the Pope was abolished.ment.King was declared head of the Irish Church, and the firstfruits of all ecclesiastical benefices were to be remitted toIt was, however, easier to make these laws than tohim.iput them into practice. The two races united for the de-fence of their common faith, and insurrections broke outon all sides.of Gray,St. Leger, the successorre-assembled theParliament in Dublin, in June, 1541. The first act of thisParliament was to erect Ireland into a kingdom, and togive Henry VIII. the title of King of Ireland, instead ofthat of Lord, which he and his predecessors had bornepreviously : " Although under the precedingtheKings had all kinds of jurisdiction, power, pre-eminence,and lawful authority belonging to a king ; because hismajesty and his noble ancestors were justly, and of goodright, and ought to be Kings of Ireland—reputed, recog-nised and named as such."titleAnother statute of Parliament shows that in 1541 theEnglish had eleven counties in Ireland, which formed theIreland comprised thirty-two countiesEnglish province.The following are the eleven counties thataltogether.made up the Pale, orDublin,Meath, Louth, Kildare, Kilkenny, Tipperary, Wexford,Watcrford, Kerry, and Limerick. 2is thus acknow-the Englishprovince :It' The author is only making a rapid sketch of events that bear onHe does not propose to discuss every question thathis subject.arises ; for instance, how any parliament in Ireland could be got tovote such measures.Trans.' The author or the printer has here omitted one county.At allevents, the hold of the English on some of these counties must havebeen very slight, if worth mentioning.This error, though it extends to a word, is not so serious as that ofthe printer mentioned in Rollin's Treatise on Studies, who, by thechange of a single letter {mendacitate for mendicitate), made out that allA FRIEND OF IRELAND.Illlodged that in 1541, towards the close of the reignofHenry VIII. , the English had scarcely one-third part ofthe island.The peerage of the new kingdom was accepted by thelords who had heretofore recognised the authority of theEnglish court ; also by some of the chiefs, who, thoughvassals in name, had preservedindependence inUlick de Burgo was made Earl of Clanricard ;reality.Murrough O'Brien, Earl of Thomond ; and O'Neill, Earlof Tyrone.their(1543.)Edward VI., taking up seriously his title of Head of theChurch, established in Ireland a kind of " Holy Synod,"consisting of one ecclesiastic and two laymen, to grant allkinds of permissions, dispensations, rescripts, privileges,delegations, and other faculties which exceed the ordinarycompetence of bishops, and for which recourse must beHenry VIII. had committed allhad to the Holy See.these things to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who, atleast, was considered to belong to -the ecclesiastical order ;but Edward went farther, for he shared these powers withtwo laymen. Tn this respect, he anticipated by a hundredand fifty years the famous " Holy Synod " that the Czar,Peter I., established in Russia, andaMuscovite patriarch.substitutedforLet us see how the King writes to Antony St. Leger(Lord Deputy of Ireland), the Protestant Bishop of Meath," All Kings who professand Richard Reid, Chancellor :the Christian Faith having received from the Most Highall power of jurisdiction, we, who bear the special title ofDefender of the Faith, ought to take care more than anyother that not only the orthodox faith should be cultivatedand observed in all its integrity among our subjects, butalso that justice should be rendered to every one, accord-... In virtue of our right of Supremeing to equity.Head of the Church, English as well as Irish .. wegrant to you and any two of you conjointly the full and.the most eminent men of Greece were great liars all their days, whenthe meaning was that they livedin great poverty all their days." Grsecorum clarissimi prsestantissimique viri per totam vitam inextrema mendaciiate versati sunt."How necessary, we may infer, is care in the'copying of manuscripts !—Trans.112rOPE ADRIAN IV.,absolute power, authority, and faculty of giving;, fromtime to time, in our name, to each and every person ofeither sex, present and future in our kingdom of Ireland,and living under our Irish government ... all kinds what-soever of licences, dispensations, compositions, faculties,concessions, rescripts, delegations, and other permissions,in all cases and causes whatsoever ... as the Archbishopof Canterbury gives them in our kingdom of England."(Rymer, xv., 146.)The counsellors of the young King ought to have hadthe decency to remember that the title of " Defender of theFaith " had been conferred by a Pope.Not content with usurping papal authority, Edwardtried to hinder the true Pope from exercising his power ;for instance, he made void a regulation that the Holy Seehad prescribed regarding the Church of Saint Nicholas inGalway. The most amusing thing of all is that the royaldiploma meanly copies the clauses and the style of theRoman Chancery :" Et si secus a quoquam quavis auc-toritate scienter vel ignoranter attemptari contigerit, Illudirritum decernimus et inane, "iEdward's "Brief" isdated 29th of April, 1551.(Rymer, xv. , 258.)» It has been remarked that St. Thomas's Summa was the masterpiece of reason in the thirteenth century ; Dante's Divma Commedia-the mastermece of ima^mation in the fourteenth century • and theIimtation of Christ, by a Kempis, the masterpiece of a devout mind'All came forth in a Catholic atmosphere!in the fifteenth century.and were m keepmg with the grand cathedrals and other magnificentworks of art in those ages. A large portion ol Shakespeare's playsformed the masterpiece of a worldly genius in the sixteenth centuryat a time when many Catholic sentiments remained, but the religiousspirit was dving out.Protestantism, excluding the light of manvtruths that faith reveals, has never produced anything to equalthem—It rather dwarfs and cramps the mind, though it has madegreat discoveries m regard to, steam, electricity, etc. On such matters,however useful, our Divine Redeemer, in whom were hidden all thetreasures of knowledge, never deigned to utter a word, as if theywere of very minor importance in comparison with the great truthsof eternity, or the great work of human salvation —TramA FRIEND or IRELAND.II3CHAPTER XXVUI.ERECTION OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND BY POPE PAUL IV.{1553-)It wasIreland had never been considered a kingdom.officially designated the Land of Ireland.The Kings ofEngland called themselves Lords of this Land. The Bullsof Popes and the diplomas of Kings unite to prove thisdenomination of Land through all preceding ages. As theletter of Adrian IV. to Louis VII. used the same term todesignate the country whose conquest was desired by theKing of France and the King of England, I have taken anargument from the fact to maintain that the pontifical lettercould not apply to Spain, which comprised three king-doms, and consequently did not exist politically as onesingle nation. King John offered to the Pope the kingdomBut Innocent III. was not so innocent as toof Ireland.mention the pretended kingdom ; for he wrote to the pre-lates, knights, and people, per Hiberniam constitutis : hedid not at all say per Hihernim regnum. Henry VIII. him-self, as I have said above, writing to Leo X. , in order tooffer him his book Assertio Septem Sacramentorum tooksimply the title " Lord of Ireland."The Protestant Parliament that sat in Dublin m 1541Edward VI. took theerected Ireland into a kingdom.pompous title of " King of England, France, and Ire-land."This example was followed by Queen Mary, called tothe throne of England after the death ofher brotherEdward in 1553. When she married Philip of Spain, sonof Charles V., the proclamations and ordinances men-tioned, among other titles of these rulers, that of " Kingand Queen of Ireland."In Lingard's History, we read as follows :" Pole hadforeseen that the new title of King and Queen of Ireland,assumed by Philip and Mary, in imitation of Henry andEdward, might create some difficulty, and had thereforerequested that Ireland might be declared a kingdom beforeI114POPE ADRIAN IV.But the death of Juhus,the arrival of the ambassadors.succeeded by that of Marcellus, had prevented those Pon-tiffs from complying with his advice, and the first act ofthe new Pope,i after his coronation, was to publish a Bullby which, at the petition of Philip and Mary, he raised thelordship of Irelaivi to the dignity of a kingdom.Till thishad been done, the ambassadors waited without the city ;three days later they were introduced."Paul III. had taken it very ill that Henry VIII. assumedthe title of King of Ireland, because it was supposed thatThis sentiment hashe did so in contempt of the Holy See.found an echo in the Annals of Bzovius.(An. 1542, n. 11.)Two official documents regard the erection of the king-dom of Ireland ; first, the consistorial decree, which accom-plished this erection, and secondly, the Bull of the sameday, 7th of June, 1555.The Continuator of Baronius gives the consistorial de-cree, which appears also among the letters of CardinalPole (v. 136). The Bull is found in the Roman BuUarium,i, part 4, page 315).It is also in thelatest edition (vol.Annals of Bzovius (vol. xx., p. 301).The two documents, identical in substance, present thesame affirmations and the same clauses, expressed in theThe consistorial decree is as follows : —same terms." Rome, seventh day of the month of June, 1555.Therewas a consistory at St. Mark's. On the relation of theMost Reverend Puteus, the Holy Father erected the islandSince the time when the Kingsof Ireland into a kingdom.of England acquired the dominion of this island throughthe Apostolic See, they, for the time being, have beenaccustomed to call themselves simply its Lords. The royaltitle was de facto usurped, first by the late Henry VIII.,after his defection from the unity of the Church and sub-mission to the Roman Pontiff, under pretext of a lawmade, it is said, by the Parliament of the aforesaid island ;and then by his son, Edward VI.—both of whom, whilethey lived, held themselves for Kings of .England.HisHoliness erected the kingdom of Ireland in the manner ofother islands, which have the royal title, dignity, andhonour : without prejudice to the rights of the holy Roman1 Paul IV.A FRIKND OF IRELAND.Il5Church, or of any other party that claims to have a rightin or to the aforesaid island ; and he adorned and decoratedit with the title, dignity, honour, power, rights, and royalinsignia enjoyed by the other kingdoms of Christendom."This consistorial decree is repeated in the Bull.Thepreamble of the Bull says that the Pontiff, holding the placeof Him by whom Kings reign, willingly complies with theMtiry is called Queen ofwishes of the Catholic princes.Then the erection of the kingdomEngland and France.is granted at the request of King Philip and Queen Mary :it is not an act motu propria of the Pope.does not atall mention the BullThe erection of the kingdom of Ireland having beengranted at the request of Philip and Mary, it is necessaryto interpret the diploma according to the principles oiCanon Law.(a) PaulIV.ofIf he admitted the genuineness of this Bull,Adrian IV.he would naturally have recalled it, instead of referringvaguely to a time when the Kings of England had ob-tained the sovereignty of Ireland through the Holy See,I suspect that the Pontifical Court of 1555 had no know-It wasledge whatever of the existence of such a Bull.only fifty years later that Baronius, meeting it by chancein Matthew Paris, inserted it in his Annals, showing at thesame time how little he believed in its genuineness.John XXII., it is true, spoke of the Bull of Adrian in aletter that he addressed to King Edward 11. , as I have saidBut it does not appear that this secret letter leftabove.any remembrance or trace in the Pontifical Court.In thetime of Paul IV., the registers of John XXII. being still atthe Pontifical Palace of Avignon, the Roman archivistscould not know the particulars of secret documents thatwere not before their eyes.With what object did John XXII. send to King Edwarda copy of the Bull that he had received from the Irish ofUlster, if not to make known to this prince that he (thePontiff) knew nothing about it, and that he doubted itsIt may be that hegenuineness ?was very glad to warn the King that the Pontifical Courtwould henceforth have an eye on the fraudulent methodsthat the English employed in order to gain the submissionConcessisse dicitur !of the old Irish by a display of Apocryphal Bulls.,Il6POPE ADRIAN IV.John XXII. did not care to keep a copy of the Bull ofNeither Bernard Guidonis nor Cardinal D'Ara-Adrian.gon found a trace of it in the archives.(b) The Bull of Paul IV. passed over in silence theagreement made in 1213 between Pope Innocent III. andIt is beyond doubt that the King offered theKing John.kingdom of Ireland to the Roman Church : tottim regnumHibcrnice ; but it seems no less certain that the Pope couldnot accept this donation. Nemo dat quod non liabet is amaxim given us by the wisdom of nations. Now, KingJohn, who possessed only a small part of Ireland, was notm a position to give the whole island :it is not permittedPopeto perform good works with the property of others.Innocent III., on his side, should not on any account takethe sovereignty of a kingdom that did not exist.If hewished for sovereignty, he should begin by erecting thekingdom. We nowhere see that a Roman Pontiff con-ferred the investiture of Ireland on King John or any ofThis is why Paul IV. kept a prudenthis successors.silence..(c) Neither the Bull of Adrian nor the concordat of Inno^cent III. being able to serve as a title, it is not easy to seewhat led Paul IV. to say in his diploma that the Kings ofEngland acquired the sovereignty of Ireland through theIllius dominium per sedem. prmdictam adeptiHoly See :But lo ! this incidental phrase givessunt reges Anglice." Since the time when the Kingsrise to another difficulty.of England acquired the dominion of this island through. have been accustomed to callthe Apostolic See, they .themselves simply its Lords." How are we to know theKing John, at the beginning of his reign,precise time?and even before it, took the pompous title of " Lord ofIreland." He could not rely on the false Bull of Adrian,which granted no right to the successors of King Henry II.It was Henry who, wishing to screen his son John fromthe nickname Lackland that had been given him and thatremained with him, it was Henry who thought, by his ownauthority, to make John "Lord of Ireland."But thePopes gave John the mere title " Earl of Morton." Afterthe death of Henry II., during the reign of Richard Coeurde Lion, Pope Clement III. having occasion to speak atthe same time of Ireland and of John, gave the latter theA FRIEND OF IRELAND.II7mers title of " Earl of Morton," as if he would not recog-nise that of " Lord of Ireland," so pretentiously assumed.Thus, there is no historical connection between thetaking of the title and any grant whatsoever of sovereigntyin Ireland by the authority of the Holy See.All that canbe said is that Pope Paul IV., or rather the writer of theBull, copied from the petition of Philip and Mary.Onlythat, and nothing more.(d) During a long time, it was inculcated upon the oldIrish that they ought to regard the Pope as sovereign lordof the country. This notion was encouraged by Kings andParliaments, as an easy means of securing submission.We may read on this subject the statutes of the Parlia-ments of the English colony, especially the seventh statuteunder Edward IV.(C. g.)ofthetheSee :HolyallPaulwithtoKings ofsovereignty oftheir power,IV.thatConformably to this notion, towards which the Irishshowed themselvesincredulous, but which the Eng-Philip and MaryspreadlishEng-representedland had acquiredIreland by adominiumgranttheper sedemprmdictam (apostolicam^ ade-hti sunt regesAnglicB ; but the assertion, exceedingly doubtful for elevencounties, seems entirely devoid of exactness and truth ifwe look at the twenty-One counties which held their inde-pendence, and which the English had never subdued. Wemay be permitted to doubt that Paul IV. would have con-sented to the erection of the kingdom, if he had been in-formed that the King of England possessed only thesmaller portion of the island.(insulae)illiusIt is a fundamental principle of the Roman Chancerythat grants on petition are pre-eminently conditional :they depend on the subjective and objective veracity of thesi vera sint exposita ; quatenus preceslepresentation :veritate nitantur. When the foundation is defective, thebuilding falls to the ground. The Bull of Paul IV. showsin every word that the erection of the kingdom of Irelandwas decided on by the petition of Philip and Mary :i' Philip and Mary, and Cardinal Pole, who was Mary's cousin, raavall have believed bona fide in Adrian's grant, and thus led Pope Paul IV.astray by their representations or rather misrepresentations. For a Popecan err in matters of history just as in those of geometry or astronomy,Il8POPE ADRIAN IV.,Philippo rege et Maria regina nobis super hoc humiliterIt is otherwise when the Pope declaressupplicantibus.that he acts spontaneously, or without request from anyperson.(e) The Holy Sec always protects the rig'hts of others.Paul IV. should protect them so much the more in thepresent case as the Irish had not been consulted on anThis is why the Popeaffair that concerned them closely.expressly safeguards the rights that any third party mayprcBJudicio juriumset forth in regard to Ireland : sineipsius Romance EcclesicE, et cujuscunique alterius in ilia(insula) vel ad illani jus habere prcetendentis. The consis-torial decree makes the same reserve.Remark carefully that the Bull does not reserve only thepeaceable possession [jus in re), but it reserves also thefuture or the contested right [jus ad rem). Twenty-one in-dependent counties peaceably possessed their territory :the Pope did not intend to modify at any cost their state.I ask if the old Irish had any rig^ht to claim back the terri-Had not the invasion beentory of the English colony.unjust? Had not the conquest been accomplished byiniquitous means?Irish acquiesced in theirI do not press thespoliation?it is enough to note that the Pontifical Bull re-matter :serves all rights.Had theThis is the jus ad rem.It is very doubtful that the Irish would have consentedto let themselves be included in a kingdom totally wantingin homogeneity, being composed of two disproportionedparts : on the one side, twenty-one independent counties,and on the other, eleven counties of an English colony,which depended on the Crown of England.For example,the republic of Cracow existed from 1815 to 1847 ; but noperson had any idea of regarding it as part of the kingdomof Poland, which the Congress of Vienna gave to theEmperor of Russia.(/) The Bull of Paul IV. did not confer on the King ofEngland any new right over Ireland ; in this respect, thesituation continued the same as before.Investiture, dona-Tt is only in matters of faith and morals that he is infallible, and eventhen, only when he speaks ex cathedra. As a private theologian, he mayerr.— Trans.A FRIEND OF IRFLAND.IIQtion, concession—nothing of the kind is to be seen in thepontifical diploma. The independence of the oldtherefore received no hurt.IrishBy the erection of the king;dom of Ireland, Paul IV. con-ferred an honorary title on the King of England, who fora long time was called the King of France, although hehad no authority in this latter country.(g) I cannot say whether the Irish learned with satisfac-tion that their country had been raised to the rank of aBut I notice in McGeoghegan the following re-kingdom.marks : —" To the month of June in this year (1555) werefer a Bull or Brief of Pope Paul IV., which conferred onIreland the title of kingdom. We do not see very well thenecessity for this new creation of the title of kingdom forThis island was adorned with that title a longIreland.time before the English were known there, and even be-fore the institution of the Papacy."[Histone d'Irlande,t. 2,p. 367.)Bzovius, after the Bull, gives some account of the pri-vate interview that Paul IV. had with the ambassadors ofQueen Mary.After this, says the historian, the Pontiffcomplained that the ecclesiastical goods had not yet beenHe said that the usurpers ought absolutely torestored.be obliged to surrender them—that the English ought tobe well convinced that sacrilegious thefts would draw downa curse from heaven on their families and on their king-dom. He recommended the ambassadors to write often totheir princes on this point, and he renewed this advice onHe expressly ordered that they should en-all occasions.gage them to re-establish Peter's Pence, because he haddecided on sending a collector to England, according tocustom. He had himself discharged this employment forthree years, and he recalled to mind with pleasure theeagerness that the people, and even the poor, showed inpaying this tribute. The English ought not to expect thatSt. Peter would open for them the gate of heaven, if theydid not repair the injury that they had done him byusurping his rights.The Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland duringthe reign of Mary, wrested from the old Irish the two dis-tricts of Offaly and Leix, and erected them into counties,which he called King's County and Queen's County, in120POPE ADRIAN IV.,This fact goes tp show that,honour of Philip and Mary.erection of a new kingdom, thenotwithstanding thegreater part of Ireland continued independent of the Crownof England.The Parliament of the English colony re-establishedCatholic worship, acknowledged the authority of the Pope,and proclaimed the legitimacy of Queen Mary.(Statutesof Ireland under Philip and Mary, i, 2, 3, 4.)The Archbishop of Armagh resumed his See ; but mar-ried prelates and priests lost their benefices.Bayle, theProtestant Bishop of Ossory, who had so often putliis lifein danger by his violence and fanaticism, had the prudenceThe number of Protestantsto retire to the continent.appeared too small to excite any fear, and their zeal wastoo prudent to cause any provocation.Considering the state of poverty to which the Churchwas reduced, the Queen restored to it the ecclesiasticalproperties that, during the late reigns, had been annexedShe had renounced the supremacy : couldto the Crown.she retain the riches that came from an invasionofauthority? With the approbation of Parliament, there-fore, tithes, first-fruits, rectories, benefices united to theCrown since the twentieth year of Henry VIII., and pro-ducing a revenue of sixty thousand pounds sterling, wererestored by the Queen, and placed at the disposal of theBishops, who resumed the conferring of parishes and cura-The monastery of the Knights of St. John of Jeru-cies.salem, that of the Benedictines at Westminster, and otherreligious houses were re-established.CHAPTER XXIX.CONFISCATION OF LANDS IN IRELAND.Elizabeth,In 1560, under the reign ofthe ProtestantParliament met in Dublin.It was decided that Irelandshould be reformed according to the model of the AnglicanChurch ; but the nobility and the people detested thischange, and the new laws were not enforced, except inplaces where they could be maintained by the bayonet.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.121Of all the native chiefs, the man who most alarmed theGovernment was Shane O'Neill, eldest son of the Earl ofTyrone. The old Irish respected and obeyed him as thechief man of the island.In 1565, he took part in some actsFrequent losses obliged him to seekof open rebellion.refuge among the Scotch of Ulster, enemies alike of Irishand English ; and this Irish prince was basely murderedby his new friends, at the instigation of Pierse, an EnglishThe name, as well as the title, of O'Neill wasofficer.to resumeblotted out for ever by an Act of Parliament ;it was declared an act of high treason. The lands of Shaneand his followers, comprising half of Ulster, were confis-cated for the benefit of the Crown.But this reduction of Ulster did not bring back peace.The restless feeling of the chiefs of the country, both Irishand English, continually drew them into local wars ; andtheir attachment to the Catholic Faith made them enemies, to the Government, which proscribed their religion.In-all the provinces. The usualsurrections broke out inpunishment was the confiscation of the lands of the delin-quents ; but it was easier to pronounce this punishmentthan to put it into execution.A new plan was proposed to Queen Elizabeth—that ofcolonising the confiscated districts with English peasants,who, having an Interest in the soil, would be obliged tocombat the old Irish without expense to the Crown.A trial of it was begun in 1572. Immense grants weremade to some of the adventurers.The Earl of Essexoffered to colonise with 1,200 men the district of Clanna-By a contract made between Elizabethboy, in Ulster.and him, it was agreed that the expense should be bornein equal portions by them. ^This new plan of colonisation was regarded with horrorby the natives both of Irish and English origin.Theysaw the fate that was in store for them.Several chiefs,either in person or by messenger, implored the help OfCatholic powers for the defence of their property and theirreligion. The Kings of France and Spain were then en-gaged with matters of more immediate interest ; but' Every horseman who volunteered in the enterprise for two yearswas to obtain four hundred acres of land at two pence per acre, andevery footman two hundred acres at the same ia.te.-~ Tram.—;122POPE ADRIAN IV.,Gregory XIII. lent an ear to their complaints and theirIreland had not been named in the Bull ofsupplications.This omission was supplied for, andSaint Pius \'.Gregory signed, but without publishing, a new Bull, bywhich he declared that Elizabeth had lost the Crown ofIreland, as well as that of England.(Becchetti, xii., § 21.)In 1586, the Earl of Desmond was condemned by Par-liament, and the lands of his earldom, consisting of about600,000 acres, were confiscated to the Crown.Theselands were granted to English colonists, and nearly all thefavourites of Queen Elizabeth obtained extensive tracts,under condition of not admitting any person of Irish originto dwell among them.Half the region lapsed into awilderness. A considerable number of the old inhabitantsrather than abandon their birth-place, consented to holdfrom strangers the lands that came to them from theirancestors. 11 The following note is from the Introduction to a " Brief Descrip-tion of Ireland, 1590," published by the Archaeological Society, Dublin,.1S41 :—" Her Majesty was bent on peopling Munster with English settlers,and letters were written to every county in England to encourageyounger brothers to become ' undertakers ' in Ireland, a name appliedto the settlers on account of their being obliged to undertake to observecertain conditions enjoined by the Queen.'' The plan devised for the plantation of Munster was, to divide theforfeited lands into seignories; and to require each undertaker ior. 12,000acres to plant eighty-six families upon his estate, viz.His own family to have .... 1,600 acresOne chief farmer ...Two good farmers .... 600400,,,,Two other farmersFourteen free-holders, each 300 acresForty copy-holders, each 100 acresTwenty-six cottagers and labourers4004,2004,00080012,000,," And so proportionably for smaller seignories."The inducements to settle in Ireland were very great. The Queenproposed to give estates in fee, at two.pence per acre, in the counties ofCork and Waterford, to be rent free till March, 1590, and to pay butThenceforth they were to holdhalf the rent for the next three years.in soccage ; to have liberty for ten years to transport the growth of theirlands, duty free, to any place in amity with England ; to be free fromcess for ever; to have liberty to import necessaries from England, freeof custom ; and no Irish were to be permitted to reside on the landswith several other covenants, some of which her Majesty did not——A FRIEND OF IRELAND.133Catholic sentiment in Ireland felt a strong re-actionagainst a Queen placed under sentence of excommunica-Some champions of independencetion and deposition.appealed to the Sovereign Pontiff as their lord, not onlyspiritual, but temporal.Dr. Lingard remarks that he does not know if this titlewas accepted or rejected.But the Popes often sent pecu-niary, and sometimes military help, and exhorted the Irishto shake off the English yoke, and to free their countryfrom civil and religious bondage.These exhortations hadconsiderable influence on many persons, but the majorityof the two races continued faithful to Elizabeth. ^(Historyof England, Reign of Elizabeth, Chapter VI.)Although Parliament had passed an Act to abolishCatholic worship in Ireland, it was not in the power of aperform, particularly that of keeping troops for the security of thesettlers in Munster."The author of the book, one Robert Payne, encouraging English-men to come over to Ireland, says : — " Let not the reports of those thathave spent all their own and what they could by any means get fromothers in England discourage you from Ireland, although they andsuch others by bad dealings have wrought a generaldiscredit toEnglishmen in that country which are to the Irish unknown.Thesemen will say there is great danger in travelling the country, and muchmore to dwell or inhabit there ; yet are they freed from three of thegreatest dangers ; first, they cannot meet inall that land any worsethan themselves ; secondly, they need not fear robbing, for that theyhave nothing to lose ; lastly, they are not likely to run in debt, for thatthere is none will trust them. ..." 33 herrings, 6 mackerel, 6 sea-breams, a fat hen, 30 eggs, a fat pig,one pound of butter, or 2 gallons of new milk, for a penny. A red deer. You may keep a better house inwithout the skin, for 2s. 6ii.Ireland for £co a year than in England for ^200 a year."Trans...^ Tiis last remark, attributed to Dr. Lingard, appears to be anI have searched through two editions of his History ofinterpolation.Enaland (Mawman, London, 1823, and Baldwin and Cradock, London,1838), and .can find nothing like it. On the contrary, I find him to say :" In Ireland almost the whole population, whether of English or Irishorigin, was leagued in open or clandestine hostility against the Englishgovernment."—" The O'Neill was celebrated in every district as thesaviour of his country; and the whole of the indigenous population,and many of the chieftains of English origin, arose in arms to assertthe independence of their country."It is possible that a French edition may have been tampered with.Asa general rule, our learned author, who often quotes Dr. Lingard,is exceedingly correct in his views regarding Ireland, especially whenwe consider that he is a foreigner.Trans.124POPE ADRIAN IV.,handful of Protestants to deprive a whol-e people of theirIf the laws were observed, it was only inreligious rites.the towns of the garrison. The news of Elizabeth's deathwas immediately followed by a restoration of the ancientworship.The violent abolition of Catholic worship, and the finesinflicted on those who were absent from the ProtestantChurch on Sunday, were not the only blows of whichthe Catholics of Ireland had to complain. The law obligedevery person to take the oath of supremacy, if he wishedto practise at the bar, or to become a magistrate, or toobtain investiture or possession of feudal lands.This law was often relaxed. Sometimes it seemed to fallinto desuetude. But the Irish always knew that such favourcame only from toleration, and that they were at the mercyof the Government, and of every perfidious or interestedinformer. During the greater part of the reign of James I.the laws were executed with some indulgence, but this in-dulgence was only accidental, and even when it took place,it did not proceed from any just idea of equity.It arosefrom a sense of weakness, and a conviction thatmoment for another course was not yet come. ^theIn 1605, James issued a proclamation, commanding allCatholic priests to quit Ireland under pain of death, andrequiring the chief inhabitants to attend the ProtestantSome great families of the country cried outservice.against the unlawfulness of this ordinance, and asked thatliberty of worship should be allowed them ; but the peti-^ A certain author, to whom we have several times referred, takesa mere passing remark from a letter (in Spicil. Ossor., p. 113) which hasno name attached, but was probably written by some Englishman orAnglo-Irishman in London to the Spanish ambassador there in 1604, andhe presents it as the national sentiment of Ireland during the seventeenthIt is to the effect that all the Catholics of Ireland believedcentury.the title by which the English Kings obtained the dominion of Irelandto be that the rights of the Church should be preserved whole and invio-late, according to the decree of Pope Adrian IV., as shown in somedocuments sent the previous year from England to be printed in Frank-fort. Now, who does not see that the nameless writer of this letter hasno claim to be regarded as an exponent or a representative of the viewsheld by the Old Irish ?It was always the endeavour of the English toobtain belief for Adrian's Bull ; but the Old Irish in general knew toowell what to think of it.Their confidence in the Pope, their devotionto the Holy See, never failed for a single day. No doubt many of theAnglo-Irish followed their example.— Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.1 25tioners were arrested, and lodged in the Castle. Manywere banished out of the country.By confiscating the property of fugitives, two millionacres of land, forming nearly the whole of six counties inthe North, fell to the Crown. James I. ordered a new trialImmense lots were reserved for the bestof colonisation.known adventurers of England and Scotland, and formilitary and civil officers. Some of the smallest lots weregiven to native Irish ; but these were obliged to take theoath of supremacy, and to admit no tenant except of Eng-Its execution, however,lish origin.required many modifications.Of the whole region, ingreat part mountainous and uncultivated, a vast portionwas never divided in any manner ; and many of the indi-genous chiefs, either under pretext of loyalty or by meansof gifts, had their old possessions yielded to them. Mean-while, about a hundred thousand acres were colonised ;and the vigour of the measure, joined with the amalgama-tion of a new race, helped to keep in awe those turbulentspirits who had so often despised the authority and thepower of the English Government.Such was the plan.Under the reign of Charles I., relig'ious persecution be-The Irish then held a generalcame doubly intense. '^' Mr. Lecky, though no great friend of Ireland, felt himselfbound as an honest historian to write thus of Ireland in the latterpart of the sixteenth century :" The slaughter of Irishmen was looked upon as literally theNot only men, but even the womenslaughter of wild beasts.and children who fell into the hands of the English were deliberatelyand systematically butchered. The sword was not found efficient.But another method was found much more efficacious.Yearafter year, over a great part of all Ireland, all means of humansubsistence was destroyed, no quarter was given to prisoners whosurrendered, and the whole population was skilfully and steadilystarved to death. The pictures of the condition of Ireland atthis time are as terrible as anything in human history."We may indeed with all truth say, that during the last sevenhundred years, Ireland has presented innumerable scenes for theproper description of which no historian can find words, no paintercolours.Again, speaking of the early part of the seventeenth century," It had become clear beyond all doubt to the nativeMr. Lecky says :population that the old scheme of rooting them out from the soilwas the settled policy of the Government ; that the land whichremained to them was marked as a prey by himgry adventurers,by the refuse of the population of England and Scotland, by men—120POPE ADRIAN IV.,A national association was formed, and theassembly.members bound themselves by oath to maintain the freeand public exercise of Catholic worship, and to claim forthe people of Ireland the same privileges as were enjoyedby the people of England.All the Irish, with the excep-tion of persons who lived in fortified places occupied byconsented to draw the swordthe English garrisons,against the common enemy of their rights and of theirreligion, and resolved never to lay down arms until theyhad obtained a recognition of the independence of the IrishParliament, a removal of every degrading disqualificationmade on account of religion, and an exclusion of strangersfrom all civil and military charges in the kingdom.The King signed a proclamation on the ist of January,1642, declaring that the insurgents were traitors, andagain prohibited the exercise of Catholic worship.Parliament borrowed a large sum of money on a pledgeof the lands of the insurgents, which were regarded asalready confiscated in consequence of the rebellion.Forthis design, two million five hundred thousand acres wereThese measures served to cement the union ofset apart.the insurgents and to increase their efforts.A council of Catholic prelates and theologians was con-vened at Kilkenny, on the loth of May, 1642. A report ofthe grievances that had led the insurgents to take up armswas laid before them, and they decided that the reasonswere sufficient, and thatpro-carried on through motivesvidedpersonalofhatred,dis-honouredoathwas ordered to be taken, by which each man boundhimself to protect, at the risk of his life and fortune, theit was notinterestoractsthe war was lawful,thatprivatenorAnneedlesscruelty.byofwho cared no more for their rights and happiness than they didfor the rights and happiness of the worms which were severed bytheir own .spades."While this sad state of affairs prevailed among the Irish, theEnglish and Scotch settlers, favoured by the Government, were ofcourse prospering in every way.The President of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt, ina lecture on Cromwell, refers to the same period thus : " Ireland,utterly foreign in speech and culture, had been ground into thevery dust^ by the crushing weight of England's overlordship."How admirable to see such sentiments of humanity in a man ofsuch exalted and extensive influence !Trans.—A FKIENU OF IRELAND.—137liberty of Catholic worship, and the lawful immunitios andrig-fats of the kingdom of Ireland, against all invaders orSentence of excommunication was also decreedusurpers.against any Catholic who should abandon the union, andagainst any who should take advantage of the war to kill,wound, or rob another.The republican Parliament of London had a design toCromwell, seeingexterminate the Catholic population.the impossibility of effecting such a massacre, ^ had re-This was to engage the chiefs tocourse to an expedient.expatriate themselves, with great numbers of their fellow-countrymen, and to pass into the service of foreign powers.An Act of Parliament banished all Catholic officers.Inthis manner, the Irish population was lessened by thirty orAs for women andforty thousand men able to bear arms.children, they were assembled in crowds of thousands, puton board of ships, and transported to America, especiallyto Jamaica.2Notwithstanding all this emigration, and the frequentarrival of English and Scotch colonists, it was found thatthe Catholic population exceeded the Protestant in the pro-portion of eight to one.A proclamation of the 6th of January, 1653, commandedall Catholic priests to leave Ireland within twenty days,under pain of being treated as guilty of high treason.Every person was forbidden to give shelter to any of theclergy, under pain of death.A fine of half-a-crown was imposed on those who shouldfail to be present at the Sunday service of the ProtestantChurch. Magistrates were empowered to seize the childrenof Catholics, so as to have them brought up in England.Some Priests who remained in the country were dis-' Cromwell, after his barbarous massacres at Drogheda and Wex-ford, in which no mercy was shown to man, woman, or child, writes tothe Parliament that it has " pleased God to give into your hands thisother mercy, for which, as for all, we pray God may have all the glory."Drogheda was the first '; Wexford the second !' mercy "A more inhuman monster than Cromwell, always ready to callIf sophistry wereblack white and white black, has seldom been seen.an honourable study, his writings might serve as a text-book for it.Trans.For many interesting particulars of those cruel days, seeThe poor Irish exilesSpicilegium Ossoriense, by Cardinal Moran.were often sold as slaves for a very small sum.Trans.2——128POPE ADRIAN IV.,covered and hanged. Those who escaped search concealedthemselves in the caves of mountains, or in lonely hutsrudely built in the midst of bogs, from which they wentforth at night, to carry the consolations of religion to thedwellings of their people.A proclamation was also issued, ordering' all Nuns toMany of them weremarry, or else to quit the island.shipped to Belgium, France, and Spain, where they foundhospitality in the convents of their Orders.confirmed,As a consequence of the confiscations made by Cromwell,andtime of the Restoration, byCharles II., the Irish lost the greatest part of their lands,for only a tenth part was left them.theatThe position of the indigenous Irish improved somewhatIn 1691, freedom in the exer-after the fall of the Stuarts.cise of the Catholic religion, with a formal promise of pro-tection from all trouble on account of it, was guaranteed tothem by the Treaty of Limerick.It was stipulated thatany Irishman might leave Ireland with his family andgoods, and go to any country he pleased, except EnglandOf Scotland.CHAPTER XXX.BRIEFS OF THE HOLY SEP. ON THE WAR OF IRISH INDEPENDENCE.Si.VERAL briefs of Gregory XIII., and two other briefs byClement VI 1 1, twenty years later, approved of the risingof the Irish against the English, to recover the nationalindependence, and freedom of worship for the Catholicreligion.' Even at the present day, it seems that three-fourths of thefarms are crowded on one-fourth of the land.Trans.^ If, at the time our esteemed author wrote, the History ofIreland in the Eighteenth Century, V. vols., by William E. H. Lecky,had been published, he would likely have had a great deal more tosay on the reigns of WiUiam, Anne, and the Georges. The goodclauses of the Treaty of IJmerick held but for a very short time.Abbe McGeoghegan shows from French official documentsthat between 1691 and 1745 more than 450,000 Irishmen died in theservice of France alone, to say nothing of Spain or Austria. Lifein Ireland had been rendered next to impossible for them.Trans—A FKlliND Ol- IKHLAND.—I29In point of fact, the champions of independence appealedto the Sovereign Pontiff, and the Popes often sent thempecuniary and mihtary aid, and exhorted the Irish, byletters or by messengers, to shake off the English yoke,and to free their country from civil and religious bondage.The brief of Gregory XIII. on the 13th of May, 1580,mentions another, anterior by a few years, which had like-wise exhorted the Irish to take up arms for the defence ofThe Pontiff granted the indulgencesthe Catholic Faith.of the Crusadec, to all who should favour the good cause,The brief hasby supplying- either ammunition or food.It rhay be found in thebeen published by historians.Hisioire d'Ireland, by McGeoghegan, with the follov/ing" Behold the remedy that Gregory XIII. wouldremark :bring to the evils of Ireland, which one of his predecessors,Adrian IV., had caused !"(T. 2, p. 1139.)The first brief of Clement VIII. is dated the i6th ofAfter the death of James Geraldine and hisApril, 160a.relatives, the army took as its leader Hugh O'Neill, Earlof Tyrone. 1 The Pontiff renewed the indulgences of theCrusades for men in the army, and for all others whoshould assist in the cause of independence and the defenceof religion.The Irish formed a national association against desertersClement VIII. highly approved of theirfrom the Church.zeal ; recommended concord, a good understanding, tothem ; promised to write earnestly to Catholic princes ;and announced the sending of a Nuncio, who would resideamong them, and contribute to the maintenance of union.This brief, dated the 30th of January, 1601, was addressedto the Captain-General of the Catholic army.In 1603, two cases of conscience were laid before thePrince Hugh O'Neill wages warUniversity of Salamanca.against the Queen of England for the defence of the Catho-lic religion, that the Irish may be permitted to profess ita liberty that the Queen wishes to take from them by forceCan Irish Catholics in conscience, by arms andof arms.all other means, help Prince Hugh in this war? And canIrish Catholics, without mortal sin, enlist in the enemy's' It will be observed, that, notwithstanding what has been saidat p. 121, the name O'Neill still survives.Trans.—130POPE ADRIAN IV.,army, fight against Prince Hugh, and favour the Englishby arms or in any other manner?The Spanish Doctors answered the first question affirma-tively, the second negatively.The resistance of the Irish was just, because they de-fended religion, which the English endeavoured by force ofarms to abolish. On the side of the Irish, it was a defen-sive war ; they wished to preserve themselves from a reli-Forgious persecution and a most tyrannical oppression.the same reason, the war that the English made being un-just, an Irishman could not in conscience fight in theirranks, against his fellow-countrymen, iThe Bull of Adrian IV. was never brought forward in theIs it not truly significant that thisbriefs that I have cited.Bull was never mentioned in any official document ?therepresentativeThe Irish, bravely risen against England, earnestly de-sired that the Pope should take the temporal sovereigntyof the kingdom, and be declared its lord and master.Peterof Hugh O'NeillLombard,withClement VIII., believed in the genuineness of the Bull, asmay be seen in the " Annals of Ireland," which he pub-lished at Louvain.Frequently admitted to a Pontificalaudience, according to a promise given in the brief of 1601,he had many an opportunity of speaking of the Bull, andprobably he urged the Pope to rely upbn this ancient proofof pontifical right. But Clement VIII., resisting all impor-tunity, took good care not to admit the genuineness of theBull.? Don Philip O'SuUivan, in his Histories Catholicat HibcrnimCompendium, has given much blame to some Anglo-Irish priests,doctrine :— " Cujus mail maxima culpa in aliquot Anglo-lbernoswho, through culpable or inculpable ignorance, taught a contrarysacerdotes jure transferenda est, qui tartareum dogma ab orcoin Catholicorum perniciem emissum non negabant, licere Catholiciscontra Catholicos et suam patriam pro hsereticis gerere arma, etQuod si sacerdotes isti sand mente, et cum coeteris indimicare.hEercticis oppugandis unanimes et Concordes extitissent, et Iberniallis non obstitissent, facili negotio potuissent hsereticorumaliijugum cervicibus discutere, ut ex omni nostra historia fusius etEdited by the Rev. Dr. Matthew Kelly,assertius constat."p. 339.Trans.—A FKllCNU Of IRliLAND.I3ICHAPTER XXXI.I'MAXCU'AHOX OF Tllli IRISH.Taught by lony experience that it was impossible to over-come the Irish in matters ol religion, the English Govern-ment at last understood that it should grant Emancipation,But this great change was notwith full religious liberty.wrought in a day ; the English yielded only little by little,and when compelled by necessity. ^Since the conquest, Ireland had been subjected to iniqui-tous treatment. The conquerors began by despoiling thenatives of a great part of their lands. The next step was,by ill treatment, to drive them into rebellion, so as to havea plausible pretext for depriving them of what was left.Protestantism made no proselytes among the old Irish ;the only Irishmen who embraced it were the descendants ofthe English who settled in Ireland since the conquest.But, intead of allowing those men who had beensopitilessly robbed the exercise of the religion of their ances-tors, the English banished the priests from their churches,and gave their goods to Protestants. Some Irishmen hadstill preserved lands ; their fidelity to the Stuarts served asCromwell first, and after-a pretext for their spoliation.wards William HI., greedily confiscated whatever had notbeen already confiscated, so that there remained in thehands of Catholics only a tenth part of the lands of Ireland.To complete the evil, the new proprietors were not slowin returning to England—leaving their estates in the handsof middlemen, who sublet them in various portions to theunfortunate peasants at enormous rack-rents, and on con-ditions so hard that Russian serfs were less to be pitied.In 1793, the English Parliament passed a Bill that freed} Hence O'Connell's celebrated maxims, " England's difficultyis Ireland's opportunity," and, " We must take justice by instal-These maxims were the practical application of thements."words of one of O'Connell's warmest friends and supporters, the" Ireland is our secondMost Rev. Dr. Maginn, Bishop of Derry :mother ; her soil is sacred for us ; her honour, her glory, her in-dependence should, after God and His holy faith, enlist all oursympathies, excite our warmest affection, and concentrate all ourenergies."Trans.—"132POPE ADRIAN IV.,In 1798, an insurrection burst out in Ireland.the Catholics of Scotland from several disqualifications toThe Catholics of Irelandwhich they had been subject.were likewise permitted by a Billi to engage in civil andmilitary employments, as also to exercise electoral rights.But many restrictions were imposed on them.Theyacquired civil rights, but they were denied political rights.It cost theli\es of more than 30,000 men, and was the ruin of innu-But it was well proved, by the acknow-merable families.ledgment of many leaders in it, that it had not at all for itsTheits original object the emancipation of Catholics.chief insurgents wished only to foun4. a republic on theruins of the ancient government, and to be totally indepen-dent of Great Britain.The union of the two Kingdoms and their Parliaments,which was effected in 1800,^ did not modify the conditionTrans.^ England had lately been taugfit a severe lesson by the with-drawal of the United States of America from their allegiance toShe was also alarmed at the spread of republican principlesher.in France, and feared an invasion of Ireland.She thereforebelieved it more for her interest to be less tyrannical.'^ For a very interesting account of Ireland's losses since theUnion of iSoo,—of wliich Union, Lord Clare, the son of an apostatelawyer, was said to be the Father—see England's Wealth andIreland's Poverty, by Mr. Thomas I.rngh, M.P. The author showsthat the gross income of Great Britain is reckoned at iifteen hundredand thirty millions, and that of Ireland at seventy millions.Then,deducting £12 per head for average support of population, thetaxable income of Great Britain is about £^0 a head, and that ofthe Briton and the Irishman were to beIreland £t, a head.taxed with equal fairness, each Briton should pay ten times asmuch as each Irishman. ... In Great Britain the total tax-ation does not amount to quite one-ninth, in Ireland it amounts. The theory of theto four-fifths, of the taxable income.government of the two islands under one system is that like benefitsshould be enjoyed by both,Therefore, according to this theory,one-ninth of the taxable income is all that should be demanded" Let it not be said that this would be nothing forin Ireland.It would be just as much as the people nowthe people to pay.pay in Great Britain, and as much as they paid in Ireland whenher own statesmen controlled the destinies ofElsewhere, he shows, that the taxation of(pp. 106, 107, 121).Ireland ought to be reduced by about six millions a year (pp. 97, 98,100).abounding with instructive statistics, spoke as follows :— " WhatJMot long ago, Mr. John Redmond, M.P., in a very able speech,the countryIf..a cruel tiling it is that while every industry and interest in thecountry is neglected, while education is starved, while the labourers—A FRIKNn OF IRELAND.133of the Irish Catholics, who took no part in it, as they wereexcluded from political rights.It seems certain that Pitthad promised full Emancipation.In 1829, troubles continued in Ireland, and as feelingsgrew more and more excited on each side, a civil war wasEmancipation became necessary : the de-to be feared.mands of the Irish could no longer be resisted. ^ourcan get no justice, while the artisans o£ the towns cannot get decenthabitations, while the drainage of Irish rivers is neglected, whilethe Irish railways are the worst and dearest in the world, andnothing is done to improve transit facilities, while the piers andharbours of the country are a disgrace and a danger to humanlife, and while all these things are so because of ' want of money '—what a scandal and a crime it is that all the while we are support-ing the most expensive government in the world, and are payingfrom £3,000,000 to -f 5, 000,000 a year more thantaxablecapacity warrants as compared to Great Britain.Just think ofhow Ireland would be transformed if even a portion of this moneyof which we are annually robbed were spent under the paternalcare of a native government upon some of these matters I havementioned, instead of being squandered, as it is to-day."Trans.1 The Irish were led on to this great victory by Daniel O'Connell'who was therefore called the " Irish Liberator." An ardentpatriot, of giant mind and sympathetic heart, he laboured for manyyears to procure " Repeal of the Union." The pride of his country-men, he was regarded as an uncrowned king, and was followedwith unbounded confidence. He was a great advocate for moralforce, though some people believe that moral force shows itselfbetter by a well organised policy of passive resistance than byspeeches in the House of Commons ; and even the Times has ad-mitted that passive resistance may become " more troublesomethan armed rebellion."However, as far as can be judged at present,it seems a much wiser course for the Irish people to rally round theirparliamentary representatives, and to pull well with them.Itis to be feared that no other plan would work ; and great disunionAfter manymight be caused by advocating some crude scheme.a struggle for faith and fatherland, O'Connell died in T847 ^t Genoa,on his way to the Eternal City, bequeathing " his soul to God. hisheart to Rome, and his body to Ireland." He is buried in Glas-nevin Cemetery (near Dublin), where a noble monument—a roundtower 160 feet high, surmounted by a cross eight feet high—doeshonour to his memory. The chief street in Dublin, one of thefinest in Europe, is called O'Connell Street, that his sentiments,his aspirations, and his lifelong endeavours may never be forgottenby Irishmen.Thanks to Father Eugene O'Growney and the Gaelic League,a wonderfully strong national spirit, such as would have delightedO'Connell, has been awakened in the country during the pastfew years by the Irish Language Movement !Never, perhaps,134popr: Adrian iv.,anddistinctions,The Duke of Welling'ton proposed, and the two Housesof the English Parliament carried, a Bill which abolishedrecognised equality in politicalcivilrights, with a few exceptions.Before being able to en-gage in public functions. Catholics should take an oath ofIt was forbidden them to displayfidelity to the Crown.the insignia of their office or their rank in Catholicchurches.asBishops of the Protestant Church. Some precautions weretaken against too great an increase of monastic bodies.Bishops could not bear the same titlesThe Government made few friends for itself among thedid any movement take such a hold on the popular mind, or lead" Our primary object," says Fatherso directly to national life.O'Growney in the Gaelic Journal, " should be to. make the Gaeliclanguage live in the homes of the people."As a friend of hiswho knew him well informs us, he believed that if the Irish wouldnot re-learn their language, and cultivate their own literatureand art, they would wander farther and farther away fromIrish thought and feeling, and atlast forget that they hada country of their own to honour and defend.He believedtheywouldthatstory,n«ver be themselves ; would never listen to the voice of patriotism ;would never make a step on the road to independence, but lettheir ancient land, in spite of all its glorious memories, sink to thelevel of a British province. He was deeply convinced that " nativemartial song is the Nurse of Freedom in every land beneath thesun." A man of great ideas and ideals, he did not decry thevalue of the English language, nor did he fail to see what a mightybulwark the old language would be for the preservation of theHis life, written by Miss Agnes O'Farrelly, M.A., isold faith.a work highly interesting.music, andwithoutpoetry,IrishIn the coining of new Irish words, to meet modern requirements,it would seem better not to follow the example of the English,French, etc., who take Latin or Greek roots, but rather the exampleof the Germans, who try to find expressive terms in their ownThus, for magnanimity, they say grossmuth, great-language.spirit ; for telescope, fernrohr, far-tube ; for synonymous, gleich-hedeutend, like-meaning ; for transparent, durchsichtig, through-,see-able ; for to navigate, schiffen, to ship, or se.geln, to sail ; andfor to demonstrate, heweisen, to make wise on— that is, to instruct.Still it must be admitted that they have adopted a good manyother words which (though perhaps with a slight change of spelling)are now in general use everywhere ; as astronomie, telegraph, etc.Occasionally the coined words seem rather far-fetched, as anhang,a hang-on, for appendix, and thronhimmel, a throne-heaven, forcanopy. We also meet words of an originality that is amusing,as handsclnih, a hand-shoe, for glove, and schlagiihr, a strike-hour,Sometimes, words very much alike have quite a differentfor clock.foreseeing, providence, and versehung,meaning, as vorsehnng,A FRIKND OF IRKLAND.I35Catholics, who felt little g^ratitude for what the force ofcircumstances, rather than any sense ofjustice, hadextorted. The Emancipation Bill placed the two countrieson the same level, but it did not unite hearts.The English Government did not grant Emancipationwithout first expressing its intention of making Irishmendisown and abjure the Bull of Adrian IV., and every otherBull that implied any right in the Pope to dispose of king-doms or crowns.As a matter of fact, this question con-tinually turned up in the long inquiries that preceded theAct of Emancipation. No one ever saw a contradictionoverlooking, mistaking.to fore and over in English.The prefixes vor and ver here correspondIt is to be hoped that with the spread of Irish literature, nowso rapidly going on, a well-recognised standard, not only of style, butOf coursealso of spelling and pronunciation, will soon be attained.a great latitude must be allowed for variety of expression, without,however, letting it run wild. We should not forget what is oftenseen in history, that the dialects of people who once spoke the samelanguage, have, by imperceptible changes and for want of pruning,at last become different languages, no longer intelligible to all.About a century ago, the Welsh language was nearly extinct,btit by a vigorous effort it was revived, and is now in a most flourish-About three-fourths of the people of Wales useing condition.the Welsh language in the daily intercourse of life.There arelarge districts in which a word of English is never heard fromIn 1887, there were seventeen weeklyJanuary to December.newspapers in the Welsh language. The smallest circulation ofany of these was 1,500, while the largest was returned at 23,000.Then there were monthly, bimonthly, and quarterly magazines,one of which had attained a circulation of 37,600.(These par-ticulars are taken from the Welsh Review, quoted in the IrishIt was chiefly to the voluntaryGaelic Journal, of June, 1892.)work, we are told, of untrained teachers for an hour in the SundaySchools, that 999 out of every 1,000 Welshmen were able to readAbout 1886 a " Society for the Utilization of the WelshWelsh.Language "• was formed, and such has been its success that edu-cation in Wales is now thoroughly bilingual.Large powers, as well as large sums of public money, haveBooks on everybeen granted to the school authorities in Wales.subject, and in every standard, may have Welsh and EnglishWelsh headlines for copybooks, Welshreadings side by side.airs with Welsh words, Welsh history, etc., may be systematicallyThe annual Welsh Eisteddfod is an occasion of greattaught.national enthusiasm.Other countries of Europe—Bohemia, Finland, Poland, BelgiumBut Irish is far more" Keltic—have saved their languages in like manner.worthy of rescue and preservation than any of these.——136POPE ADRIAN IV..,more palpable.For ages the English had relied on thefalse Bull of Adrian as the title-deed of their rights overIreland ; in 1829, they repudiated this title-deed, and anyargument that might be brought forward to sustain it.^CHAPTER XXXII.Approaching the end of my work, I think it well to saysomething very briefly of the chief writers who have treatedof the Bull of Adrian' IV.As outside of England the old chroniclers have not men-tioned the Bull, I am led to believe that it was unknown ondialects," says Dr. Jamieson, " seem to excel all others for philo->logical and ethnological purposes." And Sir William Bethamremarks : " The most ancient manuscripts in Europe are Irish."" Irish Gaelic," says the Very Rev. U. J. Bourke, "is for Europeansavants a very ready, practical, and truthful vehicle for linguisticresearch in archaic fields of human speech and of history."Father Bourke also remarks that, is his opinion, the followingis the correct order and division of the Indo-European family ofAryan languages :2, Zend or Persian ; 3,Keltic or Irish-Gaelic ; 4, Latin ; 5, Greek ; 6, Gothic or German ;(See Aryan Origin of Gaelic7, Lithuanian ; and 8, Sclavonian.Race and Language, pp. 121, 154).Thus, Irish-Gaelic hold a veryhigh and honourable place.i, Sanscrit or Indian ;In some respects, Hungary may serve as a great exampleIt is said that, within the memory of living men,for Ireland.Hungary had not five journals in which a word of the Hungarianlanguage was used, and its annual revenue was under ;^6,ooo,ooo ;whereas, at present, under a better regime, it has 800 newspapersand journals published in the Hungarian language, and its revenueis ^42,000,000.Trans.1 The Rev. P. Finlay, S.J., lately reviewing tlie position ofCatholics in Ireland since the Emancipation, andthenecessity of Catholic Associations such as exists with the best resultsin other countries, especially Germany and the United States ofAmerica, used the following weighty words :— " Look abroadto the Catholics of the Continent, who have even harder strugglesthan our own, and read the lesson which they teach us.In Holland,Belgium, Germany, Catholics not only hold their own : they areadvancing surely, peacefully, and vigorously along all the pathsof civil progress. They have governed Belgium for the last twentyyears ; they control the government of Cermanv ; they are fairlyrepresented in the Ministry of Holland. They are' organisecj andurgingA FRIEND OF IRELAND.I37the continent till about the beg-inning of the seventeenthcentury.Indeed, Saint Antoninus himself does not seemto have known it. He wrote a pretty long chapter onAdrian IV. He there cites the Polycraticus of Salisbury ;but he completely omits Chapter XLII. of the Metalogicus,which speaks of Ireland and the pretended donation. Heselects from the Polycraticus the lamentations of PopeAdrian on the misfortunes of Popes : " De quo JohannesSalesberiensis,sic ait';Audivi papam Adrianum dicentem quod romano pontificcnemo est miserabilior ; conditione ejus nulla miserior."(S. Antonin., Pars Historialk , tit. 17, c. i, § g.)to speak in the following sections : —Here are the names of the writers of whom I am goingei multum familiaris,eratquiI. Cardinal Baronius, who although he seems to havehad little belief in the genuineness of the Bull, inserted itin his Ecclesiastical Annals, and thus contributed to makeit known.—united ; and so their claims are adjudged reasonable, or at an^"-rate, resistless. And look at Italy, or worse still, at Francevast Catholic majority, but without cohesion or force ; disunion,and, therefore, apathy or barren efforts ; place, power, patronagein the hands of the enemies of Catholicism, and persecution forIf French and Italian Catholicsthe loyal children of the Church.would only look across their borders ; would sink their class andparty differences, as German, Dutch, and Belgium Catholics havedone ; woiild unite to combat energetically the socialistic andanti-Catholic minority, a short, though it might be a sharp, strugglewould give them a complete victory.""aspeaks thus :— " I have read Father Finlay's Lecture on ' CatholicsIn connection with this subject, His Eminence Cardinal Loguein Civil Life ' with great interest and great pleasure. He putsthe claims of Irish Catholics on their true basis with scientificprecision. We seek no monopoly or ascendancy- We claimequality—fair play—even-handed justice—our share in the patron-age and employments which are maintained, in great part, by ourIt is an undoubted fact that we are almost wholly ex-money.cluded from these, and that our Faith is the chief disqualification.It appears to me an equally undoubted fact that we have theremedy iu our own hands."All Catholics in Irela,nd who are entitled to vote on any occasionshould take special care to see that they are not deprived of theirrights through any negligence of their own or through some legalquibble. They should al.so examine the list of voters to see thatnone are enrolled there but such as are justly entitled to be so.All this is only to borrow a leaf from the book of their opponents,who are usually most vigilant on such matters.Social life in Ireland, as elsewhere, has undergone wonderful138POPl- ADRIAN IV.,2. Bzovius, a Polish Dominican, Continuator of Baro-nius, picked up a most strange story, in such a manner asto surpass Cambrcnsis liimself.3. Bongars, in 1611, in Gesta Dei per Francos, publishedtlie letter of Adrian to Louis VII. Thirty years afterwards,Andre Duchesne re-edited this letter (t. 4, Rerum Franci-carum Scriptnres.)4. Lynch, an Irish priest, published in 1662 the cele-brated work Cambrensis Eversus, in which he directlyattacks the genuineness of the Bull.5. About 1692, Colonel Charles O'Kelly, in the Exci-diumMacaricB, followed the general sentiment. A man ofthe sword, he could not easily become a scholar by pro-fession.6. Antony Pagi, instead of imitating the circumspectionof Baronius, thought that Raoul de Diceto, Giraldus Cam-brensis, and Matthew Paris left no room to doubt oPthechanges during the last hundred years. We have been assuredby a native of Cork that in that city, about the early part of thenineteenth century, it was no uncommon thing to see a businessestablishment closed up, and a large placard " Gone to Dublin "pasted on the shutters—so that customers might be on the look-out for the return of the proprietor with a new supply of goods,and doubtless a good supply of news. How different from thepresent day, when we can stay at home, and, by means of agramophone, listen to the magnificent singing of a full GregorianChoir at a Pontifical High Mass in St, Peter's, Rome !The great consolation of the Irish people during their centuriesof suffering was their religion. They regarded faith as a precioustreasure ; it was their chiei', often their only, comfort in life and inOverwhelmed with misfortunes, and even famine-stricken,death.they held fast to it.Tt is said that in the eighteenth centuryimmense numbers of the people went barefoot, not being able to buyBut let us remember that poverty is not inconsistent withshoes.Lazarus, whose sores were licked by dogs, the angelssanctity.the Bosom of Abraham.thought it an honour todeserts of Egypt and PalestineMultitudes of hermits in theseemed in want of allthings, and yet added to their painsby lettingby mosquitoes.But thestunggreatest example of poverty and sanctity combined in moderntimes is surely that of St. Benedict Joseph Labre. The strangemanner of life that he adopted was of his own choice, not ofnecessity—his parents being in good circumstances, and himselfthe eldest son—and so far was he from being an ignorant man,that he spoke Latin fluently.For his food he was content withorange peel, cabbage stalks and leaves, withered and rotten fruit,themselves becarry toA FRIIiND OF IRELAND.139genuineness of the Bull.uncle.Francis Pagi copied from his7. In VHisioire d'lrlande, published in French at Parisin 1758, and dedicated to the Irish Brig-ades in the serviceof France, McGeog-hegan made some judicious observa-tions that deserve to be known. Without absolutely deny-ing- the genuineness of the Bull, he skilfully pleads that itwas surreptitiously or obreptitiously obtained.8. Dr. Lingard abstained from directly touching theHowever, he says enough to let us see that hequestion.had little faith in the genuineness of the Bull.9. In our days, Mr. John Cornelius O'Callaghan hasdiscussed the Bull of Adrian, first in notes to the MacaricBExcidium, published at Dublin in 1850 (p.242-279).Twcnt3'-two years afterwards, he again came forward witha summary of his assertions in a newspaper called theIrishman, June, 1872.Mr. O'Callaghan believed in goodfaith that his reasons were unanswerable.look.The endurance ofetc., thrown out of doors and windows, and tying on the streets.He never asked alms.Tf it were offered him, he took only whatTf he met with neither food nor ahns,he needed for one day.he went out into the country, ate grass, and drank water.Hishair and beard were quite neglected ; perhaps at Christmas he hadhimself shaved. He usually slept in the open air.His raggedclothes, the same in winter and summer, swarmed with vermin,which gnawed him day and night.thisloathsome pain, an excruciating torment, was his greatest penance.No articleYet his countenance always bore a sereneof his clothing was ever changed till worn out ; or even washed.Prayer was his continual occupation. A mostHe made no vows.holy man, he never lost his baptismal innocence ; he held theBut as for sanitary laws, heslightest sin in the utmost abhorrence.did not regard them as essential to the practice of virtue.Thusin Ireland it is often found, especially in houses where the Rosary issaid at night, or in localities where good schools exist, that children,even though very poor, grow up like the purest lilies, notwithstand-ing the dangers that surround them. And does not the wonderfulexample of Pope Adrian IV. show what a poor boy, with good disposi-tions, may come to ? Many of the actions of St. Benedict Joseph areonly to be admired, not imitated, by people in general, whose dutiesIf the managers of any institutionrequire a different conduct.allowed the inmates thereof to swarm with vermin, or encourageddisease by a neglect of the laws of health, how quickly and howjustly would they be condemned !In like manner, the dwellingsof the poor ought to be improved in many ways.With St. Bernard-we advocate cleanliness, which we believe to bo akin to godliness.Our churches, convents, hospitals, orphanages, etc., are usually,—140POPE ADRIAN IV.10. In reply to the aforesaid article, the Most Rev. Dr.Moran, Bishop of Ossory, published in the Irish Ecclesias-tical Record the memoir of which I have already spokena substantial work, full of new and judicious remarks,eminently calculated to raise the best founded suspicionsagainst the Bull.SECTION I.—BARONIUS.The letter of Pope Adrian IV. to Kin.o- Louis VII. appearsto have been unknown in the time of Baronius. The learnedannalist never speaks of it. The oldest edition that I knowIf Baronius had known it, his sagacityis of the year 1611.would probably have been awakened to make him examinedirectly the question of the genuineness of the Bull.Roger de Hoveden, Gervase, and William of Newbridge,are the sources from which Baronius draws. He nowhere".Order is Heaven's first law."models of neatness and tidiness.But from the example of St. Benedict Joseph Labre, who is nowhonoured on the altars of the Universal Church, we learn thatpoor people, strangers to the refinements of life, may be greatfriends of God, and worthy of our deepest respect.Some people in this country have a great deal of fault toTheyfind with Irish Catholics for building expensive churches.can point specially to the Cathedral of Armagh, which has cost;f 2 50, 000— though most of this money came from other lands.These wiseacres, who hold so much property that once belongedto Irish Catholics, regard such magnificent churches as suitedBut let us hear how His Eminence Cardinalonly for the rich.Moran, in a recent number of the Australasian Catholiclfecord (]an." These would-be critics," he says, " forget190s), refers to them.that Catholic Churches are the House of God and the home of theThere is perfect equality of rich and poor in the presencepoor.The poorest old apple-woman may enter theof the Altar of God.cathedral in her rags with as much confidence, and as much senseof ownership, as the richest nobleman in the land.Nothing canexercise a more ennobling, and elevating, and purifying influenceon a religious people than such beautiful edifices erected to the gloryof the Most High."A Parish Priest, to whom the care of souls is committed, maysometimes help much towards the bodily health of his parishioners,and thus imitate our Divine Master, who " went about doing good."With a knowledge of hygiene, he may, for example, caution themagainst the dangers of breathing bad air, drinking infected water,etc. Many simple points regarding air, food, mastication, white-—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.141quotes Giraldus Cambrensis, or Matthew Paris, though ofthe latter he found a manuscript in the Vatican.At the year 1155, Baronius gives a long extract fromthe Polycraticus, relating to the conversations of Salisburywith Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the annalist passesover in silence the Metalogicus, with its false donation ofIreland.Coming to the year1156, he relates, according toWilliam of Newbridge, the submission of the Welsh, whowere subdued by Henry II.At 1 158, Baronius relates, as done by Gervase, the :?-conciliation of Louis VII. with Henry II., the journey ofthe latter toParis, the festivitiesin consequence, themarriage of their children, and other particulars.If theannalist had had the letter of Adrian laefore his tyes, hisperspicacity would likely have led him to discover thewashing, etc., are often overlooked by poor people. What aconsolation for him it will sometimes be to reflect that by hiswarnings he has averted a serious epidemic, which might have provedfatal to the lives of many !In the building of churches, schools,etc., he will see that there is no forgetfulness of sanitary principles.He will also be mindful of the dangers of consanguinity, since,according to recent statistics, sixty-seven per cent, of sick ordeformed children come from the marriages of first cousins, and the ,dreadful percentage of ninety-six from the marriages of doubleIt is quite certain that many evils, physical as well ascousins.How prudent thereforemoral, arise from preventible causes.to anticipate them in time !As regards moral evils, it need only be remarked that, sincethe establishment of Industrial Schools in Ireland, nearly halfThis fact alone showsthe gaols of the country have been closed.how much depends on the instruction and training ofyouth,Indeedthe latter being a very necessary supplement to the former.it is the opinion of many that the most important part of a child'seducation is completed before its sixth year ; because at thatage, even though the use of reason has not been attained, themind has taken a particular set, from which it cannot afterwardsOf course a highly importantbe removed without difficult3'.part of education remains to be accomplished in the years thatTheol. Moral, vol. i., numbers 789,follow.(See Lehmkuhl,786.)It is said that in Belgium many priests take a most active part infounding and directing co-operative and other societies among theIn some, perhaps all, of the dioceses there is a priestpeasantry.specially appointed for social work of this kind, just as a catechist is(See Irish Ecclesiastical Record, June, 1905,for religious instruction.p. 504).Trans.142POPE ADRIAN IV.,objact of this alliance ; for the letter says clearly that thetwo princes wished to undertake together an expeditioninto another country, which could be no other than Ire-land.After noting the death of Adrian IV. in 1159, Baroniusgives a long biography of the Pope from an old manuscriptThere is not a single word in it aboutin the Vatican.Ireland, or a donation that the Pope made to the King ofEngland.It is enly after all this that the annalist ends by sayingthat, not to forget anything connected with the memory ofso great a Pontiff, he is going to copy from a Vaticanmanuscript (this is the chronicle of Matthew Paris) adiploma given to Henry, King of England, with a view to.re-establish in better form the affairs of religion in Ire-land ; but in what year the diploma was given is uncertain.It seems to me that Baronius could not have shown moreclearly the doubts that he entertained regarding theAn historian does not expressgenuineness of the Bull.himself in this loose manner regarding a document that heWhile declaring the uncertaintybelieves to be certain.of the date, the annalist gives the lie again to the Metalo-gicus, as well as to the chroniclers who attach the Bull tothe year 1155, or to the sojourn of John of Salisbury atBcneventum.In the memoir that appeared in 1872, Dr. Moran ex-presses himself thus : — " In the present instance we areof the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner .not left in doubt as to the source whence Baronius derivedhis information regarding Adrian's supposed Bull. Duringmy stay in Rome I took occasion to inquire whether theMSS. of the eminent annalist, which are happily preserved,indicated the special ' Vatican Manuscript ' referred to inhis printed text, and I was informed by the learned archi-. that thevistCodex Vaticanus referred to is a MS. copy of the Historyof Matthew Paris, which ispreserved in the VaticanThus it is the testimony of Matthew Paris aloneLibrary.that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius ; and nonew argument can be taken from the words oftheRelying on the same high authority, Ieminent annalist.am happy to state that nowhere in the private archives oramong thein theprivate papers ofthe Vatican,or.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.,.143Regesta ... or in the various indices of the PontificalLetters, can a single trace be found of the supposed Bullsof Adrian IV. and Alexander III."SECTION 2.BZOVIUS.Called to Rome, under Paul V., the Polish Dominicanransacked the archives of the Vatican,and publishedvarious works, among which we find an ecclesiastical his-tory, in two volumes folio, an abridgment of the twelvevolumes of Baronius ; also, a continuation of the annals ofthe learned Cardinal, from iigS to 1565, in eight volumes.The first volume, dedicated to Paul V., saw the light in1615.Although Baronius had given the Bull of Adrian IV., asI have said above, Bzovius, in his ecclesiastical history,does not say a word of it. He cites, however, John ofSalisbury, and gives three passages from the. Polycraticusbut he passes over in complete silence the Metaloglctisand the donation of Ireland.At 1 171, he cites Hoveden on the pretended submissionof the Irish Bishops to King Henry II.At the year 1172, he relates the oath that Henry II.swore in the cathedral of Avranches. The clause relatingto the feudal subjection of England is in the same terms asin Baronius.He adds a point which shows that the letter of Adrianto Louis VII. could refer only to Ireland.According tothe historian, the two Cardinals, occupied with the reha-bilitation of Henry II., required from him a promise to gointo Spain, if necessary, and the Pope should wish it :Si necesse fuerit, et dominus papa ei mandaverit, ibit inHispaniam, ad liberandam terram illam a paganis."It isincredible that, a few years previously. Pope Adrian haddissuaded the same Henry II. and Louis VII.frommaking an expedition into Spain.{Historia Eccle.siastica,t- 2, p. 331, 333, 353, 354.)I turn to the Annals of the same author.At the year1321, he gives the letter of John XXII. to King Edwardwithout date, and without name of place from which it wasHe prints this letter again in Vol. XX. of thewritten.Annals, 1542, No. 12.This time he dates it from theI 44POPE ADRIAN IV.,tenth year of John XXII., but he omits the preamble.Itis here that we read his extraordinary story, truly un-worthy of a grave historian : —" About the year ii6o,i the Chair of Peter being occu-pied by Adrian IV., an Englishman by birth, who, beforehis Pontificate, had, by his sanctity and preaching, con-verted the kingdoms of Norway and Sweden to the Faithof Christ, the Irish, who, in the beginning, immediatelyafter receiving the Christian religion, had given them-selves and all they possessed into the dominion of theRoman Pontiff, and from that time had recognised noother supreme prince than the Roman Pontiff alone, seeingthemselves greatly afflicted by the intestine wars of a mul-titude of petty kings and tyrants, some among them and agreat part of the people, in order to enjoy peace, and lestthey should be subjugated by others, desired to submitthemselves to Henry II., King of England (under whomSt. Thomas of Canterbury afterwards suffered martyr-dom, and who was at this very time in Ireland with aThis is the reason why they humbly askedgreat army).Pope Adrian, in the name of the two parties, viz., the kingon one side, and the princes and bishops of Ireland on theother, that, in order to put an end to the quarrels andseditions almost continual that arose from the multitude ofpetty rulers, and also to regulate better the worship of theCatholic religion, which had been much impaired by thefrequency of wars, especially as regarded the celebrationand observance of marriages, his Holiness would vouchsafeto grant the dominion of all Ireland to King Henry, whohad already acquired some places in the island by his ownarms and those of his friends, namely, Robert FitzStephenand Richard Earl Pembroke, the Pontiff, for these andother causes, whether because he derived no profit fromIreland, or because he could not without great expensesend help to a kingdom so remote, yielded with little diffi-culty ; but prescribing certain conditions by which the saidHenry and his descendants would hold the kingdom, andacknowledge that it had been given by the Apostolic See.When King Henry, and the Irish princes and people, hadbound themselves by oath to these conditions in two coun-cils, one held at Dublin and the other at Cashel, the King'Adrian died the previous year, 1159.A FRIEND OF IRELAM).145of England was declared by apostolic authority Lord ofIreland."Bzovius does not tell us the source of his information.I consider it needless to point out the anachronisms and thediscrepancies of the story.SECTION 3.BONGARS AND DUCHESNE.James Bongars, a Calvanist, councillor and steward ofHenry IV., born at Orleans in 1546, was employed by thisprince at the Courts of Germany, as resident ambassador.He died at Paris in 161 2, the year that followed the publica-tion of Gesta Dei per Francos. He had acquired a greatpart of the manuscripts of St. Benedict's on the Loire,scattered about after the pillage of this abbey by the Cal-vinists. He also purchased many manuscripts of thelibrary of the Cathedral of Strasburg.The letter of Pope Adrian to Louis VII. appears in GestaDei per Francos.(Page 1174, Hanoviae, 1611.)isItofthetheletterswrittentwenty-eighthtoTwenty-sevenLouis VII. by kings, princes, and prelates.were borrowed from the library of President Petau, but ofthe twenty-eighth, that of Pope Adrian, Bongars does notthe preface : —mention the source." Epistolae a regibus, principibus, praelatis, ad regem Fran-Ex biblio-corum Ludovicum Juniorem, viginti septem.I suspect that all these letters cametheca P. Petavii."from the Abbey of St. Benedict on the Loire,Probablythey were given by Bongars to Petau, except the letter ofAdrian, which he preserved, and which did not enter thePresident's library until after the writer's death.Thus we read inParis.Thirty years later, Andrew Duchesne found these sameletters in the hands of Alexander Petau, senator, or coun-They appeared incillor inVolume IV. of Rerum Francicarum Scriptores, publishedafter the death of the editor, in 1641.the Parliament ofWe are told that the manuscript of these letters wasold: —" Epistolarum volumen, quas Pontifices RomaniEx veteri codice... ad Ludovicum VII. scripserunt.senatoris ParisiensisMSS. virinunc primum editum, 1641." The volume appeared afterthe death of Andrew Duchesne, asThisclar. Alexandri PetaviiI have said.——146POPE ADRIAN IV.,learned man could hardly have been unaware that Bongarshad published the letters.question.manuscript of the letters inThe Abbey of St. Victor in Paris possessed anotherThe editor ofDuchesne admits it : —" Fuit et simile olim exemplar inbibliotheca Canonicorum Regularium Sancti Victoris Paris,not. II., 22, cum sequent! inscriptione.—Plures epistolseSummorum Pontificum Adrian! IV. et Alexandri III., &c.Inter quas multse habentur concernentes statum hujusecclesiffiUnde conjici facile potest banc epistolarum collectionem abaliquo monasterii Sancti Victoris abbate, vel canonico,fuis.se factum."Sancti Victoris sub primis abbatibus nostris.[Rerum Francicarum, t. iv., p. 557.)The manuscripts of President Petau were purchased fortheir weight in gold for Christina of Sweden, who leftthem to the Vatican Library, in which they form the chiefcollection of the Queen.Bongars, first of all, arbitrarily interpreted of Spain theinitial letter H. of the manuscript. By this mistake, moreor less intentional, he led editors and historians astray.It is natural to inquire if Bongars, a Calvinist, had anyinterest in leaving the literary world ignorant of the factthat Pope Adrian, far from authorising a conquest of Ire-land, had, on the contrary, formally dissuaded the King ofFrance and the King of England from attempting it, andpositively refused his concurrence in the expedition.Itseems to me clear that the publication of the letter in theyear 161 1 would have seriously thwarted the designs ofEngland over Ireland.Could a Calvinist point out the way to justify a Popefrom an accusation specially odious, which, during so manyages, had sullied the memory of this Pontiff ?i' After reading the above remarks, which help to solve a seriousdifficulty (namely, the frequent mention of Spain), the followingingenuous, but rather very misleading :— " The letter of Adrianremarks from a supporter of Adrian's Bull will not appear verywas printed for the first time from an orginal manuscript in theyear 161 1 by Bongars, and while Spain is the country mentioned,not a word about Ireland,About thirty years afterwards it waspubHshed from another manuscript by Duchesne, and of SpainEvery subsequent historian, from Bouquetalone mention is made.to Natalis Alexander, mentions Spain as the country in question,"Not the slightest allusion here to the letter H^ by which theTrans.reader might form a correct idea of what actually occurred,—A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I47Unless I am greatly mistaken, I have shown as clear asnoon-day that the letter of Adrian to Louis VII. cannotrefer to Spain, and that it must refer to Ireland.(ChaptersVI. and VII.)Had the King; of France any need of the Pope's permis-sion to aid the King' of Castile, who was his father-in-law?What interest could induce Henry II. to wage war inSpain P'^ He was so little disposed to it by nature, that the.Cardinal Legates made it a condition of his absolution, atthe time of the Avranches Conference.If there was question of Spain, was it an Englishman,Rotrodus of Warwick, who would be chosen to negotiatethe affair at Rome?And the clergy, the princes, the people, who ought to beconsulted—who had a right to interfere-—could all thatrefer to Mussulman Spain?It seems to me certain that King Henry II., not daringto come forward openly, got Louis VII. to ask PopeAdrian for permission to attempt the conquest of Ireland,but that the Pope absolutely refused any such permission.Therefore, it is not possible that this same Pope issued thesupposed Bull—-a Bull, moreover, that neither Bongars norDuche.snc found anywhere among their manuscripts of thetwelfth century.SECTION 4.-—LYNCH.The arguments of Lynch against the Bull have so muchthe more weight as he was not by any means a man of un-Moderate by char-reasonable or untractable disposition.acter, he took his place among those Irishmen whoapproved of the treaty for one year's suspension of armsconcluded with the Marquis of Ormond.^ He passed into' This is a point which perhaps is worthy of more considerationthan it usually receives. What motive could induce Henry toundertake a costly expedition to Spain, for the purpose of main-taining the liberties of the Church there, while he attacked themat home ? Would not Ireland, by its proximity, offer a betterfield for plunder and conquest to a rapacious monarch ?Trans.^ It is to be hoped that the day will soon come when thecharacter of the Papal Envoy, the illustrious .\rchbishop Rinuccini,and also that of the brave commander, the noble-minded OwenRoe O'Neill, which suffered so much at this sad period, will be—148POPE ADRIAN IV.,France in 1652, when Galway was taken by the troops olCromwell.During- his abode in France, he still devotedhimself to the interests of Ireland.It was proljahly in France that he published CambrensisEvcrsus : the work bears no name of printer or place. Thewriter conceals himself under the pseudonym of GratianusThis work has become exceedinglyLucius Hibernicus.rare : we are told that a multitude of copies perished in afire at London.It is a folio of 356 pages.The work wa? reprinted between i8j.8 and 1852, in threevolumes octavo, under the care of the Rev. Matthew Kelly,for the " Celtic Society." This edition is not in stock withbooksellers. 1In 1659, Richard Ferral, an Irish Capuchin, presented amemoir to the Cardinals of the Propaganda, under thethoroughly vindicated. Many works have lately appeared thatthrow a flood of light on the events of the seventeenth century.See, for example, Spicihgium Ossoriense, by Cardinal Moran ; TlieConfederate Wars, by Sir John Gilbert ; The Chances of Way, anhistorical tale, by the Rev. T. A. Finlay, S.J.Also several worksmentioned by the Dublin Review, when treating of these matters.(March, 1845 and April, 1874).It should be remembered thatwhen calumnies have once gained ground, they are not easily dis-Moreover, the books in which Catholic writers mightplaced.hope to find a true account of events were often so rare andexpensive as to be beyond their reach.Thus, 'so late as' in 1844,with all our advances in printing, Burke's Hihernia Dominicana,even without the supplement, was selling for five or six guineas;Lombard's Commentarius de Rehus Hihernia;, seven guineas ; andO'Sullivan Beare's Histori/E CathoUco! Cnmpendium (a small quarto),seventeen guineas.Trans' As the three letters (see p. 32) attributed to Pope AlexanderIII., and first published in 1728 by Thomas Hearne, sub-librarianof the University, Oxtord, were generally unknown in the timeof Dr. Lynch, it was impo.ssible for him to make any commentson them. Abb6 McGeoghegan, who wrote some thirty yearsafter Hearne, seems never to have heard of them.In this con-nection, it is well to remember that when John of Salisbury wasat Beneventum (see p. 48), Cardinal Roland, who afterwardsbecame Pope Alexander III., was also there, as one of the PapalCourt (see p. 63, note). We cannot suppose that any importantgrant regarding Ireland was made by Pope Adrian IV. throughJohn of Salisbury, without the Cardinal's signing a documentin reference to it, or at least knowing all about it.Yet John inwriting afterwards to Pope Alexander III. never asked a con-firmation of it, or made anv more allusion to it than if it neverDublin Review, first series, xvi., 520.—A FKlEND OF IRELANt).I49title : Autores ct modus eversiunis catholkcc religionis inHibernia, &c. Convinced that tlie memoir of the Capuchincould only increase the troubles of Ireland, by sowingdivisions between the old Irish and those of English origin,Lynch opposed it, and published in 1664 his Alithinologia,It is a quarto of 82 leaves. A supplement of 137&c.leaves appeared in 1667. These two works, still more rarethan Cambrensis Eversus, are much sought for, andreach very high prices at public sales.In 1G69, Lynch brought out at St. Malo his Pii antistitisIcon, sive de vita et morte P. Francisci Kirovani Alladensisepiscopi, autore Joanne LynchcBO, archidiacono I'uamensi.It is an octavo of 72 leaves.Nicholson, in his " Irish Library," says that he has seena manuscript work from the hand of Lynch himself, a col-lection of some of the most authentic annals of Ireland.Itis, he says, a work as complete as it is exact and interest-This author also speaks of a letter of Lynch to Bayle,ing.in order to prove that the Scots who first taught in theuniversities of Paris and Oxford were Scots of Ireland.Finally, he assures us that Lynch was promoted to theBishopric of Killala, in Ireland, a short time before hisdeath, which occurred about the year 1680.It is worthy of remark that a writer so enlightened asLynch should have boldly pronounced against the genuine-ness of the Bull of Adrian.About the same time appeared at Liege the " Ecclesias-tical Annals " of Afford, who also raises doubts on theexisted (seep. 51, n.). He could say enough of minor affairs, andcould he say nothing of a matter of the utmost gravity ?Moreover,in the three letters mentioned above, Pope Alexander III. shows noknowledge whatever of any such grant made by his predecessorfsee p. ,^3) ; and in the other letter attributed to Alexander III.(see p. 64) he shows a total misconception regarding the natureof the said grant, as explained in the Bull attributed to PopePassing over the last-mentioned letter, of whichAdrian IV.Giraldus himself makes little account, is it easy to believe thatIt may be objected thatthe other three letters are authentic ?Cardinal Moran believes them to be so. We can only say inreply that his Eminence gives no reason for so doing, and we aretherefore unable to consider on what grounds he proceeds. Wedo not know how anything in the book brought to light byHearne can be proved to be authentic. We rather think that anold book of this kind—probably compiled by an enemy of Ireland^deserves to be regarded with suspicion.Trans.150POPIi ADRIAN IV.,Bull. AUord was born in London in 1382. Having retiredto Lancashire, he collected materials for his Annals. Hepassed over to the continent in 1658, and died the sameHis work appeared five years after-year at St. Omer.Alford was notfour volumes.wards,Liege,atinThe two writersacquainted with Cambrensis Eversus.agreed without knowing it.historiansIt was the silence of the old chroniclers that raised" Neitherdoubts in the mind of Alford regarding the Bull.Matthew Paris," he says, " nor any one elsetheofEngland,Alfordoldit."was mistaken as far as concerns Matthew Paris ; but it isquite true that Roger de Hoveden, William of Newbridge,and, generally speaking, the chroniclers of the twelfth cen-tury, make no mention of the Apocryphal Bull.(See Chap.XXn., above.)speaksofofSECTION 5.MACARI-E EXCIDIUM.(1G92.)This work contains a history of Ireland under fictitiousTheMacaria or Cyprus is nothing but Ireland.names.English are called Cilicians. The high-priest of Delphos isColonel Charles O'Kelly surrounded himselfthe Pope.with mystery, chiefly on account of the part that he hadtaken intranslation\yas made in the last century by a Catholic priest, who tookthe pseudonym of Gratianus Regallus. A volume contain-ing both Latin and English texts, was brought out in Dub-lin in 1850, under the care of Mr. John C. O'Callaghan,as I have said above.A LatinRevolution.IrishtheI must confine myself to what regards the Bull ofAdrian ; and, in order to be more clear, I shall replace thepseudonyms by the real names." But never yet was kingdom placed on such a surefoundation that it did not ultimately arrive at the limit ofits existence ; and the Irish empire, which had enduredmore than 2,000 years, at length yielding to the decrees offate, had to recognise this immutable law, to which allhuman powers are subject. Henry, the second of the name,King of England, had promised his assistance to Dermod,the suppliant prince of Leinster, whom the King of IrelandA FRILND OF IRELAND.I5Ihad exiled, for carrying away the wife of another provin-The English leaders, whom Henry II. hadcial prince.sent over with a well-appointed fleet, to re-instate Dermod,forcibly possessed themselves of a large portion of Leinster,and, having expelled the inhabitants, divided their landsamong the English adventurers. Nor do I know that ithad ever previously occurred that one nation, professingthe Catholic faith, should usurp the dominion over anothernation of the same religion, and extirpate and expel its in-habitants from their native, soil; it being in that creedexpressly forbidden, and counted an especial sin, to covetthe goods of one's neighbour ; and, at that time, not theEnglish and Irish only, but almost all the nations ofEurope, were religious observers of the Roman Catholicrites. A success, so fully in accordance with the wishes ofHenry II., led him to carry out a plan he had long medi-tated ; for he had long since anxiously considered how hemight subdue Ireland, and extend his English empire bysuch an accession of territory. For this purpose, he forged(unless, haply, it was genuine) a Bull of the Pope of Rome,which, he pretended, granted him the dominion of Ireland,on the condition of his becoming the patron of the priest-hood, and restoring, in their ancient splendour, the ruinedtemples and neglected altars of the heavenly powers, inaccordance with Catholic rites." The Pope claimed this right over Ireland, in virtue of agrant made to him by Constantine, the first emoeror ofthe Romans who embraced the Catholic faith, who, heto him and his successors thestated, had conveyeddominion of all the islands which lay scattered amidst theOh, vain invention ofrecesses of the Mediterranean Sea.an ambitious Sovereign !—for the annals of all nations,and the monuments of every age, bear testimony the mosteloquent, that Ireland never was under the sway of theRoman Empire, and therefore its Emperor had no power togrant to another a right which he never had himselfNor, at that time, was there in all the globe,possessed.not even in Rome itself, a spot where the heavenly powerswere more rehgiously adored, and the Catholic rites moresincerely celebrated, than in the island of Ireland." Now, when Henry II. approached the shores of Ire-land with a mighty host, levied in every quarter, rumourgreatly magnified his numbers, and the lesser princes, in-"152POPE ADRIAN IV.,timidated, and more particularly afraid of opposing- thePope, whom they venerated as a second Deity, made theirsubmission to him at Dublin.Roderic O'Conor, however,who was then chief King of the whole island, relying- on theposition and natural strength of Connaught (over which hehad been the toparch, before he was called to the supremeauthority), and neither intimidated by Henry's numeroushost, nor by the unjust Bull of the Sovereign Pontiff (whohe well knew was an Englishman by birth), made vigorouspreparations to assert by arms the rights and hberties ofhis kingdom."It is needless for me to point out the anachronisms thatour gallant colonel mixes up with his narrative.Let itsuffice to remark that in his eyes the Bull attributed to PopeAdrian was an exceedingly suspicious document, and inany case very unjust, as the English aggression itself hadbeen.SECTION 6.ANTONY AND FRANCIS PAGI.These two writers discussed the question superficially.They took no trouble to fathom it thoroughly.In his notes on the Annals of Baronius, under the year1 159, Antony Pagi, thinking to correct the learned Cardi-nal, who gave the Bull without date, cites Raoul de Diceto,who refers it to 1154, but adopts with Matthew Paris the" Baronius, num. 21 et seqq. , rcfert Hadrianidate 1 155.papse epistolam Anglorum regi scriptam sine die et mense,in qua laudat eum quod velit in Hibcrniam intrare, et earndominio sancti Petri subjicere. Eamdem epistolam recitatRadulphus de Diceto in Imaginibus Historiarum, p. 529,et eam cum anno 11 54 copulat. Verum cum Henricus II.rex Angliae coronatus sit exeunte dcccmbri ejusdem Christiaiini, non potuit eo anno literas ab Hadriano IV. recipere,ideoque Mathaus Parisius eam accurate cum anno 1155connectit.Treating of the question again at the year 1171, AntonyPagi considers himself happy in citing Giraldus Cambren-sis ! He blames Alford and Lynch for raising any doubt" Quia ante prse-regarding the genuineness of the Bull.sentem annum (1171) Henricus II. expeditionem iUam ilUussuscepit, Alfordus hoc anno num. 36 de sinceritate illius"A FRIEND OF IRELAND.I53diplumatis dubitat, quod, inquit, MathaBus Paris, et aliquian*iqui rerum Anglicarum historic! illius non meminerent.Vrrum jam anno 1159 Mathseum Parisiensem, et Radul-phum de Diceto, qui lioc sseculo vixit, citavi, et utriquenunc addo Giraldum Cambrensem, qui hoc etiam temporevivebat.P'rancis Pagi, nephew of Antony, published in 1718 theBreviarum of the history of the Popes, in four volumes,quarto. Too often ,he limited himself to copying the notesthat his uncle had made on Baronius.For Francis Pagi" Diplomathe Bull of Adrian is g-enuine in all its parts.illud omni ex parte sincerum et genuinum, ac juxta illudHenricus rex anno 1171 expeditionem Hibernicam sus-cepit. " He cites Hoveden and Gervase, who do not speakAs for the Council, Francis Pagi takes careof the Bull.not to say whether it was held at Cashel or at Lismore.But if Henry H. made the expedition to Ireland in virtueof a Bull of Adrian, how are we to explain that PopeAlexander IH. relied upon a supposed voluntary submis-sion of the Irish bishops in order to confirm to King Henryand his successors the possession of Ireland, as Francis" Auctoritate apos-Pagi, following Hoveden, assures us?tolica confirmavit (Alexander) illi et haeredibus suis regnumHiberniae secundum formam chartarum archiepiscoporumHoveden is excusable, as heet episcoporum Hiberniae,"knew nothing of a Bull of Adrian ; but Francis Pagi, whohad just pronounced boldly for the genuineness of the Bull,should naturally have said that Pope Alexander, confirm-ing the diploma of his predecessor, gave Ireland to theKing and his heirs conformably to this Bull. By relyingon a spontaneous submission of the Irish, the existence ofthe Bull is denied.(Breviariiim, t. 3, p. 93.)SF.CTION 7.MCGEOGHEGAN.1 can do nothing better than let the author speak forAlthough his thesis is not complete, it is full ofhimself.judicious observations, which greatly shake the credit ofAfter what I have said in the foregoing chap-the Bull.ters, I have no need to make a few reservations on someparticular points, and I leave them to the sagacity of thereader.154POPE ADRIAN IV.,'' The English having- put an end to this monarchy in thetweh'th century, and wishing to give some colour of justiceto their usurpation and to the tyranny that they practisedagainst the inhabitants of this island, without any othertitle than a pretended Bull of Adrian IV. and the law of thestrongest, represented them as savages who dwelt inwoods.ofnation.this" The title of Henry II. had no foundation but a Bullobtained furtively from Pope Adrian IV., an Englishmanby birth. The motive of the Bull was a false account thatHenry had given to the Pope, regarding the impiety andCambrensls wasthe barbaritytheIrishrepresentation, onwritingappointed to verify inwhich the grant of the Bull had been extorted. He did notfail to strew his work with absurdities and unwarrantablecalumnies, but which the credit of a powerful King knewIt was in this spirit thathow to make available at Rome.Cambrensls laboured at his memoirs, and it was fromthem that English writers took the false colours underPassion and in-which ancient Ireland was represented.terest made these writers pass over the retractation thatCambrensls felt himself obliged to make, inthe latteryears of his life, of many false imputations with which heMoreover, Cambrensls had nothad filled his memoirs.History is not athe qualities requisite for an historian.mere product of the imagination. He spent only eighteenmonths altogether in Ireland, and he saw only a third partof it, which obeyed England. He could not even set hisfoot with safety in the rest of the kingdom.It being im-possible for him to consult the annals of this people, writtenin a language to which he was a total stranger, he foundreplace truth by falsehoods and thefancies of a prepossessed mind, in order to swell up hisI., discours prelim.,\olunies."[Histoire d'Irlande,necessary toitt.n. 13.)" Can anyone suspect the Vicar of Jesus Christ for an,Can anyone believe him capable ofinjustice so crying?dictating a Bull that overthrew a whole nation, dispos-sessed so many old proprietors of their patrimonies, led tothe shedding of so much- blood, and caused the ruin of re-ligion in this island?It is a thing inconceivable." In point of fact, if we consider the circumstances andthe motives of this Bull, it has all the characteristics of aA FRIEND OF IKELAND.155..Bull lorged under the borrowed name of Adrian.It isgiven in Baronius without date of year or day, whichrenders it very suspicious.It remained seventeen yearsit was written, we are told, inwithout seeing the light :1155, and was not made public till 1172. ." We derive no great advantage in favour of this Bullfrom the authority of John of Salisbury (afterwards Bishopof Chartres) in his treatise De Nugis Curialibus.Thiswriter is made to say towards the end of the last chapterof his fourth book that at his request Pope Adrian grantedIreland to King Henry, to be possessed by him by a titleof inheritance, because all islands belonged to the RomanChurch by a concession of the Emperor Constantine.Butlearned men regard this passage as a mere rigmaroleadded by a foreign hand, because the author, when speak-ing- expressly of his visit to the Holy Father at Bevenen-tum, where he remained three months, mentions variousconversations that he had with his Holiness, even to theirleast circumstances, without, however, saying a singleYet the affair was of suffi-word of the Bull in question.ciently great importance : and this was naturally the occa-sion to speak of it...." King Henry, who had found satellitessufficientlydevoted to avenge him on the holy prelate of Canterbury,was not at a loss for venal penmen to add to and to takefrom the writings of the time, so as to clothe with anappearance of reality a diploma that was so necessary tojustify his conduct.visit Adrian," It seems that Salisbury made the journey to Italyfrom his master, in order tohis fellow-countryman, but without any commission on the part ofthe King : since the Bull, according to Matthew of West-minster, was the fruit of a solemn embassy that Henry-sent to the Pope ; although, to say what I think, this em-bassy appears to be only a new fable added to the formerone. ..." The silence that Newbridge, an English contemporaryauthor, observes regarding this embassy and the Bullis an argument which,supposed to have been its fruit,Thisthoughauthor, zealous in sounding the praises of Henry and ofhis nation, begins his narrative by saying that the Englishhad entered Ireland with a military force, and that, theirdeserves some consideration.negative,156POPE ADRIAN IV.,I think not." The Bull speaks only of islands.numbers beingf increased, they subdued a great part of it.He does not stiy a word of a Bull granted by a Pope.Isit probable that he would have forgotten a circumstance sonecessary in order to give some colour of justice to the(Page 540.)irregular conduct of his nation?But I do not see whyan island, or a kingdom in the ocean, ought to belong tothe Holy See, as is said in the Bull, rather than a kingdomon the mainland, unless I am informed that it (the HolySee) holds the sovereignty of all islands from the liberalityof the Emperor Constantine :to which I reply that Ire-land, which had never obeyed the Romans, could not beone of this number ; therefore, the pretension made with re-gard to Ireland is frivolous, and the grant made in conse-Such a pretension might be betterquence isfounded with regard to Great Britain, which obeyed theRomans before and after the reign of Constantine. .unjust." English authors also present to us a Bull of Alexan-der III., which confirms that of Adrian, and which seemsto be of the same stamp. ... If we compare this Bull andthe previous one with the treatise on Conquered Irelandwritten at the same time by Giraldus Cambrensis, we shallfind in these works a great similarity of style ; and, if theyare not all from the same hand, they at least seem madefor mutual support, and to gain credit reciprocally one foranother...ofthereligion," The Bull of Alexander III. must seem a paradox to allwho examine closely the manners of Henry, and his con-duct towards the Court of Rome. A bad Christian makesa bad Apostle. What was Henry II. ? A man who, in hisprivate conduct, failed in the essential duties of religion,Superstitious, he joined,often even in those of nature.underpracticestheveilthe most frightful disorders.withhishis humour the mosthe broke according towords,swornsolemntreaties.enemytherights,ofcontemptuouslypersecuted their adherents,their legates, encroached on the immunities of the Church,and took pleasure in encouraging the most unjust usur-this was what caused the martyrdom of Saintpers :Thomas of Canterbury.areacknowledged by all historians. No one is ignorant thatpredecessors,attackedholiestFaithlesshis debaucheriesLikePopes,dismissedFinally,hishetheirinaA FRIRND OF IRULAND.I57he carried them so far as to seduce Ahce, the betrothed ofhis son Richard, and that this passion, as obstinate as itwas foolish and criminal, occasioned nearly all the misfor-Behold then, thetunes that troubled the close of his days.apostle, behold the reformer, whom the Holy Sec shouldThe misunderstandinghave chosen to convert Ireland !between the Sovereign Pontiff and the King of Englandwas carried to its furthest limits by the martyrdom ofSaint Thomas : can anyone believe that in such circum-stances the Pope would have openly laden with benefits aman who was tacitly excommunicated ?Can anyonesuppose that his Holiness would have chosen, for the con-version of Ireland, a prince in conflict with the Holy See?It is not possible to admit such ideas. .(Page 442.)." After all that I have just said of the state of religionin Ireland during the five hundred and fifty years thatpassed before the reign of Henry II. ; of the many councilsassembled for the regulation of manners and the restora-tion of discipline ; of so many holy and learned prelateswho did honour to religion, and of whom several werethought worthy to be called in iiyq to the third Jreneralcouncil of Lateran ; of so many zealous missionaries whohad quitted their native land, their ministry not seeminp'indispensable at home, to go and instruct foreign nations ;1' The early missionarj' voyages of St. Brendan, though after-wards turned into fabulous legends by story-tellers, just as worksof fiction are produced at the present day, had a European fame.He is supposed to have visited America, and to have preachedto the Aborgines there, among whom traces of Christianity andThe following incident incivilisation were afterwards found.connection with the discovery of America may be interesting r—" It is a well-known fact that Columbus, while maturing liisDlans for his great expedition, visited Ireland as well as Icelandin Quest of information bearing on his theories. He was assistedin his researches bv an Irisli gentleman named Patrick Masuire,Therewho accompanied him also on his great voyage of discovery.are other Irish names on the roster of the ship's crew, preserved inthe archives at Madrid ; but it is specially recorded by FatherTornitori, an Italian priest in the seventeenth century, of PatrickMaguire, that he was the first to set foot on American soil. Onthe eventful morning of he landing, the boats bearing Columbusand some of his crew were launched ; but approaching the land,the water shallowed, and Patrick Maguire jumped out to lightenthe boat, and then waded ashore."— Brendam'ana, by the Rev.Denis O'Donoghue, P.P., Ardfcrt, p.For a .short, vivid, interesting sketch of St. Columba's voyages.^33.I5SPOPK ADRIAN TV. ,of SO many roundations made by the generosity of thefaithful ; and, finally, of so many examples of virtue givenby the chiefs of the nation : can anyone imagine that cor-ruption was so general and so inveterate as is representedin the two Bulls ?"The majority of those who went toIreland underHenry II. were the descendants of Normans, real adven-turers, for whom nothing was sacred.These, then, werethe teachers whom Henry 11.Ireland, bysentintoapostolic authority forsooth, to correct morals, and to re-Their conduct was much more proper tostore religion !shake the faith of true believers than to confirm them inChristianity." A conquest, to be lawful, supposes a war whosemotive is just ; such as an injury from those who are to beThere was no war between the Irish and theconquered.English ; and, if the King of Leinster brought them tohelp him in recovering his crown, he rewarded them well.He could not transfer to them any right over the otherprovinces, because he had none himself."(Page 456.)SECTION 8.DR. LINGARD.Although this judicious historian does not directly ex-amine the question of genuineness, he lets us see that hehas little faith in the Bull.First, the pretended donation must have been extorted" Toby captious and false representations of the King :justify the invasion of a free and unoffending people, hisambition had discoveredthattheirmanners and the reform of their clergy were benefits whichthe Irish ought cheerfully to purchase with the loss of their{History of England, Reign of Henry 11.)Independence."The historian qualifies as singular the negotiation ofSalisbury at Rome :" Fourteen years after this singularnccotlation, a few Welsh adventurers landed in Ireland."He points out the disagreement between the Pseudoi-the civilisationofmissions, and labours, see Derriana, by tlieMost Rev. Dr.'O'Doherty,Bishop of Derry. p. 8 ?.For numerous lists of Irish Saints and scholars, as well asmonastic foundations, on the Continent, see Haverty's History cfJff/aKC?, 'chapters, xi., xii., xv., and xvi.— Trans.—A FRIEND OF IRKI.AND.159Salisbury and the Bull : " John of Salisbury, who musthave known its real purport, calls it a grant of inheritance.''But the Bull expresses no such idea :" It is, however, ob-servable that Adrian in this instrument avoids the usuallanguage of feudal grants."Not being able to discuss every fact, Lingard confineshimself to transcribing from chroniclers.Admitting thatSalisbury brought the Bull, what use did Henry II. make" Other projects offered themselves to Henry'sof it?ambition ; and the Papal letter was consigned to oblivionin the archives of the castle of Winchester."Fourteen years rolled by before the landing of a fewadventurers on the Irish coast.During the five months that Henry spent in IrelandNor did he add(1171-1172), he never spoke of the Bull.an inch of territory to that acquired by the first adven-turers.Five years later, according to Giraldus Cambrensis, the" It was during this period,Bull was at length divulged.when his authority in Ireland was nearly annihilated, thatHenry bethought him of the letter which he had formerlyprocured from Pope Adrian.It had been forgotten duringalmost twenty years : now it was drawn from obscurity,was intrusted to William Fitz-Aldhelm and Nicholas .and was read by them with much solemnity to a synod ofIrish bishops. "1..^ How innocent of Henry IT. to forget all about the papalletter, making him a present of Ireland 1 Let us, however, not forgetthat it is an old practice with many Englishmen to invent plansand plots by which the ordinary observer may be deceived.Thus,when, in the reign of James I, there was question of sweeping theIrish from their lands in Ulster, Sir John Davis advised that thevshould all get legal grants from'the King, after which " His Majesty'sblessed genius will banish all those generations of vipers out of it."What Cunning and perfidy ![State Papers. 1606-8, pp. 273-4.)Plots having been invented, great merit was gained by theirdiscovery at a convenient time, and they were used as a iustificationS?ee Gunpowder Plot, by thefor the most unjustifiable measures.Rev. John Gerard, S.J. It gives a good idea of the plotting spirit inthe days of " Crafty Cecil."Titus Oates, by his j^lot, obtained a pension of li,-2oo a vear fromHis story,' however, having in the reign of James II.Charles II.been proved a mere concoction, he was condemned to be imprisonedfor life, to be whipped, and to stand in the pillory four times.''.Afterwards, favoured again by fortune, he obtained a pension of;{400 a year from William III.Trans.—l6oPOPE ADRIAN IV.,Lingard adds with much good sense : " How far itserved to convince these prelates that the King was therightful sovereign of the island, we are left to conjecture."The letter of Adrian to Louis VII. did not escape theWhile following the opinion thatattention of Lingard.this letter referred to Spain, the judicious writer found init a presumption against authority for the Irish expedi-tion : " When Louis a few years later meditated a similarexpedition into Spain, and for that purpose requested theconsilium et favorem Romanse ecclesiae, the answer wasAdrian dissuaded him, because it was in-\cry different.consulta ecclesia et populo terras illius."^SECTION 9.MR. O CALLAGHAN.Here, then, are the seven reasons ofAlthough this writer has several times treated of PopeAdrian and the Bull, his arguments are common andordinary. They present nothing new, no interesting view.I content myself with a summary of them, without againgoing over ground already passed.writer: — i. The testimony of John of Salisbury. 2. TheBull of Adrian, related in extenso in Giraldus Cambrensis4. Theand contemporaries.in a Council at Waterford.publication of these Bulls5. The complaints that the Irish sent to John XXIL, witha copy of Adrian's Bull—which copy the Pontiff forwarded6. The insertion ofto King Edward II.Codice Vaticano in the Annals of Baronius.Roman Bullarium printed in 1739 gives the Bull.3. The Bulls of Alexander.extheBull7. Lastly, thethis esteemedThis worthy writer imagined in good faith that all hisunquestionable,documents were true, genuine, official,and of conclusive value !He was probably awakened from his dreams on theappearance of the Memoir of which it remains for me tospeak, fi-ud from which I have already borrowed so much.' This is a Kood point from Dr. Lingard. How nnreasonable to11 59 Pope Adrian IV. dissuaded Louis VII. fromsuppose that ininvading Spain, incnnsuUn cccUsia et i>ot>ulo terrm illuis, and thatin 115; the same Pope authorized Henry II. to invade Ireland,makino; no account of the ecclesia and popuhis there ? Father Chaillotdoe; not believe in either story.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.l6lSECTION 10.—THE " IRISH ECCLESIASTICAL RECORD."Although the question of Pope Adrian has not to-daythe importance it had in former times, there are circum-stances which occasionally require us to revert to it. Thus,a few years ago, a portion of the Irish Press opened a dis-cussion on the genuineness of the Bull, with the foolishhope of weakening in the minds of a Catholic people theirattachment to the Holy See.Protestants, always happy in being able to injure aPope, slipped the Bull of Adrian into elementary educa-Dr. Moran quotes Professor Richey, who,tional works.writing for the pupils of a Ladies' College, gave a verythe Pope haderroneous translation of the Bull,authorised Henry to subjugate the country, and to takepossession of the island, while the Pontifical letter, apocry-phal as it is, abstracts from all idea of conquest, and con-tains no transfer of dominion.asifSome people have set forth the Bull as a definition exThe Bull,cathedra ; but this idea bears no examination.even if it were genuine, has none of the conditions of adogmatic definition.In our days it would not be easy to forge or to accredita false Bull, because there would be little delay in dis-The Middle Ages, which had no printing orowning it.telegraph offices, were often led into error by apocryphaldocuments, which had a verj long life.At all periods the Irish nation, as if by an infallible in-stinct, has rejected the false Bull of Adrian, and loudlydeclared that it was nothing but a trick of the English.I content myself with these brief observations, becauseI intend to give Dr. Moran's Memoir among my justifyingpapers.CHAPTER XXXIII.THE FATE OF APOCRYPHAL DOCUMENTS.The Bull of Adrian has shared the common fate of apocry-Although the false decretals of Isidore Mer-phal works.cator and the famous donation of Constantine had a veryM—l62POPE ADRIAN IV.,tough life, it was not given them to prevail, by taking rankamong authentic title-deeds.The decretals of the False Isidore obtained such favourseven hundred years.with scholarslastedDivulged in the middle of the ninth century, the loss oftheir credit began in the sixteenth, itheythatBut we must carefully remark that the favour attachedto the work of Mercator continued with a very large num-As for what belongedber of documents that it contained.properly to the false decretals, they had no influence on thediscipline of the Church.In effect, the disciplinary falsifi-cation of the Pseudo-Isidore may be summed up under threeheads: — i. The pretended necessity of obtaining theprevious consent of the Pope for convoking a council,This did not pass into canonical dis-even a provincial one.cipline at any period. The Council of Trent commanded ain thetriennial assembly.Church that the presence of seventy-two bishops is neededto judge the criminal cause of a bishop, as Mercator3. Canonical procedure has remained whatwould have it.It was before the appearance of the false decretals. Noone has ever taken seriously in the Church the pretendedprohibition of letting laics bear witness against clerics, orThanks be to God ! theclerics themselves against laics.false decretals have had their day.It has never been held2.I admire how the Sovereign Pontiffs, by a wonderfulinstinct, have always shown prudence in holding out atarm's length, or with the tongs, the false Bull of Adrian,even on occasions when it might have seemed useful ornecessary to mention it.This has been the course, notonly with the Cardinals of Avranches, but with Inno-cent III., John XXII., Paul IV., St. Pius V. in his Bullagainst Elizabeth, Gregory XIIL, and Clement VIII., asI have shown above.^ The collection of decretals, &c., attributed to Isidore Mercatoris supposed to have appeared lirst in France, between the yearsg2q and 847. Who Isidore was, and wliether he really was theforger, is not certain. Many persons believed the work to befrom the pen of St. Isidore of Seville, who was a celebrated writerand they therefore gave implicit credit to it.It is said to containfalse decretals attributed to more than sixty Popes, and falsecanons attributed to many Councils.In the sixteenth centuryit began to be looked upon with suspicion.Since that time, ithas been known in its true light, as a mere forgery, though con-taining much that is true with much that is false.Trans.A FRIEND OF IRELAND.163The great author of the misfortunes ofIreland, thecause chiefly responsible for its unexampled calamities,was Protestantism.The " Bull of Adrian" had no serious influence on theenslavement of the country.In point of fact, so long asthe Catholic reHgion prevailed in England as well as in Ire-land, the English, notwithstanding theiren.deavours, could hardly extend the limits fixed by the earlyadventurers.constantIn our days the Apocryphal Bull is passing through theFor a long period it hasseventh century of its existence.abused the credulity of the unlearned, and the leisure of thelearned, who found themselves obliged to discuss it.It istime that it should go down for ever into the grave inwhich lie buried the decretals of Isidore Mercator, and somany other forgeries that troubled the peace of our prede-cessors.God grant that my labour may not have the fate of de-laying for a single day the complete overthrow of the im-posture !—DOCUMENTS.No. I.(The Analecta here gives an article on Pope Adrian IV. from theIrish Ecclesiastical Record, of November, 1872, written by theMost Rev. Dr. Moran, then Bishop of Ossory— afterwardsCARDINAL MORAN, ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.This article was repitblished in the Australasian Catholic Record,for 1897, witli further remarks from his Eminence after twenty-That the reader may have the benefit offive years of reflection.these valuable remarks, it is from the Australian volume that wetake the whole_essay.Trans,)POPE ADRIAN THE FOURTH, AND THE SUPPOSED GRANTOF IRELAND TO KING HENRY THE SECOND.Though it is our special purpose in this paper to discuss the authen-ticity of the Papal Letter by which Adrian the Fourth is supposedto have made a gift of Ireland to Henry the Second, yet it will notbe uninteresting to briefly sketch some incidents in the life of thisFor many English readers the most remark-illustrious Pontiff.able fact connected with him is that he was the only EnglishmanUnderwho ever held the high dignity of Successor of St. Peter.many other respects, however, his career was truly singular, and hein a special manner won the admiration of contemporaries by hisunconquerable heroism in defending the rights of the Holy See.One of his biographers described him as " a man of mild and kindlybearing, esteemed for his high character and learning, famous asa preacher, and renowned for his fine voice " (Muratori, Vita, iii.,His pontificate was short, extending over less thanpart I, 441).But forfive years, from December, 1154, t° September, 11 59.those who take the trouble to examine the contemporary chronicles,not a few remarkable events will be found crowded into that briefperiod.Adrian the Fourth was known in early life as Nicholas Break-speare, and most English writers, judging from the surname,contend that he was of Norman and not of Anglo-Saxon descent.Mr. Tarleton, the latest writer of his life, in the elaborate workand Pope,Breahspear,just published,(Londpn, 1896), considers that "this surname may have beenattached to the family from its place of residence." He findsthat as early as the Doomsday Book there was a farm or hamletCalled Breakspears, situated on the edge of the table-land, orEnglishmanNicholasl6bDOCUMENTS.plateau, on which stands the ancient parish (church) of Harefield,and jast sheltered by the brow of the hill slopinjj down to thefertile valley of the Colne. He adds the shrewd remark : "Inthose days it is far more probable that a place should give a nameto a man than that a man should give a name to a place."Inaccorda.nce with this suggestion, it is not improbable that the familyof the future Pope migrated from the Breakspears district to theneighbourhood of Abbot's Langley, in Hertfordshire, and thushe may well have been of Anglo-Saxon descent.Nicholas was of humble parentage.His father, having becomea widower, entered the Benedictine Monastery of St. Alban's asa lay-brother, and for fifty years, till his death, continued to rankas such. He outlived his son Pope Adrian, and it presents a char-acteristic picture of those times that the father was permitted tohis son wasretain his lowly position at the monastery, whileelevated to the most exalted dignity in Christendom..At thehamlet of Abbot's Langley,' Nicholas was born about the yeaxIn his youthI too, a few years after the birth of St. Bernard,he appears to have been dependent on the monks of St. Alban'smonastery for his support no less than for his education. He gaveproof, however, of quick parts, and being desirous to embrace thereligious life, he petitioned to be admitted to the monastery.Hispetition was rejected, probably on account of his father beingalreadj' enrolled as a lay-brother, and Nicholas, with no provisionsave the meagre equipment of a " poor scholar," set out to seekhis fortune and to perfect himself in higher studies in the schools" After his final failure to enterof Paris.St. Alban's, he worked his way, probably through London anddown the high road through Kent, that historic route which hasbeen the main thoroughfare of so many travellers to and from themetropolis, past Rochester and Canterbury, to Dover, from whencehe obtained a passage over the narrow seas, possibly in the verysame year (ti20) when the Blanche Neuf was wrecked on thetreacherous rocks off Barfleur, and the brilliant company sur-rounding Prince William, together with that unfortunate son ofHere the career of Nicholas mayKing Henry, werefairlv be said to have commenced."Mr. Tarleton writes :drowned.It was probably at the halls of the Abbey of St. Denys at ParisFromthat Nicholas Breakspeare pursued his higher studies.Matthew Paris we learn that he became a most painstaking scholar,and betook himself so much in earnest to the acquisition of learn-ing that he excelled all his companions, and proving himself pos-sessed of rare qualities of temper, and endowed with a natural giftof eloquence, received much praise from all his instructors.He quitted Paris about the year 1125, crossed the Khone, andentered Aries, then a town of considerable importance in theHere he frequented the schools for whichterritory of Provence.the town was famous, and it was probably here that he had as his1 The hamlet belong^ed to the monastery of St. Alban's, and was called Abbot'sdistinguish it from a neighbouring hamlet which was called King'sLangley toLang^ley, a royal seat where Edmund, son of Edward III., and Duke of York, wasbprn.DOCUMENTS.1 67master the Irishman Marianns, for whom in after life he continuedto cherish the highest esteem.After a while, filled with the desireof embracing the reli2;ious life, he wended his way to Avignon tooffer himself as a subject in one of the numerous monasteries whichin those days were a distinguishing feature of this beautiful partof France, and the ruins of which may still be seen bv many apleasant stream, and on many a commanding hill.The Abbeyof St. Rufus of the Canons Regular of St. Augustine was one ofthe most famous of those religious institutions in the environsof Avignon.Thither Nicholas one evening bent his steps, andbegged to be admitted among the brethren. He was allowed toremain on trial.During the two years he spent in probation, heappears to have been engaged in teaching, and, as Williani ofNewburgh attests, " he strove by every means in his power to con-ciliate the brothers, and being a man of iixuch personal beauty,cheerful in spirit, cautious of speech, and always obedient to autho-rity, he succeeded in pleasing everyone." When his time of pro-Ijation expired, the Canons Regular were unanimous in admittinghim to their ranks, and thus Nicholas at length attained the greatpurpose of his life by taking the religious vows, and devotingBeing remarkable no less forhimselfthe observance of Rule than for his singular ability, he in a fewyears was appointed Prior, and on the death of Abbot William in1 37, he was further chosen his successor, and was installed in thatto the service of Christ.1high office with great solemnity.St. Bernard was at this time stirring up the fervour of religiousobservance in the communities of France, and Nicholas, now Abbotof St. Rufus, resolved to leave nothing undone that the CanonsRegular of St. Augustine, by strict discipline, might be quickenedwith the true spirit of their holy Rule. Some of the Religious,however, demurred to what they styled the Abbot's innovationsin their Rule, and appealed in person to Rome.This occasionedPopethe Abbot's first visit to Italy, in the springtime of 1145.Eugene the Third, a Cisterican according to St. Bernard's ownheart, had just then been advanced to the See of St. Peter, andthe reforming Abbot Nicholas was sure to find favour at his hands.Words of conciliation and exhortation were addressed by theSovereign Pontiff to the appellant Canons of St. Rufus, and theAbbot returned to Avignon to resume the work of reform whichThe spirit of disaffection, however, was not ex-he had begun.tinguished, and being gradually fanned into a flame, broke out inThe fact of thethe following year more violently than before.Abbot being a stranger intensified their discontent. A secondtime the appellants and the Abbot proceeded to Rome. The Popeere this had become fully acquainted with the merits of the AbbotNicholas, and admired his firmness and his zeal in restoring thevigour of religious discipline among those under his care. Hedismissed the appellant Canons with the words : "I know thepretext by which Satan has ensnared you into this quarrel. Returnto 3^our Abbey : choose a Superior with whom you can, or ratherwith whom you shall have the will to be at peace : the Abbot fromwhom you appeal shall henceforth be engaged in the immediateservice of the Holy See, and shall not be a further burden to you."1 68DOCUMENTS.Thus it was that Abbot Nicholas became attached to the PapalCourt, and there the highest dignities in the gift of the Pontiffsoon awaited him.The year 1 147 was in many respects eventful. The SecondAll Christendom was arousedCrusade was about to commence.by the eloquence of St. Bernard of Clairveaux, and Pope Eugenethe Third proceeded to Paris to present the pilgrim's staff to theNicholas Breakspeare appearsFrench King, Louis the Seventh.His knowledgeto have accompanied the Pontiff on this occasion.of the various languages stood him in good behest, and it is statedthat he greatly charmed all who came in contact with him.There is no recotd of the date of his elevation to the Cardinalate.It was certainly not later than December, ii;i, for his name asCardinal is attached to a Bull of Pope Eugene of that date.In 1 1 52, an arduous mission was assigned to him by PopeEugene the Third, which through his ability and zeal was attendedIt was nothing less than to proceed towith complete success.Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, with the authority of PapalLegate, to heal the religious dissensions that had arisen in thosecountries. The cause of these dissensions may be briefly stated.The Scandinavian kingdoms were all embraced in the MetropolitanSee of Hamburg till the year 1102, when at the request of theKing of Denmark the Danish city of Lund was erected into aMetropolitan See; and the churches in Sweden and Norway weremade subject to it.These kingdoms, though at one time unitedwith Denmark, had now proclaimed their independence, and thej'regarded it as an encroachment on their freedom that they shouldbe subject in spiritual matters to the Danish Metropolitan See.The northern kingdoms were further rent by civil dissensions, andall parlies looked to Rome for a healing remedy and for guidanceCardinal Breakspeare, as Papal Legatein their distracted state.received full powers to restore religious peace throughout Scandi-navia, and in his instructions he was admonished to " preach theGospel throughout that province and to use every endeavour togain the souls of the natives to the honour of Almighty God."confusion.The Legate passed through England, and sailed from the Englishcoast for Norway, where he landed on July the 19th, 1152. HeThe throne wasfound the country in the greatestoccupied by the three sons of the m^irdered King Harold, and allthe sad results of jealousy and ambition and civil war ensued.The first care of Cardinal Breakspeare was to set the civil discordat rest. He then proceeded to heal the religious wounds of thekingdom. He thoroughly reformed the Church, and swept awaythe abuses which had crept in amid the civil disorders.In theCathedral of Nidrosa, the modern Drontheira, reposed the relicsof the holy bishop, St. Olaf. He selected that city for the Metro-politan dignity, and subjected to its authoritj' not only the otherNorwegian Sees with the Orkneys, Hebrides, and Faroe Islands,but also Iceland and Greenland, theShetlands, and WesternIslands of Scotland, and the Isle of Man. The Church of Norwaythus obtained all that it was anxious for, and the name of theLegate was held everywhere in benediction.Tarleton writes :'' y^U honour -yvas ascribed [o him, and his character and firmnessDOCUMENTS.l6qbeing in such sharp contrast to their own rulers, he became thehero of the whole nation, and was certainly the most powerfulman in Norway at that date."The national historian, Snorrow,relates that no foreigner ever came to Norway who was so honoured,or whose memory is so cherished as that of Nicholas Breakspeare.To this day his name is mentioned in Norwegian history as one ofthe benefactors of the nation, and after his death a place wasassigned him among the national Saints.He next proceeded to Sweden, called a synod in the city ofLingkopin, and appointed a Bishop of Upsala.It was not so easyto reconcile Denmark to all these changes..Nevertheless in this,loo, his efforts were crowned with success. The See of Lund wasallowed a sort of primatial pre-eminence over all the ScandinavianChurches, and its Archbishop was honoured with the title of LegatusDuring the Cardinal's stay in Denmark,natus Apcstolices Sedis.the King, Sweno, to avenge some outrages, had declared warThe Cardinal used all his influence in vain toagainst Sweden.maintain peace, and he is reported to have said that " the Danescould expect nothing else but destruction to themselves in theirThe event justified his expectations. Drawnproposed campaign."by a feigned retreat far into Finland, the Danish army was sur-rounded, and almost entirely destroyed.Cardinal Breakspeare returned to Rome in the beginning ofNovember, 1154, and throughout his homeward journey as inRome itself, he was everywhere saluted as " the Apostle of theNorth."Many changes had taken place in the capital of the ChristianPope Eugene theworld during the two years of his absence.Third had been summoned to his reward, and had had for hissuccessor the Bishop of Sabina, aged ninety years, who ascendedthe Papal Chair under the name of Anastasius the Fourth. Onthe 3rd of December, 1154, only a few weeks after Cardinal Break-spcare's arrival in Rome, the Pontificate of Pope Anastasius wascut short by death. Rome being in a very disturbed state, theCardinals met inSt. Peter's without delay, and with one voicechose Nicholas Breakspeare as the successor of St. Peter to guidethe helm of Holy Church. He at first declined the onerous charge,but the clergy and laity took up the cry " Nicholas elected by God,"and at length he bent his shoulders to the burden. He took thetitle of Adrian the Fourth, and his coronation was celebrated withgreat pomp in St. Peter's, on the 24th December, 11 54.His pontificate of four years and eight months was full of stirringevents, and his saying, as reported by John of Salisbury, that" the Pope's tiara was splendid because it burned with fire," wasDr. Creighton,fully verified in his short but brilliant career.Protestant Bishop of London, in the Dictionary of National Bio-graphy, writing of Adrian the Fourth, says that his " pontificatewas a period of constant struggles mainly of his own seeking."Now nothing can be more false than this. He was engaged inconstant struggles, indeed, but they were forced upon him bythose who were jealous of the spiritual authority, or coveted thetemporalities of the Church, and he proved himself throughoutthese varied contests an unswerving champion of the rights inthose days attached to the Holy See.lyO"DOCUMENTS.itsThe first great difficulty that presented itself to the newly-elected Pope was the attitude of the Roman citizens. They hadbeen seized for some years with a frenzy of republican fanaticism,and now under the guidance of the popular tribune, Arnold ofBrescia, they resolved to brook no further delaj' in transferringtheir theories into facts. Rome was to become once more thecentre of the world's civil authority, her old-time grandeur wasto Ije renewed. The Church, however, was to be shorn of all itsdues ; andprivileges, its wealth, its land, its possessions,paganism, under another name, was to resume its sway on theCapitol.Immediately on the election of Pope Adrian, the Roman Senatesent him an imperious demand that he would recognise the RomanIn his reply the Pontiff commanded them on theirRepublic.peril to return to their allegiance, and to compel Arnold of Bresciato quit the city. The Republicans would listen to no such counsel,and to emphasise their determination they attacked the agedCardinal Guido as he was proceeding along the Via Sacra, andinflicted serious wounds of which he soon after died. The Pope,however, naade them realise that they had to do w^ith a man whomno terrors could turn aside froni the path of duty.For the firsttime in the history of the Christian world, Rome was subjectedto an Interdict, to commence on Palm Sunday {1155), the verytime when pilgrims from all parts of Christendom were accus-This terrible blow smotetomed to flock into the Eternal City.at the same time the earthly and the spiritual interests of thecitizens. The Senate, without delay, banished Arnold from thecity, and presented a humble petition to the Pope. The Interdictwas at once removed, and the Easter Feast was kept with morethan usual splendour and rejoicing.Another storm, however, was now threatening from the North.When Frederick Barbarossa succeeded to the imperial throne ofGermany the Roman Senate forwarded to him an invitation tocome to Rome to receive the Imperial Crown at their hands. Thereply of Barbarossa was to cross the Alps in November, 1 1 54, witha large army, with the avowed intent of asserting his imperial rightsin Italy, and punishing the insolence of the Republicans of Rome.The Emperor proceeded slowly on his course, securing the fealtyof the Italian cities through which he passed. The vicissitudesof these cities need not at present detain us.Suffice it to say thaton the loth of April, 1153, Barbarossa, as King of Italy, receivedthe Iron Crown in the Church of St. Michael at Pavia. He nowavowed his intention to receive, at the hands of the Pontiff, theImperial Crown in Rome, and sent deputies to convey his wishesto Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the Pope dispatched threeCardinals to meet the F.mperor, to acquaint him with the actualcondition of the city, and to learn what his intentions were inIn the meantime, the Pope proceededregard to its temporal rule.to Civita Castellana, on the borders of the Campagna, about mid-way between Viterbo and Rome.We must now revert to Arnold of Brescia. When he fled fromRome, he endeavoured to form a league of some of the Italiannobility to stir up the citizens of Rome against the Pope andnOClIMENTS.171As a preliminary to the Imperial conse-against the Ejnperor.cration, Adrian the Fourth required that the Emperor would putan end to this attempt at sedition.Arnold soon fell a captiveinto the hands of Barbarossa, and was consigned in chains toCastel Sant' Angelo, in Rome. On a former occasion when Arnoldwas a prisoner, the citizens had revolted and set him free.ThePope was now absent from the city, at Civita Castellana, and theprefect of the city, seeing no other escape from imminent risk,had the prisoner led out from the castle and secretly put to death.His remains were burned and his ashes were flung into the Tiber.Such is the narrative of the ancient chronicler.This, however,would not suffice for Dr. Creisrhton. He would place the e-xecutionof Arnold at a later period, when the Pope was in Rome, and whenthe Emperor, after his coronation at St. Peter's, had to repel anattack of the rebellious citizens. He writes ;" Adrian the Fourthused the opportunity of the Emperor's wrath to urge the executionof Arnold of Brescia, who was tried before the Papal officials, andFor such statements there is not a particle ofput to death."Sismondi, too, gives a dramatic account of thehistoric evidence.slow burning of Arnold fastened to a cross at Porta del Popolo.Even Dean Milman characterises such an argument as" purefiction " (Latin Christianity, iv., 412).The Pope's embassy to Barbarossa brought back the pleasantannouncement that the Emperor had no hostile intentions what-ever against the Pope, that he was ready to pay all honour toHoly Church and to the See of Rome, and prayed Adrian topublicly and with all solemnity crown him in St. Peter's.Bar-barossa, however, was a prince of very doubtful character, fromwhom Adrian had but little to expect. Tarleton describes him " asa man of boundless ambition, combined with great personal strengthand courage ; in physique he was an ideal hero ; but he was un-scrupulous, masterful, and imperious.His one object was to rulea united Germany combined with Italy, to be supreme on the Tiberas well as on the Danube. He proclaimed the loftiest notions ofthe absolute supremacy of the Emperor, and carried with him theenthusiastic support of all the great princes of Germany."Bar-barossa with his arm 5' had encamped at Sutri, the ancient Sutrium,a small stronghold known as the key of Etruria, which occupiedthe crest of one of the numerous rocky hills in that rich province ofItaly.Pope Adrian had advanced as far as the picturesque castle ofNepi, with his suite of Cardinals, and a few attendants. TheEmperor, having declared his intentions to be pacific, and ex-pressed his wish to meet the Pontiff, Adrian set out, as usual inthose days, on horseback, accompanied by a small retinue ofAs he approched the Imperial camp, aCardinals' and guards.brilliant group of German nobles, their armour flashing in thesunlight, galloped out to meet him, and, joining the procession,escorted him amid the shouts of the troops and the blare of trumpetsBarbarossa now came forth into the front of the Imperial tent.gorgeous armour, and around him were the rough chivalry ofThe etiquette of those days required the sovereign,Germany.when welcoming the Pope, in recognition of the higher spiritual172DOCUMENTS.authority, to hold the Papal stirrup whilst its owner dismounted.This part of the ceremony Barbarossa resolved not to fulfil. Headvanced to meet Adrian, and, bowing low, offered to assist himAdrian, however, waited, that the full ceremonialto dismount.Barbarossa' s pride would not brook thisshould be observed.His guards half drew their swords,threateninghumiliation.murmurs were heard in the ranks of the soldiers, the Pope's ownretinue turned their horses and fled. Though Adrian was thusalmost left alone, yet his courage never for a moment failed. Hedismounted without insisting, for the moment, on the prescribedhomage, and allowed the Emperor to lead him to the throne pre-pared for him, where Frederick knelt and kissed his feet.Afterthis ceremony the Emperor rose and approached for the kiss ofIn dignified words he refusedpeace.to grant it, and told the Emperor that until the usual homage waspaid in full he would withhold his blessing and refuse to crownWhatever may be our judgment regarding the ceremonialhim.details of those times, one cannot fail to be struck by the magni-The Emperor used every argumentficent courage of the Pontiff.that could be devised to change Adrian's resolution, but his wordsThreats ormight as well be addressed to the rocks of Sutri.entreaties were alike of no avail to move the steady resolution ofthe Pope, who next day quitted the camp and returned to Nepi.It was now Adrian's turn.Barbarossa, however, was determined to receive coronation atthe hands of Adrian, and resolved to submit to the humiliatingcondition of homage, for without it, he saw no prospect of attainingthe great object of his ambition. On June the nth, he set outfor Nepi, accompanied by a brilliant retinue. As he drew near,the Pope rode out to meet him. The Emperor dismounted, ad-vanced on foot, and, kneeling down, held the Pope's stirrup, andThis done, Adrian enfolded him in hisassisted him to dismount.arms and gave him the kiss of peace amid the ringing cheers ofboth parties of followers and spectators. As Tarleton remarks :" The splendid firmness of Adrian had gained for him a wonderfulsuccess."The Pope now returned to Rome, and on the morning of theiSth of June, with all solemnity, performed the ceremony of theEmperor's coronation in St. Peter's, How infuriated was the hostileferment of the citizens against the Germans appears from the factthat they organi-sed an armed band to attack the German armyencamped at the Neronian fields, near Ponte Molle, nor did theydesist till 200 of the assailants were made prisoners, and about 1000were slain by the Imperial troops, or were drowned in the Tiber.The prisoners were handed over to Adrian, by whom most of themAt the end of June the Emperorwere liberated in a few days.and his army quitted Rome and returned to Germany.During the next two years the Pope was mainly occupied inthe south of Italy, disputing with the Normans, who claimedSicily by right of conquest, and, togetlier with it, a considerableportion of territory on the mainland. The indomitable courageand firmness which had humbled the pride of Barbarossa was alsosuccessful in restoring peace in South Italy, and in securing theNorman power as an ally of Rome.In the meantime, the dealingsDOCUMENTS.I73of Barbarossa with the Church in Germany, and with the citiesof North Italy, led to repeated quarrels with the Pope, and em-bittered the closing days of his life. He was preparing to issue asolemn sentence of excommunication against the Emperor, whenhe was overtaken by death at Anagni, on the ist of September,His remains were interred at St. Peter's, in Rome, where1 159.the tomb of the only Englishman who ever wore the Tiara is to thepresent day an object of interest to countless tourists of the English-speaking world.*****The distinctive character of Pope AdrianFourth, assketched in the Australian Catholic Record for April, shouldto show that his supposed Bull, by which a grant ofsufficeIreland was made to King Henry the Second cannot be regardedas genuine. The main purpose of Adrian's policy was to defendthe Church's independence within her own sphere, and to repelIn the 2^0the ever-grasping pretensions of the secular power.genuine official letters of the Pontiff that have been preserved tous, we shall seek in vain for even the remotest trace of theflattery and subserviencj^ tothe royal authority which are sothe supposed Bull. We may now proceed toconspicuousinconsider in detail the arguments which are advanced in supportof the genuineness of this singular document.theTwentj'-five years a.go I inserted in the Irish EcclesiasticalRecord (Dublin, November, 1872),a short essay on this subject,which since then has been repeatedly republished or referred to inIt may not be in-the United States and the home countries.opportune to here reprint it in full, with a few verbal alterations.This will clear the way for setting forth as briefly as possible thefurther arguments which have been advanced to set this matterin its full light during the past years.There was a time when it would be little less than treason to(luestion the genuineness of the Bull by which Pope Adrian theFourth is supposed to have made a grant of Ireland to Henrythe Second ; and indeed, from the first half of the thirteenth tothroughthe close of the fifteenththis supposed grant of the Holy See that the English Govern-ment sought to justify their claim to hold dominion inthatHowever, opinions and times have changed, and at theisland.present day this Bull of Adrian has as little bearing on the con-nection between England and Ireland as it could possibly have onthe union of the Isle of Man with Great Britain.century, it was principallyOn the other hand, many writers in a spirit of hostility to theHolj' See, have said strange things whilst asserting the genuine-I need scarcely remark that it does notness of this famous Bull.seem to have been the love either of Ireland or of historic truthIt proceeded mainly from theirthat inspired their declamation.hatred to the Sovereign Pontiff, and from the vain hope that suchexaggerated statements might in some way weaken the devotedaffection of the Irish people for Rome.174DOCUMENTS.Laying aside such prejudiced opinions, the controversy as tothe genuineness of Adrian's Bull must be viewed in a purely his-torical light, and its decision must depend on the value and weightof the historical arguments which may be advanced in regard toit.The following is a literal translation of the old Latin text ofAdrian's Bull :—" Adrian, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our mostdear Son in Christ, the illustrious King of the English, greetingand the Apostolical Benediction." The thoughts of your Highness are laudably and profitablydirected to the greater glory of your name on earth and to theincrease of the reward of eternal happiness in heaven, when as aCatholic Prince you propose to yourself to extend the borders ofthe Church, to announce the truths of the Christian Faith to igno-rant and barbarous nations, and to root out the weeds of wicked-ness from the field of the Lord ; and the more effectuallytoaccomplish this, you implore the counsel and favour of the Holy See.In which matter we feel assured that the higher your aims are,and the more discreet your proceedings, the happier, with God'said, will be the result ; because those undertakings that proceedfrom the ardour of faith and the love of religion are sure alwaysto have a prosperous end and issue." It is beyond all doubt, as your highness also doth acknowledge,that Ireland, and all the islands upon which Christ the Sun ofJustice has shone, and which have received the knowledge ofChristian Faith, are subject to the authority of St. Peter and ofthe most holy Roman Church.Wherefore, we are the more de-sirous to sow in them an acceptable seed and a plantation pleasingunto God, because we know that a most rigorous account of themshall be required of us hereafter." Now, most dear Son in Christ, you have signified to us thatyou propose to enter the island of Ireland to establish the obser-vance of law among its people, and to eradicate the weeds of vice ;and that j'Ou are willing to pay from every house one penny as anannual tribute to St. Peter, and to preserve the rights of the churchesWe, therefore, receiving withof the land whole and inviolate.due favour your pious and laudable desires, and graciously grantingour consent to your petition, declare that it is pleasing and accept-able to us, that for the purpose of enlarging the limits of the Church,setting bounds to the torrent ofvice, reforming evil manners,planting the seeds of virtue, and increa-sing Christian Faith, youshould enter that island and carry into effect those things whichbelong to the service of God and to the salvation of that people ;and that the people of that laud should honourably receive andreverence you as Lord ; the rights of the churches being preservedantouched and entire, and reserving the annual tribute of onepenny from every house to St. Peter and the most Holy RomanChurch." If, therefore, you resolve to carry these designs into execution,let it be your study to form that people to good morals, and takesuch orders both by yourself and by those whom you shall findDOCIIMENIS.175qualified in faith, in words, and in conduct, that the Church theremay be adorned, and the practices of Christian faith be plantedand increased ; and let all that tends to the glory of God and thesalvation of souls be so ordered by you that you may deserve toobtain from God an increase of everlasting reward, and may secureon earth a glorious name throughout all time.Given at Rome,"&c..Before we proceed with the inquiry as to the genuineness o£this letter of Pope Adrian, I must detain the reader with a fewbrief preliminary remarks.First : Some passages of this important document have beenvery unfairly dealt with by modern writers while purporting toThus, for instance. Professor Ilichey, in hisdiscuss its merits.Lectures on Irish History, presenting a translation of the Latintext to the lady pupils of the Alexandra College, makes the Pontiffto write : " You have signified to us, our well-beloved son in Christ,that you propose to enter the island of Ireland in order to subdue. We, therefore, regarding your pious and laud-the people, etc. .able design with due favour, etc., do hereby declare our v.'ill andpleasure, that for the purpose of enlarging the borders of the ChuLCh,Such anetc., you do enter and take possession of that island." 'erroneous translation must be the more blamed in the presentinstance, as it was scarcely to be expected that the ladies whom thelearned lecturer addressed would have leisure to consult the originalLatin text of the document which he professed to translate.This,however, is not the only error into which Professor Richey has beenbetrayed regarding the Bull of Adrian the Fourth. Having mentionedin a note the statement of Roger de Wendover, that the Bull wasobtained from Pope Adrian in the year 11 55, he adds his ownopinion that " the grant appears to have been made in 1172."-The learned lecturer seems to have forgotten that, at that date.Pope Adrian had been for about thirteen years freed from thecares of his Pontificate, having passed to the better world in theyear 11 59.Second : Anyone who attentively weighs the words of theabove document will see at once that it prescinds from all title ofconquest, whilst at the same time it makes no gift or transfer to HenryAs far as this letter of Adrian is concerned, the visitthe Second.of Henry to our island might be the enterprise of a friendly monarch,who, at the invitation of a distracted commonwealth, would seek byhis presence to restore peace, and to uphold the observance of theThus, all the foolish theories must at once be set aside,laws.which rest on the groundless supposition that Pope .Adrian autho-rised the invasion and plunder of the Irish people by the Anglo-Norman adventurers.Third : There is another serious error which is sufficiently refutedI mean that opinionby the simple perusal of the above document.which would fain set forth the letter of Pope Adrian as a dog-matical definition of the Holy See, as if the Sovereign Pontiff then1 Lectures on the History of Ireland, by A. G. Richey, Esq., delivered to theDublin,Pupils of Alexandra College during; the Hilary and Easter Terms of .869.18^, pagfes la:, I23."^ [hid., page 121.176DOCUMENTS.spoke ex cathedra, i.e., solemnly propounded some doctrine to bebelieved by the Universal Church ; it proposes no matter of faithto be held' by all the children of Christ ; in fact, it presents nodoctrine whatever to be believed by the faithful, and it is nothingmore than a commendatory letter addressed to Henry, resting onthe good intentions set forth by that monarch himself.There isone maxim, indeed, which awakens the suspicions of the old Gallicanschool, viz. : that " all the islands are subject to the authoritv ofis no doctrinal teachine; that is thusSt. Peter."propounded : it is a matter of fact admitted by Henry himself,a principle recognised by the international law of Europe in themiddle ages, a maxim set down by the various states themselves,the better to maintain peace and concord among the princes ofChristendom. To admit, however, or to call in question the teach-ing of the civil law of Europe, as embodied in that maxim, hasnothing whatever to say to the great prerogative of St. Peter'ssuccessors, whilst they solemnly propound to the faithful, in unerringaccents, the doctrines of Divine faith.However, itFoi;rth : To many it will seem a paradox, and yet it is a fact,that the supposed Bull of Pope Adrian had no part whatever in thesiibmission of the Irish chieftains to Henry the Second. Even accord-ing to those who maintain its genuineness, tliis Bull wasnotpublishedtill the year 1175, and certainly no mention of it was made inTheIreland until long after the submission of the Irish princes.success of the Anglo-Normans was mainly due to a different cause,viz., to the superior military skill and equipment of the invaders.Among the Anglo-Norman leaders were some of the bravest knightsof the kingdom, who had won their laurels in the wars of FranceTheir weapons and armour rendered it almost impos-and Wales.sible for the Irish troops to meet them in the open field. The crossbowwhich was made use of for the first time in this invasion, producedas great a change in military tactics as the rifled cannon in ourown days. When Henry came in person to Ireland his numerousarmy hushed all opposition.There were 400 vessels in his fleet,and if a minimum of twenty-five armed men be allowed for eachvessel, we shall have an army of at least 10,000 men fully equippedlanding unopposed on the southern shores of our island."It is tothis imposing force, and the armour of the Anglo-Norman knights,that we must in great part refer whatever success attended thisinvasion of the English monarch.To proceed now with the immediate matter of our presenthistorical inquiry. The following is the summary of the argumentsin favour of the authenticity of Pope Adrian's letter, drawn up byauthor of many valuable works on Irish history :— " We have,J. C. O'Callaghan, Esq., editor of the MacaricB Excidium, andfirst, the testimony of John of Salisbury, secretary to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and one of the ablest writers of his day,who relates his having been the envoy from Henry to Adrian, in1155, to ask for a grant of Ireland, and such a grant having thenbeen obtained, accompanied by a gold ring, containing a fine'' The authorities for the statements made in the text may be seen in MacariceExcidium, edited by Mr. O'Callaghan for the Irish ArchEeolog:ical Society in 18^0.nncuMF.NTS.177emerald, as a token of investiture, with which grant and ring thesaid John returned to Henry. We have, secondly, the grant orBull of Adrian in extsnso in the works of Giraldus Cambrensisand his contemporary, Ridnlfus de Diceto, Dean of London, as wellas in those of Roger de Wendover and Matthew Paris. We have,thirdly, several Bulls of Adrian's successor, Pope Alexander III,,still further to the purport of Adrian's, or in Henry's favour. Wehave, fourthly, the recorded public reading of the Bulls of Adrianand Alexander at a meeting of Bishops at Waterford in 1175. Wehave, fifthly, after the liberation of Scotland from England atBannockburn, and the consequent invitation of Bruce's brother,Edward, to be King of Ireland, the Bull of Adrian prefixed to theeloquent lay remonstrance, which the Irish presented to PopeJohn XXII., against the English ; the same Bull, moreover, referredto in the remoirstrance itself, as so ruinous to Ireland ; and a copyof that Bull accordingly sent back by the Pope to Edward II. ofEngland, for his use under those circumstances. We have, sixthly,from Cardinal Baronius, in his great work, the A nnales Ecdesiastici,under Adrian IV., his grant of Ireland to his countrymen in full,or, as is said, ' ex codice Vaticano, diploma datum ad Henricum,Anglorum Regem.' We have, seventhly, the Bull in the BullariumRomanum, as printed at Rome, in 1739.The citations and refer-ences in support of all the foregoing statements will be found inthe ' Notes and Illustrations ' of my edition of Maoarice Exoidium,for the Irish Arch^ological Society in 1850, given in such a manneras must satisfy the most sceptical."Examining these arguments in detail, I will follow the orderthus marked out by Mr. O'Callaghan.I. We meet, in the first place, the testimony of John of Salis-bury, who in his Metalogicits (lib. iv., cap. 42), writes, that beingin an official capacity at the Papal Court, in 1155, Pope Adrian IV.then granted the investiture of Ireland to the illustrious King HenrvII. of England.'I do not wish in any way to detract from the praise due toJohn of Salisbury, who was at that time one of the ablest courtiersHowever, the words here imputed to him must beof Henry II.Inserted as they are in the last chaptertaken with great reserve.of his work, the5r are not at all required by the context ; by can-celling them the whole passage runs smoother, and is more con-This is more striking, as in another worknected in every way.of the same writer, which is entitled Pnlycraticus, we meet witha detailed account of the various incidents of his embassy to PopeAdrian, yet he there makes no mention of the Bull in Henry'sfavour, or of the gold ring and its fine emerald, or of the grant ofIreland, all of which would have been so important for his narrative.We must also hold in mind the time when the Metalogicus waswritten. The author himself fixes its date ; for, immediately before' " Ad preces meas illustri regi ang^Ionim Henrico Secundo (Adrianus) concessit etdedit Hiberniam jure hiereditario possidendam ;ipsius testantur inhodiernum diem- Nam omnes insulae, de jure antiquo,_ ex donationeConstantini quiearn fundavit et dotavit, dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam pertinere, annulum (juoqueper me transmisit aureum, smaraffdo optima decoratum, quo fieret investitura luris incuriali archivo publico custodir!ferenda Hibernia : idemque adhuc annulus injussus est."liter^esicut1^78DOCUMENTS.asking the prayers of " those who read his book, and those who hearit read," he tells us that the news of Pope Adrian's death hadreached him a little time before, and he adds that his own patron,,still living, wasTheobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, thoughweighed down by many infirmities. i Now, Pope Adrian departedthis life in 1159, and the death of Archbishop Theobald happenedHence, Gale and the other editors of John of Salisbury'sin 1 161.works, without a dissentient voice, refer Metalogicus to the)year 1 159.Now, it is a matter beyond the reach of controversy, that ifHenry II. obtained the investiture of Ireland from Adrian IV.,he kept this grant a strict secret till at least the year 1175.Fortwentv years, i.e., from 11 55 to 1175, no mention was made of theHenry did not refer to it when authorising hisgift of Adrian.vassals to join Diarmaid in 1167, when Adrian's Bull would havebeen so opportune to justifv his intervention ; he,_did not mentionit when he himself set out for Ireland to solicit and receive thehomage of the Irish princes ; he did not even refer to it when heassunied his new title and accomplished the purpose of his expedi-11 72, was the first episcopaltion. The Council of Cashel, inassembly after Henry's arrival in Ireland ; the Papal Legate waspresent there, and did Adrian's Bull exist it should necessarilyhave engaged the attention of the assembled Fathers.Never-theless, not a whisper as to Adrian's grant was to be heard at thatEven the learned editor of Cambrensis Eversus,,famous Councd.whilst warmly asserting the genuineness of Adriari's Bull, admits." there is not any, even the slightest authority, for asserting thatits existence was' known in Ireland before the year 1172, or forthree years later " (vol. ii., p. 440, note z).It is extremely dilScult,in any hypothesis, to explain in a satisfactory way this mysterioussilence of Henry 1 1., nor is it easy to understand how a fact soimportant, so vital to the interests of Ireland, could remain somany years concealed from those who ruled the destinies of theFor, we must hold in mind, that throughout thatIrish Church.interval Ireland numbered among its Bishops one who held theimportant office of Legate of the Holy See ; the Irish Church hadconstant intercourse with England and the Continent, and throughSt. Laurence O'Toole and a himdred other distinguished prelatesenjoj'ed in the fullest manner the confidence of Rome.If Adrian granted this Bull to Henry at the solicitation ofJolm of Salisbury in US'!, there is but one explanation for thesilence of this courtier in his diary, as set forth in the Polyoraiicus,and for the concealment of this Bull itself from the Irish Bishopsand people, viz., that this secrecy was required by the state policyAnd, if it be so, how then can we beof the English monarch.asked to addiit as geuuine this passage of the Mstalvgicus in whichthe astute agent of Henry, still continuing to discharge ctfices ofthe highest trust in the Court, would proclaim to the world asearly as the year 1159, that Pope Adrian had made this grantof Ireland to his royal master, and that the solemn record of theinvestiture of this high dignity was preserved in the public archivesof the kingdom ?' ifetalogicus, lib. iv. cap. ult.DOCUMENTS.lygIt must be added that there are some phrases in this passageof the Metalogicus wliich manifestly betray the hand of the im-Thus, the words usque in hodiernum diem imply that apostor.long interval had elapsed since the concession was made by PopeAdrian ; and surely they could not have been penned by John ofSalisbury in 1159. Much less can we suppose that this writeremployed the words jure haredHario possidendam. No suchhereditarj'- right is granted in the Bull of Adrian.It was notdreamt of even during the first years of the Anglo-Norman invasion,and it was only at a later period, when the Irish chieftains scornfullyrejected the Anglo-Norman law of hereditary succession, that thisexpedient was thought of for allaying the fierce opposition of theIrish people.Thus we are forced to regard the supposed testimony of Johnof Salisbury? as nothing more than a clumsy interpolation, whichprobably was not inserted in his work till manv years after the firstAnglo-Norman invasion of Ireland.2. I now come to the second ^nd main argument of those whoseek to defend the authenticity of Pope Adrian's Bull. We haveGiraldus Cambreusis, they say, a contemporary witness, whosetestimony is unquestionable. He inserts in fullthis letter ofAdrian IV., and he nowhere betrays the slightest doubt as to itsgenuineness.Some years ago we might perhaps have been tempted to acceptthis flattering character of Giraldus Cambrensis, but at the presentday, and since the publication of an accurate edition of his his-torical works, it is impossible for us to do so.It was not till many years after the death of Pope Adrian thatGerald de Barry, better known as Giraldus Cambrensis, entered onTwice he visited Ireland after the yearthe stage of Irish history.1 1 83, and on both occasions he discharged those duties whicti,at the present da3^ would merit for hiiu the title of special courtThe Expugnatin Hibernica,correspondent with the invading army.in which he inserts Adrian's Bull, may justly be said to have beenHence, as a matter of course, Giraldus adoptedwritten to order.as genuine every document set forth as such by his royal master,and any statements that strengthened the claim or promoted theinterests of his brother Welsh adventurers were surely not likelj'to be too nicely weighed in the scales of criticism by such an his-torian. The editors of the works of Giraldus, published under thedirection of the Master of the Rolls, have fully recognised thisspecial feature of the historical works of Giraldus. The officialcatalogue describing the Expu^natio Hibernica, of which we treat,expressly says : "It may be regarded rather as a great epic, than asober relation of facts occurring in his own days. No one canperuse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poeticalfiction than a prosaic truthful history."In the preface to the fifth volume of the Historical Treatises ofGiraldus, the learned editor. Rev. James F. Dimock, enters atconsiderable length into the inquiry, whether the ExpugnatioHibernica was to be accepted as genuine and authentic history.I need do no more than state the conclusions which he enunciates :-j-" I think I have said enough to justify me in refusing to acceptl8onOCIlMFNTS.Giraldus's history of the Irish and ol their Enghsh invaders as" My good friendsober, truthful history." ' And again he writes :and pre-labourer in editing these volumes of Giraldus's Avorks(Mr. Brewer) says of the Expugnatio, that Giraldus would seemto have regarded his subject rather as a great epic, which it un-doubtedly was, than a sober relation of facts occurring in his own. This is a most true and characteristic description oldays. .Giraldus's treatment of his subject ; the treatise certainly is, ingreat measure, rather a poetical liction than a prosaic truthfulhistory." ^.I must further remark, as another result from Rev. Mr. Dimock'sresearches, that the old text of Giraldus in reference to Pope Adrian'sBull, from which Mr. O'Callaghan's citations are made, is nowproved to be singularly defective.I shall give the pithy words ofthat learned editor, wfiich are stronger than any I should wish touse : " No more absurd nonsensical a muddle was ever blunderedIt is of course from theinto by the most stupid of abbreviators." ^ancient MSS. of the work that this corruption of the old text ismainly proved ; but it should indeed be apparent from an attentivestudy of the very printed text itself, for, as Mr. Dimock remarks,being accurately translated, its words " marvellously contrive tomake Henry, in 1172, apply for and procure this privilege fromPope Adrian, who died in 11 59, and with eqiially marvellous con-fusion they represent John of Salisbury, who had been Henry'sagent in procuring this privilege in 1155, as sent, not to Ireland,but to Home, for the purpose of publishing the Bull at Waterfordin 11,74 or 1 175."I shall only add, regarding the testimony of Giraldus Cam-brensis, that in the genuine text of the Expugnatio Hibernica heplaces on the same level the Bull of Adrian IV. and that of Alex-Nevertheless, as we shall just now see, he elsewhereander III.admits that there were many and grave suspicions that the sup-posed Bull of Alexander had never been granted by the Holy See.The other names mentioned together with that of Giralduswill not detain us long. They are all writers who only incidentallymake reference to Irish matters, and in these they naturally enoughtake Giraldus for their guide.Ralph de Diceto wrote about 1210, and like Giraldus receivedhis honours at the hands of Henry II.Irish historians have notyet accepted him as a guide in reference to matters connected withFor instance, the Synod of Cashel of 11 72, whichtheir country.was one of the most important events of that period of Ireland'sliistory, is described by him as held in Ijsinore.Roger de Wendover was a monk of St. Albans, who died 6th ofMay, 1237.His Flore.s Historiarum begin with the creation ofthe world, and end two years before his death in 1235. He merelycompendiates other sources down to the beginning of the thirteenthIt is only the subsequent portion of his work which iscehtviry.held in esteem by English annalists.^'• Giraldl Cambrensis Opera," under the direction of the Master of the Rolls,vol. v., London, I867. Preface, p. Ixix.'^ /did. p. Ixx,S/4W. p. xliii./iiJ.—DOCUMENTS.l8lilattliew Paris was a brother religious of Roger de WendoverMr. Coxe, who edited aill St. Albaus, where he died in 1259.portion of the Flores Historiarum for the EngUsli Historical Society(1841-1844), has proved that down to the year 1335 MatthewParis only compendiates the work of Wendover, At all events hisHistoria Maior is of very little weight. A distinguished Germanhistorian of the present day, ScrhOdl, thus conveys his strictureson its merits :" Se trompe a chaque instant, et, entraine par son aveuglerage de critique, donne pour des faits historiques des anecdotespiquantes qni n'ont aucnne authenticity, des Ifgendes d6raisonnables,et toutes sortes de details suspects, exageres et calomnicux."To the testimony of such writers we may well oppose thesilence of Peter de Blois, secretary of Henry II., though chroniclingthe chief events of Henry's reign ; and to this we may add thesilence of all our native annalists, not one of whom ever mentionsthe Bull of Adrian.3. But it is time to pass on to the third argument which isadvanced by those who maintain the authenticity of the Bull.It is quite true that we have some letters or Bulls of Pope Alex.andsrIII. connected with the Irish invasion.Three of these, written in1 172, are certainly authentic. They are preserved in the LiberNiger Scaccarii, from which they were edited by Hearne, and inlater times they have been accurately printed by Mr. O'Callaghanand Rev. Mr. Kelly. They are addressed respectively to the Irishbishops, King Henry, and the Irish princes.So far, however, arethese letters from corroborating the genuineness of Pope Adrian'sBull, that they furnish an unanswerable argument for whollysetting it aside as groundless and unauthentic. They are entirelydevoted to the circumstances of the invasion of our island and itsresults, and yet the only title that they recognise in Henry is " thatmonarch's power and the submission of the Irish chieftains." Theysimply ignore any Bull of Adrian, and any investiture from theHoly See.There is, however, we are told another Bull of Alexander III.,preserved by Giraldus Cambrensis, which is supposed to have beengranted at the request of King Henry in 11 72, confirmatory of thegift and investiture made by Pope Adrian ; and Mr. O'Callaghanholds that this Bull of Alexander HI. sets at rest for ever all doubtas to the genuineness of the grant made by Adrian IV.iThe question at once suggests itself :— Is this Bull of AlexanderIf its ownIII. to be itself admitted as genuine and authentic ?authority be doubtful, surely it cannot suffice to prop up the totter-Now, its style is entirely different froming cause of Adrian's Bull.that of the three authentic letters of which we have just spoken.Quite in opposition to these authentic letters, " the only authorityalleged in it for Ilenrji-'s right to Ireland is the Bull of Adrian,"as Dr. Lanigan allows.2 The genuine letters are dated from Tus-culum, where, as we know from other sources, Alexander actuallyresidecl in 11 72. On the other hand, this confirmator}' Bull, though^ Maca-rlce Excidiittn-, p. 247,Eccles Hist, iv., 224.182DOCUMENTS.supposed to have been obtained in 1172, is dated from Rome, thusSuch was the dis-clearly betraying the hand o£ the impostor.turbed condition ot Rome at that period that it was impossiblefor iriis Holiness to reside there ; and hence we find hirn sometimesholding his Court in Tusculum, at other times in Segni, Anagni,It was only when these disturbances were quelledor Ferrara.that Alexander III. was able, in 1178, to return in triumph to hiscapital.'But there is still another reason why we must doubt of theauthority of this confirmatory Bull. The researches of Rev. Mr.Dimock have proved what Ussher long ago remarked, that theBull of Alexander originally formed part of the work of GiraldusCambrensis,^ although later copyists, and the first editors, includ-ing the learned Camden, recognising its spuriousness, excluded itfrom Giraldus's text. The matter is now set at rest, for the ancientMSS. clearly prove that it originally formed part of the ExpugnatioThanks, however, to the zeal and industry of Mr.Hibernica.Brewer, we are at present acquainted with another work of Giraldus,written at a later period than his Historical Tracts on Ireland.It is entitled De Pyincipis I ns'trucHone , and was edited in 1846for the Anglia Christiana Society. Now in this treatise Giraldushimself refers to the Bull of Alexander III., of which we treat,: " Somebut he prefaces it with the following remarkable words 'assert or imagine that this Bull was obtained from the Pope ; but" Sicut aothers deny that it was ever obtained from the Pontiff.''quibusdam impetratum asseritur aiit confingitur ; ab aliis autemunquam impetratum fuisse negatur."Surely these words shouldsuffice to convince the most sceptical that contemporary writersquestioned the authenticitv of this confirmatory Bull of AlexanderIII.4. As regards the Synod of Waterford in 1175, and the state-ment that the Bulls of Adrian and Alexander were publishedtherein for the first time, all these matters rest on the very doubt-ful authority of Giraldus Cambrensis. We have no record in theIrish Annals that any general meeting of the Irish Bishops was11 75. The circumstances of the countryheld in Waterford inrendered such a Synod impossible ; for war and dissensions ragedIt was in thatthroughout the length and breadth of the land.year, however, that the first Bishop was appointed by King Henryto the See of Waterford, as Ware informs us; and, perhaps, weshould not err were we to suppose that the Synod so pompouslyset forth by Giraldus was a convention of the A-nglo-Normanclergy of Waterford under their newly-appointed Prelate, all ofwhom would, no doubt, joyfully accept the official documentspresented in the name of the King by Nicholas of Wallingford.Leland supposes that this Synod of Waterford was not heldtill 1177. The disturbed state of the kingdom, however, rendereda Synod equally impossible in that year, and all our ancient autho-rities utterly ignore such a Synod.Mozzoni, Tavole Cronologiche. Rome, 18^7, ad an, 1179,'^ Opcya Giraldi vol. v., p. 3r8.De Frincip. Ittstruct,, p. 53.DOCUMENTS.1835. In the Remonstrance addressed by the Irish princes andpeople to John XXII., about the year 1315, repeated mention ismade of the Bull of Adrian.Bnt then it is only cited there as aconclusive argument ad hominem against the English traducers" lest the bitter and venomous calumnies ofof the Irish nation :the English, and their unjust and unfounded attacks upon us andall who support our rights, may in an5r degree influence the mindof your Holiness."The Bull of Adrian IV. was published by theEnglish, and set forth by them as the charter-deed of their rule inIreland, yet they violated in a most flagrant manner all the con-The Irish princes and people in self-ditions of that Papal grant.defence had now made o\';r the sovereignty of the island to EdwardBruce, brother of the Scottish King ; they style him their adoptedmonarch, and they pray the Pope to give a formal sanction to theirThus, throughout the whole Remonstrance the Bullproceedings.of Adrian is used as a telling argument against the injustice of theinvaders, and as a precedent which John XXII. might justlyfollow in sanctioning the transfer of the Irish crown to EdwardIf it was lawful for Adrian IV. to grant the kingdom toBruce.Henry II. under certain conditions, the King of England shouldnot complain if another Pontiff were to transfer such a grant tothe Prince of Ireland's choice, the conditions of the former pre-tended grant not having been fuliilled.But in all this the his-torian will find no grounds for asserting the genuineness of thesupposed Bulls of Adrian or Alexander. We shall just now seethat at this very time the Irish people generally regarded theseBulls as spurious and mere inventions of their English enemies.6. Baronius, the eminent ecclesiastical historian, inserts in hisinvaluable Annats the Bull of Adrian IV., " from a Vatican Manu-This is the sixth argument advanced by Mr. O'Callaghau.script."It is not my intention to question in any way the servicesrendered by Cardinal Baronius to the cause of our Church History ;but at the same tims no one will deny that considerable progresshas been made in historical research during the past three hundredand fifty years, and many documents are now set aside whichwere then accepted as unquestioned on the supposed reliableauthority of preceding chroniclers.In the present instance we are not left in doubt as to the sourcewhence Baronius derived his information regarding Adrian's sup-During my stay in Rome I took occasion to inquireposed Bull.whether the MSS. of the eminent annalist, which are happilypreserved, indicated the special " Vatican Manuscript " referred toin his printed text, and I was informed by the then learned archivistof the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner, that the Codex Vaticaiiusreferred to is a MS. copy of the history of Matthew Paris, which isis the testimony ofpreserved in the Vatican Library.Matthew Paris alone that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius,and no new argument can be taken from tlic words of the eminentRelying on the same high authority, I am happy to stateannalist.that nowhere in the private archives or among the private papersof the Vatican, or in the Regesta, which Jaffe's researches have madeso famous, or in the various indices of the Pontifical Letters, canThus it184DOCUMENTS.a single trace be found of the supposed Bulls of Adrian IV. andAlexander III.7. The last argument advanced by Mr. O'.Callaghan will not detainus long. The insertion or omission of such ancient records in theBiillarium is a matter that depends wholly on the critical skill ofCurious enough, in one edition of the BuUarium, asthe editor.may be seen in the references of Dr. Lanigan, Adrian's Bull isinserted, while no mention is made of that of Alexander ; in anotheredition, however, the Bull of Alexander is given in full, whilst theBull of Adrian is omitted. We may well leave our opponents tosettle this matter with the conflicting editors of the BuUarium.They, probably like Baronius, merely copied the Bull of Adrianfrom Matthew Paris, and erred in doing so.LabbS, in hismagnificent edition of the Councils, also publishes Adrian's Bull,but then he expressly tells us that it is copied from the work ofMatthew Paris.We have thus examined in detail the various arguments whichsupport the genuineness of the supposed Bull, and now it onlyremains for us to conclude that there are no sufficient groundsfor accepting that document as the genuine work of Pope Adrian.Indeed the Irish nation at all times, as if instinctively, shrankfrom accepting it as genuine, and unhesitatingly pronounced it anAnglo-Norman forgery. We have already seen how even GiraldusCambrensis refers to the doubts which had arisen concerning theBull of Pope Alexander ; but we have at hand still more conclusiveevidence that Adrian's Bull was rejected by the Irish people.There is, happily, preserved in the Barbcrini archives, Rome, aMS. of the fourteenth century, containing a series of official papersconnected with the Pontificate of John XXII., and amongst themis a letter from the Lord Justiciary and the Royal Council ofIreland, forwarded to Rome under the Royal Seal, and presentedto His Holiness by William of Nottingham, Canon and Precentor'of St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, about the year 1325.In thisimportant, but hitherto unnoticed document, the Irish are accusedof very many crimes, among which is insidiously introduced therejection of the supposed Bulls : " Moreover, they assert that theRing of England under false pretences and hy false Bulls obtainedthe dominion of Ireland, and this opinion is commonly held by them."" Asserentes etiam Dominum Regem Angliae ex falsa suggestioneet ex falsis BuUis terram Iliberniae in dominium impetrasse acThis national tradition was pre-communiter hoc teneutes."served unbroken throughout the turmoil of the fifteenth andsixteenth centuries, and on the revival of Ireland's historical litera-ture in the beginning of the seventeenth century, was registeredin the pages of Lynch, Stephen White, and other writers.It will be well also whilst forming our judgment regarding this sup-posed Bull of Adrian, to hold in mind the disturbed state of society,especially in Italy, at the time to which it refers.At the presentday it would be 110 easy matter indeed for such a forgery to sur-vive more than a few weeks.But at the close ofthe twelfthOwing to the constant revolutionscentury it was far otherwise.^Cotton, in Fasti Ecc. Hid. gives his name as Prerentbr in 1323 to I337,DOCUMENTS.—l85and disturbances that then prevailed, tlic Pontiff was oftentimesobliged to flee from city to city ; frequently his papers were seizedand burned, and he hiinseU detained as a hostage or a prisonerby his enemies.Hence it is that several forged Bulls, examplesof which are given in Cambrensis Everfits, date from these times.More than one of the grants made to the Norman families are nowbelieved to rest on such forgeries ; and that the Anglo-Normanad^'enturers in Ireland were not strangers to such deeds of dark-ness appears from the fact that a matrix for forging the PapalSeal of such Bulls, now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy,was found a few years ago in the ruins of one of the earliest Anglo-Norman monasteries founded by De Courcy.The circumstances of the publication of the Bull by HenryOur opponentswere surely not calculated to disarm suspicion.do not pretend even that it was made known in Ireland till theyear 1175, and hence, though publicly granted with solemn investi-ture, as John of Salisbury's testimony would imply, and thoughits record was deposited in the public archives of the kingdom,this Bull, so vital to the interests of the Irish Church, should haveremained dormant for twenty years, unnoticed in Rome, unnoticedby Henry's courtiers, still more, unnoticed by the Irish Bishops,and I will add, unnoticed by the Continental Sovereigns, so jealousForof the power and preponderance of the English monarch.such suppositions there is indeed no parallel in the whole historyof investitures.It is seldom, too, that the hand of the impostor may not be'detected in some at least of the minor details of the spurious docu-In the present instance more than one ancient MS. pre-ment.serves the concluding formula of the Bull : " Datum Romae "Now, this simple formula would suffice of itselfdated from Rome.Before the news of theto prove the whole Bull to be a forgery.election of Pope Adrian to the Chair of St. Peter could reach England,that Pontiff was obliged to seek for safety in ilight from his capital.Rome was in revolt, and Arnold of Brescia sought to renew thereJohn of SaUsbury, in hisa spectre of the old Pagan Republic.Pnlycralicus, faithfully attests that on his arrival in Italy, the PapalCourt was held not in Rome, but in Beneventum ; it was in thiscity he presented to Pope Adrian the congratulations of Henry II.,and he mentions his sojourn there during the three months that heThis is further confirmed by the Italian chron-remained in Italy.Baronius saw the inconsistency of tne formula. Datumicles.Romae, with the date 1155, and hence", in his annals, he enteredAdrian's Bull under the year 11 59; but if this date be correct,surely then that Bull could not have been brought to Henry byJohn of Salisbury, and the passage of the Melalogicus referring toOther historians haveit must at once" be admitted a forgery.Forbeen equally puzzled to find a year for this supposed Bull.instance, O'Halloran, in his History of Ireland, whilst admittingthat the Irish people .always regarded the Bull as a forgery, refersits date to the year 1167, that is, eight years after the death ofPope Adrian TV.There is one other reflection which forces itself on us whenreading Adrian's S'upposed Bull. The condition of Ireland, andl86DOCUMENTS.the relations between Ireland and the English King, which are setforth in the supposed Bull, are precisolj' those of the year 1172 ;but it would have required more than a prophetic vision to haveIn 11 55 Ireland was not in a state ofanticipated them in 11 55.turmoil, or verging towards barbarism ; on the contrary, it wasrapidly progrtssing, and renewing its claim to religious and moralI will add, that Pope Adrian, who had studiedpre-eminence.under Marianus, an Irish master, kenw well this iiourishing con-In 1172, however, a sad change had comedition of Ireland.Four years of continual warfare, and the ravagesover the island.of the Anglo-Norman filibusters, since their first landing in 116.S,Ireland to a state of barbarism, and thehad well nigh reducedauthentic letters of Alexander III, in 1172, faithfully describeits most deplorable condition.Moreover, an expedition of Henry to Ireland, which wouldnot be an invasion, and yet would merit the homage of the IrishBut owing to theprinces, was simply an impossibility in 1155.special circumstances of the kingdoin, such in reality was the ex-pedition of Henry in 1 1 72. He set out for Ireland not avowedlyto invade and conquer it, but to curb the insolence and to punishthe deeds of pillage of his own Norman freebooters.Hence duringhis stay in Ireland he fought no battle and made no conquest ; hisfirst measures of severity were directed against some of the mostlawless of the early Norman adventurers, and this more thanany thing else reconciled the native princes to his military display.In return he received from a majority of the Irish chieftains theempty title of Ard-righ, or " Head Sovereign," which did notsuppose any conquest on his part, and did not involve any sur-render of their own hereditary rights.Such a state of thingscould not have been imagined in ii5t ; and yet it is one which isimplied in the spurious Bull of the much maligned Pontiff, Adrianthe Fourth.Since the publication of the above essay ifl November, 1872,several interesting papers have appeared treating of the subjectin the fullest detail, some rejecting the Bull as a mere forgery,others presenting it as genuine and authentic.Among the most determined opponents of the Bull I maymention the French writer. Rev. Louis Chaillot, in the AnalectaJuris Pontificii (Rome, May and June, i?82) ; Father Gasquet,O.S.B., in the Dublin Review (July, 1883) ; Stephen T. M'Cormick,in The Pope and Ireland (San Francisco, 1889) ; Canon Bellesheim,of Aix-la-Chapelle, in The History of the Catholic Church in Ireland(German edition, 1890) ; and Father W. B. Morris, of the LondonOratory, in his interesting work, Ireland and St. Patrick (1891).The genuineness of the Bull has been, on the other hand, stoutlj'maintained by the Rev. Sylvester Malone, in the Dtd)lin Review(April, 1884) ; by j\Iiss Norgate, in the English Historical Review(January, 1S93) ; and by Alfred Tarleton, in his Life of NikolasBreakspeare (London, 1896).Looking back upon the whole discussion, it appears to me thathe arguments as set forth in my former essay remain unshaken.bOCUMENTS.187Add to this that considerable light has been thrown on the circum-stances of the times and other details which brin^ those argumentsinto bolder relief, and thus it becomes more and more evident thatthe supposed Bull was a mere clumsy forgery of the English monarchI shall endeavour to compendiate in a few para-or his courtiers.graphs the additional information which has been gleaned regard-ing this subject during the past twenty-five years.of government.(a) It is now very generally admitted that during the turmoilof the twelfth century, when there was question of local or personalinterests, ambitious men did not shrink from the crime of forgery.The disturbed condition of Italy, and in particular of Rome, lentspecial facilities for falsifying the Papal documents, and made theRepeatedly thedetection of forgery proportionately difficult.Popes were compelled to flee from Rome, whilst Arnoldo of Bresciaor his disciples assumed the reinsProfessor" It is well known from history that everywhereJungman writes :towards the close of the twelth century forged or corrupted PapalLetters or Diplomas were not uncommon. That such was thecase in England is susceptible of proof from the Letters of Johnof Salisbury and of others.Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury,successor of St. Thomas a Beckett, instructed all the Bishops ofEngland to promulgate in all their churches the severe sentence ofexcommunication against the public pest of forgery, so commonhad this crime become in the twelfth century.In the time ofPope InnocentIII. also, various statutes were enacted againsithis abominable crime, which was becoming daily more widespre-idJohn of Salisbury's testimony sets this matterand dangerous."beyond all doubt. He expressly attests that the forger had beenbusy with the Letters of Pope Alexander III., and writing to that" Nobis si placet rescribite qua ani-Pontifi (Epis. 129), he asks :vestrarum."madversioneliterarumcorruptoresGervase, in his chronicle, at the year 1181, makes reference to" several rare and suspicious documents," which were producedabout this time.ferendisuntThe question may now be asked, "was Henry's character such asto free himself and his courtiers from all suspicion of having recourseThe career of butto such forgeries, the better to attain his ends ?few of the kings of England has been sketched for us in darkercolours than that of Henry II. And the account comes to usnot from later writers, but from contemporaries best acciuaintedSt. Thomas of Canterburywith his perverseness and duplicity.did not hesitate to write that " from the first day of his accessionto power, he has stretched out his hand against the liberties of theChurch, as if they were his own hereditary right."CardinalVivian, Papal Legate in England and Ireland, speaking of the King,said, " Never did I witness this man's equal in lying."Louis ofFrance declared to Henry's ambassadors that " their njasterwasso full of fraud and deceit that it was impossible to keep faith withhim " (Lingard, Hist, of Eng., ii., p. 106, n.).This prepares us forthe entry in the very accurate continuation of the Chronicle of" Henry, King of England, puffedSigebert, under the year 1171 :up with pride, and usurping things not conceded, striving for thingshe had no business to do, prepared ships and called together thej88UOCUMfiNTS.soldiers of his kingdom to conquer Ireland " (Migne, Patrol., cix.,307). The supposed Bull of Adrian would have been of no littlevalue to Henry in his dealings with the Irish Bishops soon afterIt gave some colour of justice to the course whichthe invasion.he pursued, and afforded a plausible pretext to the courtiers toquell the opposition of those who on religious grounds might beunwilling to accept Henry's rule in Ireland.(b) Father Morris of the London Oratory, in his interestingwork, Ireland and St. Patrick (1S91), dwells at considerable lengthon the unenviable character of the English King, which indeed isnow unquestioned among the students of history, and he drawsthence the conclusion that it is quite inconsistent with the wholecareer of Pope Adrian to suppose that such a Pontiff would assignto such a king the guardianship of the rights and liberties of theIn reply to Father Morris's line of argument. MissIrish Church.Norgate triumphantly appeals to the high opinion entertainedby the English people of the character of their young AngevinKing in the bright morning of his reign, the English Chronicleattesting that " all folk loved him, for he did good justice andmade peace."This however, is not a sufficient reply to the argu-It is quite true that in the first monthsment of Father Morris.of his reign in 11 54, he left nothing undone to ingratiate himselfwith the English people, and hence he was for a time idolized bythem, but this did not prevent him from ambitioning at the veryoutset of his reign to grasp the rich domains of the Church andto crush her liberties, and from the letters of the Archbishop ofCanterbury it is more than probable that those designs of Henrywere well known at the Roman Court in the very first days ofAdrian's Pontificate. The contemporary, Roger of Pontigny,under the year 1154, says that, when Henry succeeded to his an-cestral kingdom, a great thirst for novelties arose in England.And no slight fear took hold of the Church of that country, as wellbecause of the suspicious age of the king, as from the notoriousmalignity of his family in their dealings with the rights of eccles-William of Canterbury writes in the same style,iastical liberty."and describes this " malice of the king's designs " at the veryoutset of his reign, as well as the boldness of his ministers in " con-spiring to strip the Church of her possessions."(c) As the matter at present stands Giraldus Cambrensis isthe sole witness on whose testimony we have to rely, whilst weIt is now admittedaccept as genuine the Bull of Pope Adrian.that Matthew Paris and other chroniclers merely copied the Bullfrom his pages. The question, therefore, may be asked : Is Giraldusa writer to whose testimony implicit credence can be given, par-ticularly in matters relating to Irish history, or, on the other hand,may it be supposed that without much investigation or minuteinquiry he accepted on the word of Henry's^courtiers the supposedBull as authentic and genuine ? The sketch of the character ofGiraldus in the pruceding essay will enable the reader to form anaccurate opinion as to the answer which should be given to suchThe writer in the English Historical Review, on thea question.other hand, contends that the testimony of Giraldus is unim-peachable, and criticises with noilittle severity the statement ofnOCUMTiNTR.t8qFather Morris, that Giraldus should be regarded as "the venalcourt historian of Henry II."In proof of her contention Miss Norgate appeals to the unbend-ing opposition of the King at the time when Giraldus apphed forprornotion to some rich benefices in Wales, and to the bitter enmityof Giraldus, as shown in many of his writings, towards Henry.However, tlie old ma-^cim, distingue tcmpora ct conciliahis jura,may here be very well applied.In the earlier years of Giraldus'scareer, when promotion to rich benefices in his native Wales wasrefused him, he wrote in a spirit of bitterest hostility to the King.And again towards the close of his life, when he sought to be pro-moted to the See of St. David's, and ambitioned other high Churchpreferment, the old bitterness of hostility to the royal court wasBut at the period to which Giraldus's writings on Irelandrevived.must be referred, all this was changed. No one was more readythan he to alter liis views according to the measure of royal patron-age extended to him. At the time of which we treat Giraldusenjoyed the favour of Henry, and repaid with abject flattery thepatronage of the King.In the Dictionary of National Biography,now in the course of publication, we read : "In 1184 Giraldus wasmade one of Henry II. 's chaplains, and was sent by the King toaccompany his son John in his expedition to Ireland. He wasoffered whilst in Ireland the bishopricks of Wexford and Leighlin,and apparently at a little later time, the bishoprick of Ossoryand the archbishoprick of Cashel, but declined them all.It is tothis journey we owe the treatise Topographia Hibernica, dedicatedto Henry ll., which appeared in 1188.It gives an account of thegeneral features of the country, its productions, climate,&c.,mixed up with many marvellous stories. The E.rpitgnatio Hibernica,which probably appeared the same year, dedicated to Richard(Strongbow), though containing much that is interesting andvaluable, can scarcely be considered as sober, truthful history."(Vol. xxi., 390). The lack of critical acumen is seen in all Giraldus'sThe history and antiquities of Wales were the favouritewritings.Nevertheless, of his chief work, De Juresubjects of his studies.Menevensis Ecclesiae, Mr. Brewer remarks that it exhibits " astrange mixture of antiquarian research with a total absence of allTopographia tohistoricalHenry can hardly find words sufficient for the king's eulogy. Hestyles him the " Alexander of the West," the " Invincible," the" Solomon of his age," " the most pious of princes."Of Giraldus'ssuffice. Heslanderous attacks on Ireland one specimen willdeliberately sets forth that from the days of St. Patrick the Bishopsof Ireland, without a solitary exception, had utterly neglectedThe Anglican editor of his works. Rev. Mr.their sacred duties." Giraldus was replete with the exactDimock, remarks on this :qualities the very reverse of what was needed to form an accuratehistorian. He asserts that from the time of St. Patrick therehad never been a single Irish bishop who had manfully striven toinstruct and correct the people, and this he asserts, though St.Malachy's fame could not possibly be unknown to him.St.Malachy had been dead only about forty years ; and few, if any,more earnest and laborious instructors and reformers can perhapsGiraldus dedicating hiscriticism."igODOCUMENTS.be named, among the bishops of all Christendoiu of all times, andhe had contemporaries and followers not unworthy of him. Andthis, too, he asserts of the Isle of Saints, for ages after Patrick'stime the great nursery of missionary Bishops, Apostles of thefaith, throughout the wide district of the Continent of Europe,where the name of many an Irish saint and martyr is still held inreverence ; to whom also was due the conversion of Scotland andof a large part of Saxon England." Dimock might have addedthat at the very time of the English invasion St. Laurence O'Toolewas Archbishop of Dublin, whilst St. Gelasius ruled in Armagh,The learned Ware wasand St. Christian was Bishop of Lismore.in many ways prejudiced against Ireland ; nevertheless, in hisAntiquities of Ireland (ch. xxiii.) he does not hesitate to write :" I cannot but express my surprise how men nowadays, other-wise grave and learned, have obtruded on the world the fictionsof Giraldus for truths." '(d) In the preceding essay it is mentioned incidentally thatAdrian's Bull was not allowed a place in Jaffe's Regesta..Since thepublication of that essay a new edition of the Rp.gesta has appearedin Germany, with the addition of Adrian's Bull.Interrogated onthis matter, the editors have replied that this addition was madeon the authority of a newly discovered manuscript exemplar ofThrough the kindness of a verythe Bull in the Vatican archives.distinguished friend further inquiries were made at the Vatican,which elicited from Very Rev. Father Denifle, the present illus-trious Vatican archivist, an attestation to the effect that whenthe papers formerly preserved in the Castle of San Angelo wereexamined a few years ago, a copy of the famous Bull was found ;it was nothing more, however, than a transcript made in the four-teenth century, and was manifestly copiedfrom the work ofMatthew Paris.Such an addition, therefore, adds no evidencein favour of the authenticity of Adrian's Bull.[e) In the lithographed edition of the Leabhar Breac (fifteenthcentury MS.), published by Royal Irish Academy, Adrian's Bullappears, as if it had originally formed part of that valuable collec-tion of early records, and the reader would be led to suppose thatits text was written by the same hand as the remainder of theMS.In the original MS., however, it is seen to be written byquite a different and more recent hand, on a vacant column, betweentwo old Celtic tracts of the original compilation. When I collatedthe text, in the original venerable MS. in Trinity College, Dublin,Library, many years ago, the letters Gir, though partly effaced,were still legible at the loot of Adrian's Bull.This, I need scarcelyremark, indicated Giraldus as the source whence the Bull had beenderived.(/) Some modern Protestant scribes in Ireland, following in thesteps of Rev. Robert King (in Primer of the Church History ofIreland), have appealed to another passage in Leabhar Breac, in1 In regard to John of Salisbury, it may be remarked tliat after the death of PopeNevertheless, in his many subsequentAdrian he fell into disgrace at Henry's Court,letters setting forth his merits, and defending? himself ajraiiist the displeasure of theKing, he never thought of pleading the service he had rendered in obtaining the gift ofIreland-DOCUMENTS.191proof that Adrian IV. sold Ireland to 'the English King. The pas-sage referred to is as follows : " O'Annoc and O'Chalchin, of Kilmore,O'Sluaisi of Cooloslushty,' and O'Glesain : these were they whostole the horses, and the mules, and the asses of the Cardinal whocame from Rome to the Land of Erin to instruct in the timeof Domhnall More O'Brien, King of Munster ; and it was on thataccount the successor of Peter sold the rent and right of Erin tothe Saxons : and that is the right and title which the Saxons holdon the Gaedhil at this day ; for it was to the successor of Peter,to Rome, used to go the rent and tribute of Erin till then."This, however, is nothing more than a gossiping sentence, intro-duced by the scribe, having no historical weight, and having noconnection whatever with the ancient tracts copied into the LeabharCardinal Vivian was the first Cardinal who visited IrelandBre.ac.during the reign of the famous Domnhall More O'Brien (whose deathCardinal Vivian, however, did not visitis recorded inIreland till the year 1177, when the invasion of Ireland was anaccomplished fact, and when more than twenty years had elapsedsince the supposed grant of the kingdom was made by Adrian'sDomhnall More O'Brien did not succeed to the throne tillBull.long after the death of Pope Adrian IV.1194).William of Newbury further relates :(g) It is not easy, however, to reconcile the course pursued inIreland by Cardinal Vivian, Legate of Pope Alexander III., withthe supposition that that Pontiff and his predecessor, Adrian,had by solemn Bull assigned the lordship of Ireland to King HenrvII. He arrived in Ireland, as I have said, in 1177, and Roger deHoveden tells of the King's rage because he knew him to ^behostile to him. The chronicler adds that De Courcy made him" Johnprisoner in Ulster.De Courcy, having collected a powerful body of knights and footsoldiers, determined to invade Ulster, that province of Irelandwhich is separated from Scotland by a narrow strait.It happenedthat Vivian, the Legate of the Holy See, a man remarkable for hiseloquence, had just then arrived in these parts from Scotland.He had been honourably received by the King of Ulster and theBishops of the Province, and at the time was residing in the cityof Down, near the sea. When the news arrived of the approachof the enemy, the Irish consulted the Legate on the course to bepursued in this emergency ; he answered that it was their dutj'to fight for their fatherland and their liberty, at the same timeThus encouraged,offering up public prayers for their successthey sallied forth impetuously " (Gcsta Angl., iii., 9). How differentis this narrative from the account of Vivian's proceedings given in" Vivian, Cardinal of the titlethe Anglo-Irish Annals by Dowling :of St. Stephen in Monte Caelio, came into Ireland as Legate of theApostolic See, with a commission from Pope Alexander to pro-claim to the people the title and interests of their Lord the Kingof England in the Island of Ireland, with reservation of Peter'sPence, and also to denounce as excommunicated and accursed allthat would) resist the soldiers and agents of their lord the Kipg,or that would refuse to supply them with victuals and food at aIt is manifest that the same evil genius that die-reasonable price."ig2nOCIIMENTS.—tated the spurious Bull inspired also this Anglo-Norman record ofCardinal Vivian's mission.(h) We may now advance a step further to search out someat least of the materials made use of by the King or courtier whoconcocted the pretended Bull of Pope Adrian.There is a genuine Brief ot the Pontiff, addressed to King LouisVII. of France, and dated the I2th of the Kalends of May, 1159.It has been published by Duchesne, Remm Franc. Scriptores ;Bouquet, Recueil des Historiens ; Bongar's Gesta Dei per Francos ;Migne, Patrologia, vol. 188, and other writers.Towards the close of the year 11 58, the Bishop of Evreux, inNormand}', was dispatched to Rome by the French King to solicitthe Pontiff's sanction for a joint expedition of French and Englishtroops into the Spanish territory, to restore religion in those parts,and to free the faithful there from their worse than pagan oppressors.The Bishop of Evreux was born in England, and had been mainlyinstrumental- in effecting, at this very period the reconciliation ofthe English and French monarchs, who in 11 58, in token of theirfriendship, made a joint pilgrimage to the sanctuary of MountSt. Michael's, in Normandy. The friend of both monarchs, he re-presented both in his embassy to Rome, and pledged the heartyco-operation of Henry's army in the military crusade on whichKing Louis had set his heart. The Pontiff, however, refused his1 59, whilst commending the motivessanction, and in the Brief of 1which swayed the French monarch in devising this expedition,sets forth in detail the reasons why he felt constrained to refusehis sanction to it. From the nature of this correspondence theBrief referred to must have been unknown to the public at theperiod to which we refer, but on the other hand it must have beenin due course communicated to the English King and his courtiers.Now the preamble of this Brief supplied abundant material for theforger for embodying in his Bull the Pontiff's ideas. We will herepresent in parallel columns a few phrases from both documents :FORGED BULL.etetsatisterris,Laudabiliterfruc-tuose de glorioso nomine propa-gando inaeternaefelicitatis praemio cumulando incoelis, tua inagnificentia cogitatdum ad dilatandos Ecclesiae ter-. sicut Catho-minos, &c., &c. .et adlicus princeps intendis,id convenientius exequendumconsilium Apostolicae Sedis ex-igis et favorem ... ad bonumexitum et finem solent attingerequae de ardore fidei et religionisamore principiumhabuerunt,&c..AUTHENTIC BRIEF OF I 1 59.Satis laudabiliter et fructuoseChristiano nomine propa-degando in terris, et aeternae beati-tudinis praemio tibi cumulandoin coelis, tua videtur magnifi-centia cogitare, dum ad dilatan-dos terminos populi Christiani,&c. ... inproperareintendis, &c., atque ad id con-venientius exequendum, matristuae sacrosanctae Romanae Ec-clesiae consilium exigis et favo-rem, &c., ac de majori ardofefidei et religionis amore propo-si turn et desiderium tuum prin-cipium habuerunt, &c.H.Now, one thing at least ia imqucstionable in the matter of theDOCUMENTS.193the Brief ofPontifical Briefs, that the writers were masters of the Latin tongue,and most felicitous in varying the form of expression even whenthe same ideas had to be conveyed ; and at no time was the Latinstyle of the Papal correspondence more classic or more jealouslyattended to than at the very period to which these Briefs refer.If we suppose that Adrian's Bull of the year ::55 be genuine, weshall have to admit in11.19, such a copyingof formulas and phrases as is without parallel in the authenticregisters of the Papal Letters. And the anomaly becomes the greaterwhen we consider that this copying of former documents would befound in a Brief addressed to the most powerful sovereign inEurope when treating of a matter of the greatest delicacy andimportance, and conjointly with him to the very king to whomthe former Biill had been addressed.As it is impossible to supposethat the Pontifical Secretary, in drawing up such a royal Brief of1 1 59, would hsve copied from a royal Bull of 1 1 5 5 ; and as the Brief1 59 is unquestionably genuine it follows that the Bull of 11 55of 1must be set aside as spurious and of no authority.'(j) In tlje essay publishedtwenty-five years ago I gave oneinstance in connection with Pope Adrian's Bull to illustrate thecharacter of the " Lectures on Irish History," delivered by theI may be allowedProtestant professors in Ireland in those days.to cite another instance from a more recent work, in proof thatthe old methods of falsifying history still rule supreme in the Pro-In i88q, Rev. Dr. Stokes, Professortesta.nt University of Ireland.of Ecclesiastical History in Trinity College, Dublin, published avolume of his lectures on " Ireland and the Anglo-Norman Church."The second lecture is devoted to Giraldus Canibrensis and the Bullof Adrian IV. He eulogises Giraldus as quite a model historian,and it is quite apparent that Dr. Stokes in his lectures, whilstdecrying everything connected with the Catholic Church in Ireland,Ashas taken Giraldus for his guide, philosopher, and friend.regards the Bull of Pope Adrian, he assures his readers that the onlyargument advanced against it is " that no copy of the Bull has beenfound, or now exists in the Vatican archives." He exults in de-molishing this visionary argument, which, however, none but him-I need scarcely remark that even the negativeself has built up.argument for rejecting the supposed Bull is far different from thatTt is simply this : No Pontifical Bull orsuggested by Dr. Stokes.Brief can be accepted unless it be presented by some crediblewitness, whose authority may be sufficient to attest its genuineness.Now we have no such witness for Adrian's Bull.Here, however.Dr. Stokes declares the testimony of Gh-aldus in regard to Adrian's" Giraldus had abundant means toBull to be quite irrefragable :satisfy himself (he says) as to the authenticity of the document.He lived for years at Rome, he had continual access to the Papal. Giraldus had noRegisters, which he carefully investigated. ..' I do not deem it necessary to make special reference to ttie ingenious theory devisedby Chaillot, to tlie effect that the Pontifical Brief of 1159 had reference not to SpainThe only apparent argument in favour of this theory is that in thebut to Irelandproper names HiOernia and Ilispania, the initial capital letter is th e s.ame. Few, how-ever, Tvill be convinced by such an argument, the more so as the whole context of theBrief has manifest reference to the condition of Spain ia those days.194DOCUMENTS.conceivable motive for forging this Bull in favour of a king he hated,and who had mortally injured him." The onlv proof for Giraldus'sacquaintance with the Roman Registers is the Rev. Professor'sIt is not at all necessary to suppose that thevivid imagination.Bull was forged by Giraldus. Any other courtier may be respons-His uncritical frame of mind made itible for that serious crime.particularly easy to impose such frandulent documents on him. Hetells us himself that he made four journeys to Rome, but it wasbetween the years 1199 and 1203.His one ambition in thesejourneys was to obtain the See of St. David's, and the forged Bullshad already been many years published. He presented to theCourt in Rome several of his works which he names, but in thatlist we search in vain for the E.rpusnatio Hibernica, which containedAs regards Giraldus's hatred of the King atthe forged Bulls.the period of which we treat it is a mere dream of Rev. ProfessorI have already given sufficient proof of the abject flatteryStokes.of the English King, which characterises Giraldus's writings onIt may be added that Giraldus dedicated the Topogra-Ireland.phia Hzbeynica to King Henry, and when a second edition wasbrought out after the King's death, he prefixed a letter addressedto John, the Lord of Ireland, in which he declares that his objectin writing those works on Ireland was to sound King Henry'spraises, in laudem regis.(h) It may now be asked was the Church of Ireland at the timeof the accession of Pope Adrian IV. in that desolate condition ofdecay and barbarism wliich is set forth in the supposed Bull. Theone witness to the decay of religion and morality in Ireland in thebeginning of the twelfth century to whom the' champions of theBut thisauthenticity of Adrian's Bull appeal is St. Bernard.same venerable witness attests that, through the exertions of St.Malachy, the weeds of vice had been plucked out and Christiancivilization restored, religious faith had been revived throughoutthe length and breadth of the land, and Christian virtues werepreached, so that at the time of the saint's death in 114S the IrishChurch was arrayed in its pristine splendour.Spealcing of St.Malachy, St. Berriard says that when he visited Pope Eugene III.in Rorne, " the Sovereign Pontiff on many occasions, and withgreat care, made inquiries concerning the state of the Church inhis country, and when he was preparing to depart, authorised himto act for him throughout the whole of Ireland ; and taking themitre from his head, he placed it on that of Malachy, giving himalso the stole and maniple, which he used in offering the HolySt. Bernard adds that Malachy was not slow in carry-Sacrifice."" It is not the receiving of honouring out the wishes of the Pontiff :that engages his attention, but rather the execution of the dutiesIn various places various conven-belonging to his Legateship.tions are held, so that no district, or part of a district, should beleft without the fruits and advantages of his legatine office. Theseed is sown upon all waters ; there is no one able to hide himselfNot sex, not age, notfrom the influence of his anxious care.Among allcondition, not profession enters into his calculations.the health-giving seed is scattered ; among all alike thealikeheavenly trumpet sends forth its note. .. Religion is planted,.DOCUMENTS.I95In the Councils, whichpropagated, cherished in every quarter.are celebrated in all parts of the land, traditions of ancient dateai"e revived ; new ones are also devised. And all appointmentspromulgated by him, like decrees issued from heaven itself, areadopted, enforced, and secured ia written, records, in order toThis, however, is a theme ontheir preservation for posterity."which it is not necessary to dwell at any length.Suffice it to saythat the Bishops of Ireland throughout the period were men accord-ing to St. Malachy's own heart, and enjoyed in the fullest measurethe confidence of the Holy See.In token of perfect order beingrestored in the Irish Church, and of the confidence placed in theIrish Bishops by Rome, Cardinal John Paparo was sent to Ireland1 52, only two years before Pope Adrian's accession, and in thein 1National Synod, held at Kelts, in the presence of the Irish Bishopsand of 300 priests, and of very many of the princes and chieftainsof Erin, he solemnly granted to the four archbishops the BlessedPallium for which St. Malachy had so earnestly pleaded. Fromthe letters of Adrian the Fourth and his immediate successors itIS manifest that the conferring of the Pallium in those days wasregarded as the highest honour and most distinctive proof of sin-gular esteem and favour that the Holy See could confer upon anySuch an estimate of the Irish Church in RomeNational Church.is quite inconsistent with the picture of its deformity which thesupposed Bull of Adrian presents.^ PATRICK F. CARD. MORAN.No. 2.LETTER OF POPE ADRIAN IV. TO KING LOUIS VII.,DISSUADING HIM FROM THE IRISH EXPEDITION.Adrianus episcouus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo in Christofilio Ludovico illustri Francorum Regi, salutem et apostohcambenedictionem.Satis laudabiliter et tructuose de Christiano nomine propagandoin terris, et aeternae beatitudinis prasmio tibi cumulando in ccelis,tua videtur magnificentia cogitare, dum ad dilatandos terminospopuli Christiani, ad paganorum barbariem debellandam, et adgentes apostatrices, et quae catholica; fidei refugiunt nee recipiuntveritatem, christianorum jugo et ditioni subdendas, simul cumcharissimo filio nostro Henrico illustri Anglorum rege, in H: pro-perare disponis, et studes assidue (ut opus hoc telicem exitumsortiatur) exercituni et quae sunt itineri necessaria congregare.Atque ad id convenientius exsequendum, matris tu:e sacrosancta;Romanae Ecclesia» consihum exigis et favorem. Quod quidempropositum tanto magis gratum acceptumque tenemus, et ampliussicut commendandum est commendamus, quanto de sincerioricharitatis radice talem intentionem et votum tam laudabile proces-196DOCUMENtS.sisse credimus, ac de majori ardore fidei et religionis amore pro-positum et desiderium tuum principium acceperunt.Verurn cum excellentia tiia et consilii maturitate sit provida, etluce illustrata, in ordine ipsius facti videtur plurimum esse festina.Unde et multos attonitos reddidit, et suspenses, cum omne bonumquod suo tempore et competenti ordine exercet.ur, aeterno Conditoripiacitum habeatur modis omnibus et acceptuni, aliter autein nonQuod utique ut magispotest gratum ejus existere voluntati.appareat, et ut sit quod proponimus paulo amplius maniiestum,aliquid exempli gratia duximus, non inutiliter supponendum.Corpus qnideni Christi conficere, et in ara IJominica ho^tiain immo-late, rectum, imo et salutiierum esse, nemo qui recte sapit ignorat,Casterum si tempore suo et horis immol^tum non luerit consti-tutis, jam illud reservatur ad posnam quod exspectebatur ad gloriam;et qui extra tempus immolat constitutum, inde sibi damnationemsi constituto tempore immolasset, meritumdolebit infligi : unde,sibi gauderet et pr<Emium augmentari.Accedit ad hoc quod alienam terram intrare nee providumvidetur esse, nee tutum, nisi a principibus et a populo terrae priusconsilium requiratur. Tu vero, sicut accepimus, inconsuUa Ec-clesia, et principibus terr^e illius, accedere illuc et festinare disponis,cum hoc deberes nulla ratione tentare, nisi cognita per principesUndeterraj necessitate, et ab eis prius esses exinde requisitus.quia nos honorem et incrementum tuum tota mentis intentionediligimus, et nihil tale te aggredi, nisi rationabili causa exigente,vellemus, sublimitati tuLE pruisentibus litteris suadcmus ut priusnecessitatera terrae per principes illius regni inspicias, ct consideres,et tam illius Ecclesias quam principum et populi voluntatem dili-genter inquiras, et ab eis consi-li-u-ra, sicut decct, accipias. Quofacto, si et necessitatem terra? videris imminere et Ecclesia; consiliumfuerit, ipsi ctiam terrjE principes tua; sublimitatis auxilium postu-laverint, et consilium dederint, juxta postulationem et consultumeorum poteris postea in facto ipso procedere, et laudabile votumtuum, divino comitante pra;sidio, adimplere.Aliter tamen timen-dum esset, nc iter tuum infructuosum existeret, et ne ad desideratumnon posset exitum pcrvcnire.Ipsi vero principes et populus intanto apparatu tuo, si forte non necessitas iiicumberet, gravarentur,et nos ipsi leves in hoc facto possomus multipliciter apparere.Debet enim scrcnitatis tua: celsitudo recolere, et ad memoriamrevocare, qualiter alio tempore, cum tam Conradus bona; memoriaequondam rex Romanorum, quam tu ipse, inconsulto populo terras,Hierosolymitanum iter minus caute aggressi estis, speratum fruc-tum et optatum cornmodum non perceperitis, et quantum Ecclesia;Dei et universo fere populo Christiano detrimcutum exinde pro-Sane quoque Romanae Ecclesia;, quia vobisvenerif et jactura.super hoc consilium prjestiterat et favorern, in ipso facto fuit nonmodicum derogatum ; et omnes adversus ipsam ex niulta indig-natione clamabant, dicentcs, earn auctriceni tantipericuli exstitisse.Cum igitiir ha?c omnia sollicite cogitantibus occurrerent formi-danda. nos admonitionem et exhortationem apostolicam ad popu-lum regni tui, secundum quod venerabilis frater R. Ebroicensisepiscopus nobis ex tua parte proposuit, duximus differendam.Attendentes quoniam quod difiertur ad tempus, peuitus non anfer-DOCUMENTS.197Sed tunc tandem exhortatorias et commonitorias litterastur.in peccatorum remissionem juxta desiderium gloriajtuie, auctoreDomino, transmittemus, cum de consilioet postulatione tarnprincipnm quam populi terrac illius, sicat superius dictum est,volueris iter arripere, et conceptum in animo votuni necessitatistempore, cum forte niodo aliqua necessitas non immineat, dis-crete ac laudabiliter disponeris adimplere.Litteras autein, in quibus regnmn tuuni sui:> beati Petri etnostra protectione susciperemus, his qui regnum ipsum usque adreditum tuum prsesunierent impugnare, iraniet indignationemapostoUcam proponentes, secundum petitionem regite <lignitatiste etiam re-nee ad priesens du.ximus concedendas.ticente, et a nobis nullatenus exigente, pro illius fervore diiectionisquam erga tuam sublimitatem habemus, quidquid honoris et ex-tibi et regno tuo exhibere possemus, prompto animoaltatioiiisSane discretio tua etcuraremus efficere, et operibus adimplere.nostram dissuasionem, quam rationabiliter credimus nosfecisse,provida deliberatione consideret, atque alia per quae ad illud iterEt illud tandemtam festinanter aspiras, inspiciat et atteiidat.tibi consilium super negotio ipso eligas, quod magis de judiciorationis cognoveris eligendum.Nos etiain,De castero, ea qu^e mem^oratus frater noster episcopus ex nostraparte regiae proposuerit dignitati, velut si ab ore uostro procederent,absque uUa hesitatione suscipias, et ipsius verbis, tanquam sicontingeret nos ea proferre, fidem non dubites adhibere.lUenamque injunctam sibi legationem ita prudenter tuit et soUiciteexsecutus, quod omne illud a nobis studio suas probitatis et dis-cretionis obtinuit, quidquid per soUicitam et providam vigilantiamdebuerit quilibet alius obtinere,-_-,Datum Laterani XII Kalen. Martii.(Bongars, Gesta Dei per Francos, p. 1174; Andre Duchesne,iv., p. 557 ; Dom Bouquet,lierum Francicarum Scripto}cs,Recueil des Hisioriens de France, t. 15 ; Migne, Patrolngie, t. 188,col. 161;.)t.No. 3.FROM CHAPTER XLII. OF THE METALOCICUS, Lib. IV.Sed ha;c hactenus. Jam enim Here magis vacat, quam scribere :et visibili argumento doceor quod mundus totus subjacet vanitati,Expectavimus enim pacem, et ecce turbatio et tempestas ingruensTolosanis, Anglos et Gallos undique conoitat, ct reges, quos amicis-insatiabiliter persequuntur. Ad h^ec, morssimos vidimus, seAdriani summi pontificis, cum omnes christianae religionis populosiiationesque perturbaverit, Angiiam nostram, unde fuerat oriundus,acerbioji dolore commovit,irrigavitque lacriymis prof\isioribus.Omnibus ill"' bonis flebihs occidit, sed nulli flebihor, quam mihi.Cum enim matrem haberet et fratrem uterinum : me, quam illoa,Fatebatur, et publice et secreto, quodarctiori diligebat_affectu,XgSDOCUMENTS.deEarndiligebat.omrtibusmortalibusme praemeconceperat opinionem, ut quoties opportunitas aderat, conscientiamEt cum romanussuam in conspectu meo effundere laeteretur.pontifex esset, me in propria mensa gaudebat habere convivam ;et eundem scyphum et discuiii, sibi et mihi voiebat, et iaciebat,me renitente, esse communem. Ad preces meas illustri regi Anglo-rum, Henrico secundo, concessit et dedit Hiberniam jure haeredi-tario possidendam, sicut litter,* ipsius testantur in hodiernumdiem. Nam omnes insula;, de jure antique, ex donatione Con-stantini, qui earn fundavit et dotavit, dicuntur ad RomanamEcclesiam pertinere. Annulum quoque per me transmisit auream,smaragdo optimo decoratum, quo fieret mvestitura juris in gerendaHibernia : idemque adhuc annulus in curali archivio publico cus-Si virtutes ejus percurrere velim, in magnitodiri jussus est.voluminis librum, h:ec una excrescet materia. Omnium vero mentesmagis exulcerat scissura Ecclesiie, qua^, exigentibus culpis nostris,. Publici doloris expono causas :contingit tanto patre sublato, .cum aliunde familiarius dolore torquear, tum non leviori, quod adme spcctat.Siquidem pater mens et dominus immo et tuus,venerabilis Theobaldus, Cantuariensis Arofciepiscopus in a;gritu-dinem incidit : ut incertum sit, quidquid sperare oporteat. Negotiismore solito superesse non potest : injunxitque proviniciam duram,et importabile onus imposuit, omnium ecclesiasticorum sollicitu-Anxiatur ergo undique in me spiritus mcus, et cruciatusdinem.quos patior, non sufficio enarrare.Sed in his omnibus, unicummihi consilium superest, Deum hominem, intemeratae Virginiafilium, exorare, etc..No. 4.APOCRYPHAL BULL ATTRIBUTED TO POPE ADRIAN IV.Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei, carissiino in Christoiilio illustri Anglorura regi salutem et apostolicam benediclionem.Laudabiliter satis et fructuose, de glorioso nomine propagando interris, et Eeternse felicitatis prcemio cumulando in coelis, tua magni-ficentia cogitat ; duin ad dilatandos ecclesite terminos, ad declar-anduro indoctis et rudibus populis christianse fidei veritatem, etvitiorum plantaria de agro domiuico exstirpanda, sicut catholicusprinceps intendis ; et ad id convenientius exequendum, consiliumIn quo facto, quanto altioriapostolicEe sedis exigis et favorem.consilio et majori discretione procedis, tanto in eo feliciorein pro-gressum te, pra;stante Domino, confidimus habiturum ; eo quodad bonum exitum et iinem soleant attingere, quie de ardore fidei,Sane Hiberniam, etet religionis amore, principium acceperunt.omnes insulas, quibus sol justitiae Christus illuxit, et qum docu-menta fidei Christiana; ceperunt, ad jus beati Petri et sacrosanctERomanas Eccl6si,T, quod tua etiam nobilitas recognoscit, non estdubiuni pertinere.libentius plantationemtanto infidelem et gernien gratum Deo inserimus, quanto id a nobis internoUnrteeis—DOCUMENTS.199examine districtius prospicimus exigendum.Significasti siquidemnobis, fdi in Christo carissime, te Hibernije insulam, ad subdendumilium populum legibus et vitiorum plantaria inde extirpanda, vclleintrare ; et de singulis domibus annuam unius denarii beato Petrovelle solvere pensionem, et jura ecclesiaruni illius terrae illibata etNos itaque, pium et laudabile desideriumIntegra conservare.tuum cum favore congruo prosequcntes, et petitioni tuiE benignumimpendentes assensum, gratuni et acceptum habemus, ut prodilatandis Rcclesije terminis, pro vitiorum restringendo decursu,pro corrigendis moribus et virtutibus inserendis, pro christianiereligionis augmento, insulam istam ingrediaris, et qu<E ad honoremDei et salutem illius terrs exequaris ; et illius populus honorificeJure nimirum ecclesiarunite recipiat, et sicut doniinum veneratur.illibato et integro permanente, et salva beato Petro, et sacrosanctaeromanas Ecclesiie, de singulis domibus annua unius denarii pen-Si ergo quod concepisti animo, electa dvixeris prosequentesione.complendum, stude genteni illam bonis moribus informare ; et agastarn per te, quam per illos quos ad hoc fide, verbo, et vita, idoneosesse prospexeris, ut decoretur ibi ecclesia, plantetur et crescat fideichristiande religio, ut quae ad honorem Dei et salutem pertinentauimarum (per te) taliter ordinentur, ut a Deo sempiternce mercediscumulum consequi merearis, et in terris gloriosum noraen in secuUsobtinere.(No date.In Ussher and in Lynch there is : " Datum Roma;,"etc.)(We take the Apocryphal Bull from the late edition of GiraldusCiiwbrensis, vol. v., p. 317.)No. 5.REMARKS OF MR. BREWER AND REV. MR. DIMOCK ONGIRALDUS C.iMBRENSIS.(London Edition, 1861-1867.)" Leave us to regret that a quality of mind so valuable had notbeen strengthened by a more sober and regulated judgment.The only drawback is the recurrence of artificial orations, whichGiraldus, following the Latin and some later historians, has thoughtfit to put in the mouths of his heroes.References to Julius Cajsarand quotations from Ovid sound strangely from the lips of Irish. The Greek terminations of their names give also some-chiefs. .thing of a ridiculous {u.g. Stephanides for Fitz-Stephen, Morcadides,Geraldides, &c."(Opera Geraldi Cambrensis. Vol. i., p. xlvi.)." In the fifth chapter of the second book the early manuscriptsgive, under the year 11 74 or 11 75, a privilege long before obtainedfrom Pope Adrian IV. authorizing Henry II. 's invasion of Ireland,and a confirmatory one of the then Pope, Alexander III., withsome prefatory matter principally relating to the persons employedin bringing the privilege for publication into Ireland at this time.—————200DOCUMENTS.and to the agency of John of Salisbury in having procured theAll tliis in the early manu-first from Pope Adria.n IV. in 1155.scripts is clear and consistent, agreeing perfectly, moreover, withthe evidence of contemporary authorities, and as regards thea,,ccount of the procuring of Adrian's privilege fully corroboratedBut the later manuscripts omitby John of Salisbury himself.Alexander's privilege and all mention of him, and give Adrian'sprivilege only. The prefatory matter had to be altered accord-In doing this they marvellously contrive to make Henryingly.in 1172 apply for and procure the privilege from Pope Adrian,who died in 1159; and with equally marvellous confusion, theyrepresent John of Salisbury who had been Henry's agent in pro-curing the privilege in IT55, as sent, not to Ireland, but to Rome,for the purpose of publishing it at Waterford in 1174 or TT75.But the cause of the suppression and the germ of the blunderingin the prefatory matter were both perhaps supplied by Giraldus,in his copy of tfiis chapter as given in the T)e Inst. Princ. He therestates, in introducing Alexander's privilege, that some asserted itto be a forgery ; and hence, perhaps, its suppression afterwardsin the Expugnatio by some rectifier of his history of Henry's Papalrights over Ireland. And in the prefatory matter, by what isevidently a mere accidental mistake, he puts Adrian instead of.\lexander, as granting the privilege in 1172 ; thus giving, perhaps,no small beginning for all the after blundering of his rectifier of(Ibid., Vol. v.. Preface, xlii., pp. 315, 31S.)history."" Any suppression of them afterwards is extremely unlikely :his bitter disgust with Henry and his sons in his later years, asdisplayed vindictively and fearlessly in the De Instr. Principjs,was anything but the feeling to induce him to drop anythingoffensive."{Ibid., p. xlv.)" I think I have said enough to justify me in refusing to acceptGiraldus's history of the Irish and of their English invaders assober, truthful history."(Ibid., p. Ixix.)" Truth was not his main object ; he says that he compiled theIn his' Topographiain Hibernicam, &c., in patrisOne main object of theof himself and hiswork for the purpose of sounding the praises of Henry II.letter to King John :vestri laudem triennii labore digessi.'Expugnatio was certainly the glorificationrelations."{Ibid., p. Ixx.)" ' The treatise certainly is, in great measure, rather a poeticalBrewer will, perhaps,fiction than a prosaic truthful history,' &c.think me foolish and presumptuous, but I am sure he will not beoffended, when I say that I cannot further agree with him in con-sidering this a trivial defect in the case of historical narration.It may be that the poetical fiction is confined to certain portionsof the treatise, and that other portions are prosaic truth, but howare we to know where the one ends and the other begins ? Howcan we be sure that the poetry, which undoubtedly pervades someportions does not more or less infect all other portions, howevermuch they may look like honest prose."[Ibid., p. Ixxi.)" Mr. Brewer reflects upon the absurd orations, which Giraldusputs into the mouths of his heroes. No more ridiculous absurditiesof the sort, are perhaps, anywhere to be found. And not the least———DOCUMENTS.,201grandiloquent of them are bestowed on a most unworthy occasion.The orations of Roderic, Dermot Mac Murrough, and Fitz Stephen,if any one has the patience to read them., can only seem the pre-lude to a hard-fought field and a glorious decisive victory ; butnothing follows except a few lines about a hollow short-lived truce.Giraldus was well acquainted with Horace's De Arte Poetica ; hevery frequently quotes it ; but there is one wise bit of advice init to poetical writers that he can have taken little note of ; therenever was a more absurd instance than this of his, of a mountainin labour and a ' ridiculus mus.' "(Ibid., p. Ixxi.)" I can name scarcely any of our English historians who made'use of these treatises of Giraldus within 300 years or more afterhis time ; but I have a very imperfect acquaintance with writersSo far as I have seen, our writersafter the thirteenth century.during those 300 years were not at all given to enter largely onearlier Irish matters ; if mentioning older Irish history at all, mostof them were content with transcribing or condensing what littlethey found in Hoveden, or William de Newburg, or others of thewriters of more general history, and were but little likely to meddlewith Giraldus's Irish treatises, even if they were acquainted withthem." Higden, however, who, in his account of Henry II., certainlymakes use of our author's De Instruc. Pyincip., seems also in oneinstance, if not more, to quote from the Expugnaiio ; also, in speak-ing of the Council of Cashel, he introduces the white cow of Arch-Brompton has this also, in a passage takenbishop Gelasius.generally from Hoveden, but he seems to have derived it fromHigden."{Ibid., p. Ixxviii.)"^Recent Irish scholars have quietly received Giraldus for whathe is worth, as an impetuous, strongly biassed writer, whose state-iuents have generally more or less of truth in them, but with muchwriters, under theunfair one-sidedness, ,reaction perhaps of his having been found too much fault with,seem to me to put more faith in Giraldus's history than it reallydeserves."Some late Irish{Ibid., p. Ixxxii.)..In the later manuscripts, Cleopatra," This chapter is repeated in the De Instructione PrincipumSic, andii., IQ (page 51).Camden, as will be seen, it appears in a strangely mutilated form.They omit Pope Alexander's privilege ; do not even mention him ;make Adrian's privilege, who died in 11 59, to be now grantedHooker's translation, published several yearsafter the year 1171.before Camden's volume, contains both privileges, as in the earlyUssher, in 1632 (Epist. Hibern. Sylloge, Nos. 46manuscripts.and 47), printed the two privileges from two manuscripts of theExpugnaiio."—(Ibid., pp. 315, and cv.)202DOCUMKNTS.No. 6.REMARKS OF GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS ON THE BULL OFPOPE ADRIAN.Quatenus ea duo, quiE pater vester Adriano papas pepigeratolim, propter licentiain impetrandam intrandi in Hiberniam etexpugnandi, prudenter et discrete sibi suisque providens, cumsupreniam in terris tanti tamque cruenti in Christianos aggressusauctoritatem sibi comparavit ;scilicet Ecclesiam Dei in finibusillis exaltare, et denarium annuum de singulis domibus beato Pctro,sicut in Anglia, sic et in Hibernia dare ; juxta tenorem privilegiiejusdem papa; super hoc a patre vestro prudenter et circumspecteperquisiti, et in archivio Wintonia; fideliter rcpositi.Propter hicc etenim promissa sed hactenus omissa, duos ibi,tanquam ultionc divina,est defectus accidisse : quodtarnconsuni-(scilicet)mabilis utilitas est dilata ; et quod primi ac praecipui terra; illius. legitimam de carne sua prolem suscipere nonexpugnatores .meruerunt.conquestuscredibileefificaciaillius,diuet.Nee mirura.Mendicat enim miser in insula clerus : lugentecclesiae cathedrales, terris suis et prsediis amplis, quondam sibifideliter et devote coUatis, a pra^dictis et aliis vel cum ipsis, velEt sic Ecclesiam exaltare versunipost ipsos advectis, spoliata;.Et ut in aliquo tarn cruenti questusest ibi in ecclesias spoliare.hujus et conquestus particcps Dcus existat proraissus census ille,modicus satis atque modestus, omnes quippe liberans et neminemgravans, de cetero detur.Item eadem impatientia et hoc adjicimus, quatenus in memoriamexpugnationis hujus Hibernica; per Anglos factte ... in annuo auri,vel avium—vel etiam arborum tributo firmiter statute, quasi per-et indisisolubili vinculo, regnum Hibernicumpetuo chirographoAnglicanfe coronae subjactum omni palam tempore fiat.— (Letterto King John, from the latest edition of Expugnatio Hibernica,Vol. v., p. 408.)Propter causas in libro Expugnationis Hibernicw a Giraldoconscriptas non profecit (Johannes Comes). Quarum etiam tresPrima fuit, quod cumurgentissimas et hie inserere dignum duxi.in Saracenos potius ad Terrse Sacrae subventionem mitti deberet,Secunda quod juvenis et puer ipsemissus est in christianos.juvenum quos secum duxit, qui ibi ignoti fuerant penitus et ignari,consiliis utens, probos viros et discretes ibi repertos, qui moreset modes gentis et patriae cegnescebaiit, tanquam extraneos et in-dignos repellebat.Tertia vero, quie quidem omnium pessima fuerat, quod Deo etEcclesiae sua; nullum in partibus hoiiorem facere disponebat, sicutex visione quam tunc vidit Giraldus et in prcedicto ExpugnationisQuamquam tamenHibernicaipropter hocetexaltaret, et denarium sancti Petri sicut in Anglia sic in Hiberniadari faceret, pater ipsius intrandi Hiberniam sibique subjugandiab Ecclesia Romana Ucentiara impetravit : quemadraodum expraecipue, ut ecclesiam hibernicam extolleretpalam apparuit.posuit,libro—DOCUMENTS.203privilegio Adrian! super hoc obtento aperte declaratur.Cujustranscripuni, sicut in Expu^naiionis libro illius positum est, simulcum visione ilia verbis eisdera hie apponere ptctter rem non putavi— (De Rebus a ss Ge.stis, Op., Vol. i., p. 61.)r-INo. 7,DIPLOMA FROM CLEMENT III.,,.(1188.)Clemensetc.episcopusJuxtadesideriumcharissirai Anglorum regis, fraternitati tuas legationis officium intola Anglia et Wallia tarn per Cantuarensem, quam per Ebora-censem archiepiscopatum ; et in illis Hibernias partibus, in quibusnobilis vir Joannes comes Moretonii Irater ipsius regis potestatemhabet et dominium : authoritate apostolica duximus committendum.Datum nonis junii, pontificatus nostri anno tertio.— (Math. Paris,commendabilean. 1 188.)No. 8.LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT III. ON PETER'S PENCE INENGLAND.(I2I3-)Mcolao Tusculano episcopo, apostolicae Sedis legato, et Pan-dulpho subdiacono et familiari nostro.Cum sicut vestra discretio plene novit, singulae domus totiusAngliae singulos denarios pro censu beati Petri annuatim nobissolvere teneantur, prailati Angliae qui eam liostro nomine coUe-gerunt, rem invito Domino contrectantes, rriajorem sibi exindepartem non veriti sunt retinere, cum non nisi trecentas marcasnobis persolverint, et sibi mille vel amplius usurparint.Ut igitur jus Ecclesiae Romanae servetur illaesum, discretion!vestrje praesentium auctoritate districte prajcipiendo mandamusquatenus, prius recipientes ab eis denarium ipsum, prout hactenusexsolverunt, et eos ad id, si necesse fuerit, per censuram ecclesi-asticam appellatione postposita compellentes, firmiter postmodumex parte nostra injungatis eisdem, ut residuum cum integritatepersolvant.Non enim videmus quo jure valeant se tueri cum nee conces-sionem possint ostendere , a sede apostolica sibi lactam, nee cen-tenariam contra Romanam Ecclesiam priEscriptionem probare,maxime si tempora schismatum subducantur. .Datum Laterani quinto kal. februarii, pontificatus nostri anno..decimo sexto.(Rymer, Vol. i., p. 182.)——)204DOCUMENTS.No. g.LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT III. TO THE BISHOPS,BARONS, AND PEOPLE OF IRELAND.( 1 2 1 3.Innocentius episcopus,venerabilibusfratribus archiepiscopis et episcopis, et dilectis filiis abbatibus, etCLfiteris ecclesiarum prailatis, et nobilibus viris, principibus, conii-tibus, baronibus, et universis militibus et populis per Hiberniamconstitutis salutem et apostolicam benedictionem.servus servorum Dei,Cum, per ipsius gratiam, qui disc.ordantes parietes in se lapideanguiari copulavit, vera pax et plena Concordia sit inter Regnumet Sacerdotium in Anglia reformata, nos, qui tenemur curani etsollicitudinem gerere specialem de carissimo in Christo filio nostroJohanne illustri Anglorum rege, ac ejus Regno quod ad RomanamEcclesiam, per donum ipsius, speciali jure noscitur pertinere, sibiet haeredibus suis providere volentes, per apostolica vobis scriptamandamus atque pra;cipimus, quatenus in fidelitate ipsius regisac hjeredum suorum prompto animo et corde sincero perseverarecuretis ; tales vos, circa devotionem ipsius, per omnia exhibentes,quod tain a nobis quam ipso debeatis merito commendari ; scientespro certo quod nos ad ipsius commodum et honorem eificateraspiramus.Datum Lateranijkal. novembr., poiitificatus nostri annosextodecimo.(Rymcr, Vol. i., p. 179.)No. 10.LETTER OF THE KING OF ENGLAND TO THE BISHOPSOF IRELAND.(1275.)Rex venerabilibus patribus, archiepiscopis, et episcopis terraeQualiter terra praedicta, per discordias etHiberni^e, salutem.guerras, ibidem diu est habitas, depauperata existit fide perpen-ditis oculata ; unde cum super hoc sumus, nee immerito, anxialianimo et turbati, et totis desideriis aiifectemus quod hujusmodicontroversiEe et guerraB pacificentur ; nobis et fide et dilectione,quibus nobis tenemini, mandamus, rogantes quatenus, de consiliojustitiarii nostri terrje prasdicta;, et aliorum fidelium nostrorumpartium illarum, taliter ad invicem providcatis, quod per divinumadjutorium et vestram circumspectam discretionem hujusmodicontroversiae et guerr:£ pacificentur et Sedentur, etc.Teste regeapud Wodestok 12 die augusti.{Rymer, Vol, ii., p. 56).DOCUMENTS.205No. II.LETTER OF POPE JOHN XXII. TO KING EDWARD II.(1317).Joannes episcopu.s, servus servoruni Dei, etc.Eduardo regiAngliae illustri.Paternum amoreni ad tuie celsitudinis iucrementa, fili charissiine,gerimus, dum ad ea, qua; justo placent judici, tui regni terrarumet subditorum tuornm sint opportuna quieti, et famas tua: pariteret honori prospiciant, sollicitis hortationibus invitamus.Propterquod in eis persuasiones nostras devota debes mente suscipere, etad executionem illarum te paratum et flexibilem exhibere.Ecce, iili, quasdam recepimus litteras,directas pridem perIbemicos magnates et populum dilectis fdiis nostris Gaucelinotit. SS. Marcellini, et Petri presbytero et LucceS, Mariie in via latadiacono, cardinalibus Apostolicas Sedis Nuntiis, et per eos nobisEuis interclusas litteris destinatas, in quarum serie vidimus intercstera contineri, quod, cum felicis recordationis Adrianus papaprajdecessor noster, sub certis modo et forma distinctis apertiusclara? memoriic Henrico regiin Apostolicis litteris inde factis,Angliee progenitor! tuo, dominium Ibernia; concessisset, ipse rexac successores ipsius reges Angliie usque ad hsec tempora, modumet formam hujusmodi non servantes, quinimo eos transgredientes,indebite, diris afHictionibus inauditis, importabilium servitutumoneribus, et tyrannidibus inhumanis, ipsos eo miserabilius et intolera-bilius quo diutius oppresserunt, nee fuit hactenus qui revocaretillata gravamina, aut errata corrigeret : non fuit quem pia com-passio super eorum contritions moveret, quamvis super his ad terecursus habitus fuerit, et clamor validus oppressorum aures tuasquandoque pulsaret : unde talia ferre nequeuntes ulterius, coactisunt se a domo tua subducere, et aliumin suum regimen advocate.Hkc, dilectissime f.li, si veritate nitantur, tanto nimirum infestioranostris accedunt affcctibus quanto desideramus intentius, ut tibiCirca ilia versari sedulo debes, eaqueprospere cuncta ccdant.promptis affcctibus exequi, qute tuo sint placita Creatori, et abomnibus abstinere sollicite per quiE contra te debeat j^rovocariDeus ipse et Dominus ultionum, qui gcmitus afflictorum injusteminime despicit, et qui propter injustitias pcculiarcm suum dc-jecisse describitur populum, et translationem fecisse regnonim.Quanto etiam desiderabilius, his pra;sertini impacatis temporibus,cupimus te illis libenter intendere, per qua; tuoruni corda fideliumad tuam beuevolentiam et obedientiam del)eant allici, et ilia prose vitare quibus valeant a tua; cultu devotionis avelli.Quia itaque, fili, tua non modicum interest hujus nova; muta-tioiiis vitare dispendiuni, quamplnriraumque expedit ut hsc nonnegligantur turbatiouis initia, ne illis periculose crescentibus, se:oExcellentiam regiam soUicitamusmedicinoB remedia praeparentur.pra^sentibus, sano nihilomiuus consilio suadentes, quatenus hascprudenti nieditatione considerans, et cum suo discreteconsilioconferens, super illis circa pra^inissoruro gravaminum conectionemet reformationem debitam et festinam viis et modis decentibus-—l;o6DOCUMENTS.sufl&centerprovider! mandesin hac parte obstarediscrinimosLssiperprincipiisetquein regnas, placere valeas, et te in eis efficaciter implente quodPerdebes, cujusvis adversum te querelie materia conquiescat.quod iidem Hibernici saniori ducti consilio, tibi ut Domino pareant,aut si (qiiod absit) in incepta rebellione manere voluerint, causamsuam in apertam injustitiam, te apud Deum et homines excusato,convertant.facias,etsicprocures, quodilli,Ut autem de pra^dictis gravaminibus et querelis, quibus prsE^tuis sensibus innotescat ad plenum,dicti innituntur Ibernici,praescriptas )itteras inissas cardinalibus antedictis, tum formamliterarum, quas pracdictus Adrianus praaedecessor noster eidemHenrico regi Anglia; de terra Iberniae concessisse dicitur,tuaemagnitudini mittimus prssentibus interelusas.— (Dat.Kal.iii.Julii.)No. 12.LETTER OF KING EDWARD III. ON THE TROUBU,S OBIRELAND.(I353-)Rex cancellario suo Hibernico, salutem. Quia guerrse fortes interra Hiberni^ inter fideles nostrbs terra; iUius et Hiberuicos nobisrebellantes, a diu est, invalescunt ; et, si praelati aut alii magnatesdictae terra; (per quorum consilium et juvamen eadem terra contrahujusmodi Irebellantes regi debeat et defendi), a dicta terra Hiber-niae recesserint (ad quod se parant, ut accepimus), ipsa terra peri-culis gravibus (quod absit), verisimiliter subjaceret : nos hujusmodipericulis, quatenus poterimus, obviare volentes, vobis mandamusquod in terra praedicta, in locis ubi expedire videritis, publice pro-clamari et ex parte nostra faciatis firmiter inhiberi, ne quis, pra;-latus, vel religiosus, comes, baro, miles, vel alius homo ad arma,per quos terra pra;dicta contra hujusmodi pericula defendi poterit,sub poena forisfactura; omnium quie nobis forisfacere poterit,e.'itra terrani illam transeat absque licentia nostra speciali, etc.Et omnes illos, quos, post proclamationem et inhibitionem priE-dictas, extra terram priEdictam inveneritis transituros, una cumequis et hernesiis suis, arestari, et sub aresto deteneri faciatis,quousque a nobis inde aliud habueritis in mandatis.Teste regeapud Westmonasterium, vigesimo quarto die februarii.{Rvmer,Vol. v., p. 74,'i).No. 13.CONVOCATION OF A GREAT STATE COUNCIL IN IRELAND.(1361.)Quia terra nostra Hiberniee, per invalescentes a diu Hiberni-impotentianicorum iniraicoruni nostrorumincursus,propter—DOCUMENTS.—2O7ftdelium uostrorum habitantiura in eadem, ct pi"o eo quod magnateset alii de I'egno iiostro Anglian, terras in ea habentes, coinmodunidictaruni terraruin suaruni in eadeui terra capiunt, et defensionenialiquam non faciuut, jam tanta; vastitatis et destructionis misericesubjicitur, quod, nisi Dens avertat, et celerius succurratur eidem,ad totaleni perditionemVolumus,vobiscum, et CLim aliis de eodem regno, terras in dicta terra Hiber-habere et tractatum, etc. ApudnicB habentibus, colloquiumWestmonasteriuni in Quindena Pascha: proximo futura,(Rymer, Vol. p. vi., 31S.)in proximo deducetur, etc.etc.No. i.|.COMMAND GIVEN TO THE BARONS BY EDWARD III. TOSET OUT FOR IRELAND.{136S.)La terre est en point d'estre deiuz brief temps, parduz, si socourset remede ne y soient, par la grace de Dieu, plus hartivement uiys ;Et, en cas q'ils ne voillent cestes choses faire, nous prendronsetc.en nostre main les Seignuries et terres avantdites, a donner asautres, qi illoeques vorront demurrer et en hahiter, sur la defenseLa parde et destruction de mesmeet conqueste d'y ceulx, etc.d'Irlande sont ore plus evidentmeirt apparantz, quela terren'estoient unques devant ces heures.(Rymer, Vol. vi., p. 594.)No. 15.BRIEF OF KING EDWARD VI., " HEAD OF THE CHURCH "IN IRELAND.(1547)-Cum regibns quidem omnibus christianam fidem professis aDeo Optimo Maximo omnia juris dicendipotestas coUata sit,nobis turn, qui fidei defensoris peculiari quidem titulo utamur,ut non solum orthodoxamaxiuie pr^e ceteris curie esse debet,fides inter nostros snbditos integerrime colatur et observetur,. Nosyerum etiam ut ju.'titia unicuique ex iequo tribuatur .qui EcclesiiE tum AnglicanEe turn Hibernise jure supremi capitis. vobis et vestrum duobus conjunctimprs:esse dignoscimur .plenam et absolutani potestatem, auctoritatem et facultatein, denomine nostrotemporeetelargiendi omnibus et singulis personis utriusque sexus in regnonostro Hiberniae, et sub ditione nostra Hibernica degentibus, pras-. omnia quascumque licentiarum dispensa-sentibus et futuris .concedenditempus,dandiin...——208DOCUMENTS.tionura compositionum facultatumdelegationumquibusvis casibus et causis .in regno nostro Anglia dat concedit ct largitur, etc.XV., .p. 1.46.)conccssionum rescriptorumpro. proiit archiepiscopus Cantuariensis(Rymer, Vol.scriptorum quorumque genera,aliorumque.No. 16.BRIEF OF KING ED\V.\RD VI. AGAINST THE AUTHORITYOF THE POPE.(1551.)s^.Cum per suggestionem et inforniationeni apareat .. quodepiscopns Ronianus auctoritatem nostram suprenii capitis ecclesia;Anglican* et Hibernicae falso et injuste usvirpans et exercens,qULEdam ecclesiastica beneficia et emolumenta ... ad cultumdivinum in eadeni augmentandum dedit concessit univit .. acauctoritate et jurisdictione Romani Pontificis sic, nt priernittitur,usurpata, demum per felicissimaj memoriae dominum Henricuinoctavam nuper regem Anglise patreni nostrum penitus abolita etadnuUata .. auctoritate nostra supremi capitis ccclesieO Anglicanaeet Hibernica; qua fungimur dictam ecclesiam .sancti Nicholai deGalwey in collegium sive ecclesiam coUegiatam transponimus etmutamus per pniesentes .. Et si secus a quoquam quavis auctori-tate scienter vel ignoranter at-temptari contigerit, illud irrituni. Teste regc apud Westmonasterium vicesimodccernimus et inane .nono die Aprilis —By Brief of the Private Seal.{Rymer, Vol. xv.,....p. 258.)No. 17.CONSISTORI.U. DECREE ON THE ERECTION OF IRELANDINTO A KINGDOM.(1555.)Roma; die VII mensis junii 1555, apud Sanctiim-Marcum fnitconsistorium, in quo referente reverendissimo Puteo, erexit insulamHibcrnia?, cujus ab eo tempore, quo iUius dominium per sedemapostolicam adepti sunt reges Anglia;, qui pro tempore fuerint, sedominus tantum nuncupare consueverant, et cujus regium titulumquondam Henricus VIII, postquam ab unitate catholic;aeEcclesi'eet obedientia Romani Pontificis secessit, pnetextu cuju.sdam legisper Parlamontum ejusdem insulae, ut praetenditur, latoe, primo, etdeinde ejus natus Eduardus VI, eorum nomiuum, qui dum viverent,pro regibus Anglia; se gesserunt, de facto usurpaverant, in regnum,ad instar aliarum insularum regio titulo, dignitate et honore ful-DOCUMENTS.209gentium, sine pracjudicio juriuni sanctac Romanir; Ecclesiai,etcujuscumque alterius in ea vel ad illam jiis habere pr*tendenti5,ac titulo, dignitate, honore, facultate, juribus, insignibus regiis,qiiibus alia Oiristifidelium regna utuntur, insignavit et decoravit.No. i8.BULL OF POPE P.\UL IV. ERFXTINO IRELAND INTO AKINGDOM.(155.= -)... (absolution) .Illius per qnem reges regnant, et principes dorainantur, viceslicet immeriti gerentes in terris, votis catholicornin regum et prin-cipum quorum probata in Deum pietatis, et e.icimias erga RomanumEcclesiam tidei constantia, ac sincerje devotionis affectus in nostro,et ApostoliciE Sedis conspectu clarere dignoscuntur, libenter annui-mus, eaque favoribus prosequinmr opportunis.Hinc est, quodnos clarissimum in Christo flium nostrum Philippuni regem, etcharissimam in Christo filiam nostram Mariani reginam Angli^e. insulam Hibernise, cujuset Francia? illustres .ab eo tempore, quo illius dominium per eadem praedictam adeptisunt reges Angliae, qui pro tempore fuerint, se dominos tantuuinuncupari consuevernnt et cujus regium titulum quondam HenricusOctavus, postquam ab unitate Ecclesia; catholica; et obedientiaRomani Pontificis secessit, pra?textu cujusdam legis per Parla-niontum ejusdem insul^e ut praetenditur lata", primo, et deludeejus natus Eduardus .Scxtus, eorum nominum, qui dum viverent,pro regibus Anglia? se gesserunt, de facto usurparunt ; in regnumad instar aliarum insularum regiis titulo, dignitate,et honorefulgentium, sine prsjudicio jurium ipsius Roniana; EcclesiiE etcujuscumque alterius in ilia, vel ad illam jus habere praetendentis :ad omnipotentis Dei laudem et gloriam, ac gloriosissims ejusGenitricis Virginis Mariae, totiusque curis coelestis honorem, etMariafidei catholicsH exaltationem, prajfatis Philippo rege etregina nobis super hoc humiliter supplicantibus, de fratrum nos-et apostolic* potestatis plenitudine, apostolicatroriim consilio,auctoritate perpetuo crigimus, ac titulo, dignitate, honore, facul-tatibus, juribus, insigniis, prEcrogativis, antelationibus, et prsemi-nentiis regiis, ac quibus alia Christifidelium regna utuntur, potiuntur,et gaudent, ac uti, potiri,'et gaudere poterunt quomodolibet in futu-rum, insignimus, et decoramus. Datum Romai apud SanctumMarcuni, anno Incarnationis Dominictc 1555, septimo Idus juniis,pontificatus nostri anno primo.210DOCUMENTS.No. 19.CONFERENCE OF POPE PAUL IV. WITH THE AMBAS-SADORS OF QUEEN MARY.(I555-)In secretiori postea cum legatis sermone Pontifex indoluitnondum restitiita Ecclesia; sii.ie bona, quas ab alio occupari omninointolerandum esse dixit, ideoaue ad minimum usque quadrantemab injustis usurpatoribus vindicanda, etc. Tum, unum hoc Anglispersuasum cupit, carum rerum possessionem illicitam, esse anathemaet contagiem, cui vindicandas regnum Angliae sit pro comite indi-lisdemviduo perpetuam miseriam ac infelicitatem habiturum.legatis insuper mandavit, ut ea de re contintio ad principes suosrescriberent, nequc semel id monuisse contentus, id ipsum omnibusoccasionibus iterabat. Disertim etiam prsecepit, ut primo quoquetempore exactionem denariorum S. Petri in usum revocari curarent,quod de more exactorem eo mittere decre\'it : quod quidem rnunusipse in Angliam missus totos tres annos obierit maxima cum volup-tate, cum tantam non in populo tantuni, sed in tenuioribus e plebead pendendum prompitudinem cerneret. Neque umquam sper-andum ipsis apertum iri a Beato Petro coeli portam, quamdiu qu:ein terris ipsius propria sunt, cum summa ejus Divi injuria usurparent.— (Cotijuw, anno 1555.)No. 20.BRIEF OF GREGORY XIII. ON THE IRISH INSURRECTION.(1580.)Gregorius XIII, universis et singulis archiepiscopis, episcopis.prjelatis, nee non principibus, comitibus, baronibus, ac populisregni Hiberniae, salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem.Cum proximis superioribus annis, per nostras litteras vos ex-hortati fuerimus, ut ad vestram libertatem recuperandam, eamqueadversus hiEreticos tuendam et conservandam, bonae memoriaeJacobo Giraldino, qui dirum servitutis jugum vobis ab Anglis sanctaeRomanae EcclesiEE desertoribus imposituln depellere, summo animiardore cogitabat, pro virili vestro omnes pra?sto adesse, eumquecontra Dei et vestros hostes ire parantem, prompte ac strenueadjuvare velletis, et quo id alacrius efficeretis, omnibus contritiset confessis, qui ipsum Jacobum Ducem ejusque exercitum catho-licEe fidei assertorem et propugnatorem secuti fuissent, et se illiadjunxissent,aliisquebellicis rebus seu quacumque ratione et in haC expeditione opemdedissent, plenariam omnium peccatorum suorum veniarnetremi?Hionem, et eamdem quEe proflciscentibus ad bellum contraTurca.s, et ad recuperationera Terras Sanctai per Romanes PontificesNuper autem non sine graviimpertiri solita est, coucessimus.favore, comeatibuS, armis,aut consilio,DOCUMENTS.211dictos haereticosanimi nostri dolore per nos accepto, ipsum Jacobum fortiter citmhostibus cUmicando (sicut Domino placiiit), occubuisse, dilectumvero filium Joanaem Giraldinum ejus consobrinum in expeditionehujusmodi eximia pietate et animi magnitudine, authore Deo, cujuscausa agitur, successisse compluraque egregia facinora de catholicafide merendo jam edidisse.Idcirco vos onines et singulos, majoriquo possumus affectu, hortamur, requirimus, et urgemus in Domino,ut eumdem Joannem Ducera, ejusque exercitum, omni ope, quem-admodum dictum Jacobum viventem, ut faceretis vos admonuimus,adjuvare studeatis : nos enim vobiscontraomnibus confessis et communicatis, et vestris singulis in dictislitteris contenta pro ipso Joanne et ejus exercitu facientibus ; etpost ipsius obitum, si forte contigerit (quod Deus avertere dignetur)Jacobi ejus fratri adhacrentibus et faventibus, eamdem plenariamomnium peccatorum vestrorum indulgentiam et remissionem, quamadversus Turcas, et pro recuperanda Terra Sancta consequunturbellantes, de omnipotentis Dei misericordia ac beatorum Petri etPauli apostolorum ejus auctoritate confisi, tribuimus ct elargimurpriesentibus, quoad dicti Joannes et Jacobus fratres vixcrint,etbellum contra ha;reticos ipsos gesserint, duraturis. Quoniam autemdifftcile esset has nostras litteras ad omnium quorum interestnotitiam pervenire, volumus ut earum exemplis etiam impressis,manu notarii publici subscriptis, sigilloque persona? in dignitateecclesiastica constitutie obsignatis, plena et certa fides ubiquehabeatur, ac si praesentes essent exhibitre, vel ostensae. DatumRomae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die 13 Maii1580, pontificatus nostri anno octavo.No. 21.BRIEF OF CLEMENT VTII.(1600.)Clemens papa VIII, universis et singulis venerabilibus fratribusarchiepiscopis, episcopis et prjelatis; necnon dilectis filiis principibus,comitibus, baronibus, populis regni Hiberniae, salutem et apostoli-cam benedictionem.Cum jamdiu sicut accipimus, vos Romanorum Pontificum prae-decessorum nostrorum, ac nostris et Apostolicae Sedis cohortationi-bus adducti, ad vestram libertatem recuperandam eamque adversushaereticos tuendam et conservandam, bonae memoriae Jacobo Girald-ino (qui durum servitutis jugum vobis ab Anglis Sanctae Ecclesiaedesertoribus impositum, summo animi ardore depellere dum vixitpro viribus pi;ocuravit), deinde Joanni Giraldino ejusdem Jacobicbnsobrino, et novissime dilecto filio nobili viro Hugoni principiO'Neillo dicto comiti Tironensi, baroni Dungennaniae, et capitaneogenerali exercitus Catholici in Hibemia, conjunctis animis ac viribuspraesto fueritis, ac opem et auxilium praestiteritis, ipsique duces eteorum milites manu Domini exercituum illis assistente processu212DOCUMENTS.gratiisspirituaiibustemporis plurima egregia facinora contra hostes viriliter pugnandoproEStiterint, et in posteruni prEestare parati sint, nos, ut vos acDux et mildtes praidicti alacrius in expeditionein hanc contradictos hiereticos opem et operam in posterum etiam prcestareet favoribus prosequi volentes,studeatis,eorumdem praedecessonim nostrornm exemplo adducti ; ac deomnipotentis Dei misericordia ac beatorum Petri et Pauli aposto-lorum ejus authoritate confisi, voliis omnibus et singulis qui pra;-dictvim Hugonem Tironenseni ducem ejusque exercitum catholica;fidei assertores et propngnatores seqnimini, ac illis vos adjunxeritis ;aut auxilio, favore, comeatibus, armis, aliisque bellicis rebus seuquacumque ratione eis in hac expeditione operam dederitis, ipsiqueliugoni duci ejusque exeroitus mi'.itibus universis et singulis, sivere pcenitentes et confessi, ac etiam, si ii.eri potuerit, sacra com-munione refecti fuerint ; plenariam omnium peccatorum suorumveniam et remissionem, ac eamdem qua; proficiscentibus ad bellumcontra Turcas, ad recuperationem Terra; Sanctae, per RomanesPontifices concedi solita et misericorditer in Domino concedimus.Non obstantibus, etc.Datum RonijE apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die1 6 Aprilis 1600, pontificatus nostri anno nono.No. 22.'[-!IRISH NATION.\L ASSOCI.\TION,(1601.)'I:,Clemens VIII dilecto filio nobili viro principi Nelio, exercituscatholici in Ilibernia duci et capitaneo generali.Cognovimus ex litteris nobilitatis tuae et ex his quae dilectuslilius Petrus Lombardus civis vester pra;positus cameracensis nobiscoram exposuit, sacrum foedus quod tu et quamplures principes etproceres et nobiles primarii regni istius, Dei benignitate, iniistis,charitatis glutino coUigatum conservari et augeri ; quodque ejusdemDomini exercituum ope et virtute, prospere a vobis pluries pug-natum est adversus Anglos Ecclesise et lidei desertores. Magnamex his voluptatem in Domino cepimus, ipsique Patri misericorddarumDeo gratias egimus, qui adhuc in regno isto reliquit sibi multa milliavirorum qui non curvaverint genua sua ante Baal. Hi enim impiashtereses et prophanas novitates non sunt secuti, iino eas detestati,fortiter pugnant pro hsereditate m,ajorum suorum, pro fidei salute,integritate et unitate cum Ecclesia retinenda, quae una est Catholicaet Apostolica, extra quam non est salus. Laudamus egregiampietatem et fortitudinem tuam, fill, et principum et caeterorumomnium qui tecum juncti ac tasderati, nulla pro Dei gloria pericularecusant, seque majoribus suis qui bellicje virtutis et catholica;religionis studio ac laude imprimis floruerunt, dignos nepotes etj.nstoB successores ostendunt, et paJain protitentur.Conservate,tilii, hanc mentera, conservate unionem et consensionem vestram.DOCUMENTS.213et Deus omnipotens, Deus pacis et coneordiae erit vobiscum, etpugnabit pro vobis, et qiiemadmodum fecit, prosternet inimicosNos autera qui nobilitatem tuam etsuos aiate facieni vestrara.vos omnes avitse fidei et glori=e imitatores paterne amarims, et geri-mus in visceribus Jesu Christi, non cessamus Deum orare nostrumpro vestra salute et felicitate ; vestrique solliciti sumus et erimussemper, quantum cum Deo poterimus ; atque, ubi opus fuerit,scribemus efficaciter ad reges et principes Catholicos filios nostros,ut vobis et causie vestrae omni ope suffragentur.Cogitamus etiampropediem mittere ad vos peculiarem nuntium nostrum, et hujusSanctas Sedis, in qua Deo authore meritis licet imparilDus prsesi-demus, virum pium, prudentem, zelo Dei prseditum, et nobis pro-batum, qui nostri erga vos honoris testis sit ; vobisque omnibusin rebus ubi usus venerit, adjuraento sit ad salutarem et neces-sariam unionem vestram conservandum, ac Catholicam fidempropugnandam, ac omnia denique pro sui muneris officio efificiendaquibus Dei honor et cultus in regno isto augeatur.Interea placuithas nostras litteras ad vos prasmittere testes amoris nostri ; et utvos omnes tamquam filios nostros consolamur.Ipsum vero PetrumLombardum, quem nobilitas tua oratorem et negotiorum gestoreniapud nos destinavit,et jam libenter audivimus et deiucepstibi unanimes pro fideiaudiemus.nostramapostolicamcatholica3etDeumque precamurbenedictionemutangelos eraittat in circuitu vestro,et pios conatus vestros suaccelesti gratia dirigat vosque dextera sua? potentiae perpetuo tueatur.Datum Roma; apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris dieSilvius20 januarii anno 1601, pontificatus nostri anno nono.Antonianus, Cardinalis.Tibi vero et caeteris quiadha;reut,inipertimur,propugnationebenigneNo. 23.DECISION OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SALAMANCAREGARDING THE IRISH WAR.(T603.)Censura doctorum universitatis Salmantic^ et Vallisoleti, depraesenti Hibernite beUo, et eorumdem declaratio littcrarum sanc-tissimi doniini nostri Clementis papae VIII super eodem bello.Illustrissimus princeps Hugo O'Nellus bellum gerit cum Anglireregina et Anglis ob Catholicam religionem tuendam, ut scilicetliceat illi et Ibernis libere catholicam religionem profiteri, quamlibertatem vi et armis Angliae regina conatur eripere. Duo nunccirca hoc bellum in dubium revocantur.Alterum est an liceatcatholicis Hibernis praedicto principi Hugoni in eo bello faverearmis et quibuscumque aliis modis ?A.lterum an eisdem catholicisliceat pugnare contra praefatum principem citra mortale peccatum,et Anglis in eo bello favere armis et quavis alia ratione ?Praisertim, cum si Anglis hoc auxilii genus negeut, manifestoEtvitae periculo aiit amittendi bona temporalia sese exponant.214DOCUMENTS.ptEeterea cum ipsis catholicis Hibeniiae a summo pontifice sitpermissuin ut possint praedicta reginae Angliae obedirc, ac ut legiti-mam reginam tributa illi solvendo recognoscere, videntur id prte-stare posse quod subditorum est, pugnare scilicet adversus regina?rebelles, qui debitam ei obedientiam negant, et terram illius ditionisubjectam usurpare videntur.Ut utrique questioni satisfiat, tamquam certum est accipiendum, posse Romanum Pontificem fidei desertores et eos qui catho-licam religionem oppugnant, armis compellare ac coercere, cumEt praeterea utalia ratio non suppetet tanto malo occurrendi.primum constituendum, Anglii: reginam catholicam religionemoppugnare, nee permittere Ibernos catholicam fidem publics colere ;oademque de causa praedictum principem et ante eum alios quosapostolicac litterae Clementis VIII. commemorant, bellum adversusillam suscepisse.His ita constitutis, facile prima questio expeditur.Citra questionem namque est posse quoscumque catholicospraedicto bello favere, idque maximo cumprincipidictoinmerito, et spe retributionis aeterna;.Cum enim praedictus princeps bellum gerat authoritate summiPontificis ob tuendam religionem catholicam, ad idque eum Pon-tifex per suas litteras adhortetur et omnes Christifideles, ut exejus litteris constat, atque principi in eo bello faventes multisgratiis prosequatur, ac si bellum contra Turcas gererent ; nemojure dubitaverit et susceptum bellum justum esse, et magni essemeriti pro catholica religione, quae omnium maximum bonoriim est,tuenda pugnare.Est etiam de secunda quaestione omnino certum, eos omnescatholicos peccare mortaliter qui Anglorum castra contra praedictumprincipem sequuntur, nee posse illos aeteriiam salutem consequi,nee ab ullo sacerdote a suis peccatis absolvi, nisi prius resipiscant,ac castra Anglorum deserant.Idemque de illis censendum est, qui armis et commeatibus ineo bello Anglis favent, vel quid simile tribuunt, prster ea tributaconsueta quse ex sumnii Pontificis indulgentia et permissione eislicet regins Angliae aut ejus exactoribus solvere.Haec assertio hac apertissima ratione confirmatur, quoniamper litteras Summi Pontificis satis est compertum, Anglise reginamet ejus duces bellum gerere injustum contra praBdictum principemet eos qui illi favent. Cum enim Pontifex dicat Anglos adversusCatholicam religionem pugnare, eosque non minus ac Turcasoppugnare debere, eisdem gratiis eos oppugnantes prosequaturquibus contra Turcas pugnantes prosequitur, quis dubitet bellumab Anglis adversus catholicum e.^iercitum omnino iniquum geri ?At nemini licet iniquo bello favere, aut illi adesse sub poena asternaedamnationis.Peccant ergo gravissimc catholici qui in castris hasreticorumcontra prasdictum principem pugnant in bello aperte iniquo etinjusto, et omnes qui eidem bello favent armis aut comeatibusaut quacumque aliabelli progressumjuvent, nee posscnt rationem inire indifferentis obsequii.rationequaeperseNee eos quicguam juvat apostolicas litteras subreptionis notare :surreptio enim intervenire non potest, ubi nulla uarratur petitioDOCUMENTS.215eorum in quorum lavorem expeditur.At summus Pontifex apertein illis docet se et praedecessores suos sponte exhortatos fuisse ad.iUud bellum gerendum Ibernos principes ac fideles omnes ; et adeos magis provocandos magnis eos gratiis ac indulgentiis donat.Qui ergo fieri potest, ut surreptitia; sint littera? quJ3 solum exhorta-tionem magnis gratiis erga assentientes cumulatam continent ?eacircaNee possunt catholici Anglis faventes rationibus in secundaNullum enim peccatum mortale com-quiEstione adductis se tueri.mittendum est, etiamsi vita aut res familiaris amittenda sit. Eavero qua3 bellum injustumper se promovent ac juvant exer-Permissum est etiam Catholiciscere, aperte jjeccatum est mortale.haereticas regina; id genus obsequii prjestare quod catholicam reli-giouemPontificismensapertecum fine et scopo ipsius Pontificis de promovenda in Hiberniacatholica fide ac religione pugnant. Hanc etiam ejus esse mentemet scopum litteras ipsse apertissime declarant.nee potest essepermitterenon oppugnat.obsequiaNee fuitreginamEx quibus omnibus satis manifestum relinquitur, illustrissimumprineipem Hugonem O'Nellum et alios Catholicos Hiberniae be)lumgerentes adversus reginam hosreticam orthodoxam fidem oppug-nantem, nuUo modo rebelles esse neque debitam obedientiam negare,aut terras reginae injuste usurpare, quin potius illos justissimose terramque suam ab iniqua et impia tyrannide vindieare,bellosacramque orthodoxam fidem, ut christianos ac catholicos decet,Qufe omnia ct singula nospro viribus tueri, atque defendere.infrascripti ut certissima ac verissima judieamus et approbamus.quaeDatum Salmantics seeundo februarii anno Domini millesimosexcentcsimo tcrtio.No. 24.STRANGE STORY TOLD BY BZOVIUS.Circa annum enim . Incamationis Dominica; centesimum etsexagcsimum supra millesimum, cum Petri cathedram teneretHadrianus quartus natione Anglus, qui sanctitate ac prjedicationesua Norwegiae Sueciasque regna ante pontrficatum ad fidem Christi,converterat, Hiberni, qui initio statim post christianam religionemacceptam, se suaque omnia in Pontificis Romani ditionem dedide-rant, nee quemquam alium supremum Hibernise prineipem ad illudusque tempus prajter unum Romanum Pontificem agnoverant, cumjam intestinis multorum regulorum ac tyrannorum bellis vehe-et eorum nonnulli magnaque pars populi,menter afiiigerentur,pacis potiundae causa, et ne aliis subessent, Henrico seeundo Anglo-rum regi (sub quo Divus Thomas Cantuariensis postea martyriumpassus est, et qui tunc Hiberniam magno cum exereitu ingressusfuerat) parere cuperent ; utriusque partis nomine, id est tam regisquam suorum principum et episcoporum ab Hadriano pontificesupplices petierunt, ut ad toUendas controversias ac seditiones,quas ipsi iere perpetuas ex regulorum multitudine habebant, ad2l6DOCUMENTS.constituendum etiam Christiana; religionis nieliorem cultum, prs-cipue iti matrimoniis contrahendis ac colendis, qui bellorum consue-tudine valde fuerat depravatus, dignaretur sua Sanctitas HenricoRegi, qui ngiiuuUa jam insulae loca, sui ac suorum, hoc est RobertiFitz-Stephani et Richardi Zepoensis comitis armis acquisita'tenebat,totius Hibernije dominium concedere ; quod Pontifex cum hisaliisque de causis, turn etiam quia niliil inde emolumenti accipiebat,liec sineJmaHuis ipses umptibus tam remoto regno succurrere poterat,haud gravate concessit,certis tamen conditionibus adiunctis,quibus tam ipse Henricus, quam omnes ejus posteri, regnum illudtenerent, et sibi ab Apostolica Sede donatuni agnoscerent ; quasconditiones cum Henricus Hibernique principes et populus, bmisin comitiis, prirao DubHni, deinde Casselli celebratis, jurato appro-bassent, rex AngliaeHiberniae Dominus auctoritate apostohcadeclaratus fuit.— (Bzovius, 1542, No. 12; Vol. xx., p. 84.)————————INDEX.Adrian IV. :PAGEAsked to approve of anInvasion of Ireland .Objects to itHis Letter to King Louis. .54VII. of France6 seq.This Letter relates to I-ce-land (Hihcrnia)It does not relateSpain (Hispania)True Bull ofBiography ofAdventurers ;.,10 seq.to1 3 seq.53 seq..142Were mere BrigandsWhat M'Geoghegaii says85 seq..158of them .Alexander III. :.Excommunicates all con-cerned in the murderof St. Thomas of Can-terbury.." Charters " said to have.23been sent to him.Three letters attributedto him..Another letter,which29.32Giraldus disclaims64What Voltaine says of him 3 5Migne'scollectionof.his lettersWhat M'Geoghegan says..of him..Otherdoubtsing the BullsAnchin, Annalist of :regard-64.156. 148 mIs the author of Coniinu-aiio Acq-iiicmetinaSpeaks of Henry II..Anjou, Princes of, receiveBulls of Investiture.1919, 3484Antoninus, Saint :Wrote a long chapter onAdrian IV..Cites the Polycraticus ..137137ApocryphalFate ofDocuments,..161 seq.Avranches, Cathedral of :Cardinals Gratian andVivian hold an inves-tigation there .23 seq.Oath taken by Henry 1 1 . 30, 5 9Baronius, Cardinal :Gives the oath of Henryat Avranches ..30Sources from which hedraws..HaslittleAdrian's Bullfaith..140in.142Becket, Thomas. [Sec St.Thomas of Canterbury)Benedict Joseph Labre, St.A life of great povertyand sanctity.Benedict of Peterborough,speaks ot Strongbow.Bishops of Ireland :theyHenry II. ?Didsubmit.No mention of them inAdrian's Bull..What they say of Uni-versity EducationBishops of Scotland, Papal138 n22to27 seq.62. 86 HLetter to them..17Bongars, James, first to in-thatterpretinAdrian's Letter standsfor HispaniaH...Brendaniana, by the Rev.D. O'Donoghue, p.p.Brewer, Mr., Remarks onGiraldus...Briefs, on the Irish War of146157 kyiIndependence.128 seq.Brompton speaks of anEmbas.sy to Adrian IV.17—————2l8INDEX...56 seq.Dimock,Rev.Mr., Re-BuUariutn Romanum,awork not authenticatedBulls and Briefs, some dif-ferences between themPAGE33 n33 nBzovius :His works .Strange story told by.him...143.144Camerensis. (See GiraldusCambrensis.)Camden, what MSS. heI'ollowed..•70Canon Law, diploma to beinterpreted according tothe rules of ..115 scq.Charlemagne, gave politi-tosovereigntycalPopesCharles I., his persecutionmore intense.125 seq.Charles II., confirms pre-vious confiscations.128.146forPetauChristina, Queen of Sweden,buys the MSS. of Presi-denttheirweight in gold, and pre-sents them to the Vati-can LibraryClement III. :Extent of.jurisdictiongiven to his Legate .Speaks of John Lack-land as Earl of Morton,not as Lord of Ireland1 16Clement VIII., Briefs of 128 seq.Confiscation of lands, in91Ireland..120 seq.Conrad,KingtheRomans, his crusade afailure ... 8ofConstantine :Is falsely said to havemade a donation ofislands to the Pope .Extent of his powerGave domains, &c., toPopes, but not politi-cal sovereignty..335556Corsica,adonationofPepin and Charlemagne,not of Constantine, tothe Popes ..57PASECritics,aminedBullsCromwell,monsterwho havetheex-alleged.an.136 se,q.inhuman..127 kD'Aragon, Cardinal, writesa life of Pope Adrian IV.Davis, Sir John, his advicefor clearing UlsterDe Lacy, Hugh, his con-103i$gnquests and death .40 seq.Derriana, by the MostO'Doherty,Rev.Dr.Bishop of Derry .158 n.Desmond, Earl of, landsconfiscated.122 seq.marks on Giraldus.73Discovery of Pope Adrian'strue letter, on- the subject of an Irish Inva-sion ... 10 seq.Documents, by way of an.164..AppendixDownpatrick,the burialplace of Saints Patrick,Brigid, and CoUimbkilleDublin, attacked by Strnng-bow ...Duchesne, Andrew, authorof Reruni FrancicarumScriptores..Du Mont, Robert :39.21.145Expresses.surpriseatthe reconciliation be-tween Louis VII. andHenry II....Remarks on Strongbow222Edward I. exempt.s him-self from the usual oathof fealty ... 84Edward II. :Alsoexempts himselffrom oath..Asks Iri.sh Kings to sendhim men for his armyReceives a sharp letterJohnPopefromXXII...93 seq.8490———Edward ITI. :Asks Irish Bishops tosend him able menfor his wars.Forbids any office to beOldtotheINDEX.PAGE—219PAGEGinnell, Mr. Laurence, hislearned . essay,entitled" DoubtfulofIreland," first publishedIrelandinReviewthe NewGrant...ioo«,1 04..106 seq.Giraldus Cambrensis :givenIrishEdward VI. :Irish ...131 seq.authenticated..Believes himself to beHead of the Church inIreland, and acts ac-cordingly.Ill seq.Takes the pompous titleof King of England,France, and Ireland.113Elizabeth, Queen of Eng-land, her new plans ofConfiscationEmancipationtheof.121 seq.Emigration, not necessarywhen people can prosperat home...88 n.F1N1.AY,S.J., Rev. p.,urges the need of properCatholic association136 m.Freeman, Mr. Edward, Re-marks on Giraldua.74Gallia Christiana, givesbiography of Rotrodus .his expeditionfrom Marsala like that ofthe Welsh to IrelandGaribaldi,.1720Geraldine,James,suc-ceeded by Hugh O'Neillas leader of the Irish inarms ....129Gerard, S.J., Rev. John,makes many interestingremarks on English plots159 n,Gervase :His account of the flightof Henry II. fromNormandy.Is quoted b)' Baronius .Gibbon, Edward, the his-23 se?.140torian, is mistaken. 56 seq.72 seq.72585SHis credulityFirst historian to men-tion Bull of AdrianIV.....284r,67Sketch of his life andworks..67 seq.Several important factshisfromdeducedremarksHow far his authority..may be relied onGratian,his works notGregory VII., understandsthe strategic position ofCor .sic a..Gregory XIIT., encouragestake upthe Irish toarms..12?, seq.Guidonis or Di Guido, O.P.,Bernard , writes a Life ofPope Adrian IV..102H, in Pope Adrian IV. 'strue letter, stands forHibernia..10 seq.Hearne, Thomas, publishes" Blackat Oxford theBook cf the Exchequer "Henry I., his designs onIreland ... 132, 148 n.Henry II. :—Sets forth the interestsof religion as motivesfor an InvasionofIreland...Gains Louis VII., Kingof France, to his viewsPopeApplicationtoAdrian IV..i23 seq.The Pope will not coun-tenance the Invasion,if the Irish people andclergy do not desire it ^seq.——220INDEX.liow Henry receivet. thePAGEPope'sdecision\iseq.Hears of the murder ot.St. Thomas19, 23, 27Flight from Normandy.lyTakes refuge in Ireland 24 sec/.Returns to Normandy .26His oath in the Cathe-dral of Avranches3c se:j.Home and Foreign Indus-PAGEtriesHoveden..85 «. seq., 141 n.{Sr.e Roger deHovcdeu.)Initials, often used in theRoman Chancery as sub-stitutes for proper narnesHis e,ldest son wageswar against him'.31Innocent III. :10 seq.His power inonly nominalIreland.35 seq.He plucks out the eyesof male hostages, andcuts off the ears andnoses of female ones,among the WelshincapableWas heof.Claimed Peter's Pencefrom England, but notfrom Ireland..Not so innocent as toaccept a donation ofKingIrelandJohnIreland : —from'...36yy113forging a Bnll ?His falsehoodsHis designs on Scotland.5 1 seg.5 1 seq.as well as on Ireland 59 scq.of penetratingObjectState in the thirteenthcentury..85 seq.Its invasion had not theconditions of a trueconquest ..90 seq.into Ireland..62Erected into a kingdomNeverengagedasingle battle with theIrish ... 90inHis immoralities .1 56 seq.Henry HI. :—Entrusts the guardian-ship of his Irish domi-nions along the Irishcoast to the King ofMan"...Takes the oath of fealtyto the Holy SeeHenry IV. allows subsidiesfor the siippressionofrebels and enemies..Henry V. gives power tothe Earl of March togrant amnesty to En-glish and Irish rebelsHenry VII. —.8.384108108Bears witness to the fre-quency of revolts inIreland...108Sends Poyning as lieu-tenant..loS seq.Henry VIJI., his innova-tions ...tog seq.by Paul IV..11^ sen.Irish EcclesiasHcal Record,Dr. Moran's .\rticle.161Irish Language, its revivala most worthy object forevery Irish patriot 133 m. seq.Irish Saints, numerous onthe Continent.i^y scq.Isidore Mercator, his falsedecretals last for sevenhundred yearsIsle of Man : —.Designs of Henry 11.King of Man offers hisisland to the Pope..161 seq.James I. : —First English King toheld sway in all IrelandCommands all priests toleave Ireland.A merciless confi sea tor .John (Lackland), King of.124125England ;Has Cambrensis for atutor ... 68608390—————221INDFX.PAGEPlaces his person andthekin gdom underthe sovereignty of thePope78 seq.Lays a snare for the Pope 93Made " Lord of Ireland"..by his father, HenrvII. .'...ii5But called" EarlMorton " by the Popes 116John of Salisbury ; —Sketch of his lifeWas he charo;ed to makeofifi..known the false Bull ?4i seq.41, 47, 4S41, 45 seq.His PolycraticusHis MetalogicusDid he write chapter xlii.of the Meialogicus ?John Bayle's opinion of41.him'...Date of his deathJustthe man whosewouldbeworkschosen by a forgerHis cho.ts and other fa-miliarities With PopeAdrian at Beneven-tura..Said to have obtained agrant of Ireland forHenry II.His letters .What M'Geoghegan says..John XXII. :—Various ActsLetter to Edward II..Kilkenny :Statutes ofConfederation of ..4343. 44 n.45 sea.. 51 ».i ; :;93 seq.96 seq..106126 sea.18, 45 scq.Land of Ireland, a com-mon name of Ireland 11 seq.I,anigan, Dr. :Believes in the genuine-ness of Adrian's Bull .Complains that the Irishare accused of barbar-ous manners..Lecky, Mr. W. E. H., re-marks on the treatmentof the Old Irish, .6565125 «. seq.132)!..1 seq.4Lingard, Dr, :Speaks of Henry's flightto IrelandlittleHas.faith.\dria!rs Bull.26, 35ini$S seq.I.ogue, Cardinal, his viewson Catholic association .Lombard, Most Rev. Peter,137led into an error.99, 1 30Lords Commissioners ofthe Treasury, bring outa new edition of GiraldusCamhrensis, 8 vols., atthe expense of the State 74 n.Lough, M.P., Mr. Thomas,his valuable book, Eng-land's Wealth and Ire-land's Poverty.Loids VII., King of France :Selected by Henry 11. asan ally..Agrees to invade IrelandNo mention of the apo-duringcryphal bullhis lifetime.40 seq.True letter of the Popeto him..63 ^eq.Luard publishes, in i?74,the Chrfnica Majora ofMatthew Paris..75I^ynch,Dr.John,hisworks..147 seq.Maginn, Most Rev. Dr.,his patriotic words131 n.Mary, Queen of England :Succeeds to the throne 1 1 3 seq.Makes restitution to the.120.ChurchAlatthew Paris ;.The chief historian inspreading a knowledgeof the apocryphal bullStumbles at every step.Draws the long bowM'Geoghegan, Abbe, authoroiliistoire d'Irlande :—Is led into an errorremarksHisonthe.757;75 seq.99Bulls..153 scq.Meialogicus. (See John ofSalisbury.)———2 22Migne's Collection :INDEX.PAGEOf Salishiiry's Letters . 51 n.Of Pope Adrian IV.'sDid not believe the Popeto be Sovereign Lordof Ireland..PAGK117.6,^ n.O'Neill, Donald :.64 n.XXII,..g(S seq.Appeals to Pope Johnletters..Of Pope Alexander III.'sletters..MoUoy, Mgr., on the elec-trical power stored up inIrish bogs .,, 89 n.Moran, Cardinal. Kemarkson his article in the IrishEcclesia.'.iical Record 139, 161MorriB, Rev. W. B. ex-Salis-amines John ofbury's lettersMiiratori gives Henry II. 'soath .... 30. Si w-.Normans, men for whomnothing was sacred.158Normans ofItaly morefaithful to the Church .Nonnans in Naples andSicily, submit to com-mon law of investiture 50, 8484Oath, which Henry II.swore in the Cathedralof Avranchcs,30 seq.0'Callaghan,,Mr. John C,:—His remarks on a dona-tion of Constantine 58 seq.Edits the work Macaria:Excidittm,150 seq.O'Connell,Daniel,theIrish Liberator.133 n.O'Growney, Kev. Eugene,his Life sketched by MissAgnesO'Farrelly, M.A. . 134 n,O' Kelly, Colonel Charles,author of the work Ma-cariee Excidium, or TheDeslruclion of Cyprus 1 50 seq.Old Irish :—Should be consulted be-fore an InvasionThe murder of them notconsidered a crime bythej, English..I. 7 seq,91Constantly regarded Ad-rian's3ull as spurious J^ 100Reduced the limits of j?the Pale ..A. 'OSHis Memorial supposedto be the work ofUlster ScotchO'Neill, Hugh, wages warforElizabethagainstmany yearsO'Neill, Shane, feared bythe English..O'Neill,Owen Roe,noble-minded generalO'Sullivan, Don Philip, hisremarks on a certaindoctrine..100 n.j2ia.I47«,. i3o»..i2g seq.O'Toole, St. Laurence, a" per.sistent opposer ofEnglish rule in Ireland " 37 «.Over- taxation of Ireland :Enormous .Remarks of Mr. Thos..Lough, M.P..Remarks of Mr. JohnRedmond, M.P.. gg n.132 n.132 ».Pagi, Antony, author ofnotes on the Ann.-ils ofBaroniusPagi, Francis, too oftencopies from his uncleAntonyPale :—Full of petty tyrants87In a state of anarchy 10 <Limits when Henry VIILnobecame king.Paul III. took it ill thatHenry VIIL had as-sumed the title of " Kingof Ireland," as if in con-tempt of the Holy See .Paul IV. :—Erects Ireland into akingdom at the peti-tionPhilip andMaryof"..113,Protects the rights ofany third party15.?seq.seq.seq.114seq,118—————INDEX.223Peter de Blois, secretaryBaronius ...146Is quoted by CardinalPayne, Robert, encouragesEnglishmen of low con-andditionsettle in Irelandcometo.PAGE123 n.Pepin, King, gave politicalsovereignty to PopesPetau, President, his MSS.QueenpurchasedChristina of Swedenby56 scq..31 seq.to Henry II.Peter's Pence :To beIreland ... 34establishedinValue of the Penny inpresent money.Never established in Ire-land, even in the PaleClaimed of England byPope Innocent III,Philip and Mary, address a.606177petition to Paul IV.1 1 3 seij,Pisans rely on a false Bull 34, 5 SPlunkett, Sir Horace, in ato do muchpositiongood for Ireland. 85 n.Pole, Cardinal, a cousin ofQueen Mary, uses his in-fluence at Rome .113 ^"i-Pontifical court of the 14thcentury..92 seq.Poyning sent as lieutenantto IrelandProtestantism :.Its beginningsThetrueenemyIreland.....108\oy seq.of131Raoui. de Diceto speaksof Henry II. 's flight toIrelandRebellion of Irish in 1798 .Richard Coeur de Lionneverhimselfcalled" Lord of Ireland "Richard II.spendsmonths in IrelandsixRoger de Hoveden :Speaks of Henry's flightto Ireland24Of a Council in Ireland 28 s'q.Is contradicted by Raoul..de Diceto..Speaks of a Council atWindsor..2H36Roger de Wendover, hispreamble to the Bull ofAdrian..Roland,Cardinal,after-wards Pope AlexanderIII.1407563)!,Ronran Chancery :Often used only initialsfor proper names.10Its grants on petition arepre-eminentlytional..condi-Romans did not treat con-quered nations as theEnglish did... [11792Roosevelt, Theodore, Pre-the Unitedsympathysident ofStates,with Irelandin.126)1.His mission to RomeIts object not unknownRyraer, Thomas, publishesa large collection of olddocuments.3 seq.19. 79 w.Salamanca, Universityof, two cases of con-science submitted for itsdecisionSalisbury.{.See John o f..129 seq.26132Salisbury.)11Scotland, designs of HenryII..:.._6qSignatures.Manner inwhich Pope and Cardi-nals signed documents .63 n,107Spanish Doctors. (,Sf e Sala-Polycraiicus.Salisbury.)(See John ofRotrodus :Rinuccini,Archbishop,Papal Envoy, his char-acter yet to be fully vin-dicated... 147 ».manca.)Stephen of Hungary, Saint.A kind of Apostlcshipconfided to him ..61———,————224INDEX.Canterbury.41,47Waterford :142Warner.Mr.G.F., Remarkson Giraldus.. 74 »j.Strongbow, Richard :Arrives in Ireland withPAGEliis adventurers:?o scqHis appointment as sene-schal of all Ireland,the height of audacityStubbs, Mr. W., edits anew edition of Raoul (orRalph) de Diceto ..Suggestio, old meaning of2 ^75Theiner, Monsignor, Arc-liivist of the Vatican.Theobald, Archbishop ofThomas of Canterbury, St. :Present at the siege ofToulouse ..Martyred on December.1629, 1170 •.Translation of Document ;Of Pope .^.drian's true23, 27letter..,6 seq.Of Chapter xlii. of theMelalogicus.45 seq.Of Pope Innocent 111,'sletter on Peter's PenceOf Pope John XXII. 'sletter to King EdwardIT....Of King Edward VI. 'sBrief..7796 seq..111Of Decree erecting Ire-land into a kingdom 1145^5.Of strange story told byBzovius ...144TrinityCollege,Dublin,Monstrous misappli-cation of its revenues35 "• •;''?•Urban II., the diplomato him re-attributedgarding Corsica is apo-cryphal..34, 57Victor Emmanuel pre-ceded in his Invasion bythe Garibaldian Volun-teers, as Henry II. wasby the WelshVivian, Cardinal :..His opinion of Henry II.his opinion ofVoltaire,PAGE52Pope Alexander III.. 35 «•itsWales,subjugationnecessary before a con-quest of Ireland .Walsh, Most Rev..Dr.,Archbishop of Dublin,remarks on UniversityEducation,grsatthewant of Catholic Ireland 87 n,20A Council said to havebeen held here.36No mention of any suchCouncil in Irish chron-icles ... 37The place totally un-such anforsuitedassembly..Wellington, Duke of, pro-poses Emancipationtheirhostilitiesworthy of pirates andbrigandsWelsh,...Welsh I-anguage in a flour-371 3420 seq.ishing condition ..135;;.Wexford, Henry II., afterwaiting five months inIreland, at last receivesmessageahere, and at once setsfor England andoutNormandy .favourable.William the Conqueror, de-30 seq.signs on Ireland ..iWilliamIII. Treaty ofLimerick soon broken . 128 «.William of Newbridge :Remarks on Embassj' toAdrian IV.17On Richard Strongbow 21 seq.On Hugh de Lacy40A source from which...chroniclers draw74, 140Winchester :Visits Ireland in 1177 38 seq.found40 seq.21Adriaii's Bull said to befaithfully kept there iS seq.But no trace cf it to be3^?f''IMi