Abel the ProphetE. K. MARSHALL, JR., M.D.In the fall of 1936, the sulfa drugs were just beginning to be used inthis country. Within a decade, better sulfa drugs were introduced andless toxic and more effective remedies like penicillin and streptomycincured many forms of infectious disease. However, in that autumn of1936, I knew that few appreciated that the introduction of the sulfadrugs would completely revolutionize the treatment and importanceof infectious disease, that they would make Ehrlich's dream of a harm-less magic bullet with which to cure disease almost come true.On Christmas Eve of that year, I called on my old teacher, colleague,and friend, John J. Abel, and found him very busy in his laboratory.Having known him for over a quarter of a century, I realized that thetime was not ripe to sit for a long chat, and without removing over-coat, I sat down and talked with him for the duration of one cigarette.When I arose, the old gentleman in a fatherly way put his armaround my shoulder and very politely piloted me to the door. Whenwe arrived there, he stopped for a moment and, more as a gesture ofpoliteness than anything else, he asked me what I was doing now. Itold him I had been very busy all fall with the pharmacology of thenew antibacterial remedy, sulfanilamide. He said, "That's fine," thenjerked up and with a characteristic lift of the eyebrows, "What's thisall about?"He asked a couple of searching questions and then led me backinto the room. "Sit down, take off that coat, smoke a cigarette, and tellme all about it.""Oh, but you're very busy, Professor. I'll come over some othertime," I replied."Never too busy to hear about things like this, my boy," he said.For a half hour or more, I told him what I knew about this newdevelopment in medicine. He asked some very pertinent questions,and then raised his head and with a faraway look said, "My God,Marshall, wouldn't Paul Ehrlich turn over in his grave?This seventy-nine-year-old scientist sa\v at once the great signifi-cance of what had happened and had such a vision of the future thatthe miracles of the next decade might not have surprised him ifhe had lived to see them. This breadth of vision in foreseeing im-portant developments of medicine was one of the qualities which wasresponsible for much of Abel's success and greatness.John Jacob Abel belonged to that small group of men who madeup the first faculty of the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, and, inaddition, was one of the pioneers who helped build up scientificmedicine in America to the high place which it now occupies in theworld. This is not the place to review Abel's contributions to science,which covered many subjects during a period no less than half a cen-tury. However, I shall try to point out many instances of his propheticvision in regard to the future developments which were to take placein medicine.The life of this first professor of pharmacology in the Johns Hop-kins University began on a farm near Cleveland, Ohio, on the nine-teenth of May, 1857, and ended in Baltimore on May 26, 1938, aftera long career in American experimental medicine. His family camefrom the Rhine Valley of the Palatinate. He had no scientific fore-bears on either side. There is reason to believe that he owed hiscollege education to his initiativeHe received his Ph.B. degree from the University of Michigan in1883, but had an interim of three years in his college course, duringwhich he served as principal of a high school at La Porte, Indiana,Avhere he taught Latin, mathematics, physics, and chemistry. Abelmust have looked back on these years with satisfaction, for it was inLa Porte that he met a teacher in his school, whom he once describedas a "very sweet, mild little lady with a great deal of force." Thislady, Mary Hinman, became his wife and was his companion for fifty-five years. She stood by his side through many tribulations and en-couraged her husband to acquire a broad medical and scientific edu-cation. There can be no doubt that Abel's happy family life was apotent factor in his scientific career.After graduation, Abel set his course definitely for scientific medi-cine as his life's work. Two things which he did at that time indicatehis ability to see what scientific medicine was to be like in the future.He submitted himself to a prolonged, broad, fundamental training,which consisted of a year with Newell Martin in physiology at theJohns Hopkins and then seven years with some leading teachers inthe medical schools of Europe. He thus acquired not only a medical2degree, but a broad scientific education, and Avas prepared tor scien-tific medicine in a way which in this country was only recognized asthe correct one some thirty or forty years later.Also, there can be little doubt that at this time Abel had a clearvision of what a tremendous role chemistry was to play in the futureof scientific medicine. Irrespective of the expense, which he couldill afford, he determined to be prepared for this coming development.While in Europe in 1889, he frequently mentions in his letters theneed of medical chemistry in the hospitals in this country and wantsto come back to the States with some entirely "new line" of workas well as to get "ready for the twentieth century." Although manyof his colleagues at that time thought his ideas absurd and visionary,everyone now realizes how justified this vision of his in regard tochemistry in medicine was.Very soon after coming to the Hopkins in 1893, his interest de-veloped in the glands of internal secretion (the endocrine glands)and indeed in the isolation of their active principles or hormones.He first tackled the thyroid gland and was busily engaged on thisproject when news of Baumann's work on the iodine-containing iodo-thyroglobulin came out. He stopped the thyroid work, but soon be-came interested in the hormone of the adrenal medulla, which had aremarkable blood-pressure-raising action.When one considers the tremendous importance in medicine ofthis field of the endocrines (or hormones) at the present time, onecan only think of Abel's early interest as prophetic. It is now wellrecognized that the key to many problems connected with each endo-crine gland is to be found in the isolation of the pure active principle.That he early appreciated the importance of stich contributions isshown by the foUo^ving sentence in one of his addresses: "The actualfinding of definite and specific chemical principles in the organs ofinternal secretion has in each case an importance in the way of ex-plaining and correlating a large number of disconnected facts, onlyto be likened to the discovery of the etiological cause of an infectiousdisease." He was fond of emphasizing the importance of the powerfuldrugs present in the human body in the aphorism, "We are walkingdrug stores."To rettirn to Abel's first published research on the hormones, itis well known that in 1897, he isolated the active principle or hormoneof the adrenal medulla in the form of a benzoyl derivative. This wasthe first instance of the isolation of a hormone of any endocrine gland.Later, the pure substance was isolated without the benzoyl radical.3This substance has been called epinephrine or adrenaline and hasbeen used in medicine for the past half century.Scarcely a night passes in the accident room of any large hospitalthat patients suffering from asthma are not given an injection of epi-nephrine, which gives dramatic relief to these sufferers in the courseof a few minutes. Many individuals covered with urticaria (hives)obtain complete relief from this troublesome condition by an in-jection of epinephrine. Due to the fact that this substance causes amarked constriction of blood vessels, it is used thousands of timesevery day in connection with local anesthetics. Every time a toothis extracted, every time a minor surgical operation is performed, thissubstance is used in connection with the local anesthetic.Opinions may differ as to how much credit should be given to Abelas the one responsible for the isolation of the first pure hormone. Itis quite true that he did not obtain the hormone of the adrenalmedulla as such but only in the form of a derivative, and it is equallyevident that during the decade in which he was engaged in thisproblem, he fell into many pitfalls and made mistakes. It is nowwell known that the so-called pure hormone obtained from the ad-renals is a mixture of two substances, epinephrine and nor-epineph-rine. Be that as it may no one can detract from the importance ofAbel's pioneering work in making available this valuable medicinalfor research and therapy.Shortly after the hormone insulin, which has revolutionized thetreatment and progress of diabetes, was discovered, Abel interestedhimself in an attempt to obtain the hormone in chemically purecrystalline form. This he succeeded in doing in 1926, in spite of hissixty-nine years and his quaint and antiquated methods of chemicalprocedure. This was the first isolation in pure crystalline form of ahormone which must be considered as a protein.Abel's announcement of the crystallization of insulin was receivedwith skepticism by many chemists as a final proof of the isolation ofthe pure hormone. The criticism was made that the highly potenttrue hormone was adsorbed on a crystalline protein. But all criti-cisms were finally met and Abel's great achievement of the chemicalisolation of insulin in pure crystalline form was soon completelyestablished. It is amusing to recall that for many months after thepreparation of the crystals, Abel himself was unable to repeat theperformance. He never, however, lost faith. Ultimately, he found theanswer and crystalline insulin is now commercially prepared.This great optimism in regard to the outcome of his researches iswell illustrated by incidents which occurred during his efforts toisolate in pure form the hormone of the posterior pituitary gland.An assistant who was testing Abel's preparations for pharmacologicalactivity tells me that after he had tested dozens of preparations andfound them all inactive, Abel would come to him with a new one andconfidently say, "I've got it this time." After an evening of testing,the assistant informed Abel the next morning that the preparationwas completely inactive and was greeted, "It's probably left in themother liquor. We'll be sure to get it next time." This abiding faith,optimism, and enthusiasm in spite of great difficulties and disappoint-ments marked Abel's career.In 1913, Abel became interested in a potential method for the re-moval of diffusible substances from the circulating blood of livinganimals by dialysis. At the first inception of the work, he discussedhis idea and plans with his staff at the luncheon table. The authorcan clearly recall this particular luncheon meeting. The professor usedsmall cylinders of bread to illustrate how the apparatus was to bemade and talked glibly about how this "artificial kidney" would bevaluable to provide means for the removal of substances detrimentalto the body in order to relieve the kidneys of their function and tideover a crisis. At this conception of the idea, he clearly saw the possi-bility of the use of his "artificial kidney" as a therapeutic measure forman.The task was to pass the blood of an animal from an artery througha series of collodion tubes surrounded by saline solution back intoa vein. Many technical difficulties had to be overcome but in No-vember, 1913, the first successful experiment was performed on arabbit. [See illustration between pages 16 and 17.] When the "oldman" talked of the clinical application of the measure for the treat-ment of intoxications or to tide over when the kidneys were not func-tioning, his associates, including the author, considered him a bit of avisionary. In 1926, Haas of Giessen actually used an "artificial kidney"on three htmian patients. It was not, however, until 1946 that Kolff inHolland and Murray in Toronto were able to put the "artificialkidney" on what appears to be a workable basis. Great technical im-provement has been made, but the idea and general principles arethe same as those developed by Abel a third of a century before.In connection with his studies on the "artificial kidney," Abel foundfrom experiments on dogs that very large quantities of blood can bewithdrawn repeatedly, if the red corpuscles of the blood are separatedand reinjected in salt solution. The paper (1914) dealing with this5work contains the following prophetic sentence: "In view of the factthat mammalian corpuscles retain their stability for three or four dayswhen kept on ice, a supply of human corpuscles might possibly be keptin this manner in operating rooms for rapid injection in emergenciesthat would otherwise prove fatal." Here we have the fundamentalidea of the "blood bank" which came into use only recently and whichwas of such great value in the treatment of wounded soldiers in WorldWar II.In the summer and fall of 1921, he became very much interestedin biophysics, and wanted a department established in the MedicalSchool. Actually, during the academic year 1921-22, biophysics islisted in the catalogue as a department of instruction. It was in chargeof a lecturer in biophysics but ^vas really under Abel in the Depart-ment of Pharmacology. Fortunately or unfortunately for the School atthis time, the department only lasted a year, and Abel's attempts to gethis colleagues to continue it proved unsuccessful. Today, biophysicsis recognized as an important University department at Hopkins. Itmay be mentioned that at the time of his biophysical enthusiasm,Abel purchased from his limited funds an infrared spectroscope andhad an assistant for two or three years working with it. Today, infra-red spectroscopy is recognized as a valuable tool in organic chemistry.Lastly, in a prophetic way, I can mention his intense interest inscientific journals and in the organization of national scientific so-cieties. In view of the fact that he refused to allow himself to be side-tracked from his devotion to research to figure in the usual accompani-ments of a successful scientist, medical meetings, committee meetings,and board meetings, it is somewhat difficult to explain his interest inscientific journals and scientific societies. The answer appears to bethat he saw clearly the necessities of journals and societies in bio-chemistry and pharmacology and interested himself in them so thatthey might be properly launched.Abel was first and foremost an investigator. His great enthusiasmand passionate devotion to research dominated his whole life. In oneof his addresses, after discussing the training necessary for the medicalinvestigator, wherein an extended chemical training is emphasized,he writes:"But to what end is all this preparation for our yoimg man? Is itsolely that he may solve problems whose solution is of practical valueto mankind? Is his mind to shape itself only to the insistent demands ofutility? Even then our method of training will yield the largest profit."But it does vastly more than that. Thus trained, our young scholar6\vill be able to see beyond the immediately practical problem, eventhough it be as great a thing as the discovery of the cause and cure ofthe plague that decimates a people. Greater even than the greatestdiscovery is it to keep open the way to future discoveries. This can onlybe done when the investigator freely dares, moved as by an inner pro-pulsion, to attack problems not because they give promise of immedi-ate value to the human race, but because they make an irresistibleappeal by reason of an inner beauty."Some of the greatest investigators indeed have been fascinated byproblems of immediate utility as well as by those that deal with ab-stract conceptions only. Helmholtz invented the ophthalmoscope andthus made modern ophthalmology possible, and at the same time didwork of the highest order in theoretical physics and wrote on thenature of mathematical axioms and the principles of psychology. LordKelvin took out patents on great improvements in the compass and onoversea telegraphy and also made contributions to our knowledge ofthe ultimate constitution of the atom and the properties of the ether.From this point of view the investigator is a man whose inner lifeis free in the best sense of the word. In short, there should be in re-search work a cultinal character, an artistic quality, elements that giveto painting, music, and poetry their high place in the life of man."John Jacob Abel: A PortraitPAUL D. LAMSON, M.D.I N 1913 I was working at the University of London, the sole occu-pant of a new chemical laboratory attached to the Department ofPharmacology. I was swishing salt solution from one end of a dog'sgut to the other, whistling to myself, and dancing a bit to keep warm,when I chanced to turn around and saw in the doorway with ProfessorCushny a rather tall, thin man dressed in a morning coat, top hat,and spats, with an umbrella in one hand, a wire cage with two enor-mous toads in the other, and wearing on his face a composite expres-sion of interest, surprise, and amusement which I shall never forget.It was in this way that I first met Dr. Abel, who was looking forsomeone who would deposit his precious Bujo agua in the ZoologicalGardens until he demonstrated them at the International Physio-logical Congress which was to be held that year in London.Several biographical sketches of Dr. Abel have already been written(1), the most complete of which is that by Dr. Carl Voegtlin, whohas given us an exceptionally well-chosen outline of Abel's life besidean expert analysis of his work. Dr. Abel's personal correspondencefrom the time of his marriage was carefully saved by Mrs. Abel andis now in the hands of competent custodians, and it is expected thatthese letters from scientific men of all types in all parts of the world,covering a period from approximately 1885 to the time of his deathin 1938, will be analyzed and published eventually in some form asan historical document, which should be of great value as giving us apicture not only of this truly great man but of the times in which helived as well.Although short. Dr. Voegtlin's biography is so complete that whenI was asked to write this note for the Bulletin, I felt that there wasnothing which I could add except my own impressions of Dr. Abelas I saw him during the years 1914 to 1925. One should realize, how-ever, that this was a very brief period in Abel's long life, that hewas almost sixty when I first went to his laboratory, and that this wasat a time when he had completed his active years of teaching and8organization. In his early life he must have been a very different manfrom the one whom I saw. I have heard much from those who camebefore me, but it was always the same—amusing anecdotes mixed withthe utmost admiration and in many cases an almost religious devo-tion for this man whom we all loved.Dr. Abel's contributions to science were recognized the world over,as can be seen from the honors which he received. These are sum-marized as follows by Dr. Voegtlin:He was awarded the Willard Gibbs, Conne and Kober medals and the medalof the Society of Apothecaries, London. Honorary degrees were bestowed uponhim by the Universities of Michigan, Pittsburgh, Harvard, Yale, Lwow (Poland),Cambridge and Aberdeen. He was an honorary fellow or member of the follow-ing societies: New York Academy of Medicine, Association of American Physi-cians, Chemist's Club, Institute of Medicine of Chicago, Philadelphia College ofPharmacy, American Institute of Chemists, Royal Society of Edinburgh, Kaiser-liche Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher, Physiological Society of GreatBritain, British Pharmacological Society, Society for Biology of Buenos Aires,Chinese Physiological Society, Soci^t^ de cliimie biologiques, Wiener BiologischeGesellschaft. He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and in 1932served as President of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.On the last day of his life he received notification of his election to a foreignmembership of the Royal Society.John Jacob Abel will be remembered as the first pharmacologistin this country and a member of that remarkable group of men whomade up the first complete faculty of the Johns Hopkins School ofMedicine, and for the part that he played in the founding of threeof our most important medical publications, the Journal of Experi-mental Medicine, the Journal of Biological Chemistry, and TheJournal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. He was thepharmacological editor of the first of these, joint editor of the Journalof Biological Chemistry with Dr. Christian Herter, and the first editorof The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics.He organized both the American Society of Biological Chemists andthe American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Thera-peutics. His pioneer work on the isolation of epinephrine, the activeprinciple of the medulla of the suprarenal gland, is known to every-one. His ideas of plasmapheresis and his so-called artificial kidney areequally well known, and his work on the phthaleins which culminatedin kidney and liver function tests should be known by clinicians theworld over, as they use these tests daily. The last work which receivedgeneral recognition was his isolation of crystalline insulin. Besides9this there were innumerable investigations which cannot be gone intohere.In order to obtain an insight into Dr. Abel's character it is neces-sary to consider his early training. As Dr. Voegtlin has done this sowell, with his permission I am quoting him at length:The life of this true scientist began on a farm near Cleveland, Ohio, where hewas born on the 19th of May, 1857. Little is known about his parents save thathis ancestors came from Germany. ... At the age of 19 he began his college workat the University of Michigan. It was here that he took a course in physiologicalchemistry under Vaughan and physiology under Sewall. His college educationwas interrupted for three years during which time he was Principal of the highschool and later Superintendent of Public Schools at La Porte, Indiana. Hereceived his Ph. B. degree from the University of Michigan in 1883. After gradua-tion he married Miss Mary Hinman, a teacher in his school at La Porte. .The first academic year after graduation was spent in the Department ofBiology of the Johns Hopkins University under Newell Martin, the able pupil ofMichael Foster. .....At this time, in 1884, at the age of 27, he made the important decision to studymedicine in Europe. Throughout his seven years of European study he showeda remarkable ability to select as his teachers many of the distinguished men ofthis period. From 1884 to 1886 he was in Leipzig, studying physiology underLudwig and von Frey, histology under His, pharmacology under Boehm, pathol-ogy under Striimpell, and inorganic and organic chemistry under Wislicenus. Atthe same time he completed his doctor's dissertation in Ludwig's laboratory.The winter semester of 1886-87 was spent in Strassburg under Kussmaul in inter-nal medicine, under v. Recklinghausen in pathology and infectious diseases.The following summer semester he studied at Heidelberg with Erb in medicineand Czerny in surgery. During the summer vacation he attended clinics atWiirzburg; 1887-88 brought Abel back to Strassburg where he took courses underKussmaul, Naunyn, Hoppe-Seyler and Schmiedeberg. It was Schmiedeberg whoaroused Abel's first interest in pharmacological research, particularly in its chemi-cal aspects. In 1888 he received his M.D. degree from Strassburg. On October30th of the same year he suffered the loss of his infant daughter, a severe blow.It is not unlikely that this loss determined him to leave Strassburg, where he hadfound so much inspiration and had made many friends, in order to pursue a yearof postgraduate clinical work in Vienna with Nothnagel and others. But hisyearning for laboratory research found Abel in 1889 to 1890 working in thelaboratory of the outstanding biochemist v. Nencki in Berne, Switzerland. It washere that Abel obtained his first training in chemical research. In later years heoften enthusiastically referred to this stimulating experience. There can be littledoubt that at that time Abel had a clear vision of what a tremendous part chem-istry was to play in the future of scientific medicine. Therefore, he resolutelydetermined to be prepared, irrespective of the expense involved which he couldhardly afford. In Berne he completed a research on the "molecular weight ofcholic acid, cholesterol and hydrobilirubin." Using Raoult's method he calledattention to the limitations of this method for the purpose in view. Another paperdealt with the chemical composition of the melanins from hair and melanotic10tumors, showing that these pigments did not contain iron in significant amounts.In Berne he formed a hfe long friendship with Cushny, who at that time was work-ing in the laboratory of the Physiologist Kronecker.After this year with v. Nencki, it was Abel's intention to return home where heexpected "to carry on medical practice and to do some research work, if possible,in internal medicine in connection with one of our American medical schools."This decision was partly due to the advice given in a letter by H. C. Wood, who,though recognizing Abel's "extraordinary training," told him he must first beknown in America as a lecturer and independent investigator in order to have achance to get a professorship of from $1,500 to $3,000 a year. However, theoutlook for a clinical career would be more "promising." Having used up all hisfunds Abel decided reluctantly to enter clinical work. Then in the late summerwhile still in Berne, Abel received a cable from Vaughan which was the turningpoint in his life. On Schmiedeberg's recommendation Vaughan offered him theChair of Materia Medica and Therapeutics in the University of Michigan, withthe understanding that he was to establish a modern department of pharmacology;materia medica and therapeutics being retained in name only. Here was thechance Abel had looked for to enter a career in experimental research and with v.Nencki's advice he accepted the offer to return to his Alma Mater. But beforereturning home he induced Vaughan to let him have a last fling at biochemicalresearch with the able biochemist Drechsel in Ludwig's laboratory. Drechselat that time was doing important work on the chemistry of proteins and on pro-tein metabolism. Drechsel and Abel thus began a joint research on the occurrenceof carbamic acid in alkaline horse urine. This association led to a close friendshipwhich lasted until Drechsel's death in 1897.On his homeward journey Abel stopped at Berlin to obtain first-hand informa-tion on Koch's tuberculin treatment, which had attracted international attention.This was the subject of his first lecture at Michigan in January, 1891. In aletter to C. W. Edmunds he writes: "Here at Ann Arbor I was given the oppor-tunity of starting the first professorship of pharmacology in the United States,whose holder should devote himself entirely to giving students the best possibleinstruction by means of lectures, demonstrations and quizzes, in the manner inwhich my European teachers (Schmiedeberg and Boehm) had long carried ontheir work. All my energy that was not given to this kind of instruction tostudents was devoted to research work and to arousing the enthusiasm of others. There was no laboratory of any kind at my disposal. There was not afor it. .scrap of apparatus, not even a test tube, a flask or a beaker." But soon he hadorganized his small laboratory and with a senior student, Muirhead, he imme-diately gave demonstrations on animals and carried out a research on the occur-rence of carbamic acid in human and dog urine following the administration oflarge amounts of lime water. ....While Abel was active in Michigan the Johns Hopkins University under Presi-dent Oilman began the organization of its medical school. Welch, Osier, Halsted,and Kelly had already been appointed, and equally outstanding men were neededto fill the chairs of the preclinical subjects. In January of 1893 Abel received aletter from Osier inquiring whether he would be a candidate for the chair ofPharmacology. Ele replied that he was strongly attracted by the prospectiveintellectual contacts with Osier, Martin, Welch and Remsen. His main concern,11however, was the provision for adequate laboratory facilities. His appointmentto the Professorship of Pharmacology went into effect for the academic yearstarting in the autumn of 1893 and with it Abel reluctantly also assumed theresponsibility of giving the course in physiological chemistry. Before assuminghis duties he obtained a few months of leave to complete some research withDrechsel and to consult his old teachers in Europe.What was it that caused Abel to make such effort and sacrificesfor this very advanced education, and how was it that he showedsuch extraordinarily good judgment in choosing the men with whomhe worked and in training himself along the lines which he did? Thathe was not content with a safe and respectable position as Superin-tendent of Public Schools in a small city shows that at an early agehe was in some way inspired to go further. Was it his association withVaughan or Sewall at the University of Michigan which led him togo to the Johns Hopkins University under Newell Martin, and wasit Martin who suggested that he take up medicine? Regardless of whomay have given him such ideas or advice, it is obvious that Abel wasno ordinary student but one filled with an intense desire for the best.His ability at the time of his studying medicine, to choose the bestmen in the world, was no mere accident, but this trait continuedthroughout his long life, and when his life is written in full, it will befound that the greatest men of these times were among his friendsand correspondents.In these days it is difficult for us to comprehend the differencewhich existed in 1885 between medical science in Europe and in thiscountry. Here, biological chemistry was not then sufficiently differ-entiated from physiology to warrant the formation of a separate groupof biochemists, and pharmacology did not exist. It is safe to say thatchemistry was hardly known to the clinicians, who at about that timewere beginning to take up the new field of pathology. As late as 1911Dr. Reginald Heber Fitz, then Professor of Theory and Practice atthe Harvard Medical School, who was one of the outstanding men inclinical medicine in those days, advised me strongly not to take upchemistry in relation to medicine. He said he realized that somedayit was coming into medicine but that he had watched it all his life andwas sure that it never would amount to much in my day. Yet twenty-five years before this. Dr. Abel with his medical training and medicaldegree realized the importance of chemistry and specialized in it. Hewas probably one of the very rare men in this country who then hadanything like this training, and it was this knowledge, which othersdid not have and could only partially appreciate, that had a great dealto do with the foresight attributed to him. He had worked in Europe12Avith experienced biological chemists and pharmacologists and hadread their journals, all of which impressed upon him the need ofsimilar organizations and publications in this country. His knowl-edge of chemistry allowed him to go more deeply into fundamentalsthan was possible for many others. Then, too, the whole scientific lifeof the remarkable group of German medical men who lived at thattime made a deep impression on Abel. Their almost monastic devo-tion to medicine, their ability, modesty, the care and exactness withwhich they did their work in infinite detail, and their desire to findout the truth of matters gave him very high standards for his owndevelopment.To Professor Abel this group always remained different and aboveall others. He would speak in a hushed voice of the great Naunynor the great Nencki, and in a discussion the last word had always tobe found in a German reference book or article. This was a greatgroup, and those must have been wonderful times when, as Abel putit, he "walked the wards with v. Recklinghausen." But all of thesemen and these days have gone, and one wonders whether a professorwill ever be as much of a professor as he used to be then, whether theprofessorial, broad-brimmed, black felt hat will ever again attractthe same awe and respect that it did, and whether it will be possibleas it then was to determine the departmental rank of a group bytheir relative positions as they walked down the street.Professor Abel's work was largely of a biochemical nature, for ex-ample, that on the chemical composition of the melanins from hair,the occurrence of carbamic acid in alkaline horse urine as well as inhuman and dog urine, the chemistry of the pigment of the negro'sskin and hair, the isolation of ethyl sulfide from the dog's urine, andan attempt to isolate the active principle of the thyroid, his isolationof the active principle of the thyroid, his isolation of the active principle of the adrenal medulla, his work with Ford on the poison oiAmanita phalloides, a study of the active principles of the secretionfrom the parotid gland of the tropical toad Bufo agua, his classicalexperiment demonstrating with his "vividiffusion" apparatus thepresence of amino acids in the blood. Then there was his work withPincoffs and Rouiller on the presence of albumoses in the tissuesand in the blood as well as in the gastrointestinal mucosa, his workwith Gelling on Witte's peptone, as well as that on the active prin-ciples of the pituitary gland, his chemical studies of and isolation ofcrystalline insulin. These indicate Professor Abel's real interests. Hiswork on the phthaleins and their use in kidney and liver function13tests, his entrance for a short time into the field of chemotherapy withhis studies of the antimony thioglycollates, his plasmapheresis andhis vividiflfiision ideas were more or less side interests which kepthim from his main line of work for a short time only.The fact that Dr. Abel had to take over the teaching and laboratorywork in physiological chemistry when he first went to Johns Hopkinsprobably had little to do with this biochemical point of view. Hisinterest was definitely chemical before he went there, and althoughhe was always attracted to a great variety of problems having to dowith medicine in general, his primary interest seemed to be in thefundamentals of the living organism rather than in the secondarychanges brought about by disease or intoxications produced by drugs.It will be noted that, except in very fe^v instances. Dr. Abel paid littleattention to studying the action on the organism of the substanceswith which he worked, that is, their so-called pharmacological action.True it is that he used the reactions of the organism to separate hisvarious fractions and eventually his pure principles from complexmixtures, but it was his aim to discover what these principles werechemically rather than to study the complex reactions of the organismafter their injection.On returning to this country in 1914 after two years in Europe, Ifound that my hearing would not allow me to go on with the clinicalwork which I was then doing at the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital inBoston, and while wondering what could be done about it I suddenlythought of how Professor Abel looked when I had seen him thatmorning with Cushny in London. I immediately wrote to Dr. Abeland asked if I might come to work in his laboratory. He repliedat once in the most friendly manner urging me to come there, and Ileft for Baltimore wondering what I would find to do. After the whitemarble walls of the Harvard Medical School and the new BrighamHospital, the Johns Hopkins Medical School building of that daywas not an impressive sight. My spirits went down as I climbed thethree long flights of stairs to the pharmacological laboratory whereI found Professor Abel in his small corner room, a test tube in onehand and a capillary pipette in the other, in the process of adding aminute drop of some extract to a solution. He immediately put thesedown and greeted me with the utmost cordiality. In one corner ofthe laboratory was an old, roll-top desk piled high with papers of allkinds; and every available and unavailable space on the desk, a re-volving bookcase, and a rather large table was heaped with books andcurrent periodicals. Within three feet of his desk was a standard14chemical bench, behind which was an ordinary canvas army cot.There was a hood in one corner and a sink next to the door. Therewas no room for anything else. There was notliing new in the room;everything in it looked as though it had been used continuously formany years. I later found that there was one exception to this—anew, large Webster's Dictionary which had escaped my attention, asit was kept rolled up in a green cloth and tied with a string. In spiteof this, however, it was very often used.After a word or two of greeting I started to tell Dr. Abel about myforced change of plans, but he interrupted me almost at once, saying,"That is too bad, but let us put that off until we have an evening atour house together. If you have no problem on hand at the presentminute, let us start on something which has become of the greatestimportance on account of the war." He then suggested that we at-tempt to treat pig's blood so that it could be used in man to replacehuman blood without causing hemolysis and reactions of one sort andanother. This sounded a bit wild to me, but I did not dare to say so.He gave me a white coat of his own, hung mine on a hook on his door,sent the laboratory boy to the nearby slaughter house for pig's blood,and within fifteen minutes after I came into his room I was actuallyat work and on a problem which kept me busy for over ten years al-though it was not two days before I gave up the pig's blood ideaforever. How many men would have been able to diagnose instantlythe state of confusion brought about by such a change in one's lifeand without a word have started one off on a course which effected acure almost instantaneously?At just the time I went there, Baltimore was starting to grow upand to lose much of its old charm, which, however, has been replacedby much of beauty. The automobile was just coming in, and a fewpeople were moving out of town, but many of the best families stilllived in the city and sat on their doorsteps after dinner on warmevenings; and on the way home it was the custom for one to dropinto the Maryland, Baltimore, or University Clubs, where one wassure to find friends. The University had not moved out to Home-wood, and I lived and dined with a very pleasant group at the JohnsHopkins Club on the corner of Monument and Howard Streets.Each morning we would walk across town to the School. As we beganour pilgrimage we would pass houses with beautiful doorways, thebrass knockers and nameplates of which were being polished by thosefine old colored men of the old school, and before we had passedthe Washington monument, we were sure to have been greeted with a15"good morning, Major, Colonel, General, or Admiral," which, in spiteof slight exaggeration, gave one a sense of importance with which tobegin the day's work. Going over the hill and past the railroad tracksone saw those marvelous, great horses, eight or ten at a time, whichpulled freight cars through the streets, but after this the glamourdisappeared, as one had to watch his step to avoid the sewage drainswhich ran uncovered across the sidewalks in the famous Baltimoresewage system, and there was nothing left but a long climb up to thehospital, which tapered off from a very imposing front, to Dr. Welch'slaboratory across the street from Hanselmann's saloon, to which wasattributed the entire success of the early Johns Hopkins group.Professor Abel was at that time very comfortably settled in an old-fashioned house with high-ceilinged rooms and a cupola, just offCharles Street very near where St. Paul Street comes into it. Guilforditself had not been developed at that time although the streets werelaid and a few houses started. The Professor kept a cow, for whichthere was plenty of room, as his land ran down across the railroadtrack and up a hill on the other side and must have covered betweenten and twenty acres. I had been in Baltimore for a day or so onlywhen I was asked to dine at Dr. Abel's house and went there part wayby trolley and the rest by bus and was most cordially greeted by Mrs.Abel and the Professor. The house was to my mind an almost idealplace for a professor; everything about it was livable, inside and out.There was a large study on one side of the front hall, a living roomon the other, behind which was the dining room. In the study therewas an old-fashioned, marble fireplace with a coal grate and a firealways burning. The walls were very high and completely lined withbookshelves. The Professor's old-fashioned armchair was pulled upcasually before the fire, and in front of it was a footstool high enoughto make it possible to put one's feet on it and stretch out comfortablyin the chair, which the Professor used to do on less formal occasions.Pulled up beside the chair was a table piled with books, periodicals,and papers. The furnishings of his house, like his laboratory, wereample but simple and looked as though they had been chosen for useand used. I went to many evening and Sunday dinners at this house,and those whom I met there were almost always workers in the lab-oratory or out-of-town or foreign visitors, of whom there were many.There was always so much of immediate interest going on in Dr.Abel's mind in connection with his own work or that of his gueststhat conversation usually centered about such matters. This alwayscame about most naturally and was in no way forced.16FiGURi: 1. "Artificial Kidney" was envisioned by Dr. Abel years before one wasfinally de\eloped which would work on human patients. The \iew abo^•e,, re-jnoduced from an old drawing, shows the artificial kidney used by Dr. Abel onanimals in 1913. A cannula (tube) was inserted in the animal's artery (A) to leadblood into the device's apparatus (C), a series of collodion tubes through whichthe blood flowed and from which substances in the blood were diffused into aHuid introduced from outside. A cross-section of these tubes is shown in thecircle at upper left (E). Anticoagulant was introduced through the burette incenter of drawing (D). Blood was returned to vein of animal through uppercannula at left (B).First Crystals of Insulinprepared byDr. John J. Abel1%s-j>tt^'Figure 2. Dr. Abel was the first to obtain insulin in chemically pure crystal-line form. He isolated the hormone when he was sixty-nine years old. Formonths after he first did it, he was unable to repeat the performance, and manychemists were skeptical of his achievement. Ultimately he found the answer andcrystalline insulin is now commercially prepared.Figure 3. How Abel's first insulin crystals (still kept at Johns Hopkins)appeared under the microscope.Then, of course, there was the war, at that time in its early stages,before the United States took part in it. Professor Abel was verypro-German, which may have been on account of his ancestry butmuch more likely on account of what he knew of Germany as hehad seen it. This made it utterly impossible for him to believe thatthe Germans were what they were made out to be at that time, andit was equally hard for me to believe it then. The Avar had a greateffect on the Professor and upset his life tremendously. At first it Avasvery stimulating to him, as the Germans made neAV advances almostevery day, and this Avas reflected in the Avay he Avalked as Avell as talked.Both Dr. and Mrs. Abel Avere extremely kind to me and treated mealmost as a son. In fact, they asked me after a time to live attheir house Avith them, but I did not accept this invitation for tAvo rea-sons: one was that although I Avas fond of medicine, I did not Avant togive up everything in life to the Avhims of this man as all Avho camevery close to him had to do on account of his complete absorption inAvhat he was doing to the consequent oversight of everything else; theother Avas that my love for the Germans became less and less, and,finally, in order that there could be no mistmderstanding on this pointin Professor Abel's mind, I Avrote him a letter telling him that Ithought he should knoAV of my having lost all faith in the Germansand that I Avas going to take the part of the other side. Although Idid this as kindly as I could, I do not think that the Professor everquite got over it.For a time, after the Avar Avas over, he Avas much depressed and verybitter, but Avith his usual and extraordinary ability to take reverseshe shook off this depression and Avent to Avork Avith rencAved vigor.Unfortimately, at just this time the laboratory was overAvhelmed bya grotip of South Africans Avho were extraordinarily anti-British intheir sentiments. For several years the lunch-table conA^ersation de-generated into anti-British tales raked up from all possible quartersby this South African group. I, Avho Avas no historian, could stand thisonly so long and then Avould blow up, to be put in my place again onaccount of lack of evidence on my side, and since there was no onethere to back me, I became less popular daily. But this group and thisperiod passed, and in his later years I heard nothing more of the Avarfrom Professor Abel. I am sure that his anti-English remarks Averepurely an attempt to justify Avhat the Germans had done, because hetold me many times that Avhen he retired, his one desire Avas to goto England and spend his last days Avith "that Avonderful group ofEnglish physiologists."17I had been told that it would be a waste of time to go to Baltimoreto work with Abel, because he was always too busy with his own workand I would see nothing of him. When I arrived, he had just beenasked to write the first Mellon lecture (2) and devoted the better partof a year to the preparation of this. Anyone wishing to get an ideaof the thoroughness with which he did things, and of the breadth ofview which he had, would do well to read this as well as his other ad-dresses. This would also give one an idea of Dr. Abel's feeling thatone should give all that one had to whatever was being done. Dur-ing the first year that I was in his laboratory he carried out almost noexperimental work and would drop in to talk for hours at a time.We would often leave the laboratory early and drive about the coun-try, ending up at his house for tea or supper; but after this first yearthings were very different, and except when he came out of the se-clusion of his corner laboratory for lunch or to carry out an animalexperiment in the large laboratory, one saw very little of him.I shall never forget the day Dr. Abel decided he should move.A real estate company made plans to develop what is now Guilford.This involved the house and land where Dr. Abel lived. They triedto induce him to build another house, but he was afraid of 'beingcrowded', as he put it, and decided to go else^vhere. I had an oldcar at that time and spent many afternoons driving Dr. and Mrs.Abel all over the country looking for another house. One afternoonas the day was getting on and with a violent thunderstorm comingup, we drove out some ten miles from the middle of the city and upa hill where there was an enormous unoccupied house very similarto the one in which he used to live on Charles Street. This was offthe Windsor Mill Road and had fine groimds with wonderful, greattrees, a driveway lined with hemlocks, the same type of cupola onthe house, and goodness knows how many rooms. The house wasby no means in the best state of repair, and neither were the grounds.The Professor jumped out of the car and rushed into the house, leav-ing Mrs. Abel and me behind in the rain. Mrs. Abel got slowly outof the car, stood looking at the house in a horrified manner, and,turning to me, said in her quiet way, "My goodness. Dr. Lamson,did you ever see anything so awful?" A few minutes later Dr. Abelcame dashing out of the door shouting, "Mary, this is just exactlywhat we want." Mrs. Abel then went in, looked the house over, andsaid, "Yes, I think this will do very well indeed." This was typicalof Mrs. Abel. I have never seen such devotion in anyone as she hadfor the Professor. It made no difference what his plans might be,18they were accepted at once by Mrs. Abel, who not only willingly butwith genuine enthusiasm cooperated with him. If it were a minormatter such as unexpectedly bringing people to dinner, giving upengagements, taking a train for other parts, or changing the entireway of living, it made no difference whatever, Mrs. Abel agreed atonce, and never did any of us hear her complain. Until Mrs. Abel died,she lived on this hill. At first she had a colored boy to help her, buthe was a character and more trouble than help, and she soon gave himup.Among the letters which came to me at the time of Dr. Abel'sdeath was one from Professor Walther Straub, who told of his com-ing to this country to lecture and being met at the station by ProfessorAbel. It was some minutes after the train came in before ProfessorStraub saw him hurrying down the platform; Dr. Abel greeted himin an excited manner, saying. "I am sorry to be late, but Columbusonly just arrived." Straub said that he was much shocked and thoughtthat the Professor was losing his mind, and it ^vas only when theyreached the car that he found that Columbus was Dr. Abel's coloredboy.In these days of new schools and perfect ecpiipment it might beinteresting to consider the surroundings in which Professor Abelcarried out the work which has made him famous the world over.As I have said before, the Medical School was by no means an im-pressive sight. Each story was very high, and Dr. Abel's laboratorywas on the third floor. There was no elevator except a small freightaffair which had to be pulled up by hand. There was a hallwayaround the stair-well from which the various laboratories radiated.I have no doubt but that everything Avas done very systematicallywhen Dr. Abel was younger, but when I reached tiiere, it was a caseof every man for himself, and there certainly was no system aboutanything. There was only one kymograph in the laboratory whichworked, and that was a long paper electrical affair, and to do a bloodpressure experiment involved as much as a major surgical operation.Since I was the youngest and newest arrival, I was not allowed to takepart in such an important event as doing a blood pressure experimenton a dog, but I was allowed to watch. Dr. Rowntree had just left,and Dr. Marshall, who at that time did not even know where thekidney Avas, and a physical chemist from Europe, 'who was not quitesure whether a dog had a kidney, supervised the operation, which wasdone by Charlie Kamphaus.Outside Professor Abel's laboratory Charlie was the Department19of Pharmacology. If you wanted anything, you asked Charlie for it,and if he happened to be out, you simply did nothing until he re-turned. I asked him once how it was that none of the large stockbottles had labels on them, and he said in the most hurt mannerimaginable, "Why, Dr. Lamson, if we had labels on them, everyonewould know what was in them." At another time I asked him to re-turn something which we had borrowed from another department,and he said, "Don't do that now. If you wait a little longer, they won'tremember that you have it." Charlie was a German, short, well-fed,but not fat, then. He was the most good-natured, willing, hard-workingsoul I have ever seen. He existed for one thing only, and that was toserve Professor Abel. Sundays, week days, or holidays the Professorwould merely say, "Charlie, keep your eye on this dog, you must lookat him every two hours," and Charlie would be there day and night.If the Professor suddenly wanted a dog and there were no dogs in theanimal house, it never occurred to Charlie that this could be anyone'sfault but his own, and with tears in his eyes he would dash aboutfrom one department to another looking for a dog. Charlie liked towork and confided to me once that the height of his ambition was tobe a waiter in a beer garden where there would be twice as manypeople as one could possibly serve, and just as you had supplied onetable with beer they would shout for you to fill up the glasses again,and you would know that you could not possibly do it.Charlie was assisted in these blood pressure operations by Charlie,Charlie Drain, a devout Irish Catholic with the good and bad qual-ities of a bulldog, very fond of liquor, who died of delirium tremensduring the prohibition period. He worshipped the Professor but wasnot as sophisticated as Charlie Kamphaus. His one desire was to findsomeone who would say something against Dr. Abel so that he could,as he put it, "knock his block ofE." Together the two Charlies wouldput the dog under ether and hitch up the blood pressure apparatusand kymograph. Things would usually have worked fairly well had itnot been for the fact that the recording was done by means of glass pensblown by everyone who had ever been in the laboratory. The experi-ment would start, and then the pen would weep and the ink run downthe paper, whereupon both Charlies would discuss the advisability ofputting on another pen, and this as likely as not would refuse to write.In the excitement one or the other Charlie \vould blow through it.z\fter a very short time both of them were red ink from ear to ear.If the experiment were a long one and artificial respiration wereneeded, another assistant was called in, Mrs. Thomas, the scrub-20woman. Mrs. Thomas was getting on in years, was very fat and verypolite, and also a devout Catholic. She would sit on a stool at the dog'shead and pump away on a pair of hand bello^vs, but she had a habit ofdozing oft very frequently and had to be ^vaked up, usually by CharlieDrain, Avith a polite nudge and the remark, "A little more air, Mrs.Thomas, please." At one time Mrs. Thomas' husband had to be dugup and moved, and for years after this during lulls in an experimentshe would describe in great detail just how he looked and the variouscolors of his face. This always ended in tears, and w'e had to distracther with a call for more air. After all was well under way, and whilethe chemists were giving general directions, entirely unheeded by theoperating staff, Professor Abel would be ceremoniously called byCharlie Kamphaus, and he would appear with his little glass evaporat-ing dish, his capillary pipette, and his notebook. A hush would comeover this scene of blood, red ink, and artificial respiration, and theProfessor, entirely oblivious of everything, would fill a syringe, andsomeone ^\•ould make the injection for him.In the early days when I first went there, Professor Abel wore awhite laboratory coat. Later, he added to this a white apron whichhe had become interested in, because Dr. Binger wore these. As timewent on and as the laboratory was none too well heated, ProfessorAbel added an ordinary sack coat over the apron, and some yearslater discovered a very long, heavy, red rubber apron, 'which he thenwore underneath the white one. At about this time Dr. Abel had hisportrait painted in a gown with which there was a black velvet hat^vhich pleased him a great deal. He often spoke to me about what anice thing this hat was and how he thought it a splendid custom towear such a hat. One day a member of the surgical staff came intothe laboratory for luncheon wearing a Avhite operating cap, and Inoticed that Dr. Abel was particularly abstracted that day and keptlooking at our visitor ^^'ith an interest all out of proportion to what thesurgeon's conversation seemed to merit. After lunch the Professortook me aside and asked if I could manage to get him one of thoselittle white hats. I did, and he ^vore it to the end of his days.On the street and around his house Professor Abel was always veryspry and walked with great alertness and rapidity, but for severalyears I had been semiconscious of the fact that he went about thelaboratory in a decrepit manner. He would come out of his room andshuffle across the laboratory with very short steps, almost on his toes,and ahvays holding his evaporating dish in one hand and his pipetteor his notebook in the other. One day I happened to notice that he21held up his apron with one hand, as one would a skirt, and becominginterested in this phenomenon, I saw that the band around his neckwas so long that the rubber apron nearly touched the floor, and thestring, which should have gone around his waist, tied his knees to-gether so that it was impossible for him to take a long step. I askedif I could not shorten the neck band for him and explained whatseemed to me to be the advantage of doing this, but he only lookedat it in a dreamy sort of way and said that it was all right as it was,and it stayed that way as long as I was there.When one of these blood pressure experiments was over, the recordwas rolled out on the floor, often rimning the entire length of the largelaboratory and even out into the hall. Everyone would very seriouslygather about it and walk up and down the record looking for results.No one ever seemed to be the least bit aware that this was not theaccepted method of carrying out such experiments.The laboratory was well equipped for special chemical work, butexcept for this one kymograph there was almost nothing in the way ofapparatus. There was one microscope in the department in use, andthat belonged to me. After some ten years when I needed a micro-scope badly and everyone was using mine, I asked the Professor ifthe one which he had in his laboratory could not be turned to gen-eral use. I had seen this in action only once. It was kept in a woodenbox done up in a brown cloth, tied with a stout cord, and the wholething wrapped in an old, white laboratory coat and locked in a casein Professor Abel's room. He looked very much taken aback at sucha request on my part and asked what was the matter with the one wewere using. I told him that there was nothing the matter with it, butthat it was mine and that we needed another. He said, "But, Lamson,the microscope that I have is a good one." When I answered that minewas also, ten years ago before everyone used it, he looked at me hardwithout saying anything, and then a quiet smile came over his face,and he turned and walked away. In a few minutes he came back tomy room with the precious machine of his own and left it without aword.We had no shop, and when I tried to make a perfusion apparatusand needed to make a thermostat, the only tools which could be foundwere a hammer with a split handle, a screwdriver, and a keyhole sawwith half the blade broken off. With this outfit I managed to puttogether a thermostat made out of a soap box, which worked sur-prisingly well until one day when I was out of the room I heard agreat commotion and someone shouting, 'Tire!" I came in just in22time to see Professor Abel emptying the last of the contents of a largefire extinguisher into the middle of my precious apparatus, of whichthere was nothing left.At night the heat went off in the laboratory, and it became ex-tremely cold. Someone broke into the Medical School at one time,after which rather luiusual precautions were taken to keep a furtherbreak from occurring. These consisted in locking up the gate to thehigh iron fence which surrounded the Medical School, and no keyswere given to any members of the faculty regardless of our pleas.When one came over in the evenings to work, on an icy, snowy night,and had to climb this high, iron fence with its arrow-shaped spikes,then feel one's way into the basement in utter darkness, locate themain switch of the building, turn that on, and then climb threeflights of stairs in the dark on account of an economical lightingsystem which had been developed, it often took some time to quietone's resentment against the powers that had developed such plans,especially those who did not have to climb the fence.In spite of all this, the laboratory was one of the finest to work inthat I have ever seen. Everything was informal, and Professor Abelhad that very rare faculty of being willing to see a change made inanything at any time. Once while I was there, a plan was developedto move the Department of Pharmacology to the new HimterianBuilding, which to my mind would have ruined the spirit of theMedical School, as it would have separated biochemistry, physiology,and pharmacology, but when this was suggested to Dr. Abel, he wasperfectly willing to make the change if others thought it best for theSchool, in spite of the fact that it would upset his work for a consider-able length of time.If the Professor was a trifle thoughtless about the comforts of hisassistants, he was eqtially thoughtless about his own. For instance,he had no telephone in his room, and for a long time, in order to useone, he had to come out into the hallway and squeeze into a horriblysmall closet which was a sort of dump for dirty laboratory coats, thejanitors' shoes, etc. For a great many years he had no secretary, andit took a lot of persuading in order to get him to take on even a half-time one. The Professor immediately installed a telephone on herdesk, but he himself still had to go through Dr. Marshall's laboratory,out into the hall, and carry on his telephone conversation in thisstuffy closet. As it became annoying for the secretary to go constantlyto the Professor's room and call him to the telephone, she installed abuzzer on his desk so that it was only necessary for her to press a but-23ton and the Professor would scurry out to the telephone. It was sev-eral years before we could convince him that he deserved to have anextension telephone on his desk, which he finally did with greatreluctance.To me it seemed that Professor Abel lived in the clouds rather thanin this world. However, he was an extremely practical person whenhis attention was focused on something, as can be seen from his or-ganization of scientific societies, journals, his laboratories, and coursesfor both biological chemistry and pharmacology. It was he who ad-vised Mr. Passano of the Waverly Press to specialize in the publica-tion of scientific periodicals, a thing which had not been done in thiscountry before and which was followed with very great success, onaccount of which Mr. Passano has ^vritten a very fine tribute to Pro-fessor Abel. But everything having to do with the laboratory, hiswork, and science had a supernatural interest for him. When hewould come in to see an experiment. Professor Abel would talk in ahushed voice. He would speak with the greatest reverence of scien-tific publications and men, as well as their Avork. He gave to sciencea certain halo, which at times seemed out of place in our humdrumlife of America but which corresponded to that aura which envelopeda German professor in Europe. This was very greatly appreciated bysome who worked with him, and I am sure that it was entirely sincereand natural to Professor Abel but not in others who attempted to copyhim.That Dr. Abel had courage is well known to anyone who had any-thing to do with him. After months of work when he fully expectedthat a final experiment would prove what he had been seeking for allthis time and it proved the exact opposite, he would draw himself up,shake his rather frail shoulders, and say, "Oh, well, there are manyfish in the sea," and immediately begin on his work again. In thecourse of his early w^ork on epinephrine an explosion occurred whichfilled his eye with glass and must have been an extraordinarily painfulaffair, but those who were with him at the time told of his great cour-age then and during the removal of his eye under local anesthesia.He almost never spoke of this in any way, but one time did tell methat it was quite interesting when they cut through his optic nerve.In minor matters, however, I think he more or less enjoyed havingsomething happen which made him exert himself against circum-stances. He used to tell the most extraordinary story of how a nurseaccidentally poisoned him with atropine in the hospital. After heunderwent a rather serious operation at one time and, again, when he24broke his leg, there was no reason for, and much against, his hurryingback to his laboratory, but I think he more or less enjoyed seeingAvhether he could do it or not.Dr. Abel belonged to that generation Avhich has just passed, inwhich men still liked to think that they might know about everythingalthotigh they were perfectly well a^vare of the fact that they couldnot. I believe, however, that this irritated Professor Abel consider-ably. He seemed a trifle jealous of Dr. Welch, who had such an un-believable memory and who seemed to have had some firsthand ex-perience with almost everything that had happened in medicine.When a new edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica came out, heconfided to me that he had heard that Dr. Welch was reading it fromcover to cover, but I know that he read a great deal of it himselfwith a great deal of interest, for he used to point out the mistakes init and tell me how much better the German encyclopedias ^vere. Heused to like to dabble with Greek and Latin and has sent me post-cards written in Greek, ivhich I hope were more intelligible to himthan to me. I dropped in on him one time at Randolph, New Hamp-shire, where he used to spend the summers, and foimd him studyingLatin grammar. He explained to me how he had tramped over thewhole Presidential range with his sons, and another time he told mehow he had spent several smnmers cruising from Baltimore up to thecoast of Maine and back. This was no mean undertaking for a manunaccustomed to the sea. He apparently went at it with gieat thor-oughness, however, hired a skipper and a good-sized boat, and tookhis family over these many miles of ocean without a mishap. I found,however, that Mrs. Abel was none too pleased with some of these trips.When a storm came up, the Professor felt that the deck Avas no placefor a woman, and he not only put her below but shut all the hatchesin a supposedly seamanship manner, and Mrs. Abel admitted thatthese were not the best days she had ever enjoyed.The Professor also had a fondness for mathematics and physics,but I never realized what a sacred field this was until one day, whilewe were having luncheon, Rouiller was extracting a vacuum desic-cator by means of a very noisy water pump, and Professor Abel gotinto an argument with one of the staff members as to Avhether mole-cules could or could not pass through a hole in the desiccator in acertain way. I do not remember what the argument Avas about butonly that I heard the Professor say that molecules could not passthrough this hole, and I made the unfortunate statement that Ithought I could make them pass through so fast that they would25whistle. My remark was an entirely casual one, based on no knowl-edge of the matter whatever, but it upset the Professor as much as ifEinstein had said it. He immediately pulled out a pencil and paperand started to prove to me how I must be wrong. I then becameenough interested to believe that he could not be right, and we dis-cussed this matter all of one afternoon without leaving the lunchtable. I kept trying to get out of this by saying that it made nodifference what the molecules did, but the Professor kept saying,"But this is a very serious matter with me. You know I taughtphysics once." At about the time we should have left for dinner, Ibecame exhausted and told the Professor that since he was an olderman I could not say what I wanted to him and I thought that he hadan unfair advantage. Whereupon he said to go ahead and say whatI pleased, which we both proceeded to do for another hour or so, butwhen I reached the Johns Hopkins Club after everyone had finisheddinner, I found a group of my associates in the middle of an evenmore violent discussion about these molecules, which continued untilwell after midnight. When I arrived at the laboratory in the morn-ing, a bit late after the efforts of the preceding day. Dr. Abel cameinto my room with triumph written all over his face and handedme a book, saying, "Read that and see if I'm not right." On lookingit over, I found it to be a book on how to square the circle.The laboratory lunch table became famous among the pharma-cologists and visitors from many lands. Adjoining Professor Abel'slaboratory was a fairly large room in which Dr. Rouiller had a chem-ical bench and in which Dr. Marshall was carrying out his experi-ments on the kidney. The lunch table itself was a small kitchentable covered with a Avhite oilcloth, and, except for the Professor, whohad a chair at the head of the table, we sat on laboratory stools.Charlie Kamphaus supplied us with a long roll of bread, some cheese,and "hot dogs" which I would not eat. This irritated the Professorgreatly. He tried for years by every means he could think of to getme to eat them and usually ended his arguments by saying, "Oh,well, you are prejudiced, as all Ne^v Englanders are prejudiced."We made our own coffee. As far as I know, every member of thestaff suggested at one time or another having something else for lunch,and the Professor always allowed him to try it, but every time wecame back to the bread, cheese, and coffee luncheons, and all agreedthat these were the best. We would have almost finished luncheonwhen Professor Abel would appear from his room, having removedhis rubber apron but not his white hat. It was never more than a26few moments before he would bring up some topic of conversationwhich was always interesting. He had an enormous amount of infor-mation about matters relating to his work as well as to the work ofothers, and he was always very much interested in historical matters,particularly in relation to the war. When we had such visitors asSir Gowland Hopkins, Sir Henry Dale, Barger, and others who wereworking on biochemical problems, they would sit at the table half theafternoon going to the very bottom of these problems. But whenwe had visitors of other types who could not discuss fundamentals,the conversation soon lagged, and it became obvious that the Professorwas anxious to get back to work.There was nothing formal about these affairs or about the labora-tory. We were usually surroiuided by several dogs in a state of anes-thesia due to paraldehyde, whose ureters had been cannulated byDr. Marshall for his kidney experiments. The odor from the paral-dehyde as well as the dogs was not too pleasing, but this made nodifference. There were more roaches in that laboratory than in anyplace that I have ever been in, and I have been in bad ones. Severaltimes we tried concerted gas attacks with sprays on these roaches andcollected several buckets of them, but they came back almost at once.Then we tried putting the legs of the lunch table in tin cans of kero-sene to see if that would keep the roaches out of our food, but eventhis was none too successful. The Professor always knocked his chairon the floor and shook out his coffee cup before sitting down. Foryears the coffee cups were Cross and Blackwell crockery marmaladejars. One day I noticed the Professor wiping his knife back andforth over the oilcloth on the table in a dreamy sort of way when hesuddenly called out, "Charlie, Charlie, what is this? Haven't weoot a new oilcloth?" When Charlie answered in the affirmative, hesaid in his far-off manner, "I thought so. I couldn't hear any roachescrackle underneath it." The roaches ate the backs off our books.They were so thick that anyone who had been in the laboratory anylength of time automatically stepped back when opening a door toallow the roaches to fall, and we all turned the inside bands of our hatsdown before leaving for the night and shook the roaches out. Itried to clean the laboratory once and found that the drawers re-semljled the streets of Pompeii. They contained layers of papers andold notebooks between which rats had died, had become desiccated,and were flattened out by the accumulating material. By such excava-tions it was almost possible to tell the order in which Dr. Abel's as-sistants had come to the laboratory. It was only after a Spanish27Avoman supplanted Mrs. Thomas as laboratory scrubwoman that wemanaged to clean the place up and get rid of the roaches by meansof a roach food rather than a spray.These remarks may sound a bit exaggerated, but it is a fact thatwhen in fearful heat I was cleaning out the storeroom in the atticimmediately under the roof on a very hot day with both Charlies,Charlie Drain was about to toss me a rather large, wooden box whenCharlie Kamphaus shouted at him in a horrified manner and hestopped. It turned out that this was a box of T.N.T. which hadbeen put aside and forgotten after a few experiments by ProfessorAbel. There was enough there to have removed not only the Depart-ment of Pharmacology but the entire Medical School as well.A great deal of Professor Abel's charm was due to his intense in-terest in his work and, as I have said, his behaving as though every-thing that went on in the laboratory was on a plane far removedfrom everything else on this earth. I shall never forget his experi-ment on plasmapheresis which I saw when I first went to the labora-tory. He had already carried out his preliminary work on dogs andasked me to join Dr. Marshall and Dr. Turner in further experimentswhich he wished to have done. Dr. Marshall was at that time anexpert organic chemist with several years' training with Dr. Jones inbiochemistry, but he had not yet had any pharmacology or medicine.Dr. Turner was a physical chemist from England who appealed toDr. Abel's soul by calculating everything that went on, no matterwhat it might be. They had just bought a large centrifuge Avith whichto centrifuge the blood taken from the dogs, and Dr. Turner proceededto calculate just what would happen if the centrifuge should breakwhile running at full speed. Each day, with his sleeves rolled up anda stop watch in his hand, he would push up the starting lever step bystep, which took him the greater part of an hour, and calculate justwhere in Baltimore the different parts of the machine would land ifthings went to pieces. As Dr. Marshall and I were interested in get-ting these experiments done and as it took almost an hour to speedup the centrifuge, we were not so interested in these calculations, butthe Professor, much to my surprise, put the utmost faith in them andtold us never to use the centrifuge except under Turner's directions.Finally, we slipped in one day when Dr. Turner was away and foundthat speed could be obtained in from three to five minutes withperfect safety, a procedure which was adopted in the future.After many preliminary trials Professor Abel decided to carry outone of his plasmapheresis experiments on a patient in the hospital28who had nephritis, the idea being to remove a pint or so of blood ata time, add an anticoagulant, bring it back to the laboratory, centri-fuge it, and replace the plasma with salt solution, returning the bloodto the patient and repeating the process as often as it was necessaryto do so. It was, of course, necessary to sterilize everything used forthis work. I found that a physical chemist's idea of sterility was acurious one. Everything was passed through a flame, some slowly,others fast, depending on their nature, until they were "about sterile."Having collected a supply of this "about sterile" apparatus, we allrepaired to the hospital. The patient was lying on an operating tablewith a donor next to him in case of accident, and the surgical bencheswere filled with interested spectators. A surgeon asked the Professorif he would not care to put on a cap and gown and take part in theexperiment. Dr. Abel stepped up to the nurse and proceeded to getinto his gown backwards, much to the consternation of the nurse.He finally got it on right side round, then his rubber gloves, and, ontop of all, one of his much beloved operating caps. The Professorwent about on tiptoe, talking in a hushed voice and watching thedrawing of the blood with the greatest interest. During the first partof the time, he walked about with both hands high in the air, hismind centered on asepsis, but then he would see someone in one ofthe stands to whom he wished to speak, and would go over and takehold of the iron railing with both hands, and then come back to theoperating table again with his hands held high in the air. It wasdifficult for those watching the experiment to restrain themselvesunder these circumstances, but they did extremely well. After theblood was drawn. Professor Abel rushed about in a very excitedmanner seeing that everything was ready to take the blood back to thelaboratory, and in a low, excited whisper gave Turner directions asto just what to do. When all was ready, he disappeared out of theoperating room, with both hands still high in the air. The momentthe door closed there was a sigh of relief, but it was not more thanthirty seconds after this Avhen the Professor came rushing back stillwearing his rubber gloves, his operating gown and cap, but with hisderby hat stuffed on over it. Absolutely unconsciotisly he came up tothe operating table, stood there talking very excitedly in whispers tothe surgeon, and every few moments adjusted his derby hat withhis rubber-gloved hands. About the time we all thought we couldstand it no longer, he dashed out of the room after the blood, and onlooking out of the window, we saw him tearing up Monument Streetafter Dr. Turner with his gown flapping in the wind, his derby haton the back of his head, and his rubber gloves held high in the air.29Tlie laboratory course for the students was something never for-gotten by anyone who took it. The course was given in a largelaboratory with chemical benches all around the side, and two sets ofthese in the center of the room. I always tried to get the Professorto give the opening lecture in Pharmacology, and he would promisethat he would, but on that particular day something would alwayscome up, and as far as I can remember he never gave the lecture. Hedid, however, give a lecture occasionally, which was the cause of greatexcitement throughout the laboratory. Preparation on the lecturewas put off until the last minute, and then everyone was sent rushingfor one thing and another. The Professor would pull out from thetop drawer of his desk a set of very ancient notes in which he wouldbecome deeply absorbed. He would send for twice as many articlesas he could even look at in the time left before the lecture, and whenthe time finally did arrive, he was keyed up to such a state of excite-ment that his voice often broke and he told me, "The only way that Ican lecture is to wait imtil shortly beforehand and then saturatemy mind with material," but the result on the students was worthseeing. They instantly became absorbed in what he had to say orit may have been in the man who was saying it. In any case, theywere unanimous in their praise of his lectures. Of course, at times hewould give a special lecture on epinephrine, vividiffusion, or the pitu-itary, which he would prepare with very great care and exactness.But to return to the laboratory course. There were laboratoryexercises occupying one afternoon each week. Each year about twoweeks before the course began, the two Charlies would go through theinnumerable cupboards, drawers, research rooms, and so forth, andpull out what apparatus they could find for the laboratory experi-ments. Tambours, respiratory tanks, rubber tubing, cannulae, ethercones, kymographs were all put in a great heap on a large tablein the corner of the laboratory with the idea of sorting these be-fore the course began, but this was never known to have takenplace. In another corner of the large laboratory there was a smallresearch room which had been turned into a stock room in whichthe unlabeled bottles were kept, and this room had one of thosedoors which was cut across the middle so that the bottom could bekept closed when opening the top. About the time that the studentsbegan to arrive, the two Charlies would appear puffing up the threelong flights of stairs with gunny sacks full of dogs on their backs,which were unceremoniously dumped over the half door into the30corner room, but, like the apparatus, enough dogs were never broughtup before the students arrived, so that half of the students wouldleave for the animal house and come trudging back with the dogs ofall sizes, which were also dumped into the corner room.There was a worse jam at the apparatus table than at a bargaincounter, members of the different groups shouting when they founda tambour or some other necessary object which all four members oftheir group were looking for. The scene around the table took onthe aspects of the stock exchange in a panic, members of the differentgroups diving into the melee and signaling or shouting about thevarious parts of apparatus which they sought. It was the custom toshave the dog before operating, but there was only one razor for theentire class. Elaborate methods of matching or tossing a penny forfirst. When youthe razor were devised to see who could get itdump a dozen unacquainted dogs into a small room after they havebeen tossed about in a gunny sack together, and let a crowd of excitedstudents in to see who can get the best dog, the floor is not always inthe best of condition, and after a student managed to get a dog, itmade little difference to him what else he took to the big laboratory.After this preliminary fight and when the dogs were under ether,things quieted down for a bit until the injection of drugs began.The students attempted to obtain records of their experiments, usingGerman roll paper kymographs, ^vhich one wound up with a key;the recording was done with the same red-ink pens as were used inresearch experiments. These kymographs must have been out of datewhen they were bought at the opening of the Medical School in 1893.It was impossible to make any of them run for any length of time,and you would hear a cheer from any group which managed toget a complete record of a single injection of a drug. The spirit ofchance seemed to pervade the whole procedure in the laboratory.There was not only matching for the razor, the dog, and apparatus,but you would find different groups betting on whether their kymo-graph would or would not run through the next injection. In fact,as only half the class could take the course, there was a good deal ofgambling on how to get into it, and I heard that at one time studentswere buying places for as much as twenty-five dollars.When my turn came to take charge of the laboratory course, Iwent to Professor Abel and asked if I might not improve it a bit bybuying new apparatus. Dr. Abel seemed quite hurt and said that asfar as he could see, the course was all right. In those years he nevercame into the laboratory. However, as in all things, he was very31cooperative and took me to the Dean, who was good enough to letme buy a whole new set of apparatus, a Harvard kymograph for eachgroup, and later allowed me to put in a small shop and to obtainthe services of an excellent machinist. Dr. Abel was not anxious tohave the shop and tried to dissuade me by pointing out that there wasno place to put it. When I suggested a corner of the large labora-tory, he admitted that this would be all right and became quite de-spondent; but all of a sudden he remembered that the fire escape wasright outside of the window where I proposed to put the shop, andhe told me that it would never do to put it there. When I pointedout that there was already a chemical bench in front of this windowas well as two shelves and three lines of pipes across it, which made itimpossible to get out, he gave up and let me have the shop.I spent a great deal of time on this laboratory course, systematizedthe whole procedure, and arranged for the entire class to take thecourse. I had drawers put in so that each group could lock up itsown set of apparatus, and saw that a razor as well as the necessaryapparatus for each experiment was supplied to each group. The resultwas very striking. Everything ran perfectly, the students obtainedgood records and went ahead in a very orderly fashion, and I wasextremely proud of what I had done. But one day the Professorhappened to come into the laboratory in the middle of the after-noon to ask me a question. In the midst of what he was saying,he suddenly stopped and looked around the room in a dreamy kindof way at the quietly working students and after a time said, "Mygoodness, Lamson, you certainly have ruined this course. The stu-dents used to have a good time here." There was much in this. Toomuch refinement can obliterate all initiative, but where the line isto be drawn is something for each generation to decide.After my first year in the laboratory, during which Professor Abelwas largely occupied with the writing of his Mellon lecture, I had achance to see him at work on research. He became interested insecretin and with Dr. Pincoffs made more and more concentratedextracts of the intestinal mucosa until he obtained fractions that were^ery active. Endless such fractions were separated, and each neededio be tested by its effect on the rate of pancreatic secretion in thedog. Dr. Pincoffs became very expert at preparing these animals.The pancreatic duct was cannulated, the trachea connected with anether bottle, and the dog left to reach a state of equilibrium whileeveryone had lunch. Everything worked perfectly for a time, andthen the dogs developed a peculiar habit of dying during the lunch32hour. Everyone had his OAvn idea as to why this happened. Whenthey did die, they died at almost the same minute each day, butthere were certain days on which they did not die at all. This becamea problem of almost as much interest as the nature of secretin itself.It was solved, as many other things were in the laboratory, by CharlieKamphaus, who discovered that the sun came around the corner ofthe building at the same time each day, shone on the ether bottle,and raised the ether concentration to a lethal level.According to Charlie, it was also he who discovered the fact thatthe liver could concentrate phenoltetrachlorphthalein. Dr. Abel andDr. Rowntree were working on this substance and studying its pos-sible action as a cathartic. Charlie was cleaning up after one ofDr. Abel's experiments and was about to put the dog in a bucket whenhe noticed that this dye was pouring out of the bile duct which hadaccidentally been cut across. He called Dr. Abel's attention to this,and if what he says is so, and ^ve could trust Charlie implicitly, weagain have an example of an important medical discovery being madeby chance, combined with the foreknowledge and altertness of theobserver.Although Dr. Abel's experiments on secretin, Witte's peptone,albumoses, and so forth, were painstaking and tedious, they were asnothing compared with his work on the pituitary. The preliminarypituitary extracts were made by Dr. Rouiller, Dr. Helen Graham,or Dr. Gelling and then worked up further by Dr. Abel himself. Theywere tested either on the blood pressure or on the guinea pig uterus orboth, and here again the pharmacological tests were extremely simpleand needed no complicated apparatus. By that time more modernmethods of doing blood pressures had been introduced into thelaboratoi7, and these were run off in great numbers. I well rememberProfessor Abel's great delight when he managed to get rid of a pre-liminary fall in blood pressure and obtained pituitary fractions whichgave nothing but an instantaneous and beautiful rise of pressure.The uterine experiments were carried out by Dr. Rouiller, who wasa man for whom I had the utmost respect. He was an ideal personfor Dr. Abel to have associated with him. He was not only an or-ganic chemist of exceptional ability, but during the years in which heworked with Dr. Abel he was editing the Section on Organic Chem-istry of Chemical A hstracts, and it seemed that there was nothing onearth of which he had not heard. It was Dr. Rouiller who convincedme that it was impossible to have an original idea. Every time Ihad one, it would not be two days before he would come quietly intoS3my room, an open journal in his hand, and almost apologetically showme where this had already been done some time before. As far as Iknow. Dr. Rouiller never did anything but work, except to read onthe streetcars to and from the laboratory. He was always there thefirst thing in the morning and, as far as I know, never left the labora-tory until at least twelve o'clock at night. He had an even greaterdislike than Dr. Abel for changing methods and an utter scorn forbiological methods, particularly the one on which he worked for someeight or ten years to the exclusion of all others. This consisted incomparing the activity of Professor Abel's pituitary fractions withthat of histamine by recording their effects upon the guinea piguterus. Although Rouiller was a very quiet and self-contained per-son, what he had to say about the guinea pig's uterus cannot berecorded here. Anyone who knows these organs well, knows that ittakes more than a saint to put up with their erratic behavior. Theywere strung up in a bath of Locke's solution and tied at one end to awriting lever, which needed to be constantly agitated so that it wouldnot stick on the smoked paper of the kymogiaph. In order to producethis agitation Dr. Abel and Dr. Rouiller devised an apparatus con-sisting of a pencil stuck through the hole of a rubber stopper, and itAvas the experimenter's task to sit there and pound the desk with thisrubber stopper, often for five or six hours at a time, while the uteruswas trying to decide whether to behave itself or not. It was utterlyimpossible for me to convince either Dr. Abel or Dr. Rouiller that amechanical agitator would work just as well, and I will admit that itwas none of my business, but hammering a bench for hours at a timewas one of those things which seemed to me to be obviously incom-patible with the abilities of a great man.For many years Dr. Abel carried out this work in spite of continuedsetbacks. He used to drop into my room at the end of the day andtalk over his experiments while putting on his coat. Although attimes he was discouraged, it was much more likely that he would say,"I've got it this time. I'll show it to you in the morning," but inthe morning the fractions of which he had expected so much wereapt to turn out in as disappointing a way as ever. This would neverupset him, and he would begin all over again with as exactly as muchenthusiasm as ever.For a time Dr. Abel was assisted by Dr. Helen Graham, and asa sidelight on Dr. Abel's character it might be interesting to recorda remark which he made about her. He said one evening to me,"Lamson, I have seen a good many women in science, and, to tell34the truth, I have not felt that they were particularly well fitted for it,but Dr. Graham is different. She has upset all of my ideas on thematter, and she is as good if not better than any man whom I haveever had with me in the laboratory."Anyone who has read Dr. Abel's work on histamine, the activeprinciple of the pituitary gland, as well as his early work on epi-nephrine, must wonder why Dr. Abel published certain things thathe did, why he was apparently in such a hurry about publication,and why he was so vague in his description of his work that it is al-most impossible to repeat it. This seems incompatible with his crit-ical judgment, the exactness which he required of others, and thestandards which he set for his own journals. Personally, I thinkthat it was Dr. Abel's terrifically intense interest in the outcome ofhis work which allowed him to do this. He was so interested in anabsolutely honest way that this at times warped his judgment. Iknow that this was so about his conclusions of the part that histamineplayed in the activity of the pituitary gland. He would not listento suggestions made to him by Dr. Marshall and others in the labora-tory but dashed off this paper and published it without showing it toanyone.It was very interesting to see the inner workings of The journal ofPharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics at such times as whenDr. Abel got hot on the trail of something in which he was particu-larly interested. Before he reached the end, he would get moreand more excited about his work and become suddenly convincedthat he was going to settle everything the next day. He would callhis secretary, ask for the publishers on the line, and have them holdthe next number of the Journal until hearing from him. The entirelaboratory would then be upset in an attempt to finish his w^ork andrush a publication through. Every time the expected result was notfound, and after a considerable delay of the Journal, Dr. Abel wouldreluctantly give the order to print the next number without his con-tribution. When a piece of work was really ready to be written up,the procedme was very different and involved weeks of poring overendless periodicals by Dr. Abel and his associates. Certainly no onewould accuse him of having done this superficially.I cannot go into details of the pituitary controversy, but after thefinding that histamine was not the internal secretion of the pituitarygland and the finding by others suggesting that there were at leasttTVo, if not more, active principles rather than the one which he hadpostulated. Dr. Abel set out to sho^v that his opponents could not be35right. The discussions at the lunch table took on the character of areligious controversy, the Professor laying down the law about hisunitarian doctrine and the absurdity of that held by the trinitarians.He insisted that it was the methods used by his opponents which gavethem their multiple active principles. For years it has seemed thatthe Professor could not be right, but recent work indicates that thereis a ray of hope for his doctrine.In the previous sketches of Dr. Abel's life everyone has referred tohow hard he worked. This, I think, can be gathered from what Ihave said already. During my stay in the laboratory Dr. Abel neverspent the evenings there, for he was getting on in years, but I neverdropped in on him at home but what I found him reading eitherhistory or something bearing on his work. I never saw him read acurrent novel. I have seen him work when he was so exhausted thathe could hardly stand or speak above a whisper, particularly in theyears after he had undergone an operation. At one time matterscame to such a pass that he could not remember the names of anyonein the laboratory; he developed a very definite droop on one side ofhis face which made his speech indistinct, and I felt almost certainthat if he kept on he would have a cerebral hemorrhage. I was un-able to induce his clinical colleagues to talk to him about this, forthey felt that it was interfering with his personal affairs, so I finallywrote the Professor a letter telling him just what I thought mighthappen to him if he kept on working as he was doing, explaining thatif he should suddenly die, it would not be such a serious matter, butthat if he were paralyzed, it would be. I also offered to resign fromthe laboratory if he did not wish to have someone around who wasinterfering with his life. Dr. Abel was indisposed on this day, andI left the note with Mrs. Abel at his house, wondering what the out-come would be. At about five in the afternoon Mrs. Abel called me,saying the professsor read my letter, remained silent for a few mo-ments, and then said, "Mary, find out when the next train goes toAtlantic City." After a few weeks' rest he was a different person.At this particular time Professor Abel had worked himself into astate of collapse over the matter of a biophysicist. He was then verymuch interested in the application of the infrared spectroscope tothe analysis of his pituitary fractions. He was so impressed by theresults of the experiments reported to him (although they were laterfound to be valueless, since they were not correctly obtained) and bythe realization of the fact that those trained in physics might add asmuch to medicine as those trained in chemistry had already done,36that he set out to bring about the organization of a department ofbiophysics in tlie Medical School. He encountered great oppositionto his plan, which he attempted to overcome by sheer strength ofcharacter, but this failed, and his efforts nearly killed him. Manytimes he said to me that he was going to put this through if it wasthe last thing that he did in this world, but finally it was definitelysettled that there would be no such department, and he went backto work once more. The success of such ventures in other placessince has proven that there was more in what Dr. Abel suggestedthan was realized by his colleagues.After his work on the pituitary he turned to the problem of insulin.He, Rouiller, and Geiling worked as indefatigably on this as theyhad on the pituitary gland. In Dr. Geiling, Professor Abel foundanother devoted soul. Dr. Geiling gave up everything else in lifefor the Professor, as Mrs. Abel and Charlie Kamphaus both had done.He tested endless insulin fractions on rabbits, he looked out for all ofDr. Abel's affairs, both in and out of the laboratory, such as histraveling arrangements, his tickets, his taxicabs, and countless littlethings. He went with him to California for this work. He sharedwith Dr. Rouiller the terrible drives that Dr. Abel made on his prob-lem, which always seemed to come at Christmas, Easter, or duringthe summer vacation, when one naturally wished to let down a bit,but in spite of Dr. Ceiling's remarking that he wished the Professorcould time these drives a little differently, he was always there,working with as great intensity as the Professor himself. Dr. Geilingwas a very great help to Professor Abel in his latter years.As said before, I have thought of Professor Abel as a mystic, some-one whose mind was in the clouds and yet who was absolutely awareof what was going on in the particular field in which he was interested,whatever this might be, whether it was medical science, the war, orhistorical affairs. No one, whether it was a new assistant, one of hispast associates, one of his colleagues, or a visiting foreigner, ever cameinto the laboratory without immediately feeling the friendship of thisman and his real interest in what one came to see him about. Ifhis visitor was of the first order, himself interested in some problem,the Professor would spend any amount of time discussing it with himregardless of his station in life. On the other hand it did not take buta few moments for Dr. Abel to recognize a second-rate man. He didnot exactly like to turn such a man out but devised a convenientmethod of doing this. He ^vould appear in my doorway with the visitoron his arm and would introduce him to me with the remark, "I37want you to meet Dr. Lamson, who is doing some extraordinarilyinteresting work whicli I am sure he would be glad to tell you about,"and with a wink of his one eye he would return to his laboratory.I would like to know how many such visitors I have had to disposeof for him in this way.In his last years, time became the most precious thing for Dr. Abel.He would not relax but seemed to work harder than ever in the hopeof accomplishing something in what he knew was an ever-diminishingperiod of time. He frequently spoke of hoping to last long enoughto accomplish some particular object. We would take our manu-scripts to him as Editor of The Journal of Pharmacology and Experi-mental Therapeutics, and although he was critical of outside publica-tions, he assumed that the papers which we had written were worthpublishing and he hated to waste time on them. I would go into hisroom with a manuscript, which he would take very giaciously andwith an air of intense interest. After opening it to one or two pages,or not at all, he would hand it back with a pat on the back and theremark, "That certainly is a fine piece of work. Just give it to oursecretary, and we will put it in the next number," and even whilehanding it back, he would turn to his work once more. But if some-thing needed attention, no matter what it was, he would drop every-thing for it. After I had been in the laboratory for about a year, Ifound that shutting off the arterial blood supply to the liver preventedthe production of polycythemia after the intravenous injection ofepinephrine, and I published this work in Dr. Abel's Journal. Afterreturning to the laboratory I tried to repeat these experiments, andin the first two dogs which I used I was unable to do so. I was horri-fied at having published something from Dr. Abel's laboratory thatwas apparently not true, and decided that the best thing to do wasto resign and get it over with as soon as possible, so I immediatelywent to Dr. Abel and told him what had happened. He listened towhat I had to say with much interest, and to my utter surprisesaid, "But, Lamson, you must be right. Have you thrown away thedogs on which you carried out these experiments?" Such absoluteconfidence in an assistant not only endeared him to me for life butmade it an absolute necessity that what I might do in the future mustbe well controlled. When I told him that I still had the dogs, hesaid, "You must have some collateral blood supply which you didnot tie off." We went out to the laboratory, and he injected dye intothe aorta, and sure enough in both instances the dye immediatelywent into the liver, showing that the blood supply had not been prop-38erly cut off, and we were able to trace out collateral circulation. Itwas not only such trust and kindness as this but Dr. Abel's sympathyand understanding for all those who had the truth of things at heartthat gave one faith, faith in the value of scientific ideals.During the many years that I was with him I never heard Dr. Abelspeak of trying to find a man for his laboratory or showing interestin promising young men who might make good pharmacologists. Asfar as I knew, men simply came there as 1 did, delighted with the op-portunity of being allowed to work there. Everyone always seemedwelcome, and a place was made for him. Dr. Abel's love of foreignerswas obvious. Japanese, Chinese, South Africans, Englishmen, Swiss,Poles, and Spaniards worked there in even the few years that I was inthe department. His recommendation to his assistants of new ar-rivals was the closest to falsification that I ever knew Dr. Abel tocome. He brought me one man, for instance, whom he assured mewould be of invaluable assistance, and introduced him as an expertbiological chemist with a splendid training in medicine. This was aSpanish priest who, beside Spanish, spoke nothing but German andvery little of that. I told this new associate that my work was onthe liver, which seemed to interest him, and he confided to me thathe was a "non-conformist on the liver, that it was the cause of tuber-culosis." When I asked him why, he replied that he would have toconsult his notebooks, but they were in Spain. On getting to knowhim better, I found that he had had five years of lectures in chemistryand medicine but had never held a test tube in his hand or done asingle experiment of any description. However, he turned out to bea most delightful person, of whom I became very fond.With the exception of those who came to work ^vith Professor Abelon his own problem, men were simply turned loose and allowed tosink or swim. Some went through a great deal of mental anguish be-fore finding a problem, but it was surprising how each did, how theyabsorbed the spirit of the Professor, and after a very short time wereworking day and night. One needs only to go over the list of thosewho worked in his laboratory and their accomplishments to see thatwhatever the methods of education were which the Professor used,they certainly were successful.Finally, I should like to consider what Abel did for pharmacology,that special field of medicine for which he was responsible. It isoften said that he paid no attention to organization, that he entirelyneglected the training of his assistants as well as the students, andthat in spite of his intense interest in research he let pharmacology39run down. There can be no doubt whatever but that pharmacologydid run down in this country during the latter years of ProfessorAbel's life, and it is also true that no effort was made by him, duringthe years that I was in his laboratory, to see to it that assistants Avereput through any sort of training or that a policy of any kind wascarried out in relation to the student course. In fact, the Professorused to preach to me against spending too much time on lectures andthe organization of pharmacology and advised me to put my effortsinto research and let other matters take care of themselves. But wasthis not the reaction of a man who had been through much himselfand had forgotten that others did not have the training which hehimself had?I do not feel that pharmacology would continue to exist as anentity if all departments were organized as Dr. Abel's was when I wasthere, for they would not be headed by Abels; but we must not forgetthat the state of pharmacology in his laboratory was more or less thefault of his assistants rather than of Dr. Abel. He had been throughthe years of effort which it took to develop the first pharmacologicallaboratory in this country, a series of lectures and demonstrations aswell as laboratory experiments, the organization of a course not onlyin pharmacology but in toxicology, prescription writing, materiamedica, and dosage, and a course in pharmacy given by a group of thebest pharmacists in this country. Anyone wishing to obtain an ideaof the care with which he did this needs only to read his papers, "Onthe Teaching of Pharmacology, Materia Medica, and Therapeutics inour Medical Schools" (3), "Report on the Teaching of Pharmacody-namics, in the Report of the Committee on Medical Education of theAmerican Medical Association" (4) and "The Education of the Su-perior Student" (5). There were enough relics of these days in thePompeian layers of the laboratory drawers to indicate what had beendone in the past, but Dr. Abel's primary interest was not in organiza-tion. As soon as he had taken care of the organization of pharma-cology in this country, not only in teaching but in the provision of ajournal for the recording of experimental work and a society whichwould bring pharmacologists together, he left it to others to continuealong the line which he had planned and himself turned to research,which he kept emphasizing as the basis of everything worth ^vhile.We are apt to think of Abel as a biochemist rather than what manyconsider a pharmacologist to be. I know that Dr. Abel believed mostthoroughly in the method employed by the pharmacologist of usingthe reaction of the organism in isolating active principles from plants40and tissues. At the time when epinephrine and thyroxin were aboutthe only hormones known, he fek that we had just made a beginningin the study of those processes of the body which are under chemicalcontrol. True it is that he Avas not interested in the superficial 'ac-tions' of drugs, which are studied by many who are satisfied to gono further. His interest was in the 'nature of things,' the nature ofthe great chemical laboratory, the living organism. If he knew thatsomething in some plant, some animal poison, some gland, or somebacterial toxin brought about a change when introduced into thebody, he wanted terribly to know the nature of this chemical sub-stance, as necessarily it must bear some relationship to one of thechemical constituents of the cell with which it reacted to bring aboutthe secondary reactions observed, as changes in muscle tone, respira-tion, and so forth. Abel was as close to the bottom of things as onecould go. He was a biologist of the most fundamental type. If onewishes to obtain in Abel's own words his concepts of these matters,they may be found in his presidential address to the AmericanAssociation for the Advancement of Science (Science, 1934), as wellas in his letter on pharmacology to Dr. Abraham Flexner, which isgiven in Dr. Voegtlin's biography of Dr. Abel (1, p. 397).During the long life of a man such as Dr. Abel things are certainto change, and the problems of today are entirely different from thoseAvhich he encountered in his most active years. If pharmacology hasretrogressed since Dr. Abel began it in this country, those of us whohave followed should not put the blame on him but on ourselves,possibly for not taking our share of the organization and the atten-tion to general principles, which is necessary for the well being ofany medical discipline, and perhaps more than for any other reasonour failure to grasp just what was uppermost in Abel's mind as thefunction of the pharmacologist— the solution of the innermost chem-ical secrets of the living organism.In all that is going on in the world today, with the utter chaos ofthought, in spite of the terrific increase in scientific knowledge andtechnical ability, it is becoming more and more apparent that it isthe man that is needed, rather than knowledge alone, the man withideals and the courage to maintain them. But constructive idealsneed knowledge, which can come only with study, training, and ex-perience. All of these Abel had. It was this which made it possiblefor him to see what was best in medicine in his time, and '^vhat prob-lems were of the most importance for investigation. Abel was aheadof his time in this country. His desire to get to the bottom of matters41showed him the need of chemistry in medicine, and he took the timeand staked his savings to get a training in chemistry before settlingdown to work. It was this which made it possible for him to see prob-lems quite invisible to many of his colleagues and to visualize the com-ing of the present-day knowledge of hormones and the importance ofchemistry in all life. He was equally well aware of the coming ofphysics in medicine but was unable to convince enough others ofthis to allow him to do for biophysics what he did for biologicalchemistry and pharmacology. When the life of this man is fullywritten, students of science as well as of medicine will do well tostudy it. Dr. Abel gave the world much by his investigations, butmore than that he has given us ideals—lived up to—which anyonewould do well to follow.REFERENCES(1) Clark, W. M.: /. Biol Chem., 124, (n. p.) August 1938.Dale, H. H.: Obituary Notices of the Roy. Soc. of London, 2, 577, 1939.Ceiling, E. M. K., and Evans, E. A., Jr.: Scient. Monthly, 47, 185, 1938.Ceiling, E. M. K., and Evans, E. A., Jr.: Arch, internal, de phartnacodyn.et de therap., 60, 240, 1938.Cunn, J. A.: Nature, London, 142, 242, 1938.Marshall, E. K., Jr.: Science, 87, 566, 1938.Voegtlin, C: /. Pharmacol, ir Exper. Therap., 67, 373, 1939.(2) Abel, J. J.(3) Abel, J. J.(4) Abel, J. J.(5) Abel, J. J.Science, 42, 135 and 165, 1915.Philadelphia Med. J.. 6, 384, 1900.A. M. A. Bull., 5, 54, 1909./. Che7n. Education, 7, 283, 1930.42f^f J-IBRARv '^On the Blood-Pressure Raising \^Constituent of the SuprarenalCapsuMM(\^.JOHN J. ABEL, M.D. AND ALBERT C. CRAWFORD, M.D.B OTH clinical experience and laboratory research have shown thatthe suprarenal capsule is an organ of vital importance.Physiologistsf have proved that a very small quantity of an aqueousextract of the medullary substance raises the blood pressure to a greatheight above the normal. It has also unequaled power in reviving apoisoned heart. Gottlieb,]: for example, has shown that it will revivethe heart of a rabbit which has practically stopped beating in conse-quence of an intravenous injection of chloral hydrate.Bates§ applied an aqueous solution to the eye and found that itexerted a marked vaso-constricting action. In numerous cases of con-gestion a small quantity dropped into the conjunctival sac broughtabout an immediate pallor, lasting for some time. According to thiswriter the extract is very useful in prolonged operations, for, whenrepeatedly applied, haemorrhage is prevented and cocaine anaesthesiais in consequence indefinitely prolonged. As the result of his two years'use of the extract Bates concludes "that within the limits of its sphereof activity there is absolutely no other substance which can take itsplace."Other experiments || go to show that the aqueous extract is a power-ful poison when injected directly into the circulation and may lead tofatal results.Read before the Association of American Physicians, May 6, 1897.f Schafer and Oliver, Journal of Physiology, xvi (1894) and xvii (1895); Szy-monowicz and Cybulski, Wien. med. Wochenschrift, 1896, No. 6.:|:Arch. f. exp. Pathol, u. Pharmakol., xxxviii, 106.§ New York Medical Journal, Ixiii (1896), 647.IIFoa and Pellacani, cited in Maly's Jahresb. d. Thier-Chemie, xiii, 129; Marino-Zuco, ibid., xviii, 231; Gourfein, Rev. M^d. de la Suisse Romande, Oct. 20, 1895;Compt. rend., cxxi (1895), 311-314.43The various extracts that have been used in these experiments weremixtures of unknown substances, and it is as yet an unsolved questionwhether the various actions at present ascribed to the gland are dueto one and the same substance.We are at present interested in the isolation of the blood-pressure-raising constituent, for in a purified state, separated from all otherconstituents, it might become a therapeutic agent of great importance.On the chemical side but little advance has been made over Vul-pian's* striking original contribution more than forty years ago. Vul-pian observed that the juice expressed from the suprarenal capsuleof many different animals behaved in a striking manner toward ferricchloride and toward solutions of iodine, giving with the former rea-gent an emerald green color, and Avith the latter a beautiful rosecarmine tint. No other tissue of the body, so far as investigated by Vul-pian, gave these reactions.Virchowf substantiated Vulpian's statements, but added nothingnew. A year after Vulpian's first announcement his second paper ap-peared in conjunction with Cloez,:}; verifying and extending his firstobservations and stating his failure to isolate the chromogenic sub-stance or substances to which the above reactions are due.Equally unsuccessful were Arnold§ and Holm.|| Krukenberg,**years after, repeated the work of Arnold and came to the conclusionthat the chromogen of the suprarenal capsule is a non-volatile, nitro-genous and ferruginous organic acid which is probably related to theturacin of the musophagidae and to chlorophyll. He assumed that thesubstance giving the green color with ferric chloride is not the chromo-genic substance of Vulpian, but more likely pyrocatechin accompany-ing the chromogen. Attention being thus attracted to the possibleoccurrence of pyrocatechin in the suprarenal capsule, others took upthe subject.Brunnerj-f found that an alcoholic extract can be made to givenearly all of the reactions of pyrocatechin; thus, it gives the well-known green color with ferric chloride, passing into a fine red on theNote sur quelques reactions propres i la substance des capsules surr^nales,Compt. rend, xliii (1856), 663-665.fVirchow's Archiv, xii (1857), 481-483.+ Compt. rend., xlv (1857), 340-343.§Virchow's Archiv, xxxv (1866), 64-107.Journ. f. prakt. Chemie, c (1867), 150.* Virchow's Archiv, ci (1885), 542-591.|-f Schweizer. Wochenschr. f. Pharmacie, xxx (1892), 121-123.44addition of ammonium tartrate and a few drops of an alkali; it re-duces silver nitrate at room temperature, and Fehling's solution onboiling. The addition of an alkali soon causes it to take on a darkbrown color, lead acetate gives a precipitate, nitroprusside and verydilute ammonia give a wine-red color. All of the above reactions be-ing given also by pyrocatechin, Brunner concluded that Krukenbergwas right in his belief that pyrocatechin is present in the suprarenalgland.After the discovery of the blood-pressure-raising property of thesuprarenal gland, B. Moore,* working in Schafer's laboratory, cameto the conclusion that Vulpian's chromogen and the blood-pressure-raising constituent are identical. He based his opinion on the fact thatchemical operations which destroy the color reactions by oxidizing thereducing agent appear also to destroy the blood-pressure-rasing con-stituent. That the solubilities of the active principle are the same asthose of the reducing agent appears also to support this opinion.Fraenkelf worked with residues obtained with the help of alcoholand acetone as solvents. These residues raise the blood pressure and donot contain pyrocatechin, and on the strength of the ferric chloridereaction and its reducing po^ver he concludes that the essential prin-ciple of the residue is a nitrogenous derivative of the or//?odihydroxy-benzene series.According to Fraenkel both Krukenberg and Brunner are wrong intheir opinion that the suprarenal gland contains pyrocatechin.Fraenkel concludes, like Moore, that the blood-pressure-raising con-stituent and Vulpian's chromogen are one and the same substance.More recently still, Miihlmann:|: has attempted to prove that theblood-pressure-raising constituent is a pyrocatechin derivative. Heasserts that on boiling fresh suprarenal capsules with dilute hydro-chloric acid the active principle is decomposed and the pyrocatechinwhich is split off may be taken up with ether. Miihlmann has not,however, furnished conclusive chemical proofs for his assertion. BothMiihlmann and Brunner might have settled this point by precipitatingthe supposed pyrocatechin with lead acetate and analyzing the leadsalt thus obtained. Pyrocatechin may be present in small amounts inthe gland, but no proof of this has yet been furnished.There is therefore at present great diversity of opinion as to theJournal of Physiology, xvii (1895), Proc. Physiol. Soc, p. xiv.f Wiener med. Blatter, 1896, No. 14-16.+ Deutsche med. Wochenschr., 1896, No. 26, 409-411.45chemical character of the blood-pressure-raising constituent of thegland.Whatever the probability may be of the correctness of this or thatview, it is to be noted that all of the above-named investigators havebased their conclusions on reactions made with aqueous, alcoholic oracetonic extracts; none of them have even roughly isolated a definitechemical compound. The subject is one of great difficulty, and ourown work is at present merely preliminary, but we have arrived at thefollowing conclusions which we believe to be borne out by our ex-periments.First, we have found by isolating the blood-pressure-raising con-stituent in the form of a benzoyl compound and decomposing it, thatthe active principle is a substance with basic characteristics and that itmust in all probability be classed with the pyrrol compounds or withthe pyridine bases or alkaloids.Second, that pyrocatechin cannot be split off from the isolated ac-tive compound by boiling with acids, as has been asserted.Third, we have found that a carmine-red pigment can be separatedfrom the sulphate of the active principle without destroying itspower to raise the blood pressure.Fourth, in addition to this, we have isolated from the crude benzoylproduct a volatile basic body which fumes in the air and which emitsan odor very much like that of coniine.Method of Isolating the Active Principle in theForm of a Benzoyl CompoundWe have used sheep's glands in large quantity. The medullary sub-stance of the fresh glands was scraped out, dried on the water-bathat 60° C, ground up finely, and extracted with ether for several daysuntil the fats and the substance known as Manasse's jecorin were re-moved. In this way a fine dry powder of a grayish white appearanceis obtained, the aqueous extract of which is very active in raising theblood pressure.With 100 grammes or more of this powder, representing one kg. inweight or about 1000 fresh glands, we proceeded as follows: The pow-der is repeatedly extracted with warm ^vater acidulated with a fewdrops of dilute sulphuric acid until the gland has yielded up all ofits chromogenic substances, as tested by Vulpian's reactions. Thisaqueous extract is evaporated on the water-bath to a small bulk, alarge excess of strong alcohol is then added and the whole allowed tostand 24 hours, by which time the proteids have all settled out. The46alcoholic fluid is then filtered and the gieater part of the alcohol re-moved by distillation; the remainder is driven off on the water-bath.The entire removal of the alcohol is necessary, and in order to avoidtoo great concentration of the acid fluid, which seems to destroy someof the active principle, water has now and then to be added. Thebrownish fluid when filtered gives all the well-known reactions char-acteristic of Vulpian's chromogen, and on neutralizing the sulphuricacid we found the filtrate to be physiologically very active.This filtered fluid is next treated with the proper quantity ofbenzoyl chloride and sodium hydrate according to the Baumann-Schotten method of forming a benzoyl compound. There results atarry substance of a light yellow color which sticks to the sides of theseparator funnel and which is collected and washed until the washfluid no longer gives an alkaline reaction. It is next dissolved as faras possible in alcohol and the alcohol evaporated. The residue isthen treated with ether, which takes up the greater part of it, theethereal solution is filtered and the ether driven off.The residue, ^vhich is of tarry consistence and amber color, istaken up in strong alcohol from which all basic substances have beenremoved by distilling from tartaric acid. It is then boiled for two hourswith animal charcoal previously well washed with purified alcohol.After filtration and the evaporation of the alcohol a considerablequantity of crystalline residue is obtained which is found to consistof the benzoyl compound of the active principle contaminated withother benzoyl derivatives and which \\'e may call the crude benzoylproduct. It is insoluble in ^vater, alkalies or acids of ordinary strength,is soluble in alcohol, ether, glacial acetic acid and concentrated sul-phuric acid.It is of interest in this connection to note that benzoyl chlorideeffects the complete removal of the blood-pressure-raising constituentfrom an aqueous solution. This is proved by the fact that the filtratefrom the insoluble benzoate no longer gives the characteristic chemi-cal reactions of the active principle, and that chemical manipulationsno longer yield a blood-pressure-raising constituent. Indeed, an injec-tion of a sufficient amount of the material left after the sodium benzo-ate and the excess of alkali have been removed, causes a sharp andsudden fall of pressure instead of a rise.It was not until long after we had made use of benzoyl chloride asa precipitant of the active principle that we obtained access toFraenkel's* paper. From it we learned that a syrupy substance isWien. med. Blatter, 1896, No. 14-16.47thrown out when benzoyl chloride is shaken up with a pyridine solu-tion of an extract of the gland. Fraenkel did not succeed in crystallizingthis benzoyl compound, nor did he attempt to decompose it in orderto ascertain whether it was in reality a benzoate of the blood-pressure-raising principle.Methods of Decomposing the Benzoyl CompoundA quick method always used by us as a qualitative test is as follows:The compound is dissolved in as little concentrated sulphuric acid aspossible, crushed ice is slowly added, and the benzoic acid which hasbeen split off is shaken out with ether. On neutralizing the solutionwe found it to give the reactions characteristic of aqueous solutions ofthe medullary substance. We have not considered this method adaptedto the decomposition of large quantities of the product.Decomposition of this benzoyl product was effected by means of analcoholic solution of sodium alcoholate, and also with strong hydro-chloric acid and alcohol, but these methods were found to be lesssatisfactory in practice than the following, \vhich is the method onwhich we now rely. The benzoyl compound is dissolved in glacialacetic acid, the solution heated to near the boiling point, and an equalvolume of a 25 per cent solution of sulphuric acid actively boilingis slowly poured into the hot acetic acid solution, the whole beingshaken meanwhile. The flask is now attached to a back-flow condenserand heated on a small flame for about ten minutes.The solution is next diluted with water and allowed to cool, thebenzoic acid, which has been thrown out, is filtered off and the restis removed with the help of ether.Mixed with the benzoic acid which has been removed by filtrationis found a dark brittle substance which softens on the water-bath, andwhich we assume to be a benzoyl compound of unknown compositionAvhich was apparently unaffected by the dilute sulphuric acid. On dis-solving it in concentrated sulphuric acid and diluting with crushedice, the resulting fluid gives none of the reactions characteristic ofsuprarenal extracts.After decomposing the benzoyl product with hot dilute sulphuricacid and removing the benzoic acid thus split off, we next get rid ofthe acetic acid by repeated partial evaporations, taking care not tolet the solution become too concentrated and thus perhaps injure theactive principle. After the removal of the acetic acid the sulphuricacid is precipitated with the help of lead carbonate. The lead sul-phate is removed and the filtrate is allowed to stand in vacuo over48sulphuric acid until it has become of tarry consistency. It is then ex-hausted with ether, acetone and absolute alcohol in succession.The residue is physiologically very active, and it gives all the reac-tions characteristic of an aqueous solution of the gland—a beautifulrose color on the addition of an alkali, a green color with ferric chlo-ride, reducing silver nitrate, etc.However, we are not yet dealing with a pure substance. If we neu-tralize an aqueous solution of the product thus obtained with a freealkali or with a carbonate of the alkalies, an overpowering odor muchlike that of coniine is perceived. As this odor passes that of pyridineseems to take its place. The basic substance thus liberated fumes in theair or when a glass rod moistened with hydrochloric acid is broughtinto its neighborhood. To remove this basic substance we made anaqueous solution of the active principle as above isolated, renderedit faintly alkaline with sodium carbonate and shook out ether sev-eral times in succession. But this method does not remove all of theconiine-like substance. To effect this we were obliged to make theactive principle strongly alkaline with sodium hydrate before shakingout with ether. The acjueous solution, in consequence of the additionof the free alkali, takes on a deep red color, and carmine red flocks arethrown out. After the removal of the coniine-like substance withether, the fluid containing the red flocks was acidulated with sul-phuric acid and the carmine-red substance was filtered off. The clearfiltrate, which was a pale straw color, was concentrated in vacuo, andthe active principle taken up in weak alcohol. On account of the in-solubility of the sulphate of the active principle in absolute alcoholit is difficult to obtain this entirely free of sodium sulphate. We hopein future to remove both the coniine-like substance and the pig-ment ^vith the help of ammonia. The presence of pyridine in ourammonia prevented our using it for this purpose.This volatile base of a coniine-like odor has not hitherto been de-scribed as a constituent of the suprarenal capsule. The beautifulcarmine-red pigment we take to be identical with the red substancewhich many other observers have found to be thrown out as a pre-cipitate when ammonia is added to a concentrated aqueous solutionof the gland, or when a solution is evaporated in the presence of leadacetate.* Others have believed this red precipitate to be the oxidationproduct of the active principle of the gland, but we shall presentlysee that the active principle is still present in the filtrate from theHolm, Journ. f. prakt. Chemie, c (1867), 150.49carmine-red body. We have as yet made no experiments with this pig-ment except to note that it is but slightly soluble in dilute alkaliesand insoluble in dilute acids, and that iodine destroys the color. Ourmethod appears to make the further study of this substance possible.The coniine-like substance we have secured in the form of its hy-drochlorate, and with it we have made certain studies which will bepublished at a later date.Characteristics of the Blood-Pressure-Raising Constituentas obtained by decomposing itsBenzoyl CompoundWe have now obtained the active principle in the form of a sul-phate. As thus far isolated it is a hygroscopic, straw-colored residuewhich tends to crystallize on standing over sulphuric acid, agglomer-ates of small crystals forming on the edge of the bowl and the entireresidue taking on a semi-crystalline appearance. This sulphate doesnot contain the volatile coniine-like substance, nor do we find thecarmine-red pigment which falls out on the addition of an alkali.Alkalies no longer liberate the coniine-like substance, nor do theythrow out the red pigment, but they cause a brownish discoloration,and on heating, alkaline vapors, probably ammonia, are given off.Our sulphate is very active physiologically. A small quantity suf-fices to raise the blood-pressure and it is therefore evident that wehave isolated the active principle but slightly contaminated with othersubstances.A final product even more active in small quantities is that whoseaction is shown where the mercury is driven out of the manometer.This more active compound still contains much of the coniine-likesubstance, and at once throws out the carmine-red pigment on theaddition of alkalies. The sulphate of the coniine-like substance doesnot, as we have seen, raise the blood pressure; it therefore remainsfor us to consider whether the carmine-red substance Avhich is pre-cipitated on the addition of alkalies, either alone or in conjunctionwith small quantities of oxidizing agents, has any physiological sig-nificance or stands in any chemical relation to the blood-pressure-raising constituent. We incline to the opinion that this substance,which in the original aqueous solution of the gland gives with iodinewater the "teinte rose-carmin tout a fait remarquable" of Vulpian, isin nowise connected with the blood-pressure-raising constituent. Wehave repeatedly removed or destroyed this substance by boiling solu-tions containing it with strong ammonia or with sodium hydrate,50and have always been able to separate subsequently an active material.After such treatment with alkalies, care must be taken in the sub-sequent evaporation of the alcohol with which the active principleis removed, to keep an acid reaction, as otherwise the greater part, ifnot all of it, will be destroyed by oxidation. And unless all evaporationsare carried on under reduced pressure, much material will be lost,even with the above precaution.Although somewhat contaminated with its own decompositionproducts, this final sulphate has all the characteristics of an activesubstance. As shown by repeated experiments, it promptly raises theblood pressure, it constricts the vessels of an inflamed eye, and wheninjected into the dorsal lymph sac of the frog it acts like a narcoticor cerebrospinal poison.As freed of the red substance the sulphate of the active principlebehaves as follows: It is very soluble in water, fairly soluble in weakalcohol (50 per cent), almost insoluble in absolute alcohol, and quiteinsoluble in ether, acetone, ligroine and chloroform. Its aqueous solu-tion, even when freed from adherent sulphuric acid, has a slightlyacid reaction. The addition of iodine water to a neutral solution doesnot give a rose-red color. Alkalies added to a strong solution give abrown color which deepens on heating. Ferric chloride gives a pur-plish brown, almost black in concentrated solution, which on the ad-dition of tartaric acid and an alkali passes into a deep red color. Beforethe removal of the carmine-red substance the addition of ferric chlo-ride gives the well-known emerald green color, w^hich passes into redon the addition of an alkali.It is evident that our sulphate gives Vulpian's ferric chloride re-action, though somewhat changed by the removal of what we take tobe the chromogenic substance which gave his iodine reaction. It alsopromptly reduces silver nitrate in alkaline solution, but does not re-duce Fehling's solution even on boiling.Probable Relation to the AlkaloidsMore than a year ago, during our first studies with suprarenal ex-tract, we were struck with the fact that every extract entirely free ofproteids and physiologically active gave a fine pyrrol reaction whensubjected to dry distillation. This is evidenced both by the odor andby the pine sliver reaction. A small quantity of the isolated sulphatealso gives the pyrrol reaction when heated either alone or with zincdust.We attach considerable importance to this reaction. As is well51known, alkaloids in general give pyrrol on dry distillation; morphine,for instance, on being heated with 10 parts of zinc dust gives offpyrrol, ammonia, trimethylamine, pyridine, phenanthrene, etc.* Dur-ing the past winter we made several attempts to prove the presence ofpyridine among the products of dry distillation of the active principleas above isolated, as its detection would prove that our principle was tobe classed among the alkaloids.In attempting to show the presence of pyridine we heated the activeprinciple with zinc dust in a current of dry hydrogen and passed thedistillation products through a test tube and two small flasks, the tubebeing placed in a cooling mixture, the first flask being partly filledwith dilute sodium hydrate, and the second with dilute hydrochloricacid.At the close of the experiment the test tube gave off alkaline vaporsthat smelled strongly of trimethylamine and had in addition a peculiarsweetish odor. The contents of the test tube diluted with water gavea precipitate with bromine water and with copper sulphate, but withthe latter reagent the fine blue color characteristic of pyridine didnot appear. The presence of amines seems to render difficult the de-tection of small quantities of pyridine. The contents of the third flaskon exposure to the air took on a rose-red color and after a time threwout a precipitate of the same tint. Both flasks gave off the odor ofbenzaldehyde.The following experiment was also made with a little of the sul-phate, which no longer gave the rose-red reaction with iodine butwhich still contained a little of the coniine-like substance. For twohours it was kept at 150° C. in a sealed tube with 25 per cent hydro-chloric acid. On shaking out with ether a considerable crystallineresidue was obtained which, without much purification, meltedsharply at 120° C. and had all the properties of benzoic acid.In the above decomposition experiments the quantity of materialat command was small, perhaps not more than one-fifth of a grammeat a time, and not entirely pure. We do not, therefore, lay much stresson our failure to detect pyridine.The fact that the nitrogen of our compound is given off in the formof amines and pyrrol gives strong gTound to believe that our substanceis to be classed with the pyridine bases, using this term in a broadway. Its basic character, its ability to take up acid radicles, as illus-We are well aware that certain salts of glutaminic, pyromuci'c and its re-lated acids also yield pyrrol on dry distillation. These compounds, however, likethe proteids and their allies, appear to us to be excluded.52traced by the formation of a benzoyl product, its reducing power andits color reaction with ferric chloride are all points which can be urgedin support of this view. Furthermore, cupric acetate, the serviceable-ness of which as a precipitant of carbo-pyridine bases has been shownby Gautier and Landi,* also precipitates our active principle; andiodine chloride, which Dittmarf found to give brown or yellow halo-gen addition-derivatives with a large number of the alkaloids, giveswith a neutral or slightly acid solution of our active sulphate a brown-ish flocculent precipitate.Of less weight in this connection, but nevertheless of some value,is the fact that its physiological action and its power in small doses isagain in accord with what is known of alkaloids. Strychnine, thebaineand other alkaloids are readily called to mind as able to raise theblood pressure, and recently Tunnicliffe;{: has placed piperidine in thesame list. The pyrrol§ bases are also physiologically active, althoughless attention has been paid to them.Pyrocatechin cannot be split off from theBlood-Pressure-Raising ConstituentAs already said, Muhlmann has stated with great positiveness thatthe blood-pressure-raising constituent is pyrocatechin joined to someother substance, probably an acid. Muhlmann does not offer sufficientproof for his conclusion; and even had he proved the presence ofpyrocatechin in the gland itself, this is a very different thing fromshowing that it enters into the chemical constitution of the blood-pressure-raising constituent.We have repeated Miihlmann's work and have found that afterboiling the medullary substance with hydrochloric acid, the ethertakes up a trace of Vulpian's substance, as well as a substance that re-duces Fehling's solution.The ether residue also gives a precipitate with neutral lead acetatewhich, on decomposition with dilute sulphuric acid, sets free a com-pound that gives with ferric chloride the reaction so characteristicof pyrocatechin. Our blood-pressure-raising constituent is not pre-cipitated by lead acetate and could not, therefore, have been responsi-ble for this result.Compt. rend., cxiv (1892), 1154-1159.f Berichte d. deutsch. chem. Gesellsch., xviii, 1612.+ Centralbl. f. Physiol., x, No. 25, 777.§ Jac. Ginzberg, Ueber das Verhalten des Pyrrols, etc., Inaug. Diss., Konigs-berg. 1890.53Furthermore, on decomposing a fairly large quantity of the crudebenzoyl product before referred to and shaking out the resultingbenzoic acid with ether, we have twice found that the ether has takenup in addition to the benzoic acid a small quantity of a substancewhich reduces Fehling's solution and gives a precipitate with neutrallead acetate. On decomposing the resulting lead compound withdilute sulphuric acid and neutralizing the filtrate, we obtained asolution which behaved with ferric chloride in the way characteristicof pyrocatechin. The quantity of this lead compound obtained hasbeen too small for analytical purposes.We consider it, therefore, still imcertain whether or not a littlepyrocatechin is present in the gland.That the blood-pressure-raising constituent is, however, not a pyro-catechin derivative seems to us certain. To prove this we used, not theentire gland nor the medullary substance, but the active principleitself, as isolated by us by decomposing the benzoyl compound.We have used large quantities of material representing in eachexperiment the active principle of several thousand glands. We haveboiled this with hydrochloric acid of varying strength and for varyinglengths of time, and in no case have we been able to find in the etherused as a solvent any trace of a substance that would reduce Fehling'ssolution or give a precipitate with lead acetate. Inasmuch as some ofthe chromogenic substance always passes into the ether from acidsolutions, these two reactions are both necessary to establish the pres-ence of pyrocatechin. In other words, we have failed to split off pyro-catechin from the active principle as isolated by us. If present, itcould hardly have eluded our search, for even a minute quantity maybe made to give a precipitate with neutral lead acetate.We propose during the coming autumn to continue this work. Hav-ing made arrangements for the use of a large amount of material, wehope to secure both the benzoate and the sulphate in a form pureenough for analysis and for further chemical study.SummaryWe may summarize the results of our work as follows:The blood-pressure-raising constituent of the suprarenal capsulemay be completely precipitated from an aqueous extract by treat-ment with benzoyl chloride and sodium hydrate, according to theSchotten-Baumann method.On decomposing the resulting benzoyl products, a residue is ob-tained which possesses great physiological activity. It gives the color54reactions of Vulpian, reduces silver nitrate and possesses the otherspecific qualities of suprarenal extracts.With the help of alkalies a carmine-red pigment may also be sepa-rated from these decomposition products. We take this pigment to bethat one of the chromogenic substances of Vtilpian which gives therose-carmine color when suprarenal extracts are treated with oxidizingagents or alkalies.A volatile, basic substance of a coniine-like odor is always found toaccompany the crude benzoate. When these substances are removedthe active principle is left as a highly active sulphate or hydrochlorate,as the case may be. It is therefore a basic substance. Its salts give a colorreaction with ferric chloride; they also reduce silver nitrate, but notFehling's solution.It is not possible to split off pyrocatechin from this isolated activeprinciple. The fact that dry distillation causes the appearance ofamines and pyrrol in abtnidance, taken in connection with its abilityto take up acid radicles, its reducing power, its precipitability bycupric acetate and iodine chloride, and its physiological action, leadus to conclude that our active principle is to be classed with the pyri-dine bases or alkaloids.Addendum, June 15, 1897Since the foregoing paper was read before the Association of Ameri-can Physicians on May 6, 1897, B. Moore has published a paper in theJournal of Physiology, vol. xxi, Nos. 4 and 5, May 12, 1897, entitled,"On the Chromogen and on the active Physiological Substance of theSuprarenal Gland." In this paper it is suggested that the active prin-ciple may be a pyridine derivative. Moore's conjecture is based, first,on a formula calculated by him from a combustion analysis of Kruken-berg, made Avith an impine, hygroscopic, noncrystalline residue ob-tained by merely decomposing and drying a precipitate seemed oiuof an alcoholic extract of the gland with the help of basic lead acetate.The calculated formula, the carbon content of which differs by 1.33per cent from that actually found by Krukenberg, is C^H^^NO^, andMoore points out that in it the ratio in which the elements carbon andnitrogen stand to each other is the same as in pyridine, C5H-N. Nowsuch a calculation, though suggestive to the investigator, furnishes noproof of the presence of pyridine, for Krukenberg could not possiblyhave had in hand a chemical individual uncontaminated with otherconstituents of the gland. Krukenberg himself admits that his ma-terial was a mixture of unaltered pigment and its decomposition prod-55ucts. It is also certain that it was contaminated with other constituentsof the gland. This is proved by the fact that basic lead acetate precipi-tates several of the constituents of the gland which pass into alcohol,and also by the fact that the analyzed material contained 0.068 per centof sulphur and from 1.18 per cent to 1.44 per cent of ash.A second reason given by Moore in support of his conjecture isthat when "some suprarenal extract was cautiously fused with causticpotash so as to avoid charring, the peculiar odor of pyridine was atonce obtained." He admits that proteids were present in this extract,and that pyridine and its homologues are formed in the destructive dis-tillation of proteids, but states that the experiment was "conductedso as to avoid charring," and considers this a sufficient safeguard. Thisexperiment has also no value, for the odor of pyridine can always beobtained when a mixture of dry, powdered proteid and po\vderedcaustic potash are fused together so as to avoid charring. This experi-ment, therefore, must be made with material entirely free of proteids.Since reading Moore's paper we have fused a little of our active prin-ciple with caustic potash, but have failed to detect pyridine. If presentin the molecule of the active principle, it is evident that larger quan-tities of the material must be used to prove it. Only indisputablechemical proofs can establish the presence of pyridine; the odor isnot enough. We have frequently in various manipulations with theactive substance met with what we took to be the odor of pyridine,but on shaking out with ether and adding an ethereal solution ofhydrochloric acid and evaporating the ether we have been unable todetect pyridine in the residue.On the Teaching ofPharmacology, Materia Medica,and Therapeutics in Our MedicalSchoolsJOHN J. ABEL, M.D.I T WOULD seem unnecessary to define in the columns of a medicaljournal what is meant by pharmacology, but the frequent confusionof this term with pharmacy by those who are not teachers of medicinemust serve as a reason for a brief statement of the methods and aimsof this branch of medical science. The vague and often erroneous useof the word pharmacology seen in earlier writings, as in the definitionof Nathan Bailey (1736), "a treatise concerning drugs," or in that ofSamuel Johnson (1755), "an equivalent of pharmacy or pharmaceu-tics," is still frequently met with in our own time. Briefly stated,pharmacology tries to discover and explain all of the more obviousfunctional, and the less noticeable chemical and physical changesthat occur in a living thing that has absorbed a substance capable ofproducing such changes, and it is also its province to learn the fateof the substance thus incorporated. It is not, therefore, an appliedscience like therapeutics; it is one of the biological sciences, using thatterm in its widest sense.The interested student of the history of medicine discovers in everyepoch some man far in advance of his contemporaries who may belooked upon as a leader in one phase or another of our subject. Suchwere Erasistratus, Dioscorides, Mesua, Avenzoar, Paracelsus, and Hal-ler; and when we turn our attention to the modern laboratory methodsof pharmacology and the lasting achievements gained by their aid,we find that the first great impulse was given by Magendie. Thatgreat experimenter's classical research on the physiological action ofupas, undertaken early in the present century, was the first instanceof the completely successful application of the analytic method in the57study of the coarser changes of function which follow on the use ofdrugs. As early as 1813 he had also proved that the blood is capableof taking up and carrying metallic poisons, but it was not until themiddle of the century that the pernicious doctrine of the "action ofpoisons by sympathy" received its death-blow. About the middle ofthe century, too, the memorable experiments of Claude Bernard andof KoUiker proving that the paralyzing action of curare centers in theend plates of the motor nerves gave further evidence of the value ofphysiological analysis as applied to the study of drugs.Brilliant discoveries of a similar character have followed from timeto time, and we have now innumerable instances of the rational analy-sis and at least partial comprehension of the more obvious functionalchanges that follow upon the administration of drugs and poisons.One has but to recall atropin, pilocarpin, muscarin, eserin, cocain,digitalis, amyl nitrite, chloral, chloroform, ether, salicylic acid, ergot,and other well-known drugs and poisons, to appreciate how great isthe store of knowledge relating to the action of drugs which is at thedisposal of the modern student.It was experiments like those of Magendie and his successors thatinduced Mitscherlich (1847) and later Buchheim, to insist on the in-sufficiency of the mere bedside study of the action of drugs and led tothe erection of special laboratories in which experimenters can buildup their science undisturbed by the intrusive demands of practicalutility. Buchheim's pharmacological laboratory founded at the Uni-versity of Dorpat in 1849, was the first public institution of the kindin the world and was long the best equipped in Germany. But it wasnot alone in Germany that attention was called to the new methods.The medical literature of our own country contains some eloquentpleas in favor of the analyses of medical problems by means of ex-periments. From among these I would call attention to that of Dr.R. Cresson Stiles, contained in a ^vorthy but little-known research,published in 1865, entitled: On the Direct Influence of Medicinal andMorbific Agents upon the Muscular Tissues of the Bloodvessels. Thisphysician was interested in the problem as to how the blood, in febrileconditions, acts upon the circulatory mechanism. He evinced consider-able experimental skill, as shown by his use of the "surviving" um-bilical artery in his transfusion experiments, and he seems to havehad some premonitions of our later theories, for he subjected theumbilical artery to the action of blood drawn from a patient withtyphoid fever and compared the results thus obtained with thosenoted when normal blood was used.58In one part of his paper he defends and justifies his methods in thefollowing words: "Moreover, it is not to mere clinical experiencethat we must look for a revelation of the laws of disease. The laws ofchemistry were not discovered in blazing fires or crumbling rocks;the laws of hydrostatics and hydraidics were not revealed in torrents,tides, or ocean currents, nor those of pneumatics and electricity in^vinds, whirlwinds, and thunderstorms; much less coidd it be ration-ally expected that the laws of pathology should be discovered amidthe much greater complexity and more multitudinous conflicts ofelements presented to the physician at the bedside of a diseased ordying patient. It is in the laboratory, and by artifically contrived ex-periments that the clue has ever been spun and the torch lighted toguide through the labyrinths which hide the arcana of nature."By means of "artificially contrived experiments" we are today en-abled to demonstrate in detail how drugs act on the various organsof the body and what is their immediate, specific action on the partsof a compound mechanism like the circulatory apparatus. Thus weteach the student of our day the method by which is analyzed theaction of a drug on the heart and arteries, on the vasomotor, cardio-inhibitory and respiratory centers, on the terminals of the vagus, onthe spinal cord and brain, on the intestines, the uterus, the salivaryand other glands, the iris, ciliary body, etc. Conceptions familiar tothe therapeutician are thus resolved into their elements and madeaccessible to the beginner.The empiricist may perhaps assert that an experimental demonstra-tion and analysis of the manner in which atropin, for example, causesdilation of the pupil is of little service to him, that the clinical factis all-sufficient. A physician of this practical turn of mind may longuse ^vith safety his corrosive sublimate, his ether, his salicylic acid,his homatropin, eserin, and other drugs; but, sooner or later, if heis an observing man, he will find himeslf confronted by doubtful andobscure questions which directly concern the welfare of his patient,questions that can only be cleared up with the help of the "artificiallycontrived experiment." No branch of practical medicine can affordto neglect the study of the principles and methods of pharmacology.For, like other branches of experimental science, it teaches conserva-tism by pointing out how vastly complex are the phenomena of theaction of drugs and sho^ving how little is clearly understood asidefrom the grosser and visible changes which follow upon their administration. The dogmatic use, in symptomatic treatment, of cardiacstimidants, depressants, antipyretics, and innumerable other remedies59whose extraordinary virtues are lauded in commercial circulars, findsno justification in the teachings of pharmacology. Its teachings arenot always or immediately convertible into bedside dogmas.It must be confessed that the therapeutic nihilist who uses onlywhat is indispensable among drugs, but who is wise in the curativepower of air, water, food, rest, and exercise, will have less to answerfor in the final reckoning than his drug-enslaved colleague who pratesof controlling disease in its every symptom with this or that panaceaand who is guilty of the premature application to practice of whatare only unproved theories.Pharmacology gives no support to the unthinking worship of ca-nonical authority. In instances when true specifics and well-foundedremedies are manifestly powerless, the plan outlined by John Lockeis as applicable now as it was when he wrote: "You cannot imaginehow far a little observation carefully made by a man not tied up tothe four humours, or sal sulphur and mercury, or to acid and alkali,which has of late prevailed, will carry a man in the curing of diseasesthough very stubborn and dangerous; and that with very little andcommon things, and almost no medicine at all."In an age which pathology and diagnosis are so far advanced andin which more genuine help is derived from the rational use of drugsthan ever before in the history of medicine, haphazard drugging isunpardonable, and still more to be condemned is a fanatical andconceited adherence to dogmas based on a superficial understandingof complex physiological principles.I have spoken thus far only of the older and well-tried methods ofpharmacology, methods that are still fruitful, although newer tend-encies are now followed and fresher fields are being tilled. The moredetailed examination by means of modern physiological methods ofthe respiratory, circulatory, muscular, nervous, and other functionalderangements which are met in "intoxications" will surely lead tomost important results. One of my younger colleagues, who is nowcarefully reviewing the list of drugs that act on the heart, tells methat not a single one of them has been studied on all sides from amodern physiological standpoint. Digitalis alone of the list has beenthe object of a fairly complete physiological examination, but every-where in this field of the cardiaca there seems to be a great accumula-tion of physiological facts ready for the coordinating hand of thepharmacologist. As elsewhere, judgment and special knowledge arerequired, and the day has long passed when he who knows the drugsof the pharmacopeia and their clinical uses and who is able only to60set up a kymograph and attach a few registering instruments canclaim to be a pharmacologist. Such an one will not travel far beyondthe region of mere routine, a region chiefly of pedagogical interest.Thoughtful pharmacologists have also made it the object of theirinvestigations to understand more fully the chemical and chemico-molecular phenomena that underlie and accompany the coarserchanges to which reference has already been made. The principles ofphysics and chemistry must furnish the pharmacologist with pro-visional or permanent explanations of these phenomena. Like thephysicist, he is well aware, however, of the "futility of attempting anultimate explanation of natural phenomena," and fully recognizes thelimitations of his method. At present we make use of a hundredterms which convey anything but a clear idea to the mind. Take soold a drug as ethyl alcohol, for example, and endeavor to explainwhy it is not a dynamogenic substance for muscle-tissue. We hidebehind such expressions as "protoplasm poison" and the like. Weknow that alcohol is oxidized in the tissues and that liberation ofenergy folloAvs, but a more careful study of the subject shows thatoxidizability and the liberation of energy are not alone the measureof dynamogenic value. A closer study of the intermediate steps inthe oxidation and of the chemico-molecular processes which are in-itiated by these products and by the alcohol itself will alone clear upa problem of this sort.Knowledge of the "chemical architecture" and constitution of agiven drug often enables the pharmacologist to trace it in its passagethrough the body, and in studying its chemical fate and final dis-position, valuable facts bearing on the synthetic, oxidative, reductive,or splitting powers of various tissues and organs have been broughtto light. In this way, too, intermediate products of metabolism arediscovered and glimpses of hidden chemical processes are obtainedwhich throw light on deep problems of pathology and clinical medi-cine. The results of the study of the relation of chemical constitutionto physiological action as yet apply only to certain families of chem-icals. They have not led to any principles of universal application.Recently a clearer statement of the action of whole series of drugsand poisons has been given in the language of physical chemistry.Thus, this or that feature of the pharmacologic action of many acidsis in proportion to the concentration of their hydrogen ions and de-pends to a lesser degree on the specific properties of their anions. Thetoxic or disinfecting action of a series of dilute metal hydroxides standsin relation to the concentration of the OH ions. The theory of electro-61lytic dissociation, on the other hand, plays but a subordinate partin determining the toxic properties of phenylic and other compounds.But whenever this theory is applicable to the problems of our science,it has put them in a new light. Yet it must be remembered that whenwe say the pharmacologic action in a given case is ionic, we are stillfar from the last possible analysis and explanation of the observedphenomena.A new epoch began with the belief that many diseases are butinstances of acute or chronic intoxication. The growth of the doctrineof toxins forced upon us by modern experimentation in bacteriologyis seen in pharmacological literature and methods. The recent studiesin the action of toxins and antitoxins, on the nature of immunity, onthe nature and cause of diabetic coma, uremic poisoning, and otherpathologic conditions in which poisons generated within the bodyplay a role, are all instances of researches in which repeated use ofpharmacologic methods and principles is made. It is evident, then,that pharmacology deals with the most fundamental conceptions ofmedicine, that it conserves and augments a variety of facts, methodsand principles which are of service not alone to every branch of themedical art, but also to other branches whose subject-matter confinesthem to the laboratory, the private study, and the lecture hall.When and how shall this subject be taught in our medical schools?First, as to the time when it should be taught. I hold that thisshould be when the student begins his clinical studies and not before.I do not deny that it is often difficult to make room for this subjectin the first clinical year, but the argument which in reality excludesit is that pharmacology, like physiology, is so capable of illustrationby laboratory experiments and of presentation in the form of lec-turers, that it can be taught as soon as the student has the needfulfoundation in the way of physiologic chemistry, anatomy and phys-iology.But this argument ignores the fact that every drug has its clinicaluses, that the teacher of pharmacology is expected to point out whatthese uses are, and that it is impossible to avoid reference to diseasesand their symptoms. In the interest of the student, by way of lighten-ing his work and making it more profitable to him, it is imperativeto teach pharmacology hand in hand with the early clinical Avork.For now he begins to see drugs used; he notes, for example, how apatient behaves under ether; for what conditions the clinician pre-scribes iron, quinin, mercury, salicylic acid, codein, digitalis, potas-sium iodid, amyl nitrite and the like; what antiseptics and local an-62esthetics are used by the surgeon. He perhaps sees an outpatientwith a gangrenous finger due to his having swathed it in 5% carbolicacid; he learns of mercurial stomatitis, of palsies and neuritic affec-tions and anemias caused by the heavy metals, of exanthems due todrugs; he sees examples of iodism, cinchonism, etc., and specimens ofurine that show misleading features in consequence of certain drugs.Though only a beginner, he meets at every turn Avith some practicalapplication of the articles of our materia medica. Drugs now havesome significance for him, an interest is aroused in their action,important data and conceptions are gathered by actual experience.It must be remembered, too, that a description of the symptomsthat appear when more than the therapeutic dose of a drug is givenis an integral part of the teaching of the pharmacologist. In a word,toxicology is inseparable from pharmacology, and instruction in thisbranch, so far as it is not of a chemical or medicolegal character,deals with clinical and pathological data. How wasteful of energy isit to teach this part of the subject at a time when all practical knowl-edge of such data, with the exception of that gained by experimentson animals, is lacking! What does the student profit from descrip-tions, for example, of the nature of cocain, atropin, opium, or arsenicalpoisoning, at a time when he has seen nothing whatever of bedsidemedicine?To say that the practical examples of the uses of drugs and of theirtoxic action can be as well learned by the student after he has takenthe course in pharmacology is to deny the principle of economy inintellectual work, and indicates a lack of appreciation of the factthat the applied and the theoretical parts of pharmacology are notcapable of a sharp separation in courses intended for medical students.The question as to how we shall teach pharmacology may now beconsidered. But first, a few words concerning instruction in toxi-cology. It has already been stated that, from a scientific point of vie^v,no sharp line of demarcation can be drawn between this subject andpharmacology. Only ^vhen the medicolegal, the industrial, or thechemical sides of toxicology are considered is it advisable to make adistinction. But these aspects of toxicology should not be neglectedin our medical schools. Even in institutions in which the generalprinciples and methods of toxicological analysis are taught in connec-tion with the work in chemistry, or in which extensive courses in legalmedicine and in hygiene are given, there Avill still be left a large fieldto be covered by the pharmacologist. In my own experience I havefound it advantageous to give a brief course in toxicology as a pre-63liminary to the work in pharmacology. My students begin their workwith me at the conclusion of the first third of their second year, ata time, therefore, when they have had no clinical work and but littlepathology. The course requires eight weeks, and there are two after-noon sessions and a Saturday morning recitation or conference. Thepoints aimed at in the course are: First, the acquisition and compre-hension of the physiological phenomena of intoxications; second,certain important phases of the subject regarded as a part of forensicmedicine; third, the more important chronic intoxications which aremet with in the arts and industries; and fourth, the general principlesof toxicological analysis as illustrated by actual practice at the labora-tory desk.Nothing in the way of vivisection is done by the student himselfin this course.The afternoon's work begins with a brief lecture and with demon-strations of a physiological character. In these a number of circum-stances bearing on the action of a given substance, whether used as apoison or as a drug, are clearly set forth. These demonstrations con-stitute the best introduction to pharmacology. Some of the pointsillustrated are the varied symptoms of poisoning, such, for example,as the paralysis of the respiratory center by hydrocyanic acid ormorphin; the influence of the place of application, as illustrated bythe fact that not all mucous surfaces absorb poisons with equal ra-pidity; the rapidity of dispersion of poisons throughout the body;the paths of elimination for drugs and poisons, and the storage ofdrugs in various tissues and organs, and the great differences thatobtain in these two fields; changes in the blood; the anatomical lesionsproduced by powerful poisons, such as arsenic, phosphorus, nitricacid, carbolic acid, alkalies, etc. A wide range of demonstrations, inwhich organisms ranging from paramecia to dogs and rabbits maybe employed, is at the disposal of the instructor, who has access tooriginal literature. In this way the beginner receives ocular proof ofthe fact that an intoxication, whether acute or chronic, is as complexa matter as any of the clinical conditions that he will later study inthe hospital; that drugs can produce fever, convulsions, paralysis, andother symptoms; lesions of the various organs, alterations of the secre-tions and of the blood— in short, an interest in the manifold problemsof medicine can here be aroused. It is, of course, understood that therules of the physiological laboratory in regard to anesthesia are to beobserved in work of the above character. During the first week of thiscourse the demonstrations extend so far into the afternoon that the64student has no time left for laboratory work, and can only arrangehis desk for the chemical work.The chemical work of the student is so planned that it shall in-struct him in certain methods which will be of use to him in hislater work in clinical medicine and will enable him also to make atleast the necessary preliminary tests in a case of suspected poisoning.A small laboratory manual drawn up by the instructor is placed inhis hands and its directions are modified from year to year. Theground covered in the laboratory includes the methods of isolatingvolatile poisons and the analytical methods applicable to the detec-tion of small quantities of this class of poisons; the search for alkaloidsand glucosids by the methods of Draggendorff, Brouardel, Kippen-berger, and others, some typical poisons of these classes being mixedwith foods and subjected by the student to processes suitable to theirextraction; the search for metallic poisons and non-volatile acids; astudy of blood-stains and the separation of blood from rust-spots, etc.;a spectroscopic and simple chemical study of the various hemoglobinderivatives as methemglobin, hematin, reduced hematin, hematopor-phyrin, carbon monoxid hemoglobin, etc.; a study of the changes inthe urine induced by drugs.In a course of this kind a Avise selection of examples must be madeand assistance must be given to the student by means of class demon-strations and informal talks, as ^vell as by instruction at the laboratorydesk.In the past few years our students have come to us with a betterpreparation in chemistry, and many of them have already had a specialcourse in the detection of metallic and other poisons.To avoid repetition we have therefore arranged a few class dem-onstrations showing the best methods of oxidizing organic matter andof detecting arsenic, antimony, lead, mercury, and phosphorus, pay-ing especial attention to the simpler preliminary tests which shallenable the physician, if need be, to ascertain ^vith certainty whetherone or another of these poisons is present. The object of this chemicalcourse is, therefore, mainly to give the student a bird's-eye view of thefield, with a certain technic of an elementary sort and to furtherimprove his chemical knowledge, something for which the modernphysician finds more and more practical uses. Should the student whohas taken such a course ever find himself involved as a medical expertin a medicolegal case he wdll not be entirely incapable of compre-hending the controversial points which are agitating the chemicalexperts in the trial.65Along with this chemical work goes the reading of selected chaptersof a good textbook, recitations, and informal talks by the instructoron special subjects, as the commoner poisonous plants of the country,or the intoxications met in the modern arts and industries. The talkor the recitation, as the case may be, is held early in the afternoon,before the laboratory work is begun. An hour on one other day onwhich no laboratory work is done is also given up to a recitation onassigned subjects.It will be seen that there is little in the way of didactic lectures.The student profits most when, for example, he has himself detectedopium in some mixture and has read his Blyth, Kobert or Lewin andtiien meets his instructor, to discuss with him, in an informal manner,the chief points in the physiologic action of the poison in its chronicuse, or in its medicolegal significance and chemical detection. Hisprevious reading has aroused his interest, and taken in connectionwith his chemical experiments and the demonstration on the livinganimal, it has prepared him for a conference whose chief aim is tohelp him to separate the essentials from the nonessentials.The remainder of the year is devoted to pharmacology. This courseis only in part a laboratory course, the class working in sections offour. Even if it is impossible for the student to perform more than ahalf-dozen experiments, this kind of work is too valuable to be omit-ted. Nowadays, when simple apparatus can be had at a comparativelylow cost, it is not a matter of great difficulty to give every four studentsout of a class of 75 a number of highly instructive experiments. Thesemay be so arranged that the student himself learns the chief pharmaco-logical facts involved, say, in the action of ether and chloroform,the diuretics and purgatives, atropin, morphin and chloral, or dig-italis, the nitrites and other agents that have a pronounced action onthe circulatory apparatus.I would, therefore, urge that at least 5 or 6 topics be made thesubject of laboratory experiments to be preformed by the studentsthemselves under competent direction. The "artifically contrived ex-periment" has made the subject what it is; it is that instrument ofknowledge with which the teacher and investigator tests the theoriesof the day; it is his very shortest road to certainty of opinion. Why,then, should it not give a clearer insight to the student also? AsPorter so tersely puts it, "the meat on which professors are nourishedis just the diet for students."As for the rest of the experimental work, numerous class demon-strations are necessary. The work in physiology, perhaps going on at66the same time, has prepared the student to grasp the principles to beillustrated by the more complicated experiments and perhaps alsomade it unneccessary for the student himself to perform the manysimple experiments to which he is equal, but which can be morequickly performed for him. For we must keep in mind that as Pro-fessor Welch has said, "Laboratory methods are extremely time-takingand are not adapted to teach the whole contents of any of the medicalsciences." I need not recount the list of practicable class demonstra-tions. There is hardly a drug of importance for which a good demon-stration is not to be found in the various scientific journals. We knowthat the list of drugs in actual use is very large, but if we ask what arethose that have been found to be really indispensable to the surgeon,the gynecologist and obstetrician, the internist, the ophthalmologist,dermatologist and other specialists, we can easily reduce our por-tentous list to some fifty instances. Let these constitute the basis ofinstruction and serve as types; take these up in great detail, and when-ever possible connect with them less important ones of similar action.But to assist the student to master the contents of his particular sub-ject should not be the only aim of the medical teacher; he should seekto arouse an appetite for all that is fundamental in the science ofmedicine; he should stimulate to inquiry, to a searching and logicalanalysis of the phenomena to be grappled with, be it in the laboratoryor at the bedside. And in striving to carry out this high purpose, hisown life work, his spoken words and his attitude toward his pupilsare his chief means of influence.I have thus far said nothing on the subject of Materia Medica. I donot believe that special instruction in this branch is called for. Inthe day when the student to the medical school entered with littleknowledge of chemistry, botany, and other sciences, it may have been^vell enough to give special courses on the physical, chemical, andbotanical characteristics of drugs, but the result in general was tooverburden the student's mind with a multitude of dry details ofinterest or value solely to the pharmacist or to the student of pharma-cognosy. When I began to teach pharmacology ten years ago, I dis-carded all separate instruction in materia medica. My plan has beento give only those points which are of actual importance to the stu-dent of medicine or which he ought to know for historical reasons.The drugs and preparations which are discussed in lectures and recita-tions are placed on a table where all may examine them, and the moreimportant ones are passed from hand to hand while they are beingdescribed. In speaking, for example, of rhubarb, digitalis, cinchona,67ergot, or opium, only brief historical remarks, with short accountsof their chemical composition and their behavior toward solvents areintroduced.Certainly all unnecessarily detailed description of crude drugs, oftheir active principles, or of the modern synthetic remedies, is out ofplace in a medical school. The instructor should allow himself butthe briefest introduction as to the physical and chemical propertiesof a drug before he begins the more important discussion of itspharmacological action. Thus, when chloral is the subject, he willdescribe its chemical relationship to the other anesthetics and hyp-notics, its solubilities, its deliquescence, its decomposability by alka-lies, etc. A rapidly-performed test-tube experiment showing how chlo-roform is split off when it is brought into contact with an alkali willprevent the student from prescribing it in this form. Such a methodof treatment consumes but little time and is easily comprehended bythe student who has had a suitable preliminary course in chemistry.In a word, I would teach materia medica in direct connection withpharmacology, letting it serve in the case of each drug or class of drugsas a brief introduction to the latter and giving only such parts as areindispensable to the physician in his administration of drugs or ofsuch historical significance that they ought not to be neglected fromthe culture point of view. Here, as everywhere in our crowded courses,wise selection is our only safeguard. With regard to the pharmacopeialpreparations it has always been my plan to require only a knowledgeof the more important ones, the student being requested merely toread over those of lesser importance. There is much truth in the re-mark made by William Withering more than a century ago, that "theingenuity of man has ever been fond of exerting itself to vary the formsand combinations of medicines. Hence we have spirituous, vinous, andacetous tinctures; extracts hard and soft, syrups with sugar or honey,etc., but the more we multiply the form of any medicine the longer weshall be in ascertaining the real dose."Certain chemical and physical points which have a bearing on thecombination of drugs as called for in prescriptions, or official prepara-tions may be taken up again in a brief course in pharmacy. I cannotbelieve that the art of preparing drugs for therapeutic use requires aprominent place in the better medical schools of the day. The youngphysician who is fairly well trained in chemistry can get all that isnecessary in the way of pharmacy out of a course of at most a dozenor fifteen lectures in which systems of weights and measures, incom-patibles, and special points relating to prescriptions are dealt with,68and in which demonsiiations are given of how pills, tablets, supposi-tories, tinctures, and other official preparations are prepared.In schools where the student is admitted with but a poor elementarytraining much more than this may be necessary. But, even under themost favorable conditions the limited course above outlined willleave much to be desired, even then the physician is not ensuredagainst the commission of grave enors in prescribing. Without furtherstudy he must often rely upon the friendly hand of the professionalpharmacist to correct his mistakes.Here, too, then, the question is one of selection, of just how muchwill suffice in a field which is occupied by an allied profession.There are gieat differences of opinion in regard to instruction inTherapeutics. In teaching pharmacology the therapeutic uses of drugsmust necessarily be considered in more or less detail and pharma-cological discoveries harmonized Avhenever possible with clinical prac-tice. It is, therefore, necessary that the teacher of pharmocology shallbe familiar with clinical work and with the actual effect of drugs andpoisons on human beings. It is not necessary, however, that he shouldbe an active practitioner, and it is only a man of unusual powers andexceptional training in science who can successfully combine practicewith the demands made on the pharmacologist of the present day asan investigator and a teacher. In all the leading universities of theworld it is becoming more and more the custom for teachers of physi-ology, anatomy, pathology, physiological chemistry, and hygiene todevote themselves wholly to the duties of their chairs, and this practicewill prevail more and more among pharmacologists as the wealth ofmedical foundations increases. No one individual, even if he has thewidest clinical experience, can hope to teach the whole art of thera-peutics. Is it necessary to attempt this? Is not the clinical teacher whois well grounded in the fundamental sciences the only one who canrightly train the medical student in the correct choice of drugs andother agents whose employment falls within his province?Who, for example, can better teach the student how to treat thevarious acute and chronic forms of skin disease than the dermatologist;who better to treat the diseases of young children than the pediatrist;who better the details of drug application in diseases of the eye, throat,and nose than the specialist in these branches; who give wiser coun-sel in the use of drugs, foods, and other agents in the wide field of theinternist than he who daily grapples with difficult problems in thecure and alleviation of disease? A practical mastery of therapeuticscan only be obtained from contact with these men and their work.69In a limited way, a special course in practical therapeutics in thefield of internal medicine may be given in a medical school, and it isof great assistance to the medical student who is obliged to enter uponpractice immediately and without the advantages to be derived froma year or two of hospital practice. A course of this kind is a part of thecurriculum of the Johns Hopkins Medical School and is given by aninstructor in clinical medicine. It occupies a period of 15 weeks andconsists of lectures and demonstrations given twice a week; as statedin the announcement of the gentleman in charge, this course com-prises the clinical study of a number of the more common and usefuldrugs, their dosage, administration, and effects, methods of prescrip-tion-writing and illustrative formula, demonstrations of practicaltherapeutic measures, the use of hydrotherapy, the preparation ofsimple and useful forms of diet, the care of patients considered fromthe nursing point of view, the treatment of various emergencies and ofspecial diseases by climate, rest, and other practical procedures.The clinical work of the third and fourth years affords abundantopportunities for further training in practical therapeutics.This brings me to the subject of lectures and recitations or con-ferences.Some didactic teaching, be it in the form of lectures, recitations orconferences, is necessary in most, if not all, branches of medicine. Inthese exercises, the teacher not only clears up doubtful points and sum-marizes scientific evidence, but he also has an opportunity to so di-rect "the unwary understanding" of the young, as Sir Thomas Brownehas it, that some perchance will escape intellectual sclerosis at forty.My own experience with students has led me to believe that theyprofit most if they have first read their textbooks before attending alecture on a given subject. The teacher's own experience is that hederives most advantage from a consultation with a specialist in someother branch of science when he has first informed himself on thepoints at issue. It is then that a short talk with a man of wide experi-ence easily clears up an obscure point. The student should be putinto a similar attitude of mind by proving to him that he will getmore out of an hour with his teacher than out of an hour with hisbooks at home. If the subject under discussion is one that is welltreated in textbooks, the established points may be passed in rapidreview and then the latest researches, the newer theories brought outby the instructor. Whenever it is possible to do so, demonstrationsand experiments should be used to illustrate the points under discus-sion, and these may be given either during the talk or immediatelyafter.70No matter how well a textbook may be written, the teacher who ishimself a ^vorker in the laboratory and who follows attentively theresearches of his contemporaries, will be able to clear up doubtfulpoints and also to daily anticipate the author's second edition, for thelast chapter of a textbook is hardly completed before the first needsrevision. Aside from this, he is likely to have the advantage of theauthor of the book in certain fields, for no man is able to cover thewhole ground with equal authority.Now as to the student's part. I hold that only the laboratory workand attendance on such demonstrations as are of the highest impor-tance should be obligatory. With such attendance and diligent readingof the best textbooks on the subject, the student will be able to bringhimself up to the "pass" mark, since the examination should onlycover the essential points, aiming like the later State examination totest and insure an average of attainment and an ability to make use ofacquired knowledge. Of course the student will not in this way getthe utmost possible out of the course, but to do this may not be a partof his plan of study.He should be plainly told that he need not attend the lectures andrecitations unless convinced that he will profit by them, and the headof the department and his corps of assistants will surely be above anysmall resentment ^vhen the student accepts this permission in goodfaith. The mutual attitude of teacher and student is of far more im-portance than rigidity of examinations or any tests or credentials what-ever. I firmly believe in the liberty of both teacher and student. It isbut fair to require of the former that he be a worker in some part of hisheld, and that he shall meet Avith enthusiasm and give his best to thosewho elect to go deeply into the subject as well as to do his duty tothose Avho choose only the minimum or required work.The immediate result of this frank understanding between teacherand student will be that the latter is free to give additional time andenergy to some other line of ^vork for which he may have a decidedbent. But much more, he has the freedom of personal choice, withall the development that it brings to one who understands his ownmental habits and needs. Petty and irritating restraints are removedand also the undue weight of authority sometimes attached to a cur-riculum stipposed to be the result of the wisest judgment of his elders.We are apt to forget that we are dealing with men and women of somematurity ^vhose plan for their life-work is made and who have a clearidea in general, of w^hat their time is worth. They should have, asBo^vditch, Mall, and other writers on this subject have pointed out,71the advantages of an elective system and also, I maintain, have somefreedom as to method of work in the field chosen.Have childish restrictions, such as marking for daily attendance,and all the hateful machinery of the factory time-card system, bywhich some teachers attempt diurnal estimates of the student's mentalstatus, resulted in such a remarkable elevation of the average student,that we should cling blindly to our present system?As to examinations, that "necessary evil," I believe it will be ad-mitted that, in subjects like that now under discussion, they shouldnot be conducted as if the student were intending to make a specialtyof each branch. They must be fair to the class as a whole. In my ownopinion, a combination of written and oral insures the best results.Personal knowledge of the student's laboratory work, and also of theintelligence shown by him in recitations, is of great importance inenabling the instructor to judge of a student's right to his pass certifi-cate. The ideal examiner for a given student is not always the manwho has taught him, but may well be a specialist of equal rank insome other university. Such a change, so stimulating to the intellectualindependence of the student, and so broadening to the teacher, couldonly be based on a better agreement than now exists in our countryas to the teaching of a given branch in schools of equal grade. As long asfaculties issue diplomas, they assume a responsibility toward the worldof learning. How they shall discharge this duty is too large a subjectfor full discussion here, but it is very desirable that the method usedshall involve a minimum of worry and strain on the part of the student,and of police duty on the part of the teacher.72On the Removal of DiffusibleSubstances from the CirculatingBlood by Means of DialysisJOHN J. ABEL, M.D.. L. G. ROWNTREE, M.D., ANDB. B. TURNER, M.D.HERE are numerous toxic states in which the eliminating organs ofthe body, more especially the kidneys, are incapable of removing fromthe body, at an adequate rate, the natural or unnatural substanceswhose accumulation is detrimental to life. In the hope of providinga substitute in such emergencies, which might tide over a dangerouscrisis, as well as for the important information which it might be ex-pected to provide, concerning the substances normally present in theblood, and also for the light that might thus be thrown on intermediarystages of metabolism, a method has been devised by which the blood ofa living animal may be submitted to dialysis outside the body, andagain returned to the natural circulation without exposure to air, in-fection by microorganisms, or any alteration which would necessarilybe prejudicial to life. The process may be appropriately referred to as"vividiffusion."Essentially, the method consists in passing the blood of an animalwhich has been made incoagulable in injection of hirudin from acannula connected to an artery through a tube or a series of tubes,made of celloidin or other suitable dialyzing membrane, containedin a jacket filled ^vith a saline solution or artificial serum, and back byanother cannula into a vein of the same animal. The tubes andcannulae before connection are filled with a saline solution approxi-mating to the composition of the blood, like Locke's or Ringer'ssolutions, which is displaced into the system when the circulation isestablished. Except that the blood-pressure falls somewhat, accordingto the proportion of the blood outside the body, the animal shows noimmediate symptoms, and with due regard to asepsis, makes a rapidand complete recovery after an experiment that may last several hours.73In one instance, where recovery was not aimed at, a dog anesthetizedwith chloretone was kept alive during a dialyzing period of sixteenhours with about one-third of its blood outside the body. At the endof an experiment the larger proportion of the blood in the apparatusmay be driven back into the body by air-pressure or by means of asaline solution which is allowed to flow into the dialyzing tubes froma higher level and which thus drives the blood ahead of it into thebody.Many experiments have been made to determine the best form ofapparatus combining maximum diffusing surface with minimum vol-ume, absolute freedom from leaks, ease of construction, uniformity offlow, minimum exposures to surfaces of glass or other substance liableto favor clotting, etc. The most efficient type in use at present hasthirty-two celloidin tubes of 8 mm. diameter, 40 cm, long, fastenedby tying with a string to a system of glass tubes branching dichoto-mously, so that the flow of blood takes place horizontally twice ineach direction through eight tubes in parallel. (An apparatus of thissize can only be attached to animals of at least fifty pounds' weight.)Flattened tubes and other types are being tried, while very small tubeswill undoubtedly prove valuable when the necessary time and troubleare not prohibitive. [See illustration between pages 16 and 17.]Such an apparatus can obviously be used in the solution of manyproblems, both therapeutic and physiological, and is especially valu-able in the latter case because, apart from the necessary anesthetic,the normal physiological condition is in nowise disturbed, as bybleeding to obtain large amounts of blood. Diffusible substances,present in only small proportion at one time, may be isolated in con-siderable quantities provided they are regenerated in the body as fastas they are removed. Evidence of this has already been obtained in thecase of the dialyzable (non-proteid) nitrogen which is extracted inlarge quantities in prolonged experiments. Determinations by VanSlyke's method have shown a high proportion of nitrogen in the formof amino gioups (NHo), and experiments are in progress for the iso-lation of individual amino-acids by Fischer's esterification method.Several grams of the esters have been obtained by distillation in avacuum of 1 to 16 mm. at temperatures from 70° to 180° C. Basesprecipitated by phosphotungstic acid have also been obtained, butthey apparently constitute a more complex mixture than those usu-ally obtained in the digestion of proteins by acids, and the discoveryof new bodies, possibly including polypeptids, seems probable.Quantitative data have been obtained with a view to comparing the74efficiency of the apparatus in the elimination of poisons with thenatural kidney. Administering to a rabbit 1 gram of sodium salicylate,an extraction as rapid as 3 per cent in one-half hour has been observed,which compares very favorably with the normal action of the kidneys;in the case of a dog ^vith the same dose, using another apparatus, 4per cent was obtained in the first hour and a total of about 20 per centin sixteen hours. Better results may be confidently expected with anapparatus having more surface in proportion to the volume. Potas-sium iodide also passes through the membrane readily as does phenol-sulphonphthalein. Of the substances naturally present in the body,sugar, phosphates, diastase and other substances diffuse in notableamount.Ethyl sulphide, (C^H5)^S, which is so readily evolved from dogs'urine on the addition of lime-water or other alkali, may be obtainedin like manner from the diffusate, showing that the mother-substanceof this malodorous compound is freely eliminated by our apparatus.A wide field of investigation is opened up by the use of this apparatusin a comparative study of the blood flowing to and from various or-gans ^vith reference both to the substances which they extract from,or add to, the general circulation and to the special active principles(hormones, etc.) which may be present in their internal secretions. Abeginning in this direction has been made by attaching the apparattisto the portal vein, (four experiments), the blood of which gave bydiffusion considerably more amino-acids (determined by Van Slyke'smethod) than that of the carotid. Work in this direction, as well asin the improvement of the apparatus for the various purposes aboveoutlined and accumulation of the experience necessary along theselines, is being pushed actively forward. A full description of the ap-paratus, with directions for its use, together with the results, will ap-pear in the January number (1914) of the Journal of Pharmacologyand Experimental Therapeutics.75Crystalline InsulinJOHN J. ABEL, M.D.In two preceding communications^- ^it has been told how my col-laborators and I were induced to attack the problem of the isolationof insulin and what progress had been made toward its solution towithin a few months past. It was there pointed out that a clue hadbeen found, the following out of which promised to lead to the desiredgoal. This clue eventuated from the observation that when the highlyimpure and complex, though therapeutically serviceable insulin ex-tracts of commerce are boiled for a short time with N/IO sodiumcarbonate the resulting physiological inactivation of the extracts isalways associated with an alteration of a part of their sulphur, an ele-ment which our experiments justified us in believing to be an integralconstituent of the hormone itself. After such treatment ^vith a weakalkali a new property appears in the altered insulin in that it nowshows an extraordinary sensitivity to very dilute acids which immedi-ately, and contrary to their usual action, liberate hydrogen sulphidefrom it. It was found that inert fractions prepared from such extractsof the pancreas contain very little of this labile sulphur and a tablewas constructed which showed that the labile sulphur of a preparationis directly proportional to its hypoglycaemic activity for experimentalanimals. In other words, the higher the amount of labile sulphur in agiven preparation the greater its potency in lowering the percentageof blood sugar.The methods usually employed in fractioning and purifying bio-logical mixtures have been found to be quite useless in the attemptto separate the hormone from the numerous impurities that are asso-ciated with it in even the best of the extracts employed in medicalpractice. Equally unsuitable to the purpose in mind was the employ-ment of the method of isoelectric precipitation from pH 4.7 to 5.0 nomatter how frequently repeated, as likewise the analogous method ofelectro-dialysis—a method which has not yielded results of any particu-lar value in the hands of those who have tried it out on insulin ex-tracts. We are here dealing with an ampholyte present in very small76amount in a solution of other ampholytes whose solubility and pre-cipitation coefficients lie very close to one another. It seemed worthwhile to the writer therefore to employ only weak bases and acids,more especially such as can act as buffers, in the hope that there mightresult from their use such an alteration of solubilities, that impuritieswould either fall out of or remain in solution while the hormone ineach case took the opposite course. The successful outcome of theexperiments proved the essential correctness of the idea.For a description of our earlier methods of purification the readeris referred to the first paper of this series. The employment of thesimple method there described, led uniformly to the preparation ofan insulin fraction. Fraction IV, with a rabbit unitage of 40 or moreunits to the milligram, a unitage that has lately been increased by amore skilful use of these earlier methods. The next steps in the processleading directly to the crystallization of insulin are as follows.One gram, approximately, of the so-called Fraction IV, is dissolvedin a little more than the required volume of N/6 acetic acid, enoughwater is added to bring the volume up to 60 cc. or thereabout, and thecontaminating substances (together with some insulin) are then pre-cipitated by the addition of an acidulated solution of brucine contain-ing 6 gms. of brucine in 95 cc. of N/6 acetic acid. The resulting clearsupernatant fluid which contains nearly pure insulin is separatedfrom the precipitate by centrifugalization. Insulin remaining in theprecipitate may be removed by dissolving in N/6 acetic acid andprecipitating with the brucine solution as before. How profitable itmay be to repeat the process has not been determined at the moment.The clear colorless centrifugalate containing the insulin is then pre-cipitated ^vith iV/6 pyridine and the precipitate and fluid are immedi-ately centrifuged. The precipitate which settles out is largely crystal-line in character, the sides of the tube are found to be coated withglistening highly refractive crystals and the topmost layer of the pre-cipitate consists of similar crystals. It is not a difficult matter to removethis topmost layer of crystals by means of a rubber-mounted pipetteand to free them from adherent pyridine and acetic acid by frequentlywashing them with distilled water at room temperature in whichmedium pure crystalline insulin is quite insoluble. The crystals maybe recrystallized by dissolving them in N/6 acetic acid and reprecipitat-ing with N'/6 pyridine. It has been my practice, however, of late todissolve this crystalline insulin together with whatever fine granularmaterial there happens to be mixed with it in M/15 disodium hydro-gen phosphate. To the clear solution xV/6 acetic acid is added drop by77drop with vigorous shaking in order tliat any insulin thrown out willat once pass into solution again, and this addition of the acid is con-tinued until a slight amount of turbidity persists permanently. Theflask is then carefully set aside overnight. On the following morningthe bottom of the flask as well as its sides are coated with an abundanceof colorless, highly refractive crystals. The small amount of amor-phous insulin that falls out in very minute granules or floccules—anexpression of the above-mentioned turbidity— is readily separated bymeans of the pipette during the washing with cold water, as the com-pact crystals obtained by this method sink quickly to the bottom of thetube like so much sea sand. This process of crystallization may be re-peated as often as is thought to be necessary. Only a few experimentshave as yet been made with the object of crystallizing the compoundfrom hot solvents, and to prepare crystalline derivatives.Professor Swartz of the Department of Geology of the Johns Hop-kins University has kindly examined samples of the insulin crystalsand reports them as being very uniform in character suggesting ahigh degree of purity, as doubly refracting and as belonging to therhombohedral division of the hexagonal system. [See illustration be-tween pages 16 and 17.] The crystals which are allowed to form moreslowly out of acidulated disoditim hydrogen phosphate solution arevery much larger than those precipitated quickly by pyridine out ofan acetic acid solution, such crystals being readily perceptible to thenaked eye as individual crystals. Irrespective of the manner of theirpreparation the crystals melt sharply at 233 °C. with slight browningoccurring at 215°C. The melting point has remained constant on re-crystallization.Chemical Reactions.—A large fraction of the sulphur of the mole-cule is in the labile state previously described as characteristic of allinsulin fractions of high rabbit unitage. Quantitative analyses of boththe labile and more firmly bound sulphur are in progress. The com-pound gives a beautiful biuret reaction passing from a clear pink to afine purple on further addition of copper sulphate to the alkalinesolution. Millon's reaction is unequivocal and positive. The Paulyand the ninhydrin reactions are also positive. This pure insulin isvery sensitive to alkali, as shown by the fact that boiling for 1 5 minuteswith iV/10 sodium carbonate deprives it entirely of its hypoglycaemicactivity. It will be seen that the chemical reactions here described areof considerable significance as shedding light on the chemical struc-ture of the compound. It is now being examined in respect to its other78physical and chemical properties and efforts will also be made to iden-tify its various cleavage products.Animal Experiments.—Numerous tests have already been made inorder to establish the exact rabbit unitage of the crystalline compound.The rabbit unit employed by us is that fraction of a milligram perkilogram of body weight which will cause convulsions or lower theblood sugar to 0.045 per cent within 5 hours. This corresponds to ap-proximately IV2 times the "clinical unit" used at present.The exact dosage of the crystalline material has not yet been estab-lished, but for the present, as is shown in the subjoined table (1),amounts as small asi^Qgof a milligram per kilo lowered the bloodTABLE 1Blood Sugar DeterminationsInsulin crystals dissolved in M/15 Na2HP04 .1 mgm. equivalent to 10 cc. solution.Injections were made subcutaneously.My collaborators in this field of work, Dr. E. M. K. Geiling, Dr.C. A. Rouiller and Dr. David Campbell and I hope to be able in dueseason to publish more extensive reports on the various researcheswhich naturally arise in the investigation of the properties, chemicaland biological, of the pure product.^Abel, J. J., and Geiling, E. M. K., Jour. Pharm, and Expcr. Therap., 25, 423,1925."Abel, J. J., Geiling, E. M. K., Alles, G., and Raymond, A., Science, 67, 169,1925.80^•.^'A'(^:jV\.i-l-<:,(.^;i'•:.;:V,^;. ,•'•.:;;'