   III. 

Encouraged  and  animated  by  this  suc- 
cess, I  soon  formed  the  design  of  engaging 
in  another  publication,  and  set  myself  to 
choose  a  subject.  It  was  poverty,  not  am- 
bition, or  vanity,  that  first  induced  me  to 
become  an  author,  or  rather  a  compiler.  But 
I  now  formed  the  flattering  idea,  that  I  might 
not  only  help  myself,  but  benefit  the  public. 
With  this  view,  I  engaged  in  writing  a  Sum- 
mary History  of  New  England.  I  selected 
this  subject,  rather  for  public  utility,  than  for 
my  own  gratification.  My  object  was  to 
render  my  compilation  useful  to  those  in 
early  life,  who  had  not  time  or  opportunity 
to  peruse  the  large  mass  of  materials,  which, 
previously  to  my  compilation,  lay  scattered 
in  many  publications.  I  knew  the  work 
would  require  much  reading  upon  dry  sub- 
jects, such  as  ancient  news  prints,  state  pa- 
pers, &amp;c.     But  I  wrote  for  a  bare   subsis- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  23 

tence,  and  never  wished  to  gain  anything 
from  the  public  which  I  had  not  at  least 
earned  bj  laborious  investigation.  I  also 
considered,  that  attention  to  such  an  antipo- 
etical  subject  would  have  a  tendency  to  keep 
my  mind  in  a  more  healthy  state,  than  the  pe- 
rusal of  works  which  are  calculated  to  excite 
the  feelings.  I  therefore  resolved  to  fix  my 
attention  by  investigating  simple  facts,  and 
by  relinquishing  to  a  great  extent  the  reading 
works  of  taste  and  imagination. 

When  I  compiled  this  work,  there  was  not 
any  history  of  New  England  extant,  except 
Mather's  Magnalia,   and  Neale's    History ; 
and  these  extended  only  to  an  early  period  in 
the  annals  of  our  country.     If  there  had  been 
only  one  work,  which  reached  to  the  accep- 
tance of  the  Federal  constitution,   my   task 
had  been  far  less  laborious.     There  was  no 
authentic  account  of  Rhode   Island,   except 
that  of  Callender's.     This   induced  me   to 
spend  some  time  in  Providence,  in  order  to 
examine  the  Records  in  the  Secretary's  office. 
The  perusal  of  old  manuscripts,  which  were 
damaged  by  time,  was  painful  to  my  eyes  ; 


24  LIFE    OF 

but  as  they  were  naturally  strong,  I  did  not 
for  some  time  perceive  the  injury  I  suffered 
from  the  task. 

After  I  returned  from  Providence,  I  attend- 
ed to  my  compilation  with  unremitting  dili- 
gence, and  hoped  not  only  to  obtain  a  tem- 
porary support,  but  to  make  a  small  provis- 
ion for  future  subsistence.  Stimulated  by 
these  sanguine  views,  I  wrote  early  and  late 
during  one  winter,  and  expected  to  put  my 
work  to  the  press  the  ensuing  spring.  But 
how  vain  were  all  these  pleasing  anticipa- 
tions !  A  new  misfortune  arrested  my  pro- 
gress, and  made  me  feel  my  entire  depen- 
dence upon  divine  Providence.  I  found  my 
sight  suddenly  fail  to  that  degree,  that  I  was 
obliged  to  lay  aside  reading,  writing,  and  eve- 
ry employment  which  required  the  use  of  my 
eyes.  In  this  distressed  situation,  I  consult- 
ed a  number  of  physicians ;  and  their  prescrip- 
tions rather  increased,  than  diminished  my 
complaints.  The  gloomy  apprehension  of 
being  totally  deprived  of  my  sight  was  dis- 
tressing beyond  description.  I  not  only 
anticipated  the  misfortune  of  being  obliged 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  25 

forever  to  relinquish  those  literary  pursuits 
which  had  constituted  so  much  of  my  enjoy- 
ment during  life,  and  was  at  this  time  my 
only  resource  for  a  subsistence,  but  as  I  had 
from  my  earliest  years  been  an  enthusiastic 
admirer  of  the  beauties  of  nature,  I  felt  the 
most  painful  sensation  in  reflecting  that  the 
time  might  arrive,  when 

'  With  the  year 
Seasons  return,  but  not  to  me  return 
Day,  or  tlie  sweet  approach  of  eve  or  morn, 
Or  sight  of  vernal  bloom,  or  summer  rose. ' 

At  length,  by  the  advice  of  a  respectable 
friend,  I  applied  to  Dr  Jeffries  ;  and  by  assid- 
uously following  his  prescriptions  for  about 
two  years,  I  partially  recovered  my  sight. 
For  the  encouragement  of  those  who  are 
troubled  with  similar  complaints,  I  would 
mention,  that  when  I  first  consulted  the  doc- 
tor, he  had  not  any  expectation  my  eyes  would 
recover  so  as  to  enable  me  to  make  the  use 
of  them  I  have  since  done.  But  by  apply- 
ing laudanum  and  sea  water  several  times  in 
the  course  of  the  day,  for  two  years,  I  re- 
covered so  far  as  to  resume  my  studies  ;  and 
S 


26  LIFE    OF 

by  employing  an  amanuensis  to  assist  me  in 
transcribing  my  manuscript,  I  was  enabled  to 
print  the  work  in  1799.  Previously  to  put- 
ting the  copy  to  the  press,  I  consulted  all  the 
living  authors,  and  showed  them  the  use  I 
had  made  of  their  works  in  my  compilation, 
and  they  did  not  make  any  objection.  As 
my  eyes  were  still  weak,  I  could  not  bestow 
the  same  attention  in  condensing  the  last 
part  of  my  History,  as  the  first ;  and  conse- 
quently the  History  of  the  American  Revo- 
lution was  much  more  prolix  than  I  originally 
intended.  In  giving  an  account  of  the  war, 
my  ignorance  of  military  terms  rendered  it 
necessary  to  transcribe  more  from  Dr  Ram- 
say's History,  than  I  had  done  in  any  other 
part  of  the  w  ork.  I  therefore  wrote  an  apol- 
ogy to  the  doctor,  and  had  the  satisfaction  of 
receiving  in  return  a  very  interesting  letter 
from  Mrs  Ramsay,  expressing  her  approba- 
tion of  my  work,  and  inclosing  a  bill  of  ten 
dollars.  Before  my  eyes  failed,  I  had  sent 
out  a  subscription  paper  ;  but  afterward,  the 
idea  that  I  never  should  be  able  to  complete 
the  compilation,  induced  me  to  drop  it ;  and 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  27 

I  was  obliged  to  publish  the  work  almost 
entirely  at  my  own  expense.  The  printers 
were  in  low  circumstances,  and  required  pay- 
ment before  I  could  dispose  of  the  books. 
I  was  therefore  obliged  to  borrow  a  sum  of 
money  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  work, 
which,  as  it  was  printed  on  very  good  paper, 
were  large,  and  I  derived  but  little  profit 
from  my  labor. 

My  next  publication  w^as  the  third  edition 
of  my  View  of  Religions,  to  which  I  made 
the  addition  of  a  hundred  pages.  The 
Rev.  Mr  Freeman,  who  continued  his  kind 
attentions,  made  the  bargain  for  me  with  the 
printer,  by  which  I  was  entitled  to  receive 
five  hundred  dollars  in  yearly  payments,  for 
an  edition  of  two  thousand  copies.  This 
relieved  me  from  the  embarrassments  in 
which  I  was  involved  by  printing  my  History 
of  New  England  at  my  own  expense.  As 
my  eyes  still  continued  too  weak  to  engage 
in  any  new  laborious  work,  I  determined  to 
wait  till  a  large  part  of  my  History  of  New 
England  w^as  sold  ;  and  then,  if  my  life  con- 
tinued, to  abridge  it  for  the  use  of  schools. 


28  LIFE    OF 

In  the  meantime,  however,  I  set  about 
writmg  a  concise  Yiewof  the  Christian  Re- 
ligion, selected  from  the  writings  of  eminent 
lajmen.  I  wrote  with  difficulty,  as  my  eyes 
were  still  very  weak  ;  but  I  wished  to  exert 
myself  as  much  as  possible  to  be  useful,  and  to 
gain  a  subsistence.  Though  attention  to  reli- 
gious controversy  had  led  me  to  feel  undecid- 
ed on  some  disputed  points,  of  which  perhaps 
Christians  of  equal  piety  form  different  opin- 
ions, my  conviction  of  the  truth  of  divine  rev- 
elation, instead  of  being  weakened  by  all  my 
researches,  was  strengthened  and  confirmed ; 
and  I  wished  to  make  a  public  declaration  of 
my  sentiments  on  this  important  subject.  I 
found  it  difficult  to  procure  proper  materials 
for  the  work,  as  I  was  utterly  unable  to  pur- 
chase books.  A  considerable  part  of  this 
compilation,  as  well  as  the  additions  to  -the 
third  edition  of  my  View  of  Religions,  was 
written  in  booksellers'  shops.  I  went  to 
make  visits  in  Boston,  in  order  to  consult 
books  in  this  way,  which  it  was  impossible 
for  me  to  buy,  or  borrow.  1  desire,  however, 
to  recognise  with  gratitude  the  attention  of 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  29 

my  kind  father,  who  took  pains  that  I  should 
have  the  benefit  of  all  books  which  he  could 
procure,  and  assisted  me  greatly  in  disposing 
of  my  works.  When  I  had  completed  my 
compilation,  I  found  the  printers  and  book- 
sellers unwilling  to  purchase  the  copy,  be- 
cause much  had  been  written  on  the  subject, 
and  these  publications  were  unsaleable.  At 
length,  in  1804, 1  agreed  with  a  printer  to  ex- 
ecute the  work,  upon  the  small  consideration 
of  receiving  only  one  hundred  dollars  in 
books. 

The  tenor  of  my  life  at  this  time  was  very 
monotonous.  It  was  enlivened,  however,  by 
gleams  of  happiness,  from  the  society  of  a 
few  friends,  and  the  pleasure  I  derived  from 
literary  pursuits ;  and,  by  my  convictions  of 
the  truth  of  that  religion,  to  the  examination 
of  which  I  had  devoted  so  much  of  my  time. 
My  eyes  still  continued  very  weak,  and  I 
wrote  under  the  apprehension  of  being  reduced 
to  a  state  that  would  preclude  all  application 
to  study.  A  considerable  part  of  my  Histo- 
ry of  New  England  being  now  disposed  of, 
my  only  resource  appeared  to  be  to  abridge 
3* 


30  LIFE    OF 

that  work  for  the  use  of  schools.  The  pro- 
fit I  hoped  to  derive  from  this  compilation 
seemed  to  me  to  constitute  all  I  had  to  de- 
pend upon  in  future,  if  my  life  should  be 
spared.  While  I  entertained  these  hopes,  in 
which  1  was  made  sanguine  by  my  know- 
ledge of  the  success  with  which  books  for 
schools  had  been  printed,  can  it  be  a  subject 
of  blame,  or  reproach,  to  a  person  in  my 
situation,  that  I  felt  extremely  grieved,  and 
hurt,  when  I  found  my  design  anticipated  by 
a  reverend  gentleman,  whose  calling,  and  in- 
defatigable industry,  are  highly  respectable  ? 
The  difference  between  us  was  left  to  re- 
ferees, who  sustained  a  high  reputation  for 
ability,  and  sound  judgment,  extensive  infor- 
mation, and  moral  excellence.  I  was  satis- 
fied with  their  decision.  But  I  was  reduced 
to  the  painful  task  of  writing  on  the  subject ; 
for,  though  I  took  this  measure  with  extreme 
reluctance,  my  opponent  left  me  no  other 
alternative.  I  sincerely  hope  the  painful 
affair  may  never  be  recalled  to  his  prejudice. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  31 


