   II. 

Until  I  had  attained  the  twentieth  year 
of  my  age,  my  reading  had  chiefly  consisted 
of  works  of  imagination  and  feeling  ;  such  as 
novels  and  poetry.  Even  the  religious  w^orks 
I  perused  were  chiefly  devotional  poetry,  and 
such  works  as  Mrs  Row^e's  Devout  Exercises, 
and  the  lives  of  persons  who  w  ere  eminent- 
ly distinguished  for  their  piety.  I  was  al- 
most a  stranger  to  controversial  works,  and 
had  never  examined  the  points  in  dispute  be- 
tween different  denominations  of  Christians. 
But  at  length  an  incident  in  my  life  gave  a 
diflerentturn  to  my  literary  pursuit. 

While  I  was  engaged  in  learning  Latin  and 
Greek,  one  of  the  gentlemen  who  taught  me 
had  by  him  a  small  manuscript  from  Brough- 
ton's  Dictionary,  giving  an  account  of  Armin- 
ians,  Calvinists,  and  several  other  denomina- 
tions which  were  most  common.  This  awak- 
ened my  curiosity,  and  I  assiduously  engag- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  11 

ed  myself  in  perusing  all  the  books  which  I 
could  obtain,  which  gave  an  account  of  the 
various  sentiments  described.    I  soon  became 
disgusted  w^ith  the  want    of  candor  in  the 
authors  I  consulted,  in  giving  the  most  unfa- 
vorable  descriptions    of  the    denominations 
they  disliked,  and  applying  to  them  the  names 
of  heretics,  fanatics,  enth  usiasts,  &amp;c.    I  there- 
fore formed  a  plan  for  myself,  made   a  blank 
book,  and  wrote    rules  for  transcribing,  and 
adding    to,  my  compilation.     But  as  I  w^as 
stimulated  to  proceed  only  by  curiosity,  and 
never  had  an  idea  of  deriving  any  profit  from 
it,  the  compilation  went  on  but  slowdy,  though 
I  was  pressed  by  necessity  to  make  every  exer- 
tions in  my  power  for  my  immediate  support. 
During  the    American    revolutionary  war,  I 
learned  to  wTave  bobbin  lace,  which  was  then 
saleable,  and  much  more  profitable  to  me  than 
spinning,  sewing  or  knitting,  which  had  pre- 
viously been  my  employment.     At    this  pe- 
riod I  found  but  little  time  for  literary  pur- 
suits.    But  at  the  termination  of  the  Amer- 
ican war,  this  resource  failed,  and  I  was  again 
left  in  a  destitute  situation.     My  health  did 


12 


LIFE    OF 


not  admit  of  my  teaching  a  school,  and  I 
was  glad  to  avail  mjself  of  every  opportu- 
nity of  taking  any  kind  of  v\^ork  which  I 
could  do,  though  the  profit  was  very  small, 
and  inadequate  to  my  support.  One  pleas- 
ing event  occurred  in  this  gloomy  period.  I 
had  the  satisfactionof  teaching  the  rudiments 
of  Latin  and  Greek  to  three  young  gentle- 
men, who  resided  in  the  vicinity.  This  was 
some  advantage  to  me.  Besides,  it  was  a 
pleasant  amusement.  One  of  these  young 
gentlemen  was  the  Rev.  Mr  Clark,  of  Norton, 
who  pursued  his  studies  with  me  till  he  en- 
tered Cambridge  University,  and  has  contin- 
ued his  friendship  for  me  during  life  ;  and 
his  uniform  excellent  character  I  have  ever 
highly  appreciated. 

The  difficulty  of  taking  in  such  kinds  of 
work  as  I  could  do,  for  I  was  not,  like  my 
sister,  ingenious  in  all  kinds  of  needle  work, 
induced  me,  as  the  last  resort,  to  attend  to  my 
manuscript,  with  t]ie  faint  hope  that  it  might 
be  printed,  and  afford  me  some  little  ad- 
vantage. I  was  far  from  bemg  sanguine  as 
to  the  result,  even  if  I  accomplished  this  ob- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  13 

ject,  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  employing 
myself  very  diligently  for  trifling  profits,  and 
those  who  are  in  easy  circumstances  cannot 
form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  lively  satisfac- 
tion I  felt,  when  I  could  procure  any  work 
by  which  I  could  earn  a  few  shillings.  This 
kind  of  enjoyment,  which  Providence  has 
given  to  the  poor,  appears  intended  to  soften 
the  many  difficulties  in  their  situation. 

I  was  sensible,  that,  in  printing  my  manu- 
script, I  had  various  obstacles  to  encounter. 
It  w^as  difficult  to  procure  proper  materials 
for  the  work  in  my  sequestered  abode.  I  felt 
that  my  ignorance  of  the  world,  and  little 
acquaintance  with  business,  would  put  me  in 
the  power  of  every  printer  to  whom  I  might 
apply.  I,  however,  resumed  my  compilation 
on  an  enlarged  scale,  which  included  a  few 
of  the  reasons  which  the  various  denomina- 
tions give  in  defence  of  their  different  reli- 
gious systems.  Stimulated  by  an  ardent 
curiosity,  I  entered  into  the  vast  field  of 
religious  controversy,  for  which  my  early 
reading  had  ill  prepared  me.  I  perused  all 
the  controversial  works  I  could  possibly  obtain 
2 


14  LIFE    OF 

with  the  utmost  attention,  in  order  to  abridge 
what  appeared  to  me  the  most  plausible  ar- 
guments for  every  denomination.     As  I  read 
controversy  with   a  mind  naturally  wanting 
in  firmness  and  decision,  and  without  that 
pertinacity  which  blunts  the   force  of  argu- 
ments which  are  opposed   to  the  tenets  we 
have  once  imbibed,  I  suffered  extremely  from 
mental  indecision,  while  perusing  the  various 
and  contradictory  arguments  adduced  by  men 
of  piety  and  learning  in  defence  of  their  re- 
spective religious  systems.     Sometimes  my 
mind  was  so  strongly  excited,  that  extreme 
feeling  obliged  me  for  a  time  to  lay  aside  my 
employment.     Notwithstanding   it  required 
much  reading  to  perform  my  task,  the  pain- 
ful  feelings  I   suffered  while   preparing  my 
work  for   the  press  far  outweighed   all  the 
other  labor.     Reading  much  religious  con- 
troversy must  be  extremely  trying  to  a  female, 
whose  mind,   instead  of  being  strengthened 
by  those  studies  which  exercise  the  judg- 
ment, and  give  stability  to  the  character,  is 
debilitated  by  reading  romances  and  novels, 
which  are  addressed  to  the  fancy  and  imagi- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  15 

nation,  and  are  calculated  to  heighten  the 
feelings. 

After  my  View  of  Religions  was  pre- 
pared for  the  press,  the  difficulty  still  remain- 
ed of  finding  any  printer  willing  and  able  to 
print  it  without  money  immediately  paid. 
But  at  length,  after  various  perplexities,  this 
compilation  was  put  to  the  press  in  1784. 
The  profit  to  myself  was  very  small ;  for,  as 
it  might  well  have  been  expected  from  my 
father's  inexperience  in  the  business  of  book 
making,  he  was  completely  duped  by  the 
printer,  in  making  the  bargain.  After  being 
at  the  trouble  of  procuring  upwards  of  four 
hundred  subscribers,  all  the  compensation  1 
was  able  to  obtain,  was  only  fifty  books  ;  and 
I  was  obliged  to  find  a  sale  for  them,  after 
the  printer,  (whose  name,  out  of  respect  to 
his  descendants,  I  omit  to  mention,)  had  re- 
ceived all  the  subscri})tion  money.  As  my 
books  sold  very  well,  the  printer  must  have 
made  something  handsome  by  the  publica- 
tion. 

The  effect  of  reading  so  much  reli- 
gious   controversy,   which    had    been  very 


16  LIFE    OF 

trying  to  my  mind,  was  extremely  prejudicial 
to  my  health,  and  introduced  a  train  of  the 
most  painful  nervous  complaints.  I  was  at 
length  brought  so  low,  that  the  physician  who 
attended  me  supposed  I  was  in  a  decline. 
But  after  a  tedious  interval  of  extreme  suffer- 
ing, I  began  gradually  to  recover  ;  and  after- 
wards found  my  complaints  were  increased, 
by  following  the  injudicious  advice  of  the 
physician  who  attended  me.  To  the  skill 
and  attention  of  my  friend  Dr  Mann,  former- 
ly of  Wrentham,  I  owe,  under  Heaven,  the 
preservation  of  my  life  at  this  period. 

Soon  after  I  began  to  recover,  I  received  a 
letter  from  the  printer  of  my  View  of  Reli- 
gions, informing  me  that  he  had  sold  the 
greatest  part  of  the  edition,  and  was  about 
to  reprint  it;  and  requesting  me  to  inform  him 
if  I  Avished  to  make  any  additions  to  my 
work.  As  I  had  the  precaution  to  secure  the 
copy- right,  agreeably  to  the  law  passed  in 
Massachusetts,  1783,  I  returned  a  laconic, 
answer,  forbidding  him  to  reprint  it  ;  and 
he  finally  relinquished  the  design. 

The  information,  that  the  first  edition  of 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  17 

my  View  of  Religions  was  sold,  gave  me  the 
idea  of  reprinting  it  for  my  own  benefit. 
But  as  I  was  entirely  destitute  of  pecuniary 
resources,  ignorant  of  ihe  world,  incapable  of 
conducting  business,  and  precluded  from  al- 
most all  intercourse  with  persons  of  literature 
and  information,  and  consequently  destitute 
of  friends  who  were  able  and  willing  to  assist 
me,  the  execution  of  the  plan  was  ex- 
tremely difficult.  Even  the  few  friends  I 
had  gained  at  that  time  supposed  the  disad- 
vantages in  my  situation  too  great  to  encour- 
age, my  undertaking.  Instead  of  assisting 
me,  they  considered  my  plan  as  chimerical, 
and  depressed  my  hopes  and  discouraged  my 
exertions. 

While  I  was  struggling  with  embarrass- 
ments and  difficulties,  I  was  involved  in  the 
deepest  affliction  by  the  death  of  the  belov- 
ed sister,  whom  I  mentioned  in  the  preced- 
ing Chapter.  I  then  experienced  the  keen- 
est anguish  the  human  heart  can  feel  in  los- 
ing a  friend. 

Dearer  than  life,  or  aught  below  the  skies, 
The  bright  ideas  and  romantic  schemes 

2'^ 


18  LIFE    OF 

Of  perfect  love,  and  friendship,  fancy  paints, 
In  her  I  realized. 

To  describe  the  excess  of  mj  grief  on  this 
occasion  would  be  altogether  impossible. 
Those,  only,  who  have  formed  the  highest 
ideas  of  friendship,  and  have  considered  their 
earthly  happiness  as  dependent  upon  the  life 
of  one  beloved  object,  on  whose  judgment 
they  relied,  and  in  whom  they  found  com- 
fort and  support  in  every  difficulty  and  af- 
fliction, can  form  an  adequate  idea  of  what 
i  felt  on  this  occasion ;  which  led  me  to  ex- 
claim. 

And  is  she  dead  !     My  life,  my  all  is  gone. 
The  world's  a  desert.     Nothing  now  on  earth 
Can  yield  me  joy,  or  comfort. 

The  death  of  my  beloved  sister  made  me 
feel  almost  alone  in  the  w^orld.  Our  joys 
and  sorrows,  and  all  our  interests  were  so 
closely  blended,  that  I  nearly  identified  her 
existence  with  my  own.  Everything  ap- 
peared gloomy  in  my  situation.  My  health 
was  feeble  ;  I  was  entirely  destitute  of  prop- 
erty ;  my  father's  circumstances  were  very 
low  ;  and  I  had  no  other  relation  or  friend 


MISS    HANISAH    ADAMS.  19 

from  whom  I  might  expect  to  derive  assis- 
tance. But  notwithstanding  all  the  difficul- 
ties in  my  situation,  I  determined  to  use  every 
possible  exertion  to  help  myself;  considering 
that,  if  I  was  unsucessful  in  attempting  to 
extricate  myself  from  poverty,  my  efforts 
would  awaken  the  activity  of  my  mind,  and 
preserve  me  from  sinking  under  the  weight 
of  affliction  I  sustained  in  losing  the  best  of 
sisters.  It  was,  perhaps,  a  happy  circum- 
stance, that  necessity  stimulated  me  to  ex- 
ertion in  this  most  gloomy  period  of  my  ex- 
istence. 

After  I  began  to  prepare  the  additions  to 
my  View  of  Religions,  I  found  it  required  a 
great  effort  to  detach  my  mind  from  the  re- 
collection of  past  sufferings,  and  force  my- 
self to  that  mental  exertion  which  is  natur- 
ally so  congenial  to  my  mind.  At  length, 
however,  I  completed  the  task  of  preparing 
my  work  for  the  press.  I  had  previously, 
in  1790,  sent  a  petition  to  Congress,  which 
was  presented  by  the  late  Fisher  Ames, 
Esq.  for  a  general  law  to  be  passed,  to 
secure  to  authors  the  copy-right  of  their  pub- 


20  LIFE    OF 

lications.  I  now  applied  to  a  large  number 
of  printers  to  know  on  what  terms  *  they 
would  publish  my  work.  But,  though  I 
wrote  nearly  the  same  letter  to  all,  consist- 
ing of  a  few  direct  questions,  their  answers 
were  generally  various,  prolix,  and  ambig- 
uous. 

I  at  length  concluded  to  accept  the  terms 
of  one  of  the  printers  to  whom  I  applied, 
who  offered  me  one  hundred  dollars  in  books, 
for  an  edition  of  one  thousand  copies.  When 
I  went  to  Boston  for  this  purpose,  a  friend 
of  mine  introduced  me  to  the  Rev.  Mr  Free- 
man, whom  I  had  only  once  before  seen  : 
but  I  was  well  apprised  of  his  benevolent 
character,  which  I  found  more  than  realized 
the  ideas  which  I  had  formed  of  it  from  re- 
port. I  shall  ever  recollect  the  generous  in- 
terest he  took  in  my  affairs,  with  the  most 
lively  gratitude.  He  removed  my  perplex- 
ity, by  transacting  the  business  with  the 
printer.  By  his  advice,  a  subscription  pa- 
per was  published  ;  and  I  soon  found  theben- 
eiii  of  bis  patronage,  in  procuring  a  large 
number   of   subscribers,  and  concluding   an 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  21 

advantageous  bargain  for  me  with  Mr  Fol- 
som,  the  printer.  The  second  editioi?  was 
published  in  1791;  and  the  emolument  I  de- 
rived from  it  not  only  placed  me  in  a  com- 
fortable situation,  but  enabled  me  to  pay  the 
debts  I  had  contracted  during  mine  and  my 
sister's  illness,  and  to  put  out  a  small  sum 
upon  interest. 


22  LIFE    OF 


