  IV. 


Notwithstanding  the  little  profit,  and  va- 
rious discouragements  I  had  experienced  in 
writing  for  the  press,  as  I  w^as  entirely  de- 
pendent upon  my  own  exertions  for  a  sup- 
port, I  was  resolved  to  persevere.  1  had 
now  acquired  a  number  of  valuable  friends, 
to  whose  generous  exertions  in  my  favor  I 
was  deeply  indebted.  By  several  of  them, 
I  was  enabled  to  put  my  abridgment  of  the 
History  of  New  England  to  the  press.  I  was 
however  unfortunate  in  this,  as  well  as  my 
other  compilations.  The  printer  failed  while 
it  was  in  the  press,  which  deprived  me  of 
the  profit  I  expected  to  derive  from  it.  Two 
years  afterwards,  I  published  a  new  edition. 
A  similar  misfortune  befel  me  in  this  second 
attempt  to  avail  myself  of  my  labors. 

But  though  my  productions  were  far  from 
being  profitable,  and  I  had   frequent   inter- 


32  LIFE    OF 

ruptions  in  my  studies  from  ill  health,  and 
bad  ejes,  I  still  had  mj  share  of  enjoyment. 
I  hoped  my  works  might  be  useful,  and  I 
was  highly  gratified  by  their  candid  recep- 
tion by  the  public. 

I  next  chose  a  subject  in  which  I  thought 
it  probable  that  I  should  not  meet  with  any 
interference.  1  formed  the  design  of  wri- 
ting the  History  of  the  Jews,  though  I  was 
sensible  that  it  would  require  much  reading, 
and  that  I  must  wander  through  a  dreary 
wilderness,  unenlivened  by  one  spot  of  ver- 
dure. My  curiosity  was  strongly  excited, 
and  I  determined  to  persevere  in  my  at- 
tempt to  investigate  the  fate  of  this  won- 
derful people.  I  began  the  introduction 
with  their  state  under  the  Persian  monar- 
chy, after  their  restoration  from  the  Baby- 
lonish captivity.  The  standard  works  for 
this  History  were  Josephus,  and  Basnage, 
the  latter  of  whom  brings  his  narrative  down 
only  to  the  19th  century.  After  this  pe- 
riod, I  was  obliged  to  compile  from  desultory 
publications  and  manuscripts.  I  had  at  this 
time  the  privilege  of  corresponding  with  the 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  33 

celebrated  Gregoire,  who  had  attamed 
great  ceJebritj  for  the  conspicuous  part  he 
acted  during  the  French  Revolution,  and  ex- 
erted all  his  energy  in  the  first  constitu- 
tional assembly  to  procure  the  rights  of  cit- 
izens for  the  Jews.  He  had  the  goodness 
to  send  me  some  writings  in  their  favor, 
which  increased  the  interest  I  felt  in  this 
oppressed  people. 

Previously  to  concluding  this  gloomy  detail 
of  the  difficulties  1  encountered,  while  wri- 
ting for  the  press,  I  would  fir^t  notice,  that 
I  was  obliged  to  exert  myself  to  the  utmost 
to  overcome  my  natural  timidity,  and  ac- 
commodate myself  to  my  situation.  After 
the  age  and  infirmities  of  my  father  pre- 
vented him  fiom  assisting  me,  as  he  had 
formerly  done,  in  selling  and  exchanging 
the  copies  of  my  work,  I  was  necessitated  to 
exert  myself  in  doing  business  out  of  the 
female  line,  which  exposed  me  to  public 
notice.  And  as  I  could  not  but  be  sensible 
that  my  manners  were  remarkably  awk- 
ward, this  consciousness,  joined  with  my  ig- 
norance of  the  established  rules  of  proprie- 


34  LIFE    OF 

ty,  rendered  me  tremblingly  apprehensive 
of  exposing  myself  to  ridicule.  These  un- 
pleasant feelings,  however,  in  time  abated. 
In  order  to  meet  this  trial,  I  considered, 
that  w^hat  is  right  and  necessary  in  the  sit- 
uation in  which  Providence  has  placed  me, 
cannot  be  really  improper  ;  and  though  my 
acting  upon  this  principle  may  have  exposed 
me  to  the  censure,  or  ridicule  of  those,  whose 
ideas  upon  the  subject  are  derived  from  the 
varying  modes  of  fashion,  and  not  from  the 
unchanging  laws  of  moral  rectitude,  it  saved 
me  from  a  feeling  which  would  have  been 
infinitely  more  painful,  that  of  self-reproach. 
My  objects  were,  to  obtain  the  approbation 
of  my  own  heart,  and  the  esteem  of  a  few 
friends  whose  opinion  I  most  highly  prized, 
and  I  was  comparatively  indifferent  to  the 
censure  or  ridicule  of  the  world  in  general. 
In  the  life  of  Mrs  Charlotte  Smith  it  is 
pertly  remarked,  that  the  '  penalties  and 
discouragements  attending  authors  in  gen- 
eral fall  upon  woman  with  double  weight* 
To  the  curiosity  of  the  idle,  and  the  envy 
of  the  malicious,  their  sex  affords  a  pecu- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  35 

liar  excitement.  Arraigned  not  merely  as 
writers,  but  as  women,  their  characters,  their 
conduct,  and  even  their  personal  endow- 
ments, become  the  object  of  severe  inquisi- 
tion. From  the  common  allowances  claimed 
bj  the  species,  literary  women  appear  only 
to  be  exempted.' 

Though  I  have  been  too  insignificant,  and 
treated  with  too  much  candor,  fully  to  real- 
ize the  above  remarks,  yet  I  have  been  in 
a  situation  deeply  to  feel  the  trials  which  at- 
tend literary  pursuits.  At  length  I  saw  old 
age  approaching,  without  any  provision  for 
it,  when  if  my  life  was  spared,  I  should  be 
incapable  of  exerting  myself ;  and  my  mind 
was  at  times  depressed  by  this  gloomy  pros- 
pect. 


36  LIFE    OF 


