   I. 

Being  arrived  at  an  age  in  which  I  cannot 
reasonably  expect  my  life  will  be  long  con- 
tinued, at  the  request  of  a  highly  esteem- 
ed friend  I  am  about  to  give  a  concise  out- 
line of  my  past  life  ;  notwithstanding  I  am 
sensible  that  a  retrospect  of  past  errors,  faults 
and  misfortunes,  will  be  exceedingly  painful. 

I  was  born  in  Mediield,  a  country  town 
about  eighteen  miles  from  Boston.  My  father 
early  imbibed  a  love  of  literature,  and  pre- 
pared to  enter  the  university.  But  as  his 
constitution  then  appeared  to  be  very  infirm, 
and  he  was  an  only  son,  his  parents  were 
strenuously  opposed  to  his  leaving  ihem. 
Accordingly,  to  his  inexpressible  disappoint- 
ment, he  was  obliged  to  settle  upon  their  large 
farm,  without  a  suitable  knowledge  of,  or 
taste  for,  agricultural  pursuits.  This  induc- 
1 


Z  LIFE    OF 

ed  him  to  open  a  shop,  for  the  sale,  pnncipal- 
ly,  of  English  Goods  and  Books.  His  taste 
for  reading  continued  unabated  till  his  death, 
which  took  place  at  the  advanced  age  of 
eightyeight  years. 

From  my  infancy  I  had  a  feeble  constitu- 
tion ;  in  particular,  an  extreme  weakness 
and  irritability  in  my  nervous  system.  Hence 
I  can  recollect  uneasiness  and  pain  previous 
to  any  pleasurable  sensations.  My  mother 
was  an  excellent  woman,  and  deservedly  es- 
teemed and  beloved  ;  but  as  her  own  health 
was  delicate,  and  she  possessed  great  tender- 
ness and  sensibility,  I  was  educated  in  all  the 
habits  of  debilitating  softness,  which  probably 
added  to  my  constitutional  want  of  bodily 
and  mental  firmness. 

My  father's  circumstances  then  appeared 
affluent,  and  it  was  not  supposed  I  should  be 
reduced  to  the  necessity  of  supporting  my- 
self by  my  own  exertions.  Partly  from  ill 
health,  and  an  early  singularity  of  taste,  1 
took  no  pleasure  in  the  amusements  to 
which  children  are  generally  much  attached. 
My  health  did  not  even  admit  of  attending 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  D 

school  with  the  children  in  the  neis^hborhood 
where  I  resided.  The  country  scliools,  at 
that  time,  were  kept  but  a  few  months  in 
the  year,  and  all  that  was  then  taught  in 
them  was  reading,  writing  and  arithmetic. 
In  the  summer,  the  children  were  instructed 
by  females  in  reading,  sewing,  and  other 
kinds  of  work.  The  books  chiefly  made  use 
of  were  the  Bible,  and  Psaher.  Those  who 
have  had  the  advantages  of  receiving  the  ru- 
diments of  their  education  at  the  schools  of 
the  present  day,  can  scarcely  form  an  ade- 
quate idea  of  the  contrast  between  them,  and 
those  of  an  earlier  age  ;  and  of  the  great  im- 
provements which  have  been  made  even  in 
the  common  country  schools.  The  disad- 
vantages of  my  early  education  I  have  expe- 
rienced during  life  ;  and,  among  various  oth- 
ers, the  acquiring  a  very  faulty  pronunciation ; 
a  habit  contracted  so  early,  that  I  cannot 
wholly  rectify  it  in  later  years. 

In  my  early  years  I  was  extremely  timid, 
and  averse  from  appearing  in  company.  In- 
deed, I  found  but  few  with  whom  I  could 
happily  associate.     My  life,   however,  was 


LIFE    OF 


not  devoid  of  enjoyment.  The  first  strong 
propensity  of  my  mind  which  I  can  recollect, 
was  an  ardent  curiosity,  and  desire  to  acquire 
knowledge.  I  remember  that  my  first  ideaof 
the  happiness  of  Heaven  was,  of  a  place 
where  we  should  find  our  thirst  for  knowledge 
fully  gratified.  From  my  predominant  taste 
I  was  induced  to  apply  to  reading,  and  as  my 
father  had  a  considerable  library,  I  was  en- 
abled to  gratify  my  inclination.  I  read  with 
avidity  a  variety  of  books,  previously  to 
my  mind's  being  sufficiently  matured,  and 
strengthened,  to  make  a  proper  selection.  I 
was  passionately  fond  of  novels  ;  and,  as  I 
lived  in  a  state  of  seclusion,  I  acquired  false 
ideas  of  life.  The  ideal  world  which  my 
imagination  formed  was  very  different  from 
the  real.  My  passions  were  naturally  strong, 
and  this  kind  of  reading  heightened  my  sen- 
sibility, by  calling  it  forth  to  realize  scenes 
of  imaginary  distress.  I  was  also  an  enthu- 
siastic admirer  of  poetry  ;  and  as  my  memory, 
at  an  early  period,  was  very  tenacious,  I 
committed  much  of  the  writings  of  my  favor- 
ite poets  to  memory,  such  as  Milton,  Thorn- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  O 

son,  Young,  &amp;:c.  I  did  not,  however,  neglect 
the  study  of  history  and  biography,  in  each 
of  which  kind  of  reading  I  found  an  inexhausti- 
ble fund  to  feast  my  mind,  and  gratify  my  cu- 
riosity. 

Another  source  of  my  enjoyments  in  early 
life  was  an  ardent  admiration  of  the  beau- 
ties of  nature.  This  enthusiasm  was  height- 
ened by  the  glowing  descriptions  of  poetic 
writers,  and  I  entered  into  all  their  feelings. 
This  taste  has  continued  through  life.  At  the 
present  time,  when  age  and  experience  have 
in  some  measure  repressed  the  warmth  of  my 
feelings,  and  while  I  am  now  writing,  I 
should  be  more  delighted  with  beautiful  ru- 
ral prospects,  and  fine  flowers,  than  when  in 
early  life  I  used  to  be  enraptured  with  con- 
templating the  sublime  and  beautiful  in  the 
works  of  creation. 

My  early  life  was  diversified  with  few 
events,  and  those  of  a  painful  nature.  The 
loss  oF  my  excellent  mother,  which  happen- 
ed when  I  had  reached  my  tenth  year,  was 
the  first  severe  trial  I  was  called  to  suffer. 
When  her  death  took  place^  I  was  at  an  age 
1* 


b  LIFE    OF 

when  maternal  direction  is  of  the  greatest 
importance,  joarticularly  in  the  education  of 
daughters.  Soon  after,  I  was  bereaved  of 
an  aunt,  who  was  attached  to  me  with  al- 
most maternal  fondness.  A  few  years  after, 
my  father  failed  in  trade,  in  consequence  of 
which  I  was  reduced  to  poverty,  with  a  con- 
stitution and  early  habits  which  appeared  in- 
vincible obstacles  to  my  supporting  myself 
by  my  own  exertions.  Instead  of  that  gaye- 
ty,  which  is  often  attendant  on  youth,  I  was 
early  accustomed  to  scenes  of  melancholy 
and  distress ;  and  every  misfortune  was  en- 
hanced by  a  radical  want  of  health,  and  firm- 
ness of  mind.  My  life  passed  in  seclusion, 
with  gloomy  prospects  before  me,  and  sur- 
rounded with  various  perplexities  from  which 
I  could  not  extricate  myself.  The  solitude 
in  which  I  lived  was,  however,  to  me,  pre- 
ferable to  society  in  general ;  and  to  that, 
and  to  my  natural  singularity,  I  must  impute 
that  awkwardness  of  manners,  of  which  I 
never  could  divest  myself  at  an  advanced  pe- 
riod of  life.  A  consciousness  of  this  awkward- 
ness produced  a  dislike  to  the   company  of 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  7 

Strangers.  Those  who  have  been  accustom- 
ed to  general  society  when  young,  can  scarce- 
ly imagine  the  trembling  timidity  I  felt,  when 
introduced  to  my  superiors  in  circumstances 
and  education.  I,  however,  enjoyed  society 
upon  a  small  scale.  1  had  a  few  dear  friends, 
(for  novels  had  taught  me  to  be  very  roman- 
tic,) who  were  chiefly  in  indigent  circumstan- 
ces, and  like  myself  had  imbibed  a  taste  for 
reading,  and  were  particularly  fond  of  poet- 
ry and  novels.  Most  of  them  wrote  verses, 
which  were  read  and  admired  by  the  whole 
little  circle.  Our  mutual  love  of  literature, 
want  of  fortune,  and  indifference  to  the  so- 
ciety of  those  whose  minds  were  wholly  un- 
cultivated, served  to  cement  a  union  between 
us,  which  was  interrupted  only  by  the  remov- 
al of  the  parties  to  distant  places,  and  dis- 
solved only  by  their  death.  Yet  I  soon 
experienced  this  melancholy  change.  One 
after  another  became  victims  to  the  King  of 
Terrors,  till  our  little  society  was  greatly 
diminished  ;  and  I  deeply  felt  these  bereave- 
ments which  were  irreparable. 
Still,  however,  I  was  blessed  with  a  sister  of 


8  LIFE    OF 

similar  taste  and  sentiments,  but  very  dif- 
ferent in  her  disposition.  I  was  warm  and  ir- 
ritable in  my  temper  ;  she,  placid  and  even. 
I  was  fluctuating  and  undecided  ;  she,  steady 
and  judicious.  I  was  extremely  timid  ;  she 
blended  softness  with  courage  and  fortitude. 
I  was  inclined  to  be  melancholy,  though 
sometimes  in  high  spirits  ;  she  was  uniform- 
ly serene  and  cheerful.  I  placed  the  strong- 
est reliance  upon  her  judgment,  and  as  she 
was  older  than  myself,  she  seemed  the  ma- 
ternal friend,  as  well  as  the  best  of  sisters. 
In  short,  '  she  was  my  guide,  my  friend,  my 
earthly  alL^ 

As  I  was  too  feeble  to  engage  in  any  la- 
borious employments,  I  found  considerable 
leisure  for  reading ;  and  as  my  happiness 
chiefly  consisted  in  literary  pursuits,  I  was 
very  desirous  of  learning  the  rudiments  of  Lat- 
in, Greek,  geography ,  and  logic.  Some  gen- 
tlemen who  boarded  at  my  father's  offered 
to  instruct  me  in  these  branches  of  learning 
gratis,  and  I  pursued  these  studies  with  in- 
describable pleasure  and  avidity.  I  still, 
however,  sensibly  felt  the  want  of  a  more  sys- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  \j 

tematic  education,  and  those  advantages  which 
females  enjoy  in  the  present  day.  Yet  as  I 
always  read  with  great  rapidity,  perhaps 
few  of  my  sex  have  perused  more  books 
at  the  age  of  twenty  than  I  had.  Yet 
my  reading  was  very  desultory,  and  novels 
engaged  too  much  of  my  attention.  Though 
my  seclusion  from  the  world  preserved  me 
from  many  temptations  which  are  incident 
to  young  people,  I  was  perhaps  more  expos- 
ed to  errors  of  the  understanding,  than  those 
who  in  early  life  have  mixed  more  with  the 
world.  Time  and  experience  have  led  me 
to  see  the  falsity  of  many  of  my  early  opin- 
ions, and  ideas,  and  made  me  sensible  that 
they  were  the  source  of  a  large  share  of 
the  misfortunes  of  my  following  life. 


10  LIFE    OF 


