   V. 

While  I  was  compiling  my  History  of  the 
Jews,  I  boarded  in  Dedham.  I  was  here 
honored  with  the  friendship,  and  received 
the  kind  offices  of  Mr  Dowse,  his  lady,  and 
her  sister,*  and  more  pecuniary  favors  than  I 
have  ever  experienced  from  any  other  indi- 
viduals. Whenever  I  visited  this  happy 
family,  I  was  received  with  the  utmost  cor- 
diality ;  and  I  desire  publicly  to  express  my 
grateful  sense  of  their  goodness. 

While  writing  my  History,  my  eyes,  which, 
since  I  had  first  injured  them,  have  been 
occasionally  troublesome,  failed  to  that  de- 
gree, that  I  was  induced  again  to  go  to  Boston 
to  consult  Dr  Jeffi^ies,  in  the  hope,  that,  by 
attending  to  his  directions,  I  might  finish  my 

*Mrs  Shaw,  who  allowed  Miss  Adams  one  hundred  dol- 
lars a  year,  for  twentyfive  years,  paid  to  her  quarterly,  by 
Josiah  Q,uincy,  Esq. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  37 

work.  During  this  visit  at  Boston,  I  receiv- 
ed the  unexpected  intelligence,  that  a  num- 
ber of  benevolent  gentlemen  had  settled  an 
annuity  upon  me,  to  relieve  me  from  the 
embarrassments  I  had  hitherto  suffered. 
The  Hon.  Josiah  Quincy,  Stephen  Higgin- 
son,  Esq.  and  William  Shaw,  Esq.  were  some 
of  its  first  promoters.  This  providential 
interference  excited  my  most  lively  gratitude 
to  my  generous  benefactors,  and  I  hope  I 
sensibly  felt  my  deep  obligation  to  the  source 
of  all  good. 

My  generous  friends  could  hardly  appre- 
ciate the  extent  of  the  benefit  they  conferred 
upon  me.  I  had  not  been  able  to  make  any 
provision  for  my  declining  years,  and  had  not 
a  place  on  earth  which  I  could  call  my  home. 
My  spirits  were  depressed  by  my  destitute 
circumstances,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  un- 
der Providence,  the  generosity  of  my  friends 
was  the  means  of  prolonging  my  life. 

I  had  now  attained  a  condition  more  eligi- 
ble than  my  most  sanguine  wishes  could  ever 
have  led  me  to  anticipate.  If  in  early  life 
I  could  have  enjoyed  the  literary  advantages 
4 


38 


LIFE    OF 


I  now  possessed,  I  should  have  thought  it 
the  height  of  earthly  happiness.  But  I  was 
now  too  far  advanced  in  life  to  profit  by  the 
advantages  I  had  gained.  However,  1  was 
grateful,  and  happy.  My  friend  William 
Shaw,  Esq.  gave  me  the  liberty  of  frequent- 
ing the  Atheneum.  Amidst  that  large  and 
valuable  collection  of  books,  I  found  an  in- 
exhaustible source  of  information  and  enter- 
tainment ;  and  among  other  advantages,  I 
found  a  few  literary  friends,  in  whose  conver- 
sation I  enjoyed  '  the  feast  of  reason  and 
the  flow  of  soul.'  Among  the  many  bless- 
ings I  was  favored  with,  I  shall  ever  highly 
appreciate  the  acquaintance  and  friendship  of 
the  late  Rev.  Mr  Buckminster,  in  whom  I 
contemplated  with  admiration  the  rare  union 
of  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious  excellence; 
of  a  powerful  mind  with  extensive  informa- 
tion, and  a  feeling  heart  enlivened  by  devo- 
tion. He  was  admired  for  his  distinguished 
abilities  and  learning  by  all  who  knew  him  ; 
but  the  peculiar  traits  of  benevolence,  noble- 
ness of  mind,  sincerity  and  sweetness  of 
temper,  which  adorned  his  character,  could 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  39 

only  be  duly  appreciated  by  those  who  were 
honored  with  his  friendship. 

Mr  Buckminster  was  so  kind  as  to  give 
me  the  use  of  his  large  and  valuable  library, 
which  was  of  great  advantage  to  me  in  com- 
piling my  History  of  the  Jews.  In  my  ef- 
forts to  complete  the  work,  I  was  encourag- 
ed and  animated  by  his  participating  in  the 
interest  I  felt  in  this  extraordinary  people. 
Though  entering  into  the  details  of  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  persecuted  Jewish  Nation,  yet 
the  enthusiasm  Mr  Buckminster  inspired, 
and  the  pleasure  of  conversing  with  him 
upon  a  subject  with  which  he  was  intimately 
acquainted,  rendered  the  time  I  was  writing 
my  History  one  of  the  happiest  periods  of 
my  life.  I  completed  my  work  in  1812,  a 
few  months  before  his   death. 

In  the  year  1812  I  sustained  a  severe  af- 
fliction, by  the  sudden  death  of  Mr  Buck- 
minster. Amidst  the  large  number  who 
lamented  his  death,  I  believe  there  was  none 
(except  his  near  relations)  who  felt  more  dis- 
tressed than  myself.  I  desire,  however,  to  be 
grateful  to  divine  Providence  for  the  privi- 
lege of  his  acquaintance  and  friendship. 


40  LIFE    OF 

While  my  feelings  were  deeply  suscepti- 
ble from  the  recent  wound  they  had  received 
by  the  death  of  Mr  Buckminster,  I  went  to 
Medfield  to  visit  my  aged  father,  with  the 
hope  that  I  might  do  something  to  adminis- 
ter to  his  comfort,  and  in  this  way  soothe  my 
own  grief.  But  while  I  was  with  him,  he 
was  seized  with  a  complaint  which  put  a 
period  to  his  life.  Though  from  his  age, 
and  infirmities,  I  had  been  often  led  to  an- 
ticipate this  event,  I  found  it  very  trying 
when  I  actually  realized  it.  He  had  been  a 
very  kind  parent  to  me,  and  though  he  could 
not  bestow  any  property  upon  me,  he  was 
very  solicitous  to  aid  me  as  far  as  he  could. 
He  was  a  great  assistant  to  me  both  in  pro- 
coring  books,  and  in  disposing  of  my  works. 
During  the  last  years  of  his  life,  he  was  as- 
siduously engaged  in  studying  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  with  the  assistance  of  all  the 
commentaries  he  could  procure.  In  the  fune- 
ral sermon  preached  upon  his  death,  the  Rev. 
Dr  Prentiss  observes,  '  He  was  ever  strongly 
attached  to  the  society  of  literary  and  se- 
rious people,  particularly  of  the  clergy,  with 
a  number  of  whom  he  kept  up  a  friendly  in- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  41 

tercourse.  There  is  reason  to  believe,  that 
by  his  exertions  for  many  years  he  contribu- 
ted in  no  small  degree  to  the  diffusion  of 
knowledge  and  piety,  and  to  the  advance- 
ment of  the  cause  of  Christ.'  My  father's 
love  of  books  continued  till  the  last.  He 
read,  and  heard  reading,  on  the  day  on  which 
he  expired.  My  residence  in  Boston  en- 
abled me  to  procure  books  for  his  perusal, 
and  it  afforded  me  great  pleasure  to  be  thus 
permitted  to  gratify  my  honored  parent. 

When,  after  the  death  of  my  father,  I 
returned  to  Boston,  my  mind  was  depressed 
with  my  recent  losses.  But  I  was  sensible 
that  I  was  still  favored  with  many  inestima- 
ble privileges.  Mr  Buckminster  had  been 
so  kind  as  to  introduce  me  to  a  number  of 
his  acc[uaintances,  who  treated  me  with  that 
genuine  kindness  which  is  the  essence  of 
true  politeness. 

Among  the  number  of  those  excellent 
friends,  to  whom  Mr  Buckminster  was  so 
kind  as  to  introduce  me,  I  would  particular- 
ly recognise  Mrs  Dearborn,  and  Mrs  Win- 
4* 


42 


LIFE    OF 


throp,  who  shone  in  the  circles  of  polished 
life,  and  adorned  their  eminent  stations  by 
their  engaging  manners,  and  highly  cultiva- 
ted minds  ;  and  still  more,  by  their  christian 
virtues.  They  were  blessings  to  those 
around  them  ;  and  for  a  course  of  years  fa- 
vored me  with  their  attention,  and  kind  offi- 
ces. When  they  were  removed  by  death  to  a 
higher  state  of  existence,  I  deeply  mourn- 
ed the  heavy  and  irreparable  loss  I  sustained. 

While  deeply  indebted  to  the  bounty  of 
my  dear  and  honored  friends,  I  wished  to 
pursue  my  literary  occupations  with  as  much 
diligence  as  my  health  would  permit.  But  in 
the  decline  of  life,  I  was  so  far  debilitated  by 
repeated  fevers,  at  small  intervals  from  each 
other,  that  I  was  unable  to  write  for  the 
press.  At  length,  I  so  far  recovered,  as  to 
resume  a  work  I  had  formerly  begun-,  upon 
the  New  Testament,  which  I  designed  to  be 
much  larger  than  it  is;  but  my  advanced  age 
induced  me  only  to  publish  a  little  book,  en- 
titled, '  Letters  on  the  Gospels,'  which  has 
passed  through  two  editions. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  perplexity 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  43 

and  embarrassment  of  my  mind,  while  wri- 
ting my  View  of  Religions.  After  remov- 
ing to  Boston,  and  residing  in  that  city  while 
the  disputes  upon  Unitarian  sentiments 
were  warmly  agitated,  I  read  all  that  came 
in  my  way  upon  both  sides  of  the  question  ; 
and  carefully  examined  the  New  Testament, 
with,  I  think,  a  sincere  and  ardent  desire  to 
know  the  truth.  I  deeply  felt  the  difficul- 
ties upon  both  sides  of  the  question  ;  yet 
prevailingly  give  the  preference  to  that  class 
of  Unitarians,  who  adopt  the  highest  idea  of 
the  greatness  and  dignity  of  the  Son  of  God. 
I  never  arrived  to  that  degree  of  decision 
that  some  have  attained  on  that  subject. 
In  this,  and  every  other  disputable  sub- 
ject, I  would  adopt  the  following  lines ; 

If  I  am  right,  thy  grace  impart 

Still  in  the  right  to  stay  ; 
If  I  am  wrong,  O  teach  my  heart, 

To  find  the  better  way. 


NOTICES 

IN     CONTINUATION 


BY    A  FRIEND. 


NOTICES. 


Those  who  have  been  favored  with  a 
personal  knowledge  of  the  Author  of  the 
short  Memoir  contained  in  this  book,  will 
read  it  with  the  deepest  interest ;  and  per- 
haps to  them  it  may  seem  almost  superflu- 
ous to  say  more  of  her.  But  Miss  Adams's 
works  have  circulated  far  beyond  the  sphere 
in  which  she  moved,  and  there  are  many 
who  are  desirous  of  knowing  her,  as  she  was 
appreciated  by  others,  and  not  by  her  own 
estimate.  Such  would  be  poorly  satisfied 
with  the  short  sketch  she  has  given  of  her- 
self, though  her  friends  must  ever  value  it  as 
a  parting  legacy. 

The  ^  timidity  of  early  years '  followed 
Miss  Adams  through  life  ;  and,  even  when 
surround  ^d    by    intimate    friends,    it   never 


48  LIFE    OF 

wholly  forsook  her.  It  was  a  sensitiveness 
that  sprung  from  deep  feeling,  and  a  diffi- 
dence that  was  the  result  of  genuine  hu- 
mility. This  often  operated  unfavorably 
upon  her  manners,  and  produced  an  awkward- 
ness, of  which  she- was  painfully  conscious. 
But  there  were  times  vv^hen  the  warmth  of 
her  heart,  and  the  cultivation  of  her  mind, 
gave  an  enthusiasm  and  eloquence  to  her 
language,  that  astonished  those  who  listened 
to  her.  At  such  times,  her  countenance  lost 
its  usual  calm  placidity,  and  glowed  with  an 
animation  that  rendered  it  highly  interesting. 
There  was  indeed  a  wonderful  singularity  in 
her  appearance.  In  the  circles  of  polished 
life  to  which  she  was  often  courted,  there 
was  nothing  like  her.  In  the  circles  of  hum- 
ble life,  she  was  equally  unassuming,  and 
equally  peculiar.  No  one  could  see  her, 
without  feeling  that  she  was  not  of  this 
world.  It  is  possible  that  part  of  this  timid- 
ity might  have  arisen  from  the  seclusion  of 
early  years.  But  it  is  certain,  that  no  culture, 
or  discipline,  could  have  formed  her  man- 
ners to  the  standard  of  easy  and  fashionable 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  49 

life.  She  sometimes  observed,  '  I  know  I 
am  very  awkward  ;  I  never  could  learn  to 
make  a  curtsey.'  But  it  must  not  be  suppos- 
ed that  there  was  in  her  any  want  of  gentle- 
ness, or  propriety.  Her  disinterested  and 
affectionate  disposition  made  her,  in  reality, 
all  that  the  most  calculating  would  desire  to 
appear. 

The  simplicity,  and  often  the  abstracted- 
ness of  Miss  Adams'  manner,  led  many  to  sup- 
pose that  her  talents  were  confined  to  the  sub- 
jects on  which  she  wrote.  Some  considered 
her  as  a  walking  dictionary  of  '  Religious 
Opinions.'  Others  viewed  her  merely  as  an 
'  Abridgment  of  the  History  of  New  Eng- 
land.' And  many  said,  '  if  you  want  to 
know  Miss  Adams,  you  must  talk  to  her 
about  the  Jews.'  And  this  last  was,  indeed, 
a  subject  that  always  called  forth  the  energy 
of  her  mind.  She  had  faithfully  studied 
their  history,  and  she  venerated  the  antiqui- 
ty of  their  origin.  Her  inquiring  mind  was 
deeply  interested  by  their  '  wonderful  desti- 
nation, peculiar  habits,  and  religious  rites.' 
She  felt  for  them  as  a  suffering  and  persecut- 
5 


50  LIFE    OF 

ed  people  ;  and  she  felt  yet  more,  when  she 
considered  them  as  a  standing  monument  of 
that  religion,  which  she  regarded  as  the 
first  and  best  of  God's  gifts  to  men.  It  was 
the  long  contemplation  of  this  chosen  race 
that  induced  her,  amidst  all  the  obstacles 
that  were  in  her  way,  to  write  their  history. 
It  was  an  arduous  labor.  Yet  her  work  is 
a  proof,  that,  in  this  *  barren  wilderness  she 
found  many  a  spot  of  verdure.'  But  those 
who  viewed  her  merely  in  relation  to  her 
literary  works,  knew  her  but  imperfectly. 
With  her  extreme  simplicity,  there  was  an 
uncommon  depth  of  observation,  and  an  in- 
tuitive knowledge  of  character.  She  was 
often  in  circles  where  her  timidity  kept  her 
almost  wholly  silent,  and  where  she  hardly 
seemed  to  be  even  a  spectator.  But  her 
subsequent  remarks  would  show  how  accu- 
rately she  had  observed,  and  how  nicely  she 
had  discriminated.  In  speaking  of  a  lady 
of  her  acquaintance,  she  said,  '  I  value  and 
admire  her,  but  I  can  never  be  easy  with  her. 
She  is  so  kind,  and  so  condescending,  that  I 
can  see  she  never  forgets  I  am  a  poor  awk- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  61 

ward  old  woman.'  At  another  time,  when 
deploring  the  loss  of  a  young  lady,  whose 
fine  talents  had  made  her  the  delight  of  her 
friends,  '  and  yet,'  she  said,  '  she  died  at  the 
best  time.  Her  powers  were  brilliant,  and 
beautiful,  but  they  were  exhausting  to  her- 
self; and  had  she  lived,  she  would  have 
faded  before  she  reached  her  prime.'  Her 
mind  was  habitually  cheerful,  and  her  cheer- 
fulness was  much  increased  by  her  sensibility 
to  the  works  of  nature.  She  looked  upon 
every  object  with  the  eye  of  a  poet,  and 
forgot  her  infirmities,  and  even  her  diffidence, 
as  she  described  her  emotions.  On  visiting 
her  sister,  who  resided  in  the  country,  after 
having  been  confined  to  her  chamber,  in  the 
city  through  the  winter,  *  it  seemed  to  me,' 
said  she,  *  as  if  the  world  was  just  created.' 
No  one  could  exclaim  with  more  feeling  and 
truth, 

*  T  care  not,  fortune,  what  you  me  deny, 
You  cannot  rob  me  of  free  nature's  grace, 
You  cannot  bar  the  windows  of  the  sky. 
Through  which  Aurora  shows  her  brightening  face.* 

There  is  but  little  doubt,  that,  had  she 


52  LIFE    OF 

given  way  to  the  natural  temperament  of  her 
mind,  which  was  enthusiastic  and  romantic, 
she  might  have  been  a  poet.  But  her  duties, 
and  her  lot',  led  her  into  a  different  path  of 
life.  In  her  youth,  however,  she  occasion- 
ally listened  to  the  inspiration  of  the  muses  ; 
and  though  she  never  set  any  value  on  these 
productions,  they  discover  much  excellent 
thought,  and  a  high  tone  of  feeling. 

The  want  of  early  advantages,  to  which 
Miss  Adams  so  feelingly  alludes  in  her  me- 
moirs, ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  nor  the 
difficulties  through  which  she  struggled. 
Her  attendance  upon  any  school  was  ex- 
tremely uncertain,  and  often  interrupted  by 
her  feeble  health.  Added  to  this,  the  schools 
of  a  country  '  village  are  not  often  of  the 
highest  class.  Even  the  elementary  parts 
of  education  are  much  neglected  in  them. 
'  I  never,'  said  she,  '  was  taught  how  to  hold 
my  pen.' 

There  is  nothing  that  more  strikingly  de- 
notes the  progress  of  literature  in  this  part 
of  the  country,  than  the  attention  which  is 
at  present  paid  to  female  education.     There 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS,  53 

are  few  branches,  if  any,  in  which  boys  are 
instructed,  which  are  not  now  equally  open 
to  girls.  Not  many  years  ago,  however,  the 
test  of  a  good  school  rested  principally  upon 
the  exhibitions  made  of  hand-writing,  spel- 
ling, and  arithmetic.  Grammar,  it  is  true, 
was  professedly  taught,  but  in  a  manner  that 
conveyed  few  ideas  to  the  pupil.  To  get 
the  longest  lessons,  and  to  be  at  the  head  of 
the  class,  constituted  the  best  scholar.  By 
degrees,  parsing,  in  its  simplest  forms,  was 
Introduced,  to  aid  the  knowledge  of  gram- 
mar. Composition,  geography  and  history 
followed  ;  and  the  education  of  girls  began 
to  assume  a  more  respectable  standing.  Yet 
even  at  this  period,  our  village  school-mas- 
ter much  resembled  Goldsmith's,  of  whom, 

*  The  village  all  declared  how  much  he  knew  ; 
'Twas  certain  he  could  write   and  cipher  too.' 

It  was  at  such  schools  as  these  that  Miss 
Adams  received  her  early  education.  Her  ar- 
dent thirst  for  knowledge,  however,  and  her 
industry  and  perseverance  enabled  her,  in  ma- 
turer  life,  to  make  uncommon  acquirements. 
6* 


54  LIFE    OF 

Yet  she  always  felt,  and  regretted,  the 
want  of  more  thorough,  and  systematic  in- 
struction. Her  father  entered  into  trade 
as  a  desperate  resource  from  the  weariness 
of  an  agricultural  life,  for  which  he  had  no 
taste.  He  was  plundered,  and  cheated  by  the 
man,  whom  he  engaged  to  carry  on  his  farm ; 
and  as  he  had  plunged  into  all  the  transac- 
tions of  a  country  trader,  dealing  in  books 
and  drugs,  English  and  West  India  goods, 
through  all  came  vexation  and  disappoint- 
ment, and  a  total  failure  ensued.  A  large 
proportion  of  his  books  were  left  on  his 
hands,  and  afforded  to  Miss  Adams  great  fa- 
cilities for  reading.  Her  father,  too,  happily 
for  her,  had  encouraged  in  her  a  taste  con- 
genial to  his  own  ;  and  her  mind  became  cul- 
tivated, and  embued  with  knowledge,  al- 
most without  her  own  consciousness  of  the 
progress  she  was  making.  How^ever  unpro- 
pitious  to  her  were  the  pecuniary  disap- 
pointments of  her  father's  life,  they  seem  to 
have  exerted  a  favorable  influence  on  her 
mind.  Resort  was  had  also,  at  this  time,  to  the 
receiving  of  several  boarders  into  the  family ; 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  55 

and  from  these  she  acquired  the  knowledge 
of  Greek  and  Latin.  Of  this  knowledge,  she 
tells  us  she  availed  herself,  for  fitting  three 
young  men  for  College ;  and  for  Mr  P. 
Clark,  one  of  her  pupils,  mentioned  in  her 
memoirs,  she  retained  through  life  the  warm- 
est regard.  He  married  a  friend  of  hers  ; 
and  '  this,'  said  she, '  was  the  only  match  I 
ever  had  any  hand  in  making.'  Of  her 
mother,  she  ahvays  spoke  with  enthusiastic 
reverence  ;  and  though  only  eleven  years  of 
age  when  she  died,  she  retained  a  perfect  re- 
collection of  her.  Mrs  Adams  was  married 
at  fifteen,  and  died  at  the  age  of  thirty 
three,  leaving  three  girls  and  two  boys. 
Her  short  life  seems  to  have  been  filled  with 
usefuUiess  ;  and  the  following  epitaph,  writ- 
ten by  an  Episcopal  clergyman,  who  was  a 
particular  friend,  and  constant  visitor  of  the 
family,  may  still  be  traced  on  her  humble 
grave  stone,  should  any  descendant  of  '  Old 
Mortality'  chance  to  wander  to  the  spot. 

*  Beneath  this  monument  of  love  and  truth, 
Rear'd  by  fair  gratitude's  persuasive  call, 
Rest  the  remains  of  innocence,  and  youth  ; 
Esteem'd,  lamented,  and  beloved  by  all. 


56  LIFE    OF 

Fond  of  retirement,  and  of  rural  ease, 
Her  sober  wishes  never  loved  to  stray. 
Heaven  was  her  aim,  her  study,  how  to  please, 
And  carefully  improve  each  fleeting  day  ; 
To  worth,  a  friend  ;  a  parent  to  the  poor. 
Such  was  the  woman  !  could  the  saint  be  more  ?' 

After  the  death  of  her  mother,  the  care  of 
Hannah,  and  of  a  younger  sister,  devolved 
on  Elizabeth,  who  was  the  oldest  daughter. 
They  now  lived  in  great  retirement ;  and 
one  of  Miss  Adams's  early  employments  was, 
weaving  lace  with  bobbins  on  a  cushion.  In 
referring  to  this,  she  afterwards  pleasantly 
observed,  that,  '  it  was  much  more  profitable 
than  writing  books.'  This  manner  of  life, 
with  her  desultory  habits  of  reading,  gave  a 
romantic  and  enthusiastic  turn  to  her  mind, 
which  was  never  essentially  changed*  either 
by  time  or  circumstances. 

Miss  Adams's  heart  was  however  peculiarly 
alive  to  the  ties  of  natural  affection.  She 
deeply  felt  the  death  of  an  aunt,  who  had 
shown  for  her  maternal  tenderness.  But  as 
long  as  her  sister  Elizabeth  lived,  she  had,  to 
use  her  own  words,  a  friend,  a  counsellor,  and 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  57 

guide.  '  There  was,'  she  said,  *but  one  heart 
between  us  ;  and  I  used  sometimes  to  tell 
my  sister,  in  the  overflowing  of  my  affection, 
that  I  could  bear  to  lose  everything  if  she 
was  spared  to  me  ;  but,  if  she  were  taken 
away,  I  should  surely  die  ! '  Yet  this  calami- 
tous event  took  place  ;  and  Miss  Adams  liv- 
ed to  prove,  as  many  others  have  done,  that 
there  is,  in  the  day  of  sorrow,  a  strength 
imparted  beyond  human  fortitude.  The 
health  of  this  beloved  sister  was  declining 
for  nearly  two  years  ;  and  it  was,  during  that 
time,  one  of  her  constant  objects,  to  fortify 
Miss  Adams's  mind  for  an  event,  that  she  felt 
was  near,  and  which  she  feared  would  be  over- 
whelming. It  however  gradually  approach- 
ed, and  brought  no  terrors  to  herself.  She 
was  calm,  and  resigned ;  constantly  expressing 
her '  entire  submission  to  the  Divine  will, 
and  laying  all  her  burden  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross.'  There  were  no  enthusiastic  flights, 
nor  was  there  any  unnatural  exaltation  of 
mind  in  her  views  of  death.  Though  in  the 
bloom  of  youth  and  with  an  ardent  enjoy- 
ment of  life,  she  met  the  event  like  a  Chris^ 


68  LIFE    OF 

lian.      Hers  was  a  philosophy  which  was 
formed  and  nurtured  by  religion. 

'For  years  after  my  sister's  death,'  said  Miss 
Adams, '  it  was  a  struggle  to  live.'  Her  health 
was  extremely  feeble,  her  heart  she  believ- 
ed broken,  and  poverty  pressed  heavily  upon 
her.  There  were  times,  indeed,  when  she 
felt  as  if  she  had  not  even  a  home.  Her 
father  had  made  over  his  house  and  proper- 
ty to  a  son,  with  whom  he  and  his  other  chil- 
dren continued  to  live  ;  but  as  this  son  was 
married,  and  his  family  was  increasing,  not- 
withstanding his  paternal  kindness,  Miss 
Adams  felt,  and  could  not  but  feel,  as  if  she 
was  a  burden  upon  her  brother.  This  was 
the  most  trying  period  of  her  life,  and  it  was 
always  recollected  by  her  with  strong  emo- 
tion. 

The  first  effort  of  her  pen,  after  her  sis- 
ter's death,  produced  some  lines  on  that 
subject.  They  seem  to  be  the  very  breath- 
ings of  her  heart,  and  are  thrown  together 
almost  without  form;  yet  a  few  extracts 
from  them  will  best  show  the  state  of  her 
mind. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  59 

*  The  first  attachment  of  my  earliest  years, 
Ere  yet  I  knew  to  feel  the  attractive  force 
Of  sacred  friendship,  was  my  love  to  her. 
Our  minds  expanding",  each  succeeding  year 
Heightened  our  mutual  friendship.     Not  a  joy 
Ere  touched  my  soul,  but  when  she  shared  a  part. 
When  pierced  with  sorrow,  her  all  cheering  smile 
Could  give  me  comfort.     Well  she  knew  to  bear 
Life's  adverse  scenes  with  calm,  undaunted  mind, 
And  placid  resignation.     Grace  divine 
Illumed  her  soul,  and  stamp'd  its  features  there. 
*  #  #  #  #  # 

The  best  of  friends  !  Oh,  how  my  bleeding  heart 
Recalls  her  tender  love !  Of  self  unmindful, 
For  me  she  seemed  to  live  ;  forever  kind. 
Forever  studious  to  promote  my  good. 
"  She  was  my  guide,  my  friend,  my  earthly  all ; " 
Heaven's  choicest  blessing.     Not  a  single  thought 
Could  lurk  in  close  disguise.     I  knew  to  trust 
This  much  loved  sister  with  my  inmost  soul. 

And  must  I  lose  her  !  While  unkind  disease 

Threatened  a  life  so  dear,  my  trembling  heart 

Sunk  in  o'erwhelming  wo.     Could  prayers,  or  tears. 

Could  sleepless  nights,  or  agonizing  days. 

And  all  the  care  of  fond  officious  love 

Avert  thy  fate,  —  sister,  thou  still  hadst  lived.' 

Many  expressions  of  her  deep  feeling  on 
this  subject  might  be  extracted  from  her  pa- 
pers ;  and  to  her  immediate  friends,  they  are 
precious  records  of  a  sorrow  stricken,  and 
resigned  spirit.     But  the  friendship  of  these 


60  LIFE    OF 

two  sisters  was  such  as  '  strangers  intermed- 
dle not  with.'  The  death  of  this  sister 
seemed  to  be  the  dissolution  of  a  tie,  like 
that  which  occasioned  the  exclamation  of 
David  in  his  beautiful  lamentation  over  Jon- 
athan &gt;  '  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful, 
passing  the  love  of  women.' 

That  Miss  Adams  drew  her  support  from 
religion  under  this  calamity,  her  manuscripts 
very  clearly  show.  She  employed  herself, 
when  unable  to  compose,  in  making  extracts 
from  the  Scriptures,  w^hich  she  applied  to  her 
particular  state  of  mind.  These  she  arrang- 
ed in  a  little  book,  and  preserved  till  her 
death. 

In  her  memoirs,  she  alludes  to  a  small 
circle  of  females  that  had  gradually  been 
draw  n  together  from  the  neighboring  towns, 
by  a  similarity  of  taste  and  situation  ;  and 
in  this  circle  she  found  great  enjoyment.  In 
after  years,  her  imagination  probably  exag- 
gerated their  merit.  Yet  she  retained  many 
proofs  that  they  were  notof  an  ordinary  stamp. 
In  speaking  of  this  knot  of  friends,  Miss 
Adams,  said,  'they  were  all  poor,  and  most 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  61 

of  them  good-looking,'  and  then  added,  with 
her  usual  simplicity,  '  I  had  the  fewest  at- 
tractions of  any  of  them.' 

Nor  was  Miss  Adams's  pen  at  this  time 
idle.  The  powers  of  her  mind  were  early 
appreciated  by  her  young  associates  ;  or, 
perhaps,  it  is  more  just  to  say,  that  they  ob- 
tained that  influence,  which,  however  un- 
claimed, is  stamped  upon  superior  intellect. 
Mind  is  created  to  rule.  Wealth,  and  all  mere- 
ly outward  distinctions  are  thrown  into  ob- 
scurity, when  brought  in  competition  with 
mental  power.  This  is  strikingly  exempli- 
fied in  public  and  professional  strife  ;  and, 
though  more  minutely,  yet  hardly  less  ob- 
viously, in  the  miniature  circle  of  private 
life.  Miss  Adams,  with  all  her  humility, 
and  her  retiring  modesty,  was  the  casuist  of 
her  youthful  friends.  A  number  of  her  pa- 
pers that  remain,  prove  how  often  she  was 
resorted  to  by  her  companions  in  cases  of 
opinion ;  and  the  publication  of  a  few  of 
these,  it  is  believed,  cannot  be  wholly  unin- 
teresting to  those  who  knew  her  in  later  life. 

One  of  her  young  friends  put  to  her  this 
6 


62  LIFE    OF 

interrogative.  Ought  mankind  to  be  respect- 
ed for  their  personal  worth  alone,  abstracted 
from  all  accidental  causes  ? 

To  this  question  Miss  Adams  replied. 

'  Mankind  ought  primarily  to  be  respected 
for  their  personal  worth  ;  yet  if  accidental 
causes  make  that  worth  appear  more  con- 
spicuous, it  may  increase  our  esteem,  which 
still  is  founded  on  personal  worth  in  propor- 
tion as  it  appears.  The  more  we  see  of 
virtue,  the  more  it  ought  to  attract  our  love 
and  admiration.  Virtue  becomes  visible  only 
by  its  effects.  The  diamond  we  value  for 
its  intrinsic  worth.  But  when  it  is  polished 
and  set,  its  essential  beauty  appears  more 
refulgent.  So  external  accomplishments, 
and  accidental  causes,  set  forth  the  original 
beauty  of  virtue,  and  serve  to  heighten  its 
charms.  There  are  particular  circumstances 
in  which  every  virtue  will  shine  with  pecu- 
liar lustre.  For  instance,  humility  has  in- 
trinsic exc^lence.  But  it  appears  most 
attractive  in  those  who  are  placed  in  affluent 
circumstances,  and  are  surrounded  by  pomp 
and  splendor.     Fortitude,  also,  is  an  excel- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  63 

lent  quality  of  the  mind.  But  suffering  and 
adversity  must  bring  it  forth.  Persons  who 
have  performed  eminent  services  for  their 
country  are  worthy  of  greater  honor,  than 
those  who  have  remained  in  private  life 
with  equal  worth.  I  conclude,  therefore, 
that  mankind  ought  to  be  esteemed  for  their 
personal  worth,  as  it  is  rendered  conspicuous 
by  accidental  causes.' 

Another  question  proposed  was,  whether 
virtue  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  its  own 
reward,  without  any  reference  to  a  future 
state  of  happiness,  or  misery  ? 

To  this  she  replied,  '  A  regularity  of 
conduct  is  for  the  interest  of  all,  even  were 
their  prospects  terminated  by  the  enjoyments 
of  this  life.  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  vir- 
tuous Seneca  enjoyed  more  happiness  than 
Nero,  his  cruel  and  tyrannical  master.  So 
far  as  inward  peace  of  conscience  depends 
on  virtue,  it  is  its  own  reward.  But  we  do 
not  find  that  its  ends  are  commensurate  with 
its  exertions.  Honest  industry  does  not 
always  bring  even  a  moderate  support.  It 
therefore  appears  evident  to  me,  that  there 


64  LIFE    OF 

would  not  be  sufficient  reward  for,  nor  con- 
sequently sufficient  excitement  to,  the  sacri- 
fices which  virtue  requires,  without  the  hope 
of  a  future  life.  God,  bj  the  influences  of 
his  spirit,  brings  home  the  truths  of  the 
Gospel  upon  the  mind,  and  makes  them  the 
spring  of  new,  and  right  principles.  Hence 
Divine  Revelation  informs  us,  "by  his  own 
will  begat  he  us  by  the  word  of  truth."  If 
we  look  for  nothing  beyond  the  grave,  too 
many  will  say,  "  what  advantageth  it  me  ?  " 
Dr  Doddridge  observes,  "  there  are  some  suf- 
ferings of  flesh  and  blood,  to  which  good 
men  for  conscience'  sake  have  been  .exposed, 
so  extreme,  that  without  some  extraordinary 
support  from  God,  it  would  be  really  impos- 
sible that  the  pleasures  of  a  rational  thought 
should  be  enjoyed  by  them."  Such  support 
must  arise  from  a  view  of  a  future  state,  and 
from  a  conviction  that  afflictions  are  but  for 
a  moment,  and  are  "  working  out  for  them  a  far 
more  exceeding,  even  an  eternal  weight  of 
glory."  Not  that  I  mean  to  say,  we  are  to 
expect  Heaven  as  a  reivard  for  our  virtue, 
independent  of  the  free  grace  of  God,     But 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  65 

he  has  promised  a  glorious  inheritance  to 
those  who  do  well,  and  this  ought  to  stimu- 
late men  to  the  greatest  industry  in  his 
service.  Love  to  God  is  the  great  principle 
of  christian  virtue.' 

On  another  occasion  she  was  applied  to  by 
a  friend,  who  was  placed  in  an  embarrassing 
situation,  for  her  sentiments  on  the  subject 
of  forming  a  connexion,  without  mutual  at- 
tachment. 

The  following  observations  are  extracted 
from  her  reply. 

'  It  has  been  readily  allowed,  that  mar- 
riage, without  great  congeniality,  must  ren- 
der a  person  of  sensibility  extremely  wretch- 
ed. Novel  writers  have  general  urged  the 
impropriety  of  this  connexion  from  this  mo- 
tive. But  as  this  life  is  only  a  passport  to 
a  better,  the  principal  objection  ought  to 
arise  from  a  nobler  source. 

'  Both  religion  and  morality  require  that 
there  should  be  a  conformity  between  our 
words  and  actions ;  and,  that  in  both  we 
should  always  be  entirely  true.    No\v  when 


66  LIFE    OF 

two  people  marry,  they  virtually  and  public- 
ly declare,  that  they  prefer  each  other  to  all 
the  world.  If  that  preference  be  wanting, 
this  declaration  is  a  capital  breach  of  sincer- 
ity. It  is  the  declaration  of  an  untruth  be- 
fore Heaven  and  earth. 

'  The  least  deviation  from  truth,  in  this 
one  capital  point,  imposes  a  kind  of  ne- 
cessity to  practise  continual  dissimulation. 
Having  exhibited  to  the  world  the  strongest 
proof  of  a  peculiar,  and  individual  affection, 
honor  and  reputation  render  it  of  conse- 
quence to  keep  up  the  deception.  By  doing 
this,  however,  the  delicacy  of  moral  feeling 
must  be"  continually  wearing  away.  And 
what  will  be  the  happiness  of  married  life 
under  circumstances  like  these  ? 

'  The  attention  which  a  husband  and  wife 
have  a  right  to  expect  from  each  other,  must 
originate  in  a  decided  preference  of  each  oth- 
er ;  else  the  inditference  of  one;  of  the  par- 
ties may  effectually  destroy  that  happiness, 
which  they  had  bound  themselves  by  the 
most  sacred  obligations  to  promote. 

'  But  even    this   continual  dissimulation, 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  67 

which  is  highly  injurious  to  the  moral  char- 
acter, and  extremely  painful  to  an  ingen- 
uous mind,  will  be  wholly  unavailing  for  its 
end.  True  love  is  of  so  delicate  a  nature, 
that  it  can  never  be  satisfied  with  anything 
short  of  love  in  return  ;  and  it  is  of  a  power 
so  penetrating,  that,  by  its  own  light,  it 
sees  into  the  heart  of  the  person  beloved. 
Its  primary  object  is  to  possess  the  heart. 
"  Not  the  warmest  expressions  of  affection, 
or  the  most  fervent  protestations,  are  able  to 
give  any  satisfaction,  where  we  are  not  per- 
suaded the  affection  is  real,  and  the  satis- 
faction mutual. 

"  All  these  possessed  are  nought,  but  as  they  are 
The  proofs,  the  substance  of  an  inward  passion 
And  the  richplunder  of  a  taken  heart."  ' 

The  first  edition  of  Miss  Adams's  View  of 
Religion  was  published  before  her  sister's 
death,  and  partly  transcribed  by  this  sister. 
The  second  was  begun  as  soon  after  this  af- 
flicting event  took  place,  as  she  could  col- 
lect resolution  to  engage  in  it.  Those  who 
knew  her  might  indeed  wonder  that  any  mo- 


6S  LIFE    OF 

tive  could  at  any  time  be  powerful  enough  to 
induce  her  to  publish  a  book.  Her  hu- 
mility, her  diffidence,  and  her  total  igno- 
rance of  business,  seemed  to  present  insur- 
mountable obstacles.  It  was  necessary, 
how^ever,  that  she  should  earn  a  subsistence 
in  some  way.  She  had  tried  various  meth- 
ods. Making  lace,  during  the  war,  had  been 
one  of  the  most  lucrative  employments. 
But  home-made  lace  could  only  be  tolerated, 
when  no  other  could  be  procured ;  and  as 
soon  as  importation  become  easy,  it  sunk 
into  total  disuse.  Spinning,  weaving,  and 
braiding  straw  were  by  turns  tried.  But  all 
afforded  her  only  a  scanty  subsistence.  Her 
eyes  were  weak,  and  often  so  much  inflam- 
ed that  she  could  not  use  them.  Her  gene- 
ral health  also  was  extremely  feeble,  and  her 
mind  depressed  by  present  evil,  and  harass- 
ed by  distressing  fears  for  the  future.  '  It 
was  desperation,  therefore,  and  not  vanity,' 
said  she,  '  that  induced  me  to  publish.'  Her 
memoirs  mention  the  disappointment  she 
experienced  in  the  profits  of  her  first  edi- 
tion.    When  about  publishing  a  second,  it 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  69 

was  necessary  to  pay  a  few  shillings  for  the 
further  security  of  the  copy-right  ;  and  this 
sum,  though  so  small,  she  was  obliged  to 
borrow  from  a  friend.  On  the  subject  of 
poverty,  she  always  spoke  with  great  feel- 
ing. She  had  early  in  life  been  brought  up 
in  indulgence  ;  and  poverty  had  come  upon 
her  at  an  age,  when  the  sensibility  of  the 
heart  are  most  alive.  There  can  hardly,  in- 
deed, be  a  suffering  more  acute  to  a  feeling 
mind,  that  has  experienced  the  pleasure  of 
bestowing,  than  to  find  its  means  of  benev- 
olence cut  off,  and  all  its  powers  necessarily 
turned  into  a  weary,  wasting  struggle  for 
self-preservation.  'And  yet,'  she  said, '  I  had 
then  enjoyments,  of  which  the  rich  have  no 
idea.  When  I  had  any  work  brought  in  that 
would  enable  me  to  earn  a  few  shillings,  by 
which  I  might  buy  paper,  or  any  articles  of 
stationary,  I  engaged  in  writing  with  an 
interest  that  beguiled  the  monotony  of  my 
life.'  After  the  second  edition  of  her  book 
was  published,  she  kept  a  school  for  the  sum- 
mer  months  for  successive  years ;  and, 
though  in  this  employment  she  experienced 


70  LIFE    OF 

the  usual  difficulties  of  school-keeping  in  the 
country,  it  was,  upon  the  whole,  a  source  of 
happiness.  As  the  schools  were  in  the  neigh- 
boring towns,  she  resided  among  the  pa- 
rents of  the  children  hy  turns ;  and  her  intel- 
ligent and  acute  mind  often  derived  amuse- 
ment, and  profit,  from  these  occasional  re- 
sidences. She  treasured  up  many  pleasant 
little  anecdotes,  that  marked  the  habits  and 
manners  of  the  families  in  which  she  then 
lived,  many  of  which  retained  much  of  the 
primitive  simplicity  of  their  forefathers. 

One  anecdote  may  not  be  unacceptable. 
She  passed  several  months  in  the  family  of  a 
respectable  farmer,  whose  turn  it  was  to 
receive  the  school-mistress.  His  wife  was  a 
pattern  of  frugal,  industrious  management ; 
yet  not  devoid  of  that  desire  of  appearing 
^  decent,'  which  was  manifested  by  the  Vicar 
of  Wakefield's  wife  before  her.  The  usu- 
al dress  of  females  in  the  country  at  that 
period,  when  engaged  in  domestic  employ- 
ments, was  the  '  short  russet  kyrtle,'  confin- 
ed at  the  waist  by  a  home-spun  checked 
apron.     This  was  the  costume  of  the  mis* 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  71 

tress  of  the  family.  The  year  Miss  Adams 
resided  there  had  been  one  of  uncommon 
prosperity.  The  crops  were  abundant,  and 
many  little  luxuries  had  been  added  to  the 
household  establishment/  With  injunctions 
of  secrecy,  the  good  woman  informed  her 
guest,  that,  if  the  next  year  also  should  prove 
to  be  as  prosperous,  she  intended  to  wear 
long  calico  gowns  ! 

Miss  Adams  remarked,  that  these  early 
scenes  often  recurred  to  her  mind,  amidst  the 
wealth  and  splendor  she  witnessed  in  la- 
ter life  ;  and  the  impressions  of  both  were 
heightened  by  the  contrast. 

That  her  sensibility  was  a  source  of  pain, 
as  w^ell  as  of  happiness,  cannot  be  doubted. 
She  censured  herself  severely  for  moments 
of  irritation,  and  felt  the  keenest  self-re- 
proach for  what  might  be  truly  called  the 
infirmity  of  her  nature.  That  she  perfect- 
ly understood  her  weaknesses,  and  moral 
exposures,  and  guarded  in  her  heart  the  ave- 
nues to  temptation,  the  following  resolutions, 
found  among  her  papers,  are  a  sufficient 
proof. 


72  '  LIFE    OF 

SERIOUS    RESOLUTIONS. 

I  resolve  to  read  the  Bible  more  attentive- 
ly, and  diligently,  and  to  be  constant  and  fer- 
vent in  prayer  for  divine  illumination  and 
direction. 

2d.  To  read  less  from  curiosity,  and  a 
desire  to  acquire  worldly  knowledge,  and 
more  for  the  regulation  of  my  heart  and  life  ; 
consequently,  to  have  my  reading  less  desul- 
tory, and  to  read  more  books  of  practical  di- 
vinity. 

3d.  In  choosing  my  friends  and  compan- 
ions, to  have  a  greater  regard  to  religious 
characters  than  I  have  hitherto  had. 

4th.  To  avoid  such  company  as  has  a 
tendency  to  unsettle  my  mind  respecting 
religious  opinions. 

5th.  To  endeavor  to  preserve  a  firm  re- 
liance on  Divine  Providence,  and  to  avoid  all 
unreasonable  worldly  care  and  anxiety. 

6th.  To  pray  and  guard  against  loving 
my  friends  with  that  ardent  attachment,  and 
that  implicit  reliance  upon  them,  which  is 
incompatible  with  supreme  love  to,  and  trust 
in,  God  alone. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  73 

7th.  To  endeavor  to  attain  a  spirit  of 
forgiveness  towards  my  enemies,  and  to 
banish  from  my  mind  all  those  feelings  of 
resentment,  which  are  incompatible  with 
the  spirit  of  the  gospel. 

For  a  number  of  years,   no  incidents  oc- 
curred in  the  life  of  Miss  Adams  which  claim 
peculiar  notice.     It  is  a  long  road,  with  only 
here  and  there  a  milestone.     She  continued 
to  write,  but  on  subjects  not  at  all  congenial 
with  her  own  taste.     She  was  enthusiastic, 
and  a  great  lover  of  poetry  and  fiction  ;  but 
on  these  subjects  she  distrusted  herself,  and 
made  it  her  constant  study  to  accommodate  her 
mind  to  common  life.     Her  History  of  New 
England  is  evidence   of  her  perseverance  in 
this  purpose,  as   that  work  was   undertaken 
soon  after  the  second   edition   of  her  '  View 
of  Religious  Opinions.' 

In  her  memoirs,  she  mentions  her  difficulty 
of  procuring  books  that  would  aid  her  in  her 
purposes.  The  very  uncommon  faculty 
she  possessed  of  comprehending,  and  mak- 
ing her  own,  the  information  a  book  contain- 
ed, greatly  assisted  her  labors.  She  was 
7 


74  LIFE    OF 

invited  to  pass  a  week  or   two  at  the  late 
President  Adams's,  at  Quincy,  with  the  offer 
of  his  library  as  an  inducement  to  accept  the 
invitation.     He  was  much   struck  with  the 
rapidity  with  which  she  went  through  folios 
of  the   venerable   Fathers ;  and  made  some 
pleasant  remarks  in  consequence,  which  in- 
duced her  to  speak  of  their   contents.     He 
then  found,  that,  while  she  had  been  turn- 
ing over  leaf  after  leaf,  she  had  been  culling 
all  that  could  be  useful  in  her  labors.     She 
possessed   the   power  of   application   to   an 
uncommon  degree,  and  was  often  so  entirely 
engrossed  in  her   subject,  as   to  be  uncon- 
scious of  the  lapse   of  time.     This  abstrac- 
tion gave  rise    to  many  little  anecdotes.      It 
was  said   that   she   often   spent  days  at  the 
Atheneum ;     and    that    the    librarian,    after 
some  ineffectual   attempts  to  disengage    her 
from  her  book,  would  lock  the  door,  go  home 
to  his  dinner,  and  return  again,  and  find  her 
in  the  same  spot  ;  and  unconscious  either  of 
his  absence,  or  that  the  dinner  hour  was  past. 
A  friend  repeated  this  account  to  her,  and 
asked  her  if  it  was  true.     She  said  in  reply. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  75 

*  It  is  very  much  exaggerated,  I  don't  think 
it  ever  happened  more  than  once  or  twice.' 
It  was  on  a  visit  to  Boston,  that  Miss 
Adams  first  saw  Mr  Buckminster.  He  was 
then  at  college,  and  about  sixteen  years  old. 
Those  who  knew^  him  will  not  think  her 
description  of  him  an  exaggerated  one.  '  He 
had  then,'  she  said,  'the  bloom  of  health  on 
his  cheek,  and  the  fire  of  genius  in  his  eye. 
I  did  not  know  from  which  world  he  came, 
whether  from  heaven  or  earth.'  Though  so 
young,  he  entered  fully  into  her  character  ; 
and  before  they  parted,  he  gave  her  a  short, 
but  comprehensive  sketch  of  the  state  of 
literature  in  France  and  Germany.'  After  he 
became  the  Pastor  of  Brattle  street  Church, 
he,  with  Mr  Higginson,  and  Mr  Shaw  the 
active  founder  of  the  Atheneum,  pioposed 
to  Miss  Adams,  w^ho,  from  an  enfeebled 
constitution,  had  begun  to  grow  infirm,  to 
remove  to  Boston  ;  at  the  same  time  procur- 
ing for  her,  through  the  liberal  subscription 
of  a  few  gentlemen,  an  annuity  for  life. 
She  had  then  commenced  her  History  of  the 
J^.ws  ;  and  nothing  could  have  been  more 


76  LIFE    OF 

favorable  to  its  progress,  or  to  her  own  ease 
of  mind,  than  this  benevolent  arrangement. 
She  could  never  speak  of  her  benefactors 
without  deep  emotion. 

From  the  Rev.  Mr  Buckminster  she  re- 
ceived the  most  judicious,  and  extensive 
assistance.  She  was  in  the  habit  of  visiting 
him  in  his  study,  and  had  his  permission  to 
come  when  she  pleased,  to  sit  and  read 
there  as  long  as  she  pleased,  or  take  any 
book  home  and  use  it  like  her  own.  Perhaps 
people  are  never  perfectly  easy  with  each 
other,  till  they  feel  at  liberty  to  be  silent  in 
each  other's  society.  It  was  stipulated  be- 
tween them,  that  neither  party  should  be 
obliged  to  talk.  But  her  own  language  will 
best  describe  her  feelings.  'Mr  Buckmin- 
ster would  sometimes  read  for  hours  without 
speaking.  But,  occasionally,  flashes  of  gen- 
ius would  break  forth  in  some  short  observa- 
tion, or  sudden  remark,  which  electrified  me. 
I  never  could  have  gone  on  with  my  history, 
without  the  use  of  his  library.  I  was  in- 
debted to  him  for  a  new  interest  in  life. 
He  introduced  me  to  a  valuable  circle  of 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  77 

frieads  ;  and  it  was  through  him  that  I  be- 
came acquainted  with  Mrs  Dearborn,  whose 
kindness  and  attention  to  me  have  been 
unceasing.  His  character  was  the  perfection 
of  humanity.  His  intellectual  powers  were 
highly  cultivated  and  ennobled.  Yet  even 
the  astonishing  vigor  and  brightness  of  his 
intellect  were  outdone  by  the  goodness  of 
his  heart. 

'  No  thought  witliin  his  generous  mind  had  birth, 
But  Avhat  he  might  have  own'd  to  heaven  and  earth.' 

Mr  Buckminster  assisted  Miss  Adams's 
researches,  and  procured  information  for  her, 
relative  to  the  Jews.  He  took  a  warm  in- 
terest in  this  oppressed  people,  and  often 
prayed  for  them  during  communion  service, 
in  the  same  language  in  which  Jesus  had 
prayed  for  them.  '  Father,  forgive  them !  for 
they  know  not  what  they  do.'  For  about 
two  years  after  the  removal  of  Miss  Adams 
to  Boston,  she  enjoyed  this  intercourse,  visit- 
ting  his  study  with  the  utmost  freedom. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  look  back  with  ad- 
miration upon  the  benevolence  that  prompt- 
ed   these   kind    attentions ;  and   it   is   not 
7* 


78  LIFE    OF 

a  difficult  effort  of  imagination  to  en- 
ter the  library,  and  to  view  these  laborious, 
and  dissimilar  students  together.  The 
one^  distinguished  by  the  natural  ease, 
grace  and  elegance  of  his  manners  ;  the 
other,  timid  and  helpless.  The  one, 
treading  with  the  elastic  step  of  youth,  and 
the  other  declining  into  the  vale  of  years ; 
yet  both  drawn  together  by  those  sympa- 
thies, which  spring  from  the  fountain  of 
perfect  and  everlasting  good.  Who  would 
not  be  touched  by  the  spectacle  of  a 
young  man  of  distinguished  talents,  equally 
sought  by  the  world  of  scieyice,  and  of  fash- 
ion, extending  a  helping  hand,  and  devoting 
a  portion  of  his  valuable  time,  to  a  timid 
and  helpless  female,  shrinking  from  the  ills  of 
life  ;  but  who  indeed  derived  her  happiness 
from  the  same  sources  that  he  did,  literature 
and  religion  !  When,  from  indisposition,  she 
omitted  for  any  length  of  time  her  visits,  h 
kind  note,  or  a  still  kinder  call  alleviated  the 
infirmities  of  her  health.  But  this  happi- 
ness was  not  to  last.  Miss  Adams  was  only 
one  among  the  many  who  beheld  Mr  Buck- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  79 

minster  disappear,  at  the  early  age  of 
twentjeight  years,  '  in  all  the  brightness  of 
his  honors,  and  without  any  twilight  com- 
ing over   his  fame.' 

Miss  Adams  corresponded  with  literary 
characters  both  abroad  and  at  home,  but 
she  never  preserved  any  copies  of  her  own 
letters.  She  wrote  with  great  simplicity, 
and  singleness  of  heart,  without  any  display, 
and  set  no  value  on  her  own  composition. 
She  had,  indeed,  a  singular  standard  of 
judging.  It  was  her  firm  persuasion,  that 
she  never  wrote  anything  original.  '  It 
is  other  people's  thoughts,'  said  she, 
'  that  I  put  into  my  own  language.'  Were 
all  writers  brought  to  the  same  test, 
there  are  few  that  could  claim  much  origin- 
ality of  thought  ;  though  the  rich  and  var- 
ried  modes  of  expression,  and  the  different 
views  which  different  minds  take  of  funda- 
mental truths,  often  give  them  the  grace 
and  charm  of  novelty.  In  this  opinion 
of  herself,  however,  she  seems  to  refute 
her  position  ;  as  it  must  be  acknowledg- 
ed  that    this  view   of    her  own  works  is 


80  LIFE    OF 

rather  original  among  authors.  Her  defect 
was,  underrating,  instead  of  overrating  her 
powers.  Her  mind  was  like  a  well  cultivated 
garden,  stored  with  fruits  and  flowers,  and 
watered  by  pure  streams.  But  they  were 
streams  that  flowed  on  just  as  nature  had 
intended.  There  were  no  cascades,  nor 
fountains,  nor  serpentine  walks,  nor  rare  ex- 
otics.    All  was    simple,  and  natural. 

Her  timidity  was  excessive.  It  pervaded 
her  whole  character,  and  sometimes  palsied 
the  eflbrts  of  her  mind.  In  her  youth  she 
amused  herself  with  writing  tales  of  fiction. 
'  But,'  she  said,  '  they  all  took  their  color 
from  her  own  life.  She  could  do  nothing 
but  kill  and  destroy  ;  and  when  her  situation 
became  happier,  and  her  mmd  more  cheer- 
ful, she  could  not  endure  the  sight  of  them.' 
When  very  young,  her  health  being  in  a 
feeble  state,  and  not  expecting  to  live  long, 
she  determined  to  write  a  number  of  letters 
to  her  young  friends,  after  the  manner  of 
Mrs  Rowe's  ;  intending  they  should  reach 
them  mysteriously,  immediately  on  her  death. 
But  fortunately  for  the  Jews,  and  for  litera- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  81 

ture,  her  anticipations  were  not  realized. 
She  was  early  in  life  much  in  the  habit  of 
committing  poetry  to  memory  ;  and  this  she 
never  forgot.  '  I  could  repeat  poetry,'  said 
she,  '•  I  believe  for  three  months  together ; 
and  though  I  am  now  continually  troubled 
by  forgetting  where  I  have  laid  a  knife,  a 
pencil,  or  a  pen,  yet  the  long  poems  I  learned 
in  my  youth,  I  can  repeat  as  accurately  as 
ever.'  She  went  on  to  observe,  that  these 
recollections  did  not  give  her  so  much 
pleasure  as  might  be  supposed  ;  for,  as  this 
poetry  was  selected  when  she  was  young, 
much  of  it  was  not  of  a  kind  which  her  ma- 
turer  taste  and  judgment  could  approve. 

Though  Miss  Adams  w^as  born  and  bred 
in  the  country,  she  felt  the  strongest  enthu- 
siasm for  rural  scenes ;  and  they  always 
seemed  to  retain  the  power  of  novelty  over 
her  mind.  A  walk,  a  ride,  or  a  visit  to  any 
new  place,  awoke  all  the  fervor  of  her 
feelings.  It  was  on  one  of  these  occasions 
that  she  composed  the  following  lines. 

'  Such  scenes  the  days  of  innocence  renew, 
And  bring  the  patriarchal  age  to  view, 


82  LIFE    OF 

Thus  favor'd  Abraham,  in  the  days  of  old, 
On  flowery  Mamre  kept  his  fleecy  fold  ; 
While  friendly  angels  left  their  heavenly  seat, 
To  greet  the  patriarch  in  his  calm  retreat.' 

There  are  few  who  were  more  cal- 
culated for  the  enjoyment  of  friendship 
and  society  than  Miss  Adams.  Yet  for 
a  long  period  she  seems  to  have  been  in 
a  great  measure  deprived  of  both.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  what  effects  might  have  been 
produced  by  the  action  of  other  minds  upon 
her  own.  It  might  have  roused  it  to  more 
inventive  exertion  ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
the  fulness  of  enjoyment,  her  mental  pow- 
ers might  have  sunk  into  indolence.  But 
one  thing  is  certain,  that  her  happiness  would 
have  been  greatly  increased  by  it.  Those 
w^ho  knew  her  only  late  in  life  can  fully  real- 
ize how  much  she  must  have  felt  the  want 
of  a  friend,  after  the  death  of  her  sister. 
Her  strong  sensibility  to  all  that  was  excel- 
lent, and  good,  and  fair  in  creation,  peculiar^ 
ly  fitted  her  for  that  intercourse  of  thought 
and  feeling,  which  such  emotions  naturally 
call  forth.    Her  love    of  literature  was   no 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  83 

doubt  a  high  source  of  enjoyment.  But  per- 
haps even  this  might  have  been  increased, 
by  those  occasional  restraints  which  the 
forms  and  habits  of  society  impose.  The 
epicure  is  willing  to  delay  his  dinner  for  an 
appetite  ;  and,  upon  the  same  principle,  those 
who  read,  write,  or  reflect  with  the  great- 
est relish,  may  return  to  these  occupations 
with  tenfold  enjoyment,  after  giving  an  hour 
or  two  to  a  social  circle,  or  even  to  the  dull 
round  of  a  modern  tea  party.  But  Miss 
Adams  had  none  of  these  incentives.  She 
was  at  liberty  to  read,  or  write,  with 
out  interruption  ;  to  turn  over  huge  folios, 
or  musty  manuscripts,  from  morning  to 
night ;  and  if  she  sometimes  suspended  her 
labors,  and  walked  abroad,  it  was  for  a  sol- 
itary pleasure.  Yet  she  allowed  no  senti- 
ment of  repining,  or  of  discontent,  to  em- 
bitter her  life  ;  for  she  fully  realized  that, 

*  It  is  th'  allotment  of  the  skies, 
The  hand  of  the  Supremely  Wise, 
That  guides  and  governs  our  affections 
And   plans  and  orders  our  connexions  ; 
Directs   us   in  our  distant  road, 
And  marks  the  bounds  of  our   abode.' 


84  LIFE    OF 

This  feeling  of  resignation  to  existing 
circumstances  prevented  Miss  Adams  from 
making  any  strenuous  exertions  to  improve 
her  condition.  Once,  indeed,  she  projected 
a  plan  of  keeping  a  circulating  library  at 
Salem.  She  had  a  considerable  number  of 
books  to  begin  with,  and  probably  encourag- 
ed a  hope  tliat  she  might  in  this  way  be- 
come instrumental  to  the  promotion  of  re- 
ligious and  moral  instruction.  But  she  nev- 
er thought  superficially  on  any  subject;  and 
before  engaging  in  active  measures,  she 
made  full  inquiry  into  the  probable  success 
and  consequences  of  her  plan.  It  was  then 
that  her  upright,  and  conscientious  mind, 
relinquished  the  undertaking.  The  reflec- 
tion, that  the  emoluments  of  a  circu- 
lating library  are  drawn  from  novels,  plays, 
and  romances,  and  that,  in  keeping  such  a 
library,  she  must  be  accessary  to  much  waste 
of  time,  if  not  perversion  of  taste  and  even 
of  principle,  by  disseminating  works  which 
often  are  read  because  they  are  new,  deter- 
mined her  conduct.  She  felt,  and  lamented 
the  injury,  which  the  promiscuous  reading 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  85 

of  similar  works  had  produced  on  her  own 
mind.  While  they  had  sharpened  her  sensi- 
bility to  the  evils  of  life,  they  had  also  ener- 
vated her  resolution  to  endure  them  ;  and 
she  ascribed  much  of  her  mental  suf- 
fering to  this  cause.  She  would  not,  there- 
fore, pursue  the  plan  of  a  circulating  library, 
though  encouraged  to  do  it  by  some  warm- 
hearted friends.  Had  the  Waverley  novels 
made  their  appearance  in  her  youthful  days, 
they  would  probably  have  rendered  harm- 
less the  greater  part  of  those  which  fell  in- 
to her  hands.  Their  just  historical  painting, 
their  strong  delineation  of  character,  and 
masterly  touches  of  passion  and  feeling, 
united  with  the  exquisite  description  of  what 
is  beautiful  and  sublime  in  the  scenery  of 
nature,  could  not  fail  to  have  given  her  a 
juster  taste,  and  directed  her  enthusiasm 
to  a  higher  mark.  Her  own  good  sense, 
led  her,  in  time,  to  discriminate,  and  to 
separate  the  gold  from  the  dross ;  and  she 
never  ceased  to  derive  great  pleasure  from 
a  well  written  work  of  fiction.  Her  whole 
testimony,  however,  was  given  against  that 
8 


86  LIFE    OF 

promiscuous  reading  of  novels,  which  has 
been  in  times  past,  more  than  of  late  years, 
permitted  among  young  girls.  The  rapid 
progress  of  education,  by  occupying  the 
time,  and  expanding  the  mind,  has  done 
much  towards  the  correction  of  this  evil.  Ma- 
ny now  sip  at  the  fountain-head  of  elegant  lit- 
erature, and  feel  the  beauty  of  Virgil,  and  the 
sublimity  of  Dante,  in  their  native  languages; 
listen  to  the  sweet  melody  of  Tasso ;  and  find 
in  the  christian  leader  of  the  early  ages,  God- 
frey, a  hero  far  surpassing  the  heroes  of 
modern  romances. 

Happily  the  time  has  arrived,  when  the 
cultivation  of  female  intellect  needs  no  lon- 
ger to  be  advocated,  or  recommended.  It 
is  now  placed  on  a  just  and  rational  ground. 
We  hear  no  longer  of  the  alarming^  and 
perhaps  justly  obnoxious  din,  of  the  '  rights 
of  women.'  Whatever  their  capacity  of 
receiving  instruction  may  be,  there  can  be  no 
use  in  extending  it  beyond  the  sphere  of 
their  duties.  Yet  how  wide  a  circle  does 
this  include  !  Who  can  doubt  the  sacred  and 
important  duties  of  a  mother  ?  '  Nature  has 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  87 

not  more  evidently  assigned  them  the  task 
of  nourishing  the  body  of  the  infant,  than 
she  has  that  of  developing,  and  cultivating 
the  mind,  in  its  earlier  stages.'  It  is  her 
office  to  sow  the  first  seeds  of  virtue  ;  to 
regulate  the  first  excitements  of  temper  ;  to 
cultivate  gentleness,  forbearance,  disinter- 
estedness, and  above  all,  obedience.  For 
this,  her  own  habits  must  be  those  of  care- 
ful observation,  of  steady  self-government, 
and  of  systematical  arrangement ;  otherwise, 
her  plan  will  be  made  up  of  miscellaneous 
feelino-s.  and  oninions,  that  will  be  constant- 
ly fluctuating. 

'  It  may  be  doubted  whether  any  one  can 
be  placed  in  so  insulated  a  situation,  as  to 
possess  a  right  of  appropriating  any  consid- 
erable portion  of  his  time  to  studies,  which 
may  not  terminate  in  a  practical  result.' 
This  rule,  in  an  enlightened  sense,  ought  to 
be  the  standard  of  a  woman's  education. 
It  ought  to  be  the  measure  of  her  cultiva- 
tion. But  surely  no  faculty  of  her  mind  can 
be  spared  from  this  work.  '  She  is  design- 
ed by  nature  for  elegance,  and  gentleness ; 


88  LIFE    OF 

to  endear  domestic  life  to  man,  to  make 
virtue  lovely  to  her  children,  to  spread  around 
her  order  and  grace,  and  to  give  society  its 
highest  polish.  No  attainment  can  be  above 
beings  whose  end  and  aim  is  to  accomplish 
these  important  purposes.  Every  means 
should  be  used  to  invigorate  by  principle,  and 
culture,  their  native  excellence  and  grace.'* 
These  observations  may  be  deemed  irre- 
levant, but  they  are  suggested  by  Miss  Ad- 
ams's own  remarks  on  this  subject.  She 
often  regretted  the  time  she  had  spent  in 
useless,  and  desultory  r^nrlinfr  on^i  ^Koomr^jrl 
that  when  she  first  began  to  turn  her  atten- 
tion to  the  study  of  the  dead  languages,  she 
felt  as  if  she  was  '  drawing  upon  herself  the 
ridicule  of  society.'  She  lived,  however, 
to  see  these  prejudices  removed,  and  to  re- 
ceive a  respect  and  deference  from  literary 
men,  which  often  excited  her  astonishment, 
as  well  as  gratitude.  There  have  been  ma- 
ny instances  recorded,  of  talent  which  has 
been  suffered  to  languish  in  obscurity  and 
want.    Against  these,  the  present  instance 

*  Fenelon. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  89 

ought  not  to  pass  unnoticed.     The  mdividu- 
al  kindness  that  Miss  Adams  received  was 
invariable.     She  had  outlived  almost  all  her 
cotemporaries.      But  new    generations  had 
sprung  up  under  the  enlightened  influences  of 
education,  who  respected  her  intellect   and 
learning,  and  who  loved  her  for  her  good- 
ness.   After  her  removal  to  Boston,  she  was 
therefore  seldom  long  in  solitude.     Her  little 
apartment  was  usually  decorated  with   the 
flowers  that  her  young  friends  brought  her. 
Many  of  them  spent  hours  in  reading  to  her, 
and  cheered  her  by   their  bright  a^id  ani- 
mated conversation.     It  ^vould  he  mjustice, 
also,  not  to  refer  to  che  disinterested,   and 
liberal  assistance  she  received   from   those 
friends,  who  eudbled  ber  to  reserve  a  part 
of  her  laborious  earnings  for  the  benefit  of 
a  suffering  reJativo.     The  annuity,   which 
contiptied  t^  her  death,   was   said   to   have 
been  first  suggested  by  ladies  ;    but  after- 
wards, the  proposal  was  put  into   the  hands 
of  Mr  Shaw,  and  the  other  gentlemen  men- 
tioned in  her  memoirs.     A  few  years  pre- 
vious   to  her  death,  a  number  of  ladies   at 
.8* 


90  LIFE    OF 

Salem  sent  her  an  annual  sum  as  a  testimo- 
ny of  their  respect. 

At  one  period  of  her  life,  her  correspon- 
dents were  numerous.  Amongst  them  might 
be  mentioned  names,  that  will  long  be  cher- 
ished by  posterity.  The  venerable  Presi- 
dent Adams,  to  whom  the  second  edition  of 
her  View  of  Religions  was  dedicated,  took 
a  benevolent  interest  in  her  literary  success. 
From  one  of  his  letters  to  her,  the  following 
sentence  is  extracted. 

'  You  and  I  are  undoubtedly  related  by 
birth  ;  and  although  we  were  both  "  born  in 
humble  obscurity ,^'  yet  I  presume  neither  of 
us  have  any  cause  to  regret  that  circum- 
stance. If  I  could  ever  suppose  that  family 
pride  was  in  any  casc  oxusable,  I  should 
think  a  descent  from  a  line  of  vi:itu()us  in- 
dependent New  England  farmers,  for  one 
hundred  and  sixty  years,  was  a  bettf^r  foun- 
dation for  it,  than  a  descent  through  roya] 
or  titled  scoundrels  ever  since  the  flood,' 

With  the  learned  Bishop  Gregoire,  whose 
name  is  familiar  in  our  country  as  well  as 
his  own,  her  correspondence  continued  ma- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  91 

ny  years.  The  congeniality  of  their  labors 
in  the  cause  of  the  Jews,  as  well  as  general 
philanthropy,  had  made  them  acquainted 
with  each  other.  With  Mr  Cunningham, 
also,  Vicar  of  Harrow,  and  author  of  '  The 
World  without  Souls,'  she  exchanged  letters. 
From  Miss  More  she  received  several,  all  of 
which  she  most  highly  prized.  The  late 
Mrs  Catharine  Cappe  was  among  her  cor- 
respondents ;  nor  can  we  omit  to  mention 
her  letters  from  the  amiable,  and  distinguish- 
ed Swedenborgian,  Mr  Hill.  There  is  one 
also  among  her  papers  from  the  venera- 
ble Bishop  Carroll,  in  reply  to  a  letter  of 
hers  addressed  to  him.  It  is  with  no  nar- 
row feeling  we  mention  names  like  these. 
We  ask  not  their  sect  or  country.  They 
belong  to  the  great  family  of  mankind,  and 
we  claim  affinity  as  a  rightful  inheritance. 

The  strength  of  Miss  Adams's  natural  af- 
fection was  proportionate  to  her  social  ties. 
Of  her  only  remaining  sister,  and  to  whom 
her  memoir  is  bequeathed  in  the  '  humble 
hope  that  it  may  be  a  pecuniary  benefit  to 
her,'  she   often  spoke   with   deep  and    ir- 


92  LIFE    OF 

repressible  feeling.  She  sometimes  project- 
ed plans,  by  which  she  might  have  enjoyed 
more  of  the  society  of  her  nieces  ;  but  she 
submitted  to  the  necessity  which  separated 
her  from  her  relatives  without  a  murmur. 
One  of  her  nieces  was  adopted,  and  educa- 
ted by  a  lady,  who  fell  a  victim  to  consump- 
tion in  the  prime  of  life.  Here  recollec- 
tion lingers  for  a  moment.  Impelled  by  a 
powerful  sense  of  duty,thi  s  lady  quitted  her 
nearest  friend,  and  sought,  in  the  milder 
climate  of  Italy,  that  health  and  freedom  of 
respiration  which  were  denied  her  here. 
She  was  able  to  derive  much  enjoyment 
from  her  short  residence  in  a  land  that 
abounded  with  objects  congenial  to  her  taste  ; 
but  only  lived  to  return,  and  yield  her  last 
breath  in  her  native  country. 

As  Miss  Adams  has  mentioned  her  works 
in  her  memoir,  in  the  order  in  which  they 
were  written,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  more  of 
them.  They  have  been  reviewed,  and 
weighed,  by  a  candid  public  ;  and  met  at  the 
time  the  wants  of  the  different  departments 
in  which  they  were  written.     Her  History  of 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  93 

New  England  was  a  pioneer  to  many  simi- 
lar works  that  followed.  There  is,  however, 
one  work  of  hers,  published  in  1804,  which 
is  less  known.  It  is  entitled,  '  The  Truth 
and  Excellence  of  the  Christian  Religion 
exhibited.'  This  work  contains  interest- 
ing, and  short  sketches  of  the  lives  of  em- 
inent laymen,  v^ho  have  written  in  defence 
of  the  Christian  religion,  with  extracts  from 
their  writings.  The  characters  are  select- 
ed with  judgment  and  taste,  and  every  cir- 
cumstance is  omitted  that  does  not  aid  her 

Durno^e.  From  the  preface  jto.'  The  Truth 
and  Excellence  ot  the    Christian  lieiigiuii, 

written  by  the  author,  we  select  one  pas- 
sage. '  In  order  to  prevent  any  misrepresen- 
tation of  the  design  of  this  compilation,  it 
may  be  proper  to  inform  the  reader,  that 
these  great  names,  and  the  testimonies  they 
have  given  of  their  firm  belief  of  the  truth 
of  Christianity,  are  not  adduced  to  justify  a 
reliance  upon  human  authority,  or  to  estab- 
lish the  divinity  of  the  christian  system  ;  but 
the  evidences  of  revealed  religion  are  still 
submitted  to,  and  boldly  challenge,  the  strict- 


94  LIFE    OF 

est  scrutiny,  by  the  known  and  established 
rules  of  right  reason.'  In  connexion  with 
this  idea,  she  quotes  the  following  lines  from 
Cowper. 

'  "Philosophy  baptized 
In  the  pure  fountain  of  eternal  love, 
Has  eyes  indeed  ;  and,  viewing  all  she  sees, 
As  meant  to  indicate  a  God  to  man. 
Gives  him  the  praise,  and  forfeits  not  her  oAvn." ' 

The  order  and  systematic  arrangement  of 
this  work  is  excellent.  It  was  principally 
intended  for  the  use  of  young  persons  ;  and 
the   characters  selected  are    not  wanting  in 

them  attractive  to  the.  young.  The  follow- 
ing anecdote  is  there  related  of  Grotius. 

'  This  great  man  was  twice  sent  on  em- 
bassies to  England.  On  his  return  to  Hol- 
land, he  found  the  religious  divisions  which 
had  for  some  time  prevailed  in  that  country 
increased.  By  his  attachment  to  Barnevelt 
and  the  remonstrant  party,  he  incurred  the 
displeasure  of  Prince  Maurice  of  Orange. 
In  1669,  he  was  seized  and  sentenced  to  per- 
petual  imprisonment,    and  his    estate   w^§ 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  95 

confiscated.      In  pursuance  of  this  sentence, 
he   was  imprisoned  in    the  strong  castle    of 
Louvestein  ;    and  after  having    been  treated 
with  great  rigor  for  more  than  a  year  and  a 
half,  he  was  rescued   by  a  stratagem  of  his 
wife.     He   had    been  permitted  to  borrow 
books  of  his  friends ;  and  when  he  had  pe- 
rused them,  they  were  carried  back  in  a  chest 
with  his  linen,  which  was   in  this  way  sent 
to  be  washed.    During    the  first  year,   the 
guards  were  exact  in  examining  the  chest ; 
but  at  length  grew  remiss,   and  did  not  take 
the  trouble  to  open  it.     His  wife,  who  be- 
longed to  one  of  the   first   families  in  Zea- 
land, and  was  worthy  of  such  a  husband  as 
Grotius,  observing  their  negligence,  advised 
him  to  bore  holes  in  the  chest  to  prevent  his 
being  stifled,  and  then  to    put  himself  into 
it,  and  to  make  his  escape.     She   requested 
the    governor  of  the  castle  to  permit   her  to 
send  away  a  chest.     After  her  request    was 
granted,  Grotius  was  put  into  the  chest,  and 
conveyed    to   a  friend's  house   in    Gorkum, 
where,   dressing    himself  like  a  mason,  and 
taking  a  rule  and  trowel,  he  passed  through 


96  LIFE    OF 

the  market  place,  and  stepping  into  a  boat, 
went  to  Brabant.  There  he  discovered  him- 
self to  some  of  his  friends,  and  hired  a  car- 
riage at  Antwerp.  At  first  there  was  a  de- 
sign of  prosecuting  his  wife,  who  remained 
in  the  prison.  However,  she  was  released 
bj  a  plurality  of  voices,  and  universally  ap- 
plauded for  a  resolution  and  courage  which 
saved  her  husband's  life,  while  it  endanger- 
ed her  own.' 

It  would  be  a  pleasant  office,  in  paying 
this  tribute  to  the  memory  of  a  friend,  to 
record  the  names  of  many  whose  kindness 
and  attention  to  her  were  unremitting. 
Some,  like  herself,  have  gone  to  their  long 
home  ;  but  others  still  remain,  to  continue 
their  'noiseless  deeds  of  worth.'  One 
little  incident,  which  greatly  interested  her 
from  the  mystery  attached  to  it,  is  a  reason 
for  mentioning  the  name  of  a  lady  who  is 
now  no  more,  but  who  was  distinguished  for 
endowments  of  mind  and  person.  She 
married,  and  went  to  Europe  during  the  rev- 
olutionary war.  After  passing  many  years 
in  England,  Scotland  and  France,  she   re- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  97 

turned  to  this  country,  with  a  mind  fraught 
with  practical  knowledge,  a  heart  full  of 
benevolence,  and  blest  with  that  happy  tal- 
ent of  conversation,  that  draws  forth  from 
the  recipient  as  much  as  it  communicates. 
In  this  lady's  society  Miss  Adams  took  the 
greatest  delight.  During  their  long  and 
pleasant  intercourse  of  many  years,  an  artist 
waited  on  Miss  Adams,  and  requested  her  to 
sit  for  a  miniature  picture  of  herself :  say- 
ing that  he  was  commissioned  to  solicit  the 
favor  by  a  friend.  She  consented,  but  was 
entirely  at  a  loss  to  conjecture  who  the 
friend  could  be.  The  picture  was  com- 
pleted, and  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks 
sent  to  her,  with  the  following  note. 

My  dear  Madam  —  I  send  you  the  min- 
iature for  which  you  had  the  goodness  to 
sit.  It  has  been  generally  recognised,  and 
thought  a  good  likeness.  I  hope  it  will  be 
as  much  approved  in  your  room,  as  it  has  been 
in  mine.  Now,  my  dear  Madam,  you  will 
discover  the  friend  who  was  desirous  that 
you  should  live  in  future,  in  person  as  w^ell  as 
9 


98  LIFE    OF 

in  mind.  I  sincerely  hope  others  may  feel 
as  I  do  on  this  subject ;  and  a  more  valuable 
portrait  be  secured  of  the  lady,  whose  talents 
and  writings  have  diffused  so  much  useful 
knowledge,  and  whose  conduct  and  life  has 
been  so  exemplary.  After  it  has  been  with 
you  long  enough  for  your  friends  to  see  it,  I 
wish  it  returned,  and  to  have  the  honor  of 
its  hanging  in  my  house.  If  one  better  cal-  , 
culated  for  the  purpose  should  not  hereafter 
be  taken,  I  shall  bequeath  it  to  the  Athe- 
naeum. 

With  great  respect. 

Your  friend  and  servant, 

Catharine  Hay. 

Boston,  Dec.  25,  1822. 

The  hope  of  this  lady  was  accomplished. 
A  few  years  before  Miss  Adams's  death, 
through  the  influence  of  a  few  friends,  a  fine 
likeness  of  her  was  taken  by  Mr  Harding, 
and  was  afterwards  presented  by  them  to  the 
Athenseum. 

We  hope  it  may  not  be  deemed  improper 
to  mention  one  other  friend,  whose  life  was 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  99 

a  series  of  benevolent  and  disinterested  ex- 
ertions. Immediately  previous  to  Miss  Ad- 
ams's illness,  she  spoke  of  this  friend  with 
her  accustomed  interest ;  and  with  an  an- 
ticipation that  they  should  be  fellow-travel- 
lers to  the  land  of  spirits.  Mrs  Codman's 
death  took  place  a  few  days  after  that  of 
Miss  Adams.  vShe  has  left  to  her  friends 
those  sweet  and  sacred  remembrances,  that 
soften  and  elevate  the  heart ;  while  the 
influence  of  her  intelligent,  and  liberal  mind, 
will  long  be  felt  in  the  society  in  which  she 
lived. 

The  most  prominent  trait  in  Miss  Adams's 
character  was  sensibility.  It  was  impossible 
to  converse  with  her  any  length  of  time, 
without  touching  some  of  the  numerous 
chords  that  vibrated  through  her  system. 
An  instrument  thus  organized  did  not  require 
the  skill  of  an  artist  to  set  it  in  motion. 
The  feeblest  hand  could  extract  notes  of  joy, 
sorrow,  or  apprehension.  Ii  responded  to  ev- 
ery breath  that  passed  over  it.  This  sensi- 
tiveness sometimes  put  her  at  the  mercy  of 


100  LIFE    OF 

the  unfeeling  and  obtrusive.  But,  generally 
speaking,  her  sensibility  was  a  source  of  great 
enjoyment.  Towards  her  friends  it  flowed 
forth  in  an  aflection  fervent  and  enthusiastic. 
'  The  sight  of  them,'  to  use  her  own  expres- 
sion, '  was  like  the  sun  and  air  of  Heaven.' 
All  that  was  remotely  connected  with  them 
became  important  to  her.  Those  who  have 
heard  her  speak  of  Mr  Thacher,  the  eloquent 
and  feeling  historian  of  her  friend  Mr  Buck- 
minster,  understood  the  nature  of  her  emo- 
tions. She  almost  identified  him  with  the 
being  that  he  so  beautifully  and  justly  delin- 
eated. Brothers  indeed  they  were  in  the 
sacred  ties  of  love  and  harmony,  and  in 
those  qualities  of  mind  that  emanate  from 
the  source  of  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness. 
There  are  many  who  may  apply  to  both  that 
touching  sentence  the  survivor  applied  to  his 
friend  ;  '  Even  now,  when  time  has  inter- 
posed  to  subdue  all  the  more  powerful  emo- 
tions of  grief,  there  are  those  who  delight 
to  recall  the  hours  we  have  passed  with 
them,  and  to  dwell  on  those  traits,  which  we 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  101 

loved  while  living,  and  which  death  cannot 
efface  from  our  memories.' 

Mr  Thacher,  unlike  his  friend,  was  doom- 
ed to  see  death  approach  by  slow  and  falter- 
ing steps.  If  there  is  a  trial  on  earth  that 
mocks  the  power  of  human  fortitude,  it  is  to 
feel  the  usefulness  of  life  cut  off,  and  to  be 
compelled  to  remain  idle  during  the  toils  of 
the  day,  while  cares  and  labors  are  thronging 
around.  How  nobly  he  endured  this  afflic- 
tion, how  justly  he  reasoned  that  the  part 
assigned  him  was  to  ivait,  must  be  well  re- 
membered. The  teachings  of  Heaven  are 
as  various  as  our  wants.  This  sublime  exam- 
ple of  patient  endurance  has  found  its  way 
to  many  a  heart,  and  spoken  more  forcibly 
than  the  services  even  of  an  active  ministry 
could  have  done.  His  fervent  prayer  is  now 
accomplished.  He  has  gone  to  that  world 
where  '  friendship  is  uninterrupted,  and  vir- 
tue eternal.' 

We  bless  God  for  the  natural  evidence  of 

a  future  life,  which  minds  like  these,  bearing 

the  visible  stamp  of  immortality,  afford ;  we 
9# 


102  LIFE    OF 

bless  him  that  such  have  existed y  and  we 
bless  him  that  such  have  preceded  those 
w^hom  we  love,  to  cast  brightness  over  the 
dark  valley  of  death. 

We  hope  this  involuntary  digression  will 
be  pardoned,  and  we  return  again  to  the 
subject  of  our  memoir.  We  have  spoken  of 
her  sensibility  and  elsewhere  of  her  humility. 
This,  however,  must  not  be  mistaken  for  that 
slothful  quiescent  sense  of  inferiority,  which 
sometimes  belongs  to  common  minds.  It 
was  true  christian  humility  ;  it  was  the  con- 
sciousness of  high  moral  capacities,  falling 
far  short  of  her  exalted  standard  of  excel- 
lence. The  sensibility  that  led  her  so  fully 
to  appreciate  the  kindness  of  her  friends, 
made  her  alive  to  injury.  At  any  attempt  at 
imposition,  her  spirit  rose  proportionably,  and 
she  expressed  and  felt  a  resentment  for  which 
she  afterwards  reproached  herself. 

Her  judgment  and  opinion  of  books  was 
derived  from  her  own  power  of  thought.  She 
did  not  wait  for  the  decision  of  others,  but  ex- 
pressed her  own  fearlessly,  when  called  for. 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  103 

But  it  was  on  the  subject  of  character  that 
her  muid  discovered  most  acuteness  and  orig- 
inality. Even  in  those  whom  she  loved,  she 
knew  how  to  discriminate,  and  when  she 
allowed  herself  to  speak  on  the  subject, 
plainly  discovered  that  she  knew  how  to 
separate  the  good  from  the  evil,  and  that 
she  had  learned  to  love  them  with  their 
faults. 

The  last  visit  that  Miss  Adams  made  was 
to  South  Boston,  in  the  family  of  the  Su- 
perintendent of  Juvenile  Offenders.  There 
was  much  in  her  short  residence  there  to 
interest  her  mind.  The  success  of  this  in- 
stitution ;  the  groups  of  rescued  children, 
now  cheerful  and  obedient ;  the  disinterested 
kindness  of  the  family  ;  nor  ought  it  to  be 
forgotten,  the  beautiful  situation  of  the  build- 
ing, overlooking  the  bay  of  Boston  with  its 
many  islands,  the  harbor  and  city  rising  in 
its  pyramid  of  beauty,  and  crowned  by  the 
dome  of  the  State-house  ;  all  called  forth 
her  enthusiasm,  and  brightened  the  last  days 
of  her  earthly  existence.     When  she  return- 


104  LIFE    OF 

ed  to  her  lodgings  in  Boston,  she  lamented 
the  want  of  sun  and  of  prospect.  By  the 
instrumentality  of  judicious  friends,  she  was 
removed  to  Brookline  ;  and  when  there,  she 
wrote  the  following  note  to  a  friend,  which, 
as  the  last  effort  of  her  pen,  is  here  inserted. 

Dear  Madam  —  Will  you  excuse  me  if 
I  trouble  you  with  a  few  lines.  I  am  now 
settled  for  the  winter,  if  I  live.  The  great- 
est earthly  happiness  I  can   enjoy  is  seeing 

my  friends,  among  whom  dear  Mrs is 

in  the  first  rank.  I  need  not  inform  you, 
and  I  am  unable  to  express,  how  much  pleas- 
ure it  would  give  me  to  see  you  in  Brook- 
line.  The  lady  I  am  now  boarding  with  is 
all  goodness.  My  trembling  hand  will 
scarcely  allow  me  to  write.  Adieu,  dear 
Madam ;  pray  call  upon  me  as  soon  as  you 
can  conveniently. 

From  your  affectionate  and  grateful  friend, 

H.  Adams. 

Brookline,  Nov.  12,  1831. 

The  friend  to  whom  the  note  was  address- 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  105 

ed  hastened  to  see  her.  She  found  her 
m  a  large,  and  airy  apartment.  It  was 
a  fine  mornmg  ;  one  of  those  days  in  which 
'  Autumn  seems  to  linger  in  the  lap  of  Win- 
ter.' The  sun  poured  its  rajs  into  her 
apartment  to  her  heart's  content.  She  was 
bright,  and  cheerful,  and  said  with  a  smile 
she  '  believed  some  people  thought  she  had 
lived  long  enough  ;  but  she  was  willing  to 
remain  as  long  as  it  pleased  God  to  contin- 
ue her,'  and  then  added,  pointing  to  the 
prospect  without,  '  how  can  any  body  be 
impatient  to  quit  such  a  beautiful  world  !' 
But  little  remains  to  be  added  to  this 
short  sketch,  and  that  little  perhaps  is  ex- 
pressed in  the  Obituary  notice  which  we 
subjoin. 

OBITUARY. 

Died  at  Brookline,  near  Boston,  on  the 
15th  inst.  Miss  Hannah  Adams,  aged  seven- 
tysix.  Her  literary  labors  have  been  long 
before  the  public,  and  have  made  her  name 
known  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  her  native 


106  LIFE    OF 

land.  Her  first  work,  the  '  View  of  Reli- 
gions,' was  published  at  a  time  when  this 
country  had  few  authors,  and  when  a  book 
from  a  female  hand  was  almost  without  pre- 
cedent. She  was  not  impelled  by  any  de- 
sire of  fame ;  and  though  the  hope  of  use- 
fulness was  undoubtedly  a  strong  motive  to 
her  literary  exertions,  yet  this  would  not 
have  availed,  w  ithout  the  prospect  of  contri- 
buting by  her  pen  to  her  own  support,  and  the 
comfort  of  her  nearest  friends.  It  is  grati- 
fying to  know,  that  she  has  left  behind  a 
simple  and  interesting  memoir  of  her  early 
life,  which  precludes  the  necessity  of  saying 
more  of  her  literary  history.  Indeed,  litera- 
ry claims  are  perhaps  among  the  last  that,  at 
a  moment  like  this,  present  themselves  to  the 
minds  of  her  friends.  The  virtues  and  ex- 
cellences of  her  character,  her  blameless  life, 
her  sensibility,  the  warmth  of  her  affections, 
her  sincerity  and  candor,  call  forth  a  flow  of 
feeling  that  cannot  be  restrained.  To  an  al- 
most child-like  simplicity,  and  singleness  of 
heart,  she  united  a  clear  and  just  conception 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  107 

of  character ;  to  a  deep  and  affecting  hu- 
mility, a  dignity  and  elevation  of  thought, 
that  commanded  the  respect  and  veneration 
of  those  around  her.  Amidst  many  infirmi- 
ties she  retained  the  freshness  and  enthu- 
siasm of  youth.  Society  never  lost  its  charms. 
To  the  aged  she  listened  with  submission  and 
gentleness  ;  to  the  classic  and  highly  gifted, 
with  a  delight  almost  amounting  to  rapture. 
The  young,  and  there  were  such  who  felt 
it  a  privilege  to  '  sit  at  her  feet,'  she  viewed 
as  '  ministering  ano:els'  dispensing  joy  and 
gladness.  Her  love  of  nature  was  exhaust- 
less.  The  first  beam  of  morning,  the  glory 
of  noon,  the  last  rays  of  the  setting  sun,  were 
objects  which  through  a  long  life  she  never 
contemplated  with  indifference.  Those 
who  w'ere  in  the  habit  of  visiting  her,  will 
recollect  how  constantly  her  apartment  was 
decorated  by  flowers  of  the  field,  or  the  gar- 
den. It  was  her  object  to  gather  round  her 
images  of  natural  and  moral  beauty.  In 
many  respects  her  mind  seemed  so  truly  con- 
stituted   for   enjoyment,    that  to  those  who 


108  LIFE    OF 

knew  her  but  slightly,  she  might  have  ap- 
peared to  be  exempted  from  that  mental 
discipline,  which  is  gradually  leading  the 
pilgrim  on  to  the  land  of  promise.  But  her 
friends  knew  otherwise  ;  they  knew  how 
keen  was  her  religious  sensibility,  how 
tremblingly  alive  her  conscience,  how  high 
her  standard  of  excellence,  and  how  great 
her  timidity  and  self-distrust,  and  they  felt 
that  this  was  not  her  haven  of  rest. 

Though  Miss  Adams's  faith  was  fervent 
and  devout,  it  partook  of  the  constitution  of 
her  sensitive  mind,  rather  than  gave  the  tone 
to  it.  Yet  amidst  moments  of  doubt  and  de- 
spondency, a  passage  from  scripture,  or  a 
judicious  observation,  would  disperse  the 
clouds  that  had  gathered  round  her,  and  the 
brightest  sunshine  would  diffuse  itself  over 
her  mind  and  countenance.  There  are  ma- 
ny who  will  sorrow  that  they  shall  see  her 
'  face  no  more  ; '  but  those  who  knew  the 
peculiar  delicacy  of  her  constitution,  ought 
rather  to  rejoice  that  she  has  escaped  from 
the    present    inclement    winter ;   from    the 


MISS    HANNAH    ADAMS.  109 

Stormy  wind  and  tempest;  that  her  eyes  have 
opened  upon  '  one  eternal  Spring,'  a  season 
that  always  awoke  the  enthusiasm  of  her 
nature,  and  which  she  said  seemed  to  her 
'  like  the  first  freshness  of  cree^tion.' 

It  was  her  happiness  to  have  been  conver- 
sant with  some  of  the  most  enlightened  and 
gifted  men  of  the  age.  From  many  she  re- 
ceived essential  benefit ;  and  the  universal 
sympathy  and  respect,  as  well  as  the  indi- 
vidual kindness  which  she  excited,  are  testi- 
monies honorable  to  human  nature.  Many 
in  whom  she  delighted  have  passed  away. 
To  those  she  has  gone,  and  to  the  Father 
and  Saviour  whom  she  loved. 

The  last  tribute  of  respect  is,  however, 
yet  to  be  paid  to  the  honored  subject  of  this 
notice.  Her  remains  are  to  be  removed  to 
Mount  Auburn,  near  Boston,  the  spot  select- 
ed for  a  cemetery.  Subscriptions  for  a  monu- 
ment to  her  memory  have  been  raised,  and 
it  will  be  erected  in  the  spring.  There 
seems  to  be  almost  a  poetical  unity  in  this 
10 


110  LIFE  OF  MISS  HANNAH  ADAMS. 

arrangement  ;    that  one    who  so    devoutly 

'  Looked  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God,' 

should  be  one  of  the  first  tenants  of  a  spot, 
combining  so  much  natural  beauty ;  and 
which  possesses  that  magnificence  of  wood 
and  water,  which  bespeaks  it  '  a  temple 
not  made  with  hands.' 
