XVII.

DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PSEUDO-METALOGICUS AND
THE FALSE BULL OF ADRIAN IV.

I TRANSCRIBE Chapter XLII., or rather, I translate it. The
Latin text is sufficiently known. I shall add my observa-
tions.

““T conclude. At this moment it would be more proper
to weep than to write ; and I learn by sensible experience
that the whole world is subject to vanity. We have hoped
for peace, and lo! trouble and tempcst burst on Toulouse,
and everywhere rouse the English and the French ; and
Kings, whom we have seen unitcd, pursuc each other
without a moment’s intermission. Moreover, the death of
the Lord Pope Adrian, which has alarmed all the peoples of
Christendom, has caused still greater grief in our England,
of which he was a native, and evoked more abundant tears.
Good people deplore this loss, but no one should lament it
more than I. In fact, although he had his mother and a
uterine brother, he loved me more than them. He declared,
in public as well as in private, that he had a greater affec-
tion for me than for any other person in the world. He
had formed such an opinion of me that he was delighted to
open his heart and conscience to me, as often as oppor-
tunity offered. Though Roman Pontiff, he was pleased to
have me as guest at his table’; in spite of my reluctance, he
required that one plate and one cup should be in common
between us. At my request he gave Ireland to the illus-
trious King of England, Henry II., to be possessed by
hereditary right, as his letters prove to this day. For ail’

46 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

islands, in virtue of a very ancient law, are considered to
belong to the Roman Church, through a donation of Con-
stantine, who founded and endowed this Church. More-
over, Pope Adrian sent by me a gold ring, adorned with a
most beautiful emerald, by which investiture with the
right of governing Ireland should be made ; and this ring
is preserved by order in the public archives of the Court.
I should never be done if I were to relate all the virtues of
this illustrious Pontiff. But that which pierces all hearts
most is the schism, which, in punishment of our sins,
afflicts the Church, so great a Pontiff having been taken
away, ... Independently of the public sorrow, I feel an
inward sorrow which is no less. For my father and lord,
who is also yours, the venerable Theobald, Archbishop of
Canterbury, has fallen sick, and what will be the course of
the illness is uncertain. No longer able to attend to affairs,
he has laid on me a hard duty and an insupportable burden,
the care of all the ecclesiastics. My spirit everywhere finds
pain, and the tortures that I endure I am unable to ex-
press. The only recourse left for me is to pray to the
Man-God, the Son of the Immaculate Virgin.”

This strange passage claims some serious remarks. I
shall divide them into several points, so as to give more
clearness to the subject.

First Observation. The part that mentions the siege of
Toulouse imitates a part in the preface of the Polycraticus.
If John of Salisbury, about this period, entered the service
of Becket, could he be at the same time chancellor and
secretary to Theobald ?

Second Observation. In the preface of the Metalogicus,
Salisbury speaks of the dutics that he fulfils in regard to
the ecclesiastical causes of all England, by order of his
lord ; but be does not name the Archbishop, he does not
say that he speaks of Theobald. Here, in short, is the
passage from the prologue :—‘‘ Placuit itaque sociis, ut
hoc ipsum tumultuario modo dictarem : cum nec ad sen-
tentias subtiliter examinandas, nec ad verba expolienda,
studium superesset, aut otium. Necessariis enim occupa.
tionibus vix aliquid amplius deducebatur quam refectionis
hora, vel somni : cum ex mandato Domini mei, cui deesse
non possum, sollicitudo totius Britanniz, quod ad causas
ecclesiasticas, mihi incumbat. Ad -hec sollicitudo rei
familiaris, et curiales nuge, studium excludebant : amico-

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 47

rum interpellatio me fere totum absorbuerat.... Et quia
logici suscepi patrocinium, Metalogicon descriptus est
liber.”

All this agrees. very well with the first days of Saint
Thomas, before the conflict with Henry II. Accordingly,
the Metalogicus would have been written about that period.

I do not see any motive that could have induced the
author to repeat in Chapter XLII. what he had said in the
preface, namely, that he was absorbed in his duties, over-
whelmed with the cares entrustcd to him. Besides, what
is clear in the Prologus becomes ambiguous in Chapter
XLII. The preface says: Sollicitudo totius Britannia,
quod ad causas ecclesiasticas. This is the exercise of
metropolitan or primatial jurisdiction. In Chapter XLII.,
on the contrary, there is no longer any question of the
affairs of England ; there is mention only of ecclesiastics,
which seems confined to persons: Omnium ecclesiasticorum
sollicitudo, We should say that it was a mere glance over
the moral conduct of the clergy.

What is truly new in Chapter XLII. is the name of
Theobald, which is not in the Preface.

As it is very doubtful whether Salisbury was ever in
the service of Theobald, this circumstance increases sus-
picion against Chapter XLII.

Third Observation. What the writer relates of the
familiarity with which Pope Adrian treated him is truly
unworthy of the pontifical majesty. Salisbury expressed
himself more modestly in the Polycraticus :—‘‘ I remem-
ber that I set out for Apulia, to visit the Lord Pope
Adrian, who had admitted me to a special familiarity. I
remained with him at Beneventum for nearly three
months. While we were often speaking of different
matters, as is usual among friends, and he questioned me
familiarly and diligently, to know what men thought of
him and of the Roman Church, I took the liberty of
openly representing to him what I had learned in various
provinces.”’ (Poly., 1. 6, c. 24.)

‘Salisbury does not here wander from the respect
constantly due to the Sovereign Pontiff. But it is quite.a
different case in Chapter XLII.

‘Who will believe that Pope Adrian took pleasure in
saying publicly that he loved Salisbury more than any

48 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

other person in the world—more than his own mother or.
his own brother ?

It is known that the Pope eats alone. The Roman cere.
monials of the twelfth century mark the days on which
the Cardinals are invited to the Pontifical table. It would
be a strange thing that Salisbury should have been a con-
tinual guest with the Pope for nearly three months ; but
that the Pope should absolutely have wished to eat from.
the same plate and to drink from the same cup as his
pretended friend—this is an enormity which ought to
appear sufficient for the rejection of the whole passage as
apocryphal. Nothing would remain to be added but that
Salisbury was a sharcr of the Pope’s bed.

It is most extraordinary that the forger did not see
that these monstrous exaggerations would take away all
credit from what he was soon going to say about Ireland..

Fourth Observation. If it is true that Pope Adrian IV.
gave Ireland to the King of England at the request of.
Salisbury (ad preces meas), this naturally means that the
King did not ask this gift, which was spontaneous on the
part of the Pontiff. Now this circumstance is contra-
dicted by the Apocryphal Bull, which mentions a letter
from the King. In any case, it is very strange that the
donation of a kingdom should have been obtained by a
private individual, who had no official character. The
false Salisbury of Chapter XLII. does not give the least
hint in the world that Henry II. had charged him with
the mission of soliciting, in his name, authority to invade
the land of Ireland, and to compel the inhabitants to re-
cognise him as their lord and master. On the other hand,
the Apocryphal Bull does not name Salisbury ; it men-.
tions no ambassador who has made a petition in the name
of the King. One might believe that the affair had all
been arranged by correspondence.

Fifth Observation. Salisbury, in the Polycraticus, fixes
the time of his interview with Adrian IV., when saying:
that he met him at Beneventum., Adrian IV. sojourned at
Beneventum for seven months, from November 21, 1155,
to July 10, 1156. .If the concession in regard to Ireland.
was made during the three months that Salisbury spent at:
Bencventum, how explain the silence that he kept: about
it in the Polycraticus, published three years afterwards,’

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 49

in 1159? On the other hand, if the donation of Ireland
is to be referred to another journey of Salisbury’s, the
author of Chapter XLII. ought so much the more justly
to have fixed its time, as the Apocryphal Bull is without
date in Giraldus Cambrensis, who, it seems, was the first
to publish this Bull. Other historians and compilers have
put : Datum Roma, etc. According to this, the Bull could
not be referred to the sojourn of Adrian at Beneventum,
nor to the journey that the Polycraticus makes known.

Sixth Observation. The author of Chapter XLII.
announces a letter of Pope Adrian IV. regarding Ireland ;
but he did not know its tcnor, he never had it bcfore
his eyes. If he had known it, he would not have asserted
that the Pope gave Ireland to the King of England and
his successors by right of succession and inheritance :
Ad preces meas illustri Anglorum regi Henrico secundo
concessit et dedit Hiberniam jure hereditario possidendam,
sicut litere ipsius testantur in hodiernum diem. What a
misfortune that the writer did not describe more definitely
this dies hodiernus! In the Apocrypha! Bull, on the con-
trary, there is no question of investiture, and still less of a
perpetual investiture, that passes to heirs and successors,
without there bcing need to have it renewed and confirmed
at the beginning of each new reign. In fact, the Bull
simply announces a _ personal concession for King
Henry II., that he may engage in reforming morals and
repressing vices. It is only for the accomplishment of this
temporary mission, exclusively religious and moral,
that the Pope permits the King to’be received honour-
ably by the people of Ireland, and to be revered as their
lord.

‘“We therefore” (this is what the Apocryphal Bull
says), “‘ receiving with due favor your pious and laudable
desires, and graciously granting our consent to your
petition, declare that it is pleasing and acceptable to us,
that for the purpose of enlarging the limits of the Church,
setting bounds to the torrent of vice, reforming evil
manners, planting the seeds of virtue, and increasing
Christian faith, you should enter that island and carry
into effect those things which belong to the service of God
and to the salvation of that people ; and that the people of
that land should honourably receive and reverence you as

F

50 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

their lord.’’! All this is essentially different from feudal
investiture.

Seventh Observation. The sending of a ring as a sign
of investiture is a thing unexampled in history, if the
Pope does not at the same time appoinT a delegate to per-
form publicly the ceremony of the imposition of the ring.
The pseudo-Salisbury tells us gravely that Pope Adrian
sent a gold ring, in order to proceed to the investiture :
Annulum quoque per me transmisit aureum, smaragdo
optimo decoratum, quo fieret investitura juris in gerenda
Hibernia, idemque annulus in curiali archivo publico
custodiri jussus est. 1 look for the Pontifical delegate.
It certainly was not Salisbury, a simple priest.

The Apocryphal Bull itself does not speak of a ring or
of investiture. I find no trace of this ring except in
Giraldus Cambrensis, whom I have quoted above.

Eighth Observation. Hereditary investiture is without
example in the Pontifical diplomatique of the twelfth cen-
_tury. The Pope, granting that investiture should pass to
heirs and successors, required a renovation and confirma.
tion of it at each change of reign or pontificate. The
Normans of Naples and Sicily submitted to the common
law : their diplomas are met everywhcre in the annals of
Baronius and other historians. According to the pseudo-
Salisbury, Adrian IV., treating the Normans of England
much more favourably, would have granted perpetual in-
vestiture by the magic virtue of a ring kept in the royal
archives of Winchester !

Ninth Observation. Salisbury was too enlightened to
say that the Emperor Constantine founded the Roman
Church ; for foundation goes back to Jesus Christ, or to
the times of the Apostles. It is not even quite true that
this Emperor endowed the Roman Church : in the very
era of the persecutions, it owned property, which, confis-
cated under Diocletian, was restored by order of Con-
stantine.

If John of Salisbury really wrote in 1160 that all islands
belong to the Holy See, he did not perceive that this

1 To preserve uniformity of translation, the words of this sentence
are borrowed from the translation given by Cardinal Moran No, 1
among the Documents at the end.—Trans, a

pe Regenda ?

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 51

maxim would apply directly to England. We shall meet
again with this inconsistency in the Apocryphal Bull.

