XV.
CARDINAL VIVIAN..

Tue old Irish annalists mention in 1177 the arrival of
Cardinal Vivian, who convoked a council of bishops and
abbots, and made various ordinances, which are now un-
known. I borrow from the Rev. Mr. Dimock, the most
recent editor of Giraldus Cambrensis, the following note :
‘“The Four Masters, A.D. 1177, say: Cardinal Vivian
arrived in Ireland. ‘A synod of the clergy of Ireland, both
bishops and abbots, was convened by this Cardinal on the
first Sunday in Lent, and they enacted many ordinances
not now observed.” (Works of Giraldus, vol. v., p. 345.)

_Giraldus pretends, on the contrary, that Cardinal Vivian,
in the council, publicly (but verbally) proclaimed the right
of the King of England over Ireland, and the confirmation
of the Pope, with a strict precept, as well for the clergy as
the laity, under pain of anathema, to be faithful to the
King.  (Ibid.)

A verbal command, a precept sanctioned by anathema,
is a thing very strange! Yet Giraldus had studied canon
law: this is evident from his works. Moreover, the
assertion has no guarantee but the word of the author,
which cannot be admitted without a most strict examina-
tion. He also says at the same year (1177) that two impor-
tant regions of Ireland, namely, Ulster and Connacht,
had remained inaccessible to the English, whose attacks
were constantly repelled. It is difficult to suppose that the
inhabitants should submit to the King of England by order
of the Cardinal.

Vivian spent a great many years in England, in Scot-
land, and in Ircland, as Pontifical Lcgate. Giraldus un-
doubtedly calumniates him when he accuses him of a covet-
ousness that made him very ecagcr for money and other gifts

Hoveden speaks of Cardinal Vivian, and his voyage to
Ireland in 1177. Far from mentioning a pretended coun-
cil in which the right of England over Ireland was pro-
claimed, and sanctioned by anathema, the annalist relates
the misadventures of the Cardinal. ‘‘ The same year,”
he says, “ Vivian, named above, Cardinal Priest of the

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 39

title of Saint Stephen, on Mount Celius, Legate of the
Apostolic See, spent the festival of Christmas in the Isle of
Man, with King Guthred. After the Epiphany, he set sail
for Ireland, and landed at Down, in Ulster. As he was
going along to Dublin by the seaside, he met the troops of
John de Courcy, who stoppcd and held him ; but John de
Courcy delivered him and let him go his way. Before the
Purification of Saint Mary, John de Courcy besieged and
took the city of Down, the capital of Ulster, where rest the
bodies of the holy confessors Patrick and Columba, and
also that of Saint Brigid, virgin. On hearing this, Roderic,
King of Ulster, assembled a great army of Irishmen, and
gave battle to John de Courcy, who lost a considerable
part of his army, but gained a complete victory. . . . The
Bishop of Down was taken in the combat, but John de
Courcy delivered him at the petition of the Cardinal.”
(Hoveden, p. 320.)

Behold how Henry II. was lord and master of Ireland!
In reality, the King had power only in the district of Cork
and in Meath. Hoveden relates, about the end of 1177,
that the King gave Meath to Hugh de Lacy, and also dis-
posed of the district of Cork, except the city. He offered
the kingdom of Limerick to William and Herbert, brothers
of Reginald, Earl of Cornwall. He afterwards offered it to-
Jocelyn de la Pomeroy, thcir nephew. As all refused it,
the King applied to Philip de Breusa. In the meantime,
a relative of the deceased ruler possessed himself of the
place, and governed it, without making any submission to
the King of England or his ministers, because of their
duplicity, and the evil they had done without cause to the
people of Ireland. ‘‘ Quidam de progenie illius (regis
Monoculi occisi a regalibus), vir potens et fortis, regnum
de Limeric invasit, cepit, et potenter rexit, nullam subjec-
tionem faciens regi Angliz ; nec suis obedire voluit, prop-
ter infidelitatem eorum, et mala que faciebant populo
Hibernie sine merito. Rex vero Corcensis et alii multi
divites Hibernia insurrexcrunt in regem Hibernie,! et
suos: et erant novissima eorum pejora prioribus, et se
mutuo interfecerunt.’’ (Hoveden, p. 324.)

1 This word is evidently a mistake. Angliz is the word in the
edition of. Roger de Hoveden, by William Stubbs, M.A. London:
Longmans, 1869. Vol. ii., p. 136.—Trans.

Oo POPE ADRIAN IV.,

J have named Hugh de Lacy : his tragic death reveals
the proceedings to which Henry IJ. had recourse in order
to extend his domination in Ireland. Here is what we
rcad in William of Newbridge, at the year 1183 : —‘‘ Hugh
de Lacy was regarded as the principal and most powerful
of the barons of the King of England that were in Ireland.
After the death of the valiant Earl Richard, the King had
given him vast possessions, and entrusted him with the
administration of his domains. But in a little while
De Lacy so extended his limits, and so increased his riches
and his forces, that he made himself feared not only by his
enemies, but even by his own companions, that is to say,
the other barons of the King ; for he ill-treated them, if
they did not obey him in everything. He seemed to labour
in Ireland for himself rather than for the King of England,
and it was positively asserted that he was aiming at a
royal diadem. When the King was informed of this, he
recalled Hugh to England, but De Lacy despised the com-
mand. Shortly afterwards, fortune favoured the King of
England ; De Lacy was assassinated through the perfidy
of a young man whom he had made:his friend, and who
belonged to a band of confederated Irish. Henry then
happened to be at the extremity of England. On hearing
of the murder of De Lacy, he manifested extraordinary joy.
Affairs in Ireland soon received from him a more circum-
spect organisation.”” (William of Newbridge, lib. 3, c. 9.)

All these facts, attested by English chroniclers, and even
by those who were dependent on the Court, show the pre-
carious state of English rule in Ireland under Henry II.
‘They cannot be reconciled with the hypothesis of a Ponti-
fical Bull that had made a donation of the land of Ireland
to the King of England.

 

