XXVIII.

ERECTION OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND BY POPE PAUL IV.
(1553-)

IRELAND had never been considered a kingdom. It was
officially designated the Land of Ireland. The Kings of
England called themselves Lords of this Land. The Bulls
of Popes and the diplomas of Kings unite to prove this
denomination of Land through all preceding ages. As the
letter of Adrian IV. to Louis VII. uscd the same term to
designate the country whose eonquest was desired by the
King of France and the King of England, I have taken an
argument from the fact to maintain that the pontifical letter
could not apply to Spain, which comprised three king-
doms, and conscqucntly did not cxist politically as one
single nation. King John offcred to the Pope the kingdom
of Ireland. But Innoccnt III. was not so innocent as to
mention the pretended kingdom ; for he wrote to the prce-
lates, knights, and people, per Hiberniam constitutis : he
did not at all say per Hibernia regnum. Henry VIII. him-
self, as I have said above, writing to Leo X., in order to
offer him his book Assertio Septem Sacramentorum. took
simply the title “ Lord of Ireland.”’

The Protestant Parliament that sat in Dublin in 1rg5q1
erected Ireland into a kingdom. Edward VI. took the
pompous title of ‘‘ King of England, France, and Ire-
land.”’

This example was followed by Queen Mary, called to
the throne of England after the death of her brother
Edward in 1553. When she married Philip of Spain, son
of Charles V., the proclamations and ordinances men-
tioned, among other titles of these rulers, that of “ King
and Queen of Ireland.”

In Lingard’s History, we read as follows: ‘‘ Pole had
foreseen that the new title of King and Queen of Ireland,
assumed by Philip and Mary, in imitation of Henry and
Edward, might create some difficulty, and had therefore
requestcd that Ireland might be deelared a kingdom before

I

114 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

the arrival of the ambassadors. But the death of Julius,
succeeded by that of Marcellus, had prevented those Pon-
tiffs from complying with his advice, and the first act of
the new Pope,! after his coronation, was to publish a Bull
by which, at the petition of Philip and Mary, he raised the
lordship of Ireland to the dignity of a kingdom. Till this
had been done, the ambassadors waited without the city ;
three days later they were introduced.”

Paul II]. had taken it very ill that Henry VIII. assumed
the title of King of Ireland, because it was supposed that
he did so in contempt of the Holy See. This sentiment has
found an echo in the Annals of Bzovius. (An. 1542, n. 11.)

Two official documents regard the erection of the king-
dom of Ireland ; first, the consistorial decree, which accom.
plished this crection, and sccondly, the Bull of the same
day, 7th of June, 1555.

The Continuator of Baronius gives the consistorial de-
cree, which appears also among the letters of Cardinal
’ Pole (v. 136). The Bull is found in the Roman Bullarium,
latest edition (vol. 1, part 4, page 315). It is also in the
Annals of Bzovius (vol. xx., p. 301).

The two documents, identical in substance, present the
same affirmations and the same clauses, expressed in the
saine terms. The consistorial decree is as follows :—
‘“ Rome, seventh day of the month of June, 1555. There
was a consistory at St. Mark’s. On the relation of the
Most Reverend Puteus, the Holy Father erected the island
of Ireland into a kingdom. Since the time when the King's
of England acquired the dominion of this island through
the Apostolic See, they, for the time being, have been
accustomed to call themselves simply its Lords. The royal
title was de facto usurped, first by the late Henry VIII.,
after his defection from the unity of the Church and sub-
mission to the Roman Pontiff, under pretext of a law
made, it is said, by the Parliament of the aforesaid island ;
and then by his son, Edward V1.—both of whom, while
they lived, held themselves for Kings of England. His
Holiness erected the kingdom of Ireland in the manner of
other islands, which have the royal title, dignity, and
honour : without prejudice to the rights of the holy Roman

1 Paul IV,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 115

Church, or of any other party that claims to have a right
in or to the aforcsaid island ; and he adorned and decorated
it with the title, dignity, honour, power, rights, and royal
insignia enjoyed by the other kingdoms of Christendom.”

This consistorial decree is repeated in the Bull. The
preamble of the Bull says that the Pontiff, holding the place
of Him by whom kings reign, willingly complies with the
wishes of the Catholic princes. Mary is called Queen of
England and France. Then the erection of the kingdom
is granted at the request of King Philip and Queen Mary :
it is not an act molu proprio of the Popc.

The erection of the kingdom of Ireland having been
granted at the rcquest of Philip and Mary, it is necessary
to interpret the diploma according to the principles of
Canon Law.

(a) Paul IV. does not at all mention the Bull of
Adrian IV. If he admittcd the genuineness of this Bull,
he would naturally have rccalled it, instead of referring
vagucly to a time when the Kings of England had ob-
tained the sovereignty of Ireland through the Holy See,
I suspect that the Pontifical Court of 1555 had no know-
ledge whatever of the existence of such a Bull. It was
only fifty years later that Baronius, mceting it by chancc
in Matthew Paris, inserted it in his Annals, showing at the
same time how little he believed in its gcnuineness.

John XNIL., it is true, spoke of the Bull of Adrian in a
letter that he addressed to King Edward II., as I have said
above. But it does not appear that this secret letter_left
any remembrance or trace in the Pontifical Court. In the
time of Paul IV., the registers of John XXII. being still at
the Pontifical Palace of Avignon, the Roman archivists
could not know the particulars of sccret documents that
were not before their eyes.

With what object did John XXII. send to King Edward
a copy of the Bull that he had received from the Irish of
Ulster, if not to make known to this prince that he (the
Pontiff) knew nothing about it, and that he doubted its
genuineness? Concessisse dicitur! It may be that he
was very glad to warn the King that the Pontifical Court
would henceforth have an cyc on the fraudulent methods
that the English employed in order to gain the submission

of the old Irish by a display of Apocryphal Bulls.

116 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

John XXII. did not care to kcep a copy of the Bull of
Adrian. Neither Bernard Guidonis nor Cardinal D’Ara-
gon found a trace of it in the archives.

(b) The Bull of Paul IV. passed ovcr in silence the
agreement madc in 1213 betwecn Pope Innocent III. and
King John. It is beyond doubt that the King offered the
kingdom of Ircland to the Roman Church : totum regnum
Hibernie ; but it secms no less certain that the Pope could
not accept this donation. Nemo dat quod non habet is a
maxim given us by the wisdom of nations. Now, King
John, who possessed only a small part of Ireland, was not
in a position to give the whole island : it is not permitted
to perform good works with the property of others. Pope
Innocent III., on his side, should not on any account take
the sovereignty of a kingdom that did not exist. If he
wished for sovereignty, he should begin by erecting the
kingdom. We nowhere see that a Roman Pontiff con-
ferred the investiture of Ireland on King John or any of
his succcssors. This is why Paul IV. kept a prudent
silence.

(c) Neithcr the Bull of Adrian nor the concordat of Inno.
cent III. being able to serve as a titlc, it is not easy to sce
what led Paul IV. to say in his diploma that the Kings of
England acquired the sovereignty of Ireland through the
Holy Sec: Illius dominium per sedem praedictam adepti
sunt veges Angliw. But lo! this incidental phrase gives

rise to another difficulty. ‘‘ Since the time when the Kings
of England acquired the dominion of this island through
the Apostolic Sec, they . . . have been accustomed to call

vy

themselves simply its Lords.’? How are we to know the
precise time? King John, at the beginning of his reign,
and even before it, took the pompous title of ‘‘ Lord of
Ireland.” He could not rcly on the false Bull of Adrian,
which granted no right to the succcssors of King Henry II.
It was Henry who, wishing to scrccn his son John from
the nickname Lackland that had been given him and that
remained with him, it was Henry who thought, by his own
authority, to make John ‘‘ Lord of Ircland.’’ But the
Popes gave John the merc title ‘‘ Earl of Morton.” After
the death of Henry II., during the rcign of Richard Coeur
de Lion, Pope Clement III. having occasion to speak at
the same time of Ireland and of John, gave thc latter the

A FRIEND ‘OF IRELAND. IZ

did
mere title of ‘‘ Earl of Morton,’’ as if he would not recog-
nise that of ‘‘ Lord of Ireland,” so pretentiously assumed.

Thus, there is no historical connection between the
taking of the title and any grant whatsoever of sovereignty
in Ireland by the authority of the Holy See. All that can
be said is that Pope Paul IV., or rather the writer of the
Bull, copied from the petition of Philip and Mary. Only
that, and nothing more.

(d) During a long time, it was inculeated upon the old
Trish that they ought to regard the Pope as sovercign lord
of the country. This notion was encouraged by Kings and
Parliaments, as an easy means of securing submission.
We may read on this subject the statutes of the Parlia-
ments of the English colony, especially the seventh statute
under Edward IV. (C. 9.)

Conformably to this notion, towards which the Irish
showed themselves incredulous, but which the Eng-
lish spread with all their power, Philip and Mary
represented to Paul IV. that the Kings of Eng-
land had acquired the sovereignty of Ireland by a
grant of the Holy Sec: illius (insule) dominium
per sedem predictam (apostolicam’ adebti sunt repes
Angli@ ; but the assertion, exceedingly doubtful for eleven
counties, seems entirely devoid of exactness and truth if
we look at the twenty-one counties which held their inde-
pendence, and which the English had never subdued. We
may be permitted to doubt that Paul IV. would have con-
sented to the erection of the kingdom, if he had been in-
formed that the King of England possessed only the
smaller portion of the island.

It is a fundamental principle of the Roman Chancery
that grants on petition are pre-eminently conditional :
they depend on the subjective and objective veracity of the
lepresentation : si vera sint exposita ; quatenus preces
veritate nitantur. When the foundation is defective, the
building falls to the ground. The Bull of Paul IV. shows
in every word that the erection of the kingdom of Ireland
was decided on by the petition of Philip and Mary:1!

1 Philip and Mary, and Cardinal Pole, who was Mary's cousin, may
all have believed bona fide in Adrian’s grant, and thus led Pope Paul IV.
astray by their representations or rather misrepresentations. Fora Pope
can err in matters of history just as in those of geometry or astronomy,

118 POPR ADRIAN IV.,

Philippo rege et Maria regina nobis super hoc humiliter
supplicantibus. It is otherwise when the Pope declares
that he acts spontaneously, or without request from any
person.

(e) The Holy See always protects the rights of others.
Paul IV. should protect them so much the morc in the
present case as the Irish had not been consulted on an
affair that concerned them closely. This is why the Pope
expressly safeguards the rightS that any third party may
set forth in regard to Ireland: sine prajudicio jurium
ipsius Romane Ecclesia, et cujuscumque alterius in illa
(insula) vel ad illam jus habere pretendentis. he consis-
torial decree makcs the same reserve.

Remark carefully that the Bull does not reserve only the
peaceable possession (jus in re), but it reserves also the
future or the contested right (jus ad rem). Twenty-one in-
dependent counties peaceably possesscd their territory :
the Pope did not intend to modify at any cost their state,
I ask if the old Irish had any right to claim back the terri-
tory of the English colony. Had not the invasion been
unjust? Had not the conquest becn accomplished by
iniquitous means? Had the Irish acquiesced in their
spoliation? This is the jus ad rem. 1 do not press the
matter: it is enough to note that the Pontifical Bull re-
serves all rights.

It is very doubtful that the Irish would have consented
to let themselves be included in a kingdom totally wanting
in homogeneity, being composed of two disproportioned
parts: on the one side, twenty-one independent counties,
and on the other, eleven counties of an English colony,
which depended on the Crown of England. For example,
the republic of Cracow existed from 1815 to 1847 ; but no
person had any idea of regarding it as part of the kingdom
of Poland, which the Congress of Vienna gave to the
Emperor of Russia.

(f) The Bull of Paul IV. did not confer on the King of
England any new right over Ireland ; in this respect, the
situation continued the same as beforc. Investiture, dona-

Jt is only in matters of faith and morals that he is infallible, and even
then, only when he speaks ex cathedra. As a private theologian, he may
err.— Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. IIg

tion, concession—nothing of the kind is to be seen in the
pontifical diploma. The independence of the old Irish
therefore received no hurt.

By the erection of the kingdom of Ireland, Paul IV. con-
ferred an honorary title on the King of England, who for
a long time was called the King of France, although he
had no authority in this latter country.

(g) I cannot say whether the Irish learned with satisfac-
tion that their country had been raised to the rank of a
kingdom. But I notice in McGeoghegan the following re-
marks ;:—‘‘ To the month of June in this year (1555) we
refer a Bull or Brief of Pope Paul IV., which conferred on
Ireland the title of kingdom. We do not see very well the
necessity for this new creation of the title of kingdom for
Ireland. This island was adorned with that title a long
time before the English were known there, and even be-
fore the institution of the Papacy.’’ (Histoire d'Ivrlande,
t. 2, p. 367.)

Bzovius, after the Bull, gives some account of the pri-
vate interview that Paul IV. had with the ambassadors of
Queen Mary. After this, says the historian, the Pontiff
complained that the ecclesiastical goods had not yet been
restored. He said that the usurpers ought absolutely to
be obliged to surrender them—that the English ought to
be well convinced that sacrilegious thefts would draw down
a curse from heaven on their families and on their king-
dom. He recommended the ambassadors to write often to
their princes on this point, and he renewed this advice on
all occasions. He expressly ordered that they should en-
gage them to re-establish Peter’s Pence, because he had
decided on sending a collector to England, according to
custom. He had himself discharged this employment for
three years, and he recalled to mind with pleasure the
eagerness that the people, and even the poor, showed in
paying this tribute. The English ought not to expect that
St. Peter would open for them the gate of heaven, if they
did not repair the injury that they had done him by
usurping his rights.

The Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland during
_the reign of Mary, wrested from the old Irish the two dis-
tricts of Offaly and Leix, and erected them into countics,
which he called King’s County and Queen’s County, in

120 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

honour of Philip and Mary. This faet goes to show that,
notwithstanding the ereetion of a new kingdom, the
greater part of Ireland continued independent of the Crown
of England.

The Parliament of the English colony re-established
Catholic worship, acknowledged the authority of the Pope,
and proclaimed the legitimaey of Queen Mary. (Statutes
of Ireland under Philip and Mary, 1, 2, 3, 4.)

The Archbishop of Armagh resumed his See ; but mar-
ried prelates and priests lost their benefiees. Bayle, the
Protestant Bishop of Ossory, who had so often put his life
in danger by his violenee and fanaticism, had the prudenee
to retire to the continent. The number of Protestants
appeared too small to exeite any fear, and their zeal was
too prudent to cause any provocation.

Considering the state of poverty to whieh the Church
was reduced, the Qucen rcstored to it the ecclesiastical
properties that, during the late reigns, had been annexed
to the Crown. She had renounccd the supremacy: could
she retain the riehes that eame from an invasion of
authority? With the approbation of Parliament, thcre-
fore, tithes, first-fruits, reetories, benefices united to the
Crown since the twentieth year of Henry VIII., and pro-
ducing a revenue of sixty thousand pounds sterling, were
restored by the Queen, and placed at the disposal of the
Bishops, who resumed the conferring of parishes and eura-
eies. The monastcry of thc Knights of St. John of Jeru-
salem, that of the Benedietines at Westminster, and other
religious houses werc re-established.

