X.
DEPARTURE OF HENRY II. FOR IRELAND.

Sr. THOMAS OF CANTERBURY was martyred on the 29th
of December, 1170. Pope Alexander III., on hearing of
this tragic event, excommunicated the murderers, and also
their counsellors, accomplices, and protectors. The Pon-
tiff commissioned two Cardinals to inquire into the matter,
and to find out the guilty. Henry II. seemed to show some
satisfaction at these proceedings of the Pope. However,
as he did not know what might be the instructions of the
legates, or their intentions, he judged it prudent to leave
Normandy before their arrival.

Gervase, whose chronicle De Regibus Anglie extcnds
to the year 1199, relates that Henry II. did not await the
arrival of the legates in Normandy. ‘‘ The Roman Court,”
says the annalist, “ decided on sending two legates to Nor-
mandy, in order to inquire into the murdcr of the holy
martyr, and to punish the authors of this great erime.
Henry, having heard the news, hastened to pass into Eng-
land, leaving orders with the cismarine and transmarine
governors! of ports to watch most diligently all passen-
gers, and to arrest, and keep in prison, any man who bore
letters of interdict. He also commanded them not to let
any cleric pass, unless he swore that he would not cause
any hurt or harm to the King or his kingdom. He forbade

1 That is, on both sides of the Channel.

24 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

that any letter should be allowed to reach him. Henry
landed at Portsmouth on the 3rd of August.

Roger of Hoveden, a native of Yorkshirc, and chaplain
to the Royal Family, wrote some annals, which begin in
731, at which date the work of Bede ends, and come down
tu the third year of King John, in 1202. We do not know
the date of the annalist’s birth or dcath ; we know, how-
ever, that he was alive in 1204.

This historian confirms the statement that King
Henry II. withdrew to Ireland, so as to escape the just
severity of the Holy See. ‘‘In the meanwhile,” says
Hoveden, ‘“ the two Cardinal Legates a latere, sent by
the Sovereign Pontiff Alexander, namely, Gratian and
Vivian, arrived in Normandy, and showed themselves very
rcady to proceed to vexations of divers kinds ; for they
proposcd to lay an interdict on the country. To shelter
himself before their arrival, the King of England made an
appeal to the Sovercign Pontiff in person, and by this
means prevented their procedure. However, fearing the
apostolic severity, he drew near to the sea, and passed
from Normandy into England, commanding that no per-
son of whatsoever rank or dignity, carrying a Pontifical
Brief, should be permitted to enter Normandy from Eng-
land, or England from Normandy, if he did not give
security that he would not cause any evil or vexation to
the King or the kingdom.”

Gervase adds : ‘‘ In my opinion, the chief cause of this
hasty departure for Ircland was that the King wished more
easily to escape the sentence of the interdict if the Cardi-
nals published it, or more secretly there than in any other
country to conform himsclf to it.’’ (Ut sententiam inter-
dicti, si forte daretur, facilius declinaret, vel occultius ob-
servaret.) The suspension of communications shows to
what a degree Henry feared the spiritual weapons of the
Legates.

It is therefore certain that Henry II. went into Ireland
to hide himself, or to be out of reach—not at all to con_
quer the island. Indeed, during the five months that he
spent in Ireland, he never quitted the seaboard. When at
length, towards the end of March, 1172, he received at
Wexford a favourable message, he set sail for England,
through which he passed with all spced, and, crossing the

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 25

straits, arrived in Normandy, to be ncar the Cardinal
Legates.

Henry II. could not expose himself to be made a prisoncr
in Ireland. He should thereforc be accompanied to Dub-
lin by an escort of knights for his personal security ; but I
find it difficult to believe that this escort had the importance
attributed to it by English chroniclers, and by Irish his-
torians themselves, too much prcposscsscd by the idea that
if their fellow-countrymen did then really submit, they
yielded to superior force. For, I repeat, Henry did not go
to Dublin with a view to conquer Ireland. He had neither
time nor opportunity for such an attempt. At any moment
he might be obliged to return to Normandy, in order to
treat about his reconciliation with the Church.

In choosing Waterford or Dublin as a place of refuge,
Henry showed by the very fact that Ireland did not at all
belong to him. He feared that a canonical interdict would
be laid on his States ; to escape the interdict, he fled to a
cuuntry in which, it is true, he had some domains, but no
political power. Besides, his Irish possessions being of
little importance, he doubtless supposed that Rome and
the Cardinal Legates were unaware that Earl Richard had
made him a surrender of his conquests.

By the same fact it is shown that Pope Adrian IV. had
not made him a donation of Ireland ; whencc it follows
that the Apocryphal Bull had not yct bccn imagincd.

We may believe that the Cardinal Legatcs learned of
the King’s flight to Ireland. Indecd, the blockade com-
manded by the prince could not close the straits hermeti-
cally, and be an inviolable hindrance to every communica.
tion between the island and the continent. This, perhaps,
was the reason that prevented the Cardinals from launch-
ing an interdict on the States of the English King. They
rcHlected that he alonc in his realms might escape from the
effects of the sentence.

I return to the thread of events. Henry arrived in Ene-
land at the beginning of August, spent two months in the
preparation of an imposing escort, and in October was
accompanied to Waterford by a fleet—for his personal
security, I say it once more. Because the prince could
not prudently expose himself to the dangcr of being sur-
prised by the Irish, or by Norwegian or Danish pirates.

26 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Must we admit as a fact historically certain that on
October 17th, 1171, Henry embarked with five hundred
knights, their esquires, and a numerous body of archers,
in a fleet of four hundred transports? These data seem to
me suspicious, exaggerated. Lingard himself, who gives
the above figures, candidly acknowledges that King
Henry II., five months after disembarking with his five
hundred knights, and many archers, left Ireland without
having added an inch of territory to the acquisitions of the
original adventurers. (History of England, Reign of
Henry IT.)

On November 12, Henry lI. took ship at Waterford,
and directed his course to Dublin, where a_ temporary
house of timber had been prepared to receive him. The
Irish were invited to his table, and were taught to admire
the magnificence and affability of the prince. Some of the
Irish chiefs accepted the invitation, but the Ulster princes
would not so much as visit the King.

Raoul de Diceto says that during twenty weeks from the
arrival of the King in lreland, no news reached him of his
kingdom or other dominions. ‘‘ Ab ingressu regis in
Hyberniam viginti continuis ebdomadibus, de regno suo,
vel de aliqua parte dominationis suze quz tam longe lateque
diffunditur, ad ipsum rumor aliquis minime pervenit, nec
etiam, quia ventus adversabatur, penetrare potuit.”’
(Tome I. p. 350.)

Lingard confirms the fact. He says: ‘* During five
months, from the day of his landing at Waterford till the
end of March, it was observed that not a single vessel from
England or his territories on the continent had arrived on
the Irish coast. So unusual a suspension of intercourse
was attributed to the tempestuous state of the weather ;
the real cause was the policy of the King, who even at
“hat distance dreaded the spiritual arms of the Legates.”
(History of England, Henry IT.)

Such was the fear the King had of excommunication,
that he would not let any one have the material means of
notifying the sentence to him, of giving him information
about it. It was with this view that he commanded an in-
terruption of all communications, making no exception but
for the ship that should bring him a favourable message.
When he received this message, he set out at once for
England and Normandy.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 27

Behold how Henry II. occupied himself in conquering
Ircland, and in receiving the submission of its chiefs and
bishops !

