VII.

IT IS NOT POSSIBLE THAT THE LETTER OF POPE ADRIAN
RELATES TO SPAIN.

In the preceding chapter I have mentioned seven charac--
teristics attributed by Pope Adrian IV. to the country that
is the subject of his letter. Now, not one of these charac.
teristics can be applied to Spain.! It would consequently
be absurd to maintain that the Pontifical Letter concerned
an expcdition that Louis VII. and Henry II. wished to
undertake in concert against the Moors who were oppres-
sing part of the Peninsula.

1. Adrian speaks of a land. On the contrary, Spain, in-
the twelfth century, had the dignity of a kingdom. In-
deed, it counted three kingdoms: Castile, Aragon, and
Galicia. As the King of Castilc was the most powerful, hc
took the title of Emperor.

Robert du Mont, the Continuator of Sigebert, rclates

* Taking H for Hispania. Bongars was the first to interpret the-
letter H of Spain. See Chap. xxxii. § 3.—Tvans.

14 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

(1153) that Louis VII., King of France, having repudiated
Eleanor of Guienne, married Constance, the daughter of
Alphonsus, King of the Spains. The annalist says that
Toledo is the capital of the kingdom ; and as the King of
Castile is much stronger than the minor Kings of Aragon
and Galicia, he is called Emperor of the Spains. In 1154,
Louis VII. made a pilgrimage to St. James of Galicia,
and was well received by his father-in-law, the Emperor of
the Spains. (Robertus de Monte, in Migne’s Patrologie,
t. 160, p. 478.)

In 1170, the then ‘“‘ Emperor’ of Spain married
Eleanor, daughter of Henry II., King of England. On
this occasion, Robert du Mont remarks again that Toledo
is the capital of Castile. As the prince at that time was
only fifteen years of age, he was presented by the King of
Galicia and the King of Navarre, who were his near rela-
tions. (Ibid., p. 511.)

If the expedition proposed to Pope Adrian IV. had con-
cerned Spain, would Louis VII. have omitted to speak of
the Emperor of Castile, his father-in-law, who asked his
intervention? Would not a Castilian ambassador have
accompanied Rotrodus to Rome, in order to remove every
difficulty ?

2. The country of which Adrian IV. speaks in his letter
had a Church, an Episcopate, and the Pope required that
it should be consulted on the proposed expedition. Now,
Spain was divided into two camps. In the oppressed part,
no Church, no Bishops. At least, it would have been
somewhat absurd to require that the advice of any Bishops
there should be taken on the subject of an expedition pre-
pared against their oppressors.

3. If the Pontifical Letter had concerned Spain,
Adrian IV. would without doubt have recommendcd action
in concert with the Emperor of Castile, and the Kings of
Aragon, Navarre, and Galicia, who were known all over
Europe.

4. As for the people, it is needless to spcak of the
Moors, who filled the country. But the unfortunate Chris-
tians who were under their yoke—had they any opportu-
nity of expressing their sentiments on an_ expedition
having their deliverance for its object? We should attri-
bute great silliness to Adrian IV., if we applied to Spain

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. I5

the letter in which he requires that the people, having been
consulted, should ask for foreign intervention.

5. Spain does not realise a fifth characteristic any better
than the previous four. The Moors, having massacred
many Christians, were the grcat majority in the provinces
that they held. Moreover, not being idolaters, did they
present the quality of pagans, to which Pope Adrian refers
in the preamble of his letter? Where shall we find in
Spain the apostates whom Louis VII. and Henry II.
wished to subject to the powcr of Christians ?

6. Adrian would certainly not have shown so much
hesitation, if the real matter at issue had been an expedi-
tion against the Moors of Spain.

7. Lastly, he would not, in such a case, have refused to
allow the preaching of a crusade, and he would have been
cagcr to receive the kingdom of France under the protec-
tion of the Holy See during the time of the expedition.

I consider it useless to insist further on these reflections,
and I regard as henceforth admitted for an_ historical
truth that the letter of Pope Adrian IV. exclusively con-
cerns Ireland, and the project of its conquest that King
Henry II. entertained.

