XIV.
HENRY II, HAD ONLY A NOMINAL POWER IN IRELAND.

(1173-1180.)

LINGARD, always moderate in his estimates and statements,
says of Henry II., that he “ left the island without having
added an inch of territory to the acquisitions of the original
adventurers. His nominal sovereignty was, indeed, ex-
tended ovcr four out of five provinccs, but his real authority
was confined to the cantreds in the vicinity of his garri-
sons. There the feudal customs and services were intro-
duced and enforced ; in the rest of the island the national
laws prevailed, and the Irish princes felt no other change
in their situation than that they had promised to a distant
prince the obedience which they had previously paid to the
King of Connaught.?... The castles which had been for-
tified in Meath were burnt to the ground : Dublin was re-
peatedly insulted : four English knights, and four hun-
dred Ostmen, their followers, fell in a battle in Ossory ;3
and the governor himself was compelled to seek refuge
within the castle of Waterford.”

Far from thinking of conquering Ireland, Henry II.

The character of Pope Alexander III. is thus described by
Voltaire, an unexpected admirer, in his Essay on General History :—
‘Perhaps the man who, in those gross times, called the Middle Ages,
deserved most of the human race, was Pope Alexander III. It was he
who in a Council of the 12th century abolished slavery, as far as was
possible. It was this same Pope who, by his wisdom, triumphed in
Venice over the violence of the Emperor Barbarossa, and who compelled
Henry II., King of England, to ask pardon of God and men for the
murder of Thomas Becket. He upheld the rights of peoples, and put
down the crimes of Kings. . . If men entered again into their rights,
it is chiefly to Pope Alexander that they are indebted for them. It is
to him that so many cities owe their splendour.” (x., 998.) And is it
to be said that to him Ireland owes many of her misfortunes ?—Tvans.

_ * The historian does not.examine whether the story of this sub-
mission is true or false.—Tyvans.

3In 1174.

36 POPE ADRIAN Iv.,

employed all his forces to-subdue the:Welsh, who had re-
belled. Lingard says : ‘‘ Henry exercised his vengeance on
his numerous hostages, the children of the noblest families
in Wales. . . . By his orders the eyes of all the males were
rooted out, and the ears and noses of the females were
amputated.” (History of England.)

According to Roger de Hoveden, Henry II., in 1175,
held at Windsor a great Council, at which the Archbishops
of Tuam and Dublin—Cantordis, Abbot of St. Brendan—
and Master Laurence, Chancellor of Roderic, King of
Connacht, were present. The record of the chronicler
supplies me with a new proof against the genuineness of
the Bull attributed to Adrian IV. ; for this Bull was not
mentioned a single time, and the English never availed
theniselves of it in these solemn negotiations of peace.
Still more, the clauses of the Bull were violated by the
articles of the treaty. In effect, Adrian IV. had, in the
Apocryphal Bull, twenty years before, prescribed that
every house in Ireland should contribute to the Peter’s
Pence, as in England. Henry II. did not say a word of it
ip his treaty with Connacht: he claimed for himself a
tenth cowhide or shecpskin. If the Bull of Adrian had
been published in a Council of Irish Bishops, as -Giraldus
Cambrensis assures us, would the Archbishops of Dublin
and Tuam have allowed this treaty to pass over the ponti-
fical contribution in silence?

At this time, Henry IT. and his barons possessed nothing
in Ireland but Dublin, Wexford, and Waterford. We may
so conclude from the stipulation of the treaty, as related
by Hoveden. (Page 312.)

This annalist is useful, because he serves as a check
on Giraldus Cambrensis. The King’s chaplain did,
not depend on the credulous Welshman, well as he
knew the work Hibernia Expugnata, which was pub-
lished years before the death of the English chronicler.

Giraldus relates that the Bull of Adrian was sent into
. Treland—carried by William Fitz-Aldelm, and Nicholas,
Prior. of Wallingford ; and that it was publicly read in a
Council of Bishops at Waterford, by John of Salisbury,
who was sent to Rome for it, and who had also brought
the ring of investiture : a ring deposited, with the Bull,
in the archives of Winchester.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 37

We might accordingly supposc that John of Salisbury,
arriving from Rome at this moment, published in a Coun-
cil of 1175 the Bull which he had just obtained from Pope
Adrian IV., who died about fifteen years previously.

The ancient annals ot Ireland have not recorded any
general assembly of bishops in 1175. It is improbable that
the bishops would have chosen the city of Waterford as a
place of meeting, because it was in the power of Welsh
and Norman adventurers.!

1A certain learned writer, who is an earnest advocate for Adrian's
grant, admits that St. Laurence O’Toole,‘who became Archbishop of
Dublin in 1161, was a“ persistent opposer of English rule in Ireland.”
Now, can any one suppose that the Saint would have been such, if he
believed that Henry had any authority from Rome to rule in Ireland ?
And if any man in Ireland knew the sentiments of Rome, surely it was
the Archbishop of Dublin. In point of fact, St. Laurence, when com-
missioned in 1171 to make terms with Strongbow, required that he
and his followers should surrender all the places they had taken, and
quit the island by a certain day.

As wonders will never cease, the aforesaid writer contends that in
the whole domain of history there is no fact better proved than Adrian’s
grant, Yet, preferring a more mild and euphemistic term, he con-
tinually speaks of it as Adrian’s Privilege—the privilege. shall we say,
of robbing and killing the Irish, under the.Christian plea of civilising
them? Thus, he informs us that Henry, implicated in the murder of
St. Thomas, and hastening out of reach of the Legates, ‘in order to
do something to propitiate Rome, and at the same time gratify his
ambition, prepared to go in person to Ireland, and carry out the refor-
mation for which he had obtained a privilege from Pope Adrian,”
High time indeed to set to work in 1171, if the privilege was received
in 1155, anda strange method indeed of appeasing that Pope who, if
we may believe Voltaire himself (a man not likely to give undue
praise to a!Pope), ‘‘put down the crimes of Kings and upheld the
rights of peoples !’’ ‘We now learn that this royal reformer (who had
such need of reforming himself) was accompanied by a fleet of 400
vessels, carrying ‘“ mail-clad knights in hundreds and tens of thousands
of archers.”” Though puzzled somewhat :-by the numbers here given,
and amazed at the novelty of the plan, we look about for the magnifi-
cent reformation to follow. Do we find it? Alas, the words of Abbé
McGeoghegan, the distinguished French historian, immediately occur
to us, “A bad Christian makes a bad Apostle.”” Far from finding any
reformation, we find only the beginning of a long-continued and
atrocious deformation, ruinous alike to the spiritual and the material
welfare of the Irish people. And is it possible that any Pope could be
so wanting in prudence as to sanction such an enterprise, or not to
foresee the dire results that should certainly be expected from it?
(See Dublin Review, April, 1884, p. 318.)—Trans,

38 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

