XXVIII.

OF THI. FIFTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES, WITH THE
BEGINNING OF PROTESTANTISM.

Facets give an absolute proof that the Bull of Adrian did
not contribute to the preservation of Ireland. In point of
fact, it was not known, nor even invented, at the time
when King Henry II. and his Norman-Welsh adventurers
made their first settlement, to which an inch of territory
was not added. The greatest part of the island, therefore,
preserved the national independence. Protestantism—be-
hold the true enemy, the true culprit! Catholic kings

108 POPE ADRIAN 1V.,

would never have had the thought, much Icss the power,
of having recourse to the crucl gibbcts and the frightful
confiscations that crushed Ireland.

Rebellion continued to desolate the English colony
during a great part of the fifteenth century.

King Henry IV., in 1403, appointing his son, Thomas,
Lord Lieutenant, allowed him subsidies for the conquest
of the country, and the suppression of rebels and encmics :
‘Pro conquesta, expugnatione, et resistentia tam
rebellium quam inimicorum nostrorum partium predicta-
rum.”’ (Rymer, viii., 293.)

Twenty years afterwards, Ilenry V. gave the Earl of
March full power to amnesty English and Irish rebels.
(Rymer, x., 282.)

In 1430, an Act of Parliament strictly prohibited Irish
people from residing in England, and commanded them to
return to their own country cum omni celeritate. Some
dispensations were granted to chaplains and others, on
the payment of twenty pence. We note, in passing, that
English policy sometimes swarms with contradictions. At
the present day, England is full of Irish people. If they
withdrew, the manufactories and other industrial estab-
lishments could not be carried on. (Rymer, x., 467.)

Henry VII., in a patent of 1494, bears witness to the
revolts that frequently occurred: ‘‘ Universos ct singulos
tam Anglicos rebelles quam Hibernicos dict terre nostra,
eamdem terram nostram in futurum invadentes, et ipsam
terram nostros subditos ejusdem depredare, guerrare seu
alio r8.) destruere sive devastare nitentes,’”’ etc. (Rymer,

1, 558.

Thus, very far from making conquests, the English
werc hardly able to defend their own territory.

During the War of the Two Roses, the Irish of the Pale
were deeply attached to the House of York. Henry VII.
turned his attention to the pacification of the colony. He
conferred the nominal government of it on his second son,
Henry ; but as this prince was only four years of age,
Poyning was given him as Licutenant. The revolt of
O’Hanlon, an Irish prince, soon obliged this officer to take
the field. At his approach, the indigenous Irish retired to
their woods ; and thencc, by sudden and oad sallies,
caused great damage to their adversaries.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 09

Toynings assembled a Parliament, which made several
statutes to deliver the lower classes from vexatious taxes,
to reduce the power of the great lords, to maintain Eng-
lish influence, and to secure the good administration of
English territory. The statutes of Kilkenny were revived,
but not that forbidding the use of the Irish language,
which is hercby shown to have been generally adopted by
the English colonists. These measures helped to re-
establish tranquillity in the Pale, the English province.

In 1522, Francis I., at war with Henry VIII., raised up
enemics against him in Ireland and Scotland. He ad-
dressed himself to the chief of the house of Desmond, a
family that had always refused to submit to anything more
than a nominal dependence on the Crown of England.
The Earl of Desmond, dazzled by the hopes of aggran-
disement that were held out to him, signed a treaty by
which he engaged, in return for an annual pension, to join
the French army as soon as it should land in Ireland, and
not to lay down arms until he had conquered a part of the
country for himself, and the rest for Richard de la Pole,
the representative of the house of York. But Francis I.
soon forgot his engagements with Desmond: the army
never appeared, and the pension was never paid.

When Henry VIII. ascended the throne, the royal
authority in Ireland was confined within the narrowest
limits. It did not extend beyond a few seaports, and one-
half of the five counties, Louth, Meath, Dublin, Kildare,
and Wexford. The rest of the country was divided be.
tween sixty chiefs of Irish origin, and thirty of English
origin, who ruled the inhabitants of thcir respective
regions, and made war as freely as if they were indepen-
dent sovercigns. To check these hereditary quarrels,
Wolsey now resolved on confiding the government of the
country to an English nobleman.! During two years the
Earl of Surrey restrained the turbulence of the lords by the
vigour of his administration ; but, on his retirement, it
was an Irishman, the Earl of Kildare, who took the
government.

The innovations of Henry VIII. in regard to religion
were received with equal horror by the indigenous Irish

Instead of the Earl of Kildare.—Trans,

Ito POPE ADRIAN IV.,

and by the descendants of English colonists. Lord Gray
convoked a Parliament (May, 1536), and, to nullify the
opposition of the clergy, thcse powerful membcrs, who
had herctoforc voted in Parliament, were, by a declaratory
act, termed simple assistants, whose advice might be
asked, but whose consent would not be required.

The statutes adopted in this Parliament were copied
from those which had been passed in the English Parlia-
ment. The authority of the Pope was abolished. The
King was declared head of the Irish Church, and the first
fruits of all ecclesiastical benefices were to be remitted to
him.! It was, however, casier to make these laws than to
put them into practice. The two races united for the de-
fence of their common faith, and insurrections broke out
on all sides.

St. Leger, the successor of Gray, rc-assembled the
Parliament in Dublin, in June, 1541. The first act of this
Parliament was to erect Ireland into a kingdom, and to
give Henry VIII. the title of King of Ireland, instead of
that of Lord, which he and his predecessors had borne
previously : ‘“ Although under the preceding title the
Kings had all kinds of jurisdiction, power, pre-cminence,
and lawful authority belonging to a king ; because his
majesty and his noble ancestors were justly, and of good
right, and ought to be Kings of Ireland—reputed, recog-
niscd and named as such.”

Another statute of Parliament shows that in 1541 the
English had cleven counties in Ireland, which formed the
English province. Ireland comprised thirty-two counties
altogcthcr. The following arc the eleven counties that
made up the Pale, or the English province: Dublin,
Meath, Louth, Kildarc, Kilkenny, Tipperary, Wexford,
Waterford, Kerry, and Limerick.2 It is thus acknow-

‘The author is only making a rapid sketch of events that bear on
his subject. He does not propose to discuss every question that
arises ; for instance, how any parliament in Ireland could be got to
vote such measures.—Trans.

2 The author or the printer has here omitted one county. At all
events, the hold of the English on some of these counties must have
been very slight, if worth mentioning.

This error, though it extends to a word, is not so serious as that of
the printer mentioned in Rollin’s Treatise on Studies, who, by the
change of a single letter (mendacitate for mendicitate), made out that all

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. ~ III

ledyed that in 1541, towards the close of the reign of
Henry VIII., the English had scarcely one-third part of
the island.

The peerage of the new kingdom was acccpted by the
lords who had heretofore recognised the authority of the
English court ; also by some of the chiefs, who, though
vassals in name, had preserved their independence in
reality. Ulick de Burgo was made Earl of Clanricard ;
Murrough O’Brien, Earl of Thomond ; and O’Neill, Earl
of Tyrone. (1543.)

Edward VI., taking up seriously his title of Head of the
Church, established in Ireland a kind of ‘‘ Holy Synod,”
consisting of one ecclesiastic and two laymen, to grant all
kinds of permissions, dispensations, rescripts, privileges,
delegations, and other faculties which exceed the ordinary
competence of bishops, and for which recourse must be
had to the Holy See. Henry VIII. had committed all
these things to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who, at
least, was considered to belong tothe ecclesiastical order ;
but Edward went farther, for he shared these powers with
two laymen. “In this respect, he anticipated by a hundred
and fifty years the famous ‘‘ Holy Synod” that the Czar,
Peter I., established in Russia, and substituted for a
Muscovite patriarch.

Let us see how the King writcs to Antony St. Leger
(Lord Deputy of Ireland), the Protestant Bishop of Meath,
and Richard Reid, Chancellor : ‘‘ All Kings who profess
the Christian Faith having received from the Most High
all power of jurisdiction, we, who bear the special title of
Defender of the Faith, ought to take care more than any
other that not only the orthodox faith should be cultivated
and observed in all its integrity among our subjects, but
also that justice should be rendered to every one, accord-
ing to equity. ... In virtue of our right of Supreme
Head of the Church, English as well as Irish... we
grant to you and any two of you conjointly the full and

the most eminent men of Greece were great liars all their days, when
the meaning was that they lived in great poverty all their days.
“Grecorum clarissimi prestantissimique viri per totam vitam in
extrema mendacitate versati sunt.”

7 How necessary, we may infer, is care in the copying of manuscripts !
—Trans,

It2 . POPE ADRIAN IV.,

absolute power, authority, and faculty of giving, from
time to timc, in our name, to each and every person of
either scx, prescnt and future in our kingdom of Ireland,
and living under our Irish government. . . all kinds what-
soever of liccnces, dispensations, eompositions, faeulties,
concessions, rcseripts, delcgations, and other permissions,
in all cases and causes whatsoever... as the Archbishop
of Canterbury gives them in our kingdom of England.”
(Rymer, xv., 146.)

The eounsellors of the young King ought to have had
the decency to remember that the title of “ Defender of the
Faith ” had becn conferred by a Pope.

Not content with usurping papal authority, Edward
tried to hindcr the true Pope from exercising his power ;
for instanee, he made void a regulation that the Holy See
had prescribed regarding the Chureh of Saint Nicholas in
Galway. The most amusing thing of all is that the royal
diploma meanly copies the clauses and the style of the
Roman Chanccry: ‘ Et si secus a quoquam quavis aue.
toritate scienter vel ignoranter attemptari contigerit, illud
irritum decernimus et inane.” Edward’s “ Brief” is
dated 2oth of April, 1551. (Rymcr, xv., 258.)

1It has been remarked that St. Thomas's Summa was the master
piece of reason in the thirteenth century; Dante’s Divina Commedia-
the masterniece of imagination in the fourteenth century; and the,
Imitation of Christ, by 4 Kempis, the masterpiece of a devout mind,
in the fifteenth century. All came forth in a Catholic atmosphere,
and were in keeping with the grand cathedrals and other magnificent
works of art in those ages. A large portion of Shakespeare's plays
formed the masterpiece of a worldly genius in the sixteenth century,
at a time when many Catholic sentiments remained, but the religious
spirit was dving out. Protestantism, excluding the light of manv
truths that faith reveals, has never produced anything to equal
them—it rather dwarfs and cramps the mind, though it has made
great discoveries in regard to steam, electricity, etc. On such matters,
however useful, our Divine Redeemer, in whom were hidden all the
treasures of knowledge, never deigned to utter a word, as if they
were of very minor importance in comparison with the great truths
of eternity, or the great work of human salvation—Trans

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. II3

