XNIV.
JOHN LACKLAND.
(1213.)

Kinc JOHN, in 1213, seeing himself almost lost without
resource, on the brink of a precipice, placed his person and
his kingdom under the sovereignty of the Pope.! The
Golden Bull, dated the 3rd of October, is in Rymer, vol. I.,

. 176,

P i Nether determined by force, nor constrained by fear,
but of our own good and spontaneous will, and with the
common counsel of our barons, we offer and give freely to
God, to His Apostles Peter and Paul, to the Holy Roman
Church our Mother, and to our Lord Pope Innocent ITI.
and his successors, the whole kingdom of England and the
whole kingdom of Ireland. .. . We have publicly made
liegc-homage into the hands of the said Legate.”’

The prince promised to pay to the Pope a thousand
marks? sterling every year, seven hundred for the kingdom
of England and three hundred for Ireland, under pain of
forfeiture, as well for himself as for his successors.

SECTION I.

The offering of his kingdom to the Holy See furnished
King John with the happiest occasion in the world for
recalling the Bull of Adrian IV., who, seventy years be-
fore, as was said, had made a donation of Ireland to
Henry II,

The prince was acquainted with the Bull. Giraldus
Cambrensis, four years previously, had dedicated to him
the third edition of the Expugnatio Hibernica, in which it
was recorded. The dedication alone would have drawn
the special attention of the prince to this pontifical act.

"Whatever may be said of the jurisprudence of the Middle Ages,
or the consent of nations, the Pope was supposed always to act with
wisdom and prudence, according to reason and religion; and if he found
his authority abused, he had the remedy in his own hands.
however, is proverbially slow in making a change.—T vans.

*The ancient piece of money called mark was equal to 13s, 4d.—
Trans.

Rome,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 79

If, then, King John believed in the genuincness of the
Bull, could he have omitted to say anything of this old
grant? Ought he not rather to have shown that he was
already a feudatory of the Pope in Ireland, as successor
and heir to his father, Henry II. ?

Nevertheless, King John alleges no old title. He ex-
presses himself as making a new concession, as offering
spontaneously his kingdom to the Roman Church.

Hence it follows that the Bull of Adrian IV. had, in the
eyes of this princc, no worth, no value. He thought pro-
bably that silence was what suited him best, and that pru-
dence imposed it.

Neither does Innocent IIJ., in his answer, say a single
word of the Bull of Adrian, or the briefs attributed by
chroniclers to Pope Alexander III., or to other Pontiffs.

This circumspection is so much the more striking as the
Roman Chancery dclights in adducing old examples or
precedents, and saying that the Pontiff walks in the foot-
steps of his predecessors, and that he continues what they
have done: Predecessorum nostrum vestigiis inherentes,
eorumque concessionem approbantes et confirmantes, &c.
The occasion was unique for recalling the Bull of Adrian,
and putting it in vigour. It is evident that Pope Innocent
knew nothing about such a Bull.

SECTION 2.

Did Innocent accept the sovereignty of Ircland? I do
not think so.

On the 27th of October, the same ycar (1213), the Pon-
tiff addressed a letter to the Irish, which is in Rymer.1
(Tome 1, p. 179.)

The Pope speaks of the kingdom of England, but he
never mentions the kingdom of Ireland. He calls John
King of the English, without adding that he is also
King of the Irish. He says that the kingdom of England,
by a donation of this prince, belongs to the Church, which
has a special right over it. Will Ireland be henceforth in

'Thomas Rymer, an English antiquary, became historiographer
royal in 1692. He made a large collection of treaties, public letters,
etc., under the name ‘ Foedera.” It was published in London, in
wenty volumes folio.—Trans.

80 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

like condition with England as regards feudal subjection ?
Innoeent III. does not say so in any manner, explicit or
implicit. The pontifical letter may be found (No. 9) among
our justifying documents at the end.

Thus Pope Innocent II]. abstained from relating that
King John had given to the Roman Church not only the
kingdom of England, but also the kingdom of Ireland :
Totum vegnum Anglia et totum regnum Hibernia, as the
prince himself had said in the Golden Bull of the previous
3rd of Oetober.

Fidelity and devotedness are all that the Pope reeom-
mends to the Irish ; he does not speak to them of submis.
sion and obedienee. In other words, he exhorted the Irish
to show benevolence and friendship towards the King of
England.

Could Innocent III., who must have been aware that the
greatest part of Ireland preserved its independence—could
he have had the idea of imposing on the bishops, nobles,
and people of the whole island the obligation of submitting
politieally to King John and his suecessors? The sup-
position is absurd, Moreover, facts would belie it ; for
the national kings went on peaeefully in their course, and
the districts unoccupied by the English retained their full
independence.

If one wishes to make out at all costs that the pontifical
letter commanded submission to King John, this regards
only the towns and countics along the coast which the
English held from the time of the coming of the adven-
turers.

If Pope Innoeent III. had accepted the political
sovereignty of Ireland, he would have granted a solemn
diploma to invest King John, a diploma provided with the
clauses usual in diplomas of investiture. Now, this
diploma never existed for Ireland.

Before everything else, in the hypothesis made, the Pope
would have raised Ireland to the rank of a kingdom. Now,
it is heyond doubt that the Kings of England did not take
the title of King of Iveland, exeept at a mueh later period.
I do not remark the least trace of it in the voluminous
eolleetion of Rymer. Henry VIII. himself, three centuries
after King John, dedieating his work against Luther to
Pope Leo X., entitled himself in his letter King of Eng-

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 81

land and Lord of Ireland: “ Sanctissimo domino nostro
domino Leoni X. Pontifici Maximo, Henricus Dei gratia
rex Angliz, dominus Hibernie, perpetuam felicitatem.”’
All the world knows, moreover, that Pope Paul IV.
erected Ireland into a kingdom in 1555, three hundred and
forty-two ycars after Pope Innocent.

Lastly, I observe that Pope Innocent III. abstained
from making known to the Irish the annual tribute of
three hundred marks sterling which King John had
promised. 1

SECTION 3.

The promise of an annual tribute cries out loudly
against the Apocryphal Bull of Adrian IV.

Giraldus Cambrensis, as I have said above, had repre-
sented to King John, four years previously, that one of the
causes of the revcrses cxperienced by the English in Ire-
land was that they had neglected to establish Peter’s Pence
there, contrary to a formal promise of Henry II., and con-
trary to an express clause in the Bull of Adrian IV.
Giraldus recommended his royal pupil to establish the
Peter’s Pence as soon as possible—which would serve as
a perpetual testimony of the indissoluble union of Ireland
with the Crown of England.

Conformably to this solemn and advantageous counsel,
King John should naturally propose and promise to Pope
Innocent III. that he would establish Peter’s Pence in
Ireland. He might fear to see ill-received at Rome the
promise of a tribute less than that of the Peter’s Pence
imposed on the houses of Ireland, in execution of the
Bull of Adrian.

But King John learned, perhaps, that the Bull of Adrian
was regarded by the Romans as a mere fable. On this
account he would think it proper to avoid all mention of
Peter’s Pence, and to promise a tribute of a thousand
marks sterling, of which seven hundred should be for
England, and three hundred for Ireland.

Rymer relates several receipts of the tribute of a
thousand marks sterling. But the Popes never made any

' This isa very interesting analysis of the Pope’s letter, which might
of itself be misunderstood.—Trans.
G

POPE ADRIAN IV.,

distinction between a portion for England and a portion
for Ireland. We may say that the Holy See abstained
from acknowledging explicitly that it received any tribute
for Ireland.

In 1235, the Cardinals wrote to the King of England, to
claim a half of the tribute. The answer of King Henry III.
is dated 25th of February. It says that at the time of the
first concession of this tribute, it was stated in the charter
of King John, his father, that the sum should be given to
the Roman Church in an undivided manner. The King
paid it into the hands of the Pope ; but whether it all re-
mained with the Holy Father, or was divided, he never
knew ; accordingly he advised the Cardinals to have rc-
course to the Pope himself. ‘ Universitati vestre! signi-
ficamus quod in prima concessione illius census, insertum
fuit in carta Joannis patris nostri inde confecta, quod
sancte Romane Ecclesie redderetur census memoratus
pro indiviso... penitus ignorantes hucusque utrum
domino Pape integre remaneret, aut divise. (Rymer,
t. I., p. 337-)

In 1276, Pope John XXI. claimed from Edward I. the
arrears of the tribute for eight years. The letter is dated
from Viterbo, the eleventh of the calends of January, that
is, the 22nd of December. (Rymer, II., 77.)

SECTION 4.

When King John offercd Ireland to the Popc, he
followed the tactics of Henry II., who, at the beginning
of his intervention, while as yet he had only a few towns
or districts near the shore, boldly appointed a constable,
seneschal, or justiciary for all Ireland. Thus did a Roman-
Teuton Emperor call himself master of the whole world!

Henry II., in 1177, giving judgment in an arbitration
case between the King of Castile and the King of Leon,
did not take the title of Lord of Ireland. He availed him-
self, however, of it in some diplomas regarding the in-
terior of the kingdom.

Richard Coeur de Lion never used this title. We are
assured of it in Rymer. (T. I., p. 63, 64, 65, 99.)

'The acred College of Cardinals.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 83

John, from the time of his coming to the Crown of Eng-
land, addcd to his ordinary titles that of Dominus Hiber-
jie. Howcver, I do not remark that he took it in letters
which he wrote to Pope Innocent III.

In 1204, having need of money for the war against
France, he wrote to the clergy of Ireland, begging that
they would be so good as to help him in this grave neces-
sity, promising to cherish an undying gratitude for their
aid, and never again in his life to ask anything of anybody
who should now refuse him. ‘‘ Effcax nobis auxilium
faciatis in hoc necessitatis nostr# articulo.. . . Et certis-
sime sciatis quod nunquam nobis ab illo auxilium fieri
postulabimus qui nobis in hac tanta necessitate auxilium
(non?) denegabit.”’ (Rymer, 1., 136.)

The national kings still preserved their power. King
John, in 1208, wrote to them collectively : ‘* Rex Joannes
regi Conaciz, ct omnibus aliis regibus, et magnatibus
Hiberniee, salutem.’’ (/bid., p. 189.)

By a diploma of the 23rd of August, 1214, John took
under his protection Cathal, King of Connaught, and his
dominions. He wrote to the Archbishop of Dublin to buy
escarletias, as much as he believed sufficient, in order to
make a feast for the Kings of Ireland and other clients of
the King. (Ibid., p. 189.)

In 1219, the King of Man made a donation of his island
to the Pope, declaring that he possessed it by right of in-
heritance, aud owed service to no one. He wished that he
and his heirs should become vassals of the Holy See, and
offered twelve marks sterling of annual tribute. The Pon-
tifical Legate accepted the donation in the name of Pope '
Honorius. The act was signed even in London : * Actum
London., in domo militia Templi kal. Octo' ris, 1219.”
(Rymer, t. I., p. 234.)

A few years afterwards, Henry III. confided to the
King of Man (pontifical feudatory), the guardianship of the
coast of England and of the King’s dominions in Ireland,
paying annually forty marks, a hundred measures of wheat,
and five tuns of wine deliverable in terra nostra Hibernia.
(Ibid., p. 341.)

i Behold how the King was master and lord of all Ire-
and !

84 POPE ADRIAN IY.,

SECTION 5.

What surprises mc very much is that, in the acts stipu-
lated between Innocent III. and King John in 1213, all
remembrance secms to have been lost of the oath that
Henry II. took in the cathedral of Avranches forty years
previously. What significs thercfore the donation of King
John, if the kingdom of England became a fief of the Holy
See in 1172? Henry II. then engaged himself in the name
of his succcssors. Yct it docs not appear that Richard
Cceur de Lion asked pontifical investiture. As for King
John, the case seems clear. If, at the beginning of his
rcign, he had obtained Roman investituré, thcre would
have been no need to rencw the donation of the kingdom
of England in 1213. At all cvents, it is very strange that
the submission of 1213 should be rcgarded as a new con.
cession, when in reality there was nothing new about it,
except the annual tribute of a thousand marks sterling,
and the promise of renewing investiture at every change of
reign.

It might be said that the Anglo-Norman princes cried
out for the pontifical sovercignty when they saw themselves
almost lost, but that very soon, the danger over, they for-
got the service that the Pope had rendered them.
Henry III., the son of John, took the oath of fealty and
homage to the Holy See. But Edward I. exempted him-
self from it, and his son Edward II. followed this example.

The Normans of Italy showed a more true and practical
fidelity. During the two centuries of their sovereignty at
Naples and in Sicily, they obtained more than twenty
Bulls of investiture. The princes of the house of Anjou
had ten of them, for the 168 years of their sway. As re-
gards the Kings of Aragon and Spain, from 1443 till 1700,
the year of the death of Charles II., I count thirteen Bulls
of pontifical investiture for the kingdom of the Two
Sicilies.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 85

