XNII.

THE ENGLISH CHRONICLERS APPEAR 10 HAVE ALL TAKEN THE
APOCRYPHAL BULL FROM GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.

THE greater number of English annalists make little use
of Giraldus, and are eontent, as regards the affairs of Ire-
land, to draw on the little information supplied by Roger
de Hoveden and William of Newbridge. However, Hig-
den, in his History of Henry I1., appears to have employed
the treatise De Instructione Principis, and perhaps also the
Expugnatio Hibernica. Brompton seems to have taken
from Higden what he says on the same faets.

the exact qualities the very reverse of what are needed to form au
impartial historian. A man of marvellously elastic self-confidence that
nothing could put down, an overflowing self-conceit that would be
deemed a mere absurd caricature if any one but himself had depicted
himself, he looked down with sublime contempt upon everyone and
everything that did not agree with his own notions; he had not an idea
that anything he thought or said could by any chance be wrong.
. . . He was the man of all others whose nature rendered it simply im-
possible for him to write a fair history of any sort, and least of all of
Ireland, and the Irish, and the English invaders, with so many of his
own near relations among the latter '’ (pp. 1xi, 1xiii.)

Mr. Edward A. Freeman, in his continuation of the preface to
Vol. vii., says; ‘In estimating the historical value of any work of
Giraldus Cambrensis, we must remember the two-fold character of the
man with whom we are dealing. We are dealing with one who wasvain,
garrulous, careless as to minute accuracy, even so far careless as to
truth as to be, to say the least, ready to accept statements which told
against an enemy without carefully weighing the evidence for them.
We are dealing with one who was not very scrupulous as to consistency,
and who felt no special shame of contradicting himself” (p. liii.)

Mr. George F. Warner, in his introduction to Vol. viii., says of
Giraldus: ‘‘His character was marred by grave defects. His egotism
was unbounded. ... He was passionate, prejudiced, and vindictive.
No one, king or subject, who crossed his schemes, or whom he chose
to regard as his enemy, could hope for his good word”’ (p. xxi.)

These volumes were brought out by the Lords Commissioners of
the Treasury, at the expense of the State.

In some respects, Giraldus was really a clever man. He hada
great command of the Latin language, both in prose and verse, His
frequent quotations show that he had read much and remembered
much. But everywhere throughout his works, it is apparent that there
was more than one screw loose. We are told in Rome and England, by
the Rev. Luke Rivington, M.A. (p. 76), that he was sometimes called
Gerald the Savage. Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 75

{n 1876 Mr. Stubbs published a new edition of Raoul de
Diceto, Imagines Historiarum. The Apocryphal Bull of
Adrian is found in the first volume. As the annalist made
no observation on it, the editor adds a note to the follow-
ing effeet :—-It is very possible that this copy of the Bull
Laudabiliter was taken from Giraldus Cambrensis, Expug-
natio Hibernica, II., 5, which should have been published
at the time when Raoul wrote. (I., 300.)

At the year 1171 Raoul relates (like the remaining
erowd of English annalists) that the Bishops of Ireland and
the Kings of Limerick and Cork submitted to Henry II.,
but that Roderic, King of Connaught, did not. On this
last point, he contradicts Giraldus, who assures us that
Roderic submitted like the others. (Page 346.)

Roger de Wendover, a monk of St. Alban’s, like
Matthew Paris, gives a large portion of the Bull of Adrian,
with a preamble saying that King Henry sent messengers
to Rome with great solemnity, in order to ask authority to
invade Ireland. The Pseudo-Metalogicus says, on the
eontrary, that Salisbury alone treated of the affair with
Adrian IV., and Giraldus confirms this story.

Above all, it was Matthew Paris who contributed to the
diffusion of the Apoeryphal Bull. It is to be regretted that
some respectable historians have thought themselves justi-
fied in referring to an author so deeried as the monk of
St. Alban’s, who makes mistakes every moment, and
gives as historieal facets a number of fables that have no
authenticity. !

Luard, who published in 1874 the Chronica Majora of
Matthew Paris, refers to Raoul de Dieeto in what con-
eerns the false Bull of Adrian IV. He doubtless thought
that such was the souree from whieh Matthew Paris took
the document.

In the preamble, Matthew draws the long bow by

1“ There is one witness whom I have learned profoundly to dis-
trust, who has been a prolific source of misstatement in our English
historical literature, and that is Matthew Paris. Long ago Dr. Lingard
pointed out, and in certain cases proved, the untrustworthiness of the
monk of St. Alban's. . , . His summaries, where they can be compared
with originals, are quite untrustworthy; and his own comments are
almost worthless, except for those who prefer the ebullitions of spleen
to a statement of facts’’"—Rome and England, Rivington, p. xxvii.—
Trans. ‘

76 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

additions that are not at all in the Apocryphal Bull. I
italicise these cxaggerations : ‘‘ Per idem tcmpus rex
Anglorum Henricus nuncios solemnes Romam mittens,
rogavit Papam Adrianum, ut sibi liceret Hiberniez insulam
hostiliter intrare, et terram subjugare, atque homines
illos bestiales ad fidem et viam reducere veritatis, extir-
patis ibi plantariis vitiorum ; quod Papa regi gratanter
annucns, hoc sequens ei privilegium destinavit.”’ (II-, 300.)

The editor, by his own authority, has put in the margin,
Anno 1155. Now, the Apocryphal Bull is without date in
Giraldus and others, as I have often rcmarked.!

Matthew Paris says no more of Ireland till the year
1171. He gives nothing new, or little known, unless that
he formally contradicts Giraldus in reference to the King
of Connaught. We must deny that Henry penetrated
hostilitey into Ireland ; for he thought only of providing
for his own personal security, as I have said above.
Matthew does not refer to the Bull of Adrian again ; he
takes good care not to assert that it was notified to the
Irish, or that it determined the pretended submission of
bishops and chiefs. Here is all that the annalist writes of the
journey in 1171: “ Per idem tempus rex Anglorum Hen-
ricus decimo quinto kalendas novembris hostiliter Hiber-
niam intravit, ubi archiepiscopi et episcopi ipsum in regem
et dominum receperunt, et ei fidelitatem juraverunt.
Regulus de Limeric, et regulus de Chor, et rcgulus qui
Monoculus dicebatur, ei homagium juraverunt. Roderi-
cus autem regulus de Connat, quia regio quam inhabitabat
inaccessabilis est, paludibus nimiis interjacentibus, in
quibus nec vada commoda, nec pontes pervii, nec navigatio
tuta habctur, regi occurrere superscdit.’’ (Ibid., p. 284.)

'It has been the interest of England during the last seven centuries
' to disguise and misrepresent the origin of its dominion in Ireland, If
one writer tells us that John of Salisbury obtained the grant from
Adrian; another that Henry petitioned for it; another that Adrian
well pleased with the English King, conferred it spontaneously ; another
that the Irish princes, anxious to end their quarrels, besought Henry
to accept the crown of Ireland—we know what to think of them all
We may not always be able, in a confused heap of impostures to
discover the exact truth, but we do not go far from it.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 477

