NIIl.

THREE LETTERS ATTRIBUTED TO POPE ALEXANDER III.
(1172 OR 1173.)

In 1728, Thomas Hearne published at Oxford the Black
Book of the Exchequer (Liber Niger Scaccarii), in which
there are three letters, said to be of Pope Alexander III.
-—one to the King of England, one to the Archbishops of
Ireland and the Bishop of Lismore, and one to the Kings
and Princes of Ireland. The three letters bear the same
date : Tusculum, the rath of the calends of October, that
is, the 20th of September. It is believed that they may be
referred to the year 1172—_in which case they would have
been written about a month after the reconciliation at
Avranches.

I need not discuss the genuineness of the three letters.
Although they have come to us only as copies, and have
not seen the light for five hundred and fifty-six years after

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 33

the time at which they were written; although they con-
tain invectives against the Irish people such as are never
met with in Acts of the Holy See, at least as regards ex-
pression and form ; although they state facts evidently
false or controverted, which would allow the charge of
their having been surreptitiously or obreptitiously ob-
tained, supposing that they were really genuine,—I am
willing to grant that the three letters are true, and I em-
ploy them to prove that the false Bull of Adrian still re-
mained unknown.!

In point of fact, not one of the letters mentions the Bull,
or makes any allusion to it. Alexander III. recommends
King Henry II. to preserve the rights of the Holy See in
Ireland, and to extend them, if possible ; but he takes as
his ground that all islands belong more particularly to the
Pope than continents. This refers to a donation of
the Emperor Constantine, which the Decree of Gratian,
published about 1151, had made known everywhere. The
passag’e is as follows : —

‘* And since, as your Highness knows, the Roman
Church has a different right over an island from that which
it has over a vast mainland, we confidently. hope from
your devotcdness that, not only will you preserve the rights

‘ InJa theological sense, a grant is usually said to be surreptitiously
obtained when something that ought to be manifested is concealed in
the petition, and obreptitiously obtained when something false is
asserted.

Nothing can be more absurd than to assert that if the Pope, in
granting a dispensation or any other favour, makes no comment on the
statements that accompany the application for it, therefore every one
of those statements is admittedly true.

A bull is so called from its leaden or golden seal (bulla), having on
ohe side an image of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and on the
other the name of the Pope, and made pendant by a hempen or silken
string. A brief is signed by the “ Secretary of Briefs,” and, as it bears
a red wax seal, having an image of St. Peter fishing, it is said to be
given under the Ring of the Fisherman. Bulls are issued on matters
of great importance ; briefs on affairs of less serious character.

The Roman Bullavium is a large collection of bulls, It has been
compiled by learned, virtuous, diligent men, greatly assisted by others,
and accordingly much reliance may be placed on it; but still it is only’
a private collection, not authenticated by the Holy See.. How foolish
therefore to argue that because a document is found in the Roman
Bullarium, it is therefore undoubtedly genuine! ‘We may say the like
of other valuable works on ecclesiastical matters, for which the Holy
See is'in no way responsible.—Trans.

b

34 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

of this Church, but you will also labour to extend them ;
and where there are none, you will think of cstablishing
them, in such manner that we may return ample thanks to
your Highness, and you may be seen to offer to God the
first fruits of your glory and your triumph.”

The allusion to a donation of Constantine renders this
letter very suspicious. I have not remarked in the forty
volumes of the Roman Bullarium a single certain diploma,
declaring that all the islands of the world belong to the
Pope. Urban II., it is said, gave the investiture of Cor-
sica to the Pisans, on the ground of the universal sover-
eignty of the Holy See with regard to islands ; but the
Bull attributed to Pope Urban II. on this matter is apocry-
phal, as I shall show further on, when I examine the false
Bull of Adrian IV., which rests on the same pretension.

In the Apocryphal Bull, Adrian ordered the establish-
ment of Peter’s Pence in all Ireland, such as it existed in
England. Can anyone imagine that Pope Alexander III.,
some twenty years after Adrian, has no knowledge of this
pontifical right, and does not recall it when he is recom.
mending the King to preserve the rights of the Roman
Church in Ireland? This proves evidently that the Apocry-
phal Bull of Adrian continued unknown as well at Rome
as in England and Ireland.

The second letter, as I have said, is addressed to the four
Archbishops of Ireland, and the Bishop of Lismore, who
was perpetual Legate to the Holy See. Now, Pope Alex-
arider founds the obligation of obedience to the King of
England not, assuredly, on a donation of Pope Adrian, but
solely on the voluntary’ acknowledgment and spontaneous
submission that the bishops and princes have testified
towards this prince.

The chronicler of Anchin, who continued Sigebert, says
that King Henry II. failed in Ireland. I have quoted a
fragment of the annalist above. The following is the pas-
sage in full ;: —‘‘ Henry, King of England, rising up with
excessive pretensions, laying hands on things not con-
ceded, and aspiring to what was not his due, prepared
ships, and assembled the soldicrs of his kingdom, to sub-
due Ireland ; and, in the hope of wearing the royal: diadem,
he penctrated into Ireland. But learning that the people
of the country were much inclined to rebellion, and, on the

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 35

other hand, fearing a want of bread that threatened the
country, as also lest, when coming back, there should be
stormy weather at sea, he returned with confusion into his
own kingdom.”! (Patrologie, t. 160, p. 307.)

