XXV.
STATE OF IRELAND IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY,

IRELAND was divided between two races of men, different
in language, in manners, and in laws, and animated with
a deadly hatred against each other.) The most moun-

1A pood deal of this ill-feeling continues in the twentieth century.
It is not exactly a hatred of the English that the Irish have, but rather
a hatred of a certain perversity in the character of the English which
has made and still makes them inflict many wrongs on Ireland, as if
they had no proper sense of justice or humanity. Of course it finds
expression in different ways. We cannot be surprised if Sir Horace
Plunkett, in his book Ireland in the New Century, remarks: ‘‘ Upon
the England that sowed the wind was visited a whirlwind of hostility from
the Irish scattered throughout the globe.” This writer has no small share
of blame to lay on the Irish for their defects, but surely many allow-
ances ought to be made for a people so heavily and so unjustly handi-
capped for centuries, The Irish know pretty well what was the cause
of those defects, for which none have suffered more than they; and
perhaps in their sufferings they have shown more moral fibre than their
pitiless oppressors. Almost every path to prosperity was closed against
them. To say nothing of bad laws, wealthy Protestants were unwilling
toinvest their capital in Irish labour, and few Catholics, of any wealth,
knew how to employ labour in the development of trade, to profit
of improvements in machinery, or to engage in safe business on an
extensive scale. Hence, the masses of the people, struggling to earn a
poor subsistence from land, could not rise above poverty and misery.
Such was not the case in other countries, where the upper and lower
classes were in good accord, Besides, every nation of Europe, except
Ireland, had consuls or agents abroad, who could give information
regarding the products of their respective countries, and thus find new
markets for them.

To ask now that Irish history should be buried in oblivion is
much the same as to ask that England should be unmolested in her
various methods of fleecing Ireland. She has indeed made some con-
cessions to Ireland, but to say that the England of to-day is not the
England of former days, or even of fifty years ago, sounds rather
strange, while we hear ministers of the Crown coldly telling us that the
Government has no intention of granting a Catholic University, or while
we look at that monstrous anomaly, Trinity College, existing to this
day in our midst, with its £65,000 a year, derived chiefly from the con-
fiscated property of Catholics. Is this to govern with the consent of the
governed, or, as a Lord Lieutenant lately said, ‘with a full and con-
stant regard to the traditions of the country”?

It must, however, be admitted that, with some very regrettable les-
sons, savouring rather much of * amateurishness,” Sir Horace has given
us a largenumber of useful oncs. He is Vice-President of the Department

86 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

tainous districts, and the greater part of Connaught and
Ulster, were occupied by the old Irish natives. The Eng-
lish were settled along the castern and southern coasts.
By English we understand a medley of adventurers from
different parts of England, Wales, and Guienne—men
who, despairing of any fortune in their own country, re-
lied upon their swords to make it elsewhere. They
had sworn fidelity to the Crown of England, but this fidelity

of Agriculture and Technical Instruction, which was founded in zgac,
with an annual income of £166,000, derived in almost equal parts from
Irish and Imperial sources, and with a starting capital of £200,000,
Practical men like him, diligent students of social problems at home
and abroad, might do much to improve a country, as Belgium, Holland,
Switzerland, Denmark, etc., have been improved. But if the Depart-
ment would justify its existence, it should merit the confidence of the
Irish people. It should not be turned into an engine of ascendency, it
should not be made a new means of multiplying situations for a small
section of the community, and the public should be supplied with a full
record of its annual expenditure. In short, it should be an honest
institution for the general welfare of Ireland.

The great changes with regard to local government that have taken
place within the last few years, may be considered as some partial
measure of Home Rule. But, alas! how far are we still from having
obtained anything like justice! It is a most lamentable reflection that
while the population of Ireland between 1871 and 1904 has fallen by
more than a million, the taxation (for British purposes) in the same
period has risen from £6,923,402 to £9,748,500, that is by nearly three
millions, or 70 per cent. In the present year (1905) it is estimated at
£10,378,000. In 1894, when it was only £7,568,649, the Financial
Relations Commission decided that this amount was at least 2$ millions
toomuch, If restitution were to be made by England, what an enor.
mous sum would be dueto us! It seems that during 1903 there were
£14,000,000 of taxation, imperial and local, raised in Ireland, and that
large sums thereof were most wastefully expended. The cost of Dublin
Castle government went up from £5,970,0°0 in 1895 to £7,214,006 in 1902.
Yet Belgium, which has four times the trade of Ireland; and a much
larger population, is governed at about half the cost. The law and
police charges in Ireland are three times as great as they are in Scotland.
And all the while, innumerable wants, which no Department can rcach,
call loudly for a remedy. As regards education alone, the Catholic
Bishops lately declared : ‘t The first condition of a radical reform of Irish
education is the establishment of a University system that the vast
majority of the Irish people will accept. Until that is done, we shall
regard all this talk about co-ordination and local control and educational
progress as insincere.”

Englishmen sometimes say that they are unwilling to endow a
Catholic University in Ireland. But we do not require a fraction from
them, if only we are allowed to use our own money, and not to have it
taken away in millions from us, or if the wealth of Trinity College,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND.

was only a name. Since the expedition of King John, they
saw among them no sovereign. Far from the Court,
dwelling in a land regarded as foreign, they despised the
authority of the King of England. Within the precincts
of their strong castles, they defied the severity of the laws.
If we except the neighbourhood of Dublin, in which the
governors of the English colony resided, the remainder of
their territory was divided among a crowd of petty tyrants,

gathered from propeity in eighteen counties, and the thousands wasted
on Queen’s Colleges, be properly distributed for the educational welfare
of the Irish people.

Catholic education in Ireland being so very incomplete without a
University to give a tone to all its parts, and to animate youth in
running along the various paths of industry, the energies of an immense
number of citizens are paralysed, the channels of prosperity are
blocked up, and a heavy cloud of despondency rests upon the land,
The just claims of Catholic taxpayers, who form the great majority of
the nation, are ignored, and their money squandered on the advance-
ment and enrichment of the ascendancy garrison. The interests of
one-fourth the population are consulted; those of three-fourths ne-
glected, How unreasonable and unfair is such a misapplication of the
public revenues! No wonder that the Most Rev. Dr. Walsh, Arche
bishop of Dublin, addressing a large audience lately, should point out
the grounds of complaint that Irish Catholics have against the Govern-
ment for the highly unsatisfactory manner in which it has treated the
University question during the last nineteen years. They had first, he
said, the assurance of Sir Michael Hicks-Beach in 1885; secondly, in
1889, the promises of Mr. Balfour in reply to resolutions of the hier-
archy ; thirdly, in the following month, Mr. Balfour’s promises to Mr.
Parnell; fourth, in the December of the same year, the promises con-
tained in Mr. Ralfour’s great speech at Partick; fifth, Lord Cadogan's
speech at Belfast in 1896; sixth, the assurances given by Mr. Gerald
Balfour in the House of Commons; and seventh, the assurances con-
tained in Lord Cadogan’s speech to the deputation of the Senate of the
Royal University, which waited on him in connection with the appoint-
ment of the late University Commission. Yet all has come to nothing.
How quickly would these matters be settled, and how many millions
of money would be saved or profitably spent, if we had an Irish Parlia-
ment, ef which, according to many great authorities, we were illegally
and unconstitutionally deprived !

Indeed the history of the means by which the Union was carried,
shows that it was not the deliberate choice or act of the Irish people.
but more like a great swindle effected by the enemies of Ireland. If
justice has any place among men, so grievous a wrong ought to be
righted with all speed. As the learned Bishop of Limerick has re-
marked: ‘‘ Aliens can never rightly rule any people. No matter what
their intentions or dispositions, they are working against nature when
they take into their own hands the power and the responsibility which
the manifest Providence of God shows should be exercised by the inha-

88 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

who knew no other law than their own interest. Unable to
deny that they had been aggressors against the indigenous
Irish, they regarded them as their natural enemies. All
those whom they found within the limits of their district,
they reduced to the most abject servitude, and the others
they continually harassed by military excursions.

In 1275, King Edward wrote to the Bishops of Ireland,
and besought them to labour for the restoration of peace.

bitants of every nation, What is there in Ireland to condemn her to
a servitude that would not be heard of in Belgium, or Holland, or
Denmark, or amongst any other people? ”

The Rev. P. J. Dowling, C.M., Cork, writing some time ago in the
Trish Ecclesiastical Record, mentioned a number of books that would be
instructive for those interested in Irish industries, and desirous to know
something of industrial progress in foreign lands. He is a great admirer
of the Germans. ‘‘In somewhat over thirty years,’’ he says, ‘ their
system of technical training has made such a change in the industrial
life of that country that it is only rivalled in swiftness, completeness,
and beneficence by what we readin fairy tales. Starting witha popn-
lation mostly agricultural, Germany to-day is turned into a vast hive of
industries, where the farmers cannot supply the wants of the workers.”
Many persons will be glad to learn from him that ‘' the more remark.
able technical and commercial colleges, the greatest industries, are to
be found in the Rhineland, which, as every one knows, is the most
Catholic part of Germany.” He speaks of the Exhibition of Dussel-
dorf, where the Catholics are seven to one, as an extraordinary success
—one of the most wonderful exhibitions that the world has ever seen.
The machinery hall covered five acres; and the main industrial hall,
seven. He says that wages in Germany have increased three, and, in
some cases, four-fold; and that '' the German workman of to.day, with
his retiring pension at 65, is the envy of his comrades the world over.”
If this important article were re-published amiong the penny booklets of
the Catholic Truth Society, it would be very useful in Ireland. We
may confidently expect that the tide of emigration will be stemmed,
when people see that they can prosper well enough at home, though
their standard of living is not high, without exposing themselves
to the heavy toils and unhealthy climates of foreign countries.
A series of small books on all the different trades and other in-
dustries that might be largely developed in Ireland, would also
be very useful. Not the least advantage of it would be that it
would help young people to select an occupation for which they
seemed to have most taste and talent. In treating of any subject,
the author should give the names of the chief tools used, and a
simple explanation of the manner of using them. Every lesson
or chapter might be limited to a page or two.

An industry fully developed may come to something very great.
Thus, the immense, magnificent shirt-factories everywhere to be
seen in Derry, in which machinery is turned to the highest account,
show what a fortune-making business this must be. In like manner,
we learn that a distinguished Prelate, lately visiting the Deaf and

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 89

“Rex venerabilibus patribus archiepiscopis et episcopis
terre Hiberniew, salutem. Qualiter terra predicta, per
discordias et guerras ibidem diu habitas, depauperata ex-
istit fide perpenditis oculata ; unde cum super hoc sumus,
nec immerito, anxiati animo et turbati ; et totis desideriis
affectamus quod hujusmodi controversiz et guerre paci-
ficentur, vobis et fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini
mandamus, rogantcs quatcnus, de consilio justitiaril nostri

Dumb Institution at Cabra, Dublin, was told by the good Dominican
Sister in charge of the lace manufacture among the girls (over 200)
there, that it would take four years ta complete the orders on hands. Of
course, We may presume that the purchasers were notified of this
delay, and’ that, satisfied with the prospect of excellent work,
though done by poor girls both dcaf and dumb, they expressed their
willingness to wait.

Tt would seem that, after the land of Ireland, the water might be
made a source of innumerable advantages. The quantity of water-
power unemployed is very great, equal to more than two million horse-
power ; whereas in England and Scotland scarcely a drop is lost. It is
calculated that the expense of water-power in working machinery is
only about one-fourth that of steam-power, so that if it takes {20 to
produce one-horse-power fora year by steam, it takes only £5 to pro-
duce the same by water. But even if we raise this £5 to £8 or £10,
a large margin is still left. As for uniformity in the supply of water
during the year, it may be regulated in a great measure by reservoirs
and by turbine wheels. Water power may also be utilised to produce
electric power. And even bogs, it seems, may be turned to account
in like manner. For, according to Monsignor Molloy, Rector of
the Catholic University, who is a great authority on scientific
matters, there is an absolutely unbounded source of energy in the
bogs of Ireland, which is capable of being brought into action by
electrical engineering ; so that the Bog of Allen alone could supply
motive power more than sufficient to work all the railways of Ireland.
What a reduction in rates of transit would then follow! At present
we are told that turf-mould required in Dublin can be brought
more cheaply from Germany than from Galway, and that, on
account of carriage, coal from Roscommon is dearer in Galway than
coal from England. :

Another point, not unworthy of attention, is the necessity among us
of acquiring good business habits. Many Irishmen are, no doubt, irre-
proachable in this respect; but it is to be feared that a considerable
number are still wanting in the promptitude and courtesy essential to
success, The facilities now offered, not only of transmitting samples,
but of making sales, by letter and parcel post. are very different from
what they were some eighty years ago. At that time the postage of a
letter, weighing a quarter of an ounce, from Dublin to London was
Is. 3d.; to France, 2s. 3d., to America, 2s. 7d.; to Italy, 3s.; and to
Spain 3s, 3d. Packets were charged at the same rate, every ounce
counting as four letters of a quarter ounce each, And all this with

go POPE ADRIAN IV.,

terre predict et aliorum fidelium nostrorum partium
illarum, taliter ad invicem provideatis, quod per divinum
adjutorium et vestram circumspcctam devotionem, hujus-
modi controversie et guerre pacificentur et sedentur. ...
Teste rege apud Wodestolk 12 die Augusti. (Rymer, II.,
56.

un Irish Kings and the Duke of Anderken (?) had ad-
vised the King of England regarding this rebellion, and the
troubles raised by two chiefs. This shows that the national
Kings retained their dignity. (See Rymer, II., 1061.)

The Irish chiefs did not swear fidelity to the King of
England. The King employed request or invitation, not
command, when he wished for any service. At the begin-
ning of a war with Scotland, Edward II. asked the twenty-
six kings who were at the head of Irish tribes to send him
troops ; but they made no account of his petition. Rymer
has published the King’s letter, dated 22nd of March, 1314.
(T. III., p. 476.)

In the invasion of Ireland by the English, we do not
find the nature, or the characteristics, or the necessary
conditions of a true conquest. Henry II. did not employ
the force of arms to subdue the Irish, since he did not
engage in a single battle with them.

The effect of a conquest is to change the language, the
laws, the manners, and the customs of the conquered peo-
ple. The charactcristics of sovereignty are to give laws to
a people, and, by the appointment of various ministers, to
see them observed ; to punish or pardon the guilty ; and to
make peace or war.

No King of England before James I. enjoyed any pre-
rogatives of power in all Ireland. Two-thirds of the people
were governed by their own princes, without any change

great delays. The enormous increase in postal work at present requires
good correspondents, to whom a knowledge of modern languages is
often of great service. It is well known that numbers of young men
are sent over from England to France, Germany. Spain, &c., and vice
versa, that they may lcarn the language and business methods of the
country, and perhaps scttle there as agents of import or export. Every
transaction of business ought to be conducted on business lines, in a
frank and honourable manner. It would be a lamentable ease if people
throughout Ireland, writing over to a London house, found themselves
treated more satisfactorily than if they wrote to a Dublin house. There
is much to be gained by punctuality and urbanity. United with honesty,
they make many friends and no enemies.—Tran:s,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, gti

in their laws, their customs, or thcir form of government,
only that they had not one Supreme King to unite them all.
These princes, in whom even the Kings of England re-
cognised the charactcr of Kings in different charters,
appointed their own magistrates and officers of justice.
They made peace or war with all freedom, during the space
of four hundred years. Although some of these princes
became tributaries to the Kings of England, they were not
properly subjects ; they enjoyed all the other prcrogatives
of sovereignty, and, by paying a certain tribute for having
peace, they were at liberty to pursue any affair they
pleased. The English Government had neither the right
nor the power to levy taxes off them, or to disturb their
subjects. It is therefore necessary to fix this conquest
within its just bounds, and to say that it regarded only
the English province. The sovereignty of the Kings of
England was unknown outside the limits of that province,
although they took the pompous title of Lords of Ircland.
This view corresponds to that of Pope Clement III., from
the time of Richard Cceur de Lion, as appcars by the terms
of the commission that he gave to his Legatc, of exercising
jurisdiction in England, in Wales, and in that part of Ire-
land which was ruled by John, Earl of Morton : In Anglia,
Wallia, ac illis Hibernie partibus in quibus Joannes More-
tonii comes potestatem habet et dominium. (Mat. Paris,
an, 1188.)

Up to the time of Protestantism, England never sent
into Ireland the forces necessary to extend the conquest,
and things remained in the state in which Henry II. had
left them. A few hundred men, ill paid and ill disciplined,
sent from time to time into Ireland, could not suffice to
subdue the natives. The adventurers were mere brigands,
lured by the hope of gain. Though encouraged by the
Kings of England, who liberally granted them whatever
they could take by arms from the Irish, they could hardly
defend the frontiers of the English province.

Although King John and Henry III. had extended to
Ireland the laws and customs of England, and had made
viscounts or sheriffs, and othcr ministers, to govern the
people, it is certain that only the English colony, and a
few Irishmen enfranchised by special charters, werc taken
under the protection of the laws. All the others were re-
garded as aliens, as enemies of the Crown, in such manner

g2 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

that the murder of an Irishman was not considered a
capital crime, and it was permitted to kill him, even in time
of peace. If, on the other hand, it was proved that a
murdered man was of English birth or origin, the murderer
was subject to all the rigour of the laws.

The Irish could not take an action against those who had
done them an injury. It might be said that the intention
of those who governed in Ireland for the King of England
was to maintain a perpetual separation between the two
peoples, so as to be in a way of enriching themselves with
impunity—an advantage of which they would have been
deprived, if the Irish had been received under the protec-
tion of the laws, because then no one could despoil them
of their goods, The English were strictly forbidden to
make marriages with the Irish, or to have any connection
with them. Behold how they had come to reform the
manners of the old Irish!

The Romans did not thus treat the peoples whom they
had subdued. They gloried rather in polishing and re-
fining nations than in gratifying a sordid desire of wealth.
They communicated their laws to their new subjects,
whose interests were thenceforth sure of protection ; and
so many different provinces formed only one single empirc.

The state of Ireland during the thirteenth century seems
irreconcilable with the hypothesis of a pontifical donation.
If Popes Adrian and Innocent had given possession of the
island to the Kings of England, Rome would surely have
reccommended submission on the part of the Irish, who,
in their steadfast adherence to the Holy See, would
at the very least have represented the reasons that pre-
vented them from accepting English domination. The
official diplomas of the Kings of England do not make the
slightest allusion to Bulls of Popcs or to a donation of the
Holy See.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 93

