VIII.
HOW KING HENRY II. RECEIVED THE DECISION OF THE POPE,

THE immediate effect of the check met by Rotrodus at
Rome was that Henry II., having no longer any need of an
alliance with Louis VII. for an expedition to Ireland, threw
off the mask ; and that extraordinary affection which he
had been showing towards the King of France for about

1The number of reasons to show whether H was intended for
Hibernia or Hispania is not limited to seven. The reader may find
others for himself, of greater weight or greater difficulty. Nor is he
bound to admit that every reason here given, however applicable in
Some respects, is perfectly valid in all. One good strong reason is
worth a dozen weak ones.—T vans.

16 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

six months vanished as if by enchantment. A little after
the return of the ambassador, Henry, forgetting his pro-
mises of friendship, laid siege to Toulouse ; but Louis VII.
obliged him to retire before he could gain possession of the
city.

It was during the siege of Toulouse that John of Salis-
bury finished his Polycraticus. He dedicated it to Thomas
Becket, Chancellor of England, who was present at the
siege of Toulouse with Henry. Becket, to whom the
author was already known, hastened to engage him in
various employments, and presented him to the King.

Now, if Henry scarcely knew Salisbury in 1159, how is
it to be explained that four years previously he should
have sent him on a diplomatic errand to Rome—to ask
of Pope Adrian IV. the investiture of Ireland?

And if, on the other hand, Adrian gave Ireland to King
Henry in 1155, how could he, four years afterwards, re-
fuse him permission to undertake an Irish expedition ?

The biography of Salisbury shows us the improbability
of his fulfilling a diplomatic mission to Rome in 1155. He
had then been absent from England for a great many
years. Arrived in Gaul about 1137, he studied at Paris
the dialectics and categories of Aristotle ; but, being in
poor circumstances, he was obliged to earn a livelihood by
acting as tutor to students. He found in the friendship of
Peter de Celles, Abbot of Moutiers,,somc consolation in
his troubles, and means of returning to England, which
he revisited after an absence of twelve ycars. Having re-
ceived Holy Orders, he hastened back to Paris, whither.
the desire of seeing his friends and resuming his lessons
on dialectics called him.

Can anyone comprehend how Henry II., a few days
after his coronation, should have chosen for a diplomatic
mission to the Pope a teacher of categories, who had spent
his life abroad, and who, moreover, was perhaps almost
unknown to the prince?

Henry did send ambassadors to the Pope at the begin-
ning of his reign, which coincided with that of the pontifi-
cate. But he chose for this mission three Bishops, and the
Abbot of the Monastery of St. Alban. The name of a man
so obscure as Salisbury was at that time could not figure
in an embassy of prelates. ,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 17

Rotrodus, Bishop of Evreux, who later on treated of the
Irish expedition, as I have said above, was one of the
ambassadors of 1155. Hc had for his colleagues the celc-
brated Arnoul, Bishop of Lisieux, the Bishop of Mans,
and Robert, Abbot of St. Albans.

The authors of Gallia Christiana, speaking of Rotrodus,
say: ‘‘ As messenger from the Kings of England and
France, he went to the Sovereign Pontiff in 1155, with
Robert, Abbot of St. Alban’s, and the Bishops of Lisieux
and Mans.” From the article concerning Arnoul, Bishop of
Lisieux, in the Gallia Christiana, we learn that ‘‘ he
assisted at the coronation of Henry II., King of England,
who, a few days after, sent him to Rome with several
others, on some important affairs.’”? (Tome I1, pp. 557,
77°.
a we are to believe some of thé chroniclers of the
period, especially Brompton, and William of Newbridge,
the object of this embassy was to consult the Pope on a
singular case. Geoffrey, father of Henry II., had, on his
death-bed, required of the barons and prelates who
attended him to swear that they would not let his body be
buried until Henry had sworn to fulfil the secret conditions
of his will. Henry consented to take the oath ; but he re-
pented of it when he learned that his father had bequeathed
Anjou, a patrimony of the family, to Geoffrey, his second
son.

Henry asked absolution from this imprudent oath, on
the ground that he had sworn through undue influence,
and without foreseeing the consequences. Adrian granted
the absolution.

But what connection has this story. morc like romance
than history, with the conquest of Ireland, with the dona-
tion of the island to a Plantagenet?

I remark in the acts attributed to Adrian IV., a letter,
which the editor has dated 27th February, 1155,
addressed to the Bishops of Scotland, in order to notify to
them that they should henceforth belong to the ecclesiasti-
cal province of the Archbishop of York. (Migne’s Patro-
logte, T. 188, p. 1391-)

It is unnecessary for me at present to examine the
genuineness of this diploma. It suffices to observe once

more that the English ambassadors sent to Rome in 1155
Cc

18 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

never treated of [reland, nor of the conquest that King
Henry II, wished to make.}

In the Polycraticus addrcsscd to Thomas Becket and the
King during the siege of Toulouse in 1159, as I have said
above, John of Salisbury related that he had spent three
months at Beneventum with Pope Adrian, who admitted
him to some great familiarities ; but he took good care in
this work not to make the slightest allusion to Ireland, or
to a pretendcd Bull that authorised its conqucst. Indeed,
it would have been too bold and rash if, a few weeks after
the return of Rotrodus, who had just announced the formal
refusal of Pope Adrian in reference to the eonquest of Ire-
land, any one had dared to appeal to a Bull giving this
island to the King of England.

{In the mcanwhilc, Adrian IV. died. It scems to me
that John of Salisbury, if he had not heard of this death,
would not have alluded in the Polycraticus to those familiar
chats which he claimed to have had with this Pontiff on
delicate matters affecting the honour of the Holy Sec and
the Roman Court.

What is certain is that it was impossible to spcak of a
false Bull during the lifetime of Louis VII., who had re-
ceived the true and genuine letter of refusal to authorise
the conquest of Ireland. This is why we find so much
silence regarding the Apocryphal Bull before the year
1180, the time of the death of the King of France.

Let me here mention two facts which perhaps have some
relation, and which it is not absolutely forbidden to refer
to the same period.

Robcrt du Mont says that, about Michaelmas, Henry II.
held a Council at Winchester, and treated with his barons
regarding a conquest of Ircland, in order to give it to his
brother William, but that, the projcct not being relished
by the King’s mother, the expedition was postponed tilf
another time. (Patrologie, tome 160, page 479.)

On the other hand, it was in the same palace of Win-
chester that Pope Adrian’s privilege was deposited, if we

" The author seems to imply that an object of the embassy was to
bring the Church in Scotland under the authority of an English
Archbishop, or else that the bull to this effect was a forgery. In either:
case the result was to be an extension of ‘spiritual authority for
England,—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, Ig

are to give credit to John of Salisbury, in the chapter of
the Metalogicus, to which I shall refer later on. In like
manner, Giraldus Cambrensis says that Adrian’s diploma,
and the ring for the feudal investiture of Ireland, were
placed in the archives of Winchester : In archivio Win-
tonie repositus fuerat. (Giraldus Cambrensis, 5th vol.
of new edition, by the Rev. Mr. Dimock, p. 316.)

I suspect that this was the real letter of Pope Adrian
which King Henry II. buried in the secret archives of
Winchester : first, that it might remain unknown ; and
secondly, that it might serve as a pattern for forging a
false Bull.

However, the sccret of the negotiation carried on by
Rotrodus was not so strictly kept that Pope Adrian’s re-
fusal was entirely unknown. In effect, the annalist of
Anchin, who continued Sigebert, speaking, at the year
1171, of the preparations that Henry ILI., was making for
an expedition to Ireland, says that this prince arrogated
to himself things not grantcd, and ambitioned what was
not his due. ‘‘ Henry, King of England, rising up in his
pride, usurping things not conceded, and aspiring to what
was not his due, prepares ships, and musters the soldiers
of his kingdom, to subdue Ircland.”’

This passage furnishes a two-fold argument : the first,
for the true letter of Adrian IV. ; and the second, against
the Apocryphal Bull.

The Continuatio Aquicinetina was published in the
Monumenta Germanie of Pertz. It was from this source
that Migne took it. (Patrologie, tome 160, page 307.)

The refusal of Adrian IV. was a bitter disappointment
to Henry II., and checked him for a long time in realising
his projects against Ireland. Hence it was that he allowed
nearly ten years to elapse before permitting the Welsh
adventurers to begin a series of hostilities worthy of
pirates and brigands, of which he should reap the profit.
If one single time in his life he went to Ireland, he sur-
rounded himself with a cloud of secrecy, in order that
news of the expedition should not transpire on the conti-
nent. In the fear of being excommunicated for his com-
plicity in the martyrdom of St. Thomas of Canterbury,
he fled precipitately from Normandy and England, and
took refuge in Dublin, after having ordered that all sata

20 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

should be stopped and passengers arrested, as I shall re-
late further on. It was therefore a necessity for him to
make the expedition, and the great armament with which
he landed on the coast of Ireland was intended for his
personal security, not for the conquest of the country, of
which, moreover, he took only a few places near the shore.
He never again prepared such an armament.

In 1177, having been chosen arbiter in a case between
the King of Castile and the King of Leon, Henry II. took
in his decree the titles of King of England, Dukc of Nor-
mandy, and Earl of Anjou, but he did not call himself
Lord of the land of Ireland. (Rymer, tome 1, p. 48.)

After the death of Louis VII., which occurred in 1180,
Henry IJ. no longer felt himself bound to such great re-
serve. But let us not anticipate events. For the moment
I have wished to bring together some facts and signs
which show that Pope Adrian refused to authorise the con-
quest of Ireland by the King of England.

