VI.
POPE ADRIAN’S LETTER CONCERNS IRELAND.

THE officers of the Roman Chancery who transcribed
diplomas were in the habit, sometimes rather annoying
for us, of giving only the initials of proper names.! This

* The following is an example from Pope Adrian’s letter No. 313
** Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei, venerabilibus fratribus E
Lugdunensi et H_ Bisuntino archiepiscopis, salutem et apostolicam
benedictionem.” In the body of the letter, the Pope says :— Dilectus
siquidem filius noster P Abbas Trenorciensis monasterii sua nobis
narratione monstravit, quod nobilis vir G comes Matisconensis ita
terras ipsius . . . aggravet,” &c.

The compiler believes that E is used for Eraclio, H for Humberto,
P for Petrus, and G for Girardus.—T rans.

A FRIEND OF [RELAND. It

is constantly to be remarked, even in the registers kept in
the Archives of the Vatican.

In what concerns the letter of Pope Adrian to which I
have just referred, the old manuscripts that have preserved
for us this important piece of history do not mention
the country that it concerns except by the initial letter H.
It is the very tenor of the document that traces the charac-
teristics proper to make known beyond qucstion the country
to which it refers.

I say that the letter of Pope Adrian IV. concerns Ireland
(H being for Hibernia), of which Louis VII. and
Henry II. wished to make the conquest, and that it is im-
possible to apply the document to any other county or to.
any other affair.

In point of fact, what is to be remarked in the Pontifical
Letter ?

1. The country of which there is question is not a king-
dom, a political society possessed of this eminent dignity.
Adrian IV. repeatedly calls it by the name of land—the
princes of this land, the inhabitants of this land, &c. Such
is the official title that Ireland bore through all antiquity,
and kept until the sixteenth century, when it was erected
into a kingdom.

2. This same country has a Church of its own, that is
to say, an episcopal hierarchy regularly constituted, and
free to hold deliberations, Adrian IV. recommends that
this Church should be consulted, that inquiry should be
made regarding its opinion of foreign intervention. This
indicates that the Church is not under any hostile domina-
tion, which might hinder its assemblies. Clearly, this
Church exercises a preponderating influence, even in poli-
tical affairs ; for the Pope rcquires that it should be con-
sulted on the proposed intervention.

3. The country that Pope Adrian wishes to preserve
from foreign intervention is not under a single chieftain
or a single king ; we remark several princes, who, inde-
pendently of one another, govern the districts of the coun-
try. Can it be doubted that this is Ireland? Adrian IV.
recommends that these princes should be consulted, and
that their consent should be obtained for the intervention ;
but he gives no names—neither their personal names, nor
the titles of the districts in which they rule. ‘At the period

12 POPE, ADRIAN IV.,

in question, the internal state of Ireland was little known
on the continent. Rome was undoubtedly acquainted with
the episcopal hierarchy, which had been reconstituted in
Ireland a dozen years before ; but it had only imperfect
information of the divisions of the country, and of the
names of the reigning princes or chieftains. The English
themselves knew no more, though living in proximity to
Erin.

4. Adrian IV. wishes that the people should be con-
sulted, and should be allowed freely to express their
opinion on the utility of intervention. This supposes that
the pcople, far from being oppressed by tyrants, enjoy the
liberty that is necessary to meet in public asscmblies, to
dcliberate on matters of general interest, and to take
part in political affairs. Christians, bowed under the
yoke of infidels, would not have the power of expressing
their ideas on an expedition proposed with a view to their
deliverance from bondage. It follows from the Pontifical
Letter that these people, far from being plunged in bar-
barism, have, on the contrary, a considerable degree of
culture or civilisation ;! no one thinks of consulting bar-
barians or beasts.

5. The great majority of the inhabitants profess Chris-
tianity. It it were otherwise, the Pontiff would not men-
tion the Church of that land ; for this supposes that the
ecciesiastical hierarchy comprises the whole country.
However, there still remain some pagans ; but they do not
form a body, a society, a government, occupying large
‘districts. There are also some bad Christians, who con-
duct themselves like apostates, and, by their impious be-
haviour, disgrace that religion of which they make pro-
fession. This state of affairs explains and justifies the
terms used in the preamble of the Pontifical Letter ; but
these expressions do not imply that there is qucstion of a
country ruled by infidels, against whom a crusade ought
to be preached.

6. In rcgard to infidels oppressing Christian provinces,
the necessity of an expedition to expel them admits of no
doubt ; it only remains to calculate the forces that can be
employed. Here, Pope Adrian IV. continually calls into

1 A point well worthy of being noted.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 13.

doubt the opportuneness, the utility, and the necessity of
the enterprise, although two powerful kings propose to
unite all the forces of France and England. It follows
that the country viewed in the Pontifical Letter was not
one of those oppressed by Moors or other infidels.

7. There is no example in all history that any Pope has
ever refused to take under his protection, and defend from
attack, the kingdom of a prince setting out on a crusade
against infidels. In the present case, Adrian IV. refuses
the Bull of Protection which Louis VII. asks of him ; he-
does not permit the preaching of a crusade.

I have said above that the title of Land was the official’
and political denomination for Ireland through all anti-
quity, and on to the sixteenth century. Among thousands
of proofs, one need only consult the collection Fadera, by
Rymer, in which, at almost every page, there is mention.
of the Land of Ireland.

