IV.
OBJECTIONS OF POPE ADRIAN TO THE IRISH EXPEDITION.

ADRIAN began by eulogising the zeal and the pious in-
tentions of the King. He admitted that the project had for
its principle the purest root of charity, the fervour of faith,
and the love of religion.

But he could not avoid expressing his surprise to see a
wise and prudent prince show so much eagerness for such
an enterprise. ‘‘In fact,” says the Pope, “ it does not
appear prudent or safe to enter a foreign land, if one has
not first of all sought the consent of the princes and the
people of that land.”

The Pope now learns that the King, not having con-
sulted the Church or the princes of the land, is preparing
to depart without the least delay, while he ought on no
account to make the attempt, unless convinced of its
necessity by the advice of the princes of the country, and
invited by them.

This is why Adrian recommends the King to ascertain
the needs of the country through the princes, and to inform
himself of the wishes of the Church there, as well as of the
princes and the people. Then, if a necessity be found to
exist, if the bishops of the country approve of the expedi-
tion, if the princes themselves desire the intervention of the
King, and urge it, in that case the King can decide accord-
ing to their counsel and request, and accomplish his
laudable design. Otherwise, there should be reason to
fear that the expedition would be fruitless, and that the
end would not be attained. The princes and the people
would be aggrieved by an interference not required, and
the Pope himself would with some justice be taxed with
levity.

This is why Adrian thought proper to withhold the
apostolic exhortation, sought for in the King’s name, with
a view of stimulating the people to share in the expedition.
He refused the diploma of protection for the kingdom in
the King’s absence.

6 POPE, ADRIAN IV.,

The Pontiff believed that he had excellent reasons for
dissuading the King from his project. He exhorted the
prince to reflect seriously on the motives that induced him
to set out without the least delay.

Such were the objections that Pope Adrian made to the
project of conquering Ireland. They pre-eminently indi-
cate the great circumspection of the Pontiff, as well as his
deep attachment to the rules of justice and the principles
of Christian charity.

Not content with verbally expressing these objections to
Rotrodus, Pope Adrian IV. thought well to formulate them
in a letter addressed directly to Louis VII.

