XXI.
AUTHORITY OF GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS.

Ir must be admitted that in these latter times, thanks to
the eonseientious labours of Mr. Brewer and the Rev. Mr.
Dimoek, the authority of Giraldus, as a veraeious historian,
has fallen very mueh in the learned world.

Mr. Brewer, whose first volume appeared in London in
1861, is not afraid to reproaeh Giraldus with his eredulity,
and his eontinual referenees to old prophecies, as well as
to his own visions ; again, with the diseourses that the
historian plaees on the lips of Norman and Welsh adven-
turers, and of Irish ehieftains, in whieh they make quota-
tions from Greek and Latin authors—Julius Cesar, Virgil,
Horaee, Ovid, and others. ‘‘ They leave us to regret,”

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 73

adds the editor, ‘‘ that a quality of mind so valuable had
not been strengthened and improved by a more sober and
regulated judgment.” (Vol. I., p. xlvi.)

According to the Rev. Mr. Dimock, Giraldus was too
passionate to be impartial. The picture that he draws of
the Irish is unjust. Forgetful of St. Malachy, he main-
tains that since the days of St. Patrick, no Irish bishop
has acquitted himself worthily of the pastoral charge.
Little caring to find out the truth, he easily acccpts the
statements of others. ‘“ I think,’’ says Mr. Dimock,
“I have said enough to justify me in refusing to accept
Giraldus’s history of the Irish and of their English invaders
as sober, truthful history.” (Vol. v., p. xix.)

Truth was not the main object kept in view by Giraldus.
He acknowledges that he took up his pen to glorify King
Henry II. : Topographiam Hibernicam . . . in patris ves-
tri laudem triennti labore digessi, (Ibid., p. Ixx.)

The history of the Conquest of Ireland is certainly, in a
great measure, a poetic fiction, rathcr than true and
sober history. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to
distinguish where the poetry ends and the prose begins.
This is anothcr remark made by the same editor. (Jbid.,
p. Ixxi.) Nor does he believe that anything can elsewhere
be found so absurd as the orations which Giraldus puts
into the mouths of his heroes. It is the mountain bring-
ing forth the mouse. Giraldus made an cpic poem.!
(Ibid., p."1xx., note 4.)

™The Rev. Mr. Dimock, in his preface to Vol. v., says: '‘ From
his wide acquaintance with the first invaders of Ireland, and his close
connexion with several of their principal leaders,—from the time also
“that he spent there in his two visits,—-we may be inclined to conclude
that Giraldus’s means of information about Ireland, and its people, and
its conquest, as he much too grandly calls the English invasion, must
have been abundant and authentic. But there are several circum-
stances which render such a conclusion a very unsafe one ... As to
his history of the English invasion, it must have been wholly derived
from the English themselves, and in great measure, no doubt, from his
own near friends. If Giraldus had been the most cool, and fair, and
unbiassed of writers, still a history so derived could not well have been
anything but one-sided ; it would be almost impossible that the English
and their doings should not be more or less represented in colours too
bright, and the Irish and their doings in too dark colours, and more-
over, that the English, his own near friends, should not be unduly
exalted to the disparagement of others, But Giraldus was replete with

q4 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

