NXNII.
CRITICS.

APPROACHING the end of my work, I think it well to say
something very briefly of the chief writers who have treated

of the Bull of Adrian IV.
As outside of England the old chroniclers have not men-
tioned the Bull, I am led to believe that it was unknown on

dialects,” says Dr. Jamieson, ‘‘ seem to excel all others for philo-
logical and ethnological purposes.’ And Sir William Betham
remarks : ‘‘ The most ancient manuscripts in Europe are Irish.”
‘“‘ Trish Gaelic,’ says the Very Rev. U. J. Bourke, ‘‘is for European
savants a very ready, practical, and truthful vehicle for linguistic
research in archaic fields of human speech and of history.”

Father Bourke also remarks that, is his opinion, the following
is the correct order and division of the Indo-European family of
Aryan languages: 1, Sanscrit or Indian; 2, Zend or Persian ; 3,
Keltic or Irish-Gaelic ; 4, Latin; 5, Greek ; 6, Gothic or German ;
7, Lithuanian; and 8, Sclavonian. (See Avyan Ovigin of Gaelic
Race and Language, pp. 121, 154). Thus, Irish-Gaelic hold a very
high and honourable place.

In some respects, Hungary may serve as a great example
for Ireland. It is said that, within the memory of living men,
Hungary had not five journals in which a word of the Hungarian
language was used, and its annual revenue was under £6,000,000 ;
whereas, at present, under a better regime, it has 800 newspapers
and journals published in the Hungarian language, and its revenue
is £42,000,000.—Tyvans. e

1The Rev. DP. Finlay, S.J., lately reviewing the position of
Catholics m Ireland since the Emancipation, and urging the
necessity of Catholic Associations such as exists with the best results
in. other countries, especially Germany and the United States of
America, used the following weighty words :—‘ Look abroad—
to the Catholics of the Continent, who have even harder struggles
than our own, and read the lesson which they teach us. In Holland,
Belgium, Germany, Catholics not only hold their own: they are
advancing surely, peacefully, and vigorously along all the paths
of eivil progress. They have governed Belgium for the last twenty
years ; they control the government of Germany; they are fairly
represented in the Ministry of Holland. They are’ organised and

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 137

the eontinent till about the beginning of the seventeenth
eentury. Indeed, Saint Antoninus himself does not seem
to have known it. He wrote a pretty long chapter on
Adrian IV. He there cites the Polycraticus of Salisbury ;
but he completely omits Chapter XLII. of the Metalogicus,
which speaks of Ireland and the pretended donation. He
seleets from the Polycraticus the lamentations of Pope
Adrian on the misfortunes of Popes: ‘‘ De quo Johannes
Salesberiensis, qui erat ei multum familiaris, sie ait’;
Audivi papam Adrianum dicentem quod romano pontifice
nemo est miserabilior ; eonditione ejus nulla miserior.”
(S. Antonin., Pars Historialie, tit. 17, c. 1, § 9.)

Here are the names of the writers of whom I am going
to speak in the following sections : —

i. Cardinal Baronius, who although he secms to have
had little belief in the genuineness of the Bull, inserted it
in his Ecelesiastieal Annals, and thus contributed to make
it known.

united ; and so their claims are adjudged reasonable, or at any
rate, resistless. And look at Italy, or worse stil], at France—a
vast Catholie majority, but without cohesion or force; disunion,
and, therefore, apathy or barren efforts; place, power, patronage
in the hands of the enemies of Catholicism, and persecution for
the loval children of the Church. If French and Italian Catholics
would only look across their borders ; would sink their class and
party differences, as German, Dutch, and Belginm Catholics have
done; would unite to combat energetically the socialistic and
anti-Catholic minority, a short, though it might be a sharp, struggle
would give them a complete victory.”’

In connection with this subject, His Eminence Cardinal Logue
speaks thus :—-‘‘ I have read Father Finlay’s Lecture on ‘ Catholics
in Civil Life’ with great interest and great pleasure. He puts
the claims of Irish Catholics on their true basis with scientific
precision, We seek no monopoly or ascendancy. We claim
equality—fair play—even-handed justice—our share in the patron-
age and employments which are maintained, in great part, by our
money. It is an undoubted fact that we are alinost wholly ex-
cluded from these, and that our Faith is the chief disqualification.
It appears to me an equally undoubted fact that we have the
remedy in our own hands.”

All Catholics in Ireland who are entitled to vote on any occasion
should take special care to see that they are not deprived of their
tights through any negligence of their own or through some legal
quibhle. They should also examine the list of voters to see that
none are enrolled there but such as are justly entitled to be so.
All this is only to borrow a leaf from the book of their opponents,
who are usually most vigilant on such matters.

Social life in Ireland, as elsewhere, has undergone wonderful

138 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

2. Bzovius, a Polish Dominican, Continuator of Baro-
nius, picked up a most strange story, in such a manner as
to surpass Cambrensis himself.

3. Bongars, in 1611, in Gesta Dei per Francos, published
the letter of Adrian to Louis VII. Thirty years afterwards,
André Duchesne re-edited this letter (t. 4, Rerum Franci-
carum Scriptores.)

4. Lynch, an Irish priest, published in 1662 the cele-
brated work Cambrensis Eversus, in which he directly
attacks the genuineness of the Bull. ;

5. About 1692, Colonel Charles O’Kelly, in the Exci-
dium Macarie, followed the general sentiment. A man of
the sword, he could not easily become a scholar by pro-
fession.

6. Antony Pagi, instead of imitating the circumspection
of Baronius, thought that Raoul de Diceto, Giraldus Cam-
brensis, and Matthew Paris left no room to doubt of the

changes during the last hundred years. We have been assured
by a native of Cork that in that city, about the early part of the
nineteenth century, it was no uncommon thing to see a business
establishment closed up, and a large placard ‘‘ Gone to Dublin”
pasted on the shutters—so that customers might be on the look-
out for the return of the proprietor with a new supply of goods,
and doubtless a good supply of news. How different from the
present day, when we can stay at home, and, by means of a
gramophone, listen to the magnificent singing of a full Gregorian
Choir at a Pontifical High Mass in St, Peter’s, Rome!

The great consolation of the Trish people during their centuries
of suffering was their religion. They regarded faith as a precious
treasure ; it was their chief, often their only, comfort in life and in
death. Overwhelmed with misfortunes, and even famine-stricken,
they held fast to it. Itis said that in the eighteenth century
immense numbers of the people went barefoot, not being able to buy
shoes. But Jet us remember that poverty is not inconsistent with
sanctity. Lazarus, whose sores were licked by dogs, the angels
thought it an honour to carry to the Bosom of Abraham.
Multitudes of hermits in the deserts of Egypt and Palestine
seemed in want of all things, and yet added to their pains
by letting themselves be stung by mosquitoes. But the
greatest example of poverty and sanctity combined in modern
times is surely that of St. Benedict Joseph Labré. The strange
manner of life that he adopted was of his own choice, not of
necessity—his parents being in good circumstances, and himself
the eldest son—-and so far was he from being an ignorant man,
that he spoke Latin fluently. For his food he was content with
orange peel, cabbage stalks and leaves, withered and rotten fruit,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 139

genuineness of the Bull. Francis Pagi copied from his
uncle.

-_

_ 7 Int Histoire dIrlande, published in French at Paris
in 1758, and dedieated to the Irish Brigades in the service
of France, MeGeoghegan made some judicious observa-
tions that deserve to be known. Without absolutely deny-
ing the genuineness of the Bull, he skilfully pleads that it
was sutreptitiously or obreptitiously obtained.

8. Dr. Lingard abstained from directly touching the
question, However, he says enough to let us see that he
had little faith in the genuineness of the Bull.

g. In our days, Mr. John Cornelius O’Callaghan has
discussed the Bull of Adrian, first in notes to the Macarie
Excidium, published at Dublin in 1850 (p. 242-270).
Twenty-two years afterwards, he again came forward with
a summary of his assertions in a newspaper called the
Irishman, June, 1872. Mr. O’Callaghan believed in good
faith that his reasons were unanswerable.

etc., thrown out of doors and windows, and lying on the strects.
He never asked alms. Tf it were offered him, he took only what
he needed for one day. If he met with neither food nor alms,
he went out into the country, ate grass, and drank water. His
hair and beard were quite neglected ; perhaps at Christmas he had
himself shaved. He usually slept in the open air. His ragged
clothes, the same in winter and summer, swarmed with vermin,
which gnawed him day and night. The endurance of this
loathsome pain, an excruciating torment, was his greatest penance.
Yet his countenance always bore a serene look. No article
of his clothing was ever changed till worn out; or even washed.
He madeno vows. Prayer was his continual occupation. A most
holy man, he never lost his baptismal innocence; he held the
slightest sin in the utmost abhorrence. But as for sanitary laws, he
did not regard them as essential to the practice of virtue. Thus
in Ireland it is often found, especially in houses where the Rosary is
said at night, or in localities where good schools exist, that children,
even though very poor, grow up like the purest lilies, notwithstand-
ing the dangers that surround them. And does not the wonderful
example of Pope Adrian IV. show what a poor boy, with good disposi-
tions, maycometo? Many of theactionsof St. Benedict Joseph are
only to be admired, not imitated, by people in general, whose duties
require a different conduct. If the managers of any institution
allowed the inmates thereof to swarm with vermin, or encouraged
disease by a neglect of the laws of health, how quickly and how
justly would they be condemned! In like manner, the dwellings
of the poor ought to be improved in many ways. With St. Bernard:
we advocate cleanliness, which we belicve to be akin to godliness.
Our churches, convents, hospitals, orphanages, etc., are usually

140 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

to. In reply to the aforesaid article, the Most Rev. Dr.
Moran, Bishop of Ossory, published in the frish Ecclesias-
tical Record the memoir of which I have already spoken—
a substantial work, full of new and judicious remarks,
eminently calculated to raise the best founded suspicions
against the Bull.

SECTION 1I.—BARONIUS.

The letter of Pope Adrian TV. to Kine Louis VIT. appears
to have been unknown in the time of Baronius. ‘The learned
annalist never speaks of it. The oldest edition that I know
is of the ycar 1611. If Baronius had known it, his sagacity
would probably have been awakened to make him examinc
directly the question of the gcnuincness of the Bull.

Roger de Hoveden, Gervase, and William of Newbridge,
are the sourccs from which Baronius draws. IIe nowhere

models of neatness and tidiness. ‘‘.Order is Heaven’s first law.”’
But from the example of St. Benedict Joseph Labré, who is now
honourcd on the altars of the Universal Church, we learn that
poor people, strangers to the refinements of life, may be great
friends of God, and worthy of our deepest respect.

Some people in this country have a egrcat deal of fault to
find with Irish Catholics for building cxpensive churches, They
can point specially to the Cathedral of Armagh, which has cost
£250,000—though most of this money came from other lands.
These wiseacres, who hold so much property that once belonged
to Irish Catholics, regard such magnificent churches as suited
only for the rich. But let us hear how His Eminence Cardinal
Moran, in a recent number of the Australasian Catholic Record (Jan.
1905), refers to them. ‘‘ These would-be critics,” he says, “ forget
that Catholic Churches are the House of God and the home of the
poor. There is perfect equality of rich and poor in the presence
of the Altar of God. The poorest old apple-woman may enter the
cathedral in her rags with as much confidence, and as much sense
of ownership, as the richest nobleman in the land, Nothing can
exercise a more ennobling, and elevating, and purifying influence
on a religious people than such beautiful edifices erected to the glory
of the Most High,”

A Parish Priest, to whom the care of souls is committed, may
sometimes help much towards the bodily health of his parishioners,
and thus imitate our Divine Master, who ‘‘ went about doing good.”
With a knowledge of hygiene, he may, for example, caution them
against the dlangers of breathing bad air, drinking infected water,
ete. Many simple points regarding air, food, mastication, white-

A FRIEND OF fRELAND. I41

quotes Giraldus Cambrensis, or Matthew Paris, though of
the latter he found a manuscript in the Vatican.

At the year 1155, Baronius gives a long extract from
the Polycraticus, relating to the conversations of Salisbury
with Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the annalist passes
over in silence the Aletalogicus, with its false donation of
Ireland.

Coming to the year 1156, he relates, according to
William of Newbridge, the submission of the Welsh, who
were subdued by Henry II. :

At 1158, Baronius relates, as done by Gervase, the :>-
conciliation of Louis VII. with Henry II., the journey of
the latter to Paris, the festivities in consequence, the
marriage of their children, and other particulars. If the
annalist had had the letter of Adrian before his tyes, his
perspicacity would likely have led him to discover the

washing, etc., are often overlooked by poor people. What a
consolation for him it will sometimes be to reflect that by his
warnings he has averted a serious epidemic, which might have proved
fatal to the lives of many! In the building of churches, schools,
etc., he will see that there is no forgetfulness of sanitary principles,
He will also be mindful of the dangers of consanguinity, since,
according to recent statistics, sixty-seven per cent. of sick or
deformed children come from the marriages of first cousins, and the ,
dreadful percentage of ninety-six from the marriages of double
cousins. It is quite certain that many evils, physical as well as
moral, arise from preventible causes. How prudent therefore
to anticipate them in time!

As regards moral evils, it nccd only be remarked that, since
the establishment of Industrial Schools in Ireland, nearly half
the gaols of the country have been closed. This fact alone shows
how much depends on the instruction and training of youth,
the latter being a very necessary supplement tothc former. Indecd
it is the opinion of many that the most important part of a child’s
education is completed before its sixth year; because at that
age, even though the use of reason has not been attained, the
mind has taken a particular sez, from which it cannot afterwards
be removed without difficulty. Of course a highly important
part of education remains to be accomplishcd in the years that
follow. (See Lehmkuhl, Theol. Moyval., vol. 1., numbers 789,
786.)

It is said that in Belgium many priests take a most active part in
founding and directing co-operative and other societies among the
peasantry. Insomc, perhaps all, of the dioceses there is a priest
specially appointed for social work of this kind, just as a catechist is
for religious instruction. (See Irish Ecclesiastical Record, June, 1905,
Pp. 504).—Tvrans.

I42 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

object of this alliance ; for the letter says clearly that the
two prinees wished to undertake together an expedition
into another country, which eould be no other than Ire-
land.

After noting the death of Adrian IV. in 1159, Baronius
gives along biography of the Pope from an old manuscript
in the Vatican. There is not a single word in it about
Ireland, or a donation that the Pope madc to the King of
England.

It is enly after all this that the annalist ends by saying
that, not to forget anything connected with the memory of
so great a Pontiff, he is going to copy from a Vatican
manuseript (this is the ehroniele of Matthew [aris) a
diploma given to Henry, King of England, with a view to.
re-establish in better form the affairs of religion in Ire-
land ; but in what year the diploma was given is uncertain.

It seems to me that Baronius eould not have shown more
clearly the doubts that he entertained regarding the
genuineness of the Bull. An historian does not express
himself in this loose manner regarding a document that he
believes to be eertain. While declaring the uneertainty
of the datc, the annalist gives the lie again to the Metalo-
gicus, as well as to the chroniclers who attach the Bull to
the year 1155, or to the sojourn of John of Salisbury at
Beneventum.

In the memoir that appeared in 1872, Dr. Moran ex-
presses himself thus :—‘‘ In the present instance we are
not left in doubt as to the source whence Baronius derived
his information regarding Adrian’s supposed Bull. During
my stay in Rome | took oeeasion to inquire whether the
MSS. of the eminent annalist, whieh are happily preserved,
indieated the speeial ‘ Vatiean Manuseript’ referred to in
his printed text, and I was informed by the learned arehi-
vist of the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner .. . that the
Codex Vaticanus referred to is a MS. eopy of the History
of Matthew Paris, which is preserved in the Vatiean
Library. Thus it is the testimony of Matthew Paris alone
that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius ; and no
new argument can be takcn from the words of the
eminent annalist. Relying on the same high authority, |
am happy to state that nowhere in the private arehives or
among the private papers of the Vatican, or in the

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 143

Regesta...or in the various indices of the Pontifical
Letters, ean a single trace be found of the supposcd Bulls
of Adrian IV. and Alexander III.’’

SECTION 2.—BZOVIUS.

Called to Rome, under Paul V., the Polish Dominican
ransacked the archives of the Vatiean, and _ published
various works, among which we find an ecclesiastical his.
tory, in two volumes folio, an abridgment of the twelve
volumes of Baronius ; also, a continuation of the annals of
the Icarned Cardinal, from 1198 to 1565, in eight volumes.
The first volume, dedicated to Paul V., saw the light in
1615.

Although Baronius had given the Bull of Adrian IV., as
I have said above, Bzovius, in his ecclesiastical history,
does not say a word of it. He cites, however, John of
Salistury, and gives thrce passages from the Polycraticus,
but he passes over in complete silenee the Metalogicus
and the donation of Ireland.

At 1171, he eites Hoveden on the prétended submission
of the Irish Bishops to King Henry II.

At the year 1172, he relates the oath that Henry II.
swore in the cathedral of Avranches. The clause relating
to the feudal subjection of England is in the same tcrms as
in Baronius.

He adds a point which shows that the letter of Adrian
to Louis VII. could refer only to Ireland. Aceording to
the historian, the two Cardinals, occupied with the reha-
bilitation of Henry II., required from him a promise to go
into Spain, if necessary, and the Pope should wish it :
“* Si necesse fuerit, et dominus papa ei mandaverit, ibit in
Hispaniam, ad liberandam terram illam a paganis.” It is
ineredible that, a few years previously, Pope Adrian had
dissuaded the same Henry II. and Louis VII. from
making an expedition into Spain. (Historia Ecclesiastica,
t. 2, p. 33%) 332) 353) 354+)

I turn to the Annals of the same author. At the year
1321, he gives the letter of John XXII. to King Edward
without date, and without namc of place from which it was
written. He prints this letter again in Vol. XX. of the
Annals, 1542, No. 12. This time he dates it from the

144 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

tenth year of John AXII., but he omits the preamble. It
is here that we read his cxtraordinary story, truly un-
worthy of a grave historian : —

‘“ About the year 1160,1 the Chair of Peter being oceu-
pied by Adrian IV., an Englishman by birth, who, before
his Pontificate, had, by his sanetity and preaehing, con-
verted the kingdoms ot Norway and Sweden to the Faith
of Christ, the Irish, who, in the beginning, immediately
after receiving the Christian religion, had given them-
selves and all they possessed into the dominion of the
Roman Pontiff, and from that time had recognised no
other supreme prinee than the Roman Pontiff alone, seeing
themselves greatly afflicted by the intestine wars of a mul-
titude of petty kings and tyrants, some among them and a
great part of the peoplc, in order to enjoy peace, and lest
thcy should be subjugated by others, desired to submit
themsclvcs to Henry II., King of England (under whom
St. Thomas of Canterbury afterwards suffered martyr-
dom, and who was at this very time in Ireland with a
great army), This is the reason why they humbly asked
Pope Adrian, in the name of the two parties, viz., the king
on one side, and the prinees and bishops of Ireland on the
other, that, in order to put an cnd to the quarrels and
seditions almost continual that arose from the multitude of
petty rulers, and also to regulatc better the worship of the
Catholic religion, which had been mueh impaired by the
frequency of wars, espccially as regarded the celebration
and observanee of marriages, his Holiness would vouehsafe
to grant the dominion of all Ireland to King Henry, who
had already aequired some places in the island by his own
arms and those of his friends, namcly, Robert FitzStephen
and Richard Earl Pembroke, the Pontiff, for these and
other causes, whethcr bccausc he derived no profit from

Ireland, or beeause he could not without great expense
send help to a kingdom so remote, yielded with little diffi-
culty ; but preseribing certain conditions by whieh the said
Henry and his deseendants would hold the kingdom, and
acknowledge that it had been given by the Apostolic See.
When King Henry, and the Irish princes and people, had
bound themselves by oath to these eonditions in two coun-
cils, one held at Dublin and the other at Cashcl, the King

‘Adrian died the previous year, 1159.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 145

of England was declared by apostolic authority Lord of
Jreland.”’

Bzovius does not tell us the source of his information.
I consider it needless to point out the anachronisms and the
discrepancies of the story.

SECTION 3.—BONGARS AND DUCHESNE,

James Bongars, a Calvanist, councillor and steward of
Henry I1V., born at Orleans in 1546, was employed by this
prince at the Courts of Germany, as resident ambassador.
He died at Paris in 1612, the year that followed the publica-
tion of Gesta Dei per Francos. He had acquired a great
part of the manuscripts of St. Benedict’s on the Loire,
scattered about after the pillage of this abbey by the Cal-
vinists. He also purchased many manuscripts of the
library of the Cathedral of Strasburg.

The letter of Pope Adrian to Louis VII. appears in Gesta
Dei per Francos. (Page 1174, Hanoviz, 1611.)

It is the twenty-eighth of the letters written to
Louis VII. by kings, princes, and prelates. Twenty-seven
were borrowed from the library of President Petau, but of
the twenty-eighth, that of Pope Adrian, Bongars docs not
mention the source. Thus we read in the preface : —
‘“ Epistole a regibus, principibus, preelatis, ad regem Fran-
corum Ludovicum Juniorem, viginti septem. Ex biblio-
theca P. Petavii.’’ I suspect that all these letters came
from the Abbey of St. Benedict on the Loire. Probably
they were given by Bongars to Petau, except the Ictter of
Adrian, which he preserved, and which did not enter the
President’s library until after the writer’s death.

Thirty years later, Andrew Duchesne found these same
letters in the hands of Alexander Petau, senator, or coun-
cillor in the Parliament of Paris. They appeared in
Volume IV. of Rerum Francicarum Scriptores, published
after the death of the editor, in 1641.

We are told that the manuscript of these letters was
old :—‘‘ Epistolarum volumen, quas Pontifices Romani

.. ad Ludovicum VII. scripserunt. Ex veteri codice
MSS. viri clar. Alexandri Petavit senatoris Paristensis
nunc primum editum, 1641.”" The volume appeared after
the death of Andrew Duchesne, as I have said. This

L

146 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

learned man could hardly have been unaware that Bongars
had published the letters.

The Abbey of St. Victor in Paris possessed another
manuscript of the letters in question. The editor of
Duchesne admits it :—‘‘ Fuit et simile olim exemplar in
bibliotheca Canonicorum Regularium Sancti Victoris Paris,
not. II., 22, cum sequenti inscriptione.—Plures epistole
Summorum Pontificum Adriani IV. et Alexandri IIT., &c.
Inter quas multe habentur concernentes statum hujus
ecclesiz Sancti Victoris sub primis abbatibus nostris.—
Unde conjici facile potest hanc epistolarum collectionem ab
aliquo monasterii Sancti Victoris abbate, vel canonico,
fuisse factum.” (Rerum Francicarum, t. iv., p. 557.)

The manuscripts of President Petau were purchased for
their weight in gold for Christina of Sweden, who left
them to the Vatican Library, in which they form the chief
collection of the Queen.

Bongars, first of all, arbitrarily interpreted of Spain the
initial letter H. of the manuscript. By this mistake, more
or less intentional, he led editors and historians astray.

It is natural to inquire if Bongars, a Calvinist, had any
interest in Icaving the literary world ignorant of the fact
that Pope Adrian, far from authorising a conquest of Ire
land, had, on the contrary, formally dissuaded the King of
France and the King of England from attempting it, and
positively refused his concurrence in the expedition. It
seems to me clear that the publication of the letter in the
year 1611 would have seriously thwarted the designs of
England over Ireland.

Could a Calvinist point out the way to justify a Pope
from an accusation specially odious, which, during so many
ages, had sullied the memory of this Pontiff ?1

' After reading the above remarks, which help to solve a serious
difficulty (namely, the frequent mention of Spain), the following
remarks from a supporter of Adrian’s Bull will not appear very
ingenuous, but rather very misleading :—‘‘ The letter of Adrian
was printed for the first time from an orginal manuscript in the
vear 1611 by Bongars, and while Spain is the country mentioned,
not a word about Ireland. About thirty years afterwards it was
published from another manuscript by Duchesne, and of Spain
alone mention is made. Every subsequent historian, from Bouquet
to Natalis Alexander, mentions Spain as the country in question.”

Not the slightest allusion here to the letter H, by which the
reader might form a correct idea of what actually occurred.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 147

Unless Iam greatly mistaken, J have shown as clear as
noon-day that the letter of Adrian to Louis VII. eannot
refer to Spain, and that it must refer to Ireland. (Chapters
VI. and VII.)

Had the King of France any need of the Pope’s permis-
sion to aid the King of Castile, who was his father-in-law ?

What interest could induce Henry II. to wage war in
Spain?! He was so little disposed to it by nature. that the
Cardinal Legates made it a condition of his absolution, at
the time of the Avranches Conference.

If there was question of Spain, was it an Englishman,
Rotrodus of Warwiek, who would be chosen to negotiate
the affair at Rome?

And the clergy, the princes, the people, who ought to be
eonsulted—who had a right to interfere—could all that
refer to Mussulman Spain?

It seems to me eertain that King Henry JI., not daring
to come forward openly, got Louis VII. to ask Pope
Adrian for permission to attempt the conquest of Ireland,
but that the Pope absolutely refused any such permission.
Therefore, it is not possible that this same Pope issued the
supposed Bull—a Bull, moreover, that neither Bongars nor

Duchesne found anywhere among their manuseripts of the
twelfth century.

SECTION 4.—LYNCH.

The arguments of Lyneh against the Bull have so mueh
the more weight as he was not by any means a man of un-
reasonable or untractable disposition. Moderate by char-
aeter, he took his plaee among those Irishmen who
approved of the treaty for one year’s suspension of arms
conclided with the Marquis of Ormond.? He passed into

‘ This is a point which perhaps is worthy of more consideration
than it usually receives. What motive could induce Henry to
undertake a costly expedition to Spain, for the purpose of main-
taining the liberties of the Church there, while he attacked them
at home? Would not Ireland, by its proximity, offer a better
field for plunder and conquest to a rapacious monarch ?——Trans.

2 Tt is to be hoped that the day will soon come when the
character of the Papal Envoy, the illustrious Archbishop Rinuccini,
and also that of the brave commandcr, the noble-minded Owen
Roe O'Neill, which suffered so much at this sad pcriod, will be

148 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Franee in 1652, when Galway was taken by the troops of
Cromwell. During his abode in Franee, he still devoted
himself to the interests of Ireland.

It was probahly in France that he published Cambrensis
Eversus : the work bears no name of printer or plaee. The
writer eoneeals himself under the pseudonym of Gratianus
Lucius Hibernicus. Yhis work has beeome exeeedingly
rare: we are told that a multitude of eopies cerished in a
fire at London. It is a folio of 356 pages. ;

The work was reprinted between 1848 and 1852, in threc
volumes octavo, under the eare of the Rev. Matthew Kelly,
for the ‘‘ Celtie Soeiety.’’ This edition is not in stoek with
booksellers. !

In 1659, Riehard Ferral, an Irish Capuehin, presented a
memoir to the Cardinals of the Propaganda, under the

thoroughly vindicated. Many works have lately appeared that
throw a flood of light on the events of the seventeenth century.
See, for example, Spicilegium Ossoriense, by Cardinal Moran; The
Confederate Wars, by Six John Gilbert; The Chances of War, an
historical tale, by the Rev. T. A, Finlay, S.J. Also several works
mentioned by the Dublin Review, when treating of these matters.
(March, 1845 and April, 1874). It should be remembered that
when calumnies have once gained ground, they are not easily dis-
placed. Moreover, the books in which Catholic writers might
hope to find a true account of events were often so rare and
expensive as to be beyond their reach. Thus,’so late as in 1844,
with all our advances in printing, Burke’s Hibernia Dominicana,
even without the supplement, was selling for five or six guineas;
Lomhard’s Commentarius de Rebus Hiberni@, seven guineas; and
O’Sullivan Beare’s Historie Catholice Compendium (a small quarto),
seventeen guineas. Dublin Review, first series, xvi., 520.—Tyvans

1 As the three letters (see p. 32) attributed to Pope Alexander
III., and first published in 1728 by Thomas Hearne, sub-librarian
of the University, Oxtord, were generally unknown in the time
of Dr. Lynch, it was impossible for him to make any comments
on them. Abhé McGeoghegan, who wrote some thirty years
after Hearne, seems never to have heard of them. In this con-
nection, it is well to remember that when John of Salisbury was
at Beneventum (see p. 48), Cardinal Roland, who afterwards
became Pope Alexander ITI., was also there, as one of the Papal
Court (see p. 63, note). We cannot suppose that any important
grant regarding Ireland was made by Pope Adrian IV. through
John of Salisbury, without the Cardinal’s signing a document
in reference to it, or at least knowing all about it. Yet John in
writing afterwards to Pope Alexander II]. never asked a con-
firmation of it, or made any more s‘lusion to it than if it never

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 149

title: Autores et modus eversionis catholic religionis in
Hibernia, &c. Convinced that the memoir of the Capuchir
could only increase the troubles of Ireland, by sowing
divisions between the old Irish and those of English origin,
Lynch opposed it, and published in 1664 his Alithinologia,
&c. Itis a quarto of 82 leaves. A supplement of 137
leaves appcared in 1667. These two works, still more rarc
than Cambrensis Eversus, are much sought for, and
reach very high prices at public salcs.

In 1669, Lynch brought out at St. Malo his Pit antistitis
Icon, sive de vita et morte P. Francisci Kirovani Alladensis
episcopi, autore Joanne Lyncheo, archidiacono Tuamensi.
It is an octavo of 72 leaves.

Nicholson, in his ‘‘ Irish Library,” says that he has seen
a manuscript work from the hand of Lynch himself, a col-
lection of some of the most authentic annals of Ireland. It
is, he says, a work as complete as it is exact and interest-
ing. This author also speaks of a letter of Lynch to Bayle,
in order to prove that the Scots who first taught in the
universities of Paris and Oxford were Scots of Ireland.
Finally, he assures us that Lynch was promoted to the
Bishopric of Killala, in Ireland, a short time before his
death, which occurred about the year 1680.

It is worthy of remark that a writer so enlightened as
Lynch should have boldly pronounced against the genuine-
ness of the Bull of Adrian.

About the same time appeared at Liege the ‘‘ Ecclesias-
tical Annals ’’ of Alford, who also raises doubts on the

existed (see p. 51, n.). He could say enough of minor affairs, and
could he say nothing of a matter of the utmost gravitv? Moreover,
in the three letters mentioned above, Pope Alexander TIT. shows no
knowledge whatever of any such grant made by his predecessor
(see p. 33); and in the other letter attributed to Alexander III.
(see p. 64) he shows a total misconception regarding the naturc
of the said grant, as explained in the Bull attributed to Pope
Adrian IV. Passing over the last-mentioned letter, of which
Giraldus himself makes little account, is it easy to believe that
the other three letters are authentic? It may be objected that
Cardinal Moran believes them to be so. We can only say in
reply that his Eininence gives no reason for so doing, and we are
therefore unable to consider on what grounds he proceeds. We
do not know how anything in the book brought to light by
Hearne can be proved to be authentic. We rather think that an
old book of this kind—probably compiled by an enemy of Ireland
—deseryes to be regarded with suspicion.—Trans.

150 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Bull. Alford was born in London in 1582. Having retired
to Laneashire, he colleeted materials for his Annals. He
passed over to the continent in 1658, and died the same
year at St. Omer. His work appeared five years after-
wards, at Liege, in four volumes. Alford was not
aequainted with Cambrensis Eversus. The two writers
agreed without knowing it.

It was the silenee of the old ehronielers that raised
doubts in the mind of Alford regarding the Bull. ‘‘ Neither
Matthew Paris,” he says, ‘‘nor any one else of the
old historians of England, speaks of it.’ Alford
was mistaken as far as coneerns Matthew Paris; but it is
quite true that Roger de Hoveden, William of Newbridge,
and, generally speaking, the ehronielers of the twelfth een-
tury, make no mention of the Apocryphal Bull. (See Chap.
XAII., above.)

SECTION 5.—~-MACARI.E EXCIDIUM.
(1692.)

This work contains a history of Ireland under fictitious
names. Macaria or Cyprus is nothing but Ireland. The
English are called Cilicians. The high-priest of Delphos is
the Pope. Colonel Charles O’Kelly surrounded himself
with mystery, chiefly on account of the part that he had
taken in the Irish Revolution. A Latin translation
was madc in the last century by a Catholic priest, who took
the pseudonym of Gratianus Regallus. A volume contain-
ing both Latin and English texts, was brought out in Dub-
lin in 1850, under the care of Mr. John C. O'Callaghan,
as I have said above.

I must confine myself to what regards the Bull of
Adrian ; and, in order to be more clear, I shall replace the
pseudonyms by the real names.

‘But never yet was kingdom placed on sueh a sure
foundation that it did not ultimately arrive at the limit of
its existence ; and the Irish empire, which had endured
more than 2,000 years, at length yielding to the decrees of
fate, had to recognise this immutable law, to whieh all
human powers are subject. Henry, the second of the name,
King of England, had promised his assistance to Dermod,
the suppliant prince of Leinster, whom the King of Ireland

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. I51

had exiled, for carrying away the wifc of another provin-
cial prince. The English Icaders, whom Henry lI. had
sent over with a well-appointed ficet, to rc-instate Dermod,
forcibly posscssed themsclves of a large portion of Leinster,
and, having expclled the inhabitants, divided their lands
among the English adventurers. Nor do I know that it
had cvcr previously occurred that one nation, professing
the Catholic faith, should usurp the dominion over another
nation of the same religion, and extirpate and cxpcel its in-
habitants from their native. soil; it being in that creed
expressly forbidden, and counted an cspccial sin, to covet
the goods of one’s neighbour ; and, at that timc, not the
English and Irish only, but almost all the nations of
Europe, were religious observers of thc Roman Catholic
rites. A success, so fully in accordance with the wishes of
Henry II., lcd him to carry out a plan he had long medi-
tatcd ; for he had long since anxiously considered how he
might subduc Ireland, and extend his English empire by
such an accession of territory. For this purpose, he forged
(unlcss, haply, it was genuinc) a Bull of the Pope of Rome,
which, he pretended, granted him the dominion of Ireland,
on the condition of his becoming the patron of the priest-
hood, and restoring, in their ancient splendour, the ruined
tcmples and neglected altars of thc heavenly powers, in
accordance with Catholic rites.

‘“ The Pope claimcd this right over Ircland, in virtue of a
grant made to him by Constantine, the first emperor of
the Romans who embraced the Catholic faith, who, hc
stated, had conveyed to him and his successors the
dominion of all the islands which lay scattered amidst the
recesses of the Mcditerranean Sea. Oh, vain invention of
an ambitious Sovcreign!—for the annals of all nations,
and the monuments of cvcry age, bear testimony the most
cloguent, that Ireland never was under the sway of the
Roman Empire, and therefore its Emperor had no power to
grant to another a right which he never had himself
possessed. Nor, at that time, was there in all the globe,
not even in Rome itsclf, a spot whcre the heavenly powers
were more religiously adored, and the Catholic rites more
sincerely celebrated, than in the island of Ireland.

‘“Now, when Henry II. approached the shores of Ire-
land with a mighty host, levied in every quarter, rumour
greatly magnified his numbers, and the lesser princes, in-

I52 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

timidated, and more particularly afraid of opposing the
Pope, whom they venerated as a second Deity, made their
submission to him at Dublin. Roderic O’Conor, however,
who was then chief King of the whole island, relying on the
position and natural strength of Connaught (over which he
had been the toparch, before he was called to the supreme
authority), and neither intimidated by Henry’s numerous
host, nor by the unjust Bull of the Sovereign Pontiff (who
he well knew was an Englishman by birth), made vigorous
preparations to assert by arms the rights and liberties of
his kingdom.”

It is needless for me to point out the anachronisms that
our gallant colonel mixes up with his narrative. Let it
suffice to remark that in his eyes the Bull attributed to Pope
Adrian was an exceedingly suspicious document, and in
any ease very unjust, as the English aggression itself had
been.

SECTION 6.—-ANTONY AND FRANCIS PAGI.

These two writers discussed the question superficially.
They took no trouble to fathom it thoroughly.

In his notes on the Annals of Baronius, under the year
1159, Antony Pagi, thinking to correet the learned Cardi-
nal, who gave the Bull without date, cites Raoul de Diceto,
who refers it to 1154, but adopts with Matthew Paris the
date 1155. ‘* Baronius, num. 21 et seqq., refert Hadriani
pape epistolam Anglorum regi scriptam sine die et mense,
in qua laudat cum quod velit in Hiberniam intrare, et eam
dominio sancti Petri subjicere. Eamdem epistolam recitat
Radulphus de Diceto in Imaginibus Historiarum, p. 529,
et eam eum anno 1154 copulat. Verum cum Henricus II.
rex Angliz eoronatus sit exeunte decembri ejusdem Christi
anni, non potuilt eo anno literas ab Hadriano 1V. recipere,
ideoque Matheus Parisius eam accurate cum anno 1155
conneetit.”’

Treating of the question again at the year 1171, Antony
Pagi eonsiders himself happy in citing Giraldus Cambren-
sis! He blames Alford and Lynch for raising any doubt
regarding the genuineness of the Bull. ‘‘ Quia ante pre-
sentem annum (1171) Henricus II. expeditionem illam illius
suscepit, Alfordus hoc anno num. 36 de sineeritate illius

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 153

diplumatis dubitat, quod, inquit, Mathzeus Paris, ct aliqui
antiqui rerum Anglicarum historici illius non meminerent.
Verum jam anno 1159 Mathawum Parisienscm, ct Radul-
phum de Diceto, qui hoc seculo vixit, citavi, et utrique
nunc addo Giraldum Cambrensem, qui hoc ctiam tempore
vivebat,”’

Francis Pagi, nephew of Antony, published in 1718 the
Breviarum of the history of the Popes, in four volumes,
quarto. Too often he limited himsclf to copying the notcs
that his uncle had made on Baronius. For Francis Pagi
the Bull of Adrian is genuine in all its parts. ‘‘ Diploma
illud omni ex parte sincerum ct genuinum, ac juxta illud
Henricus rex anno 1171 cxpeditionem Hibcrnicam sus-
cepit.”’ He cites Hoveden and Gervase, who do not speak
of the Bull. As for the Council, Francis Pagi takes care
not to say whether it was held at Cashel or at Lismore.
But if Henry II. made the expedition to Ireland in virtue
of a Bull of Adrian, how are we to explain that Popc
Alexander III. relied upon a supposed voluntary submis-
sion of the Irish bishops in order to confirm to King Henry
and his successors the possession of Ireland, as Francis
Pagi, following Hoveden, assures us? ‘‘ Auctoritate apos-
tolica confirmavit (Alexander) illi ct heeredibus suis regnum
Hibernize secundum formam chartarum archicpiscoporum
et episcoporum Hibernia.” Hoveden is excusable, as he
knew nothing of a Bull of Adrian ; but Francis Pagi, who
had just pronounccd boldly for the genuinencss of the Bull,
should naturally have said that Pope Alexander, confirm-
ing the diploma of his predecessor, gave Ireland to the
King and his heirs conformably to this Bull. By relying
on a spontaneous submission of the Irish, the existence of
the Bull is denied. (Breviarium, t. 3, p. 93.)

SECTION 7.—MCGEOGHEGAN.

I can do nothing better than let the author speak for
himself. Although his thesis is not complete, it is full of
Judicious observations, which greatly shake the credit of
the Bull. After what I have said in the foregoing chap-
ters, I have no ncecd to make a few reservations on somc
particular points, and I leave them to the sagacity of the
reader.

154 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

‘“ The English having put an end to this monarchy in the
twellth century, and wishing to give some colour of justice
to their usurpation and to the tyranny that they practised
against the inhabitants of this island, without any other
title than a pretended Bull of Adrian IV. and the law of the
strongest, represented them as savages who dwelt in
woods.

‘* The title of Henry I]. had no foundation but a Bull
obtained furtively from Pope Adrian IV., an Englishman
by birth. The motive of the Bull was a false account that
Henry had given to the Pope, regarding the impiety and
the barbarity of the Irish nation. “Cambrensis was
appointed to verify in writing this representation, on
which the grant of the Bull had been extorted. He did not
fail to strew his work with absurdities and unwarrantable
calumnies, but whieh the credit of a powerful King knew
how to make available at Rome. It was in this spirit that
Cambrensis laboured at his memoirs, and it was from
them that English writers took the false eolours under
which ancient Ireland was represented. Passion and in-
terest made these writers pass over the retraetation that
Cambrensis felt himself obliged to make, in the latter
years of his life, of many false imputations with whieh he
had filled his memoirs. Moreover, Cambrensis had not
the qualities requisite for an historian. History is not a
mere product of the imagination. He spent only eighteen
months altogether in Ireland, and he saw only a third part
of it, which obeyed England. He could not even set his
foot with safety in the rest of the kingdom. It being im-
possible for him to consult the annals of this people, written
in a language to which he was a total stranger, he found
it necessary to replace truth by falsehoods and the
fancies of a prepossessed mind, in order to swell up his
volumes.” (Histoire dIrlande, t. I., diseours prelim.,
i, 12.) ,

‘Can anyone suspect the Vicar of Jesus Christ for an,
injustiee so crying? Can anyone believe him capable of
dictating a Bull that overthrew a whole nation, dispos-
sessed so many old proprietors of their patrimonies, led to
the shedding of so much blood, and caused the ruin of re-
ligion in this island? It is a thing ineoneeivable.

‘In point of fact, if we consider the eircumstances and
the motives of this Bull, it has all the eharaeteristies of a

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 155

Bull forged under the borrowed name of Adrian. It is
givcn in Baronius without date of year or day, which
renders it very suspicious. It remaincd seventeen years
without seeing the light: it was written, we are told, in
1155, and was not made public till 1172... .

** We derive no great advantage in favour of this Bull
from the authority of John of Salisbury (afterwards Bishop
of Chartres) in his treatise De Nugis Curialibus. This
writer is made to say towards the end of the last chapter
of his fourth book that at his request Pope Adrian granted
Ireland to King Henry, to be possessed by him by a title
of inheritance, because all islands belonged to the Roman
Church by a concession of the Emperor Constantine. But
learned men regard this passage as a mere rigmarole
added by a forcign hand, because the author, when speak-
ing expressly of his visit to the Holy Father at Bevenen-
tum, where he remained three months, mentions various
conversations that he had with his Holiness, even to their
least circumstances, without, however, saying a single
word of the Bull in question. Yet the affair was of sufh-
ciently great importance : and this was naturally the occa-
sion to speak of it. . .

‘“ King Henry, who “had found satcllites sufficiently
devoted to avenge him on the holy prelate of Canterbury,
was not at a loss for vcnal pcnmen to add to and to take
from the writings of the time, so as to clothe with an
appearance of reality a diploma that was so ncccssary to
justify his conduct.

‘Tt seems that Salisbury made the journcy to Italy
from his master, in order to visit Adrian, his fellow-
countryman, but without any commission on the part of
the King: since the Bull, according to Matthcw of West-
minster, was the fruit of a solemn cmbassy that Henry
sent to the Pope ; although, to say what I think, this em-
bassy appears to be only a new fable addcd to the former.
one... .

‘* The silence that Newbridgc, an English contemporary
author, observes: regarding this embassy and the Bull
supposed to have been its fruit, is an argument which,
though negative, deserves some considcration. This
author, zealous in sounding the praises of Henry and of
his nation, begins his narrative by saying that the English
had erred Ireland with a military force, and that, their

156 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

numbers being incrcascd, they subdued a great part of it.
He does not say a word of a Bull granted by a Pope. Is
it probable that he would have forgotten a circumstance so
necessary in order to give some colour of justice to the
irregular conduct of his nation? I think not. (Page 540.)

‘* The Bull speaks only of islands. But I do not see why
an island, or a kingdom in the ocean, ought to belong to
the Holy See, as is said in the Bull, rather than a kingdom
on the mainland, unless I am informed that it (the Holy
See) holds the sovereignty of all islands from the liberality
of the Emperor Constantine: to which I reply that Ire-
land, which had never obcycd the Romans, could not be
one of this number ; therefore, the pretension made with re-
gard to Ireland is frivolous, and the grant made in conse-~
quence is unjust. Such a pretension might be better
founded with regard to Great Britain, which obeyed the
Romans before and after the reign of Constantine. .. .

‘“ English authors also present to us a Bull of Alexan-
der III., which confirms that of Adrian, and which seems
to be of the same stamp. . . . If we compare this Bull and
the previous one with the treatise on Conquered Ireland
written at the same time by Giraldus Cambrensis, we shall
find in these works a great similarity of style ; and, if they
are not all from the same hand, they at least seem made
for mutual support, and to gain credit reciprocally one for
another.

‘* The Bull of Alexander III. must seem a paradox to all
who examine closely the manners of Henry, and his con-
duct towards the Court of Rome. <A bad Christian makes
a bad Apostle. What was Henry II.? A man who, in his
private conduct, failed in the essential duties of religion,
often even in those of nature. Superstitious, he joined,
under the veil of religion, the holiest practices
with the most frightful disorders. Faithless in his
words, he broke according to his humour the most
solemn treaties. Like his predecessors, a sworn
enemy of the Popes, he attacked their rights,
persccuted their adhercnts, dismissed contemptuously
their legates, encroached on the immunities of the Chureh,
and took pleasure in encouraging the most unjust usur-
pers: this was what caused the martyrdom of Saint
Thomas of Canterbury. Finally, his debaucheries are
acknowledged by all historians. No one is ignorant that

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 157

he carried them so far as to scducc Alice, the betrothed of
his son Richard, and that this passion, as obstinate as it
was foolish and criminal, occasioned ncarly all the misfor-
tunes that troubled the close of his days. Behold then, the
apostle, behold the reformer, whom the Holy See should
have chosen to convert Ireland! The misunderstanding
between the Sovercign Pontiff and the King of England
was carried to its furthcst limits by the martyrdom of
Saint Thomas: can anyone believe that in such circum-
stances the Pope would have openly laden with benefits a
man who was tacitly excommunicated? Can anyone
suppose that his Holiness would have chosen, for the con-
version of Ireland, a prince in conflict with the Holy Sce?
It is not possible to admit such ideas. . . (Page 442.)

‘* After all that I have just said of the state of religion
in Ireland during the five hundred and fifty years that
passed before the reign of Henry II. ; of the many councils
assembled for the regulation of manners and the restora-
tion of discipline ; of so many holy and learned prclates
who did honour to religion, and of whom scveral were
thought worthy to be called in 1179 to the third general
council of Lateran ; of so many zealous missionaries who
had quitted their native land, their ministry not seeming
indispensable at home, to go and instruct forcign nations ;}

1 The early missionary voyages of St. Brendan, though after-
wards turned into fabulous legends by story-tellers, just as works
of fiction are produced at the present day, had a European fame.
He is supposed to have visited America, and to have preached
to the Aborgines there, among whoni traces of Christianity and
civilisation were afterwards found. The following incident in
conncction with the discovery of America may be interesting :-—

“Tt is a well-known fact that Columbus, while maturing his
plans for his great expedition, visited Ireland as well as Iceland
in quest of information bearing on his theories. He was assisted
in his researches by an Irish gentleman named Patrick Maguire,
who accompanied him also on his great voyage of discovery. There
are other Irish names on the roster of the ship’s crew, preserved in
the archives at Madrid; but it is specially recorded by Father
Tornitori, an Italian priest in the seventeenth century, of Patrick
Maguire, that he was the first to set foot on American soil. On
the eventful morning of he landing, the boats bearing Columbus
and some of his crew were launched ; but approaching the land,
the water shallowed, and Patrick Maguire jumped out to lighten
the boat. and then waded ashorc.”’—Brendaniana, by the Rev.
Denis O’Donoghue, P.P., Ardfcrt, p. 333.

For a short, vivid, interesting sketch of St. Columba’s voyages,

158 POPE ADRIAN IY.,

of so many [foundations made by the generosity of the
faithful ; and, finally, of so many examples of virtue given
by the ehicfs of the nation: can anyone imagine that cor-
Luption was so general and so inveterate as is represented
in the two Bulls ?

‘*The majority of those who went to Ireland under
Henry II. were the deseendants of Normans, real adven-
turers, for whom nothing was saered. These, then, were
the teachers whom Henry II. sent into Treland, by
apostolie authority forsooth, to eorreet morals, and to re-
store religion! Their conduct was much more proper to
shake the faith of true believers than to eonfirm them in
Christianity.

‘*A eonquest, to be lawful, supposes a war whose
motive is just ; sueh as an injury from those who are to be
eonquecred. There was no war between the Irish and the
English ; and, if the King of Leinster brought them to
help him in reeovering his erown, he rewarded them well.
He eould not transfer to them any right over the other
provinees, beeause he had none himself.”’ (Page 456.)

SECTION 8.-—DR. LINGARD.

Although this judieious historian does not direetly ex-
amine the question of genuineness, he lets us see that he
has little faith in the Bull.

Tirst, the pretended donation must have been extorted
by eaptious and false representations of the King: ‘‘ To
justify the invasion of a free and unoffending people, his
ambition had diseovered that the eivilisation of their
manners and the reform of their elergy were benefits which
the Irish ought eheerfully to purehase with the loss of their
independenee.” (History of England, Reign of Henry IT.)

The historian qualifies as singular the negotiation of
Salisbury at Rome: ‘ Fourteen years after this singular
negotiation, a few Welsh adventurers landed in Ireland.”’

He points out the disagreement between the Pseudo-

missions, and labours, see Derrtana, by the Most Rev. Dr.'O’ Doherty,
Bishop of Derry, p. 85.

For numerous lists of Irish Saints and scholars, as well as
monastic foundations, on the Continent, see Hav erty’s Hrstory cf
Iveland, chapters, xi., xii., xv., and xvi. —Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 159

Salisbury and the Bull: ‘' John of Salisbury, who must
have known its real purport, calls ita grant of inheritance.”
But the Bull expresses no such idea: ‘ It is, however, ob-
servable that Adrian in this instrument avoids the usual
language of feudal grants.”

Not being able to discuss cvery fact, Lingard confines
himself to transcribing from chroniclers. Admitting that
Salisbury brought the Bull, what use did Henry II. make
of it? ‘* Other projects offered themselves to Henry’s
ambition ; and the Papal letter was consigned to oblivion
in the archives of the castle of Winchester.”’

Iourtecn years rolled by before the landing of a few
adventurers on the Irish coast.

During the five months that Henry spent in Ireland
(1171-1172), he never spoke of the Bull. Nor did he add
an inch of territory to that acquired by the first adven-
turers.

Five years later, according to Giraldus Cambrensis, the
Bull was at length divulged. ‘‘ It was during this period,
when his authority in Ireland was nearly annihilated, that
Henry bethought him of the letter which he had formerly
procured from Pope Adrian. It had been forgotten during
almost twenty years: now it was drawn from obscurity,
was intrusted to William Titz-Aldhelm and Nicholas. . .
and was read by them with much solemnity to a synod of
Irish bishops.”

1 How innoeent of Henry II. to forget all about the papal
letter, making him a present of Ireland! Let us, however. not forget
that it is an old practice with many Englishmen to invent plans
and plots by which the ordinary observer may be deceived. Thus,
when, in the reign of James I, there was question of sweeping the
Trish from their lands in Ulster, Sir John Davis advised that thev
should all get legal grants from {the King, after whieh ‘‘ His Majesty’s
blessed genius will banish all those generations of vipers out of it.”’
What cunning and perfidy! (State Papers, 1606-8, pp. 273-4.)

Plots having been invented, great merit was gained by thcir
discovery at a convenient time, and they were used as a justification
for the most unjustifiable measures. See Gunpowder Plot, by the
Rev. John Gerard, S.J. It gives a good idea of the plotting spirit in
the days of “ Crafty Cecil.” .

Titus Oates, by his plot, obtained a pension of {1,200 a vear from
Charles II. His story, however, having in the reign of James IT.
been proved a mere concoction, he was condemned to be imprisoned
for life, to be whipped, and to stand in the pillory four times."
' Afterwards, favoured again by fortune, he obtained a pension of
£400 a year from William III.—Trans.

160 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Lingard adds with much good sense: ‘‘ How far it
served to convince these prelates that the King was the
rightful sovereign of the island, we are left to conjecture.”

The letter of Adrian to Louis VII. did not eseape the
attention of Lingard. While following the opinion that
this letter referred to Spain, the judieious writer found in
it a presumption against authority for the Irish expedi-
tion: ‘‘ When Louis a few years later meditated a similar
expedition into Spain, and for that purpose requested the
consilium et favorem Romane ecelesiz, the answer was
,ery different. Adrian dissuaded him, because it was in-
consulta ecclesia et populo terre illius.’’+

SECTION 9.—MR. O’CALLAGHAN.

Although this writer has several times treated of Pope
Adrian and the Bull, his arguments are common and
ordinary. They present nothing new, no interesting view.
I content myself with a summary of them, without again
going over ground already passed.

Here, then, are the seven reasons of this esteemed
writer :—1. The testimony of John of Salisbury. 2. The
Bull of Adrian, related in extenso in Giraldus Cambrensis
and contemporaries. 3. The Bulls of Alexander. 4. The
publication of these Bulls in a Council at Waterford.
5. Lhe complaints that the Irish sent to John NNJJ., with
a copy of Adrian’s Bull—which copy the Pontiff forwarded
to King Edward II. 6. The insertion of the Bull ex
Codice Vaticano in the Annals of Baronius. 7. Lastly, the
Roman Bullarium printed in 1739 gives the Bull.

This worthy writer imagined in good faith that all his
documents were true, genuine, official, unquestionable,
and of conclusive value!

He was probably awakened from his dreams on the
appearance of the Memoir of which it remains for me to
speak, and from which I have already borrowed so much.

'This is a good point from Dr. Lingard. How unreasonable to
suppose that in 1159 Pope Adrian IV. dissuaded Louis VIT. from
invading Spain, ixconsulta ecclesia et topulo terre illius, and that
in 1155 the same Pope authorized Henry IT. to invade Ireland,
making no account of the ecclesta and populus there? Father Chaillot
does not believe in either story.—Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 161

SECTION 10.—THE ‘‘ IRISH ECCLESIASTICAL RECORD.”’

Although the question of Pope Adrian has not to-day
the importance it had in former times, there are circum-
stances which occasionally require us to revert to it. Thus,
a few years ago, a portion of the Irish Press opened a dis-
cussion on the genuineness of the Bull, with the foolish
hope of weakening in the minds of a Catholic people their
attachment to the Holy See.

Protestants, always happy in being able to injure a
Pope, slipped the Bull of Adrian into elementary educa-
tional works. Dr. Moran quotes Professor Richey, who,
writing for the pupils of a Ladies’ College, gave a very
crroneous translation of the Bull, as if the Pope had
authorised Henry to subjugate the country, and to take
possession of the island, while the Pontifical letter, apocry-
phal as it is, abstracts from all idea of conquest, and con-
tains no transfer of dominion.

Some pcople have set forth the Bull as a definition ex
cathedra ; but this idea bears no examination. The Bull,
even if it were genuine, has none of the conditions of a
dogmatic definition.

In our days it would not be easy to forge or to accredit
a false Bull, because there would be little delay in dis-
owning it. The Middle Ages, which had no printing or
telegraph offices, were often led into error by apocryphal
documents, which had a very long life.

At all periods the Irish nation, as if by an infallible in-
stinct, has rejected the false Bull of Adrian, and loudly
declared that it was nothing but a trick of the English.

I content myself with these brief observations, because
[ intend to give Dr. Moran’s Memoir among my justifying
papers.

