XI.

IF THE BISHOPS OF IRELAND SUBMITTED TO THE KING OF
ENGLAND.

As the news of the murder of St. Thomas of Canterbury
had made a great noise in the world, did the Bishops of
Ireland, who could not be unaware of this tragic event,
gladly consent to communicate in civil and religious
matters with a prince whom the public voice denounced as
the instigator of the crime? We cannot without evident
proof suppose that the Bishops of Ireland chosc such a
moment to recognise the political authority of this prince,
and to submit to him as their lawful sovereign and master
—and this without the force of a conquest obliging them
to submit, without any advantage for religion or country.

The mystery with which the King surrounded himself—
the strict blockade that he caused to be kept along the sea-
sidc—the suspension of communications with England,
with the continent, with Rome—ail were of a nature to in-
crease distrust and suspicion. Between the crime at Can-
terbury and the landing of Henry at Waterford, ten
months had elapsed. It cannot be supposed that the
Bishops of Ireland, who had frequent correspondence with
the Holy See, knew nothing of Pope Alexander’s feelings,
the mission of the two Legates into Normandy, and the
opening of judicial proceedings against the authors,
abcttors, and accompliccs of the murder. As the blockadc
establishcd by Henry II. began only in the month of
August, communication with the continent had rcmained
open and free during the previous months.

And yet it is pretended that the Bishops of Ireland took
this very moment to submit to a prince who was under the
stroke of excommunication, and perhaps threatened with
the loss of his Crown! Would not this inexplicable sub-
mission have been, under the circumstances, a true dere-
liction of duty, a baseness inconsistént with ecclesiastical
honour ?

28 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

This is why I am led to regard as mere fables what Eng-
lish chroniclers, a long time after the event, have related
of the submission of Irish Bishops and Chieftains.

1 put aside Giraldus Cambrensis, whose credulity! ex-
cecds all bounds, and who cannot be regarded as a grave,
judicious historian ; but what obscurities, what improba-
bilities, and what contradictions among annalists who
seem the most approved !

Thus, whilc Roger de Hovecden places an assembly of
Irish Bishops at Cashel, Raoul de Diceto assures us that
it was held at Lismore. Chroniclers generally agree in
saying that at Jeast Ulster refused to have any communica-
tion with Henry. On the contrary, Raoul de Diceto tells
us of the cagerness, the perfect and universal unanimity
oi bishops and people, vying with one another to submit
to the King of England. ‘ Passim omnes unanimi volun.
tate, communi assensu, pari desiderio, regis imperio se
subjiciunt. Omnibus igitur hoc ordine consummatis, in con.
cilio habito apud Lismor,’’ &c.

1 Giraldus tells us in all seriousness that there 1s a very curious
kind of grasshoppers in Sicily, which, it is said, sing more sweetly with
their heads cut off than when whole, and better dead than alive
Storks in Ireland, he says, spend the winter at the bottom of rivers, and
come up on the return of fine weather in spring. In Germany, he
assures us, where there are plenty of beavers, their tails, as having the
nature of fish, are eaten on fast-days. The willow-trees, he says, round
the cemetery at Glendalough, although their leaves and branches
present no change, bear apples every year. At the right side of a
church door on an island near Cork, there is a hollow stone, he tells
us, in which is found a supply of wine every morning, according to the
number of priests who will celebrate Mass there that day. There is a
mill in Ossory, we are told, that will not work on Sundays, nor grind
anything stolen. (Vol. v., pp. 53, 52, 59, 113, 118, 133.)

Catholics are always ready to believe in real miracles, but it does
not follow that they are to believe every improbable, unconfirmed
story, Giraldus had no sense of the ridiculous. We can hardly doubt
that the stable-boys of the Pale who knew how to spin a yarn had
many a laugh at the Welshman’s gullibility. He seemed no more
able to see through a joke than through a stone wall. Could sucha
man, so easily imposed on, be a judicious historian ?

Yet we meet a writer who has a high estimate of Giraldus. Speak-
ing of the publication of Adrian’s Bull, he says, ** So much importance
do I attach to Gerald Barry’s statement, that I give up Irish authorities
for him," —(See Dublin Review, April, 1884, p. 340.) The statements
of Irish authors must be very unreliable indeed if they cannot compare
in veracity with those of Gerald Barry.—Traus.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 29

It is unnecessary for me to discuss the contradictions of
English chroniclers ; such an examination would lead me
too far away from my subject. I pause, therefore, at one
point, which furnishes an argument against the Apocryphal
Bull, too long attributed to Pope Adrian IV.

Hoveden speaks of a Council held by the Archbishops
and Bishops of Ireland. He names them all, together with
their Sees, to the number of thirty-two. Four were Arch-
bishops and twenty-eight Bishops. These figures seem
surprising for a country which some people are pleascd to
represent as sunk in barbarism ; according to Giraldus
Cambrensis, an innumerable number of monastic abbots
assisted at the same Council. Hoveden then speaks as
follows : —‘‘ All these, Archbishops and Bishops, to the
number of thirty-two, receive Henry, King of England,
and his heirs, as kings and lords in perpetuity, and confirm
their act by their charters. . . . The King of England
sends a copy of the charters of the Archbishops and
Bishops of Ireland to Pope Alexander ; and the Pontiff
confirms to him and his heirs the kingdom of Ireland,
according to the form of the charters of the Archbishops
and Bishops of Ireland.”

These charters of the Irish Bishops, nobody has ever
seen ; no forger has ever tried his hand on them. But if,
in 1172, Henry IJ. had no other title to send to Pope
Alexander than the voluntarv submission of the Bishops,
this is a proof that the Apocryphal Bull of Pope Adrian IV.
was unknown, and that the idea of inventing it was yet to
come. A good number of years should still clapse before
the appearance of this Bull in English chronicles, as I shall
say further on.

For the rest, Hoveden ends by acknowledging that
Henry II. made no conquest in Ireland, and did not add
an inch of land to that acquired by the first adventurers.
‘Before quitting Ireland, Henry gave, and confirmed
by charter, to Hugh de Lacy, all the land of Meath,
with its dependencies, to hold in fief and succession, for
himself and his heirs, by the service of a hundred soldiers.
And he committed to his care the city of Dublin, and
appointed him Justiciary of Ireland. And he confided to
the care of Robert, son of Bernard, the city of Waterford

30 ‘POPE ADRIAN IV.,

and the city of Wexford, with their dependencies, and he
ordered strong castles to be built there.”

Such were, according to the English chronicler, the only
disposals made by Henry II., who came, it is said, to sub-
due all Ireland!

