XNNIII.
THE FATE OF APOCRYPHAL DOCUMENTS.

THE Bull of Adrian has shared the common fate of apocry- |

phal works. Although the false decretals of Isidore Mer- .

cator and the famous donation of Constantine had a very»
M

162 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

tough life, it was not given them to prevail. by taking rank
among authentic title-deeds.

The decretals of the False Isidore obtained such favour
with scholars that they lasted seven hundred years.
Divulged in the middle of the ninth century, the loss of
their credit began in the sixteenth.!

But we must carefully remark that the favour attached
to the work of Mercator continued with a very large num-
ber of documents that it contained. As for what belonged
properly to the false decretals, they had no influence on the
discipline of the Church. In effect, the disciplinary falsifi-
cation of the Pseudo-Isidore may be summed up under three
heads :—1. The pretended necessity of obtaining the
previous conscnt of the Pope for convoking a council,
even a provincial one. This did not pass into canonical dis-
cipline at any period. The Council of Trent commanded a
triennial assembly. 2. It has never been held in the
Church that the presence of seventy-two bishops is needed
to judge the criminal cause of a bishop, as Mercator
would have it. 3. Canonical procedure has remained what
it was before the appearance of the false decretals. No
one has ever taken seriously in the Church the pretended
prohibition of letting laics bear witness against clerics, or
clerics themselves against laics. Thanks be to God! the
false decretals have had their day.

I admire how the Sovcreign Pontiffs, by a wonderful
instinct, have always shown prudence in holding out at
arm’s length, or with the tongs, the false Bull of Adrian,
even on occasions when it might have seemed useful or
necessary to mention it. This has been the course, not
only with the Cardinals of Avranches, but with Inno-
cent ITI., John XNNITI., Paul TV., St. Pius V. in his Bull
against Elizabeth, Gregory XIII., and Clement VIII, as
I have shown above.

2 The collection of decretals, &c., attributed to Isidore Mercator
is supposed to have appeared first in France, between the years
829 and 847. Who Isidore was, and whether he really was the
forger, is not certain. Many persons believed the work to be
from the pen of St. Isidore of Seville, who was a celebrated writer
and they therefore gave implicit credit to it. It is said to contain
false decretals attributed to more than sixty Popes, and false
canons attributed to many Councils. Jn the sixteenth century
it began to be looked upon with suspicion. Since that time, it
has been known in its true light, as a mere forgery, though con-
taining much that is true with much that is false.—Tvans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 163

The great author of the misfortunes of Ireland, the
cause chiefly responsible for its unexampled calamities,
was Protestantism.

The ‘** Bull of Adrian” had no serious influence on the
enslavement of the country. In point of fact, so long as
the Catholic religion prevailed in England as well as in Ire-
land, the English, notwithstanding their constant en-
deavours, could hardly extend the limits fixed by the early
adventurers.

In our days the Apoeryphal Bull is passing through the
seventh century of its existence. For a long period tt has
abused the credulity of the unlearned, and the leisure of the
learned, who found themselves obliged to discuss it. It is
time that it should go down for ever into the grave in
which lie buricd the decretals of Isidore Mercator, and so
many other forgeries that troubled the peace of our prede-
cessors.

God grant that my labour may not have the fate of de-
laying for a single day the complete overthrow of the im-
posture !


DOCUMENTS.

No. 1.

(The dnalecta here gives an article on Pope Adrian IV. from the
Trish Ecclesiastical Record, of November, 1872, written by the
Most Rev. Dr. Moran, then Bishop of Ossory—afterwards

CARDINAL MORAN, ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.

 

This article was republished in the Australasian Catholic Record,
' for 1897, with further remarks from his Eminence after twenty-
five years of reflection. That the reader may have the benefit of
these valuable remarks, it is from the Australian volume that we
take the whole_essay.—Tvans.)

POPE ADRIAN THE FOURTH, AND THE SUPPOSED GRANT
OF IRELAND TO KING HENRY THE SECOND.

THOUGH it is our special purpose in this paper to discuss the authen-
ticity of the Papal Letter by which Adrian the Fourth is supposed
to have inade a gift of Ireland to Henry the Second, yet it will not
be uninteresting to briefly sketch some incidents in the life of this
illustrious Pontiff. For many English readers the most remark-
able fact connected with him is that he was the only Englishman
who ever held the high dignity of Successor of St. Peter. Under
many other respects, however, his career was truly singular, and he
in a special manner won the adiniration of contemporaries by his
unconquerable heroism in defending the rights of the Holy See.
One of his biographers described him as ‘‘ a man of mild and kindly
bearing, esteemed for his high character and learning, famous as
a preacher, and renowned for his fine voice’ (Muratori, Vita, iii.,
part 1, 441). His pontificate was short, extending over less than
five years, fromm December, 1154, to Septernber, 1159. But for
those who take the trouble to examine the contemporary chronicles,
not a few remarkable events will be found crowded into that brief
eriod.
7 Adrian the Fourth was known in early life as Nicholas Break-
speare, and most English writers, judging from the surname,
contend that he was of Norman and not of Anglo-Saxon descent.
Mr. Tarleton, the latest writer of his life, in the elaborate work
just published, Nicholas Bvreakspear, Enghshman and Pope,
(London, 1896), considers that ‘“‘ this surname may have been
attached to the family from its place of residence.’ He finds
that as early as the Doomsday Book there was a farm or hamlet
called Breakspears, situated on the edge of the table-land, or

166 DOCUMENTS.

plateau, on which stands the ancient parish (church) of Harefeld,
and just sheltered by the brow of the hill sloping down to the
fertile valley of the Colne. He adds the shrewd remark: ‘In
those days it is far more probable that a place should give a name
to a man than that a man should give a name to a place.” In
accordance with this suggestion, it is not improbable that the family
of the future Pope migrated from the Breakspears district to the
neighbourhood of Abbot’s Langley, in Hertfordshire, and thus
he may well have been of Anglo-Saxon descent.

Nicholas was of humble parentage. His father, having become
a widower, entered the Benedictine Monastery of St. Alban’s as
a lay-hrother, and for fifty years, till his death, continued to rank
as such. He outlived his son Pope Adrian, and it presents a char-
acteristic picture of those times that the father was permitted to
retain his lowly position at the monastery, while his son was
elevated to the most exalted dignity in Christendom. At the
hamlet of Abbot’s Langley,' Nicholas was born about the year
1100, a few years after the birth of St. Bernard. In his youth
he appears to have been dependent on the monks of St. Alban’s
monastery for his support no less than for his education. He gave
proof, however, of quick parts, and being desirous to embrace the
religious life, he petitioned to be admitted to the monastery. His
petition was rejected, prohably on account of his father being
already enrolled as a lay-brother, sand Nicholas, with no provision
save the meagre equipment of a ‘“ poor scholar,” set out to seek
his fortune and to perfect himself in higher studies in the schools
of Paris. Mr. Tarleton writes: ‘ After his final failure to enter
St. Alban’s, he worked his way, probably through London and
down the high road through Kent, that historic ronte which has
been the main thoroughfare of so many travellers to and from the
metropolis, past Rochester and C anterbury, to Dover, from whence
he obtained a passage over the narrow seas, possibly in the very
Same year (112%) when the Blanche Neuf was wrecked on the
treacherous rocks off Barfeur, and the brilliant company sur-
rounding Prince William, together with that unfortunate son of
King Henry, were drowned. Here the career of Nicholas may
fairly be said to have commenced.

It was probably at the halls of the Abbey of St. Denys at Paris
that Nicholas Breakspeare pursued his higher studies. From
Matthew Paris we learn that he became a most painstaking scholar,
and betook himself so much in earnest to the acquisition of learn-
ing that he excelled all his companions, and proving himself pos-
sessed of rare qualities of temper, and endowed with a natural gift
of eloquence, received much praise from all his instructors.

He quitted Paris about the year 1125, crossed the Rhone, and
entered Arles, then a town of considerable importance in the
territory of Provénce. Here he trequented the schools for which
the town was famous, and it was probably here that he had as his

?The hamlet belonged to the monastery of St. Alban’s, and was called Abbot’s
Langley to distinguish it from a neighbouring hamlet which was called King's
Langley, a royal seat where Edmund, son of Edward II1., and Duke of York, was
Kern,

DOCUMENTS. 167

master the Irishman Marianus, for whom in after life he coutinued
to cherish the highest esteem. After a while, filled with the desire
of embracing the religious life, he wended his way to Avignon to
offer himself as a subject in one of the numerous monasteries which
in those days were a distinguishing feature of this beautiful part
of France, and the ruins of which may still be seen by many a
pleasant stream, and on many a commanding hill. The Abbey
of St. Rufus of the Canons Regular of St. Augustine was one of
the most famous of those religious institutions in the environs
of Avignon. Thither Nicholas one evening bent his steps, and
begged to be admitted among the brethren. He was allowed to
remain on trial. During the two years he spent in probation, he
appears to have been engaged in teaching, and, as William of
Newburgh attests, ‘‘ he strove by every means in his power to con-
ciliate the brothers, and being a man of much personal beauty,
cheerful in spirit, Cautious of speech, and always obedient to autho-
rity, he succeeded in pleasing everyone.’’ When his time of pro-
bation expired, the Canons Regular were unanimous in admitting
him to their ranks, and thus Nicholas at length attained the great
purpose of his life by taking the religious vows, and devoting
himself to the service of Christ. Being remarkable no less for
the observance of Rule than for his singular ability, he in a few
years was appointed Prior, and on the death of Abbot William in
1137, he was further chosen his successor, and was installed in that
high office with great solemnity.

St. Bernard was at this time stirring up the fervour of religious
observance in the cornmunities of France,and Nicholas, now Abbot
of St. Rufus, resolved to leave nothing undone that the Canons
Regular of St. Augustine, by strict discipline, might be quickened
with the true spirit of their holy Rule. Some of the Religious,
however, demurred to what they styled the Abbot’s innovations
in their Rule, and appealed in person to Rome. This occasioned
the Abbot’s first visit to Italy, in the springtime of 1145. Pope
Eugene the Third, a Cisterican according to St. Bernard’s own
heart, had just then been advanced to the See of St. Peter, and
the reforming Abbot Nicholas was sure to find favour at his hands.
Words of conciliation and exhortation were addressed by the
Sovereign Pontiff to the appellant Canons of St. Rufus, and_ the
Abbot returned to Avignon to resume the work of reform which
he had begun. ‘The spirit of disaffection, however, was not ex-
tinguished, and being gradually fanned into a flame, broke out in
the following year more violently than before. The fact of the
Abbot being a stranger intensified their discontent. A second
time the appellants and the Abbot proceeded to Rome. The Pope
ere this had become fully acquainted with the merits of the Abbot
Nicholas, and admired his firmness and his zeal in restoring the
vigour of religious discipline among those under his care. He
dismissed the appellant Canons with the words: “I know the
pretext by which Satan has ensnared you into this quarrel. Return
to your Abbey : choose a Superior with whom you can, or rather
with whom you shall have the will to be at peace: the Abbot from
whom you appeal shall henceforth be engaged in the immediate
service of the Holy Sec, and shall not be a further burden to you.”

168 DOCUMENTS.

Thus it was that Abbot Nicholas became attached to the Papal
Court, and there the highest dignities in the gift of the Pontiff
soon awaited him.

The year 1147 was in many respects eventfal. The Second
Crusade was about to commence. All Christendom was aroused
by the eloquence of St. Bernard of Clairveaux, and Pope Eugene
the Third procceded to Paris to present the pilgrim’s staff to the
French King, Louis the Seventh. Nicholas Breakspeare appears
to have accompanied the Pontiff on this occasion. His knowledge
of the various languages stood him in good behest, and it is stated
that he greatly charmed all who came in contact with him.

There is no recotd of the date of his elevation to the Cardinalate.
It was certainly not later than December, 1151, for his name as
Cardinal is attached to a Bull of Pope Eugene of that date.

In 1152, an arduous mission was assigned to him by Pope
Eugene the Third, which through his ability and zeal was attended
with complete success. It was nothing less than to proceed to
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, with the authority of Papal
Legate, to heal the religious dissensions that had arisen in those
countries. The cause of these dissensions may be briefly stated.
The Scandinavian kingdoms were all embraced in the Metropolitan
See of Hamburg till the year 1102, when at the request of the
King of Denmark the Danish city of Lund was erected into a
Metropolitan See; and the churches in Sweden and Norway were
made Subject to it. These kingdoms, though at one time united
with Denmark, had now proclaiined their independence, and they
regarded it as an encroachment on their freedom that they should
be subject in spiritual matters to the Danish Metropolitan See.
The northern kingdoms were further rent by civil dissensions, and
all parties looked to Rome for a healing remedy and for guidance
in their distracted state. Cardinal Breakspeare, as Papal Legate
received full powers to restore religious peace throughout Scandi-
navia, and in his instructions he was admonished to ‘‘ preach the
Gospel throughout that province and to use every endeavour to
gain the souls of the natives to the honour of Almighty God.”

The Legate passed through England, and sailed from the English
coast for Norway, where he landed on July the 19th, 1152. He
found the country in the greatest confusion. The throne was
occupied by the three sons of the murdered King Harold], and all
the sad results of jealousy and ambition and civil war ensued,
The first care of Cardinal Breakspeare was to set the civil discord
at rest. He then proceeded to heal the religious wounds of the
kingdom. He thoroughly reformed the Church, and swept away
the abuses which had crept in amid the civil disorders. In the
Cathedral of Nidrosa, the modern Drontheim, reposed the relics
of the holy bishop, St. Olaf. He selected that city for the Metro-
politan dignity, and subjected to its authority not only the other
Norwegian Sees with the Orkneys, Hebrides, and Faroe Islands,
but also Iceland and Greenland, the Shetlands, and Western
Islands of Scotland, and the Isle of Man. The Church of Norway
thus obtained all that it was anxious for, and the name of the
Legate was held everywhere in benediction. Tarleton writes:
** All honoyr was ascribed to him, and his character and firmness

DOCUMENTS. T69

being in such sharp contrast to their own rulers, he became the
hero of the whole nation, and was certainly the most powerful
man in Norway at that date.” ‘The national historian, Snorrow,
relates that no foreigner ever came to Norway who was so honoured,
or whose memory is so cherished as that of Nicholas Breakspeare.
To this day his name is mentioned in Norwegian history as one of
the benefactors of the nation, and after his death a place was
assigned him among the national Saints.

He next proceeded to Sweden, called a synod in the city of
Lingkopin, and appointed a Bishop of Upsala. It was not so easy
to reconcile Denmark to all these changes. Nevertheless in this,
too, his efforts were crowned with success. The See of Lund was
zilowed a sort of primatial pre-eminence over all the Scandinavian
Churches, and its Archbishop was honoured with the title of Legatus
natus Apestolice Sedis. During the Cardinal’s stay in Denmark,
the King, Sweno, to avenge some outrages, had declared war
against Sweden. The Cardinal used all his influence in vain to
maintain peace, and he is reported to have said that “ the Danes
could expect nothing else but destruction to themselves in their
proposed campaign.’”’ The event justified his expectations. Drawn
by a feigned retreat far into Finland, the Danish army was’ sur-
rounded, and almost entirely destroyed.

Cardinal Breakspeare returned to Rome in the beginning of
November, 1154, and throughout his homeward journey: as in
oy itself, he was everywhere saluted as ‘the Apostle of the

otth,””

Many changes had taken place in the capital of the Christian
world during the two years of his absence. Pope Eugene the
Third had been summoned to his reward, and had had for his
successor the Bishop of Sabina, aged ninety years, who ascended
the Papal Chair under the name of Anastasius the Fourth. On
the 3rd of December, 1154, only a few weeks after Cardinal Break-
speare’s arrival in Rome, the Pontificate of Pope Anastasius was
cut short by death. Rome being in a very disturbed State, the
Cardinals met in St. Peter’s without delay, and with one voice
chose Nicholas Breakspeare as the snecessor of St. Peter to guide
the helm of Holy Church. He at first declined the onerous charge,
but the clergy and laity took up the cry ‘“‘ Nicholas elected by God,”
and at length he bent his shoulders to the burden. He took the
title of Adrian the Fourth, and his coronation was celebrated with
great pomp in St. Peter’s, on the 24th December, 1154.

His pontificate of four years and eight months was full of stirring
events, and his saying, as reported by John of Salisbury, that
“the Pope’s tiara was splendid because it burned with fire,”” was
fully verified in his short but brilliant career. Dr. Creighton,
Protestant Bishop of London, in the Dictionary of National Bio-
graphy, writing of Adrian the Fourth, says that his “ pontificate
was a period of constant struggles mainly of his own seeking.”
Now nothing can be more false than this. He was engaged in
constant struggles, indeed, but they were forced upon him by
those who were jealous of the spiritual authority, or coveted the
temporalities of the Church, and he proved himself throughout
these varied contests an unswerving champion of the rights in
those days attached to the Holy See.

T7o DOCUMENTS,

The first great difficulty that presented itself to the newly
elected Pope was the attitude of the Roman citizens. They had
been seized for some years with a frenzy of republican fanaticism,
and now under the guidance of the popular tribune, Arnold of
Brescia, they resolved to brook no further delay in transferring
their theories into facts. Rome was to become once more the
centre of the world’s civil authority, her old-time grandcur was
to be renewed. The Church, however, was to be shorn of all its
privileges, its wealth, its land, its possessions, its dues; and
paganism, under another name, was to resume its sway on the
Capitol,

siemtediately, on the election of Pope Adrian, the Roman Senate
sent him an imperious demand that he would recognise the Roman
Republic, In his reply the Pontiff commanded them on their
perl to return to their allegiance, and to compel Arnold of Brescia
to quit the city. The Republicans would listen to no such counsel,
aud to emphasise their determination they attacked the aged
Cardinal Guido as he was proceeding along the Via Sacra, and
inflicted serious wounds of which he soon after died, The Pope,
however, made them realise that they had to do with a man whom
no terrors could turn aside from the path of duty. For the first
time in the history of the Christian world, Rome was subjected
to an Interdict, to commence on Palm Sunday (1135), the very
time when pilgrims from all parts of Christendom were accus-
tomed to flock into the Eternal City, This terrible blow smote
at the same time the earthly and the spiritual interests of the
citizens. The Senate, without delay, banished Arnold from the
city, and presented a humble petition to the Pope. The Interdict
was at once removed, and the Easter Feast was kept with more
than usual splendour and rejoicing.

Another storm, however, was now threatening from the North.
When Frederick Barbarossa succeeded to the imperial throne of
Germany the Roman Senate forwarded to him an invitation to
come to Rome to receive the Imperial Crown at their hands. The
reply of Barbarossa was to cross the Alps in November, 1154, with
a large army, with the avowed intent of asserting his imperial rights
in Italy, and punishing the insolence of the Republicans of Rome.
The Emperor proceeded slowly on his course, securing the fealty
of the Italian cities through which he passed. ‘The vicissitudes
of these cities need not at present detain ns. Sufficeit tosay that
on the 10th of April, 1153, Barbarossa, as King of Italy, received
the Iron Crown in the Church of St. Michael at Pavia. He now
avowed his intention to receive, at the hands of the Pontiff, the
{mperial Crown in Rome, and sent deputies to convey his wishes
to Pope Adrian. On the other hand, the Pope dispatched three
Cardinals to meet the Emperor, to acquaint him with the actual
condition of the city, and to learn what his intentions were in
regard to its temporal rule. In the meantime, the Pope proceeded
to Civita Castellana, on the borders of the Campagna, about mid-
way between Viterbo and Rome.

We must now revert to Arnold of Brescia. When he fled from
Rome, he endeavoured to form a league of some of the Italian
nobility to stir up the citizens of Rome against the Pope and

DOCUMENTS. 171

against the Emperor, As a preliminary to the Impcrial conse-
cration, Adrian the Fourth required that the Empcror would put
an eud to this attempt at sedition. Arnold soon fell a captive
into the hands of Barbarossa, and was consigned in chains to
Castel Sant’ Angelo, m Rome. On a former occasion when Arnold
was a prisoner, the citizens had revolted and set him free. The
Pope was now absent from the city, at Civita Castellana, and the
prefect of the city, seeing no other escape from imminent risk,
had the prisoner led out from the castle and secretly put to death.
His reinains were burncd and his ashes were flung into the Tiber.
Such is the narrative of the ancient chronicler. This, howcver,
would not suffice for Dr. Creighton. He would place the execution
of Arnold at a later period, whcn the Pope was in Rame, and when
the Emperor, after his coronation at St. Peter’s, had to rcpel an
attack of the rebellious citizens. He writes: ‘‘ Adrian the Fourth
used the opportunity of the Emperor’s wrath to urge the execution
of Arnold of Brescia, who was tried before the Papal officials, and
put to death.’ For such statemcnts there is not a particle of
historic evidence. Sismondi, too, gives a dramatic account of the
slow burning of Arnold fastened to a cross at Porta del Popolo.
Even Dean Milinan characterises such an argument as ‘‘ pure
fiction ’’ (Latin Christianity, iv., 412).

The Pope’s embassy to Barbarossa brought back the pleasant
announcement that the Emperor had no hostile intentions what-
ever against the Pope, that he was ready to pay all honour to
Holy Church and to the See of Rome, and prayed Adrian to
publicly and with all solemnity crown him in St. Peter’s. Bar-
barossa, however, was a prince of very doubtful character, from
whom Adrian had but little to expect. Tarleton describes him “as
aman of boundless ambition, combined with great personal strength
and courage ; in physique he was an ideal hero; but he was un-
scrupulous, masterful, and imperious. His one object was to rule
a united Germany combined with Italy, to be supreme on the Tiber
as well as on the Danube. He proclaimed the loftiest notions of
the absolutc supremacy of the Emperor, and carried with him the
enthusiastic support of all the great princes of Germany.’’ Bar-
barossa with his army had encamped at Sutri, the ancient Sutrium,
a small stronghold known as the key of Etruria, which occupied
the crest of one of the numcrous rocky hills in that rich province of
Italy.

Pope Adrian had advanced as far as the picturesquc castle of
Nepi, with his suite of Cardinals, and a few attendants. ‘The
Emperor, having declared his intentions to be pacific, and cx-
pressed his wish to meet the Pontiff, Adrian set out, as usual in
those days, on horseback, accompanied by a small retinue of
Cardinals and guards. As he approched the Imperial camp, a
brilliant group of German nobles, their armour flashing in the
sunlight, galloped out to meet him, and, joining the procession,
escorted him amid the shouts of the troops and the blare of trumpets
to the front of the Imperial tent. Barbarossa now came forth in
gorgeous armour, and around him were the rough chivalry of
Germany. The etiquette of those days required the sovereign,
when welcoming the Pope, in recognition of the higher spiritual

172 DOCUMENTS.

authority, to hold the Papal stirrup whilst its owner dismounted.
This part of the ceremony Barbarossa resolved not to fnlfil. He
advanced to meet Adrian, and, bowing low, offered to assist him
to dismount. Adrian, however, waited, that the full ceremonial
should be observed. Barbarossa’s pride would not brook this
humiliation. His guards half drew their swords, threatening
murmurs were heard in the ranks of the soldiers, the Pope’s own
retinue turned their horses and fled. Though Adrian was thus
almost left alone, yet his courage never for a moment failed. He
dismounted without insisting, for the moment, on the prescribed
homage, and allowed the Emperor to lead him to the throne pre-
pared for him, where Frederick knelt and kissed his feet. After
this ceremony the Emperor rose and approached for the kiss of
peace. It was now Adrian’s turn. In dignified words he refused
to grant it, and told the Emperor that until the usual homage was
paid in full he would withhold his blessing and refuse to crown
him. Whatever may be our judgment regarding the ceremonial
details of those times, one cannot fail to be struck by the magni-
ficent courage of the Pontiff. The Emperor used every argument
that could be devised to change Adrian’s resolution, but his words
might as well be addressed to the rocks of Sutri. Threats or
entreaties were alike of no avail to move the steady resolution of
the Pope, who next day quitted the camp and returned to Nepi.

Barbarossa, however, was determined to receive coronation at
the hands of Adrian, and resolved to submit to the humiliating
condition of homage, for without it, he saw no prospect of attaining
the great object of his ambition. On June the 11th, he set out
for Nepi, accompanied by a brilliant retinue. As he drew near,
the Pope rode out to meet him. The Emperor dismounted, ad-
vaneed on foot, and, kneeling down, held the Pope’s stirrup, and
assisted him to dismount. This done, Adrian enfolded him in his
arms and gave him the kiss of peace amid the ringing cheers of
both parties of followers and spectators. As Tarleton remarks:
‘‘ The splendid firmness of Adrian had gained for him a wonderful
success.”

The Pope now returned to Rome, and on the morning of the
18th of June, with all solemnity, performed the ceremony of the
Emperor’s coronation in St. Peter’s, How infuriated was the hostile
ferment of the citizens against the Germans appears from the fact
that they organised an armed band to atlack the German army
encamped at the Neronian fields, near Ponte Molle, nor did they
desist till 200 of the assailants were nade prisoners, and about 1000
were slain by the Imperial troops, or were drowned in the Tiber.
The prisoners were handed over to Adrian, by whom niost of them
were liberated in a few days. At the end of June the Emperor
and his army quitted Rome and returned to Germany.

During the next two years the Pope was mainly occupied in
the south of Italy, disputing with the Normans, who claimed
Sicily by right of conquest, and, together with it, a considerable
portion of territory on the mainland. The indomitable courage
and firmness which had humbled the pride of Barbarossa was also
successful in restoring peace in South Italy, and in securing the
Norman power as an ally of Rome, In the meantime, the dealings

DOCUMENTS. 173

of Barbarossa with the Church in Germany, and with the citics
of North Italy, led to repeated quarrels with the Pope, and em-
bittered the closing days of his life. He was preparing to issue a
solemn sentence of excommunication against the Emperor, when
he was overtaken by death at Anagni, on the 1st of September,
1159. His remains wcre interred at St. Petcr’s, in Rome, where
the tomb of the only Englishman who ever wore the Tiara is to the
present day an object of interest to countless tourists of the English-
speaking world.
* * ¥* * *

The distinctive character of Pope Adrian the Fourth, as
sketched in the AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC Rreorp for April, should
suffice to show that his supposcd Bull, by which a erant of
Ireland was madc to King Henry the Second cannot be regarded
as genuine. The main purpose of Adrian’s policy was to defend
the Church’s independence within her own sphere, and to repel
the ever-grasping pretensions of thc secular power. In the 250
genuinc official letters of the Pontiff that have been prescrved to
us, we shall seek in vain for even the remotest trace of the
flattery and subserviency to the royal authority which are so
conspicuous in the supposed Bull. We may now proceed to
consider in detail the arguments which are advanced in support
of the genuineness of this singular document.

Twenty-five years ago I inserted in the Jrvish Ecclestasttcal
Record (Dublin, November, 1872), a short essay on this subject,
which since then has been repeatedly republished or referred to in
the Unitcd States and the home countries. It may not be in-
opportune to here reprint it in full, with a few verbal alterations.
This will clear the way for setting forth as briefly as possible the
further arguments which have been advanced to set this matter
in its full light during the past years.

 

There was a time when it would be little less than treason to
question the genuineness of the Bull by which Pope Adrian the
Fourth is supposed to have inade a grant of Ireland to Henry
the Second ; and indeed, from the first half of the thirteenth to
the close of the fifteenth century, it was principally through
this supposed grant of the Holy See that the Inglish Govern-
ment sought to justify their claim to hold dominion in that
island. Howcver, opinions and times have changed, and at the
prescnt day this Bull of Adrian has as little beariug on the cou-
nection between England and Ireland as it could possibly have on
the union of the Isle of Man with Great Britain.

On the other hand, many writers in a spirit of hostility to the
Holy See, have said strange things whilst asserting the genuine-
ness of this famous Bull. I need scarcely remark that it does not
seein to have been the love either of Ireland or of historic truth
that inspired their declamation. It proceeded mainly from their
hatred to the Sovereign Pontiff, and from the vain hope that such
exaggerated statenients might in somc way wcaken the devoted
affection of the Irish people for Rome. oO

174 DOCUMENTS.

Laying aside such prejudiced opinions, the controversy as to
the genuineness of Adrian’s Bull must be viewed in a purely his-
torical light, and its decision mnst depend on the value and weight
of the historical arguments which may be advanced in regard to
it,

The following is a literal translation of the old Latin text of
Adrian’s Bull :—

“Adrian, Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our most
dear Son in Christ, the illustrious King of the English, greeting
and the Apostolical Benediction.

‘The thoughts of your Highness are laudably and profitably
directed to the greater glory of your name on earth and to the
increase of the reward of cternal happiness in heaven, when as a
Catholic Prince you propose to yourself to extend the borders of
the Church, to announce the truths of the Christian Faith to igno-
rant and barbarous nations, and to root out the wecds of wicked-
ness from the field of the Lord; and the more effectually to
accomplish this, you implore the counsel and favour of the Holy See.
In which matter we feel assured that the higher your aims are,
and the more discreet your proceedings, the happier, with God’s
aid, will be the result ; because those undertakings that proceed
from the ardour of faith and the love of religion are sure always
to have a prosperous end and issue.

“It is beyond all doubt, as your highness also doth acknowledge,
that Ireland, and all the islands upon which Christ the Sun of
Justice has shone, and which have received the knowledge of
Christian Faith, are subject to the authority of St. Peter and of
the most holy Roman Church. Wherefore, we are the more de-
sirous to sow in them an acceptable seed and a plantation pleasing
unto God, because we know that a most rigorous account of them
shall be required of us hereafter,

‘‘ Now, most dear Son in Christ, you have signified to us that
you propose to enter the island of Ireland to establish the obser-
vance of law among its people, and to eradicate the weeds of vice ;
and that you are willing to pay from every house one penny as an
annual tribute to St. Peter, and to preserve the rights of the churches
of the land whole and inviolate, We, therefore, receiving with
due favour your pious and laudable desires, and graciously granting
our consent to your petition, declare that it is pleasing and accept-
able to us, that for the purpose of enlarging the limits of the Church,
setting bounds to the torrent of vice, reforming evil manners,
planting the seeds of virtue, and increasing Christian Faith, you
should enter that island and carry into effect those things which
belong to the service of God and to the salvation of that people ;
and that the people of that land should honourably receive and
reverence you as Lord : the rights of the churches being preserved
untouched and entire, and reserving the annual tribute of one
penny from every house to St, Peter aud the most Holy Roman
Church.

“Tf, therefore, you resolve to carry these designs into execution,
let it be your study to form that people to good morals, and take
such orders both by yourself and by those whom you shall find

DOCUMENTS. 175

qualified in faith, in words, and in conduct, that the Church there
may be adorned, and the practices of Christian faith be planted
and increased ; and let all that tends to the glory of God and the
salvation of souls be so ordered by you that you may deserve to
obtain from God an increase of everlasting reward, and may secure
on earth a glorious name throughout all time, Given at Rome,”
Ke.

Before we proceed with the inquiry as to the genuineness of
this letter of Pope Adrian, I must detain the reader with a few
brief preliminary remarks.

First : Some passages of this important document have been
very unfairly dealt with by modern writers while purporting to
discuss its merits. Thus, for instance, Professor Richey, in his
Lectures on Ivish History, presenting a translation of the Latin
text to the lady pupils of the Alexandra College, makes the Pontiff
to write : ‘‘ You have signified to us, our well-beloved son in Christ,
that you propose to enter the island of Ireland in order to subdue
the people, etc. . . . We, therefore, regarding your pious and laud-
able design with due favour, etc., do hereby declare our will and
pleasure, that for the purpose of enlarging the borders of the Chuich,
etc., you do enter and take possession of that tsland.’’' Such an
erroneous translation must be the more blamed in the present
instance, as it was scarcely to be expected that the ladies whom the
learned lecturer addressed would have leisure to consult the original
Latin text of the document which he professed to translate. This,
however, is not the only error into which Professor Richey has been
betrayed regarding the Bull of Adrian the Fourth. Having :nentioned
in a note the statement of Roger de Wendover, that the Buil was
obtained from Pope Adrian in the year 1155, he adds his own
opinion that ‘‘the grant appears to have been made in 1172,’
The learned lecturer seems to have forgotten that, at that date,
Pope Adrian had been for about thirteen years freed from the
cares of his Pontificate, having passed to the better world in the
year 1159.

Second: Anyone who attentively weighs the words of the
above document will sce at once that it prescinds from all title of
conquest, whilst at thesanic timeit makes no gift or transfer to Henry
the Second. As far as this lctter of Adrian is concerned, the visit
of Henry to our island might be the entcrprise of a friendly monarch,
who, at the invitation ofa distracted commonwealth, would seek by
his presence to restore peace, and to uphold the observance of the
laws. Thus, all the foolish theories must at once be set aside,
which rest on the groundless supposition that Pope Adrian autho-
rised the invasion and plunder of the Irish people by the Anglo-
Norman adventurers.

Third ; There is another serious error which is sufficiently refuted
by the siniple perusal of the above document. I mean that opinion
which would fain set forth the letter of Pope Adrian as a dog-
matical definition of the Holy See, as if the Sovereign Pontiff then

1 Lectures on the History or Ireland, by A. G. Richey, Esq., delivered to the
Pupils of Alexandra College during the Hilary and Easter Terms of 1869. Dublin,
1869, pages Ia?, I23.

lbid., page 121.

176 DOCUMENTS.

spoke ex cathedra, 1.e., solemnly propounded some doctrine to be
believed by the Universal Church ; it proposes no matter of faith
to be held by all the children of Christ; in fact, it presents no
doctrine whatever to be believed by the faithful, and it is nothing
more than a commendatory letter addressed to Henry, resting on
the good intentions set forth by that monarch himself. There is
one inaxim, indeed, which awakens the suspicions of the old Gallican
school, viz.: that ‘‘ all the islands are subject to the authority of
St. Peter.’?’ However, it is no doctrinal teaching that is thus
propounded: it is a matter of fact admitted by Henry himself,
a principle recognised by the international law of Europe in the
middle ages, a maxim set down by the various states themselves,
the better to maintain peace and concord among the princes of
Christendom. To admit, however, or to call in question the teach-
ing of the civil law of Europe, as embodied in that maxim, has
nothing whatever to say to the great prerogative of St. Peter’s
successors, whilst they solemnly propound to the faithful, in unerring
accents, the doctrines of Divine faith.

Fourth : To many it will seem a paradox, and yet it is a fact,
that the supposed Bull of Pope Adrian had no part whatever in the
submission of the Irish chieftains to Henry the Second. Even accord-
ing to those who maintain its genuineness, this Bull wasnotpublished
till the year 1175, and certainly no mention of it was made in
Ircland until long after the submission of the Irish princes. The
success of the Anglo-Normans was mainly due toa different cause,
viz., to the superior military skill and equipment of the invaders.
Among the Anglo-Norman leaders were some of the bravest knights
of the kingdom, who had won their laurels in the wars of France
and Wales. Their weapons and armour rendered it almost impos-
sible for the Irish troops to meet them in the open field. The crossbow
which was made use of for the first time in this invasion, produced
as great a change in military tactics as the rifled cannon in our
own days. When Henry came in person to Ireland his numerous
army hushed all opposition. Thcre were 400 vessels in his fleet, °
and if a minimum of twenty-five armed men be allowed for each
vessel, we shall have an army of at least 10,000 men fully equipped
landing unopposed on the sonthern shores of our island.’ It is to
this imposing force, and the armour of the Anglo-Norman knights,
that we must in great part refer whatever success attended this
invasion of the English monarch.

To proceed now with the immediate matter of our present
historical inquiry. The following is the summary of the arguments
in favour of the anthenticity of Pope Adrian’s letter, drawn up by
J. C. O'Callaghan, Esq., editor of the Macavieg Excidium, and
author of many valuable works on Irish history ;—‘' We have,
first, the testimony of John of Salisbury, secretary to the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, and one of the ablest writers of his day,
who relates his having been the envoy from Henry to Adrian, in
1155, to ask for a grant of Ireland, and such a grant having then
been obtained, accompanied by a gold ring, containing a fine

1 The authorities for the statements made in the text may be seen in Macarie
Excidium, edited by Mr. O'Callaghan for the Irish Archeological Society in 1850.

NOCUMENTS., , 177

emcrald, as a token of investiture, with which grant and ring the
said John returned to Henry. We lave, sccondly, the grant or
Bull of Adrian im extemse in the works of Giraldus Cambrensis
and his conteniporary, Ridulfus de Diceto, Dean of London, as well
as in those of Roger de Wendover and Matthew Pans. We have,
thirdly, several Bnils of Adrian’s successor, Pope Alexander ITI.,
still further to the purport of Adrian’s, or in Henry’s favour. We
have, fonrthly, the recorded public reading of the Bulls of Adrian
and Alexander at a meeting of Bishops at Waterford in 1175. We
have, fifthly, after the liberation of Scotland from England at
Bannockburn, and the consequent invitation of Bruce’s brother,
Edward, to be King of Ireland, the Bull of Adrian prefixed to the
eloquent lay remonstrance, which the Irish prescnted to Pope
John XXII, against the English ; the same Bull, moreover, referred
to in the remonstrance itself, as so ruinous to Ireland ; and a copy
of that Bull accordingly sent back by the Pope to Edward II. of
England, for his use under those circumstances. We have, sixthly,
from Cardinal Baronius, in his great work, the 4nnales Ecclesiastict,
under Adrian IV., his grant ot Ireland to his countrymen in full,
or, aS is Said, ‘ex codice Vaticano, diploma datum ad Henricum,
Angloruin Regem.’ We have, seventhly, the Bull in the Bullarium
Romanum, as printed at Rome, in 1739. The citations and refer-
ences in support of all the foregoing stateincnts will be found in
the ‘ Notes and Illustrations’ of my edition of Macarie Excidium,
for the Irish Archeological Society in 1850, given in such a manner
as must satisfy the most sceptical.”

Examining these arguments in detail, I will follow the order
thus marked out by Mr. O’Callaghan.

1, We meet, in the first place, the testimony of Jolin of Salis-
bury, who in his Metalogicus (lib. iv., cap. 42), writes, that being
in an official capacity at the Papal Court, in 1155, Pope Adrian IV.
then granted the investiture of Ireland to the illustrious King Henry
II. of England.!

I do not wish in any way to detract from the praise due to
John of Salisbury, who was at that time one of the ablest courtiers
of Henry II. However, the words here imputed to him must be
taken with great reserve. Inserted as they are in the last chapter
of his work, they are not at all required by the context ; by can-
celling them the whole passage runs sinoother, and is more con-
nected in every way. ‘This is morc striking, as in anothcr work
of the same writer, which is entitled Polycraticus, we meet with
a detailed account of the various incidents of his embassy to Pope
Adrian, yet he there makes no mention of the Bull in Henry’s
favour, or of the gold ring and its fine emerald, or of the grant of
Ireland, all of which would have been so important for his narrative.

We must also hold in mind the time when the Metalogicus was
written. The author himself fixes its date ; for, immediately before

1 “ Ad preces meas illustri regi anglorum Henrico Secundo (Adrianus) concessit et
dedit Hiberniam jure hzreditario possidendam; sicut litere ipsius testantur in
hodiernum diem. Nam omnes insule, de jure antiquo, ex donatione Constantini qui
eam fundavit et dotavit, dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam pertinere, annulum quoque
per me transmisit aureum, smaragdo optimo decoratum, quo fieret investitura juris in
gerenda Hibernia: idemque adhuc annulus in curiali archivo publico custodiri
jussus est.”’

N

178 DOCUMENTS.

asking the prayers of ‘‘ those who read his book, and those who hear
it read,” he tells us that the news of Pope Adrian’s death had
reached him a little time before, and he adds that his own patron,
Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, though still living, was
weighed down by many infirmities.1 Now, Pope Adrian departed
this life in 1159, and the death of Archbishop Theobald happened
in 1161. Elence, Gale and the other editors of John of Salisbury’s
works, without a dissentient voicc, rcfer Metalogicus to the,year 1159.

Now, it is a matter beyond the reacli of controversy, that if
Henry II. obtained the investiture of Ireland from Adrian IV.,
he kept this grant a strict secret till at least the year 1175. For
twenty years, i.c., from 1155 to 1175, no mention was made of the
gift of Adrian. Henry did not refcr to it when authorising his
vassals to join Diarmaid in 1167, when Adrian’s Bull would have
been so opportune to justify his intervention ; he,did not mention
it when he himself set out for Ircland to solicit and reccive the
homage of the Irish princes; he did not even refer to it when he
assumed his new title and accomplished the purpose of his expedi-
tion, The Council of Cashel, in 1172, was the first episcopal
assembly after Henry’s arrival in Ireland; the Papal Legate was
present there, and did Adrian’s Bull exist it should necessarily
have engaged the attention of the assembled Fathers. Never-
theless, not a whisper as to Adrian’s grant was to be heard at that
famous Council, Even the learned editor of Cambrensis Eversus,
whilst warnily asserting the genuineness of Adrian’s Bull, admits.
‘there is not any, even the slightest authority, for asserting that
its existence was known in Ireland before the vear 1172, or for
three years later’ (vol. i., p. 440, note z). It is extremely difficult,
in any hypothesis, to explain in a satisfactory way this mysterious
silence of Henry II., nor is it easy to understand how a fact so
unportant, so vital to the interests of Ircland, could remain so
Inany years concealed from those who ruled the destinies of the
Irish Church. For, we must hold in mind, that throughout that
interval Ireland numbered among its Bishops one who held the
important office of Legate of the Holy See; the Irish Church had
constant intercourse with Eugland and the Continent, and through
St. Laurence O'Toole and a hundred other distinguished prelates
enjoycd in the fullest manner the confidence of Rome.

If Adrian granted this Bull to Henry at the solicitation of
John of Salisbury in 1155, there is but one explanation for the
silence of this courtier in his diary, as set forth in the Polycraticus,
and for the concealment of this Bull itself from the Irish Bishops
and people, viz., that this secrecy was required by the state policy
of the English monarch, And, if it be so, how then can we be
asked to adrhit as genuine this passage of the A7etalogicus in which
the astute agent of Henry, still continuing to discharge offices of
the highest trust in the Court, would proclaim to the world as
early as the year 1159, that Pope Adrian had made this grant
of Ireland to his royal master, and that the solemn record of the
investiture of this high dignity was preserved in the public archives
of the kingdom ?

! Metalogicus, lib. iv. cap. ult.

DOCUMENTS, 179

It must be added that there are some phrases in this passage
of the Afetalogicus which manifestly betray the hand of the im-
postor. Thns, the words usque tn hodiernum diem imply that a
long interval had elapsed since the concession was made by Pope
Adrian ; and surely they could not have becn penned by John of
Salisbury in 1159. Much lcss can we suppose that this writer
employed the words jure ha@yeditario possidendam. No such
hereditary right is granted in the Bull of Adrian. It was not
dreamt of even during the first years of the Anglo-Norman invasion,
and it was only at a later period, when the Irish chieftains scornfully
rejected the Anglo-Norman law of hereditary succession, that this
expedient was thought of for allaying the fierce opposition of the
Irish people.

Thus we are forced to regard the supposed testimony of John
of Salisbury as nothing more than a clumsy interpolation, which
probably was not inserted in his work till many years after the first
Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland.

2. I now come to the second and inain argument of those who
seek to defend the authenticity of Pope Adrian’s Bull. We have
Giraldus Cambrensis, they say, a contemporary witness, whose
testimony is unquestionable. He inserts in full this letter of
Adrian IV., and he nowhere betrays the slightest doubt as to its
genuineness,

Some years ago we might perhaps have bcen tempted to accept
this fattering character of Giraldus Cambrensis, but at the present
day, and since the publication of an accurate edition of his his-
torical works, it is impossible for us to do so.

It was not till many yéars after the death of Pope Adrian that
Gerald de Barry, better known as Giraldus Cambrensis, entered on
the stage of Jrish history. Twice he visited Ireland after the year
1183, and on both occasions he discharged those duties which,
at the present day, would merit for him the title of special court
correspondent with the invading army, The Expugnatio Hibernica,
in which he inserts Adrian's Bull, may justly be said to have been
written to order. Hence, as a matter of course, Giraldus adopted
as genuine evcry document set forth as such by his royal master,
and any statements that strengthened the claim or promoted the
interests of his brother Welsh adventuters were surely not likely
to be too nicely weighed in the scales of criticism by such an his-
torian. The editors of the works of Giraldus, published under the
direction of the Master of the Rolls, have fully recoynised this
special feature of the historical works of Giraldus. The official
catalogue describing the Expugnatio Hibernica, of which we treat,
expressly says: ‘‘ It may be regarded rather as a great epic, than a
sober relation of facts occurring in his own days. No one can
peruse it without coming to the conclusion that it is rather a poetical
fiction than a prosaic truthful history.” oo

In the preface to the fifth volume of the Historical Treatises of
Giraldus, the learned editor, Rev. James F. Dimock, enters at
considerable length into the inquiry, whether the FExpugnatio
Hibernica was to be accepted as genuine and authentic history.
I need do no more than state the conclusions which he enunciates :—-

“JT think I have said enough to justify me in refusing to accept

Ro DOCUMENTS.

Giraldus’s history of the Irish and of their English invadcrs as
sober, truthful history.’’' And again he writes: ‘‘ My good fricnd
and pre-labourer in editing these volumes of Giraldus’s works
(Mr. Brewer) says of the Expuguatio, that Giraldus would seem
to have regarded his subject rather as a great epic, which it un-
doubtedly was, than a sober relation of facts occurring in his own
days. . . . This is a most true and characteristic description of
Giraldus’s treatment of his subject ; the treatise certainly is, in
great measure, rather a poetical fiction than a prosaic truthful
history.” ?

I must further remark, as another result from Rev. Mr. Dimock’s
researches, that the old text of Giraldus in reference to Pope Adrian’s
Bull, from which Mr. O’Callaghan’s citations are made, is now
proved to he singularly defective. I shall give the pithy words of
that learned editor, which are stronger than any I should wish to
use: ‘‘ No move absurd nonsensical a muddle was ever blundered
into by the most stupid of abbreviators.”’* It is of course from the
ancient MSS. of the work that this corruption of the old text is
mainly proved ; but it should indeed be apparent from an attentive
study of the very printed text itself, for, as Mr. Dimock remarks,
being accurately translated, its words ‘‘ marvellously contrive to
make Henry, in 1172, apply for and procure this privilege from
Pope Adrian, who died in 1159, and with equally marvellous con-
fusion they represent John of Salisbury, who had been Henry’s
agent in procuring this privilege in 1155, as sent, not to Ireland,
but to Rome, for the purpose of publishing the Bull at Waterford
in 1174 or 1175.”

I shall only add, regarding the testimony of Giraldns Cam-
brensis, that in the genuine text of the Expugnatio Hibernica he
places on the same level the Bull of Adrian IV. and that of Alex-
ander JIT. Nevertheless, as we shall just now see, he clsewhere
admits that there were many and grave suspicions that the sup-
posed Bull of Alexander had never been granted by the Holy See.

The other names mentioned together with that of Giraldus
will not detain us long. They are all writers who only incidentally
make reference to Irish matters, and in these they naturally enough
take Giraldus for their guide.

Ralph de Diceto wrote about 1210, and like Giraldns received
his honours at the hands ot Henry II. Irish historians have not
yet accepted him as a guide in reference to matters connected with
their country. For instance, the Synod of Cashel of 1172, which
was one of the most important events of that period of Ireland’s
history, is described by him as held in Lismore.

Roger dc Wendover was a monk of St. Albans, who died 6th of
May, 1237. His Flores Htstoriarum begin with the creation of
the world, and cnd two years before his death in 1235. He merely
compendiates other sources down to the beginning of the thirteenth
century. It is only the subsequent portion of his work which is
held in esteem by English annalists,

1 + Giraldi Cambrensis Opera,” under the direction of the Master of the Rolls,
vol. v., London, 1867. Preface, p. Ixix. :

2 Ibid, p. (xx,

3 Jbid, Pp. xiii,

4 fhid,

DOCUMENTS. 181

Matthew Paris was a brother religious of Roger de Wendover
in St. Albans, where he died in 1259. Mr. Coxe, who edited a
portion of the Flores Histoviarum for the English Historical Society
(1841-1844), has proved that down to the year 1235 Matthew
Paris only compendiates the work of Wendover, At all events his
Historia Mayor is of very little weight, A distinguished German
historian of the present day, Scrhodl, thus conveys his strictures
on its merits :—

“Se tronipe a chaque instant, et, entrainé par son aveugle
rage de critique, donne pour des faits historiques des anecdotes
piquantes quin’ont aucune authenticité, des légendes déraisonnables,
et toutes sortes de détails suspects, exagérés et calomnieux.”

To the testimony of such writers we may well oppose the
silence of Peter de Blois, secretary of Henry II., though chronicling
the chief events of Henry’s reign; and to this we may add the
silence of all our native annalists, not one of whom ever mentions
the Bull of Adrian.

3. But it is time to pass on to the third argument which is
advanced by those who maintain the authenticity of the Bull.
It is quite true that we have some letters or Bulls of Pope Alexander
IIT. connected with the Irish invasion. Three of these, written in
1172, are certainly authentic. They are preserved in the Liber
Niger Scaccavit, from which they were edited by Hearne, and in
later times they have been accurately printed by Mr. O’Callaghan
and Rev. Mr. Kelly. They are addressed respectivcly to the Irish
bishops, King Henry, and the Irish princes. So far, however, are
these letters from corroborating the genuineness of Pope Adrian’s
Bull, that they furnish an unanswerabie argument for wholly
setting it aside as groundless and unauthentic. ‘They are entirely
devoted to the circumstances of the invasion of our island and its
results, and yet the only title that they recognise in Henry is “ that
mionarch’s power and the submission of the Irish chieftains.’’ They
simply ignore any Bull of Adrian, and any investiture from the
Holy See.

Chere is, however, we are told another Bull of Alexander IT[1.,
preserved by Giraldus Cambrensis, which is supposed to have been
granted at the request of King Henry in 1172, confirmatory of the
gift and investiture made by Pope Adrian; and Mr. O'Callaghan
holds that this Bull of Alexander III. sets at rest for ever all doubt
as to the genuineness of the grant made by Adrian IV.

The question at once suggests itself :—Is this Bull of Alexander
III. to be itself admitted as genuine and authentic? If its own
authority be doubtful, surely it cannot suffice to prop up the totter-
ing cause of Adrian’s Bull. Now, its style is entirely different from
that of the three authentic letters of which we have just spoken.
Quite in opposition to thcse authentic letters, ‘‘ the only authority
alleged in it for Ilenry’s right to Ireland is the Bull of Adrian,”
as Dr. Lanigan allows.z2 The genuine letters are dated from Tus-
culum, where, as we know from other sources, Alexander actually
resided in 1172. On the other hand, this confirmatory Bull, though

' Macarie Excidium, p. 247
Eccles Hist. iv., 224.

182 DOCUMENTS.

supposed to have been obtained in 1172, is dated from Rome, thus
clearly betraying the hand of the impostor. Such was the dis-
turbed condition of Rome at that period that it was impossible
for tlis Holiness to reside there ; and hence we find him sometimes
holding his Court in Tusculum, at other times in Segni, Anagni,
or Ferrara. It was only when these disturbances were quelled
that Alexander III. was able, in 1178, to return in triumph to his
capital.’

But there is still another reason why we must doubt of the
authority of this confirmatory Bull. The researches of Rev. Mr.
Dimock have proved what Ussher long ago reinarked, that the
Bull of Alexander originally formed’ part of the work of Giraldus
Cambrensis,”? although later copyists, and the first editors, includ-
ing the learncd Camden, recognising its spuriousness, excluded it
from Giraldus’s text. The matter is now set at rest, for the ancient
MSS. clearly prove that it originally formed part of the Expugnatio
Hibevnica. Thanks, however, to the zeal and industry of Mr.
Brewer, we are at present acquainted with another work of Giraldus,
written at a later period than his Historical Tracts on Ireland.
It is entitled De Principrs Instructione, and was edited in 1846
for the Anglia Christiana Society. Now in this treatise Giraldus
himself refers to the Bull of Alexander III., of which we treat,
but he ptefaces it with the following remarkable words *: ‘ Some
assevé oy imagine that this Bull was obtained from the Pope ; but
othevs deny that it was ever obtained from the Pontiff?’ “ Sicut a
quibusdam iinpetratum asseritur aut confingitur ; ab aliis autem
unquam impetratum fuisse negatur.”’ Surely these words should
suffice to convince the most sceptical that conteniporary writers
questioned the authenticity of this confirmatory Bull of Alexander
III,

4. As regards the Synod of Waterford in 1175, and the state-
ment that the Bulls of Adrian and Alexander were published
therein for the first time, all these matters rest on the very doubt-
ful authority of Giraldus Cambrensis. We have no record in the
Irish Annals that any general meeting of the Irish Bishops was
held in Waterford in 1175. The circumstances of the country
rendered such a Synod impossible ; for war and dissensions raged
throughout the length and breadth of the land. It was in that
year, however, that the first Bishop was appointed by King Henry
to the See of Waterford, as Ware informs us; and, perhaps, we
should not err were we to suppose that the Synod so pompously
set forth by Giraldus was a convention of the Anglo-Norman
clergy of Waterford under their newly-appointed Prelate, all of
whom would, no doubt, joyfully accept the official documents
presented in the name of the King by Nicholas of Wallingford.

Leland supposes that this Synod of Waterford was not held
till 1177. The disturbed state of the kingdom, however, rendered
a Synod equally impossible in that year, and all our ancient autho-
rities utterly ignore such a Synod.

1 Mozzoni, Zavole Cronologiche. Rome, 18€7, “4 an, 1179,
2? Opera Givaldi vol. v., p. 318,
§ De Princip. Instruct., pr 53.

DOCUMENTS. 183

5. In thc Remonstrance addressed by the Irish princes and
people to John XXII., about the year 1315, repeated mention is
made of the Bull of Adrian. But then it is only cited there asa
conclusive argument ad hominem against the English traducers
of the Irish nation: ‘‘ lest the bitter and venomous calumnies of
the English, and their unjust and unfounded attacks upon us and
all who support our rights, may in any degree influence the mind
of your Holiness.” The Bull of Adrian IV, was published by the
English, and set forth by them as the charter-deed of their rule in
Ireland, yet they violated in a most flagrant manner all the con-
ditions of that Papal grant. The Irish princes and people in self-
defence had now made over the sovereignty of the island to Edward
Bruce, brother of the Scottish King ; they style him their adopted
monarch, aud they pray the Pope to give a formal sanction to their
proceedings. Thus, throughout the whole Remonstrance the Bull
of Adrian is used as a telling argument against the injustice of the
invaders, and as a precedent which John NXII. inight justly
follow in sanctioning the transfer of the Irish crown to Edward
Bruce. If it was lawful for Adrian IV. to grant the kingdom to
Henry II. under certain conditions, the King of England should
not complain if auother Pontiff were to transfer such a grant to
the Prince of Ireland’s choice, the conditions of the former pre-
tended grant not having been fulfilled. But in all this the his-
torian will find no grounds for asserting the genuineness of the
supposed Bulls of Adrian or Alexander. We shall just now see
that at this very time the Irish people generally regarded these
Bulls as spurious and niere inventions of their English enemies.

6. Baronius, the eminent ecclesiastical historian, inserts in his
invaluable 4nnals the Bnli of Adrian IV., ‘‘ from a Vatican Manu-
script.’”’ This is the sixth argument advanced by Mr. O’Callaghau.

It is not my intention to question in any way the services
rendered by Cardinal Baronius to the cause of our Church History ;
but at the same time no one will deny that considerable progress
has been made in historical research during the past three hundred
and fifty years, and many documents are now set aside which
were then accepted as unqnestioned on the supposed reliable
authority of preceding chroniclers.

In the present iustance we are nof left in doubt as to the source
whence Baronius derived his information regarding Adrian’s sup-
posed Bull. During my stay in Rome I took occasion to inquire
whether the MSS. of the cminent annalist, which are happily
preserved, indicated the special ‘‘ Vatican Manuscript ” referred to |
in his printed text, and I was informed by the then learned archivist
of the Vatican, Monsignor Theiner, that the Codex Vaticanus
referred to is a MS. copy of the history of Matthew Paris, which is
preserved in the Vatican Library. Thns it is the testimony of
Matthew Paris alone that here confronts us in the pages of Baronius,
and no new argument can be taken from the words of the eminent
annalist. Relving on the same high authority, I ain happy to state
that nowhere in the private archives or among the private papers
of the Vatican, or in the Regesta, which Jaffe’s researches have made
so famous, or in the various indices of the Pontifical Letters, can

184 DOCUMENTS.

a single trace be found of the supposed Bulls of Adrian IV. and
Alexander III.

7. The last argument advanced by Mr. O'Callaghan will not detain
us long. The insertion or omission of such ancient records in the
Bullarium is a matter that depends wholly on the critical skill of
the editor. Curious enough, in one edition of the Bullarium, as
may be seen in the refcrenees of Dr. Lanigan, Adrian’s Bull is
inserted, whilc no mention is made of that of Alexander ; in another
edition, however, the Bull of Alexander is given in full, whilst the
Bull of Adrian is omitted. We may well leave our opponents to
settle this mattcr with the conflicting editors of the Bullarium.
They, probably like Baronius, merely copied the Bull of Adrian
from Matthew Paris, and erred in doing so. Labbé, in his
magnificent cdition of the Councils, also pnblishes Adrian’s Bull,
but then he expressly tells us that it is copied from the work of
Matthew Paris.

' We have thus examined in detail the various arguments which
support the genuineness of the supposed Bnll, and now it only
remains for us to conclude that there are no sufficient grounds
for accepting that document as the genuine work of Pope Adrian.

Indeed the Irish nation at all times, as if instinctively, shrank
from accepting it as genuine, and unhesitatingly pronounced it an
Anglo-Norman forgery. We have already seen how even Giraldus
Cambrensis refers to the doubts which had arisen concerning the
Bull of Pope Alexander ; but we have at hand still more conclusive
evidence that Adrian’s Bull was reicctéd by the Irish pcople.
There is, happily, preserved in the Barbcrini archives, Rome, a
MS. of the fourteenth century, containing a series of official papers
connected with the Pontificate of John XXII., and ainongst them
is a letter from the Lord Justiciary and the Royal Council of
Ireland, forwarded to Rome under the Royal Seal, and presented
to His Holiness by William of Nottingham, Canon and Precentor!
of St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Dublin, about the vear 1325. In this
important, but hitherto unnoticed document, the Irish are accused
of very many crimes, among which is insidiously introduced the
rejection of the supposed Bulls: ‘ Moreover, they assert that the
King of England wnder false pretences and by false Bulls obtained
the dominion of Ireland, and this opinion is commonly held by them.”
‘* Asserentes etiam Dominum Regem Angliae ex falsa snggestione
et ex falsis Bullis terram Dliberniae in dominium impetrasse ac
communiter hoc tenentes.” This national tradition was pre-
served unbroken throughout the turmoil of the fifteenth and
sixtcenth centuries, and on the revival of Ireland’s historical litera-
ture in the beginning of the seventeenth-centurv, was registered
in the pages of Lynch, Stephen White, and other writers.

It will be well also whilst forming our judgment regarding this sup-
posed Bull of Adrian, to hold in mind the disturbed state of society,
especially in Italy, at the time to which it refers. At the present
day it would be no easy matter indeed for such a forgery to sur-
vive more than a few weeks. But at the close of the twelfth
century it was far otherwise. Owing to the constant revolutions

1Cotton, in Fasti ec. Hib. gives his name as Prezentor in 1323 to 1324,

DOCUMENTS. 185

and disturbances that then prevailed, the Pontiff was oftentimes
obliged to flee from city to city ; frequently his papers were seized
and burned, and he himself detained as a hostage or a prisoucr
by his enemies. Hence it is that several forged Bulls, examples
of which are given in Cambrensis Eversus, date from these times.
More than one of the grants made to the Norman families are now
believedl to rest on such forgeries; and that the Anglo-Norman
adventurers in Jreland were not strangers to such deeds of dark-
ness appears from the fact that a matrix for forging the Papal
Seal of such Bulls, now preserved in the Royal Irish Academy,
was found a few years ago in the ruins of One of the earliest Anglo-
Norman monasteries founded by De Courcy.

The circumstances of the publication of the Bull by Henry
were surely not calculated to disarm suspicion. Our opponents
do not pretend even that it was made known in Ireland till the
year 1175, and hence, though publicly granted with solemn investi-
ture, as John of Salisbury’s testimony would imply, and thongh
its record was deposited in the public archives of the kingdom,
this Bull, so vital to the interests of the Irish Church, should have
remained dormant for twenty years, unnoticed in Rome, unnoticed
by Henry’s courtiers, still more, unnoticed by the Irish Bishops,
and I will add, unnoticed by the Continental Sovereigns, so jealous
of the power and preponderance of the English monarch. For
such suppositions there is indeed no parallel in the whole history
of investitures. /

It is seldom, too, that the hand of the impostor may not be
detected in soine at least of the minor details of the spurious docu-
ment. In the present instance morc than one ancient M5. pre-
serves the concluding formula of the Bull: “Datum Romae ’’—
dated from Rome. Wow, this simple formula would suffice of itsclf
to prove the whole Bull to be a forgery. Before the uews of the
election of Pope Adrian to the Chair of St. Peter could reach England,
that Pontiff was obliged to seek for safety in flight from his capital.
Rome was in revolt, and Amold of Brescia sought to renew there
a spectre of the old Pagan Republic. John of Salisbury, in his
Polycraticus, faithfully attests that on his arrival in Italy, the Papal
Court was held not in Rome, but in Beneventum ; it was in this
city he presented to Pope Adrian the congratulations of Henry I1.,
and he mentions his sojourn there during the three months that he
remained in Italy. This is further confirmed by the Italian chron-
icles. Baronius saw the inconsistency of the formula, Datum
‘Romae, with the date 1155, and hence, in his annals, he entered
Adrian’s Bull under the year 1159; but if this date be correct,
surely then that Bull could not have been brought to Henry by
John of Salisbury, and the passage of the Metalogicus referring to
it must at once be admitted a forgery. Other historians have
been equally puzzled to find a year for this supposed Bull. For
instance, O'Halloran, in his History of Iveland, whilst admitting
that the Irish people always regarded the Bull as a forgery, refers
its date to the year 1167, that is, eight years after the death of
Pope Adrian IV.

There is one other reflection which forces itself on us wher
reading Adrian's supposed Bull. The condition of Ireland, and

186 DOCUMENTS.

the relations betwecn Ircland and the English King, which are set
forth in the supposed Bull, are preciscly those of the year 1172 ;
but it would have required more than a prophetic vision to have
anticipated them in 1155. In 1155 Ireland was not in a state of
turmoil, or verging towards barbarism ; on the contrary, it was
rapidly progressing, and renewing its claim to religious and moral
pre-eminence. I will add, that Pope Adrian, who had _ studied
under Marianus, an Irish master, kenw well this flourishing con-
dition of Ireland. In 1172, however, a sad change had come
over the island. Four ycars of continual warfare, and the ravages
of the Anglo-Norman filibusters, since their first landing in 1168,
had well nigh reduced Ireland to a state of barbarism, and the
authentic letters of Alexander IIJ, in 1172, faithfully describe
its most deplorable condition.

Moreover, an cxpedition of Henry to Ireland, which would
not be an invasion, and yet would merit the homage of the Irish
princes, was simply an impossibility in 1155. But owing to the
special circumstances of the kingdom, such in reality was the ex-
pedition of Henry in 1172. He set out for Ireland not avowedly
to invade and conquer it, but to curb the insolenee and to punish
the deeds of pillage of his own Norman frecbooters. Hence during
his stay in Ireland he fought no battle and made no conquest ; his
first measures of sevcrity were directed against some of the most
lawless of the early Norman adventurers, and this more than
any thing else reconciled the native princes to his military display.
In rcturn he received from a majority of the Irish chieftains the
empty titie of Avd-righ, or ‘‘ Head Sovereign,’ which did not
suppose any conquest on his part, and did not involve any sur-
render of their own hereditary rights. Such a state of things
could not have been imagined in 115%; and yet it is one which is
implied in the spurious Bull of the much maligned Pontiff, Adrian
the Fourth.

Since the publication of the above essay in November, 1872,
several interesting papers have appeared treating of the subject
in the fullest detail, some rejecting the Bull as a mere forgery,
othcrs presenting it as genuine and authentic.

Among the most determined opponents of the Bull I may
mention the French writer, Rev. Louis Chaillot, in the Analecta
juris Pontificli (Rome, May and June, 1882); Father Gasquet,
O.5.B., in the Dublin Review (July, 1883); Stephen T. M‘Cormick,
in The Pope and Iveland (San Francisco, 1889) ; Canon Belilesheim,
of Aix-la-Chapelle, in The Histery of the Catholic Church in Iveland
(Gecrinan ¢dition, 1890); and Father W. B. Morris, of the London
Oratory, in his interesting work, Ireland and St. Patrick (1801).

The genuineness of the Bull has been, on the other hand, stoutly
inaintaincd by the Rev. Sylvester Malone, in the Dublin Review
(April, 1884); by Miss Norgate, in the English Historical Review
(January, 1893); and by Alfred Yarlcton, in his Life of Niholas
Breahspeare (London, 1896).

Looking back upon the whole discussion, it appears to me that
he arguments as set forth in my former essay remain unshaken.

DOCUMENTS. 187

Add to this that considerable light has been thrown on the circum-
stances of the times and other details which briny those arguments
into bolder relief, and thus it becomes more and more evident that
the supposed Bull was a mere clumsy forgery of the English monarch
or his courtiers. I shall endeavour to compendiate in a few para-
graphs the additional information which has heen gleaned regard-
ing this subject during the past twenty-five years.

(a) It is now very generally admitted that during the turmoil
of the twelfth century, when there was question of local or personal
interests, ambitious men did not shrink from the crime of forgery.
The disturbed condition of Italy, and in particular of Rome, lent
special facilities for falsifying the Papal documents, and made the
detection of forgery proportionately difficult. Repeatedly the
Popes were compelled to flee from Rome, whilst Arnoldo of Brescia
or his disciples assumed the reins of government. Professor
Jungman writes: “It is well known from history that everywhere
towards the close of the twelth century forged or corrupted Papal
Letters or Diplomas were not uncommon. That such was_ the
case in England is susceptible of proof froni the Letters of John
of Salisbury and of others, Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury,
successor of St. Thomas 4 Beckett, instructcd all the Bishops of
England to promulgate in all their churches the severe sentence of
excommunication against the public pest of forgery, so common
had this crime become in the twelfth century. In the time of
Pcpe Innocent III. also, various statutes were enacted agains:
this abominable crime, which was becoming daily more widespread
and dangcrous.” John of Salisbury’s testimony sets this matter
beyond all doubt. He expressly attests that the forger had been
busy with the Letters of Pope Alexander III., and writing to that
Pontiff (Epis. 129), he asks: ‘‘ Nobis si placet rescribite qua ani-
madversione ferendi sunt corruptores literarum vestrarum.”
Gervase, in his chronicle, at the year 1181, makes reference to
“several rare and suspicious documents,’ which were produced
about this time,

The question may now be asked, was Henry’s character such as
to free himself and his courtiers from all suspicion of having recourse
to such forgeries, the better to attain his ends ? The career of but
few of the kings of England has been sketched for us in darker
colours than that of Henry II]. And the account comes to us
not from later writers, but from conteinporaries best acquainted
with his perverseness and duplicity. St. Thomas of Canterbury
did not hesitate to write that ‘‘ from the first day of his accession
to power, he has stretched out his hand against the hberties of the
Church, as if they were his own hereditary right.” Cardinal
Vivian, Papal Legate in England and Ireland, spcaking of the King,
said, ‘‘ Never did I witness this man’s equal in lying.” Louis of
France declared to Henry's ambassadors that “ their master was
so full of fraud and deceit that it was unpossible to keep faith with
him ” (Lingard, Hist. of Eny., ii., p. 106, n.). This prepares us for
the entry in the very accurate continuation of the Chronicle of
Sigebert, under the year 1171: ‘‘ Henry, King of England, puffed
up with pride, and usurping things not conceded, striving for things
he had‘no business to do, prepared ships and called together the

188 DOCUMENTS.

soldiers of his kingdom to conquer Ireland’ (Migne, Patrol., cix.,
307). The supposed Bull of Adrian would have been of no little
value to Henry in his dealings with the Irish Bishops soon after
the invasion. It gave some colour of justice to the course which
he pursued, and afforded a plausible pretext to the courtiers to
quell the opposition of those who on religious grounds might be
unwilling to accept Henry’s rule in Ireland. a
(b) Father Morris of the London Oratory, in his intcresting
work, Iveland and St. Patrick (1891), dwells at considerable length
on the unenviable character of the English King, which indeed is
now unquestioned among the students of history, and he draws
thence the conclusion that it is quite inconsistent with the whole
career of Pope Adrian to suppose that such a Pontiff would assign
to such a king the guardianship of the rights and liberties of the
Irish Church. In reply to Father Morris’s line of argument, Miss
Norgate triumphantly appeals to the high opinion entertained
by the English people of the character of their young Angevin
King in the bright morning of his reign, the English Chronicle
attesting that ‘‘ all folk loved him, for he did good justice and
made peace.”’ This however, is not a sufficient reply to the argu-
ment of Father Morris. It is quite true that in the first months
of his reign in 1154, he left nothing undone to ingratiate himself
with the English people, and hence he was for a time idolized by
them, but this did not prevent him from ambitioning at the very
outset of his reign to grasp the rich domains of the Church and
to crush her liberties, and from the letters of the Archbishop of
Canterbury it is more than probable that those designs of Henry
were well known at the Roman Court in the very first days of

Adrian’s Pontificate. The contemporary, Roger of Pontigny,
under the year 1154, says that, when Henry succeeded to his an-
cestral kingdom, a great thirst for novelties arose in England.
And no slight fear took hold of the Church of that country, as well
because of the suspicious age of the king, as from the notorious
malignity of his family in their dealings with the rights of eccles-
iastical liberty.’’ William of Canterbury writcs in the same Style,
and describes this ‘‘ malice of the king’s designs’’ at the very
outset of his rcign, as well as the boldness of his ministers in “‘ con-
spiring to strip the Church of her possessions.”

' (c) As the matter at prescnt stands Giraldus Camibrcnsis is
the sole witness on whose testimony we have to rcly, whilst we
accept aS genuine the Bull of Pope Adrian. It is now admitted
that Matthew Paris and other chroniclers merely copied the Bull
from his pages. The queStion, therefore, may be asked : Is Giraldus
a writer to whose testimony implicit credence can be given, par-
ticularly in matters relating to Irish history, or, on the other hand,
may it be supposed that without much investigation or minute
inquiry le accepted on the word of Henry’s{courtiers the supposed
Bull as authentic and genuine? The sketch of the character of
Giraldus‘in the preceding essay will enable the reader to form an
accurate opinion as to the answer which should be given to such
a question. The writer in the English Historical Review, on the
other hand, contends that the testimony of Giraldus is unim-
peachable, and criticises with nollittle severity the statement of

POCUMENTS. 189

Father Morris, that Giraldus should be regarded as “ the venal
court historian of Henry IT.”

In proof of her contention Miss Norgate appeals to the unbend-
ing opposition of the King at the time when Giraldus applied for
promotion to some rich benefices in Wales, and to the bitter enmity
of Giraldus, as shown in many of his writings, towards Henry.
However, the old maxim, distingue tempora ct conciliabis jura,
may here be very well applied. In the earlier years of Giraldus’s
career, when promotion to rich benefices in his native Walcs was
refused him, he wrote in a spirit of bitterest hostility to the King.
And again towards the close of his life, when he sought to be pro-
moted to the See of St. David’s, and ambitioned other high Church
preferment, the old bitterness of hostility to the royal court was
revived. But at the period to which Giraldus’s writings on Ireland
must be referred, all this was changed. No one was more ready
than he to alter his views according to the measure of royal patron-
age extended to him. At the time of which we treat Giraldus
enjoyed the favour of Henry, and repaid with abject flattery the
patronage of the King. In the Dictionary of National Biography,
now in the course of publication, we read: ‘' In 1184 Giraldus was
made one of Henry II.’s chaplains, and was sent by the King to
accompany his son John in his expedition to Ireland. He was
offered whilst in Ireland the bishopricks of Wexford and Leighlin,
and apparently at a little later time, the bishoprick of Ossory
and the archbishoprick of Cashel, but declined them all, It is to
this journey we owe the treatise Topographia Hibernica, dedicated
to Henry II., which appeared in 1188. It gives an account of the
general features of the country, its productious, climate, &c.,
mixed up with many marvellous stories. The Expugnatio Hibernica,
which probably appeared the same year, dedicated to Richard
(Strongbow), though containing much that is interesting and
valuable, can scarcely be considered as sober, truthful history.”
(Vol. xxi., 390). The lack of critical acumen is seen in all Giraldus’s
writings. The history and antiquities of Wales were the favourite
subjects of his studies. Nevertheless, of his chief work, De Jure
Menevensts Ecclesiae, Mr. Brewer remarks that it exhibits ‘‘a
strange mixture of antiquarian research with a total absence of all
historical criticism.” Giraldus dedicating his Topographia to
Henry can hardly find words sufficient for the king’s eulogy. He
styles him the ‘‘ Alexander of the West,’ the “ Invincible,’ the
“Solomon of his age,’ “ the most pious of princes.” Of Giraldus’s
slanderons attacks on Ireland one specimen will suffice. He
deliberately sets forth that from the days of St. Patrick the Bishops
of Ireland, without a solitary exception, had utterly neglected
their sacred duties. The Anglican editor of his works, Rev. Mr.
Dimock, remarks on this: ‘‘ Giraldus was replete with the exact
qualities the very reverse of what was needed to form an accurate
historian. He asserts that from the time of St. Patrick there
had never been a single Irish bishop who had manfully striven to
instruct and correct the people, and this he asserts, though St.
Malachy’s fame could not possibly be unknown to him. St.
Malachy had been dead only about forty years; and few, if any,
more earnest and laborious instructors and reformers can perhaps

Igo DOCUMENTS,

be named, among the bishops of all Christendom of all times, and
he had contemporaries and followers not unworthy of him. And
this, too, he asserts of the Isle of Saints, for ages after Patrick’s
time the great nursery of missionary Bishops, Apostles of the
faith, throughout the wide district of the Continent of Europe,
where the name of many an Irish saint and martyr is still held in
reverence ; to whom also was due the conversion of Scotland and
of a large part of Saxon England.’’ Dimock might have added
that at the very time of the English invasion St. Laurence O’Toolc
was Archbishop of Dublin, whilst St. Gelasius ruled in Armagh,
and St. Christian was Bishop of Lismore. The learned Ware was
in many ways prejudiced against Ireland; nevertheless, in his
Antiquities of Iveland (ch. xxiii.) he does not hesitate to write:
“I cannot but express my surprise how men nowadays, othcr-
wise grave and learned, have obtruded on the world the fictions
of Giraldus for truths.’’!

(d) In the preceding essay it is mentioned incidentally that
Adrian’s Bull was not allowed a place in Jaffe’s Regesta. Since the
publication of that essay a new edition of the Regesta has appeared
in Germany, with the addition of Adrian’s Bull. Interrogated on
this matter, the editors have replied that this addition was made
on the authority of a newly discovered mannscript exemplar of
the Bull in the Vatican archives. Through the kindness of a very
distinguished friend further inquiries were made at the Vatican,
which elicited from Very Rev. Father Deniflé, the present illus-
trious Vatican archivist, an attestation to the effect that when
the papers formerly preserved in the Castle of San Angelo were
examined a few years ago, a copy of thc famons Bull was found ;
it was nothing morc, however, than a transcript madc in the four-
tcenth century, and was manifestly copicd from the work of
Matthew Paris. Such an addition, thercfore, adds no evidence
.in favour of the authenticity of Adrian’s Bull.

fe) In the lithographed edition of the Leabhar Breac (fifteenth
cecntury MS.), published by Royal Irish Academy, Adrian’s Bull
appears, as if it had originally formcd part of that valuable collec-
tion of carly records, and the readcr would be led to suppose that
its text was written by the same hand as the remainder of the
MS. In the original MS., howevcr, it is seen to be written by
quite a differcnt and more recent hand, on a vacant column, between
two old Celtic tracts of the original compilation. When I collated
the text, in the original vencrable MS. in Trinity College, Dublin,
Library, many years ago, the letters Gir, though partly effaced,
were still legible at the toot of Adrian’s Bull. This, Ineed scarcely
remark, indicated Giraldus as the source whence the Bull had been
derived.

(4) Some modern Protestant scribes in Ircland, following in the
steps of Rev. Robert King (in Primer of the Church History of
Ireland), have appealed to another passage in Leabhar Breac, in

1J%n regard to John of Salisbury, it may be remarked that after the death of Pope
Adrian he feil into disgrace at Henry’s Court, Nevertheless, in his many subsequent
letters setting forth his merits, snd defending himself agaiust the displeasure of the
King, he never thought of pleading the service he had rendered in obtaining the gift of

Ireland-

DOCUMENTS. IQ

proof that Adrian IV. sold Ireland to the English King. The pas-
sage referred to is as follows : ‘‘ O’Annoc and O’Chalchin, of Kilmore,
O’Sluaisi of Cooloslushty,* and O’Glesain: these were they who
stole the horses, and the mulcs, and the asses of the Cardinal who
camc from Rome io the Land of Erin to instruct in the time
of Domhnall More O’Brien, King of Munster: and it was on that
account the successor of Peter sold the rent and right of Erin to
the Saxons: and that is the right and title which the Saxons hold
on the Gaedhil at this day ; for it was to the successor of Peter,
to Rome, used to go the rent and tribute of Erin till then.”

This, however, is nothing more than a gossiping sentence, intro-
duced by the scribe, having no historical weight, and having no
connection whatever with the ancient tracts copied into the Leabhay
Breac. Cardinal Vivian was the first Cardinal who visited Ireland
during the reign of the famous Domnhall More O’ Brien (whose death
is recorded in 1194). Cardinal Vivian, however, did not visit
Ireland till the year 1177, when the invasion of Ireland was an
accomplished fact, and when more than twenty years had elapsed
since the supposed grant of the kingdom was made by Adrian’s
Bull. Dombnall More O’Brien did not succeed to the throne till
long after the death of Pope Adrian IV.

(g) It is not easy, however, to reconcile the course pursued in
Ireland by Cardinal Vivian, Legate of Pope Alexander III., with
the supposition that that Pontiff and his predecessor, Adrian,
had by solemn Bull assigned the lordship of Ireland to King Henry
IL. He arrived in Ireland, as I have said, in 1177, and Roger de
Hoveden tells of the King’s rage because he knew him to {be
hostile to him. ‘The chronicler adds that De Courcy made him
prisoner in Ulster. William of Newbury further relates: ‘‘ John
De Courcy, having collected a powerful body of knights and foot
soldiers, determined to invade Ulster, that province of Ireland
which is separated from Scotland by a narrow strait. It happened
that Vivian, the Legate of the Holy See, a man remarkable for his
eloquence, had just then arrived in these parts from Scotland.
He had been honourably received by the King of Ulster and the
Bishops of the Province, and at the time was residing in the city
of Down, near the sea. When the news arrived of the approach
of the enemy, the Irish consulted the Legate on the course to be
pursued in this emergency; he answered that it was their duty
to fight for their fatherland and their liberty, at the same time
offering up public prayers for their success Thus encouraged,
they sallied forth impetuously ”’ (Gesta Angl., iii., 9). How different
is this narrative from the account of Vivian’s proceedings given in
the Anglo-Irish Annals by Dowling: “ Vivian, Cardinal of the title
of St. Stephen in Monte Caelio, came into Ireland as Legate of the
Apostolic See, with a commission from Pope Alcxander to pro-
claim to the people the title and intcrests of their Lord the King
of England in the Island of Ireland, with reservation of Peter’s
Pence, and also to denounce as excommunicated and accursed all
that would resist the soldiers and agents of their lord the King,
or that would refuse to supply them with victuals and food at a
reasonable price.”” It is manifest that the same evil genius that dic-

1g2 DOCUMENTS.
tated the spurious Bull inspired also this Anglo-Norman record of
Cardinal Vivian’s mission.

(kh) We may now advance a step further to search out some
at lcast of the materials made use of by the King or courtier who
concocted the pretended Bull of Pope Adrian.

There is a gennine Brief ot the Pontiff, addressed to King Louis
VI. of France, and dated the 12th of the Kalends of May, 1159.
It has been published by Duchesne, /térum Franc. Scriptores ,
Bouquet, Recueil des Historiens ; Bongar’s Gesta Det per Francos ;
Migne, Patrologia, vol. 188, and other writers.

Towards the close of the year 1158, the Bishop of Evreux, in
Normandy, was dispatched to Rome by the French King to solicit
the Pontiff’s sanction for a joint expedition of French and English
troops into the Spanish territory, to restore religion in those parts,
and to free the faithful there from their worse than pagan oppressors.
The Bishop of Evreux was born in England, and had been mainly
instrumental-in effecting, at this very period the reconciliation of
the English and French monarchs, who in 1158, in token of their
friendship, made a joint pilgrimage to the sanctuary of Mount
St. Michael’s, in Normandy. The friend of both monarchs, he re-
presented both in his embassy to Rome, and pledged the hearty
co-operation of Henry’s army in the military crusade on which
King Louis had set his heart. The Pontiff, however, refused his
sanction, and in the Brief of 1159, whilst commending the motives
which swayed the French monarch in devising this expedition,
sets forth in detail the reasons why he felt constrained to refuse
his sanction to it. From the nature of this correspondence the
Brief referred to must have been unknown to the public at the
period to which we refer, but on the other hand it must have been
im due coursc communicated to the English King and his courtiers,
Now the preamble of this Brief supplied abundant material for the
forger for embodying in his Bull the Pontiff’s ideas. We will here
present in parallel] columns a few phrascs from both documents :—

FORGED BULL.
Laudabiliter satis et fruc-
tuose de glorioso nomine propa-
gando in terris, et aeternae
felicitatis praemio cumulando in
coelis, tua magnificentia cogitat
dum ad dilatandos Ecclesiae ter-
minos, &c., &c.... sicut Catho-
licus princeps intendis, et ad
id convenientius exequendum
consilium Apostolicae Sedis ex-
igis et favorem ...ad bonum
cxitum et finem solent attingere
quae de ardore fidei et religionis
amore principium habuerunt,
&c.

AUTHENTIC BRIEF OF 1159.

Satis laudabiliter et fructuose
de Christiano nomine propa-
gando in terris, et aeternae beati-
tudinis praemio tibi cumulando
in coelis, tua videtur magnifi-
centia cogitare, dum ad dilatan-
dos terminos populi Christiani,
&c. . . . in H. properare
intendis, &c., atque ad id con-
venientius exequendum, matris
tuae sacrosanctae Romanae Ec-
clesiae consilium exigis et favo-
rem, &c., ac de majori ardorc
fidei et religionis amore propo-
situm et desiderium tuum prin-
cipium habuerunt, &c.

Now, one thing at lcast is nnqucstionable in the matter of the

DOCUMENTS. 193

Pontifical Briefs, that the writers were mastcrs of the Latin tongue,
and most felicitous in varying the form of cxpression even when
the same ideas had to be conveyed ; and at no timc was the Latin
style of the Papal correspondence more classic or more jealously
attended to than at the very period to which these Bricfs refer.
If we suppose that Adrian’s Bull of the year 1155 be genuine, we
shall have to admit in the Brief of 1144, such a copying
of formulas and phrases as is without parallel in the authentic
registers of the Papal Letters. And the anomaly becomes the greater
when we consider that this copying of former documents would be
found in a Brief addressed to the most powerful sovereign in
Europe when treating of a matter of the greatest delicacy and
importance, and conjointly with him to the very king to whom
the former Bull had been addressed, As it is impossible to suppose
that the Pontifical Secretary, in drawing up such a royal Brief of
1159, would hsve copied from a royal Bull of 1155 ; and as the Brief
of 1159 is uuquestionably genuine it follows that the Bull of 1155
must be sct aside as spurions and of no authority.'
(t) In the essay published twenty-five years ago I gave one
‘Instance im connection with Pope Adrian’s Bull to illustrate the
character of the ‘‘ Lectures on Irish History,’”’ delivered by the
Protestant professors in Ireland in those days. I may be, allowed
to cite another instance from a more recent work, in proof that
the old methods of falsifying history still rule supreme in the Pro-
testant University of Ireland. In 1889, Rev. Dr. Stokes, Professor
of Ecclesiastical History in Trinity College, Dublin, published a
volume of his lectures on “ Ireland and the Anglo-Norman Church.’’
The second lecture is devoted to Giraldus Cambrensis and the Bull
of Adrian IV. He eulogises Giraldus as quite a model historian,
and it is quite apparent that Dr. Stokes in his lectures, whilst
decrying everything connected with the Catholic Church in Ireland,
has taken Giraldus for his guide, philosopher, and friend. As
regards the Bull of Pope Adrian, he assures his readers that the only
argument advanced against it is ‘‘ that no copy of the Bull has been
found, or now exists in the Vatican archives.’’ He exults in de-
molishing this visionary argument, which, however, none but him-
self has built up. JI need scarcely remark that even the negative
argument for rejecting the supposed Bull is far different irom that
suggested by Dr. Stokes. ft is simply this: No Pontifical Bull or
Brief can be accepted unless it be presented by some credible
witness, whose authority may be sufficient to attest its genuineness.
Now we have no such witness for Adrian’s Bull. Here, however,
Dr. Stokes declares the testimony of Giraldus in regard to Adrian’s
Bull to be quite irrefragable: ‘‘ Giraldus had abundant means to
satisfy himself (he says) as to the authenticity of the document.
He lived for years at Rome, he had continual access to the Papal
Registers, which he carefully investigated. . . . Giraldus had no

1 do not deem ‘t necessary to make special reference to the ingenious theory devised
by Chaillot, to the effect that the Pontifical Brief of 1149 had reference not to Spain
but to Ireland The only apparent argument in favour of this theory is that in the
proper names Hibernia and Ilispania, the initial capical letter is the same, Few, how-
ever, will be convinced by such an argument, the more so as the whole context of the
‘Brief has manifest reference to the condition of Spain in those days,

oO

194 DOCUMENTS.

conceivable motive for forging this Bull in favour of a king he hated,
and who had mortally injured him.’’ The only proof for Giraldus’s
acquaintance with the Roman Registers is the Rev. Professor’s
vivid imagination. It is not at all necessary to suppose that the
Bull was forged by Giraldus. Any other courtier may be respons-
ible for that serious crime. His uncritical frame of mind made it
particularly easy to impose such frandulent documents on hin. He
tells us himseif that he made four journeys to Rome, but it was
between the years 1199 and 1203. His one ambition in these
journeys was to obtain the See of St. David’s, and the forged Bulls
had already been many years published. He presented to the
Court in Rome several of his works which he names, but iu that
list we search in vain for the Erpugnatio Hiber nica, which contained
the forged Bulls. As regards Giraldus’s hatred of the King at
the period of which we treat it is a mere dreain of Rev. Professor
Stokes. I have already given sufficient proof of the abject flattery
of the English King, which characterises Giraldus’s writings on
Ireland. It may be added that Giraldus dedicated the Topogra-
phia Hibernica to King Henry, and when a second edition was
brought out after the King’s death, he prefixed a letter addressed
to John, the Lord of Ireland, in which he declares that his object
in writing those works on Ireland was to sound King Henry’s
praises, in laudem regis.

(k) It may now be asked was the Church of Ireland at the time
of the accession of Pope Adrian IV. in that desolate condition of
decay and barbarism which is set forth in the supposed Bull. The
one witness to the decay of religion and morality in Ireland in the
beginning of the twelfth century to whom the champions of the
autheuticity of Adrian’s Bull appeal is St. Bernard. But this
same venerable witness attests that, through the excrtions of St.
Malachy, the weeds of vice had been plucked out and Christian
civilization restored, religious faith had been revived throughout
the length and breadth of the land, and Christian virtues were
preached, so that at the time of the saint’s death in 1148 the Trish
Church was arrayed in its pristine splendour. Speaking of St.
Malachy, St. Bernard says that when he visited Pope Eugene III.
in Rome, ‘“‘ the Sovereign Pontiff on many occasions, and with
great care, miade inquiries concerning the state of the Church in
his country, and when he was preparing to depart, authorised him
to act for him throughout the whole of Ireland ; and taking the
mitre from his head, he placed it on that of Malachy, giving him
also the stole and maniple, which hc used in offering the Holy
Sacrifice.’ St. Bernard adds that Malachy was not slow in carry-
ing out the wishes of the Pontiff: ‘‘ It isnot the receiving of honour
that engages his attention, but rather the execution of the duties
belonging to his Legateship. In various places various conven-
tions are held, so that no district, or part of a district, should be
left without the fruits and advantages of his legatine office. The
seed is sown upon all waters ; there is no one able to hide himself
from the influence of his anxious care. Not sex, not age, not
condition, not profession enters into his calculations. Among all
alike the health-giving seed is scattered; among all alike the
heavenly trumpet sends forth its note. ... Religion is planted,

DOCUMENTS. 195

propagated, cherished in every quarter. In the Councils, which
are celebrated in all parts of the land, traditions of ancient date
ate revived ; new ones are also devised. And all appointments
promulgated by him, like decrees issued from heaven itself, are
adopted, enforced, and secured in written records, in order to
their preservation for posterity.’’ This, however, is a theme on
which it is not necessary to dwell at any length. Suffice it to say
that the Bishops of Ireland throughout the period wcre men accord-
ing to St. Malachy’s own heart, and enjoyed in the fullest measure
the confidence of the Holy See. In token of pcrfect order being
restored in the trish Church, and of the confidence placed in the
Irish Bishops by Rome, Cardinal John Paparo was sent to Ireland
in 1152, only two years before Pope Adrian’s accession, and in the
National Synol, held at Kells, in the presence of the Irish Bishops
and of 300 priests, and of very many of the princes and chieftains
of Erin, he soleinnly granted to the four archbishops the Blessed
Pallinm for which St. Malachy had so earnestly pleaded. From
the lettcrs of Adrian the Fourth and his immediate successors it
is manifest that the conferring of the Palliumi in those days was
regarded as the highest honour and most distinctive proof of sin-
gular estecin and favour that the Holy Sce could confcr upon any
National Church. Such an estimate of the Irish Church in Rome
is quite inconsistent with the picture of its deformity which the
supposed Bull of Adrian presents.

4 PATRICK F, CARD. MORAN.

No. 2.

LETTER OF POPE ADRIAN IV. TO KING LOUIS VIL,
DISSUADING HIM FROM THE IRISH EXPEDITION.

Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei, charissimo in Christo
filio Ludovico illustri Francoruin Regi, salutem et apostolicam
benedictionem.

Satis laudabiliter et tructuose de Christiano nomine propagando
in terris, et wtern~ beatitudinis premio tibi cuinulando in coelis,
tua videtur magnificentia cogitare, dum ad dilatandos terminos
populi Christiani, ad paganorum barbariem debellandam, et ad
gentes apostatrices, et que catholicw fidei refugiunt nec recipiuut
veritatem, christianorum jugo et ditioni subdendas, simul cum
charissimo filio nostro Henrico illustri Anglorum rege, in H. pro-
perare disponis, et studes assidue (ut opus hoc felicem exitum
sortiatur) exercitum et quae sunt itinerl necessarla congregare.
Atque ad id convenientius exsequendum, niatris tue sacrosancte
Romane Ecclesize consilium exigis et favorem. Quod quidem
propositum tanto magis gratum acceptumque tenemus, et amplius
sicut commendandum est commendamus, quanto de sinceriori
charitatis radice talem intentionem et votuin tam laudabile proces-

196 DOCUMENTS.

sisse credimus, ac de majori ardore fidei ct religionis amore pro-
positum et desiderium tuum principium acceperunt.

Vernm cum excellentia tua et consilii maturitate sit provida, et
iuce illustrata, in ordine ipsius facti videtur plurimum esse festina.
Unde et multos attonitos reddidit, et suspensos, cum1 omne bonum
quod suo tempore et competenti ordine exercetur, eterno Conditori
placitum habeatur modis omnibus et acceptum, aliter autem non
potest gratum ejus existere voluntati. Quod utique wt magis
appareat, et ut sit quod proponimus paulo amplius maniiestum,
aliquid exempli gratia duximus, non inutiliter snpponendum.
Corpus quidem Christi conficere, et in ara Dominica hoStiam immo-
lare, rectum, imo et salutiferum esse, nemo qui recte sapit ignorat.
Cxterum si tempore suo et horis inmolatum non tfuerit consti-
tutis, jam illud reservatur ad poenani quod exspectebatur ad gloriam;
et qui extra tempus immolat constitutum, inde sibi damnationeimn
dolebit infligi: unde, si constituto tempore immolasset, meritum
sibi yauderet et premium auyimentari.

Accedit ad hoc quod alienam terram intrare nec providum
videtur esse, nec tutum, nisi a principibus et a populo terre prius
consilium requiratur. Tu vero, sicut accepimus, inconsulta Ec-
clesia, et principibus terre illius, accedere illuc et festinarc disponis,
cium hoc deberes nulla ratione tentare, nisi cognita per principes
terre necessitate, et ab eis prius esses exinde requisitus. Unde
quia nos honorem et incrementum tuum tota mentis intentione
diligimus, et nibil tale te aggredi, nisi rationabili causa exigente,
vellemus, snblimitati tue prwsentibus litteris suademus ut prius
necessitatem terre per principes illins regni inspicias, ct consideres,
et tain illius Ecclesie quam principum et populi voluntatem dili-
genter inquiras, et ab eis consittum,-sicut decct, accipias. Quo
jacto, si et necessitate:n terra videris imniinere et Ecclesix consilium
fuerit, ipsi etiam terre principes tue sublimitatis auxilium postu-
laverint, et consilium dedcrint, juxta postulationem et consultum
coruin potcris postea in facto ipso procedere, et laudabile votum
tuuin, divino comitante prwsidio, adimplere. Aliter tamen timen-
dum esset, ne iter tuum infructuosuni existcret, et ne ad desideratum
non possct exituin pcervenirc. Ipsi vero principes et populus in
tanto apparatu tuo, si forte non necessitas incuinberet, gravarentur,
et nos ipsi levcs in hoc facto possemus multipliciter apparere.

Debet enim screnitatis tua celsitudo recolcre, et ad memoriam
revocare, qualiter alio tempore, cuin tam Conradus bonw memorize
quondani rex Romanorum, quam tu ipse, inconsulto populo terre,
Hierosolymitanum iter minus caute aggressi estis, speratumi fruc-
tum et optatum colmmodum non perceperitis, et quantum Ecclesiz
Dei et universo fere populo Christiano detrinicntum exinde pro-
venerit’ et jactura. Sane quoque Romanez Ecclesix, quia vobis
super hoc consilinm prestiterat et favorem, in ipso facto fuit non
modicum derogatum ; et omnes adversus ipsam ex miulta indig-
natione clamabant, dicentes, eam auctricein tanti periculi exstitisse.

Cum igitur hac omnia sollicite cogitantibus occurrerent formi-
danda, nos admonitionem et exhortationem apostolicani ad popu-
lum regni tui, secundum quod venerabilis frater R. Ebroicensis
episcopus nobis ex tua parte proposuit, duximus differendam.
Attendentes quoniam quod differtur ad tempus, penitus non anfer-

DOCUMENTS. 197

tur. Sed tune tandein exhortatorias et commonitorias litteras
in peccatorum remissionem juxta desiderium glorie tue, auctore
Domino, transmittemus, cum de consilio et postulatione tam
principum quam populi terra illius, sicut superius dictum est,
volneris iter arripere, et conceptum in animo votum necessitatis
tempore, cum forte modo aliqua necessitas non immineat, dis-
crete ac laudabiliter disponeris adimplere.

Litteras autein, in quibus regnum tuum sub beati Petri et
nostra protectione susciperemus, his qui regnum ipsum usque ad
reditum tuum presumerent impugnare, irai et’ indignationem
apostolicam proponentes, secundum petitionem regi dlignitatis
nec ad prwsens duximus concedendas. Nos etiain, te etiain re-
ticente, et a nobis nullatenus exigente, pro illius fervore dilectionis
quam erga tuam sublimitatem habemus, quidquid honoris ct cx-
altatimiis tibi et regno tuo exhibere possemus, prompto animo
curaremus efficere, et operibus adimplere. Sane discretio tua et
nostram dissuasionem, quam rationabiliter credimus nos __fecisse,
provida deliberatione consideret, atque alia per qua ad illud iter
tam festinanter aspiras, inspiciat et attendat. Ft illud tandem
tibi consilium super negotio ipso eligas, quod miayis de judicio
rationis cognoveris eligendum.-

De catero, ea que memoratus frater noster episcopus ex nostra
parte regiw proposuerit dignitati, velut si ab ore nostro procederent,
absque ulla hesitatione suscipias, et ipsius verbis, tanquam si
contingeret nos ea proferre, fidem non dubites adhibere. Ille
namque injunctam sibi legationem ita prudenter fuit et sollicite
exsecutus, quod omne illud a nobis studio sux probitatis et dis-
cretionis obtinuit, quidquid per sollicitam et providam vigilantiam
debuerit quilibet alius obtinere_.-.—-—.

Datum Laterani XII Kalen. Martii.

_ (Bongars, Gesta Det per Francos, p. 1174; André Duchesne,
Rerum Francicarum Scriptores, t. iv., p. 557; Dom Bouquet,
Recueil des Historiens de France, t. 18; Migne, Patrologte, t. 188,

col. 1615.)

 

No. 3.
FROM 