The Red VirginMemoirs of Louise MichelLouise Michel, drawn from life, 1880. (Photo. Bib\. nat. Paris)The Ked VirginMemoirs ofLouise Micheledited and translated byBullitt LowryandElizabeth Ellington GunterThe University of Alabama PressUniversity, AlabamaPublication of this book has been assisted by agrantfrom the National Endowment for theHumanities.Copyright © 1981 byThe University of Alabama PressAll rights reservedManufactured in the United States of AmericaLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication DataMichel. Louise, 1830-1905.The Red Virgin: Memoirs of Louise MichelTranslation of Memoires de Louise Michel, ecrits par elle-meme.Bibliography: p.Includes index.1. Michel, Louise, 1830-1905. 2. Paris-History-Commune, 1871-5ources. 3.Revolutionists-France-Biography. 4. New Caledonia-Description and travel. 5.Political prisoners-France-Biography. I. Lowry, Bulliu, 1936- II. Gunter, ElizabethEllington, 1942- Ill. TitleDC342.8.M64A313944.081'2'0924 [B)80-23073ISBN 0-8173-0063-5 (alk. paper)To Anne, Ross, and SheilaAcknowledgmentsThe translators wish to express their appreciation to Stonecloud (1975),which published an earlier version of Chapter 18, "Women's Rights,"and to The Phoenix (Summer and Fall, 1977), which published abridgedversions of Chapter 4, "The Making of a Revolutionary," Chapter 10,"After the Commune," and Chapters 12-14 on New Caledonia.ContentsTranslators' Introduction1. Introduction2. Vroncourt3. The End of Childhood4. The Making of a Revolutionary5. Schoolmistress in the Haute-Marne6. Schoolmistress in Paris7. The Decaying Empire8. The Siege of Paris9. The Commune of Paris10. After the Commune11. The Trial of 187112. Voyage to Exile13. Numbo, New Caledonia14. The Bay of the West15. Noumea and the Return16. Speeches and Journalism, November 1880-January 188217. The Death of Marie Ferre18. Women's Rights19. Speeches Abroad, 1882-188320. Speeches in France, 1882-188321. The Trial of 188322. Prison23. My Mother's Death24. Final ThoughtsEpilogueBibliographyTranslators' NoteAppendix I. Chapter List Showing Source in Original TextAppendix II. Table of Poems in Original TextIndexVlll141524313845566369818995104115123135139143150158172179190198202204206207209Translators' IntroductionEven today, Louise Michel, who won fame as the "Red Virgin" duringthe Paris Commune of 1871, remains a heroine to the French Left.While Karl Marx sat in the British Museum writing tracts, Michel wasfacing French government troops across the barricades of Paris. Whileher contemporaries were just beginning to decry colonialism, she, as aconvict in New Caledonia, was involved in the Kanaka uprising of 1878.Freed by the amnesty of 1880 from her exile at the other end of theearth, she returned to France and the speaker's platform, and except forseveral periods in prison she continued her revolutionary exhortationsuntil her death in 1905.Born illegitimately on 29 May 1830, Louise Michel was brought up byher mother and paternal grandparents in a half-ruined, fortified manorhouse in the Haute-Marne. Her paternal grandfather, Etienne-CharlesDemahis, was descended from nobility and had changed his name fromDe Mahis to the less grand Demahis in republican sympathy with theFrench Revolution of 1789. Although impoverished, he was serving asmayor of the village of Vroncourt when Louise was born to a servant ofthe household, Marie Anne (or Marianne) Michel, and his son Laurent,of whom no further record exists. Louise was raised as if she had been alegitimate Demahis granddaughter, and after her paternal grandparents died, she became a schoolmistress, teaching first in the HauteMarne and later in Paris. She turned to revolutionary dreams andbecame deeply involved in radical affairs during the twilight of France'sSecond Empire, the gaslit Paris of Louis Napoleon. During the FrancoPrussian War of 1870 and the Prussian siege of Paris, she was a leadingmember of the revolutionary groups controlling Montmartre, thatsqualid and colorful district which has been inhabited by the disaffectedpoor for centuries. During the Paris Commune of March to May 1871,when the citizens of Paris rebelled against the government because theybelieved it was trying to steal their republic, Michel became even moredeeply involved in events, emerging as one of the leaders of theinsurrection.When the forces of the Versailles Government crushed the Communein May 1871, Michel was captured, tried, and sentenced to exile. She wastransported to New Caledonia on a prison ship in 1873. For six years shelived under harsh conditions in the prison colony near the capital,Noumea, and later she lived in the capital itself, with a limited amount offreedom. Following the general amnesty of 1880, which the governmentgave to the Communards in response to public pressure, she returned toFrance and public acclaim.Though massive public gatherings greeted Michel upon her return, itwas difficult for her to find a place in revolutionary circles. She wasignorant of events that had taken place in France during the precedingTranslators' IntroductionIXdecade, and the persons who had risen to power and influence in radicalcircles had no great interest in relinquishing their position to any legend.But her popular support from the working people of France remainedimmense, and her speeches in Paris, the provinces, and abroad duringthe next few years were heavily and tumultuously attended.In 1882 Michel was arrested for disturbing the peace and spent twoweeks in jail. Then, in the spring of 1883, after a demonstration at lesInvalides, she led a crowd across Paris under the black flag of anarchism.She was arrested and tried for rioting and for inciting her followers toloot bakeries. Offering no real defense at her trial, she was sentenced tosix years in prison. Pardoned three years later, she resolutely continuedher speeches and writing, the radical public honoring her as "la grandecitoyenne." From 1890 to 1905 she spent the greater part of her time inEngland in self-imposed exile, although she made a number of speakingtours in France and elsewhere. She was engaged in one of thosespeaking tours in 1905 when she died, her funeral becoming an occasionfor a massive outpouring of sentiment from three generations of revolutionaries.Louise Michel declares in her memoirs that she was an anarchist,having come to the faith after she passed through her youthful, vaguesympathy for the downtrodden and her later ill-defined devotion to aUtopian revolution. She claimed later that her transformation to anarchism came on her voyage to New Caledonia aboard the prison shipVirginie, during which time she was caged for four months with NatalieLemel, who converted her.theanarchist "Manifesto of Lyon" of January 1883 precisely expressed herpolitical beliefs. "I share all of the ideas written there," she writes in hermemoirs, and she quotes the complete text of that document.In her memoirs Michel states thatBut Michel's anarchism was emotional, not theoretical. In fact, she wassurprisingly ill read in contemporary and historical revolutionary writings. That she had read Lamennais is certain;that she had readProudhon is likely. It is less probable that she had read either Blanqui orBakunin, although she certainly knew of their ideas, which were in theair at the time. Marxism dismayed her, but played little part in hermemoirs because her full exposure to Marxism did not come until the1890s, several years after her memoirs were published. What is remarkable are her omissions. For example, she never mentions Babeuf and his"Manifesto of the Equals." She writes about close friends and associateswho made theoretical and practical contributions to radical doctrineKropotkin, Guesde, and Pouget, who was her codefendant in 1883-butshe never mentions their writings.That her commitment to anarchism was emotional did not produceintellectualinconsistency. Indeed, after her Utopian phase she wasentirely consistent in her view of property, her perception of exploita-xTranslators' Introductiontion, her claims for the role of science, and her vision of the basic good inmankind. Similarly, in her encomiums to the Social Revolution she wasconsistent regarding its form and nature: It would be a spontaneousrising of the people against injustice and exploitation.That emphasis on the spontaneous uprising of the people kept her,indirectly, from demanding the use of terror, a step many anarchiststook. Michel mentions assassination as a tool only occasionally. Once, shediscusses murdering Louis Napoleon Bonaparte; another time, she talksabout assassinating Adolphe Thiers. Yet she never made any concretepreparations to carry out plans to murder the two. Similarly, her onlyuse of explosives was an abortive attempt to blow up a statue. "Tyrannicide," she writes, "is practical only when tyranny has a single head, orat most a small number of heads. When it is a hydra, only the Revolutioncan kill it."She was vague about what would happen the day after the SocialRevolution, other than offering images of dawns and fireworks. Shedoes comment that it would be better if all the leaders of the Revolutionshould perish in achieving it, for then the people would not have tocontend with a surviving general staff. But somehow the anarchistdream would be fulfilled.Anarchism, "the logical conclusion of the romantic doctrine," to useE. H. Carr's felicitous phrase'! is perilously difficult to define. Yet itscore-an insistence on the importance of the individual, a hatred of allforms of political organization, a belief in the innate goodness ofman-fitted so providentially with Michel's thinking that it is hard todecide whether Michel found anarchism or anarchism found Michel. Atthe time when she wrote her memoirs she believed implacably thatprogress was inevitable, that people were innately good, and that governments, any governments, were evil. Her statement that "power isevil" forms the nucleus of every anarchist system, but neither she norany other anarchist ever found a ready answer to George BernardShaw's irritating question. If man is so good, he asked, "how did thecorruption and oppression under which he groans ever arise?"2Michel avoided the question. She saw history as the story of freepeople being somehow enslaved; the details were vague. But her interestin the past was as great as her hope for the future. Romantic though hervision of the past may have been, full of myth and monster, yet it was ineasy accord with her romantic dream for the future. To her, past andfuture were indissolubly linked.Unfortunately for Michel's hopes-and historical reputation-the romantic dream of anarchism was a waning force not the wave of thefuture. While it is true that anarchism's greatest influence in France,numerically at least, followed the outrages of the 1890s and lasted untilthe outbreak of the Great War, in those decades the simple and directTranslators' IntroductionXlforce of anarchism was absorbed into the Bourses de Travail,theprotean Confederation Generale du Travail, and factional infighting.The anarchism that Louise Michel dreamed of, the formless uprisingleading to the Social Revolution and the end of exploitation, disappeared into irreconcilable bickering over detail and method. The dreamdiffused, then disappeared like a wisp of smoke.Michel was no more an organizer than she was a theorist. Not forMichel the shabby, ill-lit rooms where intriguers and plotters put together demonstrations and organizations. "All revolutions have beeninsufficient because they have been political," she said in a speech in1882. She believed organization unnecessary because she was adamantlyof the opinion that at some near moment the poor and exploited wouldrise up spontaneously, and through sheer numbers, force of will, andthe decency of their cause, they would force the old order to shrivel upbefore them. In this vein, Michel's most typical act was in 1883, when,with no particular objective, she led the crowd of self-proclaimed anarchists across Paris.Neither theorist nor organizer, Michel filled another role for theFrench radicals. "Nearly Joan of Are," Verlaine called her.' And VictorHugo, no anarchist, although surely a romantic, had named the firstdraft of a poem "Louise Michel"; in this lengthy poem, retitled "MoreThan a Man," Hugo wrote,Those who know ...Your days, your nights, your cares, your tears, given to everyone,Your forgetfulness of yourself in helping others,Your words like the flames of apostles,Your long look of hatred to all those who are inhuman,And the feet of children which you warm between your hands, ...He would realize Michel was incapable of anything not heroic orvirtuous. Michel had, Hugo concluded:.. two spirits intermingled.. the divine chaos of starlike thingsSeen at the bottom of a great and stormy heart.. a radiance seen in a flame"Every movement needs prophets and lawgivers, sinners and apostates,martyrs and saints. For French anarchists, Michel was martyr andsaint-the Red Virgin.Michel's intellectual curiosity was immense, her thirst for knowledgeunquenchable. Throughout her memoirs runs an amazing assortmentof subjects: music, musical instruments, teaching techniques, cruelty toanimals, the status of women, the money used in the Canary Islands,xuTranslators' Introductioninsects, Kanakan anthropology, the weather, botany-the list is endless.As a child she collected animal skeletons in her tower; as a schoolmistressin Paris, in spite of her busy teaching schedule, she attended classes onphysics, chemistry, history, and even law; in prison she wrote books andpoetry; in New Caledonia she catalogued flora and fauna and experimented with vaccinating papaya trees against jaundice.The inner life she reveals in her memoirs was surely a remarkable one.Legends, beasts, and folk heroes mingled in her fantasies, and she neverdistinguished between her fantasies and reality. Her early life, she says,was "made up of dreams and study," a preparation for the second partof her life, "the period of struggle." But according to her account, sheacted during the waking world of the Siege and Commune as she hadseen herself act in her dreams. Dream and action were the same, and, inher mind, apparently indistinguishable. The gallows speeches she invented in her childhood she delivered to her judges in 1871.People make their own dramas and then star in them, and Michel gavethe impression of playing herself. She saw herself as druidess, valkyrie,vestal virgin, moving through a life that contained far more-strangedemons and mystic visions-than the eye could see. On one occasion inthe 1860s she walked with her friend Victorine through the deep woodsnear her childhood home. Near the pair, padding along almost silentlythrough the forest, a wolf paced their steps, she claims. Was the wolfreally there? Probably not. In the 1860s the number of wolves, even inthe Haute-Marne, was small, but the beast existed in Michel's mindcertainly and truly.When Michel is narrating events of public record she is surprisinglyaccurate, considering that the main preparation of the text took place inprison cells. After her return from New Caledonia she was followeddaily by police agents when she was not in jail. Their reports havesurvived, so her life from 1881 to 1883 and from 1886 to 1889 has acorroborative record, if not an objective one. 5 But for her childhood andher years as a schoolmistress almost the only record is her memory, andsome of the attitudes she describes do not ring true. Perhaps Michelconstructed her fantasy and then lived it out; it seems more likely thatshe lived her life and then superimposed her fantasy onto it retrospectively. Few people other than memoirists have the chance to live theirlives over again.Michel is astonishingly free of the self-aggrandizement memoirs areprone to, even to the point of neglecting her own importance. She was,after all, the chairman of the Women's Vigilance Committee during theCommune. During the Siege she had been responsible for the day-today welfare of some two hundred children, a task which she did verywell, thanks to the assistance of Georges Clemenceau; no mention of herTranslators' IntroductionXllleffort appears in her memoirs, although it is obliquely referred to at oneof her trials. After her return from exile in New Caledonia, she represented France at Kropotkin's international gathering in London; shementions the trip, but says nothing of her role there.From time to time misdirection, whether conscious or unconscious,appears in her memoirs. She points with a grand gesture to an invitingvision that is simply not true. Still, the misdirections of 1886 indicateeither the way that Louise Michel truly saw her own life or the way shewanted others to see it. The effect is almost the same, and perhaps shewas unaware of the difference. The revolutionary, a fifty-six-year-oldwoman, had sacrificed everything to the Revolution. Perhaps to justifywhat she had become she had no choice other than to make her youthfulself into the revolutionary she was later.Some of her misdirection is harmless. She subtracts five or six yearsfrom her true age, and when she writes of her childhood adventures, shepaints herself as a mischievous hoyden. She was fifteen when hergrandfather died, and twenty when her paternal grandmother died andthe half-ruined manor house where she had grown up was sold. Themajority of the childhood stories concern the period while her grandfather was still living, and she says comparatively little that can be datedwith certainty to the period from his death until her grandmother's,although her stories of the ecregnes, the gatherings of village women,probably belong to those years.She was apparently a properly religious child, despite her attempt toshow herself as determinedly anticlerical from the first Voltairian teachings of her grandfather. Contradicting her attempts to don this mantleare hints of her attraction to mystical Catholicism through the ferventteachings of her devout aunt. Even Michel's story of instructing herpupils in Audeloncourt to boycott the mandated prayer for the Emperorrings false in view of a strong recommendation by a local cure whichappears in her application to certify her schoo1. 6 Even without thatdocument as proof, much of the verse she wrote in the 1850s-versewhich she does not quote in her memoirs-was ardently Christian.Similarly, her memoirs would have the reader believe that she taughtin Audeloncourt for several years and then left for Paris. That is nottrue. After a limited formal education she received her diploma inSeptember 1852, taught in Audeloncourt for a year, went to Paris for afirst and unmentioned period beginning in January 1854, and thenreturned to the Haute-Marne the following fall because her mother wasill. She tried to reopen her school at Audeloncourt, but failed becauseher former pupils had gone elsewhere. Then she tried to open a schoolat Clefmont; whether she succeeded is unclear, but in 1855 she and JulieLongchamps opened a school at Millieres, where Michel taught for twoXlVTranslators' Introductionyears before going to Paris a second time. Possibly the reason forMichel's lack of clarity on this subject stems from embarrassment overadmitting a succession of failures or only partial successes.Perhaps still fearing governmental reprisals, Michel lies about thedemonstration of 22 January 1871, suggesting that it was intended to bea gentle and unarmed protest. In fact,it was planned as a directconfrontation with the Government of National Defense. She also omitsthe information that she was dressed in a National Guard uniform andwas carrying a rifle. Similarly, she minimizes her role in the councils ofthe Commune and is a bit elliptical when she discusses what part sheplayed in military events. For example, she was a member of the 51stBattalion of the National Guard, which was commanded by Eudes, thehusband of her friend, Victorine Louvet.Her narrative of her arrest, confinement, and trial are straightforward, as is her account of the voyage to New Caledonia in 1873. Thecaptain of the prison ship, the Virginie, was deeply concerned, his reportsshow, with the well-being of the deportees aboard; and the trip, whilecertainly unpleasant, was not unnecessarily arduous.'Michel makes light of the physical discomfort of the prison camps onthe Ducos Peninsula at Numbo and later atthe Bay of the West.Conditions there were far less easy than she suggests, but she reservesher criticism for the jailers and their policy of repression, not the poorfood and inadequate medical facilities.She was certainly involved peripherally in the Kanakan uprising of1878 in New Caledonia, yet her comments on it are scanty. Indeed, heraccount of these events, in which she hints broadly that she knows morethan she chooses to tell, is the only place in her memoirs where she is coywith the reader. Certainly the authorities might have taken notice of anopen confession, but when she writes about the Siege and the Commune, she simply avoids indictable revelations.Upon her return to France, Michel plunged into radical politics almostwithout pausing. Her account of these events is anecdotal and episodic,not systematic. Among the subjects on which she focuses is the incredibleeffort of the Prefect of Police to establish a radical journal, his idea beingthat such a publication would help him to keep track of revolutionariesbecause they would congregate around it. 8 Michel also describes speaking tours she made to Belgium and England.During those years her friend Marie Ferre died, but the climax ofevents, for Michel, was the Trial of the Sixty-eight at Lyon, where thegovernment tried to break the anarchist movement by destroying manyof its leaders, among them Kropotkin and Gauthier. Michel had been inEngland during the earlier part of the trial, but she was present at thelast phase, and she identified herself with the prisoners, although shewas not among those indicted. After the conviction of the Sixty-eight,Translators' Introductionxvshe felt she had to do something: "I would have been an accessory tocowardice if I did not use the liberty I was allowed-I don't knowwhy-to call up a new and immense International which would stretchfrom one end of the earth to the other." She was searching for martyrdom when she found it at les Invalides in April 1883; the governmentreacted savagely and after a sham of a trial she was sentenced to six yearsof solitary confinement, a sentence so incommensurate with the crimethat even conservative papers protested.Her mother's declining health worsened. Michel was given parole tovisit her while awaiting trial and at least twice after conviction. When shewas in the Centrale Prison at Clermont she was also allowed to go see hermother, a most exceptional proceeding, although as Michel's biographerEdith Thomas notes when she discusses this episode, the nineteenthcentury was "a much more humane epoch than ours."9 Michel gavecredit to the authorities for transferring her to a Paris prison at thebeginning of December 1884 so that she might be near her mother. Fourdays later the Minister of the Interior gave permission for Michel,guarded by two police inspectors, to stay at her mother's bedside. FromMichel's memoirs it is hard to tell that she stayed with her mother almosta month, from II December 1884 until her mother's death on 3 January1885.Michel's emotions were always intense. The pages of her memoirs aresprinkled throughout with affection for her mother, and when shedescribes her childhood, she exhibits devotion to her older relatives.Later, as a young woman, she formed a close friendship with JulieLongchamps, who followed her to Paris. The two remained close intothe 1860s, drifting apart only when Longchamps failed to follow Michelinto radical politics.Through the years Michel's affection for her pupils remained undimmed. She is bitter when she rebuts the government's claim, made ather first trial, that she had no pupils, yet she let far greater falsehoodsstand unrefuted. She seems to have been a conscientious and imaginative teacher, and outside evidence corroborates that judgment. Forexample, her devotion to teaching the Kanakas in Noumea earned aletter of commendation, a letter she quotes with obvious pride.Michel's sympathies focused upon all who were helpless in society: thepoor, the elderly, prisoners, and women. She developed a protofeminism, but it quickly merged into a more general radicalism. Michel sawthe problems of society clearly, and she saw that many groups, not justwomen, were being exploited. Thus, a chapter in her memoirs concerning women changes its tone until it becomes a plea for both women andmen "to move through life together as good companions" as they marchtoward the Social Revolution. After it occurs, "men and women togetherwill gain the rights of all humanity." They will not argue any longerXVITranslators' Introduction"about which sex is superior" any more than "races will argue aboutwhich race is foremost." Michel's aversion to cruelty to animals isconnected with her sympathies for the helpless and exploited: "Everything fits together, from the bird whose brood is crushed to the humanswhose nests are destroyed by war."The most intense feelings in her memoirs, after those for her mother,are reserved for Theophile Ferre. She frequently refers to him and hisexecution, but it is hard to determine whether her feelings are for Ferreas a person or as a symbol of what repression could lead to. WhetherMichel's warm friendship for Ferre's sister Marie was the product of herfeelings for Theophile or independent of them is unclear, but Michel'sand Marie Ferre's lives were permanently intertwined. Marie helped tocare for Michel's mother while Michel was at meetings, exiled, traveling,or in prison, and the two maintained a lively correspondence throughthe years. It is to Marie that she owed her collection of poems andclippings, many of which are included in the memoirs. Shortly afterMichel's arrest for the demonstration following the anniversary ofBlanqui's death Marie died, and in the memoirs Michel includes anaccount of Marie's funeral and a eulogistic letter from Henri Rochefort.But Michel's emotional life centered on her mother. Michel recognized that she had caused the greater part of her mother's sufferings,caused them because of opinions which her mother "didn't share."Throughout her life, her mother struggled to pay her daughter's debtsand showered her with affection and little presents. In return, Louisetried to hide her misfortunes from her mother and to ease her lastmoments. "We revolutionaries bring so little happiness to our families,"Michel laments. To pay tribute to her mother, Michel prints the accountof her mother's funeral in full. What she failed to realize was that themany thousands who followed her mother's body through Paris to thegraveyard at Levallois-Perret were honoring not only her mother butLouise herself.For all practical purposes, Michel's memoirs end at the time of hermother's death, and with her spirit bleak from the loss she had suffered,she completed them for publication the following year. Reality is malleable, and to recall the processes of one's mind, which a memoirist mustdo, is to see past events through whatever sun or shadow exists at themoment when the recollection is called forth. Though Michel's devotionto the revolutionary cause and her optimism for the future remainedsteadfast, even under the shadow of the mother's death, it is possible thatshe would have shown less nostalgia and less sorrow for a lost past if shehad not written her memoirs under the immediate impact of her grief.It was sometime during Michel's third prison term, which began in1883, that she started to write these memoirs, although documents forthem had been collected earlier. She also had some earlier pieces, like ahistory of the Haute-Marne that she had begun during her childhood,Translators' IntroductionXVIIand she makes one tantalizing reference to a 'Journal" she kept of thevoyage to New Caledonia, which has disappeared.In 1885, after her mother died, Michel suffered some sort of nervouscollapse, which certainly was among the reasons for her memoirs' beingfragmented and disjointed. Although a very rough chronological outlineruns through the two parts, stories and anecdotes appear more throughword association than from step-by-step narrative. Nor are the memoirslimited to factual accounts. They are filled with emotional descriptionsof her dreams, stirring calls to action, and a number of poems. She flitsfrom one idea to another "as they come to mind." Occasionally she seemsaware of the problems she might be causing the reader. "Before speaking about my third arrest," she writes in the original text, "I ought torelate the firsttwo." The memoirs oscillate wildly among nostalgia,exaltation, narrative, and prophecy.As a consequence, the original memoirs are most difficult to follow,and we, as translators, decided that a direct rendering into Englishwould be incomprehensible to modern readers. Therefore, we translated the original text completely, and then transposed Michel's wordsinto a chronological narrative of her life, being careful to stay as true aspossible to the thought and tone of the original.Very little material has been eliminated. Frequently, there were several versions of one event, agreeing with each other in broad outlinealways, which is unusual, but each adding new details. Those versionswere combined to make one account. Several poems were omittedbecause they added nothing to the narrative; furthermore, Michel'spoetry is mediocre-Edith Thomas noted that Michel's "best poem issurely her life"-and those poems that were retained were kept to addinformation or color to the text. Parts of her long catalogue of the floraand fauna of New Caledonia have also been excised; it is frequentlyimpossible to tell from her nonscientific descriptions which of severalspecies she was writing about. A digression about a literary lawsuitbrought by Grippa de Winter, in which Michel was not involved, was alsoomitted.In the original text almost every chapter ends with a paean to thecoming Revolution. Reducing the number of chapters from thirty-three(plus three appendices) to twenty-four left several extra paeans, and inany event, it seemed a bit monotonous to follow Michel's example, sothey have been included only where they seemed most appropriate.Moreover, she frequently inserts parenthetical exclamations of grief ather mother's death; their number has been reduced, although enoughof them have been retained to remind the reader of the emotional strainunder which Michel was writing.In summary, the words of these translated memoirs are LouiseMichel's; the organization of those words is ours. The loss of the originaltexture and the feeling for how ideas were associated with each other inXVlllTranslators' IntroductionMichel's mind is compensated for, we believe, by having an orderlymemoir of her life to 1886.We have added almost nothing to the narrative. In some places whereit was possible to establish definitely the identity of some person mentioned, we have added a phrase identifying him, because persons whowere familiar to Michel's readers in 1886 are now often obscure. Wehave occasionally added dates established from documents like therecords of the prison ship that carried Michel to New Caledonia. Onmatters which she could not check in prison, we felt accuracy served thereader. Where she is inaccurate and we were uncertain whether thatinaccuracy was deliberate, we left the material as it was written, notingmajor problems in italicized interpolations.Michel clearly intended to write a continuation of these memoirs. Adecade after she published this volume she talked about doing so, butnothing came of it. So, other than her poetry and letters, the volumehere,is the mainautobiographical offering of a fascinating woman, revolutionary, poet,and dreamer.the Memoires de Louise Michel ecrits par elle-meme,When she published these memoirs in 1886 she was fifty-six years oldand still had nineteen years to live, one-third of her adult life. It is a pityshe never wrote the second volume she spoke of, but the memoirs thatshe did write stand as a monument to human dreams. Motivated bycompassion, not doctrine, Michel testified in her memoirs and by her lifethat an unattractive, illegitimate child from the fringe of nowhere couldso love freedom that she was ready to sacrifice her own. There have beenworse lives.Notes1. E. H. Carr, Michael Bakunin (New York: Octagon Books, 1975), p. 434.2. George Bernard Shaw, "The Impossibilities of Anarchism," Fabian Tract 45(1895): 14-15.3. "Ballade en l'honneur de Louise Michel," in Oeuvres completes de Paul VerLaine(Paris: Albert Messein, 1911) 2:39-40.4. "Viro Major," in Oeuvres completes de Victor Hugo (Paris: Albin Michel /Imprimerie Nationale, 1935) 12:82-83; notes, 12: 360-61, 404; and plate,12:489.5. Archives historiques de la prefecture de police, Ba 1183-87, Paris.6. Edith Thomas, Louise MicMl ou La Velleda de l'anarchie (Paris: Gallimard,1971), p. 42.7. Resume du 2· voyage de circumnavigation de la Virginie, to Ministre deMarine et Colonies, 4 May 1874, Ministere de Marine, Paris.8. L. Andrieux, Souvenirs d'un prefet de police (Paris: Jules Rouff, 1885), 1: 175,337-41.9. Thomas, Louise MicMl, p. 265.The Ked VirginMemoirs of Louise MichelChapter 1IntroductionPeople have often asked me to write my memoirs, but whenever I havetried to speak about myself I have felt the same repugnance I would feelabout undressing in public. Today, in spite of these feelings, I havedecided to put together a few of my memories. My life is full of poignantmemories, and I will expose some very personal feelings. I will tell themrandomly as they come to mind; if I give my pen the right to wander, Ihave paid very dearly for this right.My life has been composed of two very distinct parts that form acomplete contrast. The first was made up of dreams and study;thesecond of events, as if the aspirations of the calm period came aliveduring the period of struggle.I will go to some lengths to avoidmentioning the names of persons whom I lost sight of long ago, to sparethem the disagreeable surprise of being accused of conniving withrevolutionaries. It might become a crime for them to have known me,and myoId acquaintances might be treated like anarchists when theydon't know exactly what anarchism is.I shall write boldly and frankly regarding everything that concerns mepersonally, leaving in the shadows they loved those people who broughtme up in the old ruin of Vroncourt in the Haute-Marne. The MilitaryTribunals of 1871 investigated the very bottom of my cradle and stillrespected the privacy of my relatives, and I won't disturb their ashes.Moss has worn their names off their tombstones in the cemetery and theold chateau has fallen down, but once again I see the nest of my infancy,and I see those who brought me up brooding over me. Their images willappear often in this book. Alas, of the memories of the dead, of thefleeting thought, of the hour which has passed, nothing remains.If a little bitterness drops onto these pages, no venom will ever fall.The human race as a whole is blameless if individuals waste away like4nimals in the struggle for existence. When the obstacles that fetterhumanity finally are forced aside, humanity will pass beyond this anguish.In this unceasing battle the lone human being is not and cannot befree. My life is not mine to live. I must fulfill my duty to the Revolution,and lead my life harshly, without comfort, so that it will all be over morequickly.2Memoirs of Louise MichelPerhaps these memoirs will have a great number of volumes. To tellall, one would write without end. In any case, I would do well to sketchthe history of my prisons. Many brave hearts are found among thoseunfortunate prisoners whom people despise. People must see things asthey are, and only someone who has lived through such experiencesknows.Some of these pages would be difficult to send out the gates ofSaint-Lazare prison, which is where I am now writing. But to rescuethese words from oblivion I intend to take advantage of an article in theregulations that states: "Attorneys can receive sealed letters from prisoners." One attorney understands that because these memoirs are, in asense, my last will and testament, I have the right to say whatever I wantin them and send them to him.In these memoirs I want to include accounts of my three trials. I havetaken reports of my first and third trial from the Gazette des tribunaux,which no one could suspect of being too favorable to me. The secondtrial took place only in a lower court, and so was not reported in theGazette; I have included a newspaper account of it. For the masses, thegreat masses, my loves, I will add some observations that I didn't think itwas proper to make to the judges at the time. For us revolutionaries,every trial is an act of war over which our flag is waving. May that flagcover my book, as it has covered my life, as it will wave over my coffin.Strasbourg'!'Chaumo tFRANCE~o 100300500 kmBourmontoOzleresoVroncourtoAudeloncourtoMillieres00LongchampClef mont 0HAUTE-MARNE012345m l~~o4268 kmDetail of the Haute-MarneChapter 2VroncourlMy childhood nest was a tumbled-down chateau. At its corners, the sameheight as the main building, were four square towers with roofs likechurch steeples. The south side had no windows, only loopholes in thetowers, which made the building look like a tomb or a castle, dependingon the point of view. A long time ago, people called the place theFortress, but when I lived there it was usually called the Tomb.To the east lay a vineyard, and we were separated from the littlevillage ofVroncourt by a grassy stretch as wide as a prairie. At the end ofit, a brook flowed down the only street in the village, and in the winterthe brook became so swollen that people in Vroncourt had to putstepping stones in it to make it passable.Further to the eastthere was a screen of poplars, and the windmurmured sweetly as it blew through those trees; and then, risingbehind everything, were the blue mountains of Bourmont. Many yearslater when I saw Sydney, Australia, surrounded by bluish peaks, Irecognized on a larger scale the crests of the mountains I had seen in mychildhood.To the west were the hills and woods of Suzerin. When the snow wasdeep, wolves would creep from the woods into the Tomb through gapsin the wall, and they would howl in the courtyard. Our dogs wouldanswer them, and this concert would last until the frozen morning. Allwas well at the Tomb, and I loved those nights.I loved them especially when the north wind raged, and we read late,the whole family gathered in the old Great Hall. I loved the wintrysetting and the frozen upper rooms. All of it-the white shroud of snow,the chorus of the wind, the wolves and dogs-would have made me apoet, even if all my family hadn't been poets from the cradle.It was glacially cold in the Tomb's enormous rooms. Through that vastruin the wind whistled, as it does through the rigging of a sailing ship.We huddled around the fire, my grandfather sitting in his easy chairsituated halfway between his bed and a stack of all kinds of guns. Inwinter he threw a big cloak of white flannel over his clothes and worewooden shoes trimmed with fleece. Often I sat on those wooden shoes infront of the fireplace, snuggling up to the cinders along with the dogsand cats.Memoirs of Louise Michel5Depending on the circumstances, my grandfather appeared like manydifferent men to me. When he told me of the old, great days, the epicfights of the First Republic, he was passionate, so that he could relate tome the war of the giants, the war when "whites" and "blues," brave menfighting brave men, showed history how heroes died. Sometimes whenhe explained to me the various books we read together, he was ironic,like Voltaire, the master of his youth. At other times he was gay andwitty, like Moliere. Still other times, when our minds traveled acrossunknown worlds together, we spoke of things he saw stirring on thehorizon. We looked at past stages of human development, and wediscussed the future. Often I cried, touched in my heart by some quickimage of progress, art, or science, and my grandfather, with great tearsin his eyes, too, would put his hand on my head, which was more tousledthan one of our dogs.Both my grandmothers lived with us, and how different they were!One had a delicate, Gallic face framed by a headdress of white muslingathered into tiny pleats, under which her hair was arranged in a largechignon on her neck. The other had eyes that were black like coal, andshort hair; she was enveloped in an eternal youth which made me thinkof fairies in the old tales.My mother was then a blonde, with soft and smiling blue eyes andlong, curly hair. She was so fresh and pretty that her friends used to sayto her laughingly, "It is impossible for this ugly child to be yours." As forme, I was tall, skinny, disheveled, wild, brazen, sunburned, and oftendecorated with torn clothing held together with pins. I knew how Ilooked, and I was amused at people finding me ugly, although my poormother sometimes took offense at it.Many animals lived in the Tomb. We had a big Spanish hound withlong yellow hair, and two sheepdogs. All three dogs answered to thename of Presta. We also had a black and white dog named Medor, and ayoung bitch we named Doe in memory of an old mare named Doe thathad died just before we got the bitch. When I gave the old mare anapronful of hay her manner would change remarkably. The thing Iremember best about her was her stealing my bouquets; she would takethem and then lick my face. When she died my grandfather and Iwrapped her head in a white cloth, so no dirt would touch it, and buriedher outside near the acacia.We had legions of cats, too, especially male ones. We called all themale cats Lion or Darling and all our female cats Galta. Sometimes thecats would crowd us at the fire, and my grandfather would use the tongsto pick a glowing coal from the fireplace and wave it at them. The wholepack would run off, only to make a fresh assault soon after.My mother, my aunt, and my grandmothers usually sat around thetable. One read aloud, and the other knitted or sewed. Beside me as Iwrite now is the sewing basket my mother kept her things in.6Memoirs of Louise MichelFriends often came to visit us. When Bertrand or M. Laumont, the oldteacher from Ozieres, came, the family sat up later than usual, readingaloud. They tried to send me to bed so they could finish reading thechapters they didn't want to read in front of me. Sometimes I obstinatelyrefused, nearly always winning eventually, and other times when I was ina hurry to hear what they wanted to hide from me, I obeyed quickly, andthen tiptoed back and hid behind the door to listen.We called the schoolteacher Little Laumont to distinguish him fromhis relative, another Laumont, the doctor at Bourmont, whom we calledBig Laumont. Big Laumont, the doctor, enveloped in a vast black coatthat made him look like an Egyptian scarab, came on a stocky horse tospend every Tuesday with us. Little Laumont was always dressed in ashort, gray frock coat and carried an enormously long cane. When hemoved, his feet never seemed to touch the ground, and he was asintelligent as he was strange. He used to spend the winters with us. Longago Little LauITlcmt had given lessons to my aunt Agathe and mymother, and I think he had taught the whole countryside to read.Those were the good days. My grandmother or I was at the piano, andmy grandfather played his bass viol. Big Laumont sometimes carried aflute in his pocket, and when he played it, he played perfectly. All of ustogether would play music until we tired of it. Then in the dusk of theevening the doctor would leave swiftly, with his capacious black cloakfloating around him. He looked like the black horseman of the legends.Big Laumont asked me once, very seriously, the way he always spoketo me, why I didn't write some prose works. Following his suggestion, Ibegan a story, The Naughty Deeds of Helen, which began, "Helen was verynaughty and stubborn." It was a collection of my own wicked deeds, eachof which I ended with an exemplary punishment for the sake ofmorality. For example, I described one episode in which Helen stole asmall encyclopedia from an old doctor's house, a leather-bound volumein which were found the names of everything that could be learned. Forpunishment, Helen was condemned to spend a month with no bookother than a huge grammar, which she certainly wouldn't have botheredto steal. "Oh, you little monster," said Big Laumont when he read thispiece, "I thought it was you who had taken my book!"That wasn't the only thing I took as a child. Each of us is capable of allthe good or evil in his being. Without remorse I used to take money(when there was any), fruits, vegetables, and so on, and gave them awayin my relatives' names. That caused some great scenes when the recipients tried to thank them. Incorrigible as I was, I laughed about it.Once my grandfather offered me twenty sous a week if I wouldpromise not to steal anything again, but I found I lost too much moneyon that deal and I refused. I had filed some skeleton keys to open thecupboards where pears and other fruits were kept, and I used to leaveMemoirs of Louise Michel7little notes there in place of what I had taken. I remember one that read:"You have the lock, but I have the key."In the summer the Tomb filled up with birds that flew in through thebroken windows. Swallows came back to their nests of former years,sparrows flew in and out of the broken windows, occasionally knockingon the unbroken panes, and the larks sang loudly with us. That is, theysang with us when we sang in a major key; when we changed to a minorkey they would fall silent.The birds weren't the dogs' and cats' only fellow-boarders. We hadpartridges, a tortoise, a roebuck, some wild boars, a wolf, barn-owls, bats,several broods of orphaned hares that we had raised by spoon-feedinga whole menagerie. And of course, there was also the colt, Zephir, andhis grandmother Brouska. How old Brouska was I don't know-she hadbeen with us so long that no one could remember her age. Brouskawalked in and out of the rooms in order to take bread and sugar fromthe hands of people she liked. To people she didn't like, she would pullback her lips, showing all her huge yellow teeth as if she were laughing intheir faces. And there were cows, too, the great white Bione and theyoung Bella and Nera. I went to their stable to chat with them, and theyanswered me in their own way by looking at me with their soft eyes.All these beasts lived on good terms with each other. The cats wouldlie curled up, following with a negligent eye the birds toddling about onthe ground. Even more strange, I never saw a cat bother about a mouse,and mice lived in all the walls. In the Great Hall, behind the greentapestry that covered the walls, the mice ran around rapidly but unafraid, uttering little shrill cries as they went. The mice behaved perfectly,and never gnawed on papers or books and never placed a tooth on theviolins, cellos, and guitars which were scattered about.What peace there was in this place, and what peace there was in my lifeat this time! Maybe I didn't deserve it. How I love to dream of this littlecorner of the earth. If my mother had been able to survive my prisonterm, I would have liked to have spent some peaceful days near her, dayssuch as she needed, with me working near her armchair, and the oldCaledonian cats purring at the hearth.Every time something important happened in my family, my grandmother would write a verse account of it. My grandfather added somepages of his own to that collection, which was kept in two large, looseleafbooks. I wrapped those books in black crepe when my grandmotherdied.The winds of adversity blow on things as well as people. Of all thepages my grandfather wrote, I have only one left, "A des antiquaires,"and I have only one piece my grandmother wrote, "La Mort," which shewrote after the death of her husband. They are all that remain to me.Their sad tones are a feeble enough exhalation compared to the delicate8Memoirs of Louise Michelverses that I no longer have. All has faded away, even my grandfather'sguitar, which crumbled while I was in New Caledonia. My mother criedover it a long time.too,In autumn, my mother, my aunts, and I used to go far into the forest.It was good to hear through the deep silence in our woods the heavyhammer of the smithy, and the sharp blows of the axe that made thebranches shiver. Then,there were the songs of birds and thebuzzing of insects under the fallen leaves. Often we would hear the littlebranches breaking where some old woman was gathering a pile offaggots. Sometimes we would hear the snort of a wild boar in the thickestwoods, and other times it was a few poor roebucks flashing across ourvision. Maybe they sensed the autumn hunts, when men cut the throatsof animals to the sound of the hunting horn. Animals kill to live; thehunter destroys only to destroy.On the road to Bourmont was Uncle Georges's old mill, which stood atthe foot of a hill where there was an uncultivated vineyard. The grasswas thick and coolin the meadow bordered by the millpond. Therosebushes rustled as the ducks moved through them or the windpushed them. In the mill, the first room was dark even at midday, and itwas there that Uncle Georges used to read every evening. How much helearned reading that way!All those people, living and dead, here they are in this place of timegone by. Here are my grandmother Marguerite's sisters with their whiteheaddresses, pins fastening scarves at their necks, the square bodicesthe complete outfits of peasant women, which they wore coquettishlyfrom their youth, when people called them beautiful girls, until theirdeaths. Like themselves, their names were simple: Marguerite, Catherine, Apolline.One of my mother's sisters, Aunt Victoire, was with us later atAudeloncourt. She was very tall, with a thin face that had fine, regularfeatures. My mother's other sister, my Aunt Catherine,lived in theLagny area. Like my mother, both had an absolute cleanliness, a luxuryof neatness, which allowed neither the shadow of a spot, nor a speck ofdust, from their headdresses to the tips of their feet.In the first flush of my Aunt Victoire's youth, some missionarypreaching at Audeloncourt left behind a religious fanaticism that ledmany young girls into the convent. My aunt was one of them. Shebecame a novice, or lay sister, at the hospice of Langres, but she brokeher health by fasting and was forced to return to secular life. She came tolive with us at Vroncourt, where she stayed until my grandparents died.I never heard a more ardent missionary than my Aunt Victoire. FromChristianity she had absorbed everything that sweeps a person away:somber hymns, evening visits to churches drowned in shadow, the livesof virgins, which recall druidesses or vestal virgins or valkyries. All hernieces were swept into this mysticism, me more easily than the others.Memoirs of Louise Michel9What a strange impression still remains with me. I used to listen at thesame time to my Voltairian grandparents and my exalted Catholic aunt.Moved by strange dreams, I searched the way a bewildered compassneedle looks for north in a fierce storm.My north, where my compass finally pointed, was the Revolution. Myfanaticism changed from dream to reality; years later my friend Theophile Ferre told me I was consecrated to the Revolution, and it was true.All of us were its fanatics.I read hungrily during those years, especially with Nanette andJosephine, two remarkably intelligent young women who had never leftthe district. We used to talk about everything. In good weather wecarried out magazines and books to read in the tall grass: Magasinspittoresques, and Musees des familles, Hugo, Lamartine, and others. I havealways wondered if Nanette and Josephine loved me better than theirown children. I certainly loved them. One day, when I was perhaps sixor seven years old, we drenched Lamennais's Paroles d'un croyant withour tears. From that day on, I belonged to the masses.From that moment I climbed step by step from Lamennais to anarchy.Is there further to go? Of course, because there is always more to come,there is always further to go, always progress to make in light and liberty,in the development of new sensitivities of which we now have only therudiments. There is a future which we imprisoned spirits cannot evenglimpse.In front of me are a few handfuls of memorabilia from my childhood.I take one at random, a description ofVroncourt my mother saved. Howmany things this little piece of yellowed paper has survived!VroncourtVroncourt lies on the slope of a mountain between the forest and theplain. You can hear the wolves howling, but you do not see the lambs'throats being cut. At Vroncourt, you're separated from the rest of theworld. The wind rattles the old church tower and the towers of thechateau, and it bends the fields of ripe grain like ocean waves. All that youcan hear is the formidable noise of the storm. It is great and beautiful.This work, as well as my Legendary Haute-Marne, was illustrated withmy own charcoal sketches. Responsible for a piece of that work wasMarie Verdet, who must have been more than a hundred years old."Say," she said to me, "it won't be worth the trouble to write your bookon Vroncourt if you don't include the legend of the Three Washerwomen."So I drew the Fountain of the Ladies. The shadow of willows lies onthe water, and from this shadow the pale washerwomen emerge, threephantoms under the trees. According to Marie Verdet, one cries aboutthe past, another moans for the days of the present, and the last mournsfor tomorrow. They remind me of the legends of the Noms.10Memoirs of Louise MichelAnother charcoal sketch in the same work depicted another custom,the Diableries of Chaumont, last held more than a century ago. Mysketches of the Diableries are impressionistic and try to reproduce thefeeling of the moonbeams, the forest, the snow, and the night.Here is another fragment. It comes from my Legendary Haute-Marneand describes these Diableries of Chaumont which took place everyseven years.The Diableries of Chaumont are related to history, fancy, and legend.The Diablerie is a dream which had a real existence, and traces of it werestill visible at the end of the eighteenth century. Many bizarre customsdisappeared at the end of the Middle Ages; the Diablerie of Chaumont wasone that survived. . . . Every seven years, say the chroniclers of Champagne, twelve men would dress like devils, or as you would expect devils todress, in all the old torn-up clothes of hell, where there are all sorts ofdisguises, even that of Jehovah. The devils of Chaumont got theirs at theshop of old Anne Larousse, at the sign of Brae etJoie: an immense pair ofhorns and a black hood. They accompanied the Palm Sunday procession tohonor heaven and to represent hell there. After they had danced in theprocession, for the love of God, our lords the devils spread out into thecountryside, which they had the right to pillage, for the love of the devil, totheir heart's content.Why did they choose the number twelve? The chroniclers say that it wasin honor of the twelve apostles, although this method of honoring themwouldn't have suited them. Some scholars claimed that they stood for thetwelve signs of the Zodiac, and others that they stood for the sons ofJacob.None of these suppositions was generally accepted. At each Diablerie thearguments arose anew among the scholars, clerks, and astrologers of thegood town of Chaumont, who exhausted themselves in writing tracts onthe question.These men disguised as devils sang continuously "Quis ist iste rexgloriae" with as much spirit as those whose costumes they were wearing,but with less harmony, since the devil has an essentially musical ear.The Diablerie of Chaumont lasted from Palm Sunday to the Nativityof St. John, and it ended with a representation of the main acts of the lifeof Saint John, presented on ten stages so that the faithful could watch.The celebration was concluded with a ceremonial death by torture.(There couldn't be a good celebration without that, either in their timeor ours.) The torture and death were ordinarily just symbolic-an effigyof Herod, representing his soul, was burned at the stake.The last year these holy orgies took place, an event happened whichmay have hastened their end. This event does not appear in the writtenchronicles, but Marie Verdet did not have the slightest doubt that ithappened, for her grandfather had heard it from his grandfather, whohad heard it from his grandmother. At this particular torture and death,Memoirs of Louise Michel11the effigy of Herod had gestured so beautifully thatthe audienceenjoying themselves at the "torture" had filled the valley of the Ecoliers.Suddenly the effigy began to moan and people went into ecstasy. Themiracle was believed all the more easily since the people later foundcharred bones in the ashes of the stake. But, if they found charredbones, they no longer found the handsome singer Nicias Guy; it was hewho had been so terribly murdered out of love's vengeance.Let me add here a few notes on my native region, the Haute-Marne.Plows bring to light the stone coffins of our fathers, the Gauls; the knifefor slitting victims' throats; Roman incense. The plowman, accustomedto these finds, turns them aside, sometimes making a watering troughfrom a coffin, or using the incense to scent the enormous stump whichburns beneath his great chimney. He continues to sing to his oxen, whilebehind him the birds gather worms in the open furrows.Formerly, near a ruined fortress, the chate pai'ot, people used to go toconjure the spirits of the ruins with a silver piece, a lighted candle, awhite shirt, and a sharpened knife."Why the piece of silver?" I asked Marie Verdet, and lowering hervoice, she answered, "For the devil!""And the lit candle?" "It's for the good Lord!" "And the white shirt?""For the dead!" "And the knife with the sharpened blade?" "For theperson carrying out the ceremony if he betrays his fealty.""His fealty to whom?""To the unknown, to the Ghost-in-Flames."Enough of these stories found in the stones that I walked over as achild. Let me return to the events of my own early life. I never learned towrite script properly. For a long time as a child I wrote my poems inletters I had invented myself, modeled after those in books. Finally, myfamily realized it was time to teach me to write like the rest of the world.The Naughty Deeds of Helen was the last work I wrote with my own lettersinstead of writing in proper script. Because no one at the Tomb couldwrite script properly, and also because they thought it would be better ifI had less free time in which to occupy myself as I pleased, I was sent tothe village school every day.In spite of the five styles of writing taught at Vroncourt, and thebeautiful English script I learned in teacher-training courses atChaumont, I returned later to the style I used at home. I rolled myletters, disheveled my words, and let my handwriting change as mythought changed. It makes my handwriting very difficult to imitate.People have tried anyway. Two years ago, my poor mother got a fairlywell-forged letter-the signature was a masterpiece-saying that I wassick and asking for her at the prison of Saint-Lazare. That was a terriblething to do. Another time someone sent the authorities a well-counterfeited request asking that I be allowed to see my mother; the forger12Memoirs of Louise Micheldidn't know that, at that very moment, I had been with my mother forseveral days.Anyway, I was sent every day to school at Vroncourt to improve myscript and occupy my time. The teacher was named Michel, but he wasnot related to me.The school at Vroncourt was a dark house with only two rooms. Thelarger, which looked out onto the street, was the classroom. The other,which was never brightly lit, was where the teacher and his wife lived. Itlooked out on a grass-covered slope through a window at ground levelwhich was like a vent in a cave. This window, like the window of theclassroom, was made of many tiny panes and bordered by red cottoncurtains.By the light of the classroom window the schoolteacher's wife, MmeMichel, sewed all winter long. Her profile, a little severe under her greatwhite headdress, seemed very beautiful to me. On the days when werecited catechism, my Aunt Victorine used to come in and sit near her,so that she could hear if I had learned it well.The tables in the classroom were arranged around three sides of theroom, the fourth side, where the front door was, being left empty. Therewere two or three benches for the little ones who couldn't write yet. Afew of the older ones who had what was called beautiful hands also saton those benches writing on their knees. They didn't need to polish theirstyle any more, and they were proud of their status.I put my mind to figuring out ways to make mischief, and I soondiscovered one way. Monsieur the teacher, as we called him, sat on ahigh wooden chair we called the pulpit. He dictated passages to us,telling us to write down the dictation precisely as he said it. I went tosome pains to write down everything he said, not just what he wasdictating. It would come out something like this:The Romans were the masters of the world (Louise, don't hold your penlike a stick;-semicolon)-but Gaul resisted their domination for a longtime (You children from up on Queurot, you're coming in very late;-aperiod. Ferdinand, blow your nose.-You children from the mill, warmyour feet)-Caesar wrote the history of their resistance, etc.Not losing a minute, I even added, scratching furiously, some things theteacher didn't say. He finally caught me. I would have been as unresponsive to his anger as I was to ordinary reproaches, if he hadn't said to medispassionately, "If the inspector of schools saw that, you would get mefired."A great sadness fell over me. I could think of nothing to reply, evenwhen he forbade me to bring him any more rose petals. Those rosepetals, dry in winter and fresh in summer, he liked to add to hischerrywood snuff box, which he opened and closed with a little leatherthong.Memoirs of Louise Michel13The next day my dictation was irreproachable. For more than a week,under his severe eye, I kept twisting in the pocket of my pinafore a littlewhite paper full of dried roses that I had fixed for him without hope.Finally, seeing that my heart was breaking, he asked me for them, and allwas well. After that, even though I played other tricks, they weren't onesthe inspector could blame Monsieur the teacher for.He earned so little that he did all sorts of odd jobs during the longsummers when the children in our village didn't have classes, but the oldteacher was always cheerful. I never heard him say a bitter word.Although books for children and even for grown-ups give the illusionthat merit is rewarded, merit is rarely recognized in this world. I firstrealized that truth from observing the teacher, Michel. Like my hatredof force, this perception comes from my earliest years. Since then I haveseen a thousand examples, so I was astonished only the first time I saw it.Any mathematical calculation became easy when M. Michel explainedit. By nothing more than the way in which he asked the question,Monsieur the teacher provoked the right answers. He put it under yournose. When a student was at the blackboard working on some problemunder the eye of the outstanding old mathematician, the teacher showedthe position of the number with the end of his hazel rod. Your mindkept the whole operation in view at the same time, and it seemed to methat the questions he asked had a rhythm to them.I told my grandfather about that. Monsieur the teacher was a frequentvisitor at the Tomb, and one evening I heard my grandfather andMonsieur the teacher chatting about things far removed from my poor,little problems. I could have stood listening to them forever. Thatevening I discovered that Monsieur the teacher was simply a genius innumbers, as well as a great astronomer and poet. I also found out thatalgebra is easier than arithmetic."Why haven't you written on mathematics?" my grandfather asked M.Michel.The old schoolteacher laughed sadly and ruefully. They exchangedvarious remarks that I didn't understand until I was much older, but theteacher's laugh stayed in my memory. Later, when I read in books aboutmerit being recognized and virtue being rewarded, I laughed the sameway.In later years, I found artlessness like M. Michel's in other people ofmerit many times. I thought about him when the captain of the Virginie,on which I was being sent to New Caledonia, told me about his trip to theNorth Pole. The old seaman, keyed up by the day's storm, the high seasoff the Cape, and the spume left after each wave crashed down on thedeck, relived for me his voyage to the North Pole and made it come alive."Why haven't you written all that down?" I asked."I'm not a writer," he answered. "Anyway, scholars have alreadywritten about all those things."14Memoirs of Louise MichelHow many scholars are as scholarly as the captain of the Virginie?Have they seen things for themselves? Knowledge must be presented ina manner that enlarges the horizon instead of restricting it. As long aspoverty, which shackles people like myoId schoolteacher, is combinedwith prejudice, which makes the unknown fearful and fetters people likethe captain of the Virginie,ignorance will continue to imprison theworld.The development of the human race and the development of newsensitivities are thwarted because people take their point of view fromthe part, not the whole. Only when totality, completeness, is seen caneach person rummage in his own little corner in harmony with wisdomand the development of the human race.Chapter 3The End of ChildhoodAs the seed contains the full-grown tree, all life from its very beginningcontains whatever it will be-whatever, despite everything,it mustbecome. Thus, I am trying to go back to the sources of the events in mylife. One piece of verse I found in myoId papers sketched out thepattern my life would take.The VoyageAt the rim of the desert how immense is the sky.On your new unknown path, child, where do you go?What do you hope for, now hid in deep mystery?If only I knew. Toward beauty and goodness!Child, what's your choice? Peace, calm, and surrender?You could live like a bird and build up your nest.Hear, while there's time; shun the hard brutal path,Where your fate will be damned, and your life will be tears.I don't want to cry, or look backwards too much.If it weren't for my mother, I would go far indeedThrough chance-controlled life, where the tempest is blowing,Go, as one follows the faraway horn.From deepest concealment, I hear a loud fanfare.Others have gone there whom I would meet.Heavy steps on the land! I hear them! I hear them!It's humanity marching. With them I would go.I look at the sand and the heaped-up grain.In profoundly blue skies I see endless cloud-worlds.Does it make any difference? One world's like another.Where those clouds disappear, it is there I must go.Those years, the years of the Tomb, when all those so dear to mesurrounded my being,those years of my grandfather, of my AuntVictoire, of Nanette and Josephine, of M. Michel and the schoolroom ofVroncourt-those years live for me still, though the Tomb is now a ruinand those who people these pages died long ago.16Memoirs of Louise MichelDeep down in the wellsprings of my life are the tales of old legends.Today, I see those phantoms still: Corsican sorceresses, mermaids withgreen eyes, medieval bandits, Jacques Bonhommes, red-haired Teutons,tall, blue-eyed Gallic peasants. From Corsican bandit in his wild gorgesto judge of the High Court of Brittany, all of them are in love with theunknown. All of them bequeath to their descendants, bastard or legitimate, the heritage of the bards.My love lies in these atavistic legends. People are always taunting mefor never speaking of love. I have to go back to those hours when youngwomen are just learning to dream. From the pages of old books read inthe dawn of life many songs of love escape, and within those pages ayoung woman can be in love with love as much as she wishes. I mean shecan look for an ideal person she could love if she were to meet him inreal life. Amongthe sons of Gaul, among the barbarians, she chooses thebravest of the brave. She can look into the far past at men of the north,the men of the Ghilde who fought for freedom and who used to pourthree cups of wine on the flagstones--one for the dead, another for theirancestors, and a third for the brave. The Bagaudes, who died in theirflaming tower; the poets; the troubadors; the great leaders of robberbands who stole from the rich bandit in the manor to give to themiserable beggar in his thatched cottage-they are my loves.I couldn't be faithful to only one of those loves; there were too manyof them. From the devil to Mandrin, from Faust to Saint-Just, how manyphantoms made me dream when I was a child!I dreamed of theJacqueries and the peoples' rebellions of the Middle Ages.Many things float in children's dreams. Some are red like blood andsome black like a night of mourning. Such were the banners of the rebelswho dwelt deep in my thoughts. The weddings of those who loved eachother were the red weddings of martyrs, and they signed their covenantsin blood.I wasn't the only young girl who loved stories of rebels. Often theother girls of the village and I talked of the things which the old songs orlegends of the country spoke of. I remember part of one song:He whom she loved,Proud he was,Helmet on head.Hear the larkThat sings for him.White she was;Hands gatheringMistletoeFrom the dark oak,And verbenaDeep in the woods.Memoirs of Louise Michel17I created poems from these old legends. Even if there hadn't been alittle atavism in my blood helping me to write poetry, no one could haveescaped being a poet in this country of Champagne and Lorraine, wherethe very winds sang Germanic war chants and songs of love andrebellion. Through the great snows of winter, past the sunken paths fullof hawthorn in the spring, pushing through the deep black woods ofenormous oaks and poplars with trunks like columns, you can still followthe paved roads of the conquering Romans, and in many places seewhere the unconquered,long-haired Gauls ripped up those pavingstones.Everyone is a bit of a poet. Nanette and Josephine, those daughters ofthe fields, were poets naturally. After many years and across many seasin New Caledonia, one of their songs, "The Black Bird of the FallowField," came back to my mind during a cyclone. In my version of it youcan hear the same black chord which vibrates in the heart of nature, buttheir version in dialect is sweeter and more mysterious. In theirs you cansmell the wild rosebush of the hedges, and at the same moment hear thebird of the fallow field, who lets his melancholy notes trickle down likesomeone telling his beads, and a deeper note like a tide grinding againsta reef.In the patois of the Haute-Marne their song goes like this:L'Age Na Deu Champ Fauve1.Dans I'champ fanne c'etotUn bel age chantol.Teut na il etotII fo y brachol.Ka ki dijot l'age,L'age deu champ fauve?2.C'etot pa les echosSous les abres du bos,Li bise pleurutDeven lu brachotCe que dijot l'ageL'age deu champ fauve?My version, translated word for word [from the patois], is:18Memoirs of Louise MichelThe Black Bird of the Fallow Field1.In the fallow fieldA pretty bird sang.Black, black it was,And it sobbed strongly.What was it saying,The bird of the fallow field?2.Through its echoesFrom under the trees,The north wind was crying,Sobbing with the bird,What the black bird was saying,The bird of the fallow field.How many memories I have. Is it irrelevant to put down all thisfoolishness? Yesterday, I had trouble getting used to writing aboutmyself; today, searching the days that have disappeared, I can't stop. Isee everything again.I can see the round stones at the far end of the yard near the knoll andthe thicket of hazel trees close by. There, thousands of young toadspeacefully underwent their metamorphosis, if we didn't kidnap themand throw them against the legs of nasty people. Poor toads!In the courtyard, behind the well, we children put bunches of twigs,bundles that let us erect a scaffold with steps, a platform, two tall woodenpoles, everything. Then we depicted historical epochs and characters weliked. We put the Terror of 1793 into dramatic form, and we climbedone after the other up the steps of the scaffold, where we made ready forour executions, crying out "Long live the Republic!" The public wasrepresented by my cousin Mathilde, and sometimes by chickens androosters gobbling and pecking and spreading their tails wide. Wesearched history books for human cruelties. Our scaffold became thestake of John Hus, or still further back in the past, the burning of therebel Bagaudes in their tower in the year 280.One day, as we were climbing our scaffold singing, my grandfathersuggested to us that it would be better to climb the steps to the platformin silence, and at the top to affirm the principle for which we were dying.Afterwards, we modified our dramas to follow his advice.Our play wasn't always so serious. Sometimes we had mock hunts. Pigsserved as boars, and we lit brooms to serve as torches. We ran with thedogs to the dreadful noise of shepherds' horns, which we called theMemoirs of Louise Michel19trumpets of the hunt. An old gamekeeper had taught us how to soundsomething he called the "hallali."We observed all the rules of the art of venery in these disheveledchases with our running dogs. They ended with our taking the pigshome, whether they liked it or not, and several times the pigs fell in thekitchen garden waterhole, where their fat supported them while theymade desperate "oufs" until someone pulled them out. Pulling them outwasn't easy. Men with ropes took charge of the operation, yelling at us.They looked at me as if I were a runaway horse.I have never met children who were, at the same time, as wild and asserious, as naughty and as fearful of causing hurt, as lazy and asindustrious as my cousin Jules and me. Each year during vacation hecame to the Tomb with his mother, Agathe, whom I loved dearly andwho spoiled me very much.The diversity of the questions that Jules and I discussed astonishes menow. Sometimes we would stop to argue in the middle of a performanceof a drama by Victor Hugo, which we had arranged for two actors."They don't respect anything," people said. At other times we wouldargue from the branches of apple trees, where we had chased our cats.Why did we chat from one tree to another? I really don't know. It waspleasant up in the branches, and, too, we used to throw each other all theapples we could reach, which gave Marie Verdet lots of good, fallen fruitto pick up. Marie Verdet was the old, old woman who told me the storyof the Three Washerwomen; she always saw those things, and Jules andI never did.That we never saw the things she saw didn't keep us from enjoying herstories. Indeed, I enjoyed them so much that I fell in love with all thatwas fantastic. Among haunted ruins I drew magical circles, and Ideclared my love to Satan. Satan didn't come, which led me to think hedidn't exist.One day, chatting from tree to tree with Jules, I told him of mydeclaration of love to Satan and his failure to answer me. Jules confessedto me that he had sent a declaration of love no less tender to the famouswoman of letters, George Sand, and she hadn't answered any more thanthe devil had.After a performance of Hugo's Burgraves or Hernani which we hadarranged for two actors, I gave Jules a lute, made like mine. In onestormy discussion on the merits of the sexes, Jules maintained that if Ilearned from the schoolbooks he had brought with him during thevacation, and learned so that I was more or less on his level, it was onlybecause I was an anomaly. Our lutes served as projectiles, and broke ourdiscussion.While still a child, I started writing a Universal History for inclusion inthe rows of redbound manuscript books my grandfather kept. I startedwriting it because Bossuet's History bored me and because Jules, one20Memoirs of Louise Michelvacation, brought me the history he used in school. I documented themain facts as well as I could, and went about my studying as if I were amale.A long time ago I recognized the superiority of the course of study inboys' preparatory schools to the education of girls in the provinces.Some years after I studied my cousin's textbook, I had the opportunityto verify the difference in emphasis given the same subject between thetwo courses of study-one for "the ladies" and the other for the "strongsex"-and to examine the result of that difference.I'm convinced that my first impressions were correct; adults give girlsa pile of nonsense supported by childlike logic, while at the same timethey make "our lords and masters" swallow little balls of science untilthey choke. For both of us, it is a ridiculous education. A few hundredyears from now people will see it all as a heap of trash-even theeducation of men.The Universal History I started to write must have contained someextraordinary mistakes. I consulted enough infallible books to assuretheir presence. But after I had worked on it for a long time, someonegave me several volumes of Voltaire, and I left my historical masterpiecefor a poem.Then I deserted my poem for a mammoth's tooth, of which even BigLaumont spoke with enthusiasm. At the top of the north tower I set up asmall cell full of everything that looked like geological findings. I addedmodern skeletons of dogs and cats, skulls of horses, crucibles, a stove,and a tripod. The devil, if he exists, knows everything I tried there:alchemy, astrology, the summoning of spirits. Every legend, from thealchemist Nicholas Flamel to Faust, had a home in my tower.Also in my tower I had a lute, a horrible instrument I made myself outof a fir board and old guitar strings. I wrote verses that I addressed toVictor Hugo, and in them I spoke pompOUSly of my barbaric instrument. He never knew what this poet's lute really looked like, this lyrewith which I sent him the sweetest greetings.In my tower I also had a magnificent barn owl with phosphorescenteyes, whom I called Olympe, and I had some darling bats who drankmilk like little cats. I stripped the grills out of the big winnowing basketto make cages for them, because it was safer for them to be confinedduring the day.When I was twelve or thirteen I had two grown-up suitors. Thememory of those two ridiculous persons who followed each other likegeese and who asked my grandparents for my hand would have drivenme away from marriage even if I hadn't already decided it was repulsive.The first one, a true comic character, wished to "share his fortune"-hemade each word ring like a little bell-with a wife reared according to hisprinciples, that is to say, like Moliere's Agnes.Memoirs of Louise Michel21After all that I had read, it was too late to rear me this way. Thatanimal! He must have slept for a century or two, and when he woke uphe came to my grandparents to recite this nonsense.My grandparents let me make up my own mind and answer formyself. The very day that fool appeared my grandfather and I had justbeen reading from an old edition of Moliere. The suitor looked to me somuch like Agnes's guardian in L'Ecole des femmes that I found a way toslip into my answer a great part of the scene beginning, "The little cat isdead," when her guardian questions her about an unknown male visitor.I gave him Agnes's speech as an answer, word for word, and naturally hedidn't understand. Then, driven to despair, I looked straight in his face,and with the ingenuousness of Agnes, I said to him boldly, knowing hehad one glass eye, "Monsieur, is your other eye glass, too?" That seemedto embarrass my relatives a little, and as for my suitor, he gave me avenomous look from the eye that wasn't glass, and made it cleaF he nolonger wanted to make me his fiancee.At this time, I had been growing a lot, and my dress was very short. Mypinafore was torn, and in my pocket I had my net for catching toads. Iwas only sorry that I hadn't already caught a few so that I could slip theminto his pocket, but I didn't need to. He never returned.Moliere inspired me just as much when I dealt with the second of mytwo suitors. I don't think they knew each other, and yet they made agood pair. So many persons seem to go in pairs or threesomes, like starsthat orbit around each other. They both had the idea of choosing a veryyoung fiancee and having her molded like soft wax for a few yearsbefore offering her up to themselves as a sacrifice.To my second suitor, I said, more or less: "You see plainly what'shanging on the wall over there." It was a pair of stag antlers. "Well, Idon't love you. I will never love you, and if I marry you I won't restrainmyself any more than Mme Dandin did. If I marry you, you will wearhorns on your head a hundred thousand feet higher than those antlers."I suppose I convinced him I was telling him the truth, for he nevercame back. My relatives advised me, however, to be a little more reservedin quoting old authors in the future.There have been unfortunate children who were forced to marry oldcrocodiles like those. If it had been done to me, either he or I would havehad to jump out the window.Not too long after that affair, my grandfather was returning fromBourmont on the stagecoach. Seated next to him was a third maniac whopointed out Vroncourt and the Tomb and said to him:"You see that old rats' nest.""Yes," grandfather replied."An old fellow lives there who is raising his grandchildren for prisonand the scaffold."22Memoirs of Louise Michel"Oh, really?" said grandfather."Yes, monsieur. My friend X-- recently proposed marrying one ofthem, a little smart-aleck, in a few years, if her education were directedas he wished.""Well?""The old fellow let her give her own answer. Whatever she wished.She said such horrible things that my friend doesn't even want to repeatthem. If I had a daughter like that, I'd put her in a reform school. Andher a little wench who doesn't have a sou to her name. Hey, where areyou going?""I'm getting off at Vroncourt," grandfather said. "I'm the old fellowyou've been discussing."So these were the days of my childhood. Now they are sketched out,laid out on the table, the cadaver of my life. These days of former timeswere so calm in events and so full of tormented dreams. Even then Isensed my destiny. People do sense their destinies, as dogs sense a wolf,and sometimes it comes true with a strange precision. If everybody toldof their prescient thoughts in minute detail, it would be like reading theTales of Edgar Allan Poe.I must write things as they come to me. They are like pictures passingfrom sight and going away endlessly into the shadows. Of myoIdrelatives, of my young and old friends, of my mother, nothing remainstoday but the dreams of my childhood. I see those who disappearedthatyesterday or a long time ago, just as they were, and I see allsurrounded their lives, and the wound of their absence bleeds just asmuch now as it did in the first few days. I have no real homesickness fora country, but I am homesick for the dead. And the further along I getin these memoirs, the more numerous are the images that press close tome of those whom I shall never see again.At the Tomb, near the hazel tree in a bastion of the wall, was a benchwhere my mother and grandmother used to come during the summerafter the heat of the day. My mother, to make Grandmother happy, hadfilled this corner of the garden with all kinds of rosebushes. While thetwo women talked I leaned on the wall. The garden was cool in the dewof the evening. The perfumes of all the flowers mingled and climbed upto the sky. The honeysuckle, the reseda, the roses, all exhaled sweetperfumes which joined each other. Bats flew gently in the twilight, andtheir shadows soothed my thoughts. I used to recite the ballads that Iloved, without ever thinking that death was going to pass over us.When these days of my dawning ended, so ended my songs that weresad and dreamy. Death swooped down on the Tomb. The foyer wasempty and those old people who had reared me were laid to rest underthe pines in the cemetery.Memoirs of Louise Michel23I inherited a small tract of land. I can only picture one piece of it now,a small copse my mother planted on the hill near her little vineyard.From the hill I could see the woods of Suzerin and the red roof of thefarm, the blue mountains of Bourmont, Vroncourt, the mill, and theentire hill of wheat waving in the wind. In my mind I imagined that thesea would look like that waving wheat, and I found out later I was right.My mother took care of the copse during her long stay in the HauteMarne while I was an assistant schoolmistress in Paris.There was so little time for living together. "Things have tears," Virgilwrote. I feel them when I think of the little woods and the vineyardwatered by Mother's sweat. Years later, her own mother Margueritewanted to see the vineyard one last time before she died, and my unclecarried here there in his arms.During the Franco-Prussian War, Prussian soldiers went through likevictors. They cut down the woods and destroyed the vineyard. Therewas a little hut in the middle, and I believe they burned it down whilemaking a fire to warm themselves out of the trees they cut down. When Iwas sent to New Caledonia, people claimed payment for various debts Ihad incurred during the Siege of Paris, and my mother had to sell theland.When my paternal grandparents died, I had to leave my calm retreatin the Tomb. From this time until her own mother died, my motherlived in Vroncourt near the cemetery. From there she could hear thewind in the pines that shadowed the family's cherished graves. I can stillsee the tops of the pines, heavy with snow during the winter. Never haveI seen winters so long as in the Haute-Marne, and never have I felt suchcold, except in polar oceans.Before I left the Tomb, I wrote a farewell verse and carved it in thewall of the tower. The old ruins did not take good care of my farewellvery long, for not a stone of it remains today.Farewell, my dreaming retreat in the manor.Goodbye, my high and windy tower.Only your old moss remains,And I, a frail, storm-broken branch,Shall follow the currents on.Your swallows will circle without meAnd sing summer days on the rooftop,While I drift on, an outcast.Won't your turret be missing its mistressWhen my voice is no longer its echo?Chapter 4The Making of a RevolutionaryAbove everything else I am taken by the Revolution. It had to be thatway. The wind that blew through the ruin where I was born, the oldpeople who brought me up, the solitude and freedom of my childhood,the legends of the Haute-Marne, the scraps of knowledge gleaned fromhere and there-all that opened my ear to every harmony, my spirit toevery illumination, my heart to both love and hate. Everything intermingled in a single song, a single dream, a single love: the Revolution.As far back as I can remember, the origin of my revolt against thepowerful was my horror at the tortures inflicted on animals. I used towish animals could get revenge, that the dog could bite the man who wasmercilessly beating him, that the horse bleeding under the whip couldthrow off the man tormenting him. But mute animals always submit totheir fate.In the Haute-Marne,the brooks and the lush fields shaded withwillows are filled with frogs during summer. You can hear them in thebeautiful evenings, sometimes an entire choir.The peasants cut frogs in two, leaving the front part to creep along inthe sun, eyes horribly popping out, front legs trembling as they try toflee under the ground. Able neither to live nor to die, the poor beasts tryto bury themselves beneath the dust or mud. In the bright sunlight theirsoft, enormous eyes shine with reproach.And geese being fattened: The peasants nail a goose's webbed feet tothe floor to keep it from moving around. Or horses, which men gorewith bulls' horns. Animals always submit, and the more ferocious a manis toward animals, the more that man cringes before the people whodominate him.The peasants give little animals and birds to their children for playthings. In spring on the thresholds of peasants' cottages you can see poorlittle birds opening their beaks to two or three-year-old urchins whostuff them innocently with dirt. They hold up fledglings by a foot towatch them flap little featherless wings trying to fly, or they drag puppiesor kittens like wagons over stones and through brooks. When the beastbites the child, the father crushes it under his shoe.Memoirs of Louise Michel25When I was a child I saved many an animal. They filled up thecrumbling Tomb, but it didn't matter if I added another to the menagerie. At first I traded things with other children to get the nests ofnightingales or linnets, but then the children came to understand that Iraised the little creatures. Children are less cruel than people think;people just don't bother to make them understand.And then there are dogs and cats that have grown too old: I have seenthem thrown live into crayfish holes. If the woman who was throwing thebeasts in had fallen into the hole herself, I wouldn't have reached out myhand to pull her out.All of this happens without anyone really thinking about it. Laborcrushes the parents; their fate grips them the way their child grips ananimal. All around the globe people moan at the machine they arecaught in, and everywhere the strong overwhelm the weak.The dominant idea of an entire life can come from some randomimpression. When I was very small, I saw a decapitated goose. I was verylittle, I know, because I remember Nanette holding me by the hand tocross the hall. The goose was walking about stiffly, and where its headhad been its neck was a bruised and bloody wound. It was a white goosewith its feathers spattered with blood, and it walked like a drunkardwhile its head, thrown into a corner, lay on the floor with its eyes closed.The sight of the headless goose had many consequences. One resultwas that the sight of meat thereafter nauseated me until I was eight orten, and I needed a strong will and my grandmother's arguments toovercome that nausea. The impression of the headless goose lies at thebase of my pity for animals, and it also lies at the base of my horror at thedeath penalty. Some years after I saw the headless goose, a parricide wasguillotined in a neighboring village, and at the time he was to die, thesensation of horror I felt for the man's anguish was mixed with myremembrance of the goose's torment.The impression I had gotten from seeing the decapitated goose waskept vivid by stories of sufferings I heard at ecregnes. During the longwinter evenings of the Haute-Marne, the women of each village met in aspecial house set aside for them known as the ecregne. In their sessions,also called ecregnes, they would spin and knit and tell old stories like thoseabout the Ghost-in-Flames, who dances through the fields in his fieryrobe, and gossip about what was going on in various peoples' homes.I liked to hear those stories told against the whir of spinning wheels atthe ecregne on evenings when Nanette and I received permission to gothere. The clack of knitting needles cut through the drone with a littledry noise. And outside, the snow, the great white snow falling, stretchedout over the ground like a shroud. We were supposed to return home atten o'clock, but we always stayed late. It was a beautiful time. Old Marie26Memoirs of Louise MichelVerdet rested her knitting on her knees, and her eyes grew wide underher headdress, which came forward over her face like a roof. In herbroken voice she told story after story about apparitions: about theGhost-in-Flames, the Three Washerwomen, and the Valley of the Sorcerers. Her sister Franchette had seen it all, too, and she nodded herhead approvingly. When Nanette and I had to leave, we left regretfully,skirting the walls of the cemetery, where we always saw, alas, only thesnow and heard only the north wind of winter.My evenings at the village ecregnes added to the feeling of revolt that Ihave felt time and time again. The peasants sow and harvest the grain,but they do not always have bread. One woman told me how during abad year-that is what they call a year when the monopolists starve thecountry-neither she, nor her husband, nor their four children wereable to eat every day. Owning only the clothes on their backs, they hadnothing more to sell. Merchants who had grain gave them no morecredit, not even a few oats to make a little bread, and two of theirchildren died-from hunger, they thought."You have to submit," she said to me. "Everybody can't eat bread everyday."Her husband had wanted to kill the man who had refused them creditat 100 percent interest while their children were dying, but she stoppedhim. The two children who managed to survive went to work ultimatelyfor the man whom her husband wanted to kill. The usurer hardly gavethem any wages, but poor people, she said, "should submit to that whichthey cannot prevent."Her manner was calm when she told me that story. I had gonehot-eyed with rage, and I said to her, "You should have let your husbanddo what he wanted to do. He was right."I could imagine the poor little ones dying of hunger. She had madethat picture of misery so distressing that I could feel it myself. I saw thehusband in his torn shirt, his wooden shoes chafing his bare feet, goingto beg at the evil usurer's and returning sadly over the frozen roads withnothing. I saw him shaking his fists threateningly when his little oneswere lying dead on a handful of straw. I saw his wife stopping him fromavenging his own children and others. I saw the two surviving childrengrowing up with this memory, and then going off to work for that man:the cowards.I thought that if that usurer had come into the ecregne at that momentI would have leaped at his throat to bite it, and I told her that. I wasindignant at her believing everybody couldn't have food every day. Suchstupidity bewildered me."You mustn't talk like that, little one," the woman said. "It makes Godcry."Memoirs of Louise Michel27Have you ever seen sheep lift their throats to the knife? That womanhad the mind of a ewe.I was thinking about that little story one day at catechism, and itcaused me to argue energetically for the opposite of the old proverb,Charity begins at home. The old cure (a real believer, that one) hadplaced a book, bound like the encyclopedia I had stolen from BigLaumont, near his hand. I confess that from the instant the cure put itdown I was preoccupied by what could be inside its brown leathercovers. It couldn't be a child's book. I was afraid the old cure wouldnotice my preoccupation, and when he called on me, I was fearful ofbeing punished, but he was calling on me only to give me the book.It contained meditations on the Psalms of Exile, and was all I neededto give me a horror of conquerors to add to my horror of other humanvampires. Reading the book, I cursed those who crush peoples as muchas I cursed those who starve them, never suspecting how many timeslater I would see that very crime in high places.Meanwhile, the family property was bringing in so little that neitherwe nor my uncle, who cultivated half of it, was succeeding in makingends meet. Many similar years would follow, I felt. People couldn'talways help others, and indeed something more than charity was necessary if each person was always to have something to eat. As for the rich, Ihad little respect for them.I know the full reality of heavy work on the land. I know the woes ofthe peasant. He is incessantly bent over land thatis as harsh as astepmother. For his labor all he gets is leftovers fwm his master, and hecan get even less comfort from thought and dreams than we can. Heavywork bends both men and oxen over the furrows, keeping the slaughterhouse for worn-out beasts and the beggar's sack for worn-out humans.The land. That word is at the very bottom of my life. It was in thethick, illustrated Roman history from which my whole family on bothsides had learned how to read. My grandmother had taught me to readfrom it, pointing out the letters with her large knitting needle. Reared inthe country, I understood the agrarian revolts of old Rome, and I shedmany tears on the pages of that book. The death of the Greeks oppressed me then as much as the gallows of Russia did later.How misleading are the Georgics and Eclogues about the happiness ofthe fields. The descriptions of nature are true, but the description of thehappiness of workers in the fields is a lie. People who know no bettergaze at the flowers of the fields and the beautiful fresh grass and believethat the children who watch over the livestock play there. The little oneswant grass only to stretch out in and sleep a little at noon. The shadow ofthe woods, the yellowing crops that the wind moves like waves-thepeasant is too tired to find them beautiful. His work is heavy, his day is28Memoirs of Louise Michellong, but he resigns himself, he always resigns himself, for his will isbroken. Man is overworked like a beast. He is half dead and works forhis exploiter without thinking. No peasants get rich by working the land;they only make money for people who already have too much.Many men have told me, in words that echoed what the woman toldme at the ecregne: "You must not say that, little one. It offends God."That's what they said to me when I told them that everyone has a right toeverything there is on earth.My pity for everything that suffers-more perhaps for the silent beastthan for man-went far, and my revolt against social inequalities wentstill further. It grew, and it has continued to grow, through the battlesand across the carnage. It dominates my grief, and it dominates my life.There was no way that I could have stopped myself from throwing mylife to the Revolution.I have often been accused of having more solicitude for animals thanfor people. It is certainly true that a sadness takes hold of me when menmust destroy a beast to whom mercy cannot be shown without endangering others. You hold in your hands a being that wishes to live.Once, near where I lived, on the hill down which vineyards sloped,men had surrounded a poor she-wolf that howled as she tried to hideher little ones within her paws. I begged mercy for her, but naturally itwasn't granted.The mercy that as a child I asked for the wolf, I wouldn't ask now forthe men who behave worse than wolves toward the human race. Whatever the pity that wrings the heart, harmful beings must disappear. Atthe death of those who, like the Russian czars, represent the slavery anddeath of a nation, I would now have no more emotion than I would haveabout removing a dangerous trap from the road. Such persons can bestruck down without remorse. If the opportunity arose, I would alwaysfeel that way, as I did yesterday, as I will tomorrow.I was accused of allowing my concern for animals to outweigh theproblems of humans at the Perronnet barricade at Neuilly during theCommune, when I ran to help a cat in peril. I did that, yes, but I did notabandon my duty. The unfortunate beast was crouched in a corner thatwas being scoured by shells, and it was crying out like a human being. Iwent to find him, and it didn't take a minute. I put him more or less insafety, and later someone even picked him up.Another incident happened more recently. Some mice had appearedin my cell at Clermont. I had a pile of wool coverings my mother andfriends had sent me, and I immediately used them to stuff up all themouseholes. From behind one of my makeshift plugs during the night,however, I heard a poor little cry, a cry so plaintive that it would havetaken a heart of stone not to open up the blocked hole. So I did, and thebeast came out.Memoirs of Louise Michel29The mouse was either imprudent or a genius in knowing how to judgeher world. From that moment on she came boldly up on my bed,carrying morsels of bread. She made fun of the gestures I made to gether to leave, and she used the underside of my pillow as a pantry andeven worse.She wasn't in my cell when I was taken away, so I wasn't able to put herin my pocket. I asked my neighbors in nearby cells to care for her, but Idon't know what happened to the poor beast.Why should I be so sad over brutes, when reasoning beings are sounhappy? The answer is that everything fits together, from the birdwhose brood is crushed to the humans whose nests are destroyed by war.The beast dies of hunger in his hole; man dies of it far away from hishome. A beast's heart is like a human heart, its brain like a human brain.It feels and understands. The heat and spark will always rise up. It can'tbe crushed out.Even in a gutter like a laboratory, a beast is sensitive both to caressesand to brutalities. More often it feels brutalities. People find it interesting to torture a poor animal to study mechanisms which are already wellknown and which fresh tortures cannot make known any better, becausethe pain being inflicted causes the animal's organs to function abnormally. When one of its sides is dug into, someone turns it over to dig intothe other. Sometimes, in spite of the bonds that immobilize it, the animalin its pain moves the delicate flesh on which someone is working. Then athreat or a blow teaches it that man is the king of animals. I have heardthat during an eloquent demonstration a professor stuck his scalpel intothe living animal as he would have into a pincushion, because he couldn'tgesture holding the scalpel in his hand. The animal was already beingsacrificed, so additional pain made little difference. At Alfort, peopledid sixty-some operations on the same horse, operations that did nogood, but made the beast suffer as it stood there trembling on its bloodyhooves with their torn-off shoes.All this useless suffering perpetrated in the name of science must end.It is as barren as the blood of the little children whose throats were cut byGilles de Retz and other madmen at the beginning of modern chemistry.Ultimately, a science, not gold, came out of their crucibles and theirsearch for the philosopher's stone, but science came from the nature ofthe elements and not from the cruelties of experimenters.New wonders will come from science, and change must come. Timeraises up volcanoes under old continents, and time allows new feelings togrow. Soon there will be neither cruelty nor exploitation, and science willprovide all humanity with enough food, with nourishing food.I dream of the time when science will give everyone enough to eat.Instead of the putrefied flesh which we are accustomed to eating,perhaps science will give us chemical mixtures containing more iron and30Memoirs of Louise Michelnutrients than the blood and meat we now absorb. The first bite mightnot flatter the palate as much as the food we now eat, but it will not betrichinated or rotten, and it will build stronger and purer bodies for menweakened by generations of famine or the excesses of their ancestors.With the abundance of nourishing food in that future world, theremust be art, too. In that coming era, the arts will be for everyone. Thepower of harmonious colors, the grandeur of sculpted marble-they willbelong to the entire human race. Genius will be developed, not snuffedout. Ignorance has done enough harm. The privilege of knowledge isworse than the privilege of wealth. The arts are a part of human rights,and everybody needs them.Neither music, nor marble, nor color, can by itself proclaim theMarseillaise of the new world. Who will sing out the Marseillaise of art?Who will tell of the thirst for knowledge, of the ecstasy of musicalharmonies, of marble made flesh, of canvas palpitating like life? Art, likescience and liberty, must be no less available than food.Everyone must take up a torch to let the coming era walk in light. Artfor all! Science for all! Bread for all!Chapter 5Schoolmistress in theDante-MarneWhen my grandparents died and I had to leave the Tomb, I began toprepare for my examinations as a schoolmistress because I wanted tomake my mother happy. There was little money, but the arrangementsfor my legal protection were complex. My mother served as one guardian and M. Voisin, a former magistrate, was another, just as if they wereadministering a fortune. The attorney, Maitre Girault, notary at Bourmont, served as surrogate of the court. People said that all this wasn'tenough to keep me from immediately wasting the eight or ten thousandfrancs in land that I had inherited.For the moment, however, I devoted myself to my education. Exceptfor three months at Lagny in 1851, my whole higher education camefrom the teacher-training course under Mmes Beths and Royer atChaumont.I see Chaumont now as it was then. I see the Boulingrin, the street ofChoignes with its sinister memories, for that was where the executionerlived. I see the viaduct crossing the whole valley of the Ecoliers. Most ofall, I see Sucot's bookstore, where first as a student and then as aschoolmistress I always had debts. I see the large curly head of M. Sucotlooking out of the window in which he displayed his fanciest stationery,newest books, and latest musical scores from Paris. As a child I had beendazzled when I looked atthe bookstore in Bourmont, and certaindisplays of books still affect me.I see Chaumont, and the old boarding house where I lodged, and myteachers, and my friends, with whom I played practical jokes on nastypeople. With Clara, one of my friends, I remember causing a greatcommotion at the homes of people who were bullying republicans. Onthe doors of their houses, we made a mark-a mysterious mark, theysaid-with red chalk. Some people saw the mark as an egalitariantriangle (a little elongated); others saw an unknown instrument oftorture; those who were disinterested in the affair saw a big donkey'sear. The last were right.The three months at Lagny came when my mother and I visitedrelatives in the area. We stayed with my uncle, who was disturbed by myconstant writing, for he feared I would desert the teacher's examinationto write poetry. To forestall this, he put me in Mme Duval's private32Memoirs of Louise Michelboarding school at Lagny, where his own daughter had been educated,and 1 stayed there about three months.At Mme Duval's, as at my school in Chaumont, everybody lived forbooks. The outside world stopped at the threshold, and I concentratedall my enthusiasm on the crumbs and bits of science I was reading about.The lack of time! You learn just enough to make you thirsty for therest, and there is never time for the rest. Before 1871 that was thetorture of every schoolmistress's life. Before getting her diploma she wasfaced with a program of study that kept growing boundlessly, and aftergetting her diploma she saw that she knew nothing. To be sure, thatpredicament was nothing new, and it was shared. All of us schoolmistresses were in the same position. The living springs where you couldquench your thirst for knowledge were not for those who had to fightfor existence.At my boarding house at Chaumont I met my friend Julie. Sometimesthe destinies of different persons intertwine for a time and then takeopposite courses. Julie and I were both schoolmistresses, first in theHaute-Marne and then in Paris, where we stayed together while we wereassistant schoolmistresses at Mme Vollier's.In Paris Julie kept busy at her studies, and the hatred I felt forNapoleon's Empire left her cold. It was music and poetry that swept heraway. Then the great events of 1870-71 came and Julie remained astranger to them. Our paths diverged completely. But before thoseevents, during our vacation, we had gone into the deep woods, andunder the oak tree traditional for such oaths we had sworn eternalfriendship for each other. Neither of us really broke that oath. Eventspulled us apart.When I took my diploma at the end of 1852, I would have liked tohave taught in Paris and worked as a schoolmistress while I continuedmy studies. Many people did just that. But at the time I did not want tobe separated from my mother, and I taught in the Haute-Marne so Icould live near her and my grandmother Marguerite. That is why Ibegan my career, in January 1853, as a schoolmistress at Audeloncourt.The road from Chaumont to Audeloncourt is long. It turns andspirals around Mont Chauve, comes down the slopes by the easiestdescents possible, and then shoots forward, straightening out its bendsthrough villages whose houses still have thatched roofs. Then the roadcomes to the Sueur Woods, where, under the low branches of twistedapple trees, sits the collapsed ruin of a little inn. The old people of thearea claim that the throats of travelers used to be slit in that inn. Only alittle over a century ago those who entered that inn rarely left it.Travelers got on and off the coach that stopped at each relay stationfrom Chaumont to Audeloncourt. Some were dressed in ordinary bluework shirts with cherrywood snuff boxes in their pockets, and theyMemoirs of Louise Michel33carried sticks hanging from their wrists by little leather straps. Otherswere dressed in their very best, clothes worn so rarely that folds from thecupboards where they had been packed were traced on them as if apressing iron had done it.Part of my maternal family lived in Audeloncourt. My maternalgreat-uncles-Simon, Michel, and Francis, who was called Uncle Francfort-lived there. They were tall, handsome old men, with strongshoulders, powerful judgments, and simple hearts. They all had red hairwith no silver threads in it, even as old as they were when I beganteaching. They had quick minds and, like my mother's brothers, theyhad somehow learned a great mass of information and spoke well.Many years ago some ancestor had bought an entire library by thekilogram. There were old texts illustrated with Homer calling down theclouds on his characters; old chronicles from which legends flew sostrongly that my great-uncles had adopted some of them; volumes ofout-of-date science; novels of by-gone days-all published under theking's censorship. I heard all of those books spoken of so enthusiasticallythat I deeply regretted the pages that were missing from some books,and the other books that had been lost completely.The women of Audeloncourt used to read my great-uncles' novels intheir late-night ecregnes. The reader of the evening would lick her thumbto turn the pages while her gentle eyes dropped tears over the misfortunes of the heroes. Some people read aloud so well that they charmedtheir listeners, and the ecregne lasted until midnight. Then, still trembling from the emotional impact of the story, some of the women wouldwalk the others back to their homes. The snow spread over everything.The hoarfrost,like flowers in May, covered the branches. The lastwomen, the ones who lived farthest away, ran through the snow to theirhouses while their friends yelled after them to reassure them.Perhaps my uncles' library also gave my maternal family the habit ofstudying alone, for none of them was rich enough to afford any formaleducation. My mother's brother, Uncle Georges, had an astoundinghistorical erudition. Uncle Michael had a passion for mechanical things,which I abused when I was a child, making him descend to the construction of a little chariot and a thousand other devices.I loved my mother's brothers a great deal, and I imprudently calledthem Georges and Fanfan until one day when my grandmother told meit was bad to treat one's elders with so little respect. I had a third unclewho died in Africa many years ago. He had been in military service andeither from that experience or from books had gotten a taste for travel.He also had a sound appreciation of many things-above all, discipline,which provided him with many reflections that he didn't think I wascapable of understanding. Anarchy, I believe, germinates in the heart ofall discipline.34Memoirs of Louise MichelMy school in Audeloncourt, which I opened in January 1853, wasclassed as a Free School, because for it to become a communal school Iwould have had to have taken an oath to support the Empire. I wasoptimistic; I even nourished the illusion of making a happy future formy mother. But a month's charge for a student could only be one franc,which was a relatively large sum for farm-workers. Because I wasn't oldenough to meet the age requirement for keeping boarders, I was obligedto put my students from other villages into the homes of my Audeloncourt pupils. Still, in spite of accusations some idiots made about thatand about my political opinions, my class went very well because I taughtwith passion. I had the zeal of the very young.When we were in my classroom at Audeloncourt we could hear theincessant noise of water. During the summer a brook flowed downhillmurmuring to the listener. In the winter, the brook became a furioustorrent. Who listens to it now? Who listens from the dark school where Iwas surrounded by attentive students? Students are always attentive inthe villages, where no harsh distractions come from outside.I can still call all my students by name, from Little Rose, whom wecalled Little Mole because of her lustrous black hair, to Big Rose, who is aschoolmistress herself now. Claire also became a schoolmistress. Eudoxiedied in my arms during an epidemic. There was Tall Estelle who lookedlike a vivacious shepherdess of Floridan, and poor Aricie, thin, lame,weak, who could absorb a whole textbook in a few days. And Zelie, thesister of the public courier of Clefmont, I loved doubly because of hervivid imagination and because she had the same name as a friend ofmine at Vroncourt, whom I mourned for a long time. The public courierand his sister were orphans. He was the eldest of the family, andalthough he was very young, he filled the place of their dead parents andhad wanted his sister to attend my school. In my trips between Audeloncourt and Chaumont, he and I used to talk of all sorts of things, the waypeople do who read a great deal.In my class at Audeloncourt, we sang the Marseillaise before themorning's study began and after study ended in the evening. The stanzaespecially for children:We'll take over this courseWhen our elders are no longer herewas sung kneeling; one of the youngest, the little brunette Rose, sang itsolo. When we picked up the chorus again, the children and I often hadtears flooding from our eyes.I found that same feeling again at Noumea during the last year of myexile in New Caledonia. It was July 14, Bastille Day. At this period I wasin charge of teaching drawing and singing in the girls' schools in the city.M. Simon, who was the interim mayor, wanted the children to stand inMemoirs of Louise Michel35the open bandstand in the Place des Cocotiers and sing the Marseillaisebetween the two customary evening cannon shots. Night had fallensuddenly. In tropical areas like New Caledonia there is neither dusk nordawn. The palm trees were rustling gently, swayed by the eveningbreeze. The lanterns lit the bandstand a little, but left the square inshadow. We felt the pressure of the crowd-a black and white crowd. Infront of the bandstand was the military band. Mme Penand, the first layschoolmistress who had come to the colony, was standing near me, as wasan artilleryman who was going to sing with us. Arranged in a circle thechildren surrounded us.After the first cannon shot such a silence fell that our hearts stoppedbeating. I felt our voices soaring into this silence, and it seemed as if wewere being carried off on wings. The penetrating voices of the children'schoir and the thunder of the brass instruments between the stanzasthrilled us beyond belief. That song had led our fathers; it was the livingMarseillaise and we loved it.Upon my return from New Caledonia, I found the sacred hymn wasbeing used in all sorts of public spectacles. It had not really recoveredfrom the mire through which the last days of the Empire had dragged it,and wounded once again, the Marseillaise was dead for us.At Audeloncourt on Sundays, small black wooden shoes clicked hurriedly toward the door of the church, in order to get out by the time thepriest intoned "Domine, salvum fac Napoleonem." I had told the children that it was sacrilegious to take part in a prayer for that man. Thelittle black wooden shoes ran hurriedly out of the church, making agentle, dry noise like hail, the same little dry noise that the bullets madeon 22 January 1871, raining down from the windows of the Hotel deVille upon the unarmed crowd. Later, I heard the sound of woodenshoes again. Those were on the tired feet of the women prisoners atAuberive, and they clumped sadly as the woman shuffled around thepnson.In those years when I was teaching in the Haute-Marne, I oftenthought of going to Paris. Paris, of which I had only an imperfect notionand of which I had only glimpsed the marvels that people spoke about,attracted me. Only there could people fight the Empire, and Paris calledso strongly that a person could feel its magnetism.The self-proclaimed defenders of law and order around Audeloncourt who deigned to bother about me at all, called me a "red," meaninga republican, and they accused me of wanting to go to Paris. I still don'tsee why my wanting to go there should have upset them. If my opinionsbothered them so much, they should have been happy to see me go.Those denunciations did trouble my mother. They also got me a goodtrip to Chaumont, the capital of the Haute-Marne. The business therewas supposed to occupy me for two days, but it ended as soon as I36Memoirs of Louise Michelarrived. I went to the home of the rector of the departmental academy,M. Fayet, and there I sat on his hearth as I used to sit talking to mygrandparents at the Tomb. I explained my actions in the light of theaccusations made against me. I said people claimed that I wanted to goto Paris and that I was a republican. Both claims, I admitted, wereperfectly true. In speaking of my studies, of the passion that called me toParis, and of the Republic, I opened my heart.The rector looked at me in silence a long time before answering. Hiswife, who took my side, smiled, while their pet doves flew around theroom, which was full of sunlight and smelled like spring and likemorning the entire day. The rector endtd the interview by chiding megently.I drove back from Chaumont with the public courier, who was thebrother of my student Zelie. Never did we have a more serious conversation than we had on that drive. In my pocket I had a piece of red chalksimilar to that with which Clara and I had drawn donkeys' ears on thedoors of Bonapartists in Chaumont. On the trip I used it to make thesame drawing on the back of a traveler who was trying to praiseBonaparte. I also made him tremble when I said: "The Republic mustcome. We are many, and we are strong."Another time, the accusations against me were of a different nature.From Audeloncourt I sent verses to Victor Hugo. My mother and I hadseen him in the summer of 1851. Later, he answered the letters I wroteto him from my exile, as he had sent letters from Paris to my nest inVroncourt and to my boarding house at Chaumont. I also sent a fewarticles to the Chaumont newspaper. I still have a few fragments of thosearticles, which are less fragile than the cherished hands that saved themfor me. One of my articles contained a passage that got me accused ofinsulting His Majesty, the Emperor. That accusation was correct, ofcourse, and could have been made on the basis of other pieces I wrote atthe time.The article was a history of the martyrs and began:Domitian was ruling. He had banished . . . philosophers and scholarsfrom Rome,increased the salary of the praetorians, reestablished theCapitoline games, and everybody therefore adored the merciful emperorwhile they waited for others to stab him....We are in Rome in the year 97 A.D.The prefect summoned me to his office. There he told me I hadinsulted His Majesty, the Emperor, by comparing him to Domitian andthat if I were not so young he would have the right to send me to theprison colony at Cayenne.I answered that anyone who saw M. Bonaparte in the portrait I hadpainted insulted him just as much as I was accused of doing, but that itwas indeed M. Bonaparte that I had in mind. I added that, as forMemoirs of Louise Michel37Cayenne, I would be perfectly happy to set up an educational establishment there, and since I could not afford to pay for the expense of thetrip myself, it would be very nice if the state sent me there. Things wentno further.Some time after this interview a credulous man wanted to ask theprefect for some favor; what, I'm not sure. He came to me saying thatsince I had been at the prefect's, I could recommend him there. In vain Itried to tell him I had been called to the prefecture only to be accusedand threatened with Cayenne, and that my recommendation would beworth very little. The good man wouldn't give up, so in the end I wrotehim a letter of recommendation that read, more or less:Monsieur Ie prefet,The person to whom you were kind enough to promise a trip toCayenne is being tormented to give a letter of recommendation to you.I have not been able to make this man understand that this would be theway to have him kicked out of your office. He is as stubborn as a donkey.Let him not learn to his sorrow that I was correct in my reluctance towrite a letter for him.I beg you, dear sir, not to forget the trip you spoke to me about.After he had made his expedition to Chaumont, the man came up tome. I confess I was already laughing at the tale of woe he was going totell me, when to my great surprise he said: "I knew it. You're lucky forme. I got what I requested." He, not I, was lucky.My dear friend Julie taught nearby at Millieres, and two institutionswith no resources were barely able to subsist near each other. Theobvious thing was for us to get together, which we did at Millieres. Julieand I used to sing together in the spring evenings with a piano serving asan organ. At that time she had a voice like the forest nightingales.But always I dreamed of Paris. Throughout these years in the HauteMarne, Paris called me ever more strongly, for in Paris I would be at theheart of affairs. In 1855 or 1856 I finally decided that there was noalternative to my going there.Chapter 6Schoolmistress in ParisWhen I left the Haute-Marne to become a schoolmistress in Paris, I hadto leave my mother and grandmother behind. Being separated fromthem made me suffer deeply, but I hadn't yet given up the hope ofmaking a happy future for them, and I held tightly to that illusion.I became a teacher in Mme Vollier's school at 14, rue du Chateaud'Eau in Montmartre. From the time I went to Paris until Mme Vollierdied in my own school four years before the Siege, we never left eachother. Her portrait is among my most precious souvenirs that mymother preserved carefully for me-half-faded portraits, worm-eatenbooks, bunches of yew and pine, and withered red carnations and whitelilies. Today those souvenirs also include the white roses with drops ofblood on the petals which I sent my mother from Clermont.I see the pupils at the rue du Chateau-d'Eau again in groups. Therewere the seniors, two or three of whom were very tall-Leonie, Aline,Leopoldine. There were the blondes, two of whom had wide foreheadsand steel-blue eyes-Heloise and Gabrielle. There was a group of palechildren: Josephine, little Noel, Marie. And others so brown they wereblack: Elisa, who had the sharp features of someone from the Midi; littleJulie, whose voice was loud even though it wasn't beautiful yet; Elisa,who played her little piece in a prize competition at a younger age thaneven Mozart had done. And so many more. What has become of them?Julie joined me as a teacher at the school, and Mme Vollier was asaffectionate as a mother. She even found ways to dress Julie and mestylishly. I remember hats made of white crepe with bouquets of daisies,a dress of black silk, and mantelets of lace. Pawn shops and secondhandstores helped, and we were fitted out for much less money than peoplewould have believed.While Julie and I were at Mme Vollier's we always dressed alike andbecause both of us were tall and brunette, people used to think we weresisters. In 1871, when the police took down detailed information aboutme, I had to explain that misconception.At this time, two of my cousins were also assistant schoolmistresses,one in the Puteaux suburb of Paris, the other at La Chapelle. We all hadabout the same income, the little that teaching earned in this period.That lack of money didn't depress us, for we realized that this poorincome would continue under the regime of His Majesty Napoleon IIIMemoirs of Louise Michel39as it had under his predecessors. There is no profession in which peoplehave less money, and no trade in which people know so well how to dowithout it. Some women of letters among our friends suffered far more.We were all a little bohemian, even Mme Vollier. As much as any womanwho lives on her wages, and in spite of her age, she knew how to laugh atthe situation.We used to joke about our troubles when we gathered every Thursdayevening and drank cups of steaming coffee. I kept from telling mymother that I had great difficulty making my income equal my expenditures, however restrained they were.Recognizing that we wouldn't earn anything from teaching, but notwishing to publicize that fact, Mme Vollier, Julie, and I drew up a formalpartnership. I was able to send my mother the act of partnership,executed in good and proper form, which stopped people from sayingthings to her like: "Your daughter will never earn anything"; or, "Shespends everything and you shouldn't send her any more"; or, "A cookearns ten times more than your daughter does." We knew quite well thatteaching paid almost nothing, but any other trade open to womenoffered less fulfillment when money wasn'tthe only objective. Arewomen's professions any better today? Men's aren't.My own dear mother found a way to send me a little money occasionally, which unhappily for my wardrobe I spent on books and music.Because of the act of partnership, she was entirely at ease about myfinancial position. The lamentations that imbeciles made about howwrong she had been in not forcing me to marry had ceased.I continued to reject allthought of marriage. There are enoughtortured women in the world without my becoming another one. True, Ican think like this since those people who asked to marry me, althoughthey are as dear to me as brothers, would be equally impossible ashusbands. Why I feel this I truthfully don't know. Like all women, I setmy sights very high, and I believed in remaining free for the comingRevolution. Anyway, I have always looked upon marriage without loveas a kind of prostitution.After the partnership there was nothing those who had been tauntingmy mother could say. I was a partner in a day school in Paris, even if itwas less grand than they assumed. None of us was lazy, but educationalestablishments crowded the neighborhood, and our rent was very high.In the evening after classes we gave lessons to supplement our income.Even Mme Vollier, although she was very old, gave some. And to a lesserdegree she told her sons the same lies I had told my mother."If your daughter earns so much money," people asked my mother,"why doesn't she ever send you any presents?" Moreover, I hadn't beenable to go see her during our vacation. We had only a week's vacation ayear in our day schools, because otherwise we would have lost ourstudents. Parents who had to look after their children only when they40Memoirs of Louise Michelweren't in class couldn't or wouldn't take complete charge of them for avacation of more than eight or ten days each year. Then, too, because wewere giving private lessons, we couldn't get away for long. Besides, howcould we have made enough money to pay the terrible rent if there hadbeen no income for a month?My mother came to Paris to see the situation for herself. A warmfriendship sprang up between her and Mme Vollier, who resembled mygrandmother. The two of them used to say bad things about me, butwhat a good two weeks we spent during my mother's first visit, with oneexception.to reassure her-about a resolution I had made notIt was the evening of my mother's arrival, and the three of us weredining together. I was so happy that it seemed inevitable that thishappiness would be disturbed. I was right. A great lout of a man withshifty eyes came to the door unexpectedly and demanded payment for apromissory note I had completely forgotten about. He came just at themoment when I was speaking warmly to my mother-not to deceive herto spendbuteverything I had for books. The obvious silence of Mme Vollier while Iwas saying this didn't presage anything good, and the intrusion of thatjackass showed in the most absolute possible way that I was lying. MmeVollier, then, to put my mother at ease, took part of the rent money thather sons had just finished getting together and gave it to the man. It wasjust enough to payoff the note. My mother sent me the sum when shereturned to Vroncourt, and she gently drew my attention to how manydeprivations my purchasing books had already caused her. I didn't buyany more books for a long time, but it was hard to resist, for there wereso many that tempted me and to me books were everything.Except for being unhappy over the struggle for existence, I havenever been unhappy as a teacher. When we played games during recess,I had a magnificent time with the older students. We extemporizeddramas that we performed for the younger children. Through everything I stayed young.One Sunday, alone at Mme Vollier's, I was sitting at the piano trying towrite some music that I knew would never see the light of day. It was noless than an opera, The Dream of the Witches' Sabbath. I knew it wouldnever be presented, and I had resigned myself to that fact bravely. It isimpossible to find publishers when you're unknown, and you can't beknown until you find a publisher. You don't waste your time draggingyour manuscripts into waiting rooms. You continue your regular trade,whatever it is. If you don't have a trade, I, at least, would rather becomea ragpicker than go looking for recommendations to influence publishers. I even feel a kind of pleasure in throwing stanzas and motifs andsketches into the wind.The plot I had written for The Dream ofthe Witches' Sabbath was a simpleone. After the destruction of all life on our planet, hell was establishedMemoirs of Louise Michel41here, where things were very suitable. In the first act, the end of life hasalready been caused by a geological revolution. The stage looks like alunar landscape. Satan is seated on top of a Parisian building whose baserests in molten lava.The basis of all the action is the love that Satan and the other maincharacter, Don Juan, have for a druidess. Their love for her kindles aninfernal war. Every person in history, poetry, or legend who everinspired me had a role to suit his character in my drama.The end comes when the globe itself crumbles. All the spirits areabsorbed in the forces of nature, whose chorus is heard in a nightcrossed by flashes of lightning. The general clamor of the orchestradiminishes little by little. First one instrument, then another, becomessilent. Finally nothing is left but a chorus of harps, and one after theother they too fall sileti,t. Then only one remains, and it fades in apianissimo sweeter than ~atet falling on leaves. At last these final notesalso fade away, and all is silent.t scored this work for every instrument possible, from cannon toharmonicas, lyres, flutes, bugles, and guitars. A choir of devils speakswordlessly:onstage with violins, twenty of them. To hold this monstrousorchestra you'd need a valley in the mountains or some bay in the NewWorld.As I was working at the piano that Sunday on the music for the sceneof the infernal hunt, someone rang the doorbell. It was an old Jewess,the grandmother of one of my pupils. She stood as straight as the ghostof Don juan's commander, and she was very beautiful. Her face lookedas if it had been carved from marble. She must have been listening to meoutside."Is it really you," she asked, "who is responsible for that savagery Ihave been hearing?""Yes," I answered. "It is I.""I'm sure you wouldn't dare to continue those horrors in front of me,"she said. "To punish you, I want to hear the rest."Because of that challenge I started The Dream of the Witches' Sabbathover. The wild motifs made her indignant, but I kept going. She wasn'tso hard on several parts, and she liked the love songs. She liked the"Ballad of the Skeleton."Lady of the green turretsWho sings to the evening stars,Come down and open up my heart.White are my hands before youAnd faithful my love. Come:Then I will have lightIn my eyeless socketsAnd I will seeThe tournament's queen of beauty.42Memoirs of Louise MichelAt the end of the ballad the girl, of course, has fallen in love with theskeleton, and she follows him off into the unknown. They go off into avalley of solitude to the accompaniment of only a lute solo.The old lady also deigned to approve my "Lay of the Troubadour":The bird was singingAs it shiveredBeneath the falling leaves.And in the wind,The soul took wing,And was crying,Crying.I went on through the finale, and after my grotesque imitation on thepiano of the last fading notes of the last harp, the J ewess looked at mewith amazament."Poor girl," she said. "Those monstrosities really are yours."I didn't answer."The most unfortunate thing about it is that there are some good partsthere.""If there weren't any good parts," I said, "I wouldn't be stupid enoughto work on it.""You know very well," she said, "that you have to be either rich orfamous to indulge in things like that.""I'm not simply indulging myself. I intend to stay on here as a teacher,and as proof I shall leave this unproducible piece just the way it is now. Itreally is a dream, you know, whether it is about covens or real life, and Iwill throw it away as I have thrown away other dreams."She took my hand. Hers was cold."Your heart," she said. "Where will you throw it?""To the Revolution," I said.She sat down at the piano and her icy hands glided over the keys. Shebegan to play some invocation to the God of Israel. In it you could feelthe desert and the calm of death, and this calm went straight to my heart.Sometime later this lady took me to a synagogue, where the strangenessof the rites and rhythms, a sort of Kyrie in a majestic place, took hold ofme. Seeing the tears in my eyes, she believed I had been touched by thegrace of Jehovah."No," I told her. "It's just that an impression has taken hold of me.Perhaps everything is that way."I wrote out part of the score for The Dream ofthe Witches' Sabbath to giveto my friend Charles de Sivry. From laziness I substituted a gradualdiminuendo for the final catastrophe, which saved me about ten leaves.It's so boring to write out a fair copy.None of the part where the orchestra fades out and ends on the lastharp note appeared worth any great effort. The Revolution was rising,Memoirs of Louise Michel43so what good were dramas? The true drama was in the streets, so whatgood were orchestras? We had cannon.Today the room where I lived in Montmartre is inhabited by peoplewhom I do not know, but like the house near the cemetery at Vroncourt,I like to let my memory rest on it for an instant. It has been so very long.The last time I saw Vroncourt was during the vacation of 1865. I wentthere with Mme Eudes, then Victorine Louvet. She was very young then,perhaps sixteen or seventeen years old, and she was preparing for herteacher's examination.During the illness from which she died so young, after her returnfrom exile, Victorine still talked to me about that autumn vacation inVroncourt. We had gone together into the woods, and I had shown herthe oak tree where oaths were exchanged. The Tomb was still standingthen, and I took her to see that, too. She went with my mother into thevineyard, which was full of young trees my mother had planted. Oneevening, as we went through the forest from Thol to Clefmont, going tothe home of "Uncle" Marchal, an old forester who had just married offhis daughter, the regular steps and luminous eyes of a wolf followed usthe whole way. That gave me the setting for "The Legend of the Oak."The Legend of the Oak1.Beneath the oak the priestess stands,Vines of verbena entwining her hair,Silence seizes the shadowed forest,Except for the bards and the mystical priests,Spreading their tools for the rite.The great songs end; the air holds their echo.Wind-blown branches strum the strings of a lute.From goblets of oak the white bull's blood pours,But the sacrificed beast cries out in his pain,A sinister omen.The priestess beseeches the fates and hearsThe rumbling storm demand she giveA human sacrifice. He comesTo let his blood be poured on the earth,Let out of his heart with a golden scythe.His death-glow lighting the purpling sky,He waits the ennobling martyr's death.She strikes his heart with her golden scytheAnd trembling, strikes herself, to fallPiercing her heart again.44Memoirs of Louise Michel2.Fierce, proud men of Gaul long pastWore over their hearts a talisman.The furze that blooms above their bonesAllows them to wear their symbol still.That was the time when every slaveRose against bloody Caesar's Rome.That was the time when Gaul was braveAnd gathered home her scattered sons.Proud and ferocious great grand-sires,How long and heavy is your sleep!o Fathers, omens still occur today,And your red blood flows in our veins.You who arm yourselves, why live?Liberty'S love is stronger than death.A person must seek for freedom's joy.Happy are those who seize the chance!Marriage fetters a hundredfold;It gives new slaves to the tyrannyOf Tiberius with bloody eyes.No, we'll not be slaves in his games.3.My friends, beneath the oak is good.Regardless, oaks keep oaths once sworn,An oath of love, an oath of hate,Sealed with blood on the mistletoe.That vacation in the autumn of 1865 should have lasted forever. Mymother's and grandmother's joy in seeing me again was as great as myown, but it was over far too soon. When Victorine and I left Vroncourtand those two women, I didn't dare to turn my head, for my heart wasbreaking. I was never to see my grandmother Marguerite again. But itwas the moment when the struggle against the Empire was intensifyingand each person kept his place, as small as it was.I am afraid to dwell too long on this first period of my life, the days ofcalm with tormenting dreams. I have described puerile and childishthings; that is the way of every person's earlier years, and sometimes itlasts throughout whole lives. As I continue the narrative I will return tomoments and events from these early times, drawn by some associationor other; sometimes the pen, like spoken words, rushes off pursuing itsown goal.Chapter 7The Decaying EmpireThe city of Paris condemned our school building on the rue du Chateaud'Eau. Mme Vollier hoped in vain that after its demolition we would getan indemnity which would let us establish a day school in the suburbs.Julie had received a small sum from her family, and she struck out onher own. Relinquishing her share in the partnership to us, she bought aday school in faubourg St. Antoine; I chose not to go with her, but ontogether, and on Thursday evenings I gave musicholidays we gotlessons at her school.My mother sold all her remaining land except the vineyard to give meenough money to buy a day school in Montmartre. The poor woman,how little she got back for that money, and what sacrifices she andGrandmother imposed on themselves to raise it! Mme Vollier and I livedin the day school. Her sons gave her an annuity, and gradually thenumber of our pupils increased, so that for schoolmistresses we werenearly comfortable. What plans we made. Those were good times, whenmy grandmother was still living, and I continually got good news abouther and my mother. For a few brief years, joy filled my heart.But then Mme Vollier died. One evening Julie and Adele Esquiroshad come over to dine with us. It was a holiday, and all four of us werevery warm in our little room high up. We spoke gaily, especially MmeVollier. I had never seen her so cheerful. S~e had just received herpension, so we were momentarily rich, and we were even talking aboutsending a little gift to the Haute-Marne. Julie had brought something toeat from the country, and Adele was responsible for some dainties.On the open piano, the fat, black cat paced back and forth on the keys,listening to the tune which his paws produced. His head was raised, andearlier he had lapped up a whole bowl of coffee cream.I told the others how, the day before, I had pasted a republican posteron the back of a policeman. I had been holding the poster, and there wasnowhere else to put it.Mme Vollier told us that, in the best interests of the household, shehad collected all the keys and put them in her pocket. She made themclink in her pocket with the same smile in her eyes I used to see in mygrandmother's and that I had seen so many times in my mother's whenshe snatched something back from my little larcenies.46Memoirs of Louise MichelOur friends applauded Mme Vollier, and we laughed still more when,full of remorse, I gave her back the purse I had stolen from the chest ofdrawers that morning. Almost nothing was missing from it. In the midstof all this happiness some kind of terrible grieftook hold of me. We wereso happy it couldn'tto try to ignore thatlast, but I did my bestforeboding.Our friends left fairly late, and I walked with them as far as theomnibus on the rue Marcadet. The night was black and sad, and in thisdarkness a dog was howling. As I was returning, he began to follow me.lt was chance that put this sinister beast on my track; he was an evilportent.When I got back to school I was careful to avoid letting Mme Volliersee the sadness sweeping over me. She was still gay, but not for long.That night she had her second stroke.Her portrait is near my bed, opposite a bouquet of red carnations. Hersons gave me a share of memorabilia as if I were their sister. After herdeath a great sadness forced its way into my heart, but there was no timeto indulge my suffering. The Empire became more threatening as itneared its end, and we became more determined.I kept my school going. MIle Caroline L'Homme, the first schoolmistress who had established herself in Montmartre, and who had, sherightly claimed, taught the whole neighborhood to read, had becomesick and old. She still had a few pupils, and one day she brought them tome and established herself in my school. She was exhausted.She was like one of the legends of the North. She appeared to be oneof the Noms, so quietly did she walk. Pale, her long white hair fastenedby a large needle, she exhaled a spirit of something prophetic andfateful. There was no person more charming than MIle L'Homme. Shewas so sweet and at the same time so proud, and now she too is dead.Then my grandmother died. My poor mother had so few peacefuldays. Broken by the death of her mother, she came to Montmartre, butwhen she came the Revolution was imminent, so I left her alone duringmany long evenings. Afterwards it was days, then months, then years.Can the mothers of revolutionaries be happy? I loved her so much that Iwill be happy only when I go to meet her in the earth where we shallsleep.Of all the schoolmistresses I have known, one of the most keen tocollect all of the details of science was MIle Poulin in Montmartre.Although her health had been undermined by consumption for a longtime, she no longer felt it. She kept busy piling up the greatest amount ofknowledge possible so that she could take it with her to her grave. At thevery end of the Empire, MIle Poulin and I united our two schools into anew school at 24, rue Houdon. MIle Poulin lived for only a brief time,Memoirs of Louise Michel47and by coincidence I saw her tomb one last time at the climax of thefighting in May 1871.I had met MIle Poulin at the rue Hautefeuille. Many of us schoolmistresses continued our educations at the center where various activitiestook place. We had free courses in elementary teaching, professionalcourses, readings to mothers of families, and a night course for youngpeople who had to work. I taught a great number of those poor childrenthere. Young as they were they had to work all day, and if it hadn't beenfor the center on the rue Hautefeuille, they would never have been in aclass. Instruction continued up to ten o'clock at night, and when I gotout even the bookstores were closed. Under the Empire those womenwho were either young teachers or were preparing themselves to become teachers were eager for this learning. They had only what they hadbeen able to snatch here and there, and at the rue Hautefeuille theybecame even more thirsty for knowledge and liberty. Many good friendships were born there.It was comfortable there in the evenings, both in our little groups andwhen a large meeting occurred. When big meetings took place, we leftthe floor of the hall to the strangers, and our little group of enthusiastsgathered near the instructor's desk, where a skeleton and other thingswe liked were kept. From that spot near the desk we could see and hearmuch better than if we had tried to join the mob in the room.The rue Hautefeuille overflowed with life and youth. We lived in thefuture, in the time when people would be more than beasts of burdenwhose work and blood other people made use of. At the rue Hautefeuille in the long night of the Empire we had glimpses of a better world.Five or six years before the Siege, it provided an untainted refuge in themiddle of imperial Paris, a place impervious to the stench of the charnelhouse, although sometimes our history courses roared out the Marseillaise and smelled of gunpowder.Somehow we were always able to find the time to attend coursesseveral days a week. There were lectures on physics, chemistry, and eventoo. In addition tolaw. People tried out new methods of teaching,listening to others, we found time to give lectures ourselves. I had neverunderstood how time could be so elastic. We didn't waste a minute, andour days were stretched to fit so that midnight seemed early.I remember a tall old man with white hair explaining how usefulstenography could be in teaching. Using stenographic techniques wouldallow many things to be abbreviated. People have so little time for study,and they waste so much of it.Several of us began spasmodic studies for the baccalaureate again. Myformer passion for algebra engrossed me once more. I was able to verify,and this time with certainty, that if a person isn't an idiot (at least all the48Memoirs of Louise Micheltime), he can get along in mathematics without a teacher. The trick is toleave no formula behind without knowing it and no problem behindwithout finding its answer.A frenzy for knowledge possessed us. It was refreshing to sit two orthree times a week on student benches ourselves, side by side with ourown most advanced pupils, whom we sometimes brought with us. Theylistened happily and proudly beside us, scarcely thinking about the time.The more excited we got about all these things, the more we lapsedinto the high spirits of schoolchildren. We had good times, and often weresembled students more than teachers.When we were sad, we played jokes, for laughter cuts the shadows.One vacation day, I went to an employment agency to get ajob as a cookat the home of some bourgeois family. After the first dinner I planned tocook for them, they would have fired me pretty rapidly. The employment agency was next to the Bastille on a fourth floor. Of course I hadno papers, so I told the employment agent I had forgotten them. When Igave him the names of the imperial gangsters I claimed to have workedfor, he got giddy. He ended up making me feel sorry for him, and I gaveup the project; I flung it all in his face, laughing till my sides hurt.Why are people so entranced with name-dropping? That was thelesson I gave that poor devil, and it would have been worth the trouble togo put pepper in the sugared dishes of some bourgeois soul used tocordon bleu cooks. Once the employment agent understood what washappening, he began to rail at me. Still laughing at him I left, after Iwarned him against being too easily "bonaparted" with name-dropping.I recall another incident. One evening at the rue Hautefeuille we hadbeen learning Danel's method of musical notation. As in England andGermany the notes in Danel's method are represented by letters of thealphabet, but with the difference that they are written without a staff.We left the rue Hautefeuille late, and because there were no more buses,we were returning to our homes on foot. Some idiot began to follow me,walking up on his toes with long heronlike legs. At first it amused me towatch this shadow of a bird glide along under the streetlights.He kept repeating the foolish remarks people use when they don'tknow if you will answer them. I became impatient, and that spoiled theimpression I got of his being some kind of fantastic bird running aroundon his long legs. I looked him straight in the face, and in my loudestvoice I began to descend the Dane! scale: D, B, L, S, F, M, R, D!The effect was overwhelming.Perhaps it was the somewhat masculine accent, or perhaps it was thestrange syllables formed by the letters. I never found out. The birddisappeared.Another time I was returning home on foot fairly late, and I had on along cloak which enveloped me completely. I was wearing a sort of wideMemoirs of Louise Michel49hat made out of shaggy cloth which cast a lot of shadows on my face, andbrand-new ankle boots from the pawnshop, For some reason the heelsmade a lot of noise. The newspapers recently had been writing a lotabout nocturnal attacks. Some good bourgeois heard my boots ringing,and being unable to make out my exact form because of my cloak andhat, he began to run with such fear that it gave me the idea of followinghim for a bit to scare him properly.He went along, looking around to see if anyone would come to helphim. With the black night and the deserted streets, the bourgeois wasscared witless, and I was having a really good time. He lengthened hisstride as much as he could. I kept to the shadows and made my heelsstrike even louder, because that noise was what kept up his fright. I don'tknow what district we had come to when I let the bourgeois go, yelling athim: "Must you be so stupid?"That night I returned home very late, or rather very early in themorning, and I was no longer laughing. In the same night, after I hadscared the bourgeois idiot, I had seen the people who live off victims,and people who are the victims themselves. It was an ordinary night ofwhat people call civilized society.Mme Vollier was still living then, and when I got home she scolded mefor my lateness, in spite of my daily precaution of setting back the clock.The poor woman had been worrying about me as my mother wouldhave done, and she told me how tired I would feel the next day.As she was talking to me I composed in my mind a few verses aboutthe bandits and girls I had spoken with that night, and with whom I haveoften spoken since.Criminals and WhoresDiscerned in the dark of ill-lit streets,The sublimely wretched shamble through the night,Namelessly slide past and cast no shadow,Past obscured doorways at the edge of lightFor other phantoms to erase.I have seen criminals and whoresAnd spoken with them. Now I inquireIf you believe them made as now they areTo drag their rags in blood and mire,Preordained, an evil race?You, to whom all men are prey,Have made them what they are today.No one comes into the world with a knife in his hand to stab others, orwith a card in her hand to sell herself. No one comes into the world with50Memoirs of Louise Michela club ready to be a cop, and no one comes into the world carrying aminister's portfolio, so that he may be captured by the dizziness of powerand drag nations down.No bandit who could not have been an honest man. No honorableman who is not capable of committing crimes.Among the people associated with the rue Hautefeuille was JulesFavre. At this time he was a true republican leader, but after the fall ofNapoleon III he became one of those who murdered Paris. Power wouldpoison him as it poisons all those who are clothed in that cloak of Nessus.In those years during the twilight of the Empire that same Jules Favrewas like a father, and he treated us with a father's kindness. Many times Iused his being a chairman of our association as a pretext for takingpeople to him who needed a lawyer's opinion and couldn't pay for it.One day, I remember I took him an old woman who thought she wasbeing persecuted, and he had to try to reassure her. Dealing with hercost him a lot of time. I was with her in his office, and Favre came over totell me how annoyed he was with me. The obtuse angle made by hisforehead and his chin closed into a right angle, a bad sign."This is too much," he muttered to me while the old woman keptcurtseying to him and telling him how she had been persecuted fortwenty years.I can still see the spot where that took place; Favre and I werewhispering near a large vase his voters had given him. An uncontrollabledesire to laugh took hold of me, and I did. I laughed so heartily that theright angle of Favre's profile was transformed into its usual obtuse angleagain, and his eyes shone. He couldn't stop himself from laughing, too.Still curtseying, the old woman left saying, "Thank you very much.Till another time. See you soon."Another chairman of our association was Eugene Pelletan, a republican member of Bonaparte's assembly. His eyes, sunk under thick, grayeyebrows, glowed like coals and gave him a strange appearance. Hereminded me of Nicolas Flamel or Cagliostro or some other alchemistout of the legends. It was when he was speaking from the desk at the rueHautefeuille that we especially liked to huddle near the skeleton andobserve events from there, listening, caught up in the poetry of science,caught up in his words on liberty, his love of the Republic, and his hatredfor the Caesars.Under this inspiration we began to write many works that are losttoday. I wrote an enormous manuscript that I entitled The Wisdom of aMadman. Pelletan was then our chairman, and I carried it to him so thathe could read it and give me his opinion. Since then I have come tounderstand how patient he must have been to read that enormous,unintelligible book and to annotate a few passages in it."This is not the wisdom of a madman," he wrote. "One day it will bethe wisdom of peoples."Memoirs of Louise Michel51Bringing that manuscript home, I seemed to walk on air. I rereadmuch of it carefully, but I didn't have time to revise it. I had to give moreand more lessons after class, and The Wisdom of a Madman was laid asidewith my other unpublished works. Perhaps I would have looked for apublisher if I hadn't been so busy.The last two years before 1871, the rue Hautefeuille was a hotbed ofintellectual women. My friend Marie L-- wrote page after page, andJeanne B-- and possibly her sister were assumed to have manuscriptsin progress. Julie L-- and Mlle Poulin threw poems to the winds. Butprose and verse and music disappeared because we felt so near thedrama coming from the street, the true drama, the drama of humanity.The songs of the new epoch were war songs, and there was no room foranything else.The professional schools, for which we had Jules Simon, an oppositionmember of the Assembly, to thank, captured all-out enthusiasm. Thoseschools saved a few handfuls of girls from apprenticeship, and providedthem with trades or diplomas.In the last years of the Empire there was a free professional school onthe rue Thevenot. Each of us gave three evenings a week there. TheSociety for Elementary Education took care of the rent, and it all workedout. One of our professors, a man whom we called Doctor Francolinus,displayed fiendish activity there. Sometimes the police of the Empiregave us the pleasure of attending our classes, and then an hour oflessons would go by quickly, because we put in occasional comments thatgave a good clawed swat at Napole.on Ill's ugly hyena's moustache.I taught the literature and ancient geography courses twice a weekand Charles de Sivry taught them two other days. We taught themexactly the same way, for Charles and I often had the same ideas. Thelast idea we had was for a piano whose hammers had been replaced bylittle bows to give a piano something of the passion that violins have. Iwrote an article about this, and it was published in the Progres musicalunder the name of Louis Michel. I have often noticed that when I sent aperiodical material signed Louise Michel it was a hundred to one itwouldn't be printed, but if I signed it Louis Michel or Enjolras, apseudonym I used, the chances of publication were greater.What Charles and I taught in the courses on literature was the utilityof examining cities and peoples in terms of childhood, youth, and decay.That is the real way it happens, although people think it is a romanesqueapproach. The lives of individuals and the history of humanity show aparallel progression. In every individual's life you can see the sametransformations that you can see in our history, in the story of ourcollective existence that spans the centuries.Nevertheless, however aware a person is of those centuries-longrhythms of change, he still lives inside his own epoch. It is inside his ownepoch that he feels, suffers, and is happy; and all the love, all the hate, all52Memoirs of Louise Michelthe harmony, all the power that he possesses-he must throw all this intohis surroundings. One person is nothing and yet part of that which iseverything-the Revolution.And so here is Louise Michel. She is a menace to society, for she hasdeclared a hundred times that everyone should take part in the banquetof life. What would be the pleasure of riches if one were unable tocompare one's own well-fed condition to that of people dying of hunger?Where would the feeling of security come from if one were unable tocompare one's good, solid position to that of people who must work inpoverty?What is more, Louise Michel is a woman. If she could only be fooledby the idea that women can get their rights by asking men for them. Butshe has the villainy to insist that the strong sex is just as much a slave asthe weak sex, that it is unable to give what it does not have itself. Allinequalities, she claims, will collapse when men and women engage inthe common battle together.Louise Michel is a monster who maintains that men and women arenot responsible for their situations and claims it is stupidity which causesthe evils around us. She claims that politics is a form of that stupidity andis incapable of ennobling the race.If Louise Michel were the only person saying all this, people could sayshe is a pathological case. But there are thousands like her, millions,none of whom gives a damn about authority. They all repeat the battlecry of the Russian revolutionaries: land and freedom!Yes, there are millions of us who don't give a damn for any authoritybecause we have seen how little the many-edged tool of power accomplishes. We have watched throats cut to gain it. It is supposed to be asprecious as the jade axe that travels from island to island in Oceania. No.Power monopolized is evil.Who would have thought that those men at the rue Hautefeuille whospoke so forcefully of liberty and who denounced the tyrant Napoleonso loudly would be among those in May 1871 who wanted to drownliberty in blood? Power makes people dizzy and will always do so untilpower belongs to all mankind.During the twilight of the Empire the type of things I wrote changed.When I was at Mme Vollier's I sent some poems to the newspapers,L'Union des poetes, La Jeunesse, and others. I just threw things out and Ibarely paid any attention to them; I don't even know which ones wereprinted. I did send some of the best poems to Victor Hugo when I was inexile.The time was far removed from those days at Vroncourt when I hadsent him verses that the indulgent master had said were as sweet as myyouth.Memoirs of Louise MichelMe, I am the white doveOf the black arch.53I had sent him that one from Vroncourt. Now, the verses I sent himsmelled of gunpowder:Do you hear the brazen thunderBehind the man who takes no side?A reluctant man betrays tomorrow.Up the mountains and over the cliffsWe go together to sow freedom.That poem, "The Black Marseillaise," I threw one July 14 into thewicket at the Echelle along with some others addressed to Mme Bonaparte. These later poems, begun in collaboration with Vermorel, hadbeen reviewed and augmented by friends who had the same disdain forrhyme;they added other phrases that were more appropriate to thecircumstances.Adele Esquiros,Under the Empire, literature was strange, as it always is when nationsare slaughterhouses. Books were filled with foolishness, but there wereforgotten corpses behind each page. All published writing smelled stale.the author of captivating works, remained silentduring those years as she waited for more propitious times. She continued to write, but submitted nothing to a publisher. From time to time,however, she would read us a few pages full of fresh lines and graciousimages that gave us the impression of spring mornings when dew coversthe flowers and the sun shines in the branches. There were also bitterpassages in her work, but she covered their sadness with some seemingpleasantry. I wonder what has become of her manuscripts; I have neverseen any of them appear in print. Because of deportation and prison, Ihaven't had enough time to visit myoid friends. Adele Esquiros has beenparalyzed for several years now, but she is submitting to her fate with thesame smile on her lips that she wore before.At the end of the Empire our revolutionary meetings became morenumerous, and many of them were even held in daylight. Eveningmeetings were more common, however, and one evening while mymother was living with me, I had planned to go to a meeting. To keepher from worrying, I had been claiming that I wasn't actively involved inanything. Two of our friends came by to take me to the meeting, butstayed outside so she wouldn't suspect what was going on. I told her Iwas going out to give some lessons."Impossible," said the poor woman. "You can't be going out to givelessons at this hour.""Julie sent for me," I said.She went to the window.54Memoirs of Louise Michel"I knew it," she said. "It is one of your meetings."And she laughed in spite of herself, as my friends and I left laughing,too.Most of our meetings took place outside Paris. Often as we werereturning to Paris by little paths through fields, we talked about manythings. At other times we were silent, dazzled by the idea of sweepingaway the shame of twenty years. We were all poets, a little. We havesuffered, but we have seen some beautiful things.One holiday I was going to julie's when I encountered a vast multitude of people on the boulevard. With the hopes I held, I believed thehour had come, but it was a carnival, in the midst of which the oldrepublican Miot was being taken to prison. Some people in the crowdwho were following the carnival performers left them to see the old mandragged off by the varlets of the Empire. It was a joyous crowd on a dayof mourning, but they weren't really the people. They were the samecrowd you see at public executions, but which you can never find whenyou need to rip up paving stones to build barricades. They are the sameunthinking crowd that bolsters up tyrannies and cuts the throats ofpeople trying to save them. They are the great herd that bares its backfor the whip and holds out its neck to the knife.For five years, from 1865 to 1870, we had believed that the end of theEmpire was imminent. For the cup to overflow, however, the defeat atSedan had to be added to the other crimes. People always wait for thecup to overflow for the same reason that keeps them from ever beingupset by the approach of misfortunes they think they can prevent.How strongly toward the end of the Empire the fearful stanza ofVictor Hugo came back to me. "Harmodius, it's time! / You can strikedown this man without remorse," Hugo wrote. Hugo's words went intomy heart like a knife, and each syllable rang in my ears like the tolling ofa bell. Vengeance finally reached Harmodius, the Athenian murderer,when the younger brother of his innocent victim cut him down.I would have killed my tyrant without feeling any distress. Millionswould have been spared ifhe had died. Someone promised me an entreeto him; even to kill him I wouldn't have requested a formal audience.But I got that entree only after Bonaparte had left for the war and wasno longer in Paris.Sedan could have been avoided if Bonaparte had been dead. Peopleare used to waiting for the annihilation of multitudes, and to stopbandits like Bonaparte they will accept the annihilation of a nationwillingly. Perhaps Sedan will make things understood more quickly, andthe destruction of those legions will keep the human race from surrendering itself any longer to those woodcutters of men who chop peopledown like a forest for their own convenience.Memoirs of Louise Michel55Far away in the forests of New Caledonia, I once saw a rotten treecollapse suddenly. When the cloud of dust dispersed, there was only aheap of trash, over which, like headstones in a graveyard, a few greenboughs stretched out, the last effort of the old tree dragged down by thedead trunk. In that tree, myriads of insects had lived for centuries, andthey, too, were engulfed in the collapse. Some of them stirred painfullyin the dust, and startled and upset they stared at the daylight which wasgoing to kill them, for their kind, born in the shade, could not standlight.Like those insects, we live in an old tree, and we stubbornly believe itstill lives, but the least breath of wind will destroy it, and its debris willblow across the earth. No one can escape change.Chapter 8The Siege of ParisDespite overwhelming support given Napoleon III in a plebiscite held in May1870,the emperor was coming under increasing political pressure, and hisgovernment tried to win public support through an adventurous foreign policy.Conflict with Prussia over the nomination of a German princeling to the emptythrone of Spain led the French government to decide for war against Germany on14 July 1870. Two weeks later Napoleon left Paris to join the French militaryforces. The Germans defeated the French army decisively at Sedan on 1 September1870, and captured the emperor.Crowds in Paris began to demonstrate two days later, and on September 4,amidst severe disorder, the Paris mob proclaimed the Republic. A Government ofNational Defense headed by Napoleon'S military governor of Paris, GeneralTrochu, took power in the name of the Republic. Two weeks later German forcessurrounded Paris.During the terrible year of the war and the Siege, when I saw ourpeople die while they were so full of life, I suddenly recalled animpression from my childhood. I saw an oak standing tall and solid withits shadow falling over the long grass full of white daisies and buttercups.It was the oak of my legend, and it had an axe embedded in its heart; inits trunk was a wide gash, and the iron of the axe was damp with sap.These impressions come back like dead leaves driven by the wind.Paris was quivering from the Empire's crimes. In spite of the blandishments of the imperial gang, we true repUblicans were not eager for thewar with Prussia. To befuddle the people, the Bonapartists had torn thewings off the Marseillaise, and when we cheered for the Republic inAugust, Paris should have risen in remembrance of its proud and heroictradition. The city should have cleansed itself by bathing in the blood ofthe Empire. Instead, revolutionary Paris stood silent. I can still see thecity amid a quiet haze: Every shutter was closed, leaving the boulevardLa Villette deserted. Around the carriage in which Eudes and Brideauwere prisoners, people cried out: "Attack the Prussians!"After September 4 there was too little change, for the people didn'tinsist on it. Some wanted to undertake desperate sorties to drive back thePrussians, but they were forbidden to try. Even after the encirclement ofParis, people waited for an army to liberate the city, for they claimed thata city had never raised a siege without outside help. That something hasnever happened before certainly does not mean it is impossible.Memoirs of Louise Michel57When several of our friends were condemned to death for havingtried to proclaim the Republic in August before Bonaparte was overthrown, Andre Leo, Adele Esquiros, and I were appointed to carry toGeneral Trochu a protest against their sentences signed by thousands ofpeople. Some people had signed that protest from momentary indignation and then had become timid, and wanted their names taken off thelists because of second thoughts. Our friends' lives were at stake, and Icertainly did not want to erase a single name.To get our protest to General Trochu was not easy. It took all myfeminine stubbornness to get into his office. By almost a direct assault,we got to some kind of antechamber. The people there wanted us toleave before we had seen the governor of Paris."We come on behalf of the people," we said, and the words soundedominous to them in those surroundings. There was only one red sash ofthe Revolution being worn at the Hotel de Ville, and that was worn byHenri Rochefort. And yet the Parisians were saying to themselves, "Thepeople are now ruling." We were invited to leave Trochu's office, but wewent over and sat on a bench against the wall, declaring that we shouldnot leave without an answer.Tired of seeing us wait, a secretary went to look for some personagewho was said to represent Trochu. That person came over to us, andwhen we decided it was impossible to see the general personally, wepresented our protest to this aide. He weighed the voluminous petitioncovered with thousands of signatures (which seemed to upset him) in hishand, and he declared that the petition would be taken under consideration because of the number of signatures. That promise would havemeant little if the Empire hadn't been collapsing. Rotten as the Empirewas, the hammer blow of Sedan killed it.Shortly after the encirclement of Paris, I was arrested for the firsttime. Because the city of Strasbourg was in great danger from thePrussian armies, Mme Andre Leo and I had rounded up a large numberof volunteers, determined to make one last great effort or die withStrasbourg. We were crossing Paris in long columns, crying out, "ToStrasbourg, to Strasbourg." We were going to sign our names in theregister placed on the lap of the statue of Our Lady of Strasbourg in thePlace de la Concorde, and from there go to the Hotel de Ville anddemand arms. There we were arrested, Mme Leo, me, and a poor, littleold woman who had been crossing the square to get some kerosene whilethe demonstration was going on. She kept clutching her oil can while shewas being accused of intending to commit arson. We testified in herbehalf, but the most eloquent witness for her innocence was the way shecontinued to grip her can, and the authorities let her go. As she left, heroil can dribbled oil on her dress because her hands were trembling sobadly.58Memoirs of Louise MichelA fat old jackass came in later, egged on by his curiosity. I tried to tellhim what was going on. "What does Strasbourg matter to you?" thisinsensitive, bedecked functionary asked. "Do you think that Strasbourgwill perish simply because you aren't there?"Finally a member of the Provisional Government got us released, butat that very moment, September 27, Strasbourg surrendered to thePrussians.In Montmartre, in the Eighteenth Arrondissement, we organized theMontmartre Vigilance Committee. Few of its members still survive, butduring the Siege the committee made the reactionaries tremble. Everyevening, we would burst out onto the streets from our headquarters at41, chaussee Clignancourt, sometimes simply to talk up the Revolution,because the time for duplicity had passed. We knew how little thereactionary regime, in its death throes, valued its promises and the livesof its citizens, and the people had to be warned.Actually there weJ;e two vigilance committees in Montmartre,themen's and the women's. Although I presided over the women's committee, I was always at the men's, because its members included someRussian revolutionaries. I still have an old map of Paris that hung on thewall of our meeting room; I carried it back and forth across the oceanwith me as a souvenir. With ink we had blotted out the Empire's coat ofarms, which desecrated it and which would have dirtied our headquarters.The members of the men's Montmartre Vigilance Committee wereremarkable persons. Never have I seen minds so direct, so unpretentious, and so elevated. Never have I seen individuals so clearheaded. Idon't know how this group managed to do it. There were no weaknesses.Something good and strong supported people.The women were courageous also, and among them, too, there weresome remarkable minds. I belonged to both committees, and the leanings of the two groups were the same. Sometime in the future thewomen's committee should have its own history told. Or perhaps the twoshould be mingled, because people didn't worry about which sex theywere before they did their duty. That stupid question was settled.In the evenings I often was able to be at meetings of both groups, sincethe women's, which met at the office of the Justice of the Peace on therue de la Chapelle, began an hour earlier than the men's. Thus after thewomen's meeting was over I could go to the last half of the men'smeeting, and sometimes other women and I could go to the entire men'smeeting.The Montmartre Vigilance Committees left no one without shelterthe meeting halls,and no one without food. Anyone could eat atalthough as the Siege continued and food supplies became shorter, itmight only be one herring divided between five or six people. For peopleMemoirs of Louise Michel59who were really in need we didn't hesitate to dip into our resources or touse revolutionary requisitioning. The Eighteenth Arrondissement wasthe terror of profiteers. When the reactionaries heard the phrase,"Montmartre is going to come down on you," they hid in their holes; wechased them down anyway, and like hunted beasts they fled, leavingbehind the hiding places where provisions were rotting while Parisstarved.Ultimately the Montmartre Vigilance Committees were mowed down,like all revolutionary groups. The rare members still alive know howproud we were there and how fervently we flew the flag of the Revolution. Little did it matter to those who were there whether they werebeaten to the ground unnoticed in battle or died alone in the sunlight. Itmakes no difference how the millstone moves so long as the bread ismade.Everything was beginning, or rather, beginning again, after the longlethargy of the Empire. The first organization of the Rights of Womenhad begun to meet on the rue Thevenot with Mmes Jules Simon, AndreLeo, and Maria Deraismes. At the meetings of the Rights of Womengroup, and at other meetings, the most advanced men applauded theidea of equality. I noticed-I had seen it before, and I saw it later-thattheir declarations notwithstanding, although they appeared tomen,help us, were always content with just the appearance. This was theresult of custom and the force of old prejudices, and it convinced methat we women must simply take our place without begging for it. Theissue of political rights is dead. Equal education, equal trades, so thatprostitution would not be the only lucrative profession open to awoman-that is what was real in our program. The Russian revolutionaries are right; evolution is ended and now revolution is necessary or thebutterfly will die in its cocoon.Heroic women were found in all social positions. At the professionalschool of Mme Poulin, women of all social levels organized the Societyfor the Victims of the War. They would have preferred to die ratherthan surrender, and dispensed their efforts the best way they could,while demanding ceaselessly that Paris continue to resist the Prussiansiege.Although I knew some of them well, I don't know who is still living,but during the Siege no one failed. They didn't become like thoseharpies the following May who dug out the eyes of our fallen comradeswith the tips of their parasols.Later, when I was a prisoner, the first visitor I had was Mme Meuricefrom the Society for the Victims of the War. At my last trial, behind thehand-picked spectators, among those who had to wedge themselves in,were two other former members of the Society, the large woman, JeanneB-- and the petite Mme F--.60Memoirs of Louise MichelI salute all those brave women of the vanguard who were drawn fromgroup to group: the Committee of Vigilance, the Society for the Victimsof the War, and later the League of Women. The old world ought to fearthe day when those women finally decide they have had enough. Thosewomen will not slack off. Strength finds refuge in them. Beware ofthem! Beware of those who, like Paule Minck, go across Europe wavingthe flag of liberty, and beware of the most peaceful daughter of Gaulnow asleep in the deep resignation of the fields. Beware of the womenwhen they are sickened by all that is around them and rise up against theold world. On that day the new world will begin.The Prussian siege continued; the days became dark and the trees losttheir leaves. Hunger and cold reached more deeply into the houses ofParis.On October 31, atthe Hotel de Ville the people proclaimed theCommune. The Committees of Vigilance from all over Paris organizedthe demonstration, and the people no longer cried out "Long live theRepublic"; they cried out "Long live the Commune!" The Governmentof National Defense promised to hold meetings and elections andpromised to take no reprisals against these demonstrators. It broke bothpromises. The word Commune was hushed up as effectively as someconjurer's trick, but experiences like that are necessary, for they let yousee who the real enemy is. If we are implacable in the coming fight, whois to blame?Another month went by and conditions became increasingly bad. TheNational Guard [best described as a half-trained Parisian popular militia] could have saved the city, but the Government of National Defensefeared supporting the armed force of the people.thatEarly in December I was arrested a second time. That second arrestcame when several women who had more courage than clairvoyancewanted to propose some unknown means of defense to the government.Their zeal was so greatthey came to the Women's VigilanceCommittee in Montmartre, using the name of a woman and of a groupwhom they had neglected to receive permission from, but if they hadcome to us with no recommendation at all to introduce them, it wouldnot have mattered. We agreed to join them the next day in a demonstration in front of the Hotel de Ville, but we made one reservation. We toldthem we would go as women to share their danger; we would not go ascitizens because we no longer recognized the Government of NationalDefense. It had proved itself incapable even of letting Paris defend itself.The next day we went to the rendezvous at the Hotel de Ville, and weexpected what happened:I was arrested for having organized thedemonstration. I answered their charges by saying that I couldn't haveorganized any demonstration to speak to the government, because I nolonger recognized that government. I added that when I came on myMemoirs of Louise Michel61own behalf to the Hotel de Ville, it would be with an armed uprisingbehind me. That explanation appeared unsatisfactory to them, and theylocked me up.The next day four citizens-Theophile Ferre, Avronsart, Christ, andBurlot--eame to claim me "in the name of the Eighteenth Arrondissement." At this declaration, the reactionaries became frightened. "Montmartre is going to descend on us," they whispered to each other, andthey released me.Mme Meurice also came to claim me in the name of the Society for theVictims of the War, but she arrived after I had already left the prefecture.It wasn't until January 19, when the struggle was almost over, that thethe NationalGovernment of National Defense finally agreed to letGuard effect a sortie to try to retake Montretout and Buzenval. At firstthe National Guard swept the Prussians before them, but the muddefeated the brave sons of the people. They sank into the wet earth up totheir ankles, and unable to get their artillery up on the hills, they had toretreat.Hundreds stayed behind, lying quietly in death; these men of theNational Guard-men of the people, artists, young persons-died withno regrets for their lost lives. The earth drank the blood of this firstParisian carnage; soon it would drink more.Paris still did not wish to surrender to the Prussians. On January 22,the people gathered in front of the Hotel de Ville, where GeneralChaudey, who commanded the soldiers, now had his headquarters. Thepeople sensed that the members of the government were lying whenthey declared they were not thinking of surrendering.We prepared a peaceful demonstration, with Razoua commandingour battalions from Montmartre. Because our friends who were armedwere determined for the demonstration to be peaceful, they withdrewwith their weapons, even though peaceful demonstrations are alwayscrushed.When only a disarmed multitude remained, soldiers in the buildingsaround the square opened fire on us. No shot was fired by the peoplebefore the Breton Mobiles fired their volleys. We could see the pale facesof the Bretons behind the windows, as a noise like hail sounded in ourears. Yes, you fired on us, you untamed Celts, but at least it was yourfaith that made you fanatics for the Counterrevolution. You weren'tbought by the reactionaries. You killed us, but you believed you weredoing your duty, and some day we will convert you to our ideals ofliberty. You will bring to liberty the same fierce convictions you now arebringing to the reaction, and with us you will assault the old world.The Breton Mobiles fired first; the people around the square of theTour Saint Jacques became indignant as the bullets began to rain down62Memoirs of Louise Michelon them, and they began to throw up barricades. Malezieux, his cloakriddled with bullet holes, took over as our leader. He was an old mannow, a hero of June 1848. He remembered bygone days and bravelytook command of the situation as if he had been draped in his June flag.I stood in the middle of the square lost in thought. I looked at theaccursed windows from which the Bretons continued to fire on us andthought, "One day you will be on our side, you brigands."The bullets continued to make their hail-like noise. The squarebecame deserted while the projectiles coming from the Hotel de Villedug into the ground haphazardly or killed people here and there.Near me, a woman of my build, who was dressed in black and whoresembled me, was struck down by a bullet. A young man who had comewith her was also killed. We never found out who they were, but theyoung man had the intrepid profile of the Midi.Gradually the square emptied. Many people did not want it to end likethat, but we decided that this was not the time to attempt to overthrowthe government.On this January 22, Sapia was killed along with many others. P-- ofthe Blanqui Group had his arm broken. Passersby were killed like ourown people, and over the fallen we swore an oath of vengeance andliberty. As a token of defiance, I took off my red scarf and threw it on agrave. A comrade picked it up and knotted it in the branches of a willow.the people having been raked bymachine-gun fire and then raked with assurances that the governmentdid not intend to surrender, the government surrendered to the Prussians. This time the shudder of anger that went through Paris did notabate; it prepared Paris for the coming months.Six days after that January 22,Chapter 9The Commune of ParisAfter Paris surrendered to the Prussians in January 1871, the other Frenchforces agreed to an armistice, during which the Prussians allowed the French toelect a national government, there being some doubt whether the self-proclaimedParisian government could speak for France as a whole. Expected to decide on theterms of the peace, that new government met first at Bordeaux and then moved toVersailles, just outside Paris. Monarchists dominated the new Versailles government, and until the divisions between those who supported rival pretenders to theit seemed likely that the Versailles government wouldthrone became evident,reestablish a monarchy in which the dreams of republicans and revolutionarieswould dissolve.On January [sic: February] 22,the Committees of Vigilance wereclosed down, and newspaper publication was suspended. The Versaillesreactionaries decided they had to disarm Paris. Napoleon III was stillalive, and with Montmartre disarmed, the entrance of a sovereign, eitherBonaparte or an Orleanist, would have favored the army, which waseither an accomplice of the reactionaries or was allowing itself to bedeceived. With Montmartre disarmed, the Prussian army, which wassitting in the surrendered forts around Paris while the armistice continued, would have been protected.The cannon paid for by the National Guard had been left on somevacant land in the middle of the zone abandoned by the Prussians. Parisobjected to that, and the cannon were taken to the Parc Wagram. Theidea was in the air that each battalion should recapture its own cannon.A battalion of the National Guard from the Sixth Arrondissement gaveus our impetus. With the flag in front, men and women and childrenhauled the cannon by hand down the boulevards, and although thecannon were loaded, no accidents occurred. Montmartre, like Bellevilleand Batignolles, had its own cannon. Those that had been placed in thePlace des Vosges were moved to the faubourg Saint Antoine. Somesailors proposed our recapturing the Prussian-occupied forts around thecity by boarding them like ships, and this idea intoxicated us.Then before dawn on March 18 the Versailles reactionaries sent introops to seize the cannon now held by the National Guard. One of thepoints they moved toward was the Butte of Montmartre, where our64Memoirs of Louise Michelcannon had been taken. The soldiers of the reactionaries captured ourartillery by surprise, but they were unable to haul them away as they hadintended, because they had neglected to bring horses with them.Learning that the Versailles soldiers were trying to seize the cannon,men and women of Montmartre swarmed up the Butte in a surprisemaneuver. Those people who were climbing believed they would die,but they were prepared to pay the price.The Butte of Montmartre was bathed in the first light of day, throughwhich things were glimpsed as if they were hidden behind a thin veil ofwater. Gradually the crowd increased. The other districts of Paris,hearing of the events taking place on the Butte of Montmartre, came toour assistance.The women of Paris covered the cannon with their bodies. When theirofficers ordered the soldiers to fire, the men refused. The same armythat would be used to crush Paris two months later decided now that itdid not want to be an accomplice of the reaction. They gave up theirattempt to seize the cannon from the National Guard. They understoodthat the people were defending the Republic by defending the arms thatthe royalists and imperialists would have turned on Paris in agreementwith the Prussians. When we had won our victory, I looked around andnoticed my poor mother, who had followed me to the Butte of Montmartre, believing that I was going to die.On this day, the eighteenth of March, the people wakened. If they hadnot, it would have been the triumph of some king; instead it was atriumph of the people. The eighteenth of March could have belonged tothe allies of kings, or to foreigners, or to the people. It was the people's.The people arrested General Lecomte, who commanded the soldiersthat had moved against Montmartre, as well as General ClementThomas, whose curiosity had led him to watch what he thought would bethe degradation of Paris. Their very acts had convicted both of them along time before. Clement Thomas's crimes extended as far back as theJune Days of 1848, and he had reminded the people of his earlieractions when he insulted the National Guard. Lecomte, like ClementThomas, owed an old debt he had to pay. His soldiers remembered, andvengeance came out of the past. The hour struck for them.It will strike for many others, without the Revolution pausing in itscourse. The old world takes note of the reactionaries who die because ofpopular reprisals. It does not count our side's losses; it is not able to,because the sons of the people who fall are only stubble under sickles,only grass mowed in the summer sun.Several of our side perished. Turpin, who was wounded near me onthe eighteenth in the predawn attack on 6, rue des Rosiers, died atLariboisiere several days later. He told me to commend his wife toMemoirs of Louise Michel65Georges Clemenceau, the mayor of the Eighteenth Arrondissement, andI carried out his dying wish.I have never heard Clemenceau's testimony at the inquiry into theevents of March 18; we weren't able to read newspapers when he gavehis evidence. Clemenceau's indecisiveness, for which people reproachhim, comes from the illusion he holds that he should wait for parliamentarianism to bring progress. But parliamentarianism is dead, and Clernenceau's illusion is some kind of infection he caught from theBordeaux Assembly. When that assembly became the Versailles government, he fled from it. Properly, his place is in the streets, and when hisanger is finally roused, he will go there. That is what remains of hisrevolutionary temperament. His indignation at some infamy will bringhim out of his illusions, as he came out of the Bordeaux Assembly.Wouldn't it be better for the last parliamentarians who remain honestto follow the example of the great Jacobin, Delescluze? The attempt towork through parliaments has been going on for a long while, butparliaments, standing as they do in the midst of rottenness, can nolonger produce anything worthwhile.In the provinces people believed the stories Versailles spread aboutthe Commune. After all, statecraft requires a government to creatediscord among the common people. The bosses give the common peopleenough to allow them to work, but too little to revolt. And between eachperiodic pruning they grow back as numerous and as strong as Gallicoaks. At any rate, some of our most committed supporters went fromParis to the provinces to explain the situation. Among those who wentwere women like Paule Minck. They worked as hard as they could. If theprovinces had only understood the true situation, they would have sidedwith us, but they listened to the lies of the Versailles government. We inParis even tried launching balloons filled with letters to the provinces.Some of them came down in the right places, but they were not enough.Nevertheless, not everyone was fooled by the lies of Versailles. Lyon,Marseille, Narbonne, all had their own Communes, and like ours, theirstoo were drowned in the blood of revolutionaries. That is why our flagsare red. Why are our red banners so terribly frightening to thosepersons who have caused them to be stained that color?Some people say I'm brave. Not really. There is no heroism; peopleare simply entranced by events. What happens is that in the face ofdanger my perceptions are submerged in my artistic sense, which isseized and charmed. Tableaux of the dangers overwhelm my thoughts,and the horrors of the struggle become poetry.It wasn't bravery when, charmed by the sight, I looked at the dismantled fort of Issy, all white against the shadows, and watched my comradesfiling out in night sallies, moving away over the little slopes of Clamart or66Memoirs of Louise Micheltoward the Hautes Bruyeres, with the red teeth of chattering machineguns showing on the horizon against the night sky. It was beautiful,that's all. Barbarian that I am, I love cannon, the smell of powder,machine-gun bullets in the air.I am not the only person caught up by situations from which thepoetry of the unknown emerges. I remember a student who didn't agreewith our ideas (although he agreed even less with the other side's), whocame to shoot with us at Clamart and at the Moulin de Pierre. He had avolume of Baudelaire in his pocket, and we read a few pages with greatpleasure-when we had time to read. What fate held for him I don'tknow, but we tested our luck together. It was interesting. We dranksome coffee in the teeth of death, choosing the same spot where three ofour people, one after another, had been killed. Our comrades, anxiousabout seeing us there at what seemed to be a deadly place, made uswithdraw. Just after we left a shell fell, breaking the empty cups. Aboveall else, our action was simply one of a poet's nature, not bravery oneither his part or mine.During the entire time of the Commune, I only spent one night at mypoor mother's. I never really went to bed during that time; Ijust nappeda little whenever there was nothing better to do, and many other peoplelived the same way. Everybody who wanted deliverance gave himselftotally to the cause.During the Commune I went unhurt except for a bullet that grazedmy wrist, although my hat was literally riddled with bullet holes. I didtwist my ankle, which had been sprained for a long time, and because Icouldn't walk for three or four days, I had to requisition a carriage.It was a little two-wheeled buggy that looked fairly attractive. Weharnessed it to a horse which, unfortunately, was used to the whip. Therotten beast refused to move when we treated him nicely. Everythingwas all right when we were only following a funeral cortege to aMontmartre cemetery at a walking pace, but after the funeral it was adifferent story. That damned animal wouldn't keep up even the slow jogwhich allowed him practically to go to sleep standing up. He simplystopped, which gave time for a group of imbeciles to gather around usand begin whispering to each other, "Ah. Here are some people whohave a buggy. They're filthy rich. The upkeep of that buggy must cost alot.""Wait," said a friend who was riding with me. "Don't get down. I'llmake the horse move." He gave a piece of bread and other encouragements to that monster, who began to munch on the bread while he rolledback his lips as if he were laughing in our faces. And he didn't budge aninch. At that point, with all due respect to those who, like me, are slavesto beasts, I applied the law of necessity and hit him with the whip, and hetook off, shaking his ears, for the Perronnet barricade at Neuilly.Memoirs of Louise Michel67While I was going to Montmartre for the funeral, I hadn't dared tostop off at my mother's, because she would have seen that I had a sprain.Several days before the funeral, though, I had come face to face with herin the trenches near the railroad station of Clamart. She had come to seeif all the lies I had written her to soothe her were true. Fortunately, shealways ended up believing me.If the reaction had had as many enemies among women as it didamong men, the Versailles government would have had a more difficulttask subduing us. Our male friends are more susceptible to faintheartedness than we women are. A supposedly weak woman knows better thanany man how to say: "It must be done." She may feel ripped open to hervery womb, but she remains unmoved. Without hate, without anger,without pity for herself or others, whether her heart bleeds or not, shecan say, "It must be done." Such were the women of the Commune.During Bloody Week, women erected and defended the barricade at thePlace Blanche-and held it till they died.In my mind I feel the soft darkness of a spring night. It is May 1871,and I see the red reflection of flames. It is Paris afire. That fire is a dawn,and I see it still as I sit here writing. Memory crowds in on me, and Ikeep forgetting that I am writing my memoirs.In the night of May 22 or 23, I believe, we were at the Montmartrecemetery, which we were trying to defend with too few fighters. We hadcrenelated the walls as best we could, and, except for the battery on theButte of Montmartre-now in the hands of the reactionaries, and whosefire raked us-and the shells that were coming at regular intervals fromthe side, where tall houses commanded our defenses, the position wasn'tbad. Shells tore the air, marking time like a clock. It was magnificent inthe clear night, where the marble statues on the tombs seemed to bealive.When I went on reconnaissance it pleased me to walk in the solitudethat shells were scouring. In spite of my comrades' advice, I chose towalk there several times; always the shells arrived too early or too late forme. One shell falling across the trees covered me with floweredbranches, which I divided up between two tombs, that of Mlle Poulinand that of Murget, whose spirit seemed to throw us flowers. Mycomrades caught me, and one ordered me not to move about. Theymade me sit down on a bench near the tomb of Cavaignac. But nothingis as stubborn as a woman.In the midst of all this Jaroslav Dombrowski passed in front of us sadlyon his way to be killed. "It's over," he told me."No, no," I said to him, and he held out both his hands to me.But he was right.Three hundred thousand voices had elected the Commune. Fifteenthousand stood up to the clash with the army during Bloody Week.68Memoirs of Louise MichelWe've counted about thirty-five thousand people who were executed,but how many were there that we know nothing of? From time to timethe earth disgorges its corpses. If we are implacable in the coming fight,who is to blame?The Commune, surrounded from every direction, had only death onits horizon. It could only be brave, and it was. And in dying it openedwide the door to the future. That was its destiny.Chapter 10After the CommuneSomehow I managed to escape from the soldiers trying to arrest me.Finally the victorious reactionaries took my mother and threatened toshoot her if I wasn't found. To set her free I went to take her place,although she didn't want me to do it, the poor, dear woman. I had to tellher a lot oflies to convince her, and as always she ended up believing me.Thus I saw to it that she returned home.They took me to the detention camp in the 37th [sic: 43rd] Bastion,near the Montmartre railroad. Even that far out, fragments of paper ashcoming from the burning of Paris blew like black butterflies. Above usthe lights of the fire floated like red crepe. And always we could hear thecannon. We heard them until May 28, and right up to that day we said toeach other:"The Revolution will take its revenge."At the 37th Bastion, in front of the dust-filled square where we werepenned up, there are casemates under a mound of green lawn. There, assoon as General de Gallifet arrived, the soldiers shot two unfortunatepeople in front of us. They resembled each other and must have beenbrothers. They both struggled until the shots rang out, for they did notwant to die. They hadn't even been on our side. They had come out intothe street, perhaps to insult us, and had been arrested. Before they wereshot, they had said they weren't worried, because they were sure they'dbe freed. Then General de Gallifet gave an order to shoot into the crowdif anyone moved. The two brothers were terrified and tried to flee. Wecried out:"We don't know them. They're not ours."But it did no good. They were shot anyway. They weren't even able tostand up for the volley. They were so frightened that all they could saywas that they were Montmartre merchants; they couldn't even remember their addresses so that they could commend their children to thoseof us who remained. We didn't think we could figure out who they wereeither. People thought that one of them was saying "Alas." I have alwaysguessed that he said "Anne," and that she was his daughter. How manypeople were seized like this, how many who really were enemies of theCommune, like those two unfortunate men of Bastion 37?70Memoirs of Louise MichelAfter this execution we were lined up and marched off towardVersailles. As we arrived there, a bunch of bullies threw rocks at us as ifwe were rabbits, and a member of the National Guard had his jawbroken. One thing lowe to the cavalry who were guarding us: Theypushed back the ruffians and their girl friends who had come to theprisoner-baiting. We didn't stop at Versailles, however; we were ledbeyond, south to Satory.The prisoners filing past from Montmartre to Satory are present nowin my mind. We were marching between the lines of a cavalry escort. Itwas night. Nothing could have been more horribly beautiful than theplace where they made us climb down into the ravines near the Chateaude la Muette. The gloom, barely lit by the wan moon, transformed theravines into walls. The shadows of the horsemen on either side of ourlong file formed a black fringe that made the path seem lighter. The sky,hovering with the promise of heavy rains on the morrow, seemed topress down on us. Everything became blurred and appeared dreamlike-except for the horsemen who led the column and the first groupsof prisoners. A sudden flash of light filtered from below between thehooves of the horses and lit them up; scattered red reflections seemed tobleed on us and on the uniforms. The rest of the file stretched out in along trail of ink, ending in the murky depths of the night.People said they were going to shoot us in those ravines, but thesoldiers had us climb out, although I didn't know why. I felt no fear, forI was wrapped up in the picture I saw and no longer thought of wherewe were. Thrilled by my perceptions, I earned no merit at all fordespising a danger I wasn't thinking about. Gripped by the tableau Ionly looked, and now I remember.Satory! As we got there during a downpour which made the slopeslippery, we were told: "Move! Climb as if you were charging up theButte of Montmartre." And everybody climbed at full charge, and thenwe had to walk in front of some machine guns that they rolled after us.We told an old woman who was on the verge of hysterics, and who was inour group only because her husband had been shot, that the machineguns were only a formality they went through each time new prisonersarrived. We weren't so sure of this, but at least the woman fell silent. Webelieved the soldiers were going to kill us, and there would only be timeenough for us to yell, "Long live the Commune" before we died. Butthen they pulled back the machine guns.Satory! In the middle of the night the soldiers would call out groups ofprisoners. They'd get up from the mud where they had lain down in therain, and follow the soldier's lantern that led their way. They'd be givena pick and shovel to dig their own graves, and then they'd be shot. Theechoes of volleys shattered the silence of the night.Satory! The prisoners drank from their hands at the little pond whenthey were too thirsty and when the heavy rain which was falling on themMemoirs of Louise Michel71had swept away the pink foam. There the victors washed their hands,which were often redder than those of butchers.Who will record the crimes that power commits, and the monstrousmanner in which power transforms men? Those crimes can be endedforever by spreading power out to the entire human race. To spread thefeeling of the homeland to the entire world, to extend well-being to allpeople, to give science to all humanity-that will save humanity.When I arrived at Satory the soldiers said they were going to shoot methe next day, in the evening; then the next day they said they wouldshoot me the day after. I don't know why they didn't, for I was insolentto them, as insolent as one is in defeat to ferocious victors.Shortly thereafter, a grou p of us was sent to the prison of Chantiers atVersailles. As we were marching, a strange thing happened. A furiouswoman dashed in front of us, crying out that we had killed her sister,that she knew it, that there were witnesses. A cry rose up from our midst.It was her sister, who had been arrested by the Versailles government.When we arrived at the prison of Chantiers, we were kept in a hugesquare room on the second floor, sitting on the floor by day andstretching out any way we could at night. At the end of two weeks theygave us bundles of straw, each of which had to do for two people. Atnight two lamps lit our morgue, where we hung up our rags and tatterson strings above our sleeping bodies. Above the room was a holethrough which we climbed to the interrogation room; another hole ledto the ground floor, where they kept the children who were prisoners,the children whose fathers they couldn't find. Some of those children,like Ranvier, were courageous and we were proud of them.For a long time I was forbidden to see my mother, who came oftenfrom Montmartre without being able to speak to me. One day she waspushed back while she was offering me a bottle of coffee, and I threw thebottle at the gendarme who had pushed her. A nearby officer rebukedme, and I told him my only regret was that I had thrown the bottle at atool of the government rather than at the head of it. They finally didallow my mother to see me, but it was a long time later.At the prison of Chantiers I saw grotesque things....A deaf and dumb woman spent several weeks there, charged withhaving cried out, "Long live the Commune!" An old woman, both ofwhose legs were paralyzed, was charged with having built barricades.For three days, another woman just walked around the room, her basketunder one arm and her umbrella under the other. In her basket weresome poems that her employer had written in praise of the victors.Ironically,the soldiers believed those poems were in praise of theCommune, even one with a line that ran:Good gentlemen of VersaillesEnter into Paris.72Memoirs of Louise MichelInside the Prison des Chantiers, Versailles, 15 August 1871. LouiseMichel is the third prisoner from the right, second row. (Photo. Bib!.nat. Paris)Memoirs of Louise Michel73But laughter quickly dies. The cries of the insane, uncertainty aboutrelatives and friends whose fate was unknown, mothers left alone-allthat I feel even now.We were proud in defeat, and the ruffians and their girl friends whocame out to see the vanquished as if they were going to look at animals inthe Jardin des Plantes didn't see our tears. Instead, we sneered at theiridiotic faces.On the floor of our prison room there were so many lice they madelittle silver nets as they meandered about, going to their nests thatresembled anthills. They were enormous lice, with bristling backs thatwere a little bit round-shouldered, so many lice that you believed youcould hear the noise of their swarming.Constantly guarded by soldiers, we women couldn't change our underwear easily (those of us who had any to change into). I was finally ableto get some from my mother, who pushed it through the openwork gatein the courtyard.I spent my nights looking at the tableau of this morgue. I have alwaysbeen taken by views like that, so much so that I often forget people in theface of the horrible eloquence of things. Sometimes this morgue lookedlike dusk or dawn playing on a field where the crop had been harvested.I could see the empty stalks, thin bundles of straw, gilded like wheat. Atother times, light mirrored off them. When daybreak paled the lamps, itlooked like a harvest of stars.On 15 June 1871, the worst forty of us were sent from the prison tothe reformatory at Versailles. Mme Cadolle and Mme Hardouin haverelated what happened at Chantiers after we left.Of course I was one of the worst forty sent to Versailles. We had towait in the courtyard under a beating rain, and an officer said he wassorry. I couldn't keep myself from saying that making us stand in thedrenching rain fitted in with all their other acts, and anyway I liked itbetter that way.At the reformatory of Versailles, conditions for us forty werestrangely eased. To get ready for the trial of the members of theCommune, the government tried a number of unfortunate women andsentenced them to death, although they had only been ambulancenurses. Because of her name, Eulalie Papavoine was sentenced to forcedlabor and was sent to Cayenne, even though she was not related to thelegendary Papavoine. The Versailles government carefully kept fromsentencing the boldest women to death;they didn't execute eitherElisabeth Retif or Marchais, although they proved the two had conspiredwith each other, in spite of the fact that they had never met.On the third of September, the eve of the first anniversary of theproclamation of the Republic, the sentencing of the chief members ofthe Commune was drawing to a close. By decree the governor general of74Memoirs of Louise MichelParis had established the Third Military Court-Martial. Colonel Merlinwas president and the members were Major Gaulet, Captain de Guibert,M. Mariguet, Lieutenant Caissaigne, Second Lieutenant Leger, WarrantOfficer Labbat, Major Gaveau, and Captain Senart. The Third MilitaryCourt-Martial tried eighteen persons, among them Theophile Ferre.Theophile Ferre, who once had been Clemenceau's deputy mayor,was the brother of my great friend Marie. In the Dossier [sic: CahiersJ de Lamagistrature by Odysse Barot I found an account of Theophile Ferre'sarrest, and I quote those pages which were written under the vividemotion of the horrible scene. People will understand why, when I amdiscussing these terrible sorrows, I quote friends who have related theevents of those sad days instead of telling about them myself. Couragehas limits, and one doesn't pass them unless duty demands it.There is a detail about which people do not know and which has notbeen written about until now: the manner in which Ferre's arrest tookplace and the way the authorities discovered his hiding place.All enquiries had been fruitless. The authorities had arrested five or sixpseudo-Ferres, just as they had shot five or six pseudo-Billiorays and fiveor six pseudo-Valles.What did they do then? They went to the little house on the rueFazilleau in the suburb of Levallois-Perret, where the former member ofthe Commune used to live with his parents.Theophile Ferre was not at the house, but the authorities had knownwhen they went to Levallois-Perret that there was no chance of findingFerre at his parents' home. Why did they go there? How naive you are! Helived there with his family, and what good is a family if it does not informon and surrender its own?Needless to say, the authorities pushed their way brutally into the littlecottage surrounded by its garden. Ah! Wait, I do not know if my pen willhave the courage to finish. The other day business took me to Levallois,and when I passed down that street and came to that house, whose numbersuddenly came back to mind, I was forced to stop for a few minutes. Bloodrushed to my head and sweat ran down my forehead; a simple memorycaused waves of anger and rage to overwhelm me. Please excuse me forthis involuntary emotion, but you will share that indignation, that anger,and that rage.The authorities entered the house. The father had left for his daily job,and only two women were there, the old mother and the young sister ofthe man they were looking for. The sister, Mile Marie Ferre, was in bed,dangerously sick with a high fever.The authorities fell on Mme Ferre and questioned her harshly. Theyordered her to reveal the hiding place of her son. She swore she didn'tknow it and that, if she did, it was terrible to tell a mother to betray herown son.They increased their pressure and used both gentleness and threats.Memoirs of Louise Michel75"Arrest me if you want to," Mme Ferre said, "but I can't tell you what Idon't know and you will not be so cruel as to tear me away from mydaughter's sickbed."The poor woman trembled all over just thinking about that. One of themen smiled fleetingly, for her words had given him a diabolical idea."Since you won't tell us where your son is, we are going to take yourdaughter away."Mme Ferre cried out in despair and anguish, but her prayers and tearswere unavailing. The men set about getting her sick daughter up anddressing her, at the risk of killing her."Courage, mother," said Mile Ferre. "Don't worry, I'll be strong. It willbe nothing. They will have to let me go."They were going to take her away.Mme Ferre was faced with the horrible alternative of sending her son tohis death or killing her daughter by allowing her to be taken off. In spite ofdesperate signs which the heroic Marie made to her, the hapless mother ina frenzy of grief lost her head in her anguish, hesitated ..."Be silent, mother! Be silent!" murmured the sick girl.The authorities were taking Marie off. ...It was too much for her mother to bear. She broke down. Her reasonbecame dark, and incoherent phrases escaped from her lips. The executioners listened for a clue.In her hysteria the tormented mother let the address "rue Saint-Sauveur" slip several times.Alas! No more was needed. While two of the men kept the Ferre homeunder observation, the others ran to finish the job. The rue Saint-Sauveurwas sealed off and searched, and Theophile Ferre was arrested.A week after the horrible scene at the rue Fazilleau, the courageousMarie was freed. But they didn't free her mother, who had become insane,and soon died in the asylum of Sainte-Anne.At the court-martial, Theophile Ferre refused to have a defenselawyer, but the president of the court, according to law, appointedMaitre Marchand to defend him. Ferre explained the role of theCommune, after having discussed the coup d'etat prepared by theenemies of the Republic, who had gone so far as to deny Paris the rightto elect its municipal council."Honest and sincere newspapers were suppressed," Ferre said to thecourt-martial. "The most patriotic among us were condemned to deathwhile Royalists were preparing to divide France. Finally, during thenight of March 18, they believed they were ready, and they tried todisarm the National Guard and arrest all republicans. Their attemptfailed because it was faced with the complete opposition of Paris andeven the mutiny of their own soldiers. The royalists fled and took refugeat Versailles.76Memoirs of Louise Michel"Paris was now free, and some vigorous and courageous citizens triedto reestablish order and safety at the risk of their lives. A few days laterthe population voted and created the Commune of Paris."It was the duty of the Versailles government to recognize the validityof the vote of Paris and to confer with the Commune about restoringtranquility. On the contrary, as if foreign war had not already givenFrance enough misery and ruin, the government added a civil war.Breathing hate and vengeance against the people, the Versailles government attacked Paris and subjected it to a new siege."Paris resisted for two months, and then it was conquered. For tendays, without making any pretense at legality, the Versailles governmentauthorized the massacre of citizens. Those terrible days remind us of St.Bartholomew's Massacre and surpassed the atrocities of June and December. When will the machine-gunning of people stop?"Because I am a member of the Paris Commune, I am in the hands ofthe victors. They want my head. Let them take it. Free I have lived, andfree I expect to die."I add only one word: Fortune is capricious. I entrust to the future mymemory and my revenge."Ferre was condemned to death. Of the eighteen defendants at thatcourt-martial only he and Lullier were sentenced to death. Urbain andTrinquet were sentenced to life at hard labor. Sentenced to deportationto a fortification were Assi, Bilhoray, Champy, Regere, Ferrat, Verdure,and Grousset.Jourde and Rastoul were sentenced to simple deportation.Courbet was sentenced to six months and fined 500 francs, and Deschamp, Parent, and Clement were acquitted.Another murder took place, too. Flourens was killed in an outpost aspunishment for letting some men escape on October 31. They slippedaway through windows, doors, and water closets, and he didn't join thehunt for the vanquished.The Board of Pardons reviewed the verdicts of the court-martial, andthat board is guilty of the volleys at the execution stakes. The fifteenmembers of the Board of Pardons were only fifteen executioners. If thesoldiers were drunk with blood up to their ankles, the Board of Pardonshad blood up to its belly.Theophile Ferre and I were able to exchange a few letters from ourprisons while we were both at Versailles. I still have some of them, andsome of the poetry I wrote for him. The year of seventy-one! I have anotebook of black-bordered mourning paper in which Marie copieddown some of my poems, a number of which she copied in red ink, redlike blood. Marie had given this notebook to her brother Hippolyte, wholent it to me, but he won't get it back until I'm dead and the pages thatare now blank are written upon.I think I still have Ferre's last letter to me from his cell at Versailles.None of the house searches took those papers away from me, and myMemoirs of Louise Michel77friends didn't want to disturb them because the people mentioned wereeither dead or prisoners. It is too painful to quote his letter; I will sayonly that Ferre, instead of being moved by his own fate, looked at libertyrising on the faraway horizon across the blood of 1871.I do have a copy of the last letter Ferre sent to my dear Marie. Thisfragment came to me on May 24 of this year; I did not need to see theaccompanying letter to guess that it came from you, my dear Avronsart.Prison of Versailles, no. 6Tuesday, 28 November 1871, 5:30 A.M.My beloved sister,In a few moments I am going to die. At the last instant, thoughts of youwill be in my mind. I beg you to ask for my body so that it may be reunitedwith that of our unfortunate mother. If you can, have the hour of myburial put in the newspapers, so that friends can accompany me. Ofcourse, no religious ceremony: I die a materialist, as I have lived.Place a wreath on the tomb of our mother.Try to cure my brother and to console our father. Tell them both howmuch I loved them.I give you a thousand kisses and thank you for the attention you havenever ceased to lavish on me. You must overcome your sorrow and, as youhave often promised me, be equal to events. As for me, I am happy. I amgoing away to be done with my sufferings, and there is no reason to feelpity for me.All yours,Your devoted brother,Th. FerreAll my papers, my clothing, and other objects are to be returned, exceptfor the money in the clerk's office which I leave to more unfortunateprisoners.Th. FerreAt seven o'clock on the morning of 28 November 1871, Ferre wasassassinated on the plain of Satory along with Rossel and Bourgeois, whohad been condemned to death in another trial. Here are the terms inwhich a reactionary newspaper related the heroic death of Ferre:The condemned are very firm. Ferre, backed up to his post, throws hishat on the ground. A sergeant comes forward to place a blindfold over hiseyes; Ferre takes the blindfold and throws it on his hat. ... The threecondemned remain alone. The three firing squads, which have just advanced, fire.Rossel and Bourgeois fall immediately; as for Ferre, he stays standingfor a moment and then falls on his right side. The surgeon-major of thecamp, M. Dejardin, hurries over to the cadavers. He signals that Rossel isquite dead and calls the soldiers who are to give the coup de grace to Ferreand to Bourgeois.Finally the march past begins.78Memoirs of Louise MichelMarie recovered somewhat, and being the only member of the familywho was free, she proved her courage by going from prison to prison aslong as her brothers and her father were locked up, and she came toclaim Theophile's body for burial.Because of the letters Theophile and I had exchanged, the Prefect ofPolice sent me to Arras. By a maneuver of the prefect, a name wascrossed off the list of those who were being sent to wait in farawayprisons, and mine was put in its place. I must say that the MilitaryTribunal didn't know about this, let alone approve it. I protested notagainst the prison, where we found much better treatment than atSatory or in the temporary prison camps, but againstthe squalidmaneuvering of this transfer. I was under the jurisdiction of the MilitaryTribunal and not that of the Prefect of Police, who wanted to delay mytrial indefinitely, while insulting me by trying the other women, Retifand Marchais, first.On the day of Ferre's execution I was recalled from Arras. At therailroad station of Versailles I saw Marie, who had come to claim herbrother's body. I was able to speak to her for only a moment. She wasdressed entirely in black, and her thick brown curls stood out as if herskin was marble, for she was very pale. She showed neither tears norweakness, but she looked like a corpse, and she was so cold to the touch!She was as cold as she was years later when I arranged her in her coffin.The execution of Ferre prompted me to write to General Appert,under whose authority the trials were taking place.Prison of Versailles2 December 1871Sir:I finally believe that the triple assassination of Tuesday morning reallyhappened.If you don't want to go through the legal formalities, you already knowenough about me to shoot me. I'm ready, and the plain of Satory is nearby.You and all your accomplices know very well that if I get out of herealive I will avenge the martyrs.Long live the Commune.Louise MichelBut they didn't want to put me in front of a firing squad at Satory, andI am still here, seeing death mow people down all around me. No onewho hasn't experienced this kind of emptiness can know what courage ittook to live.But no weakness! None! Long live the dead Commune! Long live theliving Revolution!In May 1871 the streets of Paris were dappled white as if by appleblossoms in the spring. But no trees had cast down that mantle of white;it was chlorine that covered the corpses. Now, the ground was all whiteMemoirs of Louise Michel79again, this time with snow. On 28 November 1871, six months after thehot-blooded butchery had ended, the cold-blooded assassinations began.The soldiers had become tired and perhaps their machine guns werebreaking down. Now there would be an end to scenes of limbs half-covered with earth, an end to cries of agony coming from heaps of personswho had been summarily executed, an end to swallows dying poisonedby the flies that had been feeding in that enormous charnel house.Henceforth, murder would be done cold-bloodedly, in an orderly fashion.We do not know the names of all those who died in the hunt and after.The enormous number of missing persons proves how minimal theofficial figures of the slaughter are. Sometimes now, in the corners ofcellars, skeletons are found, and no one knows where they came from.People claim it is mysterious, but every out-of-the-way spot became acharnel house to the victory of the Versailles royalists.And the plain of Satory. If it were excavated, corpses would be foundthere too. The royalists covered them with quicklime in vain, becauseplows will uncover them, and every stone upturned will reveal them.As I write these pages, those places are only boneyards. Fifteen yearsago they were slaughterhouses. And down in the catacombs under Paris,where the government chased the Communards with torches and dogsas if they were animals, there must be many modern skeletons amongthe ancient bones. Betrayals so numerous they were nauseating, stupidfear, disgust, the horror-all this was the aftermath of the Commune.The trial of the members of the Commune was riddled with errors,but the main purpose of the appeal our lawyers filed with the Court ofCassation had been to test Versailles's justice to its end. None of thecondemned counted on it, although the legal flaws were numerous. Theprosecutor, Major Gaveau, insulted Ferre in the course of the trial bysaying "the memory of a murderer." That same Gaveau twice vacated hisseat as public prosecutor, did not appear even for a moment at thesession of September 2, and did not attend the reading of the sentence, asentence in which false documents appeared.The members of the Commune did not conceal their acts. It was noteasy to be found innocent, even when one had committed no crime,when people felt responsible for their own actions. Ferre carried his actsproudly and bore responsibility for them to the execution post at Satory.The others carried theirs to prison or to exile. Yet in order to convict thedefendants, the authorities thought they needed to add forgeries thatwere established as false, forgeries that were so patently false that somewere not even written in French.By June 1872 the Versailles 'Justice" had delivered 32,905 verdicts.They had already condemned 72 persons to death, and sentencedanother 33 to death in absentia. That made a total of 105 sentenced tocapital punishment, and the Versailles 'Justice" kept on operating.80Memoirs of Louise MichelForty-six children under the age of sixteen were put in reformatories.No doubt it was to punish them for what their fathers had been shot for.Small children, in the orgy of the fighting, had had their heads smashedagainst walls.In the summer of 1873 they were still shooting prisoners at Satory.After a mockery of a trial in which I made no attempt to defend myself, Iwas sentenced to deportation to a fortification for life.Chapter 11The Trial of 1871This chapter consists of an account of the trial as reported in the Gazette desTribunaux that Louise Michel included as an appendix to her memoirs.SIXTH COURT-MARTIAL BOARD (VERSAILLES)PRESIDENT OF THE COURT: DELAPORTE, COLONEL, TWELFTHCAVALRYSESSION OF 16 DECEMBER 1871The Background of the Case against Louise MichelThe Commune had an insufficient number of men for protectionagainst the loyal members of the National Guard, so it establishedcompanies of children known as Wards of the Commune. It also tried toorganize a battalion of amazons. This group was never formed, butwomen wearing fanciful uniforms and carrying carbines at their shoulders could be seen preceding the battalions that went to the ramparts.Among those women who seem to have exercised considerable influencein certain quarters was Louise Michel, ex-schoolmistress at Batignolles,who never stopped displaying boundless devotion to the insurrectionarygovernment.Louise Michelis thirty-six years old, petite, brunette, with a verydeveloped forehead which recedes abruptly. Her nose, mouth, and chinare very prominent, and her features reveal an extreme severity. Shedresses entirely in black. Her temperament is as excitable as it wasduring the first days of her captivity. When she was first brought in frontof the court-martial, she suddenly raised her veil and stared at herjudges fixedly.Captain Dailly was the public prosecutor for the Sixth Court-Martial.According to regulations, Maitre Haussman was appointed to assist theaccused in her defense, but she declared she would refuse the help ofany lawyer.The clerk of the court-martial, M. Duplan, read the following report:82Memoirs of Louise MichelStatement by the Clerk of the Court-MartialIn 1870, at the occasion of Victor Noir's death, Louise Michel began todisplay her revolutionary ideas. Because Michel was an obscure schoolmistress with almost no pupils, it was not possible for our investigators tofind out what her previous revolutionary activity had been or what herpart was in the events leading up to the monstrous offense whichterrified our unfortunate country.To retrace the incidents of 18 March 1871 in their entirety would beuseless, and this court, as its point of departure in the prosecution ofMIle Michel, will limit itself to determining precisely the part she took inthe bloody drama whose theater was the Butte of Montmartre and therue des Rosiers.Louise Michel was an accomplice in the arrest of the two unfortunategenerals, Lecomte and Clement Thomas. She was fearful that the twovictims might escape. "Don't let them go," she cried out with all hermight to the scoundrels who surrounded the generals. Later, when themurder had been committed, she showed her joy at the spilled blood,and dared to exclaim in the presence of the mutilated bodies, "It servesthem right." Then, radiant and satisfied with her good day, she went toBelleville and La Villette to assure herself "that these neighborhoodswere still armed."On the nineteenth she returned home, after having taken the precaution of removing the National Guard uniform that could incriminateher. She felt the need to talk a bit about the events with her concierge."Ah," she cried. "If Clemenceau had gotten to the rue des Rosiers a fewinstants sooner, they wouldn't have shot the generals. He would havebeen against it because he was on the side of the Versailles government."Paris, in the hands of foreigners and rascals who had come from everycorner of the world, proclaimed the Commune. Louise Michel, assecretary of the society called Improvement of Working Womenthrough Their Work, organized the famous Central Committee of theUnion of Women, as well as the Committees of Vigilance charged withrecruiting stretcher-bearers-and, at the height of the struggle,women-to serve on the barricades and perhaps even some to bearsonists.A copy of a manifesto found in the Town Hall of the Tenth Arrondissement indicates the role she played in the aforementioned committees during the last days of the struggle. The text of that manifestoreads:In the name of the Social Revolution that we acclaim, in the name of thedemand for the right to work and the rights of equality and justice, theUnion of Women for the Defense of Paris and the Care of the Woundedchallenges with all its strength the shameful proclamation addressed towomen which a group of reactionaries posted the day before yesterday.Memoirs of Louise Michel83That proclamation stated that the women of Paris are appealing to thegenerosity of Versailles and are requesting peace at any price.No. The women workers of Paris have come to demand not peace butwar to the death.Today, reconciliation would be treason. It would be to deny all theaspirations of women workers who acclaim complete social change, theannihilation of all existing social and legal relations, the suppression of allspecial privileges, the end of all exploitation, the substitution of the reignof work for the reign of capital. In a word, they demand the emancipationof the worker through his own efforts.Six months of suffering and treason during the Siege, six weeks oftitanic fights against the united exploiters, waves of blood spilled for thecause of liberty-these are our warrant for glory and vengeance.The present struggle can have only one result-the triumph of thepopular cause. Paris will not pull back, for it carries the flag of the future.The final hour has struck! Give way to the workers! Enough of theirexecutioners! Acts! Energy!The tree of liberty grows tall, watered with the blood of its enemies! ...United and resolute, the women of Paris are matured and enlightenedby the suffering that social crises bring. The women of Paris are deeplyconvinced that the Commune, representing the international and revolutionary principles of peoples, carries in itself the germ of Social Revolution. When the moment of greatest danger comes, the women of Paris willprove to France and to the world that they know how, at the barricadesand on the ramparts of Paris, if the reactionaries force the gates, to givetheir blood like their brothers, to give their lives for the defense andtriumph of the Commune-for the people.Then, victorious, able to unite and agree on their common interests,working men and working women, interdependent and made one for afinal effort ... [The last phrase is incomplete.]Long live the Republic of all persons! Long live the Commune!Holding the positions cited above, Louise Michel directed a school at24, rue Oudot. There, from her lectern in her rare spare moments, sheprofessed the doctrines of free thought and made her young pupils singpoems she had written, among which was the song entitled "TheAvengers."As President of the Club of the Revolution which met in the church ofSaint-Bernard, Louise Michel is responsible for the vote at the session onMay 18 (21 Floreal, year 79). That vote was for:The suppression of magistrates and the annihilation of the legal Codes,with their replacement by a commission of justice;The suppression of religions, the immediate arrest of priests, and thesale of their goods and the goods of those fugitives and traitors whosupported the scoundrels of Versailles;The execution of an important hostage every twenty-four hours untilis freed andCitizen Blanqui, an appointed member of the Commune,arrives in Paris.84Memoirs of Louise MichelIt was not enough for this "passionate spirit," as the author of animaginative account included in her dossier calls her,to stir up thepeople, to applaud assassination, to corrupt children, to preach fratricide, and to encourage crime; she still had to set an example and commitcrimes herself.Thus we find her at Issy, Clamart, and Montmartre fighting in thefront line, shooting at government forces or rallying retreating rebels.The April 14 issue of the eri du peuple proves this charge. "Citizen LouiseMichel, who fought so valiantly at Moulineaux, was wounded at the fortof Issy." Fortunately for her, we add, the heroine of Jules Valles cameout of that notorious action with a simple sprain.What was the motive that pushed Louise Michel down this irrevocablepath of politics and revolution?Clearly, it was arrogance.Louise Michel was an illegitimate child reared by charity. Instead ofthanking Providence for giving her the means to live happily with hermother, she surrendered to her heated imagination and excitable character. Breaking with her benefactors, she ran to Paris for adventure.The wind of revolution began to blow. Victor Noir died. It was themoment for Louise Michel to enter on stage, but an anonymous role wasrepugnant to her. Her name had to draw public attention and be in theheadlines of false proclamations and posters.In conclusion, we must give a legal classification to the acts thisdevil-ridden fanatic committed during the period from the beginning ofthe frightful crisis that France has just undergone to the end of theblasphemous struggle in which the accused took part amid the tombs ofthe Montmartre cemetery.She assisted, knowingly, the persons who apprehended the generalsLecomte and Clement Thomas. She assisted, knowingly, in the deedsthat followed their apprehension: the torture and death of those twounlucky individuals.Intimately linked with the members of the Commune, she knew alltheir plans in advance. She helped them with all her might and will.Moreover, she assisted them and even surpassed them when she volunteered to go to Versailles and assassinate the President of the Republicwith the intention of terrifying the Assembly and, according to her,ending the fighting.She is as guilty as "Ferre, the proud republican," whom she defendedin such a strange fashion and whose head, to use her own words, "is achallenge thrown at your consciences-the answer to which is revolution."She excited the passions of the crowd and preached war withoutmercy or truce. A she-wolf eager for blood, she brought about the deathof hostages through her hellish plots.Memoirs of Louise Michel85Therefore, it is our opinion that there is sufficient cause to bringLouise Michel to trial for:1. A crime, having the overthrow of the government as its goal.2. A crime, having for its purpose the instigation of civil war throughencouraging citizens to arm themselves against each other.3. For having, during an insurrection, carried visible weapons andworn a military uniform and for having made use of those weapons.4. Forgery of documents.5. Use of a false document.6. Complicity through provocation and planning in the assassinationof persons held as hostages by the Commune.7. Complicity in illegal arrests, followed by torture and death, andknowingly assisting the perpetrators of those deeds in the acts theycommitted.These crimes are provided for in articles 87, 91,150,151,59,60,302,341, and 344 of the Penal Code, and article 5 of the Law of 24 May 1834.The Testimony of Louise MichelPRESIDENT OF THE COURT: You have heard the acts you are accused of.What do you have to say in your defense?THE ACCUSED: I don't want to defend myself, nor do I want to bedefended. I belong completely to the Social Revolution, and I declarethat I accept responsibility for all my actions. I accept it entirely andwithout reservations.You accuse me of having participated in the assassination of GeneralsClement Thomas and Lecomte. To that charge, I would answer yes-if Ihad been at Montmartre when those generals wanted to fire on thepeople. I would have had no hesitation about shooting people who gaveorders like those. But once they were prisoners, I do not understandwhy they were shot, and I look at that act as a villainous one.As for the burning of Paris, yes, I participated in it. I wanted to blockthe Versailles invaders with a barrier of flames. I had no accomplices inthat. I acted on my own.I am also charged with being an accomplice of the Commune. That isquite true, since above everything else the Commune wanted to bringabout the Social Revolution, and Social Revolution is my dearest wish.Moreover, I am honored to be singled out as one of the promoters of theCommune. It had absolutely nothing to do with assassinations or burning. I attended all the sessions at the Hotel de Ville, and I affirm thatthere never was any talk of assassinations or burnings.Do you want to know who the real guilty parties are? The police.Later, perhaps, the light of truth will fall on all those events. Now peoplenaturally place responsibility on the partisans of Social Revolution.86Memoirs of Louise MichelOne day I did propose to Theophile Ferre that I go to Versailles. Iwanted two victims: M. Thiers and myself, for I had already sacrificedmy life, and I had decided to kill him.Question: Did you say in a proclamation that a hostage should be shotevery twenty-four hours?Answer: No, I only wanted to threaten. But why should I defend myself?I have already told you I refuse to do it. You are the men who are goingto judge me. You are in front of me publicly. You are men, and I, I amonly a woman. Nevertheless, I am looking you straight in the face. Iknow quite well that anything I tell you will not change my sentence inthe slightest. Thus I have only one last word before I sit down.We never wanted anything but the triumph of the great principles ofRevolution. I swear it by our martyrs who fell on the field of Satory, byour martyrs I still acclaim here, by our martyrs who some day will findtheir avenger.I am in your power. Do whatever you please with me. Take my life ifyou want it. I am not a woman who would dispute your wishes for amoment.Question: You claim you didn't approve of the generals' assassinations.On the contrary, people say that when you were told about it, you criedout: "They shot them. It serves them right."Answer: Yes, I said that. I admit it. In fact, I remember that I said it in thepresence of Citizens Le Moussu and Ferre.Question: Then you do approve of the assassinations?Answer: Let me point out that my statement is not proof. I said thosewords with the intention of spurring on revolutionary zeal.Question: You also wrote for newspapers, the eri du peuple, for example.Answer: Yes, I've made no effort to conceal that.Question: In each issue, those newspapers demanded the confiscation ofthe clergy's property and suggested other similar revolutionary measures. Were those opinions yours?Answer: Indeed yes, but note that we never wanted to take those goodsfor ourselves. We thought only of giving them to the people for theirwell-being.Question: You asked for the suppression of the court system?Answer: Because I had in front of me examples of its errors. I remembered the Lesurques affair and so many more.Question: Do you confess to having resolved to assassinate M. Thiers?Answer: Of course. I have already said that, and I claim it now.Question: It seems that you wore various uniforms during the Commune.Answer: I was dressed as usual. I only added a red sash over my clothes.Question: Didn't you wear a man's uniform several times?Answer: Once. On March 18. I dressed as a National Guardsman so Iwouldn't attract attention.Few witnesses had been subpoenaed, because Louise Michel had notdisputed the acts she was charged with....Memoirs of Louise Michel87SummationCAPTAIN DAILLY, the prosecutor, spoke. He asked the court-martial toexcise the accused from society, because the accused was a continuingdanger to it. He withdrew all charges except that of carrying visible orhidden arms in an insurrectionary movement.MAiTRE HAUSSMAN, appointed to defend the accused, spoke. He declared that because of the formal wish of the accused not to be defended,he would simply put his faith in the wisdom of the court-martial.PRESIDENT OF THE COURT: Accused, do you have anything to say in yourdefense?LOUISE MICHEL: What I demand from you, you who claim you are acourt-martial, you who pass yourselves off as my judges, you who don'thide the way the Board of Pardons behaves, you who are from themilitary and who judge me publicly-what I call for is the field of Satory,where our revolutionary brothers have already fallen.I must be cut off from society. You have been told that, and theprosecutor is right. Since it seems that any heart which beats for libertyhas the right only to a small lump of lead, I demand my share. If you letme live, I will not stop crying for vengeance, and I will denounce theassassins on the Board of Pardons to the vegeance of my brothers.PRESIDENT OF THE COURT: I cannot allow you to continue speaking if youcontinue in this tone.LOUISE MICHEL: I have finished .... If you are not cowards, kill me....The SentenceAfter these words, which caused a great stir in the courtroom, thecourt-martial withdrew to deliberate. After a time,it returned andannounced its sentence: that Louise Michel be sentenced to deportationto a fortified place.Louise Michel was brought back into the courtroom and informed ofthe verdict. When the clerk told her she had twenty-four hours topetition for reviews, she cried out: "No, there is nothing to appeal. But Iwould have preferred death."[This speech ends the excerpt from the Gazette des tribunaux reprinted inthe Memoirs. Louise Michel later appended a short note.]ObservationsI shall limit myself to pointing out a few errors.1. I was not reared by charity but by my grandparents, who thought itproper to do so.I left Vroncourt only after their deaths, and I left to prepare for myschoolmistress's diploma. I believed that in this fashion I could be usefulto my mother.88Memoirs of Louise Michel2. The number of my pupils in Montmartre was 150. That was statedby the authorities during the Siege.3. Perhaps there is some use in noting that contrary to the descriptionof my person given at the beginning of the account in the Gazette destribunaux, I am tall, not short. In the times in which we live, it is proper topass only for oneself.Chapter 12Voyage to ExileWhile I waited for deportation, I was kept in the Auberive prison. Onceagain I can see that prison, with its enormous cell blocks and its narrowwhite paths running under the pines. There a gale is blowing, and I cansee the lines of silent women prisoners with their scarves folded at theirnecks and wearing white headdresses like peasants. In front of the pinesthe tiredburdened with snow during the long winter of 1872-73,women prisoners passed slowly by, their wooden shoes ringing a sadcadence on the frozen earth.My mother was still strong then, and I waited for my deportation toNew Caledonia without seeing what I have seen since: the terrible andsilent anguish under her calm appearance. She was staying at her sister'sin Clefmont, which was very near the Auberive prison, and I knew shewas well. She brought me packages of cakes and cookies the way sheused to do when I was a student at Chaumont.How many little gifts her old hands sent me, even in the last year shewas alive. We revolutionaries bring so little happiness to our families, yetthe more they suffer, the more we love them. The rare moments wehave at home make us intensely happy, for we know that those momentsare transient and our loved ones will miss them in the future.According to the few pages remaining from my journal of the trip toNew Caledonia, we left Auberive on Tuesday, [5] August 1873, betweensix and seven in the morning. The night before we left my mother cameto say goodbye, and I noticed for the first time that her hair was turningwhite.When I left for exile I wasn't bitter about deportation because it wasbetter to be somewhere else and so not see the collapse of our dreams.After what the Versailles government had done, I expected to find thesavages in the South Pacific good, and perhaps I would find the NewCaledonian sun better than the French one.We were put on a train and while we were crossing through Langreson the way to Paris, five or six metalworkers with bare arms black up totheir elbows came out of their workshop. One white-haired workerflourished his hammer and let out a yell that the noise of the railroadcarriage's rolling wheels almost drowned out. "Long live the Commune!" he cried. Something like a promise to stay worthy of his salutefilled my heart.90Memoirs of Louise MichelThat evening we arrived in Paris in a prison carriage. As we werebeing transported from the Gare de l'Est to the Gare d'Orleans, I peeredout and could see the little shop on the rue Saint-Honore where mymother planned to live with a relative after my departure. We left almostimmediately from the Gare d'Orleans, and the next day around four inthe afternoon we arrived near the Atlantic coast at the prison of laRochelle.On August 8 we were put aboard a vessel, the Gomete, to go the lastthirty kilometers to Rochefort. Aboard the Gomete we were treated like avanquished enemy, not like evildoers, and some friendly people in smallboats followed the Gomete the entire way. We answered their salute fromafar. As my last farewell I wanted to wave a red scarf I had saved sincethe Commune, but it was buried deep in my baggage, hidden from anysearch, and on deck I had only my black veil.In the harbor at Rochefort we were put aboard the old warshipVirginie. On Sunday, August 10, the crew let out the sails and weighedanchor while they sang the old war songs of Brittany. The rhythm oftheir songs multiplied their strength, and the cable rose while the mensweated. Their harmony became a force without which it would havebeen impossible to raise the anchor.Until Monday we skirted the coasts of France. Then came the opensea. At first two or three ships were in sight on the horizon; then onlyone; then none at all. Two seabirds accompanied us for some time, buttoward the fourteenth the last large ones disappeared. On the sixteenththe waves were strong. The wind blew a tempest, and the sun made athousand flashes on the water. Two rivers of diamonds seemed to slidedown the flanks of the ship.It was really my ship then, alone under the heavens! Except for thetrip between Chaumont and Paris, I had never traveled. Now I wastaking a long voyage on a warship; I would never have dared to dreamof such a stroke of good luck, especially with the' state paying the cost. Itwas true that ultimately the cost was high: our people by the thousandsfallen in the slaughter and mothers who believed they would never seeus again. Still, to me, the sea was the most beautiful of spectacles, eventhough from infancy pictures and tales and especially my imaginationhad filled my mind with the ocean. I had dreamed of the ocean the way ittruly was, and now that the reality had appeared, I was charmed andmagnetized by its immensity. In my imagination I had loved the sea allmy life; now I loved it as I really saw it.For my first toys my grandfather had made me boats, beautiful littleones whose sails could be clewed up with cables of thick thread. In apoem about my childhood, I wrote about those toy boats my grandfathermade.Memoirs of Louise Michel91As my first toys, he made me some boats.Ships of great beauty with real sails and masts,And we floated them through the cool of the pond.We sailed them through hazards of monstrous brown toads,Which sometimes turned and leaped on their decksDown near the old elm where honeybees swarmedIn the hot summer sun, midst the roses of Provins.How many white sails I saw as a child.They swooped o'er the waves in my dreams of the night,There was one in the starlight that floated alone,A soaring white bird against blackest horizon.How great was its beauty! I painted it brightly,And stood struck with awe at its forest of rigging.My grandfather said: "I will build you a ship,A ship of great beauty with its heart made of oak,For it is a frigate." ...But though he made me many lesser craft he never made that dreamfrigate with its oaken heart, and we never set it afloat in the pond nearthe red rosebushes with bees flying over its masts. He never built it, andyet on the real waves, after the defeat of the Commune, I recognized mydream frigate; it was the Virginie.Anyone can try to explain this childhood dream. When I saw the shipfrom my imagination appear in the real world, I had already seen toomany strange things to be moved by that new coincidence. I have seenthings that made me think of Edgar Allan Poe or Baudelaire or thenarrators of strange events; here I simply note that the Virginie breastingthe waves under full sail was the very ship I had seen in my dreams.On August 19 a black ship like the legendary Naglfar, the spectral shipof the North, came into view, sometimes crowding on sail and comingnearer, sometimes slipping back. It began to look as if it were lying inwait, and we wondered if its crew were liberators. It followed us in anintermittent fashion for two days. On the evening of the second day ourvessel did some practice maneuvers and fired two blank cannon shots,and the strange ship faded into the night. For a little while longer itwatched from a greater distance, its white sails shining like stars just overthe horizon against the depths of shadow. Then it returned no more.On August 22 sea swallows perched on our yardarms. We were insight of Palma [sic: Las Palmas], Grand Canary Island, whose whitehouses seemed to grow out of the water. From the ships we could seemountains and more mountains, piled up and mixed with the clouds.From the anchorage at Las Palmas we could see some savage rocks, twoforts, Luz and Santa Catarina [sic: Catalina], and some ruins which we92Memoirs of Louise Michelwere told were those of a customshouse. To the north, on a hilloverlooking the bay, was the citadel.The inhabitants came out to the ship in barges laden with enormousgrapes, and they acquainted us with the monetary system of the Canaries. An ounce of gold or quadruple is eighty-four francs eightycentimes, a quantity of money none of us needed to worry about. Thenthere are quarters, eighths, and sixteenths of piastres and piecettes anddemi-piecettes. There is also the real, nine of which are equal to a five-francpiece, and still others.More interesting was the type of inhabitant. Two among them weremagnificent. May science forgive me, but after looking in a number ofscientific books, I don't think I'm mistaken; the natives were theGuanches, and their ancestors had lived in Atlantis. Perhaps the Canaries are the remains of Atlantis. Why not? The tormented groundthere still shakes.On the twenty-fourth we raised anchor at 9 A.M. We followed the reefand kept seeing mountain peaks without number and without end. Inthe deep gorges between them were forests or plantations of a sombergreen with delicate green spots. The bays lay open to the northwestwind. To the west we could see Tenerife in the distance and farther stillwe could see what appeared to be a blue summit lost in the sky, but wedecided it must be masses of clouds.I can smell the bitter odor of the waves. I can hear the organlike soundof the wind in the sails and the clatter of clearing for action andmaneuvers. I can hear the whistles trilling as the sailors heaved up theanchor, snubbed it, and made it fast. I can hear the rough chafing of thecable and metal being bumped and the chants of the sailors who pushedat the capstan.I see the ship tacking, and I see our ports of call, the Canaries andthen Santa Catarina in Brazil before we turned southeastward. Thesailors spread the topsails and hauled in the sheets to hoist them. Up onthe yards the sailors let out the reefs, the canvas caught the wind andpulled away from the mast, and the land disappeared behind us.We exchanged many letters and poems across the grates of the cagesin which we were confined. Such actions were forbidden, but the guardsdid not enforce that rule. Because they treated us with consideration, wedid not break their other regulations.Until after my return from exile I saved much of that shipboardcorrespondence, but it has since been destroyed. The only fragments Istill have are a few scraps of poetry I wrote and a wonderful poem thatHenri Rochefort wrote to me, "To My Neighbor, Starboard Aft." I missthose scraps of paper on which the deportees wrote their simple lettersand verses. There was one very pretty dedication that a comrade, azealous Protestant, wrote on the flyleaf of some pious book that wasscented with myrrh and cinnamon. I tore out the dedication and kept it,Memoirs of Louise Michel93but I threw the book overboard. Some letters-a great many of themwere full of memories of those we left behind us. Those persons wouldbe less free under the surge of the triumphant reaction in France thanwe would be in the Caledonian deserts.The Virginie sailed on, ever southeastward. The sea was calm as anoilcloth, peacefully reflecting the shadow of the high yards. Then camethe stormy seas of the Cape of Good Hope. On the mountains of wavesall white with foam, all black in their depths, the eastern sun rose. Atnight millions of phosphorescent stars made constellations in the waves.How magnificent it all was!There were albatrosses,the poor albatrosses that beat their wingsagainst the ship or that the sailors caught with a hook. After snaringthem, the sailors hung them up by their beaks until they died; any othermethod of killing them might let drops of blood spot the whiteness oftheir valuable feathers. Sadly, the albatrosses would keep their heads upas long as possible, rounding their swans' necks, prolonging their pitifulagony for a moment or two. Then with one last grimace of horror theyopened wide their great, black-lidded eyes and died.I wrote a poem to them:Soar high in brilliant whiteness, birds,Fly high above the roaring waves,And beat your shining wings aroundThe tiny ship that glides away.Float in a dream on the foaming sea,Float like a scattered, roving fleet,Gleam in the light of the shining sun,For soon our men will capture you.Men to glut their petty vices,Defiling beauty, want your feathers.They mean to torture you to death.Poor flying birds, be fearful!That sort of death is not given only to an albatross. Some men killother men the same way, being very careful not to let the drops of bloodsoil either them or their victims.The Virginie sailed through polar seas far south of the Cape of GoodHope, and the air itself was frozen under a black sky in which morningmingled with evening. With every swell the vessel creaked. The sailorssang old airs from Brittany as a magical chant to keep the cold fromovertaking them, so that in the midst of polar cold, I smelled the breathof Brittany filled with the scent of genista in bloom.Finally as we sailed across the Indian Ocean, the terrible cold slackened, and for week after week we sailed across the empty seas bound forNew Caledonia.NEW CALEDONIAr-.....r-"'I.-o10050150 km~,w."""~NEWCALEDONIANEW ~ZEAL(JVSOUTHWESTERN PACIFIC~o200010003000 kmoDUCOS PENINSULA AND NOUMEA~o2134 kmNew Caledonia and the Ducos PeninsulaChapter 13Numbo, New CaledoniaLouise Michel was fortunate. Those persons sent to New Caledonia and sentencedto the most rigorous deportation lived under conditions that were tolerable, if noteasy. Basically, the authorities restricted Louise Michel and her comrades to asmall territory near Noumea at the tip of the Ducos Peninsula. The issue ofrations was insufficient, but the deportees were allowed to supplement their dietsthrough their own efforts.After Henri Rochefort's successful escape in 1874, the tyrannical GovernorAleyron replaced Governor de la Richerie, and the major problem of the deporteeswas an arbitrary administration which harassed them and cut off informationabout the world outside as much as possible. Medical care was minimal. Conditions, in fact, were more unpleasant than Michel suggests, but less severe than thegovernment had intended.Four months after the Virginie left France, we sailed into Noumeathrough one of the gaps in the double rampart of coral which surroundsthe island. Here, as at Rome, there are seven hills, which appeared blueunder an intensely blue sky. To the south was Mt. Dore, with redcrevasses of gold-bearing earth, and other mountain peaks were visiblein all directions. One mountain had split in two, forming a V, and wherethe two arms of the V met, uprooted rocks had fallen backwards intosome internal cavity. Those arid summits, those gorges torn from acataclysm and still gaping wide, those volcanic cones from which flamesspurted long ago and may erupt again-all that wilderness pleased me.As usual, the authorities tried to separate the men from the women.At first they tried to send us women up the coast to Bourail while themen stayed on the Ducos Peninsula just outside Noumea. The excusethey used was that conditions at Bourail were better, and for that veryreason we protested bitterly. If our male comrades were going to suffermore on the Ducos Peninsula, we wanted to be there with them. Thecaptain of the Virginie understood that we were right, and he made theauthorities understand, too. Finally, on the captain's orders, the Virginie's launch ferried us ashore.I can still see all the details of the site. On the Ducos Peninsula we livedon the edge of the sea near the Western Forest. Noumea was on theother side of the hills from Numbo, which was composed of earthen hutsover which creepers formed arabesques. From a distance their random96Memoirs of Louise Michelgroupings among the trees were lovely. We heard the waves beatingeternally on the reefs, and above us we saw the cracked mountain peaksfrom which torrents of water poured noisily down to the sea during thefrequent great rains. At sunset we watched the sun disappear into thesea, and in the valley the twisted white trunks of the niaoulis glowed witha silver phosphorescence.The men who had sailed with us had disembarked several days beforewe women did. When we were rowed ashore, they were waiting for us onthe beach with other comrades who had come on earlier ships, and formore than a week we were honored guests, feted from hut to hut.Our first meal was with Pere Malezieux, that old man of the June Dayswhose coat had been riddled by bullets on January 22. He had escapedfrom the slaughter without having any idea how he had survived, nordid we. I believe that the less you value your life, the more chance thereis that you will keep it.Lacour cooked a roast in a hole, the way the Kanakas do. Lacour wasthe comrade who had heard the Protestant organ playing one night atNeuilly near the Perronnet barricade. The organ had been answeringthe Versailles artillery, sometimes like a challenge, sometimes by imitating the diabolical thunder of the cannons. Lacour, along with five or sixNational Guardsmen, had pushed his way into the church oratory tothreaten the person whose playing was attracting shells to the barricade.It was I, of course. Ordered to rest, I had gone into the oratory, whichwas close to the barricade; the organ was a good one-at that time only afew notes were broken-and I had never felt in greater form. Everyonerests in his own way. In my memory I could hear a few measures of thatdance of the bombs, so Lacour was an old friend.At another feast in our honor, one given by Henri Rochefort, I met aKanaka for the first time. It was Daoumi, from Sifou. On Balzenq'sadvice, Daoumi had come dressed like a European in a high hat, whichmarred the effect of his wild man's head, and he was wearing kid gloves.With his hands thus imprisoned, Daoumi could not help Olivier Painwith the roast, nor could he help with the other preparations. That ishow I was able to get him alone and have him sing a war chant to mewhile I fed leaves to a she-goat tethered to a castor oil plant.Daoumi sang that war chant in the soft voice of the Kanakas. A threathowled through its tune in quarter tones, and the farewell at the endcame out as a true cry; the Kanakas get those quarter tones from thecyclones, just as the Arabs draw theirs from the hot and violent wind ofthe desert.Within the prison area on the Ducos Peninsula, the town of Numbogrew up little by little, each new arrival adding his own earthen hutcovered with grass. Numbo,theeastern end being the top of the crescent and containing the prison, thein the valley, was crescent-shaped,Memoirs of Louise Michel97post office, and the canteen. The other end, the western one, lay in aforest on low hills covered with salt-resistant plants. The middle of thecrescent, running along the whole length of the bays from east to west,was where we built our huts.Each person built his nest or dug his lair according to his ownimpulses. From a distance Bauer's hut was a beautiful villa. He had hunga basket in front of it filled with euphorbia that was sometimes cared for.Pere Croiset had built a chimney for his hut, and with luck you couldalmost make coffee there to celebrate the anniversary of March 18without making the roof go up in flames. G-- had ploughed up halfthe mountainside to plant crops; an onlooker would have thought hewas watching the Swiss Family Robinson. In G--'s storehouse under arock he kept a whole menagerie, in the midst of which his cat reignedsupreme. At the very top of the mountain Burlot dwelt like a lookout.You could hear the sonorous cackle of his hen, which sang out like adonkey warning him of anyone entering his place.Champy's hut on the western coast was so small that when severalpeople sat down there it was like being in a basket. When the wind blew,as it did strongly enough to tear the horns off cattle in the forest and onNou Island southwest of us in the bay, it made Champy's little basketdance.Provins had a stupendous voice and would yell across from one bay toanother, trying to chat with us across four hundred meters of water. Wecould hear him, but our responses couldn't reach him. He was the onlyone among us with such a powerful voice.Pere Malezieux had built his hut with his smithy at the edge of a largeforest, which we called Pere Malezieux's Forest. Near him lived Balzenq,a former staff member of Blanqui's newspaper, and in his hole full ofcrucibles, Balzenq distilled an essence of niaouli from the trees. At hishut you could almost believe you were visiting some alchemist. Bunantlived nearby and went into the woods with his hatchet in his belt; he andhis wife both dressed like bandits.All our operations were as primitive as the Stone Age. We had to makeour own tools, improvising as best we could for the things we lacked orthat weren't allowed in the camp.When I was living at Numbo in a hut below the infirmary, I partiallydemolished an uninhabited hut to make it into a greenhouse. Theguards were appalled at my audacity in daring to touch a buildingowned by the state. Even the deportees found my action a little brash,and speculated on what the governor-at that time de la Richeriewould do when he inspected the area and found out about it.As it turned out, I was able to get his sympathy for my experimentwhen he came. I took him inside the greenhouse and showed him sometrees standing in the best-lit corner. They were papayas which I had98Memoirs of Louise Michelvaccinated with the sap of other papayas afflicted with plant jaundice,and I wanted to keep them hidden until my experiment was completed.Governor de la Richerie understood my experiment and gave ordersthat I be allowed to continue using the greenhouse.I wanted to succeed with twenty trees before I talked about myexperiment. That was important to me because even among the deportees, where all of us were suffering for having loved liberty, prejudicestill remained. What would my comrades have said if I had talked openlyabout using vaccines on vegetables? Even when only very few personsknew what I was doing I kept hearing things like, "If it were true thatvaccines could be used against all illnesses, professors of medicine wouldalready have done it. Are you some sort of scientist that you are so busyon projects like this?"Since that time scientists have tried vaccines for rabies and cholera,just as I tried it for plant jaundice in New Caledonia. Sap is like blood,and the same principles that govern diseases of the blood apply to theillnesses of plants. If boldness is useful to experimenters, it is most usefulwhen it is employed to reason about the analogies that exist among allliving things.My four vaccinated papayas contracted jaundice, but they recovered.Perhaps they were the only ones which did not die of plant jaundice thatyear, especially on the peninsula. Before my experiment was complete,however, a new governor, the brutal and grotesque Aleyron, sent uswomen to the Bay of the West, and I don't know what became of mytrees.Governor Aleyron took over in 1874, following Henri Rochefort'sescape, and the situation of the deportees worsened greatly. GovernorAleyron's time in office was a time of desperate madness. On one side ofthe area to which we were confined was the prison itself, and underGovernor Aleyron the prison was always full. Many of our friends werelocked up there for long periods. Odious things happened. The guardsshot at any deportee who returned to his cabin after curfew, even if hewas only a few minutes late. One unfortunate man who didn't have allhis wits about him was shot at, the way somebody would have taken aimat a rabbit, because he came back a little late to his plot. At roll calls therewere similar insults, and as punishment the deportees were deprived ofbread.The comical thing-there is always something comical-was thatAleyron set sentries around Numbo at night, and their calls in the midstof silence created an operatic effect. The sentries cast black shadows asthey stood under the full moonlight which came over the peaks. Downfrom the top of the mountains we heard the clear night echo to,"Sentinels, take care." It was almost as if I were at a performance of theTour de Nesles on an immensely enlarged stage, and I admit I enjoyed theMemoirs of Louise Michel99spectacle greatly. Some of the sentries had beautiful, deep voices, andchance picked them to begin. But then their voices grew hoarse and theeffect palled.Even under Aleyron and Admiral Ribourt, who was on the islandinvestigating Rochefort's escape, I was able to smuggle a few letters out.They described the illegal actions of Governor Aleyron, and they tell thestory of our transfer from Numbo to the Bay of the West.Numbo, New Caledonia18 April 1875Dear friends:From the publicity given the revelations made by those who haveescaped recently, you ought to know, more or less, the situation of thedeportees. You oughtthe abuses of authority whichMessieurs Ribourt, Aleyron, and their consorts are guilty of.to know aboutUnder Admiral Ribourt our letters were opened and read, as if the fewpersons who had survived the slaughter of 1871 still struck fear into theassassins across the ocean.Under Colonel Aleyron, the hero of the Lobau barracks, a guard fired ata deportee sitting in his own hut. That deportee had unknowingly crossedthe boundary to look for firewood. Earlier another guard had shot atCroiset's dog, which was lying between the legs of his master, and I don'tknow whether the guard was aiming at the man or the dog.So many things have happened since then. It seems to me that I'm goingto forget something, because there is so much to tell, but I'll remembersooner or later.You have already learned that the guards cut off the bread ration of thedeportees who showed up for roll call but did not line up in two rows in amilitary fashion. The deportation laws do not require them to line up thatway, and their protest was vigorous but peaceful. It showed that thedeportees had not forgotten solidarity, in spite of the divisions broughtabout among us by people foreign to our cause, whom the administratorsthe guards have cut offhave deliberately mixed with us. Since then,supplies to forty-five deportees, allowing them to receive only bread, salt,and dried vegetables. Their only crime was showing their hostility to a jobthat existed solely in the officials' imagination.Four women have also been deprived of supplies on the charge thattheir conduct and morality left something to be desired. That charge isfalse. The husband of one of those women, the deportee Langlois, responded vehemently because his wife had given him no grounds fordiscontent. For defending his wife against those slanders, he was sentenced to eighteen months in prison and fined 3000 francs.Verlet says that the deportee Henry Place also spoke up for the womanwho is his companion, the conduct of whom merits the respect of all thedeportees. Place nevertheless was sentenced to six months in prison andfined 500 francs. Even worse, nothing can bring his child back to life. Thechild was born while Place was imprisoned awaiting trial, and it died as a100Memoirs of Louise Michelconsequence of the torments suffered by its mother, who was nursing it.Place was never allowed to see his child alive.The courageous and dignified Cipriani was sentenced to eighteenmonths in prison and fined 3000 francs. Nourny was treated the same wayletters that they clearlyfor writing insolentdeserved.letters to the authorities,Recently, Citizen Malezieux, the dean of the deportees, was seated oneevening in front of his hut chatting with several deportees who work withhim. A drunken guard accused him of disturbing the peace at night andstruck him, whereupon Malezieux was put in prison.Our beloved conquerors mix the droll with the harsh. They have drawnup lists to give deportees rewards for hard work or to cut off provisionsfrom persons being disciplined. It turns out that the people who haveworked the hardest since their arrival have been put on the list to be cut offfrom provisions. One deportee is on both lists at the same time: the list ofthose being punished for refusing to work and the list of those to receiverewards for special diligence, both lists being printed in the official Journalde Noumea.At the evening roll call a few days before Captain de Pritzbuer took overfrom Aleyron as governor, a guard with a bad reputation threatened thedeportees with his revolver in his hand. That challenge and many otherssince merit the deepest scorn.It is very probable that in the future there will be new lists of persons cutoff from provisions. Work doesn't really exist because communicationshave been cut off for too long for anyone to try anything. Moreover, forsome of the deportees to continue their old professions would requiresome basic expenditures which it is impossible for them to make.Telling all these things will serve to tear the veil completely away fromthe events in New Caledonia. It will show just where the hatred of thevictors can descend, and that is useful to know. But not to imitate them, forwe are neither butchers nor jailers. We need to know and publicize theexploits of the party of order so that its defeat will be complete.Farewell. I'll see you soon, perhaps, if the situation requires those of uswho don't value our lives highly to risk them to escape, so that we can tellpeople about the crimes our lords and masters are committing here in NewCaledonia.Louise Michel, number 1At the end of this letter of 18 April 1875 I went on to talk about anescape plan Mme Rastoul and I had worked out. Mme Rastoullived inAustralia, and we developed our plan through letters we smuggled fromthe Ducos Peninsula to Sydney and back hidden in the bottom of a boxof sewing materials.The plan was that one night after roll call I was to climb over themountain and get to the Northern Forest. There I would get on the roadthat ran through the Northern Forest, and if I observed three or fourrisky precautions as I followed it, I would finally enter Noumea throughthe cemetery. Meanwhile, Mme Rastoul would arrange for someone toMemoirs of Louise Michel101smuggle me aboard the mail packet to Sydney. When I arrived in SydneyI would tell about the actions of Aleyron and Ribourt, inspiring theEnglish, I hoped, to send a brig crewed by bold sailors. I would returnon the brig to rescue the other deportees, or if I failed to move theEnglish, I would return alone.It was the sewing box containing the plan which failed to return.When I finally came through Sydney after I was legally repatriated, Ilearned from Mme Rastoul (now Mme Henry) that at the moment whenI was supposed to receive the message to carry out our escape plan,someone handed our sewing box over to the authorities.I have no idea why the New Caledonian administration never spoke tome about those plans for escape they had intercepted, but it may havebeen one motive behind sending us women from Numbo to the Bay ofthe West.A month after I wrote the letter to my friends about the evil acts ofGovernor Aleyron and his guards, we women were ordered to movefrom Numbo to the Bay of the West, which is also on the DucosPeninsula, and I wrote another letter describing those events.Ducos Peninsula9 June 1875Dear friends,Here are the official transfer papers 1 have spoken to you about. Weconsented to the transfer only after our protests had been satisfied. Weprotested two points: first, the way the transfer was ordered; and second,the manner in which we were to live in the new huts.Whether we occupied this corner or that corner of the peninsula madeno difference to us, but we couldn't endure the insolence of the first orderthe administration posted, and we had the right to set our conditions andnot consent to change residence until those conditions were met.That is what we did.Here is a copy of the first order, dated 19 May 1875 and posted atNumbo. That was the way we got the government's orders-by proclamation.19 MAY 1875By ORDER OF THE GOVERNMENT THE DEPORTEDWOMEN WHOSE NAMES FOLLOW WILL LEAVE THECAMP OF NUMBO ON THE TWENTIETH OF THE CURRENT MONTHTO GO TO LIVE ON THE BAY OF THE WEST IN THELODGINGS ASSIGNED TO THEMLOUISE MICHEL, NUMBER 1MARIE SCHMIT, NUMBER 3MARIE CAILLEUX, NUMBER 4ADELE DESFOSSES, NUMBER 5NATHALIE LEMEL, NUMBER 2MME DUPRE, NUMBER 6102Memoirs of Louise MichelWe protested. Here are our two letters of protest, the first fromMme Lemel.Numbo, 20 May 1875The deportee Nathalie Duval (Mme Lemel) doesnot refuse to live in the hut to which the administrationassigns her, but she wishes to call attention to thefollowing points.First, she cannot move herself;Second, she cannot procure the wood necessary forcooking her food and saw it up herself;Third, she has already built two hen housesand cultivated a garden;Fourth, through the authority of the law ondeportation which reads, "The deportees will beable to live in groups or in families," the depor-tees have the right to choose the persons with whomthey wish to establish relationships. The saiddeportee Nathalie Duval (Mme Lemel) refuses communallife except under those conditions.(signed) Nathalie Duval (Mme Lemel) , number 2I sent the authorities my protest, too.Numbo, 20 May 1875The deportee Louise Michel, number 1, proteststhe measure which assigns a domicile far from thecamp to the women deportees, as if their presence inthe camp was a scandal. The same law governs bothmale and female deportees; no unmerited insult shouldbe added.I cannot go to this new domicile unless theadministration publicly posts its motives for sendingus there.The deportee Louise Michel declares that if thosemotives are insulting, she will be obliged to protestto the end, no matter what happens to her.Louise Michel, number 1The day after our protests, we were warned to be ready to move duringthe day, an order we hastened not to obey. We were firmly resolved not toleave Numbo until the authorities acceded to our just protests. We declared we were ready to go to the prison if they wished, but we wouldcertainly not bother to move as they had ordered. We affirmed, however,that once the insolent proclamation was corrected and our lodgingsarranged in such a way that we wouldn't disturb each other, we had noreason to prefer one place to another.Memoirs of Louise Michel103The head guard was very annoyed with us. Toward evening he came onhorseback so he would appear more imposing, but his horse kept breakingwind, which spoiled the effect. And then, bored with the long pause hismaster made in front of our huts, the horse ran back to the military campmore swiftly than his rider wished.Three or four days later, the governor and the territorial commandingofficer came to our huts. They promised to accede to our demands byputting up a second proclamation, and they agreed to separate us in littlehuts where we would be able to live in twos and threes as we wished. Thusat the Bay of the West we would be allowed to group ourselves accordingto our trades.They fulfilled a part of their commitments immediately, but so long asthey weren't met totally, it was impossible for them to make us leaveNumbo. Their problem was that there were no places for us in the prison,so they decided to meet our demands completely. Now we are at the Bay ofthe West. It is sad for Mme Lemel, who is so sick she can scarcely walk.That's why I'm not rejoicing in the nearness of the forest I love so much.Without passion or anger, that is the story of our transfer.Bay of the West, 9 June 1875Louise Michel, numberThe administration gave in to our rebellion because it would have hadgreater problems if it had not; there was no special prison in which tokeep a half-dozen women. But in June 1875 I made a new beginning atthe Bay of the West.Chapter 14The Bay of the WestWhen I was forced to go to the Bay of the West, I had a greateropportunity to observe the countryside that I loved. Between the Western Forest and the sea, there is a band of volcanic rocks, some standinglike the menhirs at Karnak, others affecting monstrous poses, one evenlooking like an enormous rose with a few broken petals. At high tide thesea prevents people who are fearful of the water from prowling around.Dominating the Western Forest is the signal post. Covered with swallowsresting on its supports, the signal post appears from afar to be a gigantictree with spreading branches, and from their resting places the talkativeswallows gossip with each other.The forest was beautiful. Lianas cover it with creepers twice a year,their branches floating in the air or thrown in mad arabesques. Almostall of them have white or yellow flowers, but different varieties of lianahave differently shaped leaves. Some are like arrowheads in the tarot,others like lanceheads, and still others like grape leaves. Others haveleaves that look like cut glass.There is another creeper with grape leaves which are fragile andtransparent and covered with a sort of down, like a French plum. It hasflat, checkered seeds covered with a vermillion fruit, like the jellyfish thatcyclones scrape up from the bottom of the sea and throw on the beach.The woods are red with indigenous tomatoes about the size of Frenchcherries. They climb high up through the shade, and, like strawberries,they put out fruit where the sun reaches through. There are figs whichsmell like ashes, fat mulberries covered with an odorless white coatinglike sugar, and yellow plums with an enormous round pit. Most peoplesaid the fruits weren't fit to eat, but I liked them; indeed, I preferredthem to European fruit. I particularly liked gathering them from bushesbetween the rocks in the profound silence of the forest. Then all Ineeded was a light breeze from the sea and some good letter from mymother or Marie in my pocket.There are berries which look like black currants. They have a fragrantaroma, although each cluster of fruit yields scarcely half a drop ofjuice.It has the bouquet of a very strong madeira, and I believe it could befermented to make a liquor that would comfort the sick.Memoirs of Louise Michel105When I walked in the Western Forest, I saw few niaoulis, which areuncommon there but plentiful on the high slopes that crown the DucosPeninsula. On dark nights the niaoulis give off a phosphorescence, andin the light of the full moon their branches rise up weeping like the armsof giants crying over the enslavement of the earth.In the midst of the Western Forest, deep in a gorge between littleknolls still impregnated with the bitter odor of the sea, there is animmense tree very like a European olive tree, and its branches stretchout horizontally, like a larch. No insect ever lands on its bitter-tastingblack leaves, and no matter what the time of day or season, there is agrottolike coolness in its shadow, refreshing to thought as well as body.Above it, enveloping a whole rock with its archings, was a banyan tree,which was cut down in the last year of our exile. Never have I seenstranger insects than those that lived in the clefts of worn-away rockunder the shadow of that banyan tree. If we hadn't been forbidden tohave alcohol, I would have been able to preserve some of them.Once and sometimes twice a year a gray snow enveloped the peninsula, sometimes ankle deep and whirling around. It was locusts. Noisescared them away temporarily, but they always returned, and eventuallythey devoured the forests and the cultivated lands alike. Leaves, vegetables, tender grass, old bushes-everything except the trunks of the treeswas eaten.If they appeared a second time, it was because the eggs of the firstwave had hatched in the bushes. They remained there wingless for atime before flying out to devour the second crop and then to go offelsewhere to destroy the vegetation of some other area, lay eggs, and die.Perhaps men could sweep the locusts into deep trenches, and cover themwith enough earth to blanket the smell; then the locusts would become arich fertilizer.Nothing was as beautiful as the gray and turbulent snow of the locusts.Their uniform color filled the whole sky, and the insects filtered thesun's rays, making it look as if the sunlight were coming through a sieve.From the sky, gray flakes fell in a strangely blurred chiaroscuro.Only as a last resort did the locusts attack the castor oil plants thatgrew everywhere; and often they left those plants completely untouched. So castor oil silkworms could be raised in New Caledonia, andthey are esteemed in the Indies almost as highly as the mulberrysilkworms. For ten years I wrote asking scholars to send me castor oilsilkworm eggs. In telling this story I beg the pardon of those savants whosent them to me, but they always sent the eggs first to Paris. From therethey came through the mail to me half across the world, and they alwaysdied in transit. Yet ships came to Noumea which had just stopped at thevery places from which those eggs had been sent to France. During thelast year of my exile, after thoroughly cursing the manners and customs106Memoirs of Louise Michelof scholars who do nothing the simple way, I found some castor oilplants covered with worms that looked like silkworm moths. Perhapssilkworms exist in the wild in New Caledonia, and I will know someday.New Caledonia is the paradise of spiders, too, among them a silk-spinning spider. It spins a tent of gauze and might be useful for mankind.The natives respect spiders because they think spiders destroycockroaches. They even allow an enormous, black, hairy-legged varietyto run free in their houses for that purpose. The Kanakas also esteem afat white spider, which looks like a giant hazelnut, for its fine taste; theyesteem it as highly as the locusts, which they eat like shrimp.Another spider is a real monster. It exploits the work of little spiderswho live in its web and repair it. Does the big spider eat them eventually?Probably, unless their work is more profitable than the nourishmentthey provide.At the top of the high knolls in the Western Forest, enormous rockshave collapsed like the ruins of fortresses and have been covered overwith pink heather, fragile creepers, and fragrant flowers. Among thoseruined rocks lives a brown spider, as hairy as a bear. The female attachesthe male to her web, and when he no longer pleases her, she devourshim. That is the opposite of the human species.No New Caledonian insect has a venom that affects humans yet; theyhave known man for too short a time. Even the animals that use poisonsagainst each other cannot harm man.Even the water serpents pose no threat to man. Their fangs are tooshort, and their species is disappearing everywhere. Those serpents arelarge and very beautiful. Some have white and black rings; others havepatches of white and black. Some of us tamed them, and for a long time Ikept one in a water hole I dug, but I had to let it go free because myoidcat was terrified by it and constantly provoked it by spitting in its face.The serpent might have ended up by smothering her in its coils;certainly it followed her movements with its little reptile eyes filled withan expression that held very little sympathy.On the mountain slope near the prison was the post office, its verandacovered with creepers. To send a letter to France and have it answeredtook six to eight months. At the end of my stay in New Caledonia, itregularly took only six months. On mail days, we climbed that hillanxiously at the exact hour set. Oh dear, beloved letters! With whatecstasy I received them. My mother wrote me the longest letters, and Iawaited news from her with great joy.Another frequent correspondent was M. de Fleurville, the inspectorof the Montmartre schools, who had taken charge of my affairs inParis-mostly a certain number of debts. At his own expense he got myContes d'enfants published: I had written it while I was in the Auberiveprison. M. de Fleurville wrote to me in New Caledonia about newdiscoveries because he knew we were not allowed newspapers.Memoirs of Louise Michel107I am reliving those days. I am walking down the hill with my letters inmy hands: Marie's, full of flowers; M. de Fleurville's, a good half ofwhich he devoted to scolding me the way he had in Montmartre; mymother's, in which she assured me she was still strong. At the beginningof last December she was still telling me she was well, just as she hadduring those years in New Caledonia, and forbidding anyone to tell meabout her illness.Coming back from the post office to the Bay of the West, I amfollowing the edge of the sea. The pungent and powerful odor of the seafills the air and smells good. Walking on the path, I hear guitar musiccoming from L--'s hut played on the guitar Pere Croiset has madehere in Numbo. It is so nice on shore, but I cannot keep from thinkingabout the prisoners on Nou Island only two kilometers away across thewater. They are forced to live under the most severe conditions and arefar more afflicted than we are. It is there that the best of us are lockedup. We are hungry for news of them, but news is difficult to get througha thousand obstacles.I see those silent beaches at the edge of the sea, where suddenly a fightbetween crabs splashes the water under the mangroves. Nothing butwild nature and deserted waves exists any more.And the cyclones. Once you've seen them you are sated with theterrible splendors brought by the fury of the elements. It is the wind, thewaves, the sea, which the old songs sang about. A cyclone seems to carryyou away amidst the howling of a terrible choir; wings carry you, andthey beat between the dark of the sky and the black of the waves.Sometimes an immense red fork of lightning tears the shadows andleaves a glimmer of purple against which the blackness of the wavesfloats like a mourning band. Thunder, the harsh sounds of the waves,the alarm gun firing in warning, the noise of water pouring in torrents,the enormous blast of the wind-all that is only one sound, immense andsuperb, the orchestra of frenzied nature.Our first cyclone took place at night. Those are the most beautifulones. On the Ducos Peninsula the barometer had fallen to its lowestpoint. No single refreshing breeze stirred, and the air had announcedthe coming cyclone since morning. The animals became uneasy, andeverybody took his beasts into his own house. Having taken in my goatand my cats, I got an idea which I wanted to tell to Perusset, a formership captain. There was no time to lose.With some difficulty I followed the path to Numbo. Evening wasfalling, and the storm was beginning. I got to his house, one of the firsthouses on the side of the Western Forest where I used to live, andknocked."Who's there in this weather? Idiot," came from within. "Who'sthere?" Still grumbling, Perusset opened his door."I came to look for you," I said.108Memoirs of Louise Michel"Why?""The boat that guards the harbor isn't rowing around any more. Itwon't be in the harbor the rest of the night. On a raft we could float offwith the cyclone and be carried to the next landfall. Sydney, probably.To an old sea dog like you they would give a brig to sail back and get theothers."But I flattered Perusset in vain. I called him an old salt, an old pirate,and so forth, but my vocabulary was soon exhausted. Perusset simplylooked at me silently. He was a scholar, and knowledge makes you think;it is a bar to action, for it prevents you from surrendering yourself gladlyto the unknown.Finally, very gravely, he said, "In the first place we have nothing tomake a raft with.""There are some old barrels," I said. "We could fasten them together.""Where do we get them?" he asked."Wherever we find them," I said. "At the canteen. Wherever.""Even if we had them, how do we know where we'll land?""Luck," I said. "We must take our chances.""A thousand to none we'd die.""Well," I said, "we'll take the one chance you call 'none.' "Thus we argued while the storm unfolded and the rain began."Do you want me to escort you back?" Perusset asked. He was uneasyabout the path."No," I yelled. "I don't need you." I slammed his door shut in his face.I heard his lamp fall, poor old man. He opened the door, but I hadalready moved away, and I cried from afar, ''I'm with many others." Itold him five or six names. "Go back. Eight of us are leaving.""Are you sure?""Of course, I wouldn't lie."But it wasn't true. I was all alone, and when you're angry it's better tobe alone. Keeping to the rocks, I returned to the Bay of the West. Howbeautiful it was. I no longer thought about Perusset or anything else. Ilooked not only with my eyes, but with all my heart.Like night grabbing day the sea rose up on the rocks where I stood.Enormous claws of foam, completely white, stretched out toward me.From the waves came a sound like a death rattle deep in someone's chest.I finally returned to my hut and changed clothes because mine weresoaked.The young people who were my students gradually gathered at myhut as the storm increased its intensity. They were afraid somethingwould happen to me, so they came."We almost got bowled over by the wind," they said."I know," I answered.And, I reflected, if only I had thought of those young people to crewmy raft. If only Perusset's title of sea captain hadn't dazzled me. ForMemoirs of Louise Michel109there certainly was no question of navigating during a cyclone; you onlysurrender to it. Those young people would have found what we neededto make a raft, and then we would have tempted fate. Now there was nolonger time to do it.I began to look around to see as much as I had eyes for, to absorb thisnight in which everything collapsed, moaned, howled. Whatever you seeat any given moment has its usefulness and beauty. Across the torrentsof rain, as if across a crystal veil, the lightning bolts showed splendid withhorror.How silent it was the next day! Thrown together in the river mouthwere flotsam torn from the bowels of the sea and pieces of wreckagefrom the peninsula and Nou Island. And the chance for escape duringthe cyclone had passed, for the guard boat had resumed its monotonouspatrol.On a branch torn from the forest a female bird sat on a nest above herlittle ones. The cyclone had carried them away without destroying theirnest, and the little birds had not fallen out during their terrible voyage;the mother bird must have held them pressed down under her body.Among humans during fires or other disasters, some terrified parentsforget their children while fleeing. I picked up the branch and fastenedit to a gum tree as well as I could. The birds would be better off therethan on the ground.Month by month, deportees kept arriving at the Ducos Peninsula.When I first got there, few of the condemned of the Commune had yetbeen sent out. They continued to arrive until just before the amnestywhich the people forced the government to grant.From the time we first arrived, each mail brought illusions to thehomesick and those hopes pushed them into their graves. Those exilescould have mastered their yearning to return if only they hadn't nurtured premature hopes which disillusionment later crushed. In vain wecautioned them that the average deportation lasts ten years. We toldthem too much blood had flowed for the government to allow us toreturn. But they preferred to dream those fallacious dreams that killedthem rather than to listen to the voice of reason. Too many times Iwalked in funeral corteges dressed in a clean white frock, the flower of awild cotton plant in my buttonhole, mourning some father of a family oflittle children, for during the first days of exile it was the fathers of smallchildren who were most likely to leave for the deliverance of death.When I had disembarked on the Ducos Peninsula the first person Ihad asked about was Verdure.I had seen him only once since 4September 1870, when we had gathered saplings for liberty trees fromthe garden of the Tuileries. My mother kept one of them alive forseveral years, but it perished in the glacial winter just before my return.During the days of the fighting, we hadn't had enough time to see ourfriends, and I had hoped to find Verdure in New Caledonia and help110Memoirs of Louise Michelhim to teach the young people. But just before my arrival Verdure haddied of grief at receiving no news from home. Only a few days after hisdeath a bundle ofletters arrived for him. Poor Verdure! Now he sleepsover there, and I took over his pupils alone.Many of the best of us have stayed on in New Caledonia because theyfell into the great sleep. Some of those ghosts are good, others terrifying.Muriot, the suicide, sleeps under a niaouli which twists its white, desolatebranches like the limbs of some specter. Blanche Arnold, who lived likethe sweet flowers on the liana, died on the voyage home. She does not liein the ground; instead she sleeps under the waves. In the earth of NewCaledonia little Theophile Place lies in his coffin, his tiny hands foldedaround the stanzas written in honor of his birth. Over his tomb, aeucalyptus grows. There lies Eugenie Tiffault, a beautiful girl with darkblue eyes who died at the age of sixteen. For her tomb Henri Lucienmade a terra cotta statue which survived the cyclones until after ourdeparture. The comrades on New Caledonia cultivated flowers on all thegraves.Down the hill from the cemetery, mangroves intertwine, sometimesbeating back the ocean, sometimes being recaptured by the waves.Above the cemetery is a rock of rose marble on which I would have likedsomeone to have inscribed the names of those buried there.Wreaths from France still cover the grave of Passedouet, the journalist. Passedouet died a little before I returned; he had been sick a longtime, and his memory had failed. In spite of all his wife's care, it seemedthat his last moments were approaching and that he would never leavehis bed again, so I was astonished when I encountered him at the Bay ofthe West, when only the evening before I had seen him look very ill.Now his mind was clear. He stopped to rest at the women's huts in theforest, and he chatted almost the way he used to do, but he was very pale,and his legs were trembling.I didn't dare to tax him with explaining how he had undertaken thistrip alone, but I suspected his wife must be very uneasy over his absence.So I proposed that I return with him to Numbo, where he lived, and heaccepted.Leaning rather heavily on my arm, he walked very well. When wereached the heights between the Ndie Bay and the Bay of the West, fromwhere we could see the buildings of the convict prison on Nou Island,reddish on the horizon, Passedouet drew himself up to his full height.He stretched out his long, gaunt arm toward the prison, and said to me,biting off each syllable:"Proudhon was right. Every reform we've ever tried to make keeps thesame causes for disasters, the same inequalities, the same antagonisms.Proudhon said it: 'The men who produce everything get only povertyand death in return.' The best commercial treaties of a nation onlyMemoirs of Louise Michel111protect exploiters. People will end all that. But how much pain, howmuch evil. ... "Now reciting Proudhon word for word, now developing ideas in shortphrases separated by rather long intervals, Passedouet remained standing there with his arm stretched out toward Nou Island. It was thePassedouet of the old days. But he was a phantom getting ready to rejointhe slaughtered of '71. Several times he repeated: "Proudhon. Proudhon."Then he became silent, and said almost no word after that. We walkedon to Numbo where, as I had expected, they were looking for him. Helived only a few more days, and we never knew why he had come to theBay of the West.But that is the way I remember him now: standing on the heights, hisarm outstretched toward Nou Island and giving the last light of hisreason, the last breath of his body, to the day of deliverance.And it will come.That same hope for liberty and bread was in the hearts of theKanakas. They rebelled in 1878, seeking liberty and dignity. Not all ofmy comrades approved of their rebellion as strongly as I did. One dayBauer and I were talking about the revolt of the Kanakas, a burningquestion on the Ducos Peninsula. We started speaking so loudly that aguard ran over from the post office thinking that a riot had broken out.He withdrew, very disconcerted, when he saw there were only two of us.As a general statement, Michel's explanation for the Kanaka rebellion issufficient, but more specifically, the French settlers were displacing the nativesfrom the land; the introduction of a large number of cattle caused seriousproblems. The natives felt that French labor practices were, at best, deceptive, andthe French males were casual in carrying off native women. Precipitating theinsurrection was a serious drought in some areas in 1877, which caused Frenchcattle to destroy native crops.That argument was about not only the Kanakas, but also about aKanaka play. Bauer accused me of wanting to put on a Kanaka play, andI didn't deny it. We deportees had a real theater on the hill aboveNumbo. It had its directors, its actors, its stagehands, its sets, and itsboard of directors. This theater was a masterpiece, given the conditionsunder which we were living. Every Sunday we used to go to the theater.We put on everything there: dramas, vaudeville, operettas. We evensang fragments of an opera, Robert the Devil, although we didn't have allthe score.True, the leading women usually had deep, booming voices, and theirhands kept searching in their skirt pockets as if they were looking for acigar. Even my court-martial dress, which was very long, left their feetuncovered to the ankles, for some of our leading ladies were tall. They112Memoirs of Louise Michellengthened their skirts finally, and then nothing was lacking in theircostumes.Wolowski trained the chorus. They were talking about an orchestrawhen I left the peninsula for Noumea. I had my own ideas for anorchestra: I wanted to shake palm branches, strike bamboo, create ahorn from shells, and use the tones produced by a leaf pressed againstthe lips. In short, I wanted a Kanaka orchestra, complete with quartertones. Thanks to knowledge I had gotten from Daoumi and the Kanakaswho brought supplies, I believed I knew enough to try. But my plan wasblocked by the Committee of Light Classical Theater. Indeed,theyaccused me of being a savage.To some comrades I seemed to be more Kanaka than the Kanakas.They argued a bit, so to make the situation a little more interesting, Ispoke of putting on a Kanaka play whose text was wearing out mypocket. I even talked about performing the play dressed in black tights,and I added a few more details designed to exasperate those people.The incident took its normal course, rousing my adversaries and amusing me deep within.The revolt of the tribes was deadly serious, but it is better if I say littleabout it. The Kanakas were seeking the same liberty we had sought inthe Commune. Let me say only that my red scarf, the red scarf of theCommune that I had hidden from every search, was divided in twopieces one night. Two Kanakas, before going to join the insurgentsagainst the whites, had come to say goodbye to me.They slipped into the ocean. The sea was bad, and they may neverhave arrived across the bay, or perhaps they were killed in the fighting. Inever saw either of them again, and I don't know which of the twodeaths took them, but they were brave with the bravery that black andwhite both have.There is the legend-perhaps it is a story-of Andia, the bard withlong hair, Andia the Takala, who sang his songs and was killed in combatby the side of Atai [a historical figure, the leader of the insurrection of1878]. Andia had an olive complexion, and the build of a dwarf with anenormous head and crooked legs; his body was as crooked as a niaouli,but his heart was brave. In his blue eyes the light sparkled, and he diedfor liberty at the hands of a traitor, when Atai, too, was struck down.May traitors everywhere be cursed!From the traditions of the Kanakas or from the resources of hismusical ear, Andia discovered, or rediscovered, the lute. The Kanakashave their bamboo and shell instruments, and they also have a bagpipe;the legends say it was first made by Naina from the skin of a traitor. Inthis tradition, Andia made a lute, with strings of catgut taken from oneof the degenerate, wild descendants of the cats Captain Cook abandonedin the forests here.Memoirs of Louise Michel113It took a traitor and a white military expedition to kill Atai: and Andia.Under Kanaka practice a chief can be struck only by a chief or bysomeone appointed by another chief. One chief had sold out to thewhites and appointed Segou to kill Atai:, even giving him the weaponwith which to kill him. Segou went out with the white militia columnsand spotted Atai: between the huts and Amboa; Atai: was returning to hisown encampment with some of his people. Segou ran out from amidstthe white soldiers and pointed out the great chief Atai:, who wasrecognizable because of his snow-white hair. Atai: had his sling wrappedaround his forehead and carried a gendarmarie saber in his right handand a small axe in his left. Around him were his three sons and the bardAndia, who was armed with a short spear.Atai: turned to face the column of whites and noticed Segou."There you are," he cried out.The traitor Segou faltered for a moment under the look of the oldchief, but then, wanting it all to be over, he threw his short spear at Atai:and it pierced the old chief's right arm. Atai: raised his axe in his lefthand as his sons were shot down around him, one killed and the otherswounded.Andia lunged forward crying out, "A curse on you. A curse on you,"but he was shot dead instantly.Then Segou moved in against the wounded Atai:, and with his own axestruck blow after blow, the way he would have chopped at a tree.Atai: fell, and Segou grabbed at his partially severed head. He struckhim several more blows, and Atai: was finally dead. Seeing Atai: fall atSegou's hands, the Kanakas unleashed their death cry in an echo to themountains. The Kanakas love the brave.AtaI's head was sent to Paris, but I don't know what happened to thebard Andia's.To keep memory alive, I have translated one of Andia's war chants.The TakataGathered adoueke in the forest,Adoueke, the shield herb,In the moonlight, adoueke,The war herb,The spirit plant.The warriorsDivided adouike.It makes them fierceAnd charms their wounds.The spiritsOf their fathersMake a storm.They are waitingFor the brave.114Memoirs of Louise MichelThe braveAre welcome.Friends or enemies,They are welcomeBeyond this life.Those who wish to liveGo back.War is come.Blood will flowOver the earthLike water.The adouekeMust be blood.The Kanakan Insurrection of 1878 failed. The strength and longingof human hearts was shown once again, but the whites shot down therebels as we were mowed down in front of Bastion 37 and on the plainsof Satory. When they sent the head of Atai' to Paris, I wondered who thereal headhunters were; as Henri Rochefort had once written to me, "theVersailles government could give the natives lessons in cannibalism."After I had stayed on the Ducos Peninsula for five years, first atNumbo and then at the Bay of the West, I was allowed to go to Noumeaas a schoolmistress. There it was easier for me to study the country, and Iwas able to see Kanakas of various tribes. I even had some in my Sundayclasses, a whole horde of them at my house in Noumea.Shortly after I left the peninsula, some of my friends who had been atNou Island arrived there, and I went back to welcome them. It was ajoyful occasion for the deportees. We loved them more than the othersbecause they had suffered more. That made them as proud as they hadbeen during the May Days. We sat at the edge of the sea on rocks, andevents came back to us, rising like the waves.After the human beehive of Paris, any crowd looked small to us. Afterwe had crossed the entire world to New Caledonia, any voyage seemedshort to us. Days became crowded together without our really thinkingabout them, as if we turned the hourglass each year. Days fell upon daysin the silence, and all the past swirled around us like the gray snow oflocusts.Chapter 15Noumea and the ReturnDuring my exile I used to let my mind return to France. From time totime down there in New Caledonia, with my gaze fixed on the sea andmy thoughts free in space, I used to see the years gone by. I inhaledagain the odor of roses in the yard, the hay just mown and lying in thesummer sun, and the bitter reek of hemp. I saw it all again: thousands ofdetails which had made no impression on me when they had occurredfloated up from the depths of my memory. I discovered the sacrifices mymother had uncomplainingly made for me. She would have given meher very blood as piece by piece she had let me take everything wepossessed so that I could promote ideas she didn't share. All she everwanted was to live near me in some quiet corner, in some village schoollost in the woods.Now that I have returned to France I let my thoughts roam free inspace to New Caledonia. After the cyclones I witnessed there, I nolonger gaze at the European storms I used to love so much. I had seenmy first cyclone at night while I was on the Ducos Peninsula. I saw mysecond cyclone by day at Noumea. It was beautiful, but less grand thanthe cyclone at night had been, even though sheet-metal roofs went flyingabout like immense butterflies. The sea clamored with rage. The rainsoaked us; it didn't fall so much as pour down like an ocean. The needleof the compass went wild and searched for north with anguish. Greatgusts of wind struck in the midst of the roar of sea and rain, and yet thedramatic effect was less awesome; perhaps I was becoming as sated withstorms as I was with other things.I had pardoned Perusset a long time before for failing to help meescape during the first cyclone, and while I was living in Noumea hedied. Although he had done many other bold things, he had refused tohelp me escape, perhaps because he felt he had trusted his luck toooften, and to have put blindly to sea would have been to provoke fate.Men, like beasts, have an instinct that warns them of danger, and whenwe think too much, we lose that ability. A horse has no hesitation insurrendering to instinct and can find the road hidden beneath the snowwhen its lost rider loosens the reins in desperation. Perhaps if Perussethad listened to me, we would have arrived in Sydney the way other waifshave dropped anchor there.116Memoirs of Louise MichelThe authorities allowed me to leave the Ducos Peninsula and move toNoumea early in 1879. Those who had a profession and could beself-supporting were given a measure of freedom; so I went to Noumeato teach. There I taught not only the children of the white colonists, butalso the Kanakas, and among those I taught was Daoumi's brother.It was fitting that I should teach him, because Daoumi was the firstKanaka I had met in New Caledonia, when he had come to Rochefort'sbanquet. After that first meeting with Daoumi, I saw him again manytimes. To practice European life he got ajob at the canteen on the DucosPeninsula, and when I talked to him I got him to tell me the legends ofthe Kanakas, and he gave me vocabulary lists. For my part, I tried to tellhim the things I believed it was most important for him to know.Daoumi himself, though he was the son of a chief of Lifon, was almostEuropean through living with whites. He knew how to read perfectly, hiswriting wasn't any worse than many others, and even under the miserable stovepipe hat which he had had the naivete to burden himself with,he had the air of Othello.He introduced his brother to me, a magnificent wild man withglittering teeth and wide phosphorescent pupils. He was dressed in theKanakan manner, which is in nothing at all, and he spoke French, whichis harsher than Kanakan dialects, with difficulty.There is a story that a certain white woman loved Daoumi and nearlydied of grief when her parents refused her permission to marry him.When I went to Noumea, I found that the white girl who had lovedDaoumi was still living, but that Daoumi had died, and Daoumi's brotherhad taken over the project of learning about European life. It is he whowill return to his tribe with knowledge, and he who will derive thebenefits from it.That handsome wild man had begun to dress in a strange costume hebelieved was European. He had already learned how to read, and hecame to my house to learn to write. There we used to speak aboutDaoumi and of the long-shadowed past of his tribe.I do not know if the traditions which say that another race lived wheretheir own was established are founded in fact or not, but the legends thatare connected with them are too numerous for there to be no truth inthem, all things considered. I don't know the evidence for the argumentthat people make about some mainland Asian tribes being the same typeas some Oceanic ones. But I believe that the so-called albinos seen byCook and others in this part of the world were not albinos, but the lastrepresentatives of an Aryan branch, having long hair and, most of all,blue eyes, which are not albino characteristics. These Aryans, lost insome migration or in some geological revolution, lived on, marryingamong themselves and among the Oceanic tribes. That inbreeding andMemoirs of Louise Michel117intermarriage together are what explains their extinction and the ricketyforms of their last representatives.There were many legends that I learned from Daoumi and hisbrother. Daoumi's brother and I also spoke of the short future thatloomed before his race, when untutored and unarmed men faced ourgreed and our innumerable means of destruction. Seeing the lofty,resolute mind and the courageous and kind heart of Daoumi's brother, Iwondered which of us was the superior being: the one who assimilatesforeign knowledge through a thousand difficulties for the sake of hisrace, or the well-armed white who annihilates those who are less wellarmed. Other races giving way before our arms is no proof of oursuperiority. If tigers and elephants and lions suddenly covered Europethey would triumph in a storm of destruction andand attacked us,would seem superior to us.At my school in Noumea on Sundays, I got to know the Kanakasfirsthand. They are neither stupid nor cowardly,two characteristicscommon in the present century. Curiosity about the unknown is asstrong for them as itis for us, perhaps even more so, and theirperseverance is great. It isn't rare for a Kanaka to puzzle for days-I'veeven seen them spend years-over something that interests him, tryingto understand something, and finally come and tell you, "Me understandwhat you say other day." Time for them is always measured the same:'other day.'In their minds, like blank pages, many new things could be inscribed,perhaps better than in ours. Ours are confused by doctrines and blurredby erasures.Lively methods must be used to teach the Kanakas; they're necessaryfor any young mind. Even educated persons learn more quickly if theirtheteachers use dramatic colors rather than arid lists. In any case,Kanakas don't have the time or the facilities to wear out their pants onschoolbenches. For one thing, they have no pants.Reading, mathematics, and the elements of music can be taught with apointer against wall charts. With the pointer the teacher can single outletters or numbers, or using a pencil tip, can draw notes on a staff. Thistechnique produces a spirited atmosphere, which facilitates understandmg.The Kanakas learn writing almost intuitively. If the teacher makes thewords with movable letters, the blacks will write the words in an acceptable way very quickly. I say 'acceptable' with assurance, because theKanakas have a marvelous dexterity for writing as well as for drawing.Their sense of numbers is unlike ours. Ours has been shaped by ourvoyages and our crowds which have accustomed us to large numbers.Their sense of numbers is of small ones only. It is impossible for them to118Memoirs of Louise Michelput a specific number on a large quantity-even one that is still small tous. Their word is 'numerous'-that which can no longer be numberedprecisely.At Noumea I had a piano. Some of the keys were silent, and unlesssomeone sang constantly to cover up the gaps in the melody, youcouldn't use it. Boeuf finally rebuilt the piano for me as a true instrument, and at the very end of my stay I was able to use it properly. Butbefore it was repaired the piano served me as a teaching method thatproduced good results. With this piano whose broken hammers orstrings made some notes in a run silent, the pupils realized there weregaps, and filled them in with their own notes. Sometimes they sang notesfrom the piece they were studying, and at other times they searched outtheir own musical phrases to fill the gap. Thus they created motifs whichwere often strange and sometimes beautiful. Since I'm on the subject, letme add that I tried out this method on my regular schoolchildren as wellas in my Sunday class for the Kanakas.From time to time on Sundays, when I was teaching my Kanakaclasses, I noticed the head of M. Simon outside my window. Then Icould be sure that shortly I would receive the white paper, boards forwood carving, notebooks, and everything else we lacked. In addition M.Simon would see to it that I got tobacco, firecrackers, and other treats forthe Tayos.At my Sunday classes there were tall Tayos, whose protruding earshad been lulled by the wind from the sea blowing through the palm treesand filled with the noise of storms. After they have reflected for five orsix years over the little we have taught them, perhaps they will find fromthat little bit the wherewithal to astonish us. Leave them alone and letthem dream about what they've learned. If, instead of civilizing childlikepeoples with muskets, we sent schoolmasters to the tribes-as M. Simon,the mayor of Noumea, wanted to do-the tribes would have buried thewarstone a long time ago.Throughout the world there are too many minds left uncultivated,just as good land lies fallow while much of the old cultivated land isexhausted. It is the same for human races. Between those who knownothing and those who have a great deal of false knowledge-thosewarped for thousands of generations by infallible knowledge that isincorrect-the difference is less great than it appears at first glance. Thesame breath of science will pass over both.When I returned to Europe from New Caledonia, the pen-wieldingcrows attacked me with various calumnies. Some hate-maddened idiotarranged for a newspaper (I forget which one) to print infamous thingsabout my work in Noumea. Those enemies had already tried to put theirlies across in a gathering where, purely by chance, some former depor-Memoirs of Louise Michel119tees from the Commune who knew better were present, so the attack waswithout success, or without the sort of success they had anticipated.Now they hoped for better luck through the publication of their lies.They did not dream that thousands of persons had watched my life dayby day in New Caledonia. It was another Caledonian, M. Locamus, alawyer and former town councilor and officer at Noumea, who answeredthose charges against me. Because my anonymous slanderers have beenso persistent, I am obliged to reprint M. Locamus's letter, even though itis flattering. Is it worth the trouble? Yes, because all the witnesses willsoon be dead, and we ought to keep our reputations pure for the sake ofthe Revolution, which will live eternally. Shaking off specks of mud isnot useless, so here is a clipping that prints M. Locamus's letter:Citizen Locamus, formerly a town councilor at Noumea, sends us thefollowing letter, We believe we must publish it, even though our friendLouise Michel needs no testimonial to protect herself against the foulvilifications against which her whole life stands in evidence.Paris, February 27Dear Editors:I have just read in the Intransigeant a few lines from Louise Michel'sresponse to her slanderers.I have not read the calumny, but I amconvinced, as you are,it should only be scorned. Nevertheless,thatbecause Louise Michel has deigned to answer it, I feel it is my duty todiscuss the subject; also, Noumea is far away, and the response to thoseslanderers would come too late from there.Happily, there are some former Noumeans in Paris. I am one, and astown councilor of Noumea, with responsibility over public education in1879 and 1880, I must now give a certificate of esteem and satisfaction toour former town schoolmistress.The Board of Municipal Public Education was composed of threepersons: M. Puech, an important merchant; M. Armand, a pardoneddeportee, and me. The lay schools we inaugurated in the colony producedexcellent results. By virtue of a governmental decree issued by the interimmayor, M. Simon, Louise Michel was invited to assist us, and she discharged her duties with unfailing devotion. Her assistance was most usefulfor us.I shall add that Louise Michel's conduct and attitude at Noumea inspired respect and admiration even from her political enemies.Sincerely,P. Locamus120Memoirs of Louise MichelIn 1880, after I had spent a year and a half in Noumea, the government granted a general amnesty to us Communards. At the same timethat I heard the news of the amnesty, I received word that my motherhad had her first attack. Weariness had overcome her, and she wasfearful she wouldn't live to see me again. I, too, was afraid that I wouldarrive too late. My voyage home, therefore, was sad, and I came on deckonly rarely. But the voyage was beautiful.We were landed at Sydney and there, thanks to the lessons I had givenand to help from a few friends, I was able to request passage on a mailpacket rather than a slow sailing ship. That way I would get to mymother's side more quickly. The French consul at Sydney had not yetmade up his mind to repatriate me with some others scheduled to go onthe mail packet. I told him that, in that case, I would be obliged to givelectures on the Commune for several days, so that I could use the feesfor my trip. He preferred to send me with twenty others on the JohnHelder, which was leaving for London.I don't know the inward nature of the consul at Sydney, but inHolland I have seen a painting of a Flemish burgomaster, peaceablyseated in front of a beer mug. It is exactly the consul's portrait: hiscoloring, his pose, his profound calm. Standing in front of that portrait Iunderstood him better than I had in front of his person in Sydney. Iunderstood how our ideas appeared subversive to him, and the goodness which was hidden deep in his face would have made him prefer toallow me to leave as quickly as possible, so that I could see my motheragain.With Mme Henry as my guide I was able to see a bit of the territorysurrounding Sydney before I sailed. There are great expanses of solitude cut by wide roads. Only the forest can be seen, the forest full ofgum trees and eucalyptus. They say the whip-snake and others arecommon there, but we saw none, perhaps because it was the end of thesouthern winter and those animals feared the cold. I saw no kangarooseither, and they would have interested me much more. Those wide,beautiful roads cutting through the forests must keep wild animals away.Sydney is already an old city; when the John Helder put into Melbourneeven that place seemed like a European town, one washed by waves. Istill have a notebook on which Mme Henry and her children, LucienHenry, and other friends wrote inscriptions to me. When I stopped inMelbourne, some strangers came to visit us, and they wrote their namesthere,too. My twenty traveling companions on the John Helder alsoinscribed their names in that notebook, and those are the only pages leftin it. The other pages were plucked out on the John Helder for sketchesof my fellow passengers.A large proportion of those sketches were ones I made of the frail anddarling English babies, of which the third-class passengers had a greatcollection. The poor always have swarms of children; nature makes up inMemoirs of Louise Michel121advance for young shoots mowed down by death. The mothers, Englishwomen as blonde as the children, asked me for the sketches, and it wasonly proper for me to give them away. A few sketches of sailors withenormously wide shoulders met the same fate. I have only one sketchleft, one I made near the Isthmus of Suez, looking over a sandy desertwhere the rocks seem like a sleeping Isis. In my sketch is the eternalsand, and then rocks whose corrugated surface looked like the bark of aniaouli. They form walls against which there is a caravan at rest, andcamels stretch their necks out on the sand.On that trip there was one English lady who took special care of someunfortunate girls who had been turned into prostitutes. People heapedshame on them because they were prostitutes, as if the victims and notthe assassins deserved that shame.I brought five of my oldest cats with me from Noumea, giving threeothers that were younger and more beautiful to friends. They had madethe crossing from Noumea to Sydney on the bare deck, sheltering fromthe cold in a crate. As we sailed into cold regions where the wind blewharsh and icy-it was winter in the antipodes-they rubbed up againsteach other, probably missing the warm sun of their homeland. They hadsome sort of comprehension that they had to abstain from loud demonstrations either there or aboard the John Helder, onto which I smuggledall five of them, crowded into a parrot cage. They spent the wholecrossing attached like ornaments to the shelf that formed my bed. Theynever cried out, and were satisfied with fussing over me sadly.Once in London, in front of a fire, with an enormous bowl of milk myfriends brought them, they began to stretch out, yawning. Only then didthe large red tom and the old black female express their unfavorableimpression of the Dutch ship. As for the three little cats, they looked atthe fire with adoration.The Figaro and other ludicrous newspapers, instead of taking as muchtrouble as they did to add burlesque episodes to my return, would havedone better if they'd opened their eyes wide enough to see that when wecame down the gangplank in London, my friends and I each hadsomething under our arms disguised to look like briefcases. Well hiddenin our coats were five cats.Three of them are still alive, the old black female and two of the littleones. Let anybody laugh who wants to; they are something alive leftfrom home. For me they have become a cherished souvenir-as much asanything could be to the heart of someone who has before him only asolitary life and a destroyed home. But perhaps it's better that it is so,because when there is nothing, you don't look back anymore.The exiles in London welcomed us warmly. We hadn't seen each otherfor ten years, and meeting that way, it seemed as if we were reliving thedays of the Commune.While en route I had gotten a letter from Marie that my mother had122Memoirs of Louise Michelrecovered somewhat when my return was announced. I was happy to beamong my friends again, but I was in too much of a hurry to see mymother again to linger in London, and I left immediately for Paris.With my tickets paid for and ten francs in my pocket, my Londonfriends took me to the railroad station, from where we were to take thetrain that connected with the boat to Dieppe. The London railroadstation had been set ringing by our singing of the Marseillaise. Wecontinued to hear its echo as our train left, and English sensibilitiesweren't offended by it. So long as we could hear it we responded, and noone reproached us for our song. At Dieppe friends were waiting for usat the station, and at the first stop after Dieppe my dear Marie and MmeCamille B-- joined us.I have a few documents concerning my return that Marie kept for me.Here is a letter I sent to Rochefort and Olivier Pain, which describes myarrival in Paris:Dear Citizens Rochefort and Pain,I have received a telegram from Pain asking for some details concerningmy arrival [on November 9].I don't remember much of my arrival at Paris. I do remember that Iembraced all of you, but because I was disoriented at the prospect ofseeing my mother again, I didn't wait to listen to any speeches, and I didn'treally understand anything of what was going on before we came to theSaint-Lazare station. I saw only that great rumbling crowd that I used tolove so much and which I love even more now that I have returned tocivilization. I heard only the Marseillaise, and a new and strange idea cameto me: that instead of sending this beloved crowd to another slaughter itwould be better to risk only one person. The nihilists were right.I also hasten to express my gratitude and to say that, with the ten otherdeportees who also returned yesterday, we had a similar welcome inLondon from the exiles there which nearly prepared us for yesterday. Itproves what good friends we are and how well we remember each otheracross time, exile, and death.I'm writing to Joffrin about the meeting in Montmartre at the same timethat I'm writing you. I can attend no other meeting before that one. It wasin Montmartre that I marched before; it is with Montmartre that I marchtoday. But you know very well that if I agree to be the object of one ofthose receptions-which really isn't a high reward for a whole lifetime-Idon't want it all addressed to me personally. I want it in honor of the SocialRevolution and all the women of the Revolution.I embrace you with all my heart.Louise MichelI had come home.Chapter 16Speeches and JournalismNovember 1880 - January 1882I stayed in Lagny with my mother for almost two weeks, and then Ireturned to Paris to my first formal meeting. When I had come back toFrance the Social Revolution had been strangled. It was a France whoserulers mendaciously called themselves republicans, and they betrayedour every dream through their "opportunism."It had begun ten years before in the drawing rooms of the Elysee,when Foutriquet [President Adolphe Thiers] went in front with theDuke de Nemours. In the course of the evening the Count and Countessof Paris, the Duke of Alen<;on, and the Prince and Princess of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha all came. The presence of these princes of Orleans was theoccasion for that reception, the third dinner party that M. Thiers, theOrleanist President of the Republic, had given. After him as presidentcame MacMahon, Marshal of the Empire. The more things change, themore they remain the same.That was the situation after my return, when I made my first speech. Igave it in the early afternoon of November 21 at the Elysee-Montmartre.Today at one o'clock, the first meeting in honor of Louise Michel tookplace.At one-thirty, Louise Michel went to the rostrum and cried out: "Longlive the Social Revolution!" Then she added: "The Revolution was killed,but now it is reborn." The audience responded with "Long live LouiseMichel!" and "Long live the Revolution!" and people brought severalbouquets to the heroine.Citizen Gambon declared that the Commune was more alive today thanever, and that France would always be at the head of revolutions. Joan ofAre, he said, was a victim of the ingratitude of a king, and Louise Michelhad been the victim of the ingratitude of the Republic.Louise Michel then spoke again. "Let us hope that we will never againsee Paris transformed into a river of blood. When all those people whomaligned the Commune are no longer here, we will have been avenged.When the Gallifets and all the others have fallen from power, we will haveserved the people well. No longer do we wish vengeance through blood.To shame those men will suffice."Religions vanish in the blowing wind, and when they do we becomemasters of our own destinies. We accept the ovations given us, but not for124Memoirs of Louise Michelourselves. We accept these ovations FOR THE COMMUNE AND THOSE WHODEFENDED IT. . . ."So that the Revolution will triumph, we will accept into our ranks allthose people who want to march with us, even if they opposed us in thepast."Long live the Social Revolution!"Long live the nihilists!"Those cries were repeated by the audience, and people added:"Long live Trinquet!""Long live Pyat!""Long live the Commune!"I remained, and will always remain, faithful to my principles. Here isthe report of another speech ten days later.I December 1880. Yesterday a private lecture to benefit those personswho had received amnesty took place in the Graffard hall.Citizen Gerard thanked Louise Michel for the assistance she had givenin organizing this meeting. He saluted the "principle of hate" in her"which alone makes great revolutionaries and great events," and presentedher with two bouquets.Louise Michel responded that she accepted the bouquets in the name ofthe Social Revolution and for the women who had fought for theirfreedom. "It is the people that I salute here," continued Citizen Michel,"and in the people, the Social Revolution."Applause and cries of "Long live the Commune!" interrupted her."The time when they machine-gunned people at Satory is now in frontof our eyes. We still see the men who judged us, as well as the murderer ofTransnonain, the Bazaines, and the Cisseys."At the end of the road those men whom we believed lost forever arenow coming back, holding their heads higher than ever. The Reaction isno more than a corpse the government lifts up, and we will crush it like asnake when it tries to pass among us."Today it is destiny that is advancing. It is the people, still convictsdragging their chains, who will deliver us from the men who have beencorrupting us, and the people themselves will win their liberty."In 1881 a general election took place. Paule Mink and I were proposed as candidates, though as mere women we were forbidden to voteor hold office. Even if men had voted for us, we would have beenineligible to take office and our candidacy,therefore, was a deadcandidacy. I wrote about that subject.THE ILLEGAL CANDIDACYCitizens, you ask Paule Mink and me what we think of dead candidacies.Here is my answer, and I think Citizen Mink will agree with me.Memoirs of Louise Michel125Dead candidacies are both a flag and a demand. They are pure idea, theidea of the Social Revolution soaring without individuality, an idea that canbe neither struck at nor destroyed, an idea as invincible and implacable asdeath.Illegal candidacies are just. Dead candidacies are great, like the Revolution itself. As for women being candidates, that is a claim, a demand thatcomes from the eternal slavery of the mother who must raise men andmake them what they are. But what does that matter? We are all part of thesame slavery, and we fight the same enemy.For my part, I do not bother with particularist questions. I stand with allgroups which attack the cursed edifice of the old society, whether withpick-axe, land mine, or fire.I salute the awakening of the people, and I salute those who by dyinghave opened wide the gates of the future so that the Revolution can passwhole through those gates.Louise MichelHere is a second article on my being a candidate.Seeing my name among those proposed as candidates, I feel obligated torespond. I cannot oppose the candidacy of women, because for women tobe candidates affirms the equality of men and women. But, faced with theseriousness of the situation, I must repeattoseparate their cause from that of the rest of humanity; instead, they musttake a militant part in the great revolutionary army.that women ought notWe are combatants, not candidates. We are brave and implacablecombatants-that's all there is to it.To propose the candidacy of women is enough to do in support of theprinciple. But because those candidacies won't come to anything-andeven if they should come to something, they would change nothing in thesituation-I must ask our friends to withdraw my name.What we want is not a few scattered outcries asking for a justice that willthe entire people and allnever be accorded without force. We wantpeoples to stand up for the freeing of all the slaves, whether they call thoseslaves women or workers.There are three possible courses of action. Those who still hope for afavorable outcome through the ballot can vote for workers. Or they canabstain. Butthisempire-in-miniature, this government that is called a republic, shouldacclaim the sacred principle of the Social Revolution. They should revivethe names of their representatives who were assassinated in 1871.is full of a seething disgust forthose whose heartIt is still a question of waking from sleep. It is a sinister sleep, in whichwe will not allow the people to remain, because when the people sleep,empires are created and opportunism increases. Certain persons find itexpedient that the daughter of the people should be in the street, exposedto rain and shame, so that the daughter of the rich is safeguarded; itpleases them to lead men in herds to the slaughterhouse and women inherds to the brothel. We want no more buying and selling of human fleshthat is to be stuffed into the mouths of cannon or used to sate the appetitesof parasites.126Memoirs of Louise MichelWe proclaim very clearly: no more questions of personalities, not evenquestions of sex; no more egotism; no more fear.The brave must go to the front of our march, and the faint-hearted, whenthey realize where we are going, can fall away.Louise MichelI had no interest in cooperating with the opportunist republicans,even when their motives were good. Shortly after my return from NewCaledonia, the Chamber of Deputies requested me to give testimony onconditions there, and I refused.Paris, 2 February 1881Chairman, Board of Inquiry into the System of Convict Deportation inNew CaledoniaChamber of Deputies, Tenth CommitteeDear Sir:Thank you for the honor you do me in calling me as a witness concerning prison conditions in New Caledonia.While I approve of shedding light on those faraway torturers, I will notgo to the Chamber of Deputies to testify against those bandits Aleyron andRibourt as long as M. de Gallifet, whom I saw shoot prisoners, dines withthe President of the Republic at the Palais-Bourbon.In New Caledonia, if the jailers deprived the deportees of bread, ifoverseers with drawn revolvers insulted them at roll call, if guards shot at adeportee returning to his garden plot in the evening, still, those officialswere not sent over there to put us on beds of roses.But at this time when Barthelemy-Saint-Hilaire is a cabinet minister andMaxime du Camp is in the Academy; when Cipriani and young Morphyare expelled and so many other iniquities are being committed; when M.de Gallifet can draw his sword over Paris again; when the same voice thatcalled for every severity of the law against the "bandits of la Villette" asksfor the absolution and glorification of Aleyron and Ribourt-I'll wait fortrue justice to come first.Sincerely,Louise MichelIn January 1881 I wrote a letter to Le Citoyen which they published onJanuary 28. The problem was that the amnestied, heroic defenders ofthe Commune could find no work, and no work meant that they werestarving. I helped with efforts to relieve their terrible suffering. The firstpart of my letter, however, did not talk about soup kitchens for theexiles.The first part of my letter talked of a paltry thing, but it might amusethe reader. Various newspapers were repeating a stupid phrase theyattributed to me: "When the pigs are fattened, you kill them."Memoirs of Louise Michel127Amidst several other images, I had said that when a wild boar isdegraded by being fattened, it becomes a domestic porker. That's all Isaid. But now every time that anyone made an allusion to pigs, thereactionaries claimed that a personage in the government was beinginsulted. It was forbidden to name anything fat. I couldn't even mentionVitellius, and sometimes I wasn't even thinking of the personage inquestion. If he were alive, I wouldn't say so little about him.Anyway, here is my letter to Le Citoyen:It has now become an historic phrase: "The pigs shouldn't get fat." Atleast that was how the newspaper Le Gaulois quoted me. They did not gettheir money's worth, because when they reported what I said-althoughthey got more than half, I admit-they made it almost polite, while myintention was to be worse than the original offense. That offense iscommitted by the friends of a certain high personage who say that theirmaster is attacked each time the name of the animalin question ispronounced. They express themselves crudely, while we are giving them agood example by using the proper word for a domesticated wild boar.That was the first part of my letter. The second part became moreserious.Let us not forget those who are hungry and cold, the brave people whoprevented the return of the Empire in 1871 and who are walking theice-cold pavement without work and without shelter.Some devoted citizens are talking about establishing a soup kitchen to bekept in operation until next March. There every amnestied person couldfind one meal daily to keep from dying of hunger. The project would befinanced by a speech at which an enormous audience would raise themoney.In addition, if a hundred or two hundred families or men by themselvescould each give an unemployed amnestied person a place to sleep untilnext March, then the people themselves would save the lives of theirbrothers returning from prison or exile.That would be a first step in the people's learning to act for themselves.Louise MichelThis second part of my letter, the part about founding a soup kitchenfor the exiles, put on paper a dream we hoped to make real even thoughwe had no money. All we had were speeches and the devotion of thosewho had work and would help those who were not working. And thenfrom among those people who would find in our midst the few crumbsthat occasionally save a life, some might have helped others in their turn.I had no money myself. A few idiots invented lies about my havinghorses and carriages, or that I got income from lands and so forth. I hadto put up with that sort of nonsense during the entire three years I wasfree after my return from New Caledonia. My mother and I would getinsulting letters after people had asked me, futilely, for three or four128Memoirs of Louise Michelhundred francs, or even for several thousand francs-when thereweren't even a hundred sous in the house. My mother often cried aboutit. But my account book is open, and it has always been open.To make money, I would have had to sell my writings, and I had notime to run from publisher to publisher. I was dividing my time betweenstaying near my sick mother and going to meetings. That is why I used tocollaborate with people who had the time to find a publisher.I wrote a letter alluding to these matters to M. Fayet: "As for the fearsyou express about my future, don't worry. I won't need charity."Then I continued my letter with a comment on how tyranny mightcome to an end at last. "You have enough of my verses from the old daysto recognize that I have always thought that it was better for one personto perish instead of a whole people."The last few lines of this excerpt are and always will be true. As forthinking that one person is nothing compared to all the people, I havealways believed that way. Tyrannicide is practical only when tyranny hasa single head, or at most a small number of heads. When it is a hydra,only the Revolution can kill it.Perhaps 'practical' is the wrong word to use. We are nothing morethan bullets more or less well adapted to the struggle and are not worththe trouble of being considered as anything more. There is no prohibition against wanting to live only as long as one is useful and to preferdying upright rather than in bed.Although we are still savages ourselves, we are nevertheless trying tomake the world clean for those who are coming. The Revolution will bethe flowering of humanity, as love is the flowering of the heart.Those who will be alive then will march in the epic, and they alone willknow how to tell it, because they will have done it; and they will have theit, because the sense of the arts which is nowartistic skillrudimentary will have developed in everybody.to tellIn those years just after my return from New Caledonia I wasconcerned with more than indicting opportunist politicians and trying toease the destitution of returned deportees; I also speculated about thepower of strikes. I wrote a series of articles on strikes and what theireffects would be. Among my favorites was a piece I wrote on conscriptsgoing into the army. I have always dreamed of sheep refusing to becomewolves, and in this article I wrote of conscripts who would refuse tobecome assassins.THE STRIKE OF THE CONSCRIPTSAs if there weren't a social question here! Little children are born in thesame beds where their fathers are dying, and to relieve that horriblemisery Public Assistance sends one franc per person. To print up andMemoirs of Louise Michel129display one single speech costs the people thirty-four thousand francs. It isthe people who pay, always the people.The people should be satisfied, however, because they are told they are"sovereign," an opportunistic word in which to hide the other phrase thatis really being spoken no less opportunistically, "the vile multitude."Trick election laws are applied when it is a matter of getting the herd toelect Badinguet the Third or Opportunist the First, and not used when thequestion concerns some right by which the "sovereign" multitude couldsolve social questions.If "majority rule" were applied properly there would be a way to resolvesocial questions other than by selling the daughters of the people tobrothels or by slitting the throats of the sons of the people on somebattlefield to satisfy some opportunistic pleasure. There would be a betterway to resolve social questions than by starving old workers as if they wereworn-out horses at Montfaucon.As if there weren't a social question here! Now the people are enchainedthrough having been made to believe that they are free. The socialquestion could be summed up in one single act of will by the people. Thatact need be no more than a passive one, and would bring no repression,for although an army can be shot, or all the inhabitants of a city can havetheir throats cut, no one would dare to attack an entire nation.If everyone of a heroic people were to use his full authority to shutdown the vice squad lists, the lists that make certain girls commit suicideproperly!-rather than have their names put down....If an entire people were to refuse to send its sons into hazardousundertakings that might end up as future Sedans; if the conscripts were tostrike, it would silence the potentates who claim they are fertilizing the soilwith blood. It makes the land fertile only for them. If the conscripts wereto strike, they would force kings and dictators to take Boulogne's flag,Membrin's helmet, and Marlborough's saber and go off to war by themselves.Rather than do that, those potentates would solve the problems they hadhoped to exploit to maintain themselves in power. The authorities wouldsolve them so they would not have to leave their peace and quiet and theirlives at the trough.Now that the wind is at war, if the authorities, using the new law on"freedom of the press," came to arrest me at the bedside of my sickmother-to arrest me when I have seen the Franco-Prussian War, in whichgenerals were bought and sold and in which great battalions had theirspirit broken by forced marches-I would still scream out the cry that fillsmy soul:Conscripts, strike!Louise MichelMarie Ferre stayed with my mother when I went to meetings, and inthe spring of 1881 I was able to travel through France to speak to thevarious revolutionary groups that had invited me. On April 21 I spoke tothe Workers' Union of Amiens, and one newspaper reported it this way:130Memoirs of Louise MichelThe Workers' Union of Amiens had delegated fifty of its members, ledby Citizen Delambre, to welcome Citizen Louise Michel at the railroadstation. More than five hundred persons joined the delegation. TheWorkers' Union had organized a meeting at the Longueville Circus forthat afternoon, and fifteen hundred persons attended.Louise Michel went to the speaker's platform after a few words fromCitizen Hamet, who was presiding over the meeting. She described thesufferings of the working class, and condemned the conduct of those whogovern us."The men in power today," she said, "are Jesuits masquerading asrepublicans. They send soldiers to Tunis to kill them, as was done atSedan."I claim the rights of women and not of men's servants. If some day ourenemies catch me, they must not let me slip away, for I don't fight like anamateur. I'm fighting as people do when they are absolutely determinedthat it is time for social crimes to end. That is why I will be pitiless duringthe struggle and why I wish no mercy for myself. I am fooled by neitherthe lies about universal suffrage, nor the lies about the concessions theyappear to be giving to women."We women are half of all humanity. We fight on the side of all theoppressed, and we will keep our share of equality, which is only just."The earth belongs to the peasant who cultivates it; the mine to thosewho dig it; all belongs to all-bread, work, science. The freer the humanrace is, the more it will draw riches and power from nature."The 'vile multitude' has the numbers, and when it decides to do it, it willbe the force which sets people free instead of overburdening them."Following Louise Michel's speech Citizen Gauthier explained his ideason the question of capital and labor.During that same spring I went through the Midi. At Bordeaux, I waswith Cournet, and I remember that at one small meeting where variousgroups were represented, someone raised the question of death."We shall die standing," Cournet cried out. He alluded to the commotion that would ensue when the Revolution attacked the old, empty shellfrom all sides. The day when that happens, everyone will give ofhimself-the young, those returning from the slaughter, probably thelast Blanquistes. These persons bound together will all support therevolutionary forces like an army. At the head of their march, those of1871 will take their place along with the anarchist groups. "We," saidCournet, "have the right to die standing, too."Those who were mown down on the red anniversary at Pere Lachaiseshould not complain. They were following the blood-speckled flags, andthey died without ever stopping the struggle. They died standing.I knew only vaguely what had happened at Pere Lachaise on May 26,because I hadn't read the newspapers for two years. Nothing other thanwhat happened was possible. The prohibition against displaying theforbidden flags foreshadowed what was to come.Memoirs of Louise Michel131o my friends, I hope that none of you is crazy enough to dream ofhaving any power whatever after the people are victorious. Every timesomeone possesses power, every single time, it leads to events like thoseat Pere Lachaise. When authority has been dressed in the cloak ofNessus, you smell the stench of Charenton.This time the people must be the masters. The feeling for liberty willdevelop. Perhaps it would be better for the people if all of us who leadthe fight now should fall in battle, so that after the victory, there will beno more general staffs. Then the people could understand that wheneveryone together shares power, then power is just and splendid; butunshared it drives some people mad.A friend quoted a newspaper passage to me that he wanted me toknow about. Savages, drunk with wine and blood, are applauded just asthe assassins were applauded in 1871. People egg them on because notenough murders have been committed yet.I hope that our side, the day after our victory, or even at the verymoment when we attain it, will have other things to do than to duplicatethose shameful acts.The Revolution is terrifying, but its purpose is to win happiness forhumanity. It has intrepid combatants, pitiless fighters, and it needsthem. The Revolution is pulling humanity from an ocean of mud andblood, an ocean in which thousands of unknown persons serve as feastsfor a few sharks, and if the Revolution has to cause pain to achieve itsvictory, it is necessary. To pull a drowning person from the water, youdo not choose whether you are pulling him by the hair or in some way hefinds more comfortable.One item deserves prominent notice in my memoirs: the affair of thenewspaper La Revolution sociale. Because of the revelations people havemade, it is a matter of honor for me to bring up the matter.What none of us knew at the time was that the Prefect of Police, LouisAndrieux, had financed a revolutionary newspaper by supplying fundsto a Belgian named Serraux. Andrieux did this to give himself a way towatch over revolutionary groups more closely. His idea was stupid. Hisplan to destroy us by founding La Revolution sociale destroyed him asmuch as us. It was a strange thing for an intelligent man to do, to fight usthis way. If we followed his example and established a reactionarynewspaper the way he established a radical one, people would think weshould be sent to the madhouse at Charenton.I knew the ostensible program of La Revolution sociale from theeditorial printed in its first issue, and it was most attractive. Anarchy isnot a new idea; writers long before Saint-Just believed that a person whomakes himself a leader commits a crime.Here is a fragment from the editorial statement printed in the firstissue of La Revolution sociale. Who would have believed that the Prefect ofPolice, M. Andrieux, was on the paper's editorial committee?132Memoirs of Louise MichelThe Revolutionary party ought to organize itself solidly on its ownground, with its own arms, without borrowing anything from its enemies'institutions, sophistries, or procedures. It ought to prepare itself so thatonce the "heroic times" have returned, it can lay siege to the State, lay siegeto the fortress which defends and protects the avenues of privilege, andnot leave one stone upon another.FROM EACH ACCORDING TO HIS STRENGTH, TO EACH ACCORDING TO HISNEEDS. We believe that society is neither innate nor immanent, but is ahuman invention whose purpose is to struggle against the deaths thatnature brings otherwise. Above all, society ought to benefit the weak andsurround them with a special solicitude to compensate for their inferiority.Consequently, the goal we propose and hope for is the creation of a socialorder in which the individual, so long as he gives all he can give of devotionand work, will receive all he needs.Let the table be set for everyone, and let each person have the right andthe means to sit down to the social banquet. Let everyone eat at thatbanquet as his choice and appetite direct without anyone measuring outhis serving according to the amount he can pay.Before the Congress at London in July 1881, Emile Gautier and I gotsome anonymous warnings about agents of M. Andrieux, but whobelieves anonymous letters? To be sure, I had asked some of my Londonfriends to go to see a woman who, they said, had advanced money to M.Serraux. Our friends found the lady in an apartment that gave them theimpression of having just been furnished, but with only that impressionand no other proof, they could not support the accusation. The ladygave them some reasonable explanation, and neither my London friendsnor I were led to believe she represented M. Andrieux. But it doesn'tmatter; the trap he set for us did more harm to those who set it than itdid to us.Now, even though M. Andrieux has confessed his deception publicly,I still need to clear the air. When I found an anarchist paper after myreturn, I blindly accepted an invitation to participate in writing it. M.Serraux offered me the chance to write for La Revolution sociale, but if hehad not, I might have tried to submit my material to the paper anyway.I admit I had great confidence in M. Serraux, and it was only recentlythat I learned of the trap. I must say, however, that M. Andrieux couldhave lied and accused my friends and me, but he did not do it. He wasfar less opportunistic than many others in his party.Let me quote from one article published in La Revolution sociale. Myoriginal title was "To M. Andrieux." I did not know that it was unnecessary to publish it for him to read it. Someone, perhaps Andrieuxhimself, retitled it "Silence the Villain."SILENCE THE VILLAINThe traiter Andrieux, when he named me at the inquest that took placeat Arbresles, has inspired a rejoinder. The villain made some costlyMemoirs of Louise Michel133admissions. He admitted that he let my companions and me return toFrance so that he could have us under his butcher's paw. He wanted todishonor us with degrading charges so he could murder us an inch at atime.Noumea is too far away for Andrieux to be able to satisfy his hatredagainst the wrecks of the Commune. On his own authority at Lyon he hadpeople arrested or murdered by his soldiers. But he ran out of victims andhe had to get some new flesh for his club-wielding helpers. That was thereason he voted for the amnesty. He said so. He prides himself on it.We must have justice against the one who is kept as a public executioner,the one who serves as the butchers' valet for all sorts of repression. Doesanyone believe that the French people will put up with what the Russianpeasants refuse to accept? No. Like the Russian peasant we know how todie, but not how to live under the whip. It is a question of wounds that menwho call themselves political realists do not feel; otherwise, that gallowssalesman would have been hit as many times as there are fists on the citycouncil. Because it is impossible for the men who work for the governmentto do anything about him, it is up to those of us who are independent to getjustice done.Louise MichelI do not have the last issue of La Revolution sociale. I would like to havethe last two or three articles I did, especially the last one. That one I didwith the intention of having the authorities break up the newspaper. Itold M. Serraux that was my idea, and now I understand why they didnot want to. Who the devil could have guessed that the Prefect of Policewas behind it all?I have said enough to make it clear that I was above questions ofpersonality. The affair of Foutriquet's statue left me completely indifferent, also. [Andrieux was aware of, or instigated, a plot to blow up a newstatue of President Thiers; the plan came to nothing when the explosivesfailed to go off.] To keep the misfire from being blamed on a man, Iwanted to attribute it to a child. At that age, if the hand is unsure, thechild is corrected, and then it doesn't matter. If Andrieux deceived us,our frankness will break the trap, and it will not sully the Revolution.The most perfidious part of Andrieux's plan failed. Like other comrades, I had inserted in the newspaper several letters in which I declaredI would write insults only against the government and I would refuse todeal with any insults stupidly addressed to other groups scattered alongthe path of revolution.I have always made war against bad principles. As for particular men,they do not count. Andrieux and his lackeys who tried to set traps for usare having the trap turned on them.Only this morning did I become aware of a little maneuver they had.When there were articles that especially attacked personalities instead ofideas (which is completely opposed to the way I see things), they wouldput a few adroitly cut words of mine in an epigraph. Then people were134Memoirs of Louise Michelled to attribute the rest of the article to me. Personal hatreds weregenerated by that technique.The rest of 1881 I spent making speeches, attending an internationalmeeting in London, and writing for various newspapers. In January1882 the silent poor spoke out on the anniversary of the great Blanqui'sdeath, and I was arrested. I have copied the story of the trial fromL'Intransigeant of 7 January 1882, because the affair was not reported inthe Gazette des tribunaux.POLICE COURTLouise Michel was the first accused called. The valiant citizen wasentirely self-possessed, and in her own voice she answered the judge'squestions in a very precise manner."You are charged with insulting policemen," said M. Puget, the judge."On the contrary, it is we who should bring charges concerning brutalityand insults," Louise Michel said, "because we were very peaceful. Whathappened, and doubtless the reason I am here, is this: I went to theheadquarters of the police commissioner and when I got there, I lookedout a window and saw several policemen beating a man. I did not want tosay anything to those policemen because they were very overexcited, so Iwent up to the next floor and found two other policemen who werecalmer. I said to them, 'Go down quickly. Someone is being murdered.' "The judge said, "That story does not agree with the depositions ofwitnesses we're about to hear."Louise Michel answered, "What I've said is the truth. When accusationsagainst me have been true, I've admitted things far more serious thanthis."The first witness called was a police constable named Conar. He said thatwhen he got to the police commissioner's he found two women, one ofwhom was Louise Michel. He testified that she said to him, "You are hoodsand deadbeats.""That's a lie," said Louise Michel. The police constable persisted inclaiming his account was true. Louise Michel repeated that she was tellingthe truth and could say nothing more.Regardless of the police constable's story being a lie, the court sentencedLouise Michel to two weeks in prison for violating Article 224 of the PenalCode.My friends were right to believe that I could not have said the wordsattributed to me. I said, "Someone is being murdered," not some slangphrase, and the word "deadbeat" isn't in my vocabulary. Nevertheless, Ispent two weeks in the middle of January 1882 in jail, while my motherwaited for me.Chapter 17The Death of Marie FerreMarie Ferre had lived for a decade after the horrible events surroundingthe arrest of Theophile. Persons whose brothers or fathers were sent toNew Caledonia or to exile elsewhere know her devotion and indefatigable courage. At London the refugees had spoken to me about a few daysshe had spent there as if, by seeing her, they saw friends again who haddisappeared during the slaughter. I believe they loved Marie more thanI did, but none of us has her any longer.After I was arrested for the incident on Blanqui's anniversary, MarieFerre fell ill. Her heart had been weak for ten years, any emotion wasdangerous for her, and after she suffered a short illness, death came forher on the night of 23-24 February 1882.At 47, rue Condorcet in Paris, there is a red room shaped like alantern. Marie, when Mme Bias rented the room, told me about it. "It's areal nest," Marie said. "You'll see how peaceful it is there." It was anest-the nest of her death.Her illness had not seemed serious at first. We did not suspect it wasgoing to have such a terrible conclusion, but it was in that little red roomshaped like a lantern that we lost her.After I had served my two-week sentence, I was released. When 1found that Marie was ill, I was a little upset that she didn't come to staywith me until she recovered, but she told me, "I shall be well in my littlered room. After a few days it will all be over."It was indeed all over. If God existed, he would be truly a monster tostrike such a blow.Her bed was opposite the door, with its head against the wall. Duringthe two days while her body was laid out there, someone across the hallwho didn't know what was happening never stopped playing the violin.That's the way it is in cities where each building is a city in itself. Thesound of that violin sank into my heart.In front of her bed we laid Marie in her coffin, well wrapped in mylarge red shawl, which she used to like. Someone had given it to me incase I needed to make a banner, and it made her shroud. It's the samething now.Here is the way the newspapers of 28 June [sic: February] 1882described the funeral of Marie Ferre.136Memoirs of Louise MichelYesterday morning at 9 o'clock, the funeral of the courageous CitizenMarie Ferre took place. She was the sister of Theophile Ferre, who wasmurdered by the reactionary bourgeoisie for his participation in theCommune.The life of Marie Ferre was one of self-abnegation and devotion to thecause for which her brother died. Thus it was with respectful admirationthat a great number of friends yesterday followed this martyr to therevolutionary faith to her last resting place....The cortege was made up of a thousand persons, among whom wereHenri Rochefort, Clovis Hughes, Hubertine Auclert, Camille Bias, Cadolle, and Louise Michel. ...When the funeral procession reached the cemetery at Levallois-Perret,several persons made speeches: delegates from revolutionary groups,social studies circles, free thought associations, and the Committee ofVigilance of the Eighteenth Arrondissement...."History," Jules Allix said, "will associate the memory of TheophileFerre with the great and sublime devotion of his sister Marie, and it is hersimple and great life that we salute here."Frail and gentle like all women, she was as strong as the most courageous man."We salute you, Marie Ferre. Your memory will live in spite of the careyou took to hide yourself. We the tortured, we the banished and exiled,form a procession here for you. It will last until the day when we willglorify our martyrs who died to make liberty grow for those who remain."The crowd that is pressing around your tomb, dear citizen with theis making a greater eulogy to your life than all thewonderful spirit,speeches today. May you be honored, Marie Ferre. We ask that we mayimitate your example, so that instead of martyrdoms alone, we will win thefinal triumph. Long live the Republic! Long live the Revolution!"The sad moment ended with a few words from Emile Gautier and me.I said to the crowd: "Citizens, we place this tombstone over the veryheart of the Revolution. Let us remember. Let us always remember!"Gautier concluded the ceremony: "You have said it very well, Louise.Let us remember. May memory come back to life and make us glimpsethe dawn of the days when liberty, equality, and justice will reign."When Marie Ferre died, the revolutionary women of Lyon who hadbeen calling themselves the Louise Michel Association took the nameMarie Ferre Association. Thank you, just and valiant women of Lyon.Among the fragments of 28 February 1882 there are many touchingpages written about the heroic and impressive friend whom we had lost.Henri Rochefort reminisced about her at length.When I saw Marie again after my return from exile, I had been keepingin my mind an ineradicable memory of the young girl from my days inprison, and her unexpected death brought it back to my attention.Memoirs of Louise Michel137I see her again, gliding like a shadow in her black clothing along thecorridor that led to the visiting room in the jail. Rossel, Theophile Ferre,and I were usually all together in a set of cubicles which were arranged likea sort of prison wagon. Because all three of us were marked for execution,we were locked up next to each other on the first floor of the prison withtwo guards who had uneasy eyes staring curiously at us through openspy-holes.In the visiting room Mile Rossel, Mile Ferre, and my children waited,sharing their common anxiety. When they found out I had been sentencedonly to deportation for life, I shall never forget the look of sympatheticlonging the two young girls gave my children. It seemed to say, "Yourfather is only going to have to end his days six thousand leagues from hereamong man-eating savages. You're fortunate!"Like Delescluze's sister, Ferre's sister struggled bravely againstthebitterness of regrets, and then she fell, vanquished.When the clerical calendar that the mailman brings us each year isreplaced by the republican calendar, the name of this martyr will shinethere among the most memorable. If ever civil baptism replaces religiousbaptism, decent women will honor her virtue and her memory by dedicating their children to her.The last fragment I want to give is a poem I wrote to Marie's memoryjust after her death.In Memory of Marie FerreWe have to admit that she is dead.From the gates of jail, we'll see her no more.The door to cold nothing will never reopen.These words shall go where tears can't reach.To speak her name will take us backTo all those we have lost.Marie was modest, brave, and proud,A contrast of charm we often admired.It's over now; and in her tombShe sleeps forever; our last smileHeld in her heart; and beneath the stoneMy heart is buried alive.Betwixt bleak skies and stony earthA few rare treasures are fleetingly oursBefore pale death swoops in to steal.We stand beneath our crimson flagsAnd mourn the loss of those we love,Too soon taken to the tomb.138Memoirs of Louise MichelRevolution; beloved mother who devours usGiving equality, take our broken destiniesAnd make of them a dawning. Make libertyFly above our cherished dead. When the bellsOf ominous May ring out again, wake usTo your luminescent clarity.Louise MichelFebruary 1882After the terrible blow of Marie's death, I thought I would die. Mymother still remained alive then, my mother and the Revolution. As Iwrite these lines, I have only the Revolution.Chapter 18Women's RightsAll the women reading these memoirs must remember that we womenare not judged the same way men are. When men accuse some otherman of a crime, they do not accuse him of such a stupid one that anobserver wonders if they are serious. But that is how they deal with awoman; she is accused of things so stupid they defy belief. If she is notduped by the claims of popular sovereignty put forth to delude people,or if she is not fooled by the hypocritical concessions which hoodwinkmost women, she will be indicted. Then, if a woman is courageous, or ifshe grasps some bit of knowledge easily, men claim she is only a"pathological" case.At this moment man is master, and women are intermediate beings,standing between man and beast. It is painful for me to admit that weare a separate caste, made one across the ages.For many years the human race has been lying in its cocoon with itswings folded; now it is time for humanity to unfold its wings. Thehuman race that is emerging from its cocoon will not understand why welay supine so long.The first thing that must change is the relationship between the sexes.Humanity has two parts, men and women, and we ought to be walkinghand in hand; instead there is antagonism, and it will last as long as the"stronger" half controls, or thinks it controls, the "weaker" half.How marvelous it would be if only the equality of the sexes wererecognized, but while we wait, women are still, as Moliere said, "the soupof man." The strong sex condescends to soothe us by defining us as thebeautiful sex. Nonsense! It's been a damned long time since we womenhave had any justice from the "strong" sex.We women are not bad revolutionaries. Without begging anyone, weare taking our place in the struggle; otherwise, we could go ahead andpass motions untilthe world ends and gain nothing. For my part,comrades, I have refused to be any man's "soup," and I've gone throughlife with the masses without giving any slaves to the Caesars.Let me tell men a few truths. They claim man's strength is derivedfrom woman's cowardice, but his strength is less than it appears to be.Men rule with a lot of uproar, while it is women who govern withoutnOise.140Memoirs of Louise MichelBut governing from the shadows is valueless. If women's mysteriouspower were transformed into equality, all the pitiful vanities and contemptible deceptions would disappear. Never again would there beeither a master's brutality or a slave's perfidy.The worship of force which exists today reminds me of savages anddawn-age peoples. In New Caledonia I saw warriors loading theirwomen as if they were mules. Whenever someone might see them, theyposed haughtily, carrying only their warrior's spear. But if the gorgesand mountains closed up and hid them from view, or if the path weredeserted, then the warrior, moved by pity, would unload some of theburden from his human mule and carry it himself. Thus lightened, thewoman breathed deeply; now she had no more than one child hangingon her back and one or two others hanging on her legs. But if a shadowappeared on the horizon-even if only a cow or a horse-quickly theload went back on the woman's back, and the warrior made a greatpretense of adjusting it. Oh dear, if someone had seen him-a warriorwho thinks women are worth something! But most women after alifetime of being treated like this no longer wanted anything more.Is it not the same everywhere? Human stupidity throws old prejudicesover us like a winding-sheet over a corpse. Are there not stupid arguments about the inferiority of women? Maternity or other circumstancesare supposed to keep women from being good fighters. That argumentassumes people are always going to be stupid enough to butcher eachother. Anyway, when a thing is worth the pain, women are not the last tojoin the struggle. The yeast of rebellion which lies at the bottom of everywoman's heart rises quickly when combat stirs it up, particulariy whencombat promises to lessen squalor and stinks less than a charnel house.Calm down, men. We are not stupid enough to want to run things.Our taking power would only make some kind of authority last longer;you men keep the power instead, so that authority may wither awaymore quickly. I must add that even "more quickly" will still be too long.We women are disgusted, and further villainies only inspire us to act.We jeer a little also. We jeer at the incredible sight of big shots, cheappunks, hoods, old men, young men, scoundrels-all turned into idiots byaccepting as truth a whole heap of nonsensical ideas which have dominated the thinking of the human race. We jeer at the sight of those malecreatures judging women's intellects by weighing the brains of women intheir dirty paws.Do men sense the rising tide of us women, famished for learning? Weask only this of the old world: the little knowledge that it has. All thosemen who wish to do nothing are jealous of us. They are jealous of usbecause we want to take from the world what is sweetest: knowledge andlearning.I have never understood why there was a sex whose intelligencepeople tried to cripple as if there were already too much intelligence inMemoirs of Louise Michel141the world. Little girls are brought up in foolishness and are expresslydisarmed so that men can deceive them more easily. That is what menwant. It is precisely as if someone threw you into the water after havingforbidden you to learn to swim or even after having tied your arms andlegs. It is all done under the pretext of preserving the innocence of littlegirls.Men are happy to let a girl dream. And most of those dreams wouldnot disturb her as they do now if she knew them as simple questions ofscience. She would be in fact more truly innocent then, for she couldmove calmly through visions which now trouble her. Nothing that comesfrom science or nature would bother her. Does a corpse disturb peoplewho are used to the dissecting room? When nature, living or dead,appears to an educated woman, she does not blush. There is no mystery,for mystery is destroyed when the cadaver is dissected. Nature andscience are clean; the veils that men throw over them are not.Englishmen have created a race of animals for slaughter. "Civilized"men prepare young girls to be deceived, and then make it a crime forthem to fall, but also make it almost an honor for the seducer. What anuproar when men find an unruly animal in the flock! I wonder whatwould happen if the lamb no longer wanted to be slaughtered. Mostlikely, men would slaughter them just the same, whether or not theystretched their necks out for the knife. What difference does it make?The difference is that it is better not to stretch your neck out to yourmurderer.There is a roadside market where men sellthe daughters of thepeople. The daughter of the rich is sold for her dowry and is given towhomever her family wishes. The daughter of the poor is taken bywhoever wants her. Neither girl is ever asked her own wishes.In our world, the proletarian is a slave; the wife of a proletarian iseven more a slave. Women's wages are simply a snare because they are someager that they are illusory. Why do so many women not work? Thereare two reasons. Some women cannot find work, and others wouldrather die of hunger, living in a cave, than do a job which gives themback less than enough to live on and which enriches the entrepreneur atthe same time.Prostitution is the same. We practice Caledonian morality, and mendon't count women for much here either. There are some women whohold tight to life. But then, forced on by hunger, cold, and misery, theyare lured into shame by the pimps and whores who live from that kind ofwork. In every rotten thing,there are maggots. Those unfortunatewomen let themselves be formed into battalions in the mournful armythat marches from the hospital to the charnel house.When I hear of one of these miserable creatures taking from a man'spocket more than he would have given her, I think, "So much thebetter." Why should we close our eyes? If there were not so many buyers,142Memoirs of Louise Michelthat sordid market would not exist. And when some honest woman,insulted and pursued, kills the scoundrel who is chasing her, 1 think,"Bravo, she has rid others of the danger and avenged her sisters." Buttoo few women do it.If women, these accursed-even the socialist Proudhon said they canonly be housewives and courtesans, and indeed they cannot be anythingelse in the present world-if, as I say, these women are often dangerous,to whom does the blame belong? Who has, for his pleasure, developedtheir coquetry and allthe other vices agreeable to men? Men haveselected these vices through the ages.We women have weapons now,the weapons of slaves, silent andterrible. No one has to put them into our hands. It is done.I admit that a man, too, suffers in this accursed society, but no sadnesscan compare to a woman's. In the street, she is merchandise. In theconvents, where she hides as ifin a tomb, ignorance binds her, and rulestake her up in their machinelike gears and pulverize her heart andbrain. In the world, she bends under mortification. In her home, herburdens crush her. And men want to keep her that way. They do notwant her to encroach upon either their functions or their titles.Be reassured, "gentlemen." We do not need any of your titles to takeover your functions when it pleases us to do so. Your titles. Bah! We donot want rubbish. Do what you want to with them. They are too flawedand limited for women. The time is not far off when you will come andoffer them to us in order to try to dress them up a little by dividing themwith us.Keep those rags and tatters. We want none of them. What we do wantis knowledge and education and liberty. We know what our rights are,and we demand them. Are we not standing next to you fighting thesupreme fight? Are you not strong enough, men, to make part of thatsupreme fight a struggle for the rights of women? And then men andwomen together will gain the rights of all humanity.Beyond our tormented epoch will come the time when men andwomen will move through life together as good companions, and theywill no more argue about which sex is superior than races will argueabout which race is foremost in the world. It is good to look to thefuture.This chapter is by no means a digression. As a woman, I have the rightto speak for women.Chapter 19Speeches Abroad,1882-1883During the year after Marie's death, I made speeches not only in Francebut also in Belgium, Holland, and England. More or less true accountsexist of the speeches I gave in Brussels in October 1882. They went verywell except for the third or fourth speech. At that one some young foolwho claimed his name was Fallou caused a disturbance. To explain whyno one knew him in Brussels, he declared ingenuously that he had comefrom Paris the same time I did. To the crowd he stated that I had writtenan article in La Revolution sociale proposing the erection of a statue to M.Thiers!!! He claimed he had the issue that proved his allegations, and alarge number of people believed his nonsense, even though the onlyarticle I had ever written about Thiers was one that began, "The littlesquirt has been castrated."In spite of the objects that "friends of order" threw at the rostrum, Ifinished my speech. The incident showed by the very example peoplehad before their eyes that those "friends of order" understood "order"to mean their right to knock down people like myself who claim that beesshould not have to work forever for hornets.Reactionaries have raised two questions about my foreign speecheswhich would be laughable if our principles were not involved. Onequestion is, Where did I get the money for my trips? and the other was,What did I do with the money I made?The money for the trips came from Henri Rochefort when whatevergroup that invited me did not furnish it. He lent me the money, which Ihave never paid back, and any money I received over my expenses Igave to the sponsoring group. Other friends bought my railroad tickets.Receipts? Both in New Caledonia and since my return, I have made it apractice to keep receipts or documents which would establish, if necessary, what I have done with the various sums I have been given todispense, but the revolutionary groups know what was done with themoney. They know I kept nothing for myself.I'd like to quote a piece from L'[ntransigeant.144Memoirs of Louise MichelWe've seen a report in the magazine Voltaire which reads: "Revolutionary propaganda brings in a great deal of money. Mile Louise Michel'sthree speeches at Brussels each got her 500 francs, or 1500 francs for allthree. At prices like those, calls for revolt have become a pretty good deal."Not only have we seen that report, but one of our kind readers,astonished at the princely gifts Citizen Louise Michel is giving to Chagot'svictims through us, has asked us for information about her means ofsupport. That gentleman feels Louise Michel has a knack for uttering"charming bits of nonsense" and making "pleasure trips at the expense offools exploited by a committee of scoundrels." ...To this gentle reader we shall limit ourselves to submitting a few figureswhich the Voltaire is also at liberty to use for its own purposes.Over and above the cost of the first speech and independently of whatwas earmarked for the work of revolutionary propaganda, L'Intransigeantreceived a hundred francs to give to the exiles of 1871.Over and above the cost of the second speech, a hundred francs weregiven to the Barinage miners. Another hundred francs went to the socialistpress in Antwerp, and the remainder, three hundred francs, the "princelygift," was featured yesterday at the head of the list of contributors for theaccused of Chalon-sur-Saone and their families.There certainly was no less democratic or worthwhile use made of theproceeds of the third speech.Is our gentle reader satisfied?I'm obliged to get quotations from friends because I can find the truthnowhere else. I delete things that are too flattering to me when I can;they are only exaggerations in response to the exaggerated hatred myenemies express, and I do not deserve that flattery-although I'm not amonster. I just follow my own inclinations,the way everybody andeverything does.We are the product of our own times, that's all, and each of us has hisgood side and his bad. It does not matter what we are so long as ourwork is great and covers us with its glory. In the midst of the things webegin, what our own lives are does not matter. What counts is what willbe left for humanity when we have disappeared.Two weeks after my speeches in Brussels, I spoke at Ghent. Ourfriend Deneuvillers has told the story of what happened that day inGhent. I'm going to quote his account from revolutionary pride, notpersonal pride. It shows the conduct of the people compared to theconduct of those who are their exploiters, consciously or unconsciously.LOUISE MICHEL AT GHENTLouise Michel gave a speech Wednesday at the Mont-Parnasse hall, thethe socialist cause. Threeproceeds from which were earmarked forthousand comrades were present and gave an enthusiastic welcome to thespeaker, who talked on "Revolutionary Proselyting."Memoirs of Louise Michel145Then she left to go to deliver a speech at the Hippodrome in a bourgeoisand reactionary setting. The brave and courteous people of Ghent wantedto form a procession around her to protect her from hecklers, but LouiseMichel told them: "We must not allow the enemies of the people to believethat anyone person from our ranks is an idol. We should form processionsonly for the Revolution. That's why I ask you to let me go on by myself."The workers who heard her at Mont-Parnasse were composed andenthusiastic, butthe Hippodrome were wild andfurious. For three days the delirious Catholic clerics had been preparinghowling choristers to prevent people from hearing her. Only wide openmouths yelling out furious cries could be seen, along with enough raisedclubs to make Pietri envious.the reactionaries atThere was a comic side to the Hippodrome speech; as a souvenir of theclerical arguments the speaker was able to keep a two-kilogram piece of abench which had been thrown at her head.The Catholic packs gathered in the streets where they bayed after thetrail of socialists. They tried to murder the person the Catholics thoughtwas their leader, the courageous Anseele, and he escaped from their handsonly because we intervened in the fight....DeneuvillersIn Ghent after I had witnessed the magnificent spectacle of the guildsmarching, I saw during the night, which added to the setting, a medievalscene in a medieval city. It came after my speech that caused so muchfuror. One part of the hall in which I was speaking was occupied bypolicemen sent from Paris, and a person,like the conductor of anorchestra, signaled them when to make a racket. Students from Catholicuniversities occupied the upper parts of the hall, and with their earsconspicuous against the shadows, they howled out in unison every timethe conductor raised his baton. If only there had been some realbellowing at that concert, but all the police and students did was yelp.My friends forced me to leave that concert, and their decision waswrong. Those raucous little fellows would finally have lost their voices,and the reasonable parts of the room would have been able to judgetheir conduct at the end. To my regret, I obeyed the wishes of myfriends and left, but it was painful.They pushed me into a cab which immediately pulled away, butJeanne, a friend who was accompanying me, had been separated fromme in the turmoil. I kept trying to make the cab driver turn back for her,but for half an hour he whipped on his horses without answering me oradmitting he heard me or even felt me pulling on his arm.I finally prevailed upon the driver, and he turned back, drivingthrough "Messieurs the scholars," who were throwing stones at themeeting hall. The windows of the cab were broken, the horse was hardlyable to move, and now and again outlined against the black night, ayoung head, flushed with the drunkenness of the chase, pushed its way146Memoirs of Louise Michelthrough the fragments of the carriage's windows and howled out someinsult. The old phantom city behind them opened out dead black to myVIew.Amidst my concern for my friend Jeanne, I thought about the oldGhent of the fourteenth century, the days of the van Arteveldes, whenthe guilds used the axe to kill those they believed were seeking power,and I looked out atthe somber banks of the canal. It all made amagnificent spectacle, framed between the water and the night. In frontof the meeting hall were the students and those who kept watch overthem, all of them milling around. The Middle Ages were alive still.Very worried about Jeanne, I got down from the cab to ask them ifthey had seen the tall brunette who had been with me and to ask whatthey had done with her, because I was the one they wanted to kill. A fewof them became serious and began to make inquiries. Then a policesuperintendent helped me to search for Jeanne.He was a police superintendent from Ghent, and not at all like thepolicemen who had migrated from Paris to bellow at my speech. He toldme not to get involved in any way with what was going on other than tolook for Jeanne, and in fact it was he who located her. I remember thatwhen he found that the students were acting improperly he placedhimself in front of me, to my great astonishment, and he helped memove through the packed mass. That surprised me, because I fullyexpected to be led off to prison for having been insulted. That's what thepolice would have done in Paris.The newspapers recognized the evenhanded honesty of those Belgianpolice.The spectacle of fevered madness lasted until evening. The mobthought that by stifling a speech they had saved religion and society.Without the protection of the burgomaster and the police chief, whoproved they had truly heroic devotion to principle by intervening in thefight at the Circus and even up to the railroad station, we do not knowwhat might have happened to our friend, Louise Michel.I traveled to Holland, also. Besides our friends, of whom I have suchgood memories, there were scholars who were curious to see close upwhat species of animal we revolutionaries are.. They undertook theirstudies in good faith. I also met enemies who were sincere because theyknew about us only through gossip in reactionary newspapers. Theywere astonished at having been deceived and ended up by understanding revolutionaries.In Holland, the motherland of the brave, I also saw Freemasons, andit seemed to me that Freemasonry had undergone a rejuvenation.During the courageous proceedings of the Freemasons in 1871 I hadgotten the impression of an assembly of specters drawing themselves upMemoirs of Louise Michel147on the ramparts in front of the royalists who were butchering theRevolution. It was grand and coldly beautiful. Later in New Caledonia Isaw the Freemasons again;there they had been revitalized by theinfluence of the tropics. They seemed to be moved by a great desire forprogress and were going to a lot of pains to take part in it, there wherethe sun was warm.But more and more,is clear that societies based on rites, orhampered by any rites whatever, will not last until the emergence of theonly viable fellowship--that of revolutionary humanity. Rite-bound societies will assist that birth only as ghosts.itAn isolated life can be interesting only as it relates to the multitude oflives that surrounds it. Only crowds, with each person free in theimmense harmony, are worthwhile now.Two months after this northern trip, just after the beginning of 1883,I went to London to give a series of speeches. The travel expenses werepaid by Citizens Otterbein of Brussels and Mas of Anvers, and I have notpaid them back yet.At London, I lived with our friends Varlet, Armand Morceau, andViard the way I had done during the conference of 1881, and as alwaysthey spoiled me a bit. It is impossible for me to spend money when I goto London; they spend it. As for the proceeds from the speech, ourfriends know what was to be done with them. For a gathering ofrevolutionary groups, the hall we rented was very expensive, and whatwe came up with had to be supplemented. L'Intransigeant added moreyet, because we had promised our friends of '71 who had become infirmthat there would be a small remembrance for them.The proceeds were small. Some time ago we made a plan to create avery modest refuge where old and starving former exiles could find alittle bread and a few drops of broth. With no qualification other thandestitution, those poor people who had become unable to work or towhom people had refused work could receive food and find shelter.Many of the Communards are proud, and some of them had alreadytaken the path of Pere Malezieux. With the proceeds from our meetings,we hoped to support a home for these exiles, owned by the exilesthemselves, and if we had received sufficient funds, perhaps we couldhave saved a few desperate persons.Even the most aristocratic and reactionary English newspapers reported my London speeches quite impartially. Perhaps that relativekindness was owed to the bad faith of the bourgeois gutter press ofFrance. Nothing puts people in a better light than to say too many badthings about them. After a good round of violent criticism, exaggerations are immediately noticeable.As for the accounts of my London speeches in the opportunistic pressof Paris, they were all based on the same stereotype. They did not need148Memoirs of Louise Michelto send reporters. It was enough for them to know the name of themeeting hall where I was speaking, the subject treated, and the groupthat had organized the meeting to permit them to fix up their accountsof the "revolutionary craze" in their good old-fashioned way.Because my London lectures were given in rich neighborhoods wherepeople knew about me only through the legend my enemies hadinvented, my British audience was quite astonished at finding me neitherso ill-mannered nor so ridiculous as it had heard. Those who saw me inEngland did not recognize in the slightest the horrible portrait of methey had been given. Also, all the newspapers, even the aristocratic PallMall Gazette, were extremely courteous to me.One thing that surprised them was that I did not share the currentBritish ideas on workhouses, but they were incorrect when they thoughtthey saw me contradict myself on on this point. They thought I wasenthusiastic about the workhouses, and that's not what I think of them. Ionly stated the pleasure I felt over England's considering it a duty to beconcerned about people who have neither food nor shelter. The thingthat struck me-and I immediately said so-was the care with which insome workhouses, Lambeth for example, they soften the refuge whereold Albion piles its poverty.The English will wait on their own little island until the rest of Europehas had its revolution, and then, not imitating the stupid mistakes othershave committed, England will do everything at once. Albion will risesuddenly and light the sacred fire. The winds from abroad will cause thesacred fire to burn more brightly and will make it a dawning.So that their antiquated institutions will last longer, the English warmthem up with the enthusiasm of women. Women direct the workhousesnow, and in the future there will be women in Parliament. But the greenbranches on the old tree cannot rejuvenate the rotten trunk.There is one workhouse where the old and the poor are happy; it isone in which the woman who directs it feels that liberty is necessary if thedestitute are to stay alive like other people. "There are no rules" iswritten in big letters on the wall, and the place is more orderly thananywhere else. The clock directs people. At the time for meals or workor a walk, everybody goes freely where he must, the same way a personin his own house goes to his own meal or his own work.I will not name the people in England who showed me their sympathy.They will remember that evening of the black London winter on which acloud of fog floated. Raindrops condensed in an unceasing mist and nowand again came in broad sheets. They will remember a frozen evening inthe large, cold meeting hall in front of a cold and correct audiencedrawn from a grand neighborhood of immense palaces under which thewretches have holes like animals. But despite that, I felt an impression ofhuman honesty persisting regardless of the accursed chains that peopleinterminably fasten on each other.Memoirs of Louise Michel149The audience did not share my beliefs, but they were sincere. I do notknow why, but they seemed like a family to me, even as serious and coldas they were. Then, as I had done long ago during my childhood atVroncourt, as I had done when I was a young schoolmistress and sat onthe hearth-stone at Mme Fayet's while I let everything in my heart breakfree, I began to talk unrestrainedly. In this large, cold meeting hall inLondon, I spoke freely about the scenes of my life which came tomind-from Vroncourt to New Caledonia, and at that moment thosepast things were truly present.My English friends, Miss M--, Miss X--, Miss F--, do notbelieve for a minute that I have forgotten you. Do you really believe,Miss M--, that the book in which you wrote the words of the oldJacobins-"neither God nor master"-could ever have been destroyed?I certainly still have it. I also have "The Song of the Shirt" translated intoFrench so well by you, Sir T. S--.London! I love London, where my exiled friends have always beenwelcomed, London, where old England, standing in the shadow of thegallows, is still more liberal than the French bourgeois republicans are.Maybe those French opportunists really think they are liberal. Do yousuppose that everybody who commits crimes againstthe people isconscious of what he is doing? Among them are persons who aredeluding themselves and who wish to reward themselves for virtue andintelligence. Intelligence, nonsense! Wisdom is found in the people.It is quite true that today the people do not know any science, butconsidering the mess science is in now, that's all right. Science today isonly opening its buds. Tomorrow it will be wonderful, and tomorrowscience will belong to everybody. Today, if the people do not know thisor that little bit of information, at least they are not stubborn aboutbelieving, for example, that glowworms are stars. That's something.Chapter 20Speeches in France,1882-1883In the summer of 1882 I made a lecture tour through northern Francewith Jules Guesde, in connection with a strike. The trip had some merrymoments. In one cafe a dozen men came over and made a circle aroundus, looking at us the way curious animals do. I took out my sketch padand began to draw their mugs. I wrote underneath the sketches "SkillfulStool-pigeon," "Fool," and "Spiteful Stool-pigeon." They weren't informers any more than we were, but they were so stupid, looking at usthe way they did. One of them came and peeked over my shoulder; theothers did too, and then we were rid of them.During the journey, there was another moment of comedy when onefellow went on and on telling another man about the burials of famousmen he had seen; nobody could have been as complete a fool as thisfellow was. I wondered if he was in earnest. When I realized he was, Ibecame fearful that Guesde would find a way to disturb the bird, but hedidn't, and the fellow ended his recital of hopes for funeral processionswith the wish that Victor Hugo, whose age he worked out, would soongive him another spectacle.After having stirred that prospect around for a long time he began onanother subject: Thiers. That mournful crow certainly had a gift forconversation. He was talking to a man who had a neck as red as aturkey's and who was watching him admiringly, and so was a youngwoman with big, round eyes. Then a traveling salesman who was neitheraffected nor boastful straightened him out by telling some truths to thefellow who was deploring the miseries of the "poor bosses."At the meeting we had come to attend, the chief of police, all dressedup with his sash of office, placed himself near Guesde and me. Clearlybelieving the tales the reactionaries were telling about us, he seemedastonished at how calm our friends kept the meeting. It is true that thefour sergeants-at-arms appointed to keep order in the hall were all thesize of Hercules, and one of them picked up a lower-middle-classtroublemaker and put him under his arm the way you carry a cat. ThatMemoirs of Louise Michel151troublemaker was giving a signal for the start of a racket, but theHercules carried him out before anyone did anything. The other reactionaries calmed down magically.In September 1882 there was a meeting at Versailles. Quite a group ofus anarchists went there together. We were prepared for the worst, butwe thought it was our duty to go to Versailles and memorialize there theexecution grounds at Satory and the wall at Pere Lachaise. I still have aletter I wrote about this meeting which was published in L'Intransigeant.[24] September 1882Concerning the incidents which occured at the meeting organized lastSunday at Versailles by a revolutionary socialist group, Louise Michelsends us the following note:Did our friends expect us to get a different reception? We don't need totalk about the Revolution to people who are revolutionaries; we need totell people who aren't revolutionaries about it.Since we began at Versailles, 1 don't see any obstacle to our ending up insome place like Brittany, which is even more reactionary. Soon we will goto all the royal provinces. Maybe some of the people there will greet uswith pitchforks, but our publicity will win others over to the SocialRevolution. All their Breton obstinacy will turn toward the truth, and alltheir fanaticism will be directed toward the future instead of the past.I've thought about conquering Brittany for a long time, ever since 22January 1871, when I stood in the courtyard of the Hotel de Ville. Thatday, more than ten years ago, I looked up indignantly at the broad, palefaces of the Breton boys glued against the windows of the building whichonce had been and again would be the home of the democratic Commune.In accordance with Trochu's plan,they fired at us then from thosewindows with great conviction, but we will recruit those Bretons too, likeall the others, for the Revolution. We will recruit the king's faithful, justlike all other proletarians.Louise MichelThat article in L'Intransigeant went 'on to print another of my letters:Yesterday our friend, Citizen Louise Michel, addressed a letter to theeditor-in-chief of L'Intransigeant, commenting on an article entitled "Memories of Satory."152Memoirs of Louise MichelTo Citizen Rochefort.My dear traveling companion,I congratulate you for your article today. How could those peopleimagine that the pursuit and cries of an ignorant pack of dogs could alarmme when I have the image of Satory in my mind? It would be just likeamusing myself by grumbling when I was on the Ducos Peninsula, as Ilooked at Nou Island visible at the horizon.Once again we are able to declare that our adversaries have no seriousarguments. They use shouts, which is an admission that they have lost.Still, the crowd was picturesque. The most striking figure was a limpingbeggar who stretched himself out on his crutches like a spider andscreeched against the enemies of property. You've seen Callot's painting"The Beggars," haven't you? You would have thought that the fellow hadbeen pulled out of the frame. There were also a few big, funny-lookingcreatures that looked like the monsters that form the retinue of thegoddess of the sea, and some street urchins, among whom there was morethan one future insurgent. All in all, they made up the whole tableau ofhuman stupidity.No matter. This scene will have made its contribution by bringing usmore than one listener. Things have an eloquence that words lack.Louise MichelAt another meeting, this one at the de la Perle meeting hall, I believe,someone managed to break a window and throw a smoke-bomb behindthe speaker's rostrum. If we had not dealt with it immediately and toldthe audience it was a trick of the police or of idiots, it would have causedthe crowd to rush toward the one very small exit, and there would havebeen some accidents. It turned out to have been the work of idiots.Ashamed of what they'd done, they later sent me their apologies, which Iread publicly, of course without mentioning their names.There were many other meetings; accounts of them are in one ofMarie's notebooks. Among them was one at the Graffard meeting hall.there is a painting of me in the Grevin MuseumSpeaking of that,entitled "Louise Michel at the Graffard Meeting Hall." Why the Graffard, I don't know; that title is given to other portraits and caricatures. Icertainly have been at the Graffard hall, as I have been at almost everyother meeting hall in Paris, but it seems to me that your face does notchange from one speaker's platform to another.Memoirs of Louise Michel153"Louise Michel at the Graffard Meeting Hall" is again the inscription,I believe, under the portrait that a very young painter, the son of MmeTynaire, stubbornly persisted in doing for the Salon. I let him do it inspite of the distress I felt at posing during that time, for it was immediately after Marie's death. I did not want to thwart a child who had talent,and I was sure the Salon would accept it for two reasons. The first andforemost was that he painted very well. The second, and the one onwhich I counted, was that his portrait of me resembled, feature forfeature and especially expression for expression, not me, but an oldprisoner named Mme Dumollard whom I had seen in '72 at the Auberive prison.I'm aware of my own ugliness, but between my ugliness and theportrait I'm speaking of-a portrait which was magnificently paintedand which doesn't resemble me at all-there is a difference that can bechecked simply by comparing it to any of my photographs.The reactionaries must have rubbed their paws together and said,"What a fright." It made me laugh until someone was stupid enough totell my mother about several incidents, the knowledge of which painedher, but her distress was relieved when a simple-minded man, absolutelydressed to the teeth, a stupid man as stiff as a wooden doll, appeared atthe door of 45, boulevard Ornano, where my mother and I were living."MIle Michel?" he asked, forgetting to take off his stove-pipe hat andbeating his right hand with a small stick."I am she," I said."No, you aren't her.""I'm not me?""Well! I know Louise Michel. I saw her portrait in the Salon.""So?""So! Try not to make fun of me. A woman who has horses andcarriages doesn't open her own door. Go and get her for me. I repeat: Itisn't her who is opening this door.""It's she who is closing it," I said. Whereupon, as this stupid manwasn't all the way inside, I pushed him completely outside and slammedthe door in his face. He blustered a little from the other side of the door,and then I heard him going down the steps, still shouting insults.People did say that I had horses and carriages, and people appearedto believe that I made money from my speeches. Because the personswho organized the meetings know what was done with the profits, Iconfess that I spent hardly any time worrying about that spiteful, stupidtalk.In October 1882 I went to Lille to speak in connection with the strikeof the women spinners there. They were all around us at the speaker'splatform, all those female workers from the cellars of Lille, whose cheap154Memoirs of Louise Michelshoes protect their feet so little from the water, and who are killed bywork before their time. They were asking for only ten or fifteencentimes more a day to continue their horrible life. Those ten or fifteencentimes for bread would be sufficient for those who work so hard tosupport the rich.Those poor workers are just like the silkworm, which is boiled when ithas spun its cocoon. When their labor is finished, those workers, too,must die. Like the silkworms, their lives must stop with the thread. Howwill they exist in their old age? Won't their daughters be chained to thesame torture before they are scarcely out of their cradles?The rich must use and abuse their flocks. Both the silkworms and thedaughters of the people are made for spinning; the worm will be boiled,and the girl will die or become twisted like green wood that has beenbent. All they wanted was ten or fifteen centimes for a little bread, andthey earned billions for others.All the strikers had to do was hold out for one week more and theexploiters would have given in, but to last a week longer the strikersneeded two thousand francs. That was why I went to Lille to make aspeech. Thanks to the reactionaries who paid for their seats so that theycould come to insult me, we made the two thousand francs in one lecturealone. I asked the organizers of the speech to put that money awaysafely, and then I was able to announce to the gentlemen who hadbought tickets that we had what we needed. Thus, they were free eitherto listen to me or to spend their time howling, either of which wasperfectly all right with me because we already had the two thousandfrancs that we needed.That frank explanation calmed them down, and the speech took placewithout further incident. Around one in the morning I was able to takethe train and return to my mother. For the tomb of Marie Ferre Ibrought back a sacred souvenir-a bouquet the workers of Lille hadgiven me.Unfortunately, at the end of the week a few evil persons made somegullible workers believe that others had gone back to their workshops,and they believed it was their duty to do the same. Once back in theircapitalist prison, they saw they had been fooled, and then it was too latefor them, but the lesson will not be lost.Just after the turn of the year, in January 1883, was the trial of thesixty-eight anarchists in Lyon, fifty-four of whom were prisoners, theother fourteen being tried in absentia. Because the reactionaries couldnot figure out a crime to accuse them of, they were indicted for beingaffiliated with the International, which had been dissolved in 1876. Thetrial was a travesty.It began on January 9 and Prince Kropotkin, Emile Gautier, Bordat,Bernard, and forty-three others of the accused issued a manifesto whichGautier had written.Memoirs of Louise Michel155MANIFESTO OF THE ANARCHISTSWhat is anarchy and what are anarchists?Anarchists are citizens who, in a century where freedom of opinion ispreached everywhere, have believed it to be their right and duty to appealfor unlimited liberty.Throughout the world there are a few thousand of us, maybe a fewmillion, for we have no merit other than saying out loud what the crowd isthinking. We are a few million workers who claim absolute liberty, nothingbut liberty, every liberty.We wantliberty; we claim for every human being the rightto dowhatever he 'pleases and the means to do it with. A person has the right tosatisfy all his needs completely, with no limit other than natural impossibilities and the needs of his neighbors, which must be respected equally withhis.We want freedom, and we believe its existence incompatible with theexistence of any power whatsoever, no matter what its origin and form, nomatter whether it be elected or imposed, monarchist or republican, inspired by divine right, popular right, holy oil, or universal suffrage.History teaches us that every government is like every other governmentand that all are worth the same. The best are the worst. In some there ismore cynicism, in others more hypocrisy, but at bottom there are alwaysthe same procedures, always the same intolerance. There is no government, including even the ones that appear the most liberal, which does nothave in the dust of its legislative arsenals some good little law about theInternational to use against inconvenient opposition.Evil, in the eyes of anarchists, does not dwell in one form of governmentmore than any other. Evil lies in the idea of government itself. Theprinciple of authority is evil.Our ideal for human relations is to substitute a free contract, perpetuallyin place of administrative and legalopen to revision or cancellation,guardianship and imposed discipline.Anarchists propose teaching people to get along without government asthey are already learning to get along without God.Anarchists will also teach people to get along without private ownership.Indeed, the worst tyrant is not the one who locks you up; it is the one whostarves you. The worst tyrant is not the one who takes you by the collar; it isthe one who takes you by the belly.No liberty without equality! There is no liberty in a society where capitalis monopolized in the hands of an increasingly smaller minority, in asociety where nothing is divided equally, not even public education, whichis paid for by everyone's money.We believe that capital is the common patrimony of mankind because itis the fruit of the collaboration between past and present generations, andthat it ought to be put at the disposal of everyone in such a way that no oneis excluded and in such a way that no one can hoard one part of it to thedetriment of other people.In one word, what we want is equality. We want factual equality as thecorollary of liberty, indeed as its essential preliminary condition.156Memoirs of Louise MichelTo each according to his rights; to each according to his needs.That is what we want; that is what our energies are devoted to. It is whatshall be, because no limitation can prevail against claims that are bothlegitimate and necessary. That is why the government wishes to discreditus.Villains that we are, we claim bread for all, knowledge for all, work forall, independence and justice for all.That was the manifesto of the anarchists. I was in London when thetrial began, but I arrived in time to go to several of the last sessions andto see the prosecutor, M. Fabreguettes. When I looked at his angularprofile, with his arm raised and the wide sleeve of his robe rolled up, andheard his biting words, I thought of an engraving I had dreamed infront of during my childhood, an engraving of the Grand Inquisitor,Tomas de Torquemada.I have only one account of the speeches I gave at Lyon during thetrial, and I no longer remember which newspaper it was taken from:Telegraphed from Lyon, 19 January 1883Yesterday evening in the Elysee meeting hall, Louise Michel gave alecture for the benefit of the families of the detained anarchists.The meeting proclaimed Kropotkin and Bernard as honorary chairmen.When Louise Michel started her speech, she stated that only force cantransform society, since force is being used to destroy it.At Lyon, she said, anarchists are in the dock. In England they aremembers of the House of Commons.Louise Michel said she had brought back a resolution signed by theFrench refugees in London protesting againstthe trial at Lyon anddeclaring their solidarity with the accused and their theories. But becauseshe knew she was under police surveillance, she had destroyed the piece soas not to compromise anyone.Louise Michel developed at length her ideas on the situation of womenin present society.The chairman put the order of the day-the taking up of arms todefend oneself against the bourgeoisie-to a vote. It was adopted.At this point a person named Besson requested that the journalistspresent be expelled. Louise Michel protested, saying that liberty must beequal for everyone.Another speaker requested the assembly to pass a motion in favor ofacquitting the anarchists. The chairman answered that that matter was thebusiness of the court and not of the assembly. Such a resolution could notbe passed without the consent of the persons accused.The meeting adjourned in the midst of cheering by those present.Memoirs of Louise Michel157Of course, the court found Kropotkin and all the others guilty. Theidiocy of the charge was no defense, and Kropotkin and the maindefendants were sentenced to five years' imprisonment.With all this in my mind I returned to Paris at the end of January1883.Chapter 21The Trial of 1883Several weeks after the trial at Lyon, it seemed to me that I would havebeen an accessory to cowardice if I did not use the liberty I wasallowed-I don't know why-to call up a new and immense International which would stretch from one end of the earth to the other.On 9 March 1883 there was a mass demonstration at the Esplanade of lesInvalides, after which Louise Michel led a number of demonstrators across Paris.For that, she was accused of rioting and looting. A massive police hunt for her inParis and throughout Europe ensued while she remained comfortably hidden atthe home of the editor of L'Intransigeant, M. Vaughan. On March 30 shesurrendered herself in a farce designed to make the police look as foolish aspossible.I stayed in hiding for three weeks. While certain reporters claimedthey were chatting with me in a house where I wasn't present, others sawme at a pleasure party in the Bois de Boulogne, where I wasn't either. Iwas living with the families of my friends Vaughan and Meusy, fromwhere I made my way to my mother's, dressed as a man. In those clothesI would have been able either to stay hidden in Paris or take my motherabroad.I would even have been able to continue to publicize theRevolution. Wearing men's clothing, I had often gone to meetings fromwhich women were excluded. Dressed in a National Guard's or soldier'suniform during the Commune, I went many times to places wherepeople hardly expected to have to deal with a woman.You, my friends, who gave me hospitality after the demonstration atles Invalides as if I were a family member, when you read this, remember that I was sorry to cause you so much trouble. Your true spirit wasrevealed when you sheltered me from the searchers, but I had to facetrial. We must be implacable, especially concerning ourselves. Lies aretoo shameful.Louise and Augustine, remember that you agreed, and you told methat I was right. I haven't forgotten, and I know you will feel that sameway always. If your brothers will need courage for the things they'll see,you will need a hundred times more. Women must have dry eyes todaywhere men might cry.Memoirs of Louise Michel159And you, you other little boys and girls, do you really believe I haveforgotten you? If Paul and Marius one day become what I believe theywill, they, too, will need courage. May the one who is a poet and the onewho is a musician go their way in sunlight.And you, Marie and Marguerite, you,too, my little ones, you arecoming to that great moment when humanity is on the march, and youmust not weaken. It will be so much the worse for you, but the better forhumanity.Let me get back to my trial. Several of our friends offered to defendme, but each one of us must explain his own thought himself. Then, too,it was impossible for me to choose between those who had alreadydefended our friends the way free men should be defended, andLocamus, who had defended the deportees called before the colonialcourts at Noumea.So many times we saw Locamus pass by us, going away to prison inhandcuffs, with his clients having been acquitted at the cost of his beingsentenced for insulting the judiciary. He prized those theatrics andmade the courts do it to him so that the whole process would lookridiculous. As he was being taken away, Locamus used to laugh in a waythat made you laugh,too. He swaggered, just like Lisbonne in hisconvict's uniform. The only difference was that Locamus, standingstraight, used to shake his great curly head, and Lisbonne, striking outwith his crutch, raised his head under his mane. Both of them lookedlike lions.As the trial progressed, I was conscious of how bothersome it was tospeak to a court when you are only one of several persons accused. Youhave to be very careful, because the prosecutors wait in ambush overyour sentences to get them to serve, when possible, as ammunition forprosecuting the others. I hope I avoided that trap.There were a number of young people disguised as lawyers-perhapsthey were newly created lawyers-who gathered together like a classicalchorus to stare at me and laugh or do other things like that. I hope thatthe three or four who stopped shouting insults themselves have notallowed themselves to be reenlisted in the band that insults the dead. Ihope that they won't look at things through the wrong end of theiropera-glasses again, and that the names of Valles, Rigault, Vermorel, deMilliere, Delescluze, and so many others who have been students just likethem will sometimes come to their minds.At my trial I used to think of Erasmus's Praise of Folly. The scepters offools were missing, but the sound of the little bells that dangle fromthem tinkled in your ears. The obtuse jurors were bewildered by theindictment, in which they had been told that if they did not convict metheir shops would not be safe. I was accused of the burlesque charge that160Memoirs of Louise MichelI had laughed on their doorsteps. Youngsters came to insult me, butsome of them were pacified and left-perhaps captured by the Revolution, which blows through the courts.It is not me, messieurs, whom you condemned. You know very wellthat I was not acting from motives of personal gain. It is myoid motherwhom you condemned to death-and she is dead now.Let me give myself justice here. The accusation that I laughed wasonly a decoy. They did not want to accuse me of anything else because awoman is killed more quickly by ridicule. Let's get the facts straight.What people prosecute me for is my ideas. That is why I quoted thecomplete Manifesto of Lyon in the last chapter. I share all of the ideaswritten there.This is justice. Now that I have quoted that manifesto and confessedthat the ideas in it are the same as my beliefs, justice is done. I thereforehave no need to worry any more about commenting on the details of mytrial, although I will quote the transcript.At my trial it was agreed that I laughed on a doorstep one day whenpeople were asking those inside for work. I did this, although my motherhad begged me to wait until she was dead before I took part in any moredemonstrations.Here is the record of the trial taken from the Gazette des tribunaux.SUPERIOR COURT OF THE SEINE DISTRICTM. RAMi, PRESIDING JUDGESESSION OF 21 JUNE 1883Louise Michel, Jean-Joseph-Emile Pouget, and Eugene Mareuil arecharged:1. With having been the leaders and instigators of looting committedby a band in Paris in March 1883, the said looting having been committed by force and the loot consisting of loaves of bread belonging to themarried couple Augereau, who are bakers;2. With having been, at the said time and place,the leaders andinstigators of forceful looting committed by a band, the loot consisting ofloaves of bread belonging to the married couple Bouche, who arebakers;3. With the similar looting, the loot consisting of loaves of breadbelonging to the married couple Moricet, who are bakers.THE QUESTIONING OF LOUISE MICHELQuestion: Have you ever been prosecuted?LOUISE MICHEL: Yes, in 1871.Question: That can't be mentioned any more. Those deeds were coveredby the amnesty. Have you been convicted since then?Memoirs of Louise Michel161MICHEL: I was sentenced to two weeks in pnson for the Blanquidemonstration.Question: Do you take part in every demonstration that occurs?MICHEL: Unfortunately, yes. I am always on the side of the wretched.Question: Because of that habit you went to the demonstration at theEsplanade of les Invalides. What result did you hope for?MICHEL: A peaceful demonstration never produces results, but Ithought the government would follow its usual policy and sweep thecrowd with cannon fire, so it would have been cowardly of me not to go.Question: You recruited your followers for that demonstration. Did youknow Pouget?MICHEL: I had met Pouget at some meetings.Question: Pouget was your secretary. He was supposed to distributebrochures propagating your ideas in the provinces. He acquired a nameas one of your followers.MICHEL: They are not, properly speaking, followers. Some people arecurious about our ideas.Question: You were the leader of a small demonstration that followed thegeneral demonstration, but let's take care of your participation in thegeneral demonstration first. You went to les Invalides and you metPouget there?MICHEL: Yes, monsieur.Question: Had you planned with Pouget and MareuilEsplanade?MICHEL: No, monsieur. We met by chance.Question: Wasn't the demonstration only for unemployed workers?MICHEL: Yes, monsieur.Question: Did you think that this demonstration could provide work?MICHEL: I've already told you, no. I went there out of duty.Question: The demonstration was dispersed. Isn't it true that at thatmoment you decided to make your own little demonstration?MICHEL: It wasn't a demonstration. I wanted to make people hear thecry of the workers.Question: You asked for a black flag?MICHEL: Yes, and someone brought me a black rag.Question: Who gave it to you?MICHEL: A person I didn't know.Question: You don't find a flag so easily and accidentally on the Esplanade of les Invalides.MICHEL: All you need to do is find a broomstick and a black rag.Question: It was easy to find because the demonstration had beenprepared in advance. Who had prepared that flag?MICHEL: No one. Even if somebody had, you know quite well that Iwouldn't point him out.to go to the162Memoirs of Louise MichelQuestion: Didn't you leave the Esplanade with the intention of making adisturbance?MICHEL: I simply put myself at the head of a group.Question: Were Pouget and Mareuil part of it?MICHEL: Yes, they were determined to protect me.Question: What was your purpose in crossing Paris with a black flag? Didyou believe you could get bread for the workers that way?MICHEL: No, but I wanted to make people see that the workers didn'thave any and that they were hungry. The black flag is the flag of strikesand the flag of famines.The judge ordered the bailiff to go to the table of exhibits and pick upa black flag, which Louise Michel identified as the one she carried onMarch 9.Question: You came to the boulevard Saint-Germain. Why did you stop infront of Bouche's bakery?MICHEL: I kept on walking. The kids told me that someone was givingthem bread. I didn't bother with the details.Question: You claim that the bakers were voluntarily giving bread away?MICHEL: Yes, monsieur. The kids told me they were being given breadand some small change. I was very humbled by that.Question: And the men who were armed with clubs. Was anyone givingthem bread voluntarily?MICHEL: We didn't have anyone with us armed with a club. They are notamong the accused.Question: You can't challenge the facts. The witness Bouche saw youarriving at the head of a mob, and fifteen or twenty individuals movedaway from it to pillage his shop. They were chanting, "Bread and workor lead."MICHEL: They weren't with us. That was something the police staged.Question: You said during one interrogation that you didn't look ontaking bread as a crime.MICHEL: Yes, I said that, but I have never taken any, and I never shalltake any, even if I were dying of hunger.Question: When you were stopped on the place Maubert, did you say tothe police officer, "Don't hurt me. We are only asking for bread"?MICHEL:asking for bread. You won't be hurt."Question: In short, M. Bouche's bakery was completely looted.MICHEL: I did not see the bakery, nor do I know M. Bouche.Question: The shop sticks out into the street and stares you in the face.MICHEL:I wasn't thinking aboutbakers' shops.I didn't say, "Don't hurt me." Perhaps I said, "We are onlyI was thinking only about poverty;Memoirs of Louise Michel163Question: You then arrived in front of M. Augereau's shop?MICHEL: I don't know M. Augereau.Question: Did you raise your flag in front of that shop?MICHEL: I could have raised and lowered it many times.Question: Did you say "Go"?MICHEL: I could have said it. I must have said "Let's go": or "Let's move"many times. I don't remember it.Question: How many persons did you see around you?MICHEL: I don't know.Question: To be brief, the shop of M. Augereau was completely wrecked.MICHEL: I didn't know that, and I am astonished that M. Augereau isconcerned with trifles like that. I have seen something else plunderedand killed.Question: Then you are absolutely indifferent to the looting of his shop?MICHEL: Yes, absolutely indifferent.Question: Then you moved out into the boulevard Saint-Germain andstopped in front of Moricet's shop?MICHEL: I don't know, and I don't understand why you're asking mesuch a question.Question: Did you start to laugh in front of Moricet's shop?MICHEL: What could have made me laugh? Would it have been thedistress of the people around me? Would it have been the sad state ofthings which takes us back before 1789?Question: In short, you claim to be unacquainted with all those events I'vementioned.MICHEL: Yes, monsieur.Question: But those three merchants who were robbed assert that thecrowd was obeying a signal.MICHEL: That's absurd. To obey a signal, it would have to be agreedupon in advance. Therefore, it would have been necessary to make itknown throughout Paris that I would raise or lower a flag in front of thebakeries.Question: Then the looting was an instinctive movement of the populace?MICHEL: It was the work of a few children. The reasonable peoplearound me did not bother with it.Question: You leftleavingPouget and Mareuil, who had gotten themselves arrested to save you, inthe hands of the police. Then you disappeared.MICHEL: My friends demanded that I not let myself be arrested at thattime.Question: Did you know about Pouget's having distributed a brochureentitled To the People'S Army in the provinces?MICHEL: At the time when the Orleanists were openly inciting peopleagainst the Republic, I wanted to incite people to support the Republic,the demonstration atthe Place Maubert,164Memoirs of Louise Micheland that brochure was distributed at my suggestion. It was a cry ofanguish.Question: Did you know about the special studies of incendiary materialsto which Pouget devoted himself?MICHEL: Today, everybody is interested in science. Everybody reads theRevue scientifique and tries to better the lot of the workers through theinformation there.Question: We aren't here to make theories. Were you informed about thestudies Pouget was making?MICHEL: I do not pay any attention to whether someone reads or doesnot read scientific journals.The court then proceeded to question M. Pouget. [The account of hisincluded in the Gazette des tribunaux. The otherquestioning is notwitnesses were examined next.]THE WITNESSESJULES BOUCHE, baker, rue de Canettes: On March 9, around one o'clockin the afternoon, a score of people invaded my bakery. They werearmed with leaded canes and demanded "bread or work." I told them,"If you want bread, take some, but don't break anything."Question: Do you recognize the accused?BOUCHE: No, monsieur.Question: Did you let them take your bread because you couldn't dootherwise?BOUCHE: There was no way to do anything; any resistance was impossible.Question: Was it children who came into your shop?BOUCHE: No, sir. They were of the age of reason. (Laughter)LOUISE MICHEL: The persons armed with leaded canes weren't ours. Iknow where they came from.Question: Where?MICHEL: The police. (Laughter)MME AUGEREAU, wife, baker, rue du Four-Saint-Germain: During theafternoon of March 9 Mme Louise Michel stopped in front of my door.Someone yelled, "Bread, bread!" These men entered my store and stolesome bread and baked goods. They broke a platter and two windowpanes.Question: Was it youngsters who plundered your shop?MME AUGEREAU: Oh, there were more grown-ups than youngsters.Question: Where was Louise Michel while they were plundering yourshop?MME AUGEREAU: She was stationed exactly in the middle of the street.Memoirs of Louise Michel165Question: Did you give your bread away voluntarily?MME AUGEREAU: Oh, no, monsieur.THE WIFE OF MORICET, baker, 125, boulevard Saint Germain: LastMarch 9, a crowd gathered in front of my shop. At its head was LouiseMichel. She stopped in front of my shop, struck the ground with herflag, and started to laugh. The crowd was asking for bread or work. Ibegan to give them bread, but they didn't wait for it. They took itthemselves and broke up everything.Question (to Louise Michel): What do you think of that testimony? Is itclear enough?LOUISE MICHEL: So clear I have never seen anything like it. (Laughter)How was I able to laugh in front of her store? She dreamed all of it.MME MORICET: I'm here to say what I saw.LOUISE MICHEL: You are free to say what you want, but I'm free to saythat you dreamed it.Question (to the witness): You didn't give your bread to those peoplefreely?MME MORICET: No, monsieur, I did it because they were making suchfrightful gestures when they came in;they were yelling, "Work andbread!"LOUISE MICHEL: Oh, they were very frightful. I, too, was frightful. Thesewomen were hallucinating from fear. They saw Louise Michel as amonster.CORNAT, a municipal police officer of the VIe Arrondissement: On lastMarch 9 when I learned that a gang was crossing the arrondissementyelling out seditious slogans, I went in pursuit and caught up with it atthe Place Maubert. The gang was led by Louise Michel, with Pouget andMareuil at her side. I arrested the latter two, and Pouget called me acoward and a scoundrel. As for Louise Michel, she was able to slip away.All those people were yelling, "Long live the Revolution! Down with thepolice!"Question: Did not Louise Michel say something to you?POLICEMAN CORNAT: She said to me: "Don't hurt me."BLANC, a policeman in the VIe Arrondissement: Last March 9 a policeman came to inform the municipal police officer that a bakery on the ruede Canettes was being plundered. We set off in pursuit of the gang, andwe caught up with it at the Place Maubert. The municipal police officerstopped Louise Michel, who said to him, "Don't hurt us; we're onlyasking for bread." Pouget called the municipal police officer a cowardand a scoundrel. Mareuil yelled out, "Down with the police! Down withVidocq! Long live the Social Revolution!" The assailants had leadedcanes, revolvers, and knives.166Memoirs of Louise MichelLOUISE MICHEL: I never said, "Don't hurt us," but only, "You won't behurt." Both those men were very disturbed.Question (to Louise Michel): No one but you was showing any self-control?LOUISE MICHEL: We have seen so much of it! For the sake of the honorof the Revolution,to point outdiscrepancies in the witnesses' testimony. I have never prostrated myselfin front of anyone, and I have never asked for mercy. You can sayanything you want to about us, you can sentence us to prison, but I donot want you to dishonor us.I surely have the rightI protest.SESSION OF JUNE 22WITNESSES FOR THE PROSECUTION (CONTINUED)YOUNG MLLE MORICET: Last March 9, I was in the shop with my sisterand mother when I saw a gang stop in front. They were led by a womanarmed with a black flag. That woman stopped in front of the shop,struck the ground with her flag, and began to laugh.Immediately the gang rushed into the shop, and took all the breadthen they broke the platters and windows. I wentand cakes there;quickly to get my father.Question: You are very sure you saw Louise Michel stop in front of theshop and laugh while she struck the ground with her flag?YOUNG MLLE MORICET: Yes, monsieur.LOUISE MICHEL: I would be ashamed to respond to testimony like that. Iflittle Mlle Moricet brings in her sister, her cousin, her little brotherwhomever she wants-I will not hold matters up to answer charges asfrivolous as those. I shall wait for the prosecution's summation before Ianswer them.YOUNG MLLE MORICET, the sister of the preceding one: I was in the shopwith my mother. Suddenly I saw a whole gang headed by a woman. Itwas madame. She began to laugh as she looked at the shop, and I evensaid to my mother, "Hey, she knows you?" At that moment all thosepeople rushed into the shop and started to take everything.LOUISE MICHEL: I will repeat what I said a moment ago: It is shameful tosee children reciting in this court the lessons that their parents havetaught them.[WITNESSES FOR THE DEFENSE]CHAUSSADAT, a painter, quai de Louvre, was heard at the request of thedefense: On March 9, I was at the corner of the rue de Seine oppositethe Moricet bakery. From a distance I saw the crowd arrive. Mlle LouiseMichel went by without stopping. Later I heard talk about the looting ofthe bakery, or rather I saw bread thrown about.Memoirs of Louise Michel167Question: You don't call that plundering?CHAUSSADAT: I saw that bread was being thrown about, and some poorpeople were gathering it up.LOUISE MICHEL: I must thank the witness for rendering homage to thetruth.[Three witnesses, Rochefort, Vaughan, and Meusy, testified concerning a sum of money in Pouget's possession, declaring that it came from acollection taken up at the demonstration. That testimony is irrelevant toLouise Michel's trial, and it has been omitted.]ROUILLON, a neighbor of Louise Michel's mother: Citizen Louise Michelhad absolutely no faith in the result of the demonstration. She told methat before she went ro it. The citizen went only out of duty.The witness Rouillon then went into lengthy details about the violenceand threats to which Louise Michel and her family have been subjected.LOUISE MICHEL: You can see very clearly that our families are beingmurdered in our homes, and the authorities are allowing it to happen.That was the last witness forthe defense. Then Avocat-generalQuesnay de Beaurepaire was called on. Then Maitre Balandreau, thecounsel appointed for Louise Michel, declared that she intended todefend herself.LOUISE MICHEL'S STATEMENTWhat is being done to us here is a political proceeding. It isn't we whoare being prosecuted, but the anarchist party through us. For thatreason I had to refuse Maitre Balandreau's offer to defend me and alsothe offer made by our friend Laguerre, who, not long ago, undertook todefend our comrades at Lyon so warmly.M. I'Avocat-general has invoked the Law of 1871 against us. I won'tbother to find out whether this Law of 1871 wasn't made by the victorsagainst the vanquished, made against those whom they were crushing asa millstone crushed grain. Eighteen seventy-one was the time when theNational Guard was being hunted on the plains, when Gallifet waspursuing us in the catacombs, when the streets of Paris had heaps ofcorpses piled on either side.What is surprising you, what is appalling you,is that a woman isdaring to defend herself. People aren't accustomed to seeing a womanwho dares to think. People would rather, as Proudhon put it, see awoman as either a housewife or a courtesan.168Memoirs of Louise MichelWe carried the black flag because the demonstration was to be absolutely peaceful, and the black flag is the flag of strikes and the flag ofthose who are hungry. Could we have carried any other flag? The redflag is nailed up in the cemeteries, and we should take it up only when wecan protect it. Well, we couldn't do that. I have told you before and nowI repeat: It was an essentially peaceful demonstration.I went to the demonstration. I had to go. Why was I arrested?I've gone throughout Europe saying that I recognize no frontiers,saying that all humanity has the right to the heritage of humanity. Thatinheritance will not belong to us, because we are accustomed to living inslavery; it will belong to those persons in the future who will have libertyand who will know how to enjoy it.When we are told that we are the enemies of the Republic, we haveonly one answer: We founded it upon thirty-five thousand of ourcorpses. That is how we defended the Republic.You speak of discipline, of soldiers who fired on their officers. Do youbelieve, M. l'Avocat-general, that if at Sedan the soldiers had fired attheir leader~, who were betraying them, they would not have been doingthe right thing? If they had done that, we wouldn't have had the filth ofSedan.M. l'Avocat-general has talked a lot about soldiers. He has boastedabout those who carried the anarchist manifestos to their superiors. Howmany officers, how many generals reported back the bribes of Chantillyand the manifestos of M. Bonaparte? I'm not putting [the Duc d']Orleans or M. Bonaparte on trial; we're putting their ideas on trial. M.Bonaparte has been acquitted, and we are being prosecuted. I pardonthose who commit the crime, although I do not pardon the crime. Isn't itsimply a law of might makes right which is dominating us? We want toreplace it with the idea that right makes right. That is the extent of ourcrime.Above the courts, beyond the twenty years in prison you can sentenceus to-beyond even a life sentence-I see the dawn of liberty andequality breaking.Knowing whatis going on around you, you too are tired of it,disgusted by it. How can you remain calm when you see the proletariatconstantly suffering from hunger while others are gorging themselves?the demonstration at les Invalides would come tonothing, and yet it was necessary to go there. At this time in history weare very badly off. We do not call the regime that rules us a republic. Arepublic is a form of government which makes progress, where there isjustice, where there is bread for all. How does the republic you havemade differ from the Empire? What is this talk about liberty in thecourts when five years of prison waits at the end?We knew thatMemoirs of Louise Michel169I do not want the cry of the workers to be lost. You will do with mewhat you wish, but it's a question of more than me alone. It's a matterthat concerns a large part of France, a large part of the world, for peopleare becoming more and more anarchistic. People are sickened whenthey see power used the way it was under M. Bonaparte. The peoplehave already led many revolutions. Sedan relieved us of M. Bonaparteand the people revolted again on the eighteenth of March.There is no doubt that you will see still more revolutions, and for thatwe will march confidently toward the future.When one person alone no longer has authority, there will be light,truth, and justice. Authority vested in one person is a crime. What wewant is authority vested in everyone. M. l'Advocat-general has accusedme of wanting to be a leader; I have too much pride for that, for to be aleader is to lower oneself, and I do not know how to lower myself thatway.Here we are very far from M. Moricet's bakery, and it is difficult forme to return to those details. Do we have to talk about the breadcrumbsdistributed to children? It wasn't bread that we needed; it was work thatwe were asking for. How can you think that reasonable men trifled bytaking a few loaves of bread? Some youngsters were gathering upcrumbs, yes, but it is difficult for me to discuss things that are so trivial. Iwould prefer to return to serious ideas. Young persons should workinstead of going to cafes, and they will learn to fight to ease the plight ofthe unfortunate and to prepare for the future.People recognize homelands only to make them a foyer for war.People recognize frontiers only to make them an object of intrigue. Weconceive homelands and family in a much broader sense. There are ourcrimes.We live in an age of anxiety. Everybody is trying to find his own way,but we say anyhow that whatever happens, if liberty is realized andequality achieved, we shall be happy.The session adjourned at five o'clock and the proceedings werecontinued the next day.SESSION OF JUNE 23The presiding judge asked the accused if they had anything to add intheir defense.Louise Michel spoke as follows:I wish to say only a word. This trial is a political trial. It is a politicaltrial you are going to have to judge.170Memoirs of Louise MichelAs for me, you have given me the role of the primary person accused.I accept it. Yes, I am the only person responsible. I sacrificed myself along time ago, and what is pleasant or unpleasant to me is no longer astandard to judge by. I see nothing more than the Revolution, and it isthe ideal I shall always serve. It is the Revolution I salute. May it rise upover men instead of rising up over ruins.At two forty-five, the jury withdrew into a room for its deliberations. Itcame back at four-fifteen.The foreman of the jury read the verdict. It was 'guilty,' but mitigatedby extenuating circumstances as far as Louise Michel, Pouget, andMoreau (alias Gareau) were concerned. The other accused were found'not guilty.'After deliberating half an hour, the court passed a sentence by whichthe two accused who had been tried in absentia, Gourget and Thierry,were condemned to two years in prison. Louise Michel was sentenced toto eight years of solitarysix years of solitary confinement, Pougetconfinement, and Moreau (alias Gareau) to one year in prison.Louise Michel and Pouget were also to be placed under police supervision for ten years.THE JUDGE: Those of you found guilty have three days to petition forreversal of the sentences just passed.LOUISE MICHEL: Never! You are too good an imitator of the Empire'smagistrates.From the back of the room violent protests greeted the sentencing ofthe accused. A few cries of "Long live Louise Michell" were heard, andthe session was adjourned in the midst of noise and the most variedoutcries.The tumult continued outside the courtroom and citizen Lisbonne,who called attention to himself by the vehemence of his protests, wasexpelled from the Palais de Justice. The crowd continued to stand forsome time on the Place Dauphine. [Here ends the account taken fromthe Gazette des tribunaux.]NOTESince I am speaking to the crowd today, I shall say what I did not thinkwas necessary to say in front of the prosecutor because we were nottrying to move our judges. It would have been a useless effort becausewe were judged in advance.I did not start laughing stupidly in front of some door-and havingjust left my mother who was begging me to wait until she was no longeralive before going to demonstrations, I did not feel much like laughing.Memoirs of Louise Michel171As for choosing Moricet's bakery to be the target of a revolutionarymovement, I do not need to defend myself against such an absurdity.It is not a question of breadcrumbs. What is at stake is the harvest ofan entire world, a harvest necessary to the whole future human race, onewithout exploiters and without exploited.Chapter 22PrisonThere's no party without a morning after. Two years ago on July 14, 1was taken to the Centrale Prison at Clermont. Women's prisons are lessharsh than men's. I did not suffer from cold or hunger or any of thevexations our male friends underwent.As far as I am concerned, my stay in prison was as easy as it would befor any other schoolmistress. Solitude is restful, especially for a personwho has spent a great part of her life always needing an hour of silenceand never finding it, except at night. That is the case with a greatnumber of schoolmistresses.In those silent hours of the night, she hurries to think, to feel alive, toread, to write, to be just a little free. At the end of the day, at the lastlesson, she feels herself becoming an overworked beast of the fields, buta beast that is still proud, still lifting its head to go to the end of the hourwithout breaking down. When the hour is ended, silence surrounds her,fatigue has disappeared, and she lives and thinks and is free. In prison, Ifound those few hours of rest laboriously paid for over long years.I'm going to write a book on prisons. I have a lot of pages for italready, and all I have to do is gather them up. The first pages will bededicated to the poor gallant ambulance attendants of the Commune,the women condemned to death who instead were sent to Cayenne,where the climate is the murderer. They were convicted because theyhad cared for the wounded of the Commune and,in passing, forwounded men of the Versailles forces. Wounded men belonged toneither side, and those brave women dressed the wounds of anyone theyfound, whereas the leaders of the Versailles forces often opportunistically abandoned their wounded soldiers so they could snipe at us better.Victor Hugo got pardons for those unpretentious and gallant women,Retif and Marchais. Following them were Suetens, Papavoine, andLachaise, who had been condemned to forced labor for the same deeds.After my first pages on the ambulance attendants, the chapters thatfollowed would belong to the friends met in prison. I would begin withmy own. At Satory the wives of my prisoner friends were not afraid toembrace me, although I warned them that the authorities were going to"treat me as I deserved." By embracing me they risked their lives. AtChantiers in the great morgue of the living, it was the same, under theMemoirs of Louise Michel173rags hung at night along the walls. I must thank those brave souls fortheir friendship.Many, alas, are now dead. The first to die was Mme Dereure; alreadyill, she could not survive the harsh ordeals to which she had to submit. Inthe full view of conquered Paris, the colors of the Commune followedher coffin. Without doubt, others are dead; we have not seen themagam.How many prisons! Have I said that already? Yes, how many prisons.From Bastion 37 to New Caledonia, stopping at Satory, Chantiers, laRochelle, Clermont, Saint-Lazare ...When my book on prisons appears, grass will have grown up over stillmore unknown corpses, but the idea will remain the same. It will still beon the same subject: that human beings suffering through destitution,poverty, and ignorance are not responsible for acts against each other.The old nations are the murderers, the old nations, where the strugglefor existence is so terrible that people turn on each other incessantly,clamoring for their prey. The only noise that can be heard is the cries ofcrows and the flapping of their wings above people who have beenbeaten to the earth.A trap is set all around us, and poor, wretched women get caught in it.Is it the fault of those poor women that there is a place for some of themonly in the streets or on display? Is it their fault if they have stolen a fewsous to live on or to keep their children alive? Rich people can spendmillions of francs and thousands of living beings on their whims. I can'tstop myself from speaking about those things with such bitterness.Everything weighs so heavily on women. I'm well placed to judge thathere at Saint-Lazare prison, this general warehouse from which womenleave in all directions-even to liberty. Someone who stays here only afew days cannot see things clearly, but after being here for a long time, aperson can sense how many generous hearts beat under the shame thatstifles them.You know the lines from Hugo:Lazarus, Lazarus, LazarusRise up.Yes, like Lazarus, rise up, you poor women. You have fought so longand you are crying over your shame, and it isn't you who are guilty. Wasit you who gave the fat, scrofulous, swollen bourgeois their hunger forfresh flesh? Was it you who gave pretty girls, who owned nothing, theidea of making themselves into merchandise?And the others, the female thieves, how guilty are they? When womenare thrown into the street, it is certain that they will go wherever the manthey call their pimp sends them, because he beats them and exploitsthem. They will also go into the streets alone. People keep walking when174Memoirs of Louise Michelthey are lost. There are also seamstresses who steal. They have kept littleremnants of the cloth they were stitching. Do the great dress designerscarry those remnants home? Other women deceive their husbands.Haven't their husbands ever deceived them? If only we let people chooseeach other instead of making marriages by matching up fortunes, thatwould happen less often.Still other people, old women most often, when they are dying ofhunger and want to live a little longer, insult a policeman to get somebread in prison. I saw one old woman who had eaten nothing for such along time that after she had a little soup she sank down as if she weredrunk. A few days later she died. Her stomach could no longer accustomitself to receiving nourishment.When I was in my cell at Clermont, I was unable to see anybody, but Iheard some scraps of conversations. From a cell you can understandeverything best. Every cell looks out on some kind of courtyard andvoices rise up to it. All you have to do is follow a few of the parts of thishorrible choir of misery. Here are some fragments. I am choosing onesthat tell the sadness at the bottom of misery. Listen to them."You're getting out tomorrow. You're lucky.""Hell, no. It's too cold and hungry outside.""But your mother has a nice place.""She was thrown out because I was in prison.""Where is she?""In the street.""Where are you going to go?""Big Chiffe made me ask to go back to tricking on the streets. I'll givemy mother however much the prison sends me out with, and I'll go backto Big Chiffe.""You'll be back here again, I bet.""What could I do so I wouldn't be? There's no work for girls who haveworn-out work permits. People with prison numbers can't get one."Here are some others."Where are you from?""From Saint-Lazare, naturally, because I'm from Paris.""What did you do?""How should I know? My pimp stole somebody's stash, and it lookedlike I was his partner.""You didn't know anything about it?""Do you think he tells me where he's going to work his fingers to thebone?""Maybe he gives you something."Memoirs of Louise Michel175"Him? Give to me? He takes my stuff. He has to get fifteen francs aday off me.""What does he do with it?""Lady, he isn't rich. He's got to payoff a buddy who knows what hedoes. If he doesn't pay him off, his buddy will split on him to the cops.""What do you do to make him his fifteen francs?""I did the window bit. That's better than tricking on the streets. You'vegot to live. When I went looking for real work, I got sent away from thestores because I wasn't dressed well enough. One time somebody lent mea dress, and then it was the other side: I was too well dressed. Then thisjohn picked me up, and that was that. I had to get a card, and on top ofthat, a pimp.""Where'd you do the window?""At Relingue's place-you know her, the one that gets herself arrestedso she can recruit for her crib in the prison.""That Relingue woman! If you ask me, I'll take this crib over hers. Shemakes too many francs out of our poor carcasses.""So where else would I go? Prison grain takes root only on sidewalks."And here are some others."Hey, you look sad, snub-nose.""That's because I'm just going out to meet up with my bad luck.""What's your bad luck?""He's the father of my children.""Are you married?""No.""Why don't you leave him?""Because he's the father of my children. The poor dog got upset aboutthe first ones, but men stand pain less easily than women. When ill windsblow, they have to lie down."And after women prisoners are released, there isn't any place forthem to seek refuge. There are some asylums for women who get out ofprison, but they don't have room for everybody. It's only holding out acup to catch a waterfall.If the women in prisons horrify you, it is society that disgusts me. Let'stake away the sewer first. When the place is clean with the sunlightshining on it, then nobody will have to roll around in the sewer anymore. You young girls with sweet, pure voices, here are some girls yourown age with rough, broken voices. Your voices are clear because you donot live the way they do, drinking to divert your mind, drinking to forgetthat you're alive.176Memoirs of Louise MichelSaint-Lazare. Listen, you young girls who have never left your mothers, there are some children here like you, children sixteen years old.But the ones here either don't have mothers, or their mothers didn'thave the spare time to watch over them. The poor cannot watch overtheir little ones; they cannot even take the time to watch over their dead.The young girls in Saint-Lazare are pale and blighted. Idiots claim ithas to be that way to protect you nice girls from men hungering for freshflesh. If they weren't able to glut themselves on the daughters of thepeople, they would attack you. We no longer eat each other's flesh theway our cave-dwelling ancestors did-we aren't strong enough-but weeat each other's lives.That is equality and justice.Let's glance at one of the most terrible human misfortunes. I want thereader to revolt against the crimes of society instead of only having himlament the woes of one person.Bordello-keepers trade women with each other, just as farmers tradehorses or cattle. Women are just herds of livestock, and this humanlivestock makes more profit.When the johns of some city in the provinces decide that some weakwoman is too worn out or they get tired of her, the bordello-keeperarranges it so the girl owes the house a sum she can never payoff. Thatmakes her a slave. Then she can be swapped in any horse-trade possible.The animal has to go into whatever stable will make the most profit forthe swappers.For other girls it is an enlistment. They come from their provinces toonaive to know any better, or if they are Parisians and aware that thereare ogres for fresh flesh and appetites to feed, poverty makes themtractable. Then, too, there is false finery to lure them; when they areonce in the lion's den, they will be charged six times its worth to get themin debt.There is also recruiting. Despicable old women find ways to getthemselves imprisoned for a few months, and then they recruit andentice all the pretty girls who are stranded in prison. They tell the girlsthey don't have to fear being hungry. When they leave there will be adrinking spree-enough of a spree for the girls to die from it. Theirvoices will get hoarse, and their bodies will fallto pieces. It'll be aspree-a spree for the hungry bourgeois.The women on the street are still the least unhappy; those in closedhouses have a life so horrible that it would surprise people who nolonger feel surprise. What I know about it I will write sometime, becauseit is so terrible, so shameful, that people must learn about it.But for the moment I'll stay with the pathetic stories of the streetwalkers. Won't anyone ever understand that to allow prostitution is tosupport every crime? Once a woman becomes a prostitute, she becomesMemoirs of Louise Michel177numb while she obtains money from idiots; and men thereby becomemurderers. Everybody should know that, so why does prostitutioncontinue to exist?If the great merchants of the trade in women who crisscross Europecanvassing orders for their business were each hanging on the end of ahangman's rope, I wouldn't go cut it.And when a poor girl who believes she has entered an honest house(there are some) realizes where she is and finds it impossible to leave,and then with her own hands she strangles one of the despicable personswho keeps her there, or she sets the cursed place on fire, I believe it isbetter to do those things than to wait for court action. So long ascircumstances are as they are, there will be no change.Will the owls who bite the paws off mice to keep them in their nestsever stop acting so cruelly? If the captive mouse, instead of uttering hislittle plaintive cry from the owl's nest between earth and heaven, whichare equally deaf, tried to gnaw the throat of the owl that was eating him,the first mouse to do so would certainly die. But eventually the owlwould become fearful, and as every being wishes to continue living, theowl would end up keeping itself alive on grain rather than risking death.That's the way the poor human livestock must proceed. A womanshould not waste her time demanding illusory rights. The people whopromise them to her have no such rights themselves. She ought to takeher place at the head of the group which is struggling and at the sametime free herself from prostitution. No other person can free her fromit. When she no longer wants to be the prey of appetites and lusts, shewill know that death is preferable to that life, and she will not be sostupid as to die uselessly.Here is what I am hearing while I am writing this. It is the story of asale."There was a fellow who made me sell it on the boul' de Batignolles.He wanted to give me only twenty sous, but I was hungry, and then I hada pimp who had a deal with the cops. I had to pay him or he would havebeaten me up, and I sure didn't want that.""What did you do with the forty sous from the old goat who was sodrunk?""I gave twenty to my pimp and twenty to a poor little kid.""Why didn't you try to get away when the cops grabbed you?""Because, I told you, I had nothing to drink. Might as well be inprison. Shit, might as well be dead."Yes, those poor girls speaking from the bottom of the pit are right. Itwould be better to die than to continue a life where you have to drink soas not to feel being alive.178Memoirs of Louise MichelI don't want to believe that a man has to feed himself by gorginghimself with all sorts of orgies. Even if he does, however, a woman,whoever she is, must not be dirtied by these indecent brutalities.But let's look forward, because in the midst of these tortures, the newhumanity will be born. Ferre at the execution post at Satory, the nihilistsfrom the czar's gallows, the German socialists with their heads under theaxe salute that newborn humanity as I salute it while I look at life, whichnow is more horrible than death.Chapter 23My Mother's DeathFor a while during my deportation my mother lived with a relative shehad always been very fond of, at a little woolens shop opposite theLouvre stores in Paris. After a time she went to live with other relativesin Lagny, and she was living there when I returned from New Caledonia. Four months after my return she moved back to Paris where welived at 24 [sic: 36], rue Poloneeau, and at that place we had fleetingmoments of joy. With my mother and Marie near me, I was almostafraid, because happiness is such a fragile branch, and we break it whenwe rest on it. Two old women, friends of my mother, came to see herevery day, and they gave her those little attentions old people love somuch; my dear Marie stayed with her while I was away at meetings.My mother's last home was at 45, boulevard Ornano on the fifth floor.There she underwent the long torture of two years without me beforeher death. In the middle room her bed was placed parallel to the hall,and above the chest of drawers hung a large portrait of me that MmeJacqueline had painted. How many times my poor mother must havehad her eyes on it during those two years! In her last moments when itwas difficult for her to speak, it seemed to me that she wanted me to givethat painting to Rochefort, and he has kept it for me ever since.On sunny days, so long as we could make her believe that I would be inprison for only one year, she stayed at her window for hours at a time. Itwas there where she had waited for me so often, Mme Bias waiting withher, when I was expected home from my last lecture tours. Each time agroup of prisoners was released my mother would rally because of thehope I would be among them. Finally it was necessary to admit thatinstead of my being sentenced to only one year, I had been sentenced tosix years, and instead of being near her at Saint-Lazare, I was atClermont. Personal hatreds unleashed by unscrupulous persons hadcontributed to my being sentenced to six years in prison, and fromBastille Day of 1884 on, when my mother had to be told the truth, she nolonger went to the window. From the moment she learned that news, shegot up from her easy chair only to lie down on her bed, and from herbed she went only to her coffin.180Memoirs of Louise MichelI could have fled abroad and taken her with me instead of submittingto trial, but I allowed myself to be put on trial because that is our custom.I could also have baffled the people who questioned me. They weretrying to find out if I was responsible, and I could have made fun of theirheavy-handed tricks, but we revolutionaries do not avoid responsibility.I answered the worthy investigators as if I suspected nothing, though Iknew very well where their vengeance came from.In prison I was well treated. Anybody who believes that simply beingwell nourished is enough to make a person happy would have believedme far happier than I was. Even if I had been poorly treated, I wouldhave felt nothing but my mother's affliction.From prison I wrote several letters to the authorities, some at themoment when cholera was rife in Paris, and then I had a twofold right:to be near my mother and to be in the city that I had never deserted in itsdays of trial. I wrote other letters when my mother was in her last days,and I asked to be taken to her. These letters should be in a Book ofMemorial, for they contain two death agonies-my mother's and myown.Here is one letter:Prison of Clermont (Oise)Number 1327Sunday, 15 November 1884(Personal)Monsieur Ie president de la RepubliqueHere is the truth. If no man's heart understands it, may it stand alone asmy witness.For eighteen months I haven't read one line from a newspaper. Butacross the prison wall which separates us from the world a scrap of asentence has reached me. Cholera is in Paris. It has been going on for along time, and all the denials in the world won't convince me otherwise.Not one person has called to mind that in those circumstances my placeis in Paris, even if it be in an underground cell. It is to you, therefore, that Isay: If I am treated like a criminal of the State, remember that I cameforward openly to place myself in the hands of my judges. May they actsimilarly towards me.Louise MichelA week later I wrote:Prison of Clermont (Oise)Number 132721 November 1884Monsieur Ie ministre de I'InterieurI have only my mother left in this world. My cruelest enemies would askMemoirs of Louise Michel181for my immediate transfer to a prison in Paris if I could speak out, becauseunder the present circumstances either her illness or cholera could takemy mother from me.I am not asking for visits or letters in the prison you might put me in. Ifyou want, I won't be eligible for release. But I shall be in Paris breathingthe same air that my mother breathes, and my mother will know that I amthere. She can experience that happiness while she is alive and not aftershe is dead.Sincerely,Louise MichelHere are some fragments of letters I wrote asking to be brought nearmy mother:I shall be absolutely straightforward. In exchange for a release or transferto another prison, just so it be in Paris near my mother, I will go to NewCaledonia when she is no longer with us. I have already been useful there,and I can be so again by founding schools in the midst of the tribes.The beginning of that letter is missing, but undoubtedly it also wassent to the Minister of the Interior. Still another fragment contains thesewords:I have not had an answer to my letters and shall probably never haveone. But considering the times we live in, who knows whether one of yourgrandsons caught in the same situation won't be sorry you didn't answerme.It is not a political question. It is a question concerning mothers, andunfortunately, I shall not be the last prisoner.Louise MichelI do not believe that this sorrow inflicted on my poor old motherincreased anyone's happiness very much, but no one can do anythingabout it any longer. You cannot awaken the dead.For a long time I had no response to the letters I had written to allthose officials. Finally, I was transferred to Saint-Lazare. If the authorities had only brought me near my mother sooner! Her powerfulconstitution immediately rallied at each of my visits, and she would notbe dead.Even at this point my anonymous enemies threatened to trouble herlast days by claiming that her paralysis was some contagious disease.Although the public is always credulous in times of cholera, my enemiesfailed. Those vipers are consoling themselves now by writing false lettersover my name. I envy the happiness of people who bother with this sortof thing. I no longer feel them. All the venom in the world could fall onmy head without my noticing it, and those letters are only a few drops ofwater where a whole ocean has passed.182Memoirs of Louise MichelThe authorities acted very well at the last, and allowed me to go to mydying mother's bedside. As always, the rulers were less evil than theirlaws, and they allowed me several days near her. Policemen, instead oftormenting me, helped me move my mother smoothly from one bed toanother each time she wanted. Those policemen were not like the oneswho take care of politicians, and they weren't among the ones whosavagely beat down the people on May 24 this year at the Pere Lachaisecemetery. My mother thanked the policemen who helped me to moveher, and I remember it, too.At 4:57 in the morning of 3 January 1885 my mother died. When Icame down the stairs at 45, boulevard Ornano on the morning of herburial, I left her lying in her coffin, which had not yet been nailed shut,and I thought of all her sorrow during the past two years. In my heart Ifelt everything she had suffered. Poor mother! How happy she wouldhave been to spend a few days with me.I must say that the authorities acted well here, for I had been able tostay with her until the end. Then, before I left her house forever, I wasable to lay her out on her bed as she used to like to lie down. She nolonger suffered. Let justice be done to everyone in the world, even theleast important person.Because my mother was no longer suffering, I didn't ask the authorities for permission to attend the funeral; with her death I had nothingmore to ask for. Her funeral on 5 January 1885 became the occasion fora massive outpouring of public sentiment. Here is how it was reported:At the Home of the DeceasedThe working-class districts of the city emptied their dark alleys as theyhad done during the great days of the popular awakening. From everydirection came the great mass of the people, the true people, from theirdank dens and from their workshops.In front of 45, boulevard Ornano in the XVIII< Arrondissement thecrowd was such that no traffic could move.The coffin was placed on the hearse at 11 :00 A.M. precisely-too precisely, because thousands of people arrived in the half hour that followedthe departure of the hearse.Louise Michel, before her return to Saint-Lazare prison, had placed afew mementos near the body of her mother: a red-framed photograph ofherself leaning on a rock; a lock of her hair tied with a black ribbon; abouquet of red immortelles which she had brought back from the burial ofher friend, Marie Ferre; a portrait of Marie; and finally, some of theflowers which had been brought to her sick mother during her last days.Citizen Clemenceau had come to offer his condolences to the family andto apologize for not being able to be in the funeral procession.Numerous wreaths had been placed on the coffin and at the rear of thehearse. Many bouquets of real flowers were mingled with the wreaths.Memoirs of Louise Michel183There was one wreath inscribed: "To the mother of Louise Michel fromL'Intransigeant staff'; one from the Libre-Pensee; one from the Bataille; andmany others. Louise Michel placed a wreath made of black beads; it boreonly the words, "To my mother."The funeral procession began. Immediately after the hearse came anold man with white hair. He was M. Michel, the nearest relative of thedeceased, and he was accompanied by his two daughters, the cousins of theimprisoned Louise.Behind them Citizen Henri Rochefort walked with his eldest son,Vaughn, and the entire staff of L'Intransigeant.Then came Citizen Louise Michel's comrades in the struggle, those whofollowed her in becoming enemies of the state and who were continuingthe revolutionary fight in the press or in the courts. Notable among themwere: Alphonse Humbert; joffrin; Eudes; Vaillant; Granger; Lissagaray;Champy; Henri Maret; Lucipia; Odysse Barot; S. Pichon, who is a municipal counsellor of PaFis; Antonio de la Calle, a former member of therevolutionary government of Cartagena; MOise, a councilman in his arrondissement; Frederic Cournet; Victor Simond and Titard of the Radical;and still more-many former deportees from the Ducos Peninsula andconvicts from Nou Island.We must note also the presence of Citizen Deneuvillers, a former exileof 1871 and now L'Intransigeant correspondent at Brussels; Citizen Theleni, the representative of the Radical des Alpes; Bariol, the delegate fromthe Club of the Rights of Man in Vaucluse; P. Arna!, the delegate from theFraternal Association of Republicans of the Basses-Alpes, Vaucluse, andVar; and many delegates representing groups in the provinces and Paris,but we regret we are not able to give all their names.Mingled with this funeral procession of persons who had fought in 1871and persons who had been tested at other times were fervent young peoplefrom recently founded revolutionary groups. Among them were a hundred anarchists. As soon as the funeral procession began to move, theseyoung people unfurled three red flags, one of which bore the inscription:"The Revolutionary Sentinel of the XVIIIe Arrondissement."Behind, filling the entire width of the street, came an immense crowdbringing the tribute of its respect and gratitude to Louise Michel in thesesorrowful circumstances.On the WayNot since the burial of Blanqui has such an imposing spectacle of apopular demonstration occurred-nothing so grand and majestic as yesterday.The funeral procession headed towards the cemetery of Levallois-Perretby way of the boulevards of Ornano, Ney, Bessieres, Berthier, and thePorte de Courcelles. The slope of the ramparts on the right of theprocession was occupied by numerous spectators who rose in tiers up theincline. On the other side, the walls, roofs, and windows were also filledwith the curious.184Memoirs of Louise MichelFrom every street opening on the main road, a new crowd of workersand the poor either lined up respectfully for the passing of the cortege orjoined it, making the procession even larger.The police remained hidden, and thus calm continued to reign and noclashes occurred. Order was kept by only two constables under thedirection of a corporal, butthe authorities had taken extraordinarymeasures to throw a hidden army against the demonstrators if the needarose. The Garde republicaine was to the left of the marchers on the rueOrdone, and policemen had been put inside all the police stations alongthe route. In the courtyard of the La Pepiniere Barracks in the PlaceSaint-Augustine near the Etoile a battalion of infantry was drawn up withtheir packs ready to march.When the funeral procession reached the Porte Ornano, it was estimated at over twelve thousand persons. From time to time the cry of"Long live the Commune!" or "Long live the Social Revolution!" camefrom the midst of that immense crowd.As the cortege crossed the bridge over the Western Line Railroad, twodespatch riders appeared. Because the going and coming of officialmessengers is never a good omen, shouts of "Long live the Revolution!"multiplied. The two riders hurried to withdraw as soon as their task wasdone.At the boulevard Berthier, in front of Bastion 49, a couple of dozenpolicemen were drawn up. They were under the command of Florentin,the municipal police chief of the XVIII' Arrondissement, who had justbeen given a medal for having protected the police spy and agitator,Pottery. This Florentin was doubtless looking forward to working wondershere and winning new stripes and new medals.The moment the hearse passed in front of the police station, Florentin,followed by his men, blocked the boulevard and ordered the red flag to betaken down.Resounding cries of "Long live the Revolution!" and "Long live theCommune!" answered him. The demonstrators, keeping a close watch ontheir flags, seemed ready to defy this savior of informers. At this tensemoment Citizen Rochefort moved towards the police officer and said tohim: "Your attitude is the real provocation. Up to now, everything hashappened in the most perfect order, and your intervention is completelyimproper."Visibly intimidated, Florentin answered, "M. Caubet sent me the expressorder to stop the parading of the red flag.""Those red flags you are speaking of," Rochefort said, "are the bannersof societies which have the perfect right to choose whatever color suitsthem. There were also red banners following Gambetta's coffin, and noone dared to oppose their being unfurled."These words and the forceful attitude of the citizens present madeFlorentin pause. He relented and went with his two dozen men to the headof the funeral procession in front of the hearse.But when the police are not ferocious,they are treacherous. Theyplanned their actions, and at the Porte d'Asnieres, as soon as the hearseMemoirs of Louise Michel185crossed the iron bars in front of the tollbooth, they tried to close the gatesquickly. The police intended to cutthe hearse off from the funeralprocession and thus prevent the exhibition of red flags, which they hadtheir hearts set on doing.They failed to count on the determination of the revolutionaries. Thegates gave way before the pressure of the crowd. A few carriages returningto Paris while this was happening owed their not being inspected at thetollbooth to these events.One last incident occurred while the funeral procession was going alongbeside the tracks of the Inner Circle Railroad. A train passed by with all thepassengers at the side doors. Recognizing the funeral procession of LouiseMichel's mother, a great number of them began to wave their hats andhankerchiefs.So the funeral procession arrived at Levallois-Perret, just outside the citywalls.At the CemeteryThe little city of Levallois-Perret was in a state of great excitement; somany people had not been seen for a long time. Many carriages wereparked at the approaches to the cemetery, and all the residents of Levallois-Perret were standing, forming a hedge along the road where thefuneral cortege was to pass.The little cemetery had been tidied up. The gates were wide open, andthe more eager citizens had already taken their places around the spotchosen for the burial.It was Ferre's tomb, Theophile Ferre, whom the Versailles forces hadmurdered at Satory. He is buried there with his sister Marie Ferre, whowas the close friend and devoted companion of Louise Michel. Thememorial statue is modest. The plot is surrounded by an iron fence, andthe graves are covered by a large flat stone. A marker bears the name ofthe martyr and his sister.The bell at the cemetery rang to announce the arrival of the funeralprocession. In a second, the crowd had invaded the field of the dead. Itwas only with great difficulty that the pallbearers brought the body to thetomb, and the only way the wreaths could be gotten from the hearse to thecoffin was to pass them from hand to hand.The red flags were unfurled, and the tombs disappeared under a livingtide that rose over them from the ground up to the top of the memorialstatues. The spectacle was one of grandeur and majesty.The SpeechesAfter a moment of silence and contemplation, the first speaker was ourcontributor, Ernest Roche. Here is a summary of his speech, which wasinterrupted frequently with cheers and applause from the crowd."Who are we, standing here around the coffin of this simple and goodwoman who never dreamed of being famous?186Memoirs of Louise Michel"Why is there such a mixture here of so many different sorts ofrepublicans and socialists?"What feeling moves all of us?"What attraction draws us here?"What unity of spirit inspires in each of us the same respect and· giveseach of us the same feeling of indignation in front of this dead woman?"Let me tell you."There is one flag sacred to all of us, the flag that people fly only atcertain solemn times, the flag that inflames us more than any gorgeousfabric. It is the flag of our martyrs, the flag of our heroes."The corpse of Lucrecia overturned the Tarquins and founded theRoman Republic. The bodies of unknown men who were struck down on23 February 1848 by Louis Philippe's soldiers brought on the collapse ofhis throne. The corpse of Victor Noir in the spring of 1870 caused theweakening of Louis Napoleon's Empire and precipitated its fall."The body of Louise Michel's poor mother is our common bond, for ineach of our spirits it causes the same feeling of horror against the criminalswho have murdered her."Don't take shelter behind the age of your victim, you hypocrites. Herage doesn't mitigate the odiousness of your terrible crime."Certainly, we know very well it wasn't she you meant to reach, any morethan the Empire had any particular hatred for Victor Noir. What difference does it make to us whether your ferocity strikes down a simpleperson, or an unknown one, or a famous one from our ranks? Themartyrdom with which you crown the person is enough to ignite our angerand is enough to explain it."Those two poor women, Louise Michel and her mother! Those whohave known them know how indispensible they were to each other. Themother survived on the atmosphere of filial love with which her daughtersurrounded her. By taking away her daughter, you killed her, and herdeath, perhaps, will drag along a second victim."After her, it will be Peter Kropotkin's turn; he is dying in prison. Thenwill come others, more obscure, but no less unfortunate."And you don't want us to get hold of these corpses, nor for us to rallyaround them with the idea of legitimate defense against those thieves whothey canare stealing billions of francs and ruining our country untilauction it off."We have come here to sign a compact for danger, vengeance, andjustice. We have come to sign it in front of the tomb of Ferre, who wasassassinated by the bullets of Versailles, and in front of the coffin of thiswoman poisoned by sorrow."1 have one last thing to say: On behalf of our friends and colleagues atL'Intransigeant in whose name I am speaking, on behalf of those whofought beside our valiant citizen, Louise, on behalf of those who sharedher agonies at being exiled and her joys upon returning-on behalf of allthese, I must say how much we are moved by the sorrow that afflicts ourfriend Louise Michel and how much we would like to lighten its weight, iffriendship and esteem can be any compensation for such a loss."Memoirs of Louise Michel187Citizen Chabert expressed his feelings in these words:"Here there is unanimity among the socialists as there will be on the dayof battle, when everyone marches to the battlefield arm in arm."All of us agree on the goal we seek; we differ only on our choice ofmeans. Already we can see the day dawning when we shall claim ourrights, because the bourgeois oppc;>rtunists are no longer satisfied withkilling only men; now they kill women."Let us unite and declare first of all that if we become the masters we willno longer want any form of government at all. It is necessary for thepeople themselves finally to be the masters. Our elected officials who try todeceive us and set themselves up as governments, we will punish withdeath."The battle drawing us in foreshadows our victory because the situationis such that everyone will be involved. The opportunists are lettingthemselves slip into inactivity; they are counting on parliamentarism, butwe are battering at parliamentarism, and we are on the verge of breakingdown its door."Citizen Digeon spoke next:"In the name of the anarchist groups, we have come to glorify theheroine of the demonstration at les Invalides two years ago."In front of this tomb, let us bring about the alliance of all revolutionaries. I am willing to bring all revolutionaries into one alliance on thefoundation of absolute liberty and without any hidden motives."I do not wish to end without expressing all the hate I have built up forthe pleasure-seekers who are oppressing us. We are the disinherited of thesocial order, which is why we are rushing to see justice come."Then Citizen Champy came to give homage to Louise Michel, and heassociated himself with her sorrow."The revolution for which she was the apostle must give the peopleequality, well-being, and the inviolable rights they have earned throughtheir work."Citizens Tortelier and Oddin spoke, and then the crowd broke up andstreamed out of the cemetery with the utmost calm. It is easy to explainwhy they were orderly: no policemen were present.That is how the newspapers reported the burial of my poor mother.Thank you, friends, all of you who were there. I shall always picture youthat way around my poor dead mother, united and with no distinctionsbetween factions, united in a common sorrow and with a common hope.Your hope is that after our generation, no one will suffer the way amother suffered when she was separated from her daughter for twoyears of agony.I want to say a few words about my mother's life. People who knew herknow how simple and good she was and know that she was intelligentand even had a certain gaiety in her conversation.My grandmother used to speak to me about allthe troubles mymother endured so courageously. I saw for myself her inexhaustible188Memoirs of Louise Micheldevotion and the horrible sorrows that she bore from 1870 to 1885. Iknew very well that I loved her, but I did not realize the immense scopeof this affection. Death made me feel it when it ended her existence.Because her mother, Marguerite Michel, was a widow with six children, my mother was reared in the chateau at Vroncourt. She often toldme about her fearful life as a little girl after she was transported fromher nest. But how she loved those two persons who reared her with theirown son and daughter! Perhaps some time in the future I will be able torelate her laborious and unassuming life.She helped to keep those kind persons who reared her from knowingthat easy circumstances no longer existed in the house, and she softenedthe sadness of death which struck freely around them.I am what people call a bastard. But the two people who gave me thepoor gift of life were free. They loved each other, and none of thewretched tales told of my birth is true, nor can they reach my mothernow. Never have I seen a more decent woman.And never have I seen more modesty and refinement, nor have I everseen more courage. She never complained, although her life was one ofsorrow.Two days before her death she told me, "I have been very unhappynot to see you any more and to cost my friends so much." That was theonly time that she spoke to me in such a sad way. Her voice had a smallwail in it and was no more than a breath.Our friends realized how witty my mother was and how well shechatted in her simple way. Only I know, in spite of the pains she took tohide it, how good she was. She liked to appear brusque, and she laughedabout it like a child.In the last letter to me that my mother dictated, 27 November 1884,she told me:My dear daughter,Don't be troubled; I'm not getting any worse. What hurts me is that youare always worrying.I'm sending you some silk thread for your needlework. Make yourcrewel-work. Make me the views of the sea I talked to you about.Your most recent needlework was not as good as the others. I see thatyou are sad and you're wrong to be.Don't make any sweaters for me. I have enough. I need nothing anymore. Too much has already been spent on me.Above all else, don't torment yourself. I embrace you with all my heart.She was lying when she said she wasn't any worse. She was already inbed, and she would never get up again. As for the crewel-work, the oneof the sea she spoke about is not done yet. The "most recent" one whichwas "not as good as the others" was that way because I sensed that sheMemoirs of Louise Michel189was dying. It portrayed a great oak struck to its heart with an axe, andthe axe was left in the wound from whence the sap flowed. It is a sadsouvenir. I have kept the needles my mother sent me. I use them nolonger, but one day I shall obey her and on my mother's behalf makethose views of the sea.Chapter 24Final ThoughtsI come to the end. Now that the black bird of the fallow field has sungfor me, I want to explain what it means when a person no longer hasanything to fear, when a person no longer has anything to suffer from.From the other side of sorrow, I can watch events coldly, feeling nothingmore than the indifference a trash man feels as he turns over rags andtatters with his spiked stick.People wonder how all these things could have happened during thefifteen years which have just passed. When we are crushed, it onlyremoves the last obstacle to our being usefulin the revolutionarystruggle. When we are beaten down, we become free. When we are nolonger suffering because of what happens to us, we are invincible.I have reached that point, and it is better for the cause. What does itmatter now to my heart, which has already been torn bleeding from mychest, if pen nibs dig into it like the beaks of crows? With my motherdead, no one remains to suffer calumnies. If I had been able to spendthese last two years near my mother and feel her happiness, I, too, wouldhave been happy. But there is no reason now for my enemies to fear thatI will ever find happiness, for she is dead.My mother's death was the signal for both my friends and enemies toseek my release, as ifher death was some sort of certificate. Freedom-asif they could pay me for her corpse. I'm gratefulto the presentgovernment for having understood how odious an insult was the pardonthey would have inflicted on me. The government behaved properlywhen it allowed me to go to my dying mother, and it must not tarnishthis generosity by a pardon after her death. Why do I merit a pardonmore than other people?I don't have a copy of the letter I wrote to refuse that insulting offer ofa pardon, but I do have a few lines summarizing my feelings in a letterthat I wrote to Lissagaray, who had protested against the government'splan to pardon me. I seems that other friends had also protested. Notbeing allowed to read the newspapers, I was unaware of their efforts,and I take the opportunity here to thank them.Citizen Lissagaray,1 thank you. It seems that you felt 1 wasn't able, without being disgraced,to accept a pardon to which I have no more right than others.4 May 1885Memoirs of Louise Michel191All or nothing.I don't want them to pay me for the corpse of my mother. May thefriends who warned me in time be thanked also.I accept completely the responsibility for refusing the pardon. If myfriends think about it, they will come to feel that if they can't do anythingmore for me, at least they shouldn't insult me.My adversaries felt that way.I clasp your hand.Louise MichelP.S. If the government hadn't listened to me and refused the pardon, Iwould have left France immediately and gone to Russia or Germany. Inthose countries they kill revolutionaries; they don't besmirch them.May I just be left alone.L.M."All or nothing." That's the way I hope I always feel. I also hope thatthey won't repeat the insult that I didn't merit and which they were kindenough to take away.A man who is a prisoner has to fight only against the situation whichhis adversaries make for him. A woman who is a prisoner has not onlythat same struggle but also the complications caused by her friendsintervening in her behalf. They come to aid her because they attribute toher every weakness, every stupidity, every folly.A woman must be a thousand times calmer than a man, even facingthe most horrible events. Although pain may be digging into her heart,she cannot let one word that is not "normal" escape her. If she does, herfriends, fooled by pity, and her enemies, motivated by hate, will pushher into a mental institution where, with all her faculties intact, she willbe buried near madwomen, madwomen who perhaps weren't mad whenthey were locked up.Comrades, you have been very good to my poor mother and me. Mydear friends, you have to get used to not passing it off as madness if thethought of my mother's death rushes up in front of me and bewildersme. Remember that once the poor woman was no longer suffering, Iburied her without shedding a tear. Returning to Saint-Lazare, I startedback to work the day after her death without anyone ever seeing me cryor stop being calm, even for an instant. What more does anyone want? Ilive for the fight, but I do not wish to live under shamefulshallcircumstances.During the May Days of 1885 the dead went quickly: Hugo, Cournet,Amouroux. All three remind us of 1871. Amouroux dragged the ball ofpenal servitude in New Caledonia. Cournet was exiled, and exile was theunhappiest fate of the vanquished. Victor Hugo offered his house atBrussels to the fugitives from the slaughterhouse.Three others were mowed down along with the century thatisending-Louis Blanc, Pere MaU:zieux, and Louis Auguste Blanqui. I192Memoirs of Louise Michelremember Blanqui's last speech. The hall was bedecked with the Tricolor. The brave old man stood up to curse the colors of Sedan andVersailles waving in front of him, the symbols of surrender and murder.The howls of the reactionaries often covered the words of the old man,but then his dying chest filled up with the immense breath of the futureand dominated the hall in its turn. After the meeting he went to bed andnever got up again.Malezieux was a man of both June and of Seventy-one, and when,upon his return from exile, the bosses found him too old to work, he lostthe will to live. The facial resemblance between him and Victor Hugowas striking and complete. Their faces had the same nobility, proud inthe old fighter's, gentle in the poet's. Their nobility lit up those two oldHomers, and they looked like two old lions lying down observing you.Hugo was the last of the old bards who sang alone, like Homer. Thenew bards will sing from one end of the earth to the other when wefinally drag down the wreck of the old world, and they will have us astheir chorus.In New Caledonia on an enormous rock that opened its petals ofgranite like a rose, a granite rose that was spotted with little blackstreams of cold lava like trickles of black blood, I engraved one of Hugo'spoems for the cyclones:To the PeopleParis bleeding by moonlightDreams over the common grave.Give honor to mass murderers.More conscription, more tribunes:Eighty-nine is wearing a gag.The Revolution, terrible to those it touches,Is buried, a robber-chief doingWhat no Titan could do,And a Jesuit logician laughs crookedly.Unsheathed against the great RepublicAre all the Lilliputian sabers.The judge, a merchant clothedIn legal vestments, sells the law.Lazarus, Lazarus, LazarusRise up.Victor HugoAs a child and all through my later life I kept sending poetry to VictorHugo. But I sent him none after I returned from New Caledonia,Memoirs of Louise Michel193because then it was unnecessary to do anything more to honor him.Everyone was celebrating the master, even those who had been far fromfeting him in the past, and there was no need for me to assist in thosejoyful days. That is why I was so horrified to learn that Maxime du Campplanned to speak to the crowd from the top of Hugo's tomb.It was Maxime du Camp--du Camp of Satory-who betrayed himselfand us to the Versailles criminals. He was a purveyor of hot and coldmassacres, besliming all those he pointed out. His forehead is markedwith blood from the six years he spent flushing out citizens for thecourts-martial, and he did it for pleasure. For him to speak under theblooming trees on the red anniversary would insult our sleeping dead.Master Hugo, on you shall fall no single word of his voice, nor any noiseof his steps.We revolutionaries aren't just chasing a scarlet flag. What we pursue isan awakening of liberty, old or new. It is the ancient communes ofFrance; it is 1793; it is June 1848; it is 1871. Most especially it is the nextrevolution, which is advancing under this dawn. That is all that we aredefending.We wish that all the people of the world might be revenged for all theSedans to which despots and fools have dragged humanity. Revenge isthe Revolution, which will sow liberty and peace over the entire earth.When the people gain their full vigor, every person will have to line upon one side or the other. People will have to choose either to crowd withtheir castes into the ruts that moving wheels have left behind or to shakeoff the absurd limitations of class and take their places on the humanstage under the light of the rising sun.At the burial of Valles there was an emotional multitude over whichthe red and black banners waved. Was that the whole revolutionaryarmy? The advance guard? It was hardly a battalion. When the hourcomes, which ferocious and stupid governments are pushing forward, itwill not be a boulevard that quivers under the steps of a crowd. It will bethe entire earth trembling under the march of the human race.In the meantime, the wider the river of blood flowing from thescaffold where our people are being assassinated, the more crowded theprisons, the greater the poverty, the more tyrannical the governments,the more quickly the hour will come and the more numerous thecombatants will be. How many wrathful people, young people, will bewith us when the red and black banners wave in the wind of anger! Whata tidal wave it will be when the red and black banners rise around the oldwreck!The red banner, which has always stood for liberty, frightens theexecutioners because it is so red with our blood. The black flag, withlayers of blood upon it from those who wanted to live by working or die194Memoirs of Louise Michelby fighting, frightens those who want to live off the work of others.Those red and black banners wave over us mourning our dead and waveover our hopes for the dawn that is breaking.If we were free to fly our banners wherever we wanted in somecountry, it would show better than any vote can show on which side thecrowd was lining up. No longer could men be put in the pockets of theauthorities the way fistfuls of bulletins are stuffed there now. It would bea good way to assure each other of our unfalsified true majority, whichthis time would be that of the people. But we are allowed to fly our flagsonly over our dead.People must continue to fight against the masters who oppress them.In England, the gallows will probably greet them, but that does not spoilthe vision. They should fight anyway. There was a time when I foundthe idea of some poor person grimacing at the end of a rope disagreeable. Since than I have learned that in Russia they put you in a sack first.Germany had the headsman's block, as Reinsdorff and others saw.These various techniques are only different forms of the same death,and the more mournful the setting, the more it is wrapped in the redlight of dawn.At the time when I had a preference, I imagined a scaffold fromwhich I could address the crowd. Then I saw the execution post on theplain of Satory, and as far as the manner of my execution was concerned, the white wall of Pere Lachaise cemetery or even some angle ofthe walls of Paris would have suited me. Today I don't care. I don't carehow, and I don't care where. What does it matter to me whether I'mkilled in broad daylight or in a woods at night?A decade and a half have elapsed since the struggle of the Commune.Of the living I say nothing. They are fighting hard in the struggle forlife. They have days without work, which means days without food.When I speak of the survivors of the battle and the exile and thedeportation to New Caledonia, I must speak of the courage of MmeNathalie Lemel during all those events. It won't hurt her, for where sheis working now, all the employees are criminals of the Commune andconvicts returned from the 'justice" of Versailles. I shall name only thoseto whom an employer won't say: "Ah, you come from being imprisonedfor the Commune. Well, get out of here. There is no longer any work inmy place for you." That happened and still happens often.The court, just for the sake of variety, had sentenced some of us tohard labor. Some were deemed too weak to stand the trip to NewCaledonia, and several of them are now dead: Poirier, so courageousduring the Siege and the Commune; Marie Boire; and many others whowere no longer alive when we returned from New Caledonia. MmeLouise was sent to New Caledonia in spite of her age, and she died therecalling for her children, whom she could not see one more time in heMemoirs of Louise Michel195last hours. Of those who were sent to Cayenne, two are dead. One wasElisabeth Retif, a poor and simple girl, who did a magnificent job ofcarrying out the wounded under fire and who never understood howanyone could find her actions evil. Elisabeth de Ghi, who had marriedand become Mme Langlais, died on the ship during the voyage homefrom New Caledonia. She would have loved to see Paris again, but wewere still far away from it when, between two cannon shots, her body wasslid through a cargo port into the depths of the sea. Marie Schmidt, oneof the bravest, died last year in the home for the destitute on the rue deSevres. In 1871 she had been a stretcher bearer and a soldier, but workwas hard to find upon our return and poverty kills quickly.Sleep in peace, valiant ones, whether you be under the storms andwaves, or lying in a common grave. You are the happy ones. Let ushonor the obscure dead who suffered to aid those who will come afterus. Let us honor the obscure dead who sensed only indistinctly thefar-off horizon that will raise up their shades in sprays of stars and letthem see the dazzling light of dawn.As for the executioners, retribution wasn'tlong in coming. Theprosecutor, Major Gaveau, whose passionate indictments were known toeveryone, died insane. It had been necessary to lock him up for sometime before his death; and according to the newspapers of the time, hehad the most terrible death agonies imaginable. During the whole daybefore his death he believed that he saw fantastic creatures tumblearound in front of his eyes, and it seemed to him that someone wasbeating a hammer on his skull. The expert Delarue, who had testified toa falsehood against Ferre, was himself later condemned for giving falseexpert testimony that sent a man to prison for five years. The cost ofsending one of our comrades to the execution post at Satory wasn't asgreat. The farm of Donjeu, which belonged to M. Feltereau of Villeneuve, was burned by accident. I don't know if any accident befellColonel Merlin, who had been a judge in the trial of the members of theCommune and who had commanded the troops which oversaw theassassinations of November 28. Why do criminals escape the consequences of their acts more easily than other people? Doesn't each actprepare its own destiny?After the amnesty, I came home from ten years of exile in NewCaledonia only to see my poor mother die. With my own hands I laid mymother down in her coffin, as I did Marie Ferre, the one in my redshawl, the other in a soft red coverlet which she liked. So they are for theeternal winter of the tomb, and people ask me if now I am turning myattention to liberty and the spring which makes the branches blossomout again. Am I giving up, now that I have shut my heart under theearth? No! I shall remain standing until the last moment. I returnedfrom deportation faithful to the principles for which I shall die.196Memoirs of Louise MichelYesterday was May 24. From a distance, I heard some kind of rapidbugle call whose brazen notes sent a chill through my heart. That callwas like an echo of the May Days of 1871. Do they still lead soldiersagainst the people?See the grains of sand and the piled-up hay and in the highest heavensthe crowded stars. Where all that is seen is where we're going. And herecomes the great harvest, grown in the blood of our hearts. The heads ofthe wheat will be heavier because of that, and the harvest will be greater.In this somber life, cradling sad days, some refrains come back againand again. They catch at your emotions and rip you apart at the sametime.Flow, flow, blood of the captive.The Baguades, the Jacques, all of you who wear an iron collar, let's talkwhile we wait for the hour to strike. The dream emerges from the scentsof spring. It is the morning come of the new legend. Do you hear,peasant, the winds that pass in the air? They are the songs of yourfathers, the old Gallic songs.Flow, flow, blood of the captive.See this red dew on the earth. It's blood. The grass over the dead growshigher and greener. On this earth, the charnel house of the people'sdreams, the grass ought to grow thickly. As long as it pleases you to bethe beef of the slaughterhouse, to be the ox that pulls the plow or theone dragged to the carnival, people will repeat the terrible refrain:Flow, flow, blood of the captive.I don't know where the final struggle between the old world and thenew will take place, but it doesn't matter, because wherever it is-Rome,Berlin, Moscow-I'll be there. And other revolutionaries will be there,too. Wherever it begins, the spark will unite the whole world. Everywhere the crowds will rise up. Meanwhile we wait and while we wait,speeches continue. Those speeches are the rumblings of a volcano, andwhen everybody least expects it, the lava will spill out.The evening will come. They will still be dancing in the palace.Parliaments will say that discontent has been building up for a long time,but that the grumbling will go on without anyone being able to doanything about it.Then the great uprising will come. The rising of the people willhappen at its appointed moment, the same way that continents develop.It will happen because the human race is ready for it.That uprising will come, and those whom I have loved will see it. 0 mybeloved dead. I began this book when one of you was still living. Now Iend it bent over the ground where you both are sleeping.Memoirs of Louise Michel197Dead, both of them. The stones of my home overturned. I'm alone inthe room where my mother spent her last years. Friends have arrangedmy mother's furniture and bed as it was when she was still alive. A littlebird has slipped between the slats of the blinds to make its nest in thewindow, and the room is less forlorn because of it. My mother's poor oldfurniture, which was like part of her clothing, has the wings of aninnocent bird beating over it, and that bird alone hears the ticking of theold clock which marked her death.Soon, my beloved mother, Myriam!If she had lived a few more years, even a few more months, I wouldhave spent all that time near her. Today, what do prisons, lies, all the restmatter? What could death do to me? It would be a deliverance becauseI'm already dead. Why do people speak of courage? I'm in a hurry tojoin Marie and my mother.Memory crowds in on me. The cemetery at Vroncourt in the upperturning of the road under the pines. Audeloncourt. Clefmont. And myuncles' little, low, dark houses. The little house of Aunt Apolline, duginto the ground. Uncle Georges's up on top of the hill. The schoolhouse.Who hears the noise of the brook there now? Through the open windowcomes the smell of roses, of stubble, of hay in the summer sunlight. Theyall come to me now more than ever. I smell the bitter odor of the niaoulismixed with the sharp freshness of the Pacific waves. Everything reappears in front of my eyes. Everything lives again, the dead and all thosethings that have vanished.Who am I, Louise Michel? Don't make me out to be better than Iam-or than you are. I am capable of anything, love or hate, as you are.When the Revolution comes, you and I and all humanity will betransformed. Everything will be changed and better times will have joysthat the people of today aren't able to understand. Feeling for the artsand for liberty will surely become greater, and the harvest of thatdevelopment will be marvelous. Beyond this cursed time will come a daywhen humanity, free and conscious of its powers, will no longer tortureeither man or beast. That hope is worth all the suffering we undergo aswe move through the horrors of life.EpilogueMuch against her wishes, Louise Michel was pardoned and expelledthere is no other word for it-from prison in January 1886. By now, shewas legendary. Or as Paul Verlaine put it in his "Ballade en l'honneur deLouise Michel," she was "nearly Joan of Arc." She was "Saint Cecilia /And the harsh and slender Muse / Of the Poor, as well as their guardianangel." Now in her late fifties, Michel was indefatigable; she producedpoetry, wrote several involuted novels, and marched incessantly to thespeaker's platform. And the summer following her release she wasindicted once again,this time in company with Jules Guesde, PaulLafargue, and Susini, for "instigating murder and looting."She was accused of saying that the government was composed of"thieves and murderers. Thieves are arrested and murderers are killed.Throw them in the water!" Although Michel denied saying those exactwords, she admitted that the tone was correct-which seems likely. Thejury found her guilty, but despite their convicting her, it would havecaused the government grave embarrassment to send her to jail again,and ultimately she was pardoned without going back to prison.InJanuary 1888, while Michel was delivering a speech at Le Havre, afanatical Catholic Breton shot her. Her injury, a bullet that lodgedbehind her left ear, did not heal well, and for a time her health wasprecarious. True to her principles, however, Michel entered the trial ofher assailant to plead for him, arguing that he was misled by an evilsociety, and he was acquitted.This period of Michel's life coincided with the peak of the Boulangistmovement, a political phenomenon that began on the left and movedover the years to the right, uniting at one time or another all those whoopposed the Third Republic and particularly, at the end, those whowanted revenge against Germany. Although Michel's general principleswould seem to dictate her opposing the final stages of the movement, sheavoided involvement, perhaps because her friend Henri Rochefort was astaunch Boulangist. It is also possible that Michel,like the MarxistGuesde, saw Boulangism as only a bourgeois struggle and, as such,irrelevant.Michel did take the lead in a temporary alliance of anarchists andmonarchists who found a common enemy in the Third Republic.Through her, the royalists funneled funds to support anarchist activities. Some of the monarchists certainly were using Michel as the Germans would use Lenin in 1917; any trouble the anarchists fomentedwould serve the monarchist cause. But Michel, if she was aware she wasbeing used, was entirely happy with the situation. Her main enemiesnow were not monarchists but "Possibilist" socialists, who in her eyeswere no better than the "Opportunist" republicans she loathed.Epilogue199The Possibilists, usually classified today as evolutionary socialists,hoped to alleviate the misery of the poor through small reforms and towork within the system to win power. Michel believed that, in fact, thePossibilists had no greater aim than to replace the bourgeoisie withthemselves. Moreover, the minor reforms they supported would onlypostpone the Social Revolution.In 1889 the problems in founding the Second International illustratedthese theoretical distinctions. The First International had perished officially in 1876, although it had been moribund for several years prior tothat date, the victim of repression from without and schism from within.Posthumously,the First International was gaining a reputation foreffectiveness it had not earned during its life, and in 1889, the centenaryof the first French Revolution, there were two international meetingsheld simultaneously in Paris to revive it, one of Possibilists and the otherof Marxists, with delegates drifting from one meeting to the other.Michel played little role in either of those meetings, perhaps because ofher lack of interest in organizations and organizational politics.But from that chaotic founding of the Second International came theidea of using May Day demonstrations to show solidarity. By the late1880s Michel had come to focus on the general strike, La grande greve, asthe means by which the poor would achieve the Social Revolution. Itwould "interrupt ... all industries and all branches of commerce andwould finally carry the Social Revolution along." Despite Michel'sdreams of la grande greve, her enthusiasm for the May Day demonstrations was limited; the demonstrations were not intended to incite thepeople to rebel but only to publicize the Left. Perhaps Michel was nolonger so sure of crowds, and clearly she was inclining more and moresimply to belief in "propaganda by the deed" and faith in direct actioninspired and led by a small elite.thatBut Michel believed, as she always had,it was her duty toparticipate in demonstrations, and she was preparing to participate inthe 1890 May Day demonstration when she was arrested the day beforeits scheduled occurrence. In a fit of rage and frustration she destroyedthe furnishings of her cell, and officials rushed to use that behavior tohave her certified insane. For reasons that remain unclear, the Ministerof the Interior, Constans,intervened directly to stop the committalproceedings and to have her released.Michel immediately left for England, and from 1890 until her deathshe spent the greater part of her time there. Perhaps the near-successfulcommittal proceeding had frightened her; being committed was a fearshe had carried for years. Perhaps she was simply tired. In any event,England was the traditional home of foreign exiles, and Rochefort,himself a refugee after the collapse of Boulangism, was there. Rochefort200Epiloguegave her money to live on, and Prince Kropotkin gave her what aid hecould. During the following years she tried through personal contact tohelp the English poor-as always, whatever money she had at anymoment she gave away on request-and she became known in the worstslums of London as "the good woman."She returned to France only once, briefly, during the five years from1890 to 1895, which were the years of anarchism's greatest notoriety inFrance. It was during those years that France lived in daily fear ofbombings, the most savage period being the months from Ravachol'sbombings in the spring of 1892 to the explosions in the Chamber ofDeputies in December 1893 and the Cafe Terminus in February 1894.Although Michel objected to bombs because they indiscriminately killedwomen and children, she continued to approve the use of force. Ravachol was, she said, "the hero of modern legend," and later she approvedthe bombing of the Chamber of Deputies.In 1895 Michel returned to France and for the next seven monthsmade speeches and wrote poetry. The following summer she returnedto England, presumably so she could attend the scheduled meeting ofthe International, the one which confirmed the expulsion of the anarchists. Michel was horrified at the proceedings and the enforcement ofMarxist orthodoxy. The meeting proved, she said, that even the best,most intelligent, and most devoted Marxist revolutionary "will be worsethan anyone he replaces because the Marxists claim infallibility andpractice excommunication." The rupture between Michel and the Marxist socialists, like the one with the Possibilists before them, was complete.In the spring of 1897 Michel, now in her sixty-seventh year, made anextensive speaking tour throughout France. In France,the DreyfusAffair was reaching its height, but Michel took no active part in it,trials and anti-Semitism.although she did speak out against secretMaybe her faith temporarily was burning low. She had, after all, beenpreaching revolution, or been imprisoned for preaching it, for fortyyears. Moreover, her audiences were dwindling.In spite of her increasingly frail health she began a new series ofspeeches in France in May 1902, which continued into 1903 with onebreak in London. By then, Russia, which had fascinated her for years,seemed on the verge of revolution, and events there were rekindling herenthusiasm, particularly after the outbreak of war in 1904 betweenRussia and Japan. A determined antimilitarist, Michel was nonethelessdelighted at the opportunity an unpopular war provided for the onset ofthe Social Revolution. She made more speeches in France during February and early March 1904, but then fell gravely ill.She recovered, and after her well-publicized illness, which the publichad supposed would be mortal, the enormous crowds as of old came tohear her speak. Perhaps now people were only coming to view a legend,Epilogue201but come they did in great numbers, and they applauded her. At the endof the year she went to Algeria; upon her return to France she fell ill inMarseille. This illness was her last. On 9 January 1905 she died in thatcity at the Hotel de I'Oasis.Her death became the occasion of one of those spectacles she wouldhave loved. With red flags, masses of flowers, and two thousand mourners-representatives of labor unions, socialist groups, anarchists, andantireligious organizations-the funeral procession was a kilometer longas it wound through Marseille to the cemetery. Memorial services tookplace throughout France and in London and elsewhere. On January 20her body was disinterred, taken to Paris, and two days later buried at hermother's side in Levallois-Perretto the accompaniment of anotherspectacle, the largest, said the press, since the death of Victor Hugo. Notonly would Michel have approved the spectacle, she would have notedhow strange it was that on that very day a crowd of Russians in St.Petersburg attempted to deliver a petition to their czar, and the ensuingmassacre marked the day forever as Bloody Sunday.Today, Michel's birthplace of Vroncourt has a statue to her, and thestreet going through town bears her name. Her grave in Levallois-Perret-not the one in which she was buried in 1905, but a new one to whichshe was moved during the Popular Front days of 1936-still has flowersplaced on it by anonymous hands. The authorities have even named ametro station and a street for her, but both are just barely outside thecity limits of Paris.She is now a legend. That she invented part of it herself is irrelevant.Louise Michel was heroic, but as she herself said: "There is no heroism;people are simply entranced by events."BibliographyLouise Michel discussed her own writings briefly in her memoirs.Let me record a balance sheet of my writings. I have spoken of the various bitsof poetry from the years before the events of 1870-71 inserted in differentnewspapers, in the Journal de Lajeunesse, in the Union des poetes, in Adele Esquiros'newspaper, in Adele Caldelar's La Raison, and other places. Of the verses I sentto Victor Hugo in my childhood and youth, of which I have cited a few here andthere, two or three pieces which were in the papers that Marie Ferre and mymother arranged during my deportation will be found in my volume of verse. Iused the name Enjolras on a certain number of pieces of verse, Louis Michel onothers, and my own name on still more. I don't know what has become of them.I've mentioned an article signed Louis Michel in Le Progres musical in which Idiscussed an instrument I dreamed up, a piano with bows instead of mallets.They make them now in Germany.There are a large number of signed articles in the Revolution sociale,theEtendard, and a number of other signed articles are scattered. The first part ofmy Encyclopedie enfantine, which I wrote in New Caledonia, appeared in MileCheminat's Journal d'education.During my last trip to Lyon I left a drama, Le Coq rouge, at the Nouvelliste. Themasses of drama for children have all vanished after each awarding of prizesduring so many years.All my life I have kept working on La Legende du barde; there are fragments ofit everywhere. I have some fragments of other prose manuscripts, the Livred'Hermann, the Sagesse d'un iou, Litterature au crochet, the Diableries de Chaumont,and so forth. Perhaps I will put them together some day to search in them, as inmy poetry, for the changes of my ideas across life.Of the works done at Auberive I have a few pages remaining from the book LeBagne. La Conscience and Le Livre des morts are completely lost. The first part of LaFemme atravers les ages was published in H. Place's L'Excommunie. That newspaperhad announced it would publish Memoires d'Hanna La nihiliste, but the paper died.Under that title I had gathered a great many episodes of my life, along withRussian episodes. The Oceaniennes and the Legendes canaques have appeared infragments in Noumea and here upon my return.When I collaborate with someone, I keep the papers which establish the factsof my collaboration so as to be free not to take part in the profits or losses in anylawsuits my collaborators attempt. They are at liberty to do as they wish. Icollaborated with Grippa de Winter in a novel, Le Batard imperial, and took aplay, Nadine, from it. Since my return from New Caledonia I have had twocollaborators, one of whom was Mme Tynaire,]ean Guetre. She wrote almost allthe first part of La Misere, while the second part, from the chapter on Toulon on,is completely mine. In a Lille magazine, Le Fort;at, I had begun to publish thissecond part in installments which would form a complete work with the additionof a few lines of introduction. Mme Tynaire could also make a complete workout of the first part by adding a few pages.Mme Tynaire can be my friend, but it turned out that she could not be mycollaborator because we see things differently. Those differences are perfectlyBibliography203visible in La Misere, and the two distinct parts are easily discernible. Mme Tynaireexpects to promote general well-being through means in which I see no effectiveness. I see general well-being promoted only by successive revolutions cuttingthrough the series of social transformations.To remain good friends with Mme Tynaire instead of quarreling with ourpens, I gave up a second collaboration with her, the second part of Les Meprisees.If I had taken it on, I would have been obliged to make the remaining charactersundergo changes in character and circumstances which would have been incompatible with the way they were introduced to the reader in the first part. Thenovel Les Meprisees thus contains only one line I wrote.I can't list the sketches in progress, novels begun everywhere which I neverhad the time to finish owing to events. Let me end by noting that the completetext of the Encyclopedie enfantine will be published at Mme Keva's and that theLegendes canaques has already been published by the same publisher.Translators' NoteThe debts that Louise Michel's translators owe are legion. First and foremost istheir great debt to the painstaking biography of Louise Michel prepared by thelate Edith Thomas, Louise Michel ou la Velleda de l'anarchie (Paris, Gallimard,1971 ).Other biographies of Michel include: Irma Boyer, Louise Michel (Paris: AndreDelpeuch, 1927); Charles Chincholle, Les Survivants de la Commune (Paris: L.Boulanger, 1885); Dominique Desanti, Visages de femmes (Paris: Editions Sociales,1955); Ernest Girault, La bonne Louise: Psychologie de Louise Michel (Paris: Bibliotheque des auteurs modernes, 1906); and Carl, Freiherr von Letetzow, LouiseMichel (La Vierge Rouge): eine Charakterskisse (Leipzig: F. Rothbarth, 1906).Louise Michel wrote a later work specifically on the Commune, La Commune(Paris: P.-V. Stock, 1898), and although we have resisted the temptation to addmaterial to the text of her memoirs from that source, it was helpful in establishing the sequence of events, which is unclear in the memoirs. In addition, forthe period of the Siege and the Commune, Alistaire Horne's The Fall of Paris(New York: St. Martin's Press, 1965), Michael Howard's The Franco-Prussian War(New York: Macmillan, 1962), and Stewart Edward's The Paris Commune, 1871(London: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1971) were useful. The work of the Association pour la Conservation et Reproduction Photographique de la Presse inpreserving Communard newspapers was invaluable.Michel's account of her trials was checked against the Gazette des tribunaux; shewas accurate. The Gazette des tribunaux also furnished the account of the trial of1886 referred to in the Epilogue (13 August 1886, pp. 764-65).On New Caledonia, we found a school text by Jean Ie Borgne, Geographie de laNouvelle-Caledonie et des Iles Loyaute (Noumea: Ministhe de I'education, de lajeunesse et des sports, 1964), most useful for its descriptions of the flora andfauna of that island. On the Kanaka rebellion we found Roselene Dousset,Colonialisme et Contradictions: Etude sur les causes socio-historiques de l'Insurrection de1878 en Nouvelle-Caledonie (Paris: Mouton, 1970), instructive.Her voyage out, her early years in New Caledonia and her relationship withHenri Rochefort were made more comprehensible by Rochefort's memoirs, LesAventures de ma vie (5 vols.; Paris: Paul Dupont, 1896); and his L'Evade (2d ed.;Paris: Bibliotheque Charpentier, 1895); see also Roger L. Williams, Henri Rochefort: Prince of the Gutter Press (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1966).The memoirs of L. Andrieux, Souvenirs d'un Prefet de Police (2 vols.; Paris: JulesRouff, 1885) allowed us to comprehend Louise Michel's comments about policeinvolvement in La Revolution sociale.Standard works on the Third Republic, including Brogan, Chastenet, Thomson, and Cobban, were all useful, as were standard studies of anarchism,particularly George Woodcock's. Our translation of the Anarchist Manifesto ofLyon differs from the usual translation; Michel attributes it to Gautier, notKropotkin. Daniel Ligou's Histoire du Socialisme en France: 1871-1961 (Paris:Presses Universitaires de France, 1962) was useful.We must also note our debt to the French Ministry of Marine, which found forus the manuscript report of the Virginie's voyage to New Caledonia. In Francethe staffs of the Bibliotheque Nationale and the Archives Nationales both soughtexotic publications for us with customary courtesy.Translators' Note205The Public Record Office in London furnished the Admiralty charts of thevicinity of Noumea which enabled us to untangle Michel's description of theconvict encampment on the Ducos Peninsula. The Library of Congress providedcharts of the harbor of Las Palmas, Gran Canaria.For a list of some of Louise Michel's published writings, an extraordinarilyvaried assortment, see Edith Thomas, Louise Michel, pp. 459-60.Finally, the translators wish to express their gratitude to Hilde L. Robinson forher extraordinarily thorough job of copyediting; she saved us from ourselvesmany times. We also owe thanks to Eloise Green, Cindy Carrell, Karen Yount,and Beth Broyles for their assistance in typing the final manuscript.Appendix IChapter List Showing Source in Original TextChapter 1, "Introduction," Part 1, Chapter 1; with minor additions from Part 2,Chapters 11, 13.Chapter 2, "Vroncourt," Part 1, Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7, 11; Part 2, Chapter 1.Chapter 3, "The End of Childhood," Part 1, Chapters 2,3,4,6,7, 10; Part 2,Chapter 1; with minor additions from Part 1, Chapter 5.Chapter 4, "The Making of a Revolutionary," Part 1, Chapter 11; Part 2,Chapter 1; with minor additions from Part 1, Chapter 6; Part 2, Chapter 2.Chapter 5, "Schoolmistress in the Haute Marne," Part 1, Chapters 6, 7.Chapter 6, "Schoolmistress in Paris," Part 1, Chapters 7, 8; with minor additionsfrom Part 1, Chapter 4.Chapter 7, "The Decaying Empire," Part 1, Chapters 7, 8, 9, 12, 13.Chapter 8, "The Siege of Paris," Part 1, Chapters 12, 13, 14, 15; with minoradditions from Part 1, Chapter 10.Chapter 9, "The Commune," Part 1, Chapters 12, 14, 15; Part 2, Chapter 2.Chapter 10, "After the Commune," Part 1, Chapters 15, 16; Part 2, Chapters 2,4, 15.Chapter 11, "The Trial of 1871," Appendix.Chapter 12, "Voyage to Exile," Part 1, Chapter 16; Part 2, Chapter 6; with minoradditions from Part 1, Chapters 1, 6.Chapter 13, "Numbo, New Caledonia," Part 1, Chapter 16; Part 2, Chapter 6.Chapter 14, "The Bay of the West," Part 1, Chapters 10, 16; Part 2, Chapters 6,8,9.Chapter 15, "Noumea and the Return," Part 2, Chapters 6, 10, 11; with minoradditions from Part 2, Chapter 8.Chapter 16, "Speeches and Journalism, November 1880 - January 1882," Part 1,Chapter 17; Part 2, Chapters 5, 6, 11, 12; Appendix; with minor additionsfrom Part 1, Chapter 16; Part 2, Chapter 3.Chapter 17, "The Death of Marie Ferre," Part 2, Chapters 11, 15.Chapter 18, "Women's Rights," Part 1, Chapter 9; Part 2, Chapter 13.Chapter 19, "Speeches Abroad, 1882-1883," Part 2, Chapters 2, 3, 11; withminor additions from Part 2, Chapter 12.Chapter 20, "Speeches in France, 1882-1883," Part 2, Chapters 11, 12, 13.Chapter 21, "The Trial of 1883," Part 2, Chapter 13; Appendix.Chapter 22, "Prison," Part 2, Chapters 6, 14.Chapter 23, "My Mother's Death," Part 2, Chapters 5, 15, 16.Chapter 24, "Final Thoughts," Part 1, Chapters 14,16,17; Part 2, Chapters 3, 4,6, 9, 13, 15, 16; with minor additions from Part 1, Chapter 15; Part 2,Chapters 10, 12."Bibliography," Part 2, Chapter 7.Appendix IITable of Poems in Original TextPoems by Louise Michel"A bord de la Virginie," Part 2, Chapter 6"Adieux arna tourelle," Part 1, Chapter 2. Translated as "Farewell, my dreamingretreat in the manor," p. 23."A Th. Ferre," Part 1, Chapter 13."A mes freres," Part 2, Chapter 4."Au bord des flots," Part 1, Chapter 4."Au 3' Conseil de Guerre," Part 2, Chapter 4."Aux manes de Victor 'Hugo," Part 2, Chapter 9."Ballade du squelette," Part 1, Chapter 8. Translated as "Ballad of the Skeleton,"p.41."La Chanson des poires," Part 1, Chapter 3."Chanson du chanvre," Part 1, Chapter 15."Chanson de guerre" (Kanakan), translated into French by Louise Michel, Part2, Chapter 6."Le Chene," Part 1, Chapter 7. Translated as "The Legend of the Oak," pp.43-44."La coupe est rougie," Part 1, Chapter 8."Dans les mers polaires," Part 2, Chapter 6. Prose translation, p. 93."Entendex-vous tonner l'airain?" Part 1, Chapter 8. Translated as "Do you hearthe brazen thunder," p. 53."La Grilla rapita," Part 1, Chapter 2."Le Lai du troubadour," Part 1, Chapter 8. Translated as "Lay of the Troubadour," p. 42."La Manifestation de la paix," Part 1, Chapter 13."Marie Ferre," Part 2, Chapter 11. Translated as "In Memory of Marie Ferre,"pp. 137-38."Moi,je suis la blanche colombe," Part I, Chapter 8. Translated as "Me, I am thewhite dove," p. 53."Les Oeillets rouges," Part I, Chapter 13."L'Oiseau noir du champ fauve," translation into French by Louise Michel ofpatois poem, "L'Age na deu champ fauve," Part I, Chapter 4. Translated as"The Black Bird of the Fallow Field," p. 18."Pour mes premiers jouets ... ," Part 2, Chapter 6. Translated as "As my firsttoys," p. 91."Les Roses," Part I, Chapter 17."Le Takata, dans la foret," Kanakan chant of Andia, translated into French byLouise Michel, Part 2, Chapter 9. Translated as "The Takata," pp. 113-14."Toute l'ombre a verse ses tenebreuses urnes," Part I, Chapter 12. Last twostanzas translated as "Criminals and Whores," p. 49."Les Veilleurs de nuit," Part I, Chapter 13."Vent du soir"Volez, oiseaux," Part 1, Chapter 3.," Part 2, Chapter 6. Translated as "Soar high in brilliantwhiteness, birds," p. 93.208Appendix II"Le Voyage," Part 2, Chapter 1. Translated, with stanzas rearranged, as "TheVoyage," p. 15.Poems by Other Persons"A des antiquaires," by Etienne-Charles Demahis, Louise Michel's grandfather,Part 1, Chapter 3."L'Age na deu champ fauve," patois poem translated into French by LouiseMichel as "L'Oiseau noir du champ fauve," Part 1, Chapter 4. Translated as"The Black Bird of the Fallow Field," p. 18."Air de 'Malbrough [sic],' " by friends of Louise Michel in collaboration, Part 1,Chapter 8."A rna voisine de tribord arriere," by Henri Rochefort, Part 2, Chapter 6."Eut qu'elle aimot," traditional folksong, Part 1, Chapter 10. Translated as "Hewhom she loved," p. 16."La Mort," by Louise Porcquet Demahis, Louise Michel's grandmother, Part 1,Chapter 3."Paris sanglant, au clair de lune," ["Au peuple," second stanza], by Victor Hugo,Part 2, Chapter 9. Second stanza translated as "To the People," p. 192.IndexThe first names of minor figures, when given, must be treated as only tentative, unless the name alsoappears in the Memoirs.Adoueke (New Caledonian herb), 113-14"Age Na Deu Champ Fauve, L' " (patoisfolksong): text, 17; translated intoFrench by Louise Michel, text, 18Alchemy, 20, 29, 97Alcohol, use of, 104, 105, 175, 177Alenc;on, Duke of, 123Aleyron, Colonel and Governor of NewCaledonia, 95, 98, 99, 101, 126Allix, Jules, 136Amiens, Workers' Union of, 129-30Amnesty of 1880, viii, 120Amouroux, 191Anarchism and Anarchists, ix-xi, I, 33,130, 131, 132, 140, 148, 151, 154-57,160, 161, 162, 167, 169, 183, 187, 198,200"Anarchists, Manifesto of the," ix; text,155-56, 160Babeuf, "Gracchus," ixBagne, Le, lost manuscript by LouiseMichel,202Bakhunin, Mikhail, ixBalandreau, Maitre, 167"Ballad of the Skeleton," from The Dreamof the Witches' Sabbath by Louise Michel,text, 41"Ballade en l'honneur de Louise Michel,"by Paul Verlaine: cited, xi; quotedfrom, 198Balloons, 65Balzenq (deportee), 96Barinage, miners of, 144Bariol, 183Barot, Odysse, 74-75, 183Barthelemy-Saint-Hilaire, Jules, 126Bataille, La (periodical), 183Batard imperial, Le, by Louise Michel andAnarchists, Trial of the Sixty-eight, atGrippa de Winter, 202Lyon, 1883, xiv, 154-57, 158Batignolles, Seventeenth Arrondissement,I 12-I 3Andia the Takala (Kanakan),Andrieux, Louis, xiv, 131, 132, 133Animals, cruelty toward, xvi, 24-25, 28,29,93, 195. See also Oppression andexploitationAntwerp, socialist press in, 144Anvers, Belgium, 147Appert, General, 78Arras, prison at, 78Armand (pardoned deportee atNoumea), 119Arnal, P., 183Arnold, Blanche, 110Arson(ists), 57, 67, 85Aryans, in Oceana,"As my first toys," poem by LouiseI 16Michel, text, 91Assi (Communard), 76Atai (Kanakan leader), 112-14Atavism, 16, 17. See also Legends andhistoryAtlantis (legend), 92Auberive prison, 35, 89, 153, 202Audert, Hubertine, 136Audeloncourt, Haute-Marne, xiii, 8, 32,33,34,35"Avengers, The," song by Louise Michel,83Avronsart, 6 IParis, 63, 81Baudelaire, Charles, 66, 91Bauer, Henry, 97, II IBelleville, Nineteenth Arrondissement,Paris, 63, 82Bernard (defendant, Trial of theSixty-eight Anarchists), 154Besson (at Lyon), 156Beths, Mme (educator at Chaumont), 31Bias, Mme Camille, 135, 136, 179Bilhoray (Communard), 76"Black Bird of the Fallow Field, The"(patois folksong), translated intoFrench by Louise Michel, text, 18"Black Marseillaise, The," poem byLouise Michel and Vermorel, 53Blanc, Louis, 191Blanche, Place, women's barricade at, 67Blanqui, Louis-Auguste (and Blanquists),ix, 62, 83, 97, 130; last speech of,191-92; funeral, 183; anniversary ofdeath, demonstration on, xvi, 134Bloody Sunday, Russia (1905), 201Bloody Week, Commune of Paris, 67Boeuf, 118Boire, Marie, 194Bonaparte (and Bonapartism), x, 32, 36,38,46,48, 51, 52, 56, 57, 63, 168, 169,186; Louise Michel instructs pupils to210Indexboycott prayer for, xiii, 35; LouiseMichel plans assassination of, x, 54. Seealso Empire, SecondBonaparte, Eugenie, 53Bordat (defendant, Trial of theSixty-eight Anarchists), 154Bordeaux, France, 130Bordeaux Assembly, 63, 65Bossuet, Jacques Benigne, 19Botanical experiments, xii, 97-98, 105-06Boulanger, General Georges (andBoulangism), 198, 199Bourail, New Caledonia, 95Bourgeois (executed with Ferre), 77Breton. See BrittanyBrideau, Gabriel, 56Brittany (and Bretons), 90, 93, 151, 198;Breton mobiles, 61Brussels, Belgium, 143, 147, 191Bunant (deportee), 97Burgraves, by Victor Hugo, 19Burlot (deportee), 61, 97Butte de Montmartre. See Montmartre,Butte deBuzenval, battle at (19 Jan. 1871), 61Cadolle, Mme, 73, 136Cafe Terminus Bombing (1894), Paris,200Cailleux, Marie, 10 1Caissaigne, Lieutenant, 74Caldelar, Adele, 202Calle, Antonio de la, 183Callot, 'The Beggars" (painting), 152Canary Islands, 91-92Cannon, 63,67Cape of Good Hope, 93Carr, E. H., xCartegena, Spain, 183Cassation, Court of, 79Caubet (socialist), 184Cayenne (prison colony), 36, 37, 73, 172,195Centrale Prison, Clermont, xv, 28-29,172, 174, 179, 180Chabert, 187Chagot, victims of, 144Chalon-sur-Saone, 144Champy (Communard), 76, 97, 183, 187Chantiers Prison, Versailles, 71, 172-73Chate paYot, 11Chateau-d'Eau, rue de (Mme Vollier'sChaudey, General, 61Chaumont, Haute-Marne, 10-11, 31, 32,35,36Cheminat, Mile (of Journal d'Education),202Cholera, 180, 181Christ (Communard), 61Cipriani (Communard), 100, 126Citoyen, Le, 126, 127Clamart, town southwest of Paris, 65, 66,84Clefmont, Haute-Marne, xiiiClemenceau, Georges, xii, 65, 74, 82, 182Clement (Communard), 76Clermont, France. See Centrale Prison,ClermontComete (ship), 90Commune of Lyons, 65Commune of Marseille, 65Commune of Narbonne, 65Commune (and Communards) of Paris,viii, xii, xiv, 28, 52; first proclaimed,60; Chapter 9, "The Commune ofParis," 63-68; Chapter 10, "After theCommune," 69-80, 81, 83, 84, 85, 86,89,90,109, 112, 120, 121, 123, 124,126, 136, 158, 168, 169, 172, 184, 194Commune, Wards of the, 81Conscience, La,Michel,202lost manuscript by LouiseConstans (Minister of Interior), 199Contes d'enfants, by Louise Michel, 106Convict Deportation in New Caledonia,Inquiry into the System of, byChamber of Deputies, 126Coq rouge, Le, drama by Louise Michel inNouvelliste, 202Courbet (Communard), 76Cournet, Frederic, 130, 183, 191Court-martial(s), 74-76, 79-80, 81-87,194Cn du peuple, 84, 86Criminals, women, 173, 174"Criminals and Whores," poem by LouiseMichel, text, 49Croiset, Pere (Communard), 97, 99, 107Cyclones (in New Caledonia), 107-09,115Dailly, Captain, 81, 87Danel's musical notation, 48Daoumi (Kanakan), 96, 112, 116; brotherschool in Montmartre), 38of, 116Index211Dejardin, Surgeon-Major, 77Delambre (of Amiens), 130Delaporte, Colonel, 81Delarue (prosecution witness, 1871), 195Delescluze, Charles, 65, 159; sister of,137Eighteenth Arrondissement,Revolutionary Sentinel of(organization), 183Elementary Education, Society for, 51Elysee-Montmartre, 123Empire, Second, 34, 53, 54, 56, 57. SeeDemahis, Etienne-Charles, viii, xiii, 4-5,also Bonaparte7, 13, 15, 21-22, 23, 90Demahis, Laurent, viii, 188Demahis, Louise Porcquet, xiii, 5, 7Demahis family papers, 19Demonstration(s): in Dec. 1870, 60; on22 Jan. 1871, xiv, 35, 61-62,151; onBlanqui Anniversary, 1882, xvi, 134; atVersailles, September 1882, 151; at lesInvalides, 9 March 1883, xi, xv, 158;Chapter 21, "The Trial of 1883,"158-71; at Pere Lachaise, 130, 182; onMay Day, 1890, 199Deneuvillers (journalist), 144, 183Deportees, xiv, 95-123, 126-27, 147Deputies, Chamber of, bombing (1893),200Deraismes, Maria, 58Dereure, Mme, 173Deschamp (Communard), 76Desfosses, Adele, 101Diableries of Chaumont, 202. See alsoLegendary Haute-Marne; DiabolismDiabolism, 10, II, 19, 20Dieppe, France, 122Digeon (anarchist), 187Discours sur l'histoire universelle, by JacquesBenigne Bossuet, 19Dombrowski, Jaroslav, 67Dreyfus Affair, 200Du Camp, Maxime, 126, 193Ducos Peninsula, New Caledonia, xiv,115, 183. See also Numbo; West, Bayof theDumollard, Mme (prisoner), 153Dupre, Mme (deportee), 101Duval, Mme (of Lagny), 31-32Duval, Nathalie. See Lemel, NathalieEcole des femmes, L', by Moliere, 21Ecregne(s), xviii, 25, 26, 28, 33Education, 20, 30, 33, 34, 47, 48, ll7,ll8, 142, 155; of schoolmistresses, 31,32,38,39,40,46,51, 172Eighteenth Arrondissement,Butte-Montmartre, Paris. SeeMontmartreEncyclopedie enfantine, by Louise Michel inJournal d'education, 202, 203England, 148, 194, 199. See also London,EnglandEnjolras (pseudonym of Louise Michel),51, 202Erasmus, Praise of Folly, 159Esquiros, Adele, 45, 53, 57, 202Etendard, L', 202Eudes, Emile, xiv, 56Eudes, Mme. See Louvet, VictorineEvolutionary socialists. See PossibilistsocialistsExcommunie, L', (periodical), 202Fabreguettes (prosecutor, Trial of theSixty-eight Anarchists), 156"Farewell, my dreaming retreat in themanor," poem by Louise Michel, text,23Favre, Jules, 50Fayet (Rector, departmental academy,Haute-Marne), 36, 128Feltereau (of Villeneuve), 195Feminism, xv, 20, 39, 52, 58, 59, 60, 64,67, 73, 83, 122, 124, 130; Chapter 18,"Women's Rights," 139-42; 148, 172,173, 177, 191. See also ProstitutionFemme it travers les ages, La, by LouiseMichel, 202Ferrat (Communard), 76Ferre, Mme (mother of Marie andTheophile), 74-75Ferre, Marie, xiv, xvi, 74-75, 76, 77, 78,104,107, 121, 122, 129; Chapter 17,"The Death of Marie Ferre," 135-38;153, 182, 185, 195; Louise Michel'spoem on, text of, 137-38Ferre, Marie, Association (Lyon), 136Ferre, Theophile, xvi, 9, 61, 74-77, 79,84,86,135,136,137,178,185, 195Figaro, Le, 121Flags: black, of anarchy or ofdemonstrations, 161, 162, 193, 194;red, of revolution, 57, 62, 65, 90, 112,168, 183, 184, 185, 186, 193, 194, 195212IndexFleurville, de (inspector of Montmartreschools), 106-07Florentin (police chief, EighteenthArrondissement), 184Flourens, Gustave, 76For{at, Le (Lille), 202Forty-third bastion. See Thirty-seventhbastionFountain of the Ladies. See ThreeWasherwomen, legend ofFoutriquet ("Little Squirt"). See Thiers,AdolpheHaussman, Maitre, 81, 87Haute-Marne, xvi, 23, 24, 25; legendsand history of, 9-11, 17, 32; patois of,poem in, 17. See also Audeloncourt;Chaumont; Ecregne(s); Vroncourt;MillieresHautefeuille, rue, Paris (site of center foreducation), 47, 48, 50, 51, 52Haute-Marne, Prefect of, 36, 57Hautes Bruyeres, attack at, 66Henry, Lucien, 120Henry, Mme (Mme Rastoul), 100, 101,Franco-Prussian War (1870-71), 23;120Chapter 8, "The Siege of Paris," 56-62,63Free School, 34Freemasons, 146-47Gallifet, General Gaston Gabriel Augustede, 69, 123, 126, 167Gambetta, Leon, 184Garde republicaine, 184Gaulet, Major, 74Gaulois, Le, 127Gauthier (at Amiens), 130Gauthier de la Richerie, Governor ofHernani, by Victor Hugo, 19"He whom she loved," folksong, text, 16Holland, 146Houdon, rue de, school on, 46Hughes, Clovis, 136Hugo, Victor, xi, 9, 19, 20, 36, 52, 54,172,173,191, 192, 193; Burgraves,drama, 19; Hernani, drama, 19;"Harmodius," poem, quoted from, 54;"Louise Michel," poem published as"Viro Major" ("More than a Man"),quoted from, xi; "To the People,"poem, quoted from, 173, text, 192New Caledonia, 95, 97, 98Humbert, Alphonse, 183Gautier, Emile, xiv, 132, 136, 154; authorof "Manifesto of the Anarchists,"quoted, 154-56Gaveau, Major, 74, 79, 195General strike, the, 129, 199Gerard, 124German (and Germany), 178, 191, 194.See also Franco-Prussian WarGhent, Belgium, 144Ghi, Elisabeth de, 195Ghost-in-Flames, legend of, II, 25, 26Gourget (co-defendant, 1883), 170Government of National Defense, xiv, 56,58,60, 61Grafford Hall, Paris, 124, 152Granger, 183Grevin Museum, 152Grousset (Communard), 76Guanches, 92Guesde, jules, ix, 150, 198Guetre, Jean. See Tynaire, MmeGuibert, Capt. de, 74Hamet (of Amiens), 130Hardouin, Mme Celeste, 73Harmodius of Athens, 54"Illegal Candidacy, The," article byLouise Michel, text, 124-25Imperialism, 111-13, 117, 118, 130Improvement of Working WomenThrough Their Work (organization),82Indian Ocean, 93"In Memory of Marie Ferre," poem byLouise Michel, text, 137-38Interior, Minister(s) of, xv, 180-81, 199International, First, 154, 158, 199International, Second, 199, 200Intransigeant, L', 119, 134, 143, 144, 147,151, 158, 183, 186Invalides, les, demonstration at, 1883, xv;Chapter 21, "The Trial of 1883,"158-71Issy, fort of, 65, 84Jacobins, 149jacqueline, Mme (painter), 179jaundice, plant, 98Jeunesse, La (periodical), 52joffrin, 122, 183John Helder (ship), 120IndexJourde (Communard), 76Journal de La Jeunesse, 202Kanaka, xv, 96,111-14, 1H>-18, 140;Kanakan Rebellion, 1878, xiv, 111-14;Kanakan war chant, "The Takata,"translated into French by LouiseMichel, text, 113-14. See also Andia theTakala; Atai; Daoumi; Naina; SegouKeva, Mme (publisher), 203Kropotkin, Prince Peter, ix, xiii, xiv, 154,157, 186, 200Labbat, Warrant Officer, 74Lacour (deportee), 96Lafargue, Paul, 198Lagny, France, 8, 31, 123Laguerre, Maitre, 167Lamartine, Alphonse de, 9Lambeth (district of London), 148Lamennais, Felicite Robert de, ix, 9Langlais. See Ghi, Elisabeth deLanglois (deportee), 99Laumont of Bourmont (physician), calledBig Laumont, 6, 20213Leger, Second Lieutenant, 74Lemel, Nathalie (Duval), ix, 101, 102,103, 194Leo, Andre, 57Leo, Andre, Mme, 57Lesurques affair, 86Levallois-Perret (suburb of Paris), 74;cemetery of, xvi, 136, 183, 185-87, 201L'Homme, Caroline, 46Libre-Pensee (periodical), 183LilIe, France, 153Lisbonne, Maxime, 159, 170Lissagaray, Hippolyte-Prosper-Olivier,183, 190Literacy, rural, 6, 8, 27, 33; urban, 46Litterature au crochet, by Louise Michel,202Livre des morts, Le, lost manuscript byLouise Michel, 202Livre d'Hermann, Le, by Louise Michel,202Locamus (town councilor, Noumea, andattorney), 119, 159London, England, 121, 122, 132, 135,149, 156, 200. See also LambethLaumont of Ozieres (schoolteacher),London, (Kropotkin's) Congress of, July,called Little Laumont, 61881, xiii, 132, 134La Villette, Nineteenth Arrondissement,Longchamps, Julie, xiii, xv, 32, 37, 38,Paris, 8239,45"Lay of the Troubadour," from TheDream of the Witches' Sabbath, by LouiseMichel, text, 42League of Women, 60Lecomte, General, 64, 82, 84, 85"Legend of the Oak, The," poem byLouise Michel, text, 43-44Legendary Haute-Marne, by Louise Michel,xvi; quoted from, 9-11Louise, Mme, 195"Louise Michel," poem by Victor Hugo,retitled "Viro Major" ("More Than aMan"), quoted from, xiLouise Michel Association (Lyon), 136"Louise Michel at the Graffard MeetingHall" (painting by unknown artist),152; (painting with same title byTynaire [sic Tinayre)), 153Ugende du barde, La, by Louise Michel,Louvet, Victorine (Mme Eudes), xii, xiv,202Ugendes canaques, by Louise Michel, 202,203Legends and history, x, xii, 16, 17, 26,44,45, 50, 146, 196; at Ecregnes,25-26; Diableries of Chaumont, 10-11;Dream of the Witches' Sabbath, 41;folksongs showing, 16, 17-18;Ghost-in-Flames, II, 25, 26; Kanakan,112-13, 116; of the Naglfar (ship), 91;of the Haute-Marne, 9-11, 16, 24, 32;of the oath of the oak tree, 32, 43; ofthe Three Washerwomen, 9, 19, 26.See also Atavism43, 44Lucien, Henri, 110Lucipia, 183Lullier (Communard), 76Lyon, France, 154, 156Lyon, France, Commune of, 65"Lyon, Manifesto of," 1883. See"Anarchists, Manifesto of the"Lyon, Trial of the Sixty-eight Anarchistsat, 1883. See Anarchists, Trial of theSixty-eightMacMahon, Marshal Patrice de, 123Magasins pittoresques, 9214IndexMahis, de. See DemahisMalezieux, "Pere," 62, 96, 97, 100, 147,191, 192"Manifesto of Lyon." See "Anarchists,Manifesto of the""Manifesto of the Anarchists." See"Anarchists, Manifesto of the"Marchais, Josephine, 73, 78, 172Marchand, Maitre, 75Maret, Henri, 183Mareuil, Eugene, 160, 161, 162, 163,165, 170Marie Ferre Association (Lyon), 136Mariguet (member of court-martialboard),74Marseille, France, 200; Commune of, 65Marseillaise, 30, 34-35, 56, 122Marxism, ix, 199, 200Mas (of Anvers), 147Masons. See Freemasons"Me, I am the white dove," poem byLouise Michel, fragment quoted, 53Mbnoires d'Hanna La nihiliste, by LouiseMichel,202Memoirs of Louise Michel, The Red Virgin,xii, xiii, xiv, xvi, I, 18, 22, 74; editors'system for reorganization of, xvii-xviii,Appendix I; second volume of, neverwritten, xviii; smuggled from prison, 2;sources used in, xvi-xvii, 2, 7, 76-77,89, 122, 152Meprisees, Les, by Jean Guetre, MmeTynaire [sic Tinayre], 203Merlin, Colonel, 74, 195Meurice, Mme Paul, 59, 61Meusy, 158, 167Michel (a schoolteacher not related toLouise Michel), 12-13Michel, Louis (pseudonym of LouiseMichel), 51, 202MICHEL, LOUISEdescribed, xi-xii, 5, 11, 21, 38, 52, 62,81,88,144,153,179,197,200life (chronologically): born illegitimate,29 May 1830, vii, 84, 188; beginsschool at Vroncourt, II; has suitors,20-21; inherits land, 23; meets VictorHugo, 36; receives teacher training, 31;teaches at Audeloncourt, xiii, 32, 34;teaches at Paris, xiii; tries to startschools in Audeloncourt and Clefmont,but fails, xiii; joins with JulieLongchamps in Millieres, 37; goes toParis, xiii, 37; becomes schoolmistressat Mme Vollier's, 38; gets partnershipin school, rue du Chftteau d'Eau, 39;buys day school in Montmartre, 45;begins studies for baccalaureate, 47;unites school with Mile Poulin's on rueHoudon, 46; first arrest, 57; presidesover Women's Vigilance Committee,58; responsible for schoolchildren,xii-xiii; second arrest, 60-61;Demonstration of 22 Jan. 1871,61--62;school on rue Oudot, 83; climbs Butteof Montmartre 18 March 1871, 64;member, National Guard, xiv;President, Club of the Revolution, 83;surrenders, 69; confined, Bastion 37[sic 43], 69; moved to Satory, 70;moved to Chantiers prison, Versailles,71; moved to Versailles reformatory,73; moved to Arras, 78; trial, 81-88;sentenced on 16 Dec. 1871 todeportation to a fortified place, 87;moved to Auberive prison, 89; sails toNew Caledonia on Virginie, xiv, 90;converted to anarchism, ix; lands atNumbo, 96; moved to the Bay of theWest, 103; involved in KanakanRebellion, xiv, 112; goes to Noumea,1879, and teaches, 114; Amnesty of1880, 120; sails to Europe via Sydney,120-21; arrives Paris, 9 Nov. 1880,122; first speech after return, 123-24;refuses to testify to Chamber ofDeputies, 126; London Conference,143; candidate, Chamber of Deputies,124; writes for La Revolution sociale,131-33; arrested after Blanquidemonstration, 1882, tried, convicted,134-35; death of Marie Ferre, 23-24Feb. 1882, 135; travels and speeches inFrance and abroad, 143-54; attendsTrial of the Sixty-eight Anarchists, Jan.1883, Lyon, 154-56; accepts "Manifestoof the Anarchists," ix, 160;Demonstration at Les Invalides, 9March 1883, 158; tried, 160-70;convicted, 170; Centrale Prison,Clermont, 172; transferred toSaint-Lazare prison, Dec. 1884, xv,181; mother dies 3 Jan. 1885, 182;pardoned, Jan. 1886, 198; arrested,convicted, and pardoned, summer1886, 198; attempt to assassinate her,Index215Michel, Louise, continued198; arrested 1890, 199; goes toEngland, 199; dies, Marseille, 9 Jan.1905, 200and feminism, xv, 20, 39, 52, 58, 59,60,67,83, 122, 125, 130, Chapter 18,"Women's Rights," 139-42, 148, 173,191finances of, 23, 27, 31, 38, 39, 40, 45,106, 127-28, 143, 147, 153, 199-200and music, 6, 19, 20, 37, 40-42, 48, 51,83,93,96,111-12,118opinions on various subjects notindexed otherwise (alphabetically):antisemitism, 200; art, 30; battle, loveof, 66; books, 31, 32, 40; capitalpunishment, 25, 27; children, 25;courts and legal codes, 83, 86;discipline, 33; freedom, 190; heroism,65,66, 139; history, x, 5, 16, 17, 18,20,51; honor, 166; justice, 168, 182;marriage, 16, 20-21, 39, 44, 139;mental institutions, 191, 199; merit, 13;militarism, 200; nationalism, 168, 169,173; politics, 52; prescience, 22, 91;racism, xvi; religion, xiii, 8, 9, 12, 19,27, 28, 31, 35,42,83, 86, 135;revenge, 26, 142; scholars, 14, 105;science, x, 29, 98, 118, 141, 149;slanders, 119; suffrage, 125, 129, 130;treason, 112and prostitution, 49,121,141, 142,173-77and revolution: general, I, 14, 28, 42,48, 52, 54, 55, 59, 60, 64, 128-29, 130,133-34, 139; origins of herrevolutionary feeling, 5, 9, 16, 18, 24,25, 28; revolutionary theory, ix-xi, xv,xvi, 9, 29, 51, 55, 122, 123, 128-29,139, 140, 147, 155, 160, 169, 198, 203;revolutionary acts of, x, xiv, 31, 36, 45,54,58,82-85,86,128, 151, 163;revolutionary dreams of, 30, 54, 71,128, 131, 171, 193, 196, 197as a teacher: in Haute-Marne, xiii, 34,35,47; in Paris, 51, 83; in Noumea,34-35, 114, 116-19; education andtraining of, 31-32, 47, 51; of Kanakas,xv, 114, 116-19; methods and theoriesof, 14,20,51,117-18; pupils of, xiii,xv, 34, 38, 40, 48, 88, 108-09; personalsatisfaction of, 40. See also Educationtrials and arrests of: gallows speeches,xii, 18; arrests (1870), 57, 60; Trial of1871, xii, xiv, I, 38, 80, 158, 160; Trialof 1871, transcript of, 81-87; Trial of1871, observations upon, 87-88;Second Trial (1882), xv, 134, 161;Trial of 1883, ix, 59, 159-60, 179;Trial of 1883, transcript of, 160-70;Trial of 1883, observations upon,170-71; Trial of 1886,198; arrest(1890), 199writing of, xiii, xvi, xvii, 4, 17,36,40,52, 198; in collaboration with others,53, 128, 202-03; under pseudonyms,51, 202writings of, mentioned or quoted intext (alphabetically): "As my first toys,"poem, text, 91; "The Avengers," song,83; Le Bagne, lost manuscript, 172-73,202; "Ballad of the Skeleton," poem,text, 41; Le Batard imperial, with Grippade Winter, 202; "The Black Bird ofthe Fallow Field," poem, text, 18; "TheBlack Marseillaise," poem withVermorel, quoted from, 53;["Candidacy"], article, text, 125-26; LaConscience, lost manuscript, 202; Contesd'enfants, 106; Le Coq rouge, drama,202; "Criminals and Whores," poem,text, 49; Diableries de Chaumont, 202. Seealso Legendary Haute-Marne. Dream of theWitches'Sabbath, opera, 40-42;Encyciopedie enfantine, 202, 203;"Farewell, my dreaming retreat in themanor," poem, text, 23; La Femme atravers les ages, 202; "In Memory ofMarie Ferre," poem, text, 137-38;"The Illegal Candidacy," article, text,124-25; "Lay of the Troubadour,"poem, text, 41; "The Legend of theOak," poem, text, 43-44; LegendaryHaute-Marne, xvi, quoted from, 9-10;La Ugende du barde, 202; Ugendescanaques, 202, 203; Litterature au crochet,202; Le Livre des morts, lost manuscript,202; Le Livre d'Hermann, 202;["Manifesto"], text, 82-83; "Me, I amthe white dove," quoted from, 53;Memoires d'Hanna La nihiliste, 202; LaMisere, with Mme Tynaire [sic Tinayre],202; Nadine, drama, with Grippa deWinter, 202; Naughty Deeds of Helen, 6,11; Oceaniennes, 202; ["Piano withbows"], article, 51, 202; "Silence the216IndexMichel, Louise, continuedVillain," article, text, 132-33; "Soarhigh in brilliant whiteness, birds,"poem, text, 93; "The Strike of theConscripts," article, text, 128-29; 'TheTakata," translated Kanakan war chant,text, 113-14; "To M. Andrieux." See"Silence the Villain." Universal History,20; Vroncourt, quoted from, 9; "TheVoyage," poem, text, 15; The Wisdom ofa Madman, 50-51, 202. See alsoAppendix II, 207Michel, Louise, Association (Lyon), 136Michel, Louise, extended family of, 5, 6,8, 15, 18, 19,31,32,33,38,88,90,183Michel, Louise, Memoirs of. See Memoirs ofLouise MichelMichel, Marguerite (maternalgrandmother of Louise Michel), 5, 23,44,46, 188Michel, Marie Anne, also Marianne, alsoMyriam (mother of Louise Michel):described, 5, 187-88; emotional life ofLouise Michel connected to, xvi, 89,115, 138, 195, 197; life of(chronologically): childhood, 188; givesbirth to Louise, viii, 188; guardianshipover Louise, 31; accompanies Louise toLagny, 1851,31; vacation of 1856, 44;stays in Haute-Marne when Louisegoes to Paris, 38; sends Louise money,39; visits Louise, 40; sells land tofinance school, 45; moves toMontmartre after death of MargueriteMichel, 23, 46; lives with Louise,53-54; period of Commune, 64, 66,67; government threatens to shoot, 69;visits Louise at Chantiers prison, 71;lives near Auberive prison, visitsLouise, 89; lives in Paris duringLouise's exile, 90; writes letters toLouise in New Caledonia, 104, 106,107; health declines, 107, 120; afterreturn, 121-22, 127, 128, 129, 134,153; threats against, 167; forgery sentto, 11; Chapter 23, "My Mother'sDeath," 179-89 (dies 3 January 1885,xv, 182; funeral described, 182-87);not revolutionary, 115MiIliere, de (revolutionary), 159Millieres, Haute-Marne, school at, xiii, 37Minck (or Mink), Paule, 60, 65, 124Miot (Republican), 54Misere, La, by Mme Tynaire [sic Tinayre)and Louise Michel, 202Moise, Charles, 183Moliere Uean-Baptiste Poquelin), 5, 21,139Montmartre (Paris), viii, 38, 45, 58, 61,63, 64, 84, 136, 182, 184Montmartre, Butte de, 63, 67, 82Montmartre, National Guard, battalionsof,61Montmartre Vigilance Committee (men's),Chaussee Clignancourt, 58; (women's),rue de la Chapelle, xii, 58; work of,58-59, 136Montretout, battle at (19 Jan. 1871),61Morceau, Armand, 147Moreau (alias Gareau), 170"More Than a Man" ("Viro Major"), byVictor Hugo, quoted from, xiMorphy, 126Moulin de Pierre, fighting at, 66Moulineaux, fighting at, 84Muette, Chateau de la, 70Murget (or Murger), grave of, 67Muriot (deportee), 110Musees des families, 9Music, 6, 20; Arab, 96; Danel's notationfor, 48; Dream of the Witches' Sabbath,The, opera by Louise Michel, 40-42;Jewish, 42; Kanakan, 96, 112, 118;methods of instruction in, 118; ofBrittany, 90, 93; by piano with bows,51,202; Robert the Devil, operaperformed in New Caledonia, 111-12;scoring in, 41-42Nadine, drama by Louise Michel andGrippa de Winter, 202Nagifar (legendary ship), 91Naina (Kanakan), 112Napoleon III. See BonaparteNarbonne, France, Commune of, 65National Guard, xiv, 60, 61, 63, 64, 75,81,82, 86, 167Naughty Deeds of Helen, The, by LouiseMichel, 6, 11Ndie Bay, New Caledonia, 110Nemours, Duke de, 123Netherlands. See HollandNew Caledonia, viii; Chapter 13,"Numbo, New Caledonia," 95-103;Chapter 14, "The Bay of the West,"Index217104-14; Chapter 15, "Noumea and theReturn," 115-18; 181, 192. See alsoAleyron; Cyclones; Ducos Peninsula;Gauthier de la Richerie; Kanakas; NouIsland; Noumea; Numbo; Ribourt,Admiral; Rochefort; West, Bay of;Western ForestNewspapers, 63, 75, 121, 147-48. See alsonewspapers under titlesNihilists, 122, 124, 178Noir, Victor, 82, 84, 186Northern Forest, Ducos Peninsula, NewCaledonia, 100Nou Island, New Caledonia, 107, 109,110, Ill, 114, 152, 183Noumea, New Caledonia, xv, 35, 95, 100,114; Chapter 15, "Noumea and theReturn," 115-20Noumea, Board of Municipal PublicInstruction, 119Noumea, Journal de, 100Nourny (deportee), 100Numbo, New Caledonia, xiv; Chapter 13,"Numbo, New Caledonia," 95-103;107, 110Oak tree, oath of, 32, 43-44Oceana, jade axe of, 52Oceanic tribes, Aryanism in, 116Oceaniennes, by Louise Michel, 202Oddin, 187Opportunists (properly "OpportunistRepublicans," a political faction) andOpportunism, 123, 125, 128, 129, 149,187, 198Oppression and exploitation: of animals,xvi, 24-25, 29; by Bonaparte andunder Second Empire, 54, 186; inBible, 27; not eased by charity, 27; ofchildren, 47; at night in city, 49; indramas, 18; of Greeks, 27; of Kanakas,Ill; of peasants, 25, 26, 28; of people,13, 196; of the poor, 27; when powernot shared, 131; of powerless, xv; ofprisoners, 98-99; of prostitutes, 173;through rent, 39, 40; will bringrevolution, 29, 171, 193; by rich, 155;by Rome, 27; in Russia, 28; symbolizedby spider, 106; in statecraft, 65; ofwomen, 125, 139-42, 153-54, 176-77;of workers, 125. See also Animals,cruelty toward; Bonaparte; Feminism;Kanaka; Prisons; Prostitutes;Revolution; Social RevolutionOrleanists, 163Orleans, House of, 123, 168Otterbein (of Brussels), 147Oudot, rue, school on, 83Pain, Olivier, 96, 122Pall Mall Gazette, 148Palmas, Las, Grand Canary Island, 91Papavoine, Eulalie, 73, 172Papayas, vaccination of, xii, 97Pardons, Board of, 76, 87Parent (Communard), 76Paris: attraction of, 35, 37; condemnsschool, 45; Hotel de Ville of, 57, 60,61, 62; Siege of, xiv, 35, Chapter 8,"The Siege of Paris," 56--62. See alsoCommune of ParisParis, Count and Countess of, 123Parliamentarianism, 65, 187, 196Paroles d'un croyant, by Felicite Robert deLamennais, 9Passedouet (deportee), 110-11Peasants, 24, 26, 27, 28Pelletan, Eugene, 50Penand, Mme (schoolmistress, NewCaledonia), 35Pepiniere Barracks, Le, Paris, 184Pere Lachaise Cemetery (properlyCimetihe de l'Est), 151, 182Perle, de la, Meeting Hall, 152Perronet barricade, Neuilly, 28, 66, 96Perusset (deportee), 107--08, 115Pichon, S., 183Place, Henry, 99, 202Place, Theophile (infant), 99, 110Plebiscite, May 1870, 56Poe, Edgar Allan, 22, 91Poirier (Communard), 194Police, xii, 51, 77, 85, 145, 146, 150, 164,165, 182, 184. See also Andrieux, LouisPopular Front, 201"Possibilist" Socialists, 198, 199, 200Pottery (police spy), 184Pouget, Jean-Joseph-Emile, ix, 160-65,167, 170Poulin, Malvina, 46, 47, 51, 59, 67Power, nature of, x, 49, 50, 52, 71, 131,155, 169Prisons (and prisoners), xiv-xv, 2, 28-29,71, 73, 88, 95, 96-97, 98, 102, 126,Chapter 22, "Prison," 172-78, 193. Seealso Arras; Auberive prison; Bagne, Le;218IndexCentrale Prison; Chantiers Prison;Saint-Lazare prison; Satory, detentionarea at; Thirty-seventh Bastion;Versailles, reformatory ofPritzbuer, Captain de, 100Progres musical, Le, 51, 202Prostitution, 39, 49, 59, 121, 125, 129,141-42,173-78Proudhon, Pierre Joseph, ix, 110-11,142, 167Provins (deportee), 97Provisional Government. See Governmentof National DefensePrussia. See Franco-Prussian WarPublishers, 40, 128Puech (merchant, Noumea), 119Pyat, Felix, 124Quesnay de Beaurepaire, Avocat-general,167Racism, xviRadical, Le, 183Radical des Alpes, Le, 183Raison, La, 202Rame, Judge, 160Ranvier (child), 71Rastoul (Communard), 76Rastoul, Mme. See Henry, MmeRavanchol (anarchist), 200Razoua, Eugene, 61Regere (Communard), 76Reinsdorff (German), 194Religion, 8, 12, 42, 145Relingue's house of prostitution, 175Republic (and Republicans), 31, 35, 36,45,50,56, 57, 63,6~ 73, 75, 123, 16~See also Commune of Paris;Opportunists; RevolutionRepublicans, Fraternal Association of, ofthe Basses-Alpes, Vaucluse, and Var,183Retif(fe), Elisabeth, 73, 78, 172, 195Retz, Gilles de, 29Revolution (and Revolutionaries), ix, I, 9,24, 28, 39, 42, 46, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58,59, 63, 64, 65, 69, 86, 125, 128, 130,131, 133, 136, 138, 147, 148, 151, 158,160,165,166,170,193, 197Revolution, Club of, 83Revolutionary Sentinel of the EighteenthArrondissement (organization), 183Revolution sociale, La, xiv, 131, 132, 133,143, 202. See also Andrieux, LouisRevue scientifique. 164Ribourt, Admiral, 99, 101, 126Richerie, de lao See Gauthier de laRicherie, Governor of New CaledoniaRigault, Raoul, 159Rights of Man, Club of, Vaucluse, 183Rights of Women (organization), rueThevenot, 59Robert the Devil (opera), 111Roche, Ernest, 185Rochefort (city), 90Rochefort, Henri, xvi, 57, 92, 95, 96, 98,114,116,122,136-37,143,152,167,179, 183, 184, 198, 199-200Rosiers, rue de, 64, 82Rossel, Louis-Nathaniel, 77, 137Rossel, Mile, 137Rouillon, 167Royer, Mme (educator at Chaumont), 31Russia (and Russian Revolutionaries), 27,28,52,58,59, 178, 191, 194,200Russo-Japanese War, 200Sagesse d'un fou. See Wisdom of a Madman,TheSaint Antoine, faubourg, Paris, 45, 63Saint-Just, Louis de, 131Saint-Lazare prison, xv, 2, 11, 173, 179,181, 191Sand, George, 19Santa Catarina, Brazil, 92Sapia (demonstrator), 62Satory, detention area at, 70-71, 77, 78,79,80,86,87,124,151, 152, 172, 193,194Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Prince and Princessof, 123Schmi(d)t, Marie, 101, 195Second Empire. See Empire, Second;BonaparteSedan, Battle of, 54, 56, 57, 168, 169,192, 193Segou (Kanakan traitor), 113Seine District, Superior Court of, 160-70Senart, Captain, 74Serr(e)aux (pseudonym of EgideSpilleux), 131, 132, 133Shaw, George Bernard, xSiege of Paris. See Paris, Siege ofSifou, New Caledonia, 96Index219"Silence the Villain," article in LaThirty-seventh [sic] Bastion, properly theRevolution sociale by Louise Michel, text,132Silkworms, 105-06Simon (acting mayor, Noumea), 118, 119Simon, Jules, 51Simon, Mme Jules, 59Simond, Victor, 183Sivry, Charles de, 42, 51Sixth Arrondissement, Luxembourg,Paris, 63, 165Sixth Court-martial Board, 81--87"Soar high in brilliant whiteness, birds,"poem by Louise Michel, text, 93Socialists, German, 178Socialists, plea for unity among, 187Socialists, "Possibilist." See "Possibilist"SocialistsForty-third, 69Thomas, Clement, General, 64, 82, 84,85Thomas, Edith, xv, xviThree Washerwomen, legend of, 9, 19,26Tiffault, Eugenie, 110Tinayre. See Tynaire, MmeTitard, 183"To M. Andrieux," original title of"Silence the Villain," article by LouiseMichel, text, 132-33"To My Neighbor, Starboard Aft," poemby Henri Rochefort, cited, 92"To the People," poem by Victor Hugo:cited, 173; text, 192"To the People's Army" (pamphlet),Social Revolution, x, xi, xv, 82, 85, 122,123, 124, 151, 165, 184, 199, 200163-64Tomb, name of Demahis chateau,Soldiers, 61, 70, 73, 74, 75, 128-29, 184.Vroncourt, 4, 5, 7, 15, 18, 22, 23See also Commune of Paris;Franco-Prussian War; Paris, Siege of"Song of the Shirt, The," by ThomasHood,149Stenography, 47Strasbourg, France, 57, 58Strasbourg, Statue of Our Lady of(Paris), 57"Strike of the Conscripts, The," article byLouise Michel, text, 128-29Tortelier, Joseph, 187Tour Saint Jacques, square of, 61Transnonain, 124Trials. See Michel, Louise, trials of;Anarchists, Trial of the Sixty-eightTrinquet (Communard), 76, 124Trochu, General Louis Jules, 56, 57, 151Turpin, 64-65Tynaire [sic Tinayre], Mme (pseudonymof Jean Guetre), 202-03; son of, 128Strike(s), 128, 150, 153-54. See alsoTyrannicide, x, 128General strikeSuetens, Leontine, 172Suez, Isthmus of, 121Suffrage, 129, 130, 194Susini, 198Sydney, Australia, 100, 101, 108, 115,120"Takata, The," Kanakan war chant ofAndia, translated by Louise Michel,text, 113-14Tenth Arrondissement, Entrepot, Paris,82Terrorism, x, 200Theleni, 183Thevenot, rue, school on, 51Thierry (co-defendant, 1883), 170Thiers, Adolphe, x, 84, 86, 123, 143;statue of, 133Third Military Court-martial, 74-76Union des poetes, L', 52, 202Union of Women, Central Committee of,82Union of Women for the Defense ofParis and the Care of the Wounded,82Universal History, by Louise Michel, 19, 20Urbain, Raoul, 76Usury, 26Vaccination, xii, 98Vaillant, Edouard, 183Valles, Jules, 84, 159, 193Valley of the Sorcerers, legend of, 26Var, France, 183Varlet, 147Vaucluse, France, 183Vaughan, Ernest, 158, 167, 183Verdet, Marie, 9, 10, II, 19, 26220IndexVerdure (Communard), 76, 109-10Verlaine, Paul, xi, 198Verlet, 99Vermorel, 53, 159Versailles, Demonstration at, September"Voyage, The," poem by Louise Michel,text, 15Vroncourt, by Louise Michel, quoted from,9Vroncourt, Haute-Marne, viii, 4, 9, 12,1882, 15143Versailles, reformatory of, 73Versailles Government, 63, 64, 65, 76, 89Viard, 147Victims of the War, Society for, 59, 60,61Vigilance, Committees of, 60, 63, 82. Seealso Montmartre Vigilance CommitteesVirgil (Publius Vergilius Maro), 23, 27Virginie (ship), ix, xiv, 13-14,90,91,93,95Wagram, Pare, 63West, Bay of the, xiv, 98, 101, 103;Chapter 14, "The Bay of the West,"104-14Western Forest, New Caledonia, 95,104-05, 106Winter, Grippa de (pseudonym of JeanWinter), xvii, 202"Viro Major," by Victor Hugo, quotedWisdom of a Madman, The, manuscript byfrom, xiVitellius, 127Vollier, Mme, 32, 38, 39, 40, 45-46Voltaire (Franc;;ois Marie Arouet), 5, 20Voltaire, Le, 144Vosges, Place des, 63Louise Michel, 50-51, 202Wolowski (deportee), 112Women. See FeminismWomen, League of, 60Workers' Union of Amiens, 129, 130Workhouses, 148