CHAPTER  I.A JAPANESE FUNERAL.|HE ordinary individual is destined to attractattention at least twice, and often thrice,before he forever disappears from the activescenes of this world. The most important event oflife, one's birth, calls forth less interest than the twoevents which follow—the wedding and the funeral.For the latter greater preparations are generally madeand a more wide-spread interest is taken. When thewee babe first opens its eyes and the announcementgoes forth, " Unto us a son is born," or "a daughteris given," the fact is quietly recorded and usuallyforgotten by all beyond the sound of the voice of theBut when a wedding is on the boards,new-comer.interest deepens, whole neighborhoods and even citiesbecome awakened, and crowds gather to see " whatthe bride's dress is like"; and thus, amid the vulgarstare of the throng, a sweet, blushing maiden becomesthe object of curiosity, criticism and comment. Tomy mind it is far worse than are some of the customswe are wont to call " heathen." When the wedding303304ORIENTAL OBSEQUIES.is over, and, finally, the lengthened or shortenedis broken, the funeral attracts thethread of lifecrowds ; many who never spoke a kindly word ofthe dead bring forth their garlands fair to deck thecoffin, or to wilt and fade upon the grave ; and in thedying of their fragrance and beauty they carry withtliein, perhaps, the last thought of the one gonebefore.In studying the customs of the people of the world,I was deeply interested in comparing the funeral andwedding ceremonies of Asia with those of Christianlands ; but it is of funerals only that I can here findtime to speak. As the customs vary so greatly, itwould be impossible to describe them all ; it is there-fore necessary to confine myself to the extent of myown observations.Soon after landing in the city of Yokohama, Japan,I was told that a wealthy and noted native had died,and his funeral would take place the following Sun-day in one of the great temples. As we went outinto the streets on that day, it was an easy matter tofind the place of the obsequies by following thecrowds, for the streets were teeming with people, allAfter a long walk weflocking to honor the dead.reached the avenue that led to the temple, whichstood at the top of the street. The roads to the rightand to the left were thronged with some fifty thou-sand people. The short avenue in front of the templewas kept clear for the funeral procession. As a spe-cial favor I was allowed to walk down the avenue ;otherwise I would have been unable to reach the tern-ORIENTAL OBSEQUIES.305pie, for the crowds were so great. The whole streetwas lined with floral decorations, in which the Japa-I^arge trees, planted in tubs, werenese greatly excel.placed a few feet on each side, and extended from thebeginning of the avenue to the very temple door.Many kinds of flowers were arranged in the branchesof these trees to give them the appearance of bloom-ing shrubs. We were escorted up the walk by twonative policemen ; reaching the temple we found aheavy rope stretched across the great steps to keepthe crowds back. The policemen explained that wewere strangers and anxious to go into the service,and the guards kindly allowed us to enter.The temple was constructed after the manner of thearchitecture of that country, with an open front, sothat all proceedings could be witnessed from the street.The usual lack of order and solemnity prevailed ; fornowhere in the east can be found decorum at worship,funerals, weddings or other functions which we re-gard as sacred and carry on with more or less system.At one side stood the coffin, which was in the form ofa miniature temple, resting on a bier.This smalltemple was made of some kind of white spruce, beau-tifully carved, but without polish or finish. Thepointed eaves extended over the sides, and beneaththem were small carved windows, draped with whitelace curtains and lined with pale blue. The whole"casket " had more or less carved open work upon it.Near the coffin stood a band of musicians dressed inforeign uniform. They wore dark blue trousers, redcoats, and played on foreign instruments. On the3o6ORIENTAL OBSEQUIES.other side of the room stood the relatives and inti-mate friends, distributing presents ; this is a generalcustom among the wealthy or upper classes. Thepresents usually consist of sweets made from riceflour and sugar, and fashioned after the lotus blossomIn the center of the room sat numbers ofand leaf.priests clothed in black gauze, reading or chanting asort of dirge from their sacred book, the music of theband almost drowning the monotony of their voices.When this confusing ceremony came to a close theI had no idea who thefuneral procession formed.mourners were, for none were weeping or wailing orclad in any kind of mourning-garb ; all were chattingaway, each seeming to express an opinion as to howthe proceedings should be carried on. The coolies,bearing the coffin, were dressed in white garmentswith a white, drooping head covering. The place ofburial was some distance off, and numbers of thesecoolies formed relays to relieve each other at statedThose not in service at the moment pre-intervals.ceded the remains, and, behind, came the pall-bearers.Numbers of ordinary coolies bore the trees and tubs,taking them, as they passed, from the sides of thestreets, and with them a great throng moved on tothe burial-ground. The distance was too great toI was told no special service was held at thefollow.grave ; the remains were interred in the most simpleway.Just across the small body of water that separatestwo nations, I found a great difference in the mannersand customs of the people.