CHAPTER  V.OLIVE schreiner's mother.|S DAY was slowly dying from the sky wedrove to the railway station, some fewmiles distant, and I boarded the train go-ing southward, intending to visit the town whereMrs. Schreiner's mother has so long lived. Thetrain was cold, and great was my discomfort.Through the dark, moonless night I waited for thedawn, which would bring me beyond these plainswhere the wind sighed like the restless ocean uponthe shore.Morning found me in a small city by the sea,nestled at the foot of the hills. The weird desertwas far behind ; the damp air and the mists from thesea had been distilled into dew, which watered theparched earth and dried roots, giving new life to allaround.mother,I had come to this place especially to see Oliveof whom her daughter hadSchreiner'sspoken much. "My mother," she had said, "hasbeen converted to the Roman faith, and you will findher in the convent. 'Toward the convent I set my face, and reached thegreat iron gates and high walls just as the day pupilswere leaving school.Following the directions given,294AFRICA.I soon reached the house in which lives one of themost remarkable women of her age I have everknown. The door was opened by Mrs. Schreinerherself, and I found it almost impossible to believethat eighty-seven years had swept over her head.Iwas ushered into a room, the walls of which werecompletely covered with pictures, most of them relat-ing to her religious faith. The house is small, forHer domesticshe lives alone and is very active.duties are but a recreation to her. A look into herface told me where Olive had got her bright eyes,that are such a charm, and a few moments' conversa-tion told me through whom Mother Nature had be-stowed such marvelous conversational powers uponFor fourteen years Mrs. SchreinerOlive Schreiner.has lived alone, and twice only has ventured beyondI was surprised, find-the great gates in that time.ing her so shut away, to learn how thoroughly shewas informed on matters of interest in the outsideworld; but she " keeps up with the times" throughthe medium of all kinds of papers and periodicals.Being deeply interested in all good work, she spendsmuch time in prayer for the success of old reforms.In motherly tones she said :'' Yes, child, I remember well when you started onyour mission, and thought you young to go out intothe great cruel world from which I was so glad to besheltered."Knowing the religious views of other members ofher family, I wanted much to learn how she becamea Roman Catholic ; so I ventured to say :AFRICA.295" Mrs. Schreiner, do you mind telling me how youbecame interested in the Roman faith ?" No, I don't mind in the least."Then I drew forth my ever-present note-book and"recorded most of what she said,"My husband," began Mrs. Schreiner, "was aDutch missionary greatly devoted to his work, andDuring our marrieddeeply interested in the natives.life three sons and two daughters were given us—myson in England ; the one in the government ; Theo.,the temperance lecturer ; Mrs. lycwis, who has notlong been married ; and my Olive.All these areliving and are children of whom I am proud—not ablack sheep among them."The sweet gratitude with which she expressed thisfact was delightful to see, for with the sun of her lastdays flooding her path, truly it must be a blessing tolook upon a family of men and women grown, and seethem filling places of honor in the world."Well," continued she, "my husband died, thechildren were away, and I broke up the home andwent to live with a friend."Here, with moistenedeyes and a trembling in her voice, she spoke feelinglyupon the sacred theme of friendship." In that hour of sorrow, when the husband of allthese years had gone before me and left me with alonging heart and empty life, the refuge of a sweetfriendship was in a great measure a compensation.To this friend I confided everything.There was notan act of my life, thought of my heart, or longing ofmy soul that I did not tell her. We were knit to-296AFRICA.gether as were the souls of David and Jonathan.When a friend is wound and bound about the hearttill the fibers of one life can scarcely be separatedfrom those of the other, and in each there seems aconsciousness of the absolute need of the other, thathappy state is as near bliss as we shall arrive in thisOften and often I have blessed heaven forworld.But when thethe sweetness of a pure friendship.loss of my husband seemed most severe, there camethe darkest hour of my life ; my friend proved un-faithful, and in one day I was robbed of what wasSad of heart and heavy ofmore than life to me.spirit, I lost faith in man and God.I believed innothing, and life had little charm for me.In thisframe of mind I accepted an invitation to spend a fewdays with a friend whom I had long known.Glad toescape from the heart-burnings that made life a bur-den, I went to spend Christmas-tide with her. Myfriend belonged to the Catholic faith, and withoutknowing my frame of mind she invited me to theChristmas service. The sweet music attracted me,and I went from time to time, until I became inter-ested in the faith of the church. The priest visitedme often ;lastbroughtRoman Catholic church."I studied the Bible, and was atthrough the teaching of thelighttoHere she looked me in the face, and with an in-tense earnestness said, "And, child, I have foundThese are the happiest days ofthe true religion.my whole life."She spoke with tender affection ofthe religious belief of her children and concluded byAFRICA.297saying, "That, perhaps, is the religion for them, butthis is the religion for me."There was something sweetly pathetic about thelife of this devoted woman, who at her advanced ageretains all her faculties and a full interest in theworld and, most surprising of all, picks up a news-oflf withoutpaper of ordinary print and reads itMrs. Schreiner asks nothing greater thanglasses.that she may live and die in the faith to which sheis so strongly attached.