CHAPTER  III.AT HOME WITH THE AUTHOR OF " THE STORY OFAN AFRICAN FARM."|ACH country and age has its heroes, martyrsand geniuses.In every land the halo ofgreatness rests upon some brow whose re-flected light shines across the seas to other landsbearing on its shimmering beams a name that be-comes an inspiration to the world. The thought of"darkest" has been so long associated with thename of Africa that one would scarcely expect todiscover anything which could be designated by thename of " genius," yet it is a fact that from that darkland there have been flashed over the wires of theworld names whose greatness has left its imprintupon our day.While traveling through this country, in many re-spects so uninteresting, I met men and women whohad distinguished themselves, and whose names wereenrolled upon the book of fame.I suppose the bestknown woman in Africa is Olive Schreiner, or, per-haps, I should say the best known family is theSchreiner family, of which Olive is the most distin-It is not an exceptional thing to find oneguished.member of a family who possesses gifts beyond theusual ; but to find a whole family of geniuses, withgifts so varied that they compass the entire range of273274AFRICA.'thought— " The Story of an African Farm."modern thought, is something indeed extraordinary.Yet each one of the Schreiner family stands out aOlive was introduced to the lit-character by itself.erary world under the somewhat singular name of' and through the medium of a book' Ralph Iron, 'which was a decided departure from the usual line ofI readthe book soon after it appeared in America, and be-cause of its peculiar theology and remarkable viewsconcerning the marriage question— which had notthen been developed into a "question," but wasaccepted, as it had been handed down to us, as adivine institution, and therefore the only form thatcould be recognized—because of these strange ideas Ihad a great desire to see the writer. When the suc-cess of the book was assured and the real name of itsauthor had become known, I was filled with a greaterdesire than ever to look into the face of the womanwho had penned this somewhat weird production.The opportunity came to me during my sojourn inAfrica when I visited Olive Schreiner in her home.Her book being without a frontispiece of the writer,the only idea to be formed of her personal appearancemust of necessity be based on the characteristics ofThese being so unusual, it was but naturalthe book.to expect to see a somewhat unusual appearing indi-With these thoughts in my mind I left thevidual.train at a station a short distance from Craddock, andfound the carriage waiting to convey me to the farm,gome three miles distant.Olive Schreiner.AFRICA.277Viewing the surrounding country as we drovealong, I did not see how any place in that regioncould be called a farm. My whole being just tingledwith suppressed interrogation-points, as I wonderedArrived atwhat such barren land could produce.the farm, a little body flitted from the house to thegate to welcome me, and in less than five minutes Iwas truly at home with this interesting^ chatty littlewoman.genius.Mrs. Schreiner is under average height, with darkhair, arranged in that careless style so becoming toHer dark, sparkling eyes light up her facewith wonderful brightness as she expresses the inter-est she feels in all things ; for, from this place whereone seems almost buried, she keeps in perfect touchwith the outside world and its " doings."This kindof life, that would narrow down and dwarf the verysoul of some women, is to her a perpetual feast.The house is of the style of the farm-houses of thatcountry—comfortable, but scarcely presenting the sur-roundings in which one would expect to find OliveIt is impossible at such distant points toSchreiner.procure the furnishings and belongings of the kind ofhouse that charms and quiets the untamed spirit of arestless woman.Every real need was supplied, andfor actual comfort nothing was wanting, but therewere none of the luxuries present that characterizeThis was one of the penal-the modern household.ties of living in the "wilds of Africa," for such thisgreat farm—with ten thousand acres—seemed. Onone hand the high, barren, ugly hills, which form on§278AFRICA.of the fascinations of the place for Mrs. Schreiner,shut out the view. On the other, is Fish river, usu-Beyond this stretches the great "karroo,"ally dry.wild, vast and awful, over which the wind sighs likeFor months at a timea symbol of endless sorrow.the whole landscape is parched and burned, with littlesigns of vegetation ; when finally this does appear,the low bushes are almost the color of the earth fromwhich they spring—a strange gray-green that lends,if possible, a more barren aspect to the country.As we stood in the door of her house, Mrs.Schreiner pointed toward the hills with great enthu-siasm, told of the animals that prowl among thebushes, and seemed to revel in the beauty (?) of alandscape that to me breathed only of endless waste.She was, if anything, even more enthusiastic in herdelight in the great "karroo."ness.uninhabited regions."I just love it," said she, "for its mighty vast-I am filled with awe when I look upon itsalmost boundless stretches, spreading over miles ofI have almost a reverence forThen, pointing in the direction which we thenit."faced, she added, "Away over there, in a smallhouse, I wrote my story of ' An African Farm '; itwas the majesty of the almost limitless ' karroo ' thatgave me my inspiration."I did not discuss the theology or social features ofthe book, which I fully intended to do, for she talkedon about the country and of things generally inwhich she is so well informed, that time wore apace,and I was obliged to depart without haying gainedFish River, Schreiner Farm.AFRICA.281the information whether or not the book expressedLater I was told that sheher own personal views.was but nineteen years of age when this remarkableIt is said that from herproduction was brought out.publishers she received the small amount of fourteenpounds, to which, however, they added large sumswhen the book proved such an astonishing success.The next in interest was " Olive Schreiner's hus-band," as he is generally called in South Africa.Mr. Schreiner, previous to his marriage with Olive,was a Mr. Conwright ; but finding his wife unwillingto give up a name that had become known through-out the world, he took hers ; a proceeding made easyin that country by simply announcing in the papersfor a certain time that after such a date Mr. JohnSmith will be known as Mr. John Smith Brown, orNumerous criticismsGreen, as the case may be.have been passed pro and con on his unusual course,and I venture to say that sentiment generally is muchagainst a man "losing his identity inhis wife'sHowever,name," as a number have expressed it.I found Mr. Schreiner just the sort of a man onewould expect Olive Schreiner to marry, and it wasmost amusing to hear her tell, in her bright, spark-ling way, how they became engaged—sometimes hav-ing a good-natured laugh at her husband's expense.Mr. Schreiner is a man of fine appearance, some-what older than his wife, and, it is said by those whoshould know, one of the rising statesmen of SouthBeing indigenous to the country (he hasAfrica.never been out of it), he is deeply interested in all282AFRICA.social and political questions, and especially those per-taining to the welfare of the natives, for whom he ex-His power as a writer onpressed a great fondness.local subjects, and his unusual platform ability, willdoubtless place him where both gifts will tell in thePrevious to his marriage,interests of the people.Mr. Schreiner lived a bachelor life on his farm forDuring this time he gathered about himsome years.a large number of native servants, both HottentotsThese became servants indeed, for it isand Kaffirs.not overstating it to say that many of them wouldhave given their lives for him, if necessary. When Iwas there the Schreiners were about to leave the farm,and Mr. Schreiner' s greatest grief seemed to be thathe must part with his servants. The place is veryextensive, and is principally a stock farm ; that is, ifthe ostrich can be classified under the head of stock.Over this wild-looking place some hundreds of thesebirds of the desert roam at large, and scarcely knowthat a barbed wire fence keeps them within its con-fines.CHAPTKR IV.A RAMBLE OVER THE SCHREINER HOMESTEAD.farm.|E SPENT some hours rambling over theMr. Schreiner (a kodak strapped tohis back) and myself, with a Hottentot at-tendant, started out to see the ostriches and have asnap shot at some of them. The habits of theseungainly birds are most interesting. They can neverbe tamed, and itis very dangerous to go withinreach of the ugly feet and legs that possess so muchAs we approached the breeding-yards thestrength.birds took flight at the appearance of a stranger,and started on a wild run, in which even a horsecould not have overtaken them, so fleet of movementwere they.Nature has provided them with specialmeans of swiftness in the tail and wing feathers,and as they increase their speed these are spread likesmall sails, presenting an amusing appearance. Themovement of their legs is wholly lost sight of, andthey have the appearance of skimming along with-out effort. The birds when enraged are savage anddangerous, and a more blood-curdling sight couldnot be witnessed than that of an encounter withthese vicious creatures.With the aid of theHottentot, Mr. Schreinercaught an old bird and held it while I plucked a283284AFRICA.few feathers. The poor thing kicked, struggled andfloundered around, and when liberated soon put gooddistance between us. The hen bird is most savagewhen sitting, and if disturbed gives fair warning toIn some marvelous manner the longthe intruder.neck, which can be lengthened to some feet, is drawndown to the body and only the head appears fromamid a frill of feathers that fairly stand on end. Togive vent to her displeasure she opens wide hermouth, and thunders forth her rage in volumes ofsound that fall upon the ear like the roaring of aIt is wonderful, the special gifts thatwild bull.nature has bestowed upon the female ' portion of allcreation—they can at least make a noise.On theprinciple of "equal division of labor," both birdssit in turn to bring out the young.In strolling about I came upon a nest of eggs, andsaw how the sand had been scratched to make a hol-low in which to deposit the great white balls thatlater on would be transformed into life. The graybird, which is the female, has less plumage than themale, and sits in the day ; being the same color asthe grass in which her nest is made, she remainsunseen, and as the day grows old the male bird,whose color mingles with the surrounding darkness,hovers over the eggs until returning light. Whenthe ostriches are partly grown they are at their ugliestNumbers are placed in a small inclosure, thestage.walls just high enough to keep them within ; at theslightest sound they poke their long necks over thewall, perhaps fifty in a row, with no part of theirDiscovering a Nest of Ostricli Eggs.AFRICA.287bodies in sight, but a yard or two of neck bobbingup and down as they try to take in the situation.According to modern methods most of the chicks arebrought out in an incubator.' evoluting 'To the hatching-room we proceeded to inspect the' into chicks. The eggsprocess of eggs 'were deposited in long drawers, and uniform heat was" In this drawer,"maintained by the aid of a lamp.said Mr. Schreiner, as he pulled out the one nearestthe floor, " they must be almost ready to come out."Sure enough, there they were struggling with a heavyshell, trying to clear themselves of the bits thatseemed to cling so fondly to these little ugly creat-One, with more determination than the rest,ures.stood up, shook the few fragments of shell from hisdown, and started ofif with the independence of aYankee going to celebrate the Fourth of July.Inthis early stage of life they seem all head and feet,their two great, ugly toes being the most prominentfeature. The breast is a pretty fawn color, but theback is covered with quills which turn the wrongway, very similar to porcupine quills when raised.When removed from place to place they are carriedby the neck, which seems most cruel, but in no wayinjures them. When grown the birds are pluckedevery eight months. Many have written at lengthof the cruelty of plucking the ostrich, and somehumane and well-disposed persons have passed reso-lutions and pledged themselves not to wear the plum-age when, as a matter of fact, the birds suffer no morethan we would in having our hair cut. They are288AFRICA.herded into a pen, a sack is placed over their heads,and the plumes are cut off, leaving the stumps of theThese are shed in molting sea-quills on the body.son, just as the feathers would be if allowed toremain. The eggs are of great size, and the weightsurprising. The shell, when opened and the insideremoved, will hold the contents of eighteen hen eggs.Ostrich eggs are sometimes used for table purposes ;they are usually made into omelets, one <ig%, beingHaving asufficient for a meal for a whole family.desire to sample this ovicular delicacy to see what itmight be like, Mrs. Schreiner boiled one for sand-wiches to be taken on my journey ; she put it on tocook in the morning, and when it had boiled fornearly an hour it was considered well done.Mrs. Schreiner is not especially fond of the ostrich,but the hundreds of Cashmere goats and PersianI havasheep on the farm have in her a true friend.rarely seen a prettier sight than this happy husbandand wife counting the goats when they come home atnight. They are valuable for their long, pretty silkwool, which hangs almost to the ground. The sheepOf the goatsare raised for the table and market.there were a large number. The native shepherdsbrought them from the hillsides where they had beenfeeding during the day, and they all huddled togethernear the gate of the inclosure where they were toMr. Schreiner stepped over thespend the night.fence, opened the gate, and the goats began to file in,as if each understood that he must not enter until theone before him had been counted. The Persian sheepAFRICA.291are kept separate. They are most peculiar in appear-ance, with long, white bodies, closely clipped wooland black heads. They scramble, uncounted, intotheir place of shelter, and little interest is taken inthem.Some have asked, "What will be the eflfect ofwill her genius andOlive Schreiner's marriage ;identity be lost in that of her husband?"No, IShe will always be Olive Schreiner.should say not.Her individuality is too marked and strong to be lostThe same elements that gave her thein anyone.courage to dip her pen in a new color of ink, as itwere, and give her convictions to the world—whichwere only new in so far that she was brave enoughto write them—these elements will always maintainfor her a striking personality ; and Mr. Schreineris himself so strong a character that he has no needof his wife's personality to add to his strength.'Another question often asked is,' What about herhusband taking her name?" In these days whenthere is divided opinion on all points that pertain tothe " doings " of women, this question will be an-' thought of theswered according to the 'inquirer. From the expressions of opinion I gath-ered while in that country, I should say that Mr.Schreiner's example would be somewhat disastrous' of men ; but Mr. Schreiner,to the general 'happily, is a man strong enough to carry his wife'sAll men are not. The weight would carryname.some down to oblivion, or if they lived at all it would' evoluted '' run '292AFRICA.be in the reflected light from a woman, which alwayscasts a rather sickly irradiation upon a man. Theconviction grows upon me that the less pronouncedgifted women can be in winning their way to the surefooting intended for them by nature and God, themore rapid will be their progress toward that goal.My visit to this home will ever be remembered withdelight.'