CHAPTER  II.THE LAST KING OF THE ISLANDS.Y VISIT to the islands was in the days ofKing Kalakaua, who paid me the honor ofI was receivedgranting a private audience.in the royal palace, a large stone structure oppositethe State-house, situated in the middle of an inclosurecontaining about eight acres of ground forming aThis park was inclosed by a fencespacious park.eight feet high, and each of the large gates wasguarded by royal soldiers.It was quite impossibleto gain admission to the grounds without an orderto the guards. A short distance from the palace, inthe same inclosure, was the queen's house, said to bethe living-house of their majesties, the palace beingused chiefly on state occasions.Through the courtesy of the chamberlain I wasshown over the palace. A long flight of marblestairs led to the great front door, where the chamber-lain met me. We stopped iu the large hall to see thechief paintings of the palace. They hung on eachside of the hall, and were principally those of thedusky-skinned rulersof theleft,through a great archway, we reached the red, orIt was very large, and was furnishedthrone room.in garnet. The chairs were plain, but beautifulgarnet plush with gilt frames. To the far end of thepast. To theTHE SAND WICH ISL AMDS.55room, on a small platform under a canopy of magnif-icent tapestry drapery, stood the throne, plain andsimple, made after the fashion of the chairs.To the right of the hall we entered the blue, orreception room, provided with blue brocade furnituremounted in ebony. On the wall hung the pictures ofthe king and queen, and aside from this the furnish-ings were few and plain.Just before us great foldingdoors opened into the state dining-hall. A magnifi-cent sideboard, laden with silver, two long rows ofchairs, a long table, and mixed carpet, completed thefurniture. On the upper floor were the guest-cham-bers, and those occupied on occasion by the kingand queen. A severe cold prevented the queen frombeing present, but his majesty, the king, received mein the blue room.This was my first experience in the presence of reallive royalty—a natural-born king— a fellow-creaturegreat because he could not help it—born great.Poorman, how sorry I was for him to be thus burdened !Yet I must nerve myself to gaze upon a sight myeyes had never beheld. How I felt ! My democratic,Fourth-of-July principles bore down heavily upon meas I thought of the bowing, scraping and "backingout " from his natural-born mightiness.As I sat in the blue room trying to arm myselfwith a determination to rise to the occasion, theshadow of greatness fell upon the floor, and I was inthe presence of this born king. As the chamberlainpresented me the king advanced in a most friendlyway, shook hands, and seated himself near by, ready56THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.hear any petition I might make.Unlike thetoqueen, he spoke correct English, and his words wereIn appearance he was a perfect type ofwell chosen.physical manhood. He was very dark, with black,curly hair, a feature that at once betrayed the negroblood. His father and grandfather were both negroes,but his mother was a South Sea Island woman ofhigh rank ; so he took his royalty from his mother'sside. He was, I should say, six feet high, weighedabout two hundred pounds, and was both polishedand graceful in manners. He was dressed in a suitof white pressed jlannel, black tie, and canvas shoes.His display of jewelry was almost alarming ;hishands were covered with jewels of all kinds, eachfinger weighted down to the joint, and his spread ofwatch-chain was quite overpowering.While in Siam, I heard a story of Kalakaua thatamused me very much. When he made up his mindto journey around the world, he decided to visit theIt was an-remote and unbeaten regions of Siam.nounced in the newspapers of that country that thisking would appear amid them in the course of hiswanderings. The Siamese ruler thought it only fit-ting that his majesty should be received in a mostappropriate fashion, and although well educated infamiliar with thethe English language and quite" lay of the land " of this planet, he could not recallthe Sandwich Islands ; neither could he rememberhaving heard the musical name of Kalakaua. Animperial personage, the king's brother, was sum-moned before the sovereign, and instructed to makeTHE SANDWICH ISLANDS.59known to him this ruler that was to invade theirshores. The prince made all possible speed to gathertogether his books and begin researches that wouldlead to information concerning the expected guest.The first book that fell into the hands of the princechanced to be an early account of Captain Cook's visitto the islands, wherein he read, " The inhabitants areThis informationcannibals, or a man-eating tribe."imparted to the king, he decided that the hospitalityof the palace should be withheld ; for he instantlyconceived the awful result of a "man-eater" beingturned at large among the forty wives, sixty children,and fifteen hundred women in his harem.It is saidKalakaua had to content himself with the accommo-dations of the hotel.The king was very unpopular among the whites,and had his days been lengthened, he doubtless wouldhave met the fate of the one who tried to succeed him.The natives, also, were becoming well educated, thespirit of progress had taken possession of them, andthey were beginning to feel that the old form of gov-ernment did not meet the demands of the day, and therulers were behind in the recognition of the rights ofthe people.All around Honolulu are tombs, statues, halls, etc.,to perpetuate the memory of past rulers in the mindsIn front of the old native church is theof the youth.beautiful tomb of King Lunalilo.It is a good-sizedstructure of modern design, surrounded by a high,iron fence, the gate of which is always locked, so thata near approach to the tomb is impossible.In front6oTHE SANDWICH ISLANDS.of the State-house stands the statue of the first king,Kamehameha ("the ugly one"), who subdued theislands, and set up a kingdom by right of conquest.The statue stands on a pedestal some five feet high,and represents the king as conqueror, with a spear inone hand and the other outstretched and beckoning toall to come and behold his victory. He is representedas very dark-skinned, with no garments save a greatmantle, gilt color, that falls in graceful folds abouthis dusky figure.The mantle of marble gives some idea of the one hewore during his lifetime. The original mantle wasmade of yellow feathers taken from the breast of ablack bird which was known to the islands in earlydays, but which has long since become extinct. Theking ordered that the birds, which had just one yellowfeather in their breasts, should be trapped, the featherFrom these apulled out, and the birds set at liberty.mantle was made said to be worth one million dollars.It was intended to be handed down to the succeedingsovereigns so long as a fragment of it remained, or theislands were under monarchical rule. The predeces-sor of Kalakaua became possessed of the idea that ashe entered the unknown he would look well sweepingthrough the portals in this kingly robe, so he orderedthat it should form his shroud, and this garment ofvast wealth was consigned, with the king's remains,to the darkness of the tomb.a