CHAPTER  III.ALASKAN DRESS AND CUSTOMS.T IS impossible to say what the original dressof these people was when Vistus Behringdiscovered them, more than one hundredand fifty years ago ; so far as I know, an account hasIt is but natural to suppose thatnever been given.in the far North their attire was the same then as itis now. The women and men dress alike at the pres-ent time, in fur throughout : fur trousers, extendingbelow the knees ; fur-lined boots, with long tops ; afur jacket, reaching down halfway between the waistand knees ; a fur-lined, pointed hood over their heads.Thus they are completely enveloped in fur.In lower Alaska the manner of dress is very dififer-In those more accessible parts, where theent."ready-made clothing" store has found its way,they have largely adopted our manner of dressminus shoes, and with the addition of blankets.Some of the blankets are a curiosity. The Chilcatblanket and shirt, woven by the women, often bringa very large price from the money- laden tourists.These are a bright canary color, with the emblems ofthe country woven in black. The women are mostingenious in their devices for coloring and weaving,the latter being done entirely by hand. The fiber ismade from native grasses, dried and twisted till it3738ALASKA.resembles wool ; this is then woven into shirts andSo slow is the process that many monthsblankets.are required for the weaving of one garment. Thedye in which the fiber is dipped is made from theroots of herbs which grow in that country.Besides the weaving of blankets, the women makeThese are straw color, withhats, mats and baskets.the emblems of their tribes interwoven in differentlyarge numbers are sold during the touristhues.I have also seen the women at work mak-season.ing silver or bone ornaments, though I am told thatmost of the silver sold as specimens of Alaskan work-manship is really made in other parts and sent therefor sale.The women participate in all social functions, suchWhile in Juneau we learnedas feasts, dances, etc.that there was to be a dance and feast near bywhich was to last several days ; so we decided to goand see what their idea of dancing was. The peopleof each country have such diflferent ideas of what con-stitutes "the dance" that in going from land to landone hardly knows what to expect when itis an-nounced that a dance is going on ; so I started forthis with little idea of what it would be like.The occasion of this "merry-making" was theappointment and recognition of a new chief. Theold chief had just died, and the young one, who wasto " reign in his stead," must allow the people to dohim honor in feast, song and dance. The nativeshad come from many miles around ; some had trav-eled days and days to get there. We were in fullALASKA.'39sympathy with those who had sufifered much fatiguein their journey, for we went through dangers anddifficulties not a few to reach the scene of festivities.The spot selected was a bluff, about two miles outof the city, upon which had been erected a woodenhouse, where the multitudes wereto assemble.Toward this we started one night after dark. Thepath lay along the beach for about a mile ; this led toa very high cliff, the top of which must be reached ifwe would "go to the dance."It seemed a very diffi-cult task, but by climbing up three steps and slippingback two—floundering about in a most ungracefulfashion—we finally reached the top, and crawled,snake-like, around the ledge, where we sat for a timetrying to catch our breath, and congratulating our-selves that we were still alive.It is said, "Thosewho go to the dance must pay the fiddler," and wehad to give our contribution in the form of "climbingto get there."Foot-sore, breathless, and with blistered hands—tosay nothing of rent garments—we reached the dance-hall. The missionary who acted as escort to theparty entered first. The master of ceremonies cameThe only availableforward to meet and welcome us.seats were on the floor ; here we arranged ourselves inline against the side of the house where the womenwere sitting, and soon the uproar began. The mostnoticeable feature of the gathering was the costume ofthe women, the chief garment being their Chilcat, orhighly-colored blanket.solid-coloredblankets were covered with thousands of white agateThe plain,—40ALASKA.These were sewed to overlap each other,buttons.fish-scale fashion, in the most hideous forms, repre-senting the tribe from which they had descended ; or,as we should say, showing "their pedigree" — pro-claiming to their small world their "blue blood."Many had their faces painted black, each had ringseither in ears or nose, and the crowning ornamentthe labret—in the pierced lower lip.The men wore many kinds of fur. The new chiefwas arrayed in long bands of white fur, hanging likefringe all around his head, extending down to hischin, and dangling over his face.Less noted oneswore common fur, arranged in similar fashion.Unlike the custom of most countries the men do allthe dancing, and the women look on. The signalwas given, and about twenty men stepped to themiddle of the floor and formed a circle ; the womensat or piled themselves together around the sides ofthe room. The "band" was a rattle and a drum;the latter was hammered without regard to time orNot a foot moved. The dancing consisted intune.swaying the body, and bending it into every con-ceivable shape, to the time—if it could be called time—of the music.This lasted nntil the dancers wereready to drop from exhaustion, when refreshments ofoil and fish were passed.While we looked on in great astonishment someone struck up a tune ; another took it up, thenanother, until the whole scene became a bedlam ofconfusion. The women remained seated ; their onlypart in the dance is to keep time to the music byALASKA.41clapping their hands, and singing a low, sad chantthat falls upon the ear like a distant wail of distress.This continues for some days. On the last day theyusually "fill up the bowl," and keep on filling upuntil they fairly reel home to await the death of thechief—looking forward with joy and gladness to asimilar occasion.THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.