CHAPTER  VI.THEO. SCHREINER AND HIS SISTER, MRS. LEWIS.[N undertaking a journey of. long distance,the fatigue was so great that I stopped oflF ata small town to rest for the night.In thelocal papers I read that Mr. Theo. Schreiner, whohad been holding wonderful temperance meetings ata point near by, would reach town the following morn-Here was an unexpected opportunity to meeting.another member of the family of whom I had heardso much. My departure was delayed to await hisarrival. When his card was sent up I went down tomeet him, full of expectation as to what this particu-lar Mr. Schreiner might be like. As I entered, herose and greeted me in a warm, friendl}' way. Wehad each read much of the other, and we felt that weThere stood before mewere by no means strangers.a fine-looking man, who bore little resemblance to hisAbout the average height, with thicksister Olive.light hair, and beard to match, and large blue eyes,he certainly looked a splendid specimen of an Afri-Mr. Schreiner's special gift lies in his unusualcana.platform ability. He is considered one of the finestspeakers in the country. He has utilized his gift ofeloquence in the interest of reform, and for manymany years has gone up and down the land, among298AFRICA.299the Boers, speaking on all subjects for the bettermentof the people. He can discourse in Dutch like aHollander, and his special theme is gospel temper-ance.When I was about to start for the station, he pro-posed that we go early enough to drive around theIt was a small place, and very little timetown.would suflSce to see the "sights." The object ofgreatest interest was a monument, the like of whichthe world has never seen.It is usually supposed thatmonuments stand to do honor to the valiant deeds ofsome great hero, but this was by no means the objectof the granite column that arrested my attention aswe drove along. Some time ago it was decided thatthe English tongue should be the language of Parlia-ment ; no one would be eligible for Parliament whodid not speak both English and Dutch, but Englishwas to be the recognized language.This was greatlylamented by the Boer, who vainly supposed his lan-guage to be that of heaven.It is never defamed byusing its strongest adjectives ; hence a Boer reads hisBible and prays in high Dutch, but does all his swear-ing in low Dutch.Believing it to be the languageused in calling the world into being, and having a rev-erence for it second only to that for the Most High, itwas a great grief to see it crushed to earth with onefell swoop, and know that its musical accents wouldno longer enter into the laws of the land. This event,therefore, called forth the patriotism of the Boer,who expressed it by the erection of this monument." Would you like to read the inscriptions ? " asked300AFRICA.Being a Yankee, I felt I could investMr. Schreiner.my time to greater profit even in Africa then sittingdown to decipher the hieroglyphics on a tombstoneput up to a dead language ; so we drove on to meetthe train.Some days later, my line of travel took me to Kim-berley, the home of Mrs. Staksby Lewis, the oldestsister of Olive Schreiner, and wholly unlike her inevery possible way. Low of stature and very stout,with a somewhat strained voice from long publicspeaking, she had the appearance of a home-body in-stead of a platform woman. Long ago Mrs. Lewisassociated herself with temperance reform, and de-voted her unbounded energies to the Good Templars,who are still wont to call her " Sister Schreiner," not-withstanding her little flock of nine, none of whombelong to her, however.Upon the death of a relative, or friend, I do notrecollect which, Mrs. Lewis (then Miss Schreiner)adopted four children. As she went from place toplace speaking, sometimes many consecutive nights," her children " were always with her, and, in addi-tion to her public duties, she seemed to find time toDuring her travels Missinstruct and train them.Schreiner met Mr. Staksby Lewis, a widower withfive children, most of whom were well grown.Forsome years she considered his proposal of marriage ;finally, it seemed to be the call of duty, and shesettled down to the domestic cares that come to awoman who undertakes to mother nine children oftwo different families, none of them her own.—301AFRICA.Mr. Lewis is a friendly, quiet man of sterlingworth, and wholly devoted to his wife and family.Mrs. Lewis is of an intense religious nature, herspecial belief being " faith healing," a doctrine to thestudy of which she has devoted much time. Theearnestness of her platform utterances has won manyconverts to that live train of thought.Of the Schreiner family there remain only twobrothers—of whom I have not spoken. One haslong been associated with the government of SouthAfrica, and the other took up his residence in Englandsome time ago where he leads a less public life.ORIENTAL OBSEQUIES.