
[  PART   I 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH 


I 


CHAPTER  I 

Some  of  the  events  and  surroundings  among  which  I  was 
brought  up  come  back  to  my  mind  with  the  clearness  of 
a  silhouette,  perfect  in  its  outline ;  and  since  I  have  to  tell 
the  story  of  my  life,  it  is  just  as  well  to  begin  at  the  very 
beginning.  Yet  I  beg  my  readers  to  believe  that  I  have  not 
undertaken  this  task  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  speaking  of 
myself  or  boasting  of  my  triumphs.  I  only  write  because 
I  cannot  help  thinking  that  this  work,  though  deficient  in 
many  points,  may  yet  interest  some  people,  or  be  of  some 
use  to  others. 

It  is  impossible  to  write  a  biography  leaving  out  entirely 
one's  wretched  '^I,"  yet  I  shall  be  as  discreet  as  possible, 
as  there  is  nothing  I  dread  more  than  a  touch  of  ''pseudo- 
logia-fantastica-madness,"  to  which  much  stronger  natures 
than  my  own  are  often  subjected. 

Born  on  the  12th_oLXbtober,- 1840,  I  was  one  of  ten 
children  at  home,  and  being  a  member  of  such  a  numerous 
family,  I  could  not  claim  the  exclusive  attention  of  my 
mother,  who,  besides  many  domestic  duties,  had  the  man- 
agement of  her  property  on  her  shoulders.  Therefore  my 
younger  sister  Josephine  and  myself  were  left  entirely  in 
the  care  of  my  great-aunt  Teresa,  who  loved  us  dearly, 
who  was  very,  careful  of  our  health,  but  whose  attempts 
in  developing  our  little  souls  were  limited  to  the  scrupulous 
reciting  with  us  of  our  morning  and  evening  prayers. 

In  consequence,  I  grew  up  mostly  under  the  influence  of 
Nature,  among  the  incidents  of  life  and  national  calamities, 
free,  unrestrained,  forming  my  own  judgment  of  things 
blindly,  innocently,  adorning  and  magnifying  them  with 

15 


16  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

my  vivid  imagination,  catching  eagerly  snatches  of  heroic 
songs,  poems,  or  religious  hymns,  memorizing  and  repeating 
them,  and  thus  unconsciously  building  up  my  character 
as  well  as  laying  the  foundation  for  my  artistic  future. 

Talent  is  born  with  us,  but  the  influence  of  surround- 
ings shapes,  develops,  or  subdues  it.  That  sweet  sadness, 
which  for  the  most  part  exists  in  Polish  melodies  and  poems 
and  which  is  the  outcome  of  the  whole  nation's  suflferings, 
that  limitless  tenderness  and  longing,  unconsciously  rooted 
itself  in  my  soul  from  my  very  childhood,  in  spite  of  the 
fiery  and  stormy  temperament  I  brought  with  me  into  the 
world  — presumably  an  inheritance  from  a  Hungarian  great- 
grandmother.  That  note  of  tenderness  always  predominated 
both  in  my  nature  and  my  work,  in  which  often  flashes  of 
inborn  vivacity  and  passion  were  overshadowed  by  that 
touch  of  Slavonic  Tesknota,  a  word  quite  untranslatable 
into  a  foreign^  Janguage,  which  may  be  best  interpreted  by 
the  following  verse  of  Longfellow :  — 

"  A  feeling  of  sadness  and  longing 
That  is  not  akin  to  pain, 
And  resembles  sorrow  only 
As  the  mist  resembles  rain." 

When  I  follow  closely  my  childhood  I  see  distinctly  the 
logical  evolution  of  my  destiny.  As  far  as  I  can  remember, 
I  did  not  find  much  pleasure  in  the  society  of  other  children, 
who  often  left  my  company,  branding  me  with  nicknames, 
such  as:  "Princess  of  the  Sea  Foam"  or  ''Lady  with 
Long  Nails";  sometimes  they  called  me  "a  Fury,"  or  ''a 
Weeping  Willow,"  sometimes  again  "Laughing  Magpie," 
on  account  of  my  occasional  uncontrollable  fits  of  laughter. 

It  seems  that  I  was  not  one  of  the  most  amiable  of  children, 
and  all  these  nicknames  my  brothers  used  to  christen  me 
with  fitted  my  behavior. 

Misfortunes,  fires,  the  hissing  of  cannon-balls,  the  crash 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  17 

of  bursting  bombs,  the  march  of  armies,  men  killed  and 
lying  in  their  blood,  —  these  are  never-forgotten  impres- 
sions which  thrilled  my  childish  soul  through  and  through, 
shaping  it  into  an  untimely  maturity  and  awakening  in  it 
inclination  for  heroism,  thirst  for  greatness,  for  sacrifice; 
in  a  word,  the  necessity  of  attaining  the  unattainable,  the 
upward  start  in  quest  of  high  ideals. 

Alas !  it  was  not  my  destiny  to  die  for  my  country,  as 
was  my  cherished  dream,  but  instead  of  becoming  a  heroine 
I  had  to  be  satisfied  with  acting  heroines,  exchanging  the 
armor  for  tinsel,  and  the  weapon  for  words. 

My  father,  Michael  Opid,  was  a  student  of  philology  and 
a  teacher  in  one  of  the  high  schools  in  Cracow.  Born  in 
the  Carpathian  Mountains,  he  brought  with  him  to  the 
valley  a  warm,  unsophisticated  heart,  a  most  vivid  imagina- 
tion, and  a  great  love  for  music.  He  also  was  very  fond  of 
children;  I  remember  him  during  long  winter  evenings, 
sitting  by  the  fireside,  holding  me  and  my  sister  on  his 
knees;  near  him,  my  mother  knitting,  and  the  boys,  to- 
gether with  neighbors'  children,  scattered  on  the  floor, 
watching  him  with  glistening,  curious  eyes,  and  listening 
attentively  to  his  stories.  They  were  wonderful  stories 
that  touched  us  with  pity  or  thrilled  us  with  joy.  Some 
of  them  were  taken  from  national  legends  or  from  the 
mountaineer  folk-lore,  some  were  his  own  invention,  or 
subjects  taken  from  his  cherished  books.  His  favorite 
story  was  Homer's  ''Iliad,"  extracts  of  which  he  told  us 
in  his  simple  language.  I  do  not  know  how  much  I  under- 
stood then  of  the  famous  epic  poem,  but  when  I  read  it 
some  fifteen  years  later,  many  famous  scenes  came  back 
vividly  to  my  mind,  and  the  picture  of  my  father  rose  from 
the  remote  past,  filling  my  eyes  with  tears. 

Music  was  his  passion.  He  played  on  several  instruments, 
mostly  on  the  flute,  which  instrument  was  then  in  fashion, 
and  almost  every  week  he  arranged  quartets  in  his  rooms. 


18  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

On  such  occasions  the  children  were  allowed  to  enter  his 
'^sanctum  sanctorum."  He  played  with  great  feeling,  and 
often  during  the  tender  passages  I  burst  into  a  loud  wail, 
after  the  fashion  of  dogs,  which  resulted  in  my  being  taken 
out  of  the  room  and  unjustly  punished.  My  mother  did 
not,  could  not,  know  that  this  disgraceful  behavior  was  the 
effect  of  the  music,  and  that  my  tears  were  a  genuine  tribute 
to  my  father's  art.  I  understood,  however,  that  this  loud 
crying  disturbed  the  music,  and  I  used  to  creep  into  the  re- 
motest corner  of  the  room,  where  I  could  hide  my  smothered 
demonstrations  and  avoid  the  vigilant  eye  of  the  maternal 
authority. 

Those  who  knew  my  father  say  that  he  was  a  man  of 
great  kindness  —  kindness  verging  on  weakness  —  a  man  of 
great  feeling  and  few  words,  keeping  the  doors  of  his  inner 
self  closely  shut.  He  died  at  the  age  of  forty-three,  of  con- 
sumption, caused  by  a  severe  cold  contracted  while  search- 
ing for  his  drowned  brother's  body.  At  last  the  body  was 
found,  but  my  father  returned  home  with  high  fever  and 
pneumonia.  A  few  months  later  he  died  in  the  mountains, 
to  which  he  was  transported  at  his  ardent  request.  I  was 
at  that  time  about  seven  vears  old. 

In  contrast  to  my  father's  gentle  nature,  my  mother  was 
a  person  of  great  energy,  great  activity,  very  quick  and 
outspoken,  very  generous,  but  rash  in  judgment,  and  often 
regretting  her  hasty  words  and  actions.  She  possessed 
good  health  and  a  merry  heart.  Some  of  her  old  friends 
spoke  of  her  great  beauty.  My  mother  never  knew  her  own 
father,  also  a  mining  engineer,  who  perished  in  an  attempt 
to  rescue  workingmen  entombed  in  a  burning  mine.  She 
was  born  a  few  weeks  after  his  death.  A  year  later  her 
mother  was  married  again,  and  followed  her  second  husband 
to  Russian  Poland,  leaving  her  little  daughter  in  the  care 
of  her  old  widowed  mother,  Mrs.  von  Goltz.  When  my 
mother  was  seven  yeai^  old,  my  great-grandmother  was 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  19 

killed  by  lightning,  and  then  one  of  her  friends,  the  wife  of 
Senator  R.,  brought  up  the  little  granddaughter. 

At  nineteen  she  married  a  wealthy  citizen  of  Cracow,  Mr. 
Simon  Benda,  who  was  ennobled  for  the  numerous  services 
he  had  rendered  the  city.  He  was  a  widower,  and  neariy 
thirty  years  older  than  his  young  wife.  When  he  died,  he 
left  her  several  sons,  and  a  fortune  somewhat  compromised 
by  his  liberalities.  In  consequence,  my  poor  mother  had 
her  hands  full ;  but  in  a  few  years,  thanks  to  her  industry, 
economy,  and  energy  she  had  paid  off  all  debts,  and  estab- 
lished a  perfect  order  in  her  affairs.  A  few  years  later 
my  father  appeared;  and  this  time  it  was  a  love 
match. 


CHAPTER  II 

In  the  early  spring  of  1848  the  people  of  Cracow  were 
greatly  excited.  The  young  men  talked  a  great  deal,  their 
enthusiasm  was  immense;  they  were  merry,  they  sang 
derisive  couplets  on  Metternich  and  General  Castiglione. 
The  giris  were  busy  sewing  the  red  and  white  and  blue 
cockades  and  scarfs  for  the  National  Guards.^ 

I  remember  with  what  delight  I  handed  thread  and  ribbons 
to  Miss  ApoUonia,  our  young  neighbor  from  the  third  floor, 
who,  while  ardently  stitching  the  inspiring  ornaments, 
recited  patriotic  verses  or  sang  sentimental  love-songs. 
One  of  those  songs  began  with  the  words,  ''Here  is  the  brook 
and  the  meadow  where  my  lover  waits  for  me."  The  next 
one  was  very  long,  composed  of  four  stanzas,  of  which  the 
first  three  ended  with  the  words,  ''No,  no,  I  cannot  and  I 
will  not,"  and  the  last  one  was  concluded  with :  "Yes,  yes, 
I  can  and  I  will  —  I  love  —  I  love  —  tra  la  la,  tra  la  la." 
I  never  knew  why  she  changed  her  mind,  but  I  admired 
Miss  Apollonia's  delivery  of  the  songs.  She  sang  them 
with  tender,  melting  voice,  which  pleased  me,  but  my  half- 
brother,  Simon  Bend  a,  teased  her,  saying  that  her  nose  was 
not  suited  to  sentimental  or  tragic  poetry,  being  but  an 

*  In  1815  Cracow,  with  its  surroundings,  was  proclaimed  a  free  city  by 
the  Congress  of  Vienna,  with  the  agreement  of  the  powers,  Russia,  Prussia, 
and  Austria.  Notwithstanding  the  stipulations  of  those  monarchs,  and 
contrary  to  their  pledges,  Cnwow  was  annexed  by  Austria  in  October, 
1846.  During  the  same  year  Mettemich's  policy  created  a  new  ''Jac- 
Querie"  in  Gsuitzia,  sending  out  his  agents  to  rouse  the  peasants  against 
the  nobles,  and  a  terrible  massacre  ensued.  Cracow  people  naturally 
wer6  indignant  against  the  new  regime,  and  when,  in  1848,  tne  revolution 
broke  out  in  Vienna,  they  were  awakened  to  their  old  hopes  of  indepen- 
dence.    The  Austrians  crushed  these  hopes  by  the  bombardment  of  the  city. 

20 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  21 

upturned  little  bit  of  a  nose,  and  so  highly  uplifted  in  the 
air  that  her  profile  looked  very  much  like  the  profile  of  a 
coffee-pot. 

In  spite  of  this  slight  defect,  for  which  she  was  not  re- 
sponsible at  all,  Miss  ApoUonia  was  very  patriotic.  It  was 
she  who  informed  me  that  all  Russians,  and  Austrians  in 
particular,  were  scoundrels  and  cowards  who  deserved  to  be 
hanged  one  after  another  until  none  of  them  were  left  on 
earth.  One  morning  she  told  me  in  a  whisper  that  there 
would  be  war,  that  the  young  Cracovians  were  learning  to 
drill,  and  would  fight  like  tigers,  upon  which  she  changed 
the  subject  and  told  me  a  fairy  story:  — 

"One  morning  a  handsome  young  prince  saw  a  pretty 
green  frog  looking  at  him  with  pitiful  eyes.  He  picked  it 
up  and  took  it  to  his  palace.  He  placed  the  poor  creature 
in  a  separate  room,  and  fed  it  every  morning  with  flies  and 
honey.  The  frog  was  happy,  and  danced  and  croaked  and 
began  to  grow  wonderfully.  In  a  week  it  was  as  large  as 
a  big  rat,  in  another  week  it  came  up  to  the  size  of  a  cat, 
then  later  on  it  grew  as  big  as  a  lamb,  until  at  last  it  measured 
five  feet  and  six  inches.  One  morning  the  prince  heard 
beautiful  singing  in  the  frog's  room.  He  opened  the  door, 
and  there  was  Miss  Croaky  standing  on  her  hind  legs,  sing- 
ing. When  the  last  sounds  of  the  beautiful  air  died  away, 
the  monstrous  animal  shut  its  mouth,  took  a  long  breath, 
and  puffed  itself  to  such  an  extent  that  it  looked  like  a  large 
round  balloon.  Then  it  burst  suddenly  with  a  fearful  noise, 
filling  the  room  with  a  delicious  perfume,  and  out  of  the 
repulsive  hide  of  the  monster  stepped  the  most  beautiful 
princess,  in  a  wedding  gown  covered  all  over  with  pearls 
and  diamonds."  .  .  .  Here  she  stopped  for  a  while;  I 
listened  to  the  story  breathlessly,  and  when  I  was  just 
asking  her  nervously:  ''What  happened  next,  please?  — 
what  happened  next?''  —  the  distant  report  of  a  gun  was 
heard,  then  another  and  again  another.     Miss  Apollonia, 


22  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

with  outstretched  arms,  cried:    ''It  is  the  war  —  the  war! 
Did  I  not  tell  you!" 

One  morning  my  mother  entered  the  room ;  she  was  quite 
pale ;  then  all  my  brothers  rushed  in,  very  much  excited, 
and  all  talked  together  about  the  National  Guard,  the  exiles, 
the  Austrians.  The  names  of  Baron  Krieg  and  General 
Castiglione  were  mentioned,  and  while  they  were  talking, 
a  murmur  of  voices  was  heard  approaching  nearer  and 
nearer,  until  an  unusual  clamor  filled  the  streets,  and  in  the 
midst  of  it  a  cry,  ''Build  barricades !"  Then  all  the  houses 
disgorged  their  inhabitants,  who  carried  beds,'  mattresses, 
chairs,  sofas,  throwing  them  into  a  large  heap  until  a  barri- 
cade was  raised  across  the  street.  We  counted  one,  two, 
three  barricades,  the  last  one  at  the  end  of  our  street ;  and 
leaning  out  of  the  window,  we  could  see  the  Austrians' 
bayonets  in  the  distance.  Our  maidservants  worked  with 
spirit,  carrying  heavy  pieces  of  furniture,  kitchen  utensils, 
etc.,  and  placing  them  on  top  of  the  shaky  structure. 
Every  time  they  climbed  up  they  called  to  the  Austrian 
soldiers,  shaking  their  red  fists  at  them  and  giving  them 
funny  and  uncomplimentary  names.  The  whole  scene 
seemed  rather  amusing.  My  brother  Simon,  then  fourteen 
years  old,  jumping  down  oflF  the  barricade,  rushed  into  the 
house,  then  into  the  room  where  we  were  all  assembled, 
shouting*:  — 

"Give  me  a  sword,  a  pistol,  anything!  Give  me  a  spit! 
a  spit !  and  I  will  stick  that  General  with  a  cockade  on  his 
casque,  and  roast  him  like  a  chicken!''  which  speech 
provoked  merry  laughter  from  the  hearers.  Mother,  fear- 
ing the  lad  might  get  into  mischief,  seized  his  two  hands, 
pushed  him  into  the  adjoining  room,  and  locked  the  door. 
We  heard  him  stamping  and  shrieking :  — 

'^I  want  to  kill  him!     Let  me  out!     I    must  kill  him!" 

My  sister  and  myself  were  highly  interested  in  looking 
at  the  National  Guards  arranging  themselves  behind  pro- 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  ':  23 

tective  barricades,  when  we  were  peremptorily  ordered  by 
my  mother  to  keep  away  from  the  window.  We  obeyed, 
and  crept  into  the  next  room,  where  stood  my  mother's 
stately  bed,  supported  by  four  carved  and  painted  little 
negroes.  We  soon  forgot  what  was  going  on,  absorbed  in 
touching  the  large  eyeballs,  red  lips,  and  gold  ornaments 
of  the  queer  dark  fellows  with  whom  we  planned  a  long 
journey  to  the  tropics,  where  pepper  grows,  when  sud- 
denly a  loud  report  of  a  cannon  made  us  spring  up,  run 
to  mother,  and  cling  to  her  dress.     She  cried:  — 

''Great  God!  They  are  bombarding  the  city!  Aunt 
Teresa,  call  the  boys  and  servants,  and  let  us  go  to  the  cellar 
—  and  please  tell  them  to  bring  some  bedding,  as  we  must 
pass  the  night  there,  if  they  do  not  stop!''  .  .  .  She  un- 
locked the  door  where  my  poor  brother  was  imprisoned, 
and  ordered  him  to  go  first.  Cooled  off  from  his  first  ex- 
citement, he  meekly  submitted.  Then,  taking  my  sister 
by  the  hand,  our  imposing  mamma  turned  to  me  and  said 
briefly :  — 

''Follow  me!".  .  .  But  I  stood  where  she  left  me. 
Was  it  fright  or  curiosity?  I  cannot  tell;  but  I  did  not 
move.  I  heard  her  descending  the  stairs;  I  knew  it  was 
naughty  to  stay  when  she  had  ordered  me  to  follow  her, 
and  when  she  was  sure  that  I  was  walking  behind  her.  I 
knew  all  that  —  and  yet  —  I  stood  where  she  left  me. 

My  youngest  and  my  own  brother,  Adolphe  Opid,  three 
years  older  than  myself,  tearing  himself  away  from  Aunt 
Teresa's  protecting  arms,  came  up  to  me  dishevelled,  and 
with  an  expression  of  wild  passion  in  his  face  he  said :  — 

"I  will  not  go  to  the  cellar!  I  want  to  see!"  On  the 
instant  a  tremendous  crash  shook  the  house  to  its  founda- 
tions. Something  unnaturally  heavy  struck  the  wall,  fol- 
lowed by  something  equally  heavy  falling  with  a  clang 
against  the  stone  pavement.  I  began  to  cry  aloud.  My 
brother  grew  very  pale.     His  lips  were  trembling.     He  ran 


24  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  the  window,  and  leaning  out  with  half  of  his  body,  he  said 
excitedly :  — 

''A  bomb  tore  away  half  of  the  iron  balcony,  and  made 
a  big  hole  in  the  wall !"  The  cannon  reports  still  continued, 
the  streets  were  filled  with  the  clamors  and  cries  of  the  people, 
and  then,  with  a  noise  like  the  snapping  of  whips,  the  rifles 
began  their  work.  Louder  and  louder  grew  the  shooting, 
and  with  it  the  crash  of  broken  window-panes  falling  to 
the  floor  together  with  the  bullets.  Adolphe,  who,  during 
that  time,  ran  from  one  room  to  another,  picking  up  the 
bullets,  came  back,  and  taking  me  by  the  hand  pulled  me 
with  him  to  the  corner  room,  the  one  most  exposed  to  the 
projectiles  of  the  Austrian  carabines. 

''Hide  in  that  corner,"  he  cried,  pushing  me  forward, 
and  then  added,  with  unhidden  pleasure,  ''There  will  be 
more  bullets."  And  there  were  more.  This  time  bullets 
and  shots  together  like  hail  fell  through  the  window.  .  .  . 
"I  told  you  so!  hold  up  your  apron!"  and  picking  the 
leaden  toys  up  from  the  floor,  he  threw  them  into  my  apron, 
which  I  obediently  lifted  up,  —  not  altogether  displeased 
with  the  contents. 

"Pretty  little  things  —  round  and  heavy,  too,"  he  re- 
peated, weighing  them  one  by  one  in  his  hand.  "When 
I  grow  up  I  will  make  different  bullets  to  kill  the  'cow's 
feet.'  *  They  will  be  pointed,  that  they  may  go  deep  into 
their  accursed  flesh !" 

The  shooting  ceased  for  a  while  and  we  went  to  the  win- 
dow. There  a  picture  met  my  eyes.  On  the  opposite  side 
of  the  street  a  man  lies  on  his  back  on  the  pavement;  his 
shirt  is  open,  in  the  middle  of  his  breast  gapes  a  red  wound. 
A  woman  kneels  by  him,  trying  to  stop  the  blood,  which 
drips  on  the-  pavement  and  congeals.  The  face  of  the  man 
is  white,  the  eyes  staring  wide  open.     In  the  middle  of  the 

^  A  name  for  Austrian  soldiers,  caused  presumably  by  the  gaiters  they 
wore,  made  of  the  undressed  hide  of  that  narmless  animal. 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  25 

street  a  boy  of  ten  or  twelve  lies,  his  face  to  the  ground. 
Oh !  the  pity  of  it !  Oh !  the  sight  of  murder  and  death 
for  a  child's  eyes  !  The  marring  of  the  fresh  bloom  of  a  little 
soul  with  such  a  tinge  of  sadness  and  horror  !  Clinging  close 
to  my  brother,  I  cry.  He  is  pale  and  silent,  but  a  nervous 
shiver  runs  through  his  frame.  .  .  .  Some  other  wounded 
men  are  carried  away.  The  street  is  alive  with  wailing, 
lamenting  people,  and  we  sit  by  the  window  and  look  and 
look,  taking  in  every  detail  of  that  sad,  never-to-be-forgot- 
ten picture.  .  .  .  My  mother's  desperate  call,  "Helcia!* 
Adolphe!"  makes  us  leave  the  window.  We  rush  out  of 
the  room  and  down  to  the  cellar. 

By  the  dim  light  of  a  lantern  and  a  few  candles  the  interior 
of  our  large  cellar  looks  more  picturesque  than  pleasant. 
The  odor  of  dampness  is  unwelcome  to  the  nostrils,  the  stone 
walls  glisten  with  drops  of  moisture,  and  the  cold,  cavernous 
air  chills  me  through.  An  immense  quantity  of  bedding  is 
heaped  in  one  corner,  and  the  maids,  under  my  mother's 
direction,  are  making  beds  on  the  floor.  My  sister's  plump 
little  body  is  reposing  on  cushions,  her  beautiful  golden  hair 
forming  an  aureole  about  her  fair  round  face.  My  two 
half-brothers,  Simon  and  Felix,  are  quarrelling;  Simon  calls  / 
Felix  ''Metternich,"  which  is  such  an  insult  that  Felix  \ 
springs  up  to  fight  with  his  brother,  but  mother's  authori- 
tative voice  brings  order  into  the  ranks  of  the  fiery  young- 
sters. Miss  Apollonia,  half  reclining  on  a  mattress,  turns 
her  large  eyes  and  little  nose  up  to  the  ceiling  and  sighs, 
murmuring :  — 

''God  will  punish  them,  —  you  will  see,"  and  then  with 
an  inspired  voice  she  adds,  ''Poland  is  not  lost  yet!" 
Her  mother  sits  on  a  barrel  saying  her  rosary,  and  Adolphe 
plays  with  bullets. 

Slowly  silence  begins  to  reign  (in  our  subterranean  dwell- 

^  Helcia  is  a  Polish  diminutive  for  Helena. 


/ 


26  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

ing),  and  we  only  hear  the  distant  shooting  and  faint  cries 
of  the  people.  Mother  sits  on  her  improvised  bed,  with 
her  head  in  her  hands.  Aunt  Teresa  undresses  me,  and  I 
kneel  to  say  my  evening  prayers.  After  a  while  we  hear 
outside  of  the  door  the  clang  of  a  sword  against  the  stone 
stairs,  and  then  the  sound  of  steps  approaching  our  cellar. 
In  an  instant  my  mother  turns  the  huge  key  of  the  iron  door. 
Some  one  tries  the  knob,  then  there  is  a  knock,  and  then 
silence.  Finally  the  gentle  voice  of  my  eldest  half-brother, 
Joseph,  is  heard. 

''It  is  I,  mamma;  please  open."  Mother  gives  a  sigh  of 
relief  and  lets  him  in. 

There  he  stands,  in  the  fine  uniform  of  the  National 
Guard,  with  a  sword  at  his  belt,  and  by  his  side  a  beautiful 
creature  leaning  on  his  arm.  I  learned  years  afterwards 
that  she  was  an  actress  nicknamed  ''Cornflower"  (Bla- 
watka),  on  account  of  her  wonderful  blue  eyes.  Her  popu- 
larity was  great,  especially  among  young  men,  who  ad- 
mired her  beauty  and  light-hearted ness.  .  .  .  Mother, 
seeing  "that  person"  (as  she  called  her),  grew  pale  with 
anger.  She  did  not  say  a  word,  however,  but  looked  straight 
into  my  brother's  eyes. 

"Please,  mamma,"  said  Joseph,  "be  so  kind  as  to  give 
shelter  to  this  lady."     She  answered  j — 

"No  one  can  refuse  shelter  to  those  in  danger,  and  the 
young  lady  may  stay  with  us;  but  you"  —  turning  to 
my  brother  —  "what  are  you  doing  here?  The  Austrians 
kill  men  and  children  like  game,  and  you  are  here,  sane  and 
safe.  Go  back  where  your  duty  calls  you ! "  And  when 
Joseph  obediently  retired,  she  said  to  Cornflower  in  a  softer 
tone  of  voice,  "Sit  down,  young  lady,  and  rest."  Then, 
seeing  that  I  was  sitting  with  eyes  wide  open,  she  came  to 
me,  kissed  my  forehead,  and  whispered :  — 

"Lie  down  and  sleep ;  shut  your  eyes ;  you  have  seen  too 
much  to-day.     Good-night."     I  did  as  she  told  me;  but 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  27 

behind  my  closed  eyelids  I  saw  a  streak  of  red,  a  pale  face, 
and  the  wide-open  eyes  of  a  dying  man  who  stared  at  me. 

Three  days  afterwards,  on  the  large  square,  "Rynek," 
opposite  St.  Mary's  Church,  I  stand  with  my  mother.  On 
the  square,  crowds  and  crowds  of  people  wait  for  the  funeral 


The  "Rtnki,"  Ckicow. 

procession  of  the  victims  killed  on  the  day  of  the  bombard- 
ment. The  sound  of  organs  reaches  our  ears.  The  church 
is  overflowed.  Many  kneel  outside  on  the  pavement,  and 
at  the  call  of  the  great  "Zygmunt"  bell  more  and  more 
people  come  streaming  by.  The  whole  city  is  out.  Then 
a  long,  plaintive  wail  of  the  people  is  heard,  and  the  coffins 
appear,  carried  on  the  shoulders  of  men  and  women,  and 
the  long  chain  of  victims  proceeds  to  the  final  resting-place. 


CHAPTER  III 

Be  it  from  the  shock  of  the  tragic  events  I  mentioned 
in  the  last  chapter,  or  from  some  organic  defect,  shortly 
after  the  bombardment,  my  youngest  brother,  Adolphe, 
then  eleven  years  old,  began  to  show  signs  of  somnambulism. 
On  nights  when  the  moon  was  full  he  would  rise  from  his 
bed,  walk  with  staggering  steps,  yet  rapidly,  to  the  window, 
and  stand  there  with  his  eyes  wide  open,  laughing  softly 
and  stretching  his  arms  towards  the  moon.  After  a  while 
he  would  open  the  window  and  try  to  jump  out,  which 
would  have  been  sure  death.  But  usually  our  guardian 
angel,  in  a  white  nightcap  and  a  long  white  robe,  our  dear 
Aunt  Teresa,  appeared  in  time  to  rescue  the  boy  from  his 
dangerous  position  and  bring  him  back  to  bed,  screening 
off  the  moonlight  from  him.  Every  time  my  brother  had 
one  of  those  fits,  I  could  not  fall  asleep  again.  I  used  to 
creep  softly  out  of  my  couch,  go  to  the  window,  and  look 
down.  The  street,  half  white  from  the  flood  of  moonlight, 
and  half  black  with  mysterious  shadows,  was  a  great  attrac- 
tion to  me.  Leaning  a  little  forward  I  could  see  the  Francis- 
can square  and  a  corner  of  the  church.  That  part  of  the 
square  always  inspired  me  with  a  sort  of  awe.  Often  on 
the  days  of  funerals  I  have  seen  emerging  from  the  church 
door  the  brotherhood  of  St.  Francis,  of  dreadful  appearance, 
with  which  people  used  to  frighten  children.  The  members 
of  that  society  are  dressed  in  black  cassocks,  painted  all 
over  with  skulls,  bones,  and  flames.  They  wear  black 
cowls  drawn  over  their  faces,  falling  in  a  V-shape  below 
the  chin,  and  looking  like  masks  with  round  holes  for  the 
eyes.     This  institution  is  a  relic  from  mediaeval  times,  and 

28 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  29 


\  I  believe  that  even  at  the  present  time  the  brotherhood 

appears  at  some  church  ceremonies. 
The  Franciscan  square  had  yet  another  attraction:   the 

I  old  tradition  was  that  during  some  terrible  epidemics  the 

authorities,  not  being  able  to  bury  all  the  people,  threw  them 

I  pell-mell   into   the   church   vaults.      My  brother  told   me 

»  that  one  of  those  vaults  was  here  in  the  corner  of  the 

church;  I  also  heard  some  awful  ghost  stories  connected 
with  it.  The  ghosts  were  not  kind  enough  to  appear,  but 
at  night,  out  of  the  corner,  two  huge  century-old  owls  used 
to  appear  and  walk  in  the  moonlight,  throwing  long  shadows 
behind  them,  which  made  them  seem  three  times  their  own 

^  length.    These  uncanny  creatures  moved  very  slowly,  with 

silent  steps,  spreading  their  wings  from  time  to  time  in 

f  a  vain  effort  to  fly;  but,  unable  to  lift  their  old  clumsy 

\  bodies  above  the  ground,  they  dropped  their  feathered  arms 

in  despair,  dragging  them  on  the  pavement.  The  phantom 
birds,  I  imagined,  were  some  penitent  souls,  creeping  in  the 

k  dust  and  begging  for  mercy.    They  made  me  shiver  with 

fright,  and  yet  I  could  not  turn  my  eyes  away  from  them, 

^  but  sat  there  in  the  warmth  of  a  summer  moonlight,  fasci- 

nated, hypnotized.  What  thoughts  passed  across  my 
little  brain  then  I  cannot  remember,  but  many  years  later, 
when  I  studied  the  part  of  Juliet,  the  tomb  of  the  Capulets 
brought  back  vividly  to  my  mind  those  childhood  impres- 
sions of  the  Franciscan  church,  the  mysterious  vault,  and 

^  the  phantom  owls. 


CHAPTER  IV 

As  far  back  as  my  memory  can  reach,  I  remember  that  I 
loved  to  be  in  church.  To  be  there,  kneeling  on  the  marble 
floor,  looking  at  the  altars,  and  listening  to  the  organ  music, 
was  sufficient  to  make  me  happy ;  and  when  I  prayed  dur- 
ing the  Mass,  a  deep  sense  of  beauty  and  holy  peace  spread 
over  me,  and  the  church  seemed  filled  with  angels.  Often 
I  closed  my  eyes,  and  with  face  upturned,  waited,  hoping 
that  one  of  those  holy  spirits  floating  in  the  air  would  touch 
my  forehead  with  its  wings.  I  would  remain  there  motion- 
less, all  absorbed  by  some  unutterable  thoughts  and  the 
perfect  bliss  of  the  moment. 

At  the  end  of  our  short  and  wide  street,  about  one  block 
from  our  house,  and  in  the  opposite  direction  from  the 
Franciscans,  stands  the  Dominican  church,  a  point  of  great 
attraction  to  me.  The  naves  of  that  church  are  singularly 
narrow,  and  their  arches  drawn  up  so  high  that  they  seem 
to  be  out  of  proportion,  —  a  regular  old  Gothic  structure. 
Not  knowing  anything  about  architecture  then,  I  supposed 
that  this  church  was  built  in  imitation  of  two  hands  joined 
for  prayer,  with  the  finger-tips  meeting  and  relaxed  above 
the  wrists,  as  in  some  of  the  pictures  of  praying  Madonnas 
whose  hands  form  an  arch  not  unlike  the  entrance  to  a 
Gothic  church.  My  favorite  amusement  after  the  evening 
prayers  was  to  join  my  hands  in  the  same  way;  holding 
them  against  the  light,  I  imagined  I  had  a  little  chapel  of 
my  own,  with  three  arches,  a  door,  and  a  window  in  the 
background. 

The  Dominican  church  has  a  basement  with  widely  spread 
arches  of  graceful  design.     That  was  my  favorite  place. 

30 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  81 

I  liked  to  go  there  during  the  summer  months.  In  the 
winter  the  unheated  church,  with  its  stone  floor,  was  too 
chilly,  but  it  was  a  delight  to  be  there  during  the  warm 
weather,  so  cool,  so  quiet,  with  no  sound  except  the  twitter 
of  the  sparrows  in  the  yard.  How  often  I  used  to  steal 
away  from  the  house  and  stay  there  for  hours.  How  often 
I  would  lie  down,  with  my  face  to  the  ground,  in  imitation 
of  our  peasant  women,  with  arms  outstretched  in  the  shape 
of  a  cross,  kissing  the  floor^  and  praying  fervently  to  God 
for  a  miracle,  for  a  glimpse  of  an  angel  or  of  some  saint. 

One  afternoon,  when  I  was  in  one  of  my  ecstasies,  I  heard 
muffled  steps  near  the  door.  Some  one  was  coming  towards 
me  very  softly,  nearer  and  nearer.  ''A  miracle  !"  I  thought. 
''My  prayer  is  granted!  It  is  an  angel  who  comes,  or  a 
saint!"  and  thrilled  with  mysterious  joy,  I  even  imagined 
I  felt  the  waft  of  a  heavenly  garment  or  wings,  like  a  cooling 
breeze  upon  my  neck,  when  suddenly  a  strong  grasp 
clutched  at  the  belt  of  my  frock,  lifted  me  up,  and  with  one 
turn  of  the  hand  put  me  on  my  feet,  forcing  me  to  face  my 
angel  in  the  shape  of  a  distressed  old  maid.  The  dear  Aunt 
Teresa,  looking  for  me  in  vain  for  more  than  an  hour,  had 
come  upon  my  track  at  last,  and  fearing  I  might  catch  cold, 
was  determined  to  use  even  force  in  order  to  bring  me  out 
into  the  sun. 

After  that  time  I  was  watched  more  closely,  and  soon 
after  this  capture  my  sister  and  I  were  taken  to  Mrs.  R., 
in  whose  house  we  were  to  receive  our  first  education.  That 
charming  lady  was  my  mother's  old  friend.  She  had  two 
highly  educated  daughters,  Salomea  and  Ludwina,  who  at 
my  mother's  urgent  request  had  consented  to  be  our  teachers. 
I  was  taught  to  read  at  the  age  of  four,  and  at  seven  I  read 
fluently.  To  any  modern  mother  it  may  seem  absurd  to 
t^ach  a  child  so  early,  but  in  the  days  of  my  childhood  and 
youth  girls  were  taught  to  read  at  four,  and  were  ready  for 
matrimonial  duties  at  fifteen. 


32  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

The  stories  which  Miss  Ludwina  gave  me  had  developed 
in  me  quite  a  passion  for  reading,  and  I  read  everything 
I  could  find,  my  brother's  school  books  as  well  as  the  sen- 
timental love  stories  which  Miss  Apollonia  rented  from  a 
circulating  library.  In  fact,  I  read  long  before  I  could 
understand  what  I  read. 

Opposite  Mrs.  R.'s  house  stood  a  large  building,  with 
boxed-up  windows.  It  was  a  provisory  jail  for  political 
prisoners.  One  morning  I  saw  Miss  Salomea  sitting  by  an 
open  window,  with  a  sheet  of  paper  before  her  and  a  pencil, 
looking  intensely  at  the  house  opposite,  as  if  watching  or 
waiting  for  something  to  see.  After  a  while  she  began  to 
sing  a  plaintive  Polish  song.  As  soon  as  she  finished  the 
first  verse,  a  large  white  hand  appeared  in  one  of  the 
windows  of  the  jaU,  over  the  boxed  casement,  and  began  to 
trace  with  the  forefinger  some  letters  in  the  air.  At  once 
Miss  Salomea  wrote  down  some  words,  and  raising  her  eyes 
again,  she  watched  the  hand  and  wrote  down  what  the 
prisoner  communicated.  She  was  doing  that  for  many 
days,  and  what  she  wrote  down  she  read  in  a  whisper  to  her 
mother  and  sister,  and  after  some  consultation  they  usually 
sent  Felix  oa  some  errand,  and  then  some  visitors  called 
and  they  shut  themselves  in  the  parlor.  That  was  all  I 
noticed.  I  racked  my  little  brain  in  vain  to  find  out  what 
was  the  meaning  of  it  all,  when  one  day  Miss  Salomea, 
seeing  me  watching  her,  explained  to  me  that  the  man 
opposite  was  a  dear  friend,  whom  the  Austrians  kept 
unjustly  in  prison,  and  whom  she  and  her  family  were 
trying  to  release. 

"And  mind,  Helenka,"  she  added,  ''you  must  not  tell 
any  one  what  you  saw."  I  promised,  and  never  betrayed 
the  secret,  proud  of  the  confidence  placed  in  me,  and  more 
strongly  than  ever  confirmed  in  my  adverse  feelings  towards 
Poland's  enemies. 

''I  do  hate  the  Austrians,"  I  repeated  mentally  on  my 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  33 

way  home,  and  I  was  so  deeply  impressed  by  Miss  Salomea's 
words  that  I  wrote  "I  hate  the  Austrians"  several  times  on 
the  copy-book  of  my  grammar  exercise. 

I  do  not  recollect  the  exact  program  of  our  studies,  but 
my  favorite  subjects  were  grammar,  Polish  history,  and 
French,  and  it  seemed  that  I  made  some  progress  in  my 
studies  as  well  as  in  my  behavior,  for  my  mother  came 
one  day  and  expressed  her  gratitude  to  our  teachers,  Mrs. 
R.  and  her  daughters,  for  the  good  influence  they  exerted 
over  me,  assuring  them  that  they  had  corrected  many 
deficiencies  in  my  character.  To  which  Mrs.  R.  replied, 
that  though  I  seemed  to  improve,  yet  there  were  two  things 
in  my  character  she  could  not  cure  me  of :  my  stubbornness 
and  my  bashfulness.  Oh,  that  horrible,  shrinking  shyness, 
which  stood  in  my  way  so  often,  which  sent  all  the  blood 
to  my  cheeks  and  made  me  look  like  a  boiled  lobster  at  the 
least  provocation.  That  awful  timidity  which  many  times, 
even  in  my  days  of  maturity,  prevented  me  from  asserting 
my  own  value  in  the  face  of  impudent  ignorance !  How 
often  I  loathed  that  unwelcome  defect  without  being  able 
to  overcome  it !  Even  my  long  stage  career  did  not  cure  me 
entirely  of  this  disease,  which  our  Polish  poet,  Asnyk,  an 
old  and  indulgent  friend  of  mine,  called  ''fits  of  modesty." 

Mrs.  R.  often  received  visitors,  and  those  reception  days 
were  real  trials  to  me.  The  more  I  tried  to  be  ''a  good  girl, 
and  answer  the  questions  addressed  to  me,"  the  more  awk- 
ward I  felt,  and  when  I  saw  everybody  smiling  at  my  be- 
havior, I  simply  ran  out  of  the  room,  and  would  not  come 
back  for  anything  in  the  world.  In  the  meantime,  my  little 
sister  placidly  occupied  the  field  of  action,  and,  handed  from 
one  charming  lady  to  another,  was  filled  with  candy  and 
cakes.  When  she  told  me  of  her  triumphs,  I  was  very  angry 
with  my  own  stupidity,  but  the  next  time  I  fell  into  the 
same  blunder. 

Mrs.  R.  and  her  daughters  were  very  fond  of  the  theatre, 


34  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


and  one  afternoon,  together  with  my  mother,  they  planned 
to  take  a  box,  to  hear  the  new  soprano,  Miss  Studzinska. 
Miss  Ludwina,  always  kind  and  thoughtful  of  others,  begged 
my  mother  to  take  Josephine  and  me  with  them,  the  box 
being  large  enough  for  six. 

The  play  was  **  The  Daughter  of  the  Regiment,"  followed 
by  a  one-act  ballet  entitled,  ''The  Siren  of  Dniestr."     Miss  , 

Studzinska  was  the  heroine  of  the  opera,  and  little  Josephine 
Hofmann,^  dressed  as  a  butterfly,  had  the  prominent  danc- 
ing part  in  the  ballet.  It  was  my  first  visit  to  a  theatre,  and 
the  whole  evening  was  a  dream  of  joy  and  enchantment  to 
me.  My  mother  told  me,  years  afterwards,  that  I  was  so 
absorbed  in  the  play  that  I  became  perfectly  oblivious  to    .  ' 

the  surroundings.     I  was  blind,  mute,  and  deaf,  and  she  I 

could  not  get  a  sign  from  me.  I  went  to  bed  with  a  high 
fever,  and  for  weeks  afterwards  I  tried  to  imitate  the  but- 
terfly dance,  and  sang  some  airs,  accompanying  them  with 
gestures,  exciting  the  derision  of  my  brothers,  who  had 
spied  me  on  the  sly.  1 

Every  child  tries  to  imitate  actresses  seen  on  the  stage,  —  ] 

there  is  nothing  wonderful  in  that !  and  there  is  no  indica-  t] 

tion  of  talent  in  such  demonstrations.  Still,  I  know  mothers 
of  little  girls  who  think  that  their  daughters  must  one  day 
be  great  actresses  because  they  are  naturally  graceful  and 
fond  of  pretty  frocks  and  dances.  It  is  rather  dangerous 
to  encourage  that  sort  of  thing,  and  mark  out  a  career  for 
a  child  who,  were  it  not  for  the  constant  flattery,  would 
perhaps  choose  another  more  suitable  occupation.  The 
stage  is  overcrowded  with  young  persons  without  talent, 
possessing  only  some  adaptability  and  the  usual  ability  for 
imitation.  They  prosper  sometimes  as  long  as  they  are 
young,  and  then  are  pushed  aside  to  make  room  for  younger 
and  more  attractive  women.  Thus  is  formed  quite  an  army 
of  disappointed,   discontented,   poor  struggling  creatures, 

^  Josef  Hofmann's  aunt. 


I 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  36 

who,  had  they  chosen  dififerently,  would  occupy  more 
dignified  positions  in  life.  I  cannot  be  grateful  enough  to 
my  dear  mother  for  never  encouraging  my  inclination  to 
the  stage,  and  never  exciting  my  vanity  by  flattering  or 
praising  me  to  my  face.  I  became  an  actress  because  I  think 
it  was  my  destiny  to  be  an  artist  of  some  kind,  and  as  the 
stage  was  the  most  accessible  of  all  branches  of  art,  I  chose 
it. 

But,  returning  to  "The  Daughter  of  the  Regiment,"  my 
mother,  seeing  my  excitement,  decided  that  children  ought 
to  stay  away  from  the  theatre.  And  she  kept  her  word ;  but 
we  found  compensation  in  concerts  given  at  our  house 
by  some  friends  and  artists.  Madame  Majeranowska,  n6e 
Hofmann,*  then  a  young  and  very  talented  woman,  who 
later  was  a  well-known  opera-singer,  and  Bogucki,  a  splendid 
basso  profundo,  gave  us  many  never-forgotten  moments  of 
delight. 

It  is  sometimes  difficult  for  parents  to  keep  their  children 
away  from  their  cherished  attractions.  My  three  older 
brothers  were  crazy  about  the  stage,  and  asked  mother  for 
the  permission  to  give  private  theatricals  at  home.  Wearied 
with  their  incessant  pleadings,  she  consented  at  last,  prob- 
ably to  keep  them  out  of  mischief.  And  it  happened,  to 
my  great  delight,  that  we  had  regular  performances  every 
month.  Joseph,  the  eldest,  though  married,  painted  the 
scenery ;  Simon  took  care  of  the  music  and  songs ;  and  Felix 
was  the  leading  man.  With  four  or  five  young  students 
they  formed  a  company.  Girls  were  not  admitted  to  this 
histrionic  circle,  but  boys  assumed  female  parts.  I  remem- 
ber still  a  young  red-headed  and  freckled  youth,  by  the 
name  of  Jahnsen,  dressed  in  a  white  muslin  gown,  and  white 
stockings  in  place  of  shoes,  probably  to  make  his  steps  light 
and  fairy-like,  reciting  dramatic  verses,  which  called  forth 

^  The  elder  aunt  of  Josef  Hofmann,  who  by  marriage  was  oonneoted  with 
the  Benda  family. 


36  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

many  enthusiastic  bravos.     He  and  Felix  were  the  best 
actors  of  the  troup. 

We  had  many  of  these  performances,  and  many  friends 
came  to  see  them.  They  praised  or  blamed  according  to 
the  value  of  the  performer,  and  these  were  the  first  lessons 
I  received  in  dramatic  art.  Who  knows  if  this  childish 
enthusiasm  for  the  theatre  did  not  decide  my  fate,  and  also 
the  fate  of  my  sister  and  my  two  brothers.  All  four  of  us 
went  on  the  stage. 


] 


I 


&gt;^ 


u 


CHAPTER  V 

In  July,  1850,  on  Sunday  at  noon,  the  heat  was  intense. 
After  returning  from  church,  Aunt  Teresa  undressed  my 
sister  and  me  to  the  skin,  and  throwing  on  our  bare  backs 
long  gingham  blouses,  and  putting  slippers  on  our  feet, 
she  ordered  a  bath  for  us.  Suddenly  some  one  opens  the 
door  of  the  adjoining  room,  shouting:— 

''The  lower  mills  are  on  fire!''  Aunt  Teresa  looks 
frightened.  The  maid  who  appears  at  the  door,  with  hot 
water  for  our  bath,  nearly  drops  the  buckets,  and  placing 
them  where  she  stands  in  the  very  entrance,  rushes  down- 
stairs for  further  information.  I  hear  my  mother's  voice 
calling  my  brothers,  but  all  of  them  are  already  on  their 
way  to  the  burning  mills,  eager  to  see  the  sight, —  always 
so  attractive  to  boys,  young  and  old.  No  more  than  half 
an  hour  later  we  see  flames  on  the  roof  of. the  bishops' 
palace  on  Franciscan  Street,  and  almost  simultaneously  the 
red  tongues  of  fire  are  licking  the  roof  of  a  house  opposite 
ours  on  Grodzka  Street. 

CzaSy^  the  Cracow  newspaper,  describes  the  conflagration 
in  the  following  words:  ''The  panic  was  indescribable. 
People  were  maddened  with  fright.  We  heard  their  cries: 
'Golembia  Street  is  on  fire  !'  then  'the  Wielopolski's  palace ! 
Prince  Jablonowski's  house !  Four  churches  burning  at 
once!'  It  seemed  as  if  the  whole  city  were  one  flame. 
A  strong  wind  blew,  the  air  was  full  of  smoke  and  cinders, 
and  not  one  fire-engine,  not  even  a  ladder  —  nothing! 
All  was  left  to  the  mercy  of  the  destructive  element." 

My  poor  mother,  left  only  with  Aunt  Teresa  and  one  ser- 

» Time. 
37 


38  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

vant  for  help,  is  at  a  loss  what  to  do  first ;  but  before  all, 
she  wants  to  see  Josephine  and  me  in  a  safe  place,  and 
hurriedly  tells  Aunt  Teresa  to  take  us  to  St.  Sebastian's 
meadow,  which  is  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  Chestnut 
Alley,  and  to  wait  there  until  she  shall  be  able  to  join  us. 
I  obey  promptly,  and  taking  under  my  arm  the  life  of 
St.  Genevieve,  a  book  I  have  just  begun  to  read,  holding 
my  sister's  hand,  I  start  —  without  waiting  for  Aunt  Teresa 
—  straight  to  the  designated  spot. 

We  both  are  so  excited  that  we  run  ahead  without  look- 
ing under  our  feet,  and  in  consequence  do  not  see  the  drain- 
age canal,  filled  with  water  and  overgrown  with  vegetation. 
In  one  instant  Josephine  disappears  under  the  green,  slimy 
crust  of  the  ditch,  and  I,  following  her  closely,  find  myself 
up  to  my  chest  in  the  water.  Happily  I  feel  Josephine's 
fingers  on  my  arm.  I  grasp  her  hand,  and  retracing  my 
steps,  pull  her  up  to  the  dry  land ;  at  the  same  time  I  inspect 
my  precious  book,  anxious  to  see  if  it  has  not  been  destroyed 
by  the  immersion,  but  it  seems  that  I  held  it  so  tightly  under 
my  arm  that  only  the  cover  and  the  edges  are  a  little  wet. 
This  unexpected  bath  has  a  cooling  effect  upon  us.  Having 
wrung  out  our  scanty  clothes  as  soon  as  we  can,  we  begin 
to  feel  anxious,  and  look  for  Aunt  Teresa,  but  she  is  not 
there.  Behind  the  trees  of  the  avenue  the  sky  is  red, 
covered  with  smoke  and  sparks,  the  sun  is  fierce,  and  our 
blouses  are  steaming  under  his  hot  touch. 

Crowds  of  men,  women,  and  children  scatter  on  the 
meadow,  bringing  with  them  such  articles  as  they  have  been 
able  to  save  from  the  flames.  Men  are  going  back  and  forth, 
carrying  furniture,  bedding,  and  clothing,  piling  them  up 
in  different  camps.  Evidently  they  intend  to  spend  the 
night  there.  People,  horses,  cattle,  dogs,  birds  in  cages, 
and  cats  —  all  are  mixed  up.  Alone,  among  strangers,  we 
are  on  the  point  of  bursting  into  tears,  when  at  last  we 
perceive  our  dear,  perspiring,  tired,  panting  Aunt  Teresa, 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  39 

carrying  on  one  arm  a  large  feather  quilt,  and  with  the  other 
arm  pressing  tenderly  to  her  bosom  my  large  doll.  That 
is  all  she  thought,  in  her  confusion,  worth  saving. 

We  hasten  to  meet  her.  Seeing  us,  she  drops  the  quilt 
to  the  ground,  sits  on  it,  and  then  —  a  flood  of  words, 
which  could  only  be  compared  to  a  rushing  mountain  stream, 
or  the  bursting  of  a  cloud,  falls  on  our  heads,  protesting, 
grumbling,  scolding  us  for  our  independence  and  the  un- 
kind spirit  which  prompted  us  to  leave  her  side  and  to  run 
so  fast  that  she  could  not  possibly  keep  pace  with  us.  While 
she  is  talking,  her  dark  brown  eyes  and  black,  frowning 
brows  look  so  angry  that  their  aspect  chills  us  through; 
but  suddenly  she  stops.  She  touches  our  wet  clothes,  and 
Josephine  tells  her  of  our  narrow  escape  from  'drowning." 
In  an  instant  her  countenance  changes.  Her  voice  be- 
comes soft,  and  kissing  us,  she  falls  into  another  extreme, 
giving  us  sweet  names,  stroking  our  cheeks,  and  scolding 
herself  for  being  rude.     Dearest  old  Aunt  Teresa ! 

After  a  while  we  learn  from  her  that  mother  changed 
her  plan  and  decided  that  we  should  go  to  the  hills,  called 
"Krzemionki,"  and  ask  the  hospitality  of  Mrs.  X.,  my 
aunt's  old  acquaintance.  The  hills  are  about  three  miles 
•from  Cracow.  We  mount  the  hill,  and  at  sunset  we  reach 
Mrs.  X.'s  modest  villa.  After  a  frugal  meal,  which  we  finish 
almost  in  total  darkness,  we  all  go  to  the  top  of  the  hill  to 
look  at  the  burning  city. 

Heavens !  What  a  sight !  The  whole  town  is  on  fire. 
Flames,  black  and  white  smoke,  sparks  shooting  high  in 
the  air,  and  —  O  God  !  such  a  red,  red  sky !  It  is  terrify- 
ing but  also  beautiful !  I  cannot  help  admiring  the  picture. 
I  clap  my  hands  and  exclaim,  "Oh,  how  glorious!"  My 
outburst  of  enthusiasm  is  interrupted  by  a  painful  slap  on 
the  back,  accompanied  by  Aunt  Teresa's  voice,  which  rings 
in  my  ears  like  an  archangel's  trumpet. 

"You  ungodly  child  !    Hundreds  and  hundreds  of  people's 


40  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

homes  are  turning  to  ashes,  and  you  rejoice  over  it! 
Kneel  down  and  pray  God  to  forgive  you  for  your  sin." 
And  she  pushes  me  by  the  shoulders  towards  the  house. 
But  here  shame,  distraction,  anger,  take  hold  of  me;  I 
strike,  bite,  scratch,  and  altogether  behave  like  a  wild 
animal,  until,  exhausted,  I  fall  in  a  fit  of  violent  sobbing, 
followed  by  an  acute  cramp  around  my  heart.  The  next 
thing  I  remember  is  a  small  parlor,  myself  lying  on  a  sofa, 
the  dear  Aunt  Teresa's  face  bending  over  me,  and  behind 
her  the  disgusted  countenance  of  Mrs.  X,  who  looks  harshly 
at  me,  saying  these  memorable  words  to  my  aunt :  — 

''Why  do  you  take  so  much  trouble  with  her?  She  wiD 
not  die.  'Les  mauvaises  herbes  poussent  toujours.'"^ 
Years  afterwards  I  recalled  that  woman's  words. 

Dressed  in  one  of  Mrs.  X.'s  nightgowns,  a  huge  garment 
in  which  I  feel  lost,  I  kneel  at  my  prayers,  sad,  meek,  full 
of  contrition.  I  am  put  into  a  strange  bed  for  the  first 
time  in  my  life,  and  as  I  lie  down,  looking  at  the  walls  covered 
with  pictures  and  daguerreotypes  of  unknown  persons,  I 
sadly  realize  that  I  have  lost  my  home  forever. 

The  conflagration  lasted  ten  days.  During  that  time  there 
was  not  one  night  that  was  not  brightened  by  flames,  not 
one  day  without  a  new  alarm.  Every  breeze  revived  the 
fire  smouldering  under  the  ashes,  creating  a  new  panic. 
The  calamity  was  complete.  During  that  time  mother  tried 
to  find  lodgings,  but  failed.  Every  remaining  house,  every 
attic,. even  cellars,  being  crowded  with  homeless  families. 
At  last  Dr.  Schantzer  ^  offered  us  two  rooms  until  we  should 
be  able  to  rent  a  flat  or  a  house. 

During  those  days  spent  in  Dr.  Schantzer's  house  I  was 
left  entirely  to  myself,  every  one  having  their  hands  full, 
and  I  used  my  freedom  in  the  most  pleasant  way  I  could. 

*  Weeds  always  grow. 

*  The  father  of  Miss  Schantzer,  a  well-known  actress  in  Germany.  She 
married  Hans  von  Billow  after  his  divorce  from  his  first  wife,  Cosima. 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  41 

Hidden  behind  baskets  and  bundles  of  clothes,  I  gave 
myself  entirely  to  the  reading  and  re-reading  of  the  life  of 
my  favorite  saint,  the  sweet  Genevieve.  At  moments  I 
felt  quite  consoled  for  the  loss  of  home ;  for  could  we  not 
go  to  the  woods,  as  she  did,  and  Uve  on  herbs  and  roots, 
until  we  should  meet  a  poUte  doe  who  would  yield  her 
milk  to  us? 

We  had  not  fallen  to  such  extremities,  but  dark  days 
came  upon  our  lives.  Days  of  sorrow  for  my  mother, 
sleepless  nights,  nights  of  tears  and  sighs  of  regret  for  the 
past  happier  hours,  and  heavy  cares  for  the  morrow.  My 
mother  lost  in  the  fire  almost  everything  she  possessed. 
Her  two  houses  were  bringing  her  a  fine  income.  The 
houses  were  highly  insured,  but  by  some  fatal  stroke  of 
fate  the  payment  of  the  next  year's  insurance  was  not  re- 
mitted in  time.  She  was  just  ten  days  behind.  The  walls 
of  the  houses  as  well  as  the  grounds  were  sold.  With  that 
money,  and  certain  sums  she  had  among  the  people,  we  had 
to  live  until  the  brothers  were  able  to  help. 

Seeing  every  day  my  mother's  tears,  and  the  thousand 
unpleasant  experiences  she  was  exposed  to,  I  ripened  quickly, 
my  mind  developed  prematurely,  and  I  became  unusually 
serious  and  sensitive. 


CHAPTER  VI 

Two  months  after  the  conflagration,  mother,  prompted 
by  economy,  inscribed  Josephine  and  me  as  day  scholars 
at  St.  John's  convent.  We  lived  now  in  a  different  part 
of  the  city,  and  four  times  a  day,  accompanied  by  a  maid, 
Josephine  and  I  had  to  cross,  there  and  back,  the  fashionable 
sidewalk,  usually  called  line  A.  B.,  of  the  large  square 
''Rynek."  This  was  a  kind  of  distraction  to  us  and  a  new 
experience.  I  remember  meeting  almost  daily  several 
characteristic  types  I  never  could  forget.  One  of  them, 
or  rather  two  of  them,  were  the  brothers  M.,  two  middle- 
aged  bachelors,  dressed  entirely  alike,  in  long,  whitish, 
tight-fitting  coats,  tall  hats,  and  immaculate  frilled  shirt- 
fronts.  They  both  wore  small  side-whiskers  k  la  Byron, 
and  when  they  lifted  their  hats,  which  they  did  frequently 
before  promenading  ladies,!  noticed  their  high,  elaborate 
toup6e8,  firm  and  glossy  at  the  top  of  their  heads. 

Next  were  two  rich,  aristocratic  young  ladies,  two  sisters 
with  very  blond  hair,  and  such  large  hoops  and  so  many 
flounces  on  their  dresses  that  when  they  walked  side  by 
side  people  were  obliged  to  step  off  the  sidewalk,  or  to 
flatten  themselves  against  the  houses,  to  make  room  for 
them;  but  it  was  a  peculiar  pleasure  for  us  to  go  right 
through  between  them,  though  we  were  nearly  smothered 
by  falbalas  and  the  odor  of  musk.  It  was  equal  to  an 
adventure. 

The  funny  street  urchins,  with  their  sallies  and  gambols, 
so  distressing,  yet  so  amusing,  and  the  crazy  Paul  (Pawelek) 
were  also  interesting.  Poor,  silly  Pawelek,  who  offered  to 
kiss  every  pretty  girl  he  saw,  without  regard  to  their  station 

42 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  43 

in  life;  for  that  innocent  desire  he  had  been  many  times 
seized  by  the  collar  and  given  into  the  hands  of  an  unro- 
mantic  policeman. 

The  last  and  most  entertaining  type  I  remember  was  a 
person  called  Aunt  Pumpkin,  given  this  surname  on  account 
of  her  enormous  rotundity,  in  contrast  with  her  face.  It 
was  a  benevolent,  shiny,  flushed,  crab-apple  face,  framed 
in  a  large  poke  bonnet,  smiling  kindly  at  the  world.  Her 
small  head  was  rhythmically  wagging  on  a  long,  slender 
neck,  while  she  carried  on  her  swift,  waddling  legs  the  huge, 
seemingly  artificial  abdomen,  which  lifted  her  dress  in  front 
about  ten  inches  above  ground,  exhibiting  her  white  stock- 
ings and  her  low,  black,  cross-bandaged  shoes.  She  never 
could  appear  in  the  street  without  being  followed  by  a  crowd 
of  guying  boys,  yet  she  had  means  of  disarming  their  mali- 
cious remarks  by  a  pleasant  smile,  a  kind  word,  and  dry 
plums,  which  she  carried  in  her  large  green  reticule.  Poor 
Aunt  Pumpkin  !    We  laughed  at  her,  and  she  died  of  dropsy. 

At  first  I  did  not  like  the  convent.  There  were  so  many 
girls  in  my  class,  and  only  a  few  congenial  ones.  The 
comparison  between  the  crowded,  stuffy  schoolroom  and 
the  quiet,  refined  atmosphere  of  Mrs.  R.'s  library,  drew  fre- 
quent tears  from  my  eyes,  but  I  soon  learned  to  love  the 
sisters,  who  seemed  pleased  with  my  appUcation  in  the 
lessons  of  Polish  historj'^,  grammar,  and  catechism,  and 
liked  my  way  of  reciting  verses  as  well  as  my  utter  disdain 
for  the  German  language.  The  sisters  of  St.  John  were 
known  as  great  patriots.  I  remember  how  they  shielded 
me  on  the  examination  days,  when  the  Austrian  school  in- 
spector was  present,  and  how  they  always  managed  not 
to  let  him  ask  me  any  German  questions. 

Our  mother  did  not  neglect  our  education  in  spite  of  ad- 
verse fortune,  and  we  had  additional  French  hours  at  the 
convent,  music  at  home,  and  a  few  dancing  lessons.  Our 
health  was  also  taken  care  of.     In  spring,   accompanied 


44  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

by  three  of  our  brothers,  every  morning  at  half-past  five 
o'clock  we  were  sent  on  a  two-mile  walk  to  a  country  place, 
where  we  had  a  glass  of  milk  and  a  slice  of  bread.  Then 
we  returned  home  for  breakfast  and  school,  by  the  longest 
way  on  the  shore  of  the  river,  where  the  boys  usually  per- 
formed gymnastic  feats,  walking  on  the  top  of  barriers 
erected  for  protection  of  people  against  possible  falls  into 
the  whirlpool,  in  which  exercises  they  made  me  take  part. 
It  was  at  the  same  spot  where  my  uncle,  the  priest,  was 
drowned,  and  I  was  afraid  to  comply  with  their  wishes, 
which  sounded  like  orders.  To  avoid  the  name  of  coward, 
I  obeyed,  in  spite  of  the  imminent  danger  looking  up  at  me 
from  the  dark,  mysterious  waters. 

It  was  in  the  autumn  of  1850  that  my  brother  Joseph 
introduced  to  my  mother  Mr.  Gustave  Modjeski.*  I  was 
ten  years  old;  he  was  nearly  thirty  then.  He  soon  became 
a  friend  of  the  family,  and  offered  to  teach  us  children  Grer- 
man,  which  we  hated  in  every  way,  but  which  became 
obligatory  in  public  schools  and  convents.  My  sister  and 
myself  tried  to  get  out  of  these  lessons,  but  we  were  held 
fast  to  them  by  Mr.  Modjeski's  stern  behavior.  It  took 
quite  a  long  time  for  us  to  get  used  to  him,  but  we  ended 
by  Uking  him  quite  well,  especially  when,  during  the  long 
winter  evenings,  he  read  aloud  to  us  some  wonderful  stories. 
It  was  he  who  established  in  our  house  the  custom  of  read- 
ing aloud  in  the  evenings.  Every  one  had  to  take  turns, 
and  while  my  mother  and  Aunt  Teresa  were  knitting,  and 
we  children  were  dressing  or  stitching  clothes  for  our  dolls, 
one  of  my  brothers,  or  any  one  who  would  volunteer  to  do 
so,  would  read  aloud.  These  were  very  delightful,  never- 
to-be-forgotten   evenings. 

A  few  years  later  my  three  brothers  were  scattered  in 
the  world.  Joseph  Benda,  after  his  wife's  death,  leaving 
his  two-year-old  daughter  in  my  mother's    care,   went   to 

^  His  full  name  was  Gustave  Sinninayer  ModrzejewskL 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  45 

Russian  Poland,  where  he  joined  a  theatrical  company. 
Simon  Benda,  my  musical  half-brother,  went  to  Vienna  to 
a  conservatory  of  music.  FeUx  Benda,  at  nineteen  years 
of  age,  became  an  actor,  and  was  engaged  at  the  Cracow 
theatre,  but  soon  went  with  the  company  on  a  provincial 
tour.  Our  household  became  very  quiet,  and  something 
had  to  be  done  to  enliven  it.  My  brother  Adolphe  ^  sug- 
gested that,  as  we  were  now  ''grown  up''  (he  was  fifteen  and 
I  twelve),  we  could  give  performances  as  the  big  broth- 
ers did,  and  for  that  purpose  we  wrote  a  play  together. 
We  had  no  stage,  no  scenery,  but  that  did  not  matter. 
We  found  a  plot  in  a  magazine,  and  shaped  it  into  a  drama 
in  one  act,  I  writing  two  female  parts,  and  he  supplying  his 
own  speeches.  It  was  a  fierce  tragedy,  with  the  scene  laid 
in  Greece.  A  jealous  sweetheart  was  waiting  for  her  lover, 
who  was  hundreds  of  miles  away  on  some  secret  patriotic 
mission.  He  had  sworn  to  be  back  on  such  a  day,  at  such 
an  hour.  In  case  he  failed  to  return  in  time,  his  affianced 
lady  swore  on  her  part  to  take  poison,  which  the  ladies  of 
that  nation  were  supposed  always  to  carry  about  their  frail 
bodies,  in  rings,  medallions,  even  in  scapularies. 
The  bill  read  as  follows :  — 

Sophronia,  an  aristocratic  Grecian  lady    .         Helena  Opid. 

Ismena,  her  companion Josephine  Opid. 

Hector,  the  young  patriot Adolphe  Opid. 

At  the  opening  scene,  dressed  in  Aunt  Teresa's  black 
gown,  tucked  and  pinned  to  make  it  suit  my  size,  with  a 
black  lace  mantilla  on  her  head,  Sophronia  walks  up  and 
down,  excitedly  wringing  her  hands.  Suddenly  she  stops, 
and  looking  at  the  clock,  exclaims:  — 

"Ten  o'clock,  and  he  is  not  here !"  Then  a  short  dialogue 
between  herself  and  her  plump  duenna,  whose  long  dress 
is  dreadfully  in  her  way. 

*  The  youngest  boy,  and  my  own  brother,  Adolphe  Opid. 


46  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

"Twelve I  Heavens!  Now  it  is  time  to  die  !"  and  she 
pours  the  poison  into  a  tin  cup.  She  lifts  it  to  her  lips, 
when  at  once :  Oh,  rapture !  Oh,  joy !  Footsteps  are 
heard :  "Yes,  it  is  he  !"  and  with  a  laugh  of  joy  she  nestles 
on  her  hero's  breast.  But,  alas !  poor  Hector,  after  a  short 
explanation,  falls  down  and  dies  from  exhaustion  and  a 
neglected  wound.  The  heroine's  joy  turns  into  a  desperate 
speech  and  a  convulsive  sob  over  the  dead  lover's  body. 
Curtain !  The  dear  Aunt  Teresa  was  wiping  her  eyes,  but 
mother  looked  stern.  She  took  me  aside  and  said  I  had  made 
a  poor  exhibition  before  the  neighboring  children,  playing 
such  a  play  and  in  this  absurd  manner.  Then  she  concluded 
with  an  imperative  "No  more  theatricals!"  I  received 
the  blow  with  tears.  My  brother  and  Josephine  both 
laughed.  So  much  work  for  nothing !  I  had  studied  my  part 
so  thoroughly,  not  only  the  speeches,  but  also  the  gestures 
and  poses,  which  was  a  rather  difficult  task,  for  we  had  no 
looking-glass  in  our  room. 

I  had  often  asked  Aunt  Teresa  why,  when  all  the  girls 
I  knew  had  mirrors  in  their  rooms,  we  had  none.  But  she 
replied  that  it  was  a  dangerous  thing  to  look  in  them,  espe- 
cially after  dark,  because  then  a  girl,  instead  of  her  own 
face,  may  suddenly  see  a  horrid  mask  with  horns,  or  a  skull. 
The  evil  spirits,  being  very  malicious,  play  awful  tricks 
on  silly  girls.  Instead  of  a  mirror,  I  used  to  place  a  lamp 
in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  standing  in  between  it  and 
the  white  wall,  I  could  see  distinctly  the  silhouette  of  my 
whole  body,  which  I  twisted  in  all  sorts  of  impossible  poses. 
I  had  great  difficulty  in  managing  my  arms,  and  I  did  not 
like  the  appearance  of  my  rather  short-fingered  hands;  they 
did  not  look  a  bit  like  those  I  saw  in  pictures  and  statues. 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  best  way  of  managing 
them  was  to  keep  the  fingers  close  together,  as  in  some  of 
the  archaic  pictures  I  saw  in  churches.  In  spite  of  all  these 
attempts  at  what  is  now  called  "Physical  Culture"   (we 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  47 

have  such  scientific  names  for  everything  nowadays)  — 
in  spite  of  all  that,  when  I  was  before  our  modest  audience 
(composed  of  a  few  children  and  their  nurses,  my  mother, 
and  Aunt  Teresa),  I  forgot  my  hands  and  arms  and  poses, 
and  thought  only  of  the  miseries  of  my  heroine.  And 
mother  did  not  like  it,  while  I  only  tried  to  please  her  above 
all  the  people  in  the  room.  Tears  rose  to  my  eyes.  I  took 
the  manuscript  and  tore  it  up  in  little  pieces,  which  I  threw 
into  the  fire,  watching  until  the  last  scrap  was  consumed, 
then  knelt  to  my  prayers,  with  a  feeling  of  sacrifice  ac- 
complished. 

There  was  nothing  left  in  the  way  of  pleasures  during 
the  long  winter  evenings  but  books,  crochet,  and  fairy 
stories.  But  in  summer  there  were  excursions;  first, 
the  Rocks  of  the  Virgins,  where  lilies  of  the  valley  grow 
wild;  then  Bielany,  with  its  monastery  of  Camaldule 
brothers,  built  on  a  high  hill  amidst  centenarian  oaks,  the 
most  picturesque  edifice,  inhabited  by  equally  picturesque 
monks  in  white  robes  and  cloaks.  We  also  visited,  though 
rarely,  the  Dragon's  Cave ;  for  Poland,  too,  has  the  myth 
of  a  dragon  killed  by  the  first  chief  of  the  Poles,  Krakus, 
from  whom  the  name  of  Cracow  is  derived.  Most  often 
we  went  to  Kosciuszko's  mound,  raised  by^the  people,  who 
carried  with  their  own  hands  the  earth  to  the  spot  until 
they  erected  a  hill  in  his  memory. 

Besides  the  excursions,  we  attended  faithfully  the  numer- 
ous festivities.  The  most  important  of  them  is  the  Corpus 
Christi  procession.  Early  in  the  morning,  at  the  sound  of 
the  Great  ''Zygmunt"  bell,  crowds  of  peasants  from  the 
neighboring  villages  stream  in  from  all  the  streets  and 
stop  at  the  Rynek,  where  provisory  altars  are  built  at  almost 
every  corner.  These  altars  are  called  stations.  When  the 
large  square  is  filled  with  people,  it  is  hard  to  describe  the 
wonderful  display  of  costumes.  Each  village  wears  different 
garbs  in  shape  and  color.     There  are  the  white,  blue,  green. 


48  MEMORIES  AND   IMPRESSIONS 

gray,  and  brown  coats  of  the  men,  —  some  plain,  some 
embroidered  and  spangled,  with  tassels,  strings  of  brass 
rings  hanging  from  their  belts,  sleeveless  vests  with  red 
lapels,  high  boots,  and  striped,  loose,  wide  trousers.  Women 
in  rich  brocade  or  velvetrspangled  waists  and  jackets,  with 
turbans  of  embroidered  lawn  and  lace.  Girls  with  artificial 
wreaths  and  ribbons  and  strings  of  coral  ornamenting  their 
throats  and  breasts.  All  these  people  come  in  quietly, 
modestly,  with  their  prayer  books  and  rosaries,  deeply  im- 
pressed by  the  occasion.  Then  marches  in  a  regiment  of 
Austrian  soldiers  in  their  handsome  uniforms;  then,  city 
people  in  their  best  clothes,  a  string  of  girls  in  white,  with 
garlands  on  their  heads,  carrying  the  images  of  saints  on 
their  shoulders,  priests,  brotherhoods,  monks,  banners  of 
all  kinds,  etc.  They  all  crowd  the  Rynek,  and  that  mass 
of  human  beings  forms  the  most  gorgeous  harmony  of  color, 
spotted  here  and  there  by  a  dark  modern  coat  or  the  black 
crape  of  a  widow. 

The  service  begins  at  the  first  altar,  and  when  the  bene- 
diction bell  rings,  military  trumpets  send  forth  a  peal  of 
victorious  melody,  repeated  three  times  and  accompanied 
by  a  muffled  roll  of  drums,  and  all  the  banners  bend  down 
over  the  heads  of  the  prostrate  people. 

There  is  also  the  so-called  ^^Konik"  (little  horse).  A 
peasant,  accompanied  by  pipes  and  drums,  appears  riding 
a  hobby  horse.  He  is  armed  with  an  imitation  mace, 
stuffed  with  straw,  with  which  he  hits  every  one  who  comes 
in  his  way,  making  funny  remarks,  allusions,  and  altogether 
behaving  without  respect  or  regard  to  his  fellow-men.  The 
only  way  of  stopping  his  tongue  and  his  blows  is  to  give  him 
a  few  coins,  for  which  he  usually  returns  graceful  thanks, 
unless  some  features,  dress,  gesture,  or  walk  of  the  giver 
excites  his  sense  of  humor.  Then  his  thanks  are  followed 
by  such  awful  wishes  and  remarks  that  his  benefactor  soon 
regrets  his  kindness,  and  runs  away  from  the  persecutor. 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  49 

amidst  the  uproarious  laughter  of  the  crowd.  This  ludi- 
crous custom  was  established  after  one  of  the  Tartar  invasions, 
in  memory  of  a  peasant  by  the  name  of  Micinski,  who  saved 
Cracow  by  galloping  at  night  to  the  city  and  warning  the 
authorities  of  the  approaching  hordes.  Since  that  time  the 
privilege  of  this  pageant  was  granted  to  him  and  his  de- 
scendants, which  in  Poland's  happy  days,  when  the  great 
lords  of  the  city  were  lavish  in  their  gifts,  proved  very 
profitable  to  the  Micinski  family. 

At  present  ''Konik"  makes  but  a  poor  show,  though  it 
called  forth  loud  laughter  from  the  youthful  Emperor 
Franz  Joseph  at  his  first  visit  to  Cracow. 

Of  all  the  festivities  I  loved  best  the  ''Wianki"  (the 
Wreaths).  On  St.  John's  day  crowds  and  crowds  of  people 
come  to  a  certain  spot  upon  the  bank  of  the  Vistula.  They 
begin  to  come  in  the  afternoon,  though  the  festivity  opens 
only  at  dark.  Slowly,  one  after  another,  small  boats, 
trimmed  with  foliage  and  flowers,  appear  on  the  rippling 
waters  of  the  river.  Some  are  rowed  by  a  single  young 
man,  some  contain  three  or  four  men.  At  last  a  large  raft 
filled  with  students,  vocalists,  makes  its  triumphant  entrance 
amidst  hearty  applause. 

On  the  bank,  a  little  higher  up  the  stream,  is  a  group  of 
young  girls.  Each  of  them  holds  a  wreath  of  flowers,  tied 
with  ribbons  on  a  square  board,  with  a  small  wax  lamp  or 
candle  in  the  centre.  Each  of  these  wreaths  is  marked 
with  a^ifferent  color  in  ribbon.  With  nightfall,  at  a  given 
signal,  the  girls  launch  their  lighted  wreaths  on  the  water, 
and  let  them  go  with  the  stream.  Dear  little  garlands! 
Each  of  them  carries  a  thought,  a  pang,  or  a  sigh,  a  hope  or 
a  wish,  towards  an  imaginary  lover  or  the  chosen  one,  and 
by  two,  by  three,  by  four,  hunting  each  other,  spreading 
apart  or  huddling  together,  they  advance  on  the  dark  cur- 
rent to  their  unknown  fate.  Simultaneously  with  the  ap- 
pearance of  these  fluttering  messages  the  young  men  begin 


50  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

a  chase  for  them.  Steering  adroitly  with  their  swift,  small 
boats  among  those  diminutive  floating,  flowery  islands,  they 
try  to  catch  them  without  putting  out  the  lights.  This 
requires  a  certain  degree  of  agility.  Often  two  boatmen 
will  aim  at  the  same  wreath,  and  then  a  fight  ensues,  usually 
fatal  to  the  object  of  their  desire.  This  creates  great  ex- 
citement among  the  girls,  who  watch  the  game  anxiously. 
Voices  are  heard:  ''It  is  Wanda's  wreath,  what  a  shame! 
Poor,  poor  Wanda!"  These  sad  ejaculations  are  easily 
explained.  There  is  a  superstitious  belief  that  the  girl 
whose  wreath  is  caught  safely,  with  its  light  burning,  will 
soon  be  married  happily;  but  the  one  whose  wreath  is 
drowned,  or  its  light  put  out,  is  condemned  to  celibacy  if 
not  to  early  death. 

When  the  game  is  over,  the  choral  song  of  the  students 
hushes  the  animated  crowd.  People  become  suddenly 
silent,  listening  with  delight  to  the  fresh,  youthful  voices 
whose  notes  ring  out  with  that  clearness  and  magic  beauty 
which  music  produces  in  the  stillness  of  the  night.  After 
several  songs,  a  dazzling  Bengal  light  floods  the  boats, 
the  old  castle,  and  the  distant  group  of  peasants  on  the 
opposite  shore  of  the  Vistula,  and  then,  as  a  finale,  the 
National  Hymn  is  heard.  Oh,  that  hymn,  full  of  tears, 
supplications,  and  revenge !  The  people  join  in  the  chorus, 
and  when  the  last  note  dies  away,  they  return  home  with 
heavy  hearts,  pondering  on  the  helpless  tragedy  of  their 
country. 


CHAPTER  VII 

At  the  age  of  fourteen  I  had  finished  the  highest  grade 
at  the  convent  school,  and  then  my  literary  education  began. 
I  read  frantically  our  own  poets  first  of  all.  First,  our  great 
poet  Mickiewicz,  then  Krasinski,  Slowacki,  that  incom- 
parable master  of  poetic  language,  and  Bohdan  Zaleski, 
called  the  nightingale  of  "  Ukraina,"  and  many  other 
poets.  In  the  winter  evenings  the  sole  pleasure  of  our 
small  circle  consisted  in  reading  aloud,  and  we  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Walter  Scott,  Dickens,  Bulwer,  Madame 
George  Sand,  and  of  course  of  Dumas,  p6re,  the  idol  of  young 
people.  We  never  liked  to  read  Russian  or  German  stories, 
such  was  the  resentment  we  cherished  in  our  hearts  toward 
those  nations;  but  one  evening  we  were  invited  by  Mr. 
Modjeski  to  see  the  German  troupe  playing  at  that  time  in 
our  city.  By  the  wish  of  the  government  it  was  decided 
that  Polish  and  German  companies  should  play  alternately 
at  the  Cracow  theatre.  I  had  not  been  at  the  theatre  since 
I  was  seven  years  old,  and  the  temptation  was  great. 
Mother  hesitated,  but  Mr.  Modjeski  suggested  to  her  that 
it  would  be  a  great  help  in  my  study  to  see  a  German  play, 
and  might  encourage  me  to  learn  that  language,  so  sadly 
neglected  by  me  at  school.  .  The  argument  was  convincing, 
and  she  accepted  the  invitation. 

I  dressed  in  a  hurry,  and  was  so  fidgety  and  afraid  of  being 
late  that  I  made  mother  start  three-quarters  of  an  hour 
before  the  beginning,*  and  when  we  arrived  the  lights  were 
not  yet  up.  I  remember  with  what  respect,  almost  rev- 
erence, I  entered  ''the  temple."  For  it  was  a  real  temple 
to  me,  a  place  where  human  hearts  beat  quicker  at  a  word 

51 


62  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

from  the  stage,  where  one  sentence  of  the  author,  or  one 
magic  touch  of  the  actor's  art,  makes  the  audience  laugh 
or  cry ;  where,  .  .  .  well,  I  do  not  remember  exactly  what 
thoughts  whirled  in  my  brain  at  my  entrance  to  the  theatre, 
but  I  know  that  my  whole  being  was  filled  with  a  kind  of 
rapturous  awe. 

Schiller's  '^Kabale  und  Liebe"  ("Intrigue  and  Love") 
was  the  play,  and  it  fascinated  me  completely.  I  sat  like 
one  petrified,  drinking  in  the  words  I  did  not  understand, 
and  feasting  my  eyes  on  the  somewhat  stiff  and  ponderous 
players.  In  the  dramatic  passages,  however,  their  actions 
were  impressive  and  clear.  By  the  force  of  the  acting,  and 
the  help  of  Mr.  Modjeski,  who  translated  to  me  several 
scenes,  I  succeeded  in  understanding  the  plot.  When  we 
returned  home,  I  sat  at  the  tea-table  without  a  word, 
ruminating  over  the  wonderful  masterpiece  I  had  just  seen, 
until,  jeered  at  as  a  lunatic,  I  was  sent  to  bed. 

That  evening  created  a  revulsion  of  feeling  in  me.  I 
thought  better  of  Germans.  Next  morning  I  did  not  rest 
until  I  had  bought  a  printed  copy  of  "Kabale  und  Liebe," 
which  I  read  from  cover  to  cover  with  a  dictionary.  It 
was  very  slow  work,  and  it  lasted  several  days,  but  I  was  not 
discouraged,  and  in  this  same  toilsome  way  I  read  almost 
all  Schiller's  plays.  By  the  time  I  came  to  '*  Mary  Stuart " 
I  understood  German  quite  well. 

The  more  I  read,  the  more  I  admired  that  great  poet. 
I  actually  fell  in  love  with  him ;  I  bought  a  little  statuette 
representing  him  in  a  graceful,  quiet  pose,  with  his  sad, 
beautiful  face  slightly  inclined  towards  his  great  heart. 
I  gazed  at  it  so  often  that  I  fell  into  the  habit  of  holding 
my  head  in  the  same  way  exactly,  looking  wistfully  into 
space ;  and  when,  many  years  afterwards,  I  met  in  London 
the  ''^Esthetics,"  a  semi-artistic  circle  of  people  who  tried 
to  fashion  themselves  after  Dante  Rossetti's  and  Burne- 
Jones's  pictures,  their  poses  reminded  me  of  those  fanciful 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  63 

days  of  my  girlhood.  When  I  compared  Schiller  with  our 
poets,  he  was  not  at  all  superior  to  them  in  ideas  or  senti- 
ment, but  I  suppose  it  was  the  dramatic  form  which  took 
such  strong  hold  on  me.  Our  dear  old  poets  were  almost 
a  part  of  me;  I  had  heard  of  them  since  my  childhood. 
I  loved  and  worshipped  them,  and  laid  at  their  feet  my  soul 
and  my  patriotic  heart.  Schiller  was  only  a  lover,  and,  as  it 
sometimes  happens  to  lovers,  was  in  time  put  into  the  shade 
by  another,  a  mightier  one,  of  whom  I  shall  speak  later. 

Since  the  evening  of  ^'Kabale  und  Liebe,"  mother,  who 
loved  to  go  to  Polish  plays,  often  took  Josephine  and  me  with 
her.  We  saw  several  performances  that  season,  some  melo- 
dramas very  much  in  fashion  then,  and  also  some  Polish 
plays,  brilliant  because  of  gorgeous  costumes,  and  touching 
because  of  the  patriotic  sentiment. 

There  were  not  many  remarkable  actors  at  that  time  in 
Cracow.  My  brother  and  the  young  leading  lady  pleased 
me  the  best.  Felix  ^  played  a  romping,  jolly,  rude  peasant, 
just  as  well  as  a  refined  young  marquis,  and  I  regarded  him, 
in  all  his  parts,  as  the  perfection  of  grace  and  boyish  beauty. 
Mrs.  R.  H.,  the  character  actress  and  heavy  lead,  was  con- 
sidered very  fine,  but  I  cannot  remember  her  acting;  all  I 
know  of  it  is  that  she  walked  with  great  dignity,  and  that 
she  pulled  her  long  train  of  velvet  and  ermine  with  a  sort 
of  jerk.  Josephine  and  I  drew  her  picture  many  times; 
it  was  easy  to  draw  ermine,  and  we  did  not  care  how  the  face 
looked,  as  we  had  never  seen  her  except  over  the  footlights, 
which,  in  the  fifties,  were  not  so  brilliant  as  they  are  now. 
We  did  not  even  know  if  she  was  old  or  young.  There 
were  no  reporters  to  describe  every  feature,  handsome  or 
otherwise,  and  the  witty  or  silly  talk  of  the  actors  and 
actresses.  The  public  knew  very  little  of  their  personalities 
except  what  they  chose  to  show  in  their  acting.  A  hero 
was  a  hero ;  a  lover  was  a  lover ;   a  villain  a  villain.     The 

^  Felix  Benda,  my  half-brother  and  a  popular  actor. 


64  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

stage  was  surrounded  with  a  kind  of  mystery  which  lent 
to  performances  a  charm  of  which  they  are  deprived  in 
these  days.  I  would  have  hated  any  one  who  had  told 
me  that  the  hero  was  a  married  man  of  fifty  with  seven 
children;  or  that  the  pure  maiden,  our  juvenile  lady,  was 
engaged  every  season  to  another  man.  I  even  was  not 
curious  enough  to  read  their  family  names  on  the  program ; 
the  names  of  the  characters  were  sufficient.  Yet,  as  it 
often  happens  that  we  obtain  a  thing  we  do  not  care  for, 
so  at  the  end  of  the  season  I  was  brought  face  to  face  with 
the  owner  of  the  black  velvet  and  ermine. 

One  afternoon,  thinking  that  no  one  but  my  sister  was 
listening  to  me,  I  recited  a  snatch  from  the  poem  ''Maria," 
by  Malczewski.  When  I  finished,  I  saw  Felix  standing  in 
the  door  and  smiling.  I  was  terrified,  as  if  I  had  been  caught 
in  some  naughtiness,  but  he  asked  quietly:  — 

''Who  taught  you  to  recite?" 

"Nobody,"  I  murmured. 

"Would  you  like  to  go  on  the  stage?"  he  asked.  "He 
mocks  me,"  I  thought,  and  said  nothing.  But  he  con- 
tinued :  — 

"I  am  not  jesting ;  if  you  wish  to  become  an  actress,  I  can 
help  you."  Saying  this,  he  left  me;  left  me  with  a  whirl 
in  my  thoughts. 

"What  did  he  say?  I  to  become  an  actress!"  I  ex- 
claimed, and  looked  at  my  sister,  who  giggled,  saying:  — 

"He,  he,  he!  How  funny  you  will  look  in  black  velvet 
and  ermine !" 

"How  can  I  be  an  actress?  How  shall  I  ever  dare  to 
appear  before  a  crowd,  when  I  am  too  shy  to  speak  before 
a  single  stranger?"  I  was  neither  happy  nor  unhappy  at 
the  idea  of  devoting  my  life  to  the  stage,  and  only  when 
I  looked  at  Schiller's  statuette  a  great  joy,  a  vague  hope, 
filled  my  heart. 

"I  may,  if  I  succeed,  act  in  his  plays."     I  re-read  the 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  66 

lines  of  Louise,  the  heroine  of  Schiller's  play,  ''Intrigue  and 
Love,"  kissed  the  statuette,  and  had  a  long  talk  with  it. 

Next  day  I  was  walking  with  Felix  on  the  line  A.  B. 
towards  Madame  R.  H.'s  lodgings.  I  had  to  recite  before 
her  that  she  might  decide  whether  I  had  any  ability  for  the 
stage  or  not.  After  a  short  walk,  trembling  with  fear  and 
anticipation,  I  stood  before  my  oracle.  A  thin,  middle- 
aged  lady ;  oh,  so  unlike  the  handsome,  rosy-looking  heroine 
of  velvet  and  ermine,  sat  before  an  embroidery  frame  and 
did  not  rise  when  we  entered,  but  offered  her  long-fingered 
hand  to  my  brother,  who  kissed  it  respectfully.  She  smiled 
with  her  pale,  thin  lips,  and  pointed  a  seat  to  me,  while  my 
brother  was  introducing  me.  She  looked  at  me  attentively 
from  head  to  feet,  and  I  blushed  ''all  over"  under  her 
scrutinizing  gaze.  I  hated  my  blushes,  and  was  angry  at 
myself.  Indeed,  I  must  have  looked  foolish,  for  she  asked 
my  brother  how  old  I  was. 
Sixteen,"  he  answered. 

Already?  I  should  not  have  thought  so."  Then  she 
added,  "Since  she  is  sixteen,  it  would  be  time  to  prepare  her 
for  the  stage,  if  ... "  —  here  she  turned  to  my  brother  — 
"if  her  mother  has  nothing  against  it,"  and  "if"  .  .  .  and 
so  on,  until  she  asked  me  to  recite.  My  brother  excused 
himself,  and  left  the  room,  sending  me  an  encouraging 
smile.  How  I  ever  dared  to  say  my  lines  before  this  stately 
authority  I  do  not  know,  but  I  did  so.  She  said  nothing, 
still  bent  over  her  work ;  then,  after  a  few  moments  of  tortur- 
ing silence,  she  asked  me  if  I  could  sing. 

"No;  I  never  took  singing  lessons,"  I  said,  but  she  in- 
sisted, saying  she  only  wanted  to  know  if  I  had  any  voice. 
I  had  to  submit. 

I  think  and  I  believe  every  young  girl  will  agree  with 
me  that  it  is  a  dreadful  ordeal  to  stand  in  the  middle  of 
the  room  and  warble,  without  preparation  and  without  ac- 


ti 


56  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

companiment.  I  told  her  I  should  never  dare  to  do  it, 
especially  while  she  was  looking  at  me. 

''Oh,  is  that  so?  Then  you  may  stand  in  the  recess  of 
that  window  and  hide  behind  the  curtains,  and  I  will  resume 
my  embroidery,  since  my  eyes  disturb  you."  She  said 
*this  with  a  ring  of  sarcasm  in  her  voice,  which  fell  upon 
my  ears  like  a  slap ;  but  I  did  as  she  told  me.  For  a  long 
time  I  was  at  a  loss  what  to  sing.  I  was  ashamed,  confused ; 
I  could  not  remember  the  words  of  any  of  the  pretty  songs 
I  knew,  but,  instead  of  them,  one  most  unsuited  to  the  cir- 
cumstances came  to  my  mind,  over  and  over  with  the  ob- 
stinacy of  a  fly  —  a  rude  and  jolly  peasant  song  I  had  heard 
during  one  of  our  excursions  in  the  fields.  Some  mischiev- 
ous spirit  whispered  in  my  ear,  ''Sing  it,  sing  it !"  and  I 
obeyed  the  imp.  In  order  to  assume  a  peasant's  voice,  I 
made  mine  sound  very  deep  and  as  harsh  as  possible,  and 
I  sang  this  thing  with  the  desperate  effort  of  a  gambler  who 
has  lost  all  he  possessed,  and  throws  his  last  coin  on  the 
table  with  the  firm  conviction  of  ruin. 

Through  the  lace  curtains  I  watched  the  effect.  The 
madame  was  highly  amused;  happily  my  brother  was  not 
in  the  room.  It  was  a  fizzle  —  I  knew  it.  I  dared  not 
leave  the  window.  Madame  R.  H.,  mastering  her  merri- 
ment, asked  me  politely  to  come  down,  then  rose  from  her 
seat,  went  to  a  small  book  shelf,  and  giving  me  a  booklet 
covered  with  marbled  paper,  said :  — 

"Take  this  home  and  learn  the  part  marked  with  a  red 
pencil.  The  day  after  to-morrow  come  here,  and  I  will 
give  you  your  first  lesson.''  I  left,  her.  What  a  relief! 
She  gave  me  a  part;  evidently  she  thought  I  had  some 
ability.  I  pressed  the  precious  treasure  to  my  heart,  and 
walked  very  fast,  anxious  to  reach  home  as  soon  as  possible 
and  give  myself  entirely  to  this  new,  glorious  task.  But 
alas,  what  a  disappointment !  The  title  of  the  play  was 
already  discouraging:    "Our   Grandmother's    Parrots."    I 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  57 

read  the  short  play,  and  it  seemed  to  me  idiotic.  Here  is 
the  plot:  — 

A  grandmother,  who  suffered  in  her  youth  from  man's 
treachery,  brings  up  two  girls,  her  orphan  granddaughter 
and  her  foster-sister,  in  strict  confinement,  not  allowing 
them  ever  to  see  a  man.  The  girls  were  ignorant  even  of 
the  existence  of  Adam's  descendants,  when  one  day  two 
young  scapegraces  appear  on  the  wall  of  their  garden  and 
talk  to  them;  the  simpletons  ask  their  grandmother  what 
sort  of  animals  they  are.  '* Parrots"  is  the  answer  of  the 
wise  ancestor.     At  the  end  of  the  play,  marriage,  of  course. 

To  study  such  a  play  !  Oh,  shades  of  the  sublime  poets ! 
Oh,  Mickiewicz  !    Oh,  Schiller  ! 

After  my  first  lesson,  madame  told  my  brother  that  it 
was  useless  to  teach  me.  She  could  not  discover  any  trace 
of  talent  in  me.  She  said  that  I  laughed  all  through  my 
part,  and  seemed  to  be  amused  instead  of  taking  it  seriously, 
as  I  ought  to.  Then  she  advised  my  mother  to  keep  me 
at  home,  instead  of  condemning  me  to  become  a  mediocre 
actress;  this  cruel  sentence  was  repeated  to  me  by  my 
dear  mother,  who  seemed  rather  pleased  with  the  decree. 
But  my  heart  was  sore,  and  this  time  my  ambition  for  the 
stage  was  crushed  forever,  or  so  I  thought. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

The  next  year  happened  the  incident  which  turned;  in 
no  small  degree,  my  heart  from  Schiller.  The  German 
manager,  in  order  to  attract  the  Polish  public,  which  ob- 
stinately kept  away  from  the  German  theatre,  used  to  engage 
different  stars  from  Vienna  and  Berlin  for  what  is  called 
''Gast  Rollen,"  equivalent  to  ''Star  Engagement."  After 
the  financial  failure  of  several  stars,  a  bill  appeared  at  the 
corners  of  the  street,  announcing  Fritz  Devrient  in  the  part 
of  Hamlet.  I  had  heard  of  Shakespeare,  but  never  had 
read  or  seen  any  of  his  plays,  and  naturally  enough  my 
curiosity  was  aroused. 

Hamlet  made  an  overwhelming  impression  on  me,  and 
I  worshipped  at  once  the  great  masterwork  of  that  powerful 
man  born  and  buried  somewhere  on  the  British  Islands 
centuries  ago.  That  mysterious  spirit  ruling  over  human 
souls,  the  wonderful  wizard,  reading  human  hearts  and  God's 
nature,  the  great  inimitable  Shakespeare.  He  became  my 
master  then  and  there,  and  remained  so  through  my  theatrical 
career.  I  never  took  better  lessons  in  acting  than  those 
Hamlet  gives  tx)  the  players ;  I  never  enjoyed  acting  more 
than  when  I  played  those  wayward,  sweet,  passionate, 
proud,  tender,  jolly,  or  cruel  and  sad  heroines  of  Shake- 
speare's dramas. 

I  lived  weeks  afterwards  in  continual  enchantment. 
The  translations  of  Shakespeare  were  scarce,  but  Mr. 
Modjeski  succeeded  in  getting  Hamlet  in  Polish  transla- 
tion and  also  ''Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona,"  "The  Merchant 
of  Venice,"  and  "Simon  of  Athens,"  which  I  read  greedily. 

Fritz   Devrient,   who  played  Hamlet,  was  a  young  man, 

58 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  59 

blond  and  graceful.  He  was  the  nephew  of  Emil  Devrient, 
one  of  the  most  celebrated  German  actors  of  that  time,  and 
played  the  part  with  a  great  deal  of  dignity  and  in  a  most 
natural  way.  A  glorious  future  lay  before  him,  but  he  died 
young,  leaving  behind  the  most  flattering  memory  of  his 
great  talent.  His  acting  made  a  tremendous  impression 
on  me,  and  the  longing  for  the  stage  work  was  aroused 
again.  I  spent  a  sleepless  night,  and  had  to  use  all  my 
strength  of  will  in  order  to  crush  down  in  my  soul  that  wild 
desire.  I  succeeded,  and  the  result  of  Devrient's  Hamlet 
manifested  itself  only  in  a  long  poem,  written  in  secret, 
read  and  re-read  and  finally  destroyed.  The  vision  of  his 
art,  however,  lived  with  me  for  years,  linked  in  some  way 
with  my  worship  of  Shakespeare. 

My  ambition  to  become  a  priestess  of  Melpomene  and 
Thalia  was  nipped  in  the  bud  by  Madame  R.  H.'s  verdict, 
and  I  gave  up  all  aspirations  in  the  direction  of  the  stage. 
But  my  desire  for  achieving  a  name  for  myself  had  never 
left  me,  and  I  thought  for  a  while  I  might  gain  it  ais  a  writer. 
Poems  were  manufactured  in  secret,  and  psychological 
studies,  as  well  as  sketches  of  different  incidents.  I  tried 
to  adopt  a  certain  style  in  writing,  but  this  was  a  vain 
desire ;  I  felt  I  was  ignorant,  and  being  too  shy  to  confide 
my  ambitious  hopes  to  some  one  who  could  give  me  good 
advice,  I  burned  my  lucubrations  as  soon  as  I  wrote  them. 
The  only  person  in  whom  I  placed  my  confidence  was  my 
brother,  Simon  Benda,  who  lived  in  Vienna,  and  to  whom 
I  wrote  letters  in  rhyme.  But  though  he  was  pleased  by 
my  facility  in  rhyming,  he  never  gave  it  a  serious  thought, 
and  never  encouraged  my  aspirations. 

At  the  same  time  my  good  mother  wanted  me  to  pass 
a  teacher's  examination,  believing  in  self-support  for 
women.  I  began  to  study  history,  mathematics,  and  every- 
thing else  I  had  been  told  to  study.  To  me  learning  was  the 
highest  pleasure.     Endowed  as  I  was  with  an  exceptionally 


60  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

strong  memory,  it  did  not  cost  me  any  effort;  I  enjoyed  it. 
Some  of  the  studies,  algebra,  for  instance,  seemed  a  little 
tedious,  but  no  matter  in  what  shape  knowledge  was  pre- 
sented to  me,  I  grasped  it  eagerly,  and  was  still  crying  with 
Goethe,  ''Light!  more  light!"  Who  could  have  believed, 
then,  that  all  these  studies  were  only  preparing  and  smooth- 
ing, my  way  to  the  stage?  Since  my  failure  in  ''Our 
Grandmother's  Parrots"  and  the  victory  over  myself  after 
Devrient's  Hamlet,  I  had  no  desire  of  becoming  an  actress, 
yet  owing  to  a  mere  incident  I  nearly  became  an  opera-singer. 
It  was  at  that  time  I«  formed  a  friendship  with  a  young 
actress,  Ptaszynska.  Engaged  in  the  Polish  stock  com- 
pany, she  had  to  play  divers  parts  very  often  not  suited 
to  her  abilities.  In  one  of  those  parts  she  had  to  sing  the 
grand  aria  from  the  opera  "Hernani."  My  friend  sang 
a  little,  but  not  well  enough  to  execute  this  difficult  piece 
of  music,  and  the  management  sent  her  a  teacher,  the  well- 
known  and  excellent  master,  Mr.  Mirecki,  whose  task  was 
to  transform  this  modest  little  actress  into  a  prima  donna. 
One  morning  when  I  called  on  her  she  was  just  taking 
her  lesson.  Hearing  her  exercising,  I  quietly  entered  her 
bedroom  and  waited.  She  was  singing  the  great  aria.  I 
heard  a  man's  voice  correcting  her.  She  went  over  and 
over  the  same  passage,  but  could  not  get  it  right ;  then  the 
old  master  grew  impatient,  and  sang  for  her  the  whole  aria. 
After  a  while  he  took  leave.  As  soon  as  he  left  the  room, 
I  strolled  in,  and  in  joke,  began  to  sing  the  same  aria,  tr3dng 
as  near  as  possible  to  get  his  expression  and  accent,  ac- 
companying it  with  extravagant  gestures,  when  suddenly 
the  door  opened,  and  the  dear  old  master,  the  celebrated 
Mirecki,  appeared  before  us !  In  an  instant  I  was  under 
the  piano,  afraid  that  he  would  scold  me  for  imitating  him. 
His  eyesight  was  very  weak,  and  he  wore  a  green  shade 
over  his  eyes.  He  did  not  see  me,  but  he  asked  abruptly, 
with^  I  thought  then,  an  angry  ring  in  his  voice :  — 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  61 

"Who  sang  here,  just  now?''  My  friend,  pointing  to  me 
crouching  under  the  piano,  said :  — 

''There  she  is!"  then,  turning  to  the  master,  added,  in 
the  way  of  mocking  introduction,  ''Miss  Helena  Opid,  Felix 
Benda's  half-sister."  .  .  .  There  was  no  remedy.  I  had 
to  come  out  from  my  hiding-place  and  face  the  master,  who, 
lifting  his  shade,  looked  at  me  with  scrutinizing,  bloodshot 
gaze;  but  what  was  my  astonishment  when,  instead  of 
scolding  me,  he  said  that  I  had  a  good  voice,  that  I  must 
come  to  his  class  and  he  would  teach  me  for  nothing.  I  was 
so  overcome  and  so  surprised  that  I  could  not  say  a  word 
of  thanks,  even;  I  bowed  my  head  and  stood  motionless 
until  he  left  the  room.  But  as  soon  as  he  departed  I  nearly 
screamed  with  joy.  I  took  my  friend  by  the  waist,  and  we 
started  on  a  wild  dance  around  the  room.  She  was  as  happy 
as  I,  for  there  was  no  jealousy  in  her  nature.  She  put  on 
her  hat  and  went  home  with  me  to  tell  mother  the  happy 
news.  This  time  there  was  no  objection  on  mother's  part, 
and  I  went  steadily  to  Mr.  Mirecki's  music  school  for  three 
months.  My  only  ambition  and  desire  then  was  to  become 
one  day  a  church  and  concert  singer,  but  the  master  in- 
sisted on  making  me  a  prima  donna,  and  again  the  vision 
of  my  treading  the  stage  boards  stood  before  me  by  day 
and  by  night.  Alas !  It  was  not  to  be.  The  dear  old 
man  died  in  a  few  months,  and  I  never  took  another 
lesson. 

Again  one  of  my  cherished  dreams  was  dispelled,  but 
among  the  numerous  occupations  at  home  and  my  studies 
I  soon  forgot  this  mischance.  Memorizing  verses  was  one 
of  my  dearest  pastimes.  After  having  learned  a  few  scores 
of  Polish  poems,  I  read  one  day  Schiller's  "Kinder  Moderin," 
and  was  so  deeply  struck  by  the  dramatic  pathos  that  I 
learned  and  recited  it  before  Mr.  Modjeski.  When  he 
heard  it,  he  told  me,  to  my  great  surprise,  he  thought  that, 
in  spite  of  Mademoiselle  R.  H.'s  verdict,  I  might  make  a 


62  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

success  as  an  actress,  but  he  would  not  advise  me  to  go 
on  the  Polish  stage,  where  there  was  only  a  small  field  and 
very  few  opportunities,  but  suggested  the  German  stage. 
A  few  days  later  Mr.  Modjeski  introduced  to  us  Herr  Axt- 
man,  who  then  was  one  of  the  best  actors  in  the  Cracow 
German  stock  company.  I  learned  with  him  Louise 
in  "Kabale  und  Liebe,"  Gretchen  in  ''Faust,"  Klarchen 
Marchen  in  "Egmont,"  and  Lessing's ''Katchen  von  Heil- 
brun." 

A  pathetic  incident  is  connected  with  my  dramatic  lessons. 
Herr  Axtman  had  a  fine  voice,  and  played  on  the  guitar,  which 
instrument  I  also  cultivated  at  that  time.  The  most  beau- 
tiful thing  he  sang  was  Schubert's  serenade  (''Standchen"). 
One  afternoon  he  seemed  to  be  very  tired,  his  face  was  drawn 
and  pale.  I  thought  I  would  not  trouble  him  with  too  much 
rehearsing.  I  stopped  in  the  middle  of  my  part,  took  the 
guitar,  and  sang  a  jolly  Polish  air,  thinking  I  might  dispel 
his  sadness ;  then,  handing  him  the  instrument,  I  asked  him 
to  sing  the  ''Standchen."  He  sighed  deeply,  and  his  face 
wore  an  expression  of  distress,  but  he  struck  a  few  chords 
and  began  to  sing.  He  scarcely  sang  two  lines  when  the 
guitar  slipped  from  his  hands,  his  body  bent  forward,  and 
he  fell  to  the  ground  in  a  dead  faint.  It  seems  that  my  dear 
teacher  had  had  scarcely  any  nourishment  for  two  days, 
and  had  fainted  from  sheer  hunger.  I  mentioned  before 
what  bad  business  the  German  managers  were  doing  in 
Cracow.  Mr.  Axtman  and  his  friend  stayed  in  Cracow  with 
the  hope  of  making  some  money  by  teaching  until  they 
obtained  a  good  engagement  in  Germany.  They  were,  how- 
ever, reduced  to  utter  poverty. 

In  spite  of  this  extreme  need,  Herr  Axtman  never  wanted 
to  accept  any  remuneration  for  my  lessons,  saying  that 
my  success  on  the  stage  would  be  his  best  reward.  This 
looks  like  a  fancy  story,  but  it  is  nevertheless  the  perfect 
truth.     We  often  find  among  artists  such  natures,  full  of 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  63 

pride,  recklessness,  and  abnegation.  Shortly  afterwards, 
Herr  Axtman  and  his  friend,  having  obtained  the  desired 
engagement,  left  Cracow,  to  my  great  regret,  which  was, 
however,  relieved  by  the  hope  of  a  better  existence  for  the 
kind  artist  whose  memory  still  lives  in  my  heart. 

Among  my  papers  I  have  found  the  following  letter  I 
wrote  about  that  time  to  my  brother  Simon,  who  was  study- 
ing music  in  Vienna,  and  also  a  scrap  of  paper  to  which  I 
confided  a  few  of  my  impressions :,  — 

"Dear  Brother, 

**  I  would  have  written  to  you  oftener,  but  I  was  and  am  very 
busy  all  the  time.  You  ask  me  what  I  am  doing.  First  of  all, 
I  help  mamma  in  the  house,  for  we  have  no  servant,  only  old  Kazi- 
mierzowa  comes  twice  a  day  to  wash  the  dishes.  She  also  does 
our  laundry,  but  ironing  belongs  to  mother  and  me. 

"  Aimt  Teresa  is  still  very  ill.  The  doctor  says  she  has  a  can- 
cer. She  scarcely  leaves  her  bed  now,  and  of  course  we  have 
to  look  after  her.  Dear  —  poor  Aimt  Teresa,  she  suffers  awful 
pains. 

"  I  have  also  to  help  Stasia^  with  her  lessons.  We  have  a  good 
deal  of  trouble  with  her,  for  she  constantly  runs  into  the  street, 
and  is  as  wild  as  a  boy.  Mamma  took  her  shoes  off  one  day  and 
locked  them  in  a  closet,  but  the  imp  crept  barefoot  out  of  the 
kitchen  window  and  went  to  the  neighboring  garden,  where  she 
ate  so  many  berries  that  she  was  quite  ill  afterwards.  ...  I 
am  the  only  one  that  can  manage  her,  because  she  loves  me,  and  I 
talk  to  her  as  to  a  grown  person. 

"  All  my  days  are  taken  up  with  sewing,  studies,  and  a  thousand 
little  things.  The  evenings  I  spend  in  reading,  sometimes  pro- 
longed until  three  o'clock  in  the  morning. 

"  And  now  I  have  very  important  news  for  you,  but  I  am  afraid 
you  will  scream.  Yet  I  am  going  to  tell  you,  for  I  have  more 
courage  to  write  than  to  speak  —  I  am  to  become  an  actress ! 
This  is  not  all.  I  am  to  become  a  German  actress.  Please  do  not 
swear !  Mr.  Gustave  [Modjeski]  says  I  shall  have  better  op- 
portunities on  the  German  stage,  and  though  I  do  not  like  the  idea, 
yet,  —  I  think  I  have  to  please  him.    You  see,  dear  brother,  I 

^  My  niece,  Joseph  Benda's  daughter,  whom  he  left  in  my  mother's 
care  before  leaving  for  Russian  Poland. 


64  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

want  to  do  something  in  the  world,  and  though  I  may  not  get  an 
engagement,  yet  I  study,  study,  and  study.  It  may  be  useful  to 
me  some  day,  and  if  not,  well,  —  at  least  it  gives  me  a  great  deal 
of  comfort  at  present. 

"  I  know  you  will  say  that  I  always  Uve  in  the  clouds.  Alas,  it  is 
so.  And  I  think  I  shall  never  have  peace  imtil  I  am  really  up  there 
among  the  clouds.  I  feel  great  strength  in  me,  sometimes,  and  then 
again  at  times  I  am  so  weak  that  I  am  afraid  of  my  own  shadow. 

"  Mr.  Gustave  says  I  am  nervous  and  need  rest  and  change  of  air. 
He  always  brings  me  books.  A  few  weeks  ago  he  brought  me 
Buchner's  'Kraft  und  Stoff.'  It  is  a  philosophical  work  in  which 
the  author  tries  to  prove  that  there  is  no  God,  and  that  the  world 
created  itself  out  of  a  spark  and  accimiulation  of  matter,  etc.  I 
am  curious  to  know  who  made  the  spark,  because  he  does  not  tell 
that.  No,  no,  I  shall  never  cease  to  believe  in  God,  to  love  Christ 
and  his  Holy  Mother.  I  am  now  reading  Kochanowski's  poems, 
'Treny.'    They  are  beautiful  because  they  are  so  infinitely  sad. 

"  You  know  already  that  Adolphe  works  at  some  house-building, 
and  gives  mamma  every  month  thirty  florins.  He  lives  with  us, 
and  we  spend  Sundays  in  excursions  on  foot  or  in  'furki. '  ^  Aunt 
Teresa,  though  she  does  not  love  Adolphe  very  much  because  he 
used  to  tease  me  and  Josephine  when  we  were  children,  and  now 
is  'torturing'  Stasia,  yet  she  says  that  he  is  the  only  one  in  the 
family  who  will  become  a  man.*  Which  means  that  neither  you 
nor  Felix  nor  Joseph  have  become  'men,'  because  you  are  all 
artists,  and  art  does  not  pay.  .  .  .     'Dixi.' 

"  I  wish  spring  were  here  !  But  it  is  only  autmnn  now,  and  a 
long,  heavy  winter  is  coming.  Adieu.  Mr.  Gustave  sends  hearty 
greetings  to  you.  Mamma,  Josephine,  and  myself  send  you  a 
thousand  kisses.     Your  loving  sister,  "Hfiena 

"  P.S.  Felix  is  going  on  a  tour  with  his  wife.  The  company  is 
going  to  play  in  small  towns  and  pleasure  resorts  during  the  summer 
months.  You  should  see  Felix  on  the  stage.  He  is  simply  wonderful ! 
Ah  !  When  shall  we  be  together  again  ?    Do  write  often  and  long." 

A  scrap  found  among  my  papers: — 

"The  days  do  not  belong  to  me,  but  the  nights  are  mine.  When 
all  are  asleep  I  go  to  the  window,  open  it,  and  lookout  into  the  moon- 


^  A  sort  of  peasant  basket  wagon. 

*  In  Polish,  the  word  "  man  "  is  the  same 


as  a  man  of  means,  used  in  this  sense. 


MADAME    MODJESKA   AS    "OPHELIA"    (1871) 


\ 


•.  ♦■  •    «*•». 


&lt;1 


) 


CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  65 

light,  into  the  starlight  night.  I  stretch  my  arms  and  breathe 
deeply.  The  nightingale^s  song,  the  perfume  of  the  acacias,  fill 
me  with  mispeakable  delight  and  sadness.  I  wish  to  have  wings 
and  to  fly  into  the  endless  space.  Why  am  I  so  moved  ?  Does 
the  idea  of  becoming  an  actress  fill  me  with  joy  ?  I  do  not  know, 
though  I  feel  happy  at  the  thought,  yet  a  mysterious  pang  is  con- 
nected with  it.  I  do  not  know  what  ails  me.  I  have  to  leave  my 
country,  go  on  the  German  stage,  among  strangers.  Ha !  If 
it  must  be,  I  will  go  !  Why  do  I  not  speak  English  7  I  would  play 
Ophelia  —  Portia  —  Juliet.  Gradually  peace  comes  over  me. 
I  think  of  the  parts  I  shall  most  likely  perform.  Half  closing  my 
eyes,  I  see  among  the  trees  and  shrubs,  Louise,  wringing  her  hands 
and  shedding  tears,  Ophelia  with  her  vacant  stare.  Marguerite 
in  the  arms  of  Faust,  Klarchen  addressing  the  mob  in  desperate 
accents,  Portia  in  a  lawyer's  gown,  and  sweet  Julia  of  the  'Gentle- 
men of  Verona'  reading  her  lover's  letter.  All  these  phantoms, 
though  unlike  each  other,  have  one  and  the  same  face,  changed 
only  by  the  expression,  and  it  is  mine.  I  send  my  thoughts  into 
the  vague  future  and  see  myself  on  the  stage.  I  hear  the  applause 
of  the  j)eople.  I  see  their  tears  and  smiles.  I  know  I  make  them 
feel  what  I  feel.  This  is  power !  .  .  .  Ah,  no,  no,  this  is  all  a 
dream,  a  delusion.  What  does  my  miserable  life  amount  to? 
Where  am  I  going,  and  what  will  become  of  me?  " 

About  that  time  happened  the  great  event  of  my  life: 
Mr.  G.  S.  Modjeski,  knowing  my  great  love  for  reading, 
always  provided  me  with  books.  I  read  with  him  Goethe, 
Wieland,  and  Lessing.  He  also  made  me  memorize 
selected  verses  from  Nibelungen  Saga.  It  was  during 
those  readings  that  one  day  he  asked  me  to  become  his 
wife.  I  answered  ''Yes"  without  hesitation,  because  he 
had  already  become  as  dear  to  me  as  my  own  brothers ; 
and  besides,  my  imagination  had  adorned  him  with  the 
attributes  of  all  the  possible  and  impossible  heroes  I  read 
about  in  poetry  or  prose.  I  believed  him  to  be  a  man  who 
could  fight  to  death,  kill  a  lion  or  a  dragon  for  my  sake,  or, 
like  Werther,  commit  suicide  if  I  rejected  him;  for  I  truly 
believed  he  loved  me  with  all  the  intensity  of  that  most 
unhappy  of  Goethe's  lovers. 


PART  II 


POLAND 


i( 


f 


"5 


CHAPTER  IX 


In  1861,  in  the  month  of  May,  Mr.  Modjeski,  my  little 
son  Rudolphe,  then  four  months  old,  and  myself  were 
living  in  Bochnia,  where  my  mother  and  my  little  niece 
had  moved  previously.  The  dear  Aunt  Teresa  was  not 
with  us  any  more.     She  died  in  the  early  part  of  January. 

Bochnia  is  a  small  town  of  two  or  three  thousand  in- 
habitants in  that  part  of  Poland  which  belongs  to  Austria, 
and  which  is  called  the  Kingdom  of  Galitzia.  It  lies  about 
f  fifty  miles  east  of  Cracow.     In  old  times  Bochnia  was  a 

place  of  note,  celebrated  for  its  salt  mines.  At  present  the 
mines  are  nearly  exhausted,  and  cannot  compare  with  those 
of  Wieliczka,  the  latter  being  probably  the  largest  in  the 
world.  Buildings  half  ruined  and  miserable  huts  now 
stand  in  place  of  old  historic  castles,  and  instead  of  brilliant 
knights  and  rich  noblemen,  you  see  on  the  muddy  streets 
merely  poor  peasants,  shabby  Jews,  and  only  a  few  decently 
dressed  men  and  women.  In  short,  Bochnia  to-day  is  a  very 
uninteresting  spot,  except  for  the  legend  of  the  twelfth 
century  clinging  to  its  name.* 

At  the  present  time  little  remains  in  Bochnia  of  the 
marvels  of  its  past,  or  its  glorious  associations,  and  I  would 
not  have  mentioned  the  little  town  at  all  had  it  not  been 
closely  connected  with  my  stage  career. 

One  day  at  a  May  festival,  while  the  young  men  and  girls 
of  Bochnia  were  trying  their  feet  in  a  quadrille  on  the  un- 
even ground  of  a  meadow,  Mr.  Modjeski  and  I  perceived  the 
figure  of  a  man  in  a  summer  suit  and  blue  cravat  coming 

^  This  legend  has  been  already  printed  in  The  Arena  of  February, 
1890,  in  an  article  of  mine  entitled,  ''Reminiscenoes  of  Debuts  in  Many 
Lands." 

69 


70  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

toward  us  with  dancing  steps,  smiling  all  over  and  waving 
his  hat  in  repeated  greetings.  We  did  not  recognize  him 
at  first,  but  when  he  came  nearer,  we  both  exclaimed: — 

''Mr.  Loboiko!  What  are  you  doing  here?"  Upon 
which  he  told  us  that  Cracow,  being  overcrowded  with 
photographic  studios,  he  had  come  to  Bochnia  to  establish 
one,  and  also  to  give  dancing  lessons. 

One  afternoon  he  brought  news  of  an  unfortunate  acci- 
dent at  the  salt  mines,  causing  the  death  of  several  men, 
who  left  widows  and  orphans  without  any  means  of  support. 
We  felt  very  badly  about  it,  and  decided  to  arrange  an 
amateur  performance  for  the  benefit  of  the  bereaved  families, 
the  receipts  of  which  we  had  no  doubt  would  be  considerable, 
for  Bochnia  had  no  theatre  of  its  own,  and  the  travelling 
companies  never  stopped  there  on  their  tours. 

This  prospect  transported  me  into  the  seventh  heaven. 
The  poor  would  be  relieved,  and  moreover  I  should  act  on 
a  real  stage.  Mr.  Loboiko  at  once  offered  his  services  as 
instructor  and  artistic  director.  He  went  to  a  book-store 
and  returned  with  several  booklets  containing  short  plays, 
which  he  left  with  us,  and  which  I  devoured  one  after  the 
other,  with  the  hunger  of  a  beggar  deprived  for  days  of 
nourishing  food. 

Our  artistic  mentor,  being  also  a  very  practical  man, 
obtained  at  once  the  Casino  Hall,  in  which  he  built  a  stage 
about  ten  feet  deep.  Then  he  manufactured  some  scenery 
out  of  wall-paper  and  canvas,  and  made  a  curtain  of  red 
calico,  painted  all  over  with  golden  stars.  We  went  to  the 
Casino  every  morning  to  see  him,  with  apron  and  tucked- 
up  sleeves,  working  on  the  paraphernalia. 

Our  company  was  composed  of  two  men:  Mr.  Loboiko, 
the  leading  man;  Mr.  Bauman,  our  director's  dancing 
pupil ;  Miss  Josephine  Kossowska  (my  sister's  stage  name) ; 
myself  as  leading  lady;  and  my  eleven-year-old  niec6, 
Stasia,  as  prompter,  —  five  in  all.    The  difficulties  stand- 


POLAND  71 

ing  in  the  way  of  regular  charitable  performances  did  not 
trouble  us  much.  We  had  a  hall  in  the  Casino  gratis. 
As  to  advertisements,  there  was  no  newspaper  in  town,  so 
it  was  impossible  to  advertise,  and  the  few  bills  posted  on 
the  corners  of  the  streets  were  done  at  small  expense  by  a 
hand  printing-press,  used  commonly  for  announcements  of 
deaths  or  public  balls. 

We  selected  two  plays  for  the  performance :  ''The  White 
Camelia,''  comedy  in  one  act,  and  the  ''Prima  Donna,"  or 
"A  Foster-sister,"  a  play  with  songs,  in  two  acts.  We  had 
eight  rehearsals,  and  the  actors  were,  speaking  in  theatrical 
slang,  "dead-letter  perfect."  Yet,  when  I  heard  the  cur- 
tain bell  I  nearly  fainted.  I  tried  to  recollect  the  first 
lines  of  my  part,  but  could  not.  My  hands  became  cold 
as  ice,  thrilling  acute  shivers  ran  up  and  down  my  spinal 
column,  and  all  together  I  had  a  feeling  of  sinking  slowly  into 
the  ground.  I  do  not  recollect  how  I  found  myself  on  the 
stage,  but  once  before  the  footlights  I  recovered  my  pres- 
ence of  mind,  and  never  made  a  mistake  or  forgot  one 
word  of  my  part.  Toward  the  middle  of  the  performance 
I  was  so  much  at  ease  that,  when  just  at  the  beginning  of 
a  long  soliloquy,  my  niece  in  the  prompter's  box  dropped 
the  manuscript,  the  leaves  went  scattering  on  the  floor 
and  the  poor  child  began  to  cry,  asking  me  in  a  desperate 
whisper :  — 

"WTiat  skall  I  do  a®T?"  I  tmswered  composedly, 
"Pick  up  the  leaves,"  and  continued  my  part.  My  inborn 
shyness  had  totally  disappeared  when  at  work,  and  it  only 
came  back  to  me  the  next  morning  after  the  performance. 

The  audience  was  more  numerous  than  we  expected.  All 
the  authorities  of  the  district  and  city,  several  country 
gentlemen  of  the  neighborhood  with  their  families,  a  few 
occasional  visitors  to  the  town,  the  teachers  and  the  local 
schools,  in  fact,  everybody  who  dressed  in  Occidental 
fashion,  and  even  a  thin  scattering  of  Jews  in  their  long  silk 


72  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

gaberdines,  filled  the  Casino  Hall,  and  represented  what  is 
called,  in  the  American  theatrical  language,  '^ a  full  house." 
I  do  not  remember  very  well  the  details  of  the  reception, 
but  I  suppose  that  our  achievement  must  have  been  a 
genuine  success,  because  two  more  performances  were  given, 
each  with  a  change  of  bill.  We  played  several  new  pieces, 
rehearsing  the  whole  week  each  time,  and  playing  Satur- 
days. 

In  one  of  these  plays  —  a  farce  —  I  was  cast  for  a  man's 
part.  It  was  necessity  that  prompted  our  stage  director 
to  give  it  to  me.  The  personages  of  the  farce  did  not  exceed 
four,  which  was  exactly  the  number  of  our  company,  but 
unfortunately  they  represented  three  men  and  one  woman, 
whilst  our  dramatic  organization  was  composed  of  two  men 
and  two  women.  To  meet  this  difficulty  I  was  cast  for  the 
part  of  a  young,  ''saucy  lackey,"  whose  chief  performance 
consisted  in  stealing  a  pair  of  boots  from  a  shoe  store.  Mr. 
Modjeski,  afraid  that  I  would  appear  ungainly  in  the  part, 
and  also  to  counteract  my  shyness,  ordered  at  once  a  suit 
of  boy's  clothes  for  me,  and  every  evening  he  took  me  out 
for  long  walks,  so  that,  on  the  night  of  the  performance, 
I  almost  forgot  the  strange  garment  I  had  on,  and  played 
my  part  with  ease. 

The  preceding  piece  that  night  was  a  drama  in  two  acts, 
entitled,  ''A  Window  on  the  First  Floor,"  by  Korzeniowski, 
where  I  had  to  play  a  very  dramatic  part  —  that  of  a  wife, 
who,  on  the  point  of  being  unfaithful  to  her  husband,  is 
saved  by  the  cry  of  her  sick  baby. 

The  success  was  great,  and  the  audience  called  the  com- 
pany several  times  before  the  curtain.  The  unsophisticated 
public  of  that  time  loved  plays  with  a  healthy  sentiment 
and  a  moral.  It  was  before  the  times  of  Ibsen,  D'Annunzio, 
or  the  French  decadents.  They  always  wanted  virtue  to 
be  rewarded,  and  wickedness  to  fall  into  the  depth  of  misery. 
They  were  very  old-fashioned,  but  they  had  one  good  point : 


POLAND  73 

they  paid  most  strict  attention  to  the  words  and  to  the 
acting,  which  was  a  great  comfort  to  a  beginner  like  me. 
I  knew  that  nothing  would  escape  the  critical  eye  or  ear  of 
that  little  crowd  of  provincials,  and  I  took  the  same  pains 
for  them  as  if  I  were  playing  before  the  swells  and  sages  of 
a  metropolis.  The  farce  following  the  drama  was  also  well 
received,  and  I  was  not  recognized  in  my  boy's  dress. 

The  chief  event  of  the  evening  consisted  in  the  visit  of  a 
stranger  who  came  behind  the  scenes  after  the  performance. 
He  was  very  pleasant,  and  rather  amused  at  my  ''childish 
appearance,"  as  he  called  it.  He  asked  me,  nevertheless, 
how  long  I  had  been  on  the  stage,  which  I  considered  a 
flattering  mistake. 

''I  never  was  on  the  stage,"  I  answered,  ''and  I  am  not 
an  actress.  We  only  act  for  our  pleasure,  and  we  are  only 
amateurs,  except  Mr.  Loboiko."  It  was  Mr.  Chencinski,* 
a  well-known  actor  on  the  Warsaw  stage,  a  stage  manager 
as  well  as  a  humorous  dramatic  author.  He  said  something 
complimentary  which  I  do  not  remember,  and  then  con- 
cluded, taking  leave  of  me :  — 

"I  hope  to  see  you  in  Warsaw  soon."  These  words  en- 
graved themselves  in  my  memory,  and  turned  my  head 
completely.  All  the  doubts  concerning  my  abilities  were 
dispelled.  I  knew  now  that  I  had  talent.  I  knew  I  had 
to  become  an  actress  or  to  die !  And  I  wanted  to  be,  not 
a  German,  but  a  Polish,  actress ;  and  go  one  day  to  Warsaw 
to  play  at  the  Imperial  theatre  before  a  brilliant  audience, 
poets,  artists,  learned  men  and  refined  women,  and  with 
great  actors  and  actresses. 

In  a  few  hours  it  was  decided  that  my  little  experience 
had  opened  the  way  to  a  career,  and  Mr.  Modjeski  advised 
Mr.  Loboiko  to  go  to  Cracow  and  obtain  a  license  for  a  travel- 
ling company,  which  was  easily  granted  to  actors ;  and  thus 
we  started  on  the  road  under  Mr.  Loboiko's  management. 

^  Read  Hencinski. 


74  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

In  a  short  time,  however,  he  handed  over  the  direction  to 
Mr.  Modjeski,  who  had  more  experience  and  leisure  to  attend 
to  the  business  part  of  the  concern.  Loboiko's  name  was 
on  the  posters  and  programs,  but  he  was  only  a  member 
of  the  company  and  stage  director;  while  Mr.  Modjeski 
was  ''de  facto"  the  business  head  of  our  new-born  company. 

After  leaving  my  baby  in  my  dear  mother's  care,  we 
started  on  our  way  towards  New  Soncz  (New  Sandec),  on  a 
mountaineer's  large  three-seated  wagon  covered  with  white 
canvas,  looking  very  much  like  those  prairie  schooners 
the  Argonauts  of  1849  used  in  crossing  the  plains  on  their 
way  to  the  gold  hills  of  California.  We  were  six  all  together : 
the  company  of  four  members,  the  manager,  and  the  driver. 
Behind  us  waddled  a  little  one-horse  cart  filled  with  our 
famous  paper  scenery  and  the  trunks. 

The  picture  of  this  first  professional  trip  stands  vividly 
before  my  eyes.  The  weather  was  glorious !  From  the 
road,  which  led  uphill  almost  all  the  time,  we  saw  villages 
with  luxuriant  orchards,  golden  fields,  and  diminutive  white 
huts,  all  flooded  with  warm  sunlight,  and  far  ahead  of  us 
the  Carpathian  Mountains !  My  soul  was  filled  with  en- 
chantment and  delight.  The  joy  was  so  great  that  I  sang. 
My  sister  caught  the  tune,  and  the  others  followed.  Ab- 
sorbed by  our  own  merriment,  we  did  not  notice  that  we 
were  crossing  a  village,  until  our  wagon  stopped  and  we 
saw  peasants  gathered  around  us,  —  girls  with  pink  cheeks 
looking  at  us  from  the  windows  and  from  the  garden  gates, 
and  little  Jews  yelling,  ''Circus!  Circus!"  Amidst  laugh- 
ter and  jokes  we  descended  from  our  Noah's  Ark  at  an  inn. 
The  horses  had  to  rest  an  hour  before  we  could  proceed 
farther. 

''It  is  now  twelve  o'clock,  and  the  repast  is  ready."  So 
says  the  handsome  stout  Jewess  inviting  us  to  the  dining 
room.  Her  husband  stands  in  the  doorway  looking  at  us. 
He  is  not  handsome.     On  both  sides  of  his  cheeks  hang 


POLAND  75 

the  two  traditional  curls,  which  this  time  happen  to  be  of 
a  bright  red  hue.  He  wears  a  black  skull  cap,  breeches, 
white  stockings,  slippers,  and  a  sort  of  vest  with  several 
strings  hanging  around  it.  I  noticed  that  seeing  us  he 
kissed  one  of  the  strings,  and  then  again  another.^  He  is 
not  hospitable  either,  but  lets  his  wife  play  the  part  of  kind 
hostess,  which  she  does  to  perfection,  in  spite  of  the  five 
small  children  who  hang  around  her,  pulling  her  right  and 
left,  wiping  their  noses  on  her  gown,  and  making  faces  at 
each  other.  We  enter  the  whitewashed  room,  adorned 
by  a  few  cheap  prints  and  the  inevitable  swarm  of  flies, 
and  we  order  a  dinner. 

'^ Everything  is  ready,''  says  the  landlady.  We  shall 
have  to  wait  ''only  half  an  hour,"  our  plump  beauty  assures 
us.  We  have  to  submit,  since  there  is  no  other  inn  in  the 
village. 

While  waiting  for  the  young  chickens,  which  had  to  be 
killed  first  and  fried  afterwards,  we  take  a  stroll  in  the 
village.  It  is  an  hour  of  rest,  and  the  whole  village  is  eating. 
Some  of  the  peasants  are  taking  their  meals  in  the  huts 
and  spme  in  the  open  air,  under  the  shade  of  a  large  apple 
or  cherry  tree.  Our  peasants  are  almost  all  vegetarians 
by  necessity.  They  are  poor,  and  can  only  very  seldom 
afford  the  luxury  of  meat ;  yet  they  are  strong,  vigorous, 
indefatigable  workmen,  with  ruddy  cheeks,  excellent  humor, 
always  singing  while  at  work.  Their  songs  are  for  the  most 
part  improvisations ;  they  are  often  witty  'and  always  me- 
lodious. These  people  can  no  more  help  singing  than  the 
birds.     They  set  all  their  feelings  to  music :    love,  tears, 

*  The  orthodox  Jews  in  our  country  wear  those  vests  with  strings. 
They  lift  one  of  those  strings  from  time  to  time  and  kiss  it,  and  probably 
for  that  reason  they  call  them  in  Yiddish  "Tzitsele,"  which  sounds  eu- 
phonic enough.  There  is  a  saying  among  the  Christian  peasants  that  these 
strings  represent  the  Ten  Commandments,  and  every  time  the  Jew  tres- 
passes on  one  of  them,  or  is  tempted  to  do  so,  he  amends  the  offence  by 
Kissing  the  "Tzitsele,"  and  by  this  act  of  devotion  drives  the  evil  spirits 
away. 


76  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

joy,  despair,  oppression,  —  all  are  expressed  in  the  various 
songs  of  these  illiterate  poets  whose  only  learning  consists 
of  prayers  and  Nature's  own  inspirations.  We  return  to 
the  inn  just  in  time,  and  the  dinner  is  excellent. 

Provided  with  food  —  and  fleas  !  —  we  take  leave  of 
our  hospitable  Rebecca,  and  mount  the  high  grades  of  our 
wagon.  She  and  her  five  offspring,  augmented  by  the 
addition  of  a  sucking  baby  at  her  breast,  which  evidently 
was  asleep  when  we  arrived,  are  sitting  on  the  porch.  She 
waves  her  hand  to  us,  smiles  with  her  white  teeth,  and  says : 
''Do  widzenia!"  Her  husband  stands  frowning  at  the 
door.  We  bow  to  him,  but  he  only  nods  slightly  and  kisses 
the  ''Tzitsele." 

Our  trip  to  New  Sandec  was  delightful.  We  were  young, 
full  of  spirit  and  hope,  the  day  was  beautiful,  and  the 
country  enchanting.  We  made  plans  for  future  work, 
we  rode  on  the  clouds,  building  Spanish  castles.  We  were 
free  as  birds  and  happy  as  young  dogs. 

When  we  were  established  in  New  Sandec,  Mr.  Loboiko 
wrote  to  several  actors  and  actresses,  who  soon  joined  us. 
'  Some  of  them  came  even  without  being  invited,  so  that, 
at  the  end  of  three  weeks,  we  had  a  company  of  nineteen 
members.  The  success  was  great,  and  soon  we  were  able 
to  buy  decent  scenery  and  costumes. 

I  was  the  star  from  the  beginning,  but  I  wanted  to  play 
parts  of  various  kinds  in  order  to  gain  experience,  and  I 
made  several  hits  in  episodical  small  parts.  One  evening 
I  played  a  hysterical,  comical  old  lady,  and  made  the  public 
laugh.  I  was  ready  to  play  even  a  few  lines  in  pieces  where 
there  was  no  good  part  for  me.  Work  was  a  delight  to  me. 
Even  now  when  I  think  of  my  enthusiasm  of  those  days,  I 
am  thrilled  with  the  recollection.  We  lived  in  rooms 
which  were  barelv  furnished.  We  had  to  sit  on  boxes  and 
all  sorts  of  improvised  seats.  I  had  but  two  dresses,  one 
black  and  the  other  white,  with  two  tunics,  which  I  used  to 


POLAND  77 

transform  by  addition  of  black  or  pink  ruches;  our  meals 
were  frugal,  but  I  could  see  from  the  porch  fields  of  wild 
flowers,  trees,  and  mountains;  above  all,  I  had  my  parts. 
Walking  up  and  down  on  the  veranda,  I  studied  them,  to 
the  accompaniment  of  the  birds'  songs,  and  I  felt  as  proud 
and  wealthy  as  the  richest  woman.  v.To  live  in  the  imaginary 
world  of  my  heroines,  to  speak  their  poetic  language,  to 
render  different  sentiments,  to  work  out  a  character,  were 
the  most  cherished  delights  of  my  existence. 

The  rendering  of  the  part  was  not  so  attractive  as  the  \ 
study  of  it,  and  I  never  was  satisfied  with  the  applause  when  . 
I  was  not  quite  pleased  with  myself.  Even  at  that  early  | 
stage  of  my  career  I  had  a  habit  of  calling  before  my  mind  j 
a  picture  of  the  person  I  had  to  represent,  and  then  filling  it 
with  my  own  self.  When  I  could  not  see  the  vision  in  my 
mind  from  head  to  foot,  even  to  the  garment  and  gestures, 
when  I  could  not  hear  my  own  voice  ringing  in  the  accents 
of  my  vision,  I  rejected  the  part,  for  I  knew  I  could  not  play 
it  to  my  satisfaction,  j 

At  the  end  of  August  we  left  New  Sandec,  where,  owing 
to  the  generosity  of  the  public,  we  had  become  of  some  im- 
portance. In  order  to  prove  our  gratitude  to  the  town, 
we  called  our  company  ''The  New  Sandec  Combination.'' 


CHAPTER  X 

After  leaving  New  Sandec  we  went  to  Krynica,  a  fashion- 
able health  resort,  greatly  in  favor  with  Warsaw  people, 
who  used  to  spend  summers  among  the  pines  and  rocks 
of  that  picturesque  nook  in  the  Carpathian  Mountains. 
We  found  the  place  in  alarm.  The  news  had  come  from 
Waraaw  that  several  men  and  women  had  been  killed  in  the 
streets  by  the  Russian  soldiers. 

It  was  in  February  of  1861  that  the  Poles  began  their 
demonstrations,  singing  hymns  and  national  songs  in  public 
places,  gathering  in  churches  and  walking  in  processions. 
All  these  demonstrations  had  seemingly  a  religious  character, 
but  they  were  in  fact  the  forerunners  of  the  Insurrection 
of  1863.* 

^  The  uprising  of  the  Poles  bore  from  the  start  a  mystio  character. 
In  June,  1861,  th«!«  was  a  rumor  which  ran  like  an  electric  current  through 
all  the  country,  that  in  great  forests  near  Warsaw  strange  men  ap- 
peared, dressed  in  peasant  garbs  or  blouses.  Thev  seldom  came  out  of 
their  hiding-places,  but  when  they  were  seen,  they  behaved  with  modesty 
and  piety.  Some  people  saw  them  at  a  forester's  abandoned  house ; 
some  giris  gathering  wild  berries  met  them,  and  were  greeted  with  courtesy. 
Here  and  there  they  bought  milk  and  eggs  from  the  peasant  women; 
they  paid  royally,  talked  gently,  and  with  a  kind  of  mystic  inspiration. 
They  soon  won  the  respect  of  the  people.  When  they  were  asked  who 
they  were  and  what  they  wanted,  they  answered  with  allegories ;  they 
called  themselves  men  who  came  through  their  own  sufferings  to  redeem 
the  sufferings  of  their  fellow-men.  The  peasants  thought  they  were 
hermits  seeking  a  refuge  where  they  coula  freely  repent  of  their  sins, 
but  the  city  people  and  the  governmental  spheres  saw  in  them  secret 
revolutionary  agents. 

The  first  cause  of  the  dissatisfaction  of  the  people  was  the  peasant  ques- 
tion. The  Poles  desired  to  emancipate  the  peasants.  This  was  opposed 
by  Alexander  II,  on  the  ground  that  this  action  would  estabUsh  the 
popularity  of  the  nobles.  He  preferred  to  be  himself  the  originator  of 
the  idea,  which  he  brought  to  life  afterwards,  and  for  which  he  gained  the 
name  of  "White  Czar.'*  This  measure  of  absolutism  against  the  praise- 
worthy endeavors  of  the  Polish  nobility  was  the  first  spark  thrown  into 

78 


POLAND  79 

In  the  presence  of  the  tragic  news  from  Warsaw  it  was 
impossible  to  give  performances  in  Krynica.  We  returned 
to  Bochnia,  where  we  rested  awhile;  then,  taking  with 
us  our  baby  boy  and  his  nurse,  we  started  on  our  further 
tour.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  to  stop  a  day  in  Cracow 
on  account  of  scenery  and  luggage,  which  had  to  be  unloaded 
and  transferred  to  the  railroad  cars.  The  aspect  of  the  city 
was  unspeakably  sad. 

Already  in  February,  1861,  after  the  first  demonstration 
and  the  first  victims  in  Warsaw,  the  women  began  to  dress 
in  black,  but  now  mourning  was  recommended  by  ecclesi- 
astic authorities,  and  the  whole  country  —  all  the  three 
parts  of  Poland  remaining  under  three  different  govern- 
ments —  wore  black.  When  we  travelled  through  the 
country,  the  black  dresses  of  city  people  were  often  relieved 
by  bright  costumes  of  peasants,  but  in  Cracow  there  was 
not  one  person  dressed  in  colors.  Even  the  few  German 
women  and  oflScers'  wives  were  obliged  to  wear  black  dresses, 
lest  they  should  be  molested  by  street  urchins,  or  jeered  at 
and  remonstrated  with  by  the  people. 

The  interiors  of  the  churches  were  covered  with  mortuary 
paUs ;  groups  of  men  gathered  at  the  corners  of  the  streets 
or  on  the  ''Planty,"  talking  with  animation  but  in  low  tones 
of  voice.  All  the  faces  bore  the  same  serious  and  anxious 
expression.  In  the  evening,  black  crowds  knelt  down  in  the 
Rynek  before  the  picture  of  the  Virgin;  and  the  National 
Hymn,  in  accents  of  desperate  complaint,  was  rising  slowly 
up  to  heaven ! 

a  heap  of  combustibles.  The  whole  nation  caught  the  fever.  Many 
unpleasant  complications  followed.  Men,  women,  and  even  children, 
were  killed  in  the  streets  while  sin|:ing  religious  hymns,  or  following  fune- 
rals. The  government,  at  first  lenient  and  undecided  what  course  to  take 
against  praying  and  singing  crowds,  finished  by  a  tenible  repression. 
Cossacks  were  camping  in  the  streets  of  Warsaw,  outraging  the  inhabi- 
tants and  committing  all  sorts  of  cruelties.  The  Poles  threw  themselves 
recklesslv  into  the  Insurrection  which  broke  out  in  1863  with  all  the  fierce- 
ness of  a  long-suffering  and  injured  people. 


80  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Next  day  we  left  Cracow,  after  having  taken  a  large 
provision  of  books,  and  we  started  *'on  the  road, "  travelling 
from  one  town  to  another,  and  staying  in  each  at  least  two 
weeks,  and  often  longer.  In  Rzeszow  we  stayed  three 
months,  and  played  to  good  houses  all  the  time. 

Our  company  grew  rapidly.  In  April,  1862,  it  contained 
thirty-six  members,  and  our  equipment  and  staff  were 
considerable.  There  were  no  regular  salaries,  however, 
in  our  combination;  but  we  shared  the  income  according 
to  the  importance  and  abilities  of  the  actors.  Not  being 
in  the  cast  did  not  exclude  the  actor  from  his  right  to  a  share. 
This  system  had  one  good  point.  The  actors,  being  interested 
in  the  income,  tried  their  best  to  help  the  success.  It  hap- 
pened often  that  small  parts  were  played  by  those  who 
would  never  have  condescended  to  accept  them  under  an 
individual  management.  When  we  played  national  plays 
or  dramas  requiring  a  great  number  of  people,  all  actors 
who  were  not  in  the  cast  appeared  in  mute  parts  as  leaders 
of  the  supernumeraries.  The  result  of  this  loyal  spirit 
of  the  company  was  that  the  performances  were  smooth 
and  artistic,  and  soon  the  reputation  of  the  ''New  Sandec 
,  Combination"  reached  the  ears  of  Mr.  Nowakowski,  one  of 
the  managers  of  the  endowed  theatre  in  Lw6w  (Lemberg),^ 
who  came  to  Sambor  to  see  our  performance. 

We  played  "Sluby  Panienskie"  ("Maiden's  Vows"),  by 
Fredro,  our  Polish  Moli^re.  The  play,  written  in  verse,  is 
one  of  his  best  and  most  popular  comedies,  and  I  played 
the  subtle  and  spirited  part  of  Clara.  Mr.  Nowakowski  was 
pleased;  he  paid  many  compliments  to  the  company  and 
to  me,  and  said  he  would  surely  remember  me.  In  case  I 
should  get  tired  of  travelling  and  wish  an  engagement  in 
the  Lemberg  theatre,  the  doors  would  be  opened  for  me. 
His  gracious  words,  however,  did  not  result  at  once  in  any 
material  form,  and  we  went  on  our  further  travels. 

^  The  oapital  of  the  southeastern  part  of  Poland  called  Galitzia. 


POLAND  81 

I  became  a  favorite  of  our  provincial  public,  and  the 
evenings  on  which  I  did  not  appear  the  ''houses"  were 
smaller.  It  was  more  flattering  than  comfortable,  because 
the  company  wanted  to  have  my  name  continually  on  the 
bill,  no  matter  if  my  health  permitted  it  or  not;  and  so  it/ 
happened  that  my  daughter  Marylka  was  born  two  hours 
after  a  five-act  tragedy  in  which  I  played  the  principal  r61e, 
and  ten  days  afterwards  I  had  to  appear  again  on  the  stage. 
Another  time,  being  seriously  ill,  I  stayed  in  bed  two  weeks. 
One  of  our  ladies  came  and  told  me  that  the  public  would 
not  come  if  they  did  not  see  my  name  in  the  cast.  Could 
I  make  an  effort  and  appear  in  a  one-act  play,  just  to  have 
my  name  on  the  bills  ?  I  made  an  effort,  played  my  part, 
fainted  after  the  performance,  stayed  in  bed  two  days,  then 
played  again  and  went  to  bed. 

I  recovered,  however  with  the  help  of  youth  and  country  | 
au-,  and  in  April,  1862,  we  visited  Lemberg.     As  soon  as  we' 
came,  my  first  desire,  of  course,  was  to  go  to  the  theatre. 
I  was  very  anxious  to  see  how  the  great  city  actors  played. 

The  old  theatre,  built  by  Count  Skarbek,  and  endowed 
by  him,  is  a  very  large  building  occupying  a  square  block. 
The  stage,  scenery,  and  auditorium  seemed  to  me  very 
handsome  then.  The  play  was  "Marie  Tudor,"  by  Victor 
Hugo,  and  when  the  curtain  rose  I  was  all  eyes  and  ears. 
Madame  Ashberger,  the  leading  lady,  in  the  title  r61e,  made 
a  powerful  impression  on  me,  but  the  others  did  not  seem 
to  me  great.  They  were  commonplace,  though  correct,  but 
they  wore  very  handsome  costumes. 

After  the  performance  I  could  not  sleep  for  a  long  while. 
I  was  thinking  what  a  comfort  it  must  be  to  act  on  a  stage 
like  that,  to  have  appropriate  lights,  good  orchestra,  fine 
audience,  and  experienced,  solid  support,  and  I  was  de- 
termined to  get  there.  At  that  time  I  was  reading  a  little 
book  called  ''The  Hygiene  of  the  Soul,"  by  Feuchtersleben. 
In  this  book  the  author  tries  to  prove  that  everything  we 


f 

82  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

wish  can  be  obtained  if  we  only  wish  it  strongly.*  Obedient 
to  the  spirit  of  this  Utopian,  I  rose  from  the  bed,  and  stamp- 
ing the  floor,  I  exclaimed,  ''Well,  then,  I  must  and  I  will!" 
This  woke  up  my  nurse,  and  the  baby  began  to  cry,  so  I 
crept  back  to  bed,  dreaming  of  future  laurels. 

Feuchtersleben,  however,  did  not  help,  and  we  went 
on  our  further  provincial  tour. 

In  the  meantime  the  news  from  Warsaw  was  stirring  the 
whole  nation  and  filling  all  hearts  with  sad  apprehensions. 
Even  to  the  farthest  corners  of  the  country  the  echo  of 
Warsaw  outrages  came,  magnified  by  distance  and  casting 
a  gloom  over  all.  People,  however,  did  not  cease  to  go  to  the 
theatre,  but  even  there  they  were  reminded  of  the  ills  of 
the  country. 

We  performed  many  Polish  historical  plays  then,  and 
besides,  popular  pieces  were  placed  on  the  bill  every  week, 
—  plays  with  songs  and  dances,  in  which  I  also  took  part. 
Sad  songs  and  desperate  dances  indeed ;  at  every  patriotic 
word  or  suggestion  of  the  present  state  of  the  country,  the 
people  in  front  wiped  their  eyes,  and  the  actors  on  the 
stage  danced  with  tears  rolling  down  their  cheeks. 

In  1862  the  spring  was  beautiful,  the  business  very 
prosperous,  and,  in  consequence,  the  company  was  pleased, 
and  everybody  looked  bright  in  spite  of  the  sad  events  in 
Russian  Poland.  I  am  mistaken;  not  everybody  looked 
bright.  There  were  among  them  those  who  were  in  love, 
and  they  looked  very  unhappy,  and  there  were  many  of 
both  sexes  in  our  company  who  were  touched  with  that 
disease  which  spring  sends  to  the  world  with  the  first  waft 
of  her  breath.  I  watched  those  poor  victims.  Ah !  those 
killing,  desperate  looks,  the  sighs,  the  nonsense,  written  and 
spoken,  so  full  of  charm  or  ridicule. 

There  were  Romeos  ready  to  use  daggers  against  their 

^  It  seems  that  he  failed  in  his  theories,  for  a  few  years  later  he  oom- 
mitted  suicide. 


POLAND  83 

lives,  and  Juliets  on  the  point  of  being  buried  alive.  Some 
of  them  were  young  and  some  of  them  were  old,  but  they 
were  all  romantic  to  excess.  Our  juvenile  lady,  who  was 
desperately  in  love  with  a  young  student,  failing  to  obtain 
her  mother's  consent  to  the  marriage,  tried  to  poison  herself 
by  drinking  a  bottle  of  the  white  liquid  with  which  she 
painted  her  neck  and  hands  for  the  stage.  This  attempt 
on  her  youthful  life  resulted  in  seasickness  and  total  awaken- 
ing from  her  dream.  Another  young  lady  tried  to  jump  out 
of  the  window,  but  screamed  so  loud  before  the  fatal  leap 
that  her  sister  had  ample  time  to  rescue  her.  The  young 
men  were  not  so  rash  in  taking  such  decided  leaps  into  the 
next  world ;  their  usual  demonstrations  consisted  in  slight 
cuts  in  their  flesh,  using  their  own  blood  instead  of  ink  for 
writing  ardent  messages  to  their  sweethearts. 

During  the  season  1862,  from  February  till  September, 
besides  many  parts  in  Polish  dramas,  I  played  Amelia  in 
Schiller's  ''Die  Rauber,"  Lady  Teazle  in  Sheridan's  "School 
for  Scandal, "  and  also  the  leading  parts  in  French  melo- 
dramas: "Thirty  Years  of  a  Gambler's  Life,"  "The  Pearl 
of  Savoy,"  "Life  in  Dream,"  etc.  It  is  impossible  to 
remember  all  the  plays,  and  I  have  no  records  of  that  year. 

In  September,  1862,  we  arrived  in  Brody,  a  town  in  which 
the  Jewish  population  predominated.  And  we  did  not  ex- 
pect great  success  among  this  mixed  population.  Civilized 
Hebrews  as  a  rule  are  very  constant  theatre-goets  and 
patrons  of  art,  but  Brody,  for  the  most  part,  was  inhabited 
by  orthodox  Jews,  who  keep  strictly  to  their  religion,  and 
do  not  indulge  often  in  worldly  entertainnients.  The  Israel- 
ites of  Brody  were  for  the  most  part  very  moral  in  their 
home  life,  and  so  exclusive  that  they  did  not  like  their 
girls  to  be  seen  by  "goys,"  ^  but  kept  them  at  home  at  their 
housework  until  their  marriage.  To  these  grave  people, 
deeply  engaged  in  pursuits  of  fortune  or  religious  rites,  the 

^  Yiddish  for  Christians. 


84  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

theatre  was  no  attraction;  therefore  we  could  not  at  all 
count  upon  their  support.  However,  being  in  town,  we 
spread  our  camp.  Lodgings  were  found,  and  the  theatre 
rented. 

A  few  days  later,  on  a  bright  afternoon,  we  strolled  around 
the  town  in  company  with  our  juvenile  lady,  my  sister,  and 
some  young  actors.  As  the  day  was  very  fine,  some  one 
suggested  an  excursion  to  the  next  village.  On  the  road 
we  met  a  band  of  gypsies,  and  among  them  an  old  woman, 
who,  as  soon  as  we  approached  the  camp,  offered  to  tell  our 
fortunes.  My  companions  were  eager  to  let  the  old  lady 
have  her  way.  They  all  had  their  fortunes  read,  and  when 
my  turn  came  I  hesitated,  but  the  old  witch  looked  so 
intently  at  me  with  her  piercing  black  eyes  that  I  suc- 
cumbed to  her  fascination  and  extended  mv  hand  towards 
her.  After  a  moment  of  scrutiny  with  which  she  observed 
the  lines  of  my  hand,  she  raised  her  head,  and  looking  straight 
in  my  face,  she  said  in  Little  Russian :  — '' 

''After  to-morrow  you  will  be  in  Lw6w."  We  all  laughed, 
and  I  answered  that  it  was  impossible  because  we  had  just 
settled  down  for  two  or  three  weeks.  She  frowned  and 
repeated :  — 

''After  to-morrow  you  will  be  in  Lw6w,"  and  then  pro- 
ceeded with  her  mind-reading.  We  returned  to  town,  very 
much  amused  by  the  various  prophecies  and  nonsense  we 
had  heard,  but  very  soon  we  realized  that  the  gypsy  woman's 
words  were  true,  after  all. 

The  very  next  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  glare  of  flames 
and  an  alarm  bell.  I  looked  out.  The  roof  of  the  house 
opposite  to  ours  was  on  fire,  shooting  sparks  and  sending 
them  on  the  neighboring  houses.  I  had  enough  presence 
of  mind  to  pack  our  trunks  without  wakening  up  any  one 
for  fear  of  confusion,  and  when  this  was  done,  I  woke  my 
husband,  the  nurse,  and  the  babies,  whom  he  dressed  in  a 
hurry,  and,  having  succeeded  in  transporting  our  trunks  out 


POLAND  85 

of  the  reach  of  the  flames,  we  waited  until  daylight  in  the 
open.  The  whole  city  seemed  to  be  on  fire,  and  we  soon 
learned  that  the  theatre  was  burning,  too.  There  was 
nothing  to  do  but  to  leave  the  town  as  soon  as  possible. 
We  caught  the  morning  train  for  Lemberg,  and  the  gypsy's 
prophecy  was  fulfilled. 

In  September  of  1862  Mr.  Modjeski  saw  the  managers 
in  Lemberg,  who  consented  to  give  me  a  trial,  and  selected 
three  plays  in  which  I  had  to  appear.  Thus  by  mere  acci- 
dent my  dream  of  appearing  on  the  Lemberg  stage  was 
realized. 

The  first  of  the  plays  selected  for  my  d^but  was  a  drama 
called  ''Domy  Polskie"  ("Polish  Homes")  by  Majeranowski. 
My  part  was  strong,  very  dramatic  and  heroic,  but  also 
full  of  tenderness  and  love.  It  suited  me,  I  thought ;  and, 
strange  to  say,  I  was  not  at  all  afraid  of  playing  on  that  large 
stage.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  courage,  even  boldness,  in 
youth  and  inexperience.  Timidity  comes  with  responsi- 
bility, when  we  are  afraid  of  falling  down  from  the  pedestal 
on  which  the  audience  and  the  critics  have  placed  us. 

I  passed  happily  through  the  verdict  of  the  audience, 
in  spite  of  a  slight  incident  which  happened  at  the  close  of 
one  of  the  acts.  I  had  to  shoot  from  my  castle  at  the  attack- 
ing enemies,  and  was  supposed  to  kill  a  man.  We  had  four 
rehearsals,  and  I  thought  that  everything  went  smoothly. 
But  it  seems  that  the  supernumerary  man  who  had  to  fall 
at  my  shot  sent  a  substitute  for  the  next  rehearsal,  and 
the  substitute  sent  another  for  the  third  rehearsal,  and  this 
pne  being  awkward,  was  replaced  by  an  old  man  belonging 
to  the  theatre.  At  the  night  of  the  performance  the  first 
''super"  and  his  two  substitutes  came,  and  all  together, 
with  the  old  man  who  rehearsed  the  last,  appeared  in  the 
mob.  The  result  is  easily  foreseen  —  all  four  of  them  fell 
at  my  single  shot.  This,  of  course,  put  the  public  for  a 
while  in  a  hilarious  mood,  but  I  was  called  before  the 


86  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

curtain  repeatedly,  and  when  the  play  was  over,  I  had  no 
doubt  of  having  made  a  favorable  impression. 

Next  was  the  part  of  an  ingenue,  demure,  shy,  and  cling- 
ing, very  unlike  the  heroine  in  ''Domy  Polskie'';  and 
the  third  play  which  the  management  selected  was  "The 
Primrose  Farm, "  from  the  English,  a  sort  of  "Bluette," 
with  songs  and  dances.  I  had  to  dance  a  hornpipe !  A 
hornpipe !  I  had  never  seen,  not  even  heard  of  such  a 
dance !  I  was  in  despair,  and  while  I  was  trying  to  per- 
suade the  stage  manager  to  leave  out  the  dance.  Made- 
moiselle de  Fontlief,  who  was  crossing  the  stage,  stopped 
and  listened  to  my  desperate  appeal.  Then  she  came  right 
to  me  and  said  that  if  I  wanted,  she  would  teach  me  the  dance, 
as  she  had  played  the  part  in  ''Primrose  Farm"  before. 
She  took  me  to  her  dressing-room  and  showed  me  the  steps, 
then  invited  me  to  her  lodgings  and  rehearsed  with  me 
several  times,  playing  the  tune  of  the  dance  for  me  until 
I  was  quite  at  ease  in  it. 

Mademoiselle  de  Fontlief  was  leaving  the  Polish  stage 
at  that  time.  She  accepted  an  engagement  in  Vienna, 
where  she  made  a  great  success  at  Carl's  Theatre  in  modern 
French  plays.  She  left  the  stage  to  marry  Prince  Turn  und 
Taxis,  who  was  related  to  the  imperial  family.  She  left  one 
of  the  sweetest  impressions  on  my  soul.  I  admired  not 
only  her  talent  but  also  her  great  kind  heart. 


CHAPTER  XI 

After  my  trial  performances  I  was  almost  sure  of  an 
engagement,  especially  when  I  realized  how  useful  I  could 
be  to  the  management. 

The  favorite  of  the  audience  was  then  a  talented  and  very 
beautiful  young  woman,  Madame  X,  to  whom  the  parts 
of  ing6nues  belonged  exclusively.  She  was  greatly  admired 
by  the  public  in  the  part  of  ''La  Petite  Fadette/'  the  play 
which  Madame  Birch  Pfeifer  adapted  for  the  stage  from 
George  Sand's  novel.  This  beautiful  actress  was  rather 
capricious.  Her  spontaneous  success  went  to  her  head,  and 
she  enjoyed  imposing  her  sweet  will  upon  the  management. 
Several  times  she  sent  a  message  to  the  stage  manager  just 
before  the  performance,  declaring  that,  being  indisposed, 
she  would  not  play.  Sometimes  she  refused  parts  assigned 
to  her.  In  a  word,  she  caused  some  annoyance  to  both 
managers. 

When  I  came,  they  saw  in  me  a  sort  of  antidote  against 
her  whims,  and  proposed  to  engage  me,  on  the  absurd  salary 
of  forty  florins  a  month,  to  play  the  parts  she  rejected,  and 
also  to  be  her  understudy.  Mr.  Modjeski  advised  me  to 
accept  the  engagement.  I  played  all  sorts  of  parts.  I 
was  in  one  play  a  great  lady,  in  the  next  a  page,  a  Venetian 
courtesan  or  a  Hungarian  dancing  boy,  a  gypsy  or  a  fairy 
queen,  a  shy  inginue  or  a  rattling  singing  soubrette  in  an 
operetta!    I  also  understudied  all  Madame  X.'s  parts. 

All  went  well  and  smoothly  until  one  evening  I  came  into 
collision  with  the  capricious  favorite.  One  morning  the 
management  sent  for  me  to  rehearse  one  of  her  parts.     I 

87 


88  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

knew  the  lines  well,  and  the  stage  manager  was  satisfied, 
and  said:  — 

"  Madame  X.  is  ill,  and  will  not  be  able  to  play  to-night; 
as  you  know  her  part,  you  must  play  for  her."  Then  very 
kindly  he  went  over  the  business  with  me.  I  came  to  the 
theatre  early  that  night  and  dressed.  Just  as  I  was  leaving 
my  room,  I  saw  Madame  X.,  standing  in  the  wing  waiting 
for  her  entrance.  As  she  lived  in  the  theatre  building,  she 
came  all  dressed  and  made  up,  and  without  reporting  to  the 
stage  manager,  appeared  behind  the  scenes  just  in  time  for 
her  cue.  When  she  saw  me  she  looked  at  me  in  utter  dis- 
dain, and  exclaimed :  — 

''What  does  this  mean?  What  are  you  going  to  play 
to-night  ?  "  I  explained  that  the  management  called  for  me 
to  play  her  part  because  she  was  supposed  to  be  ill.  ''My 
dear,  they  were  joking,"  she  answered,  with  a  three-cornered 
smile,  and  shrugging  her  shoulders,  she  turned  her  back  on 
me.  That  was  not  the  only  humiliation  I  had  to  stand 
from  the  ladies  of  the  theatre.  Most  of  the  numerous  per- 
sonnel of  that  endowed  theatre  were  very  kind  and  charitable, 
especially  Madame  Ashberger,  the  leading  lady,  who  took 
me  under  her  protective  wing  from  the  start,  and  whenever 
a  difficult  or  unsuitable  part  fell  to  my  share,  she  asked  me 
to  come  to  her  room,  and  talked  to  me  about  it,  and  some- 
times even  read  the  lines  for  me.  She  also  g'ave  me  designs 
for  costumes  I  had  to  wear  in  my  various  parts.  This 
favor  she  conferred  on  me  created  more  enmity  then  ever 
in  the  ranks  of  my  adversaries.  One  evening  two  of  the 
three  antagonistic  goddesses  were  so  incensed  against  me 
that  they  would  not  allow  me  even  a  corner  in  the  large 
dfessing-room,  where  four  could  dress  comfortably,  and 
where  I  occupied  a  dressing-table  by  right.  These  spirited 
and  not  over-kind  priestesses  of  art  arranged  their  costumes 
and  baskets  in  such  a  way  that,  when  I  came  in,  not  the 
least  space  was  left  for  me  among  them.      Not  being  satis- 


POLAND  89 

fied  with  the  trick  they  played  on  the  provincial  strolling 
actress,  they  began  to  sting  me  with  their  silly  remarks, 
until  I  was  boiling  all  over  with  anger.  I  was  just  about 
to  lift  a  beautiful  spangled  gown  oflf  my  table  to  make 
room  coUte  que  coUte,  when  I  heard  a  clear  musical 
voice :  — 

''Madame  Modjeska,  come  to  my  room,  please."  It  was 
Madame  Ashberger's  voice,  who,  from  her  dressing-room,, 
separated  only  by  a  partition,  had  heard  every  word  of  the 
conflict.  I  was  so  touched  by  this  new  proof  of  that  dear 
woman's  kindness  that  I  could  not  speak.  I  only  kissed 
her  hand,  and  hot  tears  fell  from  my  eyes. 

''Do  not  cry,"  she  whispered  to  me.  "  It  would  give  them 
a  great  satisfaction  to  know  that  you  took  their  silly  talk 
to  heart.  Be  calm !  Think  of  your  part,  and  do  not  mind 
them." 

The  play  that  night  was  "Balladyna,"  by  Slowacki,  — 
entirely  new  to  me ;  for,  though  I  had  read  and  memorized 
many  of  his  poems,  I  was  not  well  acquainted  with  his 
plays.  My  part  was  that  of  an  imp,  a  sort  of  "Puck." 
Madame  Ashberger  gave  me  a  design  for  the  costume,  and  I 
executed  it  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  The  tunic  was  com- 
posed of  strips  of  shaded  brown  gauze  folded  thickly  over 
yellow  silk,  which  was  intended  to  produce  the  effect  of 
a  beetle.  My  dress  was  short  in  contrast  to  the  conven- 
tional long  skirts  actresses  then  wore  on  the  stage  even  in 
boy's  parts.  I  wore  brown  and  gold  wings  and  fleshings ! 
Horrors !  Each  of  the  goddesses  passing  before  me  said 
aloud :  — 

"Shame!  Outrageous!  She  is  naked!"  And  Madame 
Ashberger  only  laughed,  and  said  to  me:  — 

"Never  mind,  never  mind.  You  are 'all  right!"  But 
in  spite  of  her  kind,  encouraging  words,  I  experienced  one 
of  those  terrific  fits  of  stage  fright  which  makes  the  voice 
sound  hollow  and  paralyzes   the  gestures.     The  dreadful 


90  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

remarks  of  the  trio  resounded  in  my  ears,  they  burned, 
they  scorched,  until  I  became  conscious  of  my  scanty  dress, 
which,  when  I  tried  it  on  first,  seemed  to  me  rather  pretty 
and  characteristic.  I  crossed  my  arms  over  my  chest,  and 
did  not  unfold  •them  until  the  end  of  the  scene.  I  was 
awkward  and  felt  the  ground  slipping  from  under  my  feet, 
and  only  after  I  had  delivered  one  of  the  speeches  I  had 
particularly  studied,  and  received  recognition  from  the 
public,  did  I  begin  to  be  my  own  self  again.  The  language 
of  Slowacki  is  so  beautiful  that  it  was  a  delight  to  speak  the 
lines.  I  soon  forgot  all  the  bitterness  I  was  fed  on  that 
evening,  and  gave  myself  up  entirely  to  my  part  and 
the  fairyland  in  which  the  author  made  me  live  for  a 
while. 

After  a  few  weeks  of  my  uncertain  engagement  on  that 
miserable  salary,  I  received  a  more  serious  proposal  from 
the  management.  A  high-spirited  and  absurd  letter  I  wrote 
at  that  time  to  my  mother  gives  the  description  of  that 
incident :  — 

NovEMBEB  9th,  1862. 
"Dear  Mameczka  Gittle  mother), 

"Although  I  have  just  written  to  you,  the  event  which  happened 
here  lately  compels  me  to  write  again,  for  it  is  only  my  duty  to 
enlighten  you,  dear  mamma,  as  well  as  all  big  and  small  members 
of  the  family  upon  the  subject :  — 

"I  have  actually  signed  the  contract  with  the  management  of 
the  Lemberg  theatre  for  one  year  and  a  half.  The  following 
official  act  will  best  describe  thi  important  fact :  — 

"To  all  present,  etc. — 

"It  happened  in  Lemberg  on  the  6th  of  November,  1862d.  year, 
in  the  following  manner  :  — 

"At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  came  to  the  lodgings  of  the 
undersigned  a  certain  female  in  a  straw  hat,  a  red  shawl,  a  green 
dress  [without  hoops],  and  a  large  wicker  bag  on  her  arm.  Judg- 
ing by  her  face,  she  could  be  more  or  less  between  thirty  and  fifty 
years  old.  Her  Christian  name  is  Justyna,  and  after  her  husband 
she  is  called  Urbanska,  and  she  is  the  wife  of  the  property  man  of 
the  theatre. 


POLAND  91 

''She  entered  the  bedroom  without  knocking,  and  found  all 
the  family  in  bed,  and  Mr.  Modjeski  in  deep  negligee.  A  vivid 
scarlet  tint  spread  over  the  unbeautiful  face  and  the  beet- 
root nose  of  Pan!  Justina,  and  a  sigh  escaped  through  the 
wide-open  lips,  —  a  sigh  of  indignation  over  the  sad  realities 
of  the  world,  —  such  at  least  was  the  supposition  of  the  under- 
signed. After  that  deep  and  expressive  sigh,  she  deUvered  a 
statement  to  Mr.  Modjeski  and  the  undersigned,  in  which  she 
declared  that  the  gentlemen  managers  wished  to  speak  with 
them. 

"Mr.  Modjeski  and  the  imdersigned  dressed  immediately  and 
went  to  the  managers'  office,  asking  for  the  reason  of  the  summons. 
They  only  found  one  manager  in  the  office,  Mr.  S. ;  John  the 
Spendthrift,  so  called  for  his  great  economy,  was  not  there. 
Manager  N.  sent  for  him,  however,  and  when  he  arrived  we  were 
shown  into  the  rehearsal  hall.  He  took  Mr.  Modjeski  and  the 
undersigned  aside  and  declared  in  soft  tones  of  voice  that,  prompted 
by  the  noble  feelings  of  a  thoughtful  father,  he  desired  to  raise  the 
salary  of  the  undersigned  and  wished  to  sign  a  contract  with  her. 
Mr.  Modjeski  asked  what  salary  he  would  be  willing  to  ofifer  me, 
and  John  the  Spendthrift  answered: — 

"  *I  raise  her  salary  to  fifty-five  florins  a  month.'  To  which  both 
Mr.  Modjeski  and  the  undersigned  agreed. 

"What  was  the  reason  of  this  wastefulness,  unheard  of  in  Lem- 
berg  theatre  history,  no  one  knows,  but  the  current  of  whispers 
brought  to  our  ears  the  intimation  that  Majeranowska,  who  was 
until  now  a  member  of  the  Lemberg  Stock  Company,  had  obtained 
a  more  lucrative  engagement  in  Warsaw,  and  will  not  likely  return. 
The  management  was  then  in  need  of  an  operetta  singer,  and, 
having  no  one  at  hand,  they  have  destined  the  undersigned  to  that 
position. 

"How  it  happened,  no  matter;  but  it  happened.  Besides 
the  raising  of  the  salary,  the  contract  allows  traveUing  expenses 
for  the  undersigned  and  family,  as  well  as  hotel  expenses,  should 
the  company  go  on  the  road. 

"The  hearing  of  which  arrangements  is  granted  to  each  person 
concerned  in  the  matter,  as  well  as  to  all  present  and  absent  mem- 
bers of  the  family. 

"This  act  has  been  composed  and  written  in  the  presence  of  two 
trustworthy  witnesses,  who,  by  their  own  signatures,  affirm  its 
authority.  The  names  of  the  witnesses  :  Rudolphe  S.  Modjeski, 
age  twenty-one  months,  citizen  of  Lemberg,  bom  in  Cracow; 


92  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Marie  S.  Modjeska/  thirty  weeks  old,  spinster,  bom  in  Sambor, 
inhabitant  of  Lemberg. 

''Lembero,  November  9th,  1862d.  year. 

''  XRUDOLPHE  S.  M^BJISKI 

as  witmesf. 
"  X  Marie  S.  Modjeska 

as  witness. 
''  (The  witnesses,  not  knowing  how  to  write,  put  down  a  sigti  of 
the  cross.) 

"From  the  official  act  you  may,  dear  little  mother,  judge  how 
our  affairs  stand." 


I  suppress  the  end  of  the  letter,  as  it  only  contained  some 
very  intimate  details  about  the  babies  and  people  which 
could  not  possibly  be  of  any  interest  to  the  readers. 

^  The  last  vowel  of  the  name  in  Polish  changes  aocording  to  the  sex, 
"i"  for  men,  !*a"  for  women. 


CHAPTER  XII 

In  the  second  part  of  January,  1863,  the  Insurrection 
broke  out.  The  Poles,  encouraged  by  a  few  successful  en- 
counters with  the  Russians,  threw  themselves  blindly  into 
the  whirl  of  battle.  Their  courage,  their  intense  love  of 
the  country,  their  devotion  to  the  cause,  and  their 
undaunted  spirit  aroused  the  admiration  of  our  neigh- 
bors. 

For  a  long  time  they  were  under  the  delusion  that  the 
emperor  of  France,  Napoleon  III,  would  help  them,  but 
that  hope,  like  so  many  others,  was  vain. 

The  poor  Poles  were  left  alone,  with  no  sympathy  save 
in  words,  and  no  help  but  what  they  received  secretly  in 
ammunition,  arms,  and  money  from  different  parts  of  the 
world.  These  means  were  soon  exhausted,  and  nothing 
was  left  but  their  own  courage  to  depend  upon.  They 
fought  desperately.  Thousands  of  young  men  —  even  boys 
under  sixteen  —  enlisted  under  the  national  flag.  Every 
day  brought  tears  and  mourning  into  the  Polish 
homes. 

The  greatest  misfortune  of  this  uprising  was  that  not  all 
our  peasants  were  in  sympathy  with  those  who  fought  for 
independence.  If  the  whole  nation  could  have  risen  like 
one  man,  then  there  might  have  been  some  hope  for  the 
nation;  but  this  division  was  fatal,  and  the  Insurrection 
was  rapidly  progressing  to  its  hopeless  end. 

Oh,  the  painful  recollections  of  those  horrible  times! 
From  the  April  of  1861  (when  the  first  five  men  were  sacri- 
ficed), when  women  and  children  were  killed  in  the  streets 
for  singing  hymns,  the  whole  people,  even  those  who  had 

93 


94  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

but  a  few  drops  of  Polish  blood  in  their  veins,  were  pene- 
trated with  a  most  acute  feeling  of  great  wrongs  and  pity 
for  the  victims.  The  whole  nation  was  palpitating  with 
pain  and  desire  for  revenge,  the  atmosphere  was  full  of 
something  coml^ustible,  something  which  made  aU  the 
nerves  vibrate  at  the  slightest  news  from  the  battle- 
field. 

In  spite  of  the  tension  of  pain,  this  pit  of  horror  and 
despair  in  which  the  poor  country  was  precipitated,  the 
theatres  were  kept  open,  and  it  was  the  right  thing  to 
do,  for  the  unfortunate  young  men  who  were  going 
to  fight  found  there  at  least  a  few  moments'  pleasure 
before  they  went  to  sacrifice  their  young  lives  for  the 
country. 

One  never-forgotten  performance  comes  to  my  mind. 
The  youth  of  Lemberg  had  just  finished  their  enlisting. 
The  newly  enlisted  regiment  was  about  to  start.  On  the 
eve  of  departure  the  theatre  was  crowded.  All  the  young 
insurgents  were  there.  The  play  was  a  Polish  melodrama, 
with  national  costumes  and  songs.  In  the  last  act  almost 
every  actor  in  the  play  had  to  sing  a  ''couplet"  suited  to 
the  occasion,  the  words  of  which  were  pencilled  in  a  hurry 
in  the  dressing-rooms  during  the  play.  The  manager  read 
the  compositions,  approving  or  correcting  them.  They 
were  words  of  farewell  and  good  wishes,  or  appeals  full  of 
patriotic  meaning,  spurring  the  young  men  to  brave  deeds. 
The  youthful  volunteers  cheered  at  every  verse ;  the  actors 
sung,  choking  with  tears,  and  there  was  such  a  bond  of  sym- 
pathy between  the  audience  and  the  stage  that  were  it 
not  for  the  footlights  they  would  have  all  joined  in  one 
embrace. 

There  was  something  grand,  inspiring,  and  heartrending 
in  the  aspect  of  all  these  young,  eager  faces,  many  of  them 
mere  boys,  with  no  trace  of  hair  on  their  upper  lips  or 
chins,  mad  enthusiasts  who  threw  themselves  blindly  into 


POLAND  95 

the  whirl  of  battle,  never  doubting  that  the  deliverance  de- 
pended on  their  courage  alone,  and  that  the  dawn  of  liberty- 
was  near  at  hand.  No  one  could  look  at  them  with  dry 
eyes,  and  we  all  cried.  When  the  curtain  fell,  the  company 
was  called  again  and  again,  and  new  cheers  and  farewells 
were  exchanged,  until  the  exhausted  actors  refused  to  appear, 
and  the  audience  was  reduced  to  a  few  enthusiasts,  who 
would  not  leave  the  theatre  until  the  lights  were  put 
out. 

I  did  not  stay  in  Lemberg  until  the  expiration  of  my 
contract.  The  salary  was  really  too  small  to  live  and  dress 
upon,  and  my  enthusiasm  received*  many  shocks  from  the 
constant  conflict  with  the  'Hrio"  and  also  from  the  '' fa- 
therly"  managers,  who  put  all  the  parts  no  one  wanted  to  my 
care.  But,  poor  souls,  they  were  forced  to  do  so.  When  on 
one  particular  occasion  they  gave  me  a  really  good  part  of  a 
pathetic,  patriotic  boy  of  fourteen,  because  that  boy  had 
to  sing,  and  none  of  the  trio  had  any  voice,  and  when  Mr. 
Lozinski,  the  prominent  critic,  declared  that  I  possessed 
an  unmistakable  talent,  the  trio  made  so  much  ado,  accus- 
ing the  dear  old  managers  of  patronizing  a  ''pretty  face," 
that  they  never  even  tried  to  repeat  the  experience,  and  I 
continued  playing  pages,  gypsies,  servant-girls,  peasant 
women,  mysterious  countesses  in  French  melodramas,  etc. 
I  sang  and  danced,  laughed  and  cried,  and  always  tried  to 
play  even  the  smallest  part  to  the  satisfaction  of  my  best 
friend,  Madame  Ashberger,  who  allowed  me  to  recite  in  her 
presence,  and  many  a  time  corrected  me  during  rehearsals. 
I  had  worked  hard  and  always  with  the  hope  of  rising  some 
day,  and  though  I  saw  no  chance  of  the  realization  of  my 
hopes  in  the  near  future,  still  I  plodded  on  my  way  pa- 
tiently. It  was  discouraging,  yet  that  year's  experience 
did  me  a  great  deal  of  good ;  and  though  I  did  not  seem  to 
advance  in  my  art,  yet  I  was  unconsciously  working  towards 
development,  acquiring  versatility  and  originality,  for  I  had 


96  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  use  a  good  deal  of  observation  to  play  so  many  various 
characters. 

But  playing  two  or  three  new  parts  every  week,  rehears- 
ing, and  making  my  own  costumes  at  night,  nearly  exhausted 
me.  I  looked  thin  and  pale,  and  my  health  was  visibly 
failing.  Even  Madame  Ashberger  ceased  to  encourage  me, 
and  advised  me  to  take  the  engagement  offered  me  by  one 
of  the  provincial  managers,  who  promised  me  leading  parts 
and  a  good  salary. 


L 


CHAPTER   XIII 

After  a  few  weeks  of  a  "star"  engagement  in  small 
towns  of  Galitzia,  we  settled  down  in  Czerniowce,  where 
Mr.  Modjeski  rented   the  city  theatre  jind  established  a 
stock  company.    Soon  after- 
wards   all    my    three   half- 
brothers    Benda  —  Joseph, 
Felix,  and  Simon  —  joined 
us ;  and  also  a  very  talented 
actor,    Ortynski.     We    also 

1  had  in  our  company  Win- 

I  centy  Rapaeki  (who  became 

'  famous  a  few  years   later) 

and     his     wife     Josephine 

f  ,  Hofmann.      My  sister  and 

her  husband,  Tomaazewiez, 
were  also  in  our  company. 
Being  over  twenty  in  num- 
ber, we  played  a  very  im- 
posing repertoire :  comedies, 

j^  classic  ant!   modern,  trage- 

dies and  dramas,  melo- 
dramas   and    operettas,    of 

'  which    my  brother   Simon,  Wincenti  r*packi. 

who  had  just  returned  from 
the  Vienn^  conservatory,  was  the  leader. 

r-'  In  order  to  satisfy  the  authorities,  Mr,  Modjeski  had  to 

engage  a  German  company  to  alternate  with  the  Polish 

I  performances.     The  German  actors  and  actresses  used  to 


97 


98  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

come  to  our  plays,  and  I  received  great  encouragement 
from  them.  They  advised  me  to  study  for  the  German 
stage,  and  persuaded  Mr.  Modjeski  that  the  field  of  the 
Polish  stage  was  too  small  for  me,  that  I  needed  a  larger 
space  in  order  to  "spread  out  my  wings"  (the  phrase  is 
theirs,  not  mine). 

My  husband  looked  to  it  at  once.  He  brought  to  our 
house  Herr  Neugebauer,  the  high  school  professor  of 
German  literature,  who  undertook  to  instruct  me  in  his 
native  tongue.  Though  I  was  not  a  novice  in  the  language, 
yet  I  was  deficient  in  pronunciation,  emphasis,  and  enun- 
ciation. 

After  a  few  months  of  study,  however,  I  was  ready  to 
appear  with  the  German  company  in  a  one-act  play  called 
''On  Water  and  Bread"  (Bei  Wasser  und  Brod).  It  was 
a  very  modest  beginning,  but  Mr.  Modjeski  did  not  want 
me  to  appear  ia  any  of  the  responsible  parts  in  a  language 
with  which  I  was  not  thoroughly  acquainted  as  yet.  The 
rehearsals  were  called,  and  a  bill  in  large  type  announcing 
my  first  appearance  on  the  German  stage  was  placed  at  the 
theatre  entrance. 

It  was  only  then  —  only  when  I  saw  that  unfortunate^ 
announcement  —  that  I  realized  what  I  was  doing,,  and  a 
sense  of  shame  filled  me  at  the  meanness  of  my  deserting 
the  Polish  stage  just  at  the  tim_e  when  the  poor  tountry  was 
fighting  desperately  for  independence,  with  but  a  slight 
hope  of  winning  the  cause.  My  spirits  fell  to  the  lowest 
degree  of  temperature  at  the  last  rehearsal,  and  when,  on 
leaving  the  theatre,  I  perceived  several  students  before  my 
bill  frowning  as  they  read  aloud  my  name  in  German  type, 
I  ran  home  with  my  head  down,  not  daring  to  lift  my  eyes 
for  fear  of  meeting  glances  of  reproach  or  contempt. 

I  ate  my  midday  meal  in  silence  and  without  the  slightest 
appetite.  Mr.  Modjeski  was  chatting  merrily,  asked  me 
if  I    had    my   costume   ready,   and    how   it   looked,    etc. 


POLAND  99 

'^And  mind,  read  your  part  again  in  the  afternoon,"  he 
added,  "or  else  you  may  get  confused."  I  wanted  to 
scream  at  the  top  of  my  voice,  *'I  shall  never  play  in 
German!"  But  I  dared  not  disappoint  him,  and  besides, 
r  knew  well  that  he  would  treat  this  outburst  as  a  caprice 
not  worthy  of  a  sensible  person.  I  stifled  my  feelings,  and 
went  to  the  garden  with  my  part.  I  sat  there  motionless, 
brooding  over  my  misery,  and  forming  all  sorts  of  arguments 
to  justify  my  appearance  on  the  German  stage,  or  to  get 
out  of  it  entirely,  when,  suddenly,  like  an  answer  called 
forth  by  some  magic  power,  the  sound  of  a  passing  military 
band  struck  my  ears,  my  breast,  my  whole  being,  with  un- 
speakable exultation  and  pain.*  I  listened  for  a  while, 
then,  flinging  my  part  away,  I  fell  on  my  knees,  and  burying 
my  face  in  my  hands,  I  sobbed  convulsively,  repeating :  — 

''No,  no  I  I  will  never  be  a  renegade !  Never !  Never !" 
Mr.  Modjeski  found  me  in  that  state,  and  lifting  me  up,  took 
me  to  my  room.  I  do  not  remember  what  happened  next, 
but  one  detail  is  still  in  my  mind :  I  shook  with  fever,  my 
nails  were  blue,  and.  my  mother  was  sitting  at  the  foot  of 
my  bed.  My  dear,  sweet  mother,  who  had  travelled  so  many 
miles  to  come  and  live  with  us,  poured  many  comforting 
words  into  my  ears,  words  which  acted  as  balm  to  my  over- 
strung nerves,  shothing  the  pain  and  restoring  me  to  my 
own  self  again.  How  it  happened  I  do  not  know.  There 
was  no  more  question  of  my  going  on  the  German  stage.  I 
continued  to  play  in  Polish. 

We  produced  ''Angelo  Malipieri,"  by  Victor  Hugo. 
This  was  my  first  attempt  at  tragedy.  I  also  played  Louise 
in  ''Kabale  und  Liebe,"  in  ''Wilhelm  Tell,"  in  all  the 
French  melodramas,  and  in  a  great  many  patriotic  Polish 
plays.     Offenbacl^  was  also  in  our  repertoire,  and  I  played 

^  The  Austrian  under  this  reign  of  the  Emperor  Franz  Joseph  was 
liberal,  and  the  national  music  was  not  excluded  from  the  military  band's 
program. 


100  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

in  ''Fortunio/'  ''Enchanted  Violin,"  ''Wedding  by  Lan- 
terns/' and  in  several  other  musical  plays,  besides  the 
Polish  comic  operas;  when,  on  one  occasion,  during  the 
finale,  I  had  to  keep  the  high  C  during  four  full  bars,  my 
uncultivated  voice  broke,  and  I  could  sing  no  more.  I 
ought  not  to  have  sung  high  soprano  parts,  for  my  voice 
was  a  decided  mezzo,  but  we  had  no  one  else  to  sing  those 
high  notes  except  Madame  Hofmann  Rapacka,  and  she 
being  ill  at  the  time,  I  had  to  take  her  place.  The  loss  of 
my  voice  was  not  very  important,  for  I  never  liked  my 
singing  parts.  Light  operas  did  not  appeal  to  me.  I  was 
anxious  to  make  a  repertoire  of  serious  dramas  and  comedies. 

Neither  did  I  like  my  parts  in  French  melodramas ;  but  I 
had  to  play  them,  as  in  those  days  nothing  was  so  highly 
appreciated  and  enjoyed  by  the  audience  as  a  good  melo- 
drama. I  recollect  an  amusing  incident  connected  with 
one  of  these  popular  plays :  — 

We  had  in  our  company  a  young,  very  talented  actor,  who 
was  an  ardent  follower  of  the  French  melodrama.  He  had 
tendencies  for  writing,  and  in  one  of  his  happy,  or  unhappy, 
moods  he  wrote  a  play  based  on  the  French  novel,  "Le 
Bossu"  (The  Hunchback).  The  hero's  object  in  the  play 
was  to  appear  as  a  hunchback  in  the  first  three  acts,  by  way 
of  disguising  his  real  personality;  then,  at  the  supreme 
moment,  to  straighten  himself  up  to  the  full  height  of  six 
feet,  in  order  to  confound  the  villains  and  destroy  their 
wicked  plots. 

This  young  actor  thought  that  the  mere  stooping  and 
bending  of  his  body  was  not  sufficient  to  represent  the 
appearance  of  a  man  with  a  hump  on  his  back,  and  in  order 
to  give  his  figure  a  realistic  touch  (every  one  had  to  be 
realistic  at  that  time)  he  contrived  a  peculiar  scheme :  he 
bought  a  bladder  which  he  filled  with  air,  and  placed  it  on 
his  right  shoulder  under  the  coat.  Previous  to  the  perform- 
ance he  nciade  the  stage  carpenter  place  a  strong  wooden 


•*,«.«, 


POLAND  101 

board  braced  by  iron  clasps  behind  the  painted  pillar,  so 
that  he  could  lean  against  it.  He  imagined  that  by  pressing 
the  right  shoulder  against  the  pillar  the  air  would  escape 
from  the  bladder,  and  by  this  action  he  would  complete  a 
marvellous  change  from  a  hunchback  to  the  straight,  tall, 
h  ndsome  fellow  he  was  normally. 

He  forgot,  however,  one  of  the  eternal  laws  of  the  stage : 
''Before  you  let  the  audience  see  you,  you  must  see  your- 
self," which  means  the  rehearsing  of  every  point  of  the  part. 
When  the  culminating  point  of  the  play  arrived,  and  the 
\dllain  was  about  to  obtain  the  victory,  our  hero  pressed 
his  shoulder  against  the  prepared  pillar,  but  instead  of 
flattening  the  hump  he  bounced  back  with  a  jerk  which 
made  him  sway  from  one  side  to  the  other.  Determined 
to  execute  his  purpose,  he  again  braced  himself  with  all 
his  strength  against  the  supporting  board,  but  with  no 
result. 

I  played  that  night  the  unhappy  girl  who  wore  a  wedding 
gown,  being  about  to  marry  a  hated  man.  I  noticed  our 
hero's  struggle  with  the  pillar,  not  understanding,  however, 
the  object  of  his  exertions,  when  suddenly  I  saw  him  tak- 
ing out  of  his  pocket  a  penknife  which,  he  quickly  opened. 
The  audience  could  not  see  this  action  because  he  was 
shielded  by  the  mob  of  supers,  and  only  his  head  and 
shoulders  were  visible.  I  became  most  interested  in  his 
movements.  I  knew  he  was  in  terrible  trouble  about  some- 
thing, but  could  not  for  the  world  understand  what  it  was 
all  about,  when  he  turned  toward  me  with  the  expression 
of  a  hunted  animal,  and  handing  me  the  knife,  whispered 
desperately :  — 

''Please  cut  my  bladder!" 

"What?"  I  exclaimed  in  surprise. 

"Cut  the  bladder  on  my  shoulder,"  he  added,  impatiently, 
yet  still  in  a  whisper.  Then  the  whole  situation  dawned 
on  me,  and  with  the  willingness  common  among  actors  of 


102  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

helping  the  fellow-artist  out  of  his  trouble,  I  approached 
him,  took  the  knife,  and  concealing  my  action  as  much  as  I 
could,  I  plunged  the  small  weapon  even  to  the  hilt.  But 
oh !  what  happened  next  was  simply  dreadful !  When  I 
drew  out  the  knife,  the  air  escaped  from  the  artificial  hump 
with  a  gentle  and  prolonged  whistle ! 

This  unexpected  sound  put  me  almost  into  a  convulsion 
of  laughter.  The  audience  did  not  notice  anything,  but  I 
wanted  to  shriek  when  I  saw  my  hero's  expression  and  his 
set  teeth,  with  a  suppressed  curse  behind  them.  Hearing 
my  cue,  I  drew  the  veil  over  my  face  and  advanced  to  the 
footlights,  with  eyes  cast  down  and  a  handkerchief  pressed 
to  my  lips.  Fearing  to  speak  lest  I  should  choke  with 
laughter,  I  pretended  to  faint,  and  fell  flat  on  the  floor,  shak- 
ing with  unwonted  merriment. 

The  curtain  fell.  The  hero  was  applauded.  My  faint- 
ing was  taken  for  granted  as  belonging  to  the  play,  and  one 
critic  even  said  that  I  had  quite  an  original  fall.  You  may 
imagine  how  amused  I  was  when  I  read  the  following  lines : — 

"...  she  turned  her  back  to  the  audience,  but  every  one 
could  see  the  great  suffering  shaking  the  whole  frame  of  her 
slender  body;  then,  covering  her  face  with  her  veil,  she  fell  flat  to 
the  ground,  still  quivering  with  emotion." 


CHAPTER  XIV 

In  1863  Mr.  Modjeski  took  a  vacation,  and  we  both  went 
to  Vienna,  in  order  to  see  a  little  of  the  world,  and  mostly 
for  the  sake  of  my  instruction.  I  was  very  anxious  to  see 
the  best  actors  of  the  great  city,  and  my  delight  was  very 
great  indeed  when  Mr.  Modjeski  bought  two  tickets  for  the 
Burg  Theatre. 

The  play  was  ''Don  Carlos.''  I  still  remember  Sonnen- 
thal's  impressive  figure,  even  the  voice  in  which  he  uttered 
the  memorable  words  of  Marquis  Posa:  "Gebt  uns  Ge- 
danken  Freiheit,  Konig."^  I  was  delighted  with  Eboli's 
scene  of  coquetry,  and  I  shall  never  forget  Levinsky's  King 
Philip.  The  whole  performance  struck  me  as  being  per- 
fect, even  to  the  smallest  parts.  It  was  a  masterpiece  of 
stage  management,  and  though  in  some  scenes  I  should 
have  liked  more  warmth,  more  nature,  more  humanity,  yet 
this  first  great  performance  I  ever  saw  made  a  powerful 
impression  on  me,  and  kept  me  awake  until  the  small  hours 
in  the  morning. 

The  second  play  I  saw  was  "Schoene  Helene"  (La  Belle 
H61^ne),  by  Meilhac  and  Hal6vy,  with  Offenbach's  music, 
where  Miss  Geistinger  played  the  title  r61e.  What  a  con- 
trast to  ''Don  Carlos"  !  I  was  not  quite  pleased.  I  was 
too  young  then,  perhaps,  to  appreciate  the  so-called  piquancy 
of  the  scene  between  Paris  and  Helen,  and  although  I  ad- 
mired highly  Miss  Geistinger's  acting,  yet  I  was  almost 
ashamed  to  look  at  the  stage,  when  she  took  ofif  her  peplum, 
and  Paris,  with  quivering  lips,  waited  for  her  kiss.  I  felt 
humiliated   in  my  high  aspirations  in  art,  and   displeased 

*  "  Give  us  liberty  of  thought,  O  King  I " 

103 


104  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

with  this  exposition  of  what  I  thought  ought  to  be  hidden 
from  human  eyes.  It  was,  however,  not  Miss  Geistinger's 
fault  that  the  scene  was  made  objectionable.  She  was 
artistic  all  through.  The  wretched  suggestiveness  was  all 
done  by  Paris.  When  I  saw  ''Don  Carlos"  I  felt  now  and 
then  the  lack  of  naturalness  in  the  performance,  yet  I 
loved  it  all.  Here  I  really  deplored  the  brutal  realism. 
This  was  my  first  lesson  in  moderation.  I  admired  already 
the  true  realism,  and  always  tried  to  render  my  parts  as 
true  to  nature  as  possible ;  but  the  performance  of  "La  belle 
H^16ne ''  taught  me  that  I  must  not  go  too  far  in  that 
direction,  or  I  might  step  out  of  the  circle  of  art  and, 
instead  of  painting  pictures  on  the  stage,  produce  mere 
photographs. 

We  went  to  the  theatre  almost  every  evening,  and  I  had 
the  opportunity  of  seeing  several  good  actors  and  actresses : 
among  them  Mademoiselle  de  Fontlief,  my  friend  from 
Lemberg,  in  Dumas's  ''La  Dame  aux  Camillas."  She  was 
dainty,  simple,  natural,  and  very  impressive,  and  satisfied 
all  my  requirements  in  modern  drama.  Her  aristocratic 
figure  and  face,  as  well  as  her  intelligence,  strongly  ap- 
pealed to  me. 

I  called  on  her  the  next  afternoon.  We  fell  into  each 
other's  arms.  I  sincerely  congratulated  her  on  her  re- 
markable success.  She  looked  beautiful  in  her  soft,  gauzy 
dress,  surrounded  with  objects  of  art,  and  a  superb  dog 
nestling  at  her  feet.  The  only  discord  in  this  artistic  room 
was  a  parrot,  who  insisted  on  sharing  the  conversation,  and 
jarred  on  my  nerves  by  its  piercing  shrieks.  I  had  not  been 
fifteen  minutes  with  Mademoiselle  de  Fontlief  when  her  hand- 
some mother  came  in,  and  a  few  minutes  later  the  prince  of 
Thurm  und  Taxis  was  announced,  a  handsome  and  very 
young  man  with  melting  eyes  —  at  least  they  seemed  to  melt 
when  they  looked  at  her.     He  and  "Marguerite  Gauthier"  * 

^  The  name  of  the  heroine  in  Dumas's  play. 


POLAND  105 

were  engaged  at  that  time,  and  I  saw  there  before  me  the 
man  of  imperial  family  who  was  shortly  afterwards  to 
become  the  husband  of  the  fascinating  actress. 

To  my  great  regret  I  missed  seeing  the  greatest  German 
actress  of  the  time,  Frau  Rettich.  Shortly  after  the  an- 
nouncement of  her  appearance  at  the  Burg  Theatre  she 
fell  ill,  and  the  world  never  saw  her  act  again.  Levinsky 
was  the  great  man,  and  I  saw  him  in  several  parts,  and  took 
from  him  a  lesson  in  self-control  and  in  working  out  details ; 
but  I  imagined  that  a  woman  like  Frau  Rettich  would  have 
had  a  great  influence  over  my  artistic  future. 

We  lost  no  time  in  seeing  what  was  worth  looking  at  in 
Vienna,  and  we  went  several  times  to  the  Luxembourg  gal- 
leries, and  stayed  hours  admiring  the  pictures.  All  this 
was  new  to  me.  Except  the  statues,  carvings,  and  pictures 
of  Cracow  churches,  I  had  seen  nothing  until  then.  The 
works  of  art  accumulated  through  ages,  combined  with 
what  was  best  in  modern  work,  made  me  mad  with  en- 
thusiastic worship  of  art.  I  felt  small  and  humble  in  the 
presence  of  the  masterpieces  of  all  ages  and  all  nations,  and 
yet,  underneath  this  humility,  I  felt  a  glow  of  superhuman 
strength,  and  a  hope  that  one  day  I  might  achieve  fame, 
—  in  a  different  and  smaller  way,  of  course,  —  for  our 
art  was  scarcely  considered  an  art  at  all,  but  I  formed  then 
a  strong  determination  never  to  rest  until  I  had  climbed 
to  the  very  top  of  ray  profession.  Again  the  desire  of  play- 
ing in  another  language  than  my  own  began  to  make  its 
way  into  my  mind. 

I  thought  of  French  or  English  —  and  Shakespeare  — 
again;  but  German  was  the  only  tongue  I  spoke  passably 
well,  and  my  people  hated  Germans  with  the  hatred  of  a 
vanquished  nation,  and  I  could  not  think  of  going  on  the 
German  stage.  However,  one  attempt  more  was  made  by 
my  husband  to  change  my  resolve.  He  formed  some  friend- 
ships among  actors  and  managers  of  the  city,  and  one  day 


106  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

he  told  me  that  he  had  spoken  to  one  of  his  friends,  an  influ- 
ential manager,  and  he  wished  me  to  recite  before  him  some 
scenes  from  '*Mary  Stuart"  or  ''Egmont."  I  consented, 
more  in  hope  of  hearing  his  opinion  about  my  ability  than 
of  getting  the  engagement  I  secretly  dreaded. 

I  do  not  remember  being  very  nervous  when  I  entered 
the  manager's  office ;  and  besides,  being  encouraged  by  his 
compliments  as  to  my  external  value  for  the  stage,  I  began 
to  recite  the  lines  of  ''Mary  Stuart''  (Eulende  Wolken 
Sagler  der  Lufte)  with  all  the  feeling  and  pathos  I  was 
capable  of.  I  had  studied  the  language  so  long,  with  one 
of  the  best  teachers,  the  dear  Professor  Neugebauer,  that 
I  finished  by  loving  the  sound  of  the  words,  the  sonority  and 
strength  of  expression,  and  I  delivered  the  sentences  with 
delight,  and  the  precise  pronunciation  of  an  ardent  student. 

The  manager  listened  very  attentively  and  patiently, 
I  thought,  and  when  I  had  finished  he  said  he  was  pleased ; 
but  he  also  said  that  my  voice,  though  musical  in  sound,  was 
neither  strong  nor  deep  enough  for  tragedy.  He  advised 
me  to  play  parts  like  Gretchen  in  ''Faust,"  or  Louise  in 
"Kabale  und  Liebe,"  also  the  girlish  parts  in  comedy, 
until  I  grew  matured  enough  for  the  heavy  dramatic  parts. 
I  was  very  thankful  for  this  advice,  and  I  shook  hands  with 
him,  saying  good-by,  but  he  stopped  me  at  the  door  and 
said : — 

"I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  you  must  study  German  at 
least  one  year  more  before  you  go  on  our  stage,  and  it, would 
be  advisable  to  stay  in  Vienna  and  go  to  work  immediately." 
I  thanked  him  again,  and  we  left  the  office.  I  knew  very 
well  that  we  could  not  afford  to'give  up  the  stock  company 
in  Czerniowce  and  stay  in  a  large  city  without  any  income, 
but  I  wanted  to  make  sure,  and  asked  my  husband  if  we 
could  do  so. 

"Of  course  not;  it  is  quite  impossible,"  was  his  short 
answer;    and  I  breathed  again. 


POLAND  107 

I  formed  a  project  of  studying  for  the  French  stage  as 
soon  as  I  could    find  a   good    French   teacher,  and   then 
again  a  voice  like  a   distant   echo    whispered  in  my   ear  \ 
''Shakespeare/'  and  a  vision  of  myself  on  the  English  stage  • 
rose  before  me.. 

From  Vienna  we  went  to  Pesth,  where  we  found  the  wlfole 
city  in  a  great  excitement  on  account  of  the  races,  and  a 
visit  of  the  Emperor  Franz  Joseph,  then  in  the  prime  of 
youth.  We  spent  the  days  in  the  streets  and  the  evenings 
in  the  theatres.  I  have  never  seen  so  many  beautiful 
women  as  in  Pesth.  It  was  almost  impossible  to  find  an 
ugly  face;  except  in  some  ragged  old  woman,  and  even  among 
those  some  possessed  such  dignity  of  carriage  that  it  was 
a  pleasure  to  watch  them  as  they  moved  along  the  streets. 

There  was  to  be  a  so-called  ''Gala''  performance  at  the 
opera-house.  The  emperor  was  to  be  present,  and  every 
one  had  to  appear  in  national  costume.  An  exception  was 
made  for  men  who  could  not  or  chose  not  to  wear  the 
beautiful  yet  uncomfortable  and  costly  dress,  but  all  women 
agreed  to  be  attired  in  Hungarian  costumes.  We  secured 
seats,  and  I  had  to  procure  a  Hungarian  headgear.  It 
seemed  to  be  absolutely  necessary  to  do  so,  in  order  not  to 
clash  with  the  whole  female  audience.  But  I  did  not  object 
when  I  saw  how  becoming  was  the  small  bonnet  of  black 
lace,  heavily  embroidered  with  silver. 

At  the  theatre  I  was  positively  dazzled  by  the  aspect  of 
the  audience  in  the.  boxes.  Three  tiers  of  wonderfully  hand- 
some women  and  brilliant  uniforms,  and  every  one  trying  to 
look  their  best  in  honor  of  the  emperor.  Never  in  my 
life  shall  I  again  look  at  so  many  beauties  and  such  a  dis- 
play of  marvellous  jewels,  gold  and  silver  embroidered  waists, 
sparkling  with  diamonds,  rubies,  and  emeralds ;  misty  veils, 
strings  of  rare  pearls,  and  aigrettes  of  gems ;  and  amidst  all 
this  scintillating  mass  the  smiling  faces  of  the  wonderful 
specimens  of  human  beauty  of  both  sexes.     It  seemed  to 


108  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

me  like  a  chapter  from  the  '' Arabian  Nights."  My  soul  was 
in  my  eyes.  I  sat  as  in  a  daze,  and  for  the  first  time  in  my 
life  I  was  unconscious  of  the  singers  on  the  stage.  When 
the  emperor  entered,  there  was  a  deafening  cheer,  ''EUien! 
EUien!''  And  the  young  monarch,  blushing  with  pleasure, 
grated  the  audience,  then  sat  modestly  and  directed  his 
attention  to  the  stage,  his  entrance  being  the  cue  for  the 
rising  of  the  curtain. 

On  our  return  from  Pesth  to  Vienna  we  paid  a  visit  to 
Josephine  Galmayer,  the  celebrated  comedienne  and  the 
greatest  favorite  of  the  Vienna  people.  She  lived  then  in 
the  country,  resting  after  a  long  winter  season.  I  shall  never 
forget  her  eyes.  A  pair  of  dark  brown,  impish,  passionate 
eyes,  full  of  mischief,  which  in  a  flash  could  change  to  an 
inexpressible  look  of  kindness  and  sympathy.  We  chatted 
merrily  for  a  long  while.  Her  conversation  was  full  of 
wit  and  spontaneity,  and  though  some  of  her  sallies  were 
risqu6j  yet  there  was  so  much  sincerity  and  simplicity  in 
all  she  said  that  I  could  not  help  admiring  it  all.  We  parted 
like  old  friends,  and  I  do  not  know  what  warmth  and  in- 
spiration came  to  me  from  her,  but  I  threw  my  arms  around 
her  neck  and  kissed  her,  —  a  thing  I  had  never  done  before 
to  a  comparative  stranger.  She  was  indeed  the  most  mag- 
netic person  I  met  at  that  time. 


CHAPTER  XV 

When  we  returned  to  Czerniowce,  the  actors  pressed  me 
with  questions,  and  I  seemed  to  wear  a  halo  around  my  head 
because  I  had  seen  things  they  had  not  seen.  Still,  in  spite 
of  this  distinction,  I  had  not  changed  my  old  way  of  accept- 
ing any  part,  good  or  bad,  long  or  short,  that  was  given  to 
me.  I  did  not  care  what  I  played  so  long  as  I  could  learn 
something,  and  try  my  versatility  on  the  various  kinds  of 
characters.  Yet  my  methods  had  changed.  I  had  gained 
a  great  deal  in  the  way  of  finishing  the  details  and  of  putting 
more  work  on  the  development  of  parts.  I  also  remem- 
bered the  Vienna  manager's  advice,  and  avoided  as  much 
as  I  could  the  tragic  parts. 

A  regular  tragedienne  was  engaged  for  our  company,  a  tall 
lady  with  a  deep,  big  voice  and  the  grace  of  a  grenadier. 
She  charmed  the  audiences  in  grewsome  parts  like  ''Die 
Aufrau "  (The  Ancestor),  translated  from  German,  or 
"Medea,"  and  other  heavy  characters  which  she  ham- 
mered away  with  her  metallic  voice,  to  the  great  delight  of 
the  gallery  gods. 

In  spite  of  my  love  for  the  gentle,  sweet  parts,  I  put  my 
mind  to  improving  the  quality  of  my  voice  by  adding  some 
deep  tones  to  it.  I  worked  an  hour  or  more  a  day  reciting, 
no  matter  what,  and  trying  to  get  my  voice  one  shade 
deeper  every  time.  Sometimes  I  could  not  get  just  the  tone 
I  wanted ;  then  I  tried  again  and  again,  speaking  louder  and 
louder,  and  gaining  strength  with  every  effort  and  expan- 
sion of  the  diaphragm.  By  instinct  I  avoided  the  throat 
tones,  using  only  my  lungs,  and  with  this  practice  I  ac- 
quired such  stability  of  voice  that  when,  later  on,  I  played 

109 


no  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

strong  dramatic  parts  I  could,  on  coming  home,  sing  for  an 
hour  without  feeling  any  fatigue  in  the  voice.  Music  I 
always  loved  passionately,  and  having  still  a  little  singing 
voice  left,  it  was  my  custom,  after  returning  from  the  theatre, 
to  sit  at  the  piano  and  play  or  sing,  according  to  my  mood. 
I  never  could  sleep  after  the  play,  and  nothing  could  soothe 
my  nerves  better  than  music. 

While  keeping  the  stock  company  all  the  year  round  in 
Czerniowce,  we  used  to  make  excursions  to  the  smaller 
towns  in  the  neighborhood.  The  artistic  direction  of  these 
excursions  was  given  to  my  brother,  Joseph  Benda,  on  account 
of  his  presence  of  mind,  and  his  ability  to  get  the  best  of 
the  situation  in  any  emergency. 

We  played  in  all  sorts  of  houses,  —  sometimes  in  barns  or 
riding-schools,  —  but  my  brother's  ingenuity  always  suc- 
ceeded in  turning  these  buildings  into  decent-looking  sum- 
mer theatres,  with  the  help  of  a  few  boards,  paint,  curtains, 
rugs,  green  branches,  and  colored  lamps.  At  least  they 
looked  cheerful  and  cosy,  and  many  times  even  pretty. 
I  remember  one  amusing  occasion  in  which  my  brother's 
wits  were  heavily  taxed. 

It  happened  in  a  very  small  town,  which,  however,  by 
some  chance,  possessed  quite  a  decent  theatre.  We  arrived 
late  in  the  afternoon.  The  bills  announced  ''The  Devil's 
Mill."  My  brother,  after  inspecting  the  stage  and  dressing- 
rooms,  came  to  our  hotel  with  a  radiant  face,  saying  that  he 
hoped  everything  would  go  smoothly,  for  there  was  room 
enough  for  the  scenery  and  the  actors.  The  stage  was  large 
and  the  dressing-rooms  quite  comfortable.  When  he  was 
still  rubbing  his  hands  and  smiling  with  satisfaction,  there 
was  -^  knock  at  the  door,  and  the  property  man,  covered 
with  dust  and  perspiration,  entered  to  inform  us  excitedly 
that  the  costumes  of  the  devils  were  missing. 

My  brother  rushed  out  of  the  room,  and  when  he  returned 
two  hours  later,  he  looked  tired  and  discouraged.     He  said 


POLAND  111 

he  had  looked  in  several  inns,  hotels,  and  halls  for  the  trunks, 
but  in  vain.  There  was  no  telegraph  or  even  railroad  in 
Galitzia  in  1864,  and  therefore  it  was  impossible  to  make 
inquiries.  I  was  very  anxious  to  know  how  my  brother 
would  solve  the  difficulty;  the  play  had  to  be  performed 
next  evening,  and  there  was  no  time  to  make  new  costumes 
or  —  what  was  the  most  important  —  to  procure  black 
tights  for  about  twenty  demons.  No  such  article  was  to 
be  found  in  the  quiet  little  town.  When  I  saw  my  brother 
the  following  morning,  and  asked  what  he  intended  to  do 
about  it,  he  answered  with  a  mysterious  smile,  ''Come  to 
the  theatre  in  the  afternoon,  and  you  will  see  something 
that  will  amuse  you.'' 

When  I  came  at  the  appointed  hour,  I  found  my  brother 
sitting  on  a  high  office  stool  in  the  centre  of  the  stage.  At 
his  feet  were  lying  in  a  tangle  yards  of  red  cotton  stuff, 
and  he  was  telling  two  sewing  women  how  to  cut  and  stitch 
the  cloth.     I  understood  that  they  were  making  trunks. 

''What  about  the  tights?"  I  asked.  He  smiled,  and 
waving  his  hand  towards  a  huge  can  of  black  paint,  he  said, 
"There  are  the  tights,  my  dear,"  and  then  laughed  right 
out. 

"You  don't  mean  to  paint  those  poor  boys  all  over?" 

"Just  what  I  mean  to  do,  my  little  sister,"  and  he  laughed 
again. 

He  followed  the  property  man,  who  carried  the  can  of 
paint  and  a  brush  in  one  hand  and  a  bundle  of  red  trunks 
in  the  other. 

We  had  not  long  to  wait ;  in  a  few  minutes  my  brother 
opened  the  door  just  enough  to  put  his  head  out,  and 
calling  to  me:  "Attention!  Number  one  is  ready!"  he 
pushed  on  the  stage  a  most  frightened  boy,  painted  black 
all  over,  with  horns  on  his  head,  and  white  circles  around 
the  eyes,  which  made  them  look  like  goggles.  He  had  a 
tail  made  of  a  rope,  and  a  tongue  of  red  cloth  hanging  out  of 


112  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

his  opened  mouth.  The  red,  very  scanty,  trunks  were  the 
only  protection  to  outraged  modesty.  The  effect  indeed 
was  monstrous. 

I  forget  the  plot  of  that  awful  play,  but  I  remember  the 
scene  where  a  man  is  brought  in  and  sentenced  by  Lucifer. 
With  a  fearful  yell  the  demons  fall  upon  the  man  to  beat 
him  with  uncanny-looking  weapons,  broomsticks,  racks, 
iron  bars,  etc.  The  man  tries  to  escape,  and  hides  behind 
the  throne,  but  the  infuriated  servants  of  Hades  run  after 
him  and  strike  so  hard  that  he  catches  one  of  the  devils 
and  throws  him  over  his  shoulders,  as  a  shield  against  the 
blows.  The  '' supers,"  all  young  boys,  appreciated  the  fun, 
and  struck  yet  harder  than  before  at  the  exposed  part 
of  the  devil's  body,  until  the  poor  imp  screamed  with 
pain,  and  finally  exclaimed:  '^Oh,  Lord,  Saint  Marie, 
Saint  Joseph,  stop !  For  God's  sake,  don't  beat  so 
hard!" 

The  audience  shrieked  with  laughter  and  the  curtain  fell. 

One  of  the  most  picturesque  places  I  encountered  in  my 
travelling  tour  through  Galitzia  was  a  small  town  placed 
at  the  foothills  of  the  Carpathian  Mountains,  called  Zale- 
szczyki.  Another  dreadful  name  to  a  foreigner,  is  it  not? 
Well,  never  mind ;   we  shall  call  it  simply  Z.  .  .  . 

When  I  first  came  to  that  enchanted  spot  I  was  beside 
myself  from  the  sheer  enjoyment  of  breathing  the  pure 
mountain  air,  filled  with  the  penetrating  perfume  of  firs 
and  pines  mingled  with  the  odor  of  fresh  hay,  wafted  in  by 
the  breeze  from  great  green  pastures  in  the  valley.  I  went 
almost  insane  over  the  scenery,  —  the  big  mountains  and 
the  green  slopes  of  the  smaller  hills  in  the  foreground,  the 
clear  rushing  streams,  so  cool  and  fresh,  and  the  waterfalls 
at  every  turn  of  the  hills. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  sensation  when,  after  a  day  in 
the  open,  I  entered  my  dressing-room.  I  felt  suddenly  a 
horror  of  the  dingy  lamplight,  and  the  rouge  I  put  on  my 


POLAND  113 

face  made  me  laugh  at  the  incongruity  of  things :  nature 
and  art  which  had  to  reproduce  nature.  I  just  hated 
myself,  and  a  sense  of  great  humility  swept  over  me  when 
I  stood  before  the  looking-glass  with  all  the  artifices  of  my 
apparel ;  and  when  I  entered  the  stage,  which  was  to  repre- 
sent a  wood  scene,  and  compared  the  great  effects  of  nature 
with  our  poor  scenery,  I  felt  simply  crushed.  After  the 
first  act  I  went  to  my  dressing-room,  and  there  I  sat  a  long 
while,  forgetful  of  everything,  even  of  the  changing  of  my 
costume,  and  dreaming  of  the  possibility  of  appearing  on 
some  stage  of  the  world  where  the  artists  could  produce  at 
least  a  better  imitation  of  nature ;  and  again  a  great  desire 
to  fly  away  from  my  narrow  circle  rose  in  my  heart,  and  new 
dreams,  one  more  impossible  than  the  next,  took  possession 
of  me.  ''I  must!  I  must!"  I  repeated  loudly,  and  then 
began  to  recite  some  imaginary  poem  in  some  imaginary 
language.  They  were  merely  sounds  of  some  unknown 
words  which  I  uttered  with  passionate  or  tender  inflections 
of  the  voice.  I  would  have  gone  on  with  this  recitation 
forever  were  it  not  for  a  sharp  laugh  from  my  sister,  who 
dressed  with  me  in  the  same  room,  and  her  wise  words :  — 

''Helena,  you  are  positively  crazy !'' 

On  our  return  to  Czerniowce,  I  took  up  my  French  and 
music.  Mr.  Duniecki,  the  composer  of  several  operettas, 
who  was  engaged  for  our  lyric  productions,  consented  to 
give  me  lessons.  The  time  passed  in  studies  and  work. 
I  played  sometimes  three  or  four  parts  in  a  space  of  eight 
days,  and  though  we  only  gave  four  performances  a  week, 
yet  the  rest  of  the  time  was  employed  in  memorizing  the 
new  parts  and  in  constant  rehearsals,  keeping  every  one 
hard  at  work. 

It  may  seem  strange  that  I,  the  wife  of  the  manager, 
should  be  obliged  to  play  so  many  parts,  of  which  some  were 
uninteresting  and  subordinate,  yet  the  explanation  of  the 
question  is  very  simple.     I  became  quite  a  favorite  of  the 


114  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

public,  and  my  name  drew  better  houses.  There  was  no 
selection  made  of  the  plays  in  which  I  could  have  what  is  now 
called  ''star  parts."  The  management  was  obliged  to  pre- 
sent what  was  the  newest  and  the  most  popular  in  the  rep- 
ertoire without  regard  to  any  particular  person  in  the  cast. 

Life  was  a  dream  to  me,  and  it  stands  before  me  now  as 
some  vision,  half  sweet  and  half  bitter,  too  dim  to  be  seen 
quite  distinctly,  too  distant  for  detail. 

In  the  spring  of  1865  a  great  sorrow  fell  upon  me,  and  its 
blow  made  the  world  dark  for  me.  My  little  daughter 
Marylka  died. 

They  say  that  misfortunes  never  come  singly,  but  are 
accompanied  by  other  misfortunes,  forming  a  long-linked 
chain.  Blow  after  blow  struck  my  heart  and  bruised  it  to 
the  core.  Family  considerations  do  not  allow  me  to  give 
the  details  of  all  I  suffered  at  that  time;  but  after  fearful 
struggles  with  inexorable  Fate,  I  found  myself  free,  but  ill 
and  at  the  point  of  death.  My  mother  and  my  brother 
Felix  brought  me  and  my  little  son  Rudolphe  to  Cracow, 
and  I  never  saw  Mr.  Modjeski  again. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

In  the  month  of  September,  1865, 1  signed  a  contract  with   . 
the    Cracow    theatrical    management.     The    old    endowed  / 
theatre  of  my  native  city  was  at  that  time  in  the  care  of  ' 
Count  Adam  Skorupka,  a  cultured  gentleman  of  wit,  a  great 
dilettante,  and  his  partner,  Stanislas  Kozmian,  one  of  the 
most  cultivated  men  of  Cracow. 

They  started  a  new  era  which  in  the  annals  of  Polish 
stage  history  cannot  be  ignored.  The  whole  personnel  of 
the  theatre  was  changed,  new  actors  and  actresses  came 
into  view,  and  only  a  few  of  the  best  old  stock  were  retained. 

Count  Skorupka,  led  by  the  trufe  spirit  of  a  reformer, 
brought  an  artistic  stage  director  from  Warsaw,  Mr.  Jasinski, 
who  proved  to  be  the  animating  spirit  of  the  whole  insti- 
tution, as  well  as  a  perfect,  and  accomplished  instructor. 
His  gray  hair  and  his  bearing  inspired  respect,  and  his 
kindness  and  knowledge,  love  and  admiration. 

I  shall  never  forget  my  first  rehearsal  under  his  direction, 
which  was  the  first  reading  rehearsal  of  the  season.  He 
stood  on  the  stage  with  Mr.  Kozmian,  as  the  actors  and 
actresses  were  coming  in.  All  were  summoned  to  be  pres- 
ent. When  the  last  actor  entered,  Mr.  Kozmian  intro- 
duced Mr.  Jasinski  to  the  company  and  delivered  a  short 
speech  on  his  merits,  upon  which  Mr.  Jasinski  hastened  to 
assure  the  company  of  his  best  efforts  towards  the  needed 
iniprovements,  and  then  added  :  — 

''I  hope  that  you  will  help  me,  and  that  we  shall  work 
in  unison  with  but  one  view,  —  the  good  of  the  stage.''  The 
company  cheered,  and  then  Mr.  Kozmian  introduced  each 
of  us  to  the  director.     He  shook  hands  with  every  one  in 

115 


116  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

a  most  cordial  way,  and  when  the  ceremony  was  over,  he 
invited  those  who  had  parts  in  the  play  we  were  about  to 
rehearse,  to  step  into  the  reading-room.  There  he  read  the 
title  of  the  play,  and  explained  in  what  way  it  had  to  be 
treated,  and  also  described  the  chief  characters  to  us,  then 
turned  to  the  prompter  and  gave  him  the  order  to  be  ready. 
A  muffled  bell  gave  sign,  .and  the  reading  began. 

Two  days  later  the  stage  rehearsal  was  announced. 
Though  there  were  only  a  few  characters  in  the  play,  the 
whole  company  was  present ;  some  stayed  behind  the  scenes, 
and  some  occupied  the  boxes  and  chairs  in  front,  and  yet 
they  were  so  quiet  that  no  sound  was  heard  but  the  words 
uttered  by  the  players  on  the  stage  or  by  the  director,  on 
whose  remarks  every  ear  was  hanging  with  most  enthusi- 
astic attention.  The  occasion  seemed  almost  religiously 
solemn;  every  heart  was  warmed  up  with  the  expectation 
of  doing  fine,  artistic  work  and  the  future  triumphs  of  the 
Cracow  stage. 

The  play  was  '\Solomon,"  a  tragedy  in  verse  by  Waclaw 
Szymanowski,  a  talented  writer  and  editor  of  the  Warsaw 
Courier,  the  subject  of  a  mediaeval  conflict  between  Jews 
and  Christians,  treated  in  a  conciliatory  way. 

My  part  of  Judith  was  full  of  fine  sentiments,  but  too 
passive  to  be  highly  interesting.  When  I  recited  my  part, 
Mr.  Jasinski  said  nothing,  but  he  rubbed  his  forehead  several 
times  and  looked  at  me  in  such  a  way  that  I  knew  he  had 
some  remarks  to  make.  Yet  he  kept  silent  until  the  fourth 
act,  when  I  had  a  long  speech  to  deliver,  during  which  he 
showed  very  distinct  signs  of  impatience;  he  tapped  irri- 
tatingly  with  his  foot  on  the  floor,  rubbed  his  forehead  more 
and  more  excitedly,  then,  after  I  finished  the  sentence,  said 
^  abruptly :  — 

''This  is  a  very  pretty  opera,  your  voice  is  beautiful, 
but  your  sing-song  is  entirely  out  of  place."  I  was  so 
mortified   that   the  tears  rose  to  my  eyes,  and  I  scarcely 


POLAND  117 

saw  when  he  came  to  me.  He  took  my  hand  and  told 
me  not  to  take  his  remark  too  much  to  heart,  but  to  try  to 
change  my  delivery;  then  he  added:  — 

"Your  gestures,  voice,  expressions  of  your  face,  are  good; 
the  only  fault  lies  in  the  reading  of  the  verses.  If  you 
stay  here  after  the  rehearsal,  I  will  read  the  part  for  you. 
Alexandrine  verses  are  very  difficult  to  deliver,  unless  you 
treat  them  in  a  certain  measure  like  prose."  I  wiped  my 
eyes  and  thanked  him  heartily,  for  it  was  just  the  thing  I 
wanted  to  ask  of  him. 

When  the  rehearsal  was  over  and  every  one  gone,  even 
the  prompter,  Mr.  Jasinski  read  the  lines,  and  it  was  a 
revelation.  It  seemed  as  if  a  new  window  opened  in  my 
brain  and  flooded  it  with  light.  Until  then  I  had  read 
Alexandrines  very  carefully,  putting  the  emphasis  on  the 
centre  and  the  ending  syllable  of  the  verse.  He,  on  the 
contrary,  read  the  lines  naturally  and  very  simply,  disre- 
garding their  music,  and  only  careful  of  meaning  and  expres- 
sion, still  pronouncing  every  word  distinctly  and  with 
respect  for  the  rhythm.  He  did  not  lose  one  syllable,  and 
yet  the  verses  sounded  like  poetic  prose  rather  than 
rhymed  Alexandrines. 

I  drank  in  all,  returned  home,  restudied  my  part,  and 
when  I  rehearsed  next  morning  I  saw  Mr.  Jasinski's  eyes 
dance  with  pleasure.  After  the  first  act  he  shook  me  by  the 
hand,  and  said  he  never  expected  me  to  get  rid  so  soon  of 
my  sing-song. 

"Some  of  the  actors,"  he  said,  "will  keep  it  forever; 
they  simply  cannot  get  hold  of  the  Alexandrine  verses 
without  making  tedious  drawl ed-out  tirades,"  and  then  he 
added:  "You  are  brave  and  you  show  the  true  spirit, 
which  is  to  be  praised  in  a  person  who  has  already  been" 
.  .  .  here  he  paused,  then  added  with  a  most  subtle  and 
slightly  malicious  smile,  "a  so-called  'star,'  petted  by  the 
audiences  and  spoiled  by  the  critics.     You  see  I  know  some- 


118  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

thing  about  you."  I  laughed  and  thanked  him  again, 
and  on  the  night  of  the  performance  I  played  well,  for  I 
knew  that  my  master  was  pleased  with  me. 

The  Cracow  stock  company  was  completed  with  new 
forces:  Swieszewski,  a  charming  juvenile  actor  from 
Warsaw;  my  brother,  Felix  Benda;  Ladnowski,  a  dra- 
matic lover;  Rapacki,  in  character  parts;  Hennig,  an  ex- 
cellent comedian ;  and  several  others  besides  six  charming 
or  talented  actresses  in  various  parts.  They  were  all 
there  except  Antonina  Hofman,  the  leading  lady,  who  was 
taking  her  vacation,  and  only  arrived  on  the  evening  of  the 
performance  of  ^'Solomon."  I  had  met  Antonina  Hofman, 
the  leading  lady,  at  my  brother's  house,  two  years  before 
I  joined  the  profession,  and  we  had  become  friends.  She 
treated  me  with  friendly  condescension,  and  I  loved  and 
admired  her.  She  was  a  handsome  woman,  with  great 
brown  eyes,  red  lips,  and  marvellous  chestnut  hair,  very 
thick,  and  reaching  below  her  knees.  She  was  highly  gifted 
and  much  more  experienced  than  I,  so  it  was  natural  that, 
when  she  came  behind  the  scenes  after  the  performance,  I 
should  greet  her  with  the  joy  and  respect  due  to  her  position 
and  genuine  talent.  She  shook  hands  with  me,  but  her 
eyes  had  a  searching,  scrutinizing  look.  It  seemed  to  me 
that  she  was  not  the  same  person  I  had  loved  so  much.  I 
had  a  moment  of  desperate  fear,  lest  I  should  lose  her  friend- 
ship because  of  my  success,  and  without  even  waiting  for 
a  confidential  talk  I  hastened  to  inform  her  that  I  had  come 
to  Cracow  to  learn,  that  I  intended  to  occupy  a  secondary 
position,  and  had  no  claim  to  the  tragic  heroines,  Judith 
being  only  one  of  my  debutante  parts  and  not  even  of  my 
choice.* 

You  are  wise,"  was  her  rather  cool  answer;  ''you  are 


(t 


^  It  is  still  the  custom  in  Europe  to  give  to  an  actor  or  actress,  who  is 
going  to  be  engaged,  three  good  puarts  for  a  trial.  These  parts  may  be 
chosen  by  the  actor  or  by  the  management. 


POLAND  119 

very  wise,  because  you  could  not  possibly  play  dramatic 
heroines."  I  had  no  doubt  that  she  spoke  those  words  in 
kindness  and  with  conviction,  but  I  received  them  as  a  sting. 
They  did  hurt.  I  had  no  word  of  answer  but  '*  Good- 
night," and  returned  slowly  to  my  dressing-room.  I  did 
not  tell  her  that  Mr.  Jasinski  had  offered  me  several  dra- 
matic heroines,  that  I  had  refused  his  offer,  saying  that  they 
would  be  safer  in  the  leading  lady's  hands,  and  how  he 
received  my  refusal. 

He  had  said :  '^I  do  not  understand  you.  You  are  adapted 
to  those  parts,  and  it  is  foolish  not  to  seize  the  opportunity." 
I  told  him  that  I  was  afraid  to  handle  them,  and  it  would 
be  better  to  wait  for  Madame  Hofman,  and  give  her  the 
choice. 

'^Oh,  very  well,"  he  said,  pettishly,  ''I  will  not  bother 
you  with  good  parts  any  more,"  and  he  turned  away  from 
me. 

As  I  was  taking  off  my  semi-Oriental  costume,  I  thought 
of  my  master's  words,  and  of  Madame  Hofman's  cool 
answer,  and  when  I  compared  these  two  opinions  a  feeling 
of  deep  resentment  grew  in  my  soul  towards  the  woman  I 
had  loved  as  my  friend.  When  I  remembered  how  I  had 
almost  offended  Mr.  Jasinski  for  her  sake,  I  felt  very  uneasy. 

Sleep  did  not  come  to  me  that  night.  I  was  brooding 
over  it  all  until  the  bed  became  unbearable.  I  got  up  and 
walked  up  and  down,  trying  to  quiet  my  excited  nerves. 
One  of  my  turns  around  the  room  brought  me  close  to  a 
mirror,  and  looking  up  I  saw  suddenly  my  face  bearing 
such  a  dramatic  expression  that  I  stopped  to  look  closer 
at  the  reflection,  and  then,  slapping  my  forehead  with  the 
palm  of  my  hand,  I  exclaimed:  — 

''Now  I  see  why  Mr.  Jasinski  wants  me  to  play  the  emo- 
tional and  tragic  parts.  Well,  I  will  play  all  the  heroines 
he  gives  me!"  With  that  resolution  I  went  back  to  bed 
and  fell    soundly  asleep.      Next  morning  I  went  to  the 


120  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

theatre  early,  half  an  hour  before  the  beginning  of  the 
rehearsal,  knowing  that  I  should  find  my  master  at  his  post, 
as  he  always  came  at  least  fifteen  minutes  ahead.  I  had 
not  long  to  wait  before  I  saw  him  enter  the  stage.  When 
he  saw  me,  he  said  "Good-morning,"  and  paying  no  more 
attention  to  me,  he  began  to  examine  some  new  scenery. 
I  came  up  to  him  and  said  timidly:  — 

''I  wish  to  speak  to  you,  Mr.  Jasinski."  He  then  turned 
to  me  and  said  abruptly,  though  kindly:  — 

"What  is  it,  child?"  I  told  him  I  came  to  apologize  for 
having  rejected  the  parts  he  offered  me,  and  having  changed 
my  mind,  I  came  to  assure  him  that  henceforth  I  would 
play  whatever  he  gave  me,  and  that  I  put  myself  entirely 
under  his  guidance.  He  smiled,  and  shaking  my  hand, 
said :  — 

"Since  you  are  in  your  senses  again,  I  am  going  to  try 
what  you  can  do.  Come  to  my  office  to-morrow,  and  I 
shall  have  the  parts  ready  for  you." 

When  I  came  next  morning,  the  first  thing  that  drew  my 
attention  was  a  pile  of  manuscripts  on  the  desk. 

"You  may  as  well  look  at  them,"  he  said,  smiling;  "they 
are  the  parts  you  will  have   to  play  in  the  course  of  the 


season." 


"All  these!"  I  exclaimed  with  rapture. 
"Yes;  there  are  sixty  of  them,  small  and  big  ones." 
Sixty  parts !  What  luxury  !  I  picked  them  up,  hugged 
them,  then  sat  in  the  chair  and  began  to  examine  them. 
The  one  on  top  was  Princess  Eboli  in  "Don  Carlos,"  by 
Schiller;  the  next  one,  Louise  Miller  in  "Kabale  und 
Liebe,"  by  the  same  author;  then  Barbara  in  a  tragedy  by 
Felinski;  Ophelia  in  "Hamlet" ;  Dona  Sol  in  Victor  Hugo's 
"Ernani" ;  the  wife  in  "Nos  Intimes,'^  bySardou ;  "Adrienne 
Lecouvreur, "  by  Scribe  and  Legouv6;  etc.  There  were 
among  them  sparkling  parts  of  the  old  and  new  repertoire, 
and  also  some  short  parts  in  one-act  comedies,  sketches,  and 


POLAND  121 

plays  with  songs  called  vaudevilles.  I  was  so  much  ab- 
sorbed in  looking  over  my  treasures  that  I  did  not  notice 
when  Mr.  Jasinski  left  the  office.  I  wrapped  up  the  parts 
and  then  looked  for  him,  but  he  was  not  to  be  found  any- 
where. I  grabbed  my  precious  package  and  hastened  home, 
where  I  gloated  over  my  booty. 

I  played  small  parts,  and  everything  seemed  to  run 
smoothly  between  the  leading  lady  and  me  until  the  tragedy 
''Barbara"  was  called  for  rehearsal  with  my  name  in  the 
title  r61e.  Mme.  Hofman,  not  aware  of  my  altered  decision 
as  to  the  choice  of  my  parts,  was  much  astonished,  and 
spoke  to  me  about  it.  It  was  one  of  those  moments  which 
are  not  easily  forgotten.  I  answered  with  great  reserve, 
saying  that  I  had  changed  my  resolution  of  staying  behind 
all  the  time,  and  Mr.  Jasinski  was  kind  enough  to  help  me 
to  try  my  strength  in  tragedy.  She  was  sarcastic,  and  being 
very  witty,  she  had  her  laugh.  Yet  we  parted  good  friends. 
It  was  only  after  the  performance  of  ''Barbara"  that  we 
became  rivals,  and  my  line  on  the  stage  was  defined. 

My  success  in  the  tragic  heroines  did  not  prevent  me 
from  playing  smaller  parts.  I  also  played  two  or  three 
secondary  parts  in  the  plays  belonging  to  the  old  reper- 
toire in  which  Mme.  Hofman  had  made  a  success.  It  was 
interesting,  because  the  audience  on  those  nights  divided 
in  two  camps,  one  party  calling  for  Hofman  and  the  other 
for  Modjeska.* 

In  "Don  Carlos"  I  made  my  first  complete  success.  The 
part  of  the  Princess  Eboli  fell  to  my  share,  while  Antonina 
Hofman  played  the  queen.  If  she  failed  in  the  part,  it  was 
her  own  fault.  She  could  have  played  the  queen  beauti- 
fully had  she  cared  to  pay  proper  attention  to  the  lines. 
She  was  full  of  spirit  during  the  rehearsals,  chaffing  and 

^  The  European  audiences  outside  of  England  always  call  out  the  name 
of  the  actor  Whom  thev  desire  before  the  curtain.  If  oy  chance  some  one 
undesired  takes  the  call,  they  hiss  the  person  off  the  stage. 


122  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

joking  and  making  everybody  merry  with  her  witty  sallies. 
The  result  was  that  on  the  night  of  the  performance  she  had 
to  depend  too  much  on  the  prompter,  was  often  flustered, 
hesitated,  and  missed  her  points.  I,  on  the  contrary,  having 
to  appear  together  with  my  talented  rival,  took  all  the  pains 
possible  to  work  out  my  part:  in  the  first  place,  I  was 
''dead-letter  perfect,"  and  threw  all  my  soul  into  my  acting ; 
in  consequence,  I  did  not  miss  one  point,  one  studied  into- 
nation, nor  what  we  call  here  ''stage  business."  On  that 
evening  Antonina's  camp  was  almost  silent  and  mine  very 
noisy.  Even  Mr.  Kozmian,  who  was  her  ardent  admirer 
and  friend,  came  behind  the  scenes  and  congratulated  me 
on  my  success. 

As  far  as  I  can  remember,  "Don  Carlos"  was  put  on  the 
Cracow  stage  late  in  January,  1866,  a  few  weeks  after  Mr. 
Jasinski  returned  to  Warsaw,  where  his  studies  called  him. 
In  consequence  I  had  worked  my  part  of  Princess  Eboli 
without  his  help  and  was  rather  proud  of  myself ;  it  gave 
me  confidence  in  my  own  talent  and  made  me  less  timid. 

After  that  memorable  evening  my  name  began  to  creep 
slowly  into  the  Warsaw  and  also  into  some  of  the  German 
papers.  During  my  first  season  in  Cracow  I  received  a  great 
many  favors  from  the  people,  and  my  standing  was  quite 
assured.  Antonina  Hofman,  however,  held  her  own  against 
me  in  character  and  high  comedy  parts,  in  which  she  was 
indeed  excellent. 


CHAPTER  XVII 

It  was  at  that  time  I  came  in  contact  with  many  of  the 
superior  minds  and  celebrities  of  Poland. 

Mr.  Matejko,  our  celebrated  artist,  was  then  the  most 
striking  figure  in  Cracow.  He  was  recognized  in  Poland 
and  abroad  as  a  painter  of  great  force  and  expression.  The 
French  Academy  granted  him  a  gold  medal,  and  many  of 
his  historical  pictures  were  exhibited  all  over  Europe. 

One  day,  however,  quite  unexpectedly,  he  was  intro- 
duced to  me  by  Mr.  Estreicher  in  the  court  of  the  Jagellon 
Library,  where  I  used  to  get  historical  books,  or  copy  cos- 
tumes. I  was  just  about  to  play  a  part  in  a  play  of  a  remote 
period,  and  was  hunting  for  a  sketch  of  a  suitable  dress  for  it. 
I  could  not  find  it  in  the  library.  It  would  have  been  quite 
proper  to  ask  Mr.  Matejko  to  help  me  in  the  matter,  but  I 
was  so  overcome  by  the  presence  of  the  great  master  that 
I  could  not  say  anything  beyond  a  commonplace  expres- 
sion of  my  good  fortune  in  meeting  him,  and  then  blushed 
furiously  at  my  own  stupidity.  Happily  Mr.  Estreicher 
was  there,  and  he  explained  my  object  in  visiting  the 
library,  I  don't  remember  what  the  master  said  — 
probably  he  said  nothing,  or  'almost  as  much.  Shortly 
after  this  interview  one  of  my  fellow-actors,  Vincent  Rapacki, 
later  a  foremost  actor  of  Warsaw,  who  used  to  visit  the 
celebrated  painter,  brought  me  the  desired  sketch,  which 
Mr.  Matejko  had  dfawn  for  me.  I  prize  highly  the  little 
figure  of  my  heroine,  which  is  still  among  my  treasures. 

The  next  prominent  man  I  met  was  Joseph  Szujski.  He 
was  a  historian  of  great  knowledge,  and  a  successful  play- 

123 


124  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Wright,  a  man  of  great  erudition,  of  noble  soul,  and  with  a 
heart  which  melted  at  every  sympathetic  touch. 

Another  playwright,  but  of  totally  different  nature,  be- 
cause he  wrote  only  comedies  in  prose,  —  amusing  and  char- 
acteristic plays  of  modern  life,  —  was  Michal  Balucki,  who 
soon  became  a  great  favorite  with  the  Cracow  audiences, 
and  later' grew  famous  all  over  the  country.  He  was  a 
child  of  the  people,  witty,  alert,  Bohemian,  and  an  awfully 
good  fellow.  His  sarcasms  were  never  offensive,  because 
they  were  never  biting  or  scorching,  but  irresistibly  funny. 

There  are  others  of  whom  I  shall  speak  later,  people  of 
great  merit  and  talent.  I  found  myself  in  the  midst  of 
different  elements  which  offered  me  a  great  scope  for  obser- 
vation. During  that  first  season  in  Cracow  I  also  became 
acquainted  with  the  true  aristocrats  of  the  country.  The 
Countess  Arthur  Potocka,  though  quite  advanced  in  years, 
was  steadily  assisting  the  theatrical  performances. 

This  life  among  superior  minds,  artists,  men  and  women 
of  culture,  combined  with  occasional  glimpses  of  the  exclu- 
sive aristocratic  circles,  was  very  beneficial  to  my  artistic 
development. 

One  day  Countess  Arthur  Potocka  sent  Mr.  Rembowski, 
her  confidential  friend,  to  me,  and  that  irreproachable 
gentleman  asked  me  in  her  name  to  pay  her  a  visit.  I 
found  the  countess  dressed  in  black.  Her  pale,  aristocratic 
face  in  a  frame  of  silvery  hair  and  black  lace,  the  lace  shawl 
and  flounces  falling  around  her  form  in  soft  folds,  gave  her 
the  air  of  an  antique  portrait.  She  was  sitting  in  a  large, 
low,  arm-chair.  There  were  other  persons  in  the  room,  but 
I  saw  only  her. 

After  the  usual  greetings,  she  introduced  me  to  some  of 
the  members  of  her  family  and  her  friends.  I  was  all  eyes 
and  ears,  anxious  to  find  out  what  made  such  a  distinction 
between  a  high-born  lady  and  an  average  rich  woman  of  the 
city.     I  had  not  been  with  these  exquisite  creatures  fifteen 


POLAND  •    125 

minutes  before  I  discovered  the  secret:  those  aristocratic 
ladies  were  utterly  simple,  without  a  grain  of  snobbishness 
in  their  manner.  Their  grace  was  like  the  grace  of  chil- 
dren, unconscious  of  their  beautiful  movements,  which, 
however,  were  marked  with  reserve  acquired  through  early 
training. 

They  also  had  beautiful  soft  voices,  which  they  never 
raised  above  a  certain  diapason,  without,  however,  render- 
ing their  speech  monotonous.  They  also  had  a  most 
distinct  and  correct  pronunciation,  giving  their  words  their 
full  value,  and  paying  the  due  tribute  to  the  grammar.  No 
provincialisms  and  not  the  slightest  trace  df  the  argot ^^ 
so  popular  among  the  ''city  people,''  as  the  nobility  called  all 
those  who  did  not  belong  to  their  circle.  Some  of  them,  alas, 
knew  more  of  the  French  language  than  their  own,  and 
sprinkled  their  talk  with  French  words  and  phrases.  The 
old  countess,  however,  and  the  members  of  her  family, 
spoke  the  most  correct  Polish.  The  countess  was  simply 
delightful  in  all  she  said.  There  was  wisdom,  wit,  and 
manners  combined  with  inexpressible  kindness.  She  was 
clever,  good,  charitable,  and  also  versed  in  matters  of  art 
and  literature,  possessed  of  that  rare  gift  of  conversation 
which  was  an  art  by  itself  in  the  past,  and  which  is  almost 
extinct  in  our  modern  age. 

After  some  general  conversation,  she  called  me  to  sit 
near  her.  That  was  the  sign  for  the  others  to  retire.  In  a 
few  minutes  I  was  left  alone  with  the  countess,  or  Madame 
Arthur,  as  she  was  called  all  through  Poland.  She  then 
asked  me  some  questions  about  my  brother  Felix,  who  was 
one  of  her  favorite  actors ;  then  she  spoke  about  my  parts, 
criticising  some  of  my  acting,  and  praising  what  was  worth 
praising.  Her  judgment  was  just  and  most  kind.  She 
said  she  thought  I  was  unsuited  to  certain  parts,  but  she 
was  much  pleased  with  my  romantic  personations  and  also 

^  Slang. 


126  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

with  some  of  the  characters  in  high  comedy.  She  had 
seen  Rachel  and  Ristori,  and  told  me  I  had  neither  their 
strong  ringing  voice  nor  their  tragic,  statuesque  poses. 

'*You  see,"  said  she,  'Hhey  were  born  with  those  gifts, 
and  God  created  you  differently.  You  have,  instead  of 
those  grand  qualities,  sensitiveness,  intuition,  grace  ;'* 
and  then  she  added,  laughing,  ''You  are  as  clever  as  a  snake. 
You  played  the  other  evening  the  countess  in  'The  White 
Camelia'  as  if  you  were  born  among  us.  Where  did  you 
meet  countesses?" 

I  answered  that  she  was  the  only  great  lady  I  had  ever 
laid  eyes  on. 

"You  see,"  said  she,  "that  was  intuition.  Other  ac- 
tresses, when  they  represent  women  of  nobility,  or  princesses 
and  queens,  walk  with  a  straight,  rigid  spine,  as  if  they 
had  swallowed  a  stick.  They  sometimes  in  modern  come- 
dies resort  to  a  lorgnette,  looking  snobbishly  on  people 
and  examining  them  from  head  to  foot,  with  a  silly,  super- 
cilious smile.  Thank  Heaven,  you  have  none  of  that  insipid 
nonsense.     You  are  simple,  and  that  is  right." 

I  was  so  happy  to  see  how  much  interest  she  took  in  me 
that  I  did  not  know  what  to  say.  I  could  only  thank  her 
with  my  eyes.  Breaking  suddenly  a  moment  of  silence,  she 
said,  changing  her  tone  of  voice,  and  smiling  mischie- 
vously :  — 

"I  hear  that  you  snubbed  my  son  Adam."  I  knew  what 
she  meant,  but  you  who  will  read  this  do  not,  so  I  might  as 
well  tell  about  the  incident  which  the  countess  described 
as  the  snubbing  of  the  Count  Adam :  — 

I  was  in  the  greenroom  just  repeating  the  lines  of  the 
part  I  had  to  play  that  evening,  when  Mr.  Kozmian  entered 
with  a  tall  gentleman  and  introduced  him  to  me.  I  was  so 
absorbed  in  my  part  that  the  name  sounded  distant  in  my 
ears,  and  I  had  scarcely  noticed  the  visitor's  face.  I  shook 
hands    and  excused  myself,  saying   that  it  was  near  my 


POLAND  127 

entrance,  and  then  hid  in  the  remotest  corner  behind  the 
scenes,  concentrating  my  mind  upon  the  part  and  waiting 
for  my  cue. 

Next  afternoon  in  one  of  the  parks  there  was  a  fair  for 
some  charity,  and  I  was  placed  in  one  of  the  booths.  While 
I  was  discussing  the  merits  of  a  new  book  with  Mr.  X.,  —  a 
writer  and  a  newspaper  man,  —  a  very  handsome,  tall,  and 
distinguished-looking  man  approached  the  booth.  Taking 
off  his  hat  and  extending  his  hand  to  me,  he  said :  — 

''How  is  your  health,  Madame  Modjeska?"  I  did  not 
recognize  him,  and  without  taking  his  hand,  I  asked  him 
quite  impertinently:  — 

"To  whom  have  I  the  honor  of  speaking?"  The  count 
smiled,  and  said  quite  politely:  — 

"I  am  Adam  Potocki.  I  had  the  honor  of  an  introduc- 
tion to  you  last  evening  at  the  theatre.''  It  was  like  a  slap 
in  my  face;  such  manners,  such  politeness,  and  the  con- 
sciousness of  the  mistake  I  had  made.  Yet  I  did  not  make 
much  of  a  case  of  it.  Men  in  all  stations  are  only  men,  and 
women  have  to  be  on. their  guard.  I  apologized  sincerely 
and  we  chatted  merrily  awhile ;  then  purchasing  some  insig- 
nificant object,  for  which  he  paid  royally,  he  took  leave ;  and 
when  he  was  at  some  distance  I  was  startled  by  the  dis- 
tressed exclamation  of  my  literary  friend  :  — 

"Oh,  Madame  Modjeska,  what  have  you  done  ?  You  have 
snubbed  and  insulted  the  King  of  Cracow.^  What  did  you 
do  that  for?" 

"Oh,  nonsense  !"  I  exclaimed.  "I  did  not  recognize  him, 
that  was  all !" 

"Not  recognize  Adam  Potocki!"  he  almost  wailed, 
opening  wide  his  eyes  until  they  grew  quite  round  and 
white;  "why,  there  is  not  another  man  like  him  in  the 
country!" 

"Do  not  be  so  distressed,"  I  said,  trying  to  comfort  him. 
^  A  surname  given  to  the  count  by  the  Cracow  i&gt;eople. 


128  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

''I  am  sure  the  count  understood  my  mistake,  and  did  not 
feel  offended  in  the  least.  On  the  contrary,  he  seemed 
highly  amused."  But  my  friend  only  shrugged  his  shoulders, 
and  saying  dolefully,  '^Good-by,"  he  left  my  booth.  Evi- 
dently he  thought  I  was  a  most  absurd  person  and  an 
iconoclast. 

When  I  started  to  repeat  my  story  to  the  countess,  she 
interrupted  me,  saying:  — 

''Oh,  pray,  do  not  excuse  yourself.  I  am  not  angry  with 
you.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  very  much  pleased."  At  this 
moment  a  tall,  handsome  woman  with  a  superb  crown  of 
brown  hair  entered  the  room.  ''And  by  the  way,"  added 
the  countess,  "I  must  introduce  you  to  my  son's  wife." 
Then,  turning  to  the  lady  who  had  just  come  in,  she  called, 
"Katherine!     I  want  you  to  know  Madame  Modjeska." 

After  a  few  minutes'  talk  I  took  my  leave,  but  I  met  the 
countess  again ;  and  when  thirteen  years  later  I  was  sailing 
for  America,  a  photograph  of  her,  framed  in  ebony  and  ivory, 
was  sent  to  me  in  her  name,  and  brought  tears  to  my  eyes. 
All  the  regret  for  my  young  past,  for  the  kind  hearts  I  was 
leaving  behind,  rushed  to  my  mind  at  the  sight  of  that  noble 
face,  which  I  never  expected  to  see  again. 
"  At  that  time  I  worked  very  hard.  On  the  mornings 
which  followed  the  off  nights  I  used  to  get  up  at  five  o'clock, 
and  after  the  usual  cup  of  coffee  for  breakfast  I  went  into 
the  open  air  with  my  part,  sometimes  to  the  Chestnut  Alley, 
but  more  often  to  the  Botanical  Gardens,  where  I  was  sure 
not  to  meet  any  one  at  an  early  hour.  I  studied  aloud, 
having  for  accompaniment  the  songs  of  the  birds,  trees  and 
flowers  for  inspiration,  and,  above  all,  the  wonderful  gray 
or  blue  sky  with  its  fantastic  clouds. 

My  married  brother  Felix,  who  was  also  a  member  of  the 
company,  and  in  whose  house  I  then  lived,  was  a  great  help 
in  my  studies.  We  used  to  rehearse  at  all  hours,  without 
regard  for  the  proper  time  or  place:   at  the  supper-table 


POLAND  129 

after  the  performance,  behind  the  scenes  during  the  re- 
hearsals, and  mostly  during  our  walks  in  the  fields  or  under 
the  chestnut  trees  of  the  Grand  Alley.  At  the  dinner-table 
we  were  often  rebuked  by  my  mother  or  my  brother's 
beautiful  wife  for  these  eternal  rehearsals.  Felix  would 
ask  between  the  courses:  — 

''Helena,  how  does  that  scene  begin?"  and  then  we 
started.  Sometimes  we  would  discuss  the  meaning  of  the 
words,  and  in  case  we  did  not  agree,  we  fell  into  such  a 
heated  argument  that  we  had  to  be  called  to  order.  At 
other  times  we  would  find  such  natural  expression  for  our 
lines  that  mother  would  take  it  for  simple  conversation, 
and  then  there  was  my  brother's  triumphant  exclamation :  — 

''You  see,  Helena,  that  was  well  done.  Mother  thinks 
we  are  having  a  chat." 

We  often  played  those  one-act  French  comedies  where 
only  two  characters  were  required.  Mr.  Kozmian  was  so 
pleased  with  the  originality  and  exactness  of  our  acting 
that  he  looked  for  more  of  those  pieces  for  us.  We  liked 
them  because  they  were  holidays  after  the  heavy  tragedies 
and  national  dramas  (Felix  used  to  call  them  national 
bombs)  we  had  to  perform  at  the  rate  of  at  least  once  a  week. 
Very  often  I  had  to  be  perfect  at  the  rehearsals,  twice  a 
week,  in  a  rhymed  tragedy.  Happily  I  had  a  very  good 
memory,  and  I  loved  my  work.  Strange  to  say,  a  little  one- 
act  play,  though  far  from  taxing  physical  strength,  required 
often  more  work  than  a  five-act  drama,  because  it  had  to  be 
perfect  in  the  minutest  details,  in  order  to  gain  the  approval 
of  our  rather  difficult  audience. 

f  But  it  was  not  only  by  hard  work  that  I  gained  my 
pbsition  on  the  stage.  There  was  something  else;  it  was 
by  identifying  myself  with  every  part  I  played  to  such  an 
extent  that  I  really  passed  through  all  the  emotions  of  my 
heroines.  I  suffered  with  them,  cried  real  tears,  which 
I  often  could  not  stop  even  after  the  curtain  was  down. 


130  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Owing  to  this  extreme  sensitiveness  I  was  exhausted  after 
each  emotional  part,  and  often  had  to  rest  motionless  after 
the  play  until  my  strength  returned.  I  tried  hard  to 
master  my  emotions,  but  during  my  whole  career  I  could 
not  succeed  in  giving  a  performance  without  feeling  the 
agonies  of  my  heroines.  ) 

I  went  through  a  w(mderful  training  during  the  three 
years  of  my  Cracow  engagement.  There  was  but  little 
time  for  amusement.  The  time  free  from  studies  was  em- 
ployed in  reading  and  also  in  such  prosaic  occupations  as 
sewing,  or  ironing  of  muslins  and  laces,  and  often  when  I  had 
a  little  time  to  spare  I  helped  in  arranging  some  finery  for 
my  sister-in-law,  Veronique  Benda,  who  was  also  on  the 
stage.  I  do  not  recollect  going  to  parties,  save  to  those 
given  twice  a  year  by  the  manager.  Count  Skorupka;  one 
dancing  party  during  the  Carnival  and  another  at  Easter 
time,  and  then  I  danced  !  Oh,  how  I  danced  !  with  all  my 
soul  in  it,  for  I  never  did  anything  by  halves. 

Still  I  preferred  the  few  receptions  at  my  brother's  house, 
where  the  artistic  and  literary  element  was  represented 
and  where  many  an  interesting  discussion  took  place.  It 
was  my  delight  to  listen  to  wise  men.  Every  one  of  those 
evenings  opened  some  cells  in  my  brain,  and  the  seed  of 
uttered  words  fell  on  a  receptive  soil,  for,  once  shut  in  my 
room,  I  recalled  to  my  memory  every  original  or  clever 
thought  I  had  heard  during  the  evening;  I  turned  them 
over  and  over  in  my  mind,  though  not  without  comments 
on  my  part  or  criticisms  in  case  of  contradictory  opinions. 
I  sometimes  wrote  down  my  impressions  and  kept  the  notes 
for  future  use. 

One  evening  there  was  a  question  whether  ethics  and 
art  ought  to  go  hand  in  hand.  Some  young  men  present 
positively  declared  that  these  two  had  nothing  to  do  with 
each  other.  The  wise  men,  on  the  contrary,  said  that  art 
without  ethics  is  not  long-lived.     It  may  have  some  vogue 


POLAND  131 

at  the  moment  for  its  boldness  and  defiance,  but  it  is  sure 
of  dying  soon  of  consumption.  A  loud  protest  rose  in  the 
opposite  camp:  — 

''Had  Terence  died?  Had  the  jovial,  immoral  Rabelais 
died?" 

''No,  indeed,"  sounded  the  answer;  "they  live  stiU,  but 
who  reads  them  now  ?  They  are  stored  in  the  libraries  for 
the  students  of  ancient  and  mediseval  literature,  but  they 
do  not  live  with  the  people,  as  Shakespeare,  Dante,  Moli^re, 
Schiller,  and  Goethe." 

"Ah,  Goethe !"  cried  one  of  the  opponents;  "nice  ethics 
he  preaches, — in  'Stella,'  for  instance." 

"True  enough,"  said  the  wise  men,  "but  we  must  speak 
of  the  work,  not  of  the  individuals.  Goethe  wrote  those 
things,  so  did  others,  —  even  Shakespeare,  —  but  they  are 
never  presented  on  the  stage,  because  of  outraged  ethics ;  * 
but  the  work  created  during  that  phase  cannot  outlive  its 
existence,  and  must  die  of  its  own  fever,  which,  strange  to 
say,  is  often  mistaken  for  inspiration." 

^  In  almost  every  author's  life  there  is  a  phase  of  revolt  against  moral 
principles. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

In  the  year  of  1866  the  Count  Skorupkasent  our  company 
to  Posen  for  the  summer  montha.  Mr,  Kozmian  was  then  ap- 
pointed manner  of  our  troupe.  His  name,  which  was  already 
celebrated  in  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Posen,  his  cousin, 
M(ir.  Jan  Kozmian,  being 
one  of  the  most  remarkable 
men  of  the  country,  added 
a  great  deal  to  his  popular- 
ity, but  the  prosperity  of 
the  season  was  mainly  due 
to  the  excellent  training  of 
the  company  and  also  to  the 
talented  men  and  women, 
like  my  brother,  Felix 
Benda,  Rapacki,Ladnowski, 
Antonina  llofman,  and 
many  others.  We  revived 
the  best  plays  of  our  reper- 
toire before  the  public ; 
which,  almost  starved  on  a 
,    diet    of    hackneyed    melo- 

K.«.,.Bo&gt;.»,.c,L»»™,mi886.'    &lt;',™""=    ""&lt;?    old-tashioned 
plays,    received  everything 
we  presented  with  great  enthusiasm. 

My  brother  became  at  once  the  favorite  of  the  city;  so 
did  the  others,  but  not  in  quite  so  large  a  measure  as  he. 
He  jumped,  so  to  say,  at  once  to  the  hearts  of  the  people, 
while  the  others  had  to  creep  in  by  degrees. 


POLAND  133 

During  the  summer  of  1866  I  met  my  present  husband, 
Karol  Bozenta  Chlapowski.  It  was  at  the  theatre  that  I 
first  saw  him.  I  was  playing  an  insignificant  part  which 
I  understudied  for  one  of  the  minor  actresses  who  fell  ill 
suddenly  on  the  day  of  the  performance.  No  one  in  the 
company  had  as  good  a  memory  as  I,  and  though  the  part 
was  small,  yet  it  was  written  in  rhymed  verse,  and  there- 
fore Mr.  Kozmian  asked  me  to  help  him  out  of  the  diffi- 
culty. The  play  was  one  of  Count  Fredo's  classic  comedies, 
and  required  great  care  in  reading  the  lines.  I  rehearsed 
in  the  morning  and  played  the  part  at  night.  During  the 
play  I  had  a  great  deal  of  time  to  fill  up  with  some  action 
between  speeches.  The  intervals  were  long,  and  during 
one  of  them,  while  sitting  up  stage  with  my  supposed  lover, 
I  did  a  thing  I  always  avoided  doing :  I  looked  at  the  au- 
dience. The  first  face  that  drew  my  attention  was  Mr. 
Chlapowski's.  He  sat  in  the  second  tier  box  next  to  the 
stage,  leaning  over  the  balustrade,  his  chiii  on  both  folded 
arms,  eagerly  looking  down  on  the  stage. 

His  mobile  face,  a  slightly  sarcastic  smile,  and  the  ab- 
sorbed interest  with  which  he  caught  the  slightest  shadings 
in  the  actor's  words  and  actions  drew  my  attention.  I 
watched  him  awhile,  then  I  asked  my  stage  lover,  who  knew 
almost  every  one  in  town,  who  that  intelligent-looking 
young  man  was.  When  I  heard  his  name  I  was  pleasantly 
surprised, for  I  knew  already  his  cousin,  Tadeusz  Chlapowski, 
General  Chlapowski's  younger  son,  who  also  sat  in  the  same 
box  in  the  background. 

After  the  play  they  both  came  behind  the  scenes,  and 
Karol  Chlapowski  was  introduced  to  me  by  his  cousin.  The 
very  next  day  both  of  them  called  on  me,  and  Mr.  Karol 
was  re-introduced.  During  an  interesting  talk  with  him  I 
was  surprised  to  find  so  much  learning  and  such  marvellous 
gifts  of  conversation  in  a  young  man  of  twenty-five. 

He  was  also  charmingly  absent-minded,   and  while  he 


134  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

talked  he  took  a  cigarette  case  out  of  hia  pocket  and  lit 
a  cigarette  without  asking  permission ;  then  suddenly  seeing 
a  faint  smile  on  my  lips,  he  put  it  all  burning  into  his 
pocket,  apologizing  humbly  for  the  mistake.  I  hastened 
to  assure  him  that 
I  was  used  to  to- 
bacco, having  been 
brought  up  with  four 
brothers,  but  I  did 
it  chiefly  to  save  his 
coat  from  burning 
inside.  After  thank- 
ing rae  most  effu- 
sively for  my  "kind- 
ness, "  he  resumed 
the  conversation.  He 
told  me  that  three 
•  years  ago  he  left  the 
University  of  Loue- 
vain  in  order  to  join 
Dictator  Langiewicz's 
corps  during  the  re- 
cent Insurrection. 
He  was  wounded  and 
sent  back  to  his  es- 
tate across  the  border. 
After  having  recov- 
ered, he  was  going  to 

BozBNTA  Chlapowbki  (oh  the  left)  AND  ms  Friend      rejoin  the  inSUrgentS, 

8TP.    NeIWICS    in    FttUON    DCBINO    TOM    POLIBB        l,,j.  „        .^    „*    J     K, 

iNsuRMCMOR  t)"t  ^^  arrested  by 

the  Prussians  and 
put  in  prison,  in  "Moabit"  in  Berlin,  together  with  many 
other  young  Poles,  where  he  remained  twenty  months. 
While  he  was  telling  us  this  episode  of  his  life,  he  no- 
ticed   the  sad  expression  of  the  faces    around    him,    and 


POLAND  135 

rising  quickly  he  laughed,  and  going  to  the  piano, 
said :  — 

''Enough  of  this  grewsome  past.  I  will  sing  you  some 
new  Levasseem's  songs.  But  I  warn  you  that  my  voice, 
though  rather  small,  is  quite  unpleasant  to  the  ear."  With 
that  he  sang  with  quite  a  French  er.  train  and  English  accent 
the  famous  song  of  the  day,  called  ''Le  Cochon  de  Barbaric." 
It  was  just  after  our  midday  dinner,  and  black  coffee  had 
been  served  in  the  parlor.  He  wanted  his  coffee  right  on 
the  piano,  on  the  place  where  the  candles  usually  stand. 
In  one  moment,  while  he  turned  on  the  piano  stool,  the  cup 
and  coffee  were  both  inside  of  the  instrument.  Happily 
it  was  only  an  old  rented  piano,  and  no  great  damage  was 
done.  This  slight  accident  put  us  all  in  a  good  humor, 
and  when  Mr.  Karol  left  us  we  had  a  feeling  of  knowing 
him  for  years.  Leaving  the  room,  he  turned  once  more  and 
said :  — 

"I  must  tell  you  that,  having  nothing  better  to  do  at  pres- 
ent, I  am  writing  notices  about  your  company."  L  asked 
him  if  he  desired  to  be  bribed,  upon  which  he  bowed, 
kissed  my  hand,  and  said,  ''My  desire  is  to  write  honestly 
what  I  think." 

And  indeed  he  wrote  honestly,  for  the  first  thing  I  came 
across  in  the  morning  paper  was  a  severe  dissection  of  my 
acting  in  a  one-act  French  comedy.  I  liked  him  for  his 
sincerity  all  the  more,  for  I  knew  he  was  right.  This  little 
play  was  put  on  in  a  hurry.  It  was  a  revival,  but  I  had 
never  played  the  part  before.  I  was  just  studying  Juliet, 
and  could  not  concentrate  my  mind  on  anything  else.  I  was 
so  absent-minded  that  I  left  the  veil  over  my  face  during 
almost  half  an  act,  instead  of  lifting  it  up  at  the  entrance. 
I  also  missed  one  cue,  and  did  not  speak  until  I  was  prompted, 
and  all  together  I  was  a  little  constrained  in  my  actions.  I 
had  no  idea,  however,  that  anj^  one  would  notice  those 
blunders,  but  he  noticed  everything. 


136  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Playing  only  the  revivals  during  our  short  season  in 
Posen,  I  had  a  great  deal  of  time  on  hand,  and  was  very 
anxious  to  study  some  new  parts.  I  dreamed  always  of 
Shakespeare  and  his  plays.  We  had  had  nothing  but 
Hamlet  in  the  repertoire  until  then.  I  talked  about  it  often 
to  Ladnowski,  our  romantic  lover,  who  also  was  a  great 
admirer  of  Shakespeare.  We  both  were  anxious  to  have 
one  or  two  of  his  plays  produced  during  our  coming  winter 
season,  and  to  try  them  on  the  Posen  audience.  I  spoke 
to  Mr.  Kozmian,  and  he,  after  a  justifiable  moment  of  hesita- 
tion, consented  to  produce  Romeo  and  Juliet.  Ladnowski 
was  to  be  Romeo,  and  the  part  of  Juliet  was  sent  to  me, 
together  with  the  manuscript. 

I  had  never  seen  or  even  read  Romeo  and  Juliet  before, 
and  I  simply  went  wild  over  it.  I  remember  that  in  my 
excitement  I  walked  up  and  down  in  my  room,  exclaim- 
ing :  — 

'^How  great!  How  beautiful!  What  a  genius!  How 
he,  though  a  man,  knew  Juliet^s  feelings  and  thoughts ! 
There  is  no  other  being  in  the  world  who  can  compete 
with  Shakespeare  !  He  is  the  greatest  of  the  great ! "  etc. 
I  invoked  the  spirit  of  the  great  man  and  laid  my  spirit 
at  his  feet.  All  the  time  I  spent  in  studying  Juliet  I  walked 
in  a  dream,  repeating  the  lines  and  looking  for  solitary 
places  in  public  gardens  in  order  to  get  the  atmosphere  of 
certain  scenes.  I  used  to  go  for  long  evening  walks  with 
my  brother,  his  wife,  and  Ladnowski,  and  in  some  quiet 
nook  among  the  trees  we  rehearsed  the  balcony  scene  to 
try  our  hushed  voices  in  the  open.  One  evening  we  went  to 
the  cemetery,  and  I  repeated  the  tomb  scene,  and  also  my 
soliloquy  in  the  fourth  act.  In  order  to  get  the  atmosphere 
of  the  parting  scene  I  spent  a  sleepless  night,  and  at  the  first 
glimpse  of  light  went  into  the  open  air.  I  had  been  up  at 
dawn  many  a  time  before,  but  the  grand  awakening  of 
nature  had  never  had  so  much  meaning,  it  had  never  given 


POLAND  137 

me  such  a  splendid  poetic  impression  as  on  that  morning, 
when  I  awaited  the  rising  of  the  sun  with  Shakespeare's 
lines  in  my  very  heart  and  soul. 

How  I  played  Juliet  then,  I  cannot  tell  now.  I  mean 
I  cannot  give  the  details.  When  I  played  it  in  English 
I  changed  some  of  the  scenes,  but  not  the  conception  of 
the  part.  Of  that  first  performance  I  have  only  a  vague 
recollection,  yet  I  remember  two  things  distinctly:  the 
way  in  which  Ladnowski  and  I  treated  the  balcony  scene 
and  the  effect  produced  on  the  audience. 

As  I  said  before,  Ladnowski  and  myself  studied  the 
balcony  scene  in  the  open,  and  we  tried  to  tune  our  voices 
to  the  surroundings.  The  scene  was  spoken  in  hushed  voices 
all  through ;  every  sentence  came  out  with  spontaneity, 
passion,  and  simplicity.  Those  two  lovers  hung  on  each 
other's  words  with  almost  childish  intensity.  Juliet's 
words  at  times  came  out  broken  with  quick  sighs,  indicating 
the  heightened  pulse,  and  accompanied  by  furtive  glances 
around  the  place,  expressive  of  fear  lest  some  dreaded 
kinsman  should  appear  suddenly.  The  scene  was  a  cres- 
cendo, from  the  softness  of  the  speech  to  the  hurried  words 
they  exchanged  towards  the  end:  — 

Romeo.    ''So  thrive  my  soul." 

Juliet  (breaking  in  hurriedly).  ''A  thousand  times  good- 
night;" 

then  from  the  return  of  the  lovers  until  the  end  the  words 
growing  softer  and  more  and  more  dreamy. 

As  for  so-called  stage  business,  there  was  almost  none. 
One  single  rose  taken  from  Juliet's  hair,  kissed  and  thrown 
to  Romeo  with  the  words,  ''I  would  kill  you  with  much 
cherishing."  That  was  all.  What  we  looked  after  was  the 
intensity  of  the  situation,  to  which  we  tried  to  fit  our  mood 
and  our  voices,  which  remained  hushed  and  yet  audible 
even  to  the  last  seat  in  the  gallery. 

When  the  curtain  fell,  there  was  a  dead  silence,  which 


138  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

made  me  shiver  with  apprehension  of  failure,  but  after  a 
few  seconds  of  stillness,  which  seemed  to  me  ages,  a  storm  of 
appli^use  arose  and  we  were  recalled  ten  .times  before  the 
curtain. 

One  other  detail  I  remember.  In  the  parting  scene  I 
did  not  use  a  four-posted  bed,  as  I  have  seen  it  done  often. 
I  did  not  think  that  Juliet  slept  in  a  matrimonial  couch,  but 
that,  on  the  contrary,  her  virginal  bed  was  probably  narrow, 
such  as  the  girls  use  all  over  Europe.  Juliet's  single  bed  was 
placed  in  one  corner  of  the  stage,  overhung  with  curtains. 
It  was  my  belief  that  in  that  poetic  scene  Shakespeare  had 
not  intended  to  give  an  impression  of  sensuousness.  These 
two  children  are  unconscious  of  their  passion.  They  meet 
because  they  love,  because  they  want  to  be  together,  to 
hear  each  other's  voices,  and  to  look  in  each  other's  eyes, 
and  cherish  and  kiss  or  die.  If  they  succumb  to  the  naturial 
law  and  the  calling  of  their  southern  blood,  it  is  not  done 
with  premeditation.  There  is  no  necessity,  either,  to  remind 
the  audience  what  had  just  happened  in  Juliet's  room  by 
such  naturalistic  details  as  a  disarranged  four-posted  bed, 
or  the  turning  of  the  key  of  a  locked  door  at  the  nurse's 
entrance,  or  Romeo's  lacing  his  jerkin,  and  a  dishevelled 
Juliet  in  a  cr^pe  de  chine  nightgown.  Such  details  are 
cheap  illustrations  and  unworthy  of  a  true  artist.  Shake- 
speare's plays  do  not  require  Such  commonplace  interpre- 
tations in  order  to  produce  a  genuine,  vivid,  and  refining 
impression  upon  the  audience. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

I  MET  Mr.  Chlapowski  quite  often  while  we  stayed  in 
Posen,  either  at  our  house  or  in  the  public  gardens,  or 
in  society,  and  we  always  had  most  interesting  talks 
about  literature,  art,  or  politics.  Having  been  brought  up 
in  France,  he  was  more  acquainted  with  French  than  with 
his  native  language.  In  consequence  he  often  spoke  to  me 
in  French,  and  urged  me  seriously  to  perfect  myself  in  it. 
He  brought  me  books  and  made  me  acquainted  with  Alfred 
de  Musset.  He  also  read  to  me  from  Chateaubriand  and 
Lamartine,  and  I  read  to  him  in  exchange  verses  of  the 
great  Polish  poets.  He  admired  my  Polish,  I  admired  his 
French,  and  while  I  corrected  slight  mistakes  he  made  in 
his  native  tongue,  he  took  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  correct 
my  bad  French. 

I  occupied  then  a  modest  suite  of  rooms  with  my  brother 
and  his  wife.  Two  of  my  windows  overlooked  the  street. 
On  the  day  of  the  performance  I  made  a  rule  never  to  receive 
callers,  and  of  course  this  rule  extended  also  to  Pan  Karol, 
as  his  friends  called  him.  But  he  was  ingenious,  and  found 
means  of  seeing  me  by  riding  on  horseback  under  my  win- 
dows. When  I  heard  the  horse's  hoofs  on  the  pavement,  I 
could  not  resist  looking  down,  and  then  I  received  a  sweeping 
bow  and  a  ''good  afternoon"  which  made  me  stronger  for 
my  night's  work. 

When  we  were  leaving  Posen,  Mr.  Chlapowski  and  I 
parted  cheerfully,  for  we  were  sure  to  meet  sometime  in  the 
near  future.  He  promised  to  come  to  Cracow  during  our 
winter  season. 

After  leaving  Posen  we  went  to  Krynica,  with  the  inten- 

139 


140  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

tion  of  playing  there  until  the  end  of  August.  Krynica  is  a 
health  resort  in  the  Carpathian  Mountains,  charmingly  sit- 
uated among  the  pines  and  rocks  and  with  a  grand  view  of 
the  distant  hills.  There  we  lived  in  a  large  house  built  in 
the  mountaineer  style.  Some  members  of  our  company, 
with  myself  and  family,  rented  this  house,  in  which  we  lived 
as  in  a  phalanstery.  There  were,  besides  myself,  Mr. 
Rapacki  and  his  wife,  Ladnowski's  family,  my  brother  and 
his  wife  and  step-daughter,  three  young  men,  a  juvenile 
young  lady,  and  a  comedian,  all  living  in  the  same  house. 
They  were  all  congenial,  animated  by  the  same  feeling  for 
art,  —  all  young  with  the  exception  of  two  elderly  men,  — 
all  healthy  and  full  of  spirits. 

My  mother,  my  little  son,  my  little  niece  Stasia,  and 
I  occupied  two  rooms  on  the  second  floor,  and  we  had  a 
lovely  balcony  overhung  with  ivy,  shaded  by  tall  pine  trees 
on  one  side,  while  the  other  allowed  full  view  of  the  moun- 
tains. It  was  a  cosy  corner  where  my  mother  and  I  in 
moments  of  leisure  used  to  sit,  read,  work,  or  watch  my  little 
son  playing. 

There  was,  however,  one  inconvenience  in  that  house. 
The  walls  being  made  only  of  plain  boards,  were  so  thin  and 
so  full  of  cracks  that,  although  we  covered  them  with  rugs 
and  stopped  the  cracks,  placing  etchings  over  the  patches, 
yet  we  could  hear  almost  every  loud  word  said  in  the 
house. 

It  was  a  real  ''charivari"  every  morning  at  the  awaken- 
ing of  the  phalanstery.  We  had  for  our  neighbors  on  one 
side  Ladnowski  and  his  friend,  and  on  the  other  side  the 
comedian,  Mikulski.  Lying  still  in  my  bed,  I  could  hear 
every  word  that  was  said  upstairs,  and  even  downstairs,  for 
in  the  morning  all  the  windows  in  the  house  were  opened, 
even  on  rainy  days.  It  was  such  a  motley  of  thoughts  and 
comic  phrases,  interwoven  with  sentences  from  parts,  which 
always  were  studied  aloud  without  regard  to  time  or  sur- 


POLAND  141 

Foundings.  Very  often  late  at  night  someone  repeating  a 
part  would  wake  us  up  with  a  tragic  exclamation  or  sen- 
tence like  this:  ''Away,  villain,  or  I  strangle  you!"  and 
then  ''strangle  you"  would  be  repeated  a  dozen  times  in 
different  tones  and  with  increased  intensity. 

Once  the  shrill  laugh  of  a  maniac  frightened  my  poor 
mother  out  of  her  bed  and  made  her  say  a  prayer  for  dis- 
tracted souls.  When  I  happened  to  be  up  earlier,  I  would 
take  paper  and  pencil  and  write  down  what  I  heard.  This 
is  what  I  find  among  my  notes :  — 

Boleslaw  Ladnowski  (Romeo)  was  a  great  lover  of  poetry, 
and  he  even  wrote  sometimes  very  charming  verses.  He  had 
a  habit  of  reciting  aloud  the  poems  of  our  great  masters. 
Suddenly  stopping  at  the  end  of  some  line  he  would  stamp 
his  foot  and  exclaim :  — 

"Almighty  God  !  What  a  genius  that  man  was !"  Upon 
which  his  friend  would  say,  in  sleepy  tones  of  voice :  — 

"Yes,  genius  indeed!  But  look  here,  —  I  put  on  this 
collar  only  for  an  hour  last  night,  and  it  is  already  useless ! 
May  all  the  ducks  kick  it!*  Another  three  cents  gone!" 
.  .  .  Ladnowski's  voice  still  rang,  reciting  the  celebrated 
verses  of  Mickiewicz's  "Farys":  "Ye  forests,  ye  moun- 
tains, peace!    peace!" 

"Will  that  crank  never  stop  reciting?"  sounded  the 
voice  of  the  comedian. 

"Oh,  are  you  up?"  spoke  Ladnowski's  father. 
"Knight  of  free  thoughts,  defender  of  virtue,  how  did  you 
sleep?" 

"With  my  eyes  shut,  dearest  patriarch." 

"But  your  mouth  was  open;  you  snored  all  night!" 

"Nonsense,  youths  of  sixty,  like  me,  never  snore." 

"Oh,  youth,  lend  me  thy  wings!"  came  from  Romeo's 
room  again. 

*  A  favorite  swearing  among  actors,  invented  in  order  to  avoid  pro- 
fanity, yet  to  supply  relief  in  moments  of  annoyance. 


142  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

''Panie  Mikulski,  Panic  Mikulski/'  called  from  down- 
stairs Madame  Rapacka's  sweet  voice,  ''what  are  you 
doing  there?" 

''Cleaning  the  mushrooms  I  gathered  at  sunrise.  I 
thought  the  ladies  might  like  them  for  dinner." 

"Could  you  not  do  it  at  the  creek?  The  water  drips 
down  here  and  splashes  all  over  the  hall." 

"Oh,  does  the  water  drip  down?  A  thousand  pardons, 
madame,  but  I  cannot  manage  to  make  it  drip  up.  How- 
ever, we  will  remove  ourselves,  mushrooms  and  your  obe- 
dient servant." 

"This  way,  this  way,  my  pretty  maidens,"  spoke  the 
juvenile  man.  "The  lady  who  wants  to  buy  your  straw- 
berries lives  in  that  room ;  but  will  you  not  sell  me  some  ? 
How  much  do  you  say?  Yes,  I  will  give  you  five  cents, 
but  I  must  have  a  kiss  in  addition."  Upon  that  a  girlish 
scream  was  heard,  and  my  mother  left  the  room  to  stop 
the  enterprising  youth's  further  jokes.  Two  mountain 
girls,  as  pretty  and  fresh  as  the  berries  they  carried  in 
earthen  pots,  entered  the  room,  and  while  we  were  reliev- 
ing them  of  their  burdens,  we  could  hear  Ladnowski's 
voice  still  repeating :  — 

"Ye  forests,  ye  mountains,  peace!   peace!" 

We  lived  in  that  house  as  one  family.  No  project  was 
made  but  that  the  whole  phalanstery  took  part  in  it,  be  it  a 
walk  to  the  woods  or  a  day's  excursion  to  the  hills.  These 
excursions  were  executed  mostly  on  foot,  for  money  was 
scarce  among  us ;  all  we  could  afford  was  a  guide,  who  carried 
our  luncheon  and  rugs.  Some  of  us  carried  parts,  for  though 
we  only  played  revivals,  yet  we  were  preparing  a  reper- 
toire for  the  first  months  of  the  winter  sejison  in  Cracow; 
and  when  an  hour  or  two  of  rest  came,  sitting  on  rocks 
covered  with  moss  we  read  our  parts,  having  for  a  back- 
ground the  greenest  branches  of  evergreen,  the  fantastic 
sky,  and  breathing  the  superb,  cool  air  of  the  wilderness. 


POLAND  143 

At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  we  had  to  be  back  and  ready 
for  work. 

Mr.  Kozmian  was  not  at  all  pleased  with  the  fact  that 
the  best  forces  of  the  company  lived  in  one  house  in  friendly 
harmony.  It  was  soon  proved  that  his  displeasure  was 
grounded  on  good  reasons,  for  one  day  the  phalanstery 
arranged  a  strike.  I  do  not  remember  the  real  cause  of 
these  proceedings,  but  I  know  that  we  all  thought  at  that 
time  that  the  plays  put  upon  the  bills  were  bdow  our 
dignity.  Most  of  them  were  bad  melodramas  put  on  in 
order  to  attract  the  rustics  in  the  neighborhood.  One  day, 
after  rehearsing  one  of  these  pitiful  concoctions,  I  was 
informed  that  the  phalanstery  had  decided  to  strike,  and 
that  I  had  to  be  with  them  or  against  them.  Without  a 
moment's  hesitation  I  agreed  to  be  with  them.  After  hav- 
ing decided  that  none  of  us  would  appear  at  the  theatre 
in  the  evening,  a  messenger  was  sent  with  a  paper  to  Mr. 
Kozmian,  informing  him  of  our  resolution.  When  our 
envoy  came  back  we  all  eagerly  asked :  — 

What  was  the  manager's  answer?" 

Oh,  he  said  nothing,''  said  the  boy;  ''he  laughed,  and 
then  sent  the  property  man  to  the  box-office  with  the 
order  to  close  'the  shop.'" 

This  happened  on  a  rainy  day,  and  we  had  to  face  the 
prospects  of  spending  at  least  ten  or  twelve  hours  shut  up  in 
the  house.  Our  spirits,  so  high  in  the  morning,  began  to 
drop  to  a  lower  degree.  Some  men  stood  on  the  porch 
stretching  their  limbs,  yawning,  and  asking  each  other  how 
on  earth  they  could  spend  that  dismal  day,  when  my 
brother  suggested  a  dance.  The  idea  was  welcomed  with 
shouts.  At  once  the  young  men  started  to  decorate  the  hall 
with  rugs  taken  from  the  upstairs  rooms,  overhanging  the 
walls  with  them.  They  also  brought  for  decorations 
branches  of  evergreen,  which  looked  greener  and  fresher 
after  being  sprinkled  with  the  rain.     One  of  the  men  went 


ii 


144  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  hire  fiddlers,  and  the  ladies  cut  slices  of  bread  and  meat, 
and  made  enough  salad  to  last  at  least  for  two  days. 
When  everything  was  ready  and  the  day  grew  darker,"  the 
question  rose  how  to  light  the  hall.  There  was  but  one 
candlestick  in  each  room  and  a  couple  of  oil  lamps.  My 
brother  insisted  upon  an  illumination,  a  giomo,  and  we 
were  provided  with  enough  candles  to  execute  his  wish,  but 
no  way  of  getting  chandeliers. 

''Wait  a  minute,"  said  my  brother;  and  calling  our  cook- 
ing maiden,  asked  her  how  many  potatoes  she  had  in  the 
pantry. 

''Oh,  plenty,"  was  the  answer. 

"Then  to  work!"  said  my  brother.  "Boys,  we  must 
make  potatoes  stand  for  candlesticks!"  and  he  went  with 
the  maiden,  appearing  a  few  minutes  later  with  a  specimen 
of  the  vegetable  in  question.  He  cut  out  the  bottom  of  it 
to  make  a  stand,  and  bored  a  round  hole  for  the  candle  on 
the  top.  Every  one  said  "Bravo !"  and  in  an  hour  we  had 
candles  on  each  step  leading  to  the  upper  floor  and  around 
the  walls,  placed  on  improvised  shelves.  The  rooms  down- 
stairs were  also  provided  with  potato  candlesticks,  which 
the  ladies  wrapped  up  in  colored  paper  or  silk  ribbons. 
All  the  communicating  doors  of  the  rooms  downstairs  were 
left  open,  allowing  us  to  dance  all  over  the  house,  except 
upstairs,  because  of  the  lights  on  the  steps,  which  prevented 
all  the  women  from  climbing  up,  lest  they  should  be  set  on 
fire. 

We  invited  some  friends  and  a  few  actors  and  actresses, 
who,  though  they  did  not  belong  to  the  phalanstery,  joined 
us  in  the  strike.  We  spent  a  delightful  evening,  dancing, 
reciting,  and  improvising  rhymes  suited  to  the  occasion. 
The  tone  of  the  entertainment  was  kept  in  strictly  aes- 
thetic form,  and  the  gods  of  art  and  beauty  were  ever  present 
in  the  minds  of  those  poor  actors  who,  in  spite  of  their 
Bohemianism,  carried   deeply-rooted  ideals  in  their  souls. 


POLAND  145 

It  would  seem  by  this  description  that  the  evening  was  a 
solemn  affair.  It  was  not  so;  they  were  all  in  excellent 
humor,  and  gave  themselves  up  without  restraint  to  the  joy 
of  living,  only  there  was  not  one  vicious  spirit  among  them, 
and  their  merrymaking  was  simply  an  expression  of  high 
spirits  and  happiness.  My  brother  Felix  was,  as  usual,  the 
soul  of  the  party,  and  enjoyed  himself  like  a  schoolboy  on 
a  vacation,  making  fun  of  himself  and  giving  imitations  of 
some  noted  people. 

Next  morning  Felix,  after  a  conference  with  Mr.  Rapacki 
and  others,  came  to  my  room  and  told  me  that  they  were 
going  to  see  the  manager,  Kozmian,  and  tell  him  that  we 
were  ready  for  further  performances.     He  said :  — 

''We  have  had  our  fun,  and  proved  that  we  can  be  inde- 
pendent, if  we  choose.  Now  we  are  going  to  see  what  the 
manager  has  to  say  about  it.  If  he  is  very  nice,  well,  we 
shall  resume  our  work;  if  not,  we  shall  have  to  look  for 
other  engagements."  Then  he  added,  laughing,  ''But  I  am 
sure  he  will  be  nice." 

Mr.  Kozmian  had  been  highly  amused  by  the  strike,  and 
said  that  he  was  glad  we  had  had  such  a  nice  entertainment 
and  a  little  rest  from  the  dismal  melodramas  which  he  was 
compelled  to  put  on  the  stage  just  then,  but  never  intended 
to  include  permanently  in  the  repertoire.  In  short,  he  made 
us  understand  that  he  meant  to  keep  up  the  standard  of  our 
stage,  which  he  did  indeed,  as  long  as  he  was  at  the  head  of 
the  Cracow  theatre. 

Toward  the  end  of  our  summer  season,  Mr.  Karol  Chla- 
powski  arrived  in  Krynica.  He  was  heartily  greeted  by  the 
whole  phalanstery,  for  he  was  a  most  congenial  companion, 
and  an  intelligent  adviser  to  the  young  men  who  usually 
crowded  around  him,  showering  all  sorts  of  questions  on 
him,  or  listening  to  his  interesting  talk  with  friendly  feeling 
and  real  enjoyment.  He  assimilated  himself  at  once  with 
our  improvised  family,  and  took  part  in  our  meetings  and 


146  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

excursions.  His  arrival  made  me  particularly  happy,  for 
I  had  missed  his  companionship  and  his  refined,  intelli- 
gent conversations,  and  before  all,  his  personality  and  the 
great  kindness  and  forbearance  with  which  he  treated  all 
human  beings,  without  regard  to  their  material  or  even  moral 
value.  Under  the  influence  of  this  truly  Christian  spirit  I 
learned  to  moderate  my  feelings  towards  my  enemies  in  art, 
and  gained  a  great  deal  in  modifying  my  judgments  about 
people  in  general.  During  our  walks  in  the  fields  or  woods 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  that  his  theories  were  not 
merely  a  mental  attitude  but  that  they  came  from  his  heart. 
His  manners  towards  the  poor  peasants  or  workingmen 
struck  me  first  as  being  unusual  in  the  son  of  a  nobleman  and 
a  prominent  landowner,  and  as  such,  accustomed  to  the 
servility  of  peasants.  *  When  he  talked  to  one  of  them,  he  put 
himself  almost  on  the  same  level  with  the  man,  and  made 
him  feel  at  home  at  once. 

"Blessed  be  the  name  of  Jesus  I"  he  would  say,  and  the 
answer  came  back :  — 

"Through  all  the  ages,  amen."^  And  then  they  would 
talk,  not  as  a  superior  to  an  inferior,  but  as  man  to  man. 
I  also  noticed  that  he  opened  his  purse  to  the  poor  very  often, 
and  when  I  scolded  him  in  a  friendly  way  for  spoiling  the 
people,  he  excused  himself,  saying  that  he  had  too  many 
silver  pieces  in  his  pockets,  and  they  were  "so -heavy  to 
carry."  But  I  knew  well  that  it  was  only  a  pretext,  and 
that  he  could  not  see  poverty  without  lending  such  help 
as  he  was  able  to  give. 

&gt;  This  is  the  ancient  formula  of  greeting  in  Poland.  The  well-to-do 
use  it  to  the  peasants  instead  of  good  morning.  That  greeting  equalizes, 
so  to  say,  at  tne  moment,  the  men,  and  brings  them  in  closer  contact.  It 
is  used  even  now,  but  not  so  often  as  in  old  times. 


CHAPTER  XX 

When  we  returned  to  Cracow,  in  the  fall  of  1866,  Count 
Skorupka  raised  my  salary  to  two  hundred  florins^  a  month, 
and  besides  that  he  granted  me  six  weeks  of  vacation, 
which  he  suggested  I  ought  to  spend  in  Paris  in  order  to  see 
the  best  French  actors. 

Before  going  away  I  rented  an  apartment,  leaving  in  it 
my  mother,  my  little  son,  and  my  niece,  Stasia,  the  mother- 
less daughter  of  my  oldest  brother. 

Paris  made  a  great  impression  on  me.  The  Champs 
Elys6es,  the  Arc  de  Triomphe,  and  the  Bois  de  Boulogne 
—  these  wonders  of  architecture  and  landscape  combined  — 
made  me  dream  of  Olympus  and  Greece,  in  spite  of  the 
crowds  moving  along  in  their  modern  garments.  I  shall 
not  attempt  to  describe  the  beauties  of  Paris,  so  well  known 
to  most  human  beings.  To  me,  who  had  travelled  so  little, 
everything  I  saw  was  so  new,  artistic,  amusing,  or  original, 
that  I  lived  in  constant  excitement  over  the  ingenuity  of  the 
French  people  and  over  the  grandeur  and  ^clat  of  the  monu- 
ments, speaking  so  eloquently  of  the  victories  and  the  brill- 
iancy of  the  past  ages.  I  visited  picture  galleries  and 
museums.  To  the  Muste  de  Cluny  and  to  Versailles  I 
returned  several  times,  but  of  course  the  Th^dtre  Fran- 
Qais,  being  mainly  the  goal  of  my  trip,  was  most  frequented 
by  me.  After  a  week  of  my  visit  to  Paris,  Mr.  Chlapowski 
joined  us,  and  thereafter  it  was  he  who  directed  our  excur- 
sions to  different  theatres. 

The  first  play  I  saw  at  the  Th^&amp;tre  Frangais  was  Alfred  de 
Musset's  ''Fantasio,'^  with  Delaunay,  Coquelin,  and  Madame 

1  An  Austrian  florin  or  gulden  is  worth  40  cents  —  $80. 

147 


148  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Favart.  I  had  never  seen  before  the  elegance  and  finish  of 
a  Parisian  actor,  and  I  was  immensely  pleased  with  the  act- 
ing of  Delaunay.  He  was  as  near  perfection  as  a  human 
being  can  be ;  besides,  in  spite  of  his  mature  age,  he  was 
a  most  spirited  lover.  Coquelin  ain6  was  a  very  young  man 
then,  but  he  had  already  made  a  mark  in  his  line,  and  we 
predicted  his  future  fame.  Madame  Favart  did  not  appeal 
to  me.  She  had  grand  gestures  and  a  beautiful  ringing 
voice,  which,  however,  sometimes  turned  into  a  sing-song, 
which  did  not  please  me.  The  part  she  played  in  ''  Fantasio  " 
would  have  been  better  in  the  hands  of  a  less  experienced 
actress,  with  less  routine  and  more  enthusiasm,  and  above 
all,  more  nature. 

Nothing  gave  me  more  genuine  artistic  joy  than  the 
Th6&amp;tre  Frangais.  I  saw  Madame  Madeleine  Brohan  and  M. 
Bressant,  those  two  great  stars  of  high  comedy,  and  I  think 
I  learned  a  great  deal  from  both.  Monsieur  Got  made  me 
jump  up  once  in  my  seat  and  applaud  furiously,  but  I  soon 
noticed  that  my  outburst  drew  the  attention  of  some  people 
in  the  audience,  who  looked  at  me  with  astonishment,  evi- 
dently highly  amused  by  my  exhibition,  and  I  tried  in  future 
to  restrain  my  countenance  and  master  my  enthusiasm. 

As  I  have  said,  I  learned  a  great  deal  from  these  excellent 
actors,  yet  I  never  made  any  notes.  Nor  did  I  try  to  imitate 
their  tone  of  voice,  their  gait,  or  what  we  call  in  America 
''stage  business."  It  never  came  into  my  mind  to  notice 
the  details.  What  I  attempted  to  study  was  the  way  those 
actors  and  actresses  treated  their  parts,  the  capacity  of 
identifying  themselves  with  the  characters  of  the  play,  the 
general  movement  of  the  ensemble^  and  the  precision  of  ex- 
pression and  delivery.  One  thing  more  I  noticed,  and  that 
was  their  careful  costuming  and  ''make-up,'*  which  was 
always  suited  to  the  characters  they  represented.  How 
the  beautiful  dresses  w^ere  made  I  could  never  tell,  but  if 
they  were  out  of  keeping  with  the  characters,  they  struck  me 


POLAND  149 

most  unpleasantly,  and  I  retained  them  in  memory  as  warn- 
ings against  bad  taste.  This,  however,  never  happened  at  any  / 
of  the  performances  at  the  Th^Mre  Frangais  at  that  time. 

The  chief  instructive  quality  of  that  theatre  was  the 
moderation  of  gestures  and  voices  of  the  actors.  They 
never  permitted  themselves  any  excess.  They  never  ranted. 
It  was  only  in  later  years  that  some  of  that  unwelcome 
element  crept  in.  At  the  time  of  Bressant,  Brohan,  De- 
launay,  and  Got  the  performances  made  an  impression  of 
strictest  harmony,  which  was  preserved  all  through  the  play, 
and  gave  almost  an  effect  of  a  beautiful  symphony,  with  all 
the  instruments  well  tuned  and  a  masterly  execution.  Later 
on  many  things  changed,  and  I  have  had  the  sorrow  of 
seeing  a  talented  young  man  on  this  stage,  once  famous 
for  its  excellency,  tearing  passion  to  tatters  for  the  sake 
of  the  applause. 

At  the  '^Gymnase"  we  saw  Madame  Pasca,  the  direct 
pupil  of  Delsarte,  but  oh,  how  different  she  was  from  those 
who  are  proud  of  being  pupils  of  the  so-called  ''Delsarte 
system"!  Strange  to  say,  that  man,  so  much  spoken 
of  in  America,  never  left  anything  that  could  be  called  a 
''system.''  He  left  several  pupils,  mostly  opera-singers, 
but  he  never  inflicted  on  them  anything  as  dreadful  as  a 
"system."  One  of  his  intimate  friends,  and  a  great  ad- 
mirer of  his  admirable  art,  made  minute  notes  of  his  acting, 
describing  the  gestures,  expression,  and  the  quality  of  his 
voice  in  the  pieces  he  recited  or  the  songs  he  sang  with 
inborn  delicacy  and  inspiration.  Yet  he  himself  never 
pointed  out  to  his  pupils  any  of  those  attributes  which  his 
imitators  tried  to  present  as  a  part  of  the  "system."  These 
qualities  were  born  with  Delsarte  and  belonged  to  him  only ; 
to  imitate  them  would  be  quite  impossible  —  as  ineffective 
as  to  wear  an  imitation  Roman  nose,  or  to  speak  with  a 
falsetto  voice,  and  try  to  render  it  sweet.  The  effect  would 
be  comical  if  not  disastrous. 


150  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Madame  Pasca  in  the  ''Demi  Monde "  was  a  living  example 
of  what  good  training,  combined  with  talent,  can  produce. 
She  was  most  moderate  in  her  actions,  and  I  did  not  notice 
any  of  the  ridiculous  flourishing  waves  of  the  hands,  so  well 
known  in  some  of  the  pupils  of  the  ''system,"  nor  any  con- 
tortions of  the  facial  muscles,  nor  any  of  the  absurd  motions 
of  the  body.  She  was  as  correct  and  as  natural  as  an  actress 
could  be  who  went  on  the  stage  after  thirty.  She  was  very 
effective  at  given  moments,  and  maintained  the  character 
from  beginning  to  end.     Hers  was  a  fine  performance. 

A  most  pleasant  though  different  impression  was  made  on 
me  by  Madame  Delaporte.  She  was  all  spontaneity  and 
emotion.  She  played  ker  part  of  irgCi  ue  with  great  deli- 
cacy and  such  truth  of  gestures  and  voice  that  she  made 
the  audience  share  her  slightest  change  of  mood.  She  was 
simply  captivating.  So  natural,  so  vivid,  was  her  acting 
that  one  could  forget  the  stage,  the  audience,  and  the  foot- 
lights, and  only  see  the  dear  little  pure  girl  thrown  among 
the  corrupt  people,  who,  by  her  simplicity  and  truth,  put 
to  shame  those  who  endeavored  to  wipe  the  bloom  off 
that  fresh  flower  and  bring  it  down  to  their  level.  I  was 
delighted  with  her.  She  was  not  pretty,  but  real  talent  is 
more  desirable  than  mere  beauty. 

Madame  Pierson  made  a  mark  in  her  characteristic  part 
of  Madame  de  Santis.  She  was  subtle,  and  her  beautiful 
face  was  full  of  expression.  The  part  she  played  was 
rather  difficult  and  risque,  and  she  deserved  much  credit 
for  the  delicacy  with  which  she  treated  it.  Her  little  sigh 
at  the  exit  was  delightful. 

I  w'ill  refrain  from  further  descriptions  of  the  theatre 
and  actors.  We  visited  the  Od(5on,  Gymnase,  Palais 
Royal,  and  we  returned  often  to  the  Theatre  Frangais  and 
to  the  "Vaudeville."  *     Every  time  I  saw  something  new 

^  The  name  of  Vaudeville  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  American 
vaudeville  theatres.     The  Th6atre  du  Vaudeville,  where  the  best  modern 


POLAND  151 

and  original  which  made  me  happy.  At  the  Grand  Opera 
we  admired  Madame  Sachs  and  M.  Faure,  that  most  dis- 
tinguished baritone  of  his  time.  My  stay  in  Paris  was  one 
series  of  the  most  delightful  emotions,  and  I  do  not  remem- 
ber anything  which  made  me  so  happy  and  so  completely 
satisfied  in  every  way  as  those  few  weeks  spent  in  that 
world-metropolis.  It  was  an  artistic  feast  as  well  as  a  sort 
of  epicurean  enjoyment.  There  is  no  place  in  the  world, 
I  think,  where  one  can  feel  '4e  bien  etre"  as  completely 
as  in  that  wonderful  city. 

The  return  to  Cracow  was  marked  by  an  ovation  on  my 
first  appearance  before  the  public.  My  friends  were  also 
pleased  to  see  me  back  among  them.  Men  were  anxious 
to  hear  all  about  the  new  movement  in  art;  the  gentle 
sex  crowded  around  me  to  see  the  new  modes,  and  eager 
to  hear  about  the  curtailed  dresses  the  Empress  Eugenie 
had  just  brought  into  fashion.  They  were  not  pretty:  over 
a  small  hoop  fell  a  round,  gored  petticoat,  almost  with- 
out folds,  and  very  short  in  order  to  show  the  laced  boot, 
called  Hungarian,  with  tassels  at  the  top.  The  women 
looked  from  the  waist  down  like  bells.  That  sort  of  dress 
made  them  look  short,  and  the  fiat,  square  hat  in  the  style 
of  Roman  peasant  women  intensified  the  tendency  toward 
diminishing  their  height.     - 

I  resumed  my  work  in  Cracow  with  renewed  strength  and 
energy  and  played  many  parts,  some  of  them  in  Shake- 
speare's plays,  to  my  great  delight,  for  I  loved  the  great 
dramatist  so  much  that  I  preferred  a  small  part  in  any  of 
his  works  to  a  melodramatic  one,  no  matter  how  important 
or  effective  it  might  have  been  in  other  plays.  I  played 
Lady  Anne  in  ''Richard  the  Third,"  Titania  in  ''A  Mid- 
summer Night's  Dream,''  Juliet,  and  Desdemona. 

We  also  had  Victor  Hugo  in  our  repertoire,  and  I  per- 

pla^s  were  performed  had  a  fine  reputation  for  the  excellence  of  the 
acting. 


152  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

sonated  Blanche  in  ''Le  Roi  s' Amuse."  A  quantity  of 
French  plays  were  produced  at  that  time,  mostly  those 
of  Dumas  fils,  Feuillet,  Augier,  and  Sardou. 

Most  frequently,  however,  our  Polish  dramas  and  comedies 
were  presented,  —  the  ones  by  Count  Alexander  Fredro, 
Slowacki,  Szujski  Felinski,  as  well  as  modern  plays  by 
Balucki  Narzymski,  Checinski  and  others.  The  French 
plays  were  most  appreciated  by  the  fashionable  audiences, 
while  the  Polish  ones  were  favorites  with  all  classes. 

During  the  two  following  years  of  my  Cracow  engagement 
I  took  up  history  and  made  a  quantity  of  historical  notes. 
I  also  worked  at  my  French  and  music,  for  though  I  had 
stopped  playing  singing  parts,  yet  I  needed  a  certain  amount 
of  cultivation  in  music  and  voice  for  such  parts  as  required 
this  accomplishment.  I  never  liked  to  let  slip  any  op- 
portunity when  I  had  a  chance  of  perfecting  myself  in  any- 
thing the  stage  required.  And  if  I  had  to  do  a  thing,  I 
wanted  to  do  it  well. 

I  remember  making  quite  a  hit  in  Sardou 's  ''Les  Vieux 
Gargons"  in  the  part  of  an  inginue,  where  I  had  to  sing 
snatches  from  ''Rigoletto,"  accompanying  myself  on  the 
piano.  I  sang  and  played,  but  it  was  not  my  voice  which 
was  applauded,  or  the  execution,  but  the  spirit  of  it.  I 
used  to  come  home  from  the  opera  almost  crazy  over  the 
music  and  the  singers.  The  only  relief  in  this  state  of 
enthusiasm  was  to  sit  at  the  piano  and  repeat  snatches  of 
airs  and  ritournelles  before  some  human  being,  and  this 
time  it  was  an  old  bachelor  who  was  the  victim  and  the 
sharer  of  the  girl's  impressions.  One  difficulty  lay  in  ren- 
dering the  airs  in  such  a  spontaneous  manner  as  to  give 
the  audience  the  impression  of  a  thoroughly  musical  per- 
son, who  finds  no  difficulty  in  execution,  and  plays  and 
sings  by  ear.  Another  difficulty  was  in  the  treatment  of  the 
scene.  There  were  the  interruptions  of  musical  themes, 
by  gasps,  ejaculations,  and  rapid  speech.  There  were 
numerous  subtle  details  to  observe,  which,  without  draw- 


POLAND  153 

ing  any  particular  attention  to  the  music  or  the  voice, 
brought  out  the  one  effect,  that  of  an  innocent,  spirited 
girl  under  the  spell  of  Verdi's  genius.  My  brother  liked 
my  interpretation  so  much  that  every  time  we  played  the 
piece  he  stood  behind  the  scenes  and  applauded.  I  thought 
more  of  that  than  all  the  compliments  of  the  critics  or  the 
repeated  applause  of  the  audience,  for  Felix  Benda  did  not 
usually  lavish  praises  on  me.  His  attitude  was  that  of 
a  loving  but  by  no  means  blind  judge. 

I  studied  so  much  during  the  season  of  1866-1867  that 
one  morning  I  experienced  the  horror  of  a  temporary  loss 
of  memory.  It  was  the  most  dreadful  experience. 
.  During  the  stage  rehearsal  of  "Kabale  und  Liebe"  I 
could  not  recollect  one  word  of  the  part  of  Louise,  which  I 
had  played  often  before,  and  even  rehearsed  on  the  previous 
day.  I  seemed  to  have  forgotten  it  all,  even  the  cues. 
When  the  prompter  gave  me  the  first  words  of  my  part,  I 
did  not  recognize  them,  and  had  to  be  reminded  that  it  was 
my  turn  to  speak.  I  repeated  one  or  two  lines  mechani- 
cally, but  not  being  used  to  follow  a  prompter  so  closely,  I 
stopped  short.  The  prompter  also  stopped,  and  looked  at 
me  with  questioning  eyes.  My  head  began  to  swim,  and 
there  was  such  a  terrible  blank  in  my  mind  that  I  believed 
I  was  on  the  verge  of  insanity.  The  despair  and  terror 
must  have  been  clearly  painted  on  my  face,  for  my  brother 
led  me  to  my  dressing-room  and  sent  for  a  cab  to  take  me 
home.  When  alone  in  my  room,  I  burst  into  violent  sob- 
bing, which  after  a  while  brought  a  slight  relief.  A  doctor 
was  summoned,  and  he  ordered  a  complete  rest  and  coun- 
try air.  I  was  not  allowed  to  read  or  write.  Music,  how- 
ever, was  granted  to  me  in  small  doses ;  also  sewing  and 
embroidery.  I  could  not  go  to  the  country  on  account  of 
bad  weather,  but  took  drives  between  rains,  and  shut  my 
doors  to  visitors. 

After  two  weeks  of  this  quiet  family  life,  I  came  back 
to  work,  and  the  dreadful  thing  never  repeated  itself. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

On  the  12th  of  September,  1868,  I  was  married  to  my 
present  husband,  Charles  Bozenta  Chlapowski.  On  the 
next  day  we  both  left  Cracow  for  Warsaw,  where  I  had 
been  offered  an  engagement  of  twelve  performances  during 
October.  This  was  a  great  honor  but  a  dangerous  one. 
The  Warsaw  Imperial  Theatre  is  entirely  run  as  a  stock 
company,  the  star  system  being  unknown  there.  It  is  an 
enormous  and  unwieldy  machine,  controlled  as  well  as 
subsidized  by  the  Russian  government,  and  is  -composed  of 
an  opera  company,  a  comic  opera,  a  ballet,  a  drama,  and 
a  comedy  company.  Three  orchestras,  two  choruses,  a 
ballet  school,  a  dramatic  school,  and  a  large  number  of 
officials,  high  and  low,  workmen  of  all  kinds,  belong  to  the 
organization.  The  salary  list  includes  from  seven  to  eight 
hundred  people.  The  theatre  owns  a  main  building,  the 
area  of  which  is  equal  to  a  large  square  block  in  New  York, 
containing  two  theatre  auditoriums,  besides  concert  halls 
and  ball-rooms.  Another  small  theatre  in  town,  called 
''Maly  Teatr,"  also  belongs  to  the  organization.  Three 
daily  performances  are  given  in  the  various  auditoriums. 

At  the  head  of  this  establishment  is  a  high  official 
called  the  president,  usually  some  general,  whose  authority 
is  absolute.  Being  somehow  under  the  control  of  the  viceroy 
of  Poland,  in  certain  cases  he  has  the  right  of  appeal  to  the 
emperor  himself.  The  organization  is  entirely  of  a  bureau- 
cratic character,  all  its  employees  are  exempt  from  military 

154 


156  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

obligation,  and  after  a  lapse  of  so  many  years  of  service 
they,  are  entitled  to  a  pension  for  life. 

Its  artistic  force  was  recruited  mostly  from  its  dramatic 
schools,  And  if  any  outsider  was  admitted  to  the  ranks, 
it^vas  usually  to  the  lowest  ones.  It  therefore  came  to  pass, 
that  the  rule  of  seniority,  customary  in  the  military  and 
civil  services,  was  often  applied  in  the  theatre  to  the  distribu- 
tion of  parts  and  to  the  question  of  emoluments. 

A  new  president.  Count  Sergius  Mouchanoff,  had  been 
appointed  in  the  early  half  of  1868.  This  gentleman,  of 
very  high  intellectual  attainments,  had  been  aide-de-camp 
to  the  Grand  Duke  Constantin,  viceroy  of  Poland  in  1863 
and  1864.  His  high  social  position,  his  education,  his 
personal  character,  his  influence  in  court,  and  his  marriage 
with  Madame  Marie  Calergi,  daughter  of  the  celebrated 
Chancellor  Nesselrode,  made  him  one  of  the  marked  per- 
sonalities, not  only  in  Warsaw  but  in  the  highest  circles  of 
Russian  society.  The  name  of  Madame  Marie  Calergi  was 
a  very  popular  one  in  Europe.  She  was  personally  a  queen 
of  beauty,  but  more  than  this,  her  intellectual  superiority, 
her  charm  of  manner,  and  her  artistic  accomplishments 
made  her  one  of  those  grandes  dames,  in  the  noblest 
sense  of  the  word,  who  played  such  an  important  part  in 
the  social  life  of  Europe ;  a  friend  of  Alfred  de  Musset,  of 
Chopin,  of  Liszt  and  Wagner,  she  was  herself  one  of  the 
foremost  pianists  of  her  day.  The  memory  of  her  is  one 
of  the  precious  recollections  of  my  past,  and  I  shall  always 
cherish  and  revere  it,  for  she  exercised  a  strong  and  refining 
influence  upon  my  future  artistic  development. 

Count  S.  Mouchanoff  held  in  his  hands  the  reins  of  the 
Warsaw  Theatre ;  he  desired  to  infuse  new  life  into  its  veins. 
The  old  bureaucratic  institution,  though  possessing  several 
artists  of  the  highest  rank,  able  to  compete  with  the  fore- 
most actors  of  the  world,  was  going  at  a  very  slow  pace. 

Count  Mouchanoff  decided  to  leave  the  beaten  track,  and 


POLAND  157 

to  look  outside  the  charmed  circle  in  order  to  j&amp;nd  some 
new  talent.  Mr.  Hencinski/  the  same  gentleman  who  had 
seen  my  first  appearance  a  few  years  before  in  Bochnia, 
happened  to  speak  to  him  of  me  in  favorable  terms.  His 
judgment  was  confirmed  by  those  who  had  seen  me  on  the 
Cracow  stage,  as  well  as  by  the  opinion  of  the  Galitzian 
press.  A  correspondence  followed  which  terminated  in 
my  engagement  for  twelve  performances  on  terms  similar 
to  those  of  a  regular  American  star  engagement. 

This  innovation  was  not  favorably  received  by  the 
majority  of  the  members  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre.  It  was 
against  all  rules,  a  break  in  the  old  time-honored  system, 
and  looked  hke  a  revolutionary  attempt.  A  resolution 
was  formed  that  ''coflte  que  cotlte"  the  innovation  must 
be  discredited,  and  the  newcomer  must  fail.  On  the  day 
of  my  arrival  in  Warsaw  there  appeared  in  the  leading 
paper  of  the  city,  whose  chief  editor  was  the  husband  of 
the  leading  tragedienne  of  the  theatre,  a  scathing  article 
upon  the  arrogance  of  some  incipient  provincial  actors  or 
actresses  who  dared  to  enter  into  open  rivalry  with  the 
favorites  of  the  metropolitan  stage.  The  management  was 
accused,  though  in  covered  words,  of  introducing  a  new 
policy,  which  might  destroy  the  high  standing  of  the  theatre, 
etc.  This  article  was  answered  as  a  premature  and  unjusti- 
fied attack  by  other  papers.  Its  effect  upon  the  public 
was  not  a  bad  one,  as  it  only  increased  interest  in  my  appear- 
ance, but  I  confess  that  personally  it  affected  me  deeply, 
and  might  have  dampened  my  courage  had  I  not  brought 
with  me  a  great  supply  of  it. 

My  first  appearance  in  Warsaw  I  regard  as  the  decisive 
turning-point  in  my  career.  I  did  not  dream  then  of  play- 
ing ever  in  foreign  countries.  Though  speaking  some  French 
and  German,  I  did  not  know  these  languages  well  enough 
to  be  able  to  perform  in  either  of  them ;   and  our  own  lan- 

^  Checinski  in  Polish. 


158  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

guage,  which  I  think  is  one  of  the  richest  and  most  beautiful 
in  the  world,  is  too  little  known  to  be  used  on  the  stage 
outside  of  our  own  country.  Therefore  all  my  dramatic 
ambition  was  concentrated  on  our  national  stage,  and  as 
the  Warsaw  Theatre  was  the  highest  representative  of 
dramatic  art  in  Poland,  a  success  behind  the  Warsaw 
footlights  was  my  highest  dream,  and  I  was  determined 
to  realize  it. 

The  welcome  I  was  accorded  by  Mr.  and  Madame  Mouch- 
anhoff  strengthened  my  energies.  Finding  people  that 
expressed  the  same  notions  upon  dramatic  art  which  I 
treasured  myself,  I  felt  more  at  home. 

When  I  came  to  my  first  rehearsal,  I  was  received  by  my 
professional  brothers  and  sisters  with  great  courtesy  (War- 
saw people  are  celebrated  all  over  Poland  for  their  exquis- 
ite politeness),  but  in  a  ceremonious  and  somewhat  cold 
manner.  The  atmosphere  was  entirely  different  from  the 
warm,  congenial  one  of  the  Cracow  theatre,  where  we  all 
were  like  members  of  one  family.  The  play  was  *'Les  ld6es 
de  Madame  Aubray,''  by  A.  Dumas,  fits,  very  popular  at 
that  time  and,  according  to  my  judgment,  one  of  the  best 
he  had  ever  written.  I  was  to  play  Jeanine,  a  part  sym- 
pathetic, simple,  not  exacting  any  display  of  great  dramatic 
power,  though  having  very  affecting  moments.  I^elt.safe 
in  it,  as  much  as  one  can  be  safe  in  anything. 

When  we  began  to  rehearse,  I  acted  as  though  I  were 
before  the  public.  I  was  excited  by  the  importance  of  the 
occasion,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  several  of  the  actors 
and  actresses  present  were  pleased  with  my  acting,  and  even 
moved  at  moments  to  tears.  I  felt  very  happy  after  the 
first  rehearsal;  two  or  three  of  the  actors  congratulated 
me,  and  assured  me  that  if  I  played  in  the  evening  as  I  had 
at  the  rehearsal  I  would  win  my  cause. 

The  other  members,  however,  after  the  rehearsal  was 
over,  gathered  aside  and  held  a  prolonged  conference,  at 


MADAME    MODJESKA   AS   -ADRIENNE    LECOUVREUR" 


POLAND  159 

the  end  of  which  the  stage  manager  told  me  that  it  would 
be  impossible  to  produce  the  play  for  my  first  night,  as  Mr. 
X.,  who  was  to  take  part  in  it,  felt  unwell,  and  would  be 
obliged  to  stop  playing  for  some  time.  Mr.  X.  had  been 
present  at  the  rehearsal,  and  looked  the  picture  of  health. 
I  was  distressed.  Some  of  the  members  present  —  those 
who  had  congratulated  me  —  exclaimed,  '*This  is  a  shame," 
but  they  were  not  listened  to.  The  stage  manager  then 
asked  me  what  part  I  would  select  instead  of  Jeanine  for  my 
first  appearance. 

'^Why  will  you  not  play  "Adrienne  Lecouvreur"?  The 
company  is  ready  in  it,  and  there  will  be  no  diflSculty  in  the 
production.'' 

Now  ^'Adrienne  Lecouvreur"  was  then  considered  to  be 
one  of  the  most  difficult  parts  in  the  range  of  any  actress. 
It  had  been  played  years  before  in  Warsaw  by  Rachel,  and 
many  of  the  old  actors ;  many  among  the  public  remembered 
her  magnificent  performance.  Several  of  the  leading  tragic 
actresses  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre  had  attempted  to  play  it 
afterwards,  but  success  did  not  crown  their  efforts.  '*Adri- 
enne  Lecouvreur"  was  included  in  the  repertoire  I  had  chosen 
for  the  engagement,  but  I  had  put  it  at  the  last,  desiring 
first  to  gain  the  favor  of  the  public  in  easier  parts,  and  being 
afraid  of  appearing  too  presumptuous  in  playing  it  at  the 
start.  The  members  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre  had  only  smiled 
contemptuously  when  they  learned  of  my  ambition  to  play 
Adrienne,  and  they  felt  that  I  could  not  succeed  where  only 
Rachel  had  succeeded  and  every  one  else  had  failed.  I 
hesitated  when  the  proposal  was  made  so  abruptly  to  me. 
I  saw  the  snare,  but,  determined  to  brave  it,  I  answered, 
''Yes." 

I  went  straight  from  the  theatre  to  Mr.  Jasinski,  my  old 
friend,  to  seek  advice  and  consolation.  When  I  told  him 
the  story,  he  asked  me  who  was  present  at  the  rehearsal. 
When  I  gave  him  the  names,  he  said : — 


160  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

''How  could  you  be  so  foolish  as  to  act  before  them? 
But  you  must  have  done  it  well,  if  they  decided  not  to  let 
you  appear  in  Jeanine.  These  same  people  look  upon  you 
as  an  intruder,  and  have  decided  that  you  are  to  fail.  Now 
when  you  rehearse  next  time,  be  careful,  and  do  not  show 
how  you  will  perform  at  night." 

I  followed  his  advice.  At  the  rehearsal  of  Adrienne  I 
repeated  my  words  in  a  commonplace  manner,  and  indicated 
very  superficially  my  stage  business.  The  actors  belonging 
to  the  cast  of  the  piece  were  not  so  hostile  to  me  as  those 
who  were  to  play  in  "Madame  Aubray."  Some  of  them 
thought  I  had  been  unfairly  treated,  but,  nevertheless, 
they  all  were  in  an  expectant  mood. 

A  few  days  before  my  first  performance,  what  was  my 
astonishment  when  I  saw  that  the  bill  of  the  theatre  was 
''Adrienne  Lecouvreur,"  with  one  of  the  leading  actresses, 
Madame  Palinska,  the  wife  of  the  hostile  editor,  in  the  title 
r61e.  The  president  had  been  obliged  to  leave  Warsaw  for 
a  week,  and  the  cabal  had  profited  by  his  absence  to  prepare 
this  scheme.  Adrienne  had  not  been  played  there  for  three 
or  four  years.  But  the  lady  above  named  was  the  wife  of 
the  editor  who  had  written  that  anticipatory  condemna- 
tion of  me,  the  object  of  which  was  to  take  off  the  prestige 
of  the  comparative  novelty  of  the  play.  Besides,  my  infor- 
mal rehearsal  had  led  them  to  believe  that  the  comparison 
would  crush  me  in  the  most  effective  manner. 

I  went  with  my  husband  to  the  performance.  Hardly 
had  the  lady  in  question  entered  and  uttered  a  few  words, 
when  my  husband  turned  to  me  and  said :  — 

"Well,  you  are  not  afraid  any  more,  are  you?" 

"I  am  encouraged,"  I  said ;  and  so  I  was. 

At  last  the  great  night  came.  The  house  had  been  sold 
out.  They  were  anxious  to  see  how  this  young  actress, 
yet  unknown  to  fame,  would  accomplish  her  task.  The 
premature  polemic  in  the  papers  had  excited  public  curi- 


POLAND  161 

osity.  Besides  this,  it  was  the  first  stroke  of  the  theatrical 
policy  of  the  new  president.  What  would  be  its  outcome  ? 
The  viceroy,  Count  Berg,  —  an  old,  conservative,  mummified 
dignitary,  —  was  not  particularly  favorable  to  Mouchanoff, 
and  would  have  liked  to  see  him  make  a  failure,  and  official 
Russian  society,  of  course,  followed  his  lead.  Polish  society 
was  equally  interested,  but  from  different  motives.  Mar- 
riages of  actresses  into  aristocratic  families  were  rare  events 
in  Poland,  where  there  still  exist  a  great  many  old  preju- 
dices and  notions.  Moreover,  whenever  this  had  happened 
before,  the  actress  had  always  left  the  stage.  Why  was  it 
otherwise  now  ?  The  husband  of  this  new  actress  belonged 
to  a  very  exclusive  and  strictly  religious  family.  Why  did 
h^e  pursue  a  different  course  from  others,  by  allowing  his 
wife  to  remain  on  the  stage?  Was  he  justified  in  doing  so, 
as  some  claimed,  by  her  exceptional  talents,  or  did  he  act 
in  defiance  of  the  accepted  ideas,  and  so  on  ?  Well,  they  all 
came  there  in  numbers,  to  see  and  to  judge. 

I  received  a  very  pleasant  greeting  from  the  courteous 
audience,  though  it  was  immediately  hushed  into  silence. 
And  what  a  deep  silence  it  was !  Such  listening  is  never 
known  in  America.  Polish  audiences  go  to  the  theatre 
really  to  enjoy  a  performance  and  therefore  they  listen 
and  look  in  an  almost  reverent  manner,  so  as  not  to  lose  one 
intonation,  one  delicate  shading  of  the  voice,  nor  one  slight 
gesture,  one  passing  expression  of  the  face.  After  the  first 
line  1  lost  my  fear ;  after  a  few  of  them,  I  was  in  my  part ! 
Meantime,  the  silence  continued  untU  I  came  to  the  fable 
of  the  two  pigeons.  At  its  close  there  burst  in  the  theatre 
such  a  storm  of  applaud  as  I  had  never  heard  before,  and 
have  seldom  heard  since.  A  few  moments  later,  at  my  first 
exit,  the  applause  was  repeated  in  the  same  manner.  The 
first  success  gave  me  courage  and  inspiration.  I  played  as 
one  can  only  play  for  life  or  death.  The  public,  once  well 
disposed,  showered  upon  me  the  favors  of  its  encourage- 

M 


162  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

ment.     And  then  came  the  last  act,  which  was  one  of  my 

best-loved   scenes.     When   the  curtain  fell  on  poor  dead 

Adrienne,  the  public  did  not  want  to  leave  the  theatre. 

They  called  and  called,  and  the  curtain  was  raised  time 

and  again.     But  my  greatest,  or  at  least  the  most  h^h- 

priced,  triumph  was  reached  when  the  actors  who  had  played 

the  parts  of  the  prince  and 

of     Michonnet,    our     great 

Zolkowski,  the  most  perfect 

comedian  I  have  ever  seen, 

and  Richter,  second  only  to 

him,    came  and  embraced 

me  with  tears  in  their  eyes, 

greeting  me  as  a  sister  in 

art. 

I  shall  always  remember 
how  kind   Richter  was    at 
the  time    of   my  first    ap- 
■     pearance    in    Warsaw.      I 
had    been    so     frightened 
when  waiting  for  my  en- 
trance behind  the  scenes, 
that,  though  I  heard    my 
cue,  I  dared  not  go  on.     He 
was  on  the  stage  then,  and, 
Jan  Richter  OF  THB  Waesaw  Theatms.     Seeing    my    hesitation,    he 
came    very    near    my    en- 
trance, and,  while  he  improvised  to  fill  the  gap,  he  succeeded 
in  whispering  to  me :  "Come  on!     Do  not  be  afraid  !    You 
will  win  the  battle  !"     Then  he  turned  to  the  people  on  the 
stage,  "She  is  coming!"  he  exclaimed  triumphantly,  "and 
here  she  is  !"     His  look  and  the  tone  of  his  voice  were  so 
encouraging  that  I   stepped    bravely  on    the   stage,    and, 
once  there,  I  recovered  my  wits  immediately. 
When  the  curtain  fell  on  the  second  act  and  the  audience 


•       POLAND  163 

called  me  before  the  curtain  several  times,  he  came  to  me, 
and,  shaking  both  my  hands,  he  said  radiantly :  — 

''You  see!    The  battle  is  won!    I  congratulate  you!" 

''Oh,  but  I  am  afraid  of  the  fourth  act ! ''  I  said,  shivering. 

"Nonsense!"  he  answered.  "Don't  you  see  that  the 
audience  is  with  you  ?  Go  !  Change  your  dress  and  think 
only  of  your  part!    Forget  the  audience!" 

When  the  fourth  act  was  over,  I  sank  on  my  knees  behind 
the  scenes,  whispering:  "I  thank  Thee,  my  Lord!  It 
is  over !"  and  I  hid  my  face  in  my  hands.  He  came  to  me 
and,  lifting  me  from  the  floor,  said :  — 

"What  are  you  thinking  of?  The  public  is  applauding 
furiously  and  you  start  now  on  your  evening  prayers? 
Come,  take  your  call  quickly!"  And  he  dragged  me  on 
the  stage,  a  shivering,  tear-stained  creature,  glad  and  thank- 
ful to  him  and  to  that  dear  public  who  waved  handkerchiefs 
and  threw  flowers  at  me  out  of  sheer  kindness.  For  I  knew 
well  I  was  bad  in  that  act,  —  written  for  Rachel's  tragic 
powers  and  Rachel's  deep,  strong,  almost  terrible  voice,  if 
one  is  to  believe  tradition.  My  voice  had  a  merely  nervous 
power,  and  it  was  never  very  strong.  I  could  not  render  the 
recitation  from  "  Ph^dre  "  to  my  own  satisfaction,  yet  these 
dear  people  applauded  and  called  me  six  times  before  the 
curtain.  I  had  a  feeling  of  receiving  alms  and  was  rather 
more  ashamed  than  happy.  Yet  I  had  one  consolation. 
I  knew  I  could  honestly  win  my  applause  in  the  fifth  act. 

Richter  seemed  to  be  as  pleased  with  the  reception  as 
he  wanted  me  to  be. 

All  the  members  of  the  company  appeared  in  my  dress- 
ing-room, those  who  had  been  friendly  and  those  who  had 
been  hostile,  and  congratulated  me  in  the  most  affectionate 
way. 

Next  day  the  president  asked  me  to  prolong  my  present 
appearances  to  twice  their  number,  and  offered  me  an 
engagement  for  life  in  the  Imperial  Theatre.     The  press, 


164  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

not  excluding  the  Warsaw  Gazette,  which  had  previously 
attacked  me,  praised  me  much  above  my  deserts,  and  as  to 
society,  —  well,  during  the  following  two  or  three  days  it  left 
at  my  door  about  two  thousand  visiting  cards  (which  I  have 
kept  for  curiosity's  sake),  and  I  do  not  know  how  many 
invitations  to  receptions,  dinners,  balls,  and  the  rest.  The 
battle  was  won. 

I  told  the  president  that  I  was  willing  to  remain  in  War- 
saw forever,  but  I  could  not  do  so  at  once,  because  I  was  still 
under  contract  with  the  Cracow  management,  which  ex- 
pired only  next  summer.  He  agreed  to  this  postponement 
of  my  reappearance  in  Warsaw,  but  expressed  the  wish  that  I 
should  sign  the  contract  before  my  return  to  Cracow.  I  had 
no  objection  to  that,  and  then  the  question  of  salary  arose. 

'*What  sum  do  you  require  as  compensation  for  your 
services?''  asked  the  president. 

''Twenty-five  thousand  a  year,"  I  answered  timidly. 
Upon  that  he  looked  a  little  perplexed,  and  saying  he  would 
beg  a  few  days  for  consideration  and  for  necessary  consulta- 
tion with  authorities,  he  left  me.  I  was  rather  puzzled  by 
his  change  of  manner,  and  thought  that  perhaps  I  had  asked 
too  much. 

When  I  was  thus  brooding  over  this  difficulty,  Mr.  Hen- 
cinski  came  in.  He  was  visibly  anxious  to  know  the  result 
of  my  conversation  with  the  president,  and  when  I  told  him 
that  Mr.  Mouchanoflf  was  willing  to  engage  me  for  life,  but 
seemed  to  hesitate  when  I  named  the  figure  of  the  salary, 
Mr.  Hencinski  looked  puzzled.     Then  he  said  abruptly:  — 

''Pardon  my  indiscretion,  madame,  but  could  you  tell 
me  what  was  the  salary  you  demanded  ?  It  is  not  simple 
curiosity  on  my  part,  believe  me.  I  want  to  help  in  clear- 
ing up  an  obscure  point." 

When  I  told  him  what  my  sum  was,  he  looked  at  me  just 
as  the  president  did  before ;  then  suddenly  his  countenance 
changed,  and  he  asked  :  — 


POLAND  165 

"Twenty-five  thousand?''  Then,  after  a  short  pause,  he 
added,  *'0f  what,  roubles  or  florins?"^ 

''Of  florins,  of  course,''  I  said,  almost  vexed.  Then  I 
added:  ''And  I  think  it  is  not  too  much.  It  is  only  what 
Mr.  Zolkowski  gets.  I  may  not  be  yet  as  great  as  he,  but 
I  know  I  am  a  strong  attraction."  Upon  that  Mr.  Hen- 
cinski  laughed,  and  said :  — 

"That,  of  course,  is  not  too  much,  but  the  president 
thought  you  asked  for  twenty-five  thousand  roubles ;  and 
you  know  there  is  no  such  high  salary  in  this  country,  un- 
less it  is  a  Cabinet  minister's." 

Then  I  understood  the  president's  cool  manner,  and  we 
both  laughed  heartily  over  it. 

"I  will  go  this  minute  to  him,"  said  Mr.  H.,  "and  comfort 
him.  I  knew  there  must  have  been  some  misunderstand- 
ing."    And  with  these  words  he  took  leave  and  departed. 

The  very  next  day,  early  in  December  of  1868, 1  signed  a 
contract  for  life,  beginning  in  the  autumn  of  1869.  Mr. 
MouchanofiF  was  so  pleased  with  the  moderate  salary  I 
required  that  he  granted  me  a  benefit  performance  every 
year,  and  also  added  eight  hundred  roubles  yearly  for  my 
theatrical  modern  wardrobe,  —  the  costumes  of  past  ages 
being  furnished  by  the  government.  On  my  part  I  begged 
his  permission  to  insert  two  conditions  of  my  own  in  the 
contract.  Knowing  the  unwillingness  of  the  management 
to  make  innovations  and  to  introduce  new  plays,  I  demanded 
that  I  should  be  permitted  to  produce  six  new  plays  of  my 
choice  every  year,  and  to  include  them  in  the  repertoire, 
and  also  that  I  should  not  be  forced  to  play  more  than 
three  times  a  week.  These  conditions  were  accepted  and 
the  contract  signed. 

A  few  days  after  the  signing  of  my  contract  a  friend 
told  me  that  he  was  just  calling  on  the  viceroy,  General  Berg, 
when   Mr.   Mouchanoff   came   and   told  him   that  it    was 

*  6#  florins  =  1  rouble. 


166  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

doubtful  whether  he  could  secure  Modjeska  for  the  Warsaw 
Theatre  because  she  demanded  such  au  unheard-of  salary. 
"Nothing  leaa  than  twenty-five  thousand  roubles  will 
satisfy  her!"  he  stated.  The  governor  whistled  softly, 
and  then  turning  his  face  towards  the  president,  said,  smil- 
ing, "Well,  I  suppose  you  will  have  to  pve  it  to  her." 


Opem-aib  Theatrk  in  thb  Pdbuc  Pabe.  Wabsaw. 

This  Uttle  story  flattered  me,  but  did  not  incite  any  greedy 
regrets  on  my  part.  I  was  well  pleased  with  my  arrange- 
ment, especially  with  the  security  of  staying  permanently 
in  such  a  charming  city  as  Warsaw. 

Our  departure  from  Warsaw  was  touching.  All  our 
friends  and  a  great  many  stranger^^came  to  the  station. 
Students  appeared  in  a  large  body.  We  were  actually 
smothered  with  flowers  which  friends  and  the  public  threw 


POLAND  167 

into  our  compartment.  We  departed  amidst  cheers,  good 
wishes,  waving  of  handkerchiefs,  and  exclamations:  ''God 
be  with  you  !"  and '^  Come  back  to  us!''  and  ''Long  live  art!" 
and  many  other  cheers  which  escape  my  memory. 

Warsaw  is  called  the  heart  of  Poland,  and  no  name  could 
better  fit  that  city,  throbbing  with  never  extinguished  love 
of  the  country  and  mutual  love  of  people  because  of  the 
chains,  wounds,  and  constant  terror  which  link  that  sensi- 
tive, warm-hearted,  imaginative  mass  of  human  beings  so 
closely  together  that  they  seem  like  one  body,  which,  in  spite 
of  mortal  injuries,  lives,  and  is  all  ready  to  face  new  trials. 
"Heart  of  Poland,"  indeed,  for  the  blow  aimed  at  it  disabled 
the  whole  body. 

I  took  leave  of  my  new  friends  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  and 
I  felt  such  a  strong  bond  of  sympathy  for  those  I  was  leav- 
ing behind  that  my  heart  seemed  to  leap  toward  them ;  and 
to  ease  that  overflow  of  feeling  I  had  a  strong  desire  to  take 
them  fil,  strangers  and  friends,  in  one  embrace  and  tell  them 
how  much  I  loved  them. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

We  went  to  visit  my  husband's  relatives  in  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Posen.  Almost  all  the  members  of  his  family 
were  landowners,  living  on  their  large  estates  in  Prussian 
Poland. 


One  of  the  Rt^iDENcca  of  the  Chlapowski  Fauilv,  near  Posen. 

We  payed  the  first  visit  to  my  sister-in-law,  who  married 
her  cousin,  Mrs.  Casimir  Chlapowski.  She  came  with  her 
husband  to  Breslau  to  meet  us.  We  went  together  to  their 
home,  in  Kopaszewo,  a  large  colonial  mansion  with  a  beau- 
tiful park,  a  superb  drive,  and  an  abundance  of  flowers  and 


MADAME    MODJESKA 


POLAND  169 

rose-bushes.  We  were  warmly  welcomed,  and  I  lived  a  few 
days  there,  in  an  atmosphere  of  tenderness,  peace,  and 
refinement  not  easily  equalled.  The  cordial  way  in  which 
I  was  included  in  their  circle  made  me  feel  at  home  at  once, 
and  when  we  departed  I  left  a  large  part  of  my  heart  with 
them.  We  returned  to  Kopaszewo  many  times,  almost 
every  summer,  and  it  was  always  the  same  delight  to  be 
there,  to  drive,  to  walk  together  in  the  park,  to  chat  and 
read  aloud,  etc. 

There  is  in  the  park  of  Kopaszewo  a  certain  old  tree  under 
which,  as  tradition  tells  us,  our  great  poet  Mickiewicz  wrote 
his  celebrated  poem,  ''Pan  Tadeusz."  I  paid  daily  visits 
to  that  venerable  tree,  and  addressed  many  questions  about 
our  great  bard  to  its  widespread  branches. 

We  visited  also  my  husband's  grandmother,  Madame 
Morawska,  almost  ninety  years  old.  There  was  so  much 
warmth  in  her  greeting  that  when  I  kissed  her  hand  and 
she  embraced  me,  I  could  not  restrain  my  tears.  She  was 
one  of  the  most  intellectual  women  of  her  time,  a  writer/ 
and  a  wise  and  clever  adviser  of  the  younger  generation. 
I  had  a  long  talk  with  her,  in  which  I  expressed  my  hap- 
piness at  being  included  in  the  family,  and  I  asked  her  if 
she  had  any  objection  to  my  remaining  on  the  stage.  She 
answered :  — 

''By  no  means,  Helena.  On  the  contrary,  we  aU  want 
you  to  perfect  yourself  in  your  art,  and  who  knows  if  one 
day,  when  you  appear  abroad,  —  I  hope  it  will  be  on  the 
French  stage,  —  you  will  not  make  a  Polish  name  famous 
in  all  the  world.'' 

After  leaving  her,  we  went  to  Turvia,  to  the  beautiful 
home  of  General  Chlapow'ski. 

General  Desire  Chlapowski  was  one  of  the  most  prominent 

^  She  wrote  Polish  history  in  rhymes  for  the  young  generation,  and  every 
child  in  the  family  and  schools  of  the  province  knew  passages  of  it  by 
heart. 


170  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

men  in  Poland  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
As  a  young  man  he  served  under  the  great  Napoleon,  and 
was  personally  attached  to  him:  first,  as  a  page  of  the 
Empress  Josephine ;  later,  as  an  officier  d'ordonnance  of  the 
emperor ;  last,  as  commanding  a  regiment  of  the  celebrated 
Polish  Lancers.  He  left  the  French  service  when  Napo- 
leon sacrificed  the  Polish  cause. 

The  General  was  of  middle  size,  with  a  beautiful  face  and 
a  figure  of  perfect  proportions.  As  a  young  boy,  at  the  court 
of  the  great  emperor,  he  was  called,  according  to  the  con- 
temporary memoirs,  the  little  Cherubino.  He  also  had  been 
known  as  the  best  horseman  of  his  time.  In  1830-1831 
he  joined  the  Polish  revolution.  Though  by  marriage  he 
was  the  brother-in-law  of  Grand  Duke  Constantin,  viceroy 
of  Poland,  he  was  one  of  the  bravest  and  most  brilliant 
of  Polish  soldiers.  After  the  Napoleonic  wars.  General 
Chlapowski  studied  the  latest  methods  of  agriculture  in 
England  and  introduced  them  into  Poland.  His  home 
became  the  training-school  of  scientific  agriculture.  When, 
in  1848,  the  Prussian  government  established  the  emanci- 
pation of  peasants,  for  the  Polish  provinces  it  was  on  the 
plans  elaborated  by  both  General  Chlapowski  and  Mr.  Joseph 
Morawski.*  The  measure  was  so  perfect  that  it  contented 
both  the  landowners  and  the  peasants. 

I  shall  never  forget  my  first  impression  of  the  visit  to 
his  house.  We  arrived  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening, 
and  were  received  by  the  General's  unmarried  son,  Thadeus 
Chlapowski,  the  same  I  had  met  two  years  before  in  Posen, 
and  who  introduced  my  husband  to  me.  The  dinner  was 
over,  and  we  were  told  that  the  General  and  his  brother- 
in-law.  Count  Gutakowski,  were  both  in  the  chapel,  where 
the  family  gathered    every  evening  for  prayers.     We  were 

'  Mr.  Joseph  Morawski  was  m^  husband's  grandfather  on  his  mother's 
side.  He  held  a  prominent  position  during  the  Grand  Duchv  of  Warsaw, 
where  he  introduced  the  code  of  Napoleon;  he  also  was  one  of  the  eminent 
logicians  and  philosophers  of  our  coimtry. 


POLAND  171 

ushered  into  the  choir,  in  order  to  avoid  making  a  commo- 
tion and  disturbing  the  devotions  by  our  entrance  into  the 
chapel.  As  we  knelt  next  to  the  organ,  I  beheld  a  picture 
which  even  now  is  vivid  in  my  memory :  — 

On  the  altar  steps  were  kneeling  two  gentlemen  past 
eighty  years  of  age,  the  General  and  his  brother-in-law, 
both  deeply  engaged  in  prayers.  We  could  not  see  their 
faces,  only  their  silver  heads  bent  forward  in  fervent  devo- 
tion. In  the  benches  sat  some  relatives;  some  so-called 
residents,^  and  also  the  servants,  knelt,  scattered  about  the 
chapel.  All  the  women  wore  veils  over  their  heads.  A 
perfect  silence  reigned  in  the  chapel,  broken  only  by  a  soft 
rattle  of  rosaries  and  a  sigh  of  whispered  prayers.  After 
a  long  while  of  this  general  concentration,  some  one  started 
a  Litany;  we  all  repeated,  ''Have  mercy  on  us  !"  and  when 
I  looked  down  on  those  aged  men  prostrated  before  the 
altar,  another  picture  rose  before  my  soul's  eyes.  I  saw  the 
field  of  battle  covered  with  the  blood  of  our  youths,  flames, 
smoke,  gallows,  and  all  the  horrors  of  our  last  insurrection, 
the  cruelties  of  the  Cossacks,  and  the  perfidies  of  the  Prus- 
sians,— all  the  wrongs  practised  for  more  than  a  century  over 
the  people  who  had  borne  the  Christian  standard  high 
above  their  heads  fighting  for  faith  and  civilization;  and 
when  my  thoughts  returned  to  the  present  time,  and  I  saw 
no  ray  of  hope,  no  sunshine,  nothing  but  disappoint- 
ment, bitterness,  hatred,  and  oppression,  then  tears 
flooded  my  face,  and  I  repeated,  sobbing,  ''Have  mercy 
on  us ! " 

We  spent  three  most  delightful  days  in  Turwia  in  the 
company  of  the  General,  this  veteran,  admired,  respected, 
and  loved  by  all  who  knew  him.  His  talk  was  that  of  the 
past,  most  quaint  and  interesting.     He  seldom  frequented 

*  It  was  a  custom  of  the  Polish  nobility  to  maintain  several  poor  eentle- 
folk  in  their  castles,  most  of  them  widows,  orphans,  old  soldiers,  and  other 
unfortunates. 


172  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

theatres,  he  said,  and  confessed  frankly  that  I  was  the  first 
''person  of  the  theatre''  he  had  met  since  Talma. 

On  the  evening  before  our  leaving  Turwia,  the  General 
took  his  leave  of  us,  saying  that  he  had  to  be  on  horseback 
at  dawn,  and  might  not  come  back  until  noon,  while  our 
train  was  leaving  at  ten  a.m.* 

We  returned  to  Cracow,  and  I  began  my  work  of  old.  My 
position,  however,  had  undergone  a  slight  change.  Before 
my  Warsaw  experiences  the  actors  and  the  public  regarded 
me  as  a  talented,  struggling  young  actress,  while  at  my 
return  from  our  metropolis,  where  I  had  made  a  decided 
success,  I  was  raised  in  their  opinion  to  the  dignity  of  a  true 
artist. 

All  the  critics,  especially  those  who  had  predicted  my 
advancement,  were  glad  to  acknowledge  my  success,  and 
the  public  greeted  me  with  flowers  and  even  poems.  Some 
of  these  were  printed  in  the  periodical  papers. 

It  is  such  a  satisfactory  feeling  to  be  a  discoverer  of  a  new 
planet,  a  gold-mine,  or  a  talent,  even  of  a  failure.  It  is 
always  pleasant  to  be  able  to  say,  ''I  told  you  so.''  And 
one  of  the  critics  who  had  stood  by  me  from  the  beginning 
of  my  engagement  in  Cracow  wrote  a  long  article  on  the 
subject  of  my  so-called  ''Victorious  Debuts"  in  Warsaw. 
I  be&lt;^  the  reader  not  to  accuse  me  of  presumption,  if  I  quote 
this  criticism,  or  rather  eulogy.  I  do  it  simply  to  state  the 
fact. 

CZAS.  No.  284 

Dec.  19,  1868. 
"When  the  name  of  this  genuine  artist,  to-day  acclaimed  all 
over  the  country,  occupied  yet  a  modest  position  in  the  cast  of  our 
theatre,  we  had  first  the  opportunity  of  drawing  public  attention 
to  the  hopeful  resources  of  her  uncommon  talent.  We  paid  a 
just  tribute  to  her,  often  in  opposition  to  the  opinions  of  several 
local  so-called  connoisseurs,  who  did  not  suspect  that  a  child  of  the 

^  At  eighty-nine  he  still  rode  his  favorite  horse.  Men  like  him  are  very 
rare  at  the  present  time. 


POLAND  173 

&gt; 

manor  bom,  a  native  of  Cracow,  could  harbor  a  higher  flight  of 
mind  which  would  raise  her  above  the  common  level,  and  carry 
her  into  the  sphere  of  the  elite  of  art.    We  were  accused  of  spoil- 

[  ing  her  by  our  praise,  which  our  opponent  said  would  only  benumb 

y  and  blimt  an  undeniable  talent.    The  effect  was  just  reversed. 

Instead  of  acting  as  a  narcotic,  the  praise  acted  as  a  stimulant. 
The  young  actress  was  in  love  with  her  art,  as  well  as  full  of  noble 
ambition.  And  after  each  favorable  criticism  she  grew  in  power, 
and  surpassed  herself.  Each  performance  was  better  than  the 
preceding  one,  and  the  slight  defects  which  occasionally  appeared 
soon  vanished,  thanks  to  continual  studies,  in  which  she  was 

^  guided  both  by  Nature  and  a  remarkable  artistic  instinct.     In 

consequence  her  name  grew  more  and  more  popular,  and  her 
talent  received  more  and  more  recognition.  To-day  all  opposition 
is  gone.  The  verdict  of  Warsaw,  where  artistic  feeUng  has  been 
developed  by  so  many  exquisite  models,  siuroimds  Modjeska's  head 
with  a  nimbus,  —  our  young  Cracovian  artist  has  become,  con- 
trary to  the  common  saying,  a  prophet  in  her  own  country.     In  one 

^  word,  she  has  achieved  an  unparalleled  triumph. 

"Cannot  we  claim  a  pale  reflex  of  that  triumph  for  having  dis- 
covered and  supported  her  genius,  struggling  in  its  behalf  against 
local  coteries  and  prejudices,  and  are  we  not  entitled  to-day  to 
ask  boldly,  'Who  was  right'?" 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

Soon  after  our  return  to  Cracow,  my  husband  became 
the  editor  of  a  new  daily  paper  called  Kraj  (The  Country). 
This  periodical  was  to  be  the  organ  of  a  new  national  party, 
including  representatives  of  all  three  parts  of  Poland  under 
Russian,  Prussian,  and  Austrian  governments.  Its  char- 
acter was  therefore  more  national  than  merely  local. 
Without  being  radical,  it  was  of  a  decidedly  progressive 
type.  Mr.  Chlapowski  was  elected  as  editor-in-chief  at  a 
general  meeting  of  the  new  party. 

Among  the  owners  of  the  paper  the  chief  ones  were 
Prince  Adam  Sapieha  and  Mr.  Sammelson,  a  Polish  Jew. 
Both  of  them  were  natives  of  Austrian  Poland.  Among 
the  contributors  to  the  paper  there  were  some  eminent 
Polish  publicists  and  literary  men. 

Our  house  became  the  centre  of  the  artistic  and  literary 
world,  and  we  spent  many  delightful  evenings  receiving 
remarkable  and  congenial  men,  each  of  them  having  strong 
individualities  and  characteristics.  Of  the  women  of  our 
circle  I  can  say  only  that  they  were  most  charming,  and 
some  of  them  very  clever  and  witty. 

The  soul  of  these  gatherings  was  ''Sever,"  Ignacy 
Maciejewski,  of  Russian  Poland,  a  great  patriot,  who  had 
taken  an  active  part  in  the  last  insurrection,  was  seriously 
wounded  in  1863,  and  when  the  uprising  of  our  country  was 
crushed,  he  went  to  London,  whence  he  wrote  interesting 
letters  to  Polish  papers.  The  subject  of  those  letters  varied 
according  to  the  mood  or  surroundings  of  the  author.  Some 
of  them  were  political,  some  purely  literary.     It  was  he 

174 


POLAND  175 

who  first  made  known  to  us  Rusldn,  Morris,  Millais,  and 
Henry  Irving.  He  wrote  most  flattering  criticisms  of  the 
great  English  actor,  under  whose  spell  he  remained  to  the 
end  of  his  life.  After  five  years  of  sojourn  in  London, 
during  which  time  he  wrote  a  play  called  ''The  Duel  of 
Generosity,''  based  on  English  themes,  he  returned  to  the 
country  and  settled  down  in  Cracow,  entrance  into  Rus- 
sian Poland  being  denied  to  him. 

He  was  original,  witty,  and  entertaining.  His  very 
entrance  in  the  house  used  to  stir  the  company.  He  pre- 
tended contempt  for  the  present  form  of  greeting  between 
people,  and  used  to  come  in  with  his  head  slightly  bent  down, 
and  with  a  subdued  voice  pronounced  the  popular  peas- 
ant salutation,  ''Blessed  be  Jesus  Christ."  These  words 
were  in  utter  contrast  to  the  roguish  expression  of  his  face, 
and  always  called  forth  laughter  from  his  friends.  The 
strangers,  when  there  were  any,  looked  puzzled  until  a  witty 
word  or  some  sober,  rational  sentence  of  his  enlightened 
them.* 

El*«#y  Adam  Asnyk,  our  young  poet  who,  during  the 
Insurrection,  had  occupied  one  of  the  most  responsible 
positions  in  the  national  government,  though  born  in 
Russian  Poland,  came  also  to  live  in  Cracow.  His  poems 
were  exquisite,  and  I  recited  many  of  them  in  private  and 
in  public.  He  soon  became  one  of  our  guests  and  one  of  our 
best  friends  also.  His  manners  and  conversation  were  of 
the  choicest,  and  his  eyes,  of  the  bluest  blue,  shone  under  his 
blond,  bushy  eyebrows  like  two  magnetic  stars,  intense  and 
almost  fanatic  in  their  expression.  He  had  one  peculiarity : 
though  he  was  very  modest  concerning  his  poems,  he  was 
very  proud  of  his  culinary  talents,  and  would  rather  stand 
a  severe  criticism  of  his  verses  than  the  slightest  deprecia- 
tion of  his  cooking.     He  liked  to  invite  friends  to  his  dinners 

^  He  wrote  many  novels  of  the  life  of  peasants  and  middle-class  city 
I)eople. 


176  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

when  the  favorite  dishes  cooked  by  himself  were  served,  and 
woe  to  him  who  had  not  eaten  them  with  rehsh. 

Lueian  Sieminski  was  also  one  of  our  guests.  Author 
of  many  historical  books,  he  made  an  excellent  translation 
of  Homer's  '^Odyssey,"  but  above  all  he  was  a  prominent 
critic  in  literature  and  art.  He  and  Maciejewski  were 
often  engaged  in  a  friendly  combat  of  words,  from  which 
the  latter  came  out  very  often  victorious,  through  his  sheer 
humor  and  presence  of  mind. 

Ludwik  Kubala  was  a  highly  gifted,  studious,  quiet  young 
man  who  belonged  to  the  ultra  '^red"  republican  party.  He 
was  equally  intense  in  his  love  for  the  country  as  in  his 
hatred  of  the  three  foreign  governments  now  ruling  in  Poland. 
His  friends  called  him  ''Robespierre."  Endowed  with  a 
poetic  nature  and  imagination,  he  spoke  little,  but  all  he  said 
was  so  original  and  so  beautifully  expressed  that  I  often 
wrote  down  his  words.  Later  on  he  became  professor  at  the 
Lemberg  University,  and  wrote  several  historical  plays  pre- 
sented on  the  Cracow  stage,  but  his  most  valued  works  were 
historical  sketches.  One  of  them,  called  "Chmielnicki,"  in- 
spired Sienkiewicz  to  write  ''  By  Fire  and  Sword." 

He  had  a  friend,  Alfred  L.  Szczepanowski,  a  genuine  trib- 
une of  the  people  of  a  very  radical  type.  He  was  the  very 
contrast  of  Kubala.  While  the  first  was  dark,  with  bristling 
hair  and  black  eyes,  the  second  was  blond,  with  soft  blue  eyes ; 
while  the  one's  voice  was  loud  and  of  a  quality  of  a  basso 
profundo,  the  other's,  on  the  contrary,  was  soft  and  mellow. 
They  differed  in  everything  except  in  their  political  aims 
and  opinions.  They  carried  great  plans  for  the  restoration 
of  Poland's  independence  in  their  young  heads ;  they  were 
always  seen  together,  and  for  that  reason  were  called  Castor 
and  Pollux. 

Our  old  national  bard,  Vincent  Pol,  also  honored  our 
house  with  his  presence.  He  was  almost  blind  when  I  first 
met  him,  but  the  absence  of  his  eyesight  did  not  prevent 


POLAND  177 

him  from  being  one  of  the  most  picturesque  and  interesting 
men.  When  he  came  in,  the  voices  were  hushed,  and  every 
one  was  waiting  for  the  first  word  from  his  lips,  but  his  con- 
geniality put  them  soon  at  their  ease,  and  the  conversation 
became  livelier  than  ever. 

Prince  Adam  Sapieha,  the  so-called  ''Red  Prince,"  lived 
in  his  ancestral  palace  in  Lw6w  (Lemberg),  but  paid 
frequent  visits  to  Cracow  on  his  way  to  Vienna  and  Pesth, 
where  his  various  duties  called  him.  He  was  a  strikingly 
handsome  man  about  forty  years  of  age,  with  regular 
features  and  eagle  eyes,  —  slender,  tall,  erect,  full  of  life 
and  vigor.  Though  leader  of  the  liberal  party,  he  was  an 
aristocrat  to  his  finger-tips.  Most  affable  with  men  and 
courteous  with  women,  he  knew  how  to  freeze  with  a  look 
any  unwonted  forwardness  or  dishonesty,  until  the  object 
of  his  contempt  would  writhe  under  the  mocking  or  cruel 
expression  of  those  eyes  which  gazed  so  kindly  in  the  face 
of  misery  or  injustice,  and  knew  how  to  melt,  oh,  so  sweetly, 
in  the  presence  of  a  pretty  woman.  The  prince  was  con- 
sidered the  most  brilliant  orator  and  debater,  both  in  the 
Polish  legislature  of  Galitzia,  and  in  the  house  of  peers  in 
Vienna.  He  was  very  fond  of  my  husband,  and  remained 
our  faithful  friend  to  the  end  of  his  life. 

Count  Stanislaw  Tarnowsld  belongs  to  one  of  the  most 
ancient  aristocratic  families  in  Poland.  He  distinguished 
himself  as  a  statesman,  a  writer,  and  a  scientist.  Professor 
at  the  University  of  Cracow,  he  had  been  several  times  its 
rector.  At  present  he  is  President  of  the  Academy  of 
Science  and  Letters,  an  office  which  he  has  occupied  for  quite 
a  number  of  years.  A  very  prolific  author,  he  has  pubUshed 
a  great  number  of  essays  and  articles.  Although  his  pen 
was  devoted  often  to  historical,  political,  and  social  subjects, 
his  most  valuable  work  has  been  done  in  the  field  of  Uterary 
criticism. 

He  is  equally  distinguished  as  an  orator.     His  eloquence 

N 


178  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

is    brilliant,  though    somewhat    ponderous,    his    language  I 

rich,  his  style  exquisite.     He  is  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  i 

so-called  Cracow  party,  a  conservative  organization,  though 
progressive  in  social  questions.  He  deserves  great  credit 
for  being  one  of  the  first  among  the  aristocracy  of  Poland 
who  has  devoted  his  life  to  literary  and  scientific  pursuits. 
His  example  has  been  largely  followed,  so  that  to-day  we  "  ^ 

have  a  great  many  representatives  of  the  first  families  among 
the  professors,  physicians,  and  scientists  of  our  country.  In 
1864,  on  account  of  his  activity  during  the  Polish  Insur- 
rection of  1863,  he  was  imprisoned  for  several  months  in  the 
Austrian  jail.  Later  on  he  served  several  times  as  a  member 
of  the  legislature  of  Galitzia,  and  also  as  a  member  of  the 
Parliament  in  Vienna.  ^ 

Anczyc,    Balucki,    Narzymski,    and    Sabowski  were    all 
•  prominent   dramatic    authors;    the   last   two   were   deeply 
engaged  in  the  revolutionary  movement  of  1863. 

Count  Adam  Skorupka,  the  manager  of  the  Cracow  en- 
dowed theatre,,  and  his  partner,  Stanislaw  Kozmian,  be- 
longed to  the  ultra-conservative  party,  so-ciilled  *^ whites," 
yet  they  used  to  join  our  receptions  as  well  as  some  other 
men  of  their  party.  Count  Skorupka  and  his  brother  Leon 
were  known  as  the  greatest  wits  in  the  country. 

To  this  circle  of  friends  belonged  also  many  young  men 
of  talent  who  later  on  became  quite  prominent,  as  the  two 
brothers  Count  Badeni,  Count  Alexander  Fredo,  Jr.,  August 
Gorajski,  Chlendoski,  and  Kazimierz  Skrzynski,  one  of  our 
most  faithful  friends.  Our  home  soon  became  the  neutral 
ground  where  people  of  different  creeds  and  opinions  met 
each  other  face  to  face. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

It  was  during  this  time  that  I,  by  a  mere  chance,  became 
a  reporter. 

During  the  winter  of  1869  our  prominent  philosopher 
and  scientist,  Charies  Liebelt,  came  to  Cracow  to  deliver  a 
lecture  on  '\Spectrum  Analysis.''  My  husband's  duty  as 
the  editor  of  Kraj  was  to  print  an  article  upon  the  lecture. 
He  came  from  his  office  in  the  afternoon,  very  much  annoyed, 
saying  that  no  stenographer  was  to  be  found  anywhere, 
and  much  of  the  account  of  the  conference  might  be  missed. 
He  appointed  Mr.  Sluzewski,  one  of  the  staff,  to  write  the 
article. 

I  did  not  say  anything,  but  I  conceived  a  desire  to  be  of 
help  in  this  emergency  and  to  write  down  the  words  of  the 
celebrated  man.  I  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  the  subject, 
which  I  had  never  studied,  and  I  was  in  total  darkness  con- 
cerning '^Spectral  Analysis."  But  I  was  determined  to 
remember  as  much  as  possible  of  the  lecture ;  and  sitting 
in  a  quiet  corner  of  the  hall,  I  listened  with  all  intensity  of 
mind.  When  some  technical  expression  occurred,  or  names 
I  never  had  heard  before,  I  spelled  thenx  and  repeated  them 
three  times  mentally,  and  then  went  on  listening.  I  could 
have  written  them  down,  but  that  would  have  drawn 
people's  attention,  which  I  wished  to  avoid.  I  had  a  re- 
markable memory  then,  which,  moreover,  was  trained  by 
rapid  learning  of  my  parts,  and  I  knew  I  could  remember 
the  lecture.  The  only  difficulty  was  to  retain  these  tech- 
nical words,  some  of  them  in  Latin,  and  I  was  much  afraid 
of  forgetting  them.  Yet  when  I  returned  home  I  sat  down 
and  wrote  the  r^sum^  of  the  lecture  rapidly,  with  my  brain 

179 


180  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

on  fire,  though  perfectly  lucid.  The  whole  of  it,  with  all  its 
strange  terms  and  foreign  words,  came  to  me  as  vividly  as 
if  it  had  been  written  for  me  in  the  air.  Mr.  S.'s  report  and 
mine  were  compared,  and  mine  was  used  with  Mr.  S.'s  intro- 
duction. 

When  Mr.  Liebelt  came  next  evening  to  our  house  and 
told  Mr.  Chlapowski  that  he  had  read  the  article,  I  had  a 
moment  of  very  uncomfortable  feeling,  and  trembled  lest 
my  name  should  be  mentioned,  and  spoil  my  evening. 
Happily  my  husband  and  Mr.  S.  kept  the  secret,  and  the 
rest  of  the  evening  was  a  great  treat  with  the  remarkable 
man  in  our  circle. 

On  the  28th  of  April,  1869,  my  work  at  the  Cracow  theatre 
was  done  with,  and  we  left  for  Warsaw.  During  the  three 
seasons  I  had  spent  in  my  native  city  I  had  studied  one 
hundred  and  thirteen  entirely  new  parts.  The  first  season 
I  played  fifty-six  parts,  of  which  sixteen  were  in  one-act 
plays  and  three  in  comic  operas.  The  next  season,  during 
which  many  revivals  were  produced,  I  studied  but  twenty- 
six  parts,  of  which  only  three  were  in  one-act  plays. 
During  the  season  of  1868-1869  I  studied  thirty-one 
new  parts,  of  which  eight  were  short  ones  —  all  the  rest 
being  four-  or  five-act  tragedies,  dramas,  and  comedies. 

Before  we  left  for  Warsaw  I  had  a  pleasant  surprise  sent 
to  me  from  Paris  —  the  French  magazine  edited  by  Arsdne 
Houssaye,  entitled  U Artiste,  which  contained  an  article 
on  my  performance  of  Jeanine  in  ''Les  Id6es  de  Madame 
Aubray,"  followed  by  a  general  criticism  of  my  acting. 
My  portrait  and  a  sonnet  were  placed  on  the  front  page  of 
the  magazine. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

Warsaw  in  spring  is  beautiful !  Streets,  public  squares, 
and  parks  swarm  with  people ;  young  men  with  bright  faces, 
latest  fashions,  and  that  nonchalance  which  can  be  seen 
only  in  large  cities ;  beautiful  women  trotting  on  their  small, 
perfectly  shod  feet,  and  shading  their  eyes  with  parasols 
often  used  as  shields  against  the  bold  gazes  of  men ;  sweet- 
faced  and  white-haired  matrons  escorting  their  daughters; 
children;  men  and  women  of  all  stations;  rich  and  poor; 
and  among  them,  here  and  there,  the  brilliant  uniforms  of 
Russian  gendarmes.  But  on  a  glorious  spring  afternoon 
who  cares  if  even  a  million  protecting  official  eyes  are 
watching  around?  Gay  and  light-hearted  are  the  War- 
sovians;  at  least  they  appear  so  in  public.  The  great 
storm  which  only  six  years  before  had  shaken  the  whole 
nation  down  to  its  very  foundations  had  apparently  left 
no  traces  on  its  vitality.  ''Life"  seems  to  be  written  on 
every  face,  to  vibrate  in  every  countenance;  the  whole 
city  is  sparkling  with  it,  and  there  is  such  a  tremendous 
current  of  sympathy  in  the  air  that  strangers  meet  each 
other  with  a  smile  upon  their  lips,  ready  to  call  each  other 
friend.  To  be  in  a  crow:d  is  usually  a  rather  unpleasant 
experience,  but  it  is  a  real  pleasure  to  move  among  the 
spirited  throngs  of  that  ''oppressed"  people. 

We  are  carried  by  the  current  as  far  as  Jerusalem  Avenue ; 
there  we  take  a  cab  and  drive  to  Lazienki  (Baths),  a  beauti- 
ful park  with  a  summer  residence  built  by  the  last  Polish  king, 
Stanislaw  August  Poniatowski.     The  palace,  with  its  lake, 

181 


182  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

statues,  and  orange  trees,  resembles  some  Italian  villa,  and 
its  interior  reveals  the  very  exquisite  artistic  and  luxurious 
home  of  an  artist-monarch,  one  who  possessed  almost  all  the 
qualities  of  a  successful  ruler:  tact,  beauty,  taste,  suavity 
and  persuasion  of  speech,  grace,  generosity,  great  kindness 
of  heart,  —  all,  except  the  energy  and  art  of  ruling.  In  the 
park  are  many  charming  diminutive  villas  where  the  king's 
guests  used  to  live;  most  of  them  were  occupied  by  the 
exquisite  creatures  who  adorned  the  royal  bachelor's  court. 

The  king  was  very  fond  of  the  theatre.  He  built  in  the 
park,  on  the  shore  of  a  lake,  an  open-air  auditorium  after 
the  model  of  one  of  the  ancient  Roman  amphitheatres. 
The  stage,  which  represents  the  ruins  of  a  temple  built  of 
marble,  is  on  a  small  island,  and  the  audience,  in  seats 
forming  a  semicircle,  is  separated  from  the  stage  by  water. 
On  the  night  of  the  performance  the  actors  are  brought  to 
the  stage  in  front  of  the  public  in  boats  and  landed  upon 
the  stage  on  both  sides  of  the  temple.  At  the  time  of  Stanis- 
law  August,  all  sorts  of  plays,  even  tragedies,  were  presented 
there;  but  at  the  present  time  the  management  arranges 
only  one  or  two  performances  of  ballet  or  light  opera  every 
summer,  and  these  only  on  special  occasions,  such  as  the 
arrival  of  the  emperor  and  his  court,  a  visit  of  foreign  powers, 
or  an  inauguration  of  a  new  governor.  The  poor  wounded 
Syren  ^  is  still  smiling,  still  captivating,  and  more  and  more 
alluring  in  her  languor  of  pain ! 

The  palace  of  Lazienki,  as  well  as  all  the  other  imperial 
residences,  was  under  the  super\dsion  of  Count  de  Mouch- 
anoff,  the  president  of  the  theatres.  His  wife,  Madame  de 
Mouchanoff,  of  whom  I  have  spoken  already,  was  known 
in  the  artistic  circles  of  Europe  under  the  name  of  her  first 
husband,  Calergi.  Tall,  blonde,  with  exquisite  figure  and 
fine,  sensitive  features,  Madame  Mouchanoff  at  fifty  was 
still  very  attractive.     Her  grand  yet  perfectly  simple  man- 

^  Warsaw  wears  a  Syren  in  its  ooat-of-arms. 


Madaiie  Modjesea  (1669). 


184  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

ner  served  as  a  model  to  many  a  young  woman  who  came 
in  contact  with  that  exquisite  woman. 

Madame  Mouchanoff's  r61e  in  life  seemed  to  be  that 
of  a  good  fairy,  and  she  proved  to  be  such  also  to  me.  She 
encouraged  and  protected  me  in  many  cases,  especially 
in  my  wrestling  with  the  censorship.  It  was  she  who  many 
a  time  persuaded  the  censor  that  the  forbidden  plays  were 
unjustly  and  unreasonably  condemned.  When  I  selected 
"Hamlet"  for  one  of  my  yearly  benefits,  the  censor-in-chief 
peremptorily  forbade  the  performance  because  of  the  mur- 
der of  a  king  which  occurs  in  the  play. 

''Such  things  must  not  be  put  before  the  audience,  be- 
cause they  may  suggest  disloyal  ideas,''  was  his  arbitrary 
reason. 

I  went  to  Madame  MouchanoflF  and  told  her  of  my  dis- 
appointment, and  also  of  the  reason  given  me  by  the  censor. 
She  invited  the  gentleman  in  question  to  her  house,  and  in  a 
few  words  persuaded  him  that  the  murder  was  a  family  affair 
only,  and  therefore  perfectly  harmless.  "  Hamlet "  was 
performed,  and  remained  in  the  repertoire.  The  public  was 
almost  frantic  over  the  performance  of  Mr.  Krolikowski 
(Hamlet),  and  next  day,  in  the  park  which  I  had  to  cross 
going  to  the  theatre,  the  students  were  quoting  passages 
from  the  play;  some  of  them  walking  right  behind  me 
recited  my  lines  or  sang  softly  the  mad  Ophelia's  songs. 
It  was  a  genuine  success. 

Another  play  that  Madame  Mouchanoff  rescued  from 
the  censor  was  ''Mazeppa,"  bySlowacki.  By  the  way,  this 
tragedy  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  spectacular  exhi- 
bition performed  in  the  past  on  the  European  and  the 
American  stage,  the  feature  of  which  was  a  well-built  girl 
(Mazeppa)  in  pink  tights,  fastened  to  a  horse.  Slowacki's 
tragedy  is  a  beautiful  and  interesting  play  in  which  Mazeppa 
appears  as  a  young  and  handsome  page,  innocently  in- 
volved in  the  domestic  tragedy  of  the  proud  and   cruel 


POLAND  185 

Voivode  (Palatin),  who,  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  act,  gives 
the  order  to  tie  the  boy  to  a  wild  horse  of  the  steppes,  and 
thus  sends  him  to  his  death.  The  censor  would  not  pass  the 
play  because  there  was  a  Polish  king  in  it.  He  said  to 
me:  — 

''A  Polish  king?  Who  ever  heard  of  such  an  absurd 
thing!  Polish  kings  never  existed.  There  are  only  Rus- 
sian emperors  of  Poles  and  of  all  the  Russias ;  *  you  undei^ 
stand,  Madame?" 

When  I  tried  to  persuade  him  of  his  error,  he  cut  me  short 
with  the  words:  — 

''Do  not  think  of  it.     It  will  never  do,  never!" 

I  was  not  discouraged.  I  went  again  to  Madame  Mouch- 
anoff.  She  had  a  talk  with  Monsieur  Censor,  and  this 
time  concessions  had  to  be  made  on  both  sides.  Mr.  Censor 
had  a  lady  friend  in  the  ballet.  It  seems  that  this  ambitious 
beauty  desired  to  become  a  dramatic  actress.  Now,  Mon- 
sieur Censor  said  that  if  Madame  MouchanoiBF  would  obtain 
a  ''little"  place  in  the  dramatic  company  for  his  "little 
friend,"  he  would  pass  the  play.  He  put  another  condi- 
tion, and  that  was  the  substitution  of  the  title  of  "prince" 
in  the  play  for  that  of  "king."  The  play  was  performed, 
made  an  enormous  hit,  and  no  one  was  taken  in  by  the  trans- 
figuration of  the  Polish  king.  The  ballerina  became  an 
actress  —  of  small  parts,  and  Mazeppa  is  even  now  in  the 
repertoire  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre,  being  one  of  those  plays 
which  can  be  called  "classic"  for  its  perfection  of  lan- 
guage and  its  construction. 

Monsieur  and  Madame  Mouchanoff's  house  was  one  of 
the  most  hospitable  in  Europe,  and  we  were  often  invited 
to  their  dinners  and  five  o'clock  teas.  We  met  there  the 
flite  of  society  as  well  as  all  that  was  notable  in  art,  —  our 

^  The  actual  title  of  the  Czar  is  king  of  Poland  and  emperor  of  all  the 
Russias.  There  are  several  provinces  called  "Russia,"  as  white  Russia 
Red  Russia,  Little  Russia,  Great  Russia,  etc. 


186  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

local  celebrities  and  foreign  stars.  All  great  musicians  who 
had  engagements  in  St.  Petersburg  usually  stopped  in  War- 
saw to  give  one  or  two  concerts,  and  we  met  them  all  at 
Monsieur  and  Madame  Mouchanoff's  house.  We  met  there 
Anton  Rubinstein,  Hans  von  Biilow,  Joachim,  Henry. 
Wieniawski,  Laube,  and  many  other  celebrities.  At  one  of 
the  dinners  I  was  presented  to  Princess  Bariatynski,  of  the 
imperial  family,  who  urged  me  to  study  Russian,  kindly 
assuring  me  that  I  could  obtain  a  brilliant  engagement  in 
St.  Petersburg  should  I  comply  with  her  suggestion.  I 
thanked  her  most  heartily  for  her  great  kindness  and  appre- 
ciation, but  could  not  promise  to  follow  her  counsel.  At 
the  same  time  Madame  de  Mouchanoff  advised  me  to  study 
in  German  three  Shakespearian  parts, — Juliet,  Ophelia,  and 
Desdemona, — in  order  to  perform  them  at  the  great  dramatic 
festival  in  Weimar,  where  she  would  introduce  me  to  the 
German  stage  and  also  to  the  greatest  German  of  the  time, 
Wagner.  It  was  also  suggested  that  I  should  appear  in 
Italian  with  Tomaso  Salvini  in  America. 

But  all  these  tempting  projects  and  invitations  paled  in 
the  face  of  the  important  work  I  had  to  do  on  the  Warsaw 
stage.  Through  my  contract  I  was  entitled  to  put  on  the 
stage  six  new  plays  of  my  own  choice  every  year,  and  in 
fact  the  greatest  part  of  the  progress  of  the  Polish  stage 
was  in  my  hands.  I  felt  very  proud  of  my  position  and 
responsibility  and  could  not  think  of  giving  it  up.  I  was 
perfectly  happy.  My  only  wish  was  to  serve  loyally  my 
own  country,  and  I  gave  up  the  old  dreams  of  shining  in 
foreign  lands. 

Besides,  I  loved  our  artistic,  literary,  and  social  circles. 
Every  Tuesday  evening  we  received  our  friends.  Many 
questions  were  discussed  and  left  unsolved,  many  newly 
written  poems  read,  and  the  best  music  played  during  those 
memorable  evenings. 

During   the    carnival   there    were    dancing   parties   and 


POLAND  187 

balls  given  by  almost  all  our  friends,  and  I  loved  dancing. 
To  move  lightly  on  the  waxed  floor  to  the  rhythm  of  a 
Strauss  waltz,  a  Levandowski  mazurka,  intoxicated  me  as 
much  as  would  poetry,  mountain  air,  or  a  beautiful  land- 
scape. It  often  happened  that  after  a  night  spent  in  the 
ball-room  I  went  to  rehearsal  next  morning  without  feeling 
at  all  fatigued.  One  evening  I  played  Juliet,  and  after  the 
performance  we  went  to  a  party,  where  my  two  nieces  had 
preceded  me,  accompanied  by  my  husband,  who  left  them 
there,  then  came  to  the  theatre  to  bring  me  to  the  ball.  We 
had  that  night  three  invitations  to  three  different  houses. 
.We  left  one  house  at  one  o'clock  a.m.  and  went  to  the  next, 
where  we  stayed  two  hours,  then  finished  our  evening,  or 
rather  morning,  in  the  third  house,  where  we  stayed  until 
daybreak. 

By  the  way,  I  feel  obliged  to  inform  my  readers  that 
the  Polish  dancing  parties  and  balls  are  unlike  any  other 
country's  terpsichorean  entertainments.  It  is  a  custom  in 
our  country  to  dance  all  night,  and  the  feature  of  those 
balls  is  not  a  cotillon,  which  usually  is  danced  at  midnight, 
but  the  so-called  '!  White  Mazur,"  performed  by  daylight^ 
if  you  please.  The  ladies  whose  complexions  cannot  stand 
too  much  inspection  usually  retire  before  the  dawn;  but 
those  who  do  not  use  the  ^' bloom  of  youth,"  or  rouge,  wash 
their  faces,  put  on  a  fresh  pair  of  satin  shoes  if  necessary 
(they  often  carry  an  extra  pair  with  them),  arrange 
their  hair,  repair  the  torn  flounces,  and  return  to  the  ball- 
room fresh  and  ready  for  the  ''White  Mazur."  At  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning  a  breakfast  is  served:  bouillon, 
''barszcz,"^  eggs,  coffee,  rolls,  cold  meat;  and  that  closes 
the  ball. 

We  remained  with  my  two  nieces  until  the  very  end  of 
the  above-mentioned  party.  Then,  with  cloaks  and  hoods 
hiding  our  ball  attire,  we  stopped  at  the  church  to  hear  the 

^  A  clear  soup  made  of  beets. 


188  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Mass.  We  drove  home  in  the  bright  light  of  the  sunny 
morning.  It  was  glorious.  The  snow  glistened  like  myriads 
of  gems,  and  there  was  a  delightful  tingling  snap  in  the 
air.  I  opened  the  windows  of  the  carriage  and  chafifed  my 
sleepy  nieces.  Poor  things,  —  they  were  really  tired,  and 
I  am  afraid  I  was  not  a  very  considerate  chaperone.  As 
soon  as  we  got  home  I  took  a  shower  bath,  dressed  in  a  great 
hurry,  and  went  to  the  rehearsal,  leaving  my  family  plunged 
in  deep  slumber. 

Speaking  of  "Romeo  and  Juliet,"  I  remember  I  had  some 
difficulty  in  producing  it.  During  the  time  the  play  was  in 
rehearsal  our  president  and  Madame  Mouchanoff  were  in 
Weimar.  In  the  president's  place  Mr.  B.  was  substituted, 
—  a  man  of  great  administrative  ability,  a  staunch,  honest 
official,  but  of  little  education  except  in  his  own  business. 
He  opposed  ''Romeo  and  Juliet"  very  strongly. 

''Why,"  he  asked,  "Madame  Modjeska,  do  you  want  to 
put  on  the  Warsaw  stage  such  a  poor  play?" 

"What  do  you  mean,  Mr.  B.?"  I  asked. 

"I  mean  that  it  is  not  worthy  of  your  talent  to  act  in  a 
play  taken  from  an  opera.  We  had  Gounod's  "Romeo  and 
Juliet "  recently,  and  did  not  think  the  plot  very  remarkable. 
It  succeeded  because  of  the  beautiful  music,  but  what  are 
you  going  to  do  without  it  ?  It  will  surely  be  a  failure,  and 
I  sincerely  advise  you  to  stop  the  rehearsals." 

"But,  Mr.  B.,  it  is  Shakespeare's  play!"  I  exclaimed, 
highly  amused. 

"I  never  heard  of  him.  All  I  know  is  that  it  will  be  an 
imitation  of  the  oper^ !" 

Seeing  that  I  could  not  restrain  my  sarcastic  smile,  he 
grew  a  little  angry,  and  said:  — 

"You  do  what  you  please,  Madame.  Your  contract 
gives  you  the  right  of  choosing  your  plays,  and  I  cannot 
prevent  your  doing  so ;  but  I  warn  you  that  you  shall  have 
neither  new  costumes  nor  new  scenery.     You  may  use  what 


POLAND  189 

there  is,  but  it  would  be  folly  on  my  part  as  an  imperial 
officer  to  spend  money  on  a  failure." 

I  saw  that  there  was  no  use  arguing,  and  I  left  the  office, 
but  we  produced  the  play  in  spite  of  Mr.  B. ;  and,  in  spite 
of  his  predictions,  we  made  a  hit.  Shakespeare  was  always 
appreciated  and  greeted  most  heartily  by  the  Warsaw  au- 
diences, though  he  had  been  but  recently  introduced  to 
them.  Only  one  of  his  plays,  ^* Hamlet,''  had  been  produced 
years  before,  and  it  was  given  in  a  heavy  translation  in 
Alexandrine  verses.  Needless  to  say,  it  was  not  in  the 
repertoire  when  I  joined  the  Warsaw  stage.  But  —  reve- 
nons  a  nos  mouions.  The  scenery  was  very  decent,  and 
we  used  the  same  costumes  that  had  been  worn  in  the  opera, 
after  taking  off  the  profusion  of  gold  trimmings  with  which 
they  were  adorned.  I  had  a  new  costume,  though,  made  by 
the  theatrical  costumer.  Mr.  B.  was  kind  enough  to  grant 
me  that  favor,  though  he  grumbled  a  little  while  signing 
the  order  for  it. 

When  the  president  and  Madame  Mouchanoff  returned 
from  Weimar,  we  had  a  good  laugh  over  Mr.  B.'s  appreciation 
of  Shakespeare.  Madame  admired  the  great  dramatist 
intensely.  She  used  to  say  of  him  that  he  created  as  many 
characters  as  God  himself,  and  she  was  a  stanch  ally  in  my 
endeavors  to  introduce  his  plays  and  also  other  poetic  works 
of  high  rank  upon  the  stage  of  Warsaw. 

The  censorship,  however,  continued  to  slash  the  plays 
to  pieces.  Madame  Mouchanoff  was  not  always  in  War- 
saw. She  travelled  a  great  deal,  and  in  her  absence  there 
was  no  one  to  protect  them,  and  I  had  great  difficulty  in 
introducing  such  plays  as  I  liked.  All  the  modern  French 
repertoire  was  allowed,  however.  Even  when  the  plays  were 
not  highly  moral,  they  were  kindly  dealt  with ;  bu1\our  cen- 
sor always  objected  to  the  poetic  drama.  He  seemed  to 
have  a  special  pleasure  in  cutting  my  speeches  in  such  a 
way  that  it  was  quite  impossible  to  get  any  sense  out  of 


190  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

them.     It  was  very  annoying  and  sometimes  quite  ridicu-  ^ 

lous,  and  our  actors  had  a  great  deal  of  fun  every  time  a  play 
came  from  the  censor's  office.  Every  noble  sentiment  was 
forbidden.  Even  some  words  were  found  disloyal,  among 
others  the  word  ''slave."  In  one  of  the  melodramas  it 
was  cut  out  and  replaced  by  the  word  ''negro,"  and  the 
sentence,  which  ran  as  follows:  "He  was  a  slave  to  his  ^ 

passion,"  was  changed  to  "He  was  a  negro  to  his  passion"  ! 
On  another  occasion  a  Catholic  priest  had  to  say  "I  love 
my  country  and  my  people,  and  I  shall  never  leave  them." 
The  words  "country  and  people"  were  replaced  by  "wife 
and  children"!  In  another  play  the  words  "He  walked 
arm  in  arm  with  the  emperor  and  whispered  in  his  ear," 
were  changed  to,  "He  walked  three  steps  behind  the  em- 
peror and  whispered  in  his  ear"  !  These  and  like  blunders 
were  so  amusing  that  the  censorship  became  a  standing 
joke  among  actors,  who  used  to  enlarge  and  invent  some  of 
the  comical  mistakes.  I  do  not  quote  more  of  them  for 
fear  they  may  not  be  all  authentic,  but  the  above  may  give 
an  idea  of  the  censorship  at  the  time  of  my  engagement  at 
the  government  theatre  in  Warsaw.  It  is  never  right  to 
be  more  Catholic  than  the  Pope.  I  am  sure  that  our  censor 
was  overzealous  in  his  services  to  the  government,  and  too 
ignorant  of  the  language  to  see  his  absurd  mistakes. 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

The  Warsaw  Theatre  is  the  first  theatre  in  Poland, 
and  occupies  the  same  place  in  that  country  as  the  Th^^tre 
Frangais  in  France,  or  the  Burg  Theatre  of  Vienna  in  Gei^ 
many.  Being  endowed  by 
the  government,  and  there- 
fore not  forced  to  produce 
only  auch  plays  as  "pay 
the  best,"  and  having,  be- 
sides, a  very  large  com- 
pany, the  Warsaw  Theatre 
is  able  to  give  performances 
that  are  perfect  in  every 
detail.  At  my  time,  our 
stage  was  hardly  second  to 
either  of  the  two  above- 
mentioned  theatres,  and  be- 
longed to  the  first  rank  in 
Europe. 

Among  the  actors  were 
some  who  had  no  equals  on 
any  other  stage.  Such  was 
our  great   comedian,  Alois 

Zolkowski.  In  elegance  of  zolkow&gt;«.i.  op  t«  WamawTh.at™. 
manner  he  could  be  com- 
pared to  M.  Got  of  Le  Th^&amp;tre  Frangais,  yet  in  his  genuine 
comic  effects  he  surpassed  the  latter.  His  acting  was  sim- 
ple and  without  any  visible  effort  on  his  part  to  produce 
ifll 


192  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

effects ;  they  seemed  to  come  spontaneously  with  the  de- 
velopment of  the  part.  And  yet  he  worked  out  every  de- 
tail, polishing  and  perfecting  it  at  each  rehearsal.  Very 
often  he  interrupted  the  rehearsal,  and  turning  to  the  com- 
pany, asked:  — 

''Don't  you  think  it  is  better  now?  Don't  you  like 
it?''  And  we  all  applauded,  exclaiming:  ''It  is  perfect! 
Grand  1"  etc.,  which  pleased  him  immensely. 

His  genius,  combined  with  the  gift  of  observation  and 
studies  from  nature,  made  him  a  unique  actor  of  his  type. 
His  physical  advantages  completed  his  histrionic  greatness : 
tall,  handsome,  with  a  fine  figure,  large,  most  eloquent  eyes, 
and  extraordinarily  mobile  expression  of  feature,  he  was  a 
striking  figure  on  the  stage.  As  soon  as  he  entered,  all  eyes 
were  upon  him.     He  became  the  centre  of  attraction  at  once. 

I  never  shall  forget  any  of  his  performances.  Once 
he  presented  a  nouveau  riche  Jew,  who,  through  his 
large  fortune  and  influence,  tries  to  become  a  member  of 
high  society.  His  manners  are  correct,  his  house  is  splen- 
did, and  his  servants  perfectly  trained.  He  uses  the  most 
correct  language,  speaking  slowly  and  choosing  carefully 
his  expressions,  hesitating  here  and  there  in  order  to  find 
the  most  fitting  word.  Yet  in  everything  he  does  there  is 
a  visible  effort  to  appear  strictly  correct.  All  this  was 
done  with  wonderful  discretion  and  subtlety,  and  yet  pro- 
duced a  highly  comical  effect.  But  the  crown  of  the  per- 
formance was  the  last  act,  in  which  the  hero  loses  his  temper 
and  falls  into  a  fit  of  rage.  Immediately  all  the  elegance 
of  manner  and  speech  disappears,  and  he  abuses  his  oppo- 
nents in  the  most  graphic  language  of  the  Polish  Ghetto, 
wagging  his  right  hand  with  the  palm  turned  outward  in 
the  face  of  the  chief  offender.  The  effect  was  irresistible, 
and  entirely  his  own.  There  was  no  suggestion  of  it  in  the 
author's  directions. 

I  had  no  chance  to  play  much  with  him,  for  his  best  parts 


POLAND  193 

were  in  plaj'^s  in  which  there  was  no  suitable  place  for  me. 
He  played  with  me  Polonius  in  ^'Hamlet,"  the  prince  in 
''Adrienne  Lecouvreur,"  and  the  father  in  ^'Frou-Frou." 
But  I  went  often  to  see  him  act,  and  he  always  made  me 
laugh  or  cry  at  his  will. 

In  private,  Mr.  Zolkowski  was  of  a  rather  melancholy 
turn  of  mind.  He  spoke  very  little,  and  his  favorite  prome- 
nade was  the  cemetery,  where  he  used  to  walk  from  one 
grave  to  another,  reading  the  epitaphs  and  imagining,  as  he 
said  once  to  me,  how  those  dead  people  looked  and  acted 
while  they  were  alive.  He  was  not  what  we  would  call 
highly  educated,  but,  well  posted  in  our  Polish  literature, 
he  expressed  himself  exquisitely,  and  his  pronunciation 
served  as  a  model  to  the  younger  generation,  but  he  knew 
little  of  foreign  literature  or  history. 

The  great  actor  at  the  time  of  my  leaving  Warsaw  in 
1875  was  failing  in  health.  He  was  past  sixty  then,  and 
troubled  with  rheumatism.  A  few  years  later  he  died, 
leaving  behind  him  a  sort  of  diary  which  consisted  in  enu- 
merating all  the  plays  given  at  the  three  government 
theatres  during  his  long  career,  and  also  in  recording  the 
parts  he  played,  together  with  the  number  of  calls  he 
received  from  the  audience.  He  wrote  this  diary  in  copy- 
books such  as  are  used  by  schoolgirls  on  their  examination 
day,  bound  in  white,  glossy  paper,  with  gorgeous  ornaments 
in  red  and  gold.  Some  of  them  were  tiny  little  books  used 
for  poems  or  orations  on  birthdays. 

Here  are  some  of  the  translated  notes  of  the  great  actor. 
The  titles  of  the  plays  in  which  he  took  part  are  written 
in  red  ink  and  in  large,  elaborate  type ;  the  rest  is  in  small 
handwriting  and  black  ink.  The  letters  S.  T.  stand  for  Sum- 
mer Theatre,  G.  T.  for  Grand  Theatre,  and  V.  T.  indicates 
the  Variety  Theatre.^ 

*  The  names  should  be  just  the  reverse,  for  on  the  variety  stage  they 
play  nothing  but  high  comedy  and  drama,  while  at  the  Grand  Theatre,  — 


194 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


The  list  of  plays  performed  at  the  Grand,  Variety,  and 
Summer  Theatres  in  1871 :  — 

Aloizy  Gonzaga  Sabon  Zolkowski 


6 


8 
9 


Saturday 

V.T. 

Sunday 
V.T. 

Monday 
V.T. 


Tuesday 
V.T. 

Wednesday 


S.  T. 


Thursday 
V.T. 

Friday 


Saturday 
Sunday 


G.  T.    Third  time  tragedy 

"HAMLET" 
Enterprise.  Wedding  in  Ojcow 

G.T.    Flick  and  Flock 
I,  or  "EGOTISTS" 

G.  T.  Faust  (Italian  Opera) 
Fire  in  the  Convent. 
Poirier's  son-in-law. 

G.  T.  Faust 
Mademoiselle  de  Belle-Isle 

G.T.   (for  hospitals)   "EGO- 
TISTS" 

Joan's  Wedding.    Insect's 
Revenge  BaUet. 

G.  T.  Bluebeard. 
Everybody's  Uncle. 

S.  T.  GAVAUT  MINARD  &amp; 
CO. 


G.  T.  Faust. 

Theatre  on  the  island  at 

Lazienki  * 
Wedding  by  lanterns. 
Ill  guarded  Daughter  (Ballet). 


It  went  well. 
Glory  to  God! 

Excellent ! 
Glory  to  God! 
6CaUs. 


Splendid ! 
Glory  to  God! 
7  Calls. 


Laughs  and 
numerous 
applause. 

Glory  to  God! 


operas,  comedies,  comic  operas,  traf^edies,  farces,  concerts,  and  baUets  are 
performed.     I  have  seen  even  prestidigitators  and  acrobats  on  it. 
'  The  out-of-door  theatre  in  King  August's  park. 


POLAND  195 

Though  this  diary  may  seem  amusing,  yet  this  almost 
religious  respect  paid  by  him  to  the  appreciation  of  the 
audience  shows  how  ardently  he  desired  it,  and  how  ear- 
nestly he  worked  in  order  to  gain  this  appreciation.  There 
is  also  much  simplicity  and  lack  of  presumption  in  the 
exclamation  '^ Glory  to  God!''  It  suggests  the  anxiety 
and  then  the  thankfulness  for  the  accomplished  and  well- 
rewarded  work. 

Jan  Krolikowski  was  our  great  tragedian.  He  played 
also  characters  and  the  parts  called,  in  French,  raisoneurs 
in  modern  drama  and  comedy.  His  power  was  unques- 
tionable, and  though  he  did  not  seem  to  be  as  spontaneous 
as  Zolkowski,  yet  the  finish  of  his  parts  was  so  fine  that 
they  bore  the  stamp  of  greatness  upon  them.  He  was 
gentle  by  nature,  kind-hearted,  and  sensitive;  yet,  when  he 
played  lago  or  Franz  Moore  in  Schiller's  ''Brigands,"  he 
seemed  the  personification  of  evil,  so  much  so  that  some- 
times the  impressionable  public  hissed  him  during  the  per- 
formance; but  when  the  curtain  fell  on  the  last  act,  they 
realized  the  greatness  of  the  actor,  and  then  there  was  a 
storm  of  applause  and  endless  calls  before  the  curtain. 

The  recollection  of  that  outwardly  quiet,  but  highly 
strung  nature,  that  fine  actor  and  excellent  husband  and 
father,  brings  to  my  mind  sweet  memories  of  the  moments 
spent  in  his  family  circle,  over  which  reigned  his  most  charm- 
ing wife'  and  daughter.  And  when  I  think  of  what  trials 
the  man  went  through,  I  go  back  to  those  past  days  with 
my  soul  full  of  pity,  compassion,  and  greatest  admiration. 
His  two  sons  were  both  born  deaf  and  mute.  This  was  the 
grievous  sorrow  of  his  life,  and  he  bore  it  bravely  to  the  end. 

I  had  an  opportunity  to  be  often  in  the  same  bill  with 
Jan  Krolikowski.  He  was  an  excellent  Carnioli  in  Feuillet's 
''Dalila,"  and  his  Tolosan  in  Sardou's  ''Nos  Intimes"  was 
considered  one  of  his  best  performances.  His  Hamlet  was 
very  fine,  and  there  were  parts  like  the  Voivode  in  ''Ma- 


196  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

zeppa, "  and  others,  on  which  he  left  such  a  strong  stamp 
that  after  his  death  they  could  hardly  be  replaced  by 
younger  actors. 

Jan  Krolikowski,  though  usually  seen  with  an  expres- 
sion of  melancholy  in  his  eyes,  was  not  altogether  made 
of  sadness  and  patience.  No  one  could  tell  a  better  the- 
atrical anecdote  than  he.  He  had  a  large  repertoire  of  stories, 
and  told  them  with  art,  never  missing  a  point.  I  first  met 
him  in  1860,  a  few  months  before  I  became  an  actress,  at 
my  brother's  house,  and  remember  how  one  of  his  narratives 
made  us  all  shriek  with  laughter. 

My  editor  tells  me  that  the  American  public  likes  anec- 
dotes ;  therefore  I  have  written  it  down  as  well  as  I  could, 
though  it  would  be  impossible  to  describe  the  expression  of 
Mr.  K.'s  face  while  he  told  the  story,  and  his  incomparable, 
subtle  smile,  which  rendered  even  the  risques  passages  ac- 
ceptable and  highly  amusing.     Here  is  the  story:  — 

There  was  an  actor  in  Mr.  Krolikowski's  young  days  who 
was  not  much  liked  by  his  brothers  in  art  on  account  of 
his  great  stinginess,  a  fault  almost  unpardonable  among 
the  actors  of  those  days.  Being,  also,  only  a  mediocre  per- 
former, he  could  not  possibly  claim  much  respect  or  con- 
sideration, and  became  soon  an  object  of  fun  and  mischief 
to  the  actors,  who  were  always  on  the  lookout  for  a  practical 
joke.  One  evening  he  had  to  impersonate  a  Roman  senator, 
and  his  entrance  had  to  be  very  dignified  as  well  as  original. 
He  had  to  be  brought  upon  the  stage  in  a  chariot  drawn 
by  two  lions,  represented  by  two  supernumerary  men  dressed 
in  lions'  skins.  Each  of  these  skins  was  divided  in  two; 
one  part  represented  the  head,  the  chest,  and  the  fore  paws ; 
the  other  represented  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  with  the 
hind  legs  and  the  tail.  These  two  parts  were  put  together 
after  the  man  was  inside,  by  means  of  a  seam  around  the 
middle  of  the  body  which  joined  them  to  each  other.  As  it 
was  in  July,  the  evenings  were  very  warm,  and  the  men 


POLAND  197 

hated  to  be  put  in  the  lion's  skin  with  their  clothes  on.  They 
stripped  themselves,  and  then  allowed  the  stage  costumer 
to  transfigure  them  into  kings  of  the  desert.  When  the 
senator  climbed  upon  the  chariot,  he  looked  the  picture 
of  stateliness.  Clad  in  a  criipson  toga,  with  the  stylus  in 
his  right  hand  and  a  laurel  wreath  on  his  high  forehead,  he 
had  the  air  of  the  emperor  himself.  He  was  so  engrossed 
by  this  magnificent  attire  that  he  did  not  deign  to  glance 
at  the  people  gathered  behind  the  scenes,  nor  did  he  respond 
to  the  ''Good  evening"  offered  by  a  young  actor  standing 
near  the  entrance. 

In  the  meantime,  while  waiting  for  the  august  appearance 
of  the  proud  Roman  dignitary,  a  young,  mischievous  boy 
nailed  the  tails  of  the  lions  to  the  wooden  posts  used  in  those 
days  to  support  the  wings  of  the  scenery,  and  between  which 
the  lions  had  been  placed,  ready  for  entrance.  When  the 
cue  was  heard,  the  senator  whispered  to  the  lions,  ''Now 
go!"  The  lions  made  a  start,  but  could  not  advance  be- 
cause  their  tails  were  fastened  to  the  posts.  "Go  on!" 
repeated  the  senator,  —  another  start  of  the  poor  animals, 
and  then  another  stop.  Here  the  senator  gave  way  to  his 
anger.  Using  his  stylus,  he  prodded  both  lions  with  such 
violence  that  the  poor  brutes  used  a  supreme  effort,  and 
breaking  loose,  galloped  on  the  stage,  but,  alas  !  —  leaving 
the  hind  parts  of  the  skins  behind  them.  The  temporary 
seam  could  not  stand  the  effort,  and  broke  off.     Tableau  ! 

The  third  great  actor  —  for  it  seems  there  must  be  a 
trinity  in  all  associations  —  was  Jan  Richter.  He  was 
unsurpassed  in  the  part  of  Michonnet  in  "Adrienne  Lecou- 
vreur,"  in  the  title  r61e  in  Molifere's  "Miser,"  in  Fredro's 
comedies,  in  the  part  of  the  father  in  "Kabale  und  Liebe," 
and  in  many  others.  I  did  not  know  him  quite  so  well  as 
I  knew  the  former  two,  because  soon  after  my  Warsaw 
engagement  he  left  Russian  Poland  and  went  on  a  starring 
tour   through   the   Grand   Duchy   of   Posen   and   through 


198  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Galitzia ;  but  while  he  stayed  in  Warsaw  he  was  a  kind  friend 
to  me. 

He  surely  deserved  applause,  for  he  was  an  excellent 
Michonnet.  I  thanked  him  over  and  over  for  his  great 
kindness,  of  which  he  gave  me  numerous  proofs  during  my 
first  season,  and  I  was  very  sorry  when  he  left  Warsaw. 
Our  stage  lost  one  of  its  pillars  which  could  not  be  re- 
placed for  years. 

At  the  time  of  my  d^but  the  leading  tragedienne  was 
Madame  Palinska.  She  had  parts  in  all  classic  plays  and 
also  in  some  modern  dramas.  She  made  a  great  hit  in 
Sardou's  "Miss  Moulton."  When  I  first  met  her,  she  was 
a  pale,  handsome  brunette,  past  thirty.  She  died  shortly 
after  my  entering  the  Warsaw  Theatre,  to  the  great  regret 
of  the  public. 

Madame  Rakiewicz,  n^e  Ladnowska,  was  an  exceedingly 
beautiful  and  talented  woman,  but,  alas,  she  was  stopped 
on  her  road  to  fame  by  the  too  rapid  increase  of  her  progeny. 
There  was  a  newcomer  almost  every  year,  and  it  even 
happened  that  in  one  year  there  were  three  children  born, 
one  in  January,  and  twins  in  December.  Though  she  be- 
came a  great  favorite  of  the  audience  from  the  very  start, 
yet  the  prolonged  intervals  between  her  appearances  on 
the  stage  cooled  considerably  the  original  enthusiasm; 
and  the  imagination  of  the  people  dressed  her  in  a  maternal 
glory  which  by  degrees  killed  the  romance  usually  floating 
around  young  and  handsome  actresses.  Her  complexion 
was  a  marvel,  and  she  was  tall  and  slender.  Ah !  if  she 
could  only  have  remained  so  always. 

Her  great  part,  so  I  heard,  was  Schiller's  Mary  Stuart. 
Warsaw  was  wild  over  her.  This,  however,  happened  some 
years  before  my  arrival.  She  did  some  fine  work  afterwards 
in  foreign  and  Polish  drama,  and  her  ringing,  warm  voice 
and  the  simplicity  of  her  art  made  a  deep  impression  on  me. 
We  played  together  in  Lindau's  ''Mary  Magdalen,"  and 


\  MADAME    MODJESKA   AS    "MARIE    STUART" 


&gt;. 


V  I.  «-       «■ , 


POLAND  199 

also  in  some  other  plays.  After  my  third  tour  in  America, 
she  played  with  me  Elizabeth  in  ''Mary  Stuart/'  but  her 
face  was  even  then  too  beautiful  for  the  part. 

Madame  Bakalowicz  was  the  finest  product  of  the  War- 
saw dramatic  school.  Her  line  was  the  inginue.  She 
was  exquisitely  finished  in  all  her  parts.  The  precision  of 
her  language  harmonized  with  h.er  well-polished  nails  and 
her  dainty  shoes.  Of  rather  small  stature,  she  was  hien 
tournie,  as  the  French  say,  and,  without  being  strictly 
beautiful,  she  had  captivating  ways  in  the  turning  of  her 
head,  and  a  bewitching  smile.  In  her  art  there  was  no 
attempt  at  concealing  art.  The  work  was  obvious,  but  it 
was  of  such  fine  quality  that  it  could  not  fail  to  gain 
admiration.  Her  sudden  death  produced  a  great  sensation, 
the  more  so  as  it  happened  shortly  after  Madame  Palinska's 
departure  from  this  world.  Both  deaths  were  ascribed  to 
the  unsanitary  condition,  of  the  two  theatres.  I  saw  the 
president  on  that  occasion,  and  told  him  about  these  con- 
ditions, of  which  he  was  not  aware,  and  which  were  then, 
indeed,  in  a  most  deplorable  state.  Some  improvements 
were  made  immediately,  but  the  complete  remodelling  of 
the  building  took  place  after  my  departure  for  America. 

After  Madame  Bakalowicz's  death,  Romana  Popiel  in- 
herited her  repertoire,  though  the  plays  in  which  these  two 
ingSnue  actresses  had  acted  together  never  saw  the  foot- 
lights again.  Such  was  a  little  one-act  play  called  ^'Grand- 
mamma's Little  Sins,"  of  which  these  two  actresses  made 
a  real  gem  by  their  perfect  acting.  In  their  Louis  XV 
costumes  they  looked  like  two  exquisite  porcelaine  figurines, 
and  every  one  of  their  gestures  could  have  served  as  a  sculp- 
tor's model.  One  of  her  best  parts  was  Philiberte  in  Augier's 
play.  She  was  also  very  charming  as  the  princess  in 
'TEtrangfere,"  by  Dumas,  fils,  and  in  the  ingenue  part  in 
"Dalila,"  by  Feuillet.  Her  repertoire  was  very  extensive 
and  she  was  the  best  ingenue  I  ever  saw  on  any  stage. 


200  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Romana  Popiel  is  described  truly  and  flatteringly  by 
Brandes  in  his  book  entitled  '^  Poland/'  She  left  the  stage 
when  quite  young,  to  marry  Mr.  Swiencki.  She  is  still  a 
charming  and  beloved  woman,  the  lovely  mother  of  two 
beautiful  girls. 

Jan  Hencinski  (the  man  who  discovered  me)  was  not 
a  great  actor,  though  very  conscientious  and  correct.  But 
he  was  a  splendid  stage  manager,  and  a  fine  poet  and  play- 
wright. Many  of  his  plays  are  even  now  in  the  repertoire 
of  all  Polish  theatres  in  the  country  and  also  in  Bohemia. 
Most  of  them  are  written  in  rhymed  verse.  ''Nobility  of 
Soul"  is  one  of  the  most  popular  of  his  works. 

What  I  admired  immensely,  besides  his  literary  achieve- 
ments, was  his  capacity  for  work.  He  never  had  a  moment 
of  idleness,  and  all  he  undertook  was  done  on  time  and  done 
well.  A  more  conscientious  stage  manager  I  have  rarely 
ever  met,  or  a  more  competent.  On  the  spur  of  the  moment 
he  could  change  an  obscure  or  insipid  phrase  of  the  play  into 
a  clear  and  sensible  one,  mend  all  the  gaps  made  by  the 
censor's  scissors,  correct  the  language  of  a  commonplace 
translation,  make  judicious  cuts,  or  coach  young  actors  and 
actresses.  Very  often  the  success  of  the  performance  was 
due  to  his  stage  management  rather  than  to  the  company. 

The  poor  man  died,  I  believe,  from  overwork,  due  to  his 
pecuniary  difficulties.  If  author's  rights  had  existed  in 
Poland,  he  could  have  had  a  good  income  from  his  plays, 
but  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind  then,  and  even  to-day 
the  authors  are  robbed  with  impunity. 

Tatarkiewicz  was  the  leading  man,  or  rather  became 
one,  during  my  engagement.  He  was  a  young  enthusiast, 
sensitive,  ambitious,  nervous,  romantic,  and  always  in  the 
clouds.  His  pale,  handsome  face  and  tall,  slender  figure 
made  him  adapted  to  the  parts  of  lovers ;  and  he  gradually 
became  a  lover  par  excellence,  though  often  unrestrained 
in  his  acting.     But  there  is  an  old  saying  of  actors,  ''It 


POLAND  201 

is  better  for  a  young  aspirant  to  give  too  much  than  too 
little,  for  it  is  easier  to  curb  a  fiery  steed  than  to  urge  a 
lazy  one."  Romeo,  Laertes,  Mortimer  in  ''Mary  Stuart," 
and  Roswein  in  Feuillet's  ''Dalila,"  were  his  best  parts. 
Being  an  untiring  worker,  he  was  cast  in  almost  all  the  mod- 
ern and  romantic  plays  produced  in  the  Warsaw  theatres. 
Plajang  almost  exclusively  poetic  and  sympathetic  parts, 
he  soon  became  the  public's  favorite  and  the  schoolgirls' 
idol.  After  the  death  of  Hencinski,  he  became  the  stage 
manager,  and,  like  the  latter,  he  died  before  he  grew  old. 
Boleslaw  Leszczynski  is  a  superb  man.  Nature  lavished 
on  him  all  the  gifts  a  human  creature  could  desire.  He  has 
also  enough  genius  to  spare,  and  if  he  but  possessed  a  capac- 
ity for  work  equal  to  his  talent,  he  would  be  the  greatest 
actor  in  the  world.  But  I  am  afraid  he  is  indolent.  As 
every  part  seems  easy  to  him,  he  takes  them  all  easily,  yet 
in  some  exceptional  cases  he  suddenly  proves  to  the  audience 
that  he  can  be  great  when  he  chooses  to  be  so.  Taking  him 
all  in  all,  he  is  a  grand  actor.  There  is  nothing  small  about 
him.  In  stature,  face,  voice,  gesture,  he  is  a  man  to  satisfy 
all  the  aesthetic  requirements  of  an  audience,  and  his  acting, 
though  at  times  he  is  not  quite  perfect  in  his  lines,  is  electrify- 
ing to  the  audience,  from  the  gallery  to  the  boxes,  by  the 
power  and  truth  of  his  accents.  Boleslaw  Leszczynski  was 
engaged  at  the  Warsaw  Theatre  a  few  years  after  I  went 
there,  and  I  played  Desdemona  to  his  Othello.  I  shall 
never  forget  the  first  performance  of  the  play.  Leszczynski 
was  so  real  in  the  last  act  that  when  he  approached  me, 
with  murder  written  all  over  his  face,  I  became  so  frightened 
that  I  shrieked  and  jumped  out  of  the  bed.  He  started  on 
a  chase  after  me,  caught  me  in  his  arms,  carried  me  back 
to  the  couch,  and  accomplished  the  dreadful  deed,  half 
hidden  by  the  curtain,  which  he  succeeded  in  pulling  over 
one-half  of  the  bed  while  he  threw  me  down.  The  public 
was  hushed  by  the  horror  of  the  situation,  but  I  trembled 


202  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

lest  the  audience  might  criticise,  severely,  this  departure 
from  tradition,  but  to  raygreat  amazement  Mr.  L.  and  myself 
were  recalled  several  times  before  the  curtain  after  the  play. 
And,  what  was  still  more  gratifying,  some  prominent  opera- 
singers  who  witnessed  the  performance  came  behind  the 
scenes,  with  Signora  Mariani  at  their  head,  clapping  their 
hands,  and  calling,  "Brava! 
Brava!"     They  were  wildly 
enthusiastic  over  Othello,  and 
loaded    him    with    most  ex- 
travagant compliments.  And 
yet,  these  were  people  whose 
God  was  Salvini.     As  to  me, 
they  went  so  far  in  their  en- 
thusiasm as  to  lift  me  in  their 
arms  and  carry  me  all  over  the 
stage,  exclaiming,  "Oh,  bellis- 
eimaDesdemona, cara, cara  ! " 
I    beheve  they  would    have 
carried   Othello  in  triumph, 
also,  had  he  not  been  over  six 
feet  tall  and  too  heavy  to  lift. 
Loszczynski  ia  still  a  member 
of  the  Warsaw  Theatre,  play- 
ing various  parts,   for  he   is 
„  ^  „,  extremely  versatile,  and  as 

amusmg  m  comedy  as  he  is 
digni&amp;ed  and  intense  in  tragedy,  I  believe  that  all  the 
parts  of  ^olkowski,  and  some  of  the  tragic  parts  of  Kroli- 
kowski,  fell  to  his  share. 

During  my  stay  in  Warsaw  some  of  the  Cracow  actors 
made  their  debuts  and  were  engaged  by  our  management. 
Among  them,  the  two  best  were  Boleslaw  Ladnowski  and 
Wincenty  Rapacki.  They  are  still  living  there,  and  occupy- 
ing prominent  positions. 
"* Wincenty  Rapacki,  besides  being  an  excellent  character 


POLAND  203 

actor,  is  a  fine  writer.  His  play,  "Wit  Stwoss,"  a  poetic  and 
semi-historical  drama,  has  been  for  a  long  time  in  the  re- 
pertoire. He  was,  I  believe,  the  first  actor  to  introduce  a 
perfect  make-up.  He  could  make  himself  look  stout  or 
thin  at  wish ;  and  could  paint  his  face  in  such  a  skilful  way 
that  no  one,  even  standing  near  him,  could  detect  the  artifice. 
He  could  never  be  recognized  in  a  new  part  until  he  spoke, 
for  he  could  be  identified  only  by  his  voice,  which  was  of 
such  a  peculiar  quality  as  to  be  unlike  any  other  voice  I 
ever  heard.  His  articulation,  also,  was  his  own,  and  un- 
mistakable. His  best  parts  during  my  time  were  lago. 
King  Philip  in  ''Don  Carlos,"  and  Shylock,  as  well  as 
character  parts  in  Polish  and  French  plays.  He  made 
many  hits  after  I  left  Warsaw,  but  I  was  not  there  to  see 
his  new  achievements. 

Boleslaw  Ladnowski  —  my  former  Romeo  —  came  to  the 
Warsaw  theatre  after  my  departure  for  America.  He 
made  a  hit  in  Hamlet  and  other  parts,  and  was  engaged  to 
take  the  position  of  a  romantic  lover.  His  best  parts  were 
Hamlet,  Romeo,  Roswein  in  Feuillet's  ''Dalila,"  and  all 
the  parts  in  Alfred  de  Musset's  repertoire.  He  also  made 
a  strong  impression  in  several  Polish  plays  by  Fredro  and 
Slowacki.  At  present  he  occupies  the  post  of  stage  manager, 
to  which  he  is  entitled  by  his  knowledge  of  ancient  and 
modern  literature,  as  well  as  by  his  talent  for  writing.  A 
stage  manager  in  Europe  differs  from  the  American  stjage 
manager.  Education  is  essential  for  the  position,  and 
whenever,  by  necessity,  or  some  managerial  whim,  a  man- 
ager without  deep  knowledge  of  literature  is  chosen,  sooner 
or  later  his  ignorance  is  felt  in  the  productions. 

One  of  the  popular  figures  of  the  Grand  Theatre  was  the 
cashier,  Zalewski.  He  knew  almost  every  one  in  Warsaw, 
and  every  one  knew  him.  Sitting  in  his  box-office,  he  ac- 
quired a  great  knowledge  of  human  nature  by  being  in 
contact  with  so  many  different  individuals.  He  possessed 
the    almost    supernatural    gift  of    divining  what    persons 


204  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

would  come  to  see  certain  plays,  and  always  kept  seats 
reserved  for  them.  For  this  courtesy  he  was  rewarded  by 
some  additional  sum  of  money,  which  was  scrupulously 
added  to  his  steadily  increasing  capital.  He  rarely  made 
a  mistake  in  choosing  his  favorite  customers  or  in  his  cal- 
culations as  to  their  taste  and  generosity.  He  was  highly 
appreciated  by  the  public  for  his  politeness,  wit,  and  courtesy 
to  women.  Many  of  them  lavished  their  most  bewitching 
smiles  on  him  in  order  to  get  good  seats.  He  rarely  re- 
fused to  satisfy  them,  and  sometimes  even  disappointed 
men  on  their  account,  though  he  knew  well  that  all  they 
would  offer  him  as  extra  compensation  would  be  a  smile. 

After  the  second  act  of  a  play,  when  all  his  accounts  were 
made,  he  would  come  to  see  the  performance ;  and  so  ac- 
curate was  his  well-trained  instinct,  that  he  knew  at  once 
if  the  play  was  to  be  ''a  go"  or  a  failure.  In  his  moments 
of  grim  humor  he  amused  himself  by  placing  the  worst 
enemies  next  to  each  other,  or  a  jealous  wife  next  to  the 
acknowledged  sweetheart  of  her  husband,  even  a  divorced 
woman  beside  her  former  lord.  Those  accidents,  however, 
happened  very  rarely.  His  chief  amusement  was  to  place 
the  bald-headed  men  in  one  row,  or  to  form  two  rows  of 
bald  heads,  one  line  in  the  middle  of  the  stalls  running 
parallel  with  the  stage,  and  the  other  beginning  in  the 
middle  of  the  first  row  and  running  backwards  to  the  end 
of  the  seats,  so  that  the  two  lines  formed  a  perfect  cross. 
Then  he  would  sit  in  the  second  gallery  and  chuckle  over 
his  scheme.  The  students,  always  quick  in  noticing  and 
appreciating  fun,  laughed  and  applauded;  but  the  poor 
bald  heads  never  knew  the  cause  of  this  commotion.  Only 
the  author  of  the  joke  smiled  to  himself,  enjoying  in  full 
the  effect  produced  by  his  impish  design. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  speak  of  Warsaw  and  not 
mention  one  of  the  most  popular  men  of  that  time.  Dr. 
Titus  Halubinski.  As  a  medical  man  he  occupied  an  ex- 
ceptional position,  equal  to  that  of  Dr.  Da  Costa  in  America, 


POLAND  205 

Of  a  very  striking  personality,  tall,  handsome,  with  mag- 
netic eyes,  charming  manners,  wit,  and  wisdom,  he  was  a 
fascinating  man,  and  ever  welcome  guest  in  the  most  ex- 
clusive houses  in  Warsaw  and  Petersburg.  He  was  a  man 
of  great  courage  and  great  heart  as  well  as  a  man  of  high 
culture  and  a  lover  of  art  and  nature.  During  the  years 
of  the  Polish  Insurrection  he  occupied  a  conciliatory  political 
position,  and  was  a  personal  friend  of  the  Marquis  Wielopol- 
ski,  the  so-called  ''Political  Sphinx." 

During  my  engagement  in  Warsaw  we  often  in  summer 
visited  the  Carpathian  Mountains.  There  we  lived  in  the 
clean  mountaineers'  huts,  making  excursions  to  the  different 
points.  The  village  of  Zakopane  was  particularly  fascinating 
to  us,  and  is  still  the  place  of  our  predilection.  It  is  situated 
in  a  valley  and  surrounded  by  the  majestic  peaks  of  Tatry. 
We  spoke  to  Dr.  Halubinski  about  the  village  and  its  quaint, 
intelligent  inhabitants.  He  went  there,  and  fell  so  much 
in  love  with  the  place  and  the  people  that  he  built  a  villa 
on  the  outskirts  of  the  village,  and  became  the  patron  of 
the  mountaineers.  They  simply  worshipped  him.  He  dis- 
covered that  these  unlearned,  uncultivated  people  had 
more  inborn  manner,  more  real  artistic  feeling,  than  any 
of  the  average  city-bred.  He  founded  for  them  a  wood- 
carving  school,  where  even  now  the  young  boys  learn  that 
art,  so  unique  among  them.  Encouraged  by  his  example, 
I,  at  the  same  time,  started  a  school  for  lace-making  which 
is  still  in  existence. 

The  celebrated  doctor  died  long  ago,  but  his  memory 
lives  among  the  people,  and  his  friends  will  always  remem- 
ber him  with  keen  regret.  When  I  was  in  Poland  four  years 
ago,  I  saw  in  Zakopane  the  monument  which  the  grateful 
mountaineers  and  friends  erected  in  his  memory. 

Besides  the  link  of  personal  friendship  which  binds  me 
to  the  memory  of  Dr.  Halubinski,  there  is  yet  another: 
it  was  in  his  house  and  through  him  that  I  first  met  Ignace 
Paderewski.     Of  that  meeting  I  shall  speak  in  due  time. 


CHAPTER  XXVn 

During  the  Franco-Prussian  war  there  was  a  break  in  my 
activity.  I  was  ill  with  typhoid  fever,  which  I  brought 
upon  myself  by  my  own  recklessness.  Every  summer  I 
used  to  take  three  months^  vacation,  which  I  usually  spent 
in  star  engagements.  A  few  weeks  before  my  illness  we 
went  to  the  Carpathian  Mountains  to  spend  the  rest  of  my 
vacation  in  Zakopane.  We  loved  that  place  for  its  quaint- 
ness,  its  magnificent  views,  and  the  splendid,  invigorating 
air.  There  was  no  hotel  in  the  village  at  that  time,  but  it 
seemed  quite  delightful  to  live  in  a  clean  mountaineer's  hut, 
with  a  green  lawn  in  front  and  a  rushing  brook  behind  the 
house.  I  felt  unusually  restless,  nervous,  and  fatigued  that 
summer,  and  I  could  not  join  the  excursions  in  which  my 
husband  and  my  little  son  Rudolphe  took  part.  I  stayed 
in  the  village  with  my  mother,  and  to  strengthen  my  over- 
strung nerves  I  bathed  in  the  ice-cold  brook  and  walked 
barefoot  on  the  dew-sprinkled  lawn.  Unfortunately,  the 
weather  was  merciless  that  summer,  yet,  in  spite  of  the  cold 
and  rain,  and  my  mother's  warnings,  I  would  not  give  up 
any  of  my  baths  or  my  barefoot  exercises. 

Deprived  of  the  excursions  and  walks,  I  had  to  spend 
most  of  the  time  in  my  fir-scented,  cushioned,  and  carpeted 
room,  reading  and  writing  letters.  Here  is  one  that  I  wrote 
to  a  friend  in  Warsaw.  This  letter  never  reached  its  destina- 
tion, for  I  found  it  unfinished  between  the  leaves  of  a  dis- 
carded part,  where  it  was  probably  put  in  a  hurry  and 
forgotten :  — 

"What  frightful  weather  we  are  having  here,  my  dear!  It 
rains  almost  continually.    You  could  not  imagine,  were  you  here, 

206 


POLAND  207 

that  you  were  in  the  mountains,  for  there  are  no  mountains.  From 
my  window  I  usually  can  see  Gevont,  Geriach,  Lonmica,  those 
kings  of  the  valley,  but  now  I  vainly  strain  my  eyes;  I  can  see 
nothing  but  fog  and  drizzling  rain.  In  spite  of  it  all,  I  bathe  in 
the  creek  every  morning  and  walk  barefoot  on  the  lawn.  This 
heroic  treatment,  according  to  the  verdict  of  some  German  celeb- 
rity, is  bound  to  strengthen  my  shattered  nerves  and  estabUsh  a 
bUssful  equilibrium  through  my  whole  system. 

"Charles  and  Dolcio*  are  on  an  excursion.  I  could  not  join 
them  because  I  do  not  feel  quite  strong  enough  to  sleep  in  tents  or 
sheds.  I  read  and  do  fancy  work.  Mother  stays  with  me,  so  I 
am  not  quite  alone.  I  am  just  reading  'As  You  Like  it, '  of  Shake- 
speare. The  translation  is  bad,  but  the  play  is  a  most  beautiful 
idyl,  and  I  hope  that  some  day  I  shall  play  it,  though  I  doubt 
very  much  if  my  Warsaw  intimate  friends  would  like  to  see  me 
in  boy's  costume,  and  Rosalind  wears  a  page's  dress.  You  would 
not,  I  am  sure.  I  know  your  prejudices,  and  yet,  —  and  yet, — 
this  dramatic  poem  is  so  beautiful  that  some  day  I  may  break  the 
bonds  of  modesty  and  bring  it  into  Ufe.  You  will  bristle  up,  of 
course,  because  you  and  some  of  iny  friends  see  in  me  more  or  less 
a  nice  woman,  the  wife  of  a  nobleman.  The  artist  is  a  secondary 
consideration,  an  accomplishment  worthy  to  adorn  Madame 
Chlapowska,  whom  you  would  not  for  the  world  see  before  the 
footlights  dressed  in  tights.  And  yet,  I  assure  you,  I  look  quite 
modest  in  male  attire.  I  played  such  partis  before.  To  my  mind, 
I,  as  a  society  woman,  am  only  at  my  post  because  of  my  husband's 
title,  but  I  consider  my  artistic  standing  above  the  social  position 
I  occupy.  My  husband  is  of  my  opinion,  otherwise  he  would  not 
let  me  remain  on  the  stage.  But  I  will  not  torment  you  any 
longer.    Let  us  change  the  subject. 

"Two  days  ago,  I  felt  quite  melancholy.  The  weather  was 
desperate,  almost  suggesting  suicide,  and  I  had  a  feeling  of  some 
great  misfortime  hanging  in  the  air.  I  imagined  my  husband 
fallen  over  a  precipice,  my  boy  crushed  by  a  falling  pine  tree,  and 
other  pleasant  accidents ;  when,  suddenly,  I  heard  a  knock  at 
the  door.  Iii  my  riotous  imagination,  I  took  it  for  the  knock  of 
Mother  Death.  When  I  said  'Come  in,'  I  trembled,  and  then 
I  fairly  shrieked  with  joy,  for,  instead  of  some  grewsome  messenger, 
the  angeUc  face  of  Dr.  Karwowski  appeared  against  the  misty 
backgroimd.    That  dear,  lovely  man  travelled  from  Warsaw  to 

^  A  pet  name  for  Rudolphe. 


208  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

pay  us  a  visit,  and  to  see  how  we  lived  here.  Our  moiintaineer 
girl  was  just  serving  the  afternoon  tea,  and  I  kept  him  until  supper- 
time.  We  chatted  and  chatted,  and  he  told  me  so  much  about 
Warsaw  and  the  theatre  that  he  made  me  quite  anxious  to  return 
at  once  to  my  work. 

"Next  day  he  called  again.  It  was  still  raining.  When  all 
subjects  of  conversation  were  exhausted,  what  do  you  suppose  we 
did  to  kill  time  ?  We  killed  flies !  But  we  did  it  in  quite  an 
original  way.  I  foimd  among  Dolcio's  toys  two  tiny  little  bows. 
The  arrows  were  simply  made  of  matches,  with  a  needle  at  the 
end.  We  aimed  at  the  drowsy,  sprawling,  sleepy  flies  which  orna- 
mented the  wooden  walls  of  the  room,  and  one  by  one  our  victims 
fell  at  our  feet.  What  do  you  think  of  that  kind  of  occupaticm  for 
Juliet  or  Mary  Stuart?  This  is  not  all.  I  assure  you  that  both 
the  doctor  and  myself  were  as  serious  about  it  as  though  we 
were  hunting  wild  animals. 

"Charles  and  Dolcio  are  coming  back.  A  village  boy  saw 
them  from  the  hill,  and  came  on  horseback  to  bring  me  the  news. 
I  will  write  more  ..." 

When  we  returned  to  Warsaw  I  was  ill,  but  I  insisted 
on  performing  my  parts,  though  I  suffered  from  frightful 
headaches  and  fever.  The  dear  Dr.  Karwowski  told  me 
to  keep  away  from  the  stage,  but  no  persuasions  could 
induce  me  to  do  so.  I  was  determined  to  fight  the  disease. 
When  my  mother  and  husband  in  their  turn  tried  to  make 
me  give  up  acting  and  take  care  of  myself,  I  went  into  an 
uncontrollable  fit  of  weeping,  and  they  did  not  insist  any 
more.  I  realized  the  seriousness  of  my  state  only  when, 
after  the  fall  of  Amelia  in  ''Die  Rauber,"  I  could  not 
lift  myself,  and  had  to  be  carried  in  my  husband's  arms 
to  the  carriage  and  then  up  the  two  flights  of  stairs  to  our 
apartment.     There   I  fainted,  and  the   rest  was  oblivion. 

The  first  faces  I  saw  when  I  opened  my  eyes  were  those 
of  the  two  doctors,  Dr.  Halubinski  and  Dr.  Karwowski. 
Behind  them  stood  my  dear  mother,  watching  me  anxiously, 
and  I  felt  mv  husband's  cool  hand  on  mv  forehead.  Of 
that  period  I  have  but  slight  recollection.     Most  of  the  time 


] 


MoDltSKA    WITH    E 


210  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  was  unconscious,  and  all  I  can  remember  now  was  the 
agony  of  heart  I  felt  when,  dreaming  of  war,  I  imagined 
the  French  nation  crushed  by  Prussians.  I  dreamt  of 
battles,  of  regiments  following  each  other,  and  always, 
always,  the  black  and  white  standard  was  floating  in  the 
air  over  killed  and  wounded  men.  I  also  had  strange 
dreams  about  my  own  country. 

When  Dr.  Halubinski  pulled  me  through  my  illness  and 
I  was  recovering,  one  morning  my  little  son  came  to  my 
room  and,  standing  at  my  bed,  told  me  that  he  had  learned 
a  poem  which  he  wanted  to  recite.  It  was  one  of  the 
patriotic  poems  of  Pol.  All  my  feverish  dreams  came  back 
to  me,  and  I  was  seized  with  a  cramp  of  the  heart,  which 
ended  with  a  flood  of  tears  and  a  hemorrhage  from  one  of 
my  injured  lungs.  This  incident  put  me  back  for  some 
time. 

The  first  day  I  left  my  bed  was  marked  by  the  erroneous 
news  of  my  death.  A  woman  of  the  name  Modrzejowska 
died,  and  the  fact  was  announced  in  the  papers;  hence 
the  mistake.  Though  the  initials  of  her  first  name  were 
different,  yet  the  false  news  of  my  death  spread  like  light- 
ning over  the  country.  My  poor  husband  had  a  great  deal 
of  trouble  answering  letters  of  condolence  and  dismissing, 
not  very  gently,  I  fear,  the  hair-dressers  who  came  to  buy 
my  hair,  or  the  undertakers  who  insisted  on  taking  the 
measure  for  my  coffin.  The  only  compensation  for  his  pains 
was  a  beautiful  poem  written  by  El»«*y  (Adam  Asnyk), 
who,  hearing  of  my  journey  to  the  other  world,  com- 
posed, on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  one  of  his  best  poems. 
What  a  great  satisfaction  it  was  to  read  those  lines  !  It  was 
such  an  original  way  of  learning  the  degree  of  his  esteem 
and  the  place  I  had  occupied  in  that  friend's  heart.  Great 
as  was  my  joy  in  reading  the  beautiful  poem,  it  was  slightly 
marred  by  the  idea  that  I  might  have  caused  a  sort  of  dis- 
appointment to  the  poet  by  being  still  alive,  and  nothing 


POLAND  211 

was  more  welcome  than  Asnyk's  letter,  flooded  with  un- 
mistakable joy  over  my  resurrection. 

After  my  illness  I  lost  my  hair,  and  it  had  to  be  cropped 
close  to  the  scalp.  In  order  to  avoid  people's  attention 
I  wore  a  wig,  and  this  concealment  of  my  capillary  de- 
ficiency brought  a  calamity  upon  me.  One  morning,  when 
I  was  rehearsing  ''Frou-Frou,"  an  Italian  opera-singer  stood 
in  the  wings  watching  the  rehearsal:  When,  in  the  fourth 
act,  the  indignant  husband  in  the  play  has  cast  from  him 
the  poor  flippant  wife,  and  she  falls  upon  the  ground, 
the  wig,  which  was  not  well  fastened,  slipped  from  my  head. 
When  I  extended  my  hand  to  reach  it,  I  perceived  the  puz- 
zled, disappointed,  frightened  face  of  the  Italian  tenor.  The 
expression  of  that  face  was  so  amusing  in  its  perplexity 
that,  looking  at  him,  I  forgot  to  put  on  my  wig ;  and  when 
I  saw  him  crossing  himself,  I  sat  on  the  floor  and  burst  into 
a  loud  fit  of  laughter,  which  visibly  frightened  the  man,  for 
he  ran  away  as  fast  as  he  could. 

That  incident  made  me  put  away  the  wig  and  replace  it 
with  a  cap  made  of  white  gauze  and  lace.  It  was  not  very 
becoming,  but  less  disappointing,  and  much  lighter  and 
neater  than  a  mass  of  false  hair.  On  the  stage  I  wore 
wigs,  of  course,  but  they  were  carefully  secured,  and  never 
again  was  I  exposed  to  the  humiliation  of  parting  with  that 
important  ornament.  Spring  and  youth  combined  helped 
me  to  a  speedy  recovery,  and  with  the  returning  strength 
my  hair  grew  fast.  In  a  few  months  I  was  able  to  cast  away 
both  wigs  and  caps. 

When  I  was  still  wearing  caps,  my  half-brother,  Felix 
Benda,  was  invited  to  give  several  star  performances  in 
Warsaw.  He  made  a  great  hit,  and  an  engagement  on  good 
terms  was  offered  him,  but  the  Cracow  management  under 
Mr.  Kozmian  asked  him  to  stay  a  few  years  longer  in  Cracow. 
My  brother  had  great  appreciation  and  friendship  for  Mr. 
Kozmian,  and  he  refused  the  Warsaw  engagement,  though 


212  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

it  was  a  more  lucrative  one,  besides  being  also  more  com- 
fortable. In  Cracow  he  was  burdened  with  the  stage 
management,  which,  together  with  studying  and  acting,  led 
to  great  exertions  on  his  part.  He  worked  too  hard,  and, 
at  one  time,  having  a  bad  cold,  he  would  not  take  any  rest, 
but  attended  the  rehearsals  in  spite  of  his  failing  health. 
Two  years  after  his  d6but  in  Warsaw,  he  died  of  pneumonia, 
at  the  age  of  forty-two,  leaving  a  widow  and  a  little  daughter. 

The  news  of  his  death  reached  me  without  any  prepara- 
tion. During  the  performance  of  Rapacki's  drama,  ''Wit 
Stoss/'  I  received  a  telegram;  ''Felix  died  last  night." 
How  I  ever  went  through  that  performance  I  do  not  know. 
Next  morning  my  husband  and  I  went  to  Cracow  to  render 
my  beloved  brother  our  last  service. 

Felix  Benda's  death  was  a  great  loss  to  the  Cracow 
theatre.  His  place  has  never  been  filled  by  any  one.  There 
have  been  some  substitutes  and  imitators  without  soul. 
Later  on  several  excellent  —  even  great  —  actors  occupied 
important  places  on  that  stage,  but  none  with  that  magnet- 
ism, spontaneity,  humor,  that  irresistible  charm,  that  made 
my  brother  not  only  admired  but  beloved  by  every  one  who 
saw  him  on  the  stage,  and  especially  by  those  who  came 
in  closer  contact  with  him.  He  was  regretted  by  all,  as 
was  proved  by  his  funeral.  It  seemed  as  though  the  whole 
city,  from  the  highest  aristocrats  of  birth  and  brains  down 
to  the  working  class  of  people,  accompanied  him  to  his  eternal 
rest. 


CHAPTER  XXVIIl 

In  order  to  recover  entirely  from  the  effects  of  my  illness, 
we  spent  a  few  weeks  in  Krynica,  another  summer  resort  in 
the  Carpathian  Mountains,  and  there  we  met  the  De  Reszke 
family,  —  the  father,  Jan,  Eduard,  and  their  sisters.  Jan 
de  Reszke  was  then  a  beautiful  young  boy  about  nineteen ; 
his  sister  was  eighteen ;  Eduard,  sixteen ;  and  the  younger 
sister,  Josephine,  no  more  than  fifteen.  Those  four  children 
sang  quartets,  duets,  and  solos  most  beautifully,  and  on  one 
occasion,  when  I  was  arranging  a  concert  for  some  local 
charity,  I  asked  them  to  take  part  in  it.  They  consented 
readily,  and  it  was  one  of  the  finest  concerts  ever  given  in 
that  part  of  the  country.  I  have  kept  in  memory  the  pleasant 
recollection  of  that  evening.  The  De  Reszkes  had  never 
sung  in  public,  and  it  fell  to  my  share  to  introduce  Jan  de 
Reszke  to  the  audience  on  his  first  public  appearance. 
It  was  easy  to  foresee,  even  then,  a  brilliant  career  for  these 
four  wonderful  children.  Only  three  of  them,  however, 
went  on  the  stage.  The  elder  sister  married  soon  after 
her  visit  to  Krynica,  and  retired  with  her  husband  to  their 
handsome  estate  near  Warsaw.  That  delightful  family  was 
a  bright  and  brilliant  feature  of  our  season.  They  were  so 
happy,  so  handsome,  and  such  artists !  They  made  friends 
wherever  they  turned  their  steps.  Success  was  written 
on  their  sunny  countenances.  Loved  and  admired  in  their 
early  youth,  they  passed  to  fame  without  the  struggle  and 
effort  that  are  often  the  share  of  the  world's  celebrities. 

4c  3|e  3|e  ^  ^  4c  i|e 

Once  back  in  Warsaw,  we  resumed  our  Tuesday  evening 
receptions,   and  I  have  the  dearest  recollection  of  those 

213 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPKESSIONS 


POLAND  215 

moments  spent  in  the  company  of  many  distinguished  men 
and  women.  The  receptions  had  a  literary  and  artistic 
character,  but  there  were  also  persons  of  the  so-called  ''best 
world ''  who  were  pleased  to  be  among  our  guests  and  come  in 
contact  with  celebrities.  For  young,  aspiring  artists,  our 
house  was  the  place  where  they  could  discuss  art  and 
Ufe  with  people  of  high  social  standing  as  well  as  with 
scientific  and  literary  men.  This  association  served  to 
modify  somewhat  their  ultra-radical  views.  They  lived  for 
a  few  brief  hours. in  different  surroundings  from  their  own 
Bohemian  circles.  It  was  beneficial  to  them  in  one  sense, 
though  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  their  art.  This  they 
carried  in  themselves  wherever  they  went,  filling  the  place 
with  an  atmosphere  of  their  own.  My  husband  loved  those 
young  celebrities  ''in  spe,"  and  they  loved  him.  His  young 
spirit  harmonized  so  well  with  their  own  that  they  rarely 
missed  our  evenings,  and  made  themselves  entirely  at  home 
in  our  house,  which  they  rendered  more  brilliant  and  at- 
tractive by  their  natural  wit  and  originality. 

There  were  three  inseparable  young  artists  who  regularly 
attended  our  evenings,  —  the  most  extraordinary  trio  ever 
seen.  The  greatest  of  them  was  Joseph  Chelmonski,*  whose 
pictures,  just  then  on  exhibition,  were  admired  by  all  who 
saw  them.  His  way  of  dressing,  his  quaint,  unique  language, 
his  opinions,  were  all  original  and  picturesque.  He  had  the 
talent  of  saying  in  three  words  what  another  person  could 
not  express  in  a  long  talk,  so  clear  was  his  perception 
and  so  keen  his  sense  of  observation.  He  was  a  tall,  reddish 
blond  man,  with  a  most  interesting  and  handsome  face. 

The  other  two  members  of  the  trio  were  Adam  Chmielow- 
ski  and  Stanislaw  Witkiewicz.  These  three  usually  came 
to  our  receptions  very  early,  ahead  of  other  guests,  in  order 
to  have  a  friendly  chat.  Several  times  we  knew  before  we 
heard  the  door-bell  that  they  had  come,  because  Joseph 

^  Read  Helmonski. 


216  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Chelmonski  announced  himself  and  his  friends  by  a  plaintive 
air  skilfully  executed  on  a  sort  of  reed  called  ^'fujarka/' 
the  primitive  instrument  of  shepherds.  When  the  footman 
opened  the  door,  he  did  not  stop  playing,  but  walked  right 
into  the  living-room.  There  he  stood  in  a  "burka,"*  with 
the  hood  over  his  head,  the  picture  of  a  handsome  anchorite 
playing  for  his  sheep  and  birds.  We  might  have  been  the 
one  or  the  other,  for  he  never  paid  any  attention  to  us 
until  he  finished  his  air ;  then,  throwing  back  his  hood,  he 
would  ask  how  we  liked  it.  He  had  quite  a  repertoire  of 
those  airs.  Some  of  them  he  played  from  hearing,  and  some 
were  his  own  compositions. 

He  loved  to  see  a  good  play,  and  if  I  happened  to  perform 
a  part  of  which  he  approved,  he  paid  me  a  compliment  in  his 
own  original  way.  Instead  of  saying  (as  any  other  person 
would),  ^'You  were  splendid,  so  charming,"  etc.,  he  would 
look  at  me  for  a  while,  then  sigh,  and,  rubbing  his  profuse 
hair  in  all  directions,  would  say:  ''Yes,  yes,  dear  lady, 
Poland  is  a  wonderful  country.  Mickiewicz  lived  here, 
and  Chopin,  and  now  you!'' 

Shortly  before  we  left  for  America,  he  went  to  Paris, 
where  he  received  a  golden  medal ;  and  many  of  his  pictures 
were  sold  at  a  high  price  by  the  picture  dealer,  Goupil,  to 
dififerent  private  and  public  galleries  in  Europe  and  America. 
I  saw  one  of  them  in  New  York  in  the  Stewart  Gallery. 
After  several  years  of  success,  in  which  he  learned  to  speak 
French  with  a  Parisian  accent,  this  purely  Polish  painter 
of  nature  grew  tired  of  the  over  civilization  of  the  European 
metropolis.  He  wanted  to  paint  snow,  but  there  was 
scarcely  any  snow  in  Paris.  He  liked  rustic  scenes,  but 
there  were  no  models  for  Polish  peasants  or  animals.  It 
was  a  well-known  story  among  his  friends  that  once  he 
transported  from  Poland,  as  models  for  one  of  his  pictures, 
two  peasant  horses,  with  their  quaint  harness,  and  a  couple 

^  A  cloak  with  a  hood. 


POLAND  217 

of  pigs.  These  animals  he  kept  in  his  immense  studio  in  a 
faubourg  of  Paris  until  his  picture  was  finished.  Then  the 
pigs  were  sold,  and  the  horses  sent  back  to  Poland.  Even 
when  he  found  models  for  people  and  animals,  he  missed  the 
native  sky,  the  pine  woods,  and  the  meadows.  Finally  he 
was  seized  by  such  overpowering  homesickness,  and  such 
dread  of  deteriorating  in  his  art,  that  he  suddenly  returned 
to  Poland,  bought  a  farm-house  in  the  country,  and  settled 
down  in  the  very  heart  of  nature,  where  he  could  breathe 
the  fragrant  air  of  the  fields  and  feast  his  eyes  on  ever 
changing  clouds,  sunsets,  and  the  ruddy  cheeks  of  our  pretty 
peasant  girls. 

The  second  one  of  the  trio  was  Adam  Chmielowski.*  He 
was,  and  still  is,  a  living  spirit  of  all  Christian  virtues  and 
true  patriotism,  —  a  soul  more  than  a  body,  breathing 
poetry,  art,  and  charity;  a  pure,  unselfish  nature,  whose 
motto,  if  he  had  any,  would  be:  *' Happiness  to  all  men, 
glory  to  God  and  art!"  During  our  last  insurrection  he 
joined  the  ranks,  and  came  out  of  the  skirmish  with  the  loss 
of  one  of  his  legs. 

In  the  art  of  painting  he  occupied  the  place  of  a  fine 
colorist,  and  one  day  he  expressed  the  desire  to  paint 
my  portrait.  As  our  rooms  had  not  the  proper  light,  hav- 
ing a  southern  exposure,  he  asked  if  I  could  not  pose  in 
"their"  (the  trio's)  studio;  "provided,"  he  added,  "you 
can  climb  the  stairs." 

"Of  course  we  can  climb,"  my  husband  answered,  and 
the  very  next  morning  we  started  on  a  visit  to  the  studio. 
When  we  came  to  the  house  described  by  Adam  Chmielow- 
ski,  and  asked  the  porter  where  the  trio's  studio  was,  that 
individual  grinned  all  over,  and  then  said,  "On  the  seventh 
floor."     My  husband  and  I  looked  at  each  other  in  dismay. 

"Seventh  floor!"  we  both  repeated. 

"Well,"  said  my  husband,  "we  promised  to  come;   but 

^  Read  Hmieloski. 


218  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

if  you  think  you  cannot  climb  so  high,  we  can  leave  a  note 
with  the  porter  and  return  home." 

''It  will  be  such  a  disappointment  to  Mr  Chmielowski," 
I  answered,  ''and  I  think  I  can  climb."  We  started  on  our 
way  upward,  but  when  we  came  to  the  end  of  our  journey  I 
was  quite  exhausted.  I  leaned  against  the  wall  to  rest  be- 
fore entering  the  studio,  lest  the  artist  might  see  my  fatigue. 
But  as  soon  as  we  stopped  the  door  opened.  The  three 
heads  of  the  trio  appeared  against  the  light,  and  a  flood 
of  warm  welcome  greeted  us.  When  we  entered  Adam 
Chmielowski  noticed  my  fatigue,  and  called  himself  a  brute 
for  letting  me  climb  so  many  stairs. 

The  studio  was  a  large  room,  bare  and  cold,  but  with  a 
soft  northern  light  most  favorable  to  artists.  Against  one 
of  the  walls  was  an  immense  piece  of  canvas  spread  over 
a  frame,  and  on  it  the  figure  of  a  woman  at  least  nine  feet 
tall,  done  in  charcoal. 

"What  is  this?"  I  asked  innocently. 

"This  is  your  portrait,"  the  young  artist  answered.  "I 
sketched  your  figure  from  memory,  just  for  the  dimensions." 

"But  the  figure  is  too  tall!"  said  my  husband.     "It  is 


immense  i 


!" 


Just  SO,"  the  artist  said  gravely.  "Your  wife  is  im- 
mense. She  must  be  painted  differently  from  any  one 
else.  Besides,  this  portrait  is  going  to  be  hung  up  high 
over  the  entrance  to  the  National  Museum  which  is  bound 
to  be  built  some  day." 

I  did  not  like  to  contradict  him,  and  though  I  could  not 
relish  the  idea  of  being  so  magnified,  I  consented  to  give 
him  a  sitting.  He  began  to  sketch  my  head  on  a  separate 
piece  of  canvas  while  my  husband  was  chatting  with  the 
other  two  artists.  In  the  intervals,  while  I  was  resting,  I 
noticed  how  bare  the  room  was.  In  one  corner  there  was 
something  like  bedding  piled  up  and  carefully  covered  with 
a  rug  and  a  bear's  skin.     This,  with  a  table,  two  chairs,  and 


POLAND  219 

a  trunk,  was  all  the  furniture ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  numer- 
ous sketches  pinned  on  the  walls,  the  aspect  of  that  vast, 
cold  room  would  have  been  simply  unbearable.  My  obser- 
vation led  me  to  the  unmistakable  conviction  that  these 
young  men  were  extremely  poor;  and  yet  here  was  one 
of  them  painting  a  portrait  with  the  idea  of  offering  it  to  an 
imaginary  museum  instead  of  doing  some  more  lucrative 
work.  Oh,  the  dear,  fantastic  dreamer  !  The  portrait,  how- 
ever, was  never  finished,  for  the  artist  would  not  invite  me 
again  to  climb  seven  stories  to  the  studio.  He  said  he  would 
have  to  put  it  off  until  the  time  when  he  could  rent  one  on  the 
first  floor.  That  time  never  came,  and  after  we  left  War- 
saw he  gave  himself  up  to  the  religious  life. 

When,  years  later,  after  my  tours  in  America  and  Europe, 
I  met  him  in  Cracow,  he  was  called  ^'Brother  Albert,"  and 
wore  the  picturesque  gray  cowl  of  a  monk.  It  was  his 
desire  to  bring  back  to  life  the  so-called  ''Third  Order  of 
St.  Francis,"  which  had  fallen  into  desuetude  and  become 
simply  a  pious  fraternity.  He  succeeded  in  his  endeavors, 
and  restored  the  original  meaning  of  the  order,  making  of  it 
a  regular  congregation  devoted  to  the  care  of  the  lowest 
and  most  destitute  classes  of  society.  The  work  of  this 
congregation  can  be  compared  to  that  of  the  Salvation 
Army,  without  the  drums  and  songs.  Although  wrapped 
up  in  his  piety  and  charitable  work,  he  did  not  give  up  his 
art.  He  still  paints  portraits,  for  which  he  selects  his 
models  from  the  various  types  of  the  slums,  for  whose  physi- 
cal and  spiritual  welfare  he  is  toiling.  While  painting,  he 
preaches  to  his  models,  pointing  out  to  them  in  his  jocular 
way  the  ugly  lines  brought  to  their  faces  by  their  brutal 
life ;  and  telling  them  how  handsome  and  dear  to  God  they 
might  become  if  they  had  but  the  strength  of  will  to  control 
their  wicked  instincts.  These  unfortunates  worship  him 
for  his  unbounded  patience,  the  quaintness  of  his  speech, 
his  simplicity,  and  his  good  humor. 


220  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

The  third  and  youngest  member  of  the  trio  was  Stanislaw 
Witkiewicz,  called  ^^Stach"  by  his  friends.  When,  he  was 
a  little  boy,  his  father,  being  involved  in  the  insurrection  of 
the  Poles  in  1863,  was  sent  by  a  decree  of  the  Russian  gov- 
ernment to  Siberia.  His  wife  accompanied  him,  taking  the 
children  with  her.  After  her  husband's  death  she  returned 
with  the  children  to  St.  Petersburg,  where,  at  the  age  of  four- 
teen, '^Stach"  tried  to  make  his  own  living  and  suffered 
many  hardships.  Finally  he  and  his  family  moved  to  War- 
saw, where  they  settled  down. 

At  the  time  we  met  him  he  was  a  blushing  boy  of  twenty, 
with  great  blue  eyes,  black  hair,  and  heavy  black  eyebrows. 
Even  then  his  pencil  and  charcoal  sketches  were  highly 
appreciated  and  admired,  but  we  were  not  aware  of  the 
literary  talent  which  he  developed  later.  After  we  left 
Warsaw,  he  went  to  Munich,  where  he  remained  some  time, 
studying  art.  When  he  returned,  he  married,  and  then, 
attracted  by  the  beauty  of  the  Tatra  Mountains,  he  settled 
down  among  them  in  the  village  of  Zakopane,  where  he 
still  remains,  and  probably  will  remain  until  the  end  of  his 
life.  At  present  he  is  not  only  a  painter,  but  an  art  critic 
and  a  writer.  His  work  entitled  ''Art  and  Criticism" 
established  his  literary  reputation  and  won  for  him  the 
name  of  a  Polish  Ruskin.  His  language  is  very  rich  and 
original.  He  has  actually  augmented  the  Polish  vocabulary 
by  many  new  words.  His  style  is  crisp  and  picturesque, 
and  his  descriptions  of  the  mountains  unique  and  very 
valuable  to  artists.  He  also  introduced  the  original  moun- 
taineer designs  into  the  decorative  art  of  Poland,  their 
native  architecture  and  ornamentation  into  modern  build- 
ings, and  their  quaint  mediaeval  language  into  literature. 
He  is  one  of  the  most  popular,  striking,  and  picturesque 
personalities  in  that  part  of  the  country. 

Besides  this  interesting  trio  there  was  the  caricaturist, 
Kostrzowski,  a  man  of  great  wit  and  irrepressible  spirit. 


POLAND  221 

His  caricatures  and  his  pictures  of  popular  scenes  were 
highly  appreciated  on  account  of  their  striking  types.  He 
was  a  welcome  guest  everywhere,  and  the  aristocratic 
circles  made  a  great  deal  of  him.  Another  guest  was 
Gerson,  an  artist  of  great  merit;  the  name  of  Gierymski 
also  was  mentioned  wherever  there  was  any  discussion  about 
art.  That  young  artist  was  living  in  Munich  at  that  time, 
and  I  never  met  him.  Years  later,  however,  his  younger 
brother,  A.  Gierymski,  came  into  prominence,  and  his  pic- 
tures made  quite  a  sensation  in  Warsaw.  He  was  a  frequent 
guest  in  our  house.  Mr.  Chlapowski  and  myself  took  a 
great  interest  in  his  artistic  career. 

The  literary  element  of  our  circle  was  represented  first 
by  Count  Przezdziecki,  an  archaeologist  and  historian,  and 
one  of  the  richest  men  in  Poland.  I  had  met  him  occasion- 
ally during  my  engagement  in  Cracow,  and  several  times 
he  helped  me  in  my  studies  by  providing  me  with  necessary 
information  and  books. 

Next  came  the  poet,  Felician  Falenski,  and  his  ^dfe, 
both  of  strong  personality,  and  intimate  friends  of  ours; 
then  W.  Szymanowski,  also  a  poet,  and  the  editor  of  the 
Warsaw  Courier;  Edward  Lubowski,  a  playwright ;  Bogu- 
slawski,  a  dramatic  critic  of  importance,  and  author  of  the 
'^History  of  the  Polish  Theatre'';  Swietochowski,  known 
for  his  picturesque  style  and  noble  ideas,  a  most  interesting 
and  talented  man ;  and  last  but  not  least,  Henryk  Sienkie- 
wicz,  whom  I  am  bound  to  mention  often  in  my  memoirs. 

One  of  the  prominent  and  popular  men  of  my  time  in 
Warsaw  was  Edward  Leo,  a  lawyer  and  editor  of  the 
Gazeta  Polska}  He  and  his  charming  wife  were  our 
faithful  ''Tuesdayers"  and  very  best  friends.  He  was  a 
brilliant  man,  and  his  wit  was  known  in  our  country  and 
abroad  as  well.  He  was  simply  bubbling  over  with  it. 
His  friends  used  to  say  that  often,  in  the  middle  of   the 

1  The  PcHUh  GazeUe. 


222  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

night,  he  would  wake  up  his  wife  to  tell  her  of  some  joke  that 
he  had  dreamt  of.  Besides  this  irrepreseible  wit,  he  pos- 
sessed a  high  and  well-grounded  wisdom,  and  it  was  worth 
watching  him  discussing  serious  matters  with  a  face  which 
in  an  instant  changed  from  an  expression  of  the  god  "Pan" 
to  that  of  astern  philosopher. 
'"  Many  were  the  kind  deeds 

of  Dr.  Leo;  and  great  was 
his  knowledge  of  human 
nature,  his  taste,  and  his 
judgment  in  matters  of  mu- 
sic, art,  and  literature.  He 
published  in  his  paper  one  of 
the  first  novels  of  Sienkie- 
wicz,  "Hania."  He  took 
the  young  writer  under  his 
wing  from  the  start,  and 
pulled  him  through  the  first 
trials  of  an  unknown  author. 
He  recognized  at  once  the 
extraordinary  resources  of 
the  author  of  "Quo  Vadis," 
and  predicted  his  future 
fame.  Dr.  Leo  and  his  wife 
Hbnryk  s.ENKrew.cz,  in  1776.  ^cre  intimate  friends  of  oura, 
—  friends  in  a  true  meaning 
of  that  word, — and  they  remained  such  to  the  very  end- 
of  their  Hves. 

It  was  on  a  visit  to  their  country  home  that  we  met 
Henryk  Sienkiewicz,  and  that  glorious  young  man  came 
almost  regularly  to  our  receptions.  I  can  see  him  even 
now,  sitting  in  a  cosy  corner  of  the  room,  his  handsome, 
expressive  face  leaning  against  his  hand,  silent,  for  he 
rarely  spoke,  but  his  brilliant,  half-veiled  eyes  saw  every- 
thing and  his  ears  drank  in  every  word.     The  whole  room, 


POLAND  223 

with  its  contents,  —men,  women,  and  objects,  was  uncon- 
sciously yielding  food  for  his  acute  observation.  He  some- 
times outstayed  the  company,  and  when  only  a  few  of  our 
intimate  friends  remained  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
conversation,  to  our  great  delight,  for  his  many-sided  in- 
tellect and  slightly  sarcastic  humor  acted  like  a  stimulant 
upon  others,  calling  forth  most  clever  and  interesting  replies. 
I  was  usually  a  mute  listener  to  the  intercourse,  which  some- 
times became  so  fascinating  that  our  guests  did  not  notice 
when  the  candles  were  burnt  out  and  replaced  by  fresh  ones, 
while  the  dim  white  light  peeped  across  the  window-blinds. 
This,  however,  happened  rarely,  but  one  or  two  o'clock  in 
the  morning  was  the  usual  hour  for  our  guests  to  say  good 
night. 

These  prolonged  and  regular  receptions  attracted  the  at- 
tention of  the  police,  and  every  Tuesday  evening  detectives 
and  one  or  two  gendarmes  were  posted  at  our  door,  ob- 
serving and  writing  down  the  names  of  every  visitor. 
They  even  went  so  far  as  to  ask  those  who  came  from 
abroad  where  they  lived,  and  their  names  and  business.  A 
detective  followed  my  husband  wherever  he  went,  and  I 
noticed  a  vigilant  spirit  hovering  even  over  my  person 
whenever  I  happened  to  be  out. 

One  day  the  gendarmes  were  quite  alarmed  on  our  ac- 
count. We  were  driving  back  from  the  races,  when  we  per- 
ceived the  youngest  of  the  ''trio,"  S.  Witkiewicz,  sitting  on 
a  fence  and  deeply  engaged  in  sketching  horses.  He  wore  a 
blue  linen  workman's  blouse,  partly  because  it  was  a  cool 
garment,  and  partly  because  it  matched  his  blue  eyes,  I 
thought.  We  stopped  the  carriage  to  speak  to  him,  and, 
as  we  did  so,  two  gendarmes  on  horseback  approached  us, 
and  some  individual  with  a  repulsive  face  came  very  near 
us  to  listen  to  our  talk.  When,  after  exchanging  a  few  words 
with  Witkiewicz,  we  took  leave  of  him,  one  of  the  gendarmes 
escorted  us  to  the  very  door  of  our  house.     The  other  guai&gt; 


224  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

dian  angel  stayed  to  watch  the  artist,  who  had  to  undergo 
a  regular  investigation. 

All  this  was  amusing  at  first,  and  in  some  ways  comfort- 
able. We  could  go  into  the  biggest  crowd  without  being 
afraid  of  pickpockets,  against  whom  we  were  protected  by 
our  official  guardians.  But  it  became  annoying  with  time. 
Moreover,  it  was  perfectly  unnecessary  on  the  part  of  the 
police,  for  we  were  not  holding  conspiracy  meetings.  Our 
sole  object  was  to  bring  together  as  many  talented  and  brill- 
iant people  as  we  could  gather.  I  do  not  wish  to  say  that 
we  were  contented  and  placid  in  our  slavery.  We  strongly 
resented  and  always  shall  resent  the  government's  unfair  or 
cruel  proceedings.  But  we  saw  the  uselessness  of  an  active 
protest,  and  tried  to  keep  quiet  on  account  of  the  young 
people  around  us,  who  were  very  incendiary  in  their  nature. 
Even  a  tiny  spark  thrown  in  their  midst  might  have  set 
them  on  fire,  which  would  have  endangered  their  lives  and 
brought  more  oppression  upon  the  country. 


CHAPTER   XXIX 

Our  musical  friends  were  represented  first  by  Moniu- 
szko,  our  foremost  composer.  Though  his  genius  was 
appreciated  everywhere,  and  particularly  in  Italy,  he  re- 
mained a  simple,  modest  man.  His  opera  ''Halka''  and 
a  kind  of  oratorio  written  to  the  words  of  Mickiewicz's 
''Dziady, "  made  Moniuszko's  reputation.  Poland  is  still 
ringing  with  his  exquisite  songs.  During  my  engagement 
in  Warsaw,  when  we  were  rehearsing  "Hamlet,"  I  was  for- 
tunate enough  to  obtain  from  him  the  music  for  Ophelia's 
songs,  which  he  composed  expressly  for  mc,  and  which  I 
sang  even  when  I  played  with  Edwin  Booth,  adapting  the 
melody  to  the  English  text. 

Zelenski,  next  only  to  Moniuszko,  was  then  a  rising  man 
of  considerable  popularity.  Whenever  he  appeared,  he 
was  greeted  with  acclamation,  being  one  of  the  best  and 
most  entertaining  of  companions.  Endowed  with  a  healthy 
sense  of  humor,  he  could  give  a  splendid  parody  of  any 
musical  composition.  Even  Chopin  did  not  escape  his 
comic  interpretation.  But  he  was  just  as  merciless  to  his 
own  works,  and  made  us  many  times  hold  our  sides  with 
laughter  over  his  irresistible  improvisations.  He  composed 
symphonies  and  several  operas  on  Polish  themes  which 
were  highly  appreciated.  He  still  lives,  and  is  always 
admired  as  a  thorough  artist  and  one  of  the  best  of 
men. 

Zarzycki,  the  director  of  the  Conservatory  of  Music  (a 

public  institution),  was  then  a  young,  ambitious  pianist, 

and  a  great  friend  of  ours.     He  often  played  his    latest 

compositions  at  our  house.     One  of  them,  called  "Song  of 

Q  225 


226  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Love,"  ia  equal  to  Rubinstein's  piano  pieces,  and  entirely 
original.  Zarzycki  was  aa  well  versed  in  literature  as  in 
music,  and  his  talk  was  always  interesting.  He  was  one  of 
those  friends  we  missed  when  he  failed  to  appear  at  our 
Tuesday  evenings. 

The    musical  house  par  excellence  in  Warsaw  was  that 
of  Ludwig  Grossman.     Besides  having  one  of  the  largest 
piano    concerns    in   Poland 
•    and  Russia,  he  was  an  ex- 
cellent   musician    and    the 
composer  of  several  comic 
operas.    One  of  them,  called 
"The    Ghost    of    the    Voi- 
vode,"  was  for  a  long  time 
in  the  Polish  and  German 
repertoires.     In  his  house  — 
where     the     guests     were 
greeted    most    cordially  by 
the    host,     and    fed    most 
copiously     by     the     little, 
dainty^  blonde  Mrs.  Gross- 
man —  all  that  WHS  known 
in  the  musical  and  artistic 
world  of  Europe  met.    They 
not  only  met,  but  they  sang, 
played,  and  recited  in  that 
hospitable     and     congenial 
home.       We    heard    there 
Joachin  and  Henry  Wieniawski,  those  two    violin    kings, 
Anton  and  Nicolas  Rubinstein,  Hans  von  Biilow,  Madame 
Artof,  the    sisters    Marchisio,  Madame    Mariani,    Carlotta 
Patti,  the  violinist,  Wilhelmij,  that  most  picturesque  and 
handsome  man,  and  Laub,  Madame  Essipoff,  Leschetizky, 
and  many  others.     The  atmosphere  of  those  receptions  was 
so  favorable  to  artists  that  they  did  not  wait  to  be  asked, 


POLAND  227 

but  offered  to  perform,  knowing  that  there  was    no    one 
present  who  was  not  worthy  of  their  efforts. 

At  several  musical  evenings  at  Grossman's  house  I  had  . 
the  opportunity  of  meeting  Hans  von  BUlow.     When  first 


Anton  RtPBiNsTBm. 


he  was  introduced  to  me  by  Madame  Mouchanoff,  I  almost 
avoided  him  on  account  of  the  many  stories  of  his  irasci- 
bility, his  erratic  disposition,  his  offhand  treatment  of  the 
public,   his  brutality  towards  musicians,  and  many  other 


228  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

crimes  of  this  sort.  On  closer  acquaintance  with  the  great 
pianist  I  experienced  great  astonishment  to  find  him  quite 
different  from  the  picture  I  had  drawn  of  liim.  I  saw 
before  me  a  man  of  strong  mind  yet  gentle  nature,  en- 
thusiastic, well-bred,  artistic  to  the  finger-tips,  and  of  an 
exceedingly  nervous  temperament.  Irascible  he  might  have 
been  at  times,  but  I  am  sure  that  the  moments  of  un- 
governable anger  were  always  provoked  by  peopfe's  stu- 
pidity or  some  unpardonable  mistake  in  musical  execution. 
His  nerves  simply  could  not  endure  any  musical  jar  or  an 
idiotic  word  or  action. 

The  picture  I  give  of  our  social  life  in  Warsaw  would  be 
quite  incomplete  if  I  did  not  mention  an  entirely  different 
set  with  whom  we  were  in  close  contact.  It  consisted  of 
my  husband's  relations  in  the  Polish  capital,  and  was  exceed- 
ingly numerous.  The  Lubienski  family  played  not  long 
ago  quite  an  important  part  both  in  Polish  society  and 
Polish  history.  Exceedingly  prolific,  it  was  connected  by 
marriage  with  almost  all  the  foremost  aristocracy  of  the 
country.  The  last  Minister  of  Justice  of  Poland,  Count 
Felix  Lubienski,  reached  the  age  of  ninety-nine,  and  of  his 
ten  children  eight  lived  to  be  over  ninety.  One  of  them 
was  my  husband's  grandmother,  Madame  Morawska,  the 
charming  old  lady  of  whom  I  have  spoken  before;  and 
most  of  the  others  were  yet  living  in  Warsaw,  where  w^e  knew 
and  visited  them.  Almost  all  had  played  a  prominent 
part  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  all 
were  exceedingly  interesting  figures  of  the  past. 

Besides  Madame  Stephanie,  Dr.  Leo's  wife,  I  had  at  that 
time  two  intimate  friends,  —  Mademoiselle  Emilia  Sierz- 
putowska  and  Madame  Falenska,  the  poet's  wife.  I  used 
to  call  the  first  my  in  piration  and  the  second  my  con- 
science. 

Mademoiselle  Emilia  was  made  up  of  spontaneity,  impulse, 
and  enthusiasm.     Tall,  rather    robust  in  build,  with  aris- 


POLAND  229 

tocratic  bearing,  shapely  hands  and  feet,  expressive  eyes, 
and  a  charming  smile,  without  being  beautiful  she  made 
the  impression  of  a  handsome  woman.  Also  she  carried 
with  her  a  healthy,  breezy  atmosphere,  and  people  fell 
easily  under  her  charm.  A  warm  heart  and  charitable 
mind  always  attract  our  fellow-beings;  and  she  had  many 
admirers  of  both  sexes.  Highly  cultivated,  she  was,  more- 
over, a  staunch  patroness  of  art.  Like  Madame  Mouchanoff, 
she  also  had  a  cult  for  Wagner,  and  paid  frequent  visits  to 
Weimar,  where  she  met  the  great  man  and  his  wife,  Madame 
Gosima,  with  whom  she  was  in  correspondence  until  the 
end  of  her  life.  '^Panna  Emilia,"  as  she  was  called  by 
friends,  belonged  partly  to  the  Polish  and  partly  to  the 
Russian  society.  Her  father  and  her  brother  were  both  gen- 
erals in  the  Russian  army.  Her  mother  was  of  the  Polish 
nobility.  She  had  relations  among  Poles,  and  friends  among 
Russians,  and  could  have  been  a  happy  link  between  the 
two  sets  had  it  not  been  for  the  strong  prejudice  on  the 
one  side  and  the  suspiciousness  on  the  other. 

Madame  Falenska  formed  a  contrast  with  ''Panna 
Emilia"  in  many  ways.  In  fact,  they  agreed  firmly  on  but 
one  point,  and  that  was  their  warm  friendship  for  my  hus- 
band and  myself.  Madame  Falenska  was  more  of  a  scien- 
tific and  ethical,  than  artistic,  turn  of  mind.  A  great 
patriot,  she  shrank  from  Russian  society.  Her  mind  and 
her  whole  heart  were  filled  with  many  bitter  recollections 
of  past  wrongs,  and  she  bristled  at  the  mere  approach  of  a 
uniform  or  a  Russian  dignitary.  A  faithful  and  devoted 
wife,  she  always  found  time  to  lend  a  helping  hand  to  dif- 
ferent charities,  as  well  as  to  guide  young  people's  minds  and 
lead  them  into  the  right  paths  of  life.  I  called  her  my 
'^conscience,"  for  she  never  flattered,  but  spoke  openly 
what  she  thought  of  me  and  my  art ;  and,  though  her  opin- 
ions had  sometimes  the  effect  of  a  bucket  of  cold  water 
poured  upon  my  head,  yet  they  were  so  just  that  I  could 


^. 


230  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

not  but  agree  with  her.  She  also  advised  me  as  to  whom 
I  might  receive  and  whom  I  should  avoid,  and  in  this  she 
never  was  guided  by  prejudice  but  by  real  friendship.  The 
daughter  of  Polish  noble  parents,  she  married  rather  late 
in  life  Felician  Falenski,  the  well-known  poet  and  the  trans- 
lator of  Petrarch  and  Juvenal.  They  both  were  frequent 
guests  in  our  house,  and  Madame  Falenska  brought  me  in 
contact  with  a  serious  set  of  people,  among  whom  was 
Alexander  Jablonowski,  the  historian  and  archaeologist, 
and  Odyniec. 

Odyniec  was  our  romantic  old  poet,  author  of  many 
beautiful  ballads  and  poems.  Friend  and  companion  of 
Adam  Mickiewicz,  he  travelled  with  him,  and  they  both 
visited  Goethe  in  1829  at  his  home.  It  was  a  delight  to 
hear  Odyniec  when  he  referred  to  that  meeting  with  the 
greatest  of  German  poets.  Goethe  was  then  over  eighty 
years  old,  and  Adam  Mickiewicz  and  his  friend  were  young 
men,  full  of  enthusiasm,  faith,  and  patriotism.  They  were 
introduced  to  the  German  bard  by  Madame  Szymanowska, 
the  Polish  court  pianist  of  St.  Petersburg,  over  whom 
Goethe  was  in  rapture,  calling  her  the  most  exquisite  per- 
son in  the  world.  Odyniec,  in  turn,  was  very  enthusiastic 
over  Madame  Otilia,  Goethe's  daughter-in-law,  and  Madame 
Vogel,  both  of  whom  he  met  at  the  poet's  house.  He  called 
the  latter  '^  Paradies  Vogel."  *  During  the  talk  of  the  young 
Poles  with  the  great  German  poet,  the  ardor  of  my  young 
countrymen  was  considerably  cooled  by  the  pure  philosoph- 
ical principles  of  Goethe.  Odyniec  also  re&amp;ented  the  title 
of  ^'Excellency,"  which  he  had  to  use  with  every  phrase 
he  uttered  to  Goethe.  *' Excellency"  suggested  to  him  a 
government  official;  there  was  something  very  stiflf  and 
formal  in  it. 

The  great  Scandinavian  critic,  George  Brandes,  in  his 
remarkable  book  called  '' Poland,"  speaks  also  of  the  meet- 

^Bird  of  Paradise. 


POLAND  231 

ing  of  the  two  great  poets.  He  describes  it  according  to 
Odyniec's  narrative,  with  all  the  skill  of  an  experienced 
writer  of  great  talent. 

Next  to  Odyniec  was  Jadwiga  Luszczewska,  our  great 
woman  poet,  whose  '*nom  de  plume''  is  Deotyma.  Deo- 
tyma  was,  as  a  child,  a  wonderful  being.  She  could  write 
verses  and  improvise  by  the  hour.  At  sixteen  she  held  men 
of  letters  spellbound  by  her  philosophical  turn  of  mind  and 
her  marvellous  facility  for  expressing  her  thoughts  in  beau- 
tiful verse.  All  that  was  remarkable  in  science,  poetry, 
and  art  flocked  to  hear  the  wonderful  young  muse. 

When  I  met  her,  she  w&lt;'is  already  past  thirty  years  of  age 
and  in  the  full  swing  of  her  fame.  Not  very  tall,  with  rather 
a  handsome  face,  she  was  a  type  of  the  blondest  blonde. 
Her  complexion  was  matchless,  her  eyelashes  and  brows 
pale  yellow,  and  her  eyes  very  blue.  She  carried  her 
slight  embonpoint  with  dignity,  and  her  dresses  were  never 
made  to  suit  the  fashion.  One  time  she  would  wear  an 
Elizabethan  high  collar,  and  again  she  would  appear  in 
ancient  Greek  draperies,  or  a  costume  of  the  Borgias. 

She  wrote  a  great  many  poems,  but  her  dramatic  poem 
''Wanda''  and  the  epic  poem  ''Sobieski"  are  considered 
the  best  among  her  works.  ^ 


CHAPTER  XXX 

Shortly  before  the  plans  for  our  departure  for  America 
were  made,  we  visited  Vienna,  where  I  had  the  opportunity 
of  seeing  Madame  Wolter,  the  greatest  German  actress  of 
that  time.  She  played  ''Adrienne  Lecouvreur."  A  beau- 
tiful, statuesque  person,  with  fine  voice  and  expressive  face, 
she  was  more  adapted  to  classic  tragedy  than  to  modern 
French  drama.  Though  Adrienne  belonged  even  then  to 
the  so-called  *^old  school,''  yet  the  exquisite  '^facture"  of 
Scribe  and  Legouv^  required  more  brightness  and  natural- 
ness than  the  Burg  Theatre  actors  could  offer.  In  the  sec- 
ond act,  when  Adrienne  recites  La  Fontaine's  poem  of  the 
two  doves  to  her  lover,  instead  of  being  near  him  and  speak- 
ing to  him,  Madame  Wolter  stood  before  the  footlights, 
spe^ng  to  the  audience,  while  Maurice  stood  a  few  steps 
behind  her  in  a  pose  of  admiration. 

Several  of  these  mistakes  w^re  noticeable,  and  made  me 
think  that  though  there  is  a  saying  that  art  has  no  nation- 
ality, yet  the  French  plays  are  always  best  rendered  by  the 
French  actors,  while  Shakespeare  or  plays  from  the  German 
are  almost  impossible  with  them.  I  heard  that  '^ Hamlet" 
was  produced  in  Paris,  but  I  am  sure  that  I  would  not  travel 
far  to  see  a  French  ''Hamlet."  Germans  can  play  Shake- 
speare because  the  spirit  of  the  language  is  similar.  More- 
over, they  possess  the  necessary  weight  and  repose,  and 
their  translations  of  Shakespeare  and  other  English  plays 
are  excellent.  SchlegoPs  Shakespearian  translations  are 
most  faithful,  and  his  language  perfect. 

I  would  have  enjoyed  seeing  Madame  Wolter  in  Goethe's 

232 


CHiELOTTB  WOLTEB. 


234  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

or  in  Schiller's  plays,  and  I  was  sure  she  would  have  been 
an  admirable  Lady  Macbeth  or  a  Katherine  of  Aragon,  but 
we  had  to  leave  Vienna  before  seeing  her  in  another  play. 
Years  later  I  heard  that  she  made  an  enormous  hit  in  Wil- 
brandt's  '^Messaline,"  and  I  can  imagine  with  what  effect 
this  great  actress  employed  the  resources  with  which  she 
was  so  richly  endowed,  and  what  a  vivid,  fascinating, 
passionate  Messaline  she  presented. 

From  Vienna  we  went  to  Berlin  on  purpose  to  meet 
Madame  Ristori  and  to  see  her  act.  She  gave  at  that  time 
several  star  performances.  Among  the  plays  of  her  reper- 
toire were  ''Mary  Stuart,"  ''Judith,"  and  Giaccometti's 
''Elizabeth."  This  last  part  made  an  everlasting  impres- 
sion on  me.  It  was  the  perfection  of  actor's  art.  The 
changes  in  Elizabeth's  appearance  and  manner  as  she  grows 
older  from  act  to  act,  until  she  appears  an  aged,  decrepit 
woman,  haunted  by  ghosts  and  visions  at  the  hour  of  death, 
were  rendered  in  a  masterly  manner. 

In  "Judith"  she  used  too  much  pantomime,  and  the  red 
wool  representing  blood  on  her  garments  was  not  artistic. 
But  her  voice  reciting  the  verses  was  like  music,  and  the 
murder  scene  very  realistic,  except  for  the  red  blood.  In 
"Mary  Stuart"  she  was  classic  with  her  really  queenly 
bearing.  In  the  third  act  the  meeting  of  the  two  queens 
was  wonderful.  Yet  I  missed  the  womanly  element  in  that 
character,  the  most  intensely  feminine  in  history.  But  it 
is  almost  impossible  to  possess  great  tragic  power  together 
with  the  sweetness  which  belongs  to  the  weaker  sex.  The 
play  was  arranged  especially  for  the  star  part,  and  the  sec- 
ond act  was  cut  out. 

I  was  in  raptures  over  Madame  Ristori,  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  Italians  are  the  best  actors  in  the  world. 
They  can  impersonate  characters  from  all  the  plays  in  the 
world.  The  French  are  at  their  best  in  French  plays,  but 
Italians  are  universal.    There  is  something  significant  in 


Madams  Ristobi. 


P/iaioffraph  by  Sarony^ 


236  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

their  ancient  Roman  culture.     They  are  not  made  but  bom 
artists. 

We  called  on  Madame  Ristori  during  our  stay  in  Berlin. 
After  a  few  minutes  of  waiting  in  the  hotel  drawing-room, 
we  heard  quick  steps  outside,  and  Madame  rushed  in,  — all 
vigor,  spontaneity,  and  hospitality.  Though  she  was  past 
fifty  then,  she  radiated  youthful  ardor,  and  the  clasp  of  her 
hand  was  warm  and  cordial.  She  seemed  glad  to  hear  about 
the  Warsaw  Theatre,  where  she  had  been  given  a  most 
cordial  reception  some  years  before.  ''And  how  is  Zolkow- 
ski,  that  admirable  artist?'^  she  asked.  When  I  told  her 
that  he  was  still  in  good  health  and  a  great  favorite  with 
the  public,  she  said,  sighing:  ''Ah,  men  are  happier  than 
women  !  They  may  be  seventy  years  old  and  the  people  will 
still  admire  them,  while  in  a  woman  of  fifty  they  see  nothing 
but  wrinkles."  Upon  which  my  husband  quoted  a  pas- 
sage from  Cleopatra,  alluding  to  her.  She  smiled,  visibly 
pleased.  When  we  rose  to  go,  she  asked  if  we  would  not  stay 
to  see  her  play  "Elizabeth."  "Of  course  "  w^as  our  simul- 
taneous answer,  and  we  parted. 

After  seeing  her  last  performance,  we  returned  to  War- 
saw, where  we  were  surprised  by  the  announcement  of  six 
performances  of  Shakespeare  by  an  American  actor,  Maurice 
Neville.  Of  course  the  name  was  a  stage  name,  for  the 
actor  was  born  in  Hun[:aria,  but  educated  in  America.  His 
real  name  was  Grossman.  Maurice  Neville  played  "Ham- 
let" according  to  Booth^s  conception  of  the  part,  and  made 
quite  a  pleasant  impression.  His  "Othello"  and  "Mer- 
chant of  Venice"  were  equally  well  received.  There  was 
no  greatness  in  his  acting,  but  he  had  a  good  deal  of  talent, 
a  fine  voice,  and  very  distinct  delivery.  Moreover,  he  made 
our  Polish  actors  acquainted  with  the  traditions  of  the 
English  performers  of  Shakespeare.  He  played  in  English 
with  a  Polish  support. 

It  was  he  who  first  encouraged  me  to  study  English  and 


POLAND  237 

come  to  America,  but  his  words  did  not  take  root  in  my 
mind  at  once.  Other  motives  stronger  than  ambition  and 
wealth  compelled  me  to  leave  Warsaw.  I  shall  soon  come 
to  this  sad  chapter  of  my  reminiscences,  which,  however, 
resulted  in  glorious  freedom  in  art  and  life. 

Soon  after  the  departure  of  Maurice  Neville  for  America, 
we  met  Cyprian  Godebski,  the  sculptor.  He  was  then  a 
widower,  and  being  a  handsome,  fascinating  fellow  he  soon 
became  very  popular  and  a  favorite  with  the  fair  sex.  He 
lived  in  Paris  and  had  come  to  Warsaw  to  execute  some 
statues.  He  found  the  city  so  pleasant  that  he  stayed 
there  the  whole  winter  season.  A  staunch  patron  of  young 
artists,  he  was  greatly  b^oved  by  them;  they  found  in 
him  a  congenial,  charming  friend  as  well  as  a  consummate 
artist  and  adviser.  He  came  often  to  our  house,  and  there 
he  met  his  fate  in  the  person  of  a  charming  widow  and  our 
intimate  friend,  Madame  Mathilde  Natanson.  They  be- 
came engaged  at  our  house  at  dinner.  I  had  placed  them 
side  by  side,  though  without  any  previous  design.  Some 
one  remarked  that  the  charming  widow  and  the  handsome 
widower  made  such  a  delightful  pair  that  they  should  be 
married.  This  remark  was  repeated  at  the  end  of  the 
dinner,  and  their  friends  escorted  them  to  the  drawing-room 
with  great  attentions,  calling  Madame  Natanson  bride  and 
Monsieur  Godebski  bridegroom.  They  both  laughed,  and 
treated  this  indiscretion  as  a  huge  joke.  But  'Hhere  is 
much  worth  in  jest."  A  few  weeks  later  this  fascinating 
pair  were  married.  They  went  to  Paris  in  the- spring,  where 
they  remained.  Madame  Godebska  shared  her  husband's 
friendship  for  young,  struggling  artists  and  opened  her 
house  to  them.  They  used  to  pour  their  troubles  into  her 
compassionate  ear,  and  she  always  found  words  of  conso- 
lation. They  were  not  mere  words,  however,  for  she  took 
all  possible  pains  to  change  them  into  action,  —  selling 
their  pictures  or  inviting  critics  to  meet  them  at  her  house. 


238  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS  i 

Many  unknown  young  men  of  talent  would  have  remained  | 

in  obscurity  for  years  to  come  had  it  not  been  for  these  } 

two  warm-hearted  people.     We  spent  many  happy  hours  } 

in  the  hospitable  home  of  the  Godebskis,  and  always  met  ' , 

there  some  talented  men  and  women. 

Cyprian  Godebski  created  the  monument  of  Thdophile 
Gautier,  of  Count  Goluchowski,  the  viceroy  of  Galitzia, 
and  that  of  our  great  poet  Mickiewicz  in  Warsaw,  besides 
many  others. 


I 


CHAPTER  XXXI 

About  that  time  Madame  Mouchanoflf  died,  after  a  long 
and  painful  illness.  Her  death  was  a  great  blow  to  her 
husband  and  her  friends,  and  I  cannot  even  now  speak 
of  this  sad  event  without  tears  in  my  eyes.  I  lost  in  her 
the  great  warm-hearted  woman  who  had  proved  to  be  my 
friend ;  I  lost  the  artistic  support  that  she  had  always  been 
ready  to  offer  me;  and  above  all  I  lost  that  irresistible 
charm  which  emanated  from  her.  Every  one  who  came 
in  contact  with  her  felt  subjected  to  that  refining  influence 
which  may  be  called  '^the  emanation  of  divinity."  Even 
apparently  commonplace  people  became  interesting  in  her 
presence.  Such  was  the  power  of  her  mental  and  artistic 
attitude  that  she  could  force  people  to  give  what  was  best 
in  them. 

The  death  of  Madame  Mouchanoff  occurred  in  1875,  the 
year  in  which  I  lost  my  brother  Felix.  I  felt  then  instinc- 
tively that  the  work  I  had  most  at  heart,  the  elevation  of 
the  artistic  and  ethical  standard  of  our  theatre,  was  endan- 
gered and  made  almost  impossible  by  her  loss.  Deprived  of 
her  protection,  I  lost  a  great  deal  of  my  buoyancy,  and,  as 
a  natural  consequence,  things  began  to  look  less  bright  than 
hitherto.  I  felt  less  elated  at  the  good  points  in  my  situa- 
tion, and  more  despondent  at  the  dark  spots  appearing  on 
my  horizon.  In  one  word,  I  grew  discouraged,  pessimistic ; 
and  this  disposition,  increased  by  the  nervousness  produced 
by  overwork,  made  me  oversensitive  to  the  drawbacks 
and  shadows. 

In  every  artistic  career  and  especially  when  one  has 
attained  a  high  position,  one  is  bound  to  meet  with  jeal- 

239 


240  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


Madamb  Modchanof-f,  Dauohter  of  Count  Nes 


POLAND  241 

• 

ousy.  Our  poor  country  is  not  exempt  from  this.  Its 
sad  political  condition,  where  government  persecution  pene- 
trates into  the  most  intimate  recesses  of  private  life,  causing 
a  continual  nervous  tension,  cannot  exist  without  demoral- 
izing effects.  One  of  those  is  a  special  form  of  meanness 
which  our  great  Polish  writer,  Henryk  Sienkiewicz,  has 
called  '' Platonic  envy."  Anywhere  else  people  are  inclined 
to  become  jealous  of  those  who  have  succeeded  in  their 
own  profession  or  in  their  own  line  of  business ;  but  in  the 
case  of  ''Platonic  envy"  they  become  jealous  of  any  one 
who  attains  a  high  position  in  any  rank  of  life.  Thus, 
the  singer  is  envious  of  the  success  of  a  literary  man,  the 
shoemaker  of  a  poet,  the  laundress  of  an  actress,  and  the 
artist  of  a  society  man. 

Of  course,  having  achieved  success,  I  was  subjected  to 
many  attacks.  People  seemed  to  find  fault  with  the  popu- 
lar actress  who  was  also  a  society  woman.  They  objected 
both  in  the  press  and  in  private  circles  to  the  alleged  influ- 
ence exerted  by  our  so-called  literary  and  artistic  ''salon." 
They  found  fault  with  our  gatherings,  where  people  of 
society  were  met  by  young  talent,  the  promising  authors, 
painters,  and  musicians.  A  play  in  which  my  husband 
and  myself  were  caricatured  under  fictitious  names  and 
where  our  Tuesday  receptions  were  represented  in  a  most 
unfriendly  manner,  was  produced  during  the  president's 
absence.  In  fact,  the  tide  turned,  and  while  I  was  always 
acclaimed  on  the  stage,  I  felt  that  the  pedestal  on  which 
I  had  been  placed  was  shaking,  and  the  number  of  my 
adversaries  grew  in  force  and  hostility. 

But  my  chief  grievance  was  the  increasing  severity  of 
the  censorship.  There. was  no  longer  Madame  Mouchanofif 
to  moderate  it,  to  help  me  through  her  influence  and  her 
tact.  Yet  I  could  have  stood  this  annoyance  had  I  felt 
any  support  in  the  struggle.  Unfortunately  this  was 
missing.     No  such  comfort  came  to  my  share.     Compelled 


242  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  appear  in  plays  which  were  not  of  my  own  choice,  while 
those  I  selected  were  ostentatiously  rejected,  I  was  mali- 
ciously blamed  for  it  by  my  ''Platonic  foes."  The  more 
they  blamed  me,  the  more  severe  the  censorship  grew,  and 
I  usually  came  out  of  the  struggle,  between  the  critics'  opin- 
ions and  the  censorship's  insane  despotism,  broken  and 
discouraged.  My  health  began  to  fail.  I  was  at  times 
exceedingly  nervous ;  then,  again,  a  sort  of  torpidity  came 
over  me  and  made  me  indifferent  to  my  parts  and  my  sur- 
roundings. 

My  husband  suggested  a  total  rest  and  my  retirement 
from  the  stage.  His  position  in  the  insurance  company, 
together  with  his  inherited  modest  fortune,  were  quite  suffi- 
cient to  yield  a  comfortable  income,  and  we  seriously 
thought  of  retiring  into  some  secluded  part  of  the  country 
and  leading  a  domestic,  everyday  life.  We  began  by  closing 
our  doors  to  all  except  our  best  friends. 

It  happened  on  one  winter  evening  in  1875.  I  always 
consider  that  evening  as  a  stroke  of  fate  which,  in  spite  of 
our  plans  for  a  peaceful  life,  was  to  push  us  into  a  mightier 
whirl  than  we  had  been  in  hitherto.  Our  circle  was  quite 
large  that  night.  Among  others  there  was  Sarnecki,  who 
had  just  returned  from  a  journey.  There  was  also  Victor 
Baranski,  who  had  come  to  take  leave  of  us  before  his  de- 
parture for  Paris.  He  was  one  of  those  friends  who  could 
come  at  any  hour  of  the  day  and  be  always  welcome.  Sev- 
eral of  my  women  friends,  my  two  nieces,  together  with  a 
few  more  men,  formed  an  entertaining  circle. 

They  were  all  so  congenial  on  that  memorable  evening, 
and  so  jolly,  that  even  I  woke  up  from  my  torpid  state 
of  mind  and  took  part  in  the  conversation.  Someone 
brought  news  of  the  coming  Centennial  Exposition  in 
America.  Sienkiewicz,  with  his  vivid  imagination,  described 
the  unknown  country  in  the  most  attractive  terms.  Maps 
were  brought  out  and  California  discussed.     It  was  worth 


it 


POLAND  243 

while  to  hear  the  young  men's  various  opinions  about  the 
Golden  West :  — 

"You  cannot  die  of  hunger  there,  that  is  quite  sure!" 
said  one.  ''Rabbits,  hares,  and  partridges  are  unguarded! 
You  have  only  to  go  out  and  shoot  them ! " 

"Yes,''  said  another,  "and  fruits,  too,  are  plenty! 
Blackberries  and  the  fruit  of  the  cactus  grow  wild,  and 
they  say  the  latter  is  simply  delicious!" 

"I  have  heard,"  said  another,  "that  the  fruit  of  Cali- 
fornia is  at  least  three  times  larger  than  in  any  other  coun- 
try!" 

"Yes,  everything  is  extraordinary!"  sounded  the  reply. 

Fancy,  coffee  grows  wild  there !  All  you  have  to  do  is 
to  pick  it ;  also  pepper  and  the  castor-oil  bean,  and  ever  so 
many  useful  plants!  One  could  make  an  industry  of 
it!" 

"Besides  gold!"  said  a  wise  voice.  "Gold!  They  say 
you  can  dig  it  out  almost  anywhere  ! " 

"There  are  also  rattlesnakes,"  added  Baranski,  in  a 
cynical  tone  of  voice. 

"Yes!  But  who  cares!  You  can  kill  them  with  a 
stick ! " 

"Oh,  how  brave  you  are, — sitting  in  this  cosy  room!" 
said  our  sceptical  friend. 

"Rattlesnakes  are  bad,  of  course,  but  think  of  a  grizzly 
bear  and  a  puma,  the  California  jaguar !" 

"What  a  glorious  hunt  one  could  have !"  exclaimed 
Sienkiewicz,  and  then  added,  "I  should  like  to  go  and  see 
that  country  of  sunshine  and  primitive  nature!" 

Everyone  had  to  say  something  about  the  promised 
land,  and  Witkiewicz  took  a  pencil  and  drew  fantastic  pic- 
tures of  my  nieces  sitting  on  two  huge  mushrooms,  while 
an  enormous  rattlesnake  was  nestling  at  their  feet.  The 
cherries  that  hung  on  branches  over  their  heads  were  as 
large  as  apples.     Dr.  Karwowski  entered  just  when  we  were 


244  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

most  interested  in  Sienkiewicz's  description  of  an  imaginary 
storm  on  the  ocean,  and  said  to  me  jokingly:  — 

''You  need  a  change  of  air,  Madame.  Why  not  make  a 
trip  to  America?" 

''That  is  a  good  idea,"  my  husband  answered.  "Why 
not?"  and  he  looked  at  me. 

I  repeated,  smiling,  "Why  not?" 

Chmielowski  laughed  and  exclaimed:  "Let  us  all  go. 
We  will  kill  pumas,  build  huts,  make  our  own  garments 
out  of  skins,  and  live  as  our  forefathers  lived  !" 

"Just  so!"  added  Baranski.  "And  Pani  Helena^  will 
cook  and  wash  dishes,  and  instead  of  violets  and  heliotrope, 
her  perfume  will  be  the  flavor  of  dishwater.  How  en- 
ticing!" We  all  laughed,  and  the  subject  was  dismissed 
as  an  impossibility. 

During  the  intermissions  of  the  rehearsals,  I  used  to 
write  some  thoughts  and  impressions  on  the  vacant  pages 
of  my  parts.  Here  is  one  that  expresses  my  mood  at  that 
time :  — 

(Warsaw,  1875.    Written  on  the  acting  copy  of  PhMre.) 

"Peace!  Almighty  Father,  put  an  end  to  my  tortures.  Is 
my  life  to  be  an  eternal  expiation  for  sins,  mine  and  not  mine? 
If  I  could  fly  from  here,  far,  far  away,  with  my  dearest  ones,  and 
begin  a  new  life,  a  life  of  work  and  peace  !  Oh,  the  people  here ! 
that  jealous,  cruel  crowd  !  They  make  sport  of  my  tears !  they 
mock  my  heart's  agonies  !  If  I  knew  how  to  hate,  perhaps  hatred 
would  bring  me  relief.  But  I  am  weak.  I  cannot  brave  adver- 
sity. My  heart  is  only  filled  with  tears  and  love,  while  I  ought 
to  have  a  brazen  brow  and  a  heart  of  stone.  But  what  true  artist, 
what  actress,  possesses  such  attributes  ?  Only  one  who  feels  can 
produce  feeling,  only  one  who  loves  can  inspire  love.  How  can 
she  wear  a  steel  armor  over  her  heart?  Her  only  weapon  is 
contempt.  But  is  this  enough?  Will  she  suffer  less  when  she 
appears  cold  and  haughty?    No,  no,  a  public  Ufe  is  not  fit  for  a 

1  Polish  for  "Mrs.  Helena."     All  my  friends  called  me  so. 


POLAND  245 

woman!      Some  one  said,  'The   happiest  woman  is  the  one  of 
whom  nothing  good  and  nothing  bad  can  be  said.' 

"Who  knows  how  much  truth  is  in  these  words,  and  whether 
any  woman  should  seek  happiness  outside  of  her  home,  which  seems 
to  be  the  proper  place  for  her.  There  she  reigns.  Her  life  is  inac- 
cessible to  human  curiosity.  To  the  mysteries  of  her  life  only  the 
chosen  ones  have  the  key.  And  so  it  is  with  all  quiet  and  happy 
wives  and  mothers.  But  a  woman  who  has  dared  to  raise  her  head 
above  the  others,  who  has  extended  her  eager  hand  for  laurels, 
who  has  not  hesitated  to  expose  and  throw  to  the  crowds  all  that 
her  soul  possessed  of  love,  despair,  and  passion,  —  that  woman 
has  given  the  right  to  the  curious  multitude  to  interfere  in  her 
private  affairs,  to  rummage  in  the  most  secret  recesses  of  her  life, 
to  coimt  her  very  heart's  pulsations.  There  is  nothing  as  amusing 
to  the  public  as  some  overheard  snatches  of  an  actress's  talk,  or  the 
rumor  of  some  misunderstanding  in  her  home,  or  outside  of  it. 
They  censiffe  her  sadness,  they  make  commentaries  almost  inva- 
riably false.  Yet  all  these  paltry  annoyances  would  not  count 
if  they  touched  us  only.  But  when  they  touch  those  who  are 
dear  to  us,  when  cruelty  and  maUce  combine  to  tear  with  their 
claws  our  dear  ones,  then,  oh,  then,  an  invincible  horror  fills  our 
soul  towards  that  pillory  called  the  "Stage,"  and  a  great  doubt 
rises  in  our  mind.  Was  it  worth  while  to  give  all  that  we  had  of 
the  best  of  ourselves  to  the  world,  in  order  to  obtain  as  a  reward  a 
momentary  applause  followed  by  a  cup  of  bitterness?" 

Another  scrap  is  shorter  but  equally  pessimistic :  — 

(Warsaw,  2/12,  1875.    On  the  part  of  Portia.) 

"In  the  old  Roman  times  they  used  to  throw  prisoners  to  the 
lions.  I  threw  all  that  was  best  of  me  to  the  himgry  crowds,  but 
they  still  ask  for  more,  and  I  am  so  poor,  so  poor,  that  there  is  not 
enough  of  feeling  left  in  me  to  give  me  comfort  in  everyday  life." 

Then  one  morning  during  the  Christmas  holidays  my  son 
Rudolphe,  whom  I  had  sent  to  Cracow  with  my  mother 
in  order  to  place  him  in  a  Polish  school,  came  to  Warsaw 
to  spend  his  short  vacation  with  us.  He  was  even  then 
determined  to  become  a  civil  engineer.  The  first  thing  he 
spoke  of  was  the  coming  exposition  in  America;  and  the 
lad,  looking  at  the  maps,  declared  that  some  day  he  would 


246  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

build  the  Panama  Canal.  He  said  it  would  be  so  nice  if 
we  could  go  to'  America  now,  see  the  great  fair,  and  then 
cross  Panama  to  California.  He  looked  so  happy  planning 
this  journey  that  both  my  husband  and  myself  began  to 
look  upon  the  crossing  of  the  ocean  as  a  possibility.  '^  Why 
not?"  we  repeated  again,  and  my  son  put  his  arms  around 
our  necks  and,  kissing  us  in  turn,  said,  '^Oh,  let  us  go  there 
soon !" 

**How  soon?"  my  husband  asked,  smiling. 

''Not  before  my  school  is  over,  at  any  rate,"  he  answered 
eagerly. 

' '  Good  boy !  Well,  we  will  think  of  it,  and  please  you 
if  we  can."  And  fresh  embraces  followed  my  husband's 
words. 

To  a  fourteen-year-old  lad  such  a  journey  must  have 
seemed  a  realization  of  all  his  dreams.  Rudolphe  adored 
travelling,  as  all  boys  do,  but  little  he  knew,  when  he  ex- 
pressed his  wish  and  we  half  consented  to  it,  what  an  enor- 
mous stride  we  were  undertaking,  and  what  effect  this  little 
intimate  talk  was  to  produce  on  our  lives,  on  his  career  and 
mine.  He  is  now  one  of  the  successful  civil  engineers  and 
bridge-builders  in  America.  Even  then,  in  his  boyhood, 
I  was  proud  of  him,  and  I  had  so  much  confidence  in  his 
cleverness  that  everything  he  desired  seemed  to  me  reason- 
able. 

I  wrote  at  that  time  the  following  lines  about  him  to  my 
brother,  Simon  Benda:  — 

".  .  .he  takes  at  present  piano  lessons  from  Mr.  Hofmann,^ 
and  in  seven  lessons  he  learned  four  of  Kohler's  Etudes  by  heart 
and  almost  the  entire  sixth  sonata  of  Mozart.  Besides  this,  he 
studies  shorthand  writing,  languages,  takes  gymnastic  exercises 
and  horseback  riding.  With  all  these  extra  instructions  he  is 
always  the  first  in  his  class  and  wonderfully  strong  in  mathematics. 
My  darling  boy !    What  could  I  ask  more  of  life,  when  God  has 

1  The  father  of  Josef  Hofmann. 


POLAND  247 

given  me  such  a  son  !  But  this  is  not  all;  Stasia  writes  me,  'He 
is  modest  and  good.'  It  frightens  me  sometimes  to  think  that  he 
possesses  so  many  qualities.  I  wish  he  were  sometimes  a  Uttle 
bad,  and  would  show  it,  too,  that  I  might  correct  him  while  he  is 
still  a  boy.  I  tremble  lest  the  badness  may  come  out  too  late,  etc." 

I  quote  these  lines  only  to  prove  that  it  was  almost  im- 
possible to  refuse  anything  to  the  boy,  my  only  and  beloved 
son.  Yet  I  could  not  have  taken  such  a  resolution  as  cross- 
ing the  ocean  for  his  salce  only,  had  not  my  husband  also 
looked  at  the  possibility  of  that  journey  favorably. 

Once  the  idea  entered  our  heads,  we  communicated  it  to  * 
a  few  intimate  friends,  who  treated  the  project  as  an  insane 
one.  No  one  but  our  young  artists,  Henryk  Sienkiewicz 
and  my  husband's  friend  and  Moabit  prison  companion, 
Mr.  Sypniewski,  took  our  extravagant  enterprise  seriously. 
My  husband,  having  only  my  health  in  view,  proposed  a 
six  months'  vacation  and  the  trip  to  America  with  the  idea 
of  visiting  the  most  interesting  places.  We  were  to  return 
at  the  end  of  the  term,  and  then  I  should  continue  my  work 
on  the  stage  if  I  felt  strong  and  well.  If  not,  I  should  retire 
into  private  life.  My  desire  was  to  get  away  from  Warsaw 
and  the  unfriendly  spirits  as  soon  as  possible. 

As  soon  as  we  decided  to  leave,  my  impressions  on  the 
vacant  pages  of  my  parts  changed  their  tenor  and  became 
more  and  more  optimistic.  The  following  one  begins  with 
a  quotation  from  El***y's  poem,  written  after  my  supposed 
death :  — 

" '  Poor  victims  !  ^  They  are  not  allowed  to  stop  their  flight.' 
No,  indeed,  they  are  not  allowed.  Their  destiny  is  to  fly  higher  and 
higher.  Woe  to  those  who  rest,  for  the  night  will  smprise  them  and 
they  will  lose  their  way.  In  vain  will  they  look  for  it  with  the 
coming  day.  Therefore  do  not  pity  those  who  fly,  but  rather 
deplore  those  who  lose  their  strength,  or,  discouraged,  give  up  the 
flight.  Movement  means  life  !  Toil  is  Ufe  !  Pain  is  life  !  It  is 
a  himdred  times  better  to  suffer  and  Uve  than  to  sleep." 

*  An  (illusion  to  actors. 


248  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

(Warsaw,  February  2d,  1876.    On  the  part  of  Princess  George.) 

"'Why  think?'  you  say.  'Why  torment  yoiu-self  with  these 
continual  mental  struggles?' 

"  Is  not  thought  a  part  of  the  divine  in  us  ?  When  the  body  is 
weak,  the  spirit  can  save  it.  Our  soul  is  high  above  things  of  this 
world.  I  can  lift  myself  in  thought  so  high  that  no  human  being 
can  reach  me,  and  the  struggles  are  indispensable.  When  I  struggle 
I  know  I  live. 

"  Great  despair  leads  sometimes  to  suicide.  The  weak  run  away 
from  the  pain  of  life.  Only  in  one  case  is  suicide  a  courageous  deed, 
and  may  even  be  a  virtue:  when  we  sacrifice  our  life  for  an  idea, 
for  our  country,  or  for  those  we  love.  Hamlet's  'To  be,  or  not  to 
be '  found  an  echo  all  over  the  world.  I  say:  *  To  be,  to  be,  to  be  ! 
To  gather  all  the  strength  of  our  soul  and  go  ahead  farther  and 
always  higher ! '" 

(Warsaw,  February  15,  1876.    On  the  part  of  Marion  Delorme.) 

"I  do  not  feel  as  happy  when  receiving  homage  as  when  I  my- 
self can  adpre.  Every  noble  thought,  every  beautiful  work  of 
art,  every  brave  deed,  gives  me  moments  of  real  happiness.  Have 
I  not  given  in  a  small  measure  a  little  of  the  same  happiness  to 
others  ?  And  yet  I  must  go !  My  heart  is  sore,  my  wings  are 
drooping.  I  need  more  strength,  more  vigor.  WTien  I  return,  I 
shall  be  a  different  woman.  They  say  travel  widens  the  view  of 
life.  Once  on  the  ocean,  how  small  everything  else  will  look  to  me  ! 
'  Vogue  la  gaUre.*     I  am  ready  to  face  the  elements." 

As  I  mentioned  before,  my  husband's  only  desire  was 
to  take  me  away  from  my  surroundings  and  give  me  perfect 
rest  from  my  work.  He  thought,  and  the  doctors  agreed 
with  him,  that  a  long  sea  voyage  might  restore  my  health 
and  strengthen  my  nerves.  This  project  was,  however, 
changed  in  the  course  of  time.  Our  friends  used  to  talk 
about  the  new  country,  the  new  life,  new  scenery,  and  the 
possibility  of  settling  down  somewhere  in  the  land  of  free- 
dom, away  from  the  daily  vexations  to  which  every  Pole 
was  exposed  in  Russian  or  Prussian  Poland.  Henryk 
Sienkiewicz  was  the  first  to  advocate  emigration.  Little 
by  little  others  followed  him,    and  soon  five  of  them  ex- 


POLAND  249 

pressed  the  desire  to  seek  adventures  id  the  jungles  of  the 
virgin  land. 

My  husband,  seeing  the  eagerness  of  the  young    men, 
conceived  the  idea  of  forming  a  colony  in  California  on  the 
model  of  Brook  Farm.     The  project  was  received  with  ac- 
clamation.    Regular  meet- 
ings   were     arranged,     and 
the  different  points   of  the 
enterprise  discussed.    They 
planned  the  journey;  they 
wrote  statutes,  with  the  firm 
decision  of  obeying  blindly 
the  points  of  law  they  com- 
posed.    All  together   they 
treated    the    project    as    a 
most  serious  matter. 

What  wild  dreams  we 
dreamt!  What  visions  of 
freedom,  peace,  and  hap- 
piness flitted  across  our 
brains !  I  was  to  give  up 
the  stage  and  live  in  the 
midst  of  nature,  perhaps  in 
a  tent !  I  pictured  to  my- 
self a  life  of  toil  under  the 
blue  skies  of  California, 
among  the  hills,  riding  on 

horseback  with  a  gun  over  my  shoulder.     I  imagined  all 
sorts  of  things  except  what  really  was  in  store  for  me. 

Those  who  were  willing  to  share  our  voluntary  exile  were 
Henryk  Sienkiewicz  ;  our  married  friend,  Jules  Sypniewski, 
who  was  anxious  to  bring  up  his  two  children  under  the 
influence  of  nature  and  the  advanced  educational  system 
of  America;  Lucian  Paprocki,  an  amateur  caricaturist  and 
my  husband's  relative ;  and  Stanislaw  Witkiewicz  and  his 


250  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

friend,  Adam  Chmielowski.  The  latter  a  few  weeks  later 
gave  up  the  project  of  joining  our  excursion,  but  still  be- 
longed to  the  intimate  circle  of  our  emigrants,  and  came 
regularly  to  our  meetings.  It  was  he  who  su^ested  the 
study  of  English.  My  husband  engaged  a  Miss  d'Albitte  to 
teach  us.  She  was  the  daughter  of  an  Englishwoman  and 
a  Frenchman,  and  her  accent  was  a  little  affected  by  this 
combination  of  the  two  nationalities.  But  she  had  a  great 
advantage  in  being  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  French 
language,  which  rendered  our  study  more  intelligible  and 
more  pleasant,  too,  for  very  often  we  reduced  our  lesson  to 
a  pleasant  talk  in  French. 

One  evening  when  we  were  dining  at  the  Kronenbergs' 
palace,  with  that  delightful  family,  our  host  asked  me  if  it 
were  true  that  we  intended  to  emigrate  to  America.  I  told 
him  that  such  was  our  desire.  ''What  folly  !"  he  exclaimed. 
Then,  looking  at  me  for  a  while  he  added,  "  Unless  you  will 
study  English  and  play  on  the  American  stage!" 

These  words  touched  a  string  that  had  been  asleep  in 
my  soul  for  a  long  time.  It  awakened  again  the  wild  hope 
of  playing  Shakespeare  in  his  own  language.  I  returned 
home,  dreaming  impossible  dreams.  But  the  next  day  I  was 
taken  down  from  my  heaven  by  our  friends'  plans.  They 
looked  to  me  as  to  a  sort  of  providence  of  the  colony,  to 
look  after  the  moral  and  material  welfare  of  the  hard- 
working farmers  they  were  to  be,  —  in  a  word,  to  be  a 
guardian  angel  and  a  cordon  bleu  ordinarily  known  by 
the  name  of  cook. 

' '  Oh,  but  to  cook  under  the  sapphire-blue  sky  in  the 
land  of  freedom !  What  joy !"  I  thought.  ''To  bleach  linen 
at  the  brook  like  the  maidens  of  Homer's  '  Iliad  ' !  After 
the  day  of  toil,  to  play  the  guitar  and  sing  by  moonlight, 
to  recite  poems,  or  to  listen  to  the  mocking-bird!  And 
listening  to  our  songs  would  be  charming  Indian  maidens, 
our  neighbors,   making  wreaths  of  luxuriant  wild  flowers 


POLAND  251 

for  us!  And  in  exchange  we  should  give  them  trinkets 
for  their  handsome  brown  necks  and  wrists !  And  oh,  we 
should  be  so  far  away  from  every-day  gossip  and  malice, 
nearer  to  God,  and  better."  Yes,  the  prospect  of  a  simple 
life,  so  mocked  at  to-day,  had  for  us  the  charm  of  a  revivify- 
ing novelty.     It  seemed  like  being  born  again. 

I  obtained  a  leave  of  absence  from  the  president  for  one^ 
year.     After  that  time,  I  was  bound  either  to  return  or  to  \ 
pay  the  forfeit  of  6000  roubles  for  breaking  the  contract.  • 
President  Mouchanoff  had  not  the  slightest  doubt  but  that 
we  would  be  back  even  before  the  expiration  of  my  leave 
of  absence.     He  treated  our  expedition  in  a  most  cheerful 
manner.     So  did   the  rest  of  our  friends  for  that  matter; 
none  of  them  even  suspected  our  resolution  of  staying  in 
America   any  longer  than  it  would  require  to  visit  the 
Exposition,   Niagara  Falls,    and  the   principal   cities. 

In  the  early  spring  Henryk  Sienkiewicz  and  Julian 
Sypniewski  sailed  for  the  New  World.  The  rest  of  us  were 
to  follow  them  in  July.  Sypniewski  returned  with  glowing 
accounts  of  the  beauties  of  California.  According  to  his 
opinion,  paradise  was  nowhere  to  be  compared  to  that  land 
of  green  meadows,  blue  hills,  and  orange-blossoms.  Of 
course  it  must  not  be  forgotten  thai  our  friend  was  there  in 
spring,  after  heavy  rains,  and  the  country  really  looked  green. 

The  letters  of  Sienkiewicz  were  also  most  convincing, 
and  we  began  to  make  preparations  for  the  journey. 
Many,  many  articles  were  bought,  —  heavy  rugs,  telescopes, 
brass  knuckles,  guns,  etc. ;  among  other  things  two  huge 
medicine  boxes  and  a  large  array  of  surgical  instruments, 
above  all,  —  six  revolvers  !  Even  I  was  presented  with  one 
of  the  latter,  a  very  dainty  one  set  with  mother-of-pearl. 
Our  furniture  was  put  on  sale,  but  our  books,  pictures,  and 
our  entire  wardrobe  were  all  carefully  packed  for  the  journey, 
to  go  with  us  into  the  wilderness  as  the  most  indispensable 
companions  of  a  ''simple  life." 


252  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

There  was  no  custom  of  having  a  farewell  performance 
in  our  country,  but  my  last  appearance  of  the  season  was 
announced  in  the  papers,  and  the  house  was  packed.  Next 
morning  the  following  notice  in  the  Warsaw  Courier  greeted 
me  at  the  breakfast-table :  — 


(Kurjer  Warszawski  (Warsaw  Courier).    June  22,  1876.) 

"'Is  it  true  that  she  leaves  the  country  to-miorrow?' 

"'Whereto?' 

"'To  America,  I  hear.    Can  this  be  true?' 

"'They  say  the  passage  is  already  reserved  on  the  steamer.' 

"'And  will  she  stay  there  six  months?' 

"'Possibly  a  year.' 

"'She  is  going  to  Philadelphia.' 

"'Not  at  all— to  Chicago.' 

"'Is  she  going  to  act  there?' 

"'In  what  language,  Polish  or  English?' 

" '  What  will  our  stage  do  without  her  for  such  a  long  time  ? ' 

"'A  great  artist !    Yes,  a  genuine  great  artist !' 

"These  rumors  and  sayings  were  passing  last  night  from  mouth 
to  mouth.  The  fact  is  that  last  night  in  the  Summer  Theatre 
Madame  Modrzejewska  gave  her  last  performance  before  her  de- 
parture on  a  leave  of  absence  which  begins  to-day.  She  selected 
for  this  occasion  two  scenes  of  Shakespeare,  the  balcony  scene  of 
'  Romeo  and  Juliet '  and  Ophelia's  mad  scene  in  '  Hamlet ' ;  the 
last  act  of  'Adrienne  Lecouvrfeur,'  and  the  whole  of  Fredo's  comedy, 
'The  Maiden's  Vows.'  There  is  no  need  to  repeat  here  the 
praises  that  have  been  so  often  showered  on  our  great  artist  for 
these  remarkable  creations ;  we  only  want  to  say  that  her  last  ap- 
pearance, combining  as  it  did  in  one  single  night  so  many  distinct 
impressions  of  the  highest  kind,  will  long  remain  in  the  memory 
of  the  fortunate  ones  who  succeeded,  after  a  vigorous  struggle  at 
the  box-office,  in  getting  tickets.  It  allowed  them  to  admire  a 
cycle  of  parts  so  different  from  each  other,  and  executed  with  a 
perfection  that  could  hardly  be  equalled  save  on  one  or  two  of 
the  first  European  stages.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  audience  was 
aroiised  to  the  highest  pitch.  Applause  followed  applause  and 
the  calls  before  the  curtain  seemed  to  never  cease. 

"  The  greeting  extended  to  the  artist  implied  the  hope  that  she 
will  soon  return  to  us  and  shine  on  our  stage  for  a  long,  long  time. 


POLAND  253 

We  do  not  doubt  but  that  this  will  be  so,  and  we  base  our  hope 
on  what  follows  :  — 

'*  After  the  performance,"  the  Warsaw  Courier  said,  **  the  wholes 
audience,  en  masse,  formed  into  a  double  rank  extending  from 
the  back  door  of  the  theatre  through  the  whole  length  of  the  park, 
up  to  its  main  gate.  Everybody  remained  waiting  for  the  appear- 
ance of  the  artist.  As  soon  as  she  came  out,  she  was  received  by 
acclamations  and  cries  of  admiration,  intermingled  with  expressions 
of  most  cordial  good  wishes.  *  Come  back  to  us  ! '  they  cried, 
*  Come  back  as  soon  as  possible,  for  you  leave  behind  you  a  void 
impossible  to  fill.' 

"  And,  indeed,  there  will  be  a  great  void  on  our  stage  without 
one  whom  we  have  been  used  to  look  upon  as  the  first  and  main 
support  of  our  drama  and  comedy.  It  will  indeed  be  sad  for  the 
lovers  of  art  without  this  artist,  who  during  her  stay  in  Warsaw 
has  introduced  to  our  stage  the  masterpieces  of  the  great  writers 
of  the  world,  which  acquired  a  double  value  by  the  force  of  her 
genius. 

"  Moved  to  tears  by  this  extraordinary  expression  of  sympathy, 
Modrzejewska  promised  the  assembled  art-lovers  that  she  would 
soon  be  back,  with  strength  and  vigor  renewed  by  a  needed 
vacation. 

**  We,  too,  add  our  voice  to  the  general  public  in  expressing  on 
this  occasion  our  best  wishes  for  a  happy  journey,  the  complete 
restoration  of  health,  and  a  speedy  return." 

During  the  eight  years  of  my  Warsaw  engagement  I  made 
almost  every  year  excursions  to  Cracow,  Lemberg,  and 
Posen,  where  I  produced  the  plays  of  the  old  and  new  re- 
pertoire. These  star  engagements  were  delightful.  In 
every  city  I  was  welcomed  as  an  old  friend,  and  the  people 
did  all  they  could  to  entertain  my  husband  and  myself. 
Invitations  followed  invitations,  and  they  were  often  so 
numerous  that  I  had  a  good  excuse  for  not  accepting  any 
of  them. 

In  1876  my  time  was  limited.  We  were  to  sail  in  July, 
and  there  was  scarcely  four  weeks  left  until  then,  in  which 
to  visit  Galitzia  and  Prussian  Poland.  I  accepted,  however, 
some  short  engagements  urged  upon  mc.     Both  my  hus- 


254  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

band  and  myself  wanted  to  say  good-by  to  our  ^numerous 
friends  and  relations,  and  to  inform  them  of  our  decision 
of  settling  down  in  California. 

It  was  during  our  visit  to  Lemberg  that  I  met  our  poet, 
Kornel  Ujejski.  Besides  being  a  lyric  poet,  he  wrote  a  great 
many  poems  of  a  purely  national  nature.  He  was  the 
author  of  the  famous  National  Hymn,  sung  in  every  part 
of  the  country  by  men,  women,  and  children.  That  hymn 
was  written  in  1846  during  the  outrages  of  the  peasants 
against  the  nobility,*  and  was  taken  up  by  the  people  in 
1861-1863.  The  spirit  of  this  hymn  is  one  desperate, 
passionate  cry  to  God  for  justice :  ''Punish  not,  0  God,  the 
sword,  but  the  hand  !"  All  through,  it  is  a  sublime  protest 
against  the  perfidious  government.  Priests  used  to  teach 
that  hymn  to  boys,  and  it  was  sung  in  churches  and  public 
squares  wherever  there  was  a  cross  or  a  statue  of  the  Holy 
Virgin.  They  would  kneel  at  its  feet  and  sing  that  ardent 
appeal  to  God  until  the  whole  square  would  be  black  with 
kneeling  men,  women,  and  children.  Printed  copies  of 
the  hymn  were  distributed  among  the  people  by  some  patri- 
otic hands,  and  soon  the  great  majority  of  the  population 
in  all  parts  of  Poland  knew  the  words  of  Ujejski's  poem  by 
heart. 

At  the  time  we  met  Ujejski,  he  was  a  man  in  the  full  vigor 
of  maturity,  —  tall,  with  plain,  manly  features,  rather  digni- 
fied, and  yet  simple  in  manner.  There  was  a  great  deal  of 
vigor  and  youthful  enthusiasm  in  his  speech,  and  he  had 
by  no  means  given  up  the  hope  of  seeing  Poland  one  day 
restored  to  its  former  magnitude  and  power. 

The  impressive  music  to  the  National  Hymn  was  com- 
posed by  Josef  Nikorowicz,  whom  we  met  in  Lemberg  and 
who  soon  became  our  friend.  As  a  sort  of  tribute  to  dra- 
matic art  he  also  composed  music  to  four  of  my  parts: 

*  The  massacre  of  nobility  by  peasants,  instigated  by  Metternich. 


POLAND  255 

Juliet,  JVIary  Stuart,  Dona  Diana,*  and  Aniela,  an  ingenue 
part  in  "The  Maiden's  Vows,"  by  Count  Fredo. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  last  few  days  we  spent  in  Lemberg. 
It  is  a  picturesque  city  surrounded  by  hills  and  full  of  trees. 
One  evening  after  the  performance,  accompanied  by  some 
friends,  we  went  to  the  park  called  ''Jesuits'  Gardens." 
It  was  a  bright  night,  and  the  place  was  resounding  with 
songs  of  nightingales.  We  walked  along,  breathing  in  the 
warm  and  fragrant  air  of  night  and  exchanging  thoughts, 
—  free  thoughts  of  wisdom  and  of  inspiration,  art,  poetry, 
prophecies  for  the  future  of  our  poor  country,  things  of  the 
past  and  of  the  future,  —  all  spoken  to  the  magnificent  ac- 
companiment of  the  nightingales'  concert.  The  recollection 
of  that  night  makes  me,  even  now,  long  for  those  dear 
moments  of  enchantment,  for  the  dreams  I  dreamt  so  long 
ago  among  my  own  people. 

One  evening  we  were  rowing  on  the  lake.  Some  one 
recited  verses.  The  name  of  Undine  was  mentioned,  — 
Undine,  the  favorite  story  of  my  youth.  Then  new  verses 
were  recited,  verses  with  living  words.  Each  of  them  touched 
a  new  chord  in  my  soul,  now  plaintive,  now  joyful,  until 
my  whole  being  resounded  with  passionate  rapture.  The 
moon  was  bright  and  warm.  I  put  my  hand  in  the  water. 
It  was  tepid.  Its  emanations  intoxicated  me,  attracted 
me.  I  held  my  husband's  hand  in  dread  of  sharing  the  fate 
of  Undine,  which  at  that  moment  I  both  feared  and  desired. 
In  the  mood  of  poetic  madness  I  felt  myself  enveloped  at 
that  hour  of  parting.  I  wanted  to  sink  into  the  depths  of 
the  lake  and  perish  with  the  memory  of  that  evening,  which 
I  was  sure  would  never  repeat  itself. 

Next  morning  we  left  for  Cracow  to  say  farewell  to  my 
mother,  my  sister,  and  friends,  and  also  to  get  my  son, 
who,  judging  by  his  letters,  was  impatiently  awaiting  our 

« 

*  Moretto's  play  of  the  sixteenth  century. 


256  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

departure  for  America.  The  majority  of  the  Cracow  people 
had  left  the  city  on  account  of  the  heat,  so  many  of  our 
friends  were  absent  when  we  returned  to  say  *'good-by" 
to  them.  I  left  my  two  nieces  in  my  mother's  care,  with 
full  instructions  concerning  their  education;  and,  having 
shed  mutually  many  tears,  we  departed  for  Prussian  Poland, 
where  my  husband's  family  lived.  Here  more  tears  were 
shed,  and  armed  with  good  wishes  and  benedictions,  we 
proceeded  to  Bremen,  accompanied  by  my  husband's  two 
brothers,  Franciszek  and  Josef,  who  wanted  to  have  a  last 
glimpse  of  us. 

Sypniewski,  his  wife  and  two  children,  were  already 
waiting  in  Bremen,  and  also  Lucian  Paprocki.  Witkiewicz 
did  not  come.  He  sent  a  letter,  in  which  he  informed  us 
that,  although  he  had  a  great  desire  and  firm  resolution  to 
join  our  colony,  yet  he  was  forced  by  circumstances  to  give 
up  the  journey.  When  we  were  on  the  point  of  departure, 
my  husband's  third  brother,  Michal  Chlapowski,  appeared 
in  Bremen.  After  taking  most  affectionate  leave  of  those 
three  dear,  brave  young  men  with  whom  we  had  long  chats 
about  our  future  prospects,  —  after  having  written  numer- 
ous letters  to  our  families  and  friends,  —  on  a  bright  summer 
morning,  full  of  good  hopes  and  cheerful  spirit,  we  sailed 
into  the  great  Unknown. 


PART  III 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


CHAPTER  XXXII 

On  a  bright  July  morning,  in  the  year  1876,  we  stood  on 
the  deck  of  the  German  steamer  Donau,  waving  our 
handkerchiefs  to  the  three  Chlapowski  brothers,  who  stood 
in  a  small  boat  looking  sadly  towards  us,  exchanging  signs 
of  farewell,  and  while  our  ship  was  sliding  farther  and  farther 
from  them,  we  heard  their  faint  voices  calling:  ''Do  wi- 
dzenia"^.and  ''Come  back  soon!"  That  echo  of  loving 
hearts  made  me  shiver  with  regret,  and  I  had  a  feeling  as 
of  some  irreparable  loss. 

Soon,  however,  the  shrill,  loud  gong  dispelled  the  sadness, 
and  we  all  proceeded  to  the  dining  room,  where  luncheon 
was  waiting  for  us. 

Our  colonial  party  consisted  of  eight  big  and  small  human 
beings:  Mr.  Sypniewski,  his  wife  and  their  two  little  chil- 
dren, Mr.  L.  Paprocki,  Mr.  Chlapowski,  myself,  my  boy 
Rudolphe,  and  a  sixteen-year-old  girl,  whom  I  had  engaged 
to  take  care  of  the  children,  with  an  ultimate  view  of  train- 
ing her  for  housemaid  on  our  future  property,  farm,  or 
ranch,  whatever  it  was  to  be.  This  rosy,  pretty  maiden, 
by  the  name  of  "Anusia,"  who  had  been  brought  up  in  a 
convent,  and  never  had  seen  even  a  steam-engine  before 
she  started  on  that  journey,  suddenly  found  herself  going  to 
America  on  "a  house  on  water, "  as  she  called  it,  bewildered, 
stunned,  but  not  seasick. 

As  soon  as  we  established  ourselves  on  the  boat,  unpacked 

1  Until  we  meet  again. 
259 


260  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

our  grips,  arranged  and  marked  our  chairs  on  deck,  each 
of  us  assumed  an  independent  line  of  occupation. 

We  spent  the  first  evening  together,  watching  the  phos- 
phorescence of  the  waves,  but  the  next  morning  found  us 
all  scattered.  My  husband  and  Mr.  Sypniewski  made 
various  acquaintances,  and  tried  to  pick  up  English  words 
and  expressions  from  obliging  fellow-passengers.  Mrs. 
Sypniewska  nursed  her  baby  girl,  Paprocki  was  drawing 
caricatures,  for  which  he  found  numerous  and  splendid 
models  on  board,  my  son  was  trying  the  piano,  and  I  was 
walking  up  and  down  the  deck,  stopping  from  time  to  time 
to  look  at  the  ocean.  In  my  first  round  I  found  Anusia 
sitting  with  the  little  boy  in  her  lap,  looking  at  the  sky  and 
then  at  the  water,  and  muttering  something  to  ^herself, 
while  her  young  face  wore  an  almost  tragic  expression. 
When  I  came  nearer,  and  asked  her  how  she  liked  the  trip, 
she  said,  evidently  following  her  thoughts  and  without 
looking  at  me,  '^0  Holy  Mother,  nothing  but  wind  and 
water ! '' 

On  one  stormy  day,  when  the  sea  was  high  and  the  ship 
rolling  considerably,  she  became  totally  numb  and  quiescent. 
With  each  stronger  roll  of  the  steamer,  instead  of  holding 
to  the  bench,  she  let  herself  and  the  baby  roll  down  to  the 
very  edge,  and  there  waited  until  some  passer-by  picked  her 
up,  or  until  the  opposite  motion  of  the  ship  rolled  her  and 
the  baby  back  to  her  bench.  After  a  time  she  seemed  to 
rather  enjoy  the  sport,  for  I  saw  her  repeating  the  exercise, 
with  a  broad  grin  on  her  face. 

Our  journey  across  the  Atlantic  was  also  a  novelty  to  me. 
I  was  fascinated  by  the  spell  of  the  sea.  It  evidently  had 
a  soothing  effect  on  me,  judging  by  some  notes  which  I  then 
scribbled  down  in  my  nautical  enthusiasm. 

Note  1st. 

"We  are  in  full  ocean;  the  weather  is  fine.  Our  ship  moves 
majestically,  cutting  the  azure  depths,  which  retreat  with  a  hiss 


THE  NEW  WORLD  261 

and  throw  milliards  of  bubbles  on  both  sides,  leaving  behind  her 
a  long  wake  of  pale  green  and  white.  The  sky  is  clear,  here  and 
there  spotted  with  tiny  white  clouds.  The  sxu^ace  of  the  water 
is  quiet,  though  wrinkled  by  the  breeze  with  small,  sharp  waves, 
almost  pointed;  their  summits  catch  the  sun,  forming  thus  mil- 
lions of  dancing,  scintillating  lights.  There  is  such  fulness  of 
peace  in  me !  My  riotous  thoughts,  calmed  by  the  influence  of 
the  immensity  of  nature,  do  not  disturb  me  any  more,  but  carry 
me  to  some  mysterious  land,  filled  with  inexpressible  charm. 
I  like  to  be  thus  thrown  upon  the  mercy  of  the  Ocean,  who,  Uke  a 
monstrous  giant,  carries  me  on  his  back.  This  shell  in  which  we  are 
travelling  might  at  any  moment  become  his  prey,  but  he  is  to-day 
in  a  good  mood,  and  bears  swiftly  the  burden  on  his  wrinkled  back, 
murmuring  some  sad  and  solemn  hymn. 

"The  screw  of  the  steamer  works  hard,  lending  to  the  boat 
the  semblance  of  a  living  being,  in  whose  bosom  a  monotonous 
motion  repeats  itself  Uke  the  beatings  of  the  heart." 

Note  2d. 

"Heavens  !  What  color  !  What  amaze  of  emeralds,  sapphires, 
and  topazes !  The  sea  is  one  immense  treasury  of  gems !  And 
the  air !  the  air !  What  a  delicious,  cool,  fresh  breath  !  I  feel 
so  light  that  I  imagine,  lifting  myself  on  my  toes,  I  might  start 
upwards  and  fly ! 

"Is  there  no  regret  for  my  country  left  in  me?  Or  is  it  that 
the  ocean,  with  its  immortal  beauty,  has  filled  my  soul  to  the  very 
brim,  leaving  no  room  for  anything  else  ?  I  do  not  care  to  ana- 
lyze the  present  state  of  my  mind;  I  only  know  it  is  made  of  happi- 
ness and  peace.  My  soul,  lulled  by  that  strange  nurse,  is  dream- 
ing. What  are  these  dreams  ?  Ah,  there  are  no  words  in  human 
language  to  express  them.  The  thoughts  are  as  imseizable  as 
birds  in  their  flight,  like  clouds  which  scarcely  take  a  shape,  ere  they 
change  into  mist  and  melt  away.  This  is  bliss !  A  sharp  and 
fragrant  air  strokes  my  brow.  I  take  it  in  with  full  lungs  —  I 
nearly  faint  away  under  its  caressing  breath,  drawing  from  it 
strength  and  health." 

Note  3d. 

"The  breeze  has  stopped.  The  ocean,  smooth  and  peaceful, 
has  lost  its  color,  and  looks  like  a  chasm  filled  with  melted  lead. 
The  sky  is  gray,  and  only  at  its  farthest  edge  shines  a  narrow  blue 
strip,  and  above  it  spreads  a  long  and  wide  stain  of  sulphur-yeUow, 


262  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

closed  by  a  dark  hem  of  clouds.  Stillness !  The  sun,  peeping 
here  and  there  through  the  dense  mist,  is  scorching  hot.  Does  it 
mean  the  approach  of  a  storm?" 

Note  4th. 

"To-day  is  Sunday.  Next  Wednesday  we  shall  be  in  New  York, 
if  the  weather  continues  to  be  fine.  The  young  men  on  oiu*  deck 
are  playing  leap-frog.  There  are  sixteen  of  these  frogs  jumping 
around.  Our  European  young  men  would  be  ashamed  to  play  this 
game  in  public;  they  would  rather  imitate  older  men  and  sit  by 
the  women,  talking  nonsense  or  flirting.  How  much  more  whole- 
some the  leap-frog  seems  to  me  !" 

Note  5th. 

"I  looked  into  the  sapphire  depths  of  the  ocean.  The  mystery 
and  danger  of  its  abysses  attract  me.  The  thought  of  drowning 
does  not  frighten  me.  On  the  contrary,  I  would  rather  die  that 
death  than  any  other." 

Note  6th. 

"My  senses  are  wrapped  up  in  the  sea,  but  my  soul  wanders 
back  to  Poland.  I  send  continually  my  thoughts  to  those  I  left 
behind.  If  a  thought  has  power,  it  will  reach  them,  it  will  be  felt 
and  welcomed.  Illusion  ?  Well,  let  it  be  !  Is  happiness  any- 
thing but  illusion  ?  Life  can  never  give  us  complete  satisfaction, 
but  we  can  create  a  world  of  peace  in  our  souls,  a  world  we  can 
carry  with  us  wherever  we  go.  What  a  wonderful  toy  is  such  a 
little  world?" 

Note  7th. 

"The  day  after  tomorrow  we  shall  be  in  New  York ! 

"The  ocean  is  blue  again.  Every  one  is  on  deck.  The  first- 
class  passengers  are  looking  down  at  those  of  the  third  class.  There 
is  a  regular  beehive  there,  but  the  people  seem  miserable.  A  band 
of  barefooted,  dirty  children,  young  women  with  tangled  hair, 
unwashed  and  untidy.  Boys  with  starved  or  brazen  faces,  mothers 
knitting  and  fathers  smoking.  Some  sleep  on  the  bare  deck,  with 
faces  to  the  floor.  Our  fellow-passengers  of  the  first  class  amuse 
themselves  by  throwing  amidst  that  pitiful  crowd  small  coins  and 
oranges,  which  produce  a  great  conmiotion  among  the  young 
ones.  They  fight,  push,  and  nearly  strangle  each  other,  in  their 
endeavors  to  catch  a  coin.  Oranges  passing  from  hand  to  hand, 
mashed,  torn,  and  squeezed  nearly  dry,  are  grabbed  by  the  victors, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  263 

while  the  poor  children  retreat,  crying,  and  extending  in  vain  their 
tiny,  dirty  hands,  in  hope  of  getting  their  share  of  the  booty. 

"This  exhibition  was  painful  to  me,  for  there  was  no  charity  in 
it,  but  a  mere  heartless  sport.  So  I  crossed  to  the  other  side  of 
the  boat,  where  I  could  see  the  aristocracy  of  the  steerage  amusing 
themselves  with  dancing.  Several  sailors  also  danced  with  them. 
Some  men  moved  with  most  ridiculous  motions  of  feet  and  body, 
but  with  the  solemnity  of  undertakers.  One  girl  was  so  pretty, 
and  danced  with  such  grace,  that  everybody  admired  her.  She 
had  blond  hair  and  sad,  sky-blue  eyes.  What  will  become  of  that 
child,  I  wonder;  has  she  anybody  to  protect  her?  I  feel  so  sorry 
for  her,  not  knowing  why.  The  musician  who  played  on  a  har- 
monica had  the  face  of  a  Richard  Wagner,  and  must  have  been  a 
German.  He  looked  to  the  upper  deck,  tracing  on  our  faces  the 
effect  of  his  music.    We  applauded,  of  course. 

"EJncouraged  by  the  example  of  the  steerage,  the  first-class 
people  began  to  plan  a  dancing  party  for  tomorrow,  a  full-dress 
affair. 

"Late  in  the  afternoon  we  had  a  beautiful  sight.  The  sun 
was  setting  simultaneously  with  the  rising  of  the  moon.  On  the 
right  the  bright  red  light,  dancing  on  the  water  Uke  a  laugh,  on  the 
left  the  solemn  and  soft  face  of  the  moon  floating  among  the  rainbow 
shades  of  the  skies,  throwing  in  its  wake  a  long  stream  of  silver  light. 
It  was  curious  to  watch  these  two  astral  potentates  looking  at  each 
other  freely,  with  nothing  between  them  but  the  gigantic  pane  of 
the  ocean,  and  almost  touching  each  other  by  the  long  rays  of  light 
which  the  water  carried  there  and  back." 

I  have  but  an  indistinct  recollection  of  our  landing  in  New 
York,  but  what  I  remember  is  the  first  picture  of  the  city 
on  our  approach  through  the  bay,  a  picture  most  enchant- 
ing, almost  magic  in  its  ethereal  beauty.  There  were  no 
shadows  in  it,  no  perspective,  — all  was  flooded  with  sunlight. 
The  delicate,  dim  coloring  gave  to  the  whole  a  soft,  lovely, 
unreal,  and  altogether  most  wonderful  effect.  Alas,  as  w-e 
came  nearer,  the  beauty  gradually  vanished,  and  when  we 
reached  the  docks  the  charm  was  totally  dispelled. 

When  all  our  bags  were  brought  on  deck,  and  while  we 
were  waiting  for  our  turn  to  descend  the  narrow  bridge 
leading  to  the  pier,  I  took  a  glimpse  at  the  members  of  our 


264  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

colony-;  and  they  all  looked  happy,  they  all  smiled,  except 
Mrs.  Sypniewska,  who  was  pale  and  drooping  like  a  water- 

my. 

Paprocki's  eyes  twinkled  Mrith  mischievous  merriment, 
and  when  they  met  mine  he  laughed  outright.  I  asked 
the  cause  of  this  extraordinary  symptom,  and  he  answered 
with  a  broad  grin :  ''Ah,  Madame,  when  I  think  at  last  I  am 
coming  to  a  country  where  there  are  no  Jews,  I  cannot 
restrain  my  joy.  I  must  confess  that  one  of  the  reasons 
why  I  left  Poland  was  their  great  number  there,  so  when 
I  read  in  a  paper  that  America  was  free  from  the  Hebrew 
invasion,  I  said  to  myself,  'Let  us  go  to  that  happy  land  !'  " 

Paprocki  was  one  of  those  who  consider  Jews  as  enemies 
to  civilization  and  a  most  dangerous  element.  Like  many 
Europeans,  he  had  a  profound  contempt  for  the  whole  race, 
and  was  most  unreasonable  on  the  subject.  What  was  his 
amazement  and  disgust  when  the  first  person  who  addressed 
him  in  the  "happy  land"  was  a  Polish  Jew,  selling  matches 
and  Russian  cigarettes.  Paprocki  grew  pale  with  rage,  and 
shouted  "Go  away!"  to  the  poor  inoffensive  Hebrew,  who 
stepped  back,  very  much  astonished  that  any  one  should 
treat  him  so  rudely  in  the  free  country.  I  apologized  to 
him  in  Polish,  saying  that  my  friend  was  not  well,  upon 
which  the  jolly  pedler  said,  touching  his  forehead  with  the 
forefinger:  "Mishuga,*  I  understand,"  and  laughing,  pro- 
ceeded on  his  way.  Paprocki  did  not  hear  the  Jew's  re- 
mark, for  he  stood  aside,  deeply  engaged  in  his  tragic- 
comic  reflections  upon  this  unwelcome  encounter.  We  all 
laughed  at  the  incident,  but  our  friend  became  gloomy  for 
the  next  few  days.  His  only  consolation  was  the  hope 
of  going  to  California,  where  he  was  sure  not  to  meet  Jews 
of  any  description,  "not  in  the  country,  at  least";  of  that 
he  seemed  to  be  quite  certain.  We  knew  better,  but  did 
not  like  to  dispel  his  illusions. 

1  "A  madman"  in  Yiddish. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  266 

There  were  some  reasons  for  his  moods  and  his  hatred 
of  Jews.  During  the  Insurrection  of  1863  he  had  enlisted, 
with  other  young  men,  under  the  Polish  standards.  The 
detachment  in  which  he  served  was  defeated  by  the  im- 
perial troops,  the  insurgents  were  routed,  and  while  Paprocki, 
with  another  young  man.  Count  Z.  Lubienski,  a  cousin  of 
my  husband,  were  beating  the  country  in  trying  to  reach 
their  homes,  they  were  captured  by  Russians,  put  in  prison, 
and  sentenced  to  death.  It  seems  that  the  spy  who  in- 
formed the  police  of  their  whereabouts  was  a  Jew,  —  hence 
this  horror  at  the  sight  of  a  Semitic  face. 

Imprisonment  and  even  instant  death  would  not  have 
been  so  horrible  as  the  suspense  under  which  those  two 
young  men  lived  for  several  months.  Every  time  the  prison 
doors  opened  they  were  sure  they  were  to  be  led  to  their 
death.  They  experienced  the  preliminary  agony  almost 
every  hour  of  their  confinement. 

Finally,  through  Paprocki's  father  and  some  powerful 
friends'  influence,  they  were  both  liberated. 

Still  the  dark  moments  Paprocki  spent  in  jail  left  on  his 
impressionable  mind  a  lasting  mark,  and  often  made  him 
subject  to  gloomy  moods. 

The  following  extracts  from  a  letter  to  S.  Witkiewicz  gives 
some  idea  of  my  first  impressions  on  land :  — 

"  New  York,  July  13,  1876. 
"Dear  Mr.  Stanislaw:  — 

"It  is  Sunday  to-day,  and  so  quiet !  The  whole  city  seems 
plunged  into  a  deep  slumber. 

"We  shall  stay  here  a  few  weeks  on  account  of  the  Centennial 
Exhibition,  then  we  intend  to  start  for  California  on  the  steamer 
Colon,  across  Panama,  and  we  probably  shall  settle  in  Califor- 
nia. There  are  yet  many  miles  before  us,  and  much  anxiety  as  to 
our  future  prospects.  Sad  thoughts  assail  me  —  this  morning  I 
heard  singing  in  the  neighboring  church.  The  songs  were  pleas- 
ant, though  different  from  ours.  I  cried,  not  knowing  why,  and 
I  knelt  down  to  my  prayers.    I  opened  the  prayer-book  at  hap- 


266  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

hazard,  and  the  first  words  I  read  were:  'Give  yourself  up  to  God, 
and  fear  nothing.  He  will  fill  your  heart  which  the  world  liu'es, 
intoxicates,  tortures,  and  distiu'bs  without  filling  it.'  I  found  con- 
solation and  calm  in  these  words.  Peace  entered  my  soul.  I 
wonder  for  how  long ! 

"New  York  is  a  monstrous,  untidy  bazaar.  The  buildings 
are  large,  but  without  style.  Brick  or  chocolate  houses  (the  latter 
called  here  brownstone),  with  green  window-shades,  look  simply 
awful.  The  whole  city  is  as  ugly  as  can  be.  But  what  makes  the 
streets  look  still  more  unattractive  are  the  soles  of  men's  boots 
in  the  windows.  Imagine  that  men  have  here  the  singular  custom 
of  sitting  in  rocking-chairs  and  putting  their  feet  on  the  window- 
sills.  You  can  see  and  admire  the  size  of  their  shoes  in  the  hotel 
lobbies,  the  barber  shops,  the  clubs,  and  even  in  some  private  resi- 
dences.   Wherever  you  turn,  these  soles  stare  at  you. 

"A  few  days  ago  we  went  to  Central  Park,  with  the  desire  to 
take  a  walk  and  breathe  some  cooler,  fresher  air,  but,  oh  I  what 
a  disappointment !  Most  of  the  trees  are  too  young  yet  to  give 
any  shade,  and  the  roads  and  paths  are  asphalted.  The  asphalt 
melts  \mder  the  scorching  sun  and  poisons  the  air.  We  returned 
as  soon  as  we  found  a  conveyance.  There  is,  however,  one  thing 
that  I  like  quite  well.  In  the  evening  we  go  to  watch  the  ferries. 
They  are  large  boats  on  the  two  rivers  that  encircle  New  York 
on  both  sides,  and  carry  passengers  to  and  from  the  different  sub- 
urban towns.  When  all  these  boats  are  lit  inside,  they  make  a 
pretty  sight.  The  colored  lights  placed  in  front  of  each  ferry, 
reflected  in  the  water,  increase  the  effect,  and  as  there  are  many, 
many  of  those  moving  small  palaces,  going  back  and  forth,  the 
whole  river  looks  as  though  it  were  on  fire.  Of  course  we  went 
to  Philadelphia  several  times  to  see  the  Exposition,  and  Rudolphe 
was  happy,  for  he  takes  great  interest  in  all  sorts  of  engines,  which 
are  most  magnificently  represented  there.  I  saw  what  I  could  see, 
but  aside  from  gigantic  cucumbers  and  pears  from  California,  I 
did  not  notice  anything  superior  to  what  I  had  seen  before  in  Paris, 
Vienna,  or  Warsaw.  But  we  walked  aroimd,  admiring  the  order 
and  cleanliness  which  were  noticeable  in  every  part  of  the  exhibition 
grounds.  We  tried  to  do  as  others  did;  we  even  tasted  peanuts 
and  pop-corn,  wondering  why  people  ate  those  tasteless  dainties. 
Paprocki  predicts  that  in  a  few  years  our  palates  will  so  change 
under  the  influence  of  American  air  and  food  that  he  will  have  the 
satisfaction  of  seeing  me  carrying  peanuts  in  my  pocket  and  pop- 
corn in  a  bonbonidre.     We  visited  the  art  department.     How 


THE  NEW  WORLD  267 

poor  that  art  looks  here !  The  first  thing  we  saw  was  a  portrait 
of  Rapacki  in  'Hamlet,'  by  Miller;  you  may  imagiDe  how  amused 
I  was.     There  were  some  good  paintings  sent  by  France,  and  their 


Frflm  a  phoioffraph.  copyright  by  A 

AoNEa  Booth  Schokffbl. 


section  was,  to  my  mind,  the  bciat  represented.  I  saw  here  also 
the  celebrated  'Mother  of  the  Maccabees,'  by  Beher,  but  br,  br, 
br,  —  seven  hanging  corpses,  a  regular  morgue ! 

"In   the   Austrian    section,    outside  of  Makart's  'Comarina,' 
very  few  paintings  of  any  interest.     In  the  Belgian  room  are  two 


268  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

pieces  of  sculpture  by  Godebski:  an  intoxicated  peasant  and  a 
Russian  peasant  woman.  Among  the  Russians  two  statues  of 
Cengler.  .  .  . 

''Dear  Mr.  Stanislaw,  you  must  go  to  Paris  and  stay  and  work 
there.  You  will  dwindle  to  nothingness  if  you  remain  in  Warsaw. 
The  different  cliques  are  too  strong  there,  and  you  are  not  the  man 
to  cringe  and  bow.  It  is  not  in  vain  that  our  poet  called  Warsaw 
'Madame  Mediocrity.'  Do  we  not  know  a  number  of  these 
mediocrities  that  would  not  be  noticed  in  any  other  place,  but 
who  prosper  and  grow  in  wealth  and  flesh  in  Warsaw  ? 

"I  wish  you  would  paint  a  convoy  to  Siberia,  just  as  you  saw 
them  yourself,  and  described  them  to  me.  That  mother  who  had 
to  leave  her  frozen  child  and  proceed  on  her  forced  trip  to  Siberia 
is  more  tragic  than  the  'Mother  of  the  Maccabees.' 

"We  are  awaiting  to-day  the  president  of  the  Polish  Dramatic 
Society  in  New  York,  Dr.  Zolnowski.  We  had  a  long  chat  about 
'  the  theatre  when  we  first  met  him.  It  seems  that  I  may  be  able 
to  play  in  English,  but  first  we  must  go  to  California,  according 
to  our  original  plan.  'Litwos'  ^  is  there  in  a  place  called  Anaheim 
Landing,  on  the  seashore,  writing  more  of  his  'Charcoal  Sketches,' 
and  his  letters  tell  wonders  about  the  climate,  scenery,  and  vegeta- 
tion of  that  promised  land,  so  that  we  are  all  crazy  to  go.  Perhaps 
after  we  get  established  in  this  new  paradise  I  may  pick  up  enough 
English  to  play  there,  and  when  I  get  more  mastery  over  the  new 
language,  I  may  come  here;  for,  however  unattractive  New  York 
seems  to  me,  it  is  the  metropolis  of  America,  and  it  will  give  me 
pleasure  to  conquer  it.  Ah !  these  are  only  vague  projects,  yet 
when  I  think  of  the  possibility  of  their  realization,  and  of  making  a 
name  for  myself  here  and  in  England,  and  also  a  great  deal  of  money, 
I  yearn  to  return  afterwards  to  the  old  country  and  to  do  some 
good  to  my  people,  for  I  have  not  done  anything  yet,  save  acting. 
Pray  for  my  success,  for,,  indeed,  I  wish  it  not  only  for  myself,  but 
also  for  others. 

"Good-by  for  the  present.  Charles  and  the  rest  of  us  send 
greetings  to  you. 

"  Yours  ever  the  same,  etc." 

During  our  stay  in  New  York  we  went  to  different  theatres. 
At  some  of  them  farces  were  played,  or  melodramas,  but 
at  Booth's  Theatre  we  saw  "Sardanapalus,"  with  Mr.  Bangs 

^  The  nom  de  guerre  of  Sienkiewioz  in  his  young  days. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  269 

and  Mrs.  Booth '  in  the  chief  parts.  The  production  was 
magnificent,  and  Mr.  Bangs  imposing  and  very  impressive 
in  his  character.     Mrs.  Booth,  however,  did  not  seem  to  like 


P/iatin/Taph  by  Sartmy. 

F.  C.  Baitos. 

the  heroine.  Her  part  and  herself  were  so  far  apart  that 
they  never  met  for  an  instant.  I  saw  Mrs.  Booth  several 
years  later  in  a  small  comedy  entitled  "Old  Love  Letters," 
in  which  she  was   perfect.     We  also  saw  Mr.    and   Mrs. 

■  Mrs.  A^es  Booth,  later  Mrs.  Shoeffel,  sister-ia-Iaw  of  Edwin  Booth. 


270 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


Florence  at  Wallack's  Theatre  in  the  "Mighty  Dollar." 
His  "P.  I.  G."  and  Mrs.  Florence's  "Libby  dear"  sounded 
a  long  time  in  our  ears.     As  for  the  rest,  we  could  not  re- 


Mas.  Flobbncb. 


Phatooraph  bv  SarOHif. 


member  much,  for  we  were  too  deficient  in  English  to  follow 
the  dialogue.  As  far  as  I  could  judge  by  the  facial  ex- 
pression and  gestures,  I  thought  Mr.  Florence  an  excep- 
tionally good  comedian  and  his  wife  naturally  amusing. 

At  Gilmore's  Garden  we  heard  a  soprano  famous  at  that" 
time,  —  Madame  Pappenheim ;  she  had  a  great  voice,  and 


THE  NEW  WORLD  271 

gave  us  a  few  moments  of  real  pleasure.  The  place  did  not 
please  us,  however.  There  was  nothing  attractive  about  it. 
It  seemed  to  be  put  up  in  a  hurry,  without  taking  time  to 
give  finishing  touches  to  details,  You  could  see  bare  boards 
here  and  there,  and  the  main  adornments  consisted  of  stands 
with  pop-corn  and  cheap  candy,  a  few  plants,  and  a  plat- 
form, or  rather  an  improvised  stage,  painted  in  garish  colors, 
—  the  whole  lit  up  with  glaring  gaslight. 

As  I  looked  at  the  promenading  audience,  I  noticed  that 
women  still  wore  hoops,  while  that  ugly  fashion  had  been 
given  up  a  year  ago  or  more  in  Europe.  I  had  seen  them 
before  in  the  streets,  but  I  thought  they  were  only  worn  by 
the  poorer  class,  which  could  not  aflFord  too  many  changes  in 
fashion.  But  here  the  public  was  made  up  mostly  of  the 
well-to-do  people,  and  yet  hoops  reigned  supreme.  I  real- 
ized only  on  that  evening  why  passers-by  were  staring  at 
Mrs.  Sypniewska  and  myself.  They  not  only  stared,  but 
went  so  far  as  to  point  at  us  and  giggle.  They  evidently 
imagined  something  was  wrong  with  our  slim  skirts,  though 
the  latter  were  made  according  to  the  latest  French  fashion. 
While  they  were  laughing  at  our  garments,  we  were  amazed 
at  the  size  of  their  hoops  and  their  heavy  black  or  dark 
skirts,  which  were  worn  that  summer  in  New  York  with 
white  calico  or  muslin  jackets,  such  as  we  used  to  slip  on 
in  the  morning  in  the  old  country  before  dressing  for  the 
street  and  in  family  circles  only.  Times  have  changed 
indeed,  since,  in  New  York. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII 

We  started  for  California  on  the  steamer  Colon  in  good 
spirits,  for  the  weather  was  glorious.  Our  Polish  friends 
from  New  York  came  on  board  with  flowers  and  good 
wishes.  We  took  leave  cheerfully,  hoping  to  meet  soon 
again.  The  journey  promised  to  be  very  fine,  and  we  were 
in  ecstasies  over  it,  but  we  were  scarcely  three  days  on  the 
ocean  when  the  bursting  of  the  main  steampipe  disabled 
our  ship.  It  happened  on  Sunday  morning.  All  the 
passengers  w^ere  in  the  dining  room,  where  a  religious  service 
was  being  held.  Our  party  had  joined  the  rest,  prompted 
by  a  combined  motive  of  devotion  and  curiosity.  The 
captain  officiated,  reading  prayers,  and  some  young  people 
were  singing  hj^mns. 

Suddenly  we  heard  a  fearful  crash,  like  a  thousand  china 
plates  falling  on  the  floor.  The  boat  gave  two  big  lurches, 
and  then  a  violent  hiss  of  steam  followed. 

The  captain  dropped  the  Bible  and  rushed  up  to  the  deck, 
while  the  entire  congregation  was  turned^into  stone.  All 
were  so  frightened  that  there  was  no  sound,  not  a  word 
uttered.  Slowly,  almost  creeping,  we  mounted  the  stairs, 
and  arriving  on  deck  we  learned  of  the  calamity  that  had 
befallen  us.  My  first  thought  was  for  my  boy,  for  whom 
I  looked  in  vain.  Terror  seized  me.  Knowing  how  fond 
he  was  of  machinery,  and  how  often  he  tried  to  get  into  the 
engine-room,  I  imagined  all  sorts  of  terrible  things.  When 
at  last  my  husband  found  him  and  brought  him  to  me,  my 
joy  was  so  acute  that  I  fell  in  a  dead  faint. 

When  I  recovered  my  senses,  Mr.  Chlapowski  was  trying 
to  fasten  on  me  a  life-preserver,  but  somehow  he  could  not 

272 


THE  NEW  WORLD  273 

succeed,  putting  it  wrong  side  on.  He  had  learned  that  the 
lifeboats  were  being  placed  in  readiness,  and  thought  it 
would  be  better  to  have  our  life-preservers  on,  if  we  had 
to  get  into  them.  As  soon  as  the  news  about  the  boats 
was  spread  people  began  to  gather  objects  they  desired  to 
take  with  them.  It  was  quite  amusing  to  watch  those 
preparations.  A  young  German  dude  took  nothing  but  his 
comb  and  hand-mirror.  Some  old  people  were  taking  a 
package  of  sandwiches  and  a  coffee-pot;  a  young  girl 
wrapped  up  in  a  parcel  her  best  dress,  a  boy  carried  his  flute, 
and  a  sensible  Irishman  took  a  large  bottle  of  whiskey. 
When  they  were  all  ready  to  start,  one  of  the  officers  came  to 
announce  to  us  that,  owing  to  the  fine  weather  and  perfectly 
smooth  sea,  the  crew  had  succeeded  in  fastening  the  broken 
parts  of  the  engine  and  machinery.  There  was  no  immediate 
peril  for  us,  and  we  were  not  obliged  to  take  to  the  boats. 

This  announcement  was  received  with  cheers.  In  a  few 
moments  more  every  face  looked  sad,  for  we  learned  that 
two  people  in  the  engine-room  were  dead,  actually  cooked 
in  the  steam.  The  burial  was  to  take  place  next  morning. 
In  the  afternoon  two  mysterious  forms,  wrapped  up  in  white 
cloth,  were  placed  on  a  bench  at  the  stern,  and  the  solemnity 
of  Death  spread  its  wings  over  the  ship.  The  people  grew 
silent,  thoughtful,  and  strangely  softened.  In  the  evening, 
though  everybody  was  on  deck,  you  could  hardly  hear 
a  sound.  The  two  white,  human  forms  rose  and  fell  with 
the  slight  roll  of  the  ship,  and  the  ocean  whispered  strange 
things  to  them.  I  do  not  know  anything  so  depressing  as 
a  burial  in  the  midst  of  the  sea.  The  coming  up  of  the  body 
to  the  surface  after  it  has  been  thrown  down  seems  like  a 
sport,  and  it  is  simply  appalling.  The  funeral  service  also, 
without  the  presence  of  a  priest  and  the  usual  accessories, 
lacks  the  solemnity  to  which  we  are  accustomed  on  such 
occasions.  Possibly  it  might  be  better  to  have  such  burials 
at  night,  instead  of  their  being  made  a  spectacle  and  some- 


274  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

times  a  sport  for  passengers.  There  were  two  men  who 
made  bets  on  the  number  of  times  the  bodies  would  "pop 
up/'  as  they  called  it.     Horror! 

Next  morning,  when  I  came  on  deck,  I  was  told  that  we 
were  tied  to  the  stern  of  an  English  steamer,  the  Etna, 
and  soon  afterwards  I  became  conscious,  by  the  motion 
of  our  ship,  that  we  were  on  our  way  back.  We  progressed 
very  slowly,  and  it  took  us  more  than  a  week  to  return  to  the 
Hoboken  docks.  This  week  was  spent  by  the  passengers  in 
dancing,  singing,  card-playing,  and  various  sports  and  games. 
I  avoided  these  entertainments,  especially  the  social  games, 
the  forfeits  of  which  consisted  mainly  of  kisses.  It  amused 
me,  however,  to  look  at  them,  and  I  noticed  that  the  men 
blundered  on  purpose  to  obtain  their  share  of  the  punish- 
ment, while  some  unattractive  ladies  took  a  special  care  in 
being  awkward,  if  the  *' executioner"  was  young  and  good- 
looking. 

On  our  return  to  New  York  we  learned  that  in  a  few 
days  another  steamer,  the  Crescent  City,  would  take  us  to 
Panama,  and  in  the  meantime  the  poor  disabled  Colon 
extended  to  us  its  hospitality.  This  latter  was  emphasized 
by  a  champagne  dinner  every  day  while  we  remained  in 
dock. 

(A  letter  to  my  mother.    On  board  Crescent  City.) 

"To-morrow  we  shall  be  in  Panama,  or  rather  in  Aspinwall, 
three  hours  by  rail  from  Panama.  But  we  have  before  us  yet 
three  weeks  of  sea  voyage  on  the  Pacific  Ocean  before  we  reach 
San  Francisco. 

"Our  life  on  board  is  rather  pleasant.  Charles  has  a  great 
many  acquaintances, — some  young,  and  some  not  very  young, 
women  try  to  captivate  him  by  coquettish  smiles  and  graceful  hand- 
shakes, but  I  am  a  watchful  sentinel.  Paprocki  is  also  a  great 
favorite  on  account  of  his  drawings  and  caricatures.  As  to  Dolcio,* 
he  has  gained  the  reputation  of  a  marvellous  boy  pianist,  while  I 
am  taken  for  an  opera-singer,  because  I  sing  sometimes  snatches 
from  some  light  operettas.     The  people  on  board  are  not  musical 

^  A  pet  name  for  my  son. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  275 

a  bit,  hence  our  success;  but  they  like  to  sing,  although  their 
voices  are  harsh  and  nasal. 

"Charles  is  studying  English  and  Spanish  at  the  same  time, 
and  Dolcio  is  busy  almost  all  day  with  his  Ollendorf.  He  learns 
by  heart  long  English  sentences.  As  for  me,  I  shall  not  begin  to 
study  the  language  until  I  get  a  good  teacher  in  California;  in  the 
meantime  I  enjoy  my  dolce  far  niente  and  let  myself  live  free 
from  work  and  worry. 

"It  is  rather  warm  here,  and  some  of  the  men  sleep  on  deck  in 
their  bathing-suits,  in  the  expectation  of  a  shower-bath  when  they 
awake,  for  every  morning,  about  half-past  four,  the  sailors  begin 
to  wash  the  ship,  and  with  long  hose  sprinkle  every  comer  on  the 
deck.  They  are  easily  induced  to  Xise  their  hose  on  the  passengers 
desirous  of  a  morning  bath.  There  is  plenty  of  fun,  especially  if 
by  chance  or  on  purpose  a  current  of  water  strikes  some  enthusiast 
not  well  prepared  for  the  shock.  Yesterday  a  certain  stout  lady, 
who  suffers  constantly  from  heat,  got  up  on  deck  about  five  in  the 
morning  and  asked  for  a  sprinkling  bath.  It  was  a  great  amuse- 
ment for  the  sailors  when,  after  a  copious  shower,  they  began, 
pretending  a  good-natured  solicitude,  to  wring  out  the  duster  which 
was  her  outer  garment,  and  in  doing  so  to  lift  it  on  every  side 
higher  and  higher,  until  the  poor  lady  shrieked  with  anguish,  for 
she  had  but  scant  attire  imderneath,  a  very  thin  piece  of  lingerie. 
Of  course  this  courageous  woman  became  the  subject  of  conversa- 
tion for  the  whole  day. 

"There  are  three  very  charming  yoimg  girls  on  board,  one 
American  and  two  Spanish,  all  three  very  young,  beautiful,  and 
modest.  As  to  the  rest  of  the  wometi,  or  at  least  most  of  them, 
they  are  almost  constantly  attended  by  men,  with  whom  they 
whisper  and  exchange  'white'  glances.  That  is  what  is  called 
'flirtation.'  One  young  lady,  whom  we  call  'bluebird,'  as  she  is 
always  dressed  in  blue,  carries  this  proceeding  on  with  a  high 
hand.  Her  husband  lost  his  eye  while  attending  her  in  her  illness 
on  a  previous  voyage.  Some  poisonous  drug  got  on  his  fingers, 
and  he  carelessly  touched  his  eye.  Instead  of  staying  with  him, 
consoling,  or  cheering  him  in  his  misfortune,  she  promenades  the 
whole  day  with  a  young  man,  the  purser,  and  'flirts'  by  moonlight, 
while  the  poor  husband  remains  alone  with  his  sad  thoughts,  pale 
and  emaciated  by  his  pain.  I  am  told  by  a  very  polite  elderly 
German  lady,  who  has  lived  years  in  America,  that  it  happens 
here  not  infrequently,  that  when  a  husband  becomes  a  cripple, 
loses  his  good  looks,  or  the  means  of  support,  he  will  be  left 


276  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

by  his  wife,  who  gets  a  divorce  from  him.  And  indeed  no  one 
seems  to  pay  any  attention  to  this  flirtation  of  the  wife. 
Divorce,  it  seems,  is  easily  obtained  in  the  United  States,  and 
the  thrifty  little  *  bluebird*  is  trjdng  to  capture  a  new  husband. 
'Business!  that's  the  chief  object  of  human  existence,'  said  a 
middle-aged  man  with  whiskers  and  no  mustache,  when  the 
'bluebird'  and  the  purser  walked  by.  This  sentence  was  translated 
to  me  by  the  German  lady,  who  speaks  English  fluently.  She  also 
explained  that  the  word  '  business '  is  very  expressive  and  has  a 
very  extensive  meaning.  It  really  means  money,  affairs,  specula- 
tion, but  it  is  applied  almost  to  everything.  When  I  know  more 
about  it,  I  shall  tell  you. 

"Good-night,  dearest  Mamusia;  ^  I  shall  write  again  to-morrow." 

AspiNWALL,  Sept.  9th. 

"We  arrived  here  very  early  this  morning,  and  as  we  came 
near  the  pier,  a  crowd  of  dark  creatures  began  to  pull  the  ship  by 
means  of  a  long  cable  rolled  around  a  wheel,  and  while  they  were 
turning  the  latter,  they  sang  in  chorus  most  beautifully.  Under 
the  spell  of  this  music  we  slowly  came  nearer  and  nearer  to  the 
••  landing-place,  until  we  could  distinguish  the  black,  brown,  yellow, 
or  ghastly  pale  faces  of  the  singers.  Panama  fever,  that  terrible 
curse  of  these  regions,  stared  from  their  eyes. 

"Charles  and  Paprocki  were  the  first  on  shore.  As  soon  as 
they  touched  the  ground  they  were  surrounded  by  a  group  of  black 
beauties  who  stroked  their  faces,  patted  them,  endeavored  to 
attract  them  by  their  charms.  The  poor  men  had  lots  of  trouble 
in  trying  to  disengage  themselves  from  the  clutches  of  those  for- 
ward and  enterprising  enchantresses.  Fortunately  they  had  but 
little  money  about  them,  or  it  would  have  most  probably  disap- 
peared under  the  skilful  hands  of  the  dark  nymphs.  They  say 
there  is  no  place  on  earth  where  they  steal  better  than  in  that 
small  town. 

"Aspinwall  is  a  funny  little  place.  It  has  only  one  street,  or 
rather  one  long  row  of  houses,  mostly  occupied  by  stores.  Little 
shanties  and  other  buildings  are  scattered  here  and  there. 

"In  front  of  the  stores  negresses,  Indian  girls,  mulatto  and 
metis  women  are  promenading  up  and  down.  Numerous  vul- 
tures are  also  enjoying  a  walk  along  the  road,  and  seem  to  be  quite 
at  home.    They  evidently  are  aware  that  men  cannot  do  them 

1  Little  Mother. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  277 

any  harm,  —  for  the  law  forbids  the  shooting  of  the  scavenger  birds 
under  a  heavy  penalty,  —  so  they  stroll  or  flop  about  with  great 
dignity,  and  they  are  justly  entitled  to  their  pride,  for  the  people 
have  a  great  respect  for  them.  They  help  to  keep  the  town  clean 
by  eating  up  all  the  dead  rats,  dead  cats,  as  well  as  all  the  refuse 
thrown  in  the  streets  by  the  indolent  and  sans  gene  population. 

"The  beautiful  sex  of  Aspinwall  is  remarkable  for  its  original 
and  ludicrous  attire.  Some  of  their  dresses  remind  me  of  our 
peasant  costumes,  only  of  more  garish  colors,  and  they  loop  up  their 
skirts  in  their  own  way,  over  one  side,  showing  the  leg  up  to  the 
knee.  One  woman  made  me  stop  and  take  a  good  look  at  her. 
She  wore  an  old-fashioned  but  pretentious  bonnet,  trimmed  with 
flowers  and  feathers,  while  her  brown  bosom  was  scantily  covered 
with  a  red  bandana,  leaving  her  shoulder-blades  and  arms  bare. 
The  skirt  was  loosely  tied  with  a  string  around  the  hips,  far  below 
the  waist  line  in  front.  The  prettiest  in  their  general  appearance 
are  the  Indian  girls,  in  their  white  draperies. 

"But  the  most  amusing  sight  of  all  is  the  soldiers.  Imagine 
very  small  fellows  of  boys'  size  dressed  in  full  uniform  and  bare- 
footed !  One  of  them  had  no  trousers  on,  only  short  trunks. 
With  his  gaudy  imiform,  his  long  gun,  and  a  broad-brimmed 
Panama  hat,  he  looked  like  a  comic  character  in  a  burlesque. 
There  is  a  very  beautiful  statue  of  Columbus  here,  but  it  is  not 
quite  completed.     The  pedestal  is  missing. 

"I  feel  very  homesick  for  you,  and  for  our  country.  Do  write, 
please.  Our  address  will  be:  'Anaheim,  CaUfomia,  poste  restante.' 
Charles  and  Dolcio  join  me  in  kissing  your  hands  and  feet  most 
reverently  and  lovingly. 

"Helena." 

The  crossing  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  was  a  two-hours 
enchantment, — a  panorama  in  which  we  saw  most  beautiful 
scenery  flitting  before  our  eyes.  Forests  wdth  all  kinds  of 
unknown  vegetation,  rivers  where  alligators  dwell,  hills 
covered  with  orange,  lemon,  and  cocoanut  trees,  avenues 
of  palms,  arbors  formed  of  wild  grapevines,  negroes'  huts 
with  thatched  roofs,  brown  w^omen  with  skin  shiny  and 
firm  like  bronze,  in  their  white  draperies  looking  more  like 
statues  than  living  creatures,  —  unconscious  of  their  scanty 
attire  and  chaste  in  their  nudity ;   negro  women  in  red  and 


278  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

yellow,  children  swinging  in  hammocks,  looking  like  mon- 
keys, flowers  of  wonderfully  brilliant  colors,  large  blue 
butterflies,  parrots  of  gorgeous  plumage,  various  birds  never 
seen  before,  wild  turkeys  flying  over  our  heads,  and  the 
opaline  sky  for  background. 

This  short  trip  across  the  first  tropical  country  that  we 
had  ever  seen  was  like  a  dream,  and  wS  wer^  all  sorry 
when  it  was  over. 

When  we  reached  Panama,  we  learned,  to  our  regret,  that 
on  account  of  the  delay  caused  by  our  accident,  we  would 
not  stop  at  any  of  the  usual  stations  in  Central  America 
and  Mexico,  where  the  regular  steamers  make  short  stays, 
but  go  straight  to  San  Francisco.  Our  boat,  the  Constitution, 
not  prepared  for  such  a  long  trip,  had  to  be  supplied  with 
provisions  from  Panama,  which  fact  caused  a  delay  of  a  few 
hours.  It  was  quite  late  when  we  got  on  board.  The 
night  was  warm,  and  we  climbed  the  steps  to  the  upper 
deck.  There  we  saw  Paprocki  leaning  over  the  railing. 
Being  dark,  we  could  not  see  what  he  was  doing,  but  fear- 
ing a  vertigo  or  some  whim,  my  husband  approached  and 
touched  him  on  the  shoulder.  What  was  our  relief  when  we 
saw  Paprocki's  face  brimming  all  over  with  merriment. 
Turning  to  me,  he  said,  ''Is  it  not  a  great  satisfaction  to  be 
able  to  say,  'On  the  ninth  of  September,  1876, 1  spat  in  two 
oceans '?  '' 

The  Constitution  was  a  very  old  side- wheeler,  three  hun- 
dred and  sixty-five  feet  long  and  sixty  feet  wide.  Being 
built  all  of  wood,  she  cracked  and  squeaked  most  dismally, 
waking  us  up  several  times  during  the  first  night.  Twice 
we  were  on  the  point  of  dressing  and  rushing  on  deck,  in  fear 
that  our  old  veteran  boat  must  be  going  to  pieces.  Next 
morning  we  got  up  fagged  and  sleepy.  When  I  was  going  to 
breakfast,  I  met  Anusia,  looking  very  much  perplexed  and 
pale.  On  my  inquiry  what  happened  to  her,  she  answered, 
with  tears  in  her  eyes :  ''I  do  not  want  to  sleep  in  the  same 


THE  NEW  WORLD  279 

room  with  that  black  woman  (the  stewardess).  It  is  not 
only  her  face  which  is  black,  she  is  black  all  over;  I  saw  it 
when  she  undressed,  —  and  the  sun  cannot  burn  her  skin 
under  her  clothes.  Why,  she  may  seize  me  in  my  sleep  and 
carry  me  down  to  Lucifer ! "  And  the  poor  thing  burst  out 
in  sobs.  I  tried  my  best  to  calm  her,  explaining  that  the 
stewardess  was  a  human  being  like  herself,  only  belonging 
to  another  race.  It  was  all  in  vain ;  she  still  repeated : 
''Black  all  over,  she  is  no  woman;  she  is  something  else." 
Finally  I  had  to  promise  to  get  a  separate  room  for  her.  I 
now  knew  some  English  words,  such  as  ''my  maid,  negro, 
room,  sleep,"  etc.,  and  I  thought  that  I  might  explain  my 
request  to  the  captain.  I  met  him  on  the  deck,  and  directly 
put  before  him  my  plea  for  a  separate  room  for  my  silly, 
superstitious  maiden.  My  husband,  who  had  better  com- 
mand of  the  language,  succeeded  in  explaining  the  matter, 
and  the  polite  captain,  after  a  hearty  laugh,  consented  to 
supply  Anusia  with  another  berth.  Captain  Dearborn 
was  a  very  charming  gentleman,  and  at  the  same  time  a  very 
strict  and  dutiful  officer.  Nothing  was  overlooked  by  him, 
and  while  continually  on  the  lookout  for  anything  on  sea 
or  in  the  sky,  he  paid  strict  attention  to  the  ship  herself. 
He  visited  every  corner,  inspected  personally  the  passengers' 
rooms,  to  see  if  everything  was  clean  and  tidy.  He  was 
everywhere,  and  the  sailors  had  to  be  constantly  on  their 
guard  lest  the  watchful  eye  of  their  chief  surprise  them  in 
fault.  With  all  this,  he  was  much  loved  by  them,  because 
he  was  just  and  kind  and  knew  when  to  punish  or  reward. 
He  invited  us  to  his  cabin,  where,  among  photographs, 
knicknacks,  and  souvenirs,  he  kept  a  tame  squirrel  in  a  cage. 
The  little  animal,  he  said,  was  an  interesting  companion 
in  his  moments  of  leisure.  Then  he  took  us  to  the  other 
end  of  the  ship,  and  there  was  something  we  never  expected 
to  see  on  board,  —  live  cattle,  pigs,  sheep,  hundreds  of 
chickens,  and  also  some  ducks  with  their  little  ones.     I  went 


280  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

into  raptures  over  these  tiny  ''dukes/'  as,  with  my  foreign 
pronunciation,  I  called  them,  to  the  great  delight  of  the 
captain.  -  The  more  we  knew  of  him  the  more  we  liked 
him,  he  was  so  kind  and  wise.  He  explained  to  us  the 
convenience  of  keeping  live  stock  on  board  on  such  a  long 
trip,  and  said  he  did  not  believe  in  preserved  meat,  adding 
that  one  of  the  reasons  why  he  stayed  on  that  old  ship  was 
that  there  was  plenty  of  room  for  the  animals.  ''It  was  in 
this  way  passenger  ships  were  provided  in  the  old  times," 
he  observed,  "and  the  Constitution  is  one  of  the  few  sur- 
vivors of  that  system,  and  like  many  other  old  and  good 
things,  she  will  soon  go  to  rest.'' 

There  was  a  company  of  minstrels  on  board,  and  one 
evening  they  gave  a  performance  in  the  steerage,  to  which 
everybody  went.  It  seems  that,  through  a  mistake  of  the 
cook  or  his  assistants,  tea  had  been  served  to  the  steerage 
passengers  made  with  salt  water.  This  was  a  splendid 
opportunity  for  the  minstrels,  who  composed  many  songs 
on  the  incident,  directing  their  sallies  straight  at  the  captain, 
who  sat  in  the  first  row  of  seats.  I  understood  but  little 
of  these  jokes,  but  I  saw  the  captain  laughing  heartily,  and 
after  the  performance  he  sent  them  a  basket  of  wine. 

I  made  but  few  acquaintances  on  the  Constitution.  The 
person  I  liked  best  was  a  Mrs.  Jones,  who  had  with  her  two 
little  sons.  The  boys,  like  many  American  children,  were 
almost  too  clever  for  their  age,  but  somewhat  loud  and 
naughty.  Their  mother,  however,  was  sweet  and  patient 
as  an  angel,  and  altogether  very  sympathetic.  I  spent 
most  of  the  time  with  her,  and  though  we  could  not  well 
understand  each  other,  yet  we  succeeded  in  communicating 
mutually  our  impressions  by  the  aid  of  looks  and  signs. 
I  learned  from  her  several  most  useful  sentences,  and  we 
exchanged  points  on  embroidery  and  needlework.  Of 
the  other  fellow-passengers  of  our  journey  to  San  Fran- 
cisco I  do  not  remember  much,  though  I  have  a  dim  rec- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  281 

oUection  of  a  lady  with  golden  teeth,  and  a  young  woman 
with  such  a  huge  mouth  that,  when  I  first  saw  her,  she  gave 
me  a  nightmare.  I  dreamed  that  she  was  lying  on  the  floor 
right  close  to  my  berth.  Her  mouth  was  wide  open,  and  it 
seemed  to  grow  larger  and  larger,  until  it  became  as  large 
as  the  opening  of  a  good-sized  trunk.  As  I  was  rolling  up 
and  down  in  my  bed,  I  imagined  that  with  the  downward 
motion  I  must  lose  my  balance  and  fall  into  her  mouth. 
I  woke  up  with  a  shriek  and  found  myself  lying  on  the  floor. 

The  three  weeks  on  the  Constitution  passed  rapidly.  The 
sameness  of  the  ocean,  the  ever  blue  sky,  the  same  slow 
motion  of  the  ship  and  her  constant  creaking,  to  which  we 
had  grown  quite  accustomed,  —  even  hymns  and  songs  such 
as  ''Darling,  I  am  growing  old,''  or  ''In  the  Sweet  Bye  and 
Bye,''  sung  every  evening  in  unison  by  the  passengers,  — 
all  this  was  soothing  in  its  monotony.  I  let  myself  be  lulled 
by  the  warm  salt  air,  gaining  health  and  equipoise  in 
body  and  soul.  The  farther  north  we  advanced,  the  cooler 
became  the  temperature,  and  one  day,  not  far  from  San 
Francisco,  a  dense  fog  covered  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and 
enveloped  us  in  its  cold  and  damp  mantle.  For  two  days 
the  steamer  was  prevented  from  landing  because  of  the 
thickness  of  the  fog.  I  remember  standing  on  deck, 
wrapped  up  in  a  blanket,  for  the  cold  was  quite  penetrating, 
and  straining  my  eyes  in  the  direction  of  the  Golden  City. 
But  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  milky  mist,  and 
even  when  the  fog  became  less  thick,  and  at  last  we  had 
entered  the  bay,  we  could  distinguish  only  lights  piercing 
through  the  veil  of  mist,  and  some  nondescript  forms  that 
might  be  rocks  or  palaces,  vague  and  mysterious. 

It  was  quite  dark  when  we  reached  the  port,  much  dis- 
appointed not  to  have  seen  the  famous  Golden  Gate.  We 
were,  however,  rewarded  by  a  pleasant  surprise  awaiting 
us  at  our  entrance  to  California.  Several  Polish  gentlemen, 
residents  of  San  Francisco,  had  heard  of  our  arrival,  and  had 


282  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


\ 


r 


come  to  greet  us.     At  the  head  of  the  group  was  Captain 

Korwin  Piotrowski,  the  prototype  of  Sienkiewicz's  **Zag-  | 

loba/'  and  with  him  were  Captain  Bielawski,  Dr.  Pawlieki,  | 

General   Kryzanowski,   Horain,   Bednawski,    and   Captain  i 

Lessen.     I  mention  all  these  gentlemen  because  they  were 

more  or  less  connected  with  my  d^but  on  the  American 

stage.     Our  joy  at  meeting  these  countrymen  was  great, 

and  the  greetings  exchanged  quite  demonstrative.   'There 

surely  exists  a  sort  of  freemasonry  between  people  of  the 

same  class  or  education,  especially  as  in  the  present  case, 

when  they  all  belong  to  the  same  nation  and  meet  abroad. 

All  of  these  gentlemen  belonged  to  the  same  station  in  life 

as  ourselves,  some  among  them  being  members  of  Polish 

noble  families.     It  took  but  a  short  time  to  cement  between 

us  and  them  a  friendship  which  lasted  many  years.      At  the 

time  I  am  writing  these  lines,  after  thirty-two  years,  there 

remains  only  one  survivor  of  these  seven  men,  our  dear 

Dr.  Pawlieki. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV 

The  very  next  day  after  our  arrival  in  San  Francisco  I 
learned  that  a  celebrated  American  actor,  called  Edwin 
Booths  was  in  the  city  giving  a  series  of  performances. 

Ourr^rst  intention  had  been  to  go  at  once  to  Southern 
California,  to  Anaheim,  which  we,  or  rather  Mr.  Sypniewski, 
had  selected  for  our  new  home,  because  of  the  German 
families  he  had  met  there  during  his  previous  voyage  to 
America.  He  thought  it  would  be  easier  to  commence  our 
ranch  life  among  people  with  whom  we  might  be  able  to 
talk.  All  of  us  spoke  a  little  German,  while  some  were 
not  able  as  yet  to  grasp  English  at  all. 

When  Mr.  Sypniewski  consulted  me  about  our  trip  south, 
I  told  him  that  we  desired  to  stay  at  least  a  few  days  in 
San  Francisco,  because  I  was  anxious  to  see  Edwin  Booth, 
of  whose  wonderful  acting  I  had  heard  from  our  Polish 
friends.  My  husband  persuaded  Sypniewski  to  go  ahead 
of  us  with  his  family,  Paprocki,  my  son,  and  poor  bewildered 
Anusia. 

The  very  evening  after  their  departure  we  went  to  the 
California  Theatre  to  see  Booth's  Shylock,  and  a  few  days 
later  we  saw  him  in  Marc  Antony.  This  is  what  I  wrote 
about  him  to  one  of  my  friends  in  Poland :  — 

"His  first  entrance  denoted  a  great  actor.  He  was  magnificent 
in  his  simplicity,  complete  and  artistic  all  through.  His  Shylock 
was  a  revelation  to  me.  The  scene  with  Tubal  was  the  most  per- 
fect piece  of  acting.  He  was  a  genuine  Jew,  spiteful  and  mean, 
and  yet  so  human  that  I  could  not  but  sympathize  with  the  blood- 
thirsty wretch,  feel  for  his  wrongs,  and  deplore  the  injustice  to  the 
righteous  people.  In  Marc  Antony  he  was  eloquent,  eager, 
passionate,  and  full  of  youthful  vigor,  and  with  all  that  so  subtle. 

283 


THE  NEW  WORLD  285 

His  whole  countenance  expressed  the  task  of  the  Tribune,  his 
voice  was  well  modulated,  growing  from  soft  and  easy  tones  into 
a  stormy  outburst,  and  all  the  time  a  wonderful  facial  expression, 
and  such  marvellous  changes  and  flashes  of  the  eyes  as  I  had  never 
seen  in  any  actor  on  the  stage." 

These  were  my  first  impressions  of  Booth.  Farther 
down  I  wrote :  — 

"Imagine  how  indignant  I  grew  when  I  heard  men  in  the  gallery 
whistling  when  he  came  before  the  curtain  to  take  his  call.  I 
thought  the  people  must  be  crazy,  and  turning  to  Captain  Lessen, 
who  sat  next  to  me,  I  exclaimed:  '  What  an  outrage!  To  whistle 
at  such  an  artist !  I  am  siu'e  I  shall  never  play  before  such  a  stupid 
audience.'  Upon  which  my  friend  explained  to  me  that  whistling 
in  this  country  did  not  mean  an  insult,  as  it  does  in  Europe,  where 
such  a  thing  is  worse  than  hissing;  on  the  contrary,  young  men 
here  whistle  when  they  are  pleased,  to  emphasize  their  approval. 
*They  simply  imitate  birds,'  he  added." 

My  Polish  friends  in  San  Francisco  were  anxious  to  see 
me  on  the  stage,  and  General  Krzyzanowski  thought  that 
I  might  play  Ophelia  in  Polish  to  Booth's  Hamlet.  I  found 
that  project  rather  extravagant  and  not  very  desirable,  but 
the  General  and  the  others  insisted  so  much  that  I  finally 
yielded  to  their  persuasions.  He  introduced  to  me  Mr. 
McCuUough,  then  manager  of  the  California  Theatre,  and 
the  plan  was  discussed  seriously.  It  was  then  laid  before 
Mr.  Booth,  who,  however,  feeling  too  tired  for  extra 
rehearsals,  and  probably  not  having  confidence  in  the 
abilities  of  a  foreign  actress,  of  whom  he  had  never  heard, 
would  not  risk  the  performance,  and  declined  the  offer. 
I  thought  him  a  very  wise  man,  and  felt  really  glad  that 
this  polyglot  performance  did  not  take  place.  Other  pro- 
jects were  forming  in  my  brain. 

On  our  arrival  at  Anaheim  (a  small  town  in  Southern 
California,  inhabited  mostly  by  German  colonists  and 
Spaniards),  all  our  party  came  to  the  station  to  welcome  us. 


286  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Sienkiewicz,  who  had  just  returned  from  Anaheim  Landing, 
also  came  with  the  others.  He  looked  sunburned,  strong, 
and  healthy.  "You  must  have  taken  a  good  rest,"  said 
my  husband,  '^you  look  so  strong."  ''Swimming  in  the 
ocean,  and  the  sea  air  have  done  that,"  answered  the 
novelist,  ''for  I  have  not  been  altogether  lazy;  I  wrote 
two  more  'Charcoal  Sketches,'  which  I  am  going  to  read 
to  you  before  sending  them  to  the  publisher."  This  promise 
was  received  with  joy  by  all  except  Paprocki,  who  looked 
pathetic  and  sad,  and  from  whom,  on  my  asking  him  for 
the  reason  of  his  crestfallen  countenance,  I  did  not  get  a 
reply,  but  a  deep  sigh.  We  learned  from  Sienkiewicz 
that  our  eccentric  friend  had  met  a  Polish  Jew  on  the  first 
day  of  his  arrival  at  Anaheim,  and  had  been  in  a  melancholy 
mood  ever  since. 

"I  met  this  same  Jew  some  time  before,"  said  the  author 
of  the  'Charcoal  Sketches,'  "when  I  first  came  here,  and  the 
encounter  was  rather  amusing.  It  seems  that  our  country- 
man of  the  Mosaic  persuasion  (a  favorite  appellation  of 
Polish  Israelites,  who  dislike  the  name  of  Jews)  had  a  touch 
of  homesickness,  for  when  he  learned  that  I  was  from  Warsaw 
he  shouted  with  joy,  'Welcome,  welcome  1  you  come  from 
Poland!' 

"Yes." 

"Let  me  shake  hands  with  you !" 

"All  right." 

"Tell  me,  do  you  know  my  cousin  Pistolet?" 

"No." 

"You  do  not  ?    and  yet  you  say  you  come  from  Poland  ? " 

"Yes." 

"How  can  it  be?  you  come  from  Poland,  and  you  do 
not  know  my  cousin  Pistolet?" 

"  '  I  never  heard  of  him,'  I  said,  laughing,  and  tried  to  go 
away.  But  it  was  not  easy ;  he  stepped  right  in  front  of 
me,  and  asked  more  questions  about  some  other  relatives 


THE  NEW  WORLD  287 

living  'behind  the  Iron  Gate'  (a  Jewish  quarter  of  Warsaw), 
and  he  enumerated  them  &amp;11,  repeating  always  the  same 
refrain:  'You  say  you  come  from  Poland,  and  you  do  not 
know  them,  —  that  is  very,  very  strange,'  until,  half  amused 
and  half  annoyed  by  his  insistence,  I  succeeded  in  break- 
ing away  from  him."  You  may  imagine  how  mad  Paprocki 
grew  when  he  met  this  individual  and  the  latterbegan  to 
pesterhim  with  the  same  questions. 


We  found  the  rented  house  rather  small :  two  bed- 
rooms, a  dining  room,  a  so-called  parlor,  with  a  square 
piano  and  a  sofa.  The  commonplaceness  of  it  all  was 
painfully  discouraging,  and  the  front  yard,  with  its  cypresses, 
shaggy  grass,  and  flowers  scattered  at  random,  looked  like 
a  poorly  kept  small  graveyard.  The  only  redeeming  point 
was  the  view  of  the  mountains  of  the  Sierra  Madre  to  the 
north,  and  of  the  Santa  Ana  Kange  in  the  east. 

But  my  disappointment  was  great,  and  I  was  on  the 
point  of  exclaiming,  "Oh,  why  do  we  not  live  in  tents!" 
but  feared  to  wound  the  feelings  of  Mr.  Sypniewaki,  who 


288  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

had  chosen  for  us  the  farm  and  cottage,  which  he  thought 
cosy  and  pretty.  He,  with  his  wife,  occupied  the  larger 
bedroom  on  account  of  the  children.  We  took  the  smaller 
front  bedroom,  my  son  slept  on  the  parlor  "sofa,"  and 
Anusia  had  a  little  nook 
near  the  kitchen. 

About  a  hundred  feet 
from  the  house  stood  a 
barn,  part  of  which  was 
changed  into  a  sort  of 
camping-room  ornamented 
with  rugs,  mattings,  guns, 
harnesses,  etc.  This  im- 
provised and  picturesque 
abode  was  occupied  by 
Sienkiewicz  and  Paprocki. 
My  housekeeping  days 
began.  At  seven  next 
morning,  attired  in  one  of 
my  pretty  aprons  which 
I  had  brought  from 
Europe,  I  went  to  the 
kitchen.  Breakfast  was 
rather   a   complicated'  af- 

Shanty  IK  Sabt:ago  Canon       ,  ,     „     ,    '^,  .  , 

fair,  iiiverybody  wanted 
something  different.  Tea,  coffee,  milk,  chocolate,  and 
wine-soup  had  to  be  served  every  morning,  besides  other 
things.  Our  simple  life  did  not  include  privations  of  that 
sort.  The  other  daily  meals,  however,  did  not  require 
any  special  effort.  Quantity  was  often  more  appreciated 
than  quality,  especially  after  a  day  spent  in  the  fields. 
Though  Anusia.  and  I  tried  our  best,  yet  it  happened 
sometimes  that  the  chops  were  too  dry,  the  steak  too 
well  cooked,  but  our  men  were  good-natured  and  never 
grumbled.  Hunger  was  a  helpmate  of  mine,  and  I  fear, 
sometimes,  my  accomplice. 


! 


THE  NEW  WORLD  289 

The  first  time  our  gentlemen  started  on  the  cultivation 
of  the  orange  orchard,  they  looked  eager,  full  of  energy 
and  enthusiasm,  anticipating  great  joy  from  the  touch  with 
Mother  Earth.  My  son,  though  only  a  lad  of  fifteen,  went 
also  to  work  with  them.  When  they  returned  at  noon  for 
an  early  dinner,  they  were  still  full  of  spirits,  chafling  each 
other,  discussing  different  ways  of  farming,   and  nursing 

i  brilliant  hopes  of  making  fortunes  out  of  the  fertile  gound 

of  California. 

In  the  evening  they  came  back  tired  but  hopeful.  My 
boy  went  to  the  piano  to  play  one  of  Chopin's  waltzes,  — 
he  wanted  to  see  if  his  fingers  did  not  get  stiff  from  the  hoe, 

I  —  and  after  supper  Sienkiewicz,  in  spite  of  fatigue,  read  us 

^one  of  his  ''Charcoal  Sketches.''  It  was  a  beautiful  even- 
ing, and  even  the  commonplace  furniture  and  a  smoking 
lamp  did  not  interfere  this  time  with  our  enjoyment. 

Next  morning  some  of  the  party  were  late  for  breakfast ; 
the  third  day  some  one  complained  of  a  lame  back;  and 
a  week  later  there  were  only  two  who  insisted  still  on  work- 
^  ing,  my  husband  and  my  son.     Sienkiewicz  had  to  write  an 

&gt;  urgent    correspondence   to    Warsaw;   Paprocki,  unable  to 

^  .     walk  from   rheumatism,  passed  his   time  in  making  fine 

drawings ;  and  Sypniewski  was  obliged  to  stay  at  home  and 
attend  to  his  wife,  who  was  indisposed. 
"    •  My  husband  returned  that  day  very  tired  and  discouraged, 

yet  he  would  not  blame  anyone,  for  each  of  them  had  a  good 
reason  for  remaining  at  home.     In  the  afternoon  he  and  my 
4  boy  went  back  to  their  task.     I  tried  to  keep  them  away 

from  that  work,  which  neither  of  them,  nor  any  of  our 
companions,  were  used  to.  It  seemed  to  me  absurd  that 
they  should  waste  their  strength  in  such  a  way,  while  each  of 
them  could  choose  a  more  fitting  and  more  lucrative  occu- 
pation. My  husband  asked  me  to  be  patient ;  and  the  work 
^  went  on  as  well  as  might  be  expected  from  these  amateur 

farmers,  who  were  full  of  good-will  and  fine  theories,  but 


290  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

sadly  lacked  experience.  Sypniewski  was  the  only  one 
with  any  agricultural  knowledge,  but  he  could  not  apply 
it  well  to  the  new  conditions  of  soil  and  climate.  Besides 
that,  there  was  no  system  among  our  idealists ;  they  worked 
or  not,  they  discussed  a  great  deal,  they  sometimes  even 
quarrelled  and  then  made  up  and  hugged  each  other; 
in  one  word,  they  lived  under  a  nervous  tension  which  could 
not  last  long. 

For  recreation  they  used  to  ride  on  horseback,  in  which 
exercise  my  husband,  my  boy,  and  myself  often  joined  them. 
We  had  several  saddle-horses,  which  we  named  after  some 
well-known  characters  in  Poland.  Paprocki  gave  his 
vicious  and  ungainly  pony  the  name  of  a  Warsaw  Jew 
famous  for  his  absurdity.  Except  the  buggy  team,  each 
of  the  horses  had  some  peculiarities,  not  very  pleasant. 
They  all  were  broncos,  they  bucked  and  kicked, — sometimes 
bit,  —  but  we  did  not  mind  it,  and  galloped  all  over  the  plains 
among  the  sagebrush,  cactuses,  and  sumach,  frightening 
away  the  squirrels,  quail,  and  rabbits.  Hunting  and  shoot- 
ing expeditions  were  also  one  of  the  chief  pastimes  of  the 
colonists,  and  my  larder  was  well  supplied  with  quail, 
hares,  rabbits,  — ^occasionally  wild  ducks  or  geese.  Anusia 
dressed  the  bird^  and  she  used  the  wings  of  the  quail  as 
ornaments  for  b'er  hat.  I  counted  seventeen  wings  pinned 
to  it  in  all  kinds  of  positions.  She  was  very  proud  of  them, 
and  scorned  mockery.  One  day  she  was  dressing  hares,  and 
suddenly  she  screamed  fearfully ;  I  was  standing  by,  picking 
flowers  from  the  climber  near  the  kitchen  window  and 
talking  to  my  husband.  We  turned  to  her,  afraid  that  she 
had  cut  herself,  but  she  stood  dumb  and  erect,  with  an 
expression  of  horror  on  her  face,  pointing  with  her  finger 
at  the  half-skinned  hare.  On  examining  the  animal,  we 
understood  why  the  ancient  Jews  were  forbidden  by  the 
Mosaic  law  to  eat  hare,  for  the  one  on  which  Anusia  was 
operating  had  two  protuberances  on  its  interior  skin  con- 


MADAME    MODJESKA 


i 


•  •  • 


•:• 


•"• 


THE    NEW  WORLD  291 

taining  worms.  This  happens  very  often  with  the  hares 
(jackass-rabbits)  in  California,  and  is  caused  probably  by 
the  pricking  of  the  cactus  thorns.  Cactuses,  or  rather  cacti, 
as  the  botanists  call  them,  are,  I  hear,  as  plentiful  in  Palestine 
as  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  evidently  affect  the  hares  in 
J  the  same  way,  which  would  account  for  the  tabooing 
of  their  meat.  After  this  we  became  quite  cautious  with 
hares. 

Several  weeks  elapsed  since  our  establishment  in  Anaheim. 
I  noticed  that  my  husband  grew  despondent  and  unusually 
nervous,  and  I  also  began  to  feel  restless,  and  at  moments 
felt  a  sort  of  pang  around  my  heart.  Madame  Sypniew- 
ska  looked  like  the  globe  of  a  lamp,  pale  and  transparent, 
and  her  large  eyes  grew  larger  and  larger,  and  were  often 
fixed  on  some  distant  object,  looking  but  not  seeing;  her 
husband  had  sometimes  a  gloomy  expression  on  his  face 
and  walked  with  his  head  down,  grumbling  and  slapping 
his  little  boy  for  relief.  Sienkiewicz  was  seen  on  the  porch, 
with  his  elbows  on  his  knees,  eyes  turned  to  the  ground, 
and  his  jaws  twitching  with  nervous  ticks,  as  though  he 
were  chewing  some  unpleasant  thoughts;  and  one  evening 
we  came  across  Paprocki  leaning  against  a  tree  and  crying. 
We  realized  that  we  were  all  homesick. 

One  afternoon,  when  I  sat  at  the  window,  sad,  unnerved, 
brooding  over  our  fate,  I  saw  two  people  approaching  the 
house :  a  man  about  forty  years  old,  with  sharp,  clear-cut, 
regular  features,  blond  hair  and  beard,  — a  perfect  American 
type,  —  and  a  woman,  forming  a  strong  contrast,  with  her 
olive  complexion  and  black  hair.  She  looked  Spanish,  but 
her  high  cheek-bones  and  the  shape  of  her  nose  betrayed 
the  addition  of  Indian  blood. 

They  came  to  the  window,  and  an  introduction  took 
place.  The  name  of  the  man  was  Mr.  J.  E.  Pleasants,  and 
his  wife  was  called  by  her  Christian  name,  Donna  Refugio. 
The  couple  seemed  very  sympathetic.     I  called  my  husband. 


292  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

who  invited  them  to  the  house,  and  had  quite  a  long  talk 
in  two  languages,  —  broken  English  and  broken  Spanish. 
I  understood  that  they  expressed  a  wish  of  our  visiting  them 
in  their  homestead  in  the  Santa  Ana  Mountains,  where  live 
oaks  grow  and  clear  brooks  wind  around  the  rocks.  We 
had  not  the  faintest  idea  then  how  closely  this  visit  was 
connected  with  our  final  settlement  in  California. 

The  talk  with  these  two  strangers  inspired  us  with  the 
desire  of  taking  a  few  days'  vacation  from  farming  toil 
and  housekeeping  drudgery,  and  visiting  some  neighboring 
places.  Every  one  agreed  to  the  change,  and  we  commenced 
our  excursions  by  going  to  Anaheim  Landing.  All  the  colony 
went  on  this  trip,  even  Anusia  and  the  children,  the  weaker 
sex  and  the  babies  in  a  buggy,  and  all  the  men,  including 
Rudolphe,  on  horseback.  We  must  have  presented  a  curi- 
ous picture,  for  when  we  passed  through  the  town,  there 
was  not  one  person  in  the  streets  that  did  not  stop  to  take 
a  look  at  our  convoy.  We  met  many  interesting  figures  of 
Spaniards  and  cow-boys,  among  others  the  "Seflora  Coyote," 
driving  her  half-starved  horse.  This  unkind  nickname 
was  given  to  the  old  lady  by  Indians  working  in  her  vine- 
yard. She  had  come  originally  from  northern  Europe 
years  ago,  and  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  the  place. 
She  enjoyed  a  reputation  of  extreme  economy,  and  hated 
nothing  so  much  as  to  waste  anything.  It  happened  once 
that  a  coyote  was  killed  and  brought  to  her.  She  did  not 
thank  the  fellow  who  killed  it,  only  scolded ;  but  when  he 
was  gone,  she  skinned  the  animal  and  cooked  the  meat  for 
the  dinner  of  the  Indian  workmen.  A  little  boy  saw  her 
doing  this  abomination  and  betrayed  her.  Hence  the  name 
of  ''Seiiora  Coyote." 

Halfway  to  Anaheim  Landing  we  saw  for  the  first  time 
a  fantastic,  beautiful,  but  deceiving   picture,  —  a  mirage. 

When  we  arrived  at  the  Landing,  Sienkiewicz  showed 
us  the  interesting  spots,  his  favorite  walks,  and  the  shanty 


THE  NEW  WORLD  293 

where  he  had  lived  for  some  time  and  where  he  wrote  his 
stories/ 

I  listened  and  looked  at  everything,  but  I  grew  quite 
sad  when  I  turned  my  eyes  to  the  ocean.  The  blue  waters 
of  the  great  Pacific  reminded  me  of  our  first  sea-voyage  when 
we  left  our  country.  The  recollections  of  the  happy  past, 
spent  among  beloved  people,  —  Cracow,  with  its  churches 
and  monuments,  the  kind  friends  waiting  for  our  return, 
the  stage,  and  the  dear  public  I  left  behind,  —  all  came 
back  to  my  mind,  and  I  felt  a  great  acute  pang  of  home- 
sickness. I  stepped  away  from  the  rest  of  the  company, 
threw  myself  on  the  sand,  and  sobbed  and  sobbed,  mingling 
my  moans  with  those  of  the  ocean,  until,  exhausted,  I  had 
not  one  drop  of  tears  left  in  my  eyes.  A  sort  of  torpor  took 
the  place  of  despair,  and  the  world  became  a  vast  empti- 
ness, sad  and  without  any  charm.  In  that  state  of  mind 
I  returned  home,  and  for  some  time  remained  indifferent 
to  the  surroundings,  until  one  day  we  made  a  new  excursion 
to  the  Santiago  Cafion  in  the  Santa  Ana  Mountains,  where 
our  new  friends,  the  Pleasants,  lived.  On  our  way  we 
stopped  at  a  charming  spot,  called  the  ''Picnic  Glrounds'' 
(at  present  the  Orange  County  Park).  With  its  magnificent 
old  live  oaks  overhung  with  wild  grapevines,  its  green 
meadows  and  clear,  limpid  brook,  the  place  was  so  beauti- 
ful that  it  excited  our  greatest  admiration.  Towards  the 
evening  we  reached  the  upper  part  of  the  canon,  in  the 
heart  of  the  mountain,  and  the  sun  was  quite  low  when  we 
arrived  at  the  home  of  the  Pleasants.  The  couple  were 
away  on  some  errand,  but  the  spot  they  selected  for  their 
residence  was  so  enchanting  that  we  were  fully  rewarded 
for  our  long  trip. 

On  an  acre  or  so  of  level  ground  stood  a  tiny  shanty,  the 
dwelling-house ;  a  few  steps  farther  was  an  arbor  covered 

^  Altogether  Anaheim  Landing  was  a  desolate  place,  and  at  the  present 
time  it  is  even  more  so. 


294  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

with  dead  branches,  vines,  and  climbing  roses.  Inside  of 
the  arbor  a  rustic  sofa,  table,  and  chairs,  an  outdoor  dining 
room  and  living  room  in  one.  Next,  a  kitchen  consisting 
of  an  iron  stove  under  the  shelter  of  widely-spread  oak 
branches,  with  pantry  shelves  built  in  the  cavity  of  the 
same  tree.  Some  rose-bushes,  a  few  flowers,  a  small  palm, 
and  an  olive  tree  were  the  only  improvements  on  nature. 
This  primitive  miniature  house  holdwas  the  centre  of  a 
crescent  formed  by  a  sloping  mesa,  thickly  covered  with 
bushes  of  wild  lilac,  wild  honeysuckle,  etc.,  and  oaks.  In 
front  the  grounds  were  closed  by  a  swift  creek,  and  a  pre- 
cipitous mountain,  called  the  ''Flores  Peak.''  All  around, 
like  a  living  dark  green  frame,  oaks  and  oaks,  some  of 
stupendous  dimensions.  In  the  distance,  mossy  rocks  and 
mountains.  The  whole  picture  looked  more  like  fantastic 
stage  scenery  than  a  real  thing,  and  looking  at  it,  my  im- 
agination carried  me  far,  far  beyond  the  hills,  back  to  the 
footlights  again. 

A  few  years  later  we  bought  this  place,  and  I  called  it 
''Arden,"  because,  like  the  ''Forest  of  Arden"  in  "As  You 
Like  It,"  everything  that  Shakespeare  speaks  of  was  on  the 
spot,  —  oak  trees,  running  brooks,  palms,  snakes,  and  even 
lions, — of  course  California  lions, — really  pumas. 

It  was  quite  dark  when  we  left  the  Pleasants'  homestead. 
An  old  Indian  who,  in  their  absence,  took  care  of  the  place, 
advised  us  to  go  to  Mr.  Shrewsbury's,  a  neighbor  living  about 
a  mile  off,  who  had  a  larger  house,  and  could  therefore 
provide  us  with  more  comfortable  hospitality.  Old  ''Tio 
Ramon"  lit  a  lantern,  and  we  followed  him.  It  was  very 
dark,  and  we  were  among  the  trees.  We  heard  strange 
noises  in  the  woods,  which  put  every  one  in  an  expectant 
mood.  All  were  looking  for  some  strange  occurrence, 
when  suddenly  a  hushed,  trembling  voice  whispered,  "Look, 
look,  a  mountain  lion!"  and  indeed  we  saw  above  us  two 
shining  yellow  eyes.     "Get  your  gun  ready;  we'll  shoot 


THE  NEW  WORLD  295 

him."  ''Can  you  see?" ''There!  Shoot  now  I"  "Wait!" 
While  these  brief  commands  were  being  uttered,  the  Indian 
asked  us  what  was  the  matter.  He  did  not  understand  our 
words,  but  the  scared  tone  of  our  voices  had  attracted  his 
attention.  After  a  brief  talk  in  Spanish,  my  husband 
translated  to  us  that  the  ominous  fiery  eyes  did  not  belong 
to  any  wild  beast  of  prey,  but  to  a  peaceful  owl.  Our  semi- 
heroic  mood  gave  way  to  a  fit  of  wild  merriment,  and  we  were 
still  laughing  when  our  buggy  and  the  horsemen  stopped 
before  a  white  wooden  house. 

Two  brothers  lived  there,  two  squatters  by  the  i:iame  of 
Shrewsbury,  who  very  politely  offered  to  put  the  whole 
house  at  our  disposal.  They  were  the  kindest  of  hosts,  and 
after  serving  us  with  tea  and  placing  before  us  everything 
that  was  left  in  the  pantry,  they  said  "Good  night!" 
and  went  to  sleep  in  the  barn.  Before  going  to  bed,  our 
attention  was  attracted  by  some  book-shelves  in  the  room. 
We  were  amazed  by  the  titles  of  the  books:  there  were 
geological,  scientific,  and  philosophical  works  of  the  best 
and  most  modern  authors,  and  with  them  Shakespeare, 
Emerson,  Tennyson,  Longfellow,  and  others  of  more  recent 
date.  We  certainly  did  not  expect  to  find  so  much  good 
literature  in  a  squatter's  home,  and  we  were  glad  to  know 
that  there  were  other  people  with  culture  besides  ourselves 
who  had  forsaken  the  so-called  civilized  world  to  seek  in  the 
wilderness  close  contact  with  nature.  When  we  met  our 
hosts  next  morning,  we  greeted  them  with  cordiality  and 
fespect. 

They  gave  us  an  excellent  breakfast  of  "flapjacks,"  eggs 
and  bacon,  and  coffee,  and  accompanied  us  on  horseback 
for  a  while  in  order  to  show  us  the  best  road. 


CHAPTER  XXXV 

On  our  return  to  Anaheim  we  found  a  letter  from  Captain 
Piotrowski,  announcing  his  intention  of  visiting  us.  Before 
our  departure  from  San  Francisco  the  captain  had  ex- 
pressed a  wish  to  visit  us,  whereupon  my  husband  invited 
him  to  our  new  home,  to  stay  a  week  or  so  with  us.  In 
his  letter  he  announced  his  arrival.  We  made  suitable 
preparations  for  our  guest:  removed  the  sofa  from  the 
parlor  and  replaced  it  by  a  bed,  while  my  son  joined  the 
party  in  the  barn.  The  most  important  question  was  the 
menu.  The  captain  was  a  gourmet,  and  as  he  was 
so  very  tall  and  so  very  stout,  his  huge  body  required  a  vast 
amount  of  food  to  satisfy  his  almost  colossal  appetite. 
For  the  first  dinner  we  decided  upon  a  roast  turkey,  and 
Sypniewski,  as  the  most  competent  judge  in  those  practical 
matters,  went  to  town  and  bought  a  huge  and  fat  bird. 
And  then  the  question  arose,  Who  shall  kill  the  turkey? 
Our  idealists  looked  at  each  other  and  one  by  one  dispersed 
in  different  directions ;  while  they  were  going  away,  I  heard 
their  voices  muttering:  "Not  I."  "Nor  I.''  "I  never 
killed  a  turkey."  "It  is  the  business  of  the  cook,"  etc. 
"Anusia!"  I  called,  "can  you  kill  this  turkey?"  "0, 
Holy  Virgin!"  she  exclaimed,  laughing,  "that  big  thing? 
I  could  not  hold  him;  he  is  stronger  than  I;  and  then  I 
never  killed  anything,  not  even  a  chicken;  you  know 
the  gentlemen  shoot  them  for  us  when  we  want  them  for 
dinner."  Seeing  that  it  was  impossible  to  coax  this  innocent 
to  commit  murder,  I  went  to  my  husband  and  told  him 
that  if  some  one  did  not  kill  the  bird,  there  would  be  no 
dinner  for  the  captain. 

296 


THE  NEW  WORLD  297 

After  a  while,  watching  from  the  window,  I  saw  him 
returning  with  Sienkiewicz  and  Paprocki.  They  held  a  short 
consultation,  and  then  Sienkiewicz  went  to  the  barn  and 
soon  returned  with  a  ''ciupaga,"  a  kind  of  hatchet  used  by 
the  Carpathian  mountaineers  as  a  weapon,  several  of  which 
had  been  brought  by  our  men  from  the  Tatra.  He  sharpened 
his  tool  on  the  grindstone  and  put  it  against  the  stump  used 
for  wood-chopping.  Then  the  chase  for  the  turkey  took 
place,  and  after  having  secured  the  victim,  the  three  men 
stretched  it,  with  great  ceremony,  upon  the  stump.  My 
husband  held  the  legs,  Paprocki  the  head,  and  Sienkiewicz, 
with  the  stern  expression  of  an  executioner,  picked  up  the 
hatchet  and  decapitated  the  innocent  culprit. 

The  captain  arrived  next  morning,  and  with  his  entrance 
gloom  changed  into  merriment.  Every  one  smiled  and 
talked,  and  all  at  once  became  witty  and  entertaining.. 
Piotrowski  was  a  curious  type.  He  seemed  suited  rather 
to  the  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  century  than  to  our  modern 
era.  His  humor  reminded  me  sometimes  of  Sir  Toby  Belch 
or  Falstaff.  Even  his  language  was  unusual.  It  was  quaint, 
much  more  correct  and  crisp  than  our  diluted  and  distorted 
gabble  of  the  twentieth  century. 

Before  dinner  my  husband  asked  our  guest  what  wine 
he  liked  best.  ''I  only  drink  milk,"  he  answered  with 
a  malicious  twinkle  in  his  eye,  '*but  I  like  to  prepare  it 
a  little."  Then,  making  himself  at  once  at  home,  he  opened 
the  kitchen  door,  and  seeing  Anusia,  the  maid,  exclaimed, 
'^Halloo,  pretty  maiden  ! "  Then  turning  to  us,  he  said,  with 
a  wink,  ''Where  did  you  pick  up  this  dainty?"  When 
we  told  him  that  we  brought  her  with  us  from  Poland,  he 
laughed.  ''Oh !  if  she  is  a  Pole,  I  must  give  her  a  Polish 
greeting!"  With  these  words  he  entered  the  kitchen,  and 
almost  at  the  same  time  we  heard  a  shriek,  a  slap,  and  Anusia 
was  running  away  into  the  yard,  while  the  captain  was 
standing  at  the  kitchen  door,  holding  his  sides  and  laughing. 


298  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

When  he  was  able  to  catch  his  breath,  he  called,  ^'Come  back, 
little  shrew,  and  give  me  some  milk,  or  I'll  perish.  Don't 
you  see  how  thin  and  wan  I  am?  If  you  don't  get  that 
milk,  I  shall  die,  and  you  will  have  to  weep  on  my  grave." 

But  poor  Anusia  was  too  frightened  to  return.  My  son 
brought  the  milk  and  handed  it  to  the  captain,  who  retired 
with  it  to  another  room.  When  he  returned,  he  poured  out 
the  white  liquid  into  glasses  and  passed  them  ^ound. 
Scarcely  had  my  husband  lifted  the  glass  to  his  lips  when 
he  put  it  down,  coughing  and  holding  his  throat.  /'What 
is  this  frightful  stuff?"  he  asked ;  ''is  it  one  of  your  jokes?" 
Upon  that  Piotrowski  raised  his  eyes  to  the  ceiUng,  and  said, 
''0  God,  thou  hearest  and  dost  not  thunder!  If  my  wet- 
nurse,  whose  name  was  Krasicka,*  had  fed  me  with  such  milk 
I  would  not  have  been  weaned  even  until  to-day!"  This 
delightful  compound  proved  to  be  made  up  of  one  part  milk 
and  three  parts  brandy.  It  seems  that  his  physician  had 
prescribed  for  him  a  month  of  milk-cure,  and  that  was  the 
way  in  which  he  followed  the  doctor's  instructions. 

Born  of  a  noble  Polish  family,  the  captain  came  to  America 
in  the  early  forties.  His  prolonged  stay  in  different  parts 
of  this  country,  together  with  his  faithfulness  to  old  Polish 
traditions,  made  of  him  a  strange  combination  of  old-fash- 
ioned culture  and  modern  American  notions  of  politics  and 
business.  In  his  devotion  to  his  adopted  country  he  often 
would  use  Polish  phraseology  for  American  things,  and 
amongst  others  would  call  the  prominent  men  of  the 
United  States  "Nobles"  and  "Magnates."  In  his  native 
idiom  he  used  the  language  of  the  sixteenth  century  (the 
golden  era  of  Polish  literature)  ;  he  also  spoke  French  fluently, 
and  his  knowledge  of  English  was  perfect,  all  except  his 
pronunciation,  which  was  exceedingly  ludicrous.  He  would 
say  "vyter"  for  waiter,  "anoog"  for  enough,  and  "hoorh" 
for  church,  —  the  latter,  I  suppose,  because  the  sound  "ch" 

*  A  very  aristocratio  name  in  Poland. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  299 

in  Polish  is  pronounced  like  *'loch"  in  Scotch,  as  a  strong 
aspiration.  When  my  husband  remarked  that  his  words 
sounded  diflFerently  from  what  we  heard  around  us,  he 
replied:  ''I  tell  you  these  Anglo-Saxons  do  not  know  how 
to  pronounce  their  own  language.  It  should  be  pronounced 
as  it  is  written;  but  no;  they  twist  every  word,  they  push 
their  tbngues  forward  against  their  teeth  to  say  a  simple 
!thj'  aWd  that  is  the  reason  why  so  many  old  maids  have 
such  long,  protruding  teeth,  which  they  cannot  keep  behind 
their  lips.  It  is  all  nonsense ;  every  one  understands  me  in 
San  Francisco,  and  I  am  not  going  to  cripple  my  tongue 
or  disfigure  my  mouth  in  trying  to  imitate  the  deficiencies 
of  that  absurd  and  intolerable  pronunciation." 

When  we  met  him,  he  was  a  widower,  but  he  had  lived 
separated  from  his  wife  long  before  she  died.  He  spoke 
often  about  his  married  life,  and  we  learned  from  him  that 
his  wife  was  born  in  the  south  of  France. 

''Perhaps  you  are  not  aware,"  he  said  once,  ''that  the 
people  of  southern  France  are  fond  of  garlic.  Yes,  they  are ; 
but  how  could  I  have  known  that  the  pretty,  delicate  girl 
whom  I  took  for  my  wife  would  share  that  horrid  taste? 
When  I  courted  her  there  was  only  a  perfume  of  verveine 
floating  about  her ;  but  when,  on  our  wedding-tour,  I  entered 
one  day  our  private  dining  room  in  the  hotel,  0  Saints 
Peter  and  Paul !  the  smell  of  garlic  struck  my  nostrils  with 
a  club !  It  was  the  soup  A  Vailj  so  popular  in  Mar- 
seilles. I  did  not  say  anything  for  the  moment,  but  refused 
the  soup.  I  suffered  agonies  when  I  saw  that  pretty,  refined 
wife  of  mine  smacking  her  lips  after  each  spoonful,  for  I 
knew  I  had  to  avoid  contact  with  her  for  at  least  twenty- 
four  hours.  I  could  not  kiss  her  'good  night,'  and  that  was 
the  first  misunderstanding  between  us.  Then  came  an- 
other ;  I  was  very  fond  of  cheese,  and  she  detested  it.  Every 
time  she  ordered  garlic,  I  ordered  some  strong,  delicious 
cheese.     When  the  soup  came  on  the  table,  I  opened  doors 


300  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

and  windows  and  waited  outside  until  the  abominable  stuflF 
was  taken  away.  When  the  cheese  appeared  on  the  table, 
she  rose  from  her  seat  with  the  air  of  an  offended  queen 
and  walked  off,  leaving  me  chuckling  over  my  dessert. 
We  managed,  however,  to  live  a  few  years  together,  in  a  sort 
of  compromise,  but  when  the  Almighty  blessed  our  union 
with  a  little  daughter,  my  wife's  affections  concentrated 
entirely  upon  the  child,  and  the  garlic  appeared  daily  in  all 
forms  on  the  table.  It  was  an  open  war,  and  I,  who  had 
stood  bravely  in  the  ranks  against  the  Russian  army  in  1830, 
succumbed  in  this  domestic  battle  and,  like  a  miserable 
coward,  ran  away,  and  stopped  only  on  the  shores  of  this 
blessed  land  of  liberty.  And  yet,  when  a  few  years  after- 
wards I  heard  of  my  wife's  death,  I  shed  real  tears,  and 
went  to  France  to  make  provisions  for  the  future  of  my 
daughter.'' 

Notwithstanding  his  age,  the  old  gentleman  had  a  young 
heart,  and  liked  to  dwell  on  the  remembrances  of  his  love- 
affairs,  none  of  which  ended  happily;  ''for,  you  see,"  he 
said,  ''I  am  still  a  widower." 

The  captain's  visit  to  our  farm  did  not  pass  without  in- 
cidents: the  very  first  night  the  bed  broke  under  his 
colossal  frame.  We  did  not  hear  the  noise,  because,  having 
sat  up  very  late  that  night,  we  slept  very  soundly,  but  the 
captain  told  us  his  tale  of  woe  in  the  morning. 

''When  the  cardboard  bed  fell  to  pieces  under  me,  I 
thought  I  might  find  shelter  and  a  bale  of  hay  in  the  barn, 
with  the  boys.  I  took  my  pillow  and  blankets  and  went 
into  the  yard.  But  I  lost  my  way  in  the  dark  and  entered 
the  stable  instead.  The  horses,  frightened  probably  at  my 
bundle  of  bedding,  began  to  kick  and  neigh  ;  one  bronco  tore 
himself  off  and  rushed  out  into  the  open,  passing  so  close 
to  me  that  we  nearly  smashed  each  other  against  the  wall, 
and  when  at  last  I  reached  the  barn  and  opened  the  door, 
I  saw  by  the  dim  light  of  a  candle  our  young  men  sitting 


THE  NEW  WORLD  301 

on  their  couches  with  guns  pointed  at  me,  and  shouting, 
'Stop,  or  you  are  dead.'  They  said  it  in  good  English,  too. 
'You  Tartars,  you  barbarians,'  I  screamed,  'you  blood- 
thirsty heathens,  put  down  your  guns.'  They  obeyed 
quickly,  and  came  to  me.  'We  took  you  for  a  burglar 
or  a  horse  thief,'  said  Sienkiewicz,  laughing,  and  directly 
they  built  a  bed  of  hay  for  me,  for  I  refused  to  lie  down  on 
any  of- their  filigree  couches.  I  slept  well,  I  thank  you, 
but  feel  a  little  tired.  Anusia !  you  paradise  apple,  bring 
me  some  milk,  and  don't  fear ;  I  shall  not  kiss  you  this  time ; 
there  are  too  many  people  in  the  room.  I  will  catch  you 
when  no  one  is  by."  Anusia  brought  the  milk,  dropped 
a  courtesy,  and  said,  "You  never  shall  catch  me.  Captain, 
for  I  can  run  quicker  than  you."  "Do  you  see  this  saucy 
damsel?"  he  shouted  merrily;  "the  chicken  has  scarcely 
cut  through  the  shell  of  its  egg,  and  already  it  opens  its 
beak  from  ear  to  ear."  The  girl  left  the  room,  scarlet  with 
indignation,  which  increased  the  captain's  hilarity. 

One  afternoon  we  all  took  a  stroll  to  the  vineyard  for 
grapes.  After  having  filled  our  baskets,  we  noticed  that 
the  captain  was  not  with  us.  On  our  return,  and  when 
we  were  quite  near  the  house,  we  heard  his  voice  shouting, 
"Go  and  call  some  one  to  help  me  out  of  this."  "Something 
must  have  happened  to  him,"  said  Sienkiewicz,  hurriedly, 
and  ran  to  his  rescue.  The  others  followed,  and  I  also  started 
on  a  run  home.  Seeing  Anusia  in  the  yard,  I  asked  her 
what  had  happened.  "Oh,  nothing,"  she  replied,  grinning; 
"the  captain  took  a  bath,  that  is  all."  "A  bath — where  ?" 
But  Anusia  did  not  answer,  for  the  baby  began  to  cry.  "I 
must  see  to  the  baby,  Madame,"  and  she  left  me,  but  I  saw 
that  she  knew  more  about  it  than  she  would  say.  At  the 
same  time  I  perceived  the  poor  captain,  led  by  our  young 
men,  with  his  clothes  soaking  wet,  his  face  purple,  walking 
with  difficulty,  groaning  and  limping.  "He  fell  into  the 
irrigation  ditch,"  some  one  whispered;   "quick,  some  hot 


302  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

brandy ! ''  They  took  him  to  his  room,  took  off  his  wet 
clothes,  and  put  him  into  bed,  which  by  this  time  was  a  new, 
strong  one.  When  he  had  rested  awhile,  I  went  to  inquire 
how  he  felt,  and  then  he  told  us  the  whole  adventure  in  his 
quaint,  untranslatable  language. 

''I  was  very  thirsty  when  we  came  to  the  vineyard,  and 
not  wishing  to  disturb  the  company,  I  left  unnoticed,  in 
search  of  a  glass  of  water,  or  —  hm  —  never  mind.  what. 
I  thought  I  might  get  to  the  cottage  by  a  shorter  road  and 
took  a  bee-line.  When  I  was  at  a  sKort  distance,  I  saw 
Anusia  in  the  yard,  hanging  up  the  linen,  and  I  called  jok- 
ingly to  her,  'Now,  my  little  bird,  I  will  catch  you  and  kiss 
you!'  To  my  astonishment,  the  girl  did  not  run  away, 
but  called  back,  'Come,  come,  Captain,  kiss  me!'  The 
imp  knew  of  the  ditch  separating  us,  but  I  had  only  my 
foolish  fun  in  the  head,  and  the  girl  looked  quite  pretty. 
Besides,  I  could  not  see  the  ditch,  as  it  was  all  overgrown 
with  weeds.  I  clapped  my  hands  and  started  on  a  run, 
when  suddenly  —  O  Maria,  Joseph  !  shall  I  ever  forget  the 
sensation?  I  sank  plump  into  the  cold  water  up  to  my 
hips.  I  tried  to  get  out  of  the  ditch,  but  this  confounded 
soil  of  Anaheim  is  genuine  quicksand ;  the  more  vigorous 
were  my  efforts,  the  deeper  I  sank.  I  called  to  that  little 
demon  of  a  girl  to  help  me  or  to  call  some  one,  but  that 
incarnation  of  imbecility  only  laughed  more  and  more, 
while  I  was  sinking  lower  and  lower.  When  the  water 
reached  to  my  armpits,  I  gave  up  the  struggle.  Perish  will 
I,  and  my  fleas  with  me !  I  thought,  Ihd  then  I  asked  the 
Holy  Virgin  if  she  was  not  ashamed  to  let  me  die  this 
miserable  death.  The  cruelty  of  my  fate  brought  tears 
to  my  eyes,  and  I  hung  my  head  upon  my  breast,  when 
suddenly  I  heard  this  angel's  voice,"  pointing  to  Sienkiewicz. 
''I  raised  my  ej^es,  and  my  hopes  revived,  for  he  was  ex- 
tending his  hands  to  lift  me  up,  which,  however,  considering 
my  weight  and  his  slender  form,  was   almost   impossible. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  303 


Then  you  all  came  and  saved  me  from  that  ignominious 
death.     And  now,  my  good  Samaritans,  don't  you  think 

X  I  am  entitled  to  a  drink  of  my  milk?    That  water  sucked 

f  all  the  juice  out  of  me,  and  nature  calls  for  compensation." 

Such  was  the  man  who  may  have  given  to  Sienkiewicz 
the  suggestion  of  Zagloba  in  his  historical  trilogy  of 
"Fire  and  Sword,"  '^Deluge,"  and  ''Pan  Michal."     Having 

r  known' personally  the  captain,  and  having  read  Ihe  works 

of  my  great  countryman,  I  could  not  help  feeling  the  sin- 
cerest  admiration  for  the  genius  and  the  fertile  admiration 

I  of  the  writer  who,  taking  a  few  features  of  that  character, 

filled  them  in,  extended  them,  adapted  them  to  most 
numerous  and  various  situations  with  a  sense  of  artistic 
proportions,  and  thus  created  a  type  the  equal  of  which 
might  be  looked  for  only  in  Shakespeare  or  Cervantes. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 

It  was  late  in  November  when  the  captain  left  us,  after 
a  visit  of  one  or  two  weeks.  The  weather  became  cloudy 
and  windy  and  threw  everybody  into  a  gloomy  mood.  The 
desert  wind  coming  from  the  northeast^  and  locally  mis- 
named the  Santa  Ana  wind  (because  it  passes  through  the 
Santa  Ana  Caiion),  is  a  kind  of  sirocco.  Hot  and  dry  in 
summer,  its  breath  dries  up  the  plants,  gives  headaches  to 
people,  and  prostrates  them.  Furious  in  winter,  it  uproots 
trees,  tears  off  roofs,  and  devastates  fields. 

On  one  of  these  cloudy  days  we  were  all  seated  on  the 
porch,  exchanging  notes  upon  our  anticipations  of  ideal  life 
awaiting  us  in  sunny  California  and  the  realities  of  the 
present  day.  We  all  came  to  the  conclusion  that  our  farm- 
ing was  not  a  success.  Everything  seemed  to  be  a  sad 
failure.  We  had  several  cows,  but  there  was  no  one  to 
milk  them,  and  we  had  to  buy  milk,  butter,  and  cream  from 
the  neighbors.  We  had  chickens,  but  our  fine  dogs  made 
regular  meals  of  the  eggs.  We  had  a  vineyard,  which 
yielded  beautiful  muscat  grapes,  but  there  was  nobody 
to  buy  them,  and  often  people  would  come  and  fill  their 
wagons  with  them  without  more  ado ;  they  said  that  such 
was  the  custom  of  the  country.  We  were  too  courteous 
to  contradict  them,  and  smilingly  consented  to  be  robbed, 
respecting  the  practice.  The  hares  continued  to  be  diseased, 
and  our  winter  crop  of  barley  was  fast  disappearing  in  the 
mouths  of  the  neighboring  cattle,  although  I  tried  myself 
to  shoot  at  the  latter  with  my  revolver.  My  shooting  did 
not  even  scare  them;  they  did  not  seem  to  mind  it  at 
all,  except  one  little  calf,  which  got  frightened,  and  with  a 

304 


THE  NEW  WORLD  305 

treble  in  A  minor,  trotted  away,  seeking  a  refuge  between 
its  mother's  legs.  Some  of  these  mishaps  might  have 
occurred  even  to  experienced  farmers,  but  the  most  alarming 
feature  of  this  bucolic  fancy  was  the  rapid  disappearance 
of  cash  and  the  absolute  absence  of  even  a  shadow  of  income. 
This  latter  crude  reality  gave  the  final  blow  to  our  cherished 
bubble.  My  husband  had  already  spent  $15,000,  yet  he 
was  ready  to  sacrifice  the  last  penny  of  his  small  remai^i- 
ing  capital  to  keep  up  the  colony.  I  could  not  allow  that, 
and  disclosed  my  plan  of  going  to  San  Francisco  in  order 
to  study  English,  and  try  to  get  on  the  stage. 

This  project  was  received  with  acclamation,  for  they  all 
believed  that  I  would  succeed,  and  besides,  all  of  them  wanted 
a  change,  except  Sypniewski,  who  saw  the  difficulty  of 
moving  with  his  wife  and  children.  We  agreed,  however, 
that  for  the  present  he  and  his  family  might  live  on  a  farm 
which  my  husband  had  bought  in  the  summer,  and  if  we 
should  sell  that  farm,  or,  later,  if  my  dramatic  venture 
turned  out  a  success,  we  would  give  him  the  means  to  go 
back  to  Europe. 

In  the  first  days  of  January,  1877, 1  went  with  my  husband 
to  San  Francisco.  We  were  met  at  the  station  by  Captain 
Piotrowski  and  several  of  our  Polish  friends,  amongst  them 
good  old  Captain  Bielawski,  who  came  with  his  wife  to  offer 
us  the  hospitality  of  his  house  until  we  should  find  some 
suitable  lodgings. 

Next  morning  my  husband  returned  to  Anaheim  in  order 
to  sell  the  farm,  if  possible,  and  provide  for  the  return  home 
of  the  Sypniewskis.  He  would  soon  be  back  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  bring  my  son  with  him.  We  parted  in  good  spirits, 
for  he  left  me  in  care  of  kind  people,  our  good  friends. 

Captain  Bielawski  was  a  lovely  old  gentleman  with  a 
handsome  face,  clear  complexion,  and  snow-white  hair  and 
beard.  In  his  youth  he  had  served  in  the  Austrian  army, 
where  he  had  attained  the  position  of  Captain  of  Engineers, 


X 

"'~~ 

1 

4  i 

1 
1  ■ 

1 

i   i 

:  ii  h 

'  "f  £  i 

■   I 

*   9 

■    1 

s 

o 

'  a    ■&lt; 

41 

,,  g 


ji  s 


THE  NEW  WORLD  307 

and  had  done  valuable  work  in  building  fortifications.  But 
the  terrible  massacre  of  landowners  in  1846,  in  Austrian 
Poland,  instigated  by  Metternich,  excited  such  indignation 
in  his  heart  that  at  the  first  opportunity  he  left  the  military 
service  and  emigrated  to  America.  He  reached  California 
in  the  early  fifties  and,  thanks  to  his  knowledge  of  engineer- 
ing, easily  found  occupation  as  draughtsman  in  the  United 
States  Land  Office.  He  retained  the  latter  for  forty-five 
years,  and  was  generally  considered  as  a  pillar  of  that 
department  in  San  Francisco.  He  personally  surveyed 
most  of  the  old  Spanish  grants  in  California,  and  with  his 
splendid  memory  was  the  best  authority  to  be  consulted 
in  regard  to  land  titles.  His  experience  and  knowledge 
in  those  matters  was  rendered  the  more  valuable  on  account 
of  his  perfect  honesty.  It  would  have  been  easy  for  him 
to  accumulate  a  very  large  fortune,  but  he  was  exceed- 
ingly scrupulous,  and  never  availed  himself  of  the  oppor- 
tunities offered  by  his  official  position  for  his  private 
aggrandizement.  I  dwell  on  these  features  of  my  old 
friend  because  they  were  not  common  at  that  time.  In 
his  political  opinions  he  was  rather  a  radical,  a  Republican 
both  in  the  American  and  in  the  European  sense,  enemy 
of  all  the  monarchs,  and,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  equally  so  of  the 
Church,  quoting  Voltaire  and  IngersoU  and  shunning 
priests,  —  with  all  this,  kind-hearted,  generous  to  a  fault, 
very  stubborn  in  his  ideas,  and  very  devoted  to  his  friends. 
He  was  generally  respected  and  inspired  confidence  in  all 
who  knew  him.  It  was  an  original  and  curious  relation 
that  bound  him  to  his  friends.  Captain  Piotrowski  and  Dr. 
Pawlicki.  The  former  had  aristocratic  leanings  and  preju- 
dices, and  the  latter,  the  doctor,  was  a  staunch  Catholic. 
The  whole  time  they  were  of  different  opinions  and  were 
very  hot  in  their  discussions,  but  when  it  came  to  action, 
they  all  went  hand  in  hand.  They  all  three  were  the  soul 
of  honor  and  all  great  Polish  patriots. 


308  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Mrs.  Bielawska  was  an  Englishwoman  by  birth,  small, 
alert,  nervous,  neat  to  perfection,  and  always  active.  She 
possessed  a  very  tender  heart,  and  was  fond  of  rendering 
many  kind  services,  even  to  strangers.  Both  the  captain 
and  his  wife  were  very  hospitable,  and  I  was  not  the  only 
guest  in  their  house.  The  son  of  some  friends,  Johnny, 
a  boy  of  nineteen,  occupied  permanently  a  room  on  the  third 
floor.  I  learned  later  that  he  had  been  invited  to  stay  in 
the  house  till  the  end  of  his  studies.  I  actually  took  my 
first  lessons  in  English  from  that  boy.  At  every  meal  I 
asked  him  for  the  names  of  different  objects,  and  he  always 
gave  me  the  required  information  patiently  and  with  good 
humor. 

On  the  evenings  when  there  was  no  company  Johnny 
became  the  central  figure  of  our  small  circle,  for  he  knew 
a  number  of  funny  stories  and  many  jolly  songs,  to  which 
I  had  to  play  the  piano  accompaniment.  I  also  was  asked 
sometimes  to  sing,  but  I  knew  only  songs  with  Polish, 
French,  or  German  words,  which  were  well  received  by  our 
host,  familiar  with  those  languages,  but  not  much  relished 
by  his  wife,  who  spoke  and  understood  only  English,  and  not 
being  musical,  cared  more  for  the  meaning  of  the  words 
than  for  the  tune.  Realizing  my  failure  in  that  direction, 
I  determined  to  learn  some  American  songs,  and  I  began 
with  the  '^Suwanee  River.''  One  evening,  when  Mrs. 
Bielawska  had  gone  out,  I  learned  a  duet  with  Johnny,  as 
a  surprise  for  our  kind  hostess.  The  surprise  was  greatly 
enjoyed,  and  so  I  studied  some  more  of  the  trashy  but 
amusing  songs  of  the  day  to  please  the  dear  woman.  One 
of  them  was  her  great  favorite,  and  began  with  the  words, 
^^In  her  hair  she  wore  a  white  camellia.''  Johnny  corrected 
my  English  pronunciation,  and  I  made  a  hit. 

In  the  meantime  I  advertised  for  an  English  teacher,  and 
soon  afterwards  I  answered  the  bell  to  a  tall  young  lady 
who  consented  to  give  me  every  afternoon  one  hour  of  her 


4 


THE  NEW  WORLD  309 


U 


valuable  time."  For  about  two  weeks  I  was  taking  lessons 
from  her,  learning  a  great  many  words,  as  well  as  sentences, 
when  one  day  my  hostess,  wishing  to  talk  to  me,  entered 
my  room.  The  lesson  being  over,  the  teacher  was  ready 
to  go.  I  introduced  her  to  Mrs.  Bielawska,  and  the  two 
ladies  had  a  bit  of  conversation  between  them.  As  soon 
as  the  tall  young  person  of  ''the  valuable  time"  disap- 
peared behind  the  door,  my  young  hostess  said  to  me,  in 
an  alarming  tone  of  voice:  ''My  dear!  your  teacher  is  a 
German,  and  has  an  awful  accent.  Send  her  away,  for  you 
are  already  beginning  to  catch  her  horrible  pronunciation." 

I  was  gliid  to  be  able  to  understand  this  time  all  she 
said  to  me,  and  following  her  advice,  I  wrote  my  first 
English  letter  (revised  and  corrected  by  Mrs.  B.)  to  my 
teacher,  informing  her  that  I  should  not  require  her  tuition 
further. 

Captain  Piotrowski  came  quite  often  to  see  how  I  was 
getting  along  with  my  English,  and  when  I  told  him  of  the 
teacher,  he  said:  "My  dear  Madame  Helena,  you  don't 
need  any  professor.  Do  as  I  do  :  pronounce  the  words  just 
as  they  are  written,  as  you  would  pronounce  them  in  Polish. 
That's  the  only  reasonable  way  to  speak  English.  Don't 
you  spoil  the  sh^pe  of  your  mouth  or  harden  your  voice 
trj'ing  to  get  impossible  and  harsh  sounds.  And  above  all, 
do  not  try  to  pronounce  the  "th,"  as  they  do,  for  you'll 
never  get  it.  Plain  "t"  or  "d"  are  far  more  pleasant  to 
the  ear  than  their  lisping  "th,"  and,  besides,  let  me  tell  you 
this,  —  the  worse  they'll  think  your  accent,  the  better  they 
will  like  you.  Believe  your  true,  experienced  friend,  and 
remember  my  words."  These  words,  however,  instead 
of  encouraging  me,  made  me  despondent.  I  did  not  know 
what  to  make  of  them,  and  I  began  to  doubt  my  success. 
If  I  followed  the  captain's  advice,  I  would  become  a  sort 
of  freak,  to  be  laughed  at,  and  applauded  on  account  of  the 
ridicule.     What  would  become,  then,  of  my  artistic  ideals? 


3V0 


^^^RESSIOXS 


.„d  m  the  truth  of  kis  J^' '"  '  M^vrf 


"^SJl  eo&lt;.»«i    ~ -^d  to  the  traTk '?!,°""*™''  '&lt;"  I 


auv  r'  -  . *^   ana  in  me  truth  of  hi,  JT*  *  °«ueved 

in  V\is  sincerit^y    »»         .    .  ^n  oi  ins  statements     itT,  V^ 

T^as  brooding  ^t^' 'V    "*^  '"*»&lt;""'  ««!  and  don.:  ^^ 
^  ^*"-^L  .T,tcred  with  a  package  of  A.lJJT'^y'  ««. 


f, 


//? 


I  ;«»  brooding  oy^*^  " '°  "»y  «&gt;om,  sad  and  Soair.  \T' 

BkWVa  entered  with  a  package  of  dela&gt;tfrtSi  ^^ 

dressed  to    Anaheim  and  forwarded  to  4    SltV" 

New  Year's  greetings  from  Poland,  _ dear  letter  frj/''* 

f amdy  and   friends,  fiUed  with  heartfelt  wishes  anrf^  T 

Ar.'-'ro  of  seeing  us  back  in  our  old  home  again.     B    h 

asked  him  for  cASP  letters  from  society  people,  literary  m^' 

gave  me  the  required  .  ^'^^^  ^^°^  our  eminent  patriot  aS 
humor.  ** 

On  the  evenings  when  there''***^y  messages  the  teara  rolled 
became  the  central  figure  of  our  sm'-'^  *"  "^  ^^  Po^er  noj 
I  rj^""  ?^  ^"u""^  «*«"««  -nd  ma?;io?'  homesickn^.    :S?* 

French,  or  Germaf 'worl      ^7  °"^^  «««g8  w.""-^  ^'* 

host,  familiar  wTh  tlose  Jan^^  "''!  ^^"  ^ceT^^d'  ""^^^''^ 
by  his  wife,  who  SDok^^L     ^*^^«'  but  not  much  r^^  '^'^^ 

being  musical.7a'r:i'rore"?o';7^^  °"'^-  ^S,  "d"  ^"*  1 
ban  for  the  tune.     Rea^^l '  t  f  ^'"'"^  "^  the  worJT''' 


'^SS 


.„,  ,"'«  -„„  ,'!""••  „  ..l^fcr-neiation,  and  I  Cde  a  U,    "^  '*"*'='«' 

It-  ever.  arterJ:,:  rj  ^Jg 


"It  / 


o 


! 


i 


) 


THE  NEW  WORLD  311 


(( 


We  sleep  all  three  in  the  only  room  of  our  shanty. 
Last  night  the  Santa  Ana  wind  tore  off  the  roof  of  our  palace. 
We  had  to  get  up  and  put  it  on  again,  and  then  passed  a  rope 
over  it,  and  winding  the  two  ends  around  our  wrists  we 
succeeded  in  holding  it  in  place  until  daylight,  when  the 
wind  subsided.  We  go  every  day  to  see  Pleasants  and  his 
wife,  whom  I  am  teaching  French.  She  is  very  nice  and 
refined  by  nature,  etc." 

Later  on  he  wrote:  '^I  am  coming  soon  with  Dolcio,^ 
whom  I  will  leave  with  you,  for  I  shall  have  to  go  back  to 
Anaheim,  or  at  least  stay  somewhere  in  the  neighborhood, 
on  account  of  the  farm,  which  must  be  sold,  and  also  be- 
cause Sypniewski  may  feel  quite  deserted  since  Litwos 
(Sienkiewicz)  also  left  for  the  north,  where  he  will  live  with 
Piotrowski's  friend.  It  is  awfully  hot  here  now.  Yester- 
day we  spent  the  noon  hours  sitting  in  the  cool  creek  and 
frightening  the  water-snakes.  Rattlers  also  are  very  nu- 
merous at  present,  and  we  have  to  be  very  careful.  We 
kill  them  with  stones  or  guns.  Notwithstanding  these 
inconveniences,  this  canon  is  the  most  beautiful  spot  on 
earth.''  '^We  have  a  neighbor,"  he  wrote  another  day, 
''a  burly  Russian  with  a  shaggy  beard  all  over  his  face;  a 
tall,  muscular  fellow,  who  changed  his  name  for  some  reason 
or  other,  and  who  calls  himself  Williams.  He  lives  in  the 
upper  canon,  about  half  a  mile  above  us,  where  he  built 
a  log  cabin  with  his  own  hands.  He  came  to  see  us,  and  we 
returned  his  call.  He  showed  us  the  tracks  of  a  grizzly 
bear,  for  which  he  has  been  patiently  waiting  ever  since  he 
came  to  this  wilderness.  He  has  also  a  magnificent  skin 
of  a  mountain  lion  he  killed  near  his  house,  and  a  great 
many  skins  of  wildcats,  etc." 

In  one  of  his  letters  my  husband  at  last  announced  his 
and  my  son's  arrival,  to  my  great  joy  and  relief,  for  I 
trembled  lest  some  accident  happen  in  this  wilderness. 

^  Polish  diminutive  for  Rudolphe. 


312  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  left  the  hospitable  roof  of  the  dear  people  with  whom 
I  had  been  living  more  than  a  month,  and  moved  to  a  small 
but  neat  apartment  on  O'Farrell  Street,  where  I  welcomed 
my  two  squatters,  who  looked  very  healthy,  but  brown  as 
Indians.  We  spent  the  six  weeks  of  my  husband's  stay  in 
San  Francisco  in  getting  acquainted  with  the  different 
Polish  families  residing  there.  All  those  good  people  had 
been  wandering  across  the  whole  width  of  the  American 
continent  until  they  came  to  the  Golden  City,  where  they 
remained,  because  they  could  not  go  farther.  Had  they 
not  been  stopped  by  the  Pacific  Ocean,  they  would  have 
been  still  going  on  farther  west,  far  away  from  despotism, 
and  in  quest  of  freedom,  peace,  and  happiness.  The  finest 
and  best  element  of  Polish  emigration  in  America  was 
represented  by  these  few  families.  Next  to  Captain  Bie- 
lawski  there  was  old  Mr.  Bednawski,  of  the  same  age  or  older 
even  than  the  former,  an  old  soldier  of  the  Polish  Insurrec- 
tion of  1830-1831.  For  some  time  after  that  he  was  exiled 
to  the  Caucasian  Mountains,  and  later  on  went  to  France, 
where  he  served  in  the  army.  He  was  a  pensioner  of  the 
French  government  for  his  military  services.  In  spite  of 
his  advanced  years,  he  was  polished  and  poetic,  and  a  great 
admirer  of  pretty  women.  Though  he  could  not  see  them 
well,  on  account  of  his  weak  eyes,  he  pretended  the  con- 
trary, and  went  into  ecstasies  over  every  well-dressed 
woman  he  met  in  the  street.  Beauty  in  every  shape  ap- 
pealed to  him,  and  when  he  spoke  of  nature  or  of  women, 
his  face  became  so  radiant,  and  the  language  he  used  to 
describe  their  charms  was  so  expressive,  that  it  was  a  real 
pleasure  to  listen  to  him.  He  had  a  little  weakness;  he 
did  not  like  to  acknowledge  that  he  was  getting  pretty  well 
advanced  in  years.  He  never  confessed  in  what  year  he 
was  born,  and  we  could  only  judge  of  his  age  by  the  episodes 
which  he  related  to  us,  of  which  he  was  a  contemporary. 
Anyhow,   among  his   acquaintances  he   passed   for   being 


THE  NEW  WORLD  313 

ninety-nine.  All  together  he  was  a  fine  old  gentleman,  and 
proved  a  true  friend  to  me  during  the  trying  months  of 
my  preparation  for  the  American  stage. 

To  finish  with  the  oldest  generation,  there  was  yet  an- 
other veteran  of  1830,  old  Captain  Wojciechowski,  called 
usually  Captain  Francis,  an  old  companion  of  Piotrowski. 
It  was  at  his  place  that  Sienkiewicz  took  up  his  abode  when 
he  left  Anaheim.  I  did  not  know  him  so  well,  but  he  was 
spoken  of  very  highly,  and  they  say  that  Sienkiewicz  re- 
produced some  of  the  features  of  his  personality  in  another 
great  character  in  his  ''Fire  and  Sword,"  the  wonderful 
and  heroic  ''Podbipienta,"  for  like  him  he  was  more  than 
commonly  tall,  very  thin,  and  reserved  by  disposition. 
I  heard  Sienkiewicz  say  that  when  once  he  walked  between 
Captain  Piotrowski  and  his  friend,  he  was  much  amused 
by  their  respective  shadows  on  the  white,  sandy  road. 
The  contrast  of  his  own  medium  figure  next  to  those  of  his 
giant  companions  was  so  striking  that  he  thought  he  would 
make  a  description  of  himself  with  his  huge  friends  in  a 
letter  to  his  Polish  newspaper.  He  changed  his  mind, 
however,  but  a  few  years  later  memory  brought  them  back 
to  him.  He  utilized  their  outward  characteristics  as  well 
as  his  own,  and  created  three  incomparable  types,  ''Zag- 
loba,"  "Podbipienta,"  and  "Pan  Michal.'' 

About  ten  years  younger,  but  closely  connected  with  the 
former  gentlemen  by  friendship,  was  Dr.  Pawlicki.  He 
was  not  a  relic  of  the  past,  like  the  others  mentioned  before, 
and  although  older  than  my  husband  and  I,  he  was  more 
familiar  with  modern  Poland  and  its  troubles,  which  we  had 
witnessed  ourselves.  A  staunch  patriot  of  the  finest  type, 
an  ardent  and  practical  Catholic,  he  took  a  very  lively 
interest  in  everything  which  happened  in  our  country.  In 
former  years  he  had  been  a  surgeon  in  the  Russian  navy, 
but  had  left  the  service  during  the  insurrection  of  1863, 
the  same  in  which  my  husband  had  taken  an  active  part, 


314  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

and  had  come  to  San  Francisco,  where  he  married  and 
remained  ever  since. 

There  were  several  others,  most  of  them  interesting.  In 
order  not  to  make  my  picture-gallery  too  long,  I  will  men- 
tion only  Mr.  Julian  de  Horain,  General  Kryzanowski,  and 
Captain  Lessen.  The  latter  had  fought  in  1848  under 
Kossuth,  in  the  Hungarian  revolution,  while  the  General 
had  gained  his  military  title  in  the  American  Civil  War, 
where  he  had  rendered  distinguished  services  according 
to  Carl  Schurz,  who  mentions  him  very  favorably  in  his 
Memoirs  and  under  whom  he  served.  The  General  took 
a  more  lively  interest  than  any  other  of  my  Polish  friends 
in  my  future  dramatic  career  in  this  country  —  at  least 
he  was  better  acquainted  with  theatrical  people  and  things, 
and  together  with  his  friend,  Governor  Salomon,  was  later 
very  active  in  my  behalf.  As  to  Mr.  Horain,  he  had  come 
to  California  only  a  short  time  before  us,  and  it  was  in  part 
due  to  his  letters,  published  in  Polish  newspapers,  that  we 
were  first  tempted  to  come  to  California.  He  was  one  of 
our  better  humorists,  of  a  rather  sarcastic  turn  of  mind, 
but  full  of  spirit  and  of  fun.  He  was  called,  among  our 
American  friends,  ''Mr.  I  lofe  you,"  because  these  were  the 
only  English  words  he  knew,  and  he  used  to  tease  young 
girls  by  greeting  them  with  a  low  bow  and  the  words 
''I  love  you,''  but  which  he  pronounced,  ''I  lofe  you," 
chuckling  over  the  embarrassment  of  the  girls.  He  had 
a  French  wife,  delicate,  modest,  retiring,  who  gave  him  five 
children. 


» •  k 


CHAPTER  XXXVII 

Ever  since  I  dismissed  my  German  teacher  of  English  I 
had  looked  for  the  real  article,  but  without  success.  At 
last  I  found  a  girl  who  was  a  genuine  godsend  to  me. 

One  day,  despondent  and  almost  giving  up  all  hope  of 
learning  English  properly,  I  was  leaning  out  of  the  window, 
when  I  saw  a  graceful,  girlish  figure  coming  out  of  the  door 
of  our  house.  As  she  passed  under  my  window,  she  raised 
her  head,  looked  straight  in  my  face,  and  smiled.  Her 
pretty  face,  of  Oriental  type,  her  dark,  splendid  eyes  and 
dazzling  teeth,  won  me  at  once  and  I  smiled  back.  She 
went  on,  and  I  watched  her  quick  steps  and  her  elegant, 
diminutive  form  until  she  disappeared  in  a  house  oh  the 
same  side  of  the  street.  *'We  are  neighbors,"  I  thought, 
and  when  we  went  downstairs  to  our  lunch,  I  asked  Mrs..H., 
the  landlady,  who  that  pretty  person  was  who  had  visited 
the  house  in  the  morning.  ''Oh,  that  was  our  dear  Jo," 
answered  Mrs.  H.  "Jo?  a  funny  name  for  a  young  lady," 
remarked  my  husband.  ''Her  name  is  Joanna  or  Jose- 
phine, I  do  not  exactly  know  which,  but  we  all  call  her  Jo ; 
her  other  name  is  Tuholsky."  "That  sounds  Polish,"  we 
both  exclaimed.  "Well,  I  think  her  father  came  from 
Poland,  and,  by  the  way,  she  is  very  anxious  to  meet  you." 
We  arranged  a  meeting  for  the  very  next  day. 

The  moment  she  entered  the  room  I  knew  that  I  had 
found  a  friend.  We  chatted  merrily  in  three  languages, 
—  French,  German  and  English,  —  for,  though  she  was  born 
in  Poland,  she  was  only  four  years  old  when  her  parents 
brought  her  to  America,  and  consequently  she  did  not  speak 
a  word  of  Polish.      She  showed  me  so  much  sympathy  that 

315 


316  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  did  not  hesitate  to  tell  her  of  my  great  difficulty  in  finding 
a  good  English  teacher,  and  even  asked  her  if  she  knew 
of  some  one  she  could  recommend  to  me.  What  was  my 
amazement  and  joy  when  she  told  me  that  she  was  willing 
to  teach  me. 

''I  speak  good  English,  and  I  know  I  can  help  you, 
but  it  will  be  a  work  of  love,  for,  not  being  a  professional 
teacher,  I  cannot  take  money  for  my  instruction.''  I  tried 
to  persuade  her  that  she  ought  to  be  remunerated  for  her 
pains,  because  she  would  have  hard  work  to  teach  me,  but 
she  absolutely  refused,  and  put  all  money  matters  out  of 
question.  ''I  could  not  do  it  for  money,"  she  repeated, 
and  there  was  nothing  left  to  me  but  either  to  lose  this 
excellent  opportunity  or  to  accept  her  friendly  offer. 

I  was  a  little  afraid  that  my  amateur  teacher  might  be 
irregular  in  her  lessons,  but  I  wronged  her.  She  came  every 
morning  at  the  same  hour,  and  when  my  husband  returned 
to  Anaheim  she  positively  stayed  with  me  from  eight  in 
the  morning  until  the  evening,  taking  only  a  little  time  for 
meals.  Very  often  she  even  remained  during  the  evenings, 
and  we  took  walks  or  went  to  the  theatres  together,  and 
all  that  time  she  compelled  me  to  speak  English  by  not 
answering  my  German  or  French  questions  until  I  trans- 
lated them  into  English. 

My  husband  had  remained  six  weeks  with  me  this  time, 
but  he  was  obliged  to  return  south.  He  left  with  me  my 
son,  Rudolphe,  who  became  at  once  my  fellow-student. 
He  then  changed,  with  our  approval,  his  name  to  that  of 
Ralph,  because,  he  said,  Americans  do  not  like  long  foreign 
names.  Besides,  we  thought  the  names  were  really  one. 
My  boy  also  was  a  diligent  pupil,  and  we  both  began  to  learn 
English  with  an  energy  verging  on  frenzy.  There  was  not 
an  hour  of  time  lost;  every  minute  was  turned  to  profit. 
Of  course  he,  being  so  much  younger,  learned  much  more 
quickly  than  I  and  could  talk  fluently  long  before  I  was 


THE  NEW  WORLD  317 

able  to  put  a  few  sentences  together.  He  made  such  rapid 
progress  that  in  March  he  wrote  a  farce  in  English,  which 
was  performed  at  Governor  Salomon's  house  by  the  latter's 
sons  and  himself.  We  had  met  the  governor  during  our 
first  stay  in  San  Francisco,  and  he  took  a  great  interest  in 
my  prospective  d^but. 

My  American  friends  were  very  encouraging,  and  called 
me  a  wonder  as  soon  as  I  managed  to  say  a  few  simple 
things  correctly  and  succeeded  in  getting  the  right  sound 
of  'Hh,"  which  feat,  on  the  other  part,  excited  the  derision 
of  Captain  Piotrowski,  who  scorned  supremely  my  capacity 
for  imitating  that  particular  sound,  saying  that  parrots  could 
do  the  same,  but  he  would  prefer  me  to  remain  original:  ''I 
would  not  object  so  much  if  it  were  pretty,  but  that  lisping 
sound  is  simply  awful !"  Yet  I  got  the  lisping  sound,  which  . 
he  predicted  I  never  could,  and  I  got  many  other  sounds  ; 
besides,  and  it  was  all  due  to  my  dear  Jo  and  her  constant 
watching  over  my  enunciation.  At  the  very  first  lesson 
I  insisted  upon  reading  ^^Adrienne  Lecouvreur."  We  took 
every  day  a  page  or  two.  After  getting  a  more  or  less  right 
pronunciation  of  the  words,  I  memorized  the  whole  part, 
and  recited  it  over  and  over  before  my  patient  teacher,  who 
corrected  every  wrong  pronunciation  and  accentuation. 
In  the  same  manner  I  learned  also  Juliet  and  Cleopatra. 
I  also  memorized  every  day  about  a  hundred  new  words 
and  wrote  pages  of  exercises. 

It  was  not  only  that  Jo  watched  over  my  accent,  she  also 
inspired  me  with  hope  and  encouraged  me  sincerely,  pre- 
dicting success.  Every  now  and  then  I  would  have  my 
moments  of  doubt,  but  she  was  there,  never  allowing  my 
head  to  droop  or  letting  me  be  lost  in  sad  contemplation 
of  the  future.  '^You  must  succeed,  and  you  will!''  she 
repeated  constantly,  and  as  these  words  were  the  echo  of 
my  wishes,  they  cheered  me  up  for  a  while ;  yet  there  always 
remained  the  despondent  query,  buried  in  some  recess  of  my 


318  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

brain :  ''If  I  do  not  succeed,  what  then ?"  I  often  liked  to 
go  with  Ralph  and  Jo  to  Oakland  for  the  sake  of  the  ferry 
trip.  That  fatal  ''What  then?''  came  to  my  mind  every 
time  I  leaned  over  the  railing  of  the  boat,  looking  down  at  the 
water,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  answer  to  that  question 
was  only  to  be  found  in  the  green  depths  of  the  bay.  But 
Jo  was  there,  diverting  my  mind  with  her  original  remarks, 
and  my  gloom  took  flight  before  her  witty  sayings  and  her 
radiant  countenance. 

While  I  studied  Juliet,  I  became  more  hopeful.  I  believe 
that  the  mere  repeating  of  the  part  in  Shakespeare's  beautiful 
language  made  me  happy,  and  happiness  spread  over  me 
a  glow  of  hope.  I  could  not  well  analyze  my  feelings,  but 
I  was  aware  that  neither  fear  nor  apprehension  tortured 
me  any  more,  and  that  my  mind  was  gradually  returning 
to  its  normal  state. 

Among  the  many  letters  I  had  received  from  Poland 
there  was  one,  much  delayed,  from  a  friend  of  mine  in  War- 
saw, Madame  Leo,  the  wife  of  Edward  Leo,  the  managing 
editor  of  Gazeta  Polska,  the  paper  of  which  Sienkiewicz 
was  a  correspondent,  and  in  which  were  published  his 
"Charcoal  Sketches."  Madame  Leo's  letter  was  simply 
an  urgent  appeal  to  us  to  return  to  Poland,  combined  with 
a  sound  scolding  for  remaining  buried  in  the  wilderness,  or 
what  was  worse,  in  an  obscure  village.  (She  thought  I  was 
still  in  Anaheim.)  I  had  not  answered  immediately,  because 
the  uncertainty  of  my  projects  was  too  great  at  the  time, 
but  now,  about  this  time,  as  my  hopes  were  reenforced  by 
successful  study,  I  wrote  my  old  friend  Madame  Leo  the 
following  letter,  which  wa3  returned  to  me  at  my  request, 
when  I  first  conceived  the  idea  of  writing  my  reminiscences : — 

San  Francisco,  March  15,  1877. 
"Dear  Madame  Stephanie:  — 

"How  shall  I  thank  you  for  your  remembrance  and  your  scold- 
ing?   Well,  I  will  not  thank  at  all,  because  written  words  often 


THE  NEW  WORLD  319 

look  conventional,  and  I  do  not  want  to  be  conventional  with  you. 
I  broke  the  wafer  ^  with  only  the  nearest  ones  to  my  heart,  because 
your  letter  did  not  find  me  in  Anaheim,  but  in  this  city,  where  I 
have  been  for  two  months  together  with  Charles  and  Dolcio.  The 
rest  of  our  colony  remained  in  the  south,  except  Litwos,  whom,  I 
believe,  you  will  soon  see  again,  as  he  does  not  intend  to  remain 
here  longer. 

.  .  .  "You  must  not  think  that  we  left  the  farm  because  I  was 
tired  of  Nature,  which  I  still  love  and  admire  ardently.  She  is  the 
only  rival  of  Art  in  my  mind.  When,  as  it  happened  not  long  ago, 
I  am  on  the  ocean.  Art  disappears  somewhere  behind  a  veil  of  mist, 
and  my  soul,  free  from  fetters,  sinks  into  the  infinite  and  floating 
atK)ve  earth  has  no  other  desire  but  to  remain  thus  forever  and 
ever.  These  are  delights  you  cannot  realize,  accustomed  as  you 
are  to  pavements  resounding  with  the  noise  of  horses'  hoofs  and 
rolling  carriages,  and  therefore  I  was  not  surprised  when  I  read  in 
your  letter  that  you  did  not  beUeve  in  my  enthusiasm.  You  also 
wrote  me  that  such  a  life  is  no  life  at  all,  that  our  idyl  may  be 
amusing  only  for  a  short  while.  You  might  have  been  right  if  the 
idyl  had  been  only  amusement,  but  I  assure  you  that  my  occupa- 
tions were  not  aU  of  the  diverting  sort  and  might  have  become 
insufferable  had  I  not  been  able  to  breathe  this  glorious  air  of 
California,  or  look  at  the  blue  mountains  and  send  them  my  greet- 
ing every  morning  and  evening.  When  I  wrote  to  you  about 
these  charms  of  nature,  I  did  not  go  into  raptures  over  our  cheese 
and  butter,  I  did  not  glorify  the  noble  occupations  of  a  cook,  I 
simply  made  'bonne  mine  k  mauvais  jeu,'  and  laughed  at  myself 
to  prevent  others  from  laughing  at  me. 

"At  present  I  do  not  perform  any  domestic  duty,  but  I  am 
hard  at  work,  studjdng.  That  was  my  secret  plan,  at  the  very 
beginning  of  our  venture.  Country  life  was  simply  to  restore  my 
health  and  strength,  which  it  did  so  effectively  that  people  give  me 
twenty-four  or  twenty-six  years  of  age,  not  more ;  and  yet  I  wrote 
to  the  management  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre,  asking  for  a  prolonga- 
tion of  my  leave  of  absence,  on  the  plea  of  poor  health.  Do  not 
betray  me,  pray,  but  listen:  I  study,  but  what?  You  surely 
guess  I  Next  autumn  I  want  to  ask  the  president  *  what  he  pre- 
fers, either  6000  roubles  for  breaking  my  contract,  or  my  return 

^  There  is  an  ancient  Polish  custom  of  breaking  bread,  in  shape  of 
wafers,  on  Xmas  eve.    People  send  such  wafers  to  absent  friends  by  mail. 

^Mr.  Serge  de  Mouchanoff,  president  of  the  Imperial  Theatre,  in 
Warsaw. 


320  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

in  two  years  with  fame.  The  truth  is,  that  if  I  wanted  to  return 
now  I  could  not  do  so.  All  the  money  my  husband  brought  from 
Europe  was  swallowed  up  by  the  costs  of  our  travels  and  of  our 
ranching  and  the  purchase  of  a  farm,  which  is  now  managed  by 
S3rpniewski.  I  do  not  wish  Charles  to  make  further  sacrifices,  and 
I  believe  I  can  in  a  short  time  square  up  everything  by  making 
money  enough  to  send  the  colony  back  to  the  country,  for  they  are 
all  homesick.  Of  course  Litwos  is  independent,  for  he  writes,  and 
is  well  paid  for  his  work,  —  your  husband  takes  good  care  of  that,  — 
and  Paprocki  might  secure  a  position  as  a  cartoonist,  that  is,  if  he 
spoke  English;  but  in  the  meantime  both  he  and  the  Sypniewskis 
have  no  other  resources  but  farming,  which  cannot  and  does  not 
bring  any  income. 

''Besides  these  material  reasons,  there  is  another,  of  more  im- 
portance to  me  than  an3rthing  else.  Call  it  vanity,  if  you  like; 
I  prefer  to  call  it  pride  or  ambition.  Some  people  in  Poland  know 
of  my  intention  of  appearing  on  the  English-speakmg  stage,  and 
I  hear  they  already  predict  my  failure.  If  I  returned  now,  without 
even  one  small  leaf  of  laurels  gathered  here  or  in  England,  they 
certainly  would  look  upon  me  as  a  bird  with  broken  wings,  and 
treat  me  accordingly.  They  would  condole  with  me  and  patron- 
ize me.  Horror !  Can  you  imagine  anything  more  awful  than 
that  ?  No,  dear  friend,  I  must  try  to  rise.  If  I  fail,  you  will  never 
see  me  any  more;  but  if  I  succeed,  nothing  will  prevent  me  from 
flying  back  to  Warsaw,  and  then  I  will  stop  at  the  Green  Square,^ 
climb  up  the  two  flights,  open  the  door,  and  cry:  'Good  morning, 
my  friends,  how  do  you  do  ? '  Am  I  right,  or  am  I  wrong  ?  In 
my  present  situation  I  am  guided  simply  by  instinct.  And  then 
something  whispers  to  me,  that  my  staying  away  for  some  time  will 
not  hurt  my  standing  with  the  critics  and  the  public  of  Warsaw. 
They  were  beginning  to  get  tired  of  me.  Had  I  remained,  they 
soon  would  have  called  me  old  and  pass^e,  but  when  I  retiun,  and 
return  with  new  success,  they  will  receive  me  with  open  arms ! 
Everybody  will  find  me  yoimger  and  more  attractive,  because  I 
shall  bring  with  me  fame  from  abroad  to  exalt  my  position.  Some- 
body said,  'Une  duchesse  a  toujours  dix-huit  ans  pour  un  bour- 
geois.' *  I  left  Poland  as  the  leading  lady  of  the  Warsaw  Theatre; 
I  will  return  as  an  acknowledged  star  of  foreign  stages. 

"There  is  only  one  thing  which  troubles  me.  Will  my  pro- 
ceeding with  the  Warsaw  management  be  strictly  honest  ?    For, 

*  The  place  of  residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Edward  Leo  in  Warsaw. 

*  "A  (rndtiess  is  always  young  in  the  eyes  of  a  oonunoner." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  321 

though  I  intend  to  pay  the  forfeit,  and  though  I  do  not  take  a  penny 
of  salary  during  my  absence,  yet  I  am  afraid  that  what  I  am  doing 
is  not  quite  fair.  Pray  tell  me  what  you  and  Mr.  Edward  think 
of  it,  and  please  be  candid,  sincere.    Give  me  your  opinion  without 


reserve,  without  any  regard  for  my  sensitiveness;  but  above  all, 
do  not  tell  any  one  of  my  hopes,  for  I  want  to  surprise  my  little 
world. 

"Just  imagine  how  happy  we  shall  be  together,  after  our  return, 
sitting  in  your  library  before  the  fireplace,  in  the  circle  of  a  few 
select  spirits.     How  I  long  sometimes  for  a  glimpse  of  Warsaw, 


322  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

and  yet  I  would  not  return  now  for  the  world !  "nme  will  come 
when  nothing  will  keep  us  here,  but  at  present  my  soul  is  snorting 
yet,  though  my  body  has  recovered  its  normal  health.     I  need 


i'AodifFriipA  bv  JTrAcrm,  Bamillm,  Out. 
E.   A.   SOTHBBN. 


more  strength  of  mind,  and  that  strength  I  will  find  in  my  present 


"Pray  forgive  this  selfish  letter,  but  you  wished  to  know  all 
about  me,  and  so  you  get  this  long  scribble  filled  with  nothing  but 
wretched  'Me.'  Do  write  soon,  and  in  turn  do  tell  me  every^ing 
about  you  and  yours.     Charles  sends  greetings  to  both  of  you  and 


THE  NEW  WORLD  323 

kisses  the  pretty  bands  of  Madame  Stephanie.  How  are  the 
children?  Do  write  soon;  I  embrace  you,  sendii^  a  thousand 
good  wishes  for  yourself  and  your  dear  husband. 

"Helena." 

I  went  several  times  to  the  theatre  during  that  time. 
I  saw  and  admired  Mrs.  Drew  in  "School  for  Scandal" 
and  Mr.  Sothern  in  "Lord 
Dundreary";  also  Charles 
Coghlan  and  Adelaide  Neil- 
son,  each  of  the  latter  in 
three  different  parts.  I 
thought  Coghlan  a  most 
exquisite  actor.  His  parts 
in  the  "Lady  of  Lyons" 
and  "Money"  were  played 
with  a  finish  rarely  seen  on 
any  but  the  French  stage, 
while  his  lago  in  "Othello" 
was  surely  the  best  I  ever 
have  seen  before  or  since. 
To  begin  with,  he  looked 
what  Othello  calls  him,  the 
"honest  lago";  in  his  bluff, 
soldierly  appearance  there 
was  no  trace  of  the  stage 

villain,  no  cringing  poses,  pkamenphbvSarany. 

nothing  that  might  betray  Ceahlbs  Coqblan. 

him     to     Othello,     whom 

Shakespeare  certainly  does  not  make  an  idiot,  and  who  would 
not  have  been  deceived  by  a  man  with  a  Judas-like  appear- 
ance. His  honest  countenance  makes  his  villainy  the  worse. 
Ill  Coghlan'a  personation  the  coarse,  vulgar  nature,  combined 
with  the  cunning  of  an  Italian  peasant,  was  made  visible 
to  the  audience  by  his  cynical  smile,  behind  Othello's  back, 
the  twinkle  of  his  eye,  and  numerous  other  subtle  touches 


324  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

of  his  inner  base  nature, which  were  always  concealed  before 
the  Moor.  The  general  appearance  gave  the  impression  of 
a  strong,  brutal  soldier,  who  would  drink  and  sing  and 
treat  the  villainous  plot  against  his  master  more  as  a  cruel 
joke  than  as  a  crime.  With  all  the  inborn  envy  and  hatred 
of  a  low  nature  towards  his  superior,  he  chuckled  over  his 
tricks,  and  it  was  not  done  with  grimness,  but  rather  with 
the  enjoyment  of  a  callous  temperament  over  the  tortures  of 
a  man  whom,  in  spite  of  Othello's  distinction,  he  despised 
for  his  race  and  color,  and  considered  as  belonging  to  a  lower 
grade  of  mankind.  The  dagger  is,  or  at  least  was,  so  gener- 
ally used  in  Italy  that  its  use  does  not  necessarily  suggest 
refined  villainy,  but  rather  brutality  and  rage. 

Adelaide  Neilson  was  beautiful  and  perfect  in  the  "Hunch- 
back." She  was  emotional,  sincere,  and  her  beauty  was 
radiant.  I  always  remember  the  incomparable  pathos  of 
her  voice  in  her  appeal  to  her  lover :  '^  I  call  you  Cliflford,  and 
you  call  me  Madame !"  There  w^as  such  a  true  ring  in  this 
short  sentence  that  it  thrilled  me  through  and  through. 
I  did  not  like  the  play,  but  I  was  fascinated  by  Neilson's 
acting.  The  effect  of  the  balcony  scene  in  her  Juliet  was 
spoiled  to  some  degree  by  a  coarse  interruption  of  the  gallery 
boys,  who  sent  her  loud  kisses,  which  seemed  to  annoy  her 
greatly;  but  I  think  the  boys  could  not  help  themselves, 
when  they  saw  that  beautiful  vision,  flooded  with  moonlight, 
brought  nearer  to  their  view  by  the  elevation  of  the  balcony. 
On  account  of  these  interruptions,  I  could  not  well  judge  of 
her  acting  in  that  scene,  but  her  impulse  of  throwing  flowers 
at  Romeo  at  the  end  was  spontaneous,  and  brought  the  house 
down. 

I  have  only  one  criticism  to  make  of  this  performance. 
I  did  not  like,  in  the  first  act,  her  kissing  her  hand  on  the 
same  spot  where  Romeo  kissed  it  before,  because  this 
particular  stage  business  was  unnecessarily  borrowed  from 
a  modern  French  play,  where  it  was  in  its  proper  place. 


AsELiiDE  Neuron. 


326  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  would  not  have  mentioned  this  slight  deviation  from  the 
true  poetic  spirit  with  which  her  part  was  impregnated  all 
through,  were  it  not  that  I  saw  later  some  younger  actresses 
imitating  from  hearsay  just  this  action,  while  they  entirely 
failed  to  follow  Neilson's  footsteps  in  her  great  qualities,  — 
her  intensity  and  her  identification  with  the  characters 
personified.  She  did  not  seem  to  act  her  parts,  but  to  live 
them  on  the  stage.  She  was  really  a  born  actress,  and  there 
are  but  few  of  whom  one  may  say  this. 

Every  time  I  went  to  the  theatre  I  sniffed  the.  air  like 
a  battle  horse  before  a  skirmish,  and  a  great  longing  for  the 
footlights  expanded  my  chest,  finding  no  relief  but  in  a 
deep,  almost  painful,  sigh.  For  consolation  I  turned  to  my 
studies,  and  spent  delightful  moments  in  reciting  my  parts 
aloud,  while  Ralph  was  playing  on  the  piano  the  delightful 
nocturnes  of  Chopin.  He  practised  a  great  deal,  and  I  was 
glad  of  it,  not  only  for  his  sake,  but  also  for  mine,  because 
the  music  helped  me  wonderfully  to  bring  out  the  poetic 
value  of  Shakespeare's  lines.  I  would  not  have  it  on  the 
stage,  because  I  always  disliked  the  melodramatic  effect  of 
incidental  music,  but  I  liked  to  study  certain  passages  to 
the  harmonious  sounds  of  my  favorite  tunes. 

In  June  I  thought  it  time  to  take  steps  towards  securing 
my  debut  at  the  California  Theatre,  which  was  the  only 
one  then  having  a  good  supporting  stock  company.  Then 
it  was  that  I  passed  the  most  trying  moments  of  my  stage 
life.  Materially,  I  had  to  recur  for  help  to  some  of  our  old 
silverware  and  jewellery,  which  I  managed  to  dispose  of  with 
the  assistance  of  my  dear  Jo,  and  its  sale  supplied  me  with 
enough  money  to  keep  Ralph  and  me  alive  for  a  few  more 
months;  but  morally,  no  rescue  came  to  relieve  my  sad 
apprehensions  when,  after  seeing  Mr.  Barton  Hill,  the  stage 
manager  of  the  California  Theatre  and  the  representative 
of  Mr.  John  McCuUough  (the  lessee  and  head  of  the  concern), 
I  received  the  answer  that  there  was  no  opening  for  me,  all 


THE  NEW  WORLD  327 

the  dates  having  been  filled  until  the  following  winter. 
My  Polish  friends,  on  hearing  the  news,  became  at  once 
discouraged.  Some  advised  me  to  return  to  Warsaw,  some 
tried  to  induce  me  to  go  to  New  York  or  London,  and  I 
couM  see  plainly  in  the  expression  of  their  faces  that  scarcely 
one  believed  in  my  success  on  the  English-speaking  stage. 

Jo,  however,  was  not  discouraged,  and  asked  Mr.  Hill 
to  let  me  rehearse  before  him  an  act  of  Adrienne,  Juliet,  or 
Cleopatra.  He  promised  to  do  so,  but  when  we  came  to 
his  office  at  the  appointed  time,  he  was  very  polite,  called 
me  repeatedly  Madame  la  Comtesse,  insisted  on  speaking 
French  to  me,  but  absolutely  refused  to  give  me  a  rehearsal, 
saying  that  it  was  quite  impossible,  as  the  stage  was  occupied 
every  morning  and  afternoon.  From  what  he  said  further, 
in  the  form  of  good  advice  to  give  up  my  *'  fancy,"  I  under- 
stood that  he  had  doubts  as  to  my  being  an  actress  at  all, 
and  supposing  he  had  before  him  only  an  amateur  stage- 
struck  society  woman,  he  tried  to  get  out  of  this  dijfficult 
situation  as  smoothly  as  possible.  Unfortunately,  I  had 
not  one  scrap  of  paper  to  convince  him  of  his  mistake,  as 
I  never  kept  a  scrap-book,  seldom  read  criticisms,  and 
never  thought  of  preserving  what  was  written  about  me. 
It  was  only  many  years  afterwards,  when  I  first  thought 
of  writing  my  recollections,  that  I  began  to  gather  the  more 
interesting  articles  written  about  me,  and  then  I  had  old 
notices  copied  from  newspaper  files.  At  that  moment  I 
had  nothing  at  hand  to  present  to  Mr.  Hill  as  a  proof  of  my 
standing  in  my  profession. 

I  considered  my  situation  a  desperate  one,  and  when, 
after  leaving  the  manager's  office,  I  proposed  to  Jo  to  take 
a  ferry-boat  to  Oakland  or  Alameda,  she  refused  to  comply 
with  my  request,  knowing  the  temptation  to  me  of  the  blue 
waves  of  the  bay,  and  said,  laughing :  ''No,  no,  my  dear  lady, 
we  shall  not  go  for  a  bath  until  you  know  how  to  swim." 
Her  cheerful  face  and  her  words  dispelled  somewhat  my 


328  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

morbid  fancy ;  I  returned  home,  and  Jo  began  to  make  new 
plans  of  campaign.  She  suggested  that  I  see  Governor 
Salomon  and  ask  him  to  intervene  with  Mr.  Hill.  I  did  so, 
and  he  promised  to  take  up  my  cause.  I  also  told  General 
Krzyzanowski  of  my  unhappy  attempts  to  secure  Mr.  Hill's 
attention  to  my  request.  He  sincerely  sympathized  with 
me,  and  promised  to  enlighten  the  unbelieving  stage  man- 
ager as  to  my  artistic  value  in  the  old  country.  He  added : 
''It  is  unfortunate  that  John  McCuUough  is  not  in  town  at 
present,  for  I  am  sure  he  would  give  you  an  opening  at  once. 
Mr.  Barton  Hill  cannot  act  entirely  on  his  own  responsibility 
in  this  matter,  as  he  has  to  consult  his  superior,  and  it 
might  be  wiser  to  wait  until  Mr.  McCuUough's  return." 

''Wait,  wait,  and  wait!"  when  I  was  burning  all  over 
with  feverish  longing  for  the  thrill  of  expression !  when  I 
knew  my  parts  and  was  almost  sure  of  success  1  Jo  and 
I  went  once  more  to  the  theatre,  but  this  time  we  were 
humiliated  by  a  word  sent  to  us  at  the  door  that  Mr.  Hill 
was  too  busy  to  see  anyone.  "I  never  experienced  anything 
of  that  kind  yet,"  I  said  to  Jo.  "What  a  shame!  I  feel 
like  a  beggar  to  whom  alms  were  refused!"  I  really  felt 
the  ground  slip  from  under  my  feet.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  describe  the  bitterness  of  my  comparisons  between  the 
abject  situation  into  which  I  was  thrown  and  the  past,  full 
of  honors  and  love.  I  forgot  the  persecution,  the  enmities, 
the  petty  cavillings  of  my  life  in  Warsaw ;  I  only  recalled 
the  dear  public,  our  numerous  friends,  our  artistic  circle, 
and  yearned,  oh  !  so  ardently,  to  be  again  with  them.  Were 
it  not  for  my  strong  determination  I  would  have  returned 
home  at  once.  Yet  a  glimpse  of  hope  was  left  to  me  still. 
I  wanted  to  see  Mr.  McCuUough  before  planning  any  des- 
perate stroke.  I  waited.  The  month  of  June  was  nearly 
gone,  and  there  was  no  star  on  my  horizon.  Still  Jo,  the 
General,  and  Governor  Salomon  beUeved  in  my  success,  and 
spoke  in  the  most  encouraging  terms  of  my  future  prospects. 
There  was  another  who  shared  their  confidence  —  the  dear 


THE  NEW  WORLD  329 

old  poetic  Bednawski.  When  he  heard  of  my  difficulties, 
he  grew  quite  indignant,  and  in  his  enthusiasm  delivered  an 
imaginary  address  to  the  theatrical  managers  and  to  the 
whole  population  of  the  United  States,  extolling  my  merits 
and  proclaiming  my  superiority  over  all  existing  and  non- 
existing  actresses.  The  dear  fellow  made  me  laugh,  and 
I  was  thankful  for  this  diversion.  As  a  finishing  touch  to 
his  endeavors  to  cheer  me  up,  he  proposed  an  excursion  to 
the  Cliffs  next  morning,  to  look  at  the  sea-lions  and  take 
a  lunch  under  the  rocks.  He  also  invited  Jo  and  Ralph, 
who  was  overjoyed  with  the  prospect  of  fishing.  The  next 
morning  I  woke  up  cheerful  and  full  of  hope.  Why? 
Because  of  a  strange  dream  I  had  that  night.  Please, 
gentle  reader,  do  not  imagine  that  I  attach  undue  importance 
to  dreams,  although  it  is  a  fact  that  I  have  had  some  curious 
ones,  almost  prophetic,  in  my  life.  I  usually  did  not  think 
much  of  them  at  the  time,  but  their  veracity,  proved  by 
future  events,  made  me  reflect.  This  dream,  however, 
which  I  dreamed  on  the  eve  of  our  excursion  to  the  Cliffs,  was 
so  strange  and  so  vivid  that,  I  confess,  it  made  a  great  im- 
pression on  me,  though  I  realized  well  that  my  nerves  being 
unhinged  by  unusual  tension,  my  brains  were  bound  to  work 
in  sympathy  and  create  fanciful  pictures,  which  concen- 
trated in  the  following  vision :  — 

I  was  walking  through  many  streets,  led  by  the  hand  of 
a  little  boy,  who  had  the  face  of  my  friend  Jo.  When,  tired 
by  the  long  walk,  I  stopped  to  rest,  the  boy  looked  up  to  me, 
saying,  ''You  have  to  go  a  little  farther!"  and  we  went 
on  again,  until  suddenly  we  stopped  before  a  dark  open- 
ing, very  low  and  narrow.  ''Come  along,"  my  companion 
whispered.  I  thought,  "I  shall  never  pass  through,"  but  the 
child  pulled  me  by  the  hand.  I  bent  down  and  crouched 
through  that  pitch-dark  passage,  until  I  saw  a  dim  light  and, 
going  in  that  direction,  I  reached  some  steps  which,  always 
led  by  the  boy,  I  began  to  ascend.  The  higher  I  mounted, 
the  brighter  shone  the  light  and  the  broader  became  the 


330  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

steps.  In  the  middle  of  the  staircase  the  boy  sat  down 
and  said,  ''Now,  you  will  find  your  way  alone."  I  reached 
the  highest  step  and  stood  in  a  large  arched  and  ornamented 
door;  before  me  was  a  magnificent  hall,  supported  by 
Grecian  pillars.  The  hall  was  full  of  people  and,  to  my 
amazement,  I  saw  those  who  were  still  living,  and  those  who 
were  dead  long  ago  gathered  together,  talking  and  moving 
about.  They  were  all  noted  people  of  the  world,  —  writers, 
poets,  composers,  artists,  sculptors,  and  actors.  While, 
filled  with  awe  and  reverence,  I  was  looking  at  the  various 
groups  of  celebrities,  one  man  detached  himself  from  them, 
and,  coming  down  to  me,  took  me  by  the  hand  and  said, 
''Come  in!"  His  face  was  radiant,  and  I  recognized  in 
him  Poland's  greatest  poet,  Mickiewicz.  The  shock  of 
rapture  was  so  great  that  it  woke  me  up,  but  nothing  could 
shake  off  the  impression  of  that  dream,  which,  unreasonably 
no  doubt,  filled  my  heart  with  wild  hopes  and  joy. 

When  we  came  to  the  Cliffs  I  was  in  high  spirits,  and 
I  volunteered  to  reward  Mr.  Bednawski  for  -his  unswerving 
friendship  and  faith  in  me  by  reciting  for  him  some  Polish 
poems.  Poor  man,  he  had  not  heard  for  long,  long  years  the 
music  of  the  Polish  verse,  the  poetry  of  his  beloved  country. 
I  remember  delivering  Ujej ski's  "Hagar  in  the  Desert," 
with  the  rocks  in  the  background  and  the  hot  sand  under 
my  feet,  which  was  consistent  with  the  poem  It  is  true 
the  accompaniment  of  the  surge  of  the  ocean,  beating  against 
the  rocks,  did  not  altogether  fit  the  drought  of  the  desert, 
but  the  sun  made  up  for  it,  as  it  was  almost  fierce  on  that 
June  day. 

As  we  were  coming  home  we  met  Governor  Salomon, 
who  told  me  that  Mr.  Barton  Hill  had  promised  to  arrange 
a  rehearsal  for  me.  I  hated  to  approach  that  busy  man  after 
his  refusal  to  see  me,  but  Jo  remarked  that  unless  we  try 
again  we  never  would  be  able  to  succeed.  Mr.  Salomon 
also  assured  me  that  this  time  Mr.  Hill  would  receive  me. 
I  agreed  to  face  my  fate  once  more. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII 

Governor  Salomon  soon  afterward  secured  another 
appointment  for  me  with  Mr.  HUI.  When  we  knocked  at 
the  door  of  the  theatrical  office,  we  were  asked  to  be  seated, 
and  Mr.  Hill  complimented  '* Madame  la  Comtesse"  upon 
her  looks,  and  nearly  killed  her  with  politeness,  and  told 
her  about  Mr.  McCuUough's  return  to  'Frisco,  where  he  was 
to  play  Othello  and  Hamlet,  and  about  the  great  actress, 
Miss  Rose  Eytinge,  coming  to  play  in  a  grand  production 
of  Cleopatra.  Then  we  learned  that  new,  gorgeous  scenery 
was  going  to  be  painted  for  the  queen  of  Egypt,  and  that 
soon  the  Midgets  would  also  be  here,  and  so  forth,  and  so 
forth. 

I  never  uttered  a  word,  but  Jo,  after  listening  awhile, 
fired  out  her  point-blank  question:  ^^And  when  will  you 
give  Madame  Modjeska  a  hearing,  as  you  promised  Governor 
Salomon?"  This  time  Mr.  Hill  looked  at  me  attentively, 
and,  after  a  pause  said,  ''Let  me  see ;  will  next  Tuesday  do  ?  " 
''Yes,  it  will  do!  Good-by!"  "Au  revoir,  Madame  la 
Comtesse  !"  "Until  next  Tuesday,"  said  Jo,  and  repeated, 
"Next  Tuesday,  don't  forget!"  "By  no  means,  Miss  Tu- 
holskvl" 

Next  Tuesday  we  returned.  Mr.  Hill  was  in  despair 
because  the  stage  was  occupied  by  a  scenery  rehearsal,  but 
he  suggested  the  lecture  hall  in  the  same  building,  which  had 
a  platform  about  fifteen  feet  wide.  It  was  a  rather  trying 
proposition  to  rehearse  in  this  bare  hall,  with  dusty  windows 
and  dusty  platform,  without  any  furniture  except  a  shaky 
table  and  rickety  chair,  but  I  was  ready  for  any  emergency, 
and  took  off  my  hat  and  gloves.     While  I  was  looking  for 

331 


332  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

a  clean  place  where  I  might  put  them,  Mr.  Hill,  who  seated 
himself  in  the  first  row  of  stalls,  opposite  the  platform, 
called  out,  ^^ Madame  la  Comtesse,  I  must  warn  you  that 
I  shall  be  candid  and  sincere  in  my  criticism."  "Yes,  of 
course,''  I  answered ;  "I  expect  you  to  be  sincere  and  severe, 
but  please  do  not  interrupt  me  until  I  am  through."  Mr. 
Ilill  bowed,  and  the  rehearsal  began. 

All  these  proceedings,  my  repeated  visits  to  the  office, 
the  repeated  refusals,  my  friend's  pleadings,  had  produced 
the  most  stirring  feelings  in  my  soul.  I  was  glad  that  all 
this  had  happened  far  from  my  country,  and  that  my  hus- 
band was  not  the  witness  of  it  all.  My  revolt  against  these 
petty  annoyances,  my  anxiety  for  triumph  and  for  the  re- 
buke of  the  sceptical  attitude  of  my  judge,  were  so  great 
that  I  was  burning  with  the  desire  to  crlish  the  Philistine. 

Poor,  dear  Mr.  Hill,  who  was  only  doing  his  duty  as  a 
cautious  manager,  did  not  suspect  those  antagonistic  feel- 
ings, which  put  me  on  my  mettle  from  the  start  and  made 
me  deliver  my  very  first  speeches  with  so  much  intensity 
and  realism  that  I  myself  was  startled  at  my  new  intona- 
tions. I  was  sure  of  victory  from  the  very  beginning  of  the 
rehearsal.  I  had  chosen  the  last  act  of  Adrienne,  and  Jo 
gave  me  the  cues.  Gradually  I  forgot  all  except  my  part, 
in  which  I  lost  myself  entirely.  During  the  casket-scene, 
however,  I  saw  vaguely  Mr.  Hill's  handkerchief;  the  white- 
ness of  it  and  the  motion  of  the  hand  attracted  my  at- 
tention for  a  second ;  and  when,  after  the  final  death-scene, 
I  was  sitting,  tired  and  panting  still  with  emotion,  Mr.  Hill 
came  to  me  with  tears  in  his  eyes.  He  shook  hands  with 
me,  and  I  asked  directly  if  he  thought  he  could  give  me  one 
evening  for  my  d(Sbut  at  the  California  Theatre.  "One 
evening!"  he  exclaimed;  "you  shall  have  the  whole  week, 
and  more,  if  possible!"  And  then  he  complimented  me 
upon  my  acting. 

This  time  I  did  not  want  to  take  a  ferry-boat  to  Oakland, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  333 

but  I  invited  Jo,  Mr,  Bednawski,  and  Ralph  to  a  French 
dinner.  A  few  days  later  John  McCullough  returned  to 
San  Francisco,  and  a  note  came  from  Mr.  Hill  that,  if  con- 
venient to  me,  he  should  like  me  to  rehearse  the  same  act 
before  Mr.  Mc- 
Cullough. "This 
looks  like  the  ex- 
amination of  a 
young  beginner," 
I  said  to  Joe; 
"cannot  Mr.  Mc- 
Cullough take  his 
stage  manager's 
word  ? "  and  I 
rebelled  against 
the  idea  of  going 
through  thesame 
ordeal  in  that 
horrible  hall,  and 
declared  I  never 
could  do  it.  But 
the  wise  Jo  made 
me  do  it,  and 
this  time  the  sur- 
roundings    were 

more    favorable,  '  " 

for    I    rehearsed 

on  the  stage,  and  phoiovrai^y  au  Rudm.  ckicoBo. 

before       several  john  McCnLLonGH. 

judges      instead 

of  one,  for  some  other  persons  were  present  in  the  audi- 
torium. Among  them  was  Mr.  Richard  Hinton,  the 
chief  editor  of  the  Evening  Post,  who,  by  the  way,  smoothed 
consiilerably  my  way  to  success  and  has  remained  my 
faithful  friend  ever  since. 


334  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

After  the  rehearsal  Mr.  John  McCuUough  came  to  speak 
to  me.  He  was  visibly  touched  and.  said  many  flattering 
things  to  me,  and  at  once  set  the  date  of  my  d^but  for 
August  13.  Before  leaving,  he  asked  me  how  I  spelled 
my  name.  I  wrote  it  in  full,  just  as  it  is  spelled  in  Polish, 
''Helena  Modrzejewska,'^  and  handed  it  to  him.  He  looked 
at  it,  smiled,  and  rubbing  his  head,  said:  ''Who  on  earth 
could  read  that,  I  wonder?  I  fear  you  will  be  compelled 
to  change  your  name,  ]\Iadam !"  I  told  him  I  did  not  like 
to  do  so,  but  I  might,  by  the  omission  of  a  few  letters,  make 
out  a  name  which  would  sound  pretty  much  like  my  own, 
and  yet  not  frighten  people  away,  and  I  wrote  down 
"Modgeska."  He  smiled  again,  saying  it  might  remind  one 
of  "Madagascar."  I  soon  perceived  the  point,  and  changed 
the  "g"  into  a  "j''.  He  spelled  aloud  "Modjeska." 
"Now,"  he  said,  "it  is  quite  easy  to  read,  and  sounds  pretty, 
I  think."  We  parted  good  friends,  and  I  began  to  make 
preparations  for  the  performance  of  "  Adrienne  Lecouvreur." 

Mr.  McCullough  was  then  playing  his  classic  repertoire, 
and  I  went  with  Jo  to  his  performances.  I  had  already 
seen  him,  during  Booth's  engagement  in  "  Julius  Csesar,"  and 
had  admired  greatly  his  truly  Roman  appearance  and  his 
fine  delivery  of  Brutus's  lines.  This  time  I  witnessed  his 
personations  in  Othello  and  Virginius,  and  was  very  much 
impressed  by  his  acting  in  the  latter  part. 

A  few  days  before  "the  great  day  "  I  was  advised  by  my 
friends  to  move  to  the  Palace  Hotel,  and  there  I  received 
from  my  husband  the  sorrowful  message  that  on  account  of 
an  accident,  a  bad  fall,  he  was  unable  to  come  for  my  first 
performance,  but  he  would  hasten  to  San  Francisco  as  soon 
as  his  "scratches"  would  allow,  for  they  were  not  danger- 
ous, though  painful.  This  was  a  great  disappointment  to 
me,  yet  I  consoled  myself  with  the  thought  that  perhaps 
it  was  better  as  it  was,  for  his  nervous  temperament  might 
have  been  contagious  and  thrown  me  ofif  my  balance,  when 


THE  NEW  WORLD  335 

I  needed  all  the  calm  I  was  mistress  of  to  go  through  my 
task. 

Well,  there  is  little  more  to  say  about  my  American 
d6but.  I  played,  and  succeeded,  and  sent  a  dispatch  to 
my  husband  consisting  of  one  word  :  ''Victory."  A  curious 
feature  of  this,  my  first  performance  in  English,  was  that 
I  was  not  in  the  least  nervous.  The  happiness  of  being 
again  behind  the  footlights  killed  the  stage-fright,  and  I 
walked  serenely  on,  never  forgot  a  line  or  became  confused 
when  I  did  not  get  the  right  cue,  which,  I  am  sorry  to  say, 
happened  several  times  that  evening.  Even  when  my  veil 
caught  fire  from  the  footlights,  I  had  enough  presence  of 
mind  to  put  it  out  immediately.  Tom  Keene  was  a  manly 
Maurice  de  Saxe.  The  charming  Miss  Wilton  played  the 
princess,  and  Harry  Edwards  was  Minchonnet,  and  a  very 
excellent  one.  After  the  play,  the  Polish  colony,  which  had 
turned  out  in  full  and  had  applauded  furiously,  as  well  as 
Governor  Salomon  and  some  other  new  friends,  came  to  my 
dressing-room,  elated  with  the  result,  to  ofifer  hearty  con- 
gratulations. 

Gentlemen  of  the  press,  among  them  Mr.  R.  Hinton, 
H.  St.  Maur,  and  Jessup,  came  also,  and  we  had  as  much  of 
a  chat  as  my  defective  knowledge  of  conversational  English 
would  allow.  I  remember  that  I  finished  my  sentences, 
when  short  of  some  word,  with  gesticulation,  which  must 
have  been  expressive,  as  I  received  right  answers  from  my 
very  much  amused  guests.  The  critics  wrote  next  day 
fine  notices  about  my  Adrienne,  while  Sienkiewicz,  who  had 
come  for  this  occasion  to  San  Francisco,  sent  a  long  letter 
to  his  Warsaw  paper. 

Next  morning  at  eight  o'clock  a  card  was  brought  to  me. 
This  early  visitor  was  Harry  Sargent,  a  theatrical  agent. 
I  sent  him  word  to  return  in  the  afternoon.  Several  other 
agents  called  soon  after,  but  I  selected  the  one  who  rose 
the  earliest. 


836  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Mr.  Sargent  returned  in  the  afternoon,  with  his  wife,  a 
delicate,  pretty  woman,  who  had  been  an  actress  before  her 
marriage,  and  who  came  back  to  the  stage  in  later  years. 
He  proposed  to  me  a  starring  tour  in  the  East,  beginning  in 
New  York.  I  accepted  the  proposition,  on  his  terms,  and 
he  went  immediately  to  work  in  order  to  obtain  dates  for 
me  in  New  York,  Boston,  and  Philadelphia.  The  very  next 
day  he  informed  me  that  the  earliest  open  time  he  could  get 
in  New  York  was  from  the  middle  of  December  until  the 
end  of  January,  1878,  and  we  agreed  that  I  should  go  East 
late  in  November. 

In  the  meantime  Mr.  McCuUough  asked  me  to  play  an- 
other week,  with  change  of  plays.  He  said  there  was  quite 
a  rush  at  the  box-office  to  see  the  new  Polish  actress,  and 
though  next  week  belonged  by  right  to  Miss  Rose  Eytinge, 
•the  latter  kindly  consented  to  postpone  her  engagement 
for  a  week.  Her  scenery  was  not  quite  ready,  and  so  she 
preferred  to  wait,  though  she  might  easily  have  filled  that 
week  with  other  plays  of  her  repertoire.  I  called  on  her 
and  thanked  her  heartily  for  this  concession.  Mr.  McCul- 
lough  wanted  me  to  play  Juliet,  alternating  it  with  Adrienne, 
and  he  also  asked  me  if  I  could  play  Ophelia  to  his  Hamlet 
during  one  night  of  that  following  week,  which  he  had 
selected  for  his  benefit.  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  think  I 
could  learn  the  mad  scene  in  English  so  as  to  be  quite  easy 
in  it,  at  such  short  notice,  but  if  he  thought  that  the  public 
would  stand  my  rendering  of  this  scene  in  Polish  I  might 
be  ready  to  play  the  rest  of  the  part  in  English.  He  con- 
sented, and  rehearsals  were  called.  John  McCuUough  at 
that  time  was  occasionally  showing  signs  of  the  nervous  dis- 
turbance which  led  him  to  that  disastrous  disease  of  which 
he  died.  While  I  was  rehearsing  with  him  the  scenes  of 
Hamlet,  I  noticed  that  several  times  he  wiped  tears  from  his 
eyes.  When  I  inquired  what  affected  him  this  way,  he 
answered,  ''It  is  your  voice,  Madame !''    ''Is,  then,  my  voice 


THE  NEW  WORLD  337 

so  dreadfully  lachrymose,"  thought  I,  'Hhat  it  breaks  up 
that  seemingly  strong  man?"  Jo,  who  was  present  at 
every  rehearsal,  also^  found  it  strange,  but  she  added : 
''Your  voice  also  has  the  same  effect  upon  me  sometimes; 
but  then,  I  think  it  ought  not  to  affect  such  an  experienced 
actor.  It  does  so,  however,  and  this  is  a  great  compliment 
to  you."  Alas,  several  years  later  I  fully  understood  the 
reason  of  the  effect  produced  upon  that  unstrung  instru- 
ment, which  already  was  going  slowly  but  surely  to  its 
utter  destruction. 

The  second  week  proved  quite  a  financial  success,  which 
was  doubly  welcome,  both  as  an  omen  of  the  future  and  as 
a  relief  for  our  material  difficulties.  I  began  to  breathe 
freely.  During  those  two  weeks  I  lived  in  a  whirlwind  of 
excitement.  People  would  flock  to  my  dressing-room  every 
evening,  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  shaking  my  hand,  embrac- 
ing me,  and  saying  the  most  lovely  things.  I  alone  had  dry 
eyes,  and  alone  could  not  weep,  though  tears  would  have 
relieved  the  tension  of  my  nerves.  It  was  only  when  one 
of  my  friends  took  me  to  an  orphan  asylum  that  the  flood- 
gates opened  and  I  had  a  good  cry. 

Soon  after,  my  husband  came  to  town,  healed  from  his 
bruises,  and  we  had  some  delightful  parties  with  our  Polish 
friends,  and  also  were  invited  to  receptions  in  the  ''upper 
ten"  circle,  which  stood  there  for  the  "four  hundred"  of 
New  York.  Evidently  Adrienne  and  Juliet  had  made  me 
fashionable. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX 

There  was  at  that  time  in  San  Francisco  an  Irish  come- 
dian by  the  name  of  James  Ward.  He  proposed  to  arrange 
and  manage  for  me  a  short  tour  in  the  small  towns  of  Cali- 
fornia and  Nevada.  He  also  could  be  my  leading  man,  he 
said.  I  thought  that  it  would  be  excellent  practice.  My 
husband  and  Jo  agreed  with  me  that  nothing  could  be  better, 
in  order  to  get  my  parts  ''trippingly  on  the  tongue,''  than 
repeating  them  for  a  few  weeks  to  less  imposing  audiences, 
before  my  New  York  engagement. 

Previously  I  had  met  a  young  newspaper  man  and  well- 
known  humorist,  Mr.  Sam  Davis,  who  also  advised  me  to 
''rough  it"  for  a  while.  He  jokingly  alluded  to  my  Irish 
comedian  and  leading  man,  warning  me  that  I  must  watch 
him,  or  else  he  might  make  funny  faces  during  my  death- 
scenes.  Mr.  Davis  promised  to  go  to  Virginia  City,  where  I 
was  to  begin  my  "Wild  West"  tour,  ahead  of  us,  because, 
he  said,  he  was  bound  to  see  me  through  my  first  trial 
there,  not  knowing  what  effect  my  European  manners  and 
foreign  accent  would  produce  upon  the  miners.  "I  know 
them,  you  see,"  he  said,  "because  Nevada  has  been  my 
home  for  some  time.  If  you  could  begin  your  plays  with 
your  death-scenes,  you  would  make  a  hit  at  once,  because 
these  miners  are  thoroughly  soft-hearted,  although  rough, 
but  I  do  not  know  how  your  talky  scenes  will  affect  them. 
I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  be  there  with  a  club  in  my  hands 
in  case  of  some  unruly  demonstrations."  We  laughed  a 
great  deal  over  these  anticipated  dangers,  and  I  did  not 
believe  he  would  go  to  Nevada,  but  he  was  as  good  as  his 
word,  and  he  packed  up  his  satchel  and  said  "Good-by" 

338 


THE  NEW  WORLD  339 

with  the  assurance  that  we  would  soon  meet  in  Virginia 
City. 

My  husband  returned  to  Anaheim.  The  farm  he  had  bought 
so  easily  was  very  difficult  to  sell.  He  hoped,  however,  to  get 
rid  of  it,  though  with  loss,  but  as  long  as  his  duties  towards 
the  colony  were  not  fulfilled,  he  had  to  stay  with  them.  ''I 
brought  them  here;  I  have  to  send  them  back  home,"  he 
argued,  and  I  did  not  oppose  his  sense  of  justice. 

As  an  addition  to  my  repertoire,  I  studied  "Camille," 
which  I  had  refused  to  play  in  Poland  on  account  of  its 
doubtful  influence  upon  young  people.  I  was  told  that  it 
was  quite  popular  in  America,  —  my  friends'  advice  over- 
came my  scruples,  —  and  so  for  my  opening  night  in  Vir- 
ginia City  I  chose  this  spontaneous  work  of  youthful  genius, 
this  love-story  full  of  emotion,  but  not  free  from  morbid- 
ness. 

Contrary  to  the  apprehensions  of  Mr.  Davis,  the  perform- 
ance went  through  without  disturbance,  and  though  my 
comedy  Armand  was  always  out  of  the  picture,  and  several 
times  I  had  to  bite  my  lips  at  the  expression  of  his  face  and 
his  funny  gestures,  yet  the  public  did  not  take  notice  of 
these  details.  They  sincerely  applauded  the  heroine,  and 
shed  copious  tears  over  her  fate.  During  the  supper-scene 
of  the  first  act  I  took  a  look  at  the  audience,  expecting  to 
see  a  very  rough  crowd,  but  I  was  most  pleasantly  sur- 
prised at  the  manly  appearance  and  excellent  behavior  of 
the  miners,  who,  together  with  cow-boys,  constituted  the 
vast  majority  of  that  picturesque  .and  interesting  assembly. 
To  be  in  Virginia  City  and  not  to  see  some  of  the  celebrated 
Comstock  silver  mines,  then  in  the  full  flush  of  their  pros- 
perity, would  have  been  the  same  as  being  in  Rome  and  not 
seeing  the  Pope. 

Ralph,  who  accompanied  me  on  this  tour,  was  most 
anxious  to  go  underground,  and  spoke  of  his  desire  to  Sam 
Davis,  who  immediately  procured  for  us  permission  to  visit 


340  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

one  of  the  largest  and  richest  local  mines.  Next  morning 
we  all  three  started  on  our  way  to  the  subterranean  world. 
After  being  provided  with  a  cap,  a  pair  of  breeches,  and  a 
cloak,  I  was  shown  to  an  adjoining  room,  where  I  accom- 
plished my  disguise.  When  I  returned  to  the  oflBce,  I 
faced  a  very  tall,  handsome,  and  statuesque  man  in  buck- 
skins and  silver  buckles,  who  bowed  to  me.  ''This  gentle- 
man," said  Davis,  ''will  show  us  the  mine."  The  gentle- 
man in  buckskins  looked  sharply  and  haughtily,  I  thought, 
at  Sam  Davis,  and  then,  turning  to  me,  said,  "Yes,  Madame, 
come  along,  and  excuse  my  going  ahead !"  While  we  were 
following  him,  Ralph  preceding  me  and  Mr.  Davis  behind 
me,  I  asked  the  latter  in  a  whisper  who  that  stunning  man 
was.  "Oh,  he  is  only  one  of  the  miners,"  answered  the 
humorist,  with  a  mischievous  twinkle  in  his  eye.  "I  won- 
der if  all  the  miners  dress  with  such  elegance,"  I  whispered 
further.  Davis  laughed,  and  added:  "By  no  means;  but 
this  one  is  a  very  vain  man,  and  spends  all  his  salary  on  dress 
and  in  courting  women.  He  is  quite  a  dangerous  chap." 
"I  believe  he  is,"  I  whispered  back,  "to  women!"  At 
this  moment  the  superb  man  paused  at  the  opening  of  the 
shaft,  turning  his  buckled  front  to  us,  thus  putting  a  stop 
to  our  mezzo-voce  conversation.  We  were  asked  politely  to 
step  into  the  cage.  When  Ralph  and  I  were  entering  this 
awe-inspiring  lift,  I  heard  a  subdued  conversation  between 
Sam  Davis  and  the  buckskinned  gentleman,  but  I  could 
not  distinguish  the  words,  except  the  last  short  sentence  of 
our  friend  :  "No,  not  now." 

Whoever  visited  mines  can  easily  imagine  my  sensations 
when,  going  down  on  a  square  plank  lower  and  lower  by  the 
dim  light  of  a  lamp,  hearing  only  the  splash  of  the  water 
dripping  along  the  walls  of  the  shaft,  feeling  the  air  growing 
more  and  more  oppressive,  and  thinking  this  descent  wUl 
never  stop  until  we  reach  some  place  near  the  very  centre  of 
the  earth.     To  say  that  I  was  not  nervous  would  be  a  blank 


THE  NEW  WORLD  341 

untruth.  I  was  downright  afraid,  and  clung  to  Ralph  with 
both  arms,  so  that,  in  case  anything  should  happen,  we  might 
both  perish  in  the  abyss  together.  Yet  I  tried  my  best  to 
appear  calm  and  answer  the  remarks  of  Ralph  or  Mr.  Davis. 
Our  guide  did  not  speak,  but  from  time  to  time  he  stretched 
his  arm  to  protect  me  from  contact  with  the  edge  of  the 
shaft,  when  our  cage,  with  its  swinging  motion,  made  us  sway 
from  one  side  to  the  other.  At  last  we  stopped,  and  began 
to  walk  through  long,  narrow  tunnels,  lower  and  lower  still. 
''We  are  nineteen  hundred  feet  under  the  ground,"  explained 
Mr.  Davis.  The  air  became  very  hot,  and  our  conductor 
turned  to  me  and  asked  if  I  would  permit  him  to  take  off 
his  coat.  "Of  course,"  I  said,  and  he  pulled  oflF  his  buck- 
skins, exposing  an  immaculate  silk  shirt,  which  made  Mr. 
Davis  wink  at  me,  as  if  to  say,  "Did  I  not  tell  you  how  vain 
the  man  is?"  He  and  Ralph  also  took  off  their  coats,  and  I 
envied  them,  for  all  I  could  have  taken  off  was  my  coat, 
with  which,  however,  I  hated  to  part,  for  my  breeches  were 
rather  close-fitting.  We  arrived  at  a  place  where,  on  ac- 
count of  extreme  heat,  the  men  were  working  stripped  to  the 
waist,  and  it  was  a  fine  exhibition  of  human  muscles  in 
action.  All  those  miners  were  young  men,  and  most  of  them, 
in  spite  of  hard  work,  looked  cheerful.  When  I  made  a  re- 
mark about  it  to  Mr.  Davis,  he  said :  "The  wages  are  high, 
and  in  a  few  hours  they  will  be  free  to  roam  about  with 
their  sweethearts,  or  gamble  away  every  penny  they  have 
toiled  for.  Youth  and  strength  seem  to  them  inexhaustible, 
and  while  they  last  who  cares  for  the  rest?  They  also 
rely  upon  a  stroke  of  luck,  for  some  of  them  have  become 
quite  rich."  When  we  were  leaving  this  inferno,  a  cannon 
was  discharged,  and,  had  I  not  been  warned  before  of  this 
flattering  salute  in  my  honor,  I  surely  would  have  collapsed 
at  the  tremendous  shock  and  noise,  which  made  the  ground 
tremble  under  our  feet  and  the  narrow  tunnels  howl  with 
its  echo.     When  it  was  over,  Davis  thanked  the  silk-sleeved 


342  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS    . 

gentleman  for  the  "gentle  attention,"  and  we  all  laughed 
and  .proceeded  on  our  way  back. 

After  returning  to  the  office  and  changing  our  clothes, 
I  asked  Mr.  Davis  how  I  was  to  thank  the  magnificent  man 
who  showed  us  such  courtesy.  He  hesitated  awhile,  and 
answered,  ''Oh,  give  him  something;  his  courtesy  was 
nothing  else  but  obedience  to  higher  orders."  "Surely 
this  demigod  will  not  accept  money  ? "  I  exclaimed.  "Won't 
he  ?  You  don't  know  that  kind  of  men !  They  always 
take  what  they  can  get."  "But  he  is  so  gorgeous  I  would 
not  dare  ofifer  him  less  than  twenty-five  dollars,  and  I  have 
only  a  miserable  five-dollar  gold-piece  about  me,"  I  said  pite- 
ously.  'Twenty-five  dollars!  The  idea!  One  dollar  is  quite 
enough."  "Oh,  Mr.  Davis!"  "You  have  an  exaggerated 
idea  about  the  fellow ;  he  is  fond  of  money  and  will  take 
anything  you  give  him." 

The  man  in  question  returned  to  the  office,  and  I  went  to 
him  and  said :  "Thank  you  very  much  for  your  kindness, 
and  please,  ...  I  was  not  prepared  and  have  not — "  I 
stammered  out,  "more,"  extending  my  hand  with  the  small 
gold-piece  to  him.  Seeing  my  purpose,  the  demigod  stepped 
back,  drew  himself  up,  and  grew  almost  black  with  anger. 
He  gave  Mr.  Davis  a  look  which  made  me  shiver,  and  I 
imagined  that,  were  these  two  alone  in  the  room,  it  might 
have  been  very  dangerous  for  my  humorous  friend  to  meet 
the  flash  of  the  other's  eye.  This,  however,  lasted  only  a 
moment.  The  strong  man  composed  himself  and  answered 
politely,  "You  are  welcome,  Madame!"  and  added  some- 
thing which  I  did  not  understand,  except  the  last  word, 
"pleasure."  I  timidly  retired,  and  when  we  were  sitting 
in  a  cab,  on  our  way  to  the  hotel,  I  told  Mr.  Davis:  "You 
see  I  offended  the  man,  and  you  made  me  do  so !"  Davis 
only  laughed:  "He  will  get  over  it;  don't  worry."  I  was 
then  so  preoccupied  with  my  parts  and  my  English  studies 
that  this  uncomfortable  subject  did  not  dwell  long  in  my 


THE  NEW  WORLD  343 

mind,  and  I  soon  forgot  all  about  it.  We  left  Virginia  City 
in  a  week,  and  Mr.  Sam  Davis  returned  to  San  Francisco, 
while  I  went  with  the  company  to  other  towns. 

Twenty  years  later,  in  Santa  Barbara,  at  a  convention  of 
California  newspaper  men,  to  which  my  husband  and  I  were 
honored  with  an  invitation,  our  jocular  friend,  Mr.  Sam 
Davis,  related  in  a  bright  manner  the  foregoing  incident, 
which  I  have  tried  to  describe.  Then  he  publicly  con- 
fessed that  the  handsome  and  polite  man  in  buckskins  was 
nobody  else  but  the  famous  Mr.  X.,  the  owner  of  the  mine, 
one  of  the  multi-millionnaires  of  the  West  and  a  political 
potentate.  As  soon  as  Davis  came  back  from  the  platform, 
I  addressed  him  excitedly  :  '*0h,  for  shame,  Mr.  Davis ;  why 
did  you  not  introduce  him  to  me?"  ^^Oh,  because,  first, 
I  had  a  grudge  against  him ;  and  besides,  the  chap  was  such 
a  lady-killer  and  visibly  on  a  mash !  It  tickled  me  to 
death  when  you  offered  him  the  coin  and  he  drew  himself 
up,  because  it  was  the  first  money  he  ever  refused,  I  assure 
you." 

Besides  "Camille,"  I  played  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  and 
"Adrienne  Lecouvreur"  on  the  tour.  Mr.  Ward  gave  up  the 
parts  of  Romeo  and  Maurice  de  Saxe  to  Mr.  Maeder,  a  safe 
and  experienced  actor,  who  was  the  son  of  that  very  well- 
known  actress,  Mrs.  Clara  Fisher  Maeder.  The  latter  had 
been  a  star  in  her  childhood,  and  had  in  the  past  played 
with  Macready.  She  had  the  most  extensive  Shakespearian 
repertoire  ever  known,  because  it  included  both  the  female 
and  the  male  leading  parts.  In  later  times  she  was  a 
member  of  my  company,  and  it  was  a  pleasure  for  me  to 
watch  her  acting  and  her  matchless  delivery  of  the  lines. 

I  did  not  make  a  great  hit  in  these  smaller  towns,  in 
Nevada,  or  in  California,  my  fame  having  evidently  travelled 
at  a  very  slow  pace.  I  remember  having  played  in  San 
Jos6  to  about  thirty  people  in  the  house.  The  play  was 
"Adrienne  Lecouvreur."    The  few  victims  that  came  to  the 


344  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

theatre  that  evening  must  have  wondered  at  the  shortness 
of  the  performance  and  the  chill  which  ran  through  it. 
My  dressing-room  was  awfully  cold,  and  I  was  advised  not 
to  change  my  costume  between  the  acts,  and  so  it  happened 
that  Adrienne  lived  and  died  in  her  Turkish  costume  of 
Roxane.  The  stage  manager  hurried  up  the  play,  and  it 
was  presented  with  but  one  intermission  during  the  five 
acts,  and  consequently  it  was  finished  at  a  quarter-past 
nine. 

This  unsuccessful  experience  was  rather  amusing  to  me, 
but  not  so  to  my  manager,  who  had  hoped,  after  my  success 
in  San  Francisco,  to  obtain  handsome  results  from  the  tour. 
When  we  closed  our  engagement,  Mr.  Ward  came  to  my 
room,  looking  quite  distressed.  He  owed  me  a  couple  of 
hundred  dollars,  but  I  knew  he  could  not  pay  them.  Yet 
he  was  an  honest  man  and  was  willing  to  fulfil  the  terms 
of  the  contract.  I  shall  never  forget  how  I  laughed  when 
he  took  out  his  watch  and  ring,  and  placing  them  before 
me,  said:  ''This  gold  watch  and  this  diamond  ring  con- 
stitute my  whole  wealth;  will  you  accept  them  instead  of 
the  money  I  owe  you?"  I  refused,  of  course,  and  assured 
him  he  owed  me  no  money,  since  I  did  not  make  any  for 
him.  In  fact,  I  was  very  well  pleased  with  the  practice  I  had 
obtained  during  that  time  as  well  as  with  my  experiences 
in  the  ''Wild  West."  The  poor  man  was  much  more  dis- 
appointed than  I,  and  when  I  told  him  of  my  acquitting  him 
of  any  obligations,  his  face  at  once  brightened  up,  and  he 
thanked  me  with  effusion,  calling  me  "a  brick,"  a  word  I 
did  not  understand  in  this  application,  but  which  must 
have  meant  something  nice,  of  course,  so  I  shook  hands 
with  him,  and  we  parted  good  friends. 

On  returning  to  San  Francisco  I  learned  from  Mr.  Barton 
Hill  that  two  weeks  were  left  for  me  in  October,  and  would  I 
take  them  and  play  Camille,  alternating  with  Juliet  and 
Adrienne?    This  was  a  godsend  for  me,  and  I  accepted  with 


THE  NEW  WORLD  345 


enthusiasm.  I  added  to  the  above-mentioned  plays  Feuillet's 
'^Dalila/'  but  that  drama,  so  full  of  subtlety  and  refine- 
ment, was  not  very  well  presented  by  the  stock  company, 
and  was  dismissed  from  my  American  repertoire  after  a  few 
^  fruitless  attempts.     Camille,  on  the  other  hand,  was  quite 

a  hit,  and  my  two  weeks  proved  a  success. 


CHAPTER  XL 

During  the  month  of  December,  as  I  was  driving  on 
Broadway,  I  perceived  a  monstrous,  absurd  bill  representing 
me  in  the  costume  of  Juliet,  with  two  plaits  of  hair,  one  in 
front  and  one  down  my  back,  an  open  parasol  in  one  hand, 
while  the  other  was  gracefully  lifting  the  dress  in  the  act  of 
mounting  some  steps  that  led  to  a  temple-like  building. 
Beneath  that  incongruous  picture  was  an  inscription  as 
follows:  "The  famous  Polish  actress,  Helena  Modjeska, 
Countess  Bozenta."  *  ''Oh,  what  barbarians!"  I  thought; 
''it  was  not  enough  to  put  up  that  horrid  cheap  picture; 
they  also  must  make  a  show  of  the  'Countess'  to  attract  the 
mob,  always  curious  about  titled  persons."  I  had  already 
realized  that  in  this  free  and  republican  country  many 
people  were  crazy  for  titles,  but  I  deplored  the  cheapness 
of  that  kind  of  advertising,  and  spoke  of  it  to  Mr.  Sargent, 
who  withdrew  the  horrid  posters  after  a  while  replacing 
them  with  others  containing  only  my  stage  name  in  huge 
types.  "Why  such  big  letters?"  I  asked  him.  "Because 
people  are  too  busy  here  to  stop  and  read  a  small  bill,"  he 
answered.  "Unless  they  can  see  your  name  across  the 
street,  they  will  pay  no  attention  to  it."  I  had  no  choice 
but  to  submit. 

When  I  arrived  in  New  York,  Mary  Anderson  was  playing 

^  Chlapowski,  the  family  name  of  my  husband,  being  too  difficult  to 
pronounce  by  English-speaking  people,  he  used  only  his  middle  name, 
Bozenta,  and  so  it  came  that  he  was  Imown  by  that  last  name  to  the  genersJ 
pubUo  in  America. 

346 


'  THE  NEW  WORLD  347 

\  her  repertoire  at  the  Fifth  Avenue  Theatre,  where  I  was  to 

follow  her.  I  saw  her  in  "Ingomar"  and  in  "Fasio,"  and 
was  amazed  to  see  such  tragic  power  in  such  a  young  person. 
Her  beauty  also  struck  me  as  being  unusual ;  there  was 
not  only  a  beautiful  face,  but  the  harmonious  perfection 
of  the  whole  body.    Very 

1  tall,  and  with  long,  beauti- 

ful arms,  she  made,  with- 
out effort  or  without  study, 

I  gestures    which    were    the 

natural  motions  of  her 
classic  figure,    and    conse- 

f  quently  were  always  grace- 

ful. Her  voice  was  deep 
and  mellow,  and  I  ad- 
mired her  without  reserve, 
and  predicted  a  glorious 
future  for  that  most   tal- 

i  ented    actress.      She    was 

most  picturesque  in   "In- 

'  gomar,"  and  in  the  part 

of  the  jealous  wife  in 
"  Fasio "  full  of  tragic 
power  and  expression. 

;&gt;  The  FifMi  Avenue  The-  piMograph  im sarout. 

atre  was  then   under  the  William  Wintbb. 

management  of  Mr.  Stephen 

Fiske,  and  his  wife,  Mrs.  Fiske,  a  bright,  intelligent  lady, 
was  in  the  box  with  me  at  Mary  Anderson's  performance. 
Between  the  acts  she  pointed  out   the  foremost  critic  of 

it  New  York,  Mr.  William  Winter.     When  I  looked  at  him, 

he  made  me  think  of  the  romantic  period  of  America;  I 
connected  him  with  some  of  Nathaniel  Hawthorne's  types, 
with  Edgar  Poe,  and  at  the  same  time  he  reminded  me 
of  a  portrait  of  Hamilton  that  I  had  recently  seen.     No 


Fhclofraph  Ay  ^w&gt;  dtt  WiyiU,  Ltndmt, 
M&amp;BT  Amdebson. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  849 

one  had  told  me  that  the  critic  was  also  a  poet,  but  to 
me  he  looked  like  one,  and  I  was  glad  to  find  out  that 
my  first  impression  was  right.  The  appearance  of  William 
Winter  was  certainly  romantic.  He  was  introduced  to  me 
that  evening,  but  I  felt  that  I  did  not  make  a  favorable  im- 
pression, as  I  was  unable  to  express  myself  in  English,  except 
with  a  few  ready-made  sentences,  and  must  have  appeared 
awkward,  and  what  is  worse,  commonplace.  I  felt  at  once 
that  he  could  not  help  being  very  reserved  in  his  first  criti- 
cism of  me. 

The  memorable  moments  I  spent  before  my  opening  night 
in  New  York  were  the  rehearsals.  Dion  Boucicault,  at  the 
request  of  his  protfig^,  Mr.  Sargent,  had  consented  to  direct 
the  rehearsals  of  Adrienne.  It  was  an  act  of  great  kindness 
and  a  great  concession  on  his  part,  and  I  owe  him  a  debt  of 
gratitude  never  to  be  repaid.  He  corrected  here  and  there 
the  text  of  the  translation,  which  he  said  was  bad,  and  in- 
troduced some  changes  in  the  scenic  effects,  making  clear 
the  too  intricate  situations  and  passages,  so  as  to  make 
them  better  understood  by  American  audiences  not  ac- 
quainted with  the  manner  of  the  French  authors.  Scribe 
and  Legouv6.  He  also  selected  the  cast  for  the  play.  It 
was  a  study  to  watch  Mr.  Boucicault  at  the  rehearsals. 
In  my  country  I  had  been  used  to  actors  creating  their 
own  parts,  without  the  help  of  the  stage  manager.  What 
stage  business  was  introduced  was  done  by  a  mutual  under- 
standing among  those  in  the  scene,  and  during  rehearsals 
was  sanctioned  or  rejected  by  the  artistic  director.  Here, 
on  the  contrary,  most  of  the  parts  were  conceived  by  Mr. 
Boucicault,  who  actually  taught  some  of  the  actors  how  to 
speak  their  lines.  All  the  stage  business  was  given  them, 
thus  relieving  them  from  any  extra  brain  work,  reducing  it 
to  the  memorizing  of  their  parts.  When  I  rehearsed  my 
first  scenes,  one  of  the  actors  asked  me,  ''What  do  you  want 
me  to  do  now?"     ''What  you  please,"  I  answered,  rather 


Pftotoernpi  6i,  Mora.  Ntw  York 
EhoN  BotrciCAULT  AS  "Conk"  \s  "The  S*dqhraitm." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  351 

astonished.  Here  I  heard  Mr.  Boucicault  laugh.  *  Taking 
me  aside,  he  said :  ''They  are  not  used  to  such  independence. 
Stars  usually  direct  the  actors  about  stage  business."  I 
told  him  as  well  as  I  could  in  my  broken  English  that  it 
was  difficult  for  me  to  identify  myself  with  my  part  and  to 
instruct  others  at  the  same  time.  He  told  me  he  under- 
stood I  was  not  used  as  yet  to  the  star  system,  which  con- 
sists in  making  the  company  behave  so  as  to  bring  out  in 
relief  all  the  points  of  the  star.  I  was  on  the  point  of  replying 
that  I  did  not  think  much  of  this  system,  having  most  of  the 
time  played  with  good  actors,  and  often  with  excellent  ones, 
and  that  the  applause  they  received  only  helped  the  emula- 
tion and  resulted  in  a  better  ensemble,  but  suddenly  I  re- 
membered how  in  San  Francisco  the  company  was  allowed 
to  do  as  they  pleased,  how  they  sometimes  failed  to  give 
me  the  right  cues,  and  how  they  refused  to  let  me  have  the 
fireplace  in  the  right  place,  which  would  have  obliged  me  to 
change  all  my  positions  and  stage  business  in  the  last  act, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  vigorous  remonstrances  of  Jo,  who 
succeeded  in  making  them  yield  to  my  demands. 

When  I  compared  the  strict  order  of  our  rehearsals  at 
the  Fifth  Avenue  Theatre  with  the  laxity  of  those  in  the  Cali- 
fornia Theatre,  I  acknowledged  Mr.  Boucicault's  superior 
judgment,  and  held  my  peace.  He  took  infinite  pains,  teach- 
ing most  of  the  people  not  only  how  to  say  their  lines,  but 
what  to  do,  how  to  bow,  how  to  enter  or  exit,  even  how 
to  hold  a  snuff-box  and  how  to  brush  off  with  a  graceful 
gesture  the  snuff  from  their  ruffled  frill.  The  low  bows  and 
curtseys  were  the  hardest  to  teach.  As  I  watched  Mr. 
Boucicault  I  sincerely  admired  him  for  his  authority  and 
skill  in  managing  each  individual  and  his  imagination  in 
the  scenic  arrangements.  When  I  tried  to  express  my 
gratitude  for  the  pains  he  took  in  directing  the  play,  he  only 
said  he  was  glad  to  do  so,  because  I  was  a  stranger  and  he 
knew  from  experience  that  even  the  foremost  actors  in 


352  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Europe  do  not  trouble  themselves  about  the  stage  manage- 
ment. He  thought  he  might  help  me  out  of  the  difficulty 
by  looking  to  all  those  things,  or  else  the  play  might  prove 
a  failure,  in  spite  of  my  personal  efforts.  His  remarks  taught 
me  a  lesson  by  which  I  meant  to  profit  in  the  future. 

During  the  winter  it  was  my  good  fortune  to  see  Mr. 
Boucicault  in  the  title  part  of  his  own  play,  ''Shaughraun," 
and  I  did  not  know  what  to  admire  most,  the  wonderful 
originality,  wit,  and  clever  construction  of  the  author,  the 
perfect  production  of  the  stage  manager,  or  the  finish  and 
truth  of  his  exquisite  acting.  He  looked  eighteen  on  the 
stage,  and  was  simply  irresistible. 

To  return  to  Adrienne,  I  remember  that  we  had  our  first 
rehearsal  without  Maurice  de  Saxe.  My  manager  had  the 
greatest  difficulty  in  finding  a  leading  man  on  account  of 
the  lateness  of  the  season,  and,  after  many  fruitless  attempts, 
Mr.  Burroughs  was  engaged  ''to  support  Modjeska,''  as  I 
read  in  a  paper.  I  could  not  make  out  why  any  one  had 
to  ''support"  me,  until  some  kind  person  explained  to  me 
that  this  was  the  usual  way  of  indicating  the  position  of 
the  leading  man.  When  I  first  looked  at  handsome  Mr. 
Burroughs,  I  thought  it  would  be  I  who  would  have  to  "sup- 
port "  him  in  the  exciting  scene  of  the  last  act  to  prevent 
him  from  breaking  in  two,  he  was  so  delicate  and  thin. 
During  the  rehearsal  I  found  out,  to  my  satisfaction,  that  he 
was  a  good,  safe  actor,  but  I  was  distressed  about  his  di- 
aphanous appearance  in  the  part  of  the  Count  de  Saxe,  that 
robust  soldier  and  brave  adventurer,  as  well  known  for 
his  physical  strength^  as  for  his  bonnes  fortunes  and  his 
military  exploits. 

Some  time  in  December,  1877  (I  forget  the  exact  date), 
I  played  Adrienne  in  New  York  for  the  first  time,  and  I  do 
not  remember  anything  of  that  evening  except  that  I  was 
so  absorbed  in  my  part  that  I  carried  in  my  hand  a  shoe-horn 
instead  of  a  fan,  and  never  noticed  it  until  I  wanted  to  fan 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS    "SAPPHO'* 


X 


D. 


-^st, 


efc. 


\. 


•I 


•  •  • 


THE  NEW  WORLD  353 

myself;  and  also  that  after  the  end  I  was  handed  by  Mr. 
Sargent  a  telegram  from  my  husband;  with  his  good  wishes, 
which,  according  to  the  rules,  he  had  kept  the  whole  day 
in  his  pocket,  lest  its  contents  might  disturb  my  acting. 
When,  after  the  last  act,  I  returned  to  my  dressing-room, 
I  was  met  by  a  number  of  lovely  people  who  came  to  com- 
pliment the  new  star ;  and  next  morning  my  parlor  at  the 
Clarendon  Hotel  was  gay  with  flowers,  sent  by  my  new 
friends.  The  criticisms  of  the  press  were  flattering,  though 
naturally  reserved.  Mr.  Winter  gave  me  a  very  fine  notice. 
Some  of  the  writers  spoke  of  my  age:  "Adrienne,  the 
mother  of  a  young  man!"  (Ralph  was  sixteen  then.) 
One  of  them,  in  his  anxiety  to  appear  well  informed,  added 
even  five  years  to  my  age.  This  was  neither  truthful  nor 
gallant,  and  ruffled  very  much  the  temper  of  my  impresario, 
Mr.  Sargent,  who,  fearing  that  this  disclosure  of  my  antiq- 
uity might  keep  the  public  away  from  the  Fifth  Avenue 
Theatre,  devised  a  scheme  of  passing  me  for  my  son's 
sister.  It  afforded  a  great  deal  of  amusement  to  Ralph. 
Almost  every  day  he  was  accosted  by  many  questioners 
about  me.  Some  people,  led  by  the  manager's  fiction  to  be- 
lieve that  he  was  my  brother,  asked  him  how  his  sister  was. 
He  always  answered,  "Thank  you,  she  is  quite  well." 
Others,  who  knew  that  he  was  my  son,  asked  how  his  mother 
was,  and  received  the  same  answer.  It  happened  once  that 
the  two  opposite  versions  were  brought  in  contact,  when  one 
person  asked  him  about  his  sister  and  another  about  his 
mother  at  the  same  time,  and  he  was  obliged  to  confess  the 
truth;  whereupon  the  believer  in  the  sister  theory  grew- 
quite  indignant,  exclaiming:  ''Nonsense!  she  does  not  look 
more  than  twenty-six!"  ''That  is  so,"  answered  the  boy, 
"I  am  just  ten  years  younger  than  my  mother." 

It  was  only  a  few  days  after  my  first  performance  that 
I  realized  how  well  my  company  was  selected.  Mr.  Bur- 
roughs was  a  well-padded  Maurice,  and  made  a  much  better 

2a 


354  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

appearance  than  I  had  anticipated.  Mr.  Couldock  was 
great  as  Michonnet,  Mr.  Whiffen  light  and  charming  in  the 
Abb^,  and  the  Princess  de  Bouillon  was  excellent  in  every 


Pholoffraph  bv  Sarony. 
8.  W.  CoiiLBmcK. 

detail.     The  other  members  of  the  company  were  careful 
in  their  costuming  and  perfect  in  their  lines. 

However,  we  did  not  draw  crowds  to  the  Fifth  Avenue 
Theatre  with  Adrienne,  partly  because  the  French  title  of 
the  play  was  not  attractive  to  the  New  York  audiences  of 
1878,  and  partly  because  the  approach  of  the  Christmas  holi- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  356 

days  kept  the  people  busy  shopping.  For  a  change  I  played 
the  balcony  scene  of  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  as  an  addition 
to  Adrienne.     I  was  rather  reluctant  to  appear  in  Shake- 


Pkolojjraph  bi^  SoTony. 

TaouAB  WaifrEN. 

Bpeare  before  the  critical  public  of  the  metropolis,  but  I  was 
kindly  dealt  with  by  the  critics  and.  the  audiences.  The 
Tribune  and  the  New  York  Evening  Post  were  especially 
good  to  me. 

Adrienne  remained  three  weeks  on  the  bills.     Then,  in 
January,  1878,  it  was  changed  for  "Camille."    The  latter 


356  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

made  a  decided  hit  and  established  my  success.  During 
the  rehearsals  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stephen  Fiske  predicted  this 
happy  result.  There  had  been  many  Camilles  in  America 
before  me,  and  I  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  wonderful 
performances  of  Clara  Morris  and  Matilda  Heron.  But 
the  managers  seemed  to  like  my  entirely  different  conception 
of  the  character  and  the  changes  I  introduced.  Being  sure 
of  success  in  advance,  I  threw  myself  into  my  part  with  all 
my  heart  and  soul,  and  this  time  the  press  was  unanimous 
in  my  praise,  without  any  reserve.  Of  course  some  critics 
preferred  to  see  on  the  stage  a  common,  fallen  woman,  such 
as  one  may  meet  in  the  streets  after  dark,  but  I  had  read 
Arsfene  Houssaye's  story  of  ^' Marie  Duplessis,"  who  was  the 
model  of  '*La  Dame  aux  Cam^lias,"  and  who,  it  seems, 
looked  so  refined  and  cultured  and  spoke  of  art  with  such 
good  judgment  that  Franz  Liszt,  meeting  her  in  the  foyer 
of  the  theatre,  took  her  for  a  princess.  Dumas,  filsj  makes 
her  resemble  the  duke's  daughter,  thus  indicating  the 
delicate  style  of  her  personality.  I  liked  this  picture,  and 
I  followed  Houssaye's  description,  making  my  heroine  more 
refined  than  the  usual  type.  It  pleased  my  imagination  to 
present  Camille  as  reserved,  gentle,  intense  in  her  love,  and 
most  sensitive, — in  one  word,  an  exception  to  her  kind. 
This  conception  found  favor  with  the  public,  and  Camille's 
sensitiveness  proved  contagious,  for  everybody  wept  over 
the  poor  pirl.  In  the  third  act  of  the  first  performance 
even  the  prompter  threw  away  the  prompt-book  and  re- 
tired to  a  dark  corner,  behind  the  scenes,  where  he  indulged 
in  a  good  cry.  Jeannette  Gilder  came  to  my  dressing-room 
with  her  face  flooded  with  tears,  and  we  fell  into  each  other's 
arms,  laughing  heartily,  she  over  her  previous  crying  fit, 
and  I  because  a  laugh  was  such  a  great  relief  after  the  emo- 
tions of  the  third  act.  Richard  Watson  Gilder,  the  poet, 
and  his  beautiful  madonna-like  wife  also  came  to  shake 
hands  with  me,  and  I  was  happy.     These  dear   and  dis- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  367 

tinguished  people  were  the  first  friends  I  found  in  New  York, 
and  both  my  husband  and  myself  spent  many  pleasant 
hours  with  them  in  the  ^^Studio/'  and  also  on  Eighteenth 
Street,  where  old  Mrs.  Gilder  lived  with  her  three  daughters 
and  her  youngest  son,  Joseph. 

An  amusing  incident  during  that  first  evening  nearly 
ruined  my  scene  with  Armand's  father.  In  order  to  make 
a  strong  contrast  between  Camille's  former  luxurious  sur- 
roundings and  the  quiet  country  life  to  which  she  had  retired, 
and  to  emphasize  the  sudden  conversion  of  that  rather  gay 
person  into  an  angelic  creature,  full  of  love,  of  simplicity, 
and  of  nature,  the  stage  manager  had  hung  up  a  cage 
with  a  live  canary  as  a  realistic  touch  of  restful,  rustic  exist- 
ence. The  pretty  bird,  dazzled  at  the  start  by  the  light, 
behaved  quietly  through  the  first  scenes  of  the  act,  but  by 
the  time  Mr.  Duval  was  introduced;  it  felt  quite  at  home, 
and  finally  started  on  a  long,  elaborate  song,  so  shrill  and 
loud  that  I,  fearing  that  this  vocal  exhibition  might  inter- 
fere with  the  play,  took  down  the  cage  and  put  it  out  of 
the  stage  window.  I  saw  some  one  standing  there,  and  nat- 
urally thought  that  the  cage  would  be  taken  from  me  and 
carried  back  to  the  property-room.  But  the  person,  for 
some  unknown  reason,  stepped  back,  and  the  cage  fell  to 
the  floor  with  a  loud  thump.  Next  morning  I  received  a 
large  envelope  containing  a  letter  from  the  Society  for  the 
Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals,  in  which  I  was  accused  of 
having  deliberately  murdered  an  innocent  bird,  for  which 
crime  I  must,  according  to  the  statutes  of  the  society,  be 
fined,  etc.  I  had  to  prove  that  the  poor  little  bird  was  not 
injured  before  I  was  left  in  peace.  As  I  was  then  becoming 
quite  popular,  the  papers  wrote  a  great  deal  about  this  inci- 
dent. 

A  few  days  after  the  first  performance  of  ''Camille,''  my 
manager  told  me  that  there  was  not  one  seat  left  for  the 
remainder  of  the  week,  and  there  was  a  demand  for  the 


358  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

next  week.  Indeed  the  houses  were  so  crowded  that  the 
orchestra  was  taken  out  from  its  place  and  the  latter  filled 
with  chairs  for  the  public.  Many  persons  had  to  be  accom- 
modated with  seats  behind  the  scenes.  The  success  was 
complete,  and  Mr.  Fiske  urged  me  to  stay  in  New  York  two 
or  three  months  more,  but  Mr.  Sargent,  having  already 
planned  my  tour,  refused  to  accept  the  proposition. 

It  was  about  that  time  that  Sienkiewicz  passed  through 
New  York,  on  his  way  to  Europe,  and  came  to  take  leave  of 
me.  He  looked  so  happy  that  I  sincerely  congratulated 
him  on  his  return  from  his  voluntary  exile,  where ''the  orange 
grows, "  back  to  the  land  of  the  snow-storms  and  the  sleigh- 
rides. 

I  do  not  remember  the  order  of  the  different  cities  I 
visited  during  this  first  tour.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  men- 
tion a  few.  I  played  one  week  in  Philadelphia,  in  Mrs, 
Drew's  Theatre,  with  her  stock  company,  and  the  next 
thing  that  comes  to  my  memory  is  the  trip  by  boat  to  Bos- 
ton. The  weather  was  frightful,  and  we  had  a  bad  storm, 
which  delayed  our  arrival  in  Boston  for  ten  hours.  I  was 
a  little  nervous  about  my  appearance  in  that  critical  city, 
but  the  New  York  press  criticisms,  and  several  private, 
friendly  messages  made  the  field  smooth  for  me.  Mr, 
George  W.  Childs,  whom  I  had  met  in  Philadelphia,  and  who, 
with  his  well-known  kindness,  had  shown  me  great  courtesies, 
wrote  on  my  behalf  to  Mr.  George  Bancroft,  and"  Mrs, 
Gilder  had  also  sent  several  letters  to  her  Boston  friends, 
the  most  important  one  being  to  Henry  W.  Longfellow. 

I  opened  my  two  weeks'  engagement  at  the  Boston 
Museum  with  '' Adrienne  Lecouvreur,"  and  played  with  the 
stock  company,  celebrated  for  its  excellency,  for  there  were 
Mr.  Warren,  Miss  Clarke,  and  other  fine  artists  in  the  per- 
sonnel. Apparently  I  was  doomed  to  meet  on  my  first 
nights  with  some  mishap  or  accident.  As  I  related  before, 
in  San  Francisco  my  veil  took  fire ;  in  New  York,  on  the  first 


360  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

night  of  "Adrienne/'  I  carried  on  a  shoe-horn  instead  of  my 
fan ;  and  on  the  iBrst  performance  of  "Camille  "  there  was  the 
canary-bird  episode ;  but  here  it  was  something  still  worse. 
There  was  a  wooden  bar  running  along  the  back  drop, 
joining  the  two  sides  of  the  door,  which  I  had  not  seen  at 
the  rehearsal,  because  the  stage  was  not, fully  set  then. 
So  it  happened  that  when  I  was  leaving  Michonnet  in  the 
fourth  act,  with  his  hands  full  of  the  money  for  the  delivery 
of  Maurice  de  Saxe  from  the  hands  of  his  debtors,  I  was  in 
such  haste  to  get  to  my  dressing-room  to  change  my  costume 
that  I  started  on  a  run,  and  holding  my  head  up  to  express 
defiance  and  pride,  I  tripped  over  that  unfortunate  bar  and 
fell  headlong  through  the  door.  An  audible  and  distressing 
laugh  struck  my  ear  most  unpleasantly,  but  when  I  returned, 
a  few  minutes  later,  the  audience  applauded  my  entrance. 
I  bowed,  covering  my  face  with  the  fan  up  to  my  eyes,  my 
whole  attitude  expressing  how  much  I  was  ashamed  of  my 
awkwardness.  This  seemed  to  establish  a  bond  of  sympathy 
between  the  house  and  myself,  and  the  rest  of  the  periform- 
ance  went  on  undisturbed. 

One  of  the  most  important  events  of  my  stay  in  Boston 
was  my  meeting  with  Henry  W.  Longfellow.  Mrs.  Gilder 
wrote  that  the  great  man  would  call  on  me  at  my  hotel. 
Although  I  was  forewarned  of  his  visit,  yet  I  was  quite 
overcome  with  emotion  when  one  afternoon  his  card  was 
brought  to  my  room.  One  look  of  his  kind,  deep-set  eyes 
and  a  warm  hand-shake  soon  restored  my  mental  equilib- 
rium and  put  me  at  my  ease.  The  presence  of  this  true, 
great  poet,  this  man  endowed  with  the  finest  qualities  a 
man  can  possess,  was  a  spiritual  feast  for  me. 

He  spoke  to  me  of  Boston  and  its  celebrities,  and  made 
me  acquainted  with  the  names  of  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes, 
Aldrich,  James  T.  Fields,  Celia  Thaxter,  etc.,  then  chaffed 
me  about  going  up  Bunker  Hill  Monument,  and  asked  me 
how  I  compared  the  California  weather  with  the  beautiful 


THE  NEW  eWorld  sei 

climate  of  Massachusetts.  He  went  on  speaking  in  that 
manner,  that  of  a  perfect  man  of  the  world,  and  simply- 
charmed  me.      Then  my  son  Ralph  came  in,  and  we  were 


CopgriglU,  ISSt.  bn  J.  H.  IdBMiin. 
LONOFBLLOW. 

both  invited  to  lunch  at  the  poet's  house  in  Cambridge. 
Longfellow's  great  charm  was  just  that  perfect  simplicity, 
so  rare  in  celebrated  men.  There  was  not  a  shade  of  the 
patronizing  air  bo  frequently  assumed  by  people  of  superior 
standing,  not  a  particle  of  the  pomposity  I  had  observed 


362  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

more  than  once  among  much  less-known  writers.  A  celeb- 
rity without  conceit  is  rare,  but  there  was  none  in  the 
author  of  ''Evangeline"  and  ''Hiawatha."  He  did  not 
seem  to  care  much  for  compliments.  When  I  attempted 
to  speak  about  his  poems,  he  interrupted  me,  and  pointing 
to  a  handsome  arm-chair  standing  in  his  studio,  drew  my 
attention  to  it,  remarking  jokingly  that  the  children  liked 
his  verses,  because  he  had  received  that  present  from  a 
school  on  the  —  here  he  paused,  and  added,  with  a  laugh, 
"centennial  anniversary  of  my  literary  activity.".  Then, 
as  if  regretting  that  he  had  spoken  lightly  of  the  gift,  he 
grew  suddenly  serious,  and  stroking  the  back  of  the  chair 
with  his  hand,  he  said,  almost  tenderly,  "I  prize  it 
highly."  I  made  another  attempt,  and  said  I  would  gladly 
study  some  passages  from  his  poems  and  recite  them  to  him^ 
and  I  mentioned  "Hiawatha,"  but  he  stopped  me  with  the 
words  :  "You  do  not  want  to  waste  your  time  in  memorizing 
those  things,  and  don't  you  speak  of  "Hiawatha,"  or  I  will 
call  you  Mudjikiewis,  which,  by  the  way,  sounds  somewhat 
like  your  name." 

After  lunch  Ralph  played  one  of  Chopin's  nocturnes,  while 
our  host  recited  Campbell's  poem  about 'Poland,  and  made  me 
cry.     Needless  to  say,  I  left  his  house  quite  fascinated. 

My  husband  arrived  in  Boston  during  the  second  week  of 
my  engagement,  happy,  and  looking  better  than  when  I  left 
him.  From  his  letters  I  already  knew  that  he  had  sold  the 
farm  and  sent  the  Sypniewski  family  back  to  Poland. 
Lucian  Paprocki,  however,  had  remained  in  America,  look- 
ing for  work  as  a  cartoonist  for  a  newspaper  or  magazine. 

While  in  Boston  we  received  many  invitations  from 
prominent  people,  but  I  was  prevented  from  taking  part 
in  social  entertainments  because,  owing  to  the  success  made 
by  "Camille,"  I  was  induced  bv  Mr.  Sargent  to  play  three 
extra  matinees,  which  made  ten  performances  during  six 
days.    The  seats  were  sold  at  auction.    After  the  Saturday 


THE  NEW  WORLD  363 

matinee,  when  I  was  returning  with  my  husband  to  the 
hotel,  people  crowded  the  street  so  thickly  that  the  carriage 
could  scarcely  move.  Strangers  mounted  the  steps  to  shake 
hands  and  shower  all  kinds  of  compliments  and  blessings. 
Girls  with  moistened  eyes  threw  flowers  in  my  lap,  and  a 
young  mother  lifted  her  child  to  be  kissed  by  me.  The 
enthusiasm  of  the  Boston  public  on  that  occasion  reminded 
me  of  my  performance  in  Warsaw  on  the  eve  of  my  depar- 
ture, I  was  as  much  dumfounded  as  gratified  by  such 
tokens  of  approval  and  appreciation  in  a  city  supposed  to 
be  cold-blooded  and  renowned  for  its  culture  and  its  critical 
spirit. 

My  impressions  of  my  first  visit  to  Washington  were 
equally  delightful,  only  there  the  success  was  rather  more 
of  a  social  character.  I  really  was  spoiled  by  people's 
attentions,  which  were  shown  in  calls,  invitations,  recep- 
tions, dinner-parties,  etc.  We  met  there  many  men  promi- 
nent in  public  life,  amongst  whom  I  prized  most  the  ac- 
quaintance of  Carl  Schurz,  General  Sherman,  Governor 
Boutwell,  Eugene  Hale,  then  a  promising  young  Congress- 
man, and  Senator  Roscoe  Conkling.  I  deplored  my  in- 
sufficient knowledge  of  English,  which  made  me  shy  and 
diffident  in  conversation,  but  I  listened  attentively  to  all 
that  these  great  men  said.  One  evening,  however,  at  a 
dinner  at  Mr.  E.  Hale's  hquse,  I  ventured  to  speak  about 
the  condition  of  my  country,  at  Mr.  Conkling's  request. 
On  that  subject  I  never  lacked  eloquence,  even  in  English. 

It  was  our  good  fortune  to  meet  subsequently  all  these 
eminent  men,  and  I  remember  with  gratitude  the  kindness 
they  showed  to  me.  The  one  I  knew  best  in  later  years  was 
Mr.  Conkling.  It  was  to  him  I  owed  the  privilege  of  making 
the  acquaintance  of  General  Grant,  after  his  terms  of  Presi- 
dency. His  exquisite  manners  might  have  served  for 
a  model  to  the  most  refined  European  men  of  the  world, 
and  women  were  fascinated  by  his  mere  presence  in  the 


364  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

room.     When  this  unusually  tall  and  handsome  man  en- 
tered, he  became  at  once  the  centre  of  attraction. 

It  was  with  regret  that  I  left  Washington,  having  visited 
many  places  and  monuments,  but  leaving  unseen  many 
others  of  equal  interest. 

We  went  to  Baltimore,  where  we  saw  again  Dion  Bouci- 
cault,  and  where,  at  a  jolly  terrapin  supper,  we  met  Mr. 
Sothern  (the  father),  one  of  the  most  congenial  gentlemen 
I  ever  encountered.  He  had  a  charming  way  of'  talking 
to  people  he  saw  for  the  first  time  as  though  he  had  known 
them  for  years,  and  when  he  left  the  room  with  a  warm 
hand-shake  and  that  peculiar,  quizzical,  but  kind  expression 
in  his  eyes,  every  person  present  was  sure  of  having  won  a 
friend  for  life. 

The  next  city  which  comes  to  my  memory  is  Louisville, 
and  there  I  first  knew  Mr.  Henry  Watterson.  The  great 
journalist  made  a  vivid  impression  on  me.  It  was  easy 
to  recognize  in  him  a  man  of  genius,  highly  cultivated,  strong- 
minded,  full  of  vitality  and  energy ;  when  I  knew  him  better, 
I  found  that  these  brilliant  qualities  were  combined  with 
inborn  kindness  and  tenderness  of  heart.  Our  first  meeting 
was  the  commencement  of  a  friendship  which  still  lasts.  We 
spent  many  a  happy  hour  in  Mr.  Watterson 's  hospitable 
and  truly  Southern  home,  with  its  charming  chatelaine, 
Mrs.  Watterson,  in  their  family  circle.  All  through  my 
American  career  this  faithful  friend  gave  me  numerous  proofs 
of  his  kijidness. 

It  was  during  my  Louisville  engagement  that  my  manager 
conceived  the  '^glorious''  idea  of  providing  me  with  a  fat 
little  pug-dog,  in  order  to  give  me  more  style,  because,  as 
he  said,  ^^  all  prominent  stars  had  pet  dogs,''  and  though  I 
never  cared  for  that  small  canine  specimen,  being  fond  of 
large  dogs,  I  had  to  yield  to  the  appealing  eyes  of  the  pug, 
and  promise  to  keep  him  as  a  living  proof  of  my  ''artistic 
greatness'' !    But  this  was  not  the  only  token  of  the  ''emi- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  365 

nent^'  position  I  had  reached,  or  rather  of  the  ingenious 
mind  of  my  impresario.  I  was  reported  as  having  lost  my 
stage  jewels  (advertised  as  real  diamonds),  because  ''every 
great  star  always  loses  hers  at  least  once  a  year."  That 
scheme  of  being  reckless  about  valuables  was  considered 
a  splendid  advertisement.     Poor  art ! 

I  was  told  that  this  mode  of  exciting  the  public  interest 
originated  with  Mr.  Barnum,  especially  when  he  introduced 
Jenny  Lind  in  America.  Yet  there  was  something  grand 
in  Barnum's  manner  of  humbugging  people,  as,  for  instance, 
his  offering  of  the  first  night's  concert  to  charity  in  the 
name  of  the  celebrated  singer,  and  paying  her  share  out  of 
his  own  pocket.  That  was  fine,  but  his  would-be  imitators 
cheapened  his  style  considerably  in  the  time  I  am  speak- 
ing of,  and  I  had  to  submit  to  a  great  deal  of  ridiculous 
reclame,  until  I  grew  independent  and  stopped  all  that 
nonsense. 

Chicago  in  the  first  months  of  1878  was  not  one  of  the 
great  cities  of  the  world,  as  it  is  to-day,  and  I  had  no  curiosity 
to  go  out  and  visit  any  of  the  parks,  then  in  their  infancy. 
I  stayed  in  the  hotel,  studying,  and  unhappy  over  the  dis- 
mal weather.  I  went  out  only  once  to  a  reception,  tendered 
to  me  by  a  society  of  young  enthusiasts,  the  ''Owl  Club.'' 
But  the  other  days  I  did  not  leave  my  rooms  until  it  was 
time  to  go  to  the  theatre.  There  everything  appeared 
brighter.  The  profusion  of  good  scenery,  an  excellent  sup- 
porting company,  and  a  house  packed  brimful  with  nice- 
looking  people,  were  things  good  to  behold  after  my  solitary 
confinement  in  the  gloomy  hotel  room.  I  was  at  my  best 
on  the  first  night,  and  the  success  of  my  two  weeks'  en- 
gagement was  secured.  But  the  lack  of  exercise  and  of 
fresh  air  brought  me  into  trouble.  One  morning  I  woke 
up  with  a  sore  throat  and  an  unpleasant  hoarseness  in  my 
voice.  A  physician  had  to  be  summoned,  and  he  cleared  my 
throat  in  the  style  of  chimney-sweeps,  brushing  it  up  and 


366  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

down  with  a  small  brush  on  a  long  wire,  until  I  was  nearly 
choked.  I  would  not  recommend  that  energetic  process  of 
clearing  the  vocal  chords  to  Madame  Sembrich  or  to  Calv6, 
but  it  did  help  me  at  the  time.  I  went  on  with  my  engage- 
ment without  interruption,  though  I  had  to  live  on  milk 
and  sweet  oil  for  a  while. 

In  St.  Louis  I  saw  Mr.  Eugene  Field,  another  of  the  dear 
friends  I  gained  in  America.  I  admired  him  for  his  genuine 
poetic  talent,  his  originality  and  almost  childlike  simplicity, 
as  much  as  for  his  great  heart.  He  had  indeed  a  many- 
sided  and  rich  nature, — most  domestic  in  his  family  relations, 
a  delightful  host  by  his  own  fireside,  and  yet  a  perfect  Bo- 
hemian in  artistic  circles.  The  author  of  exquisitely  dainty 
poems,  and  withal  a  brilliant  and  witty  humorist,  he  was 
equally  lovable  in  all  these  various  characters.  He  was 
full  of  original  ideas  which  often  gave  a  quaint  touch  to  his 
receptions.  In  later  years,  when  he  lived  in  Chicago,  I 
remember  a  dinner  en  forme,  which  he  called  a '^reversed 
one,"  beginning  with  black  coffee  and  ice-cream,  and  ending 
with  soup  and  oysters.  After  the  first  course  he  delivered 
a  most  amusing  toast.  We  were  laughing  so  much  that 
tears  stood  in  our  eyes.  He  looked  compassionately  around 
the  table,  and  saying,  ''I  see  that  you  are  sad  and  depressed ; 
let  us  have  some  fun,"  he  went  to  a  mechanical  piano  and 
gave  us  a  few  bars  of  a  funeral  march.  After  each  dish  he 
returned  to  the  instrument  and  treated  us  to  some  doleful 
tune.  On  a  later  occasion  he  sent  us  a  formal  invitation 
to  a  party  at  his  house,  'Ho  meet  a  friend  from  abroad."  , 

But  when  we  came,  there  was  no  such  friend,  and  as  the 
evening  went  on,  the  foreigner  did  not  make  his  appearance. 
When  we  were  on  the  point  of  leaving,  we  heard  a  strange 
sound  at  the  window.  ''At  last,"  exclaimed  our  host,  and 
opening  the  w^indow,  called  out  some  name  which  I  cannotr 
remember.     After  a  few  seconds  we  saw  the  head  of  a  don-  \ 

key,  and  a  most  frightful  braying  filled  the  room.     Eugene 


THE  NEW  WORLD  367 

Field  stroked  caressingly  the  long,  soft  ears,  until  the 
soothing  effect  of  his  hands  stopped  the  musical  entertain- 
ment, and  the  introduction  took  place.  ''This  is  my  be- 
lated friend!  He  is,  indeed,  a  great  donkey!"  remarked 
our  host,  quite  seriously.  After  taking  leave,  I  overheard 
some  of  the  guests  saying,  ''That  was  indeed  a  bitter 
satire,  but  I  should  like  to  know  who  was  really  that  friend 
from  abroad,  personified  by  the  donkey."  Thus  are  com- 
mentaries written,  looking  for  some  deep,  hidden  meaning 
in  a  simple  joke. 

In  the  summer  of  1878  we  took  a  steamer  from  New  York 
and  first  went  to  Ireland,  where  we  spent  a  week  or  so 
visiting  the  places  of  interest,  not  omitting  Blarney  Castle. 
We  had  there  the  pleasure  of  witnessing  a  young  American 
girl,  held  by  the  heels,  attempting  to  kiss  the  famous  stone. 

After  a  last  look  at  the  Killarney  Lakes,  the  beauty  of 
which  still  lingers  in  my  memory,  and  a  short  visit  to  Dublin, 
we  crossed  to  England  and  spent  a  few  days  in  London. 
There  for  the  first  time  I  saw  Henry  Irving,  in  "  Van  der 
Decken.''  The  performance  was  of  a  sort  entirely  new 
to  me,  but  certainly  picturesque  and  full  of  beauty.  It 
brought  back  to  my  mind  the  enchanting  fairy-stories  which 
had  delighted  my  cl.ildhood.  Irving  himself  appeared  to 
me  weird  and  unreal,  like  the  story,  and  this  lack  of  realism, 
together  with  the  actor's  artistic  appearance,  appealed  to 
me  strongly.  When  he  stepped  out  of  the  picture-frame, 
the  illusion  was  perfect,  and  h«  truly  gave  one  the  impres- 
sion of  a  supernatural  being. 

From  London  we  went  to  Poland  to  see  our  family  and 
friends.  Every  one  seemed  overjoyed  at  our  return,  as 
well  as  at  my  success  in  America.  My  good  mother  looked 
at  me  with  an  expression  of  pride  and  assurance,  saying, 
"Well,  it  is  as  it  should  be!"  Dear,  conceited  mother,  I 
hud  to  kiss  her  good-by  again  and  leave  for  Paris,  where 
we  were  going  to  see  the  Exposition,  and  also  to  get  new 


368  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

gowns  for  Camille,  Frou-Frou,  and  Juliet.  Besides  our  ex- 
cursions to  the  Exposition,  the  theatres,  etc.,  we  also  spent 
a  great  deal  of  time  in  the  studio  of  Carolus  Duran,  to  whom 
I  was  posing  for  a  life-sized  portrait.  The  picture  had  been 
ordered  by  an  American  friend  of  ours,  Mr.  Paris  Haldeman, 
with  the  object  of  presenting  it  to  the  Philadelphia  Art 
Gallery.  It  is  there  still,  I  hear,  but  I  am  sorry  to  say  that, 
though  the  painting  is  very  fine,  there  is  no  likeness  in 
the  face,  nor  in  the  proportions  of  the  whole  figure.  It  was 
amusing  to  sit,  or  rather  to  stand,  for  Carolus  Duran  and 
see  how  very  Spanish  he  tried  to  look  in  order  to  suit  his 
name.  He  had  a  guitar  in  the  studio,  and  played  on  it, 
humming  some  Spanish  songs,  with  a  very  French  accent, 
every  time  we  took  a  few  moments  of  rest. 

One  morning  a  tall,  attractive  young  man  came  in  and 
was  introduced  by  Monsieur  Duran  as  ''Mr.  John  Sarrrgent, 
from  Amerrrica."  The  young  artist  had  brought  with  him 
a  small  canvas,  and  while  Carolus  was  painting  the  chinchilla 
of  my  dress,  he  painted  Duran 's  head.  In  an  hour  or  so  he 
made  a  sketch  which  looked  to  me  like  a  finished  portrait 
in  its  wonderful  likeness.  When  he  left  the  room,  Carolus 
said,  "  II  a  du  talent,  ce  gargon-lk!  "  It  was  a  sort  of  off- 
hand praise,  at  least  we  thought  so.  We  wished  very  much 
to  meet  again  ce  gargon-ld,  but  he  did  not  return  to  the 
studio,  at  least  while  we  were  there. 

Many  of  our  Polish  friends  came  to  Paris  for  the  Ex- 
position, and  of  course  they  also  were  greatly  excited  over 
my  success.  The  result  consisted  in  many  delightful  din- 
ners, drives,  and  all  kinds  of  pleasure  parties.  We  found 
our  old  friends,  Cyprian  Godebski  and  his  wife,  settled  in 
Paris,  and  spent  again  some  purely  artistic  evenings  in  their 
house,  which,  as  in  Warsaw,  was  the  meeting-point  not  only 
of  Polish  painters,  but  also  of  most  prominent  lights  of  art 
of  other  countries.  Among  others  there  was  our  old  ac- 
quaintance, Nicolas  Rubinstein.     One  afternoon  he  brought 


MADAME    MODJESKA 


1 


THE  NEW  WORLD  369 

to  our  hotel  Liszt  and  Tourgenief,  the  exquisite  Russian 
writer,  but  the  luck  was  against  me,  for  I  was  out  and  the 
only  souvenirs  I  had  of  these  two  great  celebrities  were 
their  visiting-cards.  They  left  for  Italy  next  morning,  and 
I  never  met  them  afterwards. 

'^Ernani,"  the  tragedy  of  Victor  Hugo,  was  then  being 
played  at  the  Th^dtre  Frangais  for  several  weeks,  and 
I  saw  the  wonderful  Sarah  Bernhardt  for  the  first  time,  in 
the  part  of  Donna  Sol.  I  was  carried  away  by  her  passionate 
and  desperate  scene  in  the  last  act,  and  quite  realized  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  public  for  the  rare  artist.  She  conquered 
me  as  she  did  many  others,  and  I  have  still  a  most  vivid 
admiration  for  her  continued  and  successful  work.  I  was 
sorry  there  was  no  change  of  bill  during  my  stay  in  Paris, 
for  I  wished  to  see  her  again  in  some  other  part. 

Having  made  with  Mr.  H.  Sargent  a  contract  for  another 
season,  a  long  one  this  time,  lasting  thirty  or  more  weeks, 
we  had  to  return  to  America.  I  left  my  son  in  the  care  of 
my  Polish  friends  ^  who  lived  in  Paris.  He  was  determined 
to  bec9me  a  civil  engineer,  and  wished  to  prepare  himself 
for  L'Ecole  des  Ponts  et  Chauss^es  (School  of  Bridges 
and  Roads).  In  the  month  of  September  Ralph  and  our 
friends  accompanied  us  to  Cherbourg,  and  I  parted  from  my 
boy  with  a  heavy  heart,  but  full  of  hope  for  his  future. 

1  Miss  Anna  Wolska  and  her  father,  Mr.  Calixte  Wolski. 


2b 


CHAPTER  XU 

On  our  return  trip  to  America  we  met  on  the  steamer 
Miss  MoUie  Elliott  Seawell,  the  well-known  author.  She  was 
then  a  very  young  girl,  with  a  refined  mind  and  delightful 
Southern  manners,  and  attracted  me  by  her  lively  conversa- 
tion and  her  ingenuous  and  candid  remarks.  Her  enthusiasm 
for  nature  was  another  link  between  us.  This  started  an 
exceedingly  pleasant  acquaintanceship,  which  we  cultivated 
for  years,  both  by  correspondence  and  several  visits  to  her 
home  in  Washington,  where  I  had  the  occasion  of  increasing 
my  knowledge  of  Washington  society. 

I  was  happy  to  be  back  in  New  York  again,  —  the  city 
of  constant  improvements,  always  yearning  for  perfection, 
so  difficult  to  obtain  on  a  long,  narrow  strip  of  land.  Still, 
even  after  two  years,  New  York  seemed  different  to  me 
from  the  city  we  landed  in  on  our  first  arrival  from  Europe. 
Many  handsome  new  buildings  had  been  erected,  and 
Central  Park  was  greener  and  more  varied.  We  were  glad 
to  see  the  improvements,  but  above  all  glad  to  see  the  dear 
friends  we  had  left  there. 

We  met  first  Jeannette  Gilder.  She  was  then  a  young 
newspaper  woman  and  wore  semi-masculine  dress, — a  melon 
hat,  a  high  collar,  a  cravat,  and  a  tailor-made  coat,  but  under 
those  manly  garments  was  hidden  an  essentially  womanly 
nature  and  a  heart  full  of  sympathy  and  kindness.  She 
always  seemed  to  me  a  wonderful  combination  of  talent, 
work,  enthusiasm,  abnegation,  and  serenity.  She  possessed 
a  wonderful  recuperative  power ;  after  toiling  almost  to  ex- 
haustion, she  would  enjoy,  in  her  moments  of  leisure,  all 
the  fun  and  pleasure  of  life  with  the  buoyancy  of  a  little 

370 


THE  NEW  WORLD  371 

girl.  We  met  often  in  the  seventies,  and  then  we  drifted 
away  from  each  other,' but  neither  space  nor  time  count  with 
her,  for  no  matter  how  many  years  might  have  elapsed 


Walt  Whitmam. 


since  our  last  meeting,  she  always  remains  the  same,  Sempre 
la  stessa.  By  the  way,  this  Italian  motto  I  had  adopted 
in  former  years  for  myself,  but  since  Count  Fredro,  Jr., 
wrote    once    at  the    foot  of  a    letter    addressed    to    me, 


372  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

"Always  the  same,  only  a  little  older,"  I  ceased  to  use  it 
personally,  and  preferred  to  apply  this  epithet  to  my  friends, 
especially  those  who,  like  Jeannette  Gilder,  are  unchange- 
able, both  in  appearance  and  character.  We  were  also 
welcomed  by  her  brother,  Richard  W.  Gilder.  We  spent 
many  delightful  hours  in  his  house  on  Fifteenth  Street, 
called  '^The  Studio,''  because  the  living-room  was  arranged 
as  an  artist's  atelier  for  his  charming  and  gifted  wife, 
Madame  Helena  de  Kay  Gilder,  who  painted  there  her 
portraits  and  sketches  from  life.  I  shall  always  remember 
the  glorious  evening  spent  in  that  artistic  abode,  where  all 
that  could  be  found  best  in  art  gathered  around  the  madonna's 
tea-table.  In  that  house  Clara  Louise  Kellogg  sang,  Salvini 
recited,  Joe  Jefferson  was  a  frequent  guest  on  his  visits  to 
New  York.  Poets,  artists,  sculptors,  as  well  as  people  of 
highest  social  position,  found  respite  from  the  daily  hum- 
drum in  that  atmosphere  of  refinement.  Amongst  others,  we 
met  Clara  Louise  Kellogg,  John  La  Farge,  Augustus  Saint 
Gaudens,  and  also  Walt  Whitman.  I  shall  not  easily  forget 
the  impression  the  latter  made  on  me.  His  whole  ap- 
pearance was  unusual.  The  expressive,  rather  large- 
featured  face  would  have  fitted  King  Lear  to  perfection. 
His  hair  and  beard  were  white,  and  his  deep  eyes  were  both 
eager  and  sad.  I  read  in  them  wisdom  and  concentration, 
but  also  a  great  deal  of  pessimism  in  the  twinkle  of  the  lids. 
He  was  sparing  of  speech,  but  when  he  spoke  it  was  like 
his  poems,  deep  and  concise.  When,  taking  leave,  he  put 
his  large-brimmed  hat  on,  he  looked  like  one  of  those  tra- 
ditional, picturesque  squatters  of  old  times,  rarely  seen 
at  the  present  day. 

I  opened  the  season  of  1878-1879  in  New  York  at  the 
Fifth  Avenue  Theatre,  with  ''Frou-Frou."  The  title  part 
of  Frou-Frou  was  more  difficult  for  me  to  learn  than  any 
other  I  had  played  before,  because  of  the  rapid  speeches. 
In  the  third  act,  especially,  my  s«ene  with  Louise  called 


THE  NEW  WORLD  373 

for  so  much  speed  that  my  tongue,  not  being  quite  used  to 
the  foreign  language,  in  addition  to  my  nervousness,  made 
me  make  such  a  havoc  of  my  words  on  the  first  night  that 
I  could  scarcely  understand  myself,  not  to  speak  of  the 
audience.  To  my  great  amazement,  a  young  critic,  Mr. 
Steinberg,  of  the  New  York  Herald,  said  quite  seriously  in 
his  notice  about  "Frou-Frou"  that  my  rapid  speeches  were 
like  Wagner's  music  to  him, — the  less  he  understood,  the 
better  he  liked  them.  He  added,  further,  that  this  rushing 
cataract  of  sounds  was  most  impressive. 

Though  the  whole  notice  was  most  enthusiastic,  and 
though  I  was  thankful  for  so  much  indulgence,  yet  I  con- 
sidered it  more  as  a  youthful  outburst  of  admiration  than  a 
truthful  account.  Had  it  not  been  so  sincere,  it  would  have 
sounded  like  satire.  I  laughed  while  reading  it,  but  blushed 
also,  and  went  directly  to  work  over  my  speeches,  repeat- 
ing them  first  slowly  and  then  more  and  more  rapidly,  until 
I  succeeded  in  making  them  more  distinct.  I  was  told  that 
my  second  performance  was  quite  an  improvement.  Yet 
one  who  has  never  played  in  a  foreign  language  has  no  idea 
how  difficult  it  is  to  render  all  the  necessary  lights  and 
shades,  when  one  is  hampered  by  the  lack  of  familiarity 
both  with  the  foreign  words  and  the  pronunciation.  No 
lessons,  no  exercise,  can  take  the  place  of  the  language  we 
have  been  born  to.  Actors,  however,  have  the  advantage 
of  illustrating  their  words  by  action  and  facial  expression. 
Were  it  not  for  that,  every  attempt  to  play  in  a  foreign 
tongue  would  be  fruitless.  That  was  the  reason  I  never 
liked  to  give  English  recitations  on  a  platform,  because  I 
had  nothing  to  help  out  the  deficiencies  of  my  pronunciation. 

I  had  my  own  company  this  time :  Frank  Clement,  from 
England,  was  my  leading  man.  and  Louise  Muldener  the 
leading  lady.  That  excellent  actress  was  a  German,  and 
spoke  English  with  a  slight  accent.  I  heard  Mr.  Stephen 
Fiske,  the  manager  of  the  theatre,  say  that  it  was  a  mistake 


374  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  have  engaged  her,  because  one  star  with  a  foreign  accent 
might  be  excused,  but  two  in  the  cast,  one  speaking  with  a 
Polish,  and  the  other  with  a  German,  accent  would  only 
supply  food  for  criticism  and  for  malicious  remarks  to  the 
quick,  mischievous  American  newspaper  men,  and  indeed 
many  jokes  were  made  on  the  subject.  Some  one  wrote : 
''No  wonder  these  ladies  quarrelled  and  that  Madame  Mod- 
jeska  was  teeming  with  rage  in  the  third  act,  when  she,  in 
her  sweet  accent,  addressed  Miss  Muldener  as  'scester,' 
and  was  called  in  return  'Oh!  Oh!  Sch visterrr ! '  Who 
could  stand  that  insult?"  There  was  a  great  deal  of  exag- 
geration in  that,  because  Miss  Muldener's  accent  was  not 
unpleasant,  but  the  fear  of  ridicule  made  my  manager 
exchange  her  for  another  young  lady,  far  less  competent. 

I  played  Juliet  during  this  season.  It  was  on  that  occa- 
sion that  Scribner^s  Monthly  published  a  long  article  about 
me,  —  written  by  Charles  De  Kay,  —  inserting  several  of 
my  photographs  and  my  portrait  by  Carolus  Duran.  The 
article  helped  to  spread  my  reputation  a  great  deal,  for 
Scribner^s  Monthly  seldom  gave  space  to  theatrical  matters. 
Besides,  being  considered  one  of  the  best,  if  not  the  best, 
magazine  of  the  times,  it  was  read  aU  over  America  and 
abroad. 

During  my  engagement  in  Philadelphia  I  was  advised 
by  my  friends  to  add  "Peg  Woffington"  to  my  repertoire.  It 
was  not  a  good  choice,  for  I  could  neither  catch  the  Irish 
brogue  nor  dance  the  jig  in  the  last  scene.  Lotta,  who 
came  to  see  me  in  the  part,  had  a  good  laugh  over  my  dance, 
and  when  I  met  that  little  lady,  she  invited  me  to  an  extra 
matinee  to  show  me  how  she  danced  the  jig.  As  soon  as 
that  tiny,  nervous  creature  entered,  I  knew  that  I  had  before 
me  a  woman  of  great  talent  and  originality.  The  style  of 
her  plays  was  not,  of  course,  elevated.  The  one  we  saw  was 
a  popular,  amusing  comedy,  not  even  well  written,  with 
commonplace  characters,  but  her  individuality  covered  all 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


Pholoarapk  by  Saroim, 


LOTTA   (CHARI.OTTB   CBABTBEK). 


376  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

the  sins  of  construction.  She  infused  life  in  the  part  she 
played,  and  her  realism  was  simply  wonderful.  She  was 
an  ideal  type  of  the  mining-camps,  and  very  pretty,  too. 
Several  actresses  imitated  her,  even  in  the  slightest  gestures, 
and  one  of  them,  having  seen  Lotta,  repeatedly  copied  all 
her  stage  business,  and  appropriating  her  plays,  went  to 
London  and  produced  them.  She  made  a  hit,  but  when 
Lotta,  who  really  originated  the  types,  came  after  her  to 
London,  she  was  considered  a  second  edition  of  her  imitator. 
Such  proceedings  as  stealing  somebody's  artistic  creation 
are  unpardonable,  yet  they  happen  often,  and  the  people 
are  not  any  the  wiser  for  it.  Happily  there  are  many  record- 
ing angels  among  the  audience  and  in  the  press.  The 
shallow  imitators  usually  disappear  fiom  the  surface,  as  it 
happened  in  this  ciise,  foi  I  forget  even  the  name  of  Lotta's 
facsimile,  while  her  own  name  will  never  be  forgotten  by 
any  one  who  saw  her  on  the  stage. 

Before  I  went  on  a  regular  tour,  I  asked  Mr.  Sargent  to 
show  me  the  route  he  planned  for  me.  There  were  several 
one-night  towns  on  the  list,  and  I  anxiously  inquired  if  I 
should  be  obliged  to  wake  up  to  catch  trains  early  in  the 
morning.  He  answered  that,  sometimes,  it  was  inevitable, 
of  course.  Upon  that  I  declared  that  I  could  not  possibly 
consent  to  it,  because  I  must  have  at  least  eight  hours  of 
uninterrupted  sleep,  or  I  could  not  act  at  all.  Usually  I 
could  not  go  to  sleep  immediately  after  the  play,  being  too 
excited.  When  we  had  no  guests,  I  would  read  or  play  the 
piano  before  going  to  bed  ;  then  I  would  sleep  soundly  until 
nine  in  the  morning.  I  was  simply  unable  to  sleep  in  the 
daytime.  I  advised  Mr.  Sargent  to  cut  out  the  one-night 
towns.  He  looked  rather  amused,  and  said  he  could  hardly 
do  so,  having  much  higher  percentage  in  those  towns  than 
in  the  large  ones,  and  tried  to  persuade  me  that,  in  my  own 
interest,  I  should  accept  the  route  as  it  was.  I  stood  firm 
in  my  decision,  and  Mr.  Sargent  went  away  discontented. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  377 

Next  morning,  however,  he  came  in,  smiling,  and  said  he  had 
found  a  way  to  give  me  as  many  hours  of  sleep  as  I  desired 
by  renting  a  private  car. 

It  was  an  ordinary  Wagner's  sleeper,  without  drawing- 
room,  but  it  was  a  great  comfort  not  only  for  me  but  for  the 
actors,  who  were  so  thankful  for  this  consideration  that,  at 
the  end  of  the  season,  they  gave  Mr.  Sargent  a  present  for 
his  '^ glorious"  idea.  Thus  it  happened  that  I  had  the  first 
theatrical  private  car  on  the  road.  All  the  ''stars"  soon 
followed  the  example,  and  now  it  has  become  a  necessity  to 
travel  in  this  manner. 

When  I  returned  from  England,  after  my  London  d^but, 
in  1882,  I  used  the  private  cars,  in  their  improved  state, 
every  season.  While  my  husband  had  the  management  of 
my  tours,  which  he  had  for  several  years,  we  had  the  whole 
company  located  in  the  private  car,  but  later  on,  under  the 
regime  of  the  Theatrical  Trust,  he  gave  up  his  connection 
with  the  business,  and  my  seasons  were  conducted  by  regu- 
lar impresarios.  Under  their  rule  the  private  cars  were 
reserved  for  the  star  and  her  party,  and,  of  course,  for  the 
manager  or  his  agent,  and  the  members  of  the  company  were 
deprived  of  its  comforts,  or  admitted  only  on  paying  a 
pretty  high  rate  for  their  berths,  which  they  rarely  could 
afford.  The  result  was  a  great  hardship  for  them.  They 
were  waked  up  at  all  impossible  hours  for  the  trains,  some- 
times they  even  had  to  change  trains  in  the  middle  of  the 
night.  This  way  of  travelling,  especially  in  the  rainy  or 
freezing  season,  is  most  unpleasant,  if  not  injurious  to  health, 
and  the  consequence  of  it  is  that  the  poor  people  are  some- 
times so  tired  and  fagged  that  they  neglect  their  appearance 
and  become  lazy  and  indifferent.  No  one  can  expect  a 
good  performance  from  a  sleepy  actor. 

The  introduction  of  private  cars  had  some  bad  results. 
It  tempted  managers  to  book  their  stars  in  too  many  one- 
night  stands,  often  causing  unsatisfactory  productions  of 


378  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

the  plays.  The  haste  of  putting  up  the  scenery,  and  the 
constant  wear  and  tear  of  it;  soon  makes  it  look  shabby, 
or,  if  the  stage  is  too  small;  local  scenery  is  used  instead  of 
that  carried  by  the  company,  and  is  usually  ugly  and  un- 
suited  to  the  plays.  It  is  not  inspiring  to  play  ''Marie 
Stuart"  in  a  kitchen  instead  of  a  royal  prison,  or  '4IamJet" 
in  a  room  painted  all  over  with  cupids,  or  "  Julius  Cffisar"  in 
some  badly  painted  Gothic  haU,  —  yet  those  things  happen 
quite  often,  though  carloads  of  fine  scenery  are  awaiting 
outside. 

I  heard  people  saying,  ''What  does  it  matter  how  the 
play  goes  in  such  a  small  town  as  this  ?  "  It  is  a  great  mis- 
take. Men  and  women  of  culture  can  be  found  everywhere, 
even  in  the  smallest  corners  of  this  country.  With  the 
constant  fluctuation  of  this  nation,  often  people  move  from 
the  smaller  places  up  to  the  metropolis  or  othei  large  cities, 
and  the  impressions  they  get  at  first  during  these  neglected 
performances  spread  around  and  create  a  bad  reputation 
for  the  production. 


CHAPTER  XLII 

In  AprU,  1879,  I  made  my  second  visit  to  Boston,  with 
three  plays,  "Adrienne  Lecouvreur,"  "Camille,"  and ''Romeo 
and  Juliet."  I  discarded  'Teg  Woffington,"  but  "East 
Lynne"  was  added  to  the  repertoire.  I  hated  that  play, 
and  called  it  "Beast  Lynne'';  still,  the  managers  insisted 
upon  my  playing  it  on  Saturday  nights,  when  a  different  class 
of  people  —  fond  of  popular  plays  —  formed  the  public ; 
"East  Lynne"  being  considered  the  most  attractive  of  them, 
I  was  persuaded  to  put  it  into  rehearsals  —  to  please  the 
Saturday -night  audiences. 

It  was  at  my  performance  of  "  Romeo  and  Juliet "  that  I 
met  Mrs.  Annie  Fields.  She  invited  Longfellow  and  some 
members  of  his  family  to  come  to  the  theatre  and  see  me 
in  the  part  of  Juliet,  and  the  great  poet  answered  as  fol- 
lows :  — 

"Cambridge,  April  18,  1879. 
"Dear  Mrs.  Fields: 

"We  shall  be  delighted  to  see  Modjeska  in  Juliet,  and  will  come 
four-strong,  or  on  all-fours,  as  you  kindly  suggest. 

"I  suppose  the  'lovely  creature,'  as  a  certain  young  artist 
would  say,  has  not  yet  arrived. 

"If  you  happen  to  know  at  what  hotel  she  will  stay,  be  kind 
enough  to  inform  me  by  a  postal  card. 

"Yours  faithfully, 

"Henry  W.  Longfellow." 

This  letter  was  sent  to  me  as  a  Christmas  present  in  1906, 
by  Mrs.  Fields,  and  was  accompanied  by  the  following 
note:  — 

379 


380  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

148  Charles  Street,  Boston. 


''Dear  Madame  Modjeska: 


"Pray  accept  the  enclosed  letter,  with  my  constant  remembrance 
and  appreciation. 

"Yours, 

"Annie  Fields." 
"Christmas,  1905. 

"With  my  greetings  also  to  Count  Bozenta." 

Then  in  a  different  kind  of  ink,  Mrs.  Fields  added :  — 

"  1906. 
"Think  of  it !    A  whole  year  has  gone,  and  I  open  this  note 
(which  could  not  go  because  I  had  no  satisfactory  adc&amp;ess)  to  again 
send  love  and  greetings." 

I  have  been  told  that,  after  the  performance  of  "  Romeo 
and  Juliet,"  Mr.  Longfellow  went  to  several  newspaper 
offices  to  see  what  was  written  about  me,  and  in  case  there 
were  any  antagonistic  remarks,  to  try  to  moderate  them. 
He  knew  the  spirit  of  some  critics,  opposed  to  a  foreigner's 
playing  Shakespeare,  and  wished  to  ward  off  the  blows.  It 
was  one  of  the  kindest  things  ever  done,  and  I  never  ceased 
to  be  thankful  to  the  great  poet  and  best  of  men  for  taking 
trouble  to  shield  me  against  unkind  remarks. 

The  critics  were  all  fair,  with  the  exception  of  one,  w^ho 
could  not  forgive  my  '^foreign  appearance  "  nor  my  accent. 
To  criticise  my  accent  was  quite  justifiable,  but  I  wondered 
what  my  foreign  appearance  had  to  do  with  the  matter. 
Was  Juliet  an  American  ?  Or  must  all  Shakespeare's  hero- 
ines look  Anglo-Saxon,  though  they  belong  to  different 
nationalities?  Well,  never  mind  that  —  my  chief  object 
was  to  act  Juliet  to  thv?  best  of  my  ability,  and  I  did  so.  It 
seems  that  the  part  was  a  success,  for  I  kept  it  in  my  reper- 
toire until  the  year  1888,  just  one  year  after  the  birth  of 
my  first  grandchild. 

Next  day,  after  the  play,  we  found  Mrs.  Fields's  cards  and 
an  invitation  to  luncheon.     There  we  met  the  poet-host, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  381 

Mr.  James  T.  Fields,  Henry  Longfellow,  Oliver  Wendell 
Holmes,  Aldrich,  Celia  Thaxter,  and  Edwin  Booth,  who 
came  with  his  young,  energetic-looking  little  wife. 

Mr.  Longfellow  said  many  kind  things  to  me  about 
Juliet,  and  urged  me  to  appear  in  London,  where  he  said 
I  was  sure  to  succeed.  His  words  made  my  heart  swell 
with  most  delightful  hopes.  Play  in  London  and  play 
Shakespeare !  The  ambition  of  my  whole  life  would  then 
be  satisfied  !  I  tried  not  to  think  of  it,  for  it  made  me  too 
happy. 

Both  my  husband  and  myself  admired  greatly  Mr. 
Fields's  library  and  different  objects  of  art,  as  well  as  the 
view  of  the  river  from  the  back  window ;  but  most  of  all  we 
admired  Mrs.  Fields's  beautiful  Dante  Rossetti  face,  her  intel- 
lect and  distinction  of  manner.  She  and  Mr.  Fields  did  all 
they  could  to  make  our  visit  a  pleasant  one.  Chopin's 
music  was  played  for  us,  some  interesting  experiences 
related,  Emerson's  and  Keats's  verses  quoted.  Keats 
seemed  to  be  a  particular  favorite  in  Mr.  Fields's  home. 
A  cast  of  that  youthful  poet's  head  was  placed  on  the  writ- 
ing-desk. I  had  quite  a  chat  with  Edwin  Booth,  whom  I 
had  always  been  anxious  to  meet  since  I  first  saw  him  on 
the  stage.  Though  my  knowledge  of  English  was  not  yet 
sufficient  for  sustaining  a  long  conversation,  it  was  easy  to 
talk  to  that  great  actor  and  lovely  man,  who  met  me  half- 
way. 

My  attitude,  however,  towards  the  poets  was  mostly  of  a 
listener.  This  I  could  do  to  perfection,  and  with  expression, 
too.  I  was  quite  a  success  in  that  capacity,  it  seems,  for 
my  listening  to  Chopin's  music  inspired  CeHa  Thaxter  with 
the  following  poem :  — 

"Deft  hands  called  Chopin's  music  from  the  keys. 
Silent  she  sat,  her  slender  figure's  poise 
Flower-like  and  fine  and  full  of  lofty  ease; 
She  heard  her  Poland's  most  consummate  voice 


382  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

From  power  to  pathos  falter,  sink  and  change; 
The  music  of  her  land,  the  wondrous  high, 

Utmost  expression  of  its  genius  strange,  — 
Incarnate  sadness  breathed  in  melody. 

Silent  and  thrilled  she  sat,  her  lovely  face 
Flushing  and  paling  like  a  delicate  rose 
Shaken  by  summer  winds  from  its  repose 

Softly  this  way  and  that  with  tender  grace, 
Now  touched  by  sun,  now  into  shadow  turned,  — 
While  bright  with  kindred  fire  her  deep  eyes  burned  I" 

We  paid  another  visit  to  Longfellow's  home  in  Cam- 
bridge. I  foiigot  my  fan  in  the  poet's  house,  and  he  sent  it 
back  to  me  with  the  following  note: — 

''Cambiodgb,  April  25,  1879. 
''Dear  Madame  Modjeska: 

''The  English  poet,  Gay,  once  wrote  a  poem  in  three  books  on 
'The  Fan,'  beginning — 

'I  sing  that  graceful  toy,  whose  waving  play 
With  gentle  gales  relieves  the  sultry  day.' 

"And  Holmes,  the  American  poet,  has  a  charming  piece  on 
*The  First  Fan,'  in  which  he  says:  — 

*  Before  this  new  Pandora's  gifts. 

In  slavery  women's  tyrant  kept  her. 
But  now  he  kneels  her  glove  to  lift. 
The  Fan  is  mightier  than  the  Sceptre. ' 

"Now,  if  I  had  a  particle  of  the  nimble  fancy  of  these  iK)ets,  I 
should  not  let  your  fan  go  back  without  a  song.  But  as  I  have 
not,  it  returns  to  your  hand  unsung,  though  not  unhonored. 

"Thanking  you  for  your,  to  us,  delightful  visit  yesterday; 
congratulating  you  on  your  artistic  success;  imploring  you  not  to 
kill  yourself  with  overwork;  wishing  you  a  prosperous  voyage 
across  the  Atlantic,  and  a  safe  and  speedy  return  to  us;  with  all 
these  present  participles,  I  am,  dear  Madame  Modjeska, 

"Yours  faithfully, 

"Henry  W.  Longfellow." 

"P.S.  I  add  a  note  of  introduction  to  Lord  Houghton  in  Lon- 
don, a  poet  and  traveller,  who  I  am  sure  will  be  glad  to  welcome 
you.  I  give  his  old  address.  You  can  easily  ascertain  if  he  has 
changed  it." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  383 

My  engagement  in  Boston  was  an  uninterrupted  chain  of 
intellectual  pleasure  and  artistic  enjoyment.  It  would  be 
diflBcult  to  find  more  congenial  and  inspiring  circles  in  the 
whole  world  than  those  of  Boston  in  1879. 

I  closed  my  season  there  with  ''East  Lynne,"  given  on 
the  last  Saturday  night  of  my  engagement.  I  do  not 
remember  how  I  played  that  part  I  disliked  so  much,  — 
badly,  of  course,  —  I  only  recollect  that  I  replaced  the  song 
from  the  ''Bohemian  Girl,"  in  the  first  act,  by  the  recita- 
tion of  one  of  Mrs.  Browning's  sonnets.  I  loved  Mrs. 
Browning,  and  read  and  reread  her  poems. 

I  also  remember  that  the  Globe  Theatre  was  so  packed 
with  people  that  there  was  no  standing  room,  and  the  or- 
chestra being  sold  out,  the  musicians  were  obliged  to  play 
on  the  stage.  I  had  a  curious  sensation  of  walking  on 
people's  heads,  the  footlights  being  so  close  to  the  upturned 
faces.  There  was  no  art  in  that  performance,  though  I  was 
called  repeatedly  before  the  curtain.  I  was  glad  when  it 
was  over.  Not  everything  that  "pays"  is  necessarily 
artistic. 

On  the  way  south  we  met  with  an  accident  near  Ala- 
bama. Our  train  went  off  the  track.  No  one  was  killed, 
but  we  were  shaken  a  good  deal,  and  when  the  train  stopped, 
our  car  tipped  up  considerably  on  one  side.  It  was  not 
pleasant  to  see  that  we  were  just  within  one  yard  of  the 
brink  of  a  precipice. 

New  Orleans  was  a  joy.  The  two  weeks  we  spent  there 
were  filled  with  many  impressions.  Every  day  we  visited 
curious  places,  old,  quaint  houses  and  churches;  we  also 
took  drives  on  the  celebrated  shell  road,  and  went  into 
ecstasies  over  the  vegetation.  The  camellia  trees  growing 
everywhere  were  marvels.  We  even  got  up  at  five  o'clock 
in  the  morning  to  go  to  the  famous  French  market,  bought 
some  Indian  trifles,  and  took  a  cup  of  bad  coffee.  The  slave 
market  was  a  point  of  great  interest,  especially  when  we 


384  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

went  there  accompanied  by  a  native  friend,  who  told  us 
many  blood-curdling  stories  about  the  old,  happy  days. 
There  were,  however,  a  few  simple  darkeys  who  told  us  they 
regretted  the  old  times  and  the  kind  masters.  In  general, 
we  met  with  many  different  opinions  about  the  negro  ques- 
tion, and  the  strange  evolutions  of  that  race  were  most 
amazing. 

A  few  years  later,  in  Boston,  we  had  an  opportunity  to 
listen  to  speeches  of  some  colored  men,  from  a  balcony 
where  we  sat,  as  in  a  gallery,  and  could  see  everything  and 
hear  every  word  spoken,  through  the  open  windows.  It  was 
a  banquet  in  one  of  the  prominent  hotels,  given  by  negroes, 
pure  and  mixed,  on  the  occasion  of  the  anniversary  of 
Dumas'  father's  death.  Many  speeches  of  eulogy  were 
delivered  to  the  memory  of  that  man  of  genius,  who  was 
related  to  them  on  his  grandmother's  side.  One  speaker, 
especially,  displayed  a  great  deal  of  energy  in  persuading 
his  audience  that,  though  the  colored  people  had  been  kept 
for  years  in  ignorance  by  their  masters,  they  do  not  lack 
intelligence  and  even  intellectuality,  as  was  proved  by  the 
great  writer  of  their  race  and  also  by  Ira  Eldridge,  the 
famous  actor,  whose  success  in  Europe  and  whose  marriage 
with  a  white  woman  proved  that  it  is  not  the  race  but  the 
conditions  in  which  that  race  was  kept  hitherto  by  their 
rulers  that  makes  so  vast  a  difference  between  them  and  the 
American  people.  *'But,"  he  went  on,  ''the  dawn  of  de- 
liverance is  at  hand,  and  the  day  is"  not  far  distant  when 
the  people  will  vote  for  a  colored  President  of  the  United 
States."  It  is  easily  imagined  with  what  enthusiasm  those 
words  were  received  by  the  hot,  impulsive  hearers.  Lis- 
tening to  those  speeches,  dictated  by  the  inflamed  hopes  of 
the  primitive  people,  put  too  rapidly  in  contact  with  culture, 
my  memory  carried  me  back  to  the  abandoned  slave  market 
in  New  Orleans  and  the  dreadful  history  of  the  past  times 
of  slavery,  and  I  asked  myself  which  would  be  preferable : 


THE  NEW  WORLD  385 

to  have  a  pretty,  dusky  slavey  to  fan  me  on  a  hot  day,  or  to 
be  under  the  rule  of  an  African  President,  and  I  decided 
that  neither  of  those  two  alternatives  were  to  my  taste. 

We  spent  several  pleasant  weeks  in  the  South,  and  met 
many  descendants  of  the  aristocratic  families  of  Virginia. 
They  were  all  most  charming  and  delightful  in  their  hospi- 
tality. 

In  Memphis,  Tennessee,  we  met  Mrs.  Sherwood  Bonner, 
and  were  glad  to  renew  the  acquaintance  (previously  made 
in  Boston)  of  that  highly  gifted  woman. 

We  visited  General  Jackson's  celebrated  horse-breeding 
farm  in  Belle  Mead,  near  Nashville,  and  were  warmly  wel- 
comed by  the  host  and  hostess. 

In  many  old  houses,  known  for  their  opulence  in  the  past, 
we  noticed  the  reduced  circumstances,  verging  on  poverty, 
but  borne  with  the  dignity  of  high  breeding.  My  heart 
went  out  to  them  in  sympathy  and  admiration. 

One  day  we  were  invited  to  a  reception  on  a  man-of-war  in 
Norfolk,  by  Miss  MoUie  Seawell,  who,  being  a  granddaughter 
of  an  admiral,  enjoyed  a  great  popularity  in  the  navy. 
Many  congenial  guests  were  present,  and  after  a  delightful 
and  delicious  luncheon  w'e  were  shown  aU  over  the  ship. 
At  the  close  of  our  visit  the  pet  of  the  crew  was  presented  to 
us,  —  a  very  clean,  pretty,  pink  and  white  pig  with  a  ribbon 
around  its  neck.  Miss  Seawell  informed  me  that  the  animal 
was  so  clever  and  performed  so  many  stunts  that  they  called 
it  ''Modjeska."  I  was  very  proud  of  my  namesake,  espe- 
cially when  I  saw  it  dancing  a  hornpipe  which  reminded 
me  of  my  unfortunate  jig  in  ''Peg  Woffington,"  and  made  me 
acknowledge  the  pig's  superiority  in  the  spirit  of  the  dance, 
—  that  spirit  I  so  sadly  lacked. 

After  the  regular,  very  successful  season  in  the  States, 
we  returned  to  New  York,  where  I  played  two  weeks  at 
the  Grand  Opera  House,  a  popular  house  in  those  days. 

On  the  first  night,  while  in  the  dressing-room,  trying  to 
2c 


386  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

bring  the  standing  mirror  to  a  certain  angle,  I  pulled  it  a 
little  too  hard.  It  sprang  out  of  its  hinges  and  fell  down 
with  a  great  crash,  strewing  the  floor  with  a  flood  of  small 
pieces  of  glass.  The  expression  on  my  maid's  face  waa  a 
study.  She  stood  livid,  and  with  white,  trembling  lips  she 
said :  "What  have  you  done,  Madame?  Do  3'^ou  know  that 
breaking  a  looking^lass  means  seven  years  of  ill  luck?" 
I  laughed  and  ordered  another  mirror,  but  she  remained 
gloomy  and  looked  quite  distressed.  The  superstition  of 
the  broken  looking-glass  is  very  deeply  rooted  among  pro- 
fessional people,  as  are  also  such  small  things  as  the  pinning 
of  white  stuff  with  a  black  pin,  or  the  turning  of  your  gar- 
ment on  the  right  side  when  you  happen  by  mistake  to  put 
it  on  wrong  side  out,  and  so  forth.  Those  omens  of  ill  or  of 
good  luck  are  so  numerous  that  it  would  take  pages  to 
describe  them.  It  was  interesting  to  study  the  effects  of 
those  different  tricks  of  imagination.  It  happened  fre- 
quently that  when  an  actor  who  implicitly  believed  in  omens 
met  with  a  presage  of  ill  luck,  he  would  be  affected  by  it  to 
such  an  extent  that  he  would  act  badly,  forget  his  lines,  and 
make  silly  mistakes  all  through  the  play.  His  only  excuse 
was:  '*I  knew  I  would  have  bad  luck  to-night." 

Happily  the  bad  omens  were  balanced  by  an  equal  num- 
ber of  good  ones,  and  the  effects  of  the  latter  were  quite 
exhilarating.     They  mostly  happened  to  young  girls. 

Against  all  precedents  in  points  of  "luck"  the  sad  pres- 
age of  my  maid  was  not  realized,  for  the  next  seven  years 
and  the  seven  more  afterwards  were  the  fullest  and  the  most 
successful  in  my  theatrical  career. 

My  season  being  over,  I  visited  the  theatres  of  New 
York.  I  saw  Clara  Morris,  and  was  amazed  by  the  inborn 
talent  of  that  actress,  by  her  expression  of  passion  and  her 
gift  of  tears.  I  do  not  remember  the  title  of  the  play ;  the 
plot  did  not  interest  me  at  all.      I  only  saw  her,  and  was 


FhaUfifraph  by  Sonny. 
Clara  MoRRte. 


388  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

fascinated.     Art  with  its  laws  had  no  power  over  her,  for 
her  art  was  her  own,  apart  from  any  rules  and  routine.     She 
was  a  born  actress,  genuine,  admirable,  spontaneous,  and 
powerful  in  her  tragic  moments,  tender  and  gentle  in  the 
touching  scenes,  and  aiwuys  true  to  nature.     I  leave  her 
deficiencies  to  the  critics ;  we  all  have  our  deficiencies,  have 
we  not?      But  it  is  the 
fate    of    those    who    rise 
above  others  to  be  criti- 
cised severely,  while  some 
lesser  talents  are  glorified 
above  their  merits. 

Joseph  Jefferson  was  a 
rare  treat.  I  only  saw 
him  then  in  "Lend  me 
Five  Shillings  "  at  some 
benefit.  Thesubtilty,  the 
finish  of  details,  were  most 
admirable.  Hewassimple, 
natural,  and  his  roguish, 
irresistible  smile  immedi- 
ately conquered  the  audi- 
ence and  brought  them 
into  sympathy  with  him. 
I  had  no  need  to  see  him 
Sabab  jewett.  in  a  larger  part  to  judge 

how  great  an  artist  he  was. 
There  was  a  charming  actress  in  New  York  at  that  time. 
Her  name  was  Sarah  Jewett,  and  she  played  ingenue  parts. 
Refined,  genuine,  subtle,  and  sympathetic,  she  appealed  to 
me  at  once.  The  shade  of  sadness  in  her  eyes  when  I  met 
her  made  her  interesting,  and  I  watched  her  career.  She 
died  in  the  full  bloom  of  her  youth.  Her  loving  and  ro- 
mantic soul  met  with  great  blows.  Life  with  its  realities 
smothered  her  ardent  nature,  and  she  died  in  an  asylum, 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


390  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

leaving  behind  her  nothing  except  the  sweet  memory  of  a 
few  devoted  friends  and  a  little  poem  which  tells  the  sad 
story  of  her  heart. 

WHY? 

When  love  must  bring  regret, 

I  would  forget  —  jand  yet 
For  memories'  rapturous  pain, 

My  heart  would  yearn  again. 
Ah  me  I    Why  would  it  be  ? 

I  know  that  love  is  blind, 

That  so  it  is  more  kind. 
And  yet  in  my  delight, 

I  long  for  perfect  light. 
Ah  me  !    It  must  not  be. 

I  wonder  if  love  meant. 

To  yield  no  full  content, 
And  yet,  for  some  reply 

That  does  not  come,  I  si^. 
Ah  me  !    It  cannot  be  ! 


CHAPTER  XLIII 

Early  in  the  spring  of  1879  I  received  an  invitation  from 
a  committee  in  Cracow  to  take  part  in  the  celebration  of  the 
fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  literary  activity  of  the  foremost 
Polish  novelist,  Kraszewski,  which  celebration  was  to  last 
a  week  or  more.  The  ceremonies  of  the  Jubilee  were 
to  be  combined  with  the  opening  of  the  recently  restored 
'^Sukiennice''  (Draper^s  Hall),  a  public  structure  first  built 
in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  later  on  fallen  into  decay. 
The  restoration  was  undertaken  by  the  city  of  Cracow,  and 
was  accomplished  under  the  supervision  of  our  great  national 
artist,  Jan  Mateiko.  The  dedication  of  that  historic  build- 
ing was  intended  to  add  yet  more  splendor  to  the  festivities 
inaugurated  in  honor  of  Kraszewski. 

I  was  only  too  glad  to  participate  in  this  national  festival, 
and  a  few  weeks  after  the  end  of  my  season  I  left  for  Poland, 
stopping  a  day  or  two  in  Paris  to  take  my  son  with  me. 

Early  in  October  we  went  to  Cracow,  where  I  was  to  take 
part  in  a  few  gala  performances  connected  with  the  festivi- 
ties of  the  occasion. 

When  we  arrived  in  town  I  learned  that  I  was  announced 
for  the  next  evening  in  the  part  of  Adrienne.  This  was  an 
unwelcome  surprise,  because,  not  having  played  the  part 
in  Polish  since  the  spring  of  1876, 1  was  not  sure  of  my  lines. 
My  husband  had  the  same  apprehension,  for  he  asked  me 
if  I  remembered  my  part.  ''Not  at  all,''  I  replied,  quite 
distressed.  And,  indeed,  when  I  tried  to  recollect  the 
Polish  words,  only  the  English  text  came  to  my  mind.  I 
sent  to  the  stage  manager  for  the  manuscript,  but  it  was 
too  late;  the  theatre  was  closed  that  evening,  and  there  was 
no  one  there. 

391 


392  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

It  was  very  annoying,  and  there  was  nothing  left  but  to 
plan  a  way  of  getting  out  of  the  performance.  But  how? 
To  change  the  bill  would  be  regarded  as  a  slight  to  the 
occasion.  It  would  surely  place  me  in  an  unfavorable  light, 
for  no  one  would  believe  I  ever  could  forget  a  part  I  had 
played  so  often.  The  only  remedy  left  was  to  make  a 
mental  translation  of  the  English  words,  and  depend  upon 
chance.  This  was  against  my  principles;  and  then  an- 
other difBculty  arose  —  how  could  I  deal  in  the  same  way 
with  La  Fontaine's  fable,  which  Ladnowski  had  so  charm- 
ingly translated  for  me? 

I  went  to  bed  with  my  mind  full  of  disastrous  forebodings ; 
fatigue,  however,  soon  closed  my  eyes  and  I  slept  soundly. 
When  I  woke  in  the  morning,  the  first  thing  that  came  to 
my  mind  were  the  Polish  lines  of  my  part.  In  my  great 
joy  I  called  my  husband,  told  him  I  remembered  every 
word  of  Adrienne,  and  began  to  recite  it  aloud  to  him. 

''How  did  you  do  it?"  he  asked. 

"I  do  not  know;  I  must  have  read  it  in  my  sleep,  for  I 
dreamt  I  saw  the  manuscript  on  my  dressing-table." 

At  the  rehearsal  I  never  stopped  for  a  word ;  I  knew  my 
part  to  the  smallest  details. 

There  were  many  famous  people  at  the  occasion  of  the 
Jubilee ;  artists,  poets,  writers,  men  of  political  standing, 
in  one  word,  the  prominent  citizens  of  all  parts  of  Poland, 
prompted  by  the  same  desire  to  pay  homage  to  Kraszewski. 

The  opening  of  the  "Sukiennice"  was  inaugurated  with 
a  ball,  and  the  president  of  the  city  (the  mayor),  Mr.  Zybli- 
kiewicz,  selected  me  to  lead  the  Polonaise  *  with  him.  He 
was  a  very  remarkable  man,  one  of  our  foremost  legislators, 
both  in  the  Assembly  and  in  the  Vienna  Parliament,  an 
eminent  lawyer,  a  great  patriot,  and  a  man  of  wonderful 
activity,  all  together  one  of  the  most  popular  individualities 

^  The  Polonaise  is  our  national  dance,  of  very  ancient  origin,  and  con- 
sists of  a  sort  of  march  with  divers  figures.     It  usually  opens  me  ball. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  393 

in  Poland.  He  was  the  first  to  open  the  Polish  schools  to 
Hebrew  children,  and  thus  to  bring  them  in  contact  with 
Christian  boys.  His  wish  was  to  destroy  gradually  the 
antagonism  existing  between  the  two  races,  and  to  widen 
the  field  for  the  young  Israelites,  who  had  hitherto  been 
kept  in  the  narrow  circle  of  their  antiquated  Talmudic 
schools.  They  lived  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  Polish 
students,  and  never  were  allowed  to  be  ''insulted,  beaten, 
and  killed"  by  the  Christians,  as  the  erroneous  report  of 
some  Prussian  papers  asserted.  It  is  the  old  story  of  the 
wounded  lion  kicked  even  by  the  meanest  animals.  Our 
poor  nation  was  and  is  repeatedly  accused,  slandered,  con- 
demned, punished,  and  robbed  without  any  other  reason 
but  the  greedy  and  malicious  animosity  toward  the  wounded 
lion. 

At  one  of  the  public  meetings,  during  the  Jubilee,  the 
question  of  building  a  new  theatre  was  raised,  and  Siemi- 
radzki,  one  of  our  most  prominent  artists,  who  was  present 
at  the  meeting,  promised  to  paint  a  curtain  for  it. 

He  kept  his  promise,  and  the  beautiful  painting  he  pre- 
sented to  the  new  theatre  is  one  of  the  most  artistic  orna- 
ments of  the  building,  and  excites  the  admiration  of  all 
foreign  visitors,  who  cannot  understand  why  such  a  beautiful 
work  of  art  is  used  for  a  theatre  curtain. 

In  my  memoranda  of  those  times  I  find  a  note  referring 
to  the  Jubilee :  — 

"  The  Jubilee  was  a  great  success.  Everybody  who  is  anybody, 
in  the  three  parts  of  Poland,  came  to  Cracow  to  take  part  in  it 
and  to  shake  hands  with  Kras^ewski.  I  feel  so  happy  in  this  re- 
union of  our  people.  Festivities  follow  festivities,  and  there  is 
an  enthusiasm  in  the  air  which  makes  the  heart  beat  more  quickly. 
The  unanimity  of  all  those  people  who  came  from  the  most  re- 
mote nooks,  with  the  same  idea  of  offering  their  homage  to  our 
great  writer,  is  the  best  proof  of  our  vitality  and  patriotism. 

"Oh!  what  is  the  use  of  saying  that  we  have  ceased  to  be  a 
nation,  when  everything  cries  against  that  sentence !  Are  the  great 


394  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

works  of  art  and  literature  to  be  counted  as  non-existent?  Can  any 
political  combination  kill  the  spirit?  No!  A  thousand  times  no! 
It  lives  and  lives!  And  the  more  it  is  persecuted,  the  stronger  it 
will  become.  They  may  suppress  the  individuals,  rob  them,  exile 
them,  but  the  national  spirit  cannot  be  destroyed.  Enough!  this 
is  not  a  revolt,  but  the  mere  statement  of  truth  as  well  as  the  out- 
pouring of  a  heart  filled  to  the  brim  with  pride  and  love  for  my 
native  land.  My  people  may  yet  go  through  many  trials,  but  the 
history  of  nations  shows  us  strange  evolutions,  and  it  does  not 
rest  with  the  petty,  persecuting  policies  of  our  oppressors  to  de- 
termine what  part  Poland  will  have  to  perform  in  the  future. 

"After  the  Jubilee  performances,  I  played  a  regular  engage- 
ment of  several  weeks  in  Cracow,  which  was  followed  by  three 
series  of  appearances  in  the  other  Polish  cities,  Lw6w  (Lemberg), 
Posen,  and  Warsaw. 

"  It  was  very  natural  that  my  countrymen  should  be  elated 
over  my  success  in  America.  They  imagined  that  I  had  helped 
to  spread  the  fame  of  Polish  art  abroad.  The  result  of  this  feel- 
ing on  their  part  was  a  continued  succession  of  ovations  upon 
which  I  need  not  dwell.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  say  that  they 
appealed  not  so  much  to  my  ambition  as  to  my  heart.  It  was 
hard  to  part  from  those  who  showed  me  such  love,  but  I  thought 
that  my  favorable  reception  on  the  foreign  stage  —  in  America  — 
ought  to  be  crowned  by  success  in  the  mother-country  of  the 
Anglo-Saxons  —  in  England. '' 


CHAPTER  XLIV 

In  January,  1880,  my  husband  went  to  London  to  visit 
his  relatives  in  Herefordshire,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bodenham, 
and  also  to  see  the  theatrical  managers  about  an  opening 
for  me. 

When  he  returned  to  Warsaw  he  told  me  that  everyone 
he  met  in  London  advised  me  to  come  and  wait  patiently 
for  a  good  opening.  There  were  still  two  or  three  months 
before  the  beginning  of  the  London  season,  and  I  could  use 
that  time  to  my  advantage. 

In  February  we  crossed  the  ill-humored  gray  channel. 
The  drizzling  rain  penetrated  me  to  my  bones,  and  I  was 
sad,  nervous,  unstrung,  and  a  limp  sample  of  humanity  when 
we  stopped  at  Charing  Cross.  It  took  us  some  time  to 
find  a  suitable  apartment,  but  at  last  we  succeeded  in  renting 
a  suite  of  small  but  prettily  furnished  rooms  in  a  street  near 
Piccadilly. 

The  first  person  who  called  was  Mr.  Hamilton  Aid6, 
whom  my  husband  had  met  on  his  previous  visit  to  London. 
Every  one  in  the  eighties  knew  Mr.  Aid^,  and  I  do  not  need 
to  describe  that  ever-youthful  man,  a  friend  and  patron 
of  artists,  an  artist  himself  and  dilettante  in  letters. 

He  at  once,  with  his  usual  hospitality,  arranged  a  reception 
for  us  in  his  handsome  rooms,  and  asked  me  if  I  would 
like  to  recite  before  his  guests,  who  were  literary  men  and 
women,  artists,  and  society  people.  I  told  him  I  had  never 
recited  in  English,  and  informed  him  of  my  theory  about 
recitations  in  a  foreign  language. 

"Do  you  recite  in  Polish?'' 

''Of  course  I  do." 

395 


396  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

''Then  why  not  do  so  at  the  reception?  The  people  I 
invited  will  be  most  desirous  to  hear  your  voice  and  see  the 
expression  of  your  face." 

Another  examination,  I  thought,  but  Mr.  Aid6  was  so 
convincing  that  I  succumbed  to  the  charm  of  his  persuasion 
and  promised  to  recite  my  favorite  poem,  ''Hagar  in  the 
Desert,"  by  Ujejski. 

When  we  entered  the  reception-room,  I  experienced,  for 
the  first  time  in  my  life,  the  most  unpleasant  sensation  of 
being  observed  by  some  women  as  an  interesting  object  of 
curiosity.  Against  all  rules  of  good  breeding  and  politeness, 
they  looked  me  over  from  head  to  foot  with  their  lorgnettes, 
and  their  supercilious  smile  was  quite  aggravating.  When 
I  knew  the  London  society  women  better,  I  was  glad  to 
find  that  this  behavior  was  not  a  fault  of  breeding,  but  of 
their  desire  to  follow  a  silly  old  fashion,  revived  by  some 
person  of  high  rank  and  weak  eyesight,  who  dreaded  to  put 
on  honest,  plain  glasses. 

I  soon  forgot  my  resentment  toward  the  weaker  sex,  when 
Mr.  Aid^  presented  to  me  men  whose  names  were  well  known 
in  artistic  and  literary  circles.  After  a  short  musical  pro- 
gram, I  was  asked  to  recite,  and,  oh !  wonder !  I  saw  the 
same  ladies  who  had  looked  me  over  drop  their  lorgnettes 
in  their  laps  and  wipe  their  eyes.  What  made  them  cry? 
I  asked  myself,  since  they  did  not  understand  a  word  of  my 
recitation.  Was  it  because,  moved  by  the  inflections  of  my 
own  voice,  I  really  felt  the  intensity  of  that  ancient  tragedy  ? 
I  could  not  tell.  I  was  simply  amazed,  and  happy  to  have 
removed  the  lorgnettes  and  moved  the  hearts,  or,  as  that 
cynical  person,  Mr.  Oscar  Wilde,  remarked,  to  have  tickled 
with  my  voice  the  tendrils  of  their  nervous  system. 

Among  Mr.  Hamilton  Aide's  guests  we  met  Lionel 
Tennyson  and  his  exquisite  wife,  and  a  few  days  later  we 
received  an  invitation  to  an  evening  reception  at  Alfred 
Tennyson's  house. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  397 

My  heart  was  beating  fast  when  I  entered  the  presence 
of  the  great  man,  and  I  could  say  but  little  when  he  greeted 
me  with  a  cordial,  strong  grasp  of  his  hand.  I  was  looking 
for  the  hostess ;  he  guessed  my  thought,  and  led  me  to  the 
other  end  of  the  room,  where  a  sweet,  delicate-looking  woman 
lay  on  her  back,  on  a  narrow  couch.  This  was  Mrs.  Tenny- 
son, to  whom  our  host  introduced  me.  There  was  something 
so  appealing  and  touching  in  her  frail  person  that  when  she 
extended  her  hand  to  me  I  instinctively  knelt  down  beside 
her  coucji,  as  I  would  at  the  bedside  of  some  dear,  sick  friend. 
I  saw  her  smooth  cheeks  blush  faintly,  and  I  rose  instantly, 
remembering  that  any  sort  of  demonstration  was  regarded 
as  out  of  place  among  English  people.  I  said  faintly, 
''Pardon  me,"  and  accepted  Mr.  Lionel's  chair,  which  he  had 
placed  for  me  near  his  mother's  couch. 

Mrs.  Lionel  approached,  and  the  acquaintance  was  soon 
made.  There  were  many  distinguished  persons  in  the  room : 
Sir  Frederic  Locker,  Dean  Stanley,  Millais,  the  great  artist, 
who  invited  us  to  his  studio,  and  several  others  belonging 
to  the  aristocratic  or  diplomatic  world.  Hallam  Tennyson, 
the  elder  son,  was  also  present.  He  helped  his  father  in 
receiving  the  guests,  and  seemed  altogether  to  be  his  right 
hand. 

The  illustrious  poet  greeted  all  who  came  in  with  pleasant 
or  jocular  remarks. 

When  all  his  guests  were  in,  he  asked  me  a  few  questions 
about  Poland.  I  could  not  speak  calmly  about  my  country. 
I  preferred  not  to  speak  at  all,  and  only  told  Mr.  Tennyson 
I  had  read  his  poem,  "Poland,"  and  thanked  him  for  the 
memorable  words:  .  .  .  "Us,  0  Just  and  Good,  forgive, 
who  smiled  when  she  was  torn  in  three,"*  which  I  recited, 
trembling  all  over.  Seeing  how  stirred  I  was,  he  suddenly 
changed  the  subject. 

1  Allusion  to  the  dismemberment  of  Poland  into  three  parts,  each  sub- 
ject to  a  different  empire. 


398  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

His  tall  figure  dominated  every  other  man  in  the  room ; 
his  high  forehead  and  the  noble,  proud,  and  far-away  expres- 
sion of  his  eyes  made  me  think  of  some  legendary  god  who 
had  descended  to  earth,  lived  and  moved  among  mankind, 
but  whose  spirit  remained  in  his  ancestral  home. 

The  following  extracts  of  letters,  written  to  friends  and 
to  my  mother,  will  best  describe  the  impressions  of  my 
visit  to  London :  — 

i 

Letter  No.  I  • 

''I  never  yet  felt  so  far  from  my  country  and  my  own  people 
as  I  feel  here.  Everything  seems  to  inspire  me  with  an  unexplained 
fear;  the  hastening  and  ever-pushing  mob,  the  blackened  walls 
of  the  buildings,  the  hissing  of  the  engines,  even  the  marvellous 
outlines  of  Westminster  Abbey. 

"Yesterday,  standing  at  the  foot  of  Nelson's  statue,  I  looked  up, 
and  I  imagined  I  saw  on  the  lips  of  the  great  Englishman  an  ironical 
smile,  as  much  as  to  say :  '  What  do  you  want  here,  little  fly  ? '  And, 
indeed,  I  seem  to  myself  nothing  but  a  fly,  a  poor  fly  with  wilted 
wings.  If  I  survive,  it  will  be  simply  providential.  I  hope  to 
play  here  in  a  few  weeks,  or  months,  who  can  teU  ?  Oh,  if  I  could 
sleep  at  least  three  months,  study  in  dream,  act  in  dream,  and 
wake  up,  when  all  is  over,  somewhere  in  the  Tatra  Mountains  or  in 
the  chestnut  alleys  of  Cracow!" 

Letter  No.  II 

"Good  FRmAY. 
"This  day,  which  is  a  day  of  mourning  in  other  countries,  is 
celebrated  here  by  a  so-called  'bank  holiday.'  Everywhere  jolly, 
laughing  crowds,  merry-go-rounds,  hand-organs  rattling  hackneyed 
tunes,  wrestling  matches  in  the  streets;  and  where  there  is  a  green 
hill  in  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  grown-up  girls  and  boys  roll  down 
the  slopes  with  merry  laughter  and  loud  jokes. 

"When  we  ask  the  people  why,  just  on  this  day,  they  all  seem 
so  happy,  the  answer  is  more  or  less  the  same:  *Why  should  we 
not  be  happy?  Was  not  our  Saviour  crucified,  and  did  he  not 
redeem  us  to-day?' 

"A  strange  point  of  view  —  rational  in  a  way  —  but  strange  — 
is  it  not  ? 

"And  now,  something  about  my  own  person:    I  am  engaged 


THE  NEW  WORLD  399 

for  twelve  perfonnances  by  Wilson  Barrett,  the  manager  of  the 
Court  Theatre.  We  chose  *  Diane  de  Lys '  for  the  d6but.  Charles 
Coghlan,  of  whom  I  wrote  you,  will  play  with  me.  The  company 
is  fairly  well  organized,  and  the  production  will  be  magnificent,  as 
far  as  the  small  stage  will  allow. 

"My  first  appearance  will  take  place  early  in  May.  In  the 
meantime  I  spend  six  or  seven  hours  a  day  in  studying  English. 
I  want  to  be  worthy  of  myself  and  of  the  appreciation  of  the  great 
Albion;  I  want  to  toych  these  people's  hearts  and  see  tears  in  their 
eyes,  'those  drops  of  pity  wrung  out  of  the  depths  of  the  heart/  as 
Lamartine  says. 

"You  see  I  am  also  quite  jolly  to-day  —  in  spite  of  Good 
Friday.  You  would  laugh  to  see  my  advertisements.  Nothing 
but  'MODJESKA'  in  letters  three  feet  long.  We  often  stand 
near  by  to  listen  to  the  remarks  of  the  passers-by.  Some  of  them, 
having  read  the  name,  ask  each  other:  'What  is  it?  Is  it  alive?' 
Others  remark  to  their  friends  that  it  surely  must  be  some  new 
tooth-powder,  or  some  sanitary  cereal,  or  a  medicine  for  rheu- 
matism. 

"My  name  is  less  known  here  than  that  of  the  ruler  of  the 
smallest  of  the  Fiji  Islands;  stiU  I  have  the  audacity  to  brave  the 
audience^  by  giving  them  samples  of  my  native  art  -^  and  my 
individuality.  Will  any  one  care?  I  tremble  at  the  prospect  of 
my  failure,  yet,  the  stronger  my  fear,  the  stronger  is  my  desire  to 
reach  the  goal.  And  mind,  I  have  no  doubt  concerning  my  value, 
only  a  dread  of  not  feeling  at  home  on  the  EngUsh  stage.  Had  I 
been  an  Englishwoman,  all  would  have  been  so  easy  I" 

Letter  No.  Ill 

"Here  I  am,  closed  in  my  gilded  cage  on  Piccadilly.  I  beat  my 
wings  against  the  bars  Uke  a  wild  bird  longing  for  space  and  air ! 
but  I  study  and  wait,  and  dread  to  think  that  I  shall  have  to  wait 
seven  more  weeks,  for  my  d^but  has  been  delayed  until  the  fifteenth 
of  May. 

"A  certain  gentleman  with  a  monumental  nose  and  strong 
white  teeth  (regular  monkey's  teeth)  comes  every  morning,  from 
eleven  to  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  to  correct  my  accent.  He 
says  that  under  his  tuition  I  shall  speak  perfect  English,  because 
I  have  no  American  accent,  as  should  be  expected,  but  a  Russian 
one,  which  is  far  more  easy  to  correct  than  a  Yankee  twang. 
When  I  told  him  I  was  not  a  Russian  but  a  Pole,  he  only  looked  at 


HENmT  Ibvtno  ab  Louis  XI,  fbom  a  Pastel  bt  J.  Bebnahd  Pabtbidoe. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  401 

me  blankly,  thinking  probably  of  the  North  Pole,  and  let  escape  a 
deprecating  'Oh!'  from  his  screwed-up  mouth. 

"My  dear  little  mother,  do  you  know  that  I  grow  quite  desper- 
ate when  I  see  how  little  they  know  about  us  abroad,  and  how 
little  they  care.  *  Poland  ?  Where  is  it  ? '  they  ^.  We  are  not 
on  the  map  any  more,  —  and  therefore  we  do  not  exist.  What 
a  diabohcal  error! 

"Last  Sunday  we  went  to  the  Polish  church.  I  wanted  to  cry 
when  I  looked  at  that  parody  of  a  temple.  The  Mass  was  read  by 
Father  Bakanowski  ^  in  the  basement  of  an  Itahan  church.  The 
altar  was  covered  with  soiled  cloth,  two  candles,  and  thirteen 
wooden  chairs.  That  was  all.  The  poor  priest  brought  in  himself 
the  wine,  the  Mass  books,  and  other  utensils.  Some  ragged  indi- 
vidual lit  up  the  candles,  and  the  Mass  began,  quietly,  sadly,  oh ! 
how  sadly  !  I  thought  of  the  Catacombs,  where  the  first  Christians, 
had  to  hide  their  ceremonies.  The  sound  of  the  organs  and  the 
roulades  of  an  opera  soprano,  reaching  our  ears  faintly  from  the 
upper  churchy  augmented  the  painful  impression." 

My  London  d^but  took  place  earlier  than  I  expected. 
Mr.  Barrett  had  at  that  time  a  successful  play  running  at  the 
Court  Theatre,  '^A  Banker's  Daughter,"  if  I  am  not  mis- 
taken, and  he  did  not  think  it  would  be  prudent  to  take  it 
off  the  bills  until  he  was  quite  sure  of  my  success.  There- 
fore he  proposed  to  me  to  play  six  matinee  performances 
first.  I  had  no  choice  but  to  accept  the  suggestion,  and 
we  decided  to  open  on  Monday,  May  1,  in  ''La  Dame  Aux 
Camelias/'  under  the  title  of  ''Heartsease." 

This  substitution  of  the  flower  happened  this  way:  We 
had  a  great  difficulty  in  passing  through  the  censorship  any 
of  the  French  plays.  Mr.  Barrett  thought  it  would  be  better 
not  to^  touch  Shakespeare  until  I  made  myself  known  in 
some  easier  literature.  But  the  plays  "Diane  de  Lys" 
and  "La  Dame  aux  Camillas"  were  on  the  index  presented 
to  the  censorship.  Both  Mr.  Barrett  and  myself  were  much 
annoyed  by  this  obstacle,  when  a  dramatist,  Mr.  Mortimer, 

^  A  few  weeks  later  Father  Bakanowski  was  shot  at  by  some  fanatic 
anarchist  and  was  wounded  but  not  killed. 

2d 


402  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

who  had  translated  ''La  Dame  aux  Cam&lt;?lias/'  conceived 
the   extravagant  idea  of  changing  its  title  and  calling  it 
''Heartsease." 

He  knew  from  Charles  Coghlan  about  my  performance  of 
Camille ;  so  did  Mr.  Barrett.  Judging  from  Mr.  Coghlan's 
statement,  they  were  almost  sure  of  my  success  in  that 
play.  They  went  to  work  and  changed  some  objectionable 
features  of  the  heroine's  "profession,"  and  then  sent  this 
remodelled  version,  under  the  title  of  "Heartsease,"  to  the 
censor,  and  obtained  his  full  sanction,  as  a  modest  produc- 
tion of  Mr.  Mortimer's  pen. 

The  name  of  Dumas  fils  was  not  on  the  title-page,  in 
order  not  to  arouse  suspicions,  and  thus  "La  Dame  aux 
Cam&lt;51ias"  was  smuggled  in  and  ready  to  be  presented  on 
the  stage  as  the  work  of  an  English  author.  The  audacity 
of  it  all  was  quite  amazing. 

Letter  No.  IV 

"'Morituri  te  salutant.' 

"With  this  quotation  I  had  begun  my  letter  last  Friday,  the 
fourteenth,  but  when  I  reread  it,  I  found  it  was  too  morbidly 
sad,  and  I  burned  it  up. 

'To-day  I  can  write  without  laments,  for  I  have  conquered. 
Do  I  feel  happier  now  ?  I  cannot  tell.  Life  is  strange,  after  all. 
Yesterday  the  public  received  me  with  more  than  approbation. 
After  the  last  act  many  of  them  waved  their  handkerchiefs  to  me. 
The  Prince  and  Princess  of  Wales  also  applauded  warmly,  and  I  ? — 
I  thought  of  you  all,  and  regretted  that  Warsaw  is  so  far  and  that 
it  is  impossible  to  drive  from  Hoza  Street  to  London. 

"My  success  surpassed  all  my  expectations;  every  one  here 
seems  to  think  it  quite  extraordinary,  and  my  manager  already  has 
numerous  projects  concerning  my  future.  Perhaps  I  shall  be 
obliged  to  keep  playing  the  same  part  till  the  end  of  July. 

"I  also  have  letters  from  Russia.  They  want  me  to  play  there 
with  a  Polish  company,  but  I  don't  think  I  shall  have  time  to  do 
so  because  I  must  be  back  in  London  next  autumn,  and  remain  here 
probably  until  Christmas.  They  speak  of  'Romeo  and  Juliet,' 
Cymbeline,'  and  other  Shakespearian  plays.  It  is  a  great  temp- 
tation. 


404  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

"  I  was  very  nervous  before  the  first  performance  of  '  Hearts- 
ease/ but  when  I  was  on  the  stage  I  was  happy,  and  the  play  went 
on  smoothly.  I  kept  the  reins  of  my  part  tight,  and  remained 
correct.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  weeping  in  the  audience  during 
the  third  and  the  last  act.  My  eyes  also  were  moist,  but  I  kept 
full  control  of  my  voice." 

Mr.  Coghlan  did  not  play  Armand,  as  it  was  decided  at 
first,  because  Mr.  Barrett  and  he  did  not  agree  as  to  the 
form  of  advertising  his  name.  Mr.  Dacre  took  his  place. 
He  was  not  as  fine  an  artist  as  Mr.  Coghlan,  but  he  was  young, 
handsome,  and  sympathetic. 

During  the  first  performance  of  ''Heartsease"  the  Prince 
of  Wales  (the  late  king  of  England)  came  to  my  dressing- 
room  with  Count  Jaraczewski,  whom  the  Prince  called  by  the 
pet  name  of  Sherry  Whiskey,  though  he,  as  became  royalty, 
was  trained  to  pronounce  the  most  difficult  foreign  names 
with  ease  and  the  right  inflection  on  the  syllable.  The 
Prince  was  grandly  simple  and  cordial,  very  complimentary, 
and  yet  reserved ;  speaking  of  the  play,  in  which  he  had  at 
once  recognized  '*La  Dame  aux  Camillas,"  he  wondered 
that  it  passed  the  censorship,  while  Sarah  Bernhardt  was  re- 
fused the  permission  to  play  it.    ''I  must  look  to  it,"  he  said. 

Next  season,  1881,  the  bills  announced  the  great  French 
actress  in  ''La  Dame  aux  Camillas." 

The  London  actors  and  actresses  spoiled  me  with  their 
kindness.  Mrs.  Kendal  came  to  my  room  with  congratu- 
lations; the  dear  Mrs.  Bancroft  embraced  me  with  tears  in 
her  eyes,  saying  that  I  had  struck  the  right  note  and  touched 
the  people's  hearts.  Mr.  John  Hare  and  his  beautiful  wife, 
Johnston  Forbes  Robertson,  Coghlan,  Clayton,  Cecil,  and 
many  others  came  to  shake  hands  with  me.  All  of  them 
showed  the  most  friendly  disposition  towards  me  and  I  was 
living  in  a  blessed  atmosphere  of  art,  peace,  and  good-fellow- 
ship, never  dreaming  that  those  feelings  might  one  day 
change  their  heavenly  aspect. 


MADAME    MODJESKA    IN    "  HEARTSEASE 


t» 


THE  NEW  WORLD  405 

Next  day,  after  the  performance,  a  box  for  the  Lyceum 
Theatre  was  sent  to  us.  Though  I  felt  tired,  I  could  not 
resist  Mr.  Irving's  kindness,  and  we  saw  him  in  Shylock. 
I  have  described  this  visit  to  the  Lyceum  Theatre  in  one 
of  the  letters  to  my  Polish  friends:  — 

"...  the  news  of  my  success  had  already  spread,  and  at  the 
entrance  to  the  theatre  we  met  a  gentleman  in  a  most  correct 
evening  dress,  with  an  exquisite  bouquet  of  white  flowers,  which  he 
offered  me,  with  a  hearty  welcome  in  Mr.  Irving's  name. 

"  I  was  deeply  touched  by  this  delicate  attention,  yet  you  must 
not  think  that  my  judgment  on  his  performance  was  in  the  least 
influenced  by  this  courtesy.  What  I  write  now  about  him  is  my 
impartial  opinion. 

"When  I  saw  this  artist  first  as  Van  der  Decken  (in  the  'Flying 
Dutchman') ,  his  peculiarities  suited  his  part.  He  was  unusual,  fan- 
tastic, and  I  liked  him  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  play. 
In  the  part  of  Shylock,  however,  it  was  different:  the  extravagant 
way  of  accentuation,  the  artificial  gestures  and  gait,  his  breathless 
voice,  and  altogether  the  lack  of  simplicity  made  me  wonder  for  a 
while  why  the  English  public  admired  this  eccentric  man.  During 
the  second  act  I  began  to  be  used  to  his  ways,  and  in  the  Tubal 
scene  a  shiver  ran  through  me  when,  after  the  outburst  of  hatred 
and  anger,  that  stem  Jew,  apparently  without  any  human  feeling  in 
his  heart,  buried  his  face  in  his  hands  and  sobbed.  When  he 
looked  up,  his  superb  dark  eyes  were  shining  with  ill-omened  light, 
and  a  wonderful  change  transfigured  his  features.  The  painted 
lines  of  his  face,  the  wretched  delivery,  the  stiff  coimtenance,  the 
unpleasant,  hollow  voice,  —  all  those  deficiencies  disappeared,  and  I 
saw  only  the  Jew  Shylock,  — not  a  modem  one,  but  Shylock  of 
the  sixteenth  century,  —  the  vision  of  the  past,  strange,  but  power- 
ful and  fascinating.     Such  is  Irving. 

"Those  who  judge  him  superficially,  and  cannot  overlook  his 
peculiarities,  do  not  like  him;  but  those  who  once  are  touched  by 
his  mental  and  occult  powers  must  admire  him  without  restriction. 

"His  exit  in  the  court  scene  is  very  fine.  No  exaggeration,  no 
contortions.  He  leaves  the  stage  with  one  prolonged  look  at  his 
enemies,  —  a  look  of  despair,  hatred,  disdain,  what  you  will;  dis- 
dain, I  believe,  is  predominant. 

"The  Jew  at  that  moment  looks  more  like  an  outraged  lord 
than  a  money-lender,  but  the  effect  is  most  artistic." 


406  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  had  stipulated  with  Mr.  W.  Barrett  to  play  three  weeks 
in  matinees,  but  at  the  end  of  the  second  week  he  said  to  me 
that,  owing  to  ray  success,  he  was  willing,  if  I  wished  it,  to 


'  AB  "HaULET." 


take  "The  Banker's  Daughter"  off  the  bills  and  to  put 
"Heartsease"  on  for  the  evening  performances.     He  hoped 
it  might  run  until  the  first  of  July,  or  longer. 
I  welcomed  this  arrangement  with  joy.     He  also  advised 


THE  NEW  WORLD  407 

me  to  cut  off  the  last  week  of  the  matindes  and  take  a  rest 
before  the  longer  run  of  the  play.  We  spent  that  week  in 
Herefordshire,  and  after  a  delightful  visit  to  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bodenham,  and  with  our  lungs  filled  with  the  balmy  air  of 
the  country,  we  returned  to  London,  and  ''Heartsease" 
was  resumed  to  a  splendid  house,  full  of  handsome  faces  and 
fine  attire.  ''  * 

The  play  was  a  genuine  success.  The  management  was 
obliged  to  fill  the  pit  with  seats,  and  the  ten-shiUing  tickets 
were  sold  for  a  guinea. 

Heartsease  became  a  fashionable  flower. 

The  critics  were  very  kind  to  me,  especially  the  most 
important  ones,  as  Labouch6re,  Joseph  Knight,  Sala,  and 
Clement  Scott. 

London  during  the  spring  season  has  always  been  an 
international  point  of  meeting  for  celebrities,  and  I  had 
an  opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with  people  of 
different  nationalities,  mostly  French,  France  being  such  a 
close  neighbor  to  England,  and  the  trip  to  Calais  and  Dover 
only  the  matter  of  a  few  hours  of  seasickness. 

One  evening  the  great  French  critic,  Francisque  Sarcey, 
who  happened  to  be  in  London  at  that  time,  came  to  my 
performance  and  wrote  a  flattering  criticism  about  me.  It 
was  he  who  induced  Sarah  Bernhardt  to  see  me,  and  the 
wonderful  creature  appeared  in  the  box  at  the  end  of  the 
second  act.  She  was  dressed  in  a  cascade  of  black  jet,  and 
her  small,  cameo-like  head,  with  its  mass  of  golden  hair, 
attracted  every  one's  attention. 

A  bouquet  of  white  camellias  from  her  was  brought  to 
my  dressing-room,  and  my  husband  went  during  the  fourth 
act  to  thank  her  in  my  name.  He  told  me  afterwards  that 
as  soon  as  she  saw  me  in  my  ball-dress,  very  much  decolleUe 
and  without  sleeves,  according  to  the  fashion  of  1880,  she 
exclaimed,  "  Mais  votre  femme  est  aussi  maigre  que  moi ! '' 

Sarah  was,  indeed,  very  thin  at  that  time,  and  many 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


PHotom-np*,  cfp]/riglit  isui,  b]/  Folk.  Sydiuii. 
Suua  Bebnhabiit  as  "Paclimk  Bi.uichabii." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  409 

amusing  stories  about  her  slender  figure  circulated  among 
people.     Some  of  them  were  told  by  herself. 

After  the  play  she  came  to  my  dressing-room,  and  said 
she  cried  during  the  last  act.  This  was  most  flattering. 
We  spoke  of  the  play.  She  remarked,  with  her  usual  grace,  / 
that  I  made  the  third  act  interesting  and  dramatic.  She 
never  before  liked  that  act,  she  said  ;  it  seemed  to  her  tame. 
She  also  liked  my  letter-writing  scene.  Her  talk  was  viva- 
cious and  interesting.  She  seemed  to  be  filled  with  art  to 
her  finger-tips. 

Among  the  French  celebrities  who  visited  London  was 
Gustave  Dor6,  a  famous  artist,  yet  simple  and  warm- 
hearted, loving  his  home,  and  speaking  about  his  mother 
with  adoration.  ''She  comes  first,"  he  said,  ''and  then  my 
art."  She  was  ill  at  that  time,  and  he  shortened  his  London 
visit  to  hasten  to  her  bedside. 

Bastien  Lepage  also  came  to  see  me  after  the  perform- 
ance. I  was  quite  fascinated  by  his  espi^le  mood.  He 
touched  all  the  objects  on  my  dressing-table,  making  amus- 
ing remarks,  then  suddenly  stopped  and  looked  straight  in 
my  face  with  his  sharp,  observing  eyes,  and  smiled  critically, 
I  thought.  I  asked  him  if  it  was  my  make-up,  or  rather 
the  absence  of  it,  that  amused  him.  He  immediately  took 
a  blue  and  a  brown  pencil  from  the  table  and  put  a  few 
lines  around  my  eyes,  nostrils,  and  cheeks. 

The  change  was  wonderful.  "Now  you  are  ready  for 
the  coffin,"  and  he  laughed.  "But  never  mind  ;  your  acting 
was  quite  convincing  without  that,"  he  added  seriously. 

One  evening  Mr.  Wilson  Barrett  came  in  between  acts 
and  said  there  was  a  crazy  man  in  front.  He  asked  me  not 
to  be  frightened  if  I  saw  any  commotion  or  heard  loud 
talking,  for  it  was  most  probable  the  man  would  have  to  be 
removed  from  the  theatre. 

"What  does  he  do?"  I  asked. 
He  shows  signs  of  great  displeasure  when  the  curtain 


tf 


410  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

goes  up,  and  only  when  you  come  on  he  listens  quietly  and 
applauds  vigorously  after  each  act,  throwing  satisfied  glances 
at  the  audience.  But  as  soon  as  the  orchestra  begins  to 
play,  he  grows  red  with  anger,  springs  up  in  his  chair,  and 
positively  runs  out  of  the  hall,  swearing  in  German.  I 
heard  him  say  'Verflucht'  and  'Verdammt,'  while  lie  rushed 
out  into  the  street,  where  he  remained  till  the  beginning  of 
the  next  act,  walking  up  and  down.  He  repeats  this  per- 
formance after  each  act,  and  grows  more  uncontrollable 
every  time." 

No  one  could  tell  me  who  that  man  was. 

Next  day  the  mystery  was  disclosed,  when  Hans  von 
Billow's  card  was  brought  up  to  our  rooms.  It  was  a  happy 
and  jolly  meeting.  His  first  words  were  congratulations 
and  most  hearty  greetings,  but  immediately  afterward 
there  was  an  explosion :  — 

"Why  do  you  allow  that  'Esel'  of  a  leader  to  murder 
Chopin  between  the  acts  ?  I  know  he  does  it  to  flatter  your 
patriotic  feelings,  but  the  'Schafskopf '  has  not  the  faintest 
idea  of  rhythm  or  harmony.  It  is  a  sacrilege, —  a  'Katzen- 
musik.'  My  ears  are  sore  from  it  even  now.  I  was  very 
angry  last  night,  and  were  it  not  for  you  I  would  have  left 
the  theatre  after  the  first  notes  of  that  stupid  orchestra." 
At  this  point  the  man  of  the  world  came  back  to  the  surface, 
and  he  changed  the  subject  with  great  skill.  After  a  de- 
lightful chat,  he  said  '^\u  revoir,  in  Warsaw." 

'^ Heartsease"  ran  until  the  first  of  July;  then  we  went 
for  a  few  days  to  my  husband's  relatives,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bodenham.  It  was  the  second  time  we  visited  them,  and 
I  welcomed  with  pleasure  the  large  brick  mansion,  with  its 
hall  ornamented  by  painted  and  gilded  carvings,  the  spa- 
cious rooms  arranged  with  great  comfort,  the  beautiful  park 
with  ancient  trees,  and  the  small,  cosy  chapel  where  we 
used  to  pray  together. 

Mrs.  Bodenham  was  a  sister  of  my  husband's  mother. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  411 

She  was  a  very  handsome,  rather  fleshy  woman  past  fifty, 
of  aristocratic  appearance  and  a  certain  air  of  unconscious 
and  benevolent  hauteur,  inspiring  respect.     Her  husband  was 


Photograph,  mn/riohi,  by  London  Strre 
FOBBBB   BOBERTSON. 


a  beautiful  old  gentleman  with  snow-white  hair  and  beard 
and  pink  complexion.  He  loved  to  recite  verses,  and  we 
spent  a  few  evenings  reviving  poems  and  scenes  from 
Shakespeare's  plays.     It  was  quite  a  novelty  for  me  to 


412  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

read  Juliet  to  that  dear  old  Romeo.  Most  valuable  was  his 
information  on  the  English  traits,  the  peculiarities  of  the 
people,  as  well  as  their  fine  qualities  and  the  difference  exist- 
ing between  their  opinions  and  the  continental  ideas.  "We 
English  are  not  satisfied  with  the  Ten  Commandments," 
he  said  once.  "We  invented  one  more,  the  Eleventh: 
'Thou  shalt  not  be  found  out.'  No  matter  what  people 
do,  if  they  only  keep  up  the  appearances,  they  are  never 
molested ;  but  even  the  smallest,  most  innocent  escapade, 
brought  to  light,  creates  a  scandal  which  hurls  down  the 
victims  into  the  pit  of  disgrace." 

The  rest  of  July  and  a  part  of  August  we  stayed  in  a 
fishing-cove  called  Cadgwith,  near  Lizard  Point,  where  we 
went  in  company  of  friends  and  my  son  Ralph,  who  came 
from  Paris  to  spend  his  vacation  with  us. 

This  remote  spot  was  suggested  to  us  by  Forbes  Robert- 
son, who  also  spent  a  few  weeks  there  with  his  brother  Ian, 
his  sister,  Mrs.  Bromley,  and  her  friend  Mrs.  Smith,  Joseph 
Knight's  daughter,  both  of  them  young  and  both  widows. 

In  that  congenial  circle  we  lived  free  from  convention- 
alities, taking  long  walks  on  the  beach  or  attending  the 
lawn-tennis  games  at  the  Rectory.  Rector  Jackson^s  and 
his  wife's  house  was  always  opened  to  visitors,  who  were 
heartily  welcomed  by  them  at  all  hours  of  the  day. 

At  this  time  I  received  the  following  letter  from  Henry 
Longfellow :  — 

"Cambridge,  July  6,  1880. 
"Dear  Mme.  Modjeska: 

"I  am  delighted  to  receive  your  letter  —  to  know  that  you  are 
well,  and  to  have  again  your  address,  so  that  a  kind  greeting  from 
me  may  reach  you. 

"My  last  was  directed  to  the  American  Agency,  Strand,  Lon- 
don, so  that  it  might  meet  you  on  your  arrival;  but  I  fear  it  never 
found  you.    It  was  in  answer  to  yours  from  L6opol,  ^  and  told  you 

*  French  for  Lemberg. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  413 

how  heartily  I  rejoiced  in  your  triumph  at  Cracow,  during  the 
f^te  in  honor  of  Kraszewski. 

*'  Now  I  can  add  my  congratulations  on  your  equally  triumphal 
entry  into  London.  How  pleasant  it  is  to  be  able  to  say,  'I  told 
you  so ! '  And  did  I  not  tell  you  so  ?  Am  I  not  worthy  to  be 
counted  among  the  Minor  Prophets  ?  I  cannot  tell  you  how  greatly 
rejoiced  I  am  at  this  new  success — this  new  wreath  of  laurel. 

"But  one  thing  in  your  letter  saddens  me.  It  is  where  you 
say  that  you  have  postponed  your  return  to  America  till  next  year. 
As  birds  in  Norway  fly  swiftest  when  the  days  are  shortest,  so 
swifter  and  swifter  fly  the  years  as  we  grow  old,  and  life  grows 
shorter.  But  when  you  do  return,  it  shall  be  a  holiday  in  this 
house. 

"  I  am  very  glad  that  you  have  seen  Mrs.  Mackintosh  and  Lord 
Houghton,  and  that  they  have  been  kind  to  you.  How  could 
they  be  otherwise? 

"  Equally  so  will  be  Lord  Rosebery,  when  he  comes  to  town- 
He  has  come  to  town;  he  has  been  kind  to  you. 

"Thanks  for  your  kind  thoughts  of  me,  dear  Mme.  Modjeska; 
count  me  always  among  your  best  friends;  always  among  your 
devoted  admirers. 

"My  daughters  join  mp  in  kind  remembrance,  and  with  best 
regards  to  your  husband,  I  am,  , 

"Ever  yours, 

"Henry  W.  Longfellow." 

I  cried  for  joy  and  gratitude  when  I  read  this  kind  mes- 
sage. 


CHAPTER  XLV 

A  CONTRACT  for  a  year,  with  Mr.  Barrett,  was  signed  by 
me  and,  after  a  very  short  and  prosperous  provincial  tour, 
we  returned  to  London,  where  I  played  ''Marie  Stuart'' 
for  the  opening  of  the  winter  season.  The  critic  of  the 
Times  did  not  approve  of  me  this  time,  neither  did  he 
of  Schiller's  play,  —  from  a  Protestant  standpoint.  But 
Joseph  Knight  gave  me  a  splendid  notice^  calling  my  per- 
formance ''an  event  in  the  history  of  the  stage.''  Mr. 
Labouch^re,  Mr.  Sala,  and  Clement  Scott  were  also  exceed- 
ingly kind.  One  organ  cut  me  up  very  severely.  I  learned 
with  a  great  deal  of  pain  that  it  was  a  paper  secretly  sup- 
ported by  a  prominent  person  belonging  to  the  stage,  and 
the  most  curious  thing  about  it  was  that  the  criticism  had 
been  written  by  the  same  man  who  wrote  a  very  laudatory 
article  about  me  in  another  paper.  What  was  my  amaze- 
ment when  the  critic  who  wrote  the  contradictory  notices 
came  to  me  and  apologized,  saying  that  he  was  on  a  salary 
for  both  papers,  and  that  in  one  of  them  special  orders  had 
been  given  to  attack  my  performances.  He  had  a  family, 
and  could  not  afford  to  lose  his  place.  The  light  dawned 
upon  me.  I  had  dared  to  touch  the  so-called  "legitimate" 
repertoire. 

In  spite  of  those  divided  opinions,  "Marie  Stuart"  reached 
very  nearly  one  hundred  performances. 

The  version  of  "Marie  Stuart"  played  by  me  in  London, 
and  afterwards  in  America,  is  a  combination  of  two  trans- 
lations from  the  German,  one  by  Mellish,  the  second  by 
Miss  Fanny  Kemble,  —  the  whole  arranged  by  Hon.  Lewis 
Wingfield.     The  latter  made  the  necessary  cuts  in  the  text 

414 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS   -MARY    STUART"   (1880; 


'* 
•/ 


•  • 


THE  NEW  WORLD  416 

and  improved  it  in  several  places.  Particularly  he  intro- 
duced several  lines  in  the  final  scene  of  the  last  act  that  are 
not  in  the  original  of  Schiller.  By  a  curious  coincidence, 
Mr.  Wingfield's  ancestor,  Sir  Robert  Wingfield,  a  high 
English  official  of  the  times,  had  been  commissioned  by 
Queen  •  Elizabeth  to  be  present  at  the  execution  of  Mary. 
His  report  of  the  occasion,  a  very  circumstantial  one,  is  yet 
in  the  governmental  archives,  and  it  is  from  this  descrip- 
tion that  a  few  details  were  added  to  the  version. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  came  several  times  to  the  play.  He 
was  in  sympathy  with  ''Marie  Stuart,"  and  he  found  the 
quarrel  between  the  two  queens  ''rather  refreshing." 

Ellen  Terry,  who  had  returned  from  her  provincial  tour, 
and  played  with  Henry  Irving  in  some  short  play,  came  to 
see  the  last  act  of  "Marie  Stuart,"  and  called  at  my  dressing- 
room  after  the  performance.  She  was  accompanied  by 
Charles  Coghlan,  who  was  then  without  engagement. 

It  seems  that,  hearing  about  a  foreign  actress  playing 
"Marie  Stuart,"  she  took  me  for  Madame  Janauschek,  who 
had  played  that  part  once  or  twice  in  London,  and  came 
with  a  preconceived  idea  that  I  was  a  stout  woman.  Her 
first  movement  when  she  entered  my  room  and  was  intro- 
duced by  Coghlan,  was  to  feel  my  arm,  and  say,  "I  was 
told  that  you  were  stout;  but  I  see  you  are  not,"  and  then 
she  stepped  back  and  looked  at  me  again :  "But  perhaps  you 
are ;  I  cannot  see  your  form  under  this  voluminous  garment." 

Whoever  has  met  Ellen  Terry  knows  that  she  is  irresistible, 
and  I  liked  her  from  the  start.  We  had  quite  a  long  chat, 
and  parted  friends. 

During  my  London  engagement  I  saw  her  in  several  parts, 
but  I  admired  her  most  in  "Much  Ado  About  Nothing" 
and  in  the  last  act  of  "Merchant  of  Venice." 

Her  stage  appearance  was  strikingly  beautiful.  The 
ease,  the  abundance  of  gestures,  even  the  nervous  restless- 
ness which  never  leaves  her,  fitted  the  part,  and  her  spirit, 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


El-LKH    TsBSt  AS    "ImOOBNE." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  417 

the  sparkling  repartees,  the  mischievous  though  good-natured 
fun,  were  captivating.  I  never  saw  a  better  performance; 
her  Beatrice  was  perfectly  fascinating. 

In  December  ''Adrienne  Lecouvreur''  followed  ''Marie 
Stuart."  This  is  what  I  wrote  about  the  performance  in  a 
letter  to  Poland:  — 

"...  Pray  excuse  my  long  silence.  Adrienne  swallowed  my 
days  and  nights.  I  was  obliged  to  study  a  revised  version,  because 
the  one  I  played  before  was  not  good  from  the  literary  stand- 
point. A  Rev.  Mr.  Harford,  a  canon  of  Westminster  Abbey,  trans- 
lated the  fable  of  '  La  Fontaine '  for  me. 

"Such  mechanical  work  as  restudying  the  lines  is  very  tiresome 
and  very  difficult.  Thank  Heaven  it  is  over  now,  and  I  came 
out  of  this  new  trial  with  Hriumph, '  as  my  friends  said;  I  could 
only  say,  'safely,'  when  my  manager  told  me  that  the  play  would 
run  till  the  end  of  the  season. 

"The  critics  are  unanimous  this  time,  and  those  who  like  me 
are  proud  of  me.  I  am  neither  proud  nor  happy;  I  am  only  tired. 
Last  night  I  cried  after  the  performance.  I  thought  of  you  all. 
.  .  .  Please  excuse  this  shaky  writing;  the  last  act  of  Adrienne 
exhausts  me." 

Another  letter:  — 

"Yes,  I  live  and  move,  my  heart  aches,  but  my  strength  grows, 
for  I  want  it  for  a  still  higher  flight. 

"I  think  they  like  me  here,  and  that  is  an  encouragement. 

"Ah!  if  I  could  be  satisfied  and  contented  in  the  midst  of 
applause  and  flattery,  and  not  desire  anything  more  of  myself  I 
If  I  could  enjoy  the  present  moments  sincerely,  foolishly,  gather 
the  flowers  I  find  on  my  path  of  Ufe,  bind  them  up  in  a  bouquet, 
drink  in  its  perfume,  and  be  glad  and  happy  ! 

"But  there  is  a  saying  that  there  are  creatures  in  whose  hands 
flowers  wither  at  a  touch.  I  belong  to  those.  Every  pleasure 
ceases  to  be  a  real  pleasure  the  moment  I  begin  to  taste  it:  every 
ray  of  Ught  grows  dim  when  I  smile  at  its  radiance.  There  is 
nothing  of  interest  to  me  save  my  work,  and  I  am  sure  that  even  at 
the  last  moment  of  my  Ufe  I  will  cry,  not  like  Goethe, '  More  Light ! ' 
but  *  Work  !  work,  more  work  !' 

"This  will  seem  to  you  like  a  touch  of  the  contagious  influence  of 
'Enfant  du  Si^cle.'     But  you  must  not  misunderstand  me.    I  am 

2.B 


418  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

contented  with  my  intime  life,  to  which  I  do  not  refer  here.  But 
I  have  two  lives,  and  one  is  so  different  from  the  other  that  the 
transition  oftentimes  is  puzzling,  if  not  painful.  My  artificial  Ufe 
is  too  real  at  moments,  and  that  is  what  makes  the  trouble.  I  take 
it  sometimes  too  seriously,  and  then  it  is  a  burden. 

A  fragment  of  another  letter  to  a  Warsaw  friend :  — 

"There  was  a  snowstorm  here  a  few  days  ago.  The  circulation 
and  the  traffic  of  the  streets  were  stopped  and  all  the  theatres  were 
empty.  My  manager  says  this  mav  change  the  success  of  Adrienne, 
and  he  is  thinking  of  substituting  Romeo  and  JuUet.'  That  tempi- 
tation  lures  and  repels  me.  I  see  clouds  gathering  over  my  head 
and  feel  a  fight  in  the  air.  Well,  I  must  prepare  for  the  next  cam- 
paign. I  have  one  consolation:  my  balcony  scene  I  know  and  I 
love  it.  It  is  good  and  unconventional.  After  all,  I  am  not 
afraid  of  anything  except  of  my  EngUsh  pronunciation.  But  I. 
will  study  the  part  with  a  competent  person.  More  work !  I 
suppose  that's  what  keeps  me  aUve.'' 

Mr.  Barrett  asked  me  one  day  if  I  would  like  to  play 
"  Romeo  and  Juliet."  He  was  indeed  afraid  that  the  spell  of 
Adrienne's  success  had  been  broken  by  a  few  empty  houses 
during  the  snowstorm,  and  that  it  would  be  rather  difficult 
to  bring  back  the  audience  with  the  same  bill.  He  was 
mistaken,  however,  because  as  soon  as  the  change  was  an- 
nounced, the  theatre  became  crowded  again,  but  "  Romeo  and 
Juliet"  was  already  advertised,  and  it  had  to  be  performed. 

I  went  to  Mrs.  Sterling  and  asked  her  if  she  would  correct 
my  English.  She  consented,  and  for  four  weeks  I  worked 
with  her.  She  gave  me  a  great  deal  of  encouragement.  I 
needed  it.  Many  failures  are  due  to  overconfidence  or 
lack  of  confidence.  I  w^anted  to  be  sure  that  my  English 
was  not  so  bad  as  to  mar  my  part,  and  I  was  told  that  it 
was  not. 

The  rehearsals  began,  and  I  met  with  some  unexpected 
difficulties :  — 

During  the  first  rehearsal  Mr.  Ryder,  who  was  cast  for 


THE  NEW  WORLD  419 

Friar  Laurence,  told  me  that  I  spoke  distinctly,  but  there 
were  a  few  words  he  wished  to  correct,  if  I  permitted  it.  I 
asked  eagerly  what  those  words  were. 

' '  One  of  them  is  the  word  '  direction' ;  you  should  pro- 
nounce it  with  a  long  4,'  like  this." 

"Dairection?''  I  repeated. 

''Yes;  that  is  a  proper  pronunciation.  The  other  word 
is  'either.'" 

"Shall  I  say  'ayther'?"  I  asked. 

"Yes,  of  course!" 

There  were  some  more  words  Mr.  Ryder  pointed  to  me  as 
utterly  wrongly  pronounced  which  I  omit  here  for  fear  of 
monotony. 

When,  in  the  afternoon,  I  recited  my  part  to  Mrs.  Ster- 
ling, with  Ryder's  corrections,  she  stopped  me,  asking: 
"Who  taught  you  that  old-fashioned  way  of  pronouncing? 
In  the  word  'direction'  you  must  use  the  short  sound  of  'i.' 
It  is  not  ' dairection ' ;  it  is  written  'direction,'  and  the 
rhythm  of  the  verse  requires  only  one,  not  two  syllables." 

"Mr.  Ryder  corrected  me  this  morning,"  I  said. 

"Oh,  Mr.  Ryder  is  a  fine  legitimate  actor,  but  between 
us,  he  is  an  old  fogy."  And  her  sweet,  slightly  mischievous 
smile,  as  she  said  this,  softened  the  severity  of  her  judg- 
ment. 

Next  morning  at  the  rehearsal  I  followed  Mrs.  Sterling's 
advice,  but  as  soon  as  I  uttered  the  sentence,  "By  whose 
direction  foundst  thou  out  this  place?"  Mr.  Ryder,  who  sat 
in  the  stalls,  spoke  to  me :  — 

"Madame,  you  forget;  it  is  not  'direction'  with  a  short 
'i ';  you  must  say  'dairection,'  with  a  long  'i.'  Excuse  the 
interruption,  but  you  should  be  reminded  of  the  proper  way 
of  saying  those  words  before  you  give  the  critics  a  chance 
to  tell  you  so." 

Mr.  Ryder  was  a  venerable  gentleman  and  very  friendly ; 
therefore,  though  it  was  not  quite  polite  nor  right  to  inter- 


420  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

rupt  the  scene,  I  bore  him  no  grudge.  Besides,  I  wanted 
by  all  means  to  find  out  who  was  right,  Mrs.  Sterling  or  he. 
Leaning  over  my  balcony,  I  told  him,  as  gently  as  I  could, 
that  Mrs.  Sterling  insisted  upon  the  word  ''direction"  with 
a  short  ''i."  ''Oh,  Mrs.  Sterling  is  a  fine  actress  and  a 
lovely  woman,  but  she  is  no  authority  on  pronunciation," 
he  answered,  with  a  shrug  of  his  shoulders. 

This  began  to  amuse  me.  I  turned  to  Mr.  Barrett  and 
asked  him  which  he  thought  was  the  right  way  of  pro- 
nouncing the  word.  "Well,  I  suppose/'  sounded  his  answer, 
"that  the  best  way  would  be  to  pronounce  it  halfway, 
neither  with  a  short  nor  a  long  *i.'"  Here  I  laughed  aloud, 
and  declared  that  I  should  follow  Mrs.  Sterling's  ways, 
which  seemed  to  me  more  simple  and  more  euphonic. 

The  deed  was  done,  and  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  was  put  on 
at  the  Court  Theatre,  and  called  forth  many  notices,  some 
good,  some  adverse,  as  might  have  been  expected  by  a 
foreigner  "tackling  Shakespeare";  but  Mr.  Sala  wrote  a 
most  judicious  account  of  my  Juliet,  pointing  out  my 
balcony  scene.  Mr.  Labouch^re,  Mr.  Joseph  Knight,  and 
Mr.  Clement  Scott  dealt  also  most  kindly  with  me,  and  all 
spoke  of  my  improved  English. 

Forbes  Robertson  was  an  admirable  Romeo,  full  of  pas- 
sion, poetry,  and  restrained  pathos  in  the  last  scenes.  Mr. 
Wilson  Barrett  had  engaged  him  to  play  Maurice  de  Saxe 
in  "Adrienne  Lecouvreur,"  and  retained  him  for  Romeo. 
It  was  a  very  good  choice,  for  there  was  no  actor  at  that 
time  in  London  who  could  even  approach  Robertson  in  the 
part  of  that  typical  lover,  for  which  he  was  so  admirably 
suited. 

Mr.  Ryder  was  an  excellent  Friar  and  Mr.  Barrett  a 
successful  Mercutio. 

Shortly  after  my  first  performance  of  the  play,  "Romeo 
and  Juliet"  was  announced  at  the  Lyceum  Theatre,  with 
Henry  Irving  as  Romeo  and  Ellen  Terry  as  Juliet. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  421 

London  in  winter  is  different  from  the  spring  London. 
It  is  more  quiet,  and  for  those  who  can  endure  occasional 
foggy  days,  more  enjoyable.  For  my  part  I  liked  the  fog. 
It  was  amusing  to  see  the  small  red  sun,  so  flat,  so  near,  and 
so  little  imposing.  The  ugly  chimney-pots  disappeared  in 
the  mist,  and  the  whole  city  became  a  phantasm.  I  used 
to  take  drives  on  such  days  and  lose  myself  in  dreams. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  winter  season  of  1880  we  had 
changed  our  lodgings  and  moved  to  Sloane  Street.  When 
we  were  well  established,  we  resumed  the  afternoon  recep- 
tions we  had  left  off  in  New  York.  We  made  many  friends 
and  also  had  opportunities  of  meeting  the  local  celebrities. 

I  have  rather  a  confused  recollection  of  our  social  life 
in  London.  When  I  try  to  carry  my  thoughts  back  to  that 
part  of  my  existence,  I  only  obtain  a  kaleidoscopic  effect, 
a  sort  of  moving  picture.  Sometimes  a  face  or  an  incident 
comes  to  my  mind,  strong  and  clear,  but  most  of  the  time 
they  pass  before  me  only  in  faint  outlines.  I  shall  try  to 
speak  of  my  clear  impressions. 

The  sweet  countenance  of  Mrs.  Jeune  is  still  present  in 
my  mind.  At  her  five  o'clocks  we  met  Mr.  Justin  McCarthy, 
the  celebrated  historian,  author  and  Home  Ruler,  the  fa- 
mous statesman,  Mr.  Chamberlain,  and  Sir  Charles  Dilke, 
whose  striking  intellect  and  extensive  knowledge  in  matters 
of  art  and  political  conditions  it  was  easy  to  recognize.  I 
remember  playing  at  Mrs.  Jeune's  house,  for  one  of  her 
charities,  a  one-act  piece  in  French,  with  Mr.  Pierre  Berton, 
the  well-known  French  actor  and, author.  He  became  one 
of  our  friends,  and  in  later  years  dramatized  forme  Balzac's 
novel  called  ^'Les  Chouans.^' 

I  can  see  even  now  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jacob  Bright,  with  whom 
we  used  to  go  to  the  Parliament,  to  hear  Mr.  Gladstone 
speak,  and  I  remember  clearly  the  impression  the  grand  old 
man's  beautiful  language,  convincing  logic,  and  distinctness 
of  utterance  made  on  me.     Mr.  Jacob  Bright  was  a  brother 


422  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

of  the  great  John  Bright.  While  not  so  well  known  as  his 
distinguished  brother,  he  was  much  pleasanter  personally; 
a  man  of  high  culture,  he  remained  for  many  years  a  member 
of  Parliament  and  was  a  great  advocate  of  woman's  suffrage. 
I  also  remember  a  happy  week  spent  at  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bright's 
home  at  Alderley  Edge,  near  Manchester. 

Another  house  that  we  frequented  was  that  of  Admiral 
and  Mrs.  Mayne,  whom  we  had  first  known  in  New  York. 
We  passed  most  enjbyable  days  in  their  country  home,  and 
I  recollect  a  great  commotion  about  matches  disappearing 
from  the  rooms,  the  catechising  of  the  children,  a  great 
anxiety  lest  the  latter  might  put  the  house  on  fire,  and  finally 
my  interference  in  the  matter,  which  greatly  relieved  the 
hostess,  by  the  statement  that  all  the  missing  matches  must 
be  in  my  husband's  pockets,  and  so  they  were.  In  his 
absent-mindedness  he  picked  them  up  instinctively  every- 
where, as  a  supply  for  his  cigarettes  when  he  went  for  a  w«dk 
in  the  garden. 

We  met  a  great  many  distinguished  people  at  the  house 
of  Lady  Henniker,  among  them  the  celebrated  General 
Wolseley,  who  asked  me,  in  jest,  I  suppose,  if  I  would  like 
the  English  army  to  come  over  and  fight  for  Poland  against 
Russia.  I  told  him  that  we  were  more  afraid  of  our  friends 
than  of  .our  enemies,  to  whom  we  had  become  more  or  less 
used,  and  I  reminded  him  of  the  way  in  which  the  great 
Napoleon  had  played  on  the  hopes  of  the  Poles,  only  to 
frustrate  them  in  the  end. 

We  assisted  at  several  gorgeous  receptions  at  Lady  Fricke's, 
but  they  left  only  a  confused  impression  on  me.  But  one 
figure  stands  out  clearly,  that  of  Mr.  Gilbert  (the  playwright), 
leaning  against  the  light  background  of  the  room,  and  look- 
ing picturesque,  though  he  did  not  want  to. 

A  very  hospitable  house  was  that  of  Mrs.  Tennant,  where 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  Monsieur  Coquelin  recite. 
His  delivery  of  verses  I  regarded  always  as  an  unequalled 


MADAME    MODJESKA    IN    -  LES    CHOUANS"    (1887) 


i^orognph  by  Filk 


THE  NEW  WORLD  423 

perfection,  and  every  time  I  heard  this  great  artist  I  brought 
home  the  most  delightful  impression. 

The  most  interesting  party  I  assisted  at  was  one  given  by 


From  a  ^UOoffraph.  t 
M.   COQDBLIN. 


Mr.  Hamilton  Aid^,  —  in  honor  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  — 
at  which  Mr.  Aid^  produced  a  short  play  from  his  pen  in 
which  I  took  part.  Miss  Genevieve  Ward,  who  made  such 
a  hit  in  "Forget  Me  Not,"  also  took  part  in  the  entertain- 


424  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

ment,  after  which  supper  was  served.  I  was  seated  next  to 
the  prince,  and  had  via-i-vis  the  most  beautiful  Mrs.  Lily 
Langtiy.    This  gave  me  an  opportunity   to    admire  her 


PilotBgrajik,  copyngMi,  ISSt,  by  Sanm^ 

Mbb.  Luiotbt. 

perfect  neck  and  shoulders.  I  had  met  Mrs.  Langtrj-  several 
times  before,  and  remember  how,  one  evening,  after  "  Romeo 
and  Juliet,"  she  came  to  my  dressing-room  and  put  on  her 
head  the  wreath  of  small  white  roses  I  wore  in  the  tomb 
scene ;  she  also  tried  the  skullcap  I  introduced  in  Juliet, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  425 

and  looked  so  bewitching  in  both  that  I  asked  her  if  she 
never  had  a  tendency  toward  the  stage.  She  smiled  and 
said,  ''Yes;  it  would  be  nice  to  be  an  actress."  But  at  that 
time  she  was  not  seriously  thinking  of  the  stage.  The 
charming  Mrs.  Cornwallis  West,  with  her  miniature  beauty, 
sat  near  by,  and  there  were  several  other  persons,  some 
of  them  known  and  some  unknown  to  me. 

Genevieve  Ward  sat  on  the  same  side  of  the  table  with 
me,  and  between  us  was  a  Russian  count  whose  name  I 
forget.  Count  Jaraczewski  was  placed  next  to  Mrs.  Corn- 
wallis West.  The  supper  was  animated.  My  husband, 
who,  at  the  end  of  the  play,  had  slipped  away  to  smoke  a 
cigarette,  came  in  when  everybody  was  seated.  The  prince 
perceived  him,  and  said  to  me,  ''There  is  Monsieur  Chi apow- 
ski."  He  pronounced  the  name  perfectly,  with  a  Polish 
inflection  on  the  second  syllable,  and  with  the  hard  "1"  so 
difficult  to  foreigners.  I  was  amazed  at  the  prince's  memory 
of  faces  and  names,  for  he  had  met  my  husband  only  once 
before. 

Seeing  him  now  approaching  our  table,  the  prince  bowed 
slightly,  waving  his  hand  to  him.  Mr.  Chlapowski,  who  is 
very  near-sighted,  thought  that  some  one  of  his  friends  was 
greeting  him,  and  sent  back  to  the  prince  a  most  familiar 
wave  of  the  hand.  When  he  came  nearer  and  recognized 
the  prince,  he  apologized,  and  both  had  a  good  laugh  over 
the  mistake. 

It  was  during  that  supper  that  the  prince  spoke  to  me 
about  the  drama.  He  said  that  dramatic  art  was  not  yet 
in  its  full  development  in  England.  I  suggested  the  founding 
of  an  endowed  national  theatre,  such  as  all  other  countries 
in  Europe  possess.  His  answer  was  discouraging :  "Do  you 
think  there  is  enough  love  for  art  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  race 
to  make  the  theatre  a  state  affair?"  There  was  no  answer 
to  that.  I  was  nonplussed,  and  did  not  know  what  to  say 
next.    Happily,  at  the  same  moment  Count  Jaraczewski 


Pkolaarapli  &amp;y  Sannf. 
Cenetuve  Wasd. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  427 

rose  from  his  seat  and  came  to  say  some  amusing  thing  to 
the  prince  in  German. 

Other  entertainments,  big  and  small,  flit  across  my  mind 
in  a  state  of  great  confusion.  I  remember  being  squeezed 
in  a  crowd  through  an  enormous  room,  where  fine  music  was 
played,  but  I  had  to  come  quite  close  to  the  instrument  in 
order  to  hear  it,  for  it  seemed  as  though  the  first  sounds  of 
an  orchestra,  a  solo,  violin,  or  a  'cello,  were  a  sign  for  the  start 
of  general  loud  conversation.  The  louder  the  music,  the 
louder  was  the  chatter.  I  never  brought  home  from  those 
parties  any  distinct  recollection.  Though  numbers  of  people 
were  introduced  to  me,  I  was  not  any  the  wiser,  for  the  names 
were  pronounced  indistinctly,  and  often  were  drowned  by 
the  noise.  Often  the  only  thing  I  carried  back  with  me 
was  a  headache. 

Sometimes  Signor  Tosti  commanded  silence  with  his  love- 
songs  —  sometimes  Signor  de  Soria's  beautiful  baritone  was 
heard  without  interruption,  but  even  the  best  virtuoso 
could  not  stop  the  deafening,  awful,  jarring  human  voices. 

In  connection  with  this  habit,  Henry  Wieniawski,  the 
king  of  violinists,  as  he  was  once  called,  told  me  that  once 
in  London  he  was  invited  by  some  person  of  high  rank  to 
play  at  his  house.  When  he  stepped  out  to  the  front,  all  eyes 
and  lorgnettes  were  on  him,  and  there  was  not  even  a  mur- 
mur in  the  audience ;  everybody  was  still  and  attentive ;  but 
he  scarcely  struck  the  first  notes  of  Raff's  cavatina,  when  all 
the  people  in  the  room  began  to  talk.  It  was  very  provoking, 
and  he  was  determined  to  teach  them  a  lesson:  knowing 
that  every  English  man  and  woman  had  to  rise  and  be  silent 
when  the  hymn  ^'God  save  the  Queen''  was  played,  he 
gave  a  wink  to  the  accompanist,  then  passed  cleverly  from 
Raff  to  the  tune  of  the  hymn  and  played  it  fortissimo. 
To  his  great  satisfaction,  the  people  stopped  talking,  and 
those  who  were  seated  rose  to  their  feet.  But  when  he 
resumed  the  cavatina,  they  also  instantly  resumed  their 


428  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

talk.  He  again  intoned  the  hymn  and  gained  a  few  minutes 
of  silence,  but  the  noise  was  stronger  than  ever  when  he 
changed  the  tune.  He  repeated  the  hymn  trick  five  or  six 
times.  When  he  finished  no  one  understood  the  hint ;  they 
only  wondered  at  the  strange  composition  in  which  the 
national  hymn  was  so  often  repeated. 

From  time  to  time  we  met  Americans.  At  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Smalley^s  house  we  met  the  handsome  Mr.  Julian  Hawthorne. 
Mr.  Nadal,  of  the  American  Legation,  whom  we  had  known 
before  in  New  York,  introduced  to  me  the  poet  Lowell, 
who  was  then  American  Minister.  Our  sincere  admiration 
for  Lowell's  poems  soon  made  us  good  friends,  so  much  so 
that  when,  on  one  occasion,  I  introduced  to  him  my  son,  then 
nineteen  years  old,  he  called  me  outright  a  *' humbug." 
Could  one  expect  a  more  friendly  or  more  familiar  compli- 
ment? 

One  sunny  morning  I  was  accosted  in  the  street  by  a  lady 
who  exclaimed,  ^' Why,  how  do  you  do,  Madame  Modjeska?" 
Her  face  was  verj'^  familiar  to  me,  but  I  could  not  place  her, 
and  I  must  have  looked  puzzled,  for  she  exclaimed :  ''Well, 
I  declare!     Don't  you  remember  Aunt  Louisa?" 

We  nearly  fell  into  each  other^s  arms.  I  was  truly  glad 
to  see  Mrs.  Eldridge,  who  was  such  an  excellent  Prudence 
in  '*La  Dame  aux  Camelias,"  but  remembering  what  a 
patriot  she  was,  and  how  often  she  had  repeated  that  she 
did  not  care  a  bit  about  London  and  the  English,  I  chaffed 
her  on  account  of  her  broken  resolution  of  '^ never  —  never" 
going  to  England. 

She  interrupted  me,  saying  quickly:  *^ Don't  you  make 
any  mistake ;  I  am  just  as  American  as  I  ever  was,  and  even 
more,  if  you  please.  Look  here!"  With  these  words  she 
lifted  her  dress  in  front  and  advanced  her  foot  to  show  me 
a  most  peculiar  stocking  —  it  was  embroidered  over  the  in- 
step with  the  American  flag  in  red,  white,  and  blue.  There 
I  was  so  much  seriousness  and  also  so  much  fun  in  the  ex- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  429 

pression  of  her  face  as  she  thus  exposed  her  loyalty  to  her  i 
native  country,  that  it  would  puzzle  many  artists  to  paint  it,  f 
or  actors  to  imitate  it.     I  saw  only  once  a  similar  expressionfl 
—  in  Joseph  Jefferson's  features  when  he  played  Bob  Acres.  1( 

Our  great  pleasure  was  to  visit  the  artists'  studios,  and  we 
were  often  invited  to  parties  at  their  homes. 

I  recollect  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Millais,  both  tall,  finely  built,  and 
though  youth  had  fled,  the  traces  of  beautj^  were  still  appar- 
ent in  their  features.  In  Millais's  studio  I  admired  greatly, 
among  other  pictures.  Lord  Beaconsfield's  portrait. 

I  also  remember  the  charming  moments  at  Sir  Frederick 
Leighton's  sumptuous  studio  and.  his  beautiful  decorative 
works. 

Of  all  artistic  houses,  Alma-Tadema's  was  the  most  at- 
tractive. We  found  both  the  great  artist  and  his  golden- 
haired  wife  most  congenial  and  hospitable.  Their  evening 
receptions  were  ardently  attended.  The  house  was  an  attrac- 
tion by  itself,  with  its  onyx  windows,  the  wonderful  pictures, 
the  gilded  and  exquisitely  painted  piano,  the  small  fountain 
among  the  tropical  plants,  the  odd  furniture,  the  rare  vases, 
and  all  sorts  of  valuable  bric-S.-brac,  all  of  them  scrupulously 
clean.  Gold  is  the  predominant  shade  in  Tadema's  house. 
I  heard  him  say  that  London  atmosphere  was  so  dull  that 
he  had  to  create  an  artificial  sunshine  in  his  house  by  putting 
in  as  much  gold  as  he  could,  and  indeed  even  on  a  dark 
winter  day  the  onyx  window  flooded  the  living-room  with 
a  soft  yellow  light,  making  everything  look  bright  and  warm. 
The  love  for  color,  especially  warm  color,  so  characteristic 
of  his  exquisite  pictures,  was  to  be  noticed  everywhere. 

As  befits  a  son  of  Holland,  his  predilection  for  cleanliness 
is  not  only  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  house,  but  is  also 
a  distinctive  trait  of  his  works:  there  is  no  suggestion  of 
sad,  grayish,  smutty  tints  in  his  clear  landscapes,  his  blue 
skies,  his  white  marbles  (oh,  how  gloriously  white!).  But 
this  cleanliness  extends  equally  to  his  moral  nature.     One 


430  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

could  not  imagine  him  painting  anything  repulsive  or  sug- 
gestive. 

One  of  the  first  living  artists,  Alma-Tadema  was  one  of 


a-Tadema. 


the  most  charming  hosts.     His  home  was  open  to  all  the 

foreign    artists  of    note    that    came    to  London,  not  only 

painters,  but  sculptors,  niusiciaiis,  and  occasionally  actors. 

It  was  my  good  fortune  to  meet  tliis  great  artist  and  his 


THE  NEW  WORLD  431 

wife  at  the  very  beginning  of  my  London  engagement,  and 
the  happy  hours  spent  in  their  hospitable  home  belong  to 
my  pleasantest  memories  of  London. 

I  had  a  staunch  friend  at  that  time  in  the  person  of  Ethel 
Coxon,  who  was  a  Ruskin,  Burne- Jones,  aesthetic  giri, 
always  picturesque,  with  her  long  limbs  and  soft  draperies. 
Her  intellectual  qualities  and  inborn  goodness  of  heart, 
however,  were  the  strongest  attractions,  and  we  soon  became 
great  friends.  She  was  always  near  me  when  I  most  needed 
her,  consoling  and  encouraging  me  or  correcting  my  English. 
She  went  with  me  to  afternoon  teas  or  accompanied  me  on 
my  shopping  trips.  It  was  she  who  opened  for  me  the 
gates  of  a  woman's  earthly  paradise  —  Liberty's  shop. 

She  also  went  to  several  studios  with  me.  She  knew 
almost  every  artist  worth  knowing  in  England,  and  she 
truly  loved  art. 

We  visited  one  morning  Burne-Jones's  simple  rooms 
flooded  with  light.  I  was  deeply  impressed,  and  a  feeling 
of  veneration  filled  my  heart  when  I  stood  before  the  pictures, 
known  by  me  till  then  in  reproductions  only.  His  art 
satisfied  the  most  exalted  desires  of  my  soul  and  imagination. 

Whistler's  pictures  were  on  exhibition  then,  and  we  went 
to  see  them.  They  struck  me  as  being  exquisitely  odd  and 
most  interesting.  We  met  the  artist.  His  appearance  was 
very  striking.  With  the  celebrated  white  lock  among  his 
black  waving  hair,  and  his  animated,  nervous  features,  he 
looked  almost  mischievous.  He  came  often  to  our  house, 
and  we  listened  with  delight  to  his  remarks  about  schools 
and  styles  of  painting.  His  views  on  the  subject  proved  his 
deep  knowledge  and  most  striking  originality. 

Mr.  Watts,  with  his  refined  face  and  silver  beard,  lives 
still  in  my  mind.  We  spent  delightful  afternoons  in  his 
studio,  admiring  his  pictures  and  talking  art.  Ethel  Coxon 
supplied  a  pigment  to  those  conversations  by  her  witty 
remarks. 


432  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

It  was  there  we  met  Matthew  Arnold,  the  poet,  and  Mrs. 
Humphry  Ward,  who  was  then  a  very  young  girl.  With 
her  aureole  of  bright  golden  hair,  she  stood   against  the 


Lord  Lbiobton,  from  the  Portrait  bt  G.  F.  Wattb. 

picture  of  a  multi-colored  angel  at  such  an  angle  that  the 
wings  seemed  to  belong  to  her.  Mr.  Arnold  introduced 
her  to  me  as  his  "niece  who  thinks  she  can  write."  There 
was,  however,  pride  in  his  eyes  when  he  uttered  this  joke. 
Many  charming  hours  in  Mr.  Boughton's  house,  with  his 


THE  NEW  WORLD  433 

aesthetic  wife  and  niece,  come  to  my  memory,  with  all  their 
refreshing  grace. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Labouchfere  we  saw  quite  frequently.  Mr. 
LabouchSre's  brilliant  mind,  his  wit,  and  his  intimate  knowl- 
edge of  English  society  and  its  foibles  were  most  interesting. 
He  always  said  the  right  thing  at  the  right  moment  and 
to  the  right  person ;  it  was  not  diplomacy,  but  inborn  tact. 
We  met  Mrs.  Braddon  in  his  house. 

One  of  the  eventful  moments  in  London  was  my  meeting 
Robert  Browning.  Before  the  introduction  I  took  him 
for  a  retired  French  officer.  He  certainly  looked  French, 
with  his  pointed  mustache,  his  imperial  d  la  Napoleon  the 
Third,  and  his  vivacious  manners.  I  never  would  have 
suspected  him  of  being  the  author  of  "Andrea  del  Sarto"  and 
"Fra  Lippo  Lippi."  He  spoke  rapidly  in  French  and  English 
on  all  possible  subjects  with  the  same  ease  and  knowledge. 
I  do  not  believe  I  have  ever  met  a  man  so  versatile  as  he, 
so  great  and  yet  so  simple ;  such  a  poet  and  yet  so  human. 

Next  I  remember  Bret  Harte.  When  he  was  introduced 
to  us,  we  greeted  him  as  an  old  friend,  for  we  knew  him 
through  his  novels  and  poems.  I  believe  that  he  was  more 
appreciated  on  the  continent  than  in  either  America  or 
England. 

When  we  spoke  of  his  great  fame  in  Europe,  he  said, 
smiling:  "You  could  not  say  that  about  England  ;  they  do 
not  appreciate  me ;  they  do  not  even  know  me."  We  pro- 
tested against  this  judgment,  and  he  replied  with  a  story :  — 

"Some  time  ago  I  was  to  deliver  a  lecture  in  one  of  the 
English  towns,  and  had  to  be  introduced  to  the  audience 
by  some  local  authority.  The  man  made  quite  a  long 
speech,  in  which  he  praised  my  great  qualities,  my  fame 
throughout  the  world,  and  my  exceptional  merits.  He 
never  mentioned  my  name,  but  wound  up  his  words  as 
follows:  ^And  now,  let  me  introduce  to  you  Mr.  —  er  — 
Mr.  .  .  .'  Then,  suddenly  turning  to  me,  he  asked,  in  a 
2f 


434  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

furious  whisper,   'What  the  deuce  is  your  name?'     This 
proved  to  me  how  well  I  was  known  in  England. 

In  the  month  of  May,  1881,  when  the  grand  opera  opened, 
some  of  our  Polish  celebrities,  together  with  other  famous 
singers,  arrived,  —  Sembrich  Kochanska,  Ikiward  de  Reszke, 
and  Mierzwinski,  the  great  tenor  of  the  day. 

Jan  de  Reszke  did  not  sing  at  that  time,  but  came  to  Lon- 
don with  his  brother.  A  peculiar  thing  in  Jan  de  Reszke's 
career  was  that  he  began  as  a  barytone.  Once  during  the 
performance  he  drank  a  glass  of  ice-water  and  lost  his  voice. 
It  was,  as  he  thought,  a  paralysis  of  the  vocal  chords.  A 
short  time  afterwards,  however,  he  recovered  from  the  shock, 
and  his  voice  was  stronger  and  better  than  ever,  but  it 
changed  to  a  tenor  —  or  rather,  it  was  decided  by  one  of  the 
great  singing  teachers  that  his  voice  was  never  a  barytone, 
but  a  heroic  tenor. 

There  lay  a  great  future  before  him,  and  yet,  in  spite 
of  many  offers,  he  hesitated  to  accept  an  engagement,  so 
afraid  was  he  of  the  repetition  of  the  dreadful  experience. 
When  I  met  him  in  1881,  in  London,  he  was  still  in  this 
uncertain  state  of  mind. 

His  voice  was  then  in  the  best  condition,  and  we  encouraged 
him  most  urgently  to  accept  an  engagement,  but  he  always 
answered  the  same:  '^I  am  afraid  to  appear  on  the  stage, 
and  my  fear  is  greater  than  my  desire  for  fame."  It  took 
him  several  years  to  overcome  this  dread,  and  then  at  last 
we  read  his  name  on  the  bills. 

How  can  I  ever  forget  the  delightful  Sunday  evenings  at 
our  house  in  Sloane  Street  and  later  in  Finchley  Road, 
where  those  two  glorious  brothers  sang  many  a  time !  We 
had  a  concert  regularly  every  Sunday,  for  the  De  Reszkes 
said  that  since '^Pani  Helena"  could  not  go  to  the  opera, 
being  occupied  every  evening  herself,  she  must  have  her 
own  opera  performance  at  home. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  435 

Madame  Sembrich  Kochanska  and  her  husband  were  also 
[  had  met  this  great  artist  before  in  Warsaw, 


PtioUmraiA  bi/  Mom.  A'™  Yvrk. 
Madaub  Sembhich. 

when  she  came  from  Dresden  to  bewitch  her  countrymen 
with  her  wonderful  skill  and  voice. 

The  charming  soprano  and  beautiful  woman,  Marie  Rose, 
and  her  husband.  Colonel  Mapleson,  frequently  joined  our 
Sunday  parties,  and  we  had  the  great  joy  of  greeting  Jose- 


436  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

phine  de  Reszke  when  she  came  from  the  Paris  Grand  Opera 
to  London  for  a  short  engagement. 

We  also  had  instrumental  music  at  our  improvised  con- 
certs, —  Joseph  Wieniawski  and  Lovenberg,  pianists,  Reise- 
nauer,  Ondryczek,  Natchez,  violinists,  and  Holman,  the 
exquisite  'cellist,  who  always  brought  with  him  his  ''wife," 
as  he  called  his  instrument,  and  never  waited  to  be  asked 
to  play,  but  did  so  with  pleasure. 

The  attraction  lay  in  the  congenial  atmosphere  of  our 
receptions.  Indeed  our  Sunday  evenings  could  have  been 
envied  by  many  rich  people,  in  whose  houses  our  Polish 
artists  declined  to  sing  for  high  remuneration. 

Almost  every  Sunday  the  De  Reszkes,  their  friend,  young 
Komierowski,  quite  a  good  amateur  barytone,  and  Mierz- 
winski  came  to  dinner ;  then  the  rest  of  the  evening  w^as 
spent  in  singing,  which  lasted  sometimes  until  three  o'clock 
in  the  morning. 

We  thought  that  the  neighbors  might  object  to  the  music 
at  such  hours  —  and,  indeed,  one  evening  a  policeman 
knocked  at  our  door.  We  were  sure  the  object  of  his  visit 
was  to  stop  the  music,  and  therefore  great  was  our  relief 
when  he  told  us  he  came  only  to  find  out  who  sang  the  last 
air.  We  named  Jan  de  Reszke,  and  asked  him  the  reason 
of  his  inquiry. 

''A  man  in  the  next  house  wanted  to  know,"  he  said. 
"Go  on;   good  night." 

It  seems  that  while  these  wonderful  concerts  were  going 
oh,  every  \\dndow  was  opened,  and  many  people  stood  in  the 
street  listening. 

I  knew  that  our  famous  friends  would  not  sing  or  play 
if  we  invited  company,  and  we  had  to  be  very  careful  not  to 
mention  our  concerts,  lest  some  people  should  invite  them- 
selves. 

The  only  persons  our  artists  ''adopted"  were  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bodenham,  and  Lord  and  Lady  Denbigh,  who  came 


THE  NEW  WORLD  437 

several  times  with  their  eldest  daughter,  Lady  Clara.  John- 
ston Forbes  Robertson,  as  my  leading  man,  and  Mrs.  Brom- 
ley, who  lived  in  our  house,  were  also  with  us. 

But  music  was  not  the  sole  entertainment.  We  played 
charades  and  other  games.  All  those  artists  were  full  of 
life,  and  enjoyed  every  minute  with  a  childlike  eagerness. 
Jests,  bon  mots,  witty  repartees,  inventions  of  amusements, 
one  more  absurd  than  the  other,  were  performed  with  the 
same  light  spirit  and  insouciance.  I  remember  that*  one 
evening  in  1882,  when  we  lived  in  Finch]  ey  Road,  I  saw 
them  put  their  heads  together  and  whisper  for  a  while. 
Then  one  of  them  announced  the  sextet  of  "Lucia  di 
Lammermoor."  The  two  De  Reszke  brothers,  Mierzwinski, 
Marie  Rose,  Komierowski,  and  some  one  I  do  not  remember, 
were  to  sing.  Lovenberg,  a  young  pianist  of  great  talent 
and  great  mischief,  sat  at  the  piano. 

We  had  heard  but  a  few  bars  of  the  sextet  when  suddenly 
Lovenberg  changed  the  tune  to  the  ''Merry  War"  waltz, 
which  the  singers  took  up,  and  after  a  while  changed  it 
again  to  the  sextet,  and  so  on  and  so  on  until  the  end.  The 
effect  was  most  tantalizing,  and  my  Polish  friend,  Anna 
Wolska.  who  had  just  arrived  from  Paris,  nearly  cried 
with  disappointment,  and  was  disconsolate  until  Jan  de 
Reszke  sang  the  air  of  "Halka,"  and  then  she  cried  with 
emotion. 

I  had  with  me  two  nieces,  who  came  from  the  convent 
for  their  vacation,  and  also  my  son  Ralph,  who  had  arrived 
from  Paris. 

The  whole  house  rang  with  merry  laughter  and  young 
voices.  There  was  no  end  of  practical  jokes,  and  when  our 
artists  came  on  Sunday,  we  could  not  tell  which  was  the 
youngest.     The  whole  place  was  turned  upside  down. 

Two  years  later  we  heard  that  Lovenberg  died  of  con- 
sumption. 


438  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

After  "Romeo  and  Juliet"  we  played  "Juana,"  by  Wills. 
It  was  a  tragedy  in  verse,  based  on  the  character  of  Jeanne 
la  Folle,  the  queen  of  Spain,  and  was  not  a  success.  It  was 
not  a  historic  play.  The  queen  was  changed  to  a  young 
girl  of  passionate  temperament,  and  inclined  to  visions. 
Like  the  queen,  she  also  was  consumed  by  jealousy  verging 
on  madness. 

The  leading  man's  part  was  that  of  Friar  John,  a  monk 
who  formerly  had  loved  Juana  hopelessly,  and  to  end  his 
torment  of  unrequited  love  had  buried  himself  in  a  mon- 
astery. 

She  loved  and  married  another,  a  brute  and  a  cad,  and  at 
the  end  of  the  second  act,  exasperated  by  his  faithlessness 
and  his  cynical  speeches,  stabbed  him  with  a  dagger,  which 
the  senoras  of  Spain  are  supposed  to  wear  always  in  their 
belt  or  garter.    The  bad  man  died  on  the  spot. 

Friar  John,  who  happened  to  be  at  hand  and  who  had 
witnessed  the  murder,  took  the  crime  on  himself,  and  was 
tried,  while  Juana  wandered  in  the  woods,  stark  mad. 

In  the  last  act,  led  to  the  monastery,  she  confessed  her 
crime  and  died  quietly,  comforted  by  the  soothing  words  of 
the  ever  faithful  Friar  John. 

I  remember  that  the  first  performance  of  "Juana"  was  on 
Saturday,  and  the  audience  was  very  enthusiastic.  I  was 
called  five  times  before  the  curtain  after  the  murder  scene. 
Others  were  applauded  profusely  also,  and  the  author  was 
called  repeatedly  before  the  curtain.  We  w^re  sure  of  a 
long  run  for  the  play.  The  company  congratulated  me, 
and  we  were  so  happy  that  we  planned  an  excursion  to  the 
country  for  a  day,  to  stay  over  until  next  Monday.     Some 

one  suggested  that  there  was  a  midnight  train  to and 

we  could  catch  it. 

"Let  us  go,  too,"  said  Ida  Bromley  to  her  elder  brother, 
Johnston,  "you,  Norman,  and  myself." 

"Bravo!   w^e  shall  all  go!" 


E    MODJESEA   AB    "  JD&amp;NA." 


440  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  sent  my  maid  for  the  valise,  and  Mr.  Chlapowski  went 
home  to  fill  his  travelling-bag  with  toilet  accessories  and  a 
large  supply  of  cigarettes.  The  house  we  lived  in  was 
across  the  square,  and  he  and  my  maid  returned  very  soon. 
But  the  last  act  was  very  long.  It  was  twenty-five  minutes 
of  twelve  when  the  curtain  went  down,  and  our  theatre  was 
fifteen  minutes  from  the  station. 

My  husband  and  Ida  lost  hope  of  reaching  the  train, 
but  I  told  them  I  would  be  ready  in  time.  While  taking 
off  my  make-up,  I  ordered  my  maid  to  pack  my  dress 
in  the  valise.  I  retained  the  costume  of  the  last  act,  the 
nun-like  garb  of  a  penitent  sinner:  a  dark  brown  cowl, 
a  hood,  and  a  white  cord  with  tassels  for  a  belt.  Throw- 
ing over  my  shoulders  a  long  cloak,  I  stood  ready  for 
departure. 

My  husband  laughed  when  he  saw  me,  but  led  me  to 
the  carriage,  where  Ida  Bromley  was  already  waiting.  My 
maid  followed  with  the  bags,  and  we  started  on  a  sharp  trot 
to  the  station.  There  we  found  Robertson  and  his  brother 
Norman,  who,  having  finished  their  parts  in  the  third  act, 

were  waiting  for  us.      When  we  arrived  at ,  the  hotel 

night-clerk  was  shocked  to  see  a  nun  in  such  jolly  company, 
but  did  not  refuse  to  supply  us  with  rooms. 

We  spent  a  delightful  day  in  the  country,  not  even  dream- 
ing that  on  our  return  we  would  find  treacherous  Dame 
Fortune  grinning  maliciously  at  our  frustrated  hopes.  On 
our  return  we  learned  with  dismay  that  the  play  was  a 
total  failure.  The  papers  declared  that  it  was  altogether 
too  gloomy,  especially  the  last  act,  with  its  dark  convent 
galleries,  its  procession  of  monks,  and  their  lugubrious 
chant.  One  of  the  critics,  after  having  praised  my  acting 
almost  extravagantly,  abused  the  play,  and  his  criticism 
ended  with  these  words:  *'If  this  play  proves  a  success, 
then  we  may  say  that  the  English  people  take  their  pleas- 
ures sadly."     I  believe,  though,  that  had  Forbes  Robertson 


THE  NEW  WORLD  441 

played  the  poetic  monk  instead  of  Wilson  Barrett,  the  play 
would  have  had  a  better  chance. 

It  was  a  grave  mistake,  though  it  would  be  hard  to  blame 
an  actor-manager  for  keeping  the  best  part  for  himself. 

The  play  was  produced  with  great  care  and  in  best  style, 
the  scenery  and  costumes  elaborate  and  handsome.  Mr. 
Barrett  did  all  he  could  to  secure  the  success  of  the  play,  and 
it  was  a  pity  to  take  '' Juana''  ofif  the  bills  after  a  two-weeks' 
run.  Norman  Forbes  Robertson  played  with  spirit  the 
short  comedy  part,  and  Wiss  Ward,  from  Australia,  was 
the  mischievous  beauty.  I  spoke  in  former  pages  of  actors' 
superstitions.  This  time  I  witnessed  the  realization  of 
one:  — 

My  husband  and  myself  went  to  Mr.  Barrett's  office  to 
find  out  what  were  his  prospects  for  the  remaining  few  weeks 
of  the  London  season.  We  found  the  poor  man  almost 
buried  in  a  pile  of  newspapers.  He  looked  pale,  though 
trying  to  smile  at  the  bad  luck.  The  first  thing  he  said  to 
me  was:  '^I  knew  the  play  would  prove  a  failuie,  because, 
just  as  I  was  leaving  my  house,  a  funeral  appeared  at  the 
corner  of  the  street,  and  being  in  a  great  hurry,  I  was  obliged 
to  cross  it,  and  there  it  is!"  He  showed  me  the  article  I 
read  before :  ^' You  see,  they  force  you  to  take  up  the  French 
repertoire  again,  and  I  am  thinking  of  '  Frou-frou.'" 

It  was  then  that  the  lease  of  the  Court  Theatre  expired, 
and  we  were  moved  to  the  Princess  Theatre,  where  the  atmos- 
phere was  not  so  congenial.  With  the  change  of  house  we 
changed  the  audience,  which  in  that  part  of  the  city  was 
quite  different,  used  more  to  melodramas  than  to  the 
modern  plays.  Mr.  Barrett  took  the  theatre  in  view  of 
producing  there  his  popular  pieces,  which,  after  the  close  of 
my  engagement,  he  subsequently  did  with  great  success. 

The  stage  of  the  Princess  was  very  much  higher  than  the 
one  at  the  Court  Theatre,  and  a  little  wider.  In  order  to 
make  the  Court  Theatre  scenery  fit,  a  frame  narrow  on  the 


442  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIOXS 

sides  and  very  deep  above  was  put  in  front  of  the  stage,  and 
the  result  was  a  fatal  one,  for  the  gallery  audience  could  not 
see  what  was  going  on  on  the  stage  unless  the  actors  were 
close  to  the  footlights.  All  the  action  performed  up  stage 
was  interrupted  by  the  loud  murmur  of  the  angrj^  gallery 
gods.  It  was  very  annoying,  especially  to  me,  who  always 
avoided  the  glare  of  the  footlights,  and  liked  to  move  freely 
in  all  directions.  I  felt  uncomfortable,  and  longed  for  the 
close  of  the  season. 

During  the  two  last  weeks  I  played  my  repertoire  and  at 
the  end  a  benefit,  to  the  success  of  which  several  prominent 
stars  kindly  contributed.  Among  them,  Sarah  Bernhardt 
played  ''Le  Passant"  with  Madame  Teissandier,  Henry 
Irving  recited,  and  Ellen  Terry  played  Ophelia's  scene. 

In  giving  a  benefit  I  followed  my  country's  custom,  and 
learned  too  late  that  in  England   such  a  thing  was  only 
allowed  in  case  of  retirement  from  the  stage.     I  am  sorry* 
to  say  that  no  one  told  me  so  when  I  planned  it. 

Always  faithful  to  Cadgewith,  we  spent  a  few  weeks  in 
that  enchanting  spot.  This  time  we  were  rather  numerous. 
Many  friends  came  also,  among  them  Mabel  Cook,  the 
novelist. 

It  was  during  that  summer  she  wrote  my  biography,  based 
on  the  information  given  her  by  Miss  Wolska.  I  never  was 
very  communicative  about  my  reminiscences,  and  therefore 
some  of  the  facts  in  Mrs.  Cook's  book  are  erroneous. 

We  left  Cadgewith  in  September,  and  then  started  on  a 
short  provincial  tour  under  Wilson  Barrett's  management. 
It  was  my  second  visit  to  different  English  towns. 

I  have  a  few  notes  from  that  time,  and  here  they 
are: — 

''  October  2d,  Sheffield. 

'*  In  the  afternoon  we  walked  a  long  time  in  the  country.  Coming 
back,  we  met  the  procession  of  the  Salvation  Army.  Their  min- 
isters call  themselves  Generals,  and,  as  I  hear,  are  doing  a  great 


THE  NEW  WORLD  443 

deal  of  good,  converting  drunkards  to  soberness  and  commending 
pure  life  among  the  poor  classes. 

"  Singing  hymns,  beating  a  drum,  and  playing  tambourines,  they 
march  among  hostile  elements,  for  they  are  not  liked  here. 

"  We  even  witnessed  a  row;  an  old  woman  struck  with  her 
soiled  broom  the  officer's  face,  and  a  skirmish  ensued.  The  drum 
was  broken,  the  banner  torn  to  pieces;  even  some  women  who 
wanted  to  join  the  procession  received  quite  serious  blows. 

**  The  Enghsh  are  demonstrative  when  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
better  classes." 

"  October  3d. 

"  At  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  we  left  for  Birmingham,  and 
opened  with  'Heartsease.'  The  house  was  not  very  full  because 
people  were  afraid  the  play  was  too  risqu^.  They  asked  if  it  was 
the  same  play  where  the  heroine  dresses  on  the  stage,  getting  up 
from  her  bed.  We  played  it,  however,  three  times,  every  time  to 
better  houses." 

"  October  5th. 

''Two  days  ago  we  rehearsed  'Marie  Stuart.' 

"  It  was  a  sad  rehearsal.  W.  ffirted  with  the  dark-eyed  Vivian, 
and  paid  no  attention  to  his  lines;  the  prompter  snored  in  his  chair, 
and  Elizabeth  could  not  read  her  part  fluently,  and  said  by  way  of 
excuse  that  she  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  pay  much  attention 
to  such  an  insignificant  part. 

"  I  am  still  reading  the  life  of  Ste.  Jeanne  Fran9oise  de  Chantal. 
Yesterday  I  had  to  put  the  book  aside  because  I  cried  so  much 
over  the  death  of  young  Baron  de  Torrens  and  his  wife,  and  over 
the  silent  resignation  of  Madame  Chantal.  Charles  laughed,  and 
said  I  would  never  grow  old.  I  feel,  indeed,  as  young  at  times  as 
I  was  at  twelve,  and  only  when  I  look  in  the  mirror  the  sad  truth 
is  revealed.  But  no  matter,  the  older  I  grow  the  better  I  shall 
be,  Anna  says,  'like  the  old  wine.' 

"  When  shall  I  see  the  Carpathian  Mountains  again?    When? 

"  Yesterday  we  were  invited  to  supper  by  Mr.  Rogers,  the  mana- 
ger of  the  Prince  of  Wales  Theatre.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kendal  were 
there  and  also  Mr.  Hare: 

"  Mr.  Rogers  spoke  a  great  deal  of  the  brotherhood  of  actors. 
How  optimistic ! 

"  After  the  supper,  Mrs.  Kendal  sang  ballads,  and  was  very  elo- 
quent and  entertaining. 


444  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


it 


Miss  Rogers,  who  was  in  Poland,  and  knows  a  few  Polish  words, 
talked  to  me  about  cur  mutual  friends  and  acquaintances." 

"  October  6th. 

''  We  took  a  stroll  in  the  city.    A  lai^  place,  but  smoky. 

'"Adrienne  Lecouvreur'  —  a  crowded  house.  Great  applause 
after  the  fourth  and  fifth  acts. 

"  Our  little  call-boy  is  awfully  funny.  He  says  he  must  marry 
one  day  a  great  lady,  and  as  they  call  me  here  '  Countess,'  he  asked 
my  maid  if  he  could,  when  he  grew  up,  and  I  became  a  widow, 
marry  me  —  and  how  could  he  manage  to  do  so.  At  twelve  years 
of  age,  it  seems  so  imnatural,  but  he  follows  me  everywhere,  carries 
the  train  of  my  dress,  and  always  wants  to  treat  me  to  a  glass  of 
lemonade.  I  wonder  what  will  become  of  him.  It  is  awful  to  say, 
but  I  have  a  feeling  that  he  will  become  a  very  clever  and  prosper- 
ous business  man." 

"  October  7th. 

"  The  public  here  is  not  very  demonstrative,  but,  as  I  had  heard, 
it  is  quite  an  educated  public. 

^*  I  met  a  man  who  tried  to  prove  to  me  that  the  Birmingham 
audiences  are  very  clever  and  good  connoisseurs  of  art,  because 
the  manufactories  of  buttons  here  are  the  best  in  the  world.  I  did 
not  understand." 

"  October  8th. 

"  We  played  *Marie  Stuart, '  and  I  was  amazed  at  the  reception. 
The  applause  in  the  third  act  was  so  genuine  and  prolonged  that  I 
could  not  say  the  final  lines,  but  the  curtain  had  to  drop  on  my  last 
words  to  Elizabeth.  It  is  strange  that  this  play  is  such  a  success 
in  the  country  where  Elizabeth  is  considered  one  of  its  greatest 
sovereigns." 

"  October  9th.    Sunday. 

''  We  went  to  see  Lord  and  Lady  Denbigh  in  Newnham  Paddocks. 

"  There  is  a  rare  collection  of  pictures  here.  The  five  Van  Dycks 
especially  interasted  me. 

"  The  English  are  conservative,  and  never  part  with  their  relics. 
Some  of  our  Polish  families  could  follow  that  praiseworthy  custom. 

"  The  bishop  and  the  chaplain  (who  carried  his  arm  in  a  sling 
because  he  had  fallen  from  a  bicycle)  asked  me  to  recite.  I  never 
refuse  that  pleasure  to  the  clergy.  I  have  ahready  recited  before 
ten  bishops,  at  least. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  446 

"I  took  the  balcony  scene  of  'Romeo  and  Juliet' ;  and  Lady 
Clara  read  the  lines  of  Romeo. 

"  There  is  no  pleasanter  home  anjrwhere.     The  hostess  and  her  " 

daughters  could  serve  as  models  to  many. women. 

'*  It  is  very  difficult  to  make  acquaintances  here,  and  foreigners 
often  have  erroneous  opinions  about  the  people.  England  is  like 
a  sea.  If  you  know  how  to  dive,  and  are  allowed  to  do  so,  you  will 
find  pearls;  but  if  not,  you  must  float  on  the  surface,  and  never  see 
the  riches  hidden  at  the  bottom  of  the  depths." 

"  October  10th.     '  Romeo  and  Juliet.' 

"  The  fountain  put  by  the  obliging  manager  in  the  balcony  scene 
interfered  with  the  lovers'  soft  speeches,  but  it  was  pretty. 

"  The  first  act  was  spoiled  by  bad  acting:  W.,  in  his  beautiful 
boots,  proved  as  clever  as  his  footgear,  and  the  poor  L.  delivered 
with  such  high  falsetto  the  duke's  speeches  that  the  gallery  boys 
imitated  him.  The  part  of  Romeo  is  one  of  the  best  of  Robert- 
son's parts.  B.  was  in  his  element  in  the  part  of  the  friar,  but 
Lady  Capulet  walked  sideways  in  the  manner  of  crabs,  and  looked 
at  everybody  over  her  shoulder  to  prove  her  dignity." 


(I 


October  11th.     'Marie  Stuart.' 


"  The  Ume-lights  ordered  by  the  stage  manager  in  the  third  act, 
in  view  of  brightening  my  scene  with  Elizabeth,  made  poor  Shrews- 
bury look  like  an  orange  and  Elizabeth  hke  a  strawberry  ice-cream. 
At  the  moment  when  I  have  to  kneel  before  my  rival  queen,  the 
Ught  went  out  with  a  snap.  The  stage  manager  nearly  tore  oflf 
one  of  his  mustaches  in  a  fit  of  vexation. 

''They  have  good  scenery  here." 


It 


October  12th.     'Frou-frou.' 


"  The  house  was  not  well  filled.  The  play  was  too  Frenchy, 
some  one  said.  We  were  all  in  bad  humor,  which  did  not  help  the 
performance. 

"It  is  my  birthday.  I  received  many  presents  and  cards  from 
friends  and  even  strangers,  but  not  one  word  from  Poland.  I 
must  return,  or  else  they  will  forget  me  entirely.  This  evening  I 
formed  a  strong  resolution  to  leave  the  stage  in  two  or  three  years. 

"  I  may  succeed,  because  I  have  good  work  in  view:  to  found 
schools  for  the  mountaineers'  children,  and  begin  by  Zakopane. 
I  have  no  distinct  plans,  only  a  desire  to  do  something  good." 


446  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

"  OcroBEB  13th. 

''  Great  joy !  Ralph  passed  his  examination  for  L'Ecole  des 
Fonts  et  Chauss^.  The  dear  boy  writes  he  was  siraid,  but  was 
not  thinking  of  himself,  only  of  my  disappointment  in  case  of 
failure. " 

"  October  14th. 

"  We  went  to  Stratford-on-Avon.  The  little  house  where  the 
great  William  was  bom  has  been  so  often  described  that  I  already 
knew  every  comer  in  it.  A  strong  emotion,  however,  thrilled  me, 
when  I  entered  that  dwelhng.  When  I  looked  around,  this  first 
impression  was  somehow  dispelled  by  amazement  at  the  human 
egotism  and  stupidity  which  prompt  the  people  to  put  their  own 
'  I '  everywhere.  Not  only  the  walls,  the  window-panes,  and  the 
ceiling  are  covered  with  the  names  of  visitors,  but  even  the  bust  of 
the  poet  is  defaced  with  them.  What  is  the  object  of  desecrating 
thus  the  sanctuary?    Another  proof  of  idiocy. 

"  In  the  first  room  there  is  a  chair  by  the  fireside  where  Shake- 
speare used  to  sit,  as  tradition  tell  us.  Every  person  who  comes 
to  that  room  sits  down  in  the  chair.  Is  there  any  sense  in  that 
action  ? 

"  At  the  'New  Place'  we  saw  an  American  couple,  both  young 
and  handsome,  kneel  down  and  kiss  the  ground  on  which  the  great 
man  walked.  I  wanted  to  do  the  same,  but  I  had  lived  in  England 
long  enough  to  learn  restraint,  and  limited  my  demonstrations  to 
picking  up  some  ivy  leaves  growing  around  the  well.  In  church 
we  saw  the  painted  bust.  I  did  not  like  it.  The  ruddy-cheeked 
and  stout  Shakespeare  did  not  appeal  to  me." 

"  October  16th. 

"  We  spent  Sunday  very  quietly.  After  the  Mass  we  drove 
to  the  park  like  two  commonplace  citizens.  The  day  was  nice, 
though  a  little  foggy.  The  weather  is  so  changeable  here  that 
when  the  rain  does  not  pour  in  streams,  or  the  wind  does  not  up- 
root the  trees,  or  tear  off  the  chimneys  and  roofs  (as  it  did  two 
days  ago)  the  people  call  it  a  fine  day. 

"  We  told  our  coachman  to  follow  us  slowly,  and  we  walked  along 
the  gravelled  paths.  Some  children  were  jumping  over  a  tree 
which  had  been  broken  by  the  storm.  We  were  both  silent,  listen- 
ing to  the  distant  rhythm  of  horses'  hoofs,  children's  laughter,  and 
their  piercing  shrieks.  The  sand  cracked  under  our  feet.  Charles 
smoked  a  cigarette  and  frowned.    His  thoughts  were  evidently 


H  i 

it  t 
tl  I 


THE  NEW  WORLD  447 

not  very  bright.  I  was  sending  my  soul  to  Poland,  and  walked 
along  with  him.  After  a  long  while  I  spoke:  'What  are  you 
thmkingof?' 

I  am  thinking  of  home  —  of  course.' 
Then  we  both  had  the  same  thoughts.' 
Two  months  more,  and  we  shall  be  there.' 

"  This  hope  made  us  forget  the  present  monotony  and  solitude; 
for,  after  all,  we  shall  always  be  solitary  among  strangers,  and  pass 
from  their  existence  hke  two  shadows. 

"  My  name  and  fame  will  soon  disappear  and  they  will  forget. 
There  is  only  one  link  between  us — art.  Oh,  but  who  understands 
its  real  meaning?  Am  I  imgrateful, saying  all  this?  I  do  not 
think  I  am;  I  only  know  that  I  long  to  go  back,  to  plunge  n\y  soul 
in  my  native  air.  My  people  will  find  me  unchanged,  for  I  will 
bring  nothing  foreign  in  me,  but  the  same  warm  and  ever  faithful 
heart. 

"  We  arrived  in  Liverpool  at  noon.  This  time  we  stopped  at  a 
private  house.  The  landlady  wears  curls  on  both  sides  of  her 
ruddy  cheeks,  brimful  with  health.  She  is  calm,  discreet,  and 
neat,  and  has  two  daughters.  We  are  very  comfortable  here,  for 
there  are  no  other  boarders.  I  grow  so  tired  of  hotels,  though  some 
one  told  me  that  the  stars  ought  to  stop  in  the  first-class  hotels,  or 
they  would  have  no  success.  Strange  idea  !  I  wonder  what  any 
one's  value  has  to  do  with  it.  And  yet,  I  fear  there  is  some  truth  in 
that  shoddy,  popular  conviction." 

"  October  18th.    'Adrienne  Lecouvreur.' 

"  The  house  was  only  half  filled ;  the  pubhc  was  cold,  and  did  not 
know  where  to  applaud.     We  must  go  to  the  hotel. " 

"  October  20th. 

"  Yesterday  I  noticed  among  the  audience  a  young  couple  sitting 
in  the  middle  of  the  first  row.  The  lady  is  white  as  marble,  with 
black  eyebrows  and  hair  and  very  dark  eyes.  The  oval  of  her  face 
is  classic.  The  young  man  looks  very  much  like  her,  only  his  com- 
plexion is  darker. 

"  She  watches  the  acting  with  an  expression  of  reverence  in  her 
face,  intensely,  and  weeps  during  the  emotional  scenes;  he  has  a 
nervous  motion  of  the  hands,  biting  his  young  mustache,  or  pulling 
his  small  beard.    Who  are  they,  I  wonder?     They  do  not  look 


448  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Elnglish.    Perhaps  they  are  Jews.    Whoever  they  are,  I  shall  play 
only  for  them  if  they  come  agaiii." 

"  October  21st.     *  Frou-frou.' 

"  My  couple  sat  in  the  same  seats.  This  time  there  was  a  stout 
man  with  them.  I  was  so  happy  to  see  them  again,  and  I  played 
better  than  ever. 

"  'Frou-frou'  was  a  success;  the  criticisms  were  splendid.'' 


"  October  23d.    '  Marie  Stuart.' 

''  And  my  imknown  friends  were  again  in  their  seats. 

"  The  house  was  very  noisy  that  night.  Shrieks,  hurrahs,  loud 
calls,  and  whistling  were  deafening.  Here,  when  they  whistle,  it 
means  that  they  are  pleased,  as  in  America. 

"  Sunday !  the  blessed,  happy  day  of  rest.^ 


ft 


Here  my  notes  stop.  My  mother  was  dangerously  ill, 
and  I  neglected  the  diary. 

We  put  on  the  bills  '^Juana,"  with  Forbes  Robertson  in 
the  part  of  Friar  John.  He  played  beautifully,  and  looked 
a  saint  to  perfection. 

After  several  other  cities,  as  Leeds,  Manchester,  etc., 
we  went  to  Scotland,  and  I  went  into  ecstasies  over  Edin- 
burgh. What  a  beautiful,  interesting  city,  and  what  sad 
stories  it  contains ! 

At  Edinburgh  Castle  I  cried  when  I  saw  the  tiny  cold 
room  in  which  Marie  Stuart  gave  birth  to  her  son,  and 
at  Holyrood  I  nearly  quarrelled  with  the  man  at  the  door 
who  was  selling  the  fancy  picture  of  Rizzio, — that  contempt- 
ible picture,  of  some  imaginative  chap,  with  a  pretentious 
mustache,  curly  hair,  and  pouting  lips,  while  the  real 
Rizzio  was  a  homely  man  over  fifty  years  old  and  a  hunch- 
back. 

^I  asked  the  man  if  he  believed  that  this  was  a  real  por- 
trait of  Rfzzio,  and  he  cynically  answered:  ''Not  at  all;  but 
people  believe  it  is  real  and  buy  it." 


THE  NEW  WORLD  449 

I  returned  to  Holyrood  over  and  over  again,  and  the 
whole  life  of  Marie  Stuart  passed  before  my  mind. 

Poor,  beautiful  queen  !  They  say  she  sinned,  but  had  she 
time  to  sin  much  ?  If  we  consider  her  occupations,  —  the 
musical  compositions,  the  verses,  the  abundant  correspond- 
ence (for  she  wrote  an  enormous  amount  of  letters),  and 
many  pieces  of  wonderful  and  most  elaborate  fancy  work 
she  left  behind, — it  is  really  hard  to  believe  that  she  spent 
much  time  in  dissipation. 

But  suppose  she  sinned,  indeed,  in  the  brief  moments  of 
her  youth,  had  she  not  more  than  her  share  of  expiation  ? 
And  yet  I  hear  that  in  some  schools  in  America  the  lady 
teachers  tell  the  children  that  even  the  name  of  Marie  Stuart 
is  odious  —  that  she  was  the  most  horrible  woman,  with 
seven  husbands  and  any  number  of  illegitimate  children. 

Is  it  not  strange  that  even  in  her  grave  she  is  piersecuted  ? 
Yet  it  is  only  fair  to  state  that  she  was  treated  most  abomi- 
nably, and  I  was  glad  when  Andrew  Lang's  book  came  out, 
in  which  he  proves  most  emphatically  that  the  supposed 
casket  letters  to  Both  well  were  counterfeits.  It  was  the 
devilish  work  of  men  who  perjured  themselves  for  money 
and  honors. 

Mr.  Lang  is  an  Englishman  and  not  a  Roman  Catholic. 
No  one  can  accuse  him  of  partiality,  for  his  object  was  only 
historic  truth. 

Please  pardon  this  deviation;  I  learned  to  love  Marie 
Stuart,  not  only  from  my  part,  but  also  from  many  books 
I  read  about  her,  and  I  am  always  slightly  excited  when  I 
speak  of  her. 

Walter  Scott's  statue  was  almost  opposite  our  hotel,  and 
I  could  say  good  morning  and  good  night  to  the  great  Scotch- 
man every  day. 

I  was  very  kindly  received  by  the  Edinburgh  audiences. 

Of  other   Scotch   cities   I   remember  Glasgow,  where  I 
saw  in  a  private  house  a  very  extensive  collection  of  Marie 
2q 


4 


.  f 


450  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

• 

Stuart's  portraits  in  print  and  etchings;   also  many  works 
about  her  unhappy  life. 

The  Glasgow  people  were  very  genuine  in  their  approval, 
and  we  had  a  successful  week,  but  we  spent  the  dullest 
Sunday  of  our  life  in  that  city.  Already  Saturday  afternoon, 
when  I  sat  at  the  piano,  I  was  informed  by  the  chambermaid 
that  music  was  not  allowed  in  the  hotel  either  on  Saturdays 
or  Sundays. 

We  had  been  told  that  the  suburbs  and  the  country  around 
Glasgow  were  beautiful,  and  we  planned  a  long  drive  on  Sun- 
day afternoon,  but  alas,  there  was  no  possibility  of  hiring 
a  carriage.  Our  landlord  told  us  proudly  that  people  do 
not  drive  on  the  Sabbath  in  Glasgow,  and  we  could  not  get 
a  pair  of  horses  for  a  million. 

Just  as  he  finished  this  respectful  sentence,  we  heard 
the  rattle  of  a  vehicle  and  the  horses'  hoofs  in  the  distance. 
My  husband  asked  what  was  the  meaning  of  this  exceptional 
turnout,  and  the  landlord's  answer  made  us  nearly  uncivil 
with  merriment.  '*  Oh,  that  V  Then,  after  a  moment's  hesi- 
tation, he  said  it  was  only  a  cart  hauling  whiskey  and 
beer  about  the  city.  New  country,  new  customs !  There 
was  at  least  a  human  note  in  this —  and  it  was  rational,  too ; 
every  other  exercise  being  forbidden,  what  could  the  poor 
people  do  but  seek  consolation  in  drink,  for  surely  no  human 
being,  not  even  a  monk,  could  pray  fifteen  or  sixteen  hours 
in  succession. 

We  gave  up  the  afternoon  drive,  of  course,  and  we  thought 
that  the  next  question  my  husband  addressed  to  the  land- 
lord was  at  least  quite  respectable :  he  asked  in  what  part 
of  the  city  the  Catholic  church  was.  ^'I  really  cannot  tell 
you  that,  sir,"  was  the  curt  answer.  A  young  lady  behind 
the  counter  looked  in  the  directory,  and  after  a  while  she 
said  there  was  nothing  about  it  in  the  book. 

We  knew,  however,  of  the  existence  of  a  Catholic  church 
in  Glasgow,  and  were  determined  to  find  it.     But  it  was  a 


THE  NEW  WORLD  451 

difficult  enterprise,  since  no  one  wished  to  inform  us  on  the 
subject.  '*I  don't  know,  I  am  sure,"  was  all  we  got  for  our 
pains. 

I  saw  a  demure,  pretty,  middle-aged  woman,  with  a  large 
prayer-book  in  her  hand,  walking  towards  us,  and  I  asked  her 
politely  to  show  us  the  way  to  our  church. 

"Not  I!"  exclaimed  the  woman,  with  fear  and  indigna- 
tion in  her  face,  and  she  walked  away  quickly -tw^  stiffly  to 
the  other  side  of  the  street.  The  poor  creature  looked  really 
injured.  We  walked  in  all  directions,  not  knowing  where 
to  go,  and  would  have  been  obliged  to  return  to  the  hotel, 
had  we  not  chanced  upon  a  jolly  Irishman,  who,  seeing  us 
look  around,  had  the  inspiration  to  ask  where  we  wanted 
to  go. 

''To  the  Catholic  church?  Come  along;  I'll  show  ye 
where  it  is/'  he  said,  with  a  grin,  and  when  we  entered  the 
poor,  small  church,  he  came  in  too. 

On  our  return  to  London  I  made  an  engagement  with 
Mr.  Bancroft,  the  manager  of  the  Haymarket  Theatre,  for 
the  coming  spring  season  to  play  "Odette,"  by  Sardou  — 
translated  and  somewhat  localized  by  Clement  Scott.  All 
the  persons  of  the  play  were  turned  into  English  people,  with 
the  exception  of  Odette  and  the  wicked  companion  of  her 
downfall  in  the  fourth  act. 

A  few  weeks  later  I  was  in  Poland,  where  I  was  greeted 
with  enthusiasm.  I  proved  quite  competent  now,  after 
having  passed  the  examination  of  two  London  seasons;  I 
was  also  young  again,  and  resumed  Juliet,  Ophelia,  and  Aniela, 
an  ingenue  part  in  Fredo's  comedy.  "Odette"  was  just 
translated,  and  I  included  it  in  my  repertoire,  getting  better 
acquainted  with  the  part  before  my  London  engagement. 

I  also  created  a  great  excitement  among  my  friends  and 
the  critics  by  producing  Ibsen's  "The  Doll's  House."  When 
I  told  my  friends  that  I  had  to  get  under  the  table  and  bark, 


452  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

and  leave  my  husband  and  children  in  the  last  act,  they 
thought  I  was  crazy  to  play  such  a  part.  They  were  all 
more  or  less  conventional,  and  this  too  close  approach  to 
nature  shocked  them.  On  the  night  of  the  performance, 
however,  they  applauded,  and  said  it  was  quaint,  and  the 
barking  fitted  the  picture,  and  my  leaving  the  unforgiving 
husband  not  so  bad,  after  all. 

The  critics  were  simply  puzzled.  Some  of  them  con- 
demned the  play,  others  lifted  it  to  the  skies.  The  result 
of  these  varied  opinions  was  a  long  run  of  '* The  Doll's  House," 
Polish, ''Nora"  for  short. 

Very  sad  news  reached  me  and  marred  my  Warsaw 
engagement :  the  great  poet  and  best  of  my  friends,  Henry 
Wads  worth  Longfellow,  died. 

Shortly  after  that  our  dear  friend,  Lucian  Paprocki,  lost 
his  reason  and  was  placed  in  an  asylum.  Such  an  end  was 
predicted  by  those  who  knew  the  painful  story  of  his  im- 
prisonment, and  yet  it  was  a  great  shock  to  us. 

I  went  to  Cracow,  Lw6w  (Lemberg),  and  Posen,  and 
played  in  each  of  those  towns  my  repertoire.  At  the  end 
of  my  short  season  I  was  more  than  usually  tired,  not  be- 
cause of  the  work,  but  because  of  our  people's  great  hos- 
pitality. 

In  the  spring  of  1882  we  returned  to  London. 

While  I  was  rehearsing  ''Odette"  I  went  to  see  Mrs. 
Kendal's  beautiful  performance  of  "Coralie's  Son,"  a  French 
play  by  Delpit.  I  had  seen  her  some  time  before  in  "Black- 
eyed  Susan,"  and  she  was  simple  and  touching  and  made  me 
shed  copious  tears. 

We  went  to  the  Gaiety  Theatre  one  evening.  Madame 
Chaumont  played  "Divorgons,"  and  was  quite  irresistible. 

Great  pains  were  taken  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bancroft  in  the 
rehearsals  of  "Odette." 

I  remember  Clement  Scott  sitting  in  the  first  balcony, 
giving  advice,  criticising,  or  approving.     I  liked  those  re- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  453 

hearsals,  as  I  always  liked  the  working  out  of  the  part 
even  better  than  the  performance. 

The  play  was  a  great  success,  and  was  kept  on  the  bills 
so  long  that  I  was  sincerely  tired  of  repeating  the  same 
lines  and  going  through  the  same  emotions. 

After  two  months'  run  I  used  to  groan  every  evening 
when  I  came  to  my  dressing-room,  and  then  dear  Mrs.  Ban- 
croft would  send  her  maid  to  ask  if  I  were  ill. 

"Oh,  no,  no!  I  am  quite  well.  Please  give  Mrs.  Ban- 
croft my  thanks  and  tell  her  it  is  only  'Odette'!" 

For  change  I  got  new  dresses,  but  there  was  not  much 
relief  in  that;  besides,  there  was  something  worse  in  store 
for  me.  We  had  played  "Odette"  nearly  three  months. 
Such  numerous  repetitions  of  the  same  text  caused  the  pho- 
nographic plates  of  my  brain  to  be  rubbed  off  in  places,  and 
I  began  to  forget  words  of  my  lines.  That  was  quite  seri- 
ous. I  never  really  made  a  mistake,  but  was  sometimes 
at  the  brink  of  an  abyss,  trying  to  keep  my  balance  by  a 
superhuman  effort.  To  prevent  serious  accidents,  I  had  to 
read  my  part  every  evening  before  going  on.  I  grew  a 
little  nervous,  losing  at  times  my  usual  composure,  or  feel- 
ing uncomfortable,  and  when  Mrs.  Bancroft  asked  me  if  I 
would  prolong  my  engagement  until  the  middle  of  July,  I 
declined  politely  to  appear  in  the  same  part  any  longer  than 
my  contract  called  for. 

Still,  I  parted  with  sincere  regret  from  the  pretty  theatre 
and  my  cosy  dressing-room  which  Mrs.  Bancroft  had  given 
up  for  me,  moving  to  the  next  floor ;  but  most  of  all  I  re- 
gretted my  kind  manager  and  his  charming,  talented  wife, 
dear  Mrs.  Bancroft.  I  have  still  the  most  vivid  and  grate- 
ful recollection  of  their  courtesy. 

Mr.  Tennyson  continued  to  be  very  kind  to  us,  and  we 
were  often  invited  to  meet  him  at  luncheon  time  at  his 
residence.  I  remember  one  day,  after  seeing  the  gorgeous 
performance  of  "The  Cup,"  we  talked  about  it,  and  Mr. 


464  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Tennyson  praised  Mr.  Irving  for  the  pains  he  took  in  giving 
such  an  elaborate  production  of  the  play. 

Sometime  later^  after  the  end  of  my  engagement,  we  were 
invited  to  visit  him  in  his  summer  home  in  Surrey.  We 
arrived  in  the  evening.  I  shall  never  forget  his  figure  in 
the  dim  light  of  his  study.  Mis.  Tennyson,  who  was  still 
delicate,  retired  early,  and  we  were  led  to  the  master's  sanc- 
tum sanctorum.  That  room  seemed  to  me  filled  with  won- 
derful visions  of  his  brain,  and  I  felt  hypnotized  by  the  very 
atmosphere  of  it.  There  was  a  fire  in  the  large  fireplace. 
He  sat  in  its  light,  and  asked  permission  to  smoke  his  after- 
dinner  pipe,  a  very  welcome  proposition  to  my  husband. 

After  talking  for  a  while  on  different  topics,  he  asked  me 
if  I  had  ever  read  his  **Rizpali."  I  acknowledged  my 
ignorance.  ''Would  you  like  to  hear  it?"  I  could  not  be- 
lieve my  ears !  What,  will  this  great  man  read  to  us  ?  He 
did,  and  it  was  a  wonderful  moment  in  my  life. 

I  was  told  that  Tennyson  never  could  read  his  own  poems 
with  effect.  I  do  not  know  what  people  meant  by  that, 
for  I  listened  to  his  reading  with  great  delight  and  with  my 
face  flooded  with  tears. 

When  I  cooled  off  from  my  impression,  he  asked  me  if 
I  would  read  a  dialogue  of  his,  together  with  Fanny  Kemble. 
I  had  never  met  the  lady,  but  I  was  afraid  of  reading  with 
my  accent  against  her  perfect  English. 

When  I  comnlunicated  my  fear  to  Mr.  Tennyson,  he 
smiled,  and  assured  me  that  I  could  do  so  safely.  I  agreed 
then  to  the  reading,  which,  however,  for  some  reason  or  other, 
never  took  place. 

Next  day  I  remember  walking  in  the  garden  by  his  side ; 
in  the  afternoon  we  took  leave  and  returned  to  London,  my 
soul  filled  with  the  memories  of  the  lofty  moments  spent  in 
the  great  man's  house. 

During  my  London  engagement  I  signed  a  contract  Tidth 
the  American  manager,  John  Stetson,  for  the  season  of  1882- 


THE  NEW  WORLD  455 

1883,  to  play  thirty  weeks  in  succession,  with  two  intervals, 
the  Christmas  week  and  the  Holy  Week. 

We  rested  a  few  weeks  at  the  sea-shore  and  then  went 
to  Paris.  Through  my  friends,  who  knew  Victor  Hugo 
quite  well,  we  received  an  invitation  to  meet  him. 

The  appointed  hour  was  hine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  We 
arrived  a  few  minutes  earlier,  anxious  to  be  on  the  spot  when 
the  great  man  left  the  dining-room.  When  we  arrived  the 
large  reception  hall  was  almost  dark,  being  only  scantily 
lit  by  a  lamp,  but  soon  a  female  servant  came  in  with  a 
taper  mounted  on  a  long  stick,  and  proceeded  slowly  to 
light  up  the  room.  In  the  meantime  we  could  take  a  good 
look  at  the  hall.  It  was  a  stately  reception  hall,  not  unlike 
many  others  we  saw  in  France.  The  arrangement  of  fur- 
niture, however,  was  a  little  puzzling :  two  rows  of  chairs, 
beginning  at  the  fireplace  and  extending  two-thirds  the 
length  of  the  hall,  stood  facing  each  other,  with  one  arm- 
chair at  the  end  of  the  right-hand  row  by  the  fire,  which,  on 
account  of  the  warm  weather,  was  not  lighted. 

Other  visitors  arrived;  and  sat  discreetly  on  chairs  and 
benches  placed  against  the  wall. 

When  the  last  candle  was  ablaze,  both  wings  of  the  dining- 
room  door  opened,  and  a  liveried  footman  walked  in,  and 
standing  stiffly  at  one  side,  announced  loudly:  ''Monsieur 
Victor  Hugo."  The  poet  came  in,  accompanied  by  his 
guests  and  ''Madame,"  known  to  me  only  by  that  name. 
She  was  the  great  man's  friend  and  his  secretary. 

We  rose  and  stood  before  a  man  of  medium  size,  with  a 
flushed  face  and  eagle  eyes.  His  profuse  white  hair  was 
cut  an  inch  from  his  scalp,  and  stood  erect.  He  bowed  to  all 
of  us  as  he  walked  between  the  two  rows  of  chairs  to  the 
fireplace,  until  he  reached  the  goal  —  I  mean  the  arm-chair. 
The  seat  next  to  him  was  empty.  There  was  a  long,  silent 
moment,  and  the  guests  and  inmates  whispered  to  each  other, 
with  their  eyes  turned  to  the  master. 


456  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

It  was  very  solemn.  My  husband  suggested  that  we 
should  kneel  before  the  great  man^  say  a  prayer,  ask  for  his 
benediction,  and  depart  in  peace.  Soon,  however,  one  of 
the  visitors  was  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  host  and 
was  invited  to  sit  in  the  empty  chair.  After  a  short  talk, 
the  person  rose  to  yield  the  place  to  another. 

The  hall  was  still  silent  and  solemn.  This  concentrated 
worshipping  mood  was  suddenly  broken  by  the  entrance 
of  a  handsome  middle-aged  man  with  a  Legion  d^honneur 
in  his  buttonhole,  who  created  quite  a  commotion.  He 
spoke  loudly,  asking  Hugo  for  a  decisive  answer  to  his  letters. 
'* Madame"  was  summoned  to  make  an  explanation,  and 
this  rather  enei^etic  intercourse  lasted  until  the  departure 
of  the  Legion  d'honneur  man. 

Another  solemn  pause,  and  we  were  introduced.  I  was 
invited  to  sit  in  turn  in  the  chair  my  predecessors  had  oc- 
cupied. 

No  one  can  talk  better  than  French  people,  and  when  a 
Frenchman  is  a  great  poet  besides,  the  talk  becomes  stimu- 
lating. 

I  was  told  many  things,  and  asked  some  questions  about 
my  country  and  America.  I  was  also  asked  what  parts  I 
played.  I  mentioned  some  heroines  of  my  repertoire,  and 
then  said  that  in  Poland  I  also  played  Victor  Hugo's  plays 
a  great  deal. 

''But  have  you  good  translations?" 

''Quite  decent  ones,  but  they  cannot  be  compared 
with  the  originals,"  I  added,  smiling;  "for  the  language 
of  the  gods  can  only  be  translated  by  the  gods  them- 
selves." 

This  seemed  to  please  him,  for  he  also  smiled.  I  grew 
more  communicative  and  slightly  reckless,  and  when  he 
suddenly  asked  me  what  parts  I  liked  best  to  act,  I  answered, 
without  hesitation,  "Shakespeare's,  of  course." 

In  an  instant  realization  of  my  mistake  dawned  upon  me, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  457 

but  it  was  too  late  to  call  back  my  words  or  to  explain. 
Anything  I  could  add  would  make  it  worse. 

The  great  man  sank  deeper  in  his  arm-chair  and  said 
nothing.  It  was  time  to  say  good-by.  I  rose,  and  Victor 
Hugo's  great  manners  came  to  the  front  immediately.  He 
kissed  my  hand  and  asked  us  to  come  often  again. 

"  Ma  maison  est  la  v6tre,"  were  his  last  words. 

I  thanked  him  effusively  for  this  polite  form  of  speech, 
and  took  my  leave. 

The  poet  addressed  a  few  public  sentences  to  the  rest  of 
us,  and  after  a  gracious  good-night  we  departed. 

The  three  weeks  we  spent  in  Paris  were  delightful.  We 
went  a  great  deal  to  the  theatres,  and  it  was  then,  if  I  re- 
member rightly,  I  saw  the  adorable  Madame  Bartet  at  the 
Gymnase.  Her  subtlety,  her  mobile  features,  together 
with  the  sweet,  melodious  voice  and  her  diaphanous  figure, 
drew  my  attention  at  once,  and  I  knew  she  would  one  day 
rise  to  a  position  worthy  of  her  talent. 

Excursions,  parties,  dinners,  were  showered  upon  us,  and 
it  was  hard  to  leave  the  pleasures  of  the  French  metropolis, 
but  the  hardest  of  all  was  taking  leave  of  my  son.  We  parted 
with  the  promise  on  his  part  to  spend  his  next  vacation  in 
California,  where  we  intended  to  go  next  summer. 


CHAPTER  XLVI 

We  sailed  on  the  steamer  Arizona  on  the  ninth  of  Septem- 
ber, 1882.  1 

In  New  York  I  met  my  manager,  Mr.  S'Jetson,  and  we 
arranged  my  repertoire  for  the  season. 

To  "Adrienne,"  "Camille,"  ''Juliet,"  ''Marie  Stuart," 
and  "Frou-frou,"  I  added  "As  You  Like  It,"  "Twelfth 
Night,"  and  "Odette."  I  wanted  to  include  also  "The 
Doir^  House,"  by  Ibsen,  but  his  name  was  utterly  un- 
known in  America,  and  the  manager  was  afraid  to  take  any 
risk  of  producing  "them  unpopular  Dutchman's  plays." 

Of  course  it  was  out  of  the  question  to  discuss  Ibsen 
with  John  Stetson,  and  I  put  off  "The  Doll's  House," 
hoping  to  introduce  it  to  the  audience  next  year. 

We  opened  the  season  not  in  New  York  but  in  Boston, 
Mr.  Stetson's  home,  where  he  had  his  own  theatre,  the 
"Globe."  All  my  friends  were  at  summer  resorts  —  and 
Henry  Longfellow  was  no  more.  The  first  and  only  visit 
I  made  during  my  stay  in  Boston  was  to  his  grave. 

I  threw  myself  feverishly  into  my  studies,  and  allowed 
myself  no  time  for  anything  else. 

During  the  rehearsals  I  noticed  that  my  stage  manager 
was  doing  some  guesswork,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary 
for  me  to  take  the  direction  of  plays  in  my  hands.  Every 
scene  had  to  be  rehearsed  and  conducted  by  me,  even  the 
grouping  of  the  people,  the  lights,  and  scenery.  I  also 
had  to  teach  some  young  girls  and  boys  how  to  deliver  their 
lines  and  what  to  do  with  their  too  many  hands  and  feet. 
I  actually  lived  at  the  theatre,  and  that  busy  life  absorbed 
me  entirely. 

458 


THE  NEW  WORLD  459 

I  had  a  curious  experience  during  my  Boston  engagement. 
At  the  first  performance  of  ''Romeo  and  Juliet''  I  noticed 
that  the  two  stage-boxes  were  decorated  with  flags.  To 
my  inquiry  as  to  the  meaning  of  these  festive  adornments, 
I  received  the  answer  that  President  Arthur  and  General 
Ben  Butler  were  coming  to  see  the  play. 

''Why,  how  strange!  have  you  two  Presidents  now?" 
I  asked.  The  man  who  gave  me  the  information  smiled, 
and  said :  "No,  of  course  not ;  but  Ben  Butler  is  the  candi- 
date for  governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  his  adherents  have 
decorated  his  box  for  him  as  a  mark  of  their  devotion  to  his 
cause." 

I  thought  that  the  wisest  course  was  to  be  silent,  and  I 
said  nothing,  keeping  my  own  counsel. 

After  the  first  act,  a  gentleman  came  behind  the  scenes 
with  a  very  fine  basket  of  flowers,  which  I  naturally  supposed 
was  for  me,  but  as  I  extended  my  hand  he  said,  in  sub- 
dued tones :  "Will  you  please  hand  this  to  President  Arthur 
at  your  first  call  after  the  next  act?"  "With  pleasure,  of 
course;  only  tell  me  in  which  box  he  is  seated."  "On  the 
right  of  the  stage,  Madame."  "And  on  the  left  from  the 
audience  —  how  funny,"  I  thought. 

The  balcony  scene  over,  I  hastened  to  take  the  flowers, 
and  while  the  applause  was  going  on  I  made  a  curtsey 
before  the  President's  box  and  handed  him  the  basket, 
which  he  received  with  a  slight  bow  to  me  and  then  to  the 
audience,  which  cheered  him  most  enthusiiistically. 

When  I  was  waiting  for  the  next  scene,  I  heard  ferocious 
cheers. 

"W^hat  is  that?"  I  asked. 

"Ben  Butler  has  just  come,"  said  the  prompter. 

Before  the  curtain  had  time  to  rise,  another  gentleman 
with  another  basket  of  flowers  asked  me,  not  in  subdued 
tones  of  voice  this  time,  but  rather  peremptorily,  to  hand 
it  to  General  Butler, 


460  MEMORIES  AXD  IMPRESSION'S 

I  looked  at  my  stage  manager,  then  at  my  leading  man,  in 
a  mute  appeal  for  counsel,  but  at  the  same  moment  my 
acting  manager,  Fred  Stinson,  came  in  and  said  to  the  basket 
gentleman,  "I  will 
attend  to  it." 
Then  he  turned 
to  me  and  said, 
''You  are  not  sup- 
posed to  belong 
to  any  party  — 
and  there  is  no 
harm  in  handing 
the  flowers  to 
General  Butler," 
"  Verj-  well,"  I 
answered ;  so,  after 
the  act  was  over, 
the  basket  was 
transferred  from 
my  hands  to  those 
of  General  Butler. 
What  was  my 
amazement  when 
he,  quick  as  a 
flash,  produced 
another         much 

PtvUar"!*  &gt;&gt;ii  BradUy  and  Rulo/Mn.  San  Frmcitm.      more  gorgeous 

basket  of  flowera 
and  handed  it  to 
me.  The  applause  was  simply  deafening.  I  do  not  re- 
member what  happened  next,  but  I  know  I  was  not  a  good 
Juliet  that  night. 

Of  all  the  parts  I  played  that  season,  Rosalind,  in  "As 
You  Like  It,"  was  the  one  the  public  liked  best,  and  we  re- 
peated the  play  so  often  that  my  manager,  in  order  to  add 


THE  NEW  WORLD  461 

more  weight  to  it,  engaged  John  Muldoon,  the  well-known 
wrestler,  who  was,  indeed,  a  valuable  addition  to  the  cast. 
He  and  Maurice  Barrymore,  who  was  of  an  athletic  though 
slender  build,  made  a  splendid  picture  in  the  wrestling  scene. 

Maurice  Barrymore  was  one  of  those  handsome  men  who 
also  have  the  rare  gift  of  winning  all  hearts.  He  was  much 
admired  by  women,  but  was  too  intellectual  to  be  a  mere 
matinde  idol.  He  was  equally  liked  by  men  and  women. 
Sentimental  girls  used  to  send  him  flowers,  to  his  great 
amusement.  They  went  so  far  as  to  send  him  white  lilies, 
which  were  always  received  with  a  roar  of  laughter.  His  best 
parts  were  Armand,  Orlando,  and  Valreas  in  ''Frou-frou." 

Mr.  Stetson  was  very  proud  to  have  engaged  that  **  dandy 
leading  man,''  as  he  called  him,  for  me. 

There  are  many  anecdotes  about  John  Stetson,  who, 
though  a  shrewd  and  clever  business  man,  never  troubled 
his  brain  much  with  history  or  literature. 

Here  is  an  authentic  story  which  happened  during  my 
engagement  in  New  York :  — 

He  had  rented  for  eight  weeks  Booth's  Theatre,  and  I  had 
to  close  it,  because  it  was  already  sold,  and  at  the  end  of  my 
engagement  had  to  pass  into  its  new  owner's  hands,  to  be 
transformed  into  a  business  building.  Among  other  plays, 
I  also  played  ''Adrienne  Lecouvreur." 

Booth's  Theatre,  splendidly  furnished  with  scenery  and 
accessories  for  Shakespeare's  productions,  lacked  the  furnish- 
ings necessary  for  the  French  plays  of  past  centuries. 

Mr.  Stetson  always  assisted  at  the  scenery  rehearsals, 
which  was  very  good  of  him,  and  a  great  comfort  to  the 
company,  because  in  case  of  any  lack  of  appropriate  pieces 
of  scenery  or  furniture,  the  stage  manager  could  apply 
directly  to  the  highest  authority.  At  rehearsal,  when  the 
stage  was  set  for  the  fifth  act  of  ''Adrienne,"  I  noticed  a  dark 
carved  fireplace  entirely  unsuited  to  the  light  walls  orna- 
mented with  Cupids'  heads  and  garlands  of  flowers. 


462  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

■ 

I  asked  the  stage  manager  why  he  had  allowed  that 
sombre  monument  to  be  put  in  Adrienne's  boudoir.  He 
answered  that  there  was  nothing  else  but  Elizabethan  or 
modern  English  fireplaces. 

Mr.  Stetson,  who  was  sitting  in  the  first  row  of  chairs, 
saw  the  embarrassment  of  the  stage  manager  and  my  dis- 
contented countenance,  and  asked  directly,  '*  Whati  is  the 
matter  ?  "  I  told  him  that  the  fireplace  did  not  suit  the«cenes. 

"It  ought  to  be  Louis  Quinze." 

''Wait  a  moment,  Madame.  What  did  you  say  -t-  Louis 
who?" 

"Louis  Quinze,''  I  repeated,  distinctly  this  time.  Upon 
that  Mr.  Stetson  called  the  chief  carpenter,  who  came  before 
the  footlights,  waiting  for  orders. 

"Where  is  that  man  Louis  Kantz  ?  "  he  asked  peremptorily ; 
"bring  him  to  me  immediately  ;  I  want  him  to  give  Madame 
another  fireplace  —  he  must  have  it  ready  for  to-morrow's 
performance.''  The  bewildered  carpenter  looked  at  me,  the 
stage  manager  bit  his  lips,  and  Barrymore,  highly  amused, 
said  to  Mr.  Stetson :  — 

"Louis  Quinze  is  not  here,  poor  man;  he  died  and  was 
buried  some  time  ago." 

"Confound  it !" — that  in  a  subdued  tone  of  voice.  "Never 
mind,  Madame;  we  may  find  what  you  want  in  other 
theatres.     I'll  attend  to  it  directly." 

In  New  York  "Odette"  was  liked  the  best,  but  I  selected 
"Romeo  and  Juliet"  for  the  closing  of  Booth's  Theatre. 

After  the  play  I  said  a  few  words  of  farewell  to  the  stage 
upon  which  Booth's  Hamlet  had  walked.  I  also  referred 
to  his  ambitious  desire  of  building  this  perfect  theatre  with 
the  hope  that  it  would  serve  exclusively  the  purpose  of 
producing  what  was  highest  and  best  in  dramatic  literature. 
Then  I  spoke  of  the  sacrifices  he  had  made  in  order  to  keep 
up  the  building,  and  how,  in  spite  of  all  efforts,  he  was  com- 
pelled to  give  up  his  pet  dream. 


CHAPTER  XLVII 

The  summer  of  1883  we  spent  in  California,  where  my 
son  joined  us.     He  brought  excellent  news.     It  was  not  easy 
to  get  along  at  the  Fonts  et  Chauss^es,  and  he  was  at  the 
head  of  the  class.     We  had 
a  jolly  good  time  together, 
visiting      the      Pleasants' 
homestead     in    San    lago 
Canon.     We  were  all  three 
of    us   ao    enchanted  with 
the  place  that  at  the  end 
of    our  visit  my  husband 
went  into  partnership  with 
the      owner,      and      they 
planned  for  a  large  cattle- 
ranch. 

When  we  returned  to 
San  Francisco,  we  opened 
the  season  under  my  hus- 
band's management,  with 
Fred  Stinson  as  acting 
manager. 

This  time,  besides  Mau- 
rice    Barrymore,    we     had  piuuerafiiiiiiAimiDuponi. 
Mrs.  Barrymore,  Mr.  Van-                       Mabt  8h*w. 
denhoff,  William  Owen  (a 

most  excellent  Sir  Toby  Belch),  and  Mary  Shaw,  who  was 
then  a  studious,  intellectual  young  woman,  with  a  great 
deal  of  talent.  She  never  slighted  even  the  smallest  details 
in  her.  parts,  but  always  worked  for  improvement. 


464  MEMORIES  AND   IMPRESSIONS 

The  two  Barrymore  children  joined  their  parents  on  our 
return  Eaot.  Lionel  was  four  years  old,  and  Ethel  was  one 
year  younger.  The  boy  was  always  busy  painting  ships  and 
railroad  trains,  and  Ethel  was  an  actress.  They  composed 
some  impossible  dialogues  and  flayed  them  together. 
Lionel  was  always  ''Pap,"  and  pthel  was  Madame.  She 
could  not  pronounce  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  but  she 
acted  with  conviction.  I  often  $aw  her  eager  eyes  watching 
me  from  behind  the  scenes  during  the  matinees. 

I  added  to  my  repertoire  ''The  Doll's  House,"  which,  I  am 
sorry  to  say,  was  not  relished  by  American  audiences,  and 
we  had  to  take  it  off.  ' 

The  play,  however,  inspired  Mr.  Barrymore,  and  he  wrote 
the  play  called  "  Nadje^da,"  which  bore  not  the  slightest 
resemblance  to  Ibsen's,  with  the  exception  of  the  desperate 
dance  he  introduced,  which  had  for  its  object  the  keeping 
the  man  from  leaving  the  room.  It  was  not  a  tarantella, 
however,  but  a  waltz. 

We  produced  the  play,  but  it  was  so  exhausting  that, 
after  the  first  three  weeks'  run,  I  had  to  take  a  rest. 

In  Boston  "  Nadjezda''  was  played  to  crowded  houses,  but 
Mr.  Barrymore  took  it  away  from  me  because  I  did  not  con- 
sent to  put  it  on'' every  night.  He  also  had  an  idea  that  the 
play  would  mate  a  hit  in  London,  where  he  produced  it  in 
1884,  but  with  no  good  result. 

In  1884-1885  we  stayed  in  Poland  and  England.  We  first 
went  to  Paris  to  pay  a  visit  to  my  son,  then  to  Zakopane 
in  the  Tatfa  Mountains,  where  we  had  built  a  villa.  In  that 
little  hou.4e  lived  Mr.  Calixte  Wolski,  with  his  daughter  and 
my  half-brother's  daughter,  Felice  Benda,  whom  I  had  taken 
from  the  convent  two  years  before  and  placed  in  the  care  of 
those  dear  friends  of  mine,  Mr.  and  Miss  Wolska. 

Miss  Wolska  is  half  American  and  half  Polish,  for  when 


THE  NEW   WORLD  465 

her  father  —  forced  by  the  unhappy  results  of  the  revolu- 
tion of  1848  —  was  emigrating  to  America  with  his  wife,  she 
was  born  on  the  ocean.  When  her  mother  died,  she  was 
brought  up  by  the  Sisters  in  New  Orleans.  At  the  age  of 
sixteen  she  returned  with  her  father  to  Poland,  and  never 
crossed  the  ocean  again.     She  is  refined  and  witty,  always 


Madame  Modjesea'b  Country  Residbhce,  near  Cracow. 

jolly,  and  of  the  sweetest  disposition  ;  and  Mr,  Wolski  was  a 
highly  educated  man  and  a  fine  instructor.  I  believed  my- 
self very  fortunate  when  those  refined  and  kind  friends 
consented  to  take  care  of  my  beloved  brother's  daughter. 
As  we  neared  Zakopane  many  friends  and  mountaineers, 
mounted  on  horseback,  met  and  greeted  us  with  cheers. 
We  stopped  our  wagon,  and  a  long  while  was  spent  in  ex- 
changing words  of  joy,  embracing,  and  kissing.     While  we 


466  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

were  thus  engaged,  another  wagon  came  up  to  us  and  also 
stopped. 

I  heard  a  sweet  voice  from  the  depth  of  it,  calling,  *' Mad- 
ame Helena!  how  do  you  do?"  and  the  beautiful  face  of 
Madame  Gorska  (the  present  Madame  Paderewska)  ap- 
peared .between  the  white  canvas  of  the  wagon.  New 
greetings,  new  exclamations. 

The  beautiful  creature,  whose  name  is  also  Helena, 
looked  at  me  with  her  wistful  eyes  and  said :  ''I  envy  your 
going  to  Zakopane ;  you  are  going  to  meet  one  of  the  most 
extraordinary  young  men  you  ever  met."  Then  she  sighed 
and  said :  ''And  I  must  go  away."  "I  must,"  she  repeated, 
lower.     *'Good-by,"  and  she  departed. 

I  never  even  had  time  to  ask  the  name  of  that  marvellous 
young  man,  but  Anna  knew  whom  she  meant,  and  named 
Paderewski. 

The  very  next  day  Dr.  Tytus  Chalubinski  introduced  us 
to  a  frail-looking  young  man  of  twenty-one,  saying :  — 

*'I  want  you  to  know  and  love  Ignace  Paderewski,  our 
second  Chopin,"  and  then  with  a  look  of  a  loving  father 
he  squeezed  the  young  man's  hand. 

At  the  piano  Paderewski's  head,  with  its  aureole  of  pro- 
fuse golden  hair  and  delicate,  almost  feminine  features, 
looked  like  one  of  Botticelli's  or  Fra  Angelico's  angels,  and 
he  seemed  so  deeply  wrapped  up  in  his  music  that  this  in- 
tensity was  almost  hypnotic.  He  also  phrased  with  so  much 
clearness  and  meaning  that  his  playing  made  an  effect  of 
something  new  and  quite"  unconventional. 

Paderewski  was  married  at  nineteen,  and  became  a  father 
and  widower  at  twenty.  At  eighteen  he  was  already  one 
of  the  professors  of  harmony  at  the  Warsaw  Music  Con- 
servatory, and  at  the  time  we  met  him  he  still  held 
that  position.  He  was  a  composer  also,  and  many  of 
his  songs  and  piano  pieces  were  published  in  Warsaw  and 
Berlin. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  467 


468  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

In  private  life  he  was  witty,  alert,  most  kind-hearted, 
always  interesting,  always  having  a  ready  answer. 

When  once  a  mature  beauty  chaffed  him,  saying  that  he 
was  sentimental,  he  answered :  — 

''Why  not,  Madame ;  sentiment  does  not  suit  a  gendarme ; 
but  will  you  not  allow  a  little  of  it  to  an  artist  ?" 

He  used  to  come  often  to  our  villa,  and  it  was  impossible 
to  keep  him  away  from  the  piano.  Sometimes  he  played 
long  after  midnight,  and  had  to  be  taken  from  the  instru- 
ment by  force  when  the  refreshments  were  announced. 

We  had  many  chats,  and  I  advised  him  to  appear  in  public. 
I  knew  he  would  make  a  name  and  fortune.  His  poetic  face, 
combined  with  his  genius,  was  bound  to  produce  brilliant 
results.  He  hesitated,  but  finally  made  up  his  mind  to  go 
to  Vienna  and  study  with  Leschetitzky.  That  same  sum- 
mer, after  leaving  Zakopane,  he  gave  a  concert  in  Cracow, 
at  which  I  had  the  great  pleasure  of  recitmg.  Then  he 
departed  for  Vienna. 

I  played  short  engagements  in  Cracow,  Lemberg,  and 
Posen,  and  we  spent  a  few  weeks  in  Prussian  Poland,  visit- 
ing my  husband's. relations.  Then  in  the  late  autumn  of 
1884  I  began  a  series  of  performances  in  Warsaw. 

Warsaw !  the  city  of  my  predilection  and  also  the 
source  of  bitter  experiences.  It  is  an  old  saying  that  we 
love  those  the  best  who  make  us  sufifer  the  most.  So  it  is 
with  Warsaw. 

I  had  scarcely  played  there  a  few  weeks  when  a  tragic 
accident  marred  my  happy  engagement. 

Brandes,  the  celebrated  Norwegian  critic,  in  his  ''Im- 
pressions of  Poland,"  writes  about  it  as  follows:  — 

"Even  more  dangerous  to  Polish  nationality  is  that  provision 
of  the  law  which  requires  that  all  instruction  in  the  schools  shall 
be  in  Russian.  Even  the  scanty  instruction  in  the  Polish  language 
is  given  in  Russian.  And  so  strict  is  the  prohibition  against  speak- 
ing  Polish  in  playtime,  or  generally  in  the  school  grounds,  that  a 


THE  NEW  WORLD  469 

boy  of  twelve  years  old  was  recently  shut  up  for  twenty-four  hours 
in  the  dark  because,  coming  out  of  school,  he  said  to  a  comrade  in 
Polish,  'Let  us  go  home  together.'  But  the  r6gime  to  which  the 
schools  are  subjected  with  regard  to  the  suppression  of  the  national 
peculiarities  is  not  confined  to  the  domain  of  language.  Li  a  family 
which  I  was  invited  to  visit,  the  following  incident  happened.  The 
son  of  the  family,  a  boy  of  sixteen,  the  only  son  of  a  widow,  one 
evening  in  the  theatre  had  thrown  a  wreath  to  Helena  Modrze- 
jewska  on  behalf  of  his  comrades.  A  few  days  after,  in  obedience 
to  an  order  from  the  Minister  of  Education,  the  principal  of  the 
school  called  him  up,  and  told  him  that  he  must  not  only  leave  the 
school,  but  that  all  future  admission  to  any  other  school  whatever 
was  forbidden  him;  it  was  the  punishment  for  having  been  guilty 
of  a  PoUsh  demonstration.  They  boy  went  home  and  put  a  bullet 
through  his  head. 

"We  may  perhaps  wonder  that  provisions  which  in  certain  cir- 
cumstances drive  a  half-grown  lad  to  suicide  are  maintained,  or 
that  so  innocent  a  thing  as  the  throwing  of  a  wreath  is  forbidden. 
But  the  answer  is  that,  as  a  rule,  everything  which  betrays  a  love 
for  the  language  is  forbidden  in  Warsaw." 

The  fact,  as  described  by  the  famous  critic,  is  correct; 
there  are  only  some  details  accompanying  this  sad  event  to 
be  rectified. 

There  were  seventeen  high-school  boys  who  put  together 
their  pennies  in  order  to  buy  a  magnificent  bouquet  and  offer 
it  to  me  over  the  footlights.  Artists  and  literary  men  had 
done  the  same  thing  before,  and  those  young  boys  were 
only  following  their  example. 

They  tied  the  bouquet  with  a  pink  ribbon  (this  detail  is 
not  without  importance),  ornamented  with  the  inscription, 
in  Polish,  ''To  Helena  Modrzejewska,  from  the  high-school 
students,"  and  when  they  brought  their  handsome  gift  to 
the  theatre,  they  looked  for  the  representative  of  police  or 
some  school  authority  in  order  to  show  it  to  them  and  ask 
permission  to  oflFer  it  to  me.  They  perceived  in  one  of  the 
boxes  Count  Buturlin,  the  most  kind  and  most  popular 
chief  of  police  that  ever  was  in  Warsaw.  President 
MouchanofiF  and  my  husband  were  with  him. 


470  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Encouraged  by  the  presence  of  Count  Mouchanoff,  who 
was  a  very  popular  man,  two  of  them  rapped  at  the  door, 
and  being  admitted  to  the  box,  they  explained  the  cause  of 
their  visit. 

Count  Buturlin,  after  having  looked  at  the  flowers  and 
read  the  words  printed  on  the  ribbon,  smiled  indulgently, 
and  said,  '^Yes,  you  may  hand  the  bouquet  to  Madame 
Modrzejewska,  only  do  it  quietly,"  and  when  the  happy 
boys  were  bowing  themselves  oflF,  he  added,  ''And  mind, 
do  not  step  on  people's  corns  when  you  walk  to  the  foot- 
lights." The  boys  did  not  know  how  to  thank  him  for  so 
much  friendliness,  and  immediately  selected  one  among 
them  who  had  to  hand  me  the  bouquet.  It  was  just  the 
unfortunate  boy  Mr.  Brandes  speaks  of. 

The  next  day  all  the  seventeen  boys  were  expelled  from 
the  school  by  the  Curator  Apuchtin.  They  were  accused 
as  guilty  of  a  ''patriotic  demonstration,"  for  having  tied 
the  flowers  with  national  Polish  colors  ^  and  an  inscription 
in  the  Polish  language.  This  was  not  enough ;  they  had  not 
only  to  leave  the  school,  but  all  future  admission  to  any 
other  school  whatever  was  forbidden  them. 

The  same  evening  they  all  met  at  the  house  of  the  boy 
who  handed  me  the  flowers,  and  there  spent  a  few  hours 
debating  what  course  to  take.  Nothing  but  manual  work 
was  left  to  them,  and  they  fully  realized  the  failure  of  their 
lives. 

At  the  end  of  the  meeting  the  young  host  rose  and  said, 
"Be  of  good  cheer;  to-morrow  you  will  all  be  re-admitted  to 
the  school."  When  they  asked  what  he  meant,  he  repeated 
his  words  and  added,  "Do  not  insist  on  explanation,  but 
be  of  good  cheer." 

They  parted.  Some  of  them  half  believed  in  the  prophecy ; 
others  treated  it  as  an  effervescence  of  a  troubled  brain. 
When  they  left  the  house  the  boy  shot  himself. 

1  Our  national  colors  are  red  and  white  —  not  pink. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  471 

His  prophecy  became  true,  then,  for  his  unexpected 
suicide  alarmed  the  authorities,  and  the  sixteen  boys  were 
called  back  to  school. 

These  details  come  from  one  who  was  present  at  the 
meeting. 

My  husband  asked  all  my  friends,  President  MouchanoflF, 
as  well  as  all  the  members  of  the  company,  not  to  tell  me  of 
it,  knowing  what  a  shock  such  news  would  give  me.  They 
all  promised  to  be  silent,  and  I  lived  in  perfect  ignorance  of 
the  fact. 

On  the  day  of  the  burial  I  had  to  recite  at  a  charity  con- 
cert. I  remember  that  matinee  so  well.  There  was  some- 
thing in  the  air  which  made  me  sad  and  nervous. 

Is  it  possible  that  there  exists  such  a  thing  as  an  uncon- 
scious feeling  of  a  misfortune  passing  by  ?  I  do  not  know, 
but  during  my  recitation  the  tears  flooded  my  face,  and  when 
I  left  the  platform  I  had  a  good  cry  in  the  foyer. 

I  heard  some  one  whisper,  ''She  knows  already, '^  and  at 
the  same  time  a  person  entered  hurriedly  and  the  word 
'' burial"  struck  my  ears.  I  lifted  my  head  and  asked 
anxiously,  ''Whose  burial?"  The  dear,  faithful  friend, 
Mademoiselle  Emily,  who  sat  near  me,  asked  me  in  turn : 
*'Did  you  not  hear?  a  student  fell  down  by  accident  from 
the  third  floor  and  died.  It  is  his  funeral  they  speak 
of." 

Thus  the  truth  remained  unknown  to  me  a  few  days  longer, 
but  one  morning,  when  at  the  stage  manager's  office  I  was 
arranging  the  repertoire  for  the  next  week,  some  actors  and 
actresses  entered  the  room.  I  do  not  remember  how  it 
happened,  but  from  them  I  suddenly  learned  the  truth, 
without  preparation  and  with  all  accompanying  details. 
The  knowledge  that  the  boy  was  the  only  son  of  a  widow 
was  the  most  painful  to  me.  To  think  of  the  tortures  of 
that  poor  mother's  heart,  to  know  that  I  was  the  indirect 
cause  of  her  son's  suicide,  made  me  disconsolate.    Dis- 


472  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

missing  abruptly  the  question  of  the  repertoire,  I  went 
home. 

In  spite  of  this  painful  experience,  I  had  to  go  on  play- 
ing, for  I  had  signed  a  contract  and  had  to  fulfil  its  terms. 

Some  new  Polish  plays  were  added  to  my  repertoire,  and 
my  time  was  taken  up  by  constant  rehearsals. 

One  day  Cazimir  Hofmann,  formerly  the  leader  of  the 
orchestra  in  Cracow,  and  a  friend  of  ours,  asked  if  I  could 
introduce  to  Louis  Grossman  his  boy,  then  six  or  seven  years 
old.  He  was  anxious  to  hear  Mr.  Grossman's  opinion 
about  the  little  Joseph's  talent. 

I  promised  at  once  to  comply  with  his  wish,  though  it 
was  not  such  an  easy  task  as  it  seemed,  for,  though  Louis 
Grossman  was  a  very  kind-hearted  man,  and  many  a  young 
musician  came  to  the  front  through  his  influence,  yet  I 
remembered  that  he  had  a  strong  aversion  to  small  prodi- 
gies. He  used  to  say  that  not  one  of  the  wonderful  chil- 
dren he  knew  had  amounted  to  anything.  ^'The  wonder 
disappears  when  they  grow  up,  and  nothing  remains  but  the 
child.'' 

In  spite  of  this  opinion  and  my  knowledge  of  his  preju- 
dice, I  did  not  hesitate  to  render  Mr.  Hofmann  the  slight 
service  he  asked  of  me,  and  I  went  directly  to  Grossman's 
house.  After  some  hesitation  he  consented  to  hear  the  boy, 
and  appointed  an  hour  for  the  meeting. 

I  can  even  now  see  Joseph  Hof mann's  tiny  figure  wrapped 
up  warmly  from  head  to  foot.  A^Tien  between  Mr.  Hof- 
mann and  myself  we  had  taken  off  little  Joseph's  wraps 
and  gaiters,  I  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  we  entered  the 
reception  room,  where  Mr.  Grossman  was  waiting  to  greet  us. 

I  introduced  father  and  son.  The  little  artist  never  even 
looked  at  the  host,  but  directed  his  eyes  towards  the  upright 
piano.  After  having  examined  that  instrument  for  a  while, 
he  looked  at  all  four  corners  of  the  room,  then  at  his  fathei , 
and  when  Mr.  Grossman  asked  him  to  play,  he  stood  before 


THE  NEW  WORLD  473 

the  piano  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  and  after  a  moment's 
suspense,  he  said :  — 

''I  will  not  play  on  that  thing." 

Our  host  was  so  surprised  at  that  tiny  person's  pluck  and 
impertinence  that  he  forgot  to  laugh.  He  looked  at  me  for 
a  moment ;  then,  with  a  loud  outburst  of  merriment,  said, 
"Well,  I  suppose  I  have  to  humor  this  little  Mozart,"  and 
with  "Come  along,  little  man,  I  will  give  you  your  choice," 
he  walked  ahead  and  took  us  to  his  piano  wareroom. 

Little  Joseph  went  from  one  piano  to  another,  touching 
the  keys  lightly,  and  finally  he  sat  in  front  of  one  of  them 
and  struck  a  few  chords. 

When  Mr.  Grossman  heard  the  tone  of  the  instrument,  he 
said,  smiling,  "That  brat  chose  my  best  Steinway,"and  he  at 
once  became  interested  in  the  boy.  He  let  him  play  and 
improvise,  and  was  so  pleased  with  the  abnormal  knowledge 
of  harmony  in  the  child  that  he  declared  it  was  the  first 
time  in  his  life  he  had  heard  anything  like  it  in  a  boy  of 
seven. 

While  he  was  talking  to  Mr.  Hofmann,  giving  his  advice 
as  to  the  future  conduct  of  Joseph's  studies,  that  diminu- 
tive personage  was  placidly  eating  chocolates  offered  him 
by  Madame  Grossman,  who  some  moments  before  had 
quietly  entered  the  hall. 

The  musical  season  was  in  its  swing  in  Warsaw,  and 
Hans  von  Billow  came  to  give  one  or  two  concerts.  At 
the  same  time  Brandes  visited  our  country.  I  met  him  at 
one  of  Edward  Leo's  receptions.  Hans  von  Biilow  was  also 
one  of  the  guests. 

I  came  late,  for  I  played  Feuillet's  "Dalila"  that  evening, 
but  I  was  told  by  my  husband,  who  preceded  me,  that 
Bulow  had  delivered  a  panegyric  about  me  before  my  arrival. 
He  spoke  with  so  much  enthusiasm  that  our  friends  were 
afraid  Mr.  Brandes  might  resent  it,  because  it  is  well  known 


474  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

that  every  critic  prefers  rather  to  himself  discover  a  genius 
than  to  be  told  to  fall  upon  his  knees  before  an  acknowl- 
edged idol. 

No  one,  however,  could  stop  Mr.  Billow's  laudatory  mood, 
and  he  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  only  knew  two  stars  in 
Poland :  one  of  them  was  Chopin,  and  the  other  —  here  he 
named  me. 

This  was  very  erratic,  indeed,  but  his  words  proved  his 
appreciation  and  friendship. 

I  do  not  think  this  outburst  of  enthusiasm  cooled  off  Mr. 
Brand es's  judgment  of  me,  for  his  criticism  made  me  very 
happy.  He  praised  not  only  my  acting,  but  he  also  spoke 
in  most  flattering  terms  about  my  husband.  No  one  could 
characterize  Mr.  Chlapowski  better  than  the  famous  Dane 
did  in  his  paragraph  on  the  Warsaw  Theatre :  — 

"  She  is  indebted  to  her  present  husband,  an  extremely  artistic 
man  of  the  world,  Karol  Chlapowski,  for  her  taste  for  English, 
poetry,  as  well  as  for  her  higher  development  as  an  artist  gener- 
aUy." 

Mr.  Brandes's  appreciation  is  quite  correct,  but  what  was 
ignored  by  him  was  my  husband's  influence  over  my  inner 
self :  the  touch  of  a  delicate  nature  and  refined  mind,  never 
tired  of  instructing  and  polishing  the  rough  edges  of  the  too 
impulsive  and  somewhat  violent  disposition  I  brought  with 
me  to  this  world.  The  true  Christian  spirit  which  had 
always  ruled  his  life  had  a  great  power  over  me,  and  the 
general  improvement  of  my  nature  was  due  to  his  constant 
soul  watching  over  mine. 

I  am  bound,  however,  to  correct  Mr.  Brandes's  statement 
in  one  point.  He  says  that  my  husband  developed  my 
taste  for  Shakespeare.  Being  brought  up  in  France,  Mr. 
Chlapowski  was  versed  in  French  literature,  and  I  learned 
a  great  deal  from  him.  He  read  with  me  the  French  classics, 
the  romantic  and  modern  poets,  but  not  Shakespeare,  in 


THE  NEW  WORLD  475 

whose  masterpieces  I  had  been  deeply  interested  from  my 
early  days.  His  plays  were  introduced  into  the  Cracow 
repertoire  through  Rapacki,  Ladnowski,  and  myself.  This 
fact  I  correct  only  because  I  have  already  spoken  of  my 
youthful  craze  for  the  Great  William,  and  because  this 
little  error  of  the  critic  has  nothing  to  do  with  my  husband's 
refining  influence  upon  my  art. 


CHAPTER  XLVIII 

Between  1884  and  1902  I  visited  Poland  several  times, 
and  I  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing  many  remarkable 
Polish  men  and  women.  Princess  Sapieha  was  one  of  them. 
She  was  the  mother  of  the  Red  Prince,  of  whom  I  spoke  in 
the  first  part  of  my  memoirs,  Adam  Sapieha,  who  inherited 
from  her  many  qualities,  among  others  the  intense  love  of 
his  country  and  great  energy. 

She  was  one  of  those  women  whom  it  was  safe  to  compare 
with  Volumnia  in  "Coriolanus,"  for  her  character  bore  a 
strong  resemblance  to  the  Roman  matron.  Exceedingly 
severe  to  herself,  she  could  not  help  being  so  to  others,  and  her 
judgment  of  people,  though  always  just,  was  often  slightly 
harsh.  But  her  kindness  to  her  friends  and  to  the  poor  was 
unbounded,  and  she  was  loved  and  highly  respected  by 
many,  though  feared  by  others.  She  had  no  use  for  the 
weak-minded,  and  her  hatred  of  them  was  equal  to  her 
hatred  of  the  enemies  of  her  country. 

Justly  proud  of  her  ancestors  and  attached  to  her  family 
traditions,  she  was  free  from  silly,  aristocratic  prejudices,  and 
disliked  titles.  On  her  visiting-card  there  was  nothing  but 
her  name,  without  a  prefix. 

I  consider  myself  very  fortunate  in  being  brought  in  con- 
tact with  that  remarkable  lady.  She  was  always  affable, 
kind,  brilliant,  and  most  natural,  a  true  grande  dame. 

We  also  had  a  glimpse  of  Princess  Marceline  Czartoryska, 
the  famous  amateur  pianist,  friend  and  pupil  of  Chopin,  and 
recognized  in  Europe  as  one  of  his  best  interpreters. 

The  great  poetess  of  recent  days,  Maria  Konopnicka,  we 
met  in  Lemberg.    Her  poems,  like  those  of  Fran5ois  Copp6e, 

476 


THE  NEW  WORLD  477 

deal  mostly  with  the  poorer  classes,  and  with  our  peasantry's 
miseries.  They  are  written  with  deep  feeling  and  art,  and 
they  won  her  the  sympathy  of  the  whole  nation. 

As  Austrian  Poland  (Galitzia)  is  enjoying  a  perfect  home- 
rule,  the  authorities  are  all  Polish,  and  Lw6w  (Lemberg), 
its  capital,  is  their  chief  residence.  A  great  many  young 
people  whom  I  had  known  in  Cracow  in  old  times  had  risen 
to  high  dignities.  The  old  acquaintance  was  not  forgotten, 
and  thus  it  happened  that  I  was  the  recipient  of  many  court- 
esies in  the  official  spheres.  The  most  remarkable  career 
was  achieved  by  two  of  our  young  friends,  the  brothers 
Badeni.  The  older  Count  Casimir  Badeni  became  governor 
of  the  province,  and  his  administration  had  such  brilliant 
results  that  Emperor  Francis  Joseph  called  him  to  Vienna 
as  the  premier  of  the  Austrian  Cabinet.  Representing  the 
Polish  nationality,  as  well  as  the  Slavonic  element  of  the 
empire,. he  was  attacked  violently  by  the  German  opposi- 
tion, and  had  to  resign  after  a  term  of  most  brilliant  states- 
manlike leadership. 

Equally  able,  if  not  more  so,  is  his  brother,  Count  Stanis- 
las Badeni,  who  has  many  times  been  the  so-called  marshal 
of  the  province  —  ''Land  Marshal."  This  office  belongs 
only  to  Austria.  It  is  somewhat  parallel  to  the  governor- 
ship, and  the  authority  is  divided  between  the  two.  While 
the  governor  represents  the  central  government,  the  mar- 
shal is  the  chief  of  the  home-rule  authorities.  Count 
Stanislas  Badeni  was  always  greatly  interested  in  the 
theatre,  and  hence  the  special  friendship  with  which  he 
honored  us. 

Prince  Eustache  Sanguszko,  for  some  time  also  marshal 
of  the  province,  later  on  governor,  was  another  one  of  those 
who  entertained  us  during  our  stay  in  Lw6w.  His  was  a 
charming  nature,  not  at  all  self-assertive,  rather  timid,  but 
exceedingly  sympathetic. 

But  the  last  one  whom  we  met  in  the  governor's  chair 


478  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

during  our  last  visit  to  Poland  (1902),  and  with  whom  we 
were  bound  most  closely,  is  a  man  whose  recent  death  by  the 
hand  of  an  assassin  has  shocked  the  whole  civilized  world, 
Count  Andr6  Potocki,  the  son  of  Count  Adam  and  the 
grandson  of  that  grand  and  excellent  lady,  Madame  Arthur, 
of  whom  I  spoke  in  the  first  part  of  these  memoirs,  and  who 
showed  me  such  a  marked  partiality.  It  is  almost  impos- 
sible 'to  realize  that  such  a  man  could  excite  hatred.  As 
governor  of  the  province,  he  was  probably  the  most  con- 
scientious official  in  the  whole  Austrian  Empire ;  he  worked 
continually  for  the  welfare  of  all,  and  was  renowned  for  his 
impartiality  as  well  as  for  his  reforming  tendencies.  Master 
of  an  enormous  fortune,  bearer  of  the  greatest  name  in  Po- 
land, and  without  a  blemish  in  his  private  life,  a  happy  hus- 
band and  father  of  a  numerous  family,  he  might  have  enjoyed 
a  Hfe  of  ease.  But  he  was  essentially  a  man  of  duty,  be- 
lieving in  the  old  adage,  ''Noblesse  oblige  " ;  and  in  the  hope 
of  being  able  to  do  good  to  his  countrymen  he  entered 
the  public  service. 

Is  it  not  a  strange  and  terrible  anomaly  that  the  anar- 
chists choose  so  frequently  for  their  victims,  not  the  oppress- 
ors, not  the  tyrants,  but  those  who  are  doing  their  best 
to  remedy  the  evils  inherent  to  our  present  social  system  ? 

To-day  it  is  the  widow  of  the  murdered  Polish  statesman, 
the  Countess  Andr6  Potocka,  a  representative  of  the  highest 
type  of  Polish  and  Christian  womanhood,  she  who  has 
suflfered  the  most  by  the  crime,  it  is  she  who  intercedes  for 
the  life  of  the  assassin. 

My  last  visit  to  Poland  was  made  exceptionally  pleasant 
through  the  kind  attentions  of  both  Count  Andr6  Potocki 
and  Count  Stanislas  Badeni.  They  both  endeavored  to 
keep  me  in  the  country,  in  order  to  take  up  the  management 
and  artistic  direction  of  both  our  Galitzian  National  Thea- 
tres, the  one  in  Lemberg  and  the  one  in  Cracow.  It  was 
with  a  heavy  heart  that  I  refused  the  oflfer  of  this  honorable 


THE  NEW  WORLD  479 

position,  which  would  have  been  such  a  beautiful  crowning 
of  my  artistic  career,  but  I  did  not  think  I  could  do  justice 
to  the  task. 

During  these  frequent  returns  to  Poland  I  passed  a  great 
deal  of  time  with  the  family  of  my  husband,  in  the  Duchy 
of  Posen.  I  think  it  only  fair  to  say  a  few  words  about  those 
dear  people,  whom  I  cherish  as  my  own.  I  am  proud  to 
say  that  few  families  in  our  country  enjoy  the  respect  with 
which  the  Chlapowskis  are  surrounded.  And  it  is  only  just, 
for  they  deserve  it  in  full.  Conservative,  though  far  from 
being  reactionaries,  broad-minded,  and  cultured,  they  are, 
before  all,  genuine  Christians  and  ardent  patriots. 

There  are  only  four  of  the  immediate  family  left:  my 
husband,  his  sister  Anna,  married  to  a  cousin,  Casimir 
Chlapowski,  Doctor  Francis,  and  Joseph. 

Madame  Anna  I  have  already  spoken  of.  Even  in  the 
best  Polish  society  I  did  not  meet  many  women  of  such 
gracious  manners,  such  intellectual  turn  of  mind,  such 
aflfability  and  simplicity.  Deeply  interested  both  in  letters 
and  sciences,  she  charms  one  with  her  brilliant  conversa- 
tion. But  all  her  best  faculties  are  concentrated  in  her 
devotion  to  her  husband  and  children. 

Mr.  Casimir  Chlapowski,  son  of  the  great  general,  reminds 
one  very  much  of  his  father.  He  is  the  man  who,  on  ac- 
count of  his  chivalrous  disposition,  has  been  called  by  one 
of  the  great  French  writers,  Montalembert,  *'the  last  gen- 
tilhomme  of  Europe.'*  Exceedingly  simple  and  modest, 
with  an  infinite  tact,  he  exerts  a  great  influence  in  his  prov- 
ince, and  has  been  for  many  years  selected  as  chairman  of 
the  great  national  meetings.  Though  practically  the  head 
of  the  Catholic  Polish  party,  he  is  very  popular  with  all  the 
other  Polish  parties,  on  account  of  his  moderation  and 
impartiality.  He  is  a  member  of  the  House  of  Peers  in 
Berlin. 

Doctor  Francis  Chlapowski's  life  has  been  devoted  to 


480  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

two  aims,  science  and  charity.  For  several  years  he  was 
a  member  of  the  German  Parliament,  but  lately  has  retired 
from  political  activity.  Prince  Bismarck,  in  his  hatred 
towards  Poles,  did  him  the  honor  of  singling  him  out  during 
the  time  of  his  parliamentary  service  as  an  object  of  ani- 
mosity. Eminent  as  a  physician  as  well  as  a  naturalist, 
he  has  been  for  years  the  chairman  of  the  physical  depart- 
ment of  the  main  scientific  society  in  Prussian  Poland.  But 
his  chief  characteristic  is  his  activity  in  works  of  charity. 
He  is  the  prime  mover  in  this  sphere,  and  his  personal  be- 
nevolence, as  well  as  his  disinterestedness,  is  proverbial 
through  the  whole  country.  He  recently  lost  his  wife,  who 
was  Countess  Marie  Lubienska,  a  woman  of  great  heart  and 
charming  manners. 

The  youngest  remaining  member  of  the  family  is  Mr. 
Joseph  Chlapowski,  eminently  a  man  of  action.  He  was 
very  successful  in  the  management  of  his  estate ;  his  wife  is 
one  of  the  sweetest  and  most  modest  women,  the  Princess 
Leonie  Woroniecka,  and  they  were  blessed  with  an  only  son, 
an  ideal  boy,  in  whom  they  centred  all  their  hopes  and 
affections.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  the  boy  died.  The 
lives  of  the  father  and  mother  were  shattered.  There 
seemed  nothing  left  for  them.  Then  it  happened  that  the 
prominent  people  of  the  province  selected  Joseph  Chla- 
powski for  a  hard  task,  but  one  of  the  most  responsible 
ones  in  the  country.  Some  time  before  a  man  of  great 
character,  Mr.  M.  Jackowskl,  had  founded  an  organization 
called  the  Agricultural  Circles.  The  latter  were  societies 
of  peasant  farmers,  scattered  all  over  the  province,  intended 
to  develop  their  agricultural  knowledge  and  thus  improve 
their  economic  condition. 

When  Mr.  Jackowski  died,  Joseph  Chlapowski  became  his 
successor,  with  the  title  of  *' Patron." 

Under  the  direction  of  both  these  men  the  organization 
increased  in  size,  until  to-day  it  is  composed  of  from  three  to 


THE  NEW  WORLD  481 

four  hundred  local  societies,  and  the  economic  condition  of 
the  peasants  has  altered  radically.  Instead  of  eking  out  a 
miserable  subsistence,  deprived  of  almost  the  necessities  of 
life,  the  present  peasant-farmers  of  the  province  enjoy  many 
comforts  and  are  free  from  poverty.  The  change  is  won- 
derful. 

The  material  betterment  of  this  class  had  as  a  natural 
consequence  the  spread  of  general  culture.  Free  from  the 
fear  of  starvation,  the  poor  peasant  is  becoming  a  citizen 
conscious  of  his  duties,  conscious  of  his  rights. 

To  this  work  Joseph  Chlapowski  has  devoted  all  his  time, 
and  his  love  for  the  Polish  peasant  has  J&amp;Ued  the  void  left 
in  his  life  by  his  bereavement. 

I  beg  to  be  excused  for  crowding  together  all  my  European 
recollections  covering  the  space  of  nearly  twenty  years. 

This  makes  my  book  more  like  a  scherzo,  if  I  may 
borrow  Mr.  De  Morgan's  expression,  ''in  jerks  and  starts," 
but  I  would  never  finish  my  memoirs  had  I  to  make  all  the 
trips  there  and  back  and  give  my  experiences  in  chronological 
order.  It  is  not  easy  to  describe  over  forty  years  of  a 
theatrical  and  private  career  step  by  step,  and  I  have  to 
depend  on  a  great  deal  of  compassion  and  indulgence. 

In  the  year  18       I  played  in  Prague  (Bohemia). 

Mr.  Schubert,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  National 
Theatre,  was  one  of  the  most  courteous  of  managers,  and 
also  a  most  appreciative  one,  and  he  did  everything  to  make 
my  Prague  d^but  pleasant  and  artistic.  He  gave  me  an 
excellent  cast  and  attended  all  the  rehearsals. 

It  was  at  first  difficult  to  play  with  Bohemian  actors,  but 
after  a  while  I  got  quite  used  to  it.  Both  languages,  Polish 
and  Czech,  are  very  much  alike  and  of  the  same  Slavonic 
origin,  and  it  was  quite  easy  after  a  while  to  understand  the 
words.  Besides,  the  National  Theatre  in  Prague  possessed 
such  fine  and  accomplished  actors  and  actresses  that  it  was 
a  pleasure  to  work  with  them. 
2i 


482  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  never  had  a  better  Maurice  de  Saxe  or  a  finer  Benedict 
than  the  leading  man  of  the  Prague  Theatre,  Mr.  Seifert. 
His  manly  appearance,  his  humor,  combined  with  undoubted 
talent  and  skill,  made  all  his  impersonations  stand  out  in 
clear  outlines,  and  the  whole  gave  the  satisfaction  of  a 
finished  picture,  without  being  finicking,  without  muddy 
or  blurred  tints,  but  vigorous,  fine  in  color,  and  true  to 
nature. 

I  still  remember  some  of  his  scenes  in  ^'Much  Ado  About 
Nothing,"  and  the  expression  of  his  face  when  Beatrice 
invites  him  to  dinner,  for  his  acting  depended  mostly  upon 
his  expression,   not  upon  the  so-called   '^ stage  business." 

The  people  in  Prague  received  us  very  kindly,  and  we  made 
many  excursions  with  our  new  friends  to  the  ancient  build- 
ings and  churches,  whose  beauties  are  known  to  every  one 
who  ever  visited  Prague. 

We  had  several  artistic  and  literary  reunions.  At  one 
of  them  the  greatest  poet  of  Bohemia,  Vrhlicki,  improvised 
and  recited  the  following  poem :  — 

To  Helena  Modrzej^wska 

"God  looked  at  the  poor  down-trodden  Poland. 

Her  brow  was  crowned  with  a  wreath  of  thorns,  in  her  aide 
was  a  bleeding  wound. 
When  He  saw  how  unhappy  she  was, 

He  took  pity  and  wanted  to  soothe  her  great  sorrows: 
He  bent  down  from  heaven,  touched  her  forehead  pale  with  pain, 
Then  upon  the  holy  brow  of  Poland  descended  Strength  and 
Beauty,  and  from  them  you  were  bom. 
Misery  of  the  poor,  fame,  victory,  songs  of  hope,  flame  of  en- 
chantment, smile  of  joy,  —  all  the  soul  is  longing  for,  all 
the  heart  can  desire,  —  we  find  all  in  your  art. 
Oh !  Queen  of  the  beautiful !    We  greet  you  !" 

Quite  confused  by  the  .flattering  words  of  the  poem,  I 
thanked  the  poet,  and  recited  snatches  from  our  great 
masters  of  thought  and  expression. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  483 

About  that  time  we  met  Mr.  Dvof  Ak,  and  attended  one 
of  this  wonderful  man's  concerts. 

Prague  seemed  to  me  an  unusually  hospitable  city. 

I  remember  a  dinner,  given  to  us  by  a  prominent  citizen 
and  his  charming  wife,  which  would  have  staggered  any 
foreigner  not  acquainted  with  the  local  customs.  The 
dinner  began  at  six  o'clock  and  ended  at  midnight. 

There  was  a  peculiar  string  orchestra  in  the  next  room 
playing  during  the  meals,  and  after  the  dessert  I  wanted  to 
see  the  instruments  and  went  to  look  at  them.  There  were 
such  violas^  guitars,  violins,  'cellos,  and  bassos  as  I  never 
saw  before.  They  were  of  all  imaginable  sizes,  from  the 
tiniest  toy-like  ones  to  tremendously  large  ones,  all  of  them 
made  of  some  white  polished  wood.  They  looked  as  though 
they  belonged  to  the  same  family,  composed  of  ancestors, 
parents,  and  great-grandchildren.  They  also  had  names 
it  would  take  any  one  a  month  to  learn  by  heart,  but  when 
all  those  instruments  were  joined  in  one  harmony,  the 
effect  was  wonderful. 

When  I  came  back  to  the  dining  room,  my  amazement 
was  great.  I  saw  some  new  guests  at  the  table,  and  the 
hostess  invited  me  to  sit  down  with  them.  The  newcomers 
were  those  who  could  not  come  to  the  early  dinner. 

This  dinner  over,  new  people  arrived,  mostly  prominent 
actors  or  musicians,  who,  being  engaged  early  in  the  even- 
ing, could  not  come  at  the  regular  hour;  but  when  they  came 
after  ten  o'clock  another  dinner  was  served  to  them,  begin- 
ning with  soup,  down  to  the  dessert  and  black  coffee. 
'  We  sat  at  the  table  six  hours,  watching  the  consecutive 
parties  of  diners,  until  we  began  to  feel  hungry  again  and 
ready  for  supper,  which  was,  of  course,  provided  in  the  same 
profusion. 

The  orchestra  did  not  stop  playing  for  a  moment,  although 
I  saw  many  platters  and  bottles  sent  over  to  their  room  by 
the  hospitable  and  thoughtful  hostess. 


d84  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

All  together,  the  month  I  spent  in  Prague  was  one  of 
the  most  enjoyable  in  my  career.  It  would  be  impossible 
to  remember  all  the  kind  attentions  showered  on  me.  The 
welcome  was  extended  both  to  the  star  and  to  the  daughter 
of  a  nation  akin  to  their  own. 

The  last  performance  was,  of  course,  an  ovation,  and  after 
the  curtain  fell,  the  director  of  the  theatre  read  from  the 
stage  a  series  of  telegrams  addressed  to  me,  from  about 
twenty  or  thirty  town  councils  in  Bohemia,  full  of  congratu- 
lations and  sympathy. 

The  extraordinary  dinner  described  above  reminds  me 
of  some  original  receptions  our  Polish  actors  arranged  for  me. 

The  most  interesting  one  was  a  sleigh-ride  with  torches, 
on  the  occasion  of  our  visit  to  Lemberg  during  the  winter 
of  1882.  The  night  was  dark.  Over  twenty  tiny  sleighs 
were  waiting  at  the  entrance  of  the  theatre,  and  at  the  side 
of  each  of  them  there  was  a  man  on  horseback,  with  a  torch 
in  his  hand,  and  this  train  of  sleighs  was  headed  by  a  small 
band  of  musicians.  As  soon  as  we  started,  a  jolly  air  of 
Krakowiak  resounded  in  the  air,  filling  the  hearts  with 
merriment.  Many  windows  opened  to  see  our  folly,  many 
people  in  the  street  sent  their  laughing  ''Hurray''  after  us. 
When  we  left  the  city,  the  music  stopped,  and  then  a  wild 
ride  took  place.  We  were  almost  flying  in  the  air  —  at 
least  it  seemed  so  to  me.  My  husband  and  myself  could 
scarcely  catch  our  breath ;  the  snow  sent  up  by  the  horses' 
hoofs  was  beating  in  our  faces,  and  the  men  with  torches 
looked  like  demons  on  their  nocturnal  ride  in  search  for 
wicked  souls. 

It  was  all  picturesque,  refreshing,  and  jolly.  After  fifteen 
minutes  of  this  extravagant  pace,  the  horses  slackened  their 
gait,  the  musicians  resumed  their  jolly  airs,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  we  stopped  at  the  door  of  a  country  house.  The 
hospitable  owner  of  the  mansion  and  his  wife  greeted  us 
warmly  and  invited  us  to  come  into  their  home.     We  found 


THE  NEW  WORLD  485 

the  large  hall  brightly  lighted,  and  some  refreshments  served. 
The  musicians  came  in;  the  air  of  a  valse  filled  the  hall, 
and  dancing  began. 

Two  hours  later  we  were  on  our  return  to  the  city,  where 
in  an  immense  dining-room  of  a  club  the  supper  was  served 
and  speeches  delivered.  Some  of  them  were  in  prose,  some 
in  rhymes,  but  all  had  only  one  object  —  art. 

The  whole  character  of  that  evening  was  purely  Bohemian, 
and  there  was  not  one  weary  moment  during  the  five  or  six 
hours  we  spent  in  the  company  of  our  congenial  fellow- 
actors. 

Another  evening  I  remember,  a  few  years  later,  Mr. 
Pawlikowski,  the  manager  and  director  of  the  Cracow 
Theatre,  together  with  the  actors,  gave  us  an  original  supper. 
When  we  entered  the  dining  room,  we  were  greeted  by  a 
chorus. 

At  each  plate  was  placed  a  wreath  of  roses,  which  every 
one,  men  and  women,  had  to  put  on  their  heads.  The  women 
looked  pretty  in  them,  so  did  the  young  boys ;  some  faces 
with  too  many  wrinkles  and  purple  tints  in  their  complexion 
looked  sad,  indeed,  in  those  flowery  ornaments,  but  to  the 
men  past  thirty  who  were  afflicted  by  a  visible  devastation 
of  their  foreheads,  the  wreaths  were  exceedingly  becoming. 
Our  manager  looked  twenty-five,  and  I  thought  that  the 
renovation  of  the  Roman  fashion  was  a  very  ingenious  one. 

I  never  heard  so  many  improvised  witty  toasts  —  all  in 
rhymes  —  at  any  other  banquet.  There  were  poems  recited, 
parodies,  epigrams  of  all  sorts,  and  the  time  flew  so  rapidly 
that  it  was  almost  daylight  when  we  parted. 

The  manager  and  some  of  his  guests  offered  to  accompany 
us  to  the  hotel.  Our  character  actor  liked  his  wreath  so 
much  that  he  left  his  hat  behind,  and  went  with  us  with  that 
flowery  halo  on  his  head.  When  we  passed  before  the  church, 
there  were  a  few  women  standing  in  front  of  it,  waiting  for 
the  opening  of  the  gate.     We  also  wanted  to  go  in  and  hear 


486  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

the  early  Mass,  but  we  dared  not  on  account  of  our  gar- 
landed companion.  Besides,  when  those  poor  women  looked 
at  us  they  all  turned  their  faces  towards  the  gate  and,  no 
doubt,  said  a  prayer  for  the  wicked.  We  had  to  hasten 
away. 

It  was  shortly  before  this  that  Mr.  Tadeusz  Pawlikowski 
had  become  the  manager  and  lessee  of  the  Cracow  Theatre. 
A  man  of  great  culture  and  means,  he  saved  the  Cracow 
stage  from  .utter  decrepitude  and  lifted  it  up  almost  to  the 
same  high  standard  it  had  at  the  time  of  Stanislaw  Kozmian. 
New  forces  were  introduced,  and  most  gorgeous  productions 
took  place  upon  that  almost  poverty-stricken  stage,  which, 
going  from  one  hand  to  another,  had  lost  gradually  all  its 
brilliancy  and  attraction. 

Actors  who  had  been  kept  in  the  background  came  in  front, 
arid  many  young  talents  found  their  way  to  success. 

The  most  prominent  actor  was  then,  and  is  now,  Ludwik 
Solski.  He  has  a  gift  of  making  up  his  face  in  such  a  way 
that  the  paint  cannot  be  seen  at  two  steps'  distance,  and 
the  range  of  his  parts  is  enormous.  He  is  intense,  humorous, 
passionate,  or  light-hearted  at  will,  and  though  all  his  parts 
have  a  stamp  of  strong  individuality,  they  are  true  to  nature 
and  never  conventional.  He  is  at  present  the  manager  and 
stage  director  of  the  endowed  theatre  in  Cracow. 

Madame  Solska,  his  wife,  is  a  very  talented  woman  of 
diaphanous  appearance,  poetic  and  original. 

Kaminski  is,  above  all,  a  character  actor,  very  unique  in 
his  style.  A  great  favorite  of  the  public,  he  occupies  the 
position  of  stage  director  in  Warsaw. 

There  is  also  Madame  Siemiaszko,  called  "Elemental." 
She  is  fine  in  passionate,  primitive  characters. 

Since  I  mentioned  our  modern  actors,  it  is  essential  that 
I  should  say  a  few  words  about  the  authors  who  provided 
them  with  new  characters  and  gave  them  opportunity  of 
showing  the  diflferent  sides  of  their  talents. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  487 

I  should  have  written  about  them  in  the  first  place, 
especially  of  the  greatest  one,  who  electrified  the  whole 
country  with  his  acutely  painful  creations  —  Stanislaw 
Wyspianski,  poet,  artist,  and  dramatic  author.  His  plays 
are  entirely  original,  both  in  their  themes  and  their  con- 
struction —  very  often  symbolical.  After  having  written  a 
fe\v  mythological  plays  in  the  style  of  the  old  Greek  trag- 
edies, he  turned  to  national  subjects.  Though  full  of  ardent 
patriotism,  they  are  free  from  any  tendency  to  flatter  his 
country ;  on  the  contrary,  all  of  his  works  are  marked  with 
a  touch  of  pessimism,  born  from  the  grief  of  a  desperate 
heart  that  feels  intensely  the  wrongs  of  Poland.  The  most 
popular  of  his  dramas  is  entitled  "The  Wedding." 

Not  only  a  writer  but  an  accomplished  artist,  he  orna- 
mented many  of  our  churches  with  his  works.  His  frescos, 
and  especially  his  stained  windows,  are  of  unusual  beauty. 

He  died  last  year,  1907,  at  the  age  of  thirty-five,  and  was 
conveyed  to  his  grave  on  the  Wawel  ^  by  an  immense  multi- 
tude of  all  classes  of  people,  rich  and  poor,  nobles  and 
peasants. 

Next  to  him,  Lucian  Rydel,  another  poet  and  playwright, 
though  not  of  the  same  magnitude,  yet  highly  endowed, 
made  a  great  success  in  "The  Enchanted  Circle"  and  in 
"Jaselka,"  the  latter  in  the  style  of  old  mystery  plays. 

Of  a  different  stamp,  but  also  very  talented,  is  Madame 
Gabriela  Zapolska.  Her  plays  are  realistic,  and  most  of 
them  represent  scenes  of  Polish  life  under  Russian  des- 
potism. Some  of  them  treat  of  social  questions.  Her 
"  Malka  Schwarzenkopf, "  taken  from  the  life  of  the  poorest 
Jewish  classes,  has  achieved  the  greatest  popularity. 

^  The  Kings'  containing  the  graves  of  the  PoUsh  kings,  also  those  of 
Kosciuszko  and  Mickiewicz. 


CHAPTER  XLIX 

In  the  spring  of  1884,  after  a  few  weeks  in  the  Lyceum 
at  London  and  in  the  English  provinces,  I  played  in  Ireland, 
where  I  was  greeted  with  an  unusual  courtesy.  The  Lord 
Mayor's  carriage  took  us  from  the  station  to  the  hotel, 
and  his  private  secretary,  Mr.  Cox,  was  appointed  to  show 
us  the  beauties  of  the  city  and  the  surrounding  country 
places. 

We  owed  this  favor  to  our  friend,  Mr.  Justin  McCarthy, 
who  was  also  a  friend  of  the  mayor.  It  was  not  the  first 
nor  the  last  proof  of  Mr.  McCarthy's  kindness  to  us. 

Strange  to  say  that  such  an  innocent  thing  as  driving  in 
an  official  carriage  would  arouse  suspicion,  but  the  fact  was 
that  we  were  taken  for  political  agitators,  as  it  proved 
towards  the  end  of  my  engagement.  In  the  meantime, 
perfectly  ignorant  of  our  'dangerous"  character,  we  en- 
joyed the  beauties  of  the  city  and  its  surroundings. 

Our  "rainy''  days,  for  it  always  rains  in  Ireland,  were 
spent  in  the  open.  Always  accompanied  by  Mr.  Cox,  who 
arranged  excursions  to  the  enchanting  spots  in  the  country, 
we  passed  the  days  in  visiting  the  hills,  rocks,  meadows, 
and  lakes,  and  in  the  evenings  I  played  with  pleasure  before 
the  impulsive,  cheering  audiences,  for  they  did  cheer  as  only 
Irish  people  can  do.  At  the  performance  of  "Marie  Stuart" 
they  grew  almost  frantic,  and  every  sentence  against  Eliza- 
beth and  the  English  government  called  forth  vehement 
acclamations. 

After  the  last  performance  of  my  engagement  in  Dublin, 
the  demands  for  a  speech  were  so  insistent  that  I  was  obliged 

488 


THE  NEW  WORLD  489 

to  say  a  few  words  to  the  dear  public.  I  believe  I  made 
a  slight  allusion  to  their  sympathy  for  the  daughter  of  an 
oppressed  country,  but  it  was  said  only  in  the  way  of 
explaining  the  great  enthusiasm  I  was  received  with; 
it  was  a  smiling  and  a  modest  ''perhaps/'  rather  than  a 
statement,  and  I  saw  no  harm  in  it. 

When  I  was  ready  to  return  to  the  hotel,  I  looked  for 
my  husband,  and  seeing  he  was  very  busy  talking  to  Mr. 
Cox  and  Mr.  Redmond,  —  not  wishing  to  interrupt  their 
discourse,  —  I  left  the  theatre  with  my  maid.  Our  hotel  was 
only  at  a  short  distance  from  the  theatre,  and  I  thought  he 
would  prefer  to  walk. 

When  I  entered  the  brougham  with  my  maid,  I  saw  a  man 
climbing  quickly  on  the  box,  and  we  started  on  a  very  sharp 
trot  in  just  the  opposite  direction  from  our  hotel.  My  maid 
called  to  the  coachman  to  turn  back,  but  he  was  deaf  to  her 
entreaties,  and  proceeded  on  his  own  way  until  we  were  far 
away  on  a  country  road.  The  girl  grew  hysterical,  and  I  also 
was  very  much  frightened.  Dreadful  pictures  of  robbers, 
kidnapping,  shooting,  and  I  don't  know  what  other  hor- 
rors followed  each  other  in  my  imagination.  Suddenly  we 
stopped  short.  Now,  I  thought,  was  the  time  for  some 
catastrophe.  But  instead  of  that  the  brougham  turned 
back,  and  we  were  trotting  in  the  direction  of  the  city. 
After  a  fifteen  minutes'  drive  we  came  to  the  corner  of 
our  street,  and  stopped  again  for  a  moment  to  let  the 
man  on  the  box  jump  down  and  disappear  in  the  gloom 
of  the  night. 

My  husband,  who  was  very  anxious  about  me,  had  looked 
in  all  directions  for  our  brougham,  and  now,  exhausted  with 
running  about,  stood  before  the  hotel,  leaning  against  the 
pillar.  Mr.  Cox  and  Redmond  were  with  him.  When  he 
saw  the  brougham,  he  exclaimed,  "Here  she  is!"  and  I 
fairly  fell  into  his  arms  descending  from  my  treacherous 
conveyance. 


490  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

When  we  all  came  to  our  drawing-room  on  the  first  floor, 
I  learned  that  the  man  on  the  box  was  a  detective. 

Some  enthusiasts  wanted  to  honor  me  by  taking  the  horses 
out  of  my  carriage  and  putting  themselves  in  harness,  to 
bring  me  in  triumph  to  the  hotel.  This  project  being  over- 
heard by  the  same  detective,  he  was  bound  to  spoil  the 
fun  by  giving  me  a  half-hour's  drive.  ''But  why?"  I 
asked. 

''God  only  knows,"  was  the  answer. 

I  had  scarcely  time  to  take  off  my  hat  and  wraps  when 
a  gendarme  entered  the  room  without  knocking,  said  "Good 
evening,"  and  apparently  took  a  mental  note  of  the  people 
in  the  room,  for  he  looked  from  one  to  another  and  then  left 
the  room,  wishing  my  husband  and  myself  a  good  journey, 
for  we  had  to  leave  next  morning  by  the  boat. 

The  crowd  gathered  before  the  hotel  began  slowly  to 
disperse  during  my  involuntary  excursion  with  the  guardian 
angel  on  the  box,  but  some  people  still  remained  waiting  for 
me.  Seeing  me  coming,  they  brought  back  the  brass  band, 
and  I  was  cheered  again  and  called  for.  There  was  no  means 
of  escaping,  for  they  saw  me  and  knew  I  was  in  my  room. 
I  was  advised  to  come  to  the  window  and  thank  the  people 
for  their  truly  Irish  hospitality. 

What,  was  my  amazement  when  next  day  I  saw  the  same 
silly  gendarme  coming  on  the  boat  and  saying  that  he 
wanted  to  see  us  safely  off. 

We  could  not  thank  Mr.  Redmond  and  Mr.  Cox  sufficiently 
for  their  courtesies,  and  parted  from  them  with  the  feeling 
of  taking  leave  of  old  friends. 

We  knew  many  charming  people  in  Dublin.  One  who  has 
never  met  the  real  Irish  society  has  no  idea  what  fine  speci- 
mens of  true  gentlemen  and  ladies  are  among  them.  Irish 
beauty  and  wit  make  a  charming  combination.  There  is 
more  of  French  than  Anglo-Saxon  element  in  their  compo- 
sition, with  one  advantage  —  simplicity.     They  never  are 


THE  NEW  WORLD  491 

arrogant  either,  but  their  gentle  wit  is  a  powerful  weapon 
against  intruders. 

We  went  for  the  summer  months  of  1885  to  Zakopane, 
and  then  to  our  new  home  in  Cracow,  built  with  the  hope 
of  living  in  it  after  my  retirement  from  the  stage,  ih  two  or 
three  years. 

My  son  returned  from  Paris,  having  completed  his  studies, 
and  directly  became  engaged  to  his  cousin,  Felicie  Benda, 
my  half-brother's  daughter. 

In  September  we  all  four  sailed  for  America,  as  well  as 
my  two  maids,  and  a  little  mountaineer  boy  whom  we  trans- 
formed into  a  "tiger,''  or,  as  they  also  called  them,  "but- 
tons." His  occupation  on  the  steamer  was  to  take  care  of 
my  jew^el-case,  but  my  husband  had  often  to  dress  or  undress 
him,  for  he  did  not  know  how  to  manage  his  livery,  having 
worn  hitherto  only  a  mountaineer's  costume. 

He  was  very  tiny,  though  ten  years  old,  and  when  he  was 
seasick,  Mr.  Chlapowski  had  to  carry  him  on  deck.  Finally 
he  engaged  a  nurse  to  take  special  care  of  him. 

I  played  the  season  of  1885-1886  under  Daniel  Frohman's 
management,  and  Mr.  Vanderfelt,  a  very  fine  English  actor, 
was  my  leading  man.  Mary  Shaw  was  also  engaged,  and 
Charles  Vandenhoff  for  heavy  lead. 

I  added  ''Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona"  and  ''Cymbeline" 
to  my  repertoire;  also  a  French  play  of  short  existence, 
called  ''Prince  Zillah, "  was  given  occasionally. 

My  son  obtained  a  position  as  a  civil  engineer  directly 
after  we  arrived  in  New  York  through  the  intercession  of 
our  dear  friend,  Mr.  Prescott  Hall  Butler,  and  departed  im- 
mediately to  Omaha,  to  take  the  place  offered  him  by  the 
bridge-builder,  Mr.  Morisson. 

In  December,  1885,  during  my  engagement  in  New  York, 
the  affianced  couple  were  married. 

Nothing  worthy  of  special  comment  happened  during  the 
remaining  season.   Mr.  Frohman  was  very  fond  of  "  Adrienne 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


Lecouvreur."  He  wanted  to  give  it  everywhere,  and  as  oftea  | 

na      it      n.no      n^ooIMn     fr.      An      on      ill  it  tin  ill-       Iniiii-InfT      tko      ■mr.r.ir^tc,  ' 


)  it  was  possible  to  do  so  without  injuring  the  receipts 
of  the  box-office.     He  went  so  far  with  his  hobby  that  even 
this  consideration,  so  essential  to  the  managers,  was  some- 
times disregarded. 
When  we  were  going  to  St.  Paul,  I  advised  him  not  to 


E.  H.  Vandebfelt. 

give  "Adrienne,"but  play  a  Shakespearian  repertoire  of  three 
plays  and  "Marie  Stuart,"  I  had  been  in  St.  Paul  before 
and  knew  the  taste  of  the  audiences,  who  disliked  Scribe's 
play.  I  suppose  not  because  it  was  French,  for  "Camille" 
was  their  favorite,  but  because  no  one  liked  to  go  to  a  play 
with  an  unpronounceable  name,  —  at  least  to  the  majority 
of  people. 


I 


THE  NEW  WORLD  493 

A  young  lady  once  said  to  me:  ''I  don't  like  those  titles 
I  cannot  read  fluently.  If  any  one  would  ask  me  in  what 
part  I  saw  you,  I  would  be  obliged  to  blush  and  stammer, 
'  Oh,  in  that  French  actress,  you  know.'  It  is  not  com- 
fortable at  all." 

Mr.  Frohman  consented  to  have  Shakespeare,  but  wanted 
absolutely  one  performance  of  ''Adrienne." 

There  was  a  good  sale  for  every  play  but  "Adrienne,"  and 
on  the  night  of  the  performance  I  was  chilled  through  when 
I  saw  the  immense  gap  here  and  there  studded  with  a  human 
face.  Not  one  of  the  boxes  was  taken,  but  there  was  a  pale, 
smiling  face  looking  at  me  from  the  stage-box,  as  much  as  to 
say,  ''Never  mind,  I  am  contented." 

Needless  to  say,  it  was  Daniel  Frohman,  who,  like  the 
celebrated  king  of  Bavaria,  had  the  performance  all  to  him- 
self. 

Of  all  the  managers  I  met  in  America,  Mr.  Frohman  was 
certainly  the  kindest  and  most  considerate  one. 

After  we  had  our  bungalow  in  California,  we  spent  most 
of  the  summers  in  San  lago  Canon,  and  that  was  the  reason 
I  did  not  return  to  England  any  more.     - 

Almost  every  two  years  we  went  to  Europe,  and  usually 
spent  a  few  months  in  Poland.  I  have  written  already 
about  those  visits,  and  will  not  dwell  on  them  any  more,  but 
pass  to  my  engagement  with  Edwin  Booth. 

My  American  tours  were  very  exhausting,  and  my  husband 
did  not  wish  me  to  play  during  the  spring  London  season 
after  thirty  or  thirty-five  weeks  of  mental  and  physical 
exertion. 

In  1886  Mr.  Chlapowski  took  again  the  management  in 
his  hands,  with  Fred  Stinson  as  business  manager,  and  we 
produced  ''Les  Chouans,"  a  play  based  on  Balzac's  novel 
of  the  same  title,  and  written  by  Monsieur  Pierre  Berton, 
a  very  talented  French  actor  and  author.     The  play,  how- 


MEMORIBS  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


THE  NEW  WORLD  495 

ever,  required  such  great  production  and  so  many  people 

that  we  could  not  keep  it  long  on  the  bills.     The  bulk  of 

scenery  and  the  number  of 

extra  men  and  women  were 

very  hard   to  handle   and 

carry  about    the    country. 

Besides  that,  we   had  our 

Shakespearian  productions, 

requiring  not  only  scenery 

but  furniture  and  a  great 

number  of  costumes. 

Had  we  played  but  this 
one  play,  we  could  have 
managed  to  pull  it  through 
with  fine  results,  but  I 
would  not  give  up  Shake- 
speare, and  preferred  to  lose 
"Les  Chouans." 

I  introduced  "Measure 
for  Measure"  to  the  public. 
It  had  not  been  given  since 
Adelaide     Neilson's    time. 

My    company  that   season  p*.^p*i^5a™„. 

was    very    numerous     and  Robbet  Tabor. 

fine:    there    was    Maurice 

Barrymore,  Mary  Shaw,  Charles  Vandenhoff,  who  made 
a  hit  in  "Les  Chouans";  William  Owen,  Ian  Robertson, 
brother  of  Forbes,  stage-manager,  and  a  very  good  actor; 
the  dainty  Hamilton  Bell,  Mrs.  Grace  Henderson,  Mr. 
Carhart,  etc. ;  and  Robert  Tabor,  who  was  then  a  begin- 
ner, but  who  filled  his  parts  with  care  and  intelligence.  In 
recent  years  he  made  a  success  of  Macduff  in  London, 
but  soon  afterwards  death  put  an  end  to  his  theatrical 
career. 

When  Mr.  Lawrence  Barrett  was  Booth's  manager,  I 


496  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

received  a  letter  from  him,  oflfering  me  an  engagement  as 
co-star  with  Edwin  Booth.  In  reply  to  Mr.  Barrett,  I 
informed  him  that  I  was  under  contract,  but  willing  to  accept 
his  proposal,  provided  the  firm  of  Nixon  and  Zimmerman 
would  release  me. 

I  was  released,  to  my  great  satisfaction,  at  the  cost  of 
$400  a  week,  which  came  off  my  salary  to  the  firm  of  N.  and  Z. 
I  much  preferred  to  be  with  Edwin  Booth  than  to  play  with 
insufficient  support  under  a  commercial  management,  and 
I  did  not  think  I  made  a  sacrifice  in  giving  up  a  few  dollars 
for  my  artistic  comfort. 

I  played  with  him  Ophelia,  Lady  Macbeth,  Portia,  and 
Julie  in  '^Richelieu."  Besides  these,  we  had  two  double 
bills;  with  Booth's  ''Fool's  Revenge"  I  played  ''Dona 
Diana";  with  his  "Taming  of  the  Shrew"  I  played  "Marie 
Stuart."  Those  double  plays  were  given  usually  on  Satur- 
day evenings  or  Wednesdays.  The  same  was  the  case  with 
the  other  double  bill,  —  that  of  "Don  C^sar  de  Bazan" 
and  "Marie  Stuart"  reduced  to  four  acts. 

The  support  was  very  fine,  —  Otis  Skinner,  Charles  Han- 
ford,  Ben  Rodgers,  Owen  Fawcett,  Miss  Annie  Proctor, 
Lawrence  Ilanley,  and  other  talented  young  men  and 
women. 

My  season  with  Edwin  Booth  was  delightful.  I  found 
him  one  of  the  kindest  and  pleasantest  men  of  the  profes- 
sion. He  also  possessed  what  I  considered  a  great  quality 
—  simplicity  of  manner. 

Some  stars  have  the  idea  that  it  is  necessary  to  be  haughty 
and  inaccessible  with  the  members  of  their  companies. 
They  put  on  airs,  they  like  to  crush  the  fellow-actor  and 
pose  as  a  kind  of  divinity  before  them.  They  even  some- 
times are  most  rude  and  insulting.  I  have  heard  of  some 
who  call  women  names,  and  behave  altogether  as  slave- 
drivers. 

Those  may  have  fame  and  money,  but  they  are  not  great, 


i 


Laivbgnce  BaRB«1T. 


498  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

because  true  greatness  means  strength ;  and  the  strong  like 
to  fight  only  the  equal,  but  do  not  take  pleasure  in  abusing 
the  weak. 

That  some  managers  are  rude  is  another  matter.  No  one 
looks  for  fine  manners  in  them;  all  we  expect  is  to  find 
them  good  business  men.  But  an  actor  who  deals  with 
subtilties  of  human  nature  is  supposed  to  possess  nobility 
of  soul  and  refinement. 

If  they  act  upon  the  stage  as  though  they  possessed  those 
qualities,  it  would  do  them  good  to  practise  them  in  real 
life.  In  Edwin  Booth  those  qualities  were  inborn,  and  the 
result  was  that  every  one  loved  him,  and  all  the  remarks  he 
made  to  the  actors  of  his  company  were  received  as  favors 
rather  than  reproofs. 

I  made  a  few  notes  on  our  life  in  the  private  car,  which 
may  throw  more  light  upon  the  intimate  character  of  that 
wonderful  man  and  artist. 

Milwaukee,  April  22,  Tuesday  Night. 

We  played  "Hamlet"  last  night. 

Ralph  and  F61icie  have  gone  —  at  1.40  p.m.  We  did  not  cry 
at  parting  —  we  hope  to  meet  again  in  Poland.  Only  when  the 
train  disappeared  from  the  station  the  tears  came  to  my  eyes. 
I  slept  the  whole  afternoon  in  order  to  calm  myself. 

The  audiences  were  cold  and  unsympathetic. 

After  the  performance  we  went  to  the  car  and  had  supper.  Edwin 
Booth  was  delightful.  He  told  us  some  of  his  early  experiences: 
how  in  Honolulu  he  was  compelled  to  paste  his  own  bills  on  the 
comers  of  the  streets,  and  was  surprised  at  that  work  by  a  fellow 
from  New  York  who  happened  to  be  there  just  at  the  time.  This 
happened,  of  course,  some  years  ago,  about  thirty-five,  I  think. 

I  went  to  bed  directly  after  supper,  but  I  heard  him  talking  to 
the  ladies  of  the  company  for  more  than  an  hour.  They  all 
shrieked  with  laughter. 

Cedar  RAPms,  April  23. 

We  arrived  about  1  p.m.,  and  after  breakfast  Charles  and  I  went 
for  a  walk.     It  was  a  bright  morning,  and  we  felt  like  students  in 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS    ISABELLA    IN    "MEASURE 

FOR    MEASURE" 


THE  NEW  WORLD  499 

vacation  time.  Cedar  Rapids  is  a  regular  country  town,  quiet  and 
uninteresting. 

At  dinner  Edwin  Booth  told  more  anecdotes  about  himself. 
He  is  a  good  talker;  in  fact,  once  started,  he  is  a  great  talker. 

We  sat  at  the  table  in  the  following  order :  — 

Edwin  Booth  at  the  head  of  the  table,  then  I  on  his  right, 
opposite  Mr.  Chase,  our  business  manager,  and  Mr.  Bromley,  the 
treasurer.  My  husband  sits  next  to  me.  Edwin  Booth  has  no 
vis-dr-vis  but  a  mirror,  so  that  he  is  not  obliged  to  look  at  any  one 
but  himself.  But  this  has  not  been  arranged  with  premeditation, 
I  am  sure. 

I  am  still  reading  Wagner's  and  Liszt's  letters,  and  the  sentence, 
"Do  something  new,  new,  and  once  more  new"  comes  very  often 
to  my  mind,  and  I  long  for  some  new  parts  again. 

E.  B.  is  just  taking  his  nap,  and  I  can  hear  in  my  stateroom  his 
regular  and  sonorous  breathing,  commonly  called  "snoring."  I 
am  writing,  and  thinking  how  "treacherous  all  earthly  blessings 
are."  But  I  do  not  want  to  be  despondent  because  some  ideal 
persons  will  snore. 

The  day  is  beautiful,  the  birds  are  singing,  and  the  chickens 
make  quite  a  pretty  picture  on  the  fence. 

Sophie  just  told  me  in  secret  that  —  but  secrets  are  secrets, 
and  I  am  not  going  to  gossip.  "This is  spring,  my  child,"  I  said, 
"and  Nature  is  responsible  for  it." 

"Oh  !  oh  !  oh  !"  I  exclaimed,  and  put  my  handkerchief  to  my 
nose  when  we  passed  the  threshold  of  the  Cedar  Rapids  temple  of 
art.  "  I  wonder  if  there  is  in  Hades  a  comer  .which  smells  as  badly 
as  that!"  We  learned  later  that  a  tannery  was  just  back  of 
the  theatre.  We  burned  pastilles,  Chinese  sticks,  paper,  and 
at  last  cotton  in  order  to  drown  that  terrible  odor.  I  sprinkled 
the  stage  with  eau  de  cologne,  and  smelt  my  bottle  during  the 
whole  act  in  fear  of  fainting,  but  in  the  court  scene  I  felt  positively 
sick. 

How  I  wished  some  of  the  stage-struck  girls  could  have  been 
here  last  night,  that  I  could  give  them  the  pleasure  of  smelling  the 
stage,  which,  in  their  imagination,  is  a  heavenly  ground  strewn  with 
roses.  If  any  of  them  could  see  the  dressing-room  poor  Portia 
occupied,  they  would  shrink  from  this  deceitful  Paradise,  go  home, 
and  thank  Heaven  and  their  good  parents  for  a  comfortable  home. 
Of  course,  for  those  who  have  no  home  it  may  be  better  than  to 
live  in  the  open  —  just  for  a  change  of  air.  "Anything  for 
change,"  some  Frenchman  said.    Well,  it  is  quite  a  French  idea^ 


500  MEMORIES   AND  IMPRESSIONS 

superficial,  as  many  French  things  are.     I  wish  I  could  get  him  at 
the  Cedar  Rapids  Theatre. 

Last  night  we  had  a  very  interesting  conversation  about  London 
and  Henry  Irving,  and  are  both  agreed  that  Irving  is  a  "great  man." 
"Not  a  great  actor  —  but  a  great  man,"  said  EMwin  Booth.  "IDs 
knowledge  of  human  nature  —  and  his  fibs  are  equally  great." 

We  returned  from  our  walk.  I  tried  to  induce  E.  B.  to  go  out, 
but  he  would  not.  In  fact,  he  never  goes  out.  All  exercise  tires 
him  and  makes  him  unfit  for  the  evening  work.  I  noticed  that  his 
left  arm  is  a  little  stiff.  He  showed  us  where  it  was  broken.  He 
broke  it  in  falling  from  a  dog-cart,  and  it  never  has  been  properly 
mended. 

April  24. 

Davenport  is  another  uninteresting  town,  and  dirty.  We  met 
some  of  the  members  of  our  company  walking.  Oh  !  the  treacher- 
ous spring ! 

Peoria  is  another  not  highly  interesting  city.  We  took  our 
usual  walk,  strolling  about  and  stopping  before  the  shops  and 
posters  of  Madame  Janauschek.  What  a  strong,  expressive  face, 
and  what  genius  !     I  wish  I  possessed  half  of  her  powers. 

At  dinner,  or  rather  after  dinner,  E.  B.  told  us  many  witty 
things  —  which  also  I  do  not  recollect.  I  stopped  writing  my  diary 
for  a  few  days  in  order  to  make  sketches.  The  consequence  is  that 
I  made  a  few  very  bad  sketches  and  forgot  many  nice  things  I 
heard.  However,  I  remember  that  at  supper  we  spoke  of  Shake- 
speare, and  then  I  had  the  opportunity  of  learning  how  deeply 
and  thoroughly  Booth  studies  his  parts.  He  says  he  has  no  ear 
for  music,  but  any  mistake  in  blank  verse  jars  upon  him  as  a  false 
note.  Of  course  he  puts  a  great  stress  upon  pronunciation,  em- 
phasis, and  inflections  of  the  voice,  and  he  kindly  pointed  out  some 
of  my  mistakes  in  pronunciation,  which  I  gratefully  accepted,  and 
tried  to  correct  myself  at  the  next  performance.  They  were  all  con- 
cerning Lady  Macbeth.  Then  he  said  that  at  first  he  did  not  like 
Portia's  putting  her  hand  on  Shylock's  arm  in  the  "Mercy"  speech; 
but  after  a  thought,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  well  con- 
ceived and  a  beautiful  bit  of  business.  He  also  said  that  my  deliv- 
ery of  the  "  Mercy  "  speech  was  "admirable."  I  felt  highly  flattered, 
and  happy,  of  course.  It  seems  that  the  reason  why  he  has  not 
studied  any  new  parts  for  a  long  time  is  that,  whenever  he  put  a 
new  play  on  the  bills,  the  audience  kept  away  from  it  and  were 
asking  for  "Hamlet,"  "Richelieu,"  etc. — plays  which  he  has 
played  for  years.     It  is  a  very  strange  thing  that  people  should  be 


THE  NEW  WORLD  501 

so  conservative  in  their  taste,  but  it  is  certainly  the  case  with  Ameri- 
cans, and  the  older  the  play  the  better  "the  draw." 

He  played  "Richard  III,"  studied  "King  John,"  played  Cardinal 
Wolsey  in  "Henry  VIH,"  and  some  other  parts,  but  without 
success;  not  because  they  were  criticised,  but  because  the  people 
liked  the  old  favorites  better. 

"Merchant  of  Venice"  was  the  play  that  night. 

Decatur,  April  26. 

"Hamlet"  on  the  bills. 

We  had  wretched  weather.  Everything  looked  gloomy  and 
dirty,  and  the  view  from  the  car  was  sad  enough  to  render  melan- 
choly even  the  poor  pigs  which  were  strolling  slowly  in  the  cool 
mud,  grunting  and  sulky. 

E.  B.  played  Hamlet  beautifully.  I  watched  behind  the  scenes, 
and  was  deeply  impressed.  This  put  me  on  my  mettle,  and  I  pliayed 
Ophelia  better  than  usual.  The  pale  face  of  Mrs.  E.,  who  recently 
lost  her  father,  followed  me  through  the  play.  A  strange  tender- 
ness took  possession  of  me  when  I  sang,  "White  his  shroud  as  a 
mountain  snow, "  and  tears  came  to  my  eyes  because  I  felt}  her 
watching  me  from  her  box.  Never  have  I  understood  the  words  of 
Liszt  better.  "We  must  become  wise  by  means  of  feeling.  Rea- 
son tells  us  *  so  it  is'  only  after  feeling  has  told  us  *so  it  must  be.'" 

After  the  performance  we  were  chatting  as  usual  about  differ- 
ent matters,  and  again  the  conversation  turned  on  the  "shop." 

E.  B.  says  that  Charlotte  Cushman  was  really  beautiful  when  she 
was  old.  Her  face  softened  with  age,  and  the  pain  she  suffered 
gave  her  face  an  exalted  look  which  she  never  had  in  her  youth. 
She  used  to  copy  all  Macready's  pecuUarities,  even  to  his  voice; 
having  played  with  him  for  years,  she  involuntarily  imitated  him. 
Forrest  used  to  call  her  Macready  in  petticoats,  and  she  called  him 
a  brute,  and  they  disliked  each  other  profoundly. 

The  next  day  was  Sunday.  The  birds  woke  me  up.  It  was  a 
glorious  morning.  I  dressed  and  went  out  with  Charles.  There 
was  something  solemn  and  yet  sweet  and  touching  in  this  awaken- 
ing of  a  spring  day.  We  felt  so  happy  that  we  wanted  to  embrace 
each  other  in  the  street. 

The  air  had  the  same  fragrance  as  it  has  in  Poland.  The  day 
before  last  we  received  some  letters  from  the  old  country  and  from 
my  children. 

Our  hearts  were  full  of  home,  and  as  we  walked  slowly  side  by 
side  we  were  exchanging  various  recollections  and  making  plans 


502  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


THE  NEW  WORLD  603 

•concerning  our  journey  to  Europe,  or  rather  to  Poland.  I  yearned 
for  this  journey  with  the  eagerness  of  a  child  for  the  sight  of  his 
mother  —  and  I  dreaded  it  also.  Will  my  friends  be  the  same  to 
me  as  before?  I  have  not  written  to  any  one  there  since  I  left 
the  country,  —  that  is  five  years  ago,  —  and  they  have  a  right  to 
be  angry  with  me. 

Shall  I  play  in  Warsaw,  and  how  will  the  audiences  like  me  now, 
after  all  these  years  ?  When  I  last  appeared  before  them,  I  was 
still  called  "the  bewitching  Madame  Helena, "  and  now  I  come  back 
the  grandmother  of  a  grandson  three  years  old. 

I  know  I  have  not  lost  any  of  my  powers,  and  my  talent  is  now 
in  its  full  vigor,  but  I  fear  the  people  will  look  for  wrinkles  on  my 
face  and,  what  is  worse,  they  will  find  some.  The  wrinkles  on  a 
woman's  face  are  a  marvellous  cooling  agent  in  the  stream  of 
enthusiasm,  although  those  on  my  own  do  not  show  on  the  stage, 
being  not  very  numerous  or  very  deep;  yet  I  am  afraid  of  the 
critical  eyes  of  our  countrymen.  But,  never  mind !  If  I  fail,  I 
will  kiss  my  little  grandson,  and  find  consolation  in  his  blue  eyes. 
My  dear  baby,  he  will  in  a  few  days  be  on  the  ocean  with  my  older 
babies,  his  parents.  May  God  bless  you,  my  dear  Uttle  crowd, 
and  grant  you  a  happy  and  quiet  passage. 

When  we  came  home  on  Simday,  we  found  E.  B  smoking  his 
cigar  in  the  observation-room.  He  opened  the  door  for  us,  and 
said,  "Tickets,"  imitating  the  conductor.  Then,  of  course,  we 
all  laughed  and  chatted  until  dinner-time.  After  dinner  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  E.  took  us  for  a  drive  and  then  to  their  house. 

A  country  house  is  always  mpre  or  less  attractive  to  me,  and 
I  spent  my  afternoon  in  the  atmosphere  of  goodness,  hospitaUty, 
and  that  Uttle  provincial  nalvetS  which  is  so  delightful  in  small 
doses,  and  then  the  children  were  so  pretty.  What  did  we  talk 
about?    Everything  and  nothing. 

It  was  nearly  eight  o'clock  when  we  came  home,  I  mean  to  the 
private  car.  The  name  of  the  car  is  "Hazlemere."  E.  B.  did  not 
go  out  at  all.  I  am  afraid  his  health  is  failing  rapidly.  Yet  he 
was  in  a  splendid  mood,  and  we  sat  until  two  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
talking.  How  many  things  he  remembers!  It  would  be  impos- 
sible to  put  down  all  I  heard  that  evening;  but  I  remember  that 
we  talked  of  spiritualism,  art,  and  travel,  and  also  a  little  about 
actors.  When  I  say  we  talked,  it  means  that  he  talked,  and  my 
husband  a  little;  I  only  listened  and  marvelled  at  E.  B.'s  narra- 
tive gift,  his  impressionability,  brightness,  and  intelligence,  of  which 
those  who  do  not  know  him  cannot  have  any  idea.     Very  often 


504  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  heard  people  say:  "He  is  getting  old  —  he  never  talks;"  or, 
"Is  he  interesting  in  private?  Is  his  conversation  original?"  etc. 
Those  are  the  individuals  who  do  not  know  him  suflBiciently.  His 
chief  fault  is  indolence,  and  also  that  which  his  father  described 
as  a  "bump  of  I-don't-care-a-damnativeness."  He  does  not  like 
to  do  anything  for  show  either,  and  the  result  is  that  when  he  is 
with  people  it  is  only  when  he  has  confidence  in  them  that  he  likes 
to  open  the  valve  of  his  eloquence,  and  then  he  is  quite  fascinating. 

Bloomington,  April  28. 

"Macbeth." 

Another  queer  little  place.  Nothing  happened  through  the 
day.  We  took  our  usual  walk.  I  brought  down  flowers  to  deco- 
rate the  dining  table;  after  dinner  I  wrote  letters  and  at  seven 
o'clock  we  went  to  the  theatre. 

What  a  queer  little  stage ! 

My  dressing-room  was  painted  with  vermilion  red,  which  made 
one's  eyes  smart. 

Everything  was  trivial  and  common  about  the  place,  even  to 
the  inscriptions  on  the  manager's  notice,  which  usually  is  put  in 
the  dressing-rooms.  On  those  notices  there  were  remarks  in  pen- 
cil, apparently  written  by  some  disappointed  actors,  and  I  am 
sorry  to  say  they  were  all  of  a  startling  vulgarity. 

Otis  Skinner  wore  his  natural  legs  without  fleshings  in  Macduff 
last  night.  They  were  painted  with  red,  brown,  and  magenta  — 
imitating  the  various  cuts  and  wounds  MacduJff  is  supposed  to 
have  received  in  the  battle.     It  was  effective. 

Indianapolis,  April  29. 

We  arrived  at  2  o'clock  p.m. 

We  played  "Macbeth,  "  again,  and  this  time  Vroom  and  Hanley 
joined  Otis  Skinner  in  the  bare-leg  show.  Skinner  and  Vroom's 
limbs  were  painted,  and  they  looked  natural,  but  Hanley's  white 
and  plump  columns  looked  out  of  place.  It  was  a  cool  night,  and 
they  were  shivering,  but  proud  of  their  appearance.  The  next 
morning  a  notice  appeared  in  the  paper:  "Macduff,  Malcolm,  and 
Ross  were  more  realistic  than  effective.  A  little  Iciss  meat  and  a 
little  more  dressing  would  have  been  not  only  more  artistic  but 
more  agreeable." 

ViNCENNES,  April  30. 
We   played    "Hamlet."    The  managers  in  small  towns  seem 
to  have  a  mania  for  notices.    This  time  it  was  placed  on  the  tin 


Photograph  bv  Sarony. 


506  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

trough  of  a  reflector  inside  of  the  footlights.  When  E.  B.  left  the 
stage  after  the  first  scene,  he  said  to  me,  'Must  read  that  notice  in 
the  footlights."  Otis  Skinner,  who  played  Laertes,  and  myself 
were  just  going  on,  and  I  nearly  laughed  aloud  when  I  read  the 
notice,  " Do  not  spit  in  this  trough."  It  was  repeated  three  times, 
on  each  end  and  in  the  middle  of  the  footlights.  Of  course  it 
directly  became  the  joke  of  the  evening,  and  when  Ben  Rogers 
(Polonius)  finished  his  advice  to  Laertes,  he  added  in  a  low  tone 
of  voice,  "and  do  not  spit  in  this  trough." 

What  a  nice  old  man  Ben  is.  I  talce  real  pleasure  in  talking 
to  him  behind  the  scenes.  He  is  always  cheerful,  contented.  I 
never  heard  him  grumbling  or  complaining,  and  even  when  the 
company  has  to  get  up  at  5  a.m.  to  catch  the  train,  and  when 
everybody  looks  lined  and  wornout  in  the  evening,  he  is  full  of 
spirit  and  jolly  as  ever.  I  asked  him  once  if  the  travelling  did  not 
tire  him.  "What?"  exclaimed  he,  "a  young  man  like  me  tired? 
Never !"  He  is  ovfer  seventy  years  old.  He  is  not  only  a  nice 
man,  but  also  a  very  excellent  comedian.  His  father  in  "Garrick," 
his  Gobbo,  Polonius,  and  Dogberry  are  perfect  types. 

At  supper  E.  B.  was  not  feeling  well,  yet  he  was  very  inter- 
esting. He  told  us  that  once  his  brother  Junius,  who  was  a  mana- 
ger at  that  time,  wanted  him  to  play  a  part  which  was  supposed  to 
have  been  written  especially  to  suit  all  his  talents,  and  in  which  he 
had  to  play  the  fiddle,  sing  and  dance.  It  seems,  however,  that 
the  musical  and  terpsichorean  capability  of  our  tragedian  did  not 
inspire  him  with  sufficient  confidence  to  produce  them  before  the 
public.  Therefore  fiddle,  song,  and  dance  were  cast  out  of  the  part. 
He  said  also  that  most  of  the  time  he  played  comedy  in  his  early  days. 

We  had  a  special  train,  and  the  ladies  were  invited  to  the  car. 
After  supper  E.  B.  went  to  the  observation-room  to  smoke  his  cigar. 
There  he  found  the  ladies  and  Mr.  Smith,  who,  being  the  husband 
of  Mrs.  Smith,  enjoys  also  the  privilege  of  being  invited  to  the  car. 
Otis  Skinner  and  Ben  Rogers  —  one  because  he  is  a  leading  man, 
and  the  other  because  of  his  age  —  are  also  invited  usually. 

The  train  was  rattling  along,  making  a  dreadful  noise.  We 
chattered  away  about  last  night's  performance,  about  the  flowers 
Miss  Proctor  had  gathered  in  the  fields,  dress,  and  other  important 
matters,  and  E.  B.  was  talking  with  Charles.  I  could  not  hear 
what  he  was  sajdng,  but  I  followed  the  movement  of  his  hands, 
and  nearly  understood  what  he  said.  His  hands  and  his  eyes  are 
remarkably  expressive.  He  was  describing  some  Indians  and  the 
way  they  shoot,  and  I  could  almost  see  the  arrows  fly  in  the  air  and 


THE  NEW  WORLD  507 

the  savage  faces  of  the  Indians.  When  the  noise  was  less  terrible, 
I  heard  him  giving  a  very  graphic  description  of  his  visit  to  the 
Mammoth  Cave  in  Kentucky.  He  never  says  too  much  or  too 
little,  and  that's  what  makes  everything  he  says  so  interesting. 
I  think  that  this  is  characteristic,  even  in  his  acting;  that  he  al- 
ways finds  a  right  measure;  even  when  situations  might  tempt 
one  to  exaggerate  he  very  seldom  oversteps  the  limits.  There  may 
be  made  an  exception  in  one  or  two  instances  in"  Richelieu/'  but 
in  Shakespeare — never.  He  gives  rather  too  little  than  too  much 
sometimes,  but  for  that  only  the  state  of  his  health  is  responsible. 
He  often  feels  tired  and  ill.  I  heard  him  saying  after  some  scenes, 
''I  wish  I  had  all  my  strength  and  vigor  to  play  this  as  I  ought  to 
play  it." 

Louisville,  May  L 
We  left  the  car  and  stopped  at  the  hotel  that  night. 
When  I  came  to  the  theatre,  I  found  my  dressing-room  beauti- 
fully decorated  with  branches  and  flowers.  A  mysterious-looking 
red  electric  Ught  shone  through  them  on  the  table,  and  the  walls 
were  overhung  with  wild  flowers  and  ivy.  This  was  done  on  the 
occasion  of  the  first  day  of  May  and  at  Miss  Proctor's  suggestion. 
She  and  four  or  five  young  people  went  to  the  woods  and  brought 
almost  a  car  load  of  flowers  and  other  plants,  and  they  decorated 
E.  B.'s  and  my  room.  Miss  Proctor  is  full  of  pretty  conceits  and 
she  loves  flowers  passionately.  I  used  to  give  her  flowers  and 
wondered  very  often  at  the  length  of  time  she  kept  them  fresh. 
It  is  the  way  she  handles  them  that  makes  them  live,  I  think. 

We  played  "  Macbeth,"  and  I  consulted  Booth  about  the  cuts 
we  intended  to  make.  In  the  banquet  scene,  my  speech  beginning 
with  the  words,  "Oh,  proper  stuff!  "  seemed  to  us  too  long,  and 
we  agreed  that  it  was  far  better  to  shorten  it.  It  goes  now  as 
follows:  — 


"  Oh,  proper  stuff. 

This  is  the  very  painting  of  thy  fear  — 
Shame  itself  —  why  do  you  make  such  faces  ? 
When  all's  done  you  look  but  on  a  stool." 

Also  m  the  preceding  speech:  — 

"Sit,  worthy  lords. 

My  lord  is  often  thus  and  has  been 
From  his  youth.    Feed  and  regard  him  not." 


608  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

May  3. 

"Hamlet,"  mating;    "Merchant  of  Venice"  at  night. 

The  performance  of  "Merchant  of  Venice"  lasted  until  mid- 
night. I  thought  that  half  of  the  audiences  would  go  out,  but 
they  stayed  until  the  last  moment.  When  we  came  home  it  was 
nearly  1  a.m. 

May  4,  Sunday,  on  the  road. 

We  have  changed  the  car,  and  this  one  is  called  "Newport." 
It  is  not  as  pretty  or  comfortable  as  "  Hazlemere  "  and  not  as  clean, 
being  an  old  car.  We  spent  the  whole  day  sitting  in  the  observa- 
tion-room —  talking  or  reading.  When  it  grew  dark,  I  sat  on  the 
platform. 

Mr.  Booth  looked  pale  and  tired.  We  knew  he  was  not  well. 
He  tried  to  read  by  the  dim  light  of  the  car  lamps.  I  went  to  our 
room,  brought  two  candles,  Charles  carried  the  footstool,  and  we 
placed  the  candles  on  it  and  put  the  whole  on  the  sofa  at  Booth's 
elbow.  He  turned  to  us  with  ah  angeUc  smile,  and  said,  "How 
good  you  both  are! "  in  a  tone  of  voice  which  might  have  been  inter- 
preted as  an  expression  of  surprise. 

After  this  he  resumed  his  reading,  and  I  went  back  on  the  plat- 
form to  spin  the  thread  of  thoughts  which  were  all  flying  towards 
the  Atlantic  Ocean,  where  my  Uttle  crowd  were  seeking  their  way  to 
Poland,  and  where  my  fancy  preceded  them. 

How  many  times  in  the  past  did  I  sit,  on  such  a  cool  evening, 
dreaming  only  of  fame!  How  different  my  dreams  are  now. 
I  would  I  had  no  fame,  but  a  home  full  of  loving  creatures.  The 
long  winter  evenings  of  my  youth  come  to  ray  mind,  with  their 
indescribable  charm,  when  our  mother  sat  at  the  table  with  her 
work  and  we  sat  around,  one  of  us  reading  aloud  and  the  rest 
busy  with  drawing  or  sewing.  How  far  these  evenings  are  from 
me  now!  Will  they  ever  be  repeated  in  my  life?  Shall  I  ever  be 
free  from  care  and  this  absorbing  work?    Perhaps. 

Dayton,  May  5.     "Merchant." 

I  spent  the  day  reading  in  my  room. 

We  played  "  Merchant  of  Venice, "  and  after  the  play,  at  supper, 
we  spoke  about  trees.  I  said  that  in  Los  Angeles  there  are  two 
date  palms  standing  together,  a  male  and  a  female.  They  are  both 
very  tall,  but  the  male  is  a  great  deal  taller  than  the  other,  and 
they  look  like  a  pair  of  lovers.  The  smaller  one  is  almost  clinging 
to  the  other  as  with  loving  affection.  People  seem  to  have  respect 
for  them,  for,  in  spite  of  a  rage  for  building  and  cutting  all  the  trees 


THE  NEW  WORLD  509 

around,  they  left  this  pair  untouched.  Mr.  Booth  said:  "I  think 
the  trees  have  feeling.  I  do  not  know  what  reHgion  I  have,  but  I 
believe  that  the  trees  love  us  when  we  treat  them  kindly.  Why 
should  we  have  so  much  affection  for  them,  if  they  do  not  recipro- 
cate it  in  some  unfelt  and  unseen  way?  I  planted  once  a  grove  of 
trees  on  my  grounds.  I  sold  the  place  long  ago,  but  I  never  go 
to  New  York  or  back  without  stepping  on  the  platform  to  look  at 
them.    They  are  as  dear  to  me  as  children.*' 

Zanesville,  May  6. 

We  arrived  here  at  3  p.m. 

I  stayed  in  bed  imtil  1  p.m.  I  find  that  the  most  sensible  thing 
is  to  lie  down  when  we  are  not  forced  to  get  up.  At  least  I  could 
read  at  my  leisure. 

We  played  "RicheUeu." 

During  the  performance  we  had  some  amusement.  A  young 
man  in  our  company  who  plays  Frangois  has  been  born  and  brought 
up  in  this  town.  Previous  to  our  coming,  the  editor  of  the  local 
paper  received  a  notice  disparaging  the  company,  but  praising  him 
highly.  This  notice  was  repeated  in  the  paper.  It  is  easily  guessed 
who  sent  it. 

The  audience  was  thus  prepared  to  see  this  wonder.    In  the 

first  act,  while  Richelieu  is  on  the  stage,  Mr. did  not  wait  for 

his  cue,  but  anticipated  E.  B.'s  words,  and  walked  on  with  quick 
steps  and  dignified  demeanor,  —  a  regular  "star  entrance."  The 
friends  in  front  gave  him  a  round  of  applause  which  made  every- 
body behind  the  scenes  laugh.  In  the  fourth  act  some  one  threw 
a  bouquet  to  him,  which  he  picked  up  gracefully,  smiling  and  bow- 
ing—  "A  la  Modjeska,"  some  one  said  behind  me. 

Mr.  Booth  was  amused,  but  said  he  did  not  like  that  sort  of  ^ 
thing;  they  usually  do  more  harm  than  good  to  the  young  men. 
He  is  right.  Our  friends  are  sometimes  our  worst  enemies.  This 
young  man  is  already  frightfully  conceited.  He  exhibits  his  large 
photograph  in  the  shop  windows,  flatters  the  critics  to  get  good 
notices,  and  does  many  things  that  would  be  repulsive  to  any  modest 
young  actor.  He  may  have  talent,  but  if  he  does  not  take  time  to 
ripen,  he  may  fall  off  the  stem  —  decayed  though  green.  The  , 
sun  of  flattery  is  hot  and  destructive. 

Wheeling,  May  7. 
I  read  in  the  paper  two  or  three  days  ago  that  there  was  a  fight 
for  tickets  in  Wheeling;  the  police  interfered,  and  some  people  were 
bruised. 


510  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

Last  night  we  sat  a  long  time  after  supper  talking.  We  spoke 
of  Shakespeare,  Boucicauit,  Bacon,  Donnelly,  etc.  Mr.  Booth,  of 
course,  believes  in  Shakespeare,  and  laughs  at  the  cipher  cranks 
and  those  who  try  to  deny  him.  As  we  all  agreed,  that  subject 
was  dismissed,  but  he  spoke  of  how  he  studies  Shakespeare. 
He  says,  "It  is  not  enough  to  take  one  edition  and  study  your 
part  from  it;  you  have  to  see  as  many  as  you  can  get  to  find  the  true 
meaning  of  a  word  sometimes.''  And  then  he  quoted  different 
readings  of  different  p)eople,  and  it  is  strange  that  the  most  far- 
fetched meaning  is  usually  the  most  popular  with  the  actors. 

Then  we  spoke  of  blank  verse  and  prose,  and  how  difficult  it  is 
sometimes  when  we  want  to  be  natural  not  to  fall  into  the  com- 
monplace. 

His  father  was  a  splendid  reader,  being  at  the  same  time  a  great 
actor.  He  never  allowed  the  Uttle  Edwin  to  look  at  him  while 
he  played.  The  boy,  who  used  to  go  with  his  father  in  order  to 
help  him  with  the  dressing,  was  kept  in  the  dressing-room  and  sup- 
posed to  learn  his  lessons,  but  he  was  all  ears,  and  did  not  lose  one 
word  of  his  father's  reading  nor  of  the  other  actors,  and  thus,  while 
still  very  young,  formed  his  opinion  and  judgment.  His  father 
did  not  want  him  to  acquire  any  of  his  own  peculiarities.  He  used 
to  say,  **I  want  your  ear  to  be  educated  first." 

It  seems  that  Edwin  Booth  has  been  three  times  a  star  and  three 
times  reduced  to  a  position  of  an  ordinary  actor  in  a  stock  com- 
pany. His  salary  while  he  was  engaged  at  a  Philadelphia  theatre 
was  six  dollars  a  week,  and  after  two  weeks  of  trial  he  was  dis- 
charged for  incompetency. 

He  spoke  a  great  deal  about  the  right  pronunciation  of  certain 
words  on  the  stage.  To  make  the  blank  verse  sound  well  he 
changes  the  inflection  of  vowels.  In  "Hamlet"  he  pronoimces 
"orisons"  with  the  inflection  oh  the  letter  "i"  —  orisons,  while 
it  ought  to  be  orisons  with  a  short  "i"  and  the  inflection  on  the 
letter  "o."  He  does  it  to  suit  the  melody  of  the  blank  verse,  to 
avoid  the  jerky  sound  which  it  would  produce  in  the  sentence. 
"In  thy  orisons"  —  the  three  first  syllables  of  the  verse  with  the 
emphasis  on  "o"  would  sound  harshly. 

Wheeling.     "Merchant  of  Venice." 

While  Mr.  Booth  was  taking  his  afternoon  nap,  I  sat  down  to 

write.     Suddenly  I  heard  the  voice  of  our  waiter  calling  the  porter 

to  show  him  the  crowd  gathered  on  the  shore  (our  car  stopped  at 

the  bank  of  the  river).     I  also  looked  out,  but  no  one  could  tell  me 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS    "VIOLA" 


THE  NEW  WORLD  511 

what  it  was.  A  few  minutes  later  Mr.  Chase  came  in  and  told  me 
with  a  smile  that  a  boat  had  been  struck  by  a  steamer  and  over- 
turned. Twenty  people  went  down  —  two  of  them  drowned.  He 
said  it  all  with  such  cheerful  expression  and  such  a  sweet  smile 
that  I  thought  he  was  telUng  me  of  some  advertising  trick  he  had 
arranged;  but  I  turned  to  our  negro  waiter,  and  seeing  his  lower 
hp  hanging  with  a  dejected  expression,  I  imderstood  that  it  was  a 
real  accident.  Some  young  people  took  a-  tiny  boat  to  go  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river  to  a  ball  game,  and  coming  home  they  were 
run  into  by  a  steamer.  "  Two  children  were  drowned  and  an  archi- 
tect." On  my  way  to  the  theatre  I  saw  three  elderly  ladies  crying 
in  the  street.  I  was  not  in  a  very  cheerful  mood  when  Sophie 
told  me  that  Mr.  Bromley  had  just  received  news  of  his  mother's 
death.     "What  a  sad  day! "  I  exclaimed. 

The  play  began  as  usual.  The  audience  was  large  and  very 
S3anpathetic,  and  I  began  in  a  good  mood,  when,  before  the  third 
act,  Mr.  Skinner  told  me  of  Charles  Vandenhoff's  death.  That 
dreadful  news  spoiled  the  rest  of  the  evening  for  me,  and  I  went 
through  the  third  act  with  my  face  flooded  with  tears. 

Charles  Vandenhofif  was  one  of  those  men  who  were  bitterly 
disUked'by  some  but  dearly  loved  by  others.  He  was  the  best 
friend  I  had  in  the  profession,  and  both  Charles  and  myself  were 
very  fond  of  him.  It  is  dreadful  to  think  that  he,  with  all  the 
refinement  he  possessed,  all  the  delicate  tastes,  should  die  in  a 
hospital  in  Washington  Territory  —  a  half-civiUzed  country  where 
the  word  "  comfort "  is  almost  unknown.  Poor,  dear  man  !  What 
a  generous,  grateful  nature  he  had!  What  pains  he  took  to  correct 
my  English  and  instruct  me  in  the  meaning  of  obscure  passages 
in  Shakespeare  !  I  did  not  even  write  to  him  lately;  it  is  hard 
to  think  of  the  duties  which  we  have  not  accomphshed,  and  which 
we  cannot  accomplish,  because  it  is  too  late ! 

We  closed  our  season  in  Buffalo.  The  "Merchant  of  Venice" 
was  given  that  night.  When  we  took  a  call  after  the  court  scene, 
and  I  looked  at  Edwin  Booth,  I  had  a  feeling  that  I  should  never 
see  him  again,  and  tears  came  to  my  eyes.  He  might  have  had  a 
similar  idea  at  the  moment,  for  his  eyes  were  almost  moist  when, 
after  the  falling  of  the  curtain,  he  said  "Good-by  "  to  me.  He 
looked  weak  and  tired  as  he  walked  to  his  room. 

We  went  to  Poland  that  spring  and  remained  there  the  whole 
year.    When  we  returned  he  lived  no  more. 


CHAPTER  L 

In  1893  I  was  invited  by  the  Committee  of  the  World's 
Fair  Auxiliary  Women's  Congress,  in  Chic^o,  to  take  part 
in  the  theatrical  section  of  the  Congress  and  to  say  some- 
thing  about  ''Woman  on  the  Stage."  I  dwelt  a  little  on  the 
history  of  Hroswitha,  the  so-called  nun  of  Gandersheim, 
who  in  the  tenth  century  wrote  a  series  of  most  remarkable 
plays,  and  whose  standing  in  the  annals  of  dramatic  lit- 
erature is  unique.  Besides  me,  three  other  ladies  of  our 
profession  addressed  the  Congress:  Clara  Morris,  Georgia 
Cayvan,  and  Julia  Marlowe.  It  may  be  remembered  that 
one  of  the  features  of  the  Congress  was  a  series  of  national 
women's  delegations,  each  of  them  describing  the  position 
of  women  in  their  country.  Among  others,  there  was  ex- 
pected a  delegation  of  ladies  from  Russian  Poland,  but  none 
of  them  came  to  Chicago.  Apparently  they  were  afraid  of 
the  possible  conflict  with  their  government,  and  they  limited 
their  activity  to  sending  a  few  statistical  notes  —  ah  !  most 
poor,  bashful  notes ! 

In  the  face  of  this  obstacle,  wishing  by  all  means  to  have 
a  representative  of  our  nationality,  Mrs.  May  Wright  Sew- 
all,  the  Chairman  of  the  Executive  Board,  appealed  to  me, 
requesting  most  urgently  that  I  appear  as  the  proxy  of  the 
Polish  delegates  and  speak  on  their  behalf.  Mrs.  Sewall, 
who  for  years  has  been  my  friend,  put  such  pressure  on  me 
that  I  finally  consented. 

I  had  only  half  a  day  to  get  ready.  I  scrambled  through 
some  of  the  statistic  material  sent  from  Poland,  and  made 
a  synopsis  of  the  situation  of  our  country. 

512 


THE  NEW  WORLD  513 

The  auditorium  was  packed,  and  I  had  some  difficulty  in 
reaching  the  platform.  The  beginning  of  my  speech  was 
an  excuse  for  the  absence  of  my  countrywomen  from  the 
Congress.  I  explained  that  they  could  not  do  anything  so 
independent  as  speaking  freely  upon  the  situation  of  Polish 
women  under  the  Russian  and  Prussian  government,  and 
then  I  sketched  a  few  pictures  of  our  existence,  such  as  I 
knew  and  had  read  about. 

Warmed  up  by  the  subject,  and  trying  to  arouse  the  sym- 
pathy of  the  brilliant  audience  for  our  cause,  I  was  probably 
not  careful  enough  in  the  choice  of  my  expressions,  but  I 
said  such  words  as  my  heart  prompted  me  at  the  moment. 

The  people  were  moved  by  my  words,  and  expressed  in 
an  emphatic  way  their  approval  of  my  feelings.  Next  day 
most  of  the  Chicago  papers,  in  big  editorials,  alluded  to  my 
address  in  a  most  flattering  way,  and  added  their  own 
scathing  comments  upon  the  governments  which  had  dis- 
membered Poland,  and  especially  upon  Russia.  Unfortu- 
nately for  me,  excerpts  of  the  Chicago  press  were  sent  over 
to  Europe  and  repeated  both  in  the  English,  German,  and 
Russian  papers. 

Two  years  later  I  happened  to  be  in  Poland,  and  imme- 
diately upon  my  arrival  I  concluded  contracts  for  perform- 
ances in  the  theatres  of  Posen,  Cracow,  Lemberg,  and 
Warsaw.  The  president  of  the  latter,  a  colonel  whose  name 
I  do  not  remember,  had  to  submit  my  contract  to  the  Gov- 
ernor-General, the  famous  General  Hurko,  for  his  approval. 
When  he  told  him  of  his  errand,  the  latter  remarked,  ''It 
will  be  all  right;  come  back  in  two  days."  When  the  presi- 
dent returned  in  two  days,  Hurko  upbraided  him  most 
violently:  ''How  dare  you  engage  for  the  Imperial  Theatre 
such  a  revolutionary  'mateznitza'  as  this  woman?  Never 
as  long  as  I  live  will  she  appear  here." 

Evidently  during  those  two  days  some  interested  person 
had  reported  to  the  Governor-General  my  speech  before  the 
2l 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


THE  NEW  WORLD  516 

Chicago  Congress,  and  that,  of  course,  had  incensed  him 
against  me.  The  president  sent  me  word  that  my  engage- 
ment was  impossible,  relating  his  conversation  with  the 
governor.  It  was  a  grievous  disappointment  for  me,  be- 
cause I  loved  my  Warsaw  audiences  and  I  knew  they  loved 
me. 

In  the  meantime  I  was  negotiating  with  some  St.  Peters- 
burg managers  about  a  series  of  appearances  there  with  a 
Polish  company.  The  fact  of  my  being  prohibited  to  play 
in  Warsaw  would  not  interfere,  they  thought,  with  an 
engagement  in  the  Russian  capital,  because  the  St.  Peters- 
burg local  authorities  were  not  half  as  stringent  in  Polish 
matters  as  those  of  Warsaw.  Besides,  I  could  rely  there 
upon  the  support  of  a  most  influential  official.  General  Wahl, 
whom  I  had  known  personally  in  old  times  in  Warsaw,  when 
he  was  aide-de-camp  to  the  Lieutenant-General  of  Poland, 
Count  Berg. 

So  the  negotiations  went  on,  and  a  contract  on  most 
favorable  terms  was  signed  for  an  engagement  in  St.  Peters- 
burg in  the  next  spring: 

In  the  meantime  I  went  on  playing  in  Cracow,  Lemberg, 
Posen,  and  in  February  my  husband  and  I  started  on  a  trip 
to  Italy,  with  the  idea  of  returning  in  time  for  the  St.  Peters- 
burg appearance.  The  news  I  received  from  my  managers 
was  most  encouraging:  all  the  preparatory  work  was 
going  on  splendidly,  the  press  wrote  very  complimentary 
notices  of  me,  the  company  was  selected  and  properly  re- 
hearsed, the  advertising  bills  were  posted,  and  at  last  the 
subscription  for  tickets  was  opened.  Inside  of  a  few  days 
the  seats  for  ten  performances  were  sold  out,  and  we  were 
telegraphed  to  come  on. 

So,  about  ten  days  before  the  date  of  the  beginning,  we 
left  Rome  on  our  way  to  St.  Petersburg.  We  stopped  a  day 
in  Posen,  at  the  house  of  my  husband's  brother.  Dr.  Francis 
Chlapowski,  when  a  despatch  arrived  from  General  Wahl: 


616  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

"  Tell  Madame  Modrzejewska  not  to  come  to  St.  Petersburg 
— her  performances  have  been  forbidden."  A  subsequent 
letter  from'  the  managers  told  us  that  at  the  last  moment 
an  order  came  from  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  Durnovo, 
prohibiting  my  appearances.  Durnovo  was  a  personal 
friend  of  General  Hurko.  The  money  was  refunded  to  the 
public,  and  both  the  managers  and  myself  suffered  severe 
financial  losses  caused  by  the  advance  expenses. 

This  was  the  second  misadventure  caused  by  my  Chicago 
address.     But  this  was  not  the  end. 

Simultaneously  with  the  fatal  despatch  from  St.  Petersburg, 
I  received  news  from  friends  in  Warsaw  that,  as  there  was 
a  new  Governor-General,  Count  ShouvalofF,  in  place  of 
Hurko,  and  the  new  administration  was  much  more  liberal, 
there  probably  would  not  be  any  more  objection  to  my 
Warsaw  engagement.  Count  Shouvaloff  had  been  ap- 
proached on  the  subject,  and  did  not  see  any  difficulty  in  the 
way.  At  the  same  time  a  semi-official  letter  of  the  man- 
agement reached  me,  proposing  a  renewal  of  the  old  contract. 

Half  hopeful  and  half  dreading  a  new  drawback,  we  went 
to  Warsaw,  and,  as  I  remember,  we  arrived  on  Wednesday. 
Thursday  morning,  on  the  advice  of  friends  familiar  with  the 
situation,  we  went  to  the  Castle  to  see  Count  Shouvaloff. 
He  was  awav  at  the  time,  but  the  same  afternoon  an  aide- 
de-camp  of  his  called  at  our  hotel,  bringing  us  word  from 
the  governor  to  come  and  see  him  next  Monday.  We  saw 
the  president  of  the  theatre,  and  perfected  plans  for  my 
appearance. 

On  Saturday  afternoon  my  husband  was  called  to  the 
chief  of  police.  General  Kleigels.  The  latter,  with  the  great- 
est courtesy,  asked  when  we  were  going  to  leave.  '^I  hope 
not  for  some  time,"  Mr.  Chlapowski  replied  —  **not  before 
my  wife's  engagement  is  over."  ''I  am  sorry  to  say  that 
the  engagement  is  cancelled,  and  I  think  it  would  be  best 
for  you  to  leave  town  at  once."      ''Is  this  an  advice  or  an 


THE  NEW  WORLD  517 

order?"  asked  my  husband.  ''I  am  sorry  to  say  it,  but  it  is 
an  order  —  an  order  straight  from  St.  Petersburg."  '^But 
we  were  bidden  by  the  Governor-General  to  call  on  him  next 
Monday."  ''This  invitation  is  also  cancelled."  After  some 
more  conversation,  he  allowed  us  to  remain  twenty-four 
hours  more,  and  when  we  went  to  the  station  next  day,  there 
were  a  number  of  gendarmes  watching  to  see  if  we  really 
would  take  the  train. 

During  the  conversation  the  General  expressed  his  regret 
that  ''Madame  Modrzejewska,  who  had  been  so  much  ad- 
mired by  the  Russians  living  in  Warsaw,  had  spoken  so 
harshly  of  them."  "In  this  you  are  mistaken.  General; 
she  did  not  say  a  word  against  the  Russians  themselves; 
she  has  not  the  slightest  prejudice  against  the  Russian  na- 
tion, and  has  a  great  many  friends  amidst  your  countrymen. 
She  only  spoke  of  the  government."  "Of  course,  but  she 
was  so  many  years  in  our  public  theatre  under  the  author- 
ity of  the  government  that  she  had  not  the  right  to  speak 
the  way  she  did.  Her  address  made  a  very  bad  impression, 
the  more  so  as  she  is  so  much  known." 

My  husband  explained  to  him  that  I  never  was  a  Russian 
subject,  that  at  present  I  was,  through  his  own  naturali- 
zation, an  American  citizen,  and  as  such  I  enjoyed  the  rights 
of  an  American  to  express  freely  my  opinion  of  my  own 
government,  and  also  of  all  foreign  governments.  "Be- 
sides, you  know,  General,"  added  Mr.  Chlapowski,  "that 
she  did  not  say  anything  more  than  the  truth.  All  of  you 
Russians,  when  you  are  abroad,  say  the  same  things,  and 
even  worse  ones,  about  your  authorities,  than  my  wife  did ; 
and  I  dare  say  that  you  yourself.  General,  when  you  are  in 
Paris,  are  not  an  exception  to  the  rule  and  that  you  criti- 
cise severely  those  highest  in  rank  in  Warsaw  or  in  St.  Peters- 
burg." 

"  Jamais  en  public  "  (never  in  public),  was  the  charac- 
teristic reply  of  the  chief  of  police. 


a  phologriph  by  ThDrs.  Sin  Fi 


CHAPTER   LI 

I  HAVE  already  written  about  my  impression  when  I  first 
saw  Edwin  Booth's  acting,  and  will  say  more  now.  Mr. 
William  Winter,  the  celebrated  critic  of  America,  has  suffi- 
ciently exhausted  this  subject,  and  all  I  could  say  would 
appear  tame  beside  the  eulogy  of  that  eminent  writer. 

For  my  part  I  admire  the  great  actor  mostly  in  Hamlet, 
Benedict,  Shylock,  and  I  shall  never  forget  his  exquisite 
subtlety  in  the  second  act  of  "  Richelieu,"  nor  his  banquet 
scene  in  "  Macbeth." 

Richard  Mansfield  came  to  the  front  a  few  years  pre- 
vious to  Edwin  Booth's  death.  He  made  his  first  hit  in  the 
''Parisian  Romance."  I  saw  him  first  in  ''Beau  Brummel," 
in  which  part  he  was  very  remarkable.  The  critics  did  not 
like  his  Richard  III,  but  I  liked  him.  He  had  splendid 
moments,  and  was  quite  unconventional.  In  "Monsieur 
Beaucaire"  he  was  simply  exquisite.  After  Edwin  Booth, 
Mr.  Mansfield  occupied  the  most  prominent  position  on 
the  American  stage. 

It  would  be  a  very  difficult  task  to  write  about  the  present 
"stars"  in  America,  for  there  are  so  many  in  the  theatrical 
constellation  that  it  would  take  too  much  time  to  enumerate 
them. 

Some  of  them  I  have  seen,  and  many  I  have  only 
heard  about. 

Besides,  I  do  not  claim  to  be  a  critic ;  I  only  could  praise 
those  I  like,  and  pass  over  the  others  in  silence.  That 
would  never  do. 

It  is  true  that  I  spoke  of  those  who  worked  with  me 

519 


S20  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

and  those  who  retired  or  are  no  more.  I  also  spoke  of  some 
foreign  actors  and  actresses,  but  when  I  made  a  list  of  the 
present  "stars"  in  this  country  1  succumbed.  A  vertigo 
seized  me  and  I  gave  up. 


RlCUABO  Mkhstieu). 


'&gt; 


I  can  only  say  in  general  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  talent  ^ 
on  the  American  stage,  and  that  many  American  actors 
and  actresses  have  attained  a  high  artistic  level.     In  the 
younger  generation  I  have  noticed,  however,  a  sad  lack  of 


THE  NEW  WORLD  521 

proper  training.  It  is  not  their  fault;  the  evil  lies  in  the 
unfortunate  condition  of  the  "star"  system.  There  is  little 
opportunity  for  beginners  to  learn  much.  They  usually 
are  shifted  from  one  company  to  another,  and  often  forced 
to  play  one  single  part  all  through  a  season.  In  most  cases 
they  are  not  allowed  to  present  their  own  conception  of  the 
character,  but  are  compelled  to  follow  blindly  the  stage- 
manager's  instructions. 

In  case  they  have  to  understudy  the  part,  they  must 
exactly  imitate  their  predecessors,  and  woe  to  those  who 
dare  to  do  otherwise. 

There  are  actors  and  actresses  who  cannot  count  more 
than  five,  and  sometimes  only  three,  parts  during  the  five 
years  taken  out  of  their  life's  career. 

There  is  no  field  for  development  under  such  a  system, 
and  the  best  schools  of  acting,  after  all,  are  the  stock  com- 
panies, though  the  latter  have  again  another  drawback: 
they  change  bills  every  week,  and  actors,  being  forced  to 
study  in  a  hurry,  cannot  pay  much  attention  to  details. 
Yet,  at  least,  they  gain  experience. 

It  also  happens  that  some  young  actors  or  actresses  are 
raised  suddenly  to  the  dignity  of  a  ''star"  before  being  quite 
ripe  for  the  position.  They  are  advertised  and  pushed 
until  the  public,  bewildered  by  the  extravagant  advertise- 
ments, crowds  the  theatre  and  repeats  after  the  clever 
theatrical  manager,  ''Great!  Great!" 

The  consequence  is  that  the  word  "great"  is  not  suffi- 
cient any  more,  if  you  do  not  add  to  it,  "Genius!"  In 
Europe  the  word  "genius"  is  only  applied  to  the  greatest 
of  the  world,  but  here  it  has  become  an  every  day  occur- 
rence. 

It  is  strange  to  say  that  some  of  those  geniuses,  after 
having  quarrelled  with  their  managers,  suddenly  cease  to  be 
great,  and  no  one  knows  why.  The  public  does  not  suspect 
the  wires  pulled  by  a  cunning  hand.^' 


522  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

The  reasons  which  several  times  before  had  made  me 
anxious  for  retirement  from  the  stage,  and  which  decided 
my  ultimate  retreat,  were,  however,  personal,  and  I  cannot 
say  that  my  decision  was  influenced  by  any  special  condi- 
tion of  the  American  drama.  If  it  had  been  so,  I  should 
long  ago  have  given  up  my  professional  career. 

So  much  I  have  to  confess,  but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact 
that  I  do  not  admire  the  way  in  which  theatrical  matters 
are  conducted  here,  and  all  along  I  have  found  fault  with 
the  present  system  in  vogue. 

Years  ago  I  published  an  article  in  the  Forum  in  which 
I  pointed  out  the  drawbacks  of  the  so-called  ''star  system." 
In  those  combinations  it  only  too  often  happens  that  the 
chief  actor  or  actress  is  surrounded  by  a  poor  company, 
and  the  lack  of  a  good  ensemble  is  frequently  very  painful. 
There  are  some  notable  exceptions  to  this  rule. 

I  must  in  this  connection  say  a  few  words  of  sincere 
appreciation  for  Mrs.  Fiske,  whose  companies  are  remark- 
able for  their  entire  cast;  no  part,  however  small,  is  slighted, 
and  the  result  is  a  harmonious  whole. 

I  believe  that  in  the  above-mentioned  article  I  was  the 
first  to  insist  upon  the  necessity  of  establishing  an  endowed 
theatre  which,  being  independent  of  the  ticket  office,  might 
devote  all  its  energies  towards  artistic  and  literary  ideals. 

The  hope  is  justified  by  the  action  and  influence  of 
the  endowed  theatres  in  continental  Europe,  especially  in 
France,  Germany,  and  Austria. 

My  dream  is  coming  to  life  in  New  York,  and  though  I 
have  retired  into  privacy,  I  am  sincerely  happy  to  see  the 
progress  and  expansion  of  the  artistic  atmosphere  which 
has  prompted  and  rendered  possible  the  realization  of  this 
project,  so  long  desired  by  numerous  lovers  of  drama  Jis 
well  as  by  myself. 

This  idea  of  a  national  theatre,  richly  endowed  by  pri- 
vate or  public  donations,  was  taken  up  by  Henry  Irving, 


Plulofraph  bu  Ouponl. 
Minnie  Maddbbn  Fisks. 


524  MEMORIES   AND   IMPtlESSIONS 

and  recently  by  many  influential  people  both  in  and  out  of 
the  profession.  It  has  started  quite  a  movement,  and  has 
found  favor  with  the  intellectual  theatre-goers. 

I  do  not  think  that  I  oupht  to  be  accused  of  optimism 
if  I  look,  in  the  near  future,  to  the  realization  of  this  project. 


Madame  Modjbbea. 

Having  spoken  of  several  of  my  fellow-artists  who  have 
disappeared  from  the  American  stage,  I  would  be  glad  to 
speak  of  those  of  my  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  &lt;lramatic 
profession  who  are  at  present  in  full  activity.  Unfor- 
tunately, there  are  a  number  of  them  with  whose  work  I  am 
not  familiar.  Some  of  the  prominent  ones  I  have  not  even 
seen,  occupied  as  I  was  with  my  daily  performances;  others 


THE  NEW  WORLD  525 

I  have  seen  only  in  one  part,  often  not  their  best  one.  It 
would  not  be  fair  to  mention  a  few  and  omit  others.  There- 
fore I  think  it  best  to  refrain  from  expressing  any  opinion 
on  the  present  American  "stars,"  the  more  so  that  it  would 
be  based  chiefly  on  impressions  instead  of  on  careful  analysis. 
I  have  to  deprive  myself  of  paying  a  just  tribute  to  those 
I  admire,  in  order  not  to  slight  unwillingly  those  whom  I 
cannot  judge. 

Of  course  I  was  obliged  to  speak  of  several  of  my  fellow- 
actors  with  whom  I  was  associated  in  common  work,  in  order 
to  describe  my  own  experiences,  but  this  could  not  be  helped, 
and  I  suppose  that  I  may  make  another  exception  in  regard 
to  some  among  the  foreign  artists  who  have  temporarily 
appeared  in  American  theatres.  The  first  place  belongs  to 
Salvini,  whom  I  consider  the  foremost  tragedian  of  our  times. 
The  impression  he  made  on  me  was  akin  to  that  I  felt  when 
I  first  came  into  the  presence  of  the  masterworks  of  Michael 
Angelo.  In  such  moments  we  do  not  criticise;  we  bow  in 
reverence.  I  am  perfectly  aware  that  my  opinion  runs 
counter  to  the  judgments  passed  on  him,  and  especially  on 
his  Shakespearian  performances,  by  some  of  the  most 
valued  dramatic  critics  in  this  country.  Nevertheless,  I 
am  bold  enough  to  maintain  my  own  opinion. 

As  to  his  rendition  of  Shakespearian  parts,  and  above 
all,  of  Othello,  there  was  raised  a  question  which  by  im- 
plication touches  all  the  foreign-born  actresses,  and  conse- 
quently also  applies  to  myself,  and  I  shall  return  to  it  later 
on.  But  as  to  Salvini  himself,  I  can  only  say  that  what 
impressed  me  most  in  him  was  that,  while  endowed  with  an 
unequalled  tragic  force,  he  never  allowed  himself  to  abuse 
it,  and  never  took  recourse  to  any  unnecessary  display  of 
his  wonderful  -.powers.  The  most  admirable  thing,  in  my 
estimation,  consisted  in  the  psychological  continuity  of  his 
personations,  the  subtlety  of  his  transitions  from  mood  to 
mood,  the  birth  and  gradation  of  passion,  .and  the  motiva- 


ToMMAao  Salvini. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  527  // 

/     ' 

tion  of  the  successive  phases  of  the  internal  struggle  —  I 
in  one  word,  in  the  logical  evolution  of  his  characters,  which  ' 
seemed  in  his  hands  to  be  his  own  spontaneous  creations, 
so  closely  were  they  linked  with  the  author's  conception. 
When  seeing  Salvini  I  was  proud  of  my  art. 

Next  to  Salvini  I  place  Madame  Ristori,  of  whom  I  have 
spoken  before,  and  then  Eleonora  Duse,  their  great  country- 
woman. She  came  here  as  the  exponent  of  the  newest 
dramatic  methods  of  the  so-called  realistic  school  of  acting. 

Generally  speaking,  I  do  not  take  great  interest  in  all  this 
talk  about  the  different  schools  of  acting.  It  seems  to  me 
that  there  are  only  two  schools,  one  of  good  acting,  the  other 
of  bad  acting.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  Madame  Duse,  I  cared 
much  less  for  her  particular  modernistic  methods  than  for 
her  own  self  and  her  artistic  powers.  Whatever  school  she 
belongs  to,  she  is  a  great  actress.  The  intensity  with  which 
she  abandons  herself  to  the  feelings  and  sufferings  of  the 
cliaracter  she  personates  makes  you  forget  all  surroundings; 
you  do  not  realize  any  more  that  you  are  at  the  theatre,  that 
there  is  an  actress  on  the  boards ;  you  cease  analyzing ;  you 
only  feel  that  you  are  in  presence  of  terrible  pain,  despair, 
and  agony.  I  shall  never  forget  her  wonderful  last  act  in 
"  Camille,''  nor  the  thrill  that  passed  through  me,  at  the  very 
end  of  'Tedora,"  by  a  single  phrase,  ''  E  la  Morte  "  (''It  is 
Death  "),  when  she  drinks  the  poisoned  cup. 

I  regret  exceedingly  that  I  did  not  see  Duse  in  comedy. 
One  whose  opinion  in  comedy  acting  cannot  well  be  gainsaid, 
and  who  was  not  altogether  an  admirer  of  the  Italian  actress, 
Mr.  Joseph  Jefferson,  told  me  that  she  was  perfection  itself 
in  the  ''Locandiera." 

Now,  in  regard  to  the  often-discussed  question  of  the 
innovations  she  brought  on  the  stage,  I  am  bound  to  acknowl- 
edge that  her  abstention  from  conventionality,  from  any 
kinds  of  stage  tricks,  could  only  gratify  me.  While  she 
spoke  very  often  in  very  low  tones  and  in  an  accelerated 


$,  it  AinU  DupiMtl, 


THE  NEW  WORLD  529 

tempo,  this  did  not  interfere  with  the  distinctness  of  her 
speech  and  did  not  diminish  the  impression,  thanks  to  her 
beautiful  mellow,  clear  voice,  the  play  of  her  wonderful, 
expressive  features,  and  the  look  of  her  glorious,  lustrous 
eyes. 

It  is  somewhat  different  with  her  imitators.  Deprived 
of  the  advantage  of  her  face  and  her  voice,  they  mumble  and 
whisper  as  one  would  in  a  private  room;  their  words  are 
not  understood,  and  their  intentions  remain  obscure  to  the 
public. 

Another  Italian  actor,  Novelli,  has  visited  America 
last  year,  and  it  was  my  good  luck  to  see  him  in  several  of 
his  parts.  The  character  in  which  I  liked  him  best  was 
Petruchio  in  ''The  Taming  of  the  Shrew."  I  was  familiar, 
of  course,  with  the  play,  and  had  seen  it  performed  by 
various  actors,  some  quite  prominent.  He  is  different  from 
all  of  them,  and  I  daresay  his  conception  of  the  part  is 
entirely  contrary  to  the  old  traditional  one.  Notwithstand- 
ing that,  he  seemed  to  me  the  most  convincing  one,  the  only 
one,  in  fact,  who  could  have  effectively  tamed  a  ''shrew." 
He  was  far  from  being  boisterous;  on  the  contrary,  he 
had  such  a  quiet,  good-humored,  chaffing  way  of  treating 
Katherine,  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  most 
stubborn  and  ill-tempered  girl  to  hold  out  against  him. 

The  above  artists,  as  is  well  known,  played  always  in 
Italian,  and  one  of  the  best  proofs  of  their  greatness  lies  in 
the  fact  that,  without  knowing  their  language,  one  could 
follow  them  and  feel  with  them. 

In  speaking  of  Salvini,  I  said  that  I  would  return  to  the 
question  of  foreign  actors  in  the  Shakespearian  repertoire. 

It  has  been  often  maintained,  both  in  England  and  America, 
that  in  order  to  render  faithfully  Shakespeare's  creations  one 
must  be  of  English  stock,  on  the  plea  that  the  poet  was  him- 
self an  Englishman,  and  therefore  could  only  bring  forth 
personages   endowed    with    English    characteristics,    which 

2  H 


530  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

cannot  be  successfully  grasped  by  any  foreigners.  This 
argument  seems  both  narrow  and  disparaging  to  the  genius 
of  Shakespeare. 

Many  authors,  either  historians  or  poets,  have  perfectly 
understood,  either  by  study  and  observation,  or  by  intuition, 
sometimes  better  called  *' inspiration,''  the  peculiarities  of 
other  nationalities  or  races.  Why  refuse  this  knowledge  or 
intuition  to  Shakespeare? 

We  foreigners,  born  outside  of  the  magic  pale  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race,  place  Shakespeare  upon  a  much  higher  pedestal. 
We  claim  that,  before  being  English,  he  was  human,  and  that 
his  creations  are  not  bound  either  by  local  or  ethnological 
limits,  but  belong  to  humanity  in  general. 

One  might  as  well  say  that  Shakespeare  could  only  be 
rightly  comprehended  and  interpreted  by  his  contemporaries, 
for  certainly  the  English  people  of  the  Elizabethan  Era 
are  very  different  from  their  descendants  of  the  twentieth 
century.  If  our  poet  was  not  able  to  reproduce  truthfully 
Italians,  Moors,  or  Spaniards,  he  certainly  could  not  be  well 
acquainted  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  those  who  were  to  be 
born  a  few  hundred  years  after  his  time.  And  yet,  are  the 
sentiments  and  passions  which  animate  the  characters  of 
his  plays  so  different  from  those  of  our  generation?  Our 
argument  is  that  when  Shakespeare  wanted  to  present  Eng- 
lish people  he  located  them  in  England,  or  at  least  gave 
them  English  names  (Sir  Toby  Belch,  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek, 
etc.);  while,  when  he  presents  Romans,  Greeks,  Jews, 
Italians,  or  Moors,  he  does  not  mean  them  to  be  travestied 
Anglo-Saxons,  but  to  have  the  characteristics  of  their  own 
race  and  nation.  It  is  evident  to  me  that  it  was  not  without 
purpose  that  he  made  Othello  a  Moor,  Romeo  and  Juliet 
Italians,  and  Coriolanus  a  Roman  patrician.  It  is  a  southern 
sun  that  warms  up  the  atmosphere  of  the  romance  of  Verona ; 
it  is  the  fire  of  African  blood  that  runs  through  the  veins 
of  Desdemona's  lover;  it  is  the  cruelty  inborn  to  his  race 


THE  NEW  WORLD  531 

that  prompts  him  to  murder ;  and  it  is  the  pride  of  the  con- 
querors of  the  world  which  swells  the  bosom  of  Coriolanus. 

The  feelings  and  passions  typified  in  Shakespeare's  plays 
animate  all  humanity,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  bard 
of  Avon  is  equally  understood,  admired,  and  loved  all  the 
world  over,  or  at  least  everywhere  where  Christian  civiliza- 
tion has  penetrated. 

Nobody  could  or  would  take  away  from  England  the 
glory  of  having  given  birth  to  the  greatest  poet  and  the 
greatest  analyst  of  human  souls,  but  nobody  has  the  right 
to  limit  his  creations  by  geographical  frontiers.  Personally 
I  have  admiration  and  respect  for  the  greatness  of  the 
Anglo-Saxon  race;  but  I  think  that  the  greatness  of  the 
human  race  ranks  above  it,  and  that  to  be  the  poet  of  hu- 
manity is  a  greater  honor  than  to  be  the  poet  of  a  special 
country. 

The  attitude  of  those  who  claim  that  only  English  people, 
or  their  descendants,  have  the  right  to  touch  the  laurels  of 
Shakespeare,  reminds  me,  speaking  with  all  reverence,  of 
the  narrowness  of  certain  disciples  of  Christ  (see  Acts  of  the 
Apostles),  who  claimed  that  salvation  was  restricted  to  Jews, 
and  did  not  benefit  converted  Gentiles. 

There  is,  however,  I  confess,  one  point  in  which  the 
argument  against  foreign  interpreters  of  Shakespeare  is 
justified  —  it  is  the  question  of  language,  and  this  applies  in 
two  ways :  if  the  plays  are  rendered  in  foreign  idioms,  even 
the  best  translations  cannot  exactly  reproduce  the  beauty 
and  force  of  the  original,  and  hence  a  great  deal  of  the  poetic 
charm  is  lost.  If  the  plays  are  rendered  in  English  by 
foreign-born  actors,  their  lack  of  familiarity  with  the  ac- 
quired language  may  make  their  pronunciation  defective, 
and  thus  imperil,  if  not  the  poetry  of  the  sentence',  at  least  the 
music  of  the  verse. 

The  latter  is  my  own  case,  and  therefore,  whenever  my 
pronunciation  was  found  fault  with,  I  could  do  nothing  but 


532  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

accept  the  criticism  in  all  humility  and  endeavor  to  correct 
the  errors  of  my  tongue;  yet  I  persisted  without  discourage- 
ment, and  went  on  studying  more  and  more  Shakespearian 


Madaue  Modjesea  as  Macda. 


parts,  conscious  that  their  essential  value  consisted  in  the 
psychological  development  of  the  characters,  and  confident 
that  I  understood  them  correctly  and  might  reproduce  them 
according  to  the  author's  intentions. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  533 

It  is  a  perfect  intuition  of  the  human  soul  and  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  its  most  secret  springs  and  its  intricate  work- 
ings which  makes  Shakespeare  the  greatest  creator  in 
literature,  and  it  is  this  analysis  of  human  nature  that  we 
foreign  interpreters  have  principally  in  view  when  we  have 
to  render  the  creations  of  the  master. 

Speaking  of  my  personal  experience,  I  want  to  add  that 
among  all  the  English  writers  it  was  Shakespeare  with 
whose  works  I  felt  most  at  home.  I  never  had  this  feeling 
with  the  other  English  playwrights  of  the  past,  and  there- 
fore did  not  attempt  such  standard  plays  as  *'The  School 
for  Scandal,"  ''The  Lady  of  Lyons,"  "The  Hunchback,"  or 
''She  stoops  to  Conquer."  The  characters  seemed  to  me  too 
much  imbued  with  racial  Anglo-Saxon  sentiments,  to  which 
I  thought  myself  unable  to  do  justice.  Once  I  tried  "Peg 
Woffington,"  and  I  failed  badly. 

During  my  next  American  tour  Mr.  Otis  Skinner  was 
my  leading  man.  His  intellectuality,  combined  with  a  fine 
tippearance,  beautiful  voice,  and  the  most  remarkable  elocu- 
tion, in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  qualified  him  to  a  higher 
position,  which  he  easily  reached  in  due  time. 

The  second  se«'ison  he  played  with  me  he  was  announced 
as  my  companion  star,  and  since  that  time  has  made  a  fine 
name  for  himself  and  has  become  one  of  the  most  respected 
exponents  of  the  best  of  both  classic  and  modern  drama. 

I  produced  during  those  two  seasons  "Henry  VIH,"  in 
which  Mr.  Skinner  played  the  king,  and  John  Lane,  a  fine 
legitimate  actor,  was  Cardinal  Wolsey. 

The  second  play  I  added  to  my  repertoire  was  Suder- 
mann's  "Magda, "  which  proved  quite  a  success.  Mr.  Skin- 
ner played  my  father,  and  did  not  quite  like  the  part.^ 

^  Sudermann  was  the  second  foreign^  author  that  it  was  my  honor  to 
introduce  to  the  American  public.  But  "Magda"  was  more  successful 
from  the  start  than  was  Ibsen's  "The  Doll's  House."  Although  the  play  was 
severely  criticised  by  the  press  in  several  cities,  it  was  received  exceedingly 


534  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

In  1894  I  was  in  Europe,  and  returned  in  the  fall  of  1895 
to  go  on  my  regular  American  tour. 

For  years  I  tried  to  get  a  play  written  by  an  American 
author,  but  my  efforts  in  that  direction  proved  always  fruit- 
less. I  had  produced  two  of  them,  '*  Countess  Roudine"  and 
^The  Tragic  Mask,"  and  both  these  plays  feU  flat.  StiU  I  was 
again  tempted  to  produce  a  play  from  the  pen  of  an  Ameri- 
can, and  added  to  my  repertoire  a  new  play  by  Clyde  Fitch, 
'*  Mistress  Betty  Singleton,"  with  the  intention  of  making 
a  feature  of  it.  Unfortunately,  the  New  York  critics  con- 
demned the  play,  which,  however,  contained  man^  charm- 
ing scenes  and  touching  moments.  I  had  to  take  refuge  in 
Shakespeare.  "Measure  for  Measure,"  which  we  revived 
soon  afterwards,  proved  a  success,  and  I  resumed  the  reper- 
toire. 

My  season  opened  unfortunately  this  time:  Miss  Abell, 
my  juvenile  lady,  was  bitten  in  the  face  by  a  naughty  little 
dog,  and  could  not  appear  for  several  weeks. 

A  few  days  later  another  young  talented  actress.  Miss 
Grace  Fisher,  fell  ill  with  typhoid  fever,  and  Mr.  Wadsworth 
Harris  had  a  grievous  family  loss. 

That  was  not  all.  With  the  resuming  of  my  legitimate 
repertoire  I  had  to  change  my  leading  man,  who,  having 
been  selected  for  the  new  piece,  was  not  adapted  to  Shake- 
speare or  Schiller,  and  all  the  plays  had  to  be  rehearsed  over 
again. 

All  these  contrarieties  were  taken  by  the  members  of  my 
company  as  so  many  strokes  of  bad  luck;  they  began  to 
look  for  a  "Jonah,"  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  they  found  one 
in  an  inoffensive  character  actor.     Forebodings  floated   in 

well  in  others,  and  acknowledged  as  a  masterpiece  of  dramatic  literature. 
As  for  myself,  I  found  in  the  title  part  one  of  my  favorite  and  most  success- 
ful personations.  That  which  appealed  to  me  was  not  so  much  the  Bo- 
hemianism,  the  plea  for  woman^s  rights,  as  Magda-s  enthusiasm  for  art, 
the  consciousness  of  the  high  mission  of  an  artist. 


THE  NEW  WORLD  535 

the  air  and  were  whispered  around  until  they  really  proved 
true. 

For  some  time  everything  went  well.  The  young  ladies 
recovered,  one  from  her  wound,  the  other  from  typhoid 
fever,  and  the  company,  thoroughly  rehearsed,  was  in  good 
trim,  when  suddenly,  one  January  morning,  in  Cincinnati, 
I  woke  up  dangerously  ill.  My  illness  was  caused  by  cold- 
water  baths  every  morning.  The  Kneipp  system  was  in 
fashion  then,  and  I  stupidly  followed  it.  The  system  is 
good  in  itself,  but  it  becomes  dangerous  when  followed  with- 
out prescribed  exercises  and  proper  care.  My  disease, 
called  thrombophlebitis,  was  of  a  very  serious  character,  as 
it  has  often  a  fatal  ending  when,  as  in  my  case,  it  settles 
not  far  from  the  heart. 

I  did  not  recover  until  late  in  the  summer.  In  the  mean- 
time I  was  transported  from  Cincinnati  to  Chic^o  to  be  with 
my  son  and  his  family,  and  later  on  I  was  advised  by  the 
doctors  to  return  to  our  California  home. 

Most  of  the  physicians  thought  I  would  never  recover, 
but  thanks  partly  to  my  constitution  and  partly  to  the 
restful,  balmy  climate  of  our  mountain  home,  I  came  back 
to  my  usual  state  of  health, 

I  even  tried  to  act  in  the  winter,  and  started  on  a  short 
tour  on  the  Pacific  coast  under  Mr.  Al.  Hayman's  manage- 
ment, but  after  two  weeks  in  San  Francisco  and  three  days 
in  the  south,  I  fell  ill  again  in  Los  Angeles. 

This  time  the  doctora  thought  it  was  the  fashioi 
disease,  appendicitis,  that  held  me  in  its  grip.  For  a 
six  physicians  deliberated  if  I  was  to  be  operated  ( 
not,  until  there  came  a  turn  in  my  state,  and  the  swoi 
Damocles  was  removed. 

After  an  interval  of  ill  health  I  returned  to  the  bi 
in  the  fall  of  1897,  under*  my  husband's  manager 
who,  mindful  of  my  health,  had  arranged  a  very  short 
of  twelve  weeks,  with  intervals,  to  prevent  my  being 


636  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

worked.  I  had  a  very  successful  engagement  of  a  few 
weeks  at  the  New  York  Fifth  Avenue  Theatre,  and  other 
leading  cities,  and  the  tour  was  prolonged  to  twenty-three 
weeks. 

Joseph  Haworth  was  my  leading  man.  I  watched  that 
talented  actor,  and  was  sometimes  surprised  by  his  great 
resources,  combined,  however,  with  a  certain  lack  of  keeping 
up  the  same  diapason  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his 
parts.  These  drawbacks,  however,  all  disappeared  when 
he  played  the  father  in  **Magda."  He  gave  a  perfect  per- 
formance. His  Macbeth  was  well  characterized  and  his 
banquet  scene  very  effective,  but  the  following  acts  were 
indifferent,  until  he  came  to  the  fight  with  Macduff,  and 
then  he  was  fine. 

He  was  the  best  example  of  a  wrongly  conducted  genius. 
He  used  to  put  me  out  sometimes  by  unexpected  stage 
business  or  attitude,  and  surprises  of  that  kind  are  not  wel- 
come, and  ought  not  to  happen  in  a  well-trained  company. 
Yet  I  have  no  doubt  that,  had  he  lived  longer,  he  would  have 
overcome  all  those  deficiencies.  The  news  of  his  sudden 
death  was  a  great  shock  to  both  my  husband  and  myself, 
for  we  had  a  true  friendship  for  that  talented  and  erratic 
actor. 

I  played  afterwards  two  seasons  with  Mr.  John  C.  Fisher 
as  manager,  from  1898  to  1899  and  from  1899  to  1900. 

I  kept  some  of  my  old  plays,  —  ''As  You  Like  It," 
''Magda,"  ''CamQle,"  ''Marie Stuart,"  and  "Macbeth,"  — 
but  the  chief  attraction  of  the  first  season  was  Shakespeare's 
"Cleopatra."  The  cast  was  good,  the  production  fine,  with- 
out being  gorgeous,  and  above  all,  correct.  My  nephew, 
Wladyslaw  Bend  a,  who  hjid  just  arrived  from  Vienna,  and 
was  on  a  visit  to  our  mountain  home,  made  the  sketches 
for  the  scenery,  accessories,  and  costumes. 

Since  then  he  made  his  way  to  New  York,  where  he  found 
his  Mecca,  but  in  spite  of  success  he  never  stopped  improving 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS    -  LADY    MACBETH  " 


THE  NEW  WORLD  537 

his  art.  His  activity  is  simply  stupendous,  and  his  imagina- 
tion so  great  that  I  saw  him  composing  four  large-sized 
charcoal  sketches  in  one  day,  with  wonderful  ease,  whis- 
tling or  humming  some  Polish  airs. 

Returning  to  '^Cleopatra, "  I  am  glad  to  say  that  this  time, 
as  before,  Shakespeare  proved  a  good  friend  to  me.     The 
play  was  a  success,  and  I  loved  my  part. 

I  had  actually  two  leading  men  that  season.  The  first 
and  principal  one  was  Charles  Herman,  and  he  was  fine  as 
Antony.  The  second  one  was  the  young  and  handsome  Mr. 
Lonegan,  who  was  then  at  the  start  of  his  career.  He 
played  juvenile  lead,  —  Armand,  Orlando,  etc. 

John  Lane  was  also  with  us,  as  well  as  a  promising  young 
actor,  Spencer.  Miss  Annie  Proctor,  who  had  been  several 
seasons  my  leading  lady,  was  reengaged.  Stately,  hand- 
some, and  experienced  actress,  she  possessed,  besides,  the 
most  winning  manner,  which  was  the  result  of  her  puro 
nature  and  kind  heart. 

Mrs.  Sargent,  the  widow  of  Harry  Sargent,  my  first 
American  manager,  was  a  splendid  Aunt  Francisca  in 
''Magda." 

The  feature  of  my  second  season  with  Mr.  Fisher  was 
''Marie  Antoinette,"  and  John  Kellard  was  my  leading 
man,  a  very  talented,  intellectual  actor,  who  distinguished 
himself  in  many  parts  in  New  York  and  other  large  cities. 

I  had  not  given  up  my  desire  of  producing  plays  of 
American  authors.  ''Marie  Antoinette''  was  written  by 
Clinton  Stuart,  and  we  produced  it  first  in  San  Francisco. 

The  play  was  severely  criticised,  but  we  kept  it  in  the 
repertoire  and  brought  it  to  Boston  and  New  York,  where 
it  received  the  final  blow,  due  partly,  I  am  bound  to  con- 
fess, to  some  intrigues  which  caused  the  dismissal  of  two 
members  of  the  company,  who  were  replaced  at  the  last 
moment  before  the  production  of  the  play. 

One  of  those  substitutes  was  an  improvement,  for  it  was 


538  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

John  Malone  who  stepped  into  the  part,  but  he  had  not 
sufficient  time  to  learn  his  part,  and  made  some  slight  mis- 
takes which  were  quickly  taken  up  by  the  critics. 

The  other  substitute  was  quite  incompetent,  and  the  first 
act  fell  flat. 

I  could  not  interfere  with  those  matters,  for  Mr.  Fisher 
was  quite  absolute  and  would  not  give  in.  There  was  a 
slight  misunderstanding  between  us  about  these  and  other 
things,  and  we  parted  at  the  end  of  the  season. 

In  1900-1901  and  1902  I  was  under  the  management  of 
Wagenhals  and  Kemper.  We  produced  ''King  John," 
with  MacLean  in  the  title  part  and  Odette  Tyler  i\a  Prince 
Arthur. 

The  next  season's  feature  again  was  "Henry  VIII," 
with  Mr.  Louis  James  in  the  part  of  Cardinal  Wolsey. 
We  were  announced  as  companion  stars,  Modjeska  and  Louis 
James.  He  was  very  fine  in  the  part  of  Wolsey  and  also  in 
Shylock.  Besides  ''Henry  VIII"  we  had  "Marie  Stuart," 
"Macbeth,"  and  "Merchant of  Venice"  always  ready  for  a 
change. 

Between  the  two  seasons  with  Wagenhals  and  Kemper 
we  went  in  summer  to  Europe  and,  of  course,  visited  also 
Poland,  where  we  spent  happy  moments  in  family  circles, 
and  where  we  had  the  good  fortune  to  witness  the  per- 
formance of  Paderewski's  opera,  "Manru,"  and  greet  the 
famous  man  and  his  charming  wife. 

In  1902  we  visited  Paderewski  at  his  beautiful  ch&amp;teau 
in  Morges,  Switzerland.  Those  were  delightful  days  spent 
on  the  shores  of  Lake  Leman  in  view  of  all  the  glory  of 
Mont  Blanc.  There  also  I  could  witness  what  a  busy  life 
Paderewski  led.  He  was  never  seen  before  luncheon,  but 
we  could  hear  the  piano  constantly.  He  was  both  com- 
posing and  practising.  After  lunch  he  retired  for  a  short 
rest,  and  then  the  piano  was  again  sending  up  its  brilliant 
notes.     He  reappeared  at  dinner,  fresh,  jolly,   a  brilliant 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


540  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

man  of  the  world,  and  stayed  with  his  guests  until  late  at 
night. 

In  the  late  summer  of  1903  we  crossed  the  ocean  for  the 
last  time,  probably,  and  settled  down  quietly  in  our  moun- 
tain home  in  California. 

Our  place  was  removed  ten  miles  from  the  railroad  and 


Tbe  Library  of  Madame  Muimesila'b  Calipornia  RBaioENCB. 

twenty-three  from  the  nearest  town,  Santa  Ana.  It  wjis 
really  a  very  peaceful  retreat,  far  from  the  turmoil  of  the 
world.  Access  to  it  was  not  easy,  and  we  had  no  visits  except 
from  those  who  really  cared  for  us.  Yet  we  did  not  suffer 
from  lack  of  society,  for  during  the  many  returns  to  Cali- 
fornia we  had  won  a  great  many  dear  friends,  too  numerous 
to  be  mentioned  here. 

The  residence  itself  was  a  bungalow  of  modest  dimen- 
sions, but  in  harmony  with  the  surroundings,  and  ( 


THE  NEW  WORLD  641 

by  Stanford  White.  The  scenery  was  magnificent,  at  least 
we  thought  so,  and  there  was  a  small  park  in  front  of  the 
house  and  a  rose  garden  we  took  great  care  of,  as  well  as  of 
the  lawn.     But  all  our  improvements  had  for  their  main 


California  Kesidence. 

object  not  to  spoil  what  nature  had  provided,  and  we  left 
all  the  old  oaks  around  the  house,  and  the  pretty,  wild  shrubs 
on  the  terrace. 

Every  time  I  came  to  "Arden"  my  thoughts  were  far 
away  from  the  stage.     It  was  an  ideivl  place  for  rest  —  ancj 


542  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  needed  rest.  After  almost  a  year  and  a  half  of  quiet, 
'  Villegiatura,'  one  day  we  received  a  telegram  from  Aus- 
tralia announcing  Paderewski's  arrival  in  California,  with 
a  promise  of  visiting  our  house. 

The  news  was  greeted  with  rapture,  and  we  anticipated 
the  pleasure  he  and  his  wife  would  take  in  driving  up  the 
canon  which  bears  such  strong  resemblance  to  some  nooks 
in  our  Tatra  Mountains,  with  its  rushing  brooks  and  water- 
falls. We  thought  they  would  be  glad  to  be  far  away  from 
the  noise  for  a  few  days,  and  above  all  to  breathe  the  pure  and 
fragrant  air  of  the  California  hills. 

It  was  the  month  of  December,  and  the  weather  was  still 
warm  and  mUd  when  my  husband  went  to  meet  our  friends 
at  the  station.  Trusting  to  the  blue  sky,  he  ordered  a  half- 
open  conveyance  in  order  to  show  them  all  the  scenic 
beauties. 

Hardly  had  they  started  on  the  twenty-three  mile  ride 
when  the  sky  turned  its  color  from  pure  blue  to  gray,  clouds 
gathered,  and  a  drizzling  rain,  the  first  of  the  season,  began 
to  fall.  The  hills  and  rocks  were  shut  off  from  view,  and 
what  was  worse,  our  passengers  were  not  well  protected  from 
the  moisture.  The  bad  weather  prolonged  the  trip,  and  they 
were  shivering  with  cold  when  they  arrived  at  "Arden." 

Notwithstanding  this  unfortunate  trick  of  nature,  the 
days  which  Mr.  Paderewski  and  his  lovely  wife  spent  in  our 
house  belong  to  our  pleasantest  reminiscences.  Paderewski, 
besides  being  one  of  the  greatest  in  art,  is  also  the  most 
delightful  companion.  Gifted  with  a  brilliant  wit,  fasci- 
nating in  conversation,  posted  on  every  subject,  he  is  a  per- 
fect entertainer  either  as  host  or  guest. 

But  it  was  not  all  perfect  harmony.  He  scolded  me  fear- 
fully at  bridge  whist,  but  this  was  not  all:  he  found  other 
reasons  for  blaming  me.  Almost  from  the  start  he  up- 
braided me  for  my  seclusion,  for  retiring  into  what  he  called 
a  wilderness.     He  could  not  be  reconciled  to  the  idea  that 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


544  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

I  had  given  up  the  profession  and  was  shrinking  from  a 
return  to  public  life. 

In  vain  I  pleaded  advanced  years  and  fatigue.  He  pooh- 
poohed  all  my  arguments,  and  he  especially  objected  to  mj- 
retiring  so  quietly  without  more  ado. 

When  he  insisted  upon  my  returning  to  the  footlights  I 
was  obliged  to  tell  him  that  I  was  not  a  favorite  with  the 
so-called  Theatrical  Trust,  and  that  it  would  be  difficult  to 
arrange  a  satisfactory  season,  as  the  syndicate  managers 
would  shut  me  out  of  the  best  cities. 

Of  course  he  was  indignant,  but  said  that  this  might  be 
overcome. 

Besides  this,  he  implored  us  most  earnestly  to  sell  the 
ranch  and  live  among  ** human  beings."  In  this  respect  we 
agreed  with  him,  and  we  then  determined  to  sell  the  prop- 
erty, which  had  been  a  white  elephant  on  our  hands,  for 
it  did  not  yield  any  income  and  was  too  expensive  to  keep 
up.  He  was  so  pleased  w^ith  this  resolve  that  he  did  not 
scold  me  that  evening  when  I  made  mistakes  at  bridge. 

As  to  my  return  to  the  stage,  we  did  not  come  to  any 
conclusion,  but  his  parting  words  were:  *^You  will  soon 
hear  from  me." 

A  month  or  two  later  I  received  the  following  paper, 
signed  by  some  of  the  most  prominent  people  in  New  York, 
by  many  of  the  distinguished  authors  and  artists,  and  a 
number  of  my  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  dramatic  profession. 

TO  MADAME  HELENA   MODJESKA 

The  undersigned,  your  friends  and  admirers,  with  many  others 
whose  names  do  not  appear  here,  desire  to  tender  you  a  public 
testimonial  in  recognition  of  your  services  to  the  stage,  and  as  an 
expression  of  our  appreciation  of  your  genius  and  our  regard  for 
your  character.  We  feel,  dear  Madame,  that  all  that  we  can  do 
must  l)e  an  inadequate  attempt  to  discharge  the  great  debt  we  owe 
you.     In  you  the  art  of  acting  in  our  day  has  rejoiced  in  one  of  its 


J 


THE  NEW  WORLD  546 

loftiest  exponents.  Shakespeare  has  found  in  you  an  interpreter 
worthy  of  his  most  exquisite  and  thrilling  imaginations,  and  in  the 
range  of  modem  tragedy  and  comedy  the  refinement  and  charm 
of  your  every  impersonation  have  ennobled  the  original. 

If  agreeable  to  you,  the  performance,  in  which  we  hope  for  your 
personal  cooperation,  will  take  place  at  the  Metropolitan  Opera 
House  on  May  2. 

New  York,  April,  1905. 

This  document  was  accompanied  by  an  explanatory  letter 
from  my  old  manager  and  friend,  Daniel  Frohman. 

I  was  deeply  touched  by  that  high  proof  of  appreciation, 
and  accepted  the  testimonial. 

I  knew  that  the  idea  was  inspired  by  Paderewski,  who 
was  joined  in  his  efforts  by  several  of  our  old  friends,  and 
Daniel  Frohman,  who  took  on  his  shoulders  all  the  practical 
details. 

When  I  arrived  in  New  York,  a  few  days  previous  to  the 
date  fixed  for  the  occasion,  I  learned  with  dismay  that 
Paderewski,  who  was  to  take  part  in  the  program,  had 
been  injured  in  travelling,  and  would  not  be  able  to  appear. 
It  was  like  a  blow  of  fate.  The  performance  lost  its  chief 
attraction. 

The  testimonial  was  given  in  the  afternoon  of  May  2, 
1905,  before  a  brilliant  audience.  Many  of  the  prominent 
artists  then  present  in  New  York  took  part  in  it,  —  Mrs. 
Patrick  Campbell,  Miss  Ada  Rehan,  Miss  Mary  Shaw, 
Mr.  Bispham,  Mr.  Louis  James,  Mr.  O'Neill,  Mr.  John  Kel- 
lard,  and  many  more  excellent  actors  and  actresses  who 
consented  to  take  even  small  parts  in  order  to  give  brill- 
iancv  to  the  occasion. 

Paderewski's  absence  was  in  part  alleviated  by  a  letter 
which  was  read  from  the  stage. 

After  the  second  act  of  "  Macbeth,"  Mr.  Clarence  Sted- 
man  delivered  a  speech  to  which  I  responded. 

This  performance  was  my  farewell  to  New  York,  and 
2n 


Phmaifriipk.  ropi/rtgU,  bu  A 


THE  NEW  WORLD  647 

it  had  the  same  character  as  my  greeting  in  this  city  almost 
twenty-eight  years  before. 

I  thought  it  would  be  my  farewell  to  the  American  st^e 
altogether,  but  Daniel  Frohman  and  Paderewski  urgently 
advised  me  to  make  another  tour  through  the  United  States. 
They  were  both  very  persuasive,  and  I  followed  their  advice. 

The  tour  was  prolonged 
for  two  years,  up  to  April, 
1907,  and  was  conducted  by 
Jules  Murry. 

I  played  my  old  repertoire 
only,  mostly  "  Macbeth " 
and  "Marie  Stuart." 

There  is  nothing  of  spe- 
cial interest  to  note  in  these 
last  seasons,  except  a  great 
ovation,  arranged  by  our 
friends  in  Los  Angeles,  dur^ 
ing  which  a  speech  was  de- 
livered by  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  men  of  California, 
Joseph  Scott,  a  prominent 
lawyer  and  great  friend  of 
ours. 

The  reception  that  even- 
ing, the  shower  of   flowers 
thrown  from  the  boxes  by 
the  prettiest  young  girls  of  Los  Angeles,  and  the  hearty 
applause  made  me  feel  that  I  was  at  home. 

We  had  thought  many  times  of  returning  for  our  last  days 
to  our  native  country,  but  for  many  reasons  we  decided  to 
remain  in  the  United  States. 

The  part  of  Poland  under  Russian  dominion  we  are  for- 
bidden to  enter.  In  the  German  provinces  we  are  looked 
upon  with  suspicion  by  the  authorities,  and  we  are  too  old 


548  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

to  be  of  much  use  in  the  strenuous  struggle  of  the  present 
times. 

Another  strong  motive  for  remaining  here  is  tKat  most 
of  my  family  settled  in  the  United  States.  My  son  has 
achieved  a  great  career  in  his  profession  of  civil  engineer 
and  bridge-builder;  two  of  my  nephews,  Louis  Opid  and 
Ludomir  Tomaszewicz  (called  Thomas  for  short),  both 
talented  musicians,  were  married  here  aiid  established  in 
this  country. 

Another  nephew,  Wladyslaw  Bend  a,  has  achieved  a  fine 
reputation  as  an  artist  and  illustrator. 

My  grandchildren  and  my  grandnieces  and  nephews 
were  all  born  here,  and  we  count  already  over  twenty  mem- 
bers of  my  family  settled  in  the  United  States. 

Through  living  in  California,  I  can  only  at  rare  intervals 
see  those  nearest  to  my  heart ;  yet  the  fact  that  in  four  and 
even  less  days  I  can  come  to  Chicago  makes  the  distance 
very  short  in  comparison  with  crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 

To  all  those  reasons  I  will  add  another.  Both  of  us  have 
become  Americanized  in  many  ways.  The  long  years  we 
spent  in  this  country  have  exerted  a  great  influence  upon  our 
way  of  looking  at  things. 

We  have  met  many  fine  men  and  women  and  learned  to 
love  them. 

While  we  have  not  become  blind  to  the  blemishes  of 
American  civilization,  to  some  faults  and  defects  of  its 
inhabitants,  yet  we  have  learned  not  to  look  at  them  \vith 
the  eye  of  indifferent  observers.  We  have  learned  to  suffer 
from  them  as  from  injuries  affecting  ourselves,  and  are  anx- 
ious for  their  removal. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  become  very  sensitive  to  the 
grandeur  of  our  adopted  country ;  its  possibilities  dazzle  us, 
and  its  wonderful  growth  and  progress  excite  our  enthusiasm.^ 

^  It  seemed  to  us  that  both  on  the  European  and  American  horizon 
there  were  many  dark  clouds,  but  the  dilTerence  was  that  while  in  Europe 


MADAME    MODJESKA    AS   "MARIE    ANTOINETTE" 


\ 

\ 


Photograph,  cop/right  iS91.  by  Schun 


THE  NEW  WORLD  549 

This  new  love  does  not  injure  our  old  love  for  Poland. 
It  only  broadens  our  feelings  and  knowledge.  We  still 
remain  the  same  ardent  patriots,  for  the  attachment  to  the 
mother-country  could  not  be  extirpated  from  our  souls  ; 
we  are  always  stirred  by  its  misfortunes  to  the  very  depth 
of  our  hearts,  and  we  always  watch  with  the  most  vivid 
interest  and  pain  the  oppression  of  that  most  injured  part 
of  our  land  remaining  under  the  Prussia-German  rule. 

In  the  autumn  of  1906  we  sold  our  ranch  in  San  lago 
Canon,  and  a  year  later,  in  spring,  I  left  the  stage  for  good. 
We  were  looking  for  some  quiet  corner  in  the  country  to 
build  our  nest,  but  we  finally  decided  to  remain  somewhere 
near  the  sea,  where  the  air  is  purer  and  more  invigorating 
than  in  the  valley.  After  a  few  months'  search,  we  found  a 
little  island  inhabited  by  a  club  of  eighteen  families,  and 
there  we  made  our  new  residence. 
&gt;^  I  am  often  asked  if  I  do  not  long  for  the  footlights  again, 
and  my  answer  is  that  even  in  the  deepest  corner  of  my 
heart  I  cannot  find  that  desire  any  more. 
J\r^  Very  often  during  my  long  theatrical  career  I  asked  my- 
self if  I  had  done  right  in  devoting  my  life  to  the  stage,  and 
could  not  find  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  question.  I 
certainly  did  not  become  an  actress  to  make  a  fortune.  In 
our  country  actors  never  get  rich,  and  besides,  I  never  at- 
tached much  value  to  money.  When  I  was  young  I  yearned 
for  fame,  but  later  on  all  other  considerations  paled  against 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  work  itself.  I  fell  in  love  with  my 
art.  To  get  out  of  myself,  to  forget  all  about  Helena  Mod- 
jeska,  to  throw  my  whole  soul  into  the  assumed  character,  to 
lead  its  life,  to  be  moved  by  its  emotions,  thrilled  by  its  pas- 
sions, to  suffer  or  rejoice,  —  in  one  word,  to  identify  myself 
with  it  and  reincarnate  another  50ul  and  body,  this  became 

it  was  hard  to  foresee  a  happy  solution  of  the  present  difficulties,  the  con- 
ditions of  life  in  America,  as  well  as  its  institutions,  made  it  possible  to 
obviate  the  evils  of  the  day  and  to  escape  the  dangers  of  the  future. 


MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 


n 


i? 


THE  NEW  WORLD  551 

my  ideal,  the  goal  of  all  my  aspirations,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  enchantment  and  attraction  of  my  work.  I  was  very 
often  misjudged  and  misunderstood,  ofiener  yet  appre- 
ciated bej^'ond  my  merits,  —  and  yet  none  of  the  comments 
upon  my  value  made  me  deviate  from  my  aim,  which  was 
always  the  grasping  for  my  ideal,  so  far  as  it  could  be  at- 
tained, —  which  at  the  end  proved  a  struggle  for  the  im- 
possible. 

"Friends  who  are  familiar  with  my  work  claim  that  I 
have  some  right  to  say  a  few  words  about  ''dramatic  art.'' 
''Ib  it  an  art,  indeed?''  asked  once  a  sceptical  acquaint- 
ance of  mine,  who  had  seen  a  comic-opera  singer,  a  person 
he  knew  to  be  without  any  training,  with  no  artistic  instincts, 
and  of  a  very  commonplace  turn  of  mind,  achieve  a  suc- 
cess in  a  serious  drama.  I  was  myself  puzzled,  but  I 
watched  carefully  the  performer,  and  discovered  that  the 
acting,  though  effective,  was  purely  mechanical,  the  impres- 
sion produced  by  old  stage  tricks,  while  the  supposed  talent 
acclaimed  by  the  critics  and  applauded  by  the  public  con- 
sisted of  §/' remarkable  gift  of  imitation.  When  I  think  of 
this  incident,  I  cannot  help  observing  that  the  correct 
interpretation  of  a  part  is  not  always  ipso  facto  a  work  of 
art.  Something  else  is  needed,  something  which  ought  to 
lie  in  the  very  depth  of  the  actor's  soul,  the  suggestion  of 
which  has  much  more  value  than  even  the  most  laborious 
study.  I  do  not  know  well  how  to  define  this  something, 
but  it  seems  to  me  to  be  an  irrepressible  desire  of  expression, 
together  with  the  riches  of  feeling,  which  one  can  open  to 
the  world.  Those  who  are  endowed  with  this  sense  of  ex- 
pression, and  moreover  can  enhance  it  with  the  color  of  their 
imagination  and  the  intensity  of  emotional  temperament, 
achieve  what  a  mechanical  though  excellent  performer 
can  never  do.  They  thrill  the  audience,  which  will  carry 
home  some  of  the  actor's  inmost  treasures  and  live  on  them 
for  a  while.     The  richer  his  nature,  the  better  the  influence. 


FiBBPbACB  IN  Madame  Modjbbka's  Lukabt  u 


THE  NEW  WORLD  553 

''The  more  I  give,  the  more  I  have/'  says  Juliet.     To  give 
and  to  give  is  our  task. 

This  does  not  mean  that  actors  get  nothing  from  the 
outside  world.  On  the  contrary,  a  keen  sense  of  observa- 
tion will  help  them  to  store  their  minds  and  give  back  to 
people  the  very  thing  they  got  from  them  in  a  different 
form.  Some  of  the  prominent  comedians  possess  a  gift  ot 
close  observation  and  analysis  which  might  be  envied  by 
many  psychologists. 

But  in  personating  dramatic  or  tragic  parts  one  cannot 
depend  solely  on  the  documents  furnished  even  by  the  closest 
observations.     While  tragic  situations  abound  around  us, 
the  emotions  produced  by  them  are  usually  concealed  and  * 
hidden  before  outsiders;  the  ludicrous  features  of  men,  on 
the  contrary,  are  most  often  exposed  to  our  view.     It   is      I 
therefore  in  his  own  soul  and  in  his  imagination  that  the      / 
tragic  or  emotional  actor  must  look  for  inspiration ;  it  is  to     / 
his  own  power  of  expression  that  he  must  trust  to  reproduce    / 
the  reality  of  the  feeling.  ^ 

The  actor  who  is  not  impressionable,  who  is  not  stirred 
within  himself,  has  to  rely  on  elocution  and  conventional 
methods,  but  his  work  will  be  cold  and  mechanical  in  spite 
of  his  assiduous  and  meritorious  efforts.  All  theatrical 
devices,  all  the  display  of  lung  power,  will  not  give  life  to  a 
dead-born  personation. 

The  artist  who  feels  makes  the  public  feel.  Coldness 
cannot  produce  heat,  and  it  is  the  latter  only  which  can 
produce  life,  or  at  least  the  illusion  of  life. 

Of  course  control  and  good  taste  are  imperative  in  every 
artistic  work.  We  have  often  to  curb  the  exuberance  of  our 
temperament  in  order  to  avoid  exaggeration,  which  may 
lead  even  a  talented  person  into  the  pit  of  '' ranting."  The 
ideal  actor,  it  seems  to  me,  must  possess  intelligence,  quick 
perception,  originality,  impressionability,  and  imagination 
enough  to  allow  him  to  identify  himself  with  an  assumed 


/ 


554  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

character,  and  above  all,  a  store  of  emotion  and  passion. 
Besides  those,  he  has  to  possess  many  physical  attributes,  as, 
for  instance,  an  expressive  face,  a  fine  figure,  and  a  sympa- 
thetic voice,  which  can  carry  the  tones  without  strain. 
If  a  person  possesses  all  these  qualities,  or  at  least  a  good 
part  of  them,  he  or  she  may  start  on  their  apprenticeship 
and  hope  for  success.  It  happens,  however,  very  often  that 
really  talented  individuals  are  outdone  in  their  struggles 
by  those  quick,  business-like  ones,  who  do  not  trouble 
their  brains  by  trying  to  do  original  work,  but  simply 
imitate  others,  get  hold  of  somebody  else's  stage  business 
and  attitudes,  etc.  They  do  all  this  with  so  much  assurance 
and  so  much  self-confidence  that  they  dazzle  the  innocent 
managers,  who  supply  them  wdth  situations  often  denied  to 
the  more  retiring  and  less  self-assertive,  though  talented, 
candidates. 

A  pretty  doll-like  face  in  the  case  of  women  is  almost 
always  a  winner,  while  a  plainer  but  expressive  and  in- 
tellectual one  is  left  in  the  shade  until  some  one  who  knows 
finds  her  out^Z-.--^-^ 

As  a  rule  the  way  to  enter  the  stage  profession  is  a  harder 
one  for  women  than  for  men.  A  bold,  dashing  creature 
counts  for  more  than  one  truly  qualified  for  the  boards.  In 
the  present  state  of  affairs,  where  tuition  is  so  expensive, 
and  where  all  depends  upon  the  good-will  of  those  who  direct 
the  theatrical  world,  it  is  exceedingly  hard  for  a  poor  and 
modest  girl  to  obtain  an  engagement. 

In  several  European  countries,  and  especially  in  France, 
there  are  so-called  dramatic  conservatories,  public  insti- 
tutions usually  closely  connected  with  the  national  theatres, 
where  aspirants  for  the  stage  can  find  an  adequate  training 
gratis.  Of  course  these  conservatories  accept  only  students 
who  appear  best  adapted  for  the  career,  and  they  do  not  keep 
them  unless  they  show  genuine  talent.  After  having  fin- 
ished the  proper  course  and  passed  examination,  the  pupils 


THE  NEW  WORLD  556 

of  these  institutions  receive  positions  in  stock  companies, 
either  in  the  capital  or  in  some  provincial  theatres. 

There  is  nothing  of  the  kind  here.  The  dramatic  schools 
in  America,  such  as  they  are  (and  a  few  of  them  are  very- 
good,  indeed),  are  very  expensive,  and  only  those  who  can 
afiford  to  pay  the  required  sum  can  receive  tuition  and  a 
subsequent  engagement.  Such  a  system  presents  two 
drawbacks :  — 

First,  young  people  who  have  talent  and  no  money  are 
deprived  of  the  advantages  the  school  could  give  them. 

Second,  those  schools  being  planned  on  a  business  basis, 

every  one  who  pays  is  admitted  to  them.     The  result  is  that 

they  produce  aspirants  for  the  dramatic  career  without  the 

slightest  qualification  for  it,  who  only  increase  the  number 

--of  bad  actors  and  actresses. '^^—^■:'^ 

"'  "^Therefore  I  welcome  with  joy  the  advent  of  the  National 
Theatre  in  New  York,  which  will,  like  the  Th^dtre  Frangais, 
have  in  connection  with  it  a  dramatic  school,  where  only 
students  who  give  indication  of  talent  will  be  accepted,  and 
where  the  tuition  and  training  will  be  offered  without  pay. 

The  establishment  of  the  National  Theatre  is  in  itself  a 
great  event  in  the  annals  of  the  American  stage,  and  will 
undoubtedly  have  a  beneficent  influence  on  the  develop- 
ment of  dramatic  art  in  the  United  States. 

I  cannot  refrain  from  mentioning  that  years  ago  I  pub- 
lished an  article  in  the  Forum  upon  the  advisability 
of  founding  endowed  theatres  in  this  country.  / 

I  began  these  general  considerations  by  quoting  the  query  * 
of  a  pessimist:  ''Is  dramatic  acting  an  art?''  In  my  own 
estimation  it  is  as  high  an  art  as  painting,  sculpture,  archi-^' 
tecture,  or  music.  All  of  them  are  based  on  brain-work,  and 
are  inspired  by  imagination  perfected  by  aesthetic  sense. 
In  common  with  painting  and  sculpture,  the  object  of  drama 
is  to  represent  nature  through  the  artist's  temperament. 
It   may  be  true  that    the  other  branches   require  a  more 


556  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS 

assiduous  training,  as  the  artistic  execution  depends,  in  a 
great  measure,  upon  perfect  manual  skill,  or  the  deft  use  of 
the  tools. 

Is  the  actor's  task  less  hard  because  his  only  tool  is  his  own 
personality  ?  Has  he  not  to  master  and  moderate  his  voice, 
rule  his  motions  and  gestures,  graduate  and  control  his 
feelings,  watch  over  the  inflection  of  every  word  and  over 
the  expression  of  his  face,  and  do  all  this  without  showing 
the  effort,  so  that  art  be  concealed  and  appear  like  reality  ? 
Has  he  not  to  throw  away  his  own  nature  and  put  himself 
into  the  character  he  represents,  to  identify  himself  with 
it,  to  shed  tears  or  to  laugh,  to  rage,  to  hate,  to  love, 
and  doing  this  maintain  the  illusion  of  life  before  hundreds 
of  strangers,  while  -  peiiiaps-  -his  own  heart  is  t-f^mhling  . 
lest  in  the  heaL-Ol  -paoeion  heJ^ose^contiQl^avrer  his  part  ? 

r  often  hear  people  complain  of  the  numbeTof  bad  airtorsy. . 
but  nobody  who  has  not  been  connected  with  the  stage  can 
realize  how  difficult  it  is  to  be  really  a  good  actor  and  what 
amount  of  work  and  experience  it  takes  to  form  a  psycho- 
logically true  conception  of  a  character,  and  how  much 
nervous  power  it  needs  to  create  an  impression  of  reality. 

I  have  endeavored  here  to  prove  why  I  consider  the  drama 
entitled  to  take  rank  among  its  sister  arts;  it  remains  only 
now  to  say  a  few  words  about  its  influence  over  the  outside 
world. 

Nobody,  surely,  tries  to  deny  the  strong  impression  it  can 
produce  when  well  presented.  Acting  through  the  medium 
of  both  senses,  sight  and  hearing,  like  plastic  art  and  music 
combined,  it  brings  the  audience  in  closer  contact  than 
either  with  the  reality  of  life  and  the  beauty  of  poetry, 
and  therefore  impresses  itself  also  more  strongly  and  quickly 
upon  man's  mentality  and  imagination.  In  the  same  way 
as  literature  its  effects  can  be  good  or  bad. 

There  is  no  question  that  when  it  is  treated  purely  as 
an  object  of  commercial  speculation  the  drama  is  apt  to 


THE  NEW  WORLD 


P 

l\ 
II 

Si 
I. 
J 


/ 


558  MEMORIES  AND  IMPRESSIONS. 

degenerate  by  becoming  an  appeal  to  the  grosser  instincts 
of  humanity,  to  be  a  purveyor  of  coarseness  and  immorality. 
This  fact  explains,  in  some  way,  though  it  does  not  entirely 
justify,  the  prejudice  against  the  theatre  which  exists,  even 
to-day,  among  many  serious  and  respectable  though  nar- 
row-minded people,  who  are  apt  to  condemn  the  highest 
effort  of  true  art,  because  at  some  theatres  indecent  plaj^s 
are  produced,  and  so-called  ''leg  shows  "  are  still  in  existence. 
They  forget  that  the  theatre,  if  true  to  its  mission  and 
properly  conducted,  may  be  one  of  the  most  refining  and 
wholesome  influences. 

All  these  thoughts  have  been  often  expounded  in  a  much 
abler  way  than  I  can  presume  to  do,  but  whilst  I  do  not 
know  how  far  my  apology  may  convince  others,  I  can  state 
that  these  considerations  always  formed  the  essence  of  my 
belief/  "" 

I  began  this  article  with  a  query  as  to  whether  I  have  done 
right  in  devoting  my  life  to  the  stage.  Now  that  I  have 
retired,  and  can  look  over  my  past  calmly,  I  do  not  regret 
my  choice.  Of  course  the  road  I  travelled  was  not  an  easy 
one,  the  obstacles  were  numerous  and  difficult,  the  work 
was  hard,  indeed,  and  many  pangs  did  my  career  cost  me, 
but  I  was  amply  rewarded.  My  life  became  richer  through 
the  experience  I  gained,  through  the  many  associations  it 
was  my  good  fortune  to  form ;  but  the  best  reward  of  fil  was 
the  artistic  satisfaction,  the  jo}''  that  I  found  in  the  work  . 
itself,  also  the  hope  that  my  achievements  may  hav-a  been 
of  some  use,  and  in  any  case  that  they  did  not  exert  an  un- 
wholesome influence  upon  my  audiences ;  for  the- key  note  j)f 
my  conceptions  was  always  founded  on  human  sympathy, 
and  I  persistently  tried  to  find  a  redeeming  side  to  the  weak- 
nesses and  errors  of  my  heroines,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand, 
I  endeavored  in  the  execution  never  to  lose  sight  of  the 
aesthetic  objects  of  art.  Another  advantage  I  reaped,  which 
I  value  most  highly,  was  the  privilege  I  shared  with  several 


THE  NEW  WORLD  559 

illustrious  countrymen  of  mine  in  proving  to  the  outside 
world  that  our  unfortunate  and  much-maligned  nation, 
Poland,  is  always  alive,  and  cannot  be  relegated  to  oblivion, 
as  its  civilization  and  art  are  undeniable  tokens  of  its 
vitality. 

I  have  done  what  I  could  do  for  art  and  myself;  I  cer- 
tainly could  not  do  it  over  again,  and  as  for  the  excitement 
and  applause,  I  never  attached  much  value  to  either. 
What  I  loved  best  in  my  profession  was  the  work,  but  the 
moment  I  realized  I  was  losing  my  buoyancy  and  my  quick 
perception,  I  left  the  stage  without  regret) 

Every  age  has  its  rights,  and  I  am  only  taking  a  due 
advantage  of  them  when  I  allow  myself  to  rest. 

The  writing  of  my  '* memories  and  impressions''  was  rather 
a  pleasure  than  a  work,  and  I  could  not  occupy  my  time 
better  than  in  sharing  some  of  my  thoughts  and  feelings 
with  those  who  in  the  past  have  seen  me  act. 

When  I  sit  on  the  porch  of  our  cottage,  looking  at  the 
purple  hills  of  Santa  Ana  and  the  peaks  of  Sierra  Madre,  or 
at  the  blue  waters  of  the  bay,  I  feel  calm  and  contented. 
The  love  for  my  dearest  ones  fills  my  heart  to  its  very  brim, 
and  though  my  thoughts  are  often  visited  with  the  images 
of  the  glorious  moments  of  my  stage  life,  yet  no  regret,  no 
bitterness,  disturbs  my  mind,  but  gratitude  for  all  I  received 
from  God  and  men. 


( 


ORATION  OF  MICHAEL  TARASIEWICZ  AT 
FUNERAL  OF  MODJESKA^      . 

Cracow,  July  18,  1910. 

''Hail  to  thee  upon  thy  return  to  the  country  the  earth 
of  which  is  to  be  thy  last  resting-place.  Welcome  thou, 
who  might  say  of  thyself  as  did  Countess  Idalia :  — 

"'I  am  here  as  a  passing  angel.  I  have  let  thee  see  the 
lightning  and  disappeared  upon  the  firmament  of  the  sky.' 

"Welcome,  thou,  for  passing  like  an  angel  upon  the  Polish 
firmament  of  art  and  genius  and  showing  the  lightning  of  it 
to  both  hemispheres. 

"Be  blessed  for  thy  unbounded  heart,  for  thy  sweetness, 
goodness,  charm,  and  grace ;  for  having  carried  generations 
to  the  highest  summits  of  ecstasy  by  pointing  towards  the 
sublime  in  the  field  of  art  and  forcing  thy  public  to  forget 
the  misery  and  grayness  of  everyday  life. 

"Be  blessed,  thou  unforgotten,  who  disappeareth  like 
'a  golden  dream'  ineffaceable  in  the  memory  of  those  who 
had  the  happiness  of  seeing  thee,  and  those  who,  never  hav- 
ing seen  thee,  will  know  of  thee  by  tradition. 

"For  thy  art,  for  thy  constant  work,  for  that  thou  hast 
never  become  renegade  to  thy  ideal,  and  that,  in  perfecting 
thy  soul,  thou  hast  been  perfecting  the  soul  of  humanity  — 
be  blessed. 

"Depart  in  the  name  of  those  who  cannot  bow  to  the 
reality  that  they  will  never  see  thee  again  —  in  the  name 
of  the  throng  thirsting  for  beauty  not  satiated,  the  hungry 
not  to  be  nourished,  and  in  the  name  of  the  thankful  and 
sincere,  the  sad  and  the  unhappy. 

^  Translated  by  F^licie  Modjeska. 
2o  561 


562  ORATION  AT  FUNERAL  OF  MODJESKA 

''Depart  in  the  name  of  those  to  whom  thy  heart  gave 
itself  in  particular  and  for  which  it  had  to  suffer. 

''In  the  name  of  those  to  whom  thou  wert  an  example  un- 
reached, an  unparalleled  mistress,  an  exquisite  friend,  and 
a  sincere  colleague,  accept  our  homage  and  good-by. 

"Lei  Cracow  receive  thee  in  its  cemetery,  where  so  many 
great  hearts  have  been  laid  away  —  where  the  great  spirit 
of  Matejko  lies. 

"Thou  queen  of  dramatic  art  and  queen  of  the  beautiful, 
rest  in  peace  after  thy  work,  thy  battles,  and  thy  triumphs. 
May  the  breeze  of  weeping  willows  bring  thee  the  murmurs 
of  thy  beloved  stage's  poetry,  to  soothe  thy  spirit  and  please 
thy  heart. 

"And  in  return  let  thy  genius  be  the  guardian  of  the 
Polish  stage  and  keep  it  in  the  light  it  hath  attained,  and 
may  the  pilgrim  artists  visiting  thy  grave  drink  as  they 
would  from  the  spring  of  Castal,  —  faith,  strength,  example, 
—  so  that  the  thankful  hearts  of  generations  accompany 
thee  to  the  landof  eternity  and  the  Pantheon  of  immortality." 

