CHAPTER IIBOSTON (1848-1854)PETER CHARDON BROOKS, the other grandfather, diedJanuary 1, 1849, bequeathing what was supposed to bethe largest estate in Boston, about two million dollars,to his seven surviving children : four sons — Edward, PeterChardon, Gorham, and Sydney; three daughters — Charlotte,married to Edward Everett; Ann, married to Nathaniel Frothing-ham, minister of the First Church; and Abigail Brown, born April25, 1808, married September 3, 1829, to Charles Francis Adams,hardly a year older than herself. Their first child, born in 1830,was a daughter, named Louisa Catherine, after her Johnson grand-mother; the second was a son, named John Quincy, after hisPresident grandfather; the third took his father's name, CharlesFrancis; while the fourth, being of less account, was in a way givento his mother, who named him Henry Brooks, after a favoritebrother just lost. More followed, but these, being younger, hadnothing to do with the arduous process of educating.The Adams connection was singularly small in Boston, butthe family of Brooks was singularly large and even brilliant, andalmost wholly of clerical New England stock. One might havesought long in much larger and older societies for three brothers-in-law more distinguished or more scholarly than Edward Everett,Dr. Frothingham, and Mr. Adams. One might have sought equallylong for seven brothers-in-law more unlike. No doubt they allbore more or less the stamp of Boston, or at least of MassachusettsBay, but the shades of difference amounted to contrasts. Mr.Everett belonged to Boston hardly more than Mr. Adams. Oneof the most ambitious of Bostonians, he had broken bounds earlyin life by leaving the Unitarian pulpit to take a seat in Congresswhere he had given valuable support to J. Q. Adams's adminis-24The Education of Henry Adamstration; support which, as a social consequence, led to the mar-riage of the President's son, Charles Francis, with Mr. Everett'syoungest sister-in-law, Abigail Brooks. The wreck of parties whichmarked the reign of Andrew Jackson had interfered with manypromising careers, that of Edward Everett among the rest, buthe had risen with the Whig Party to power, had gone as Ministerto England, and had returned to America with the halo of a Eu-ropean reputation, and undisputed rank second only to DanielWebster as the orator and representative figure of Boston. Theother brother-in-law, Dr. Frothingham, belonged to the sameclerical school, though in manner rather the less clerical of thetwo. Neither of them had much in common with Mr. Adams, whowas a younger man, greatly biassed by his father, and by the in-herited feud between Quincy and State Street; but personal rela-tions were friendly as far as a boy could see, and the innumerablecousins went regularly to the First Church every Sunday in win-ter, and slept through their uncle's sermons, without once think-ing to ask what the sermons were supposed to mean for them.For two hundred years the First Church had seen the same littleboys, sleeping more or less soundly under the same or similar con-ditions, and dimly conscious of the same feuds; but the feuds hadnever ceased, and the boys had always grown up to inherit them.Those of the generation of 1812 had mostly disappeared in 1850;death had cleared that score; the quarrels of John Adams, andthose of John Quincy Adams were no longer acutely personal;the game was considered as drawn; and Charles Francis Adamsmight then have taken his inherited rights of political leadershipin succession to Mr. Webster and Mr. Everett, his seniors. Be-tween him and State Street the relation was more natural thanbetween Edward Everett and State Street; but instead of doingso, Charles Francis Adams drew himself aloof and renewed theold war which had already lasted since 1700. He could not helpit. With the record of J. Q. Adams fresh in the popular memory,his son and his only representative could not make terms withBoston25the slave-power, and the slave-power overshadowed all the greatBoston interests. No doubt Mr. Adams had principles of hisown, as well as inherited, but even his children, who as yet hadno principles, could equally little follow the lead of Mr. Websteror even of Mr. Seward. They would have lost in considerationmore than they would have gained in patronage. They wereanti-slavery by birth, as their name was Adams and their homewas Quincy. No matter how much they had wished to enter StateStreet, they felt that State Street never would trust them, or theyit. Had State Street been Paradise, they must hunger for it invain, and it hardly needed Daniel Webster to act as archangelwith the flaming sword, to order them away from the door.Time and experience, which alter all perspectives, altered thisamong the rest, and taught the boy gentler judgment, but evenwhen only ten years old, his face was already fixed, and his heartwas stone, against State Street; his education was warped beyondrecovery in the direction of Puritan politics. Between him andhis patriot grandfather at the same age, the conditions had changedlittle. The year 1848 was like enough to the year 1776 to make afair parallel. The parallel, as concerned bias of education, was com-plete when, a few months after the death of John Quincy Adams,a convention of anti-slavery delegates met at Buffalo to organizea new party and named candidates for the general election inNovember: for President, Martin Van Buren; for Vice-President,Charles Francis Adams.For any American boy the fact that his father was running foroffice would have dwarfed for the time every other excitement,but even apart from personal bias, the year 1848, for a boy's roadthrough life, was decisive for twenty years to come. There wasnever a side-path of escape. The stamp of 1848 was almost asindelible as the stamp of 1776, but in the eighteenth or any earliercentury, the stamp mattered less because it was standard, andevery one bore it; while men whose lives were to fall in the genera-tion between 1865 and 1900 had, first of all, to get rid of it, and26The Education of Henry Adamstake the stamp that belonged to their time. This was their educa-tion. To outsiders, immigrants, adventurers, it was easy, but theold Puritan nature rebelled against change. The reason it gave wasforcible. The Puritan thought his thought higher and his moralstandards better than those of his successors. So they were. Hecould not be convinced that moral standards had nothing to dowith it, and that utilitarian morality was good enough for him,as it was for the graceless. Nature had given to the boy Henry acharacter that, in any previous century, would have led him intothe Church; he inherited dogma and a priori thought from thebeginning of time; and he scarcely needed a violent reaction likeanti-slavery politics to sweep him back into Puritanism with aviolence as great as that of a religious war.Thus far he had nothing to do with it; his education was chieflyinheritance, and during the next five or six years, his father alonecounted for much. If he were to worry successfully through life'squicksands, he must depend chiefly on his father's pilotage; but,for his father, the channel lay clear, while for himself an unknownocean lay beyond. His father's business in life was to get past thedangers of the slave-power, or to fix its bounds at least. The taskdone, he might be content to let his sons pay for the pilotage; andit mattered little to his success whether they paid it with theirlives wasted on battle-fields or in misdirected energies and lostopportunity. The generation that lived from 1840 to 1870 coulddo very well with the old forms of education; that which had itswork to do between 1870 and 1900 needed something quite new.His father's character was therefore the larger part of his educa-tion, as far as any single person affected it, and for that reason, iffor no other, the son was always a much interested critic of hisfather's mind and temper. Long after his death as an old man ofeighty, his sons continued to discuss this subject with a gooddeal of difference in their points of view. To his son Henry, thequality that distinguished his father from all the other figuresin the family group, was that, in his opinion, Charles FrancisBoston27Adams possessed the only perfectly balanced mind that everexisted in the name. For a hundred years, every newspaperscribbler had, with more or less obvious excuse, derided or abusedthe older Adamses for want of judgment. They abused CharlesFrancis for his judgment. Naturally they never attempted toassign values to either; that was the children's affair; but thetraits were real. Charles Francis Adams was singular for men-tal poise — absence of self-assertion or self-consciousness — thefaculty of standing apart without seeming aware that he wasalone — a balance of mind and temper that neither challengednor avoided notice, nor admitted question of superiority or in-feriority, of jealousy, of personal motives, from any source, evenunder great pressure. This unusual poise of judgment and temper,ripened by age, became the more striking to his son Henry as helearned to measure the mental faculties themselves, which werein no way exceptional either for depth or range. Charles FrancisAdams's memory was hardly above the average; his mind was notbold like his grandfather's or restless like his father's, or imagina-tive or oratorical — still less mathematical; but it worked withsingular perfection, admirable self-restraint, and instinctive mas-tery of form. Within its range it was a model.The standards of Boston were high, much affected by theold clerical self-respect which gave the Unitarian clergy unusualsocial charm. Dr. Channing, Mr. Everett, Dr. Frothingham,Dr. Palfrey, President Walker, R. W. Emerson, and other Bos-ton ministers of the same school, would have commanded dis-tinction in any society; but the Adamses had little or no affinitywith the pulpit, and still less with its eccentric offshoots, likeTheodore Parker, or Brook Farm, or the philosophy of Concord.Besides its clergy, Boston showed a literary group, led by Tick-nor, Prescott, Longfellow, Motley, O. W. Holmes; but Mr.Adams was not one of them; as a rule they were much too Web-sterian. Even in science Boston could claim a certain eminence,especially in medicine, but Mr. Adams cared very little for science.!The Education of Henry Adams28He stood alone. He had no master — hardly even his father. Hehad no scholars — hardly even his sons.Almost alone among his Boston contemporaries, he was notEnglish in feeling or in sympathies. Perhaps a hundred years ofacute hostility to England had something to do with this familytrait; but in his case it went further and became indifference tosocial distinction. Never once in forty years of intimacy did hisson notice in him a trace of snobbishness. He was one of theexceedingly small number of Americans to whom an English dukeor duchess seemed to be indifferent, and royalty itself nothingmore than a slightly inconvenient presence. This was, it is true,rather the tone of English society in his time, but Americans werelargely responsible for changing it, and Mr. Adams had everypossible reason for affecting the manner of a courtier even if hedid not feel the sentiment. Never did his son see him flatter orvilify, or show a sign of envy or jealousy; never a shade of vanityor self-conceit. Never a tone of arrogance! Never a gesture ofprideThe same thing might perhaps have been said of John QuincyAdams, but in him his associates averred that it was accompaniedby mental restlessness and often by lamentable want of judgment.No one ever charged Charles Francis Adams with this fault. Thecritics charged him with just the opposite defect. They called himcold. No doubt, such perfect poise — such intuitive self-adjust-ment — was not maintained by nature without a sacrifice of thequalities which would have upset it. No doubt, too, that evenself-conscious children whohis restless-minded, introspective,knew him best were much too ignorant of the world and of humannature to suspect how rare and complete was the model beforetheir eyes. A coarser instrument would have impressed them more.Average human nature is very coarse, and its ideals must neces-sarily be average. The world never loved perfect poise. Whatthe world does love is commonly absence of poise, for it has to beamused. Napoleons and Andrew Jacksons amuse it, but it is notBoston29amused by perfect balance. Had Mr. Adams's nature been cold,he would have followed Mr. Webster, Mr. Everett, Mr. Seward,and Mr. Winthrop in the lines of party discipline and self-interest.Had it been less balanced than it was, he would have gone withMr. Garrison, Mr. Wendell Phillips, Mr. Edmund Quincy, andTheodore Parker, into secession. Between the two paths he foundan intermediate one, distinctive and characteristic-— he set upa party of his own.This political party became a chief influence in the educationof the boy Henry in the six years 1848 to 1854, and violentlyaffected his character at the moment when character is plastic.The group of men with whom Mr. Adams associated himself, andwhose social centre was the house in Mount Vernon Street, num-bered only three: Dr. John G. Palfrey, Richard H. Dana, andCharles Sumner. Dr. Palfrey was the oldest, and in spite of hisclerical education, was to a boy often the most agreeable, for histalk was lighter and his range wider than that of the others; hehad wit, or humor, and the give-and-take of dinner-table exchange.Born to be a man of the world, he forced himself to be clergyman,professor, or statesman, while, like every other true Bostonian,he yearned for the ease of the Athenaeum Club in Pall Mall or theCombination Room at Trinity. Dana at first suggested the oppo-site; he affected to be still before the mast, a direct, rather bluff,vigorous seaman, and only as one got to know him better onefound the man of rather excessive refinement trying with successto work like a day-laborer, deliberately hardening his skin to theburden, as though he were still carrying hides at Monterey. Un-doubtedly he succeeded, for his mind and will were robust, buthe might have said what his lifelong friend William M. Evartsused to say: "I pride myself on my success in doing not the thingsI like to do, but the things I don't like to do." Dana's ideal oflife was to be a great Englishman, with a seat on the front benchesof the House of Commons until he should be promoted to thewoolsack; beyond all, with a social status that should place him3<dThe Education of Henry Adamsabove the scuffle of provincial and unprofessional annoyances; buthe forced himself to take life as it came, and he suffocated hislongings with grim self-discipline, by mere force of will. Of thefour men, Dana was the most marked. Without dogmatism orself-assertion, he seemed always to be fully in sight, a figure thatcompletely filled a well-defined space. He, too, talked well, andhis mind worked close to its subject, as a lawyer's should; butdisguise and silence it as he liked, it was aristocratic to the tenthgeneration.In that respect, and in that only, Charles Sumner was likehim, but Sumner, in almost every other quality, was quite dif-ferent from his three associates — altogether out of line. He, too,adored English standards, but his ambition led him to rival thecareer of Edmund Burke. No young Bostonian of his time hadmade so brilliant a start, but rather in the steps of Edward Ever-ett than of Daniel Webster. As an orator he had achieved atriumph by his oration against war; but Boston admired himchiefly for his social success in England and on the Continent;success that gave to every Bostonian who enjoyed it a halo neveracquired by domestic sanctity. Mr. Sumner, both by interest andinstinct, felt the value of his English connection, and cultivatedit the more as he became socially an outcast from Boston societyby the passions of politics. He was rarely without a pocket-fullof letters from duchesses or noblemen in England. Having sac-rificed to principle his social position in America, he clung themore closely to his foreign attachments. The Free Soil Partyfared ill in Beacon Street. The social arbiters of Boston — GeorgeTicknor and the rest — had to admit, however unwillingly, thatthe Free Soil leaders could not mingle with the friends and fol-lowers of Mr. Webster. Sumner was socially ostracized, and so,for that matter, were Palfrey, Dana, Russell, Adams, and all theother avowed anti-slavery leaders, but for them it mattered less,because they had houses and families of their own; while Sumnerhad neither wife nor household, and, though the most sociallyBoston13ambitious of all, and the most hungry for what used to be calledpolite society, he could enter hardly half-a-dozen houses in Bos-ton. Longfellow stood by him in Cambridge, and even in BeaconStreet he could always take refuge in the house of Mr. Lodge, butfew days passed when he did not pass some time in Mount Ver-non Street. Even with that, his solitude was glacial, and reactedon his character. He had nothing but himself to think about.His superiority was, indeed, real and incontestable; he was theclassical ornament of the anti-slavery party; their pride in himwas unbounded, and their admiration outspoken.The boy Henry worshipped him, and if he ever regarded anyolder man as a personal friend, it was Mr. Sumner. The relationof Mr. Sumner in the household was far closer than any relationof blood. None of the uncles approached such intimacy. Sum-ner was the boy's ideal of greatness; the highest product of na-ture and art. The only fault of such a model was its superioritywhich defied imitation. To the twelve-year-old boy, his father,Dr. Palfrey, Mr. Dana, were men, more or less like what he him-self might become; but Mr. Sumner was a different order —heroic.As the boy grew up to be ten or twelve years old, his father gavehim a writing-table in one of the alcoves of his Boston library,and there, winter after winter, Henry worked over his LatinGrammar and listened to these four gentlemen discussing thecourse of anti-slavery politics. The discussions were always seri-ous; the Free Soil Party took itself quite seriously; and they werehabitual because Mr. Adams had undertaken to edit a news-paper as the organ of these gentlemen, who came to discuss itspolicy and expression. At the same time Mr. Adams was edit-ing the "Works" of his grandfather John Adams, and made theboy read texts for proof-correction.In after years his fathersometimes complained that, as a reader of Novanglus and Massa-chusettensis, Henry had shown very little consciousness of punc-tuation; but the boy regarded this part of school life only as a32The Education of Henry Adamswarning, if he ever grew up to write dull discussions in the news-papers, to try to be dull in some different way from that of hisgreat-grandfather. Yet the discussions in the Boston Whig werecarried on in much the same style as those of John Adams andhis opponent, and appealed to much the same society and thesame habit of mind. The boy got as little education, fitting himfor his own time, from the one as from the other, and he got nomore from his contact with the gentlemen themselves who wereall types of the past.Down to 1850, and even later, New England society was stilldirected by the professions.Lawyers, physicians, professors,merchants were classes, and acted not as individuals, but asthough they were clergymen and each profession were a church.In politics the system required competent expression; it was theold Ciceronian idea of government by the best that produced thelong line of New England statesmen. They chose men to repre-sent them because they wanted to be well represented, and theychose the best they had. Thus Boston chose Daniel Webster, andWebster took, not as pay, but as honorarium, the cheques raisedfor him by Peter Harvey from the Appletons, Perkinses, Amorys,Searses, Brookses, Lawrences, and so on, who begged him torepresent them. Edward Everett held the rank in regular suc-cession to Webster. Robert C. Winthrop claimed succession toEverett. Charles Sumner aspired to break the succession, butnot the system. The Adamses had never been, for any length oftime, a part of this State succession; they had preferred thenational service, and had won all their distinction outside theState, but they too had required State support and had com-monly received it. The little group of men in Mount VernonStreet were an offshoot of this system; they were statesmen, notpoliticians; they guided public opinion, but were little guided byit.The boy naturally learned only one lesson from his saturationin such air. He took for granted that this sort of world, more orBoston:33less the same that had always existed in Boston and Massachu-setts Bay, was the world which he was to fit. Had he knownEurope he would have learned no better. The Paris of Louis. Phi-lippe, Guizot, and de Tocqueville, as well as the London of Rob-ert Peel, Macaulay, and John Stuart Mill, were but varieties ofthe same upper-class bourgeoisie that felt instinctive cousinshipwith the Boston of Ticknor, Prescott, and Motley. Even thetypical grumbler Carlyle, who cast doubts on the real capacityof the middle class, and who at times thought himself eccentric,found friendship and alliances in Boston — still more in Con-cord. The system had proved so successful that even Germanywanted to try it, and Italy yearned for it. England's middle-classgovernment was the ideal of human progress.Even the violent reaction after 1848, and the return of allEurope to military practices, never for a moment shook the truefaith. No one, except Karl Marx, foresaw radical change. Whatannounced it? The world was producing sixty or seventy mil-lion tons of coal, and might be using nearly a million steam-horse-power, just beginning to make itself felt. All experience since thecreation of man, all divine revelation or human science, con-spired to deceive and betray a twelve-year-old boy who took forgranted that his ideas, which were alone respectable, would bealone respected.Viewed from Mount Vernon Street, the problem of life was assimple as it was classic. Politics offered no difficulties, for therethe moral law was a sure guide. Social perfection was also sure,because human nature worked for Good, and three instrumentswere all she asked — Suffrage, Common Schools, and Press. Onthese points doubt was forbidden. Education was divine, andman needed only a correct knowledge of facts to reach perfection" Were half the power that fills the world with terror,Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts,Given to redeem the human mind from error,There were no need of arsenals nor forts."34The Education of Henry AdamsNothing quieted doubt so completely as the mental calm of theUnitarian clergy. In uniform excellence of life and character,moral and intellectual, the score of Unitarian clergymen aboutBoston, who controlled society and Harvard College, were neverexcelled. They proclaimed as their merit that they insisted onno doctrine, but taught, or tried to teach, the means of leadinga virtuous, useful, unselfish life, which they held to be sufficientfor salvation. For them, difficulties might be ignored; doubtswere waste of thought; nothing exacted solution. Boston hadsolved the universe; or had offered and realized the best solutionyet tried. The problem was worked out.Of all the conditions of his youth which afterwards puzzledthe grown-up man, this disappearance of religion puzzled himmost. The boy went to church twice every Sunday; he was taughtto read his Bible, and he learned religious poetry by heart; hebelieved in a mild deism; he prayed; he went through all theforms; but neither to him nor to his brothers or sisters was reli-gion real. Even the mild discipline of the Unitarian Church wasso irksome that they all threw it off at the first possible moment,and never afterwards entered a church. The religious instincthad vanished, and could not be revived, although one made inlater life many efforts to recover it. That the most powerfulemotion of man, next to the sexual, should disappear, mightbe a personal defect of his own; but that the most intelligentsociety, led by the most intelligent clergy, in the most moral con-ditions he ever knew, should have solved all the problems of theuniverse so thoroughly as to have quite ceased making itselfanxious about past or future, and should have persuaded itselfthat all the problems which had convulsed human thought fromearliest recorded time, were not worth discussing, seemed tohim the most curious social phenomenon he had to account forin a long life. The faculty of turning away one's eyes as oneapproaches a chasm is not unusual, and Boston showed, underthe lead of Mr. Webster, how successfully it could be done inBoston35politics; but in politics a certain number of men did at least pro-test. In religion and philosophy no one protested. Such protestas was made took forms more simple than the silence, like thedeism of Theodore Parker, and of the boy's own cousin OctaviusFrothingham, who distressed his father and scandalized BeaconStreet by avowing sceptism that seemed to solve no old problems,and to raise many new ones. The less aggressive protest of RalphWaldo Emerson, was, from an old-world point of view, less seri-ous. It was naif.The children reached manhood without knowing religion, andwith the certainty that dogma, metaphysics, and abstract phil-osophy were not worth knowing. So one-sided an education couldhave been possible in no other country or time, but it became,almost of necessity, the more literary and political. As the chil-dren grew up, they exaggerated the literary and the politicalinterests. They joined in the dinner-table discussions and fromchildhood the boys were accustomed to hear, almost every day,table-talk as good as they were ever likely to hear again, Theeldest child, Louisa, was one of the most sparkling creatures herbrother met in a long and varied experience of bright women.The oldest son, John, was afterwards regarded as one of the besttalkers in Boston society, and perhaps the most popular man inthe State, though apt to be on the unpopular side. Palfrey andDana could be entertaining when they pleased, and thoughCharles Sumner could hardly be called light in hand, he was will-ing to be amused, and smiled grandly from time to time; whileMr. Adams, who talked relatively little, was always a good lis-tener, and laughed over a witticism till he choked.By way of educating and amusing the children, Mr. Adamsread much aloud, and was sure to read political literature, espe-cially when it was satirical, like the speeches of Horace Mann andthe "Epistles" of "Hosea Biglow," with great delight to theyouth. So he read Longfellow and Tennyson as their poems ap-peared, but the children took possession of Ejickens and Thackeray36The Education of Henry Adamsfor themselves. Both were too modern for tastes founded onPope and Dr. Johnson. The boy Henry soon became a desultoryreader of every book he found readable, but these were commonlyeighteenth-century historians because his father's library was fullof them. In the want of positive instincts, he drifted into themental indolence of history. So, too, he read shelves of eighteenth-century poetry, but when his father offered his own set of Words-worth as a gift on condition of reading it through, he declined.Pope and Gray called for no mental effort; they were easy read-ing; but the boy was thirty years old before his education reachedWordsworth.This is the story of an education, and the person or persons whofigure in it are supposed to have values only as educators or edu-cated. The surroundings concern it only so far as they affecteducation. Sumner, Dana, Palfrey, had values of their own, likeHume, Pope, and Wordsworth, which any one may study in theirworks; here all appear only as influences on the mind of a boy verynearly the average of most boys in physical and mental stature.The influence was wholly political and literary. His father madeno effort to force his mind, but left him free play, and this wasperhaps best. Only in one way his father rendered him a greatservice by trying to teach him French and giving him some ideaof a French accent. Otherwise the family was rather an atmos-phere than an influence. The boy had a large and overpoweringset of brothers and sisters, who were modes or replicas of thesame type, getting the same education, struggling with the sameproblems, and solving the question, or leaving it unsolved muchin the same way. They knew no more than he what they wantedor what to do for it, but all were conscious that they would liketo control power in some form; and the same thing could be saidof an ant or an elephant. Their form was tied to politics or liter-ature. They amounted to one individual with half-a-dozen sidesor facets; their temperaments reacted on each other and madeeach child more like the other. This was also education, but in theBoston37type, and the Boston or New England type was well enough known.What no one knew was whether the individual who thought himselfa representative of this type, was fit to deal with life.As far as outward bearing went, such a family of turbulent chil-dren, given free rein by their parents, or indifferent to check,should have come to more or less grief. Certainly no one was strongenough to control them, least of all their mother, the queen-beeof the hive, on whom nine-tenths of the burden fell, on whosestrength they all depended, but whose children were much tooself-willed and self-confident to take guidance from her, or fromany one else, unless in the direction they fancied. Father andmother were about equally helpless. Almost every large familyin those days produced at least one black sheep, and if this genera-tion of Adamses escaped, it was as much a matter of surprise tothem as to their neighbors. By some happy chance they grew upto be decent citizens, but Henry Adams, as a brand escaped fromthe burning, always looked back with astonishment at their luck.The fact seemed to prove that they were born, like birds, with acertain innate balance. Home influences alone never saved theNew England boy from ruin, though sometimes they may havehelped to ruin him; and the influences outside of home were nega-If school helped, it was only by reaction. The dislike oftive.school was so strong as to be a positive gain. The passionate hatredof school methods was almost a method in itself. Yet the day-school of that time was respectable, and the boy had nothing tocomplain of. In fact, he never complained. He hated it becausehe was here with a crowd of other boys and compelled to learnby memory a quantity of things that did not amuse him. Hismemory was slow, and the effort painful. For him to conceive thathis memory could compete for school prizes with machines oftwo or three times its power, was to prove himself wanting notonly in memory, but flagrantly in mind. He thought his mind agood enough machine, if it were given time to act, but it actedwrong if hurried. Schoolmasters never gave time.38The Education of Henry AdamsIn any and all its forms, the boy detested school, and the pre-judice became deeper with years. He always reckoned his school-days, from ten to sixteen years old, as time thrown away. Per-haps his needs turned out to be exceptional, but his existence wasexceptional. Between 1850 and 1900 nearly every one's existencewas exceptional. For success in the life imposed on him he needed,as afterwards appeared, the facile use of only four tools : Mathe-matics, French, German, and Spanish. With these, he couldmaster in very short time any special branch of inquiry, and feelat home in any society. Latin and Greek, he could, with the helpof the modern languages, learn more completely by the intelligentwork of six weeks than in the six years he spent on them at school.These four tools were necessary to his success in life, but he nevercontrolled any one of them.Thus, at the outset, he was condemned to failure more or lesscomplete in the life awaiting him, but not more so than his com-panions. Indeed, had his father kept the boy at home, and givenhim half an hour's direction every day, he would have done morefor him than school ever could do for them. Of course, school-taught men and boys looked down on home-bred boys, and ratherprided themselves on their own ignorance, but the man of sixtycan generally see what he needed in life, and in Henry Adams'sopinion it was not school.Most school experience was bad. Boy associations at fifteenwere worse than none. Boston at that time offered few healthyresources for boys or men. The bar-room and billiard-room weremore familiar than parents knew. As a rule boys could skate andswim and were sent to dancing-school; they played a rudimentarygame of baseball, football, and hockey; a few could sail a boat;still fewer had been out with a gun to shoot yellow-legs or a straywild duck; one or two may have learned something of natural his-tory if they came from the neighborhood of Concord; none couldride across country, or knew what shooting with dogs meant.Sport as a pursuit was unknown. Boat-racing came after 1850.Boston39For horse-racing, only the trotting-course existed. Of all pleasures,winter sleighing was still the gayest and most popular. From noneof these amusements could the boy learn anything likely to be ofuse to him in the world. Books remained as in the eighteenthcentury, the source of life, and as they came out — Thackeray,Dickens, Bulwer, Tennyson, Macaulay, Carlyle, and the rest —they were devoured; but as far as happiness went, the happiesthours of the boy's education were passed in summer lying on amusty heap of Congressional Documents in the old farmhouseat Quincy, reading "Quentin Durward," "Ivanhoe," and " TheTalisman," and raiding the garden at intervals for peaches andpears. On the whole he learned most then.