CHAPTER IXFOES OR FRIENDS (1862)OF the year 1862 Henry Adams could never think withouta shudder. The war alone did not greatly distress him;already in his short life he was used to seeing people wadein blood, and he could plainly discern in history, that man fromthe beginning had found his chief amusement in bloodshed; butthe ferocious joy of destruction at its best requires that one shouldkill what one hates, and young Adams neither hated nor wantedto kill his friends the rebels, while he wanted nothing so much asto wipe England off the earth. Never could any good come fromthat besotted race! He was feebly trying to save his own life.Every day the British Government deliberately crowded him onestep further into the grave. He could see it; the Legation knew it;no one doubted it; no one thought of questioning it. The TrentAffair showed where Palmerston and Russell stood. The escapeof the rebel cruisers from Liverpool was not, in a young man's eyes,the sign of hesitation, but the proof of their fixed intention to in-tervene. Lord Russell's replies to Mr. Adams's notes were dis-courteous in their indifference, and, to an irritable young privatesecretary of twenty-four, were insolent in their disregard of truth.Whatever forms of phrase were usual in public to modify the harsh-ness of invective, in private no political opponent in England, andfew political friends, hesitated to say brutally of Lord John Russellthat he lied. This was no great reproach, for, more or less, everystatesman lied, but the intensity of the private secretary's ragesprang from his belief that Russell's form of defence covered intentto kill. Not for an instant did the Legation draw a free breath.The suspense was hideous and unendurable.The Minister, no doubt, endured it, but he had support andconsideration, while his son had nothing to think about but hisFoes or Friends129friends who were mostly dying under McClellan in the swampsabout Richmond, or his enemies who were exulting in Pall Mall.He bore it as well as he could till midsummer, but, when thestory of the second Bull Run appeared, he could bear it no longer,and after a sleepless night, walking up and down his room withoutreflecting that his father was beneath him, he announced at break-fast his intention to go home into the army. His mother seemedto be less impressed by the announcement than by the walkingover her head, which was so unlike her as to surprise her son. Hisfather, too, received the announcement quietly. No doubt theyexpected it, and had taken their measures in advance. In thosedays, parents got used to all sorts of announcements from theirchildren. Mr. Adams took his son's defection as quietly as hetook Bull Run; but his son never got the chance to go. He foundobstacles constantly rising in his path. The remonstrances of hisbrother Charles, who was himself in the Army of the Potomac,and whose opinion had always the greatest weight with Henry,had much to do with delaying action; but he felt, of his own ac-cord, that if he deserted his post in London, and found the Capuancomforts he expected in Virginia where he would have only bulletsto wound him, he would never forgive himself for leaving his fatherand mother alone to be devoured by the wild beasts of the Britishamphitheatre. This reflection might not have stopped him, buthis father's suggestion was decisive. The Minister pointed outthat it was too late for him to take part in the actual campaign,and that long before next spring they would all go home together.The young man had copied too many affidavits about rebelcruisers to miss the point of this argument, so he sat down againto copy some more. Consul Dudley at Liverpool provided a con-tinuous supply. Properly, the affidavits were no business of theprivate secretary, but practically the private secretary did asecond secretary's work, and was glad to do it, if it would saveMr. Seward the trouble of sending more secretaries of his ownselection to help the Minister. The work was nothing, and no one130The Education of Henry Adamsever complained of it; not even Moran, the Secretary of Legationafter the departure of Charley Wilson, though he might sit up allnight to copy. Not the work, but the play exhausted. The effortof facing a hostile society was bad enough, but that of facingfriends was worse. After terrific disasters like the seven days beforeRichmond and the second Bull Run, friends needed support; atone of bluff would have been fatal, for the average mind seesquickest through a bluff; nothing answers but candor; yet privatesecretaries never feel candid, however much they feel the reverse,and therefore they must affect candor; not always a simple actwhen one is exasperated, furious, bitter, and choking with tearsover the blunders and incapacity of one's Government. If oneshed tears, they must be shed on one's pillow. Least of all, mustone throw extra strain on the Minister, who had all he could carrywithout being fretted in his family. One must read one's Timesevery morning over one's muffin without reading aloud — "An-other disastrous Federal Defeat"; and one might not even indulgein harmless profanity. Self-restraint among friends required muchmore effort than keeping a quiet face before enemies. Great menwere the worst blunderers. One day the private secretary smiled,when standing with the crowd in the throne-room while the end-less procession made bows to the royal family, at hearing, behindhis shoulder, one Cabinet Minister remark gaily to another: "Sothe Federals have got another licking!" The point of the remarkwas its truth. Even a private secretary had learned to control histones and guard his features and betray no joy over the "lickings"of an enemy — in the enemy's presence.London was altogether beside itself on one point, in especial;it created a nightmare of its own, and gave it the shape of Abra-ham Lincoln. Behind this it placed another demon, if possiblemore devilish, and called it Mr. Seward. In regard to these twomen, English society seemed demented. Defence was useless;explanation was vain; one could only let the passion exhaust itself.One's best friends were as unreasonable as enemies, for the beliefFoes or Friends131in poor Mr. Lincoln's brutality and Seward's ferocity became adogma of popular faith. The last time Henry Adams saw Thack-eray, before his sudden death at Christmas in 1863, was in enter-ing the house of Sir Henry Holland for an evening reception.Thackeray was pulling on his coat downstairs, laughing because,in his usual blind way, he had stumbled into the wrong house andnot found it out till he shook hands with old Sir Henry, whom heknew very well, but who was not the host he expected. Then histone changed as he spoke of his — and Adams's — friend, Mrs.Frank Hampton, of South Carolina, whom he had loved as SallyBaxter and painted as Ethel Newcome. Though he had neverquite forgiven her marriage, his warmth of feeling revived whenhe heard that she had died of consumption at Columbia whileher parents and sister were refused permission to pass throughthe lines to see her. In speaking of it, Thackeray's voice trembledand his eyes filled with tears. The coarse cruelty of Lincoln and hishirelings was notorious. He never doubted that the Federals madea business of harrowing the tenderest feelings of women — partic-ularly of women — in order to punish their opponents. On quiteinsufficient evidence he burst into violent reproach. Had Adamscarried in his pocket the proofs that the reproach was unjust, hewould have gained nothing by showing them. At that momentThackeray, and all London society with him, needed the nervousrelief of expressing emotion; for if Mr. Lincoln was not what theysaid he was — what were they?For like reason, the members of the Legation kept silence, evenin private, under the boorish Scotch jibes of Carlyle. If Carlylewas wrong, his diatribes would give his true measure, and thismeasure would be a low one, for Carlyle was not likely to be moresincere or more sound in one thought than in another. The proofthat a philosopher does not know what he is talking about is aptto sadden his followers before it reacts on himself. Demolition ofone's idols is painful, and Carlyle had been an idol. Doubts caston his stature spread far into general darkness like shadows of a132The Education of Henry Adamssetting sun. Not merely the idols fell, but also the habit of faith.If Carlyle, too, was a fraud, what were his scholars and school ?Society as a rule was civil, and one had no more reason to com-plain than every other diplomatist has had, in like conditions, butone's few friends in society were mere ornament. The Legationcould not dream of contesting social control. The best they coulddo was to escape mortification, and by this time their relationswere good enough to save the Minister's family from that annoy-ance. Now and then, the fact could not be wholly disguised thatsome one had refused to meet — or to receive — the Minister; butnever an open insult, or any expression of which the Minister hadto take notice. Diplomacy served as a buffer in times of irrita-tion, and no diplomat who knew his business fretted at what everydiplomat — and none more commonly than the English — had toexpect; therefore Henry Adams, though not a diplomat and whollyunprotected, went his way peacefully enough, seeing clearly thatsociety cared little to make his acquaintance, but seeing also n©reason why society should discover charms in him of which he washimself unconscious. He went where he was asked; he was alwayscourteously received; he was, on the whole, better treated than atWashington; and he held his tongue.For a thousand reasons, the best diplomatic house in Londonwas Lord Palmerston's, while Lord John Russell's was one of theworst. Of neither host could a private secretary expect to knowanything. He might as well have expected to know the GrandLama. Personally Lord Palmerston was the last man in Londonthat a cautious private secretary wanted to know. Other PrimeMinisters may perhaps have lived who inspired among diplo-matists as much distrust as Palmerston, and yet between Palmer-ston's word and Russell's word, one hesitated to decide, and gaveyears of education to deciding, whether either could be trusted,or how far. The Queen herself in her famous memoranda ofAugust 12, 1850, gave her opinion of Palmerston in words that dif-fered little from words used by Lord John Russell, and both theFoes or Friends133Queen and Russell said in substance only what Cobden and Brightsaid in private. Every diplomatist agreed with them, yet thediplomatic standard of trust seemed to be other than the par-liamentarian. No professional diplomatists worried about false-hoods. Words were with them forms of expression which variedwith individuals, but falsehood was more or less necessary to all.The worst liars were the candid. What diplomatists wanted toknow was the motive that lay beyond the expression. In the caseof Palmerston they were unanimous in warning new colleaguesthat they might expect to be sacrificed by him to any momentarypersonal object. Every new Minister or Ambassador at the Courtof St. James received this preliminary lesson that he must, if pos-sible, keep out of Palmerston's reach. The rule was not secret ormerely diplomatic. The Queen herself had emphatically expressedthe same opinion officially. If Palmerston had an object to gain,he would go down to the House of Commons and betray or mis-represent a foreign Minister, without concern for his victim. Noone got back on him with a blow equally mischievous — not eventhe Queen — for, as old Baron Brunnow described him: "C'estune peau de rhinocere!" Having gained his point, he laughed,and his public laughed with him, for the usual British — or Amer-ican — public likes to be amused, and thought it very amus-ing to see these beribboned and bestarred foreigners caught andtossed and gored on the horns of this jovial, slashing, devil-may-care British bull.Diplomatists have no right to complain of mere lies; it is theirown fault, if, educated as they are, the lies deceive them; but theycomplain bitterly of traps. Palmerston was believed to lay traps.He was the enfant terrible of the British Government. On the otherhand, Lady Palmerston was believed to be good and loyal. Allthe diplomats and their wives seemed to think so, and took theirtroubles to her, believing that she would try to help them. Forthis reason among others, her evenings at home — Saturday Re-views, they were called — had great vogue. An ignorant young134The Education of Henry AdamsAmerican could not be expected to explain it. Cambridge Housewas no better for entertaining than a score of others. Lady Pal-merston was no longer young or handsome, and could hardly atany age have been vivacious. The people one met there were neversmart and seldom young; they were largely diplomatic, and dip-lomats are commonly dull ; they were largely political, and poli-ticians rarely decorate or beautify an evening party; they weresprinkled with literary people, who are notoriously unfashion-able; the women were of course ill-dressed and middle-aged; themen looked mostly bored or out of place; yet, beyond a doubt, Cam-bridge House was the best, and perhaps the only political housein London, and its success was due to Lady Palmerston, who neverseemed to make an effort beyond a friendly recognition. As a les-son in social education, Cambridge House gave much subject forthought. First or last, one was to know dozens of statesmen morepowerful and more agreeable than Lord Palmerston; dozens ofladies more beautiful and more painstaking than Lady Palmer-ston; but no political house so successful as Cambridge House.The world never explains such riddles. The foreigners said onlythat Lady Palmerston was "sympathique."The small fry of the Legations were admitted there, or toler-ated, without a further effort to recognize their existence, but theywere pleased because rarely tolerated anywhere else, and therethey could at least stand in a corner and look at a bishop or evena duke. This was the social diversion of young Adams. No oneknew him — not even the lackeys. The last Saturday evening heever attended, he gave his name as usual at the foot of the stair-case, and was rather disturbed to hear it shouted up as "Mr.Handrew Hadams!" He tried to correct it, and the footmanshouted more loudly: "Mr. Hanthony Hadams!" With sometemper he repeated the correction, and was finally announced as"Mr. Halexander Hadams," and under this name made his bowfor the last time to Lord Palmerston who certainly knew no better.Far down the staircase one heard Lord Palmerston's laugh asFoes or Friends135..... Yes! .. Ha! .he stood at the door receiving his guests, talking probably to oneof his henchmen, Delane, Borthwick, or Hayward, who were sureto be near. The laugh was singular, mechanical, wooden, and did. Ha!" Eachnot seem to disturb his features. "Ha! .was a slow, deliberate ejaculation, and all were in the same tone,. Yes!" by way ofas though he meant to say: "Yes! .assurance. It was a laugh of 18 10 and the Congress of Vienna.Adams would have much liked to stop a moment and ask whetherWilliam Pitt and the Duke of Wellington had laughed so; butyoung men attached to foreign Ministers asked no questions at allof Palmerston and their chiefs asked as few as possible. One madethe usual bow and received the usual glance of civility; then passedon to Lady Palmerston, who was always kind in manner, but whowasted no remarks; and so to Lady Jocelyn with her daughter,who commonly had something friendly to say; then went throughthe diplomatic corps, Brunnow, Musurus, Azeglio, Apponyi, Vande Weyer, Bille, Tricoupi, and the rest, finally dropping into thehands of some literary accident as strange there as one's self. Theroutine varied little. There was no attempt at entertainment.Except for the desperate isolation of these two first seasons, evensecretaries would have found the effort almost as mechanical as alevee at St. James's Palace.Lord Palmerston was not Foreign Secretary; he was Prime Min-ister, but he loved foreign affairs and could no more resist scoringa point in diplomacy than in whist. Ministers of foreign powers,knowing his habits, tried to hold him at arms'-length, and, to dothis, were obliged to court the actual Foreign Secretary, Lord JohnRussell, who, on July 30, 1861, was called up to the House of Lordsas an earl. By some process of personal affiliation, Minister Adamssucceeded in persuading himself that he could trust Lord Russellmore safely than Lord Palmerston. His son, being young and ill-balanced in temper, thought there was nothing to choose. Eng-lishmen saw little difference between them, and Americans werebound to follow English experience in English character. Minister136The Education of Henry AdamsAdams had much to learn, although with him as well as with hisson, the months of education began to count as aeons.Just as Brunnow predicted, Lord Palmerston made his rush atlast, as unexpected as always, and more furiously than thoughstill a private secretary of twenty-four. Only a man who had beenyoung with the battle of Trafalgar could be fresh and jaunty tothat point, but Minister Adams was not in a position to sympa-thize with octogenarian youth and found himself in a danger ascritical as that of his numerous predecessors. It was late one after-noon in June, 1862, as the private secretary returned, with theMinister, from some social function, that he saw his father pick upa note from his desk and read it in silence. Then he said curtly:"Palmerston wants a quarrel!" This was the point of the inci-dent as he felt it. Palmerston wanted a quarrel; he must not begratified; he must be stopped. The matter of quarrel was GeneralButler's famous woman-order at New Orleans, but the motive wasthe belief in President Lincoln's brutality that had taken suchdeep root in the British mind. Knowing Palmerston's habits, theMinister took for granted that he meant to score a diplomaticpoint by producing this note in the House of Commons. If he didthis at once, the Minister was lost; the quarrel was made; and onenew victim to Palmerston's passion for popularity was sacrificed.The moment was nervous — as far as the private secretaryknew, quite the most critical moment in the records of Americandiplomacy — but the story belongs to history, not to education,and can be read there by any one who cares to read it. As a partof Henry Adams's education it had a value distinct from history.That his father succeeded in muzzling Palmerston without a pub-lic scandal, was well enough for the Minister, but was not enoughfor a private secretary who liked going to Cambridge House, andwas puzzled to reconcile contradictions. That Palmerston hadwanted a quarrel was obvious; why, then, did he submit so tamelyto being made the victim of the quarrel? The correspondence thatfollowed his note was conducted feebly on his side, and he allowedFoes or Friends137the United States Minister to close it by a refusal to receive furthercommunications from hkn except through Lord Russell. The stepwas excessively strong, for it broke off private relations as wellas public, and cost even the private secretary his invitations toCambridge House. Lady Palmerston tried her best, but the twoladies found no resource except tears. They had to do withan American Minister perplexed in the extreme. Not that Mr.Adams lost his temper, for he never felt such a weight of respon-sibility, and was never more cool; but he could conceive no otherway of protecting his Government, not to speak of himself, thanto force Lord Russell to interpose. He believed that Palmerston'ssubmission and silence were due to Russell. Perhaps he was right;at the time, his son had no doubt of it, though afterwards he feltless sure. Palmerston wanted a quarrel; the motive seemed evi-dent; yet when the quarrel was made, he backed out of it; for somereason it seemed that he did not want it — at least, not then. Henever showed resentment against Mr. Adams at the time or after-wards. He never began another quarrel. Incredible as it seemed,he behaved like a well-bred gentleman who felt himself in thewrong. Possibly this change may have been due to Lord Russell'sremonstrances, but the private secretary would have felt his edu-cation in politics more complete had he ever finally made up hismind whether Palmerston was more angry with General Butler,or more annoyed at himself, for committing what was in bothcases an unpardonable betise.At the time, the question was hardly raised, for no one doubtedPalmerston's attitude or his plans. The season was near its end,and Cambridge House was soon closed. The Legation had trou-bles enough without caring to publish more. The tide of Englishfeeling ran so violently against it that one could only wait to seewhether General McClellan would bring it relief. The year 1862was a dark spot in Henry Adams's life, and the education it gavewas mostly one that he gladly forgot. As far as he was aware, hemade no friends; he could hardly make enemies; yet towards the138The Education of Henry Adamsclose of the year he was flattered by an invitation from Monck-ton Milnes to Fryston, and it was one of many acts of charity to-wards the young that gave Milnes immortality. Milnes made ithis business to be kind. Other people criticised him for his man-ner of doing it, but never imitated him. Naturally, a dispirited,disheartened private secretary was exceedingly grateful, and neverforgot the kindness, but it was chiefly as education that thisfirst country visit had value. Commonly, country visits are muchalike, but Monckton Milnes was never like anybody, and hiscountry parties served his purpose of mixing strange elements.Fryston was one of a class of houses that no one sought for its nat-ural beauties, and the winter mists of Yorkshire were rather moreevident for the absence of the hostess on account of them, so thatthe singular guests whom Milnes collected to enliven his Decem-ber had nothing to do but astonish each other, if anything couldastonish such men. Of the five, Adams alone was tame; he aloneadded nothing to the wit or humor, except as a listener; but theyneeded a listener and he was useful. Of the remaining four, Milneswas the oldest, and perhaps the sanest in spite of his superficialeccentricities, for Yorkshire sanity was true to a standard of itsown, if not to other conventions; yet even Milnes startled a youngAmerican whose Boston and Washington mind was still fresh.He would not have been startled by the hard-drinking, horse-racing Yorkshireman of whom he had read in books; but Milnesrequired a knowledge of society and literature that only himselfpossessed, if one were to try to keep pace with him. He had soughtcontact with everybody and everything that Europe could offer.He knew it all from several points of view, and chiefly as hu-morous.The second of the party was also of a certain age; a quiet, well-mannered, singularly agreeable gentleman of the literary class.When Milnes showed Adams to his room to dress for dinner, hestayed a moment to say a word about this guest, whom he calledStirling of Keir. His sketch closed with the hint that Stirling wasFoes or Friends139violent only on one point — hatred of Napoleon III. On thatpoint, Adams was himself sensitive, which led him to wonder howbad the Scotch gentleman might be. The third was a man ofthirty or thereabouts, whom Adams had already met at LadyPalmerston's carrying his arm in a sling. His figure and bearingwere sympathetic — almost pathetic — with a certain grave andgentle charm, a pleasant smile, and an interesting story. Hewas Laurence Oliphant, just from Japan, where he had beenwounded in the fanatics' attack on the British Legation. Heseemed exceptionally sane and peculiarly suited for countryhouses, where every man would enjoy his company, and everywoman would adore him. He had not then published "Picca-dilly"; perhaps he was writing it; while, like all the young menabout the Foreign Office, he contributed to The Owl.The fourth was a boy, or had the look of one, though in facta year older than Adams himself. He resembled in action — andin this trait, was remotely followed, a generation later, by an-other famous young man, Robert Louis Stevenson — a tropicalbird, high-crested, long-beaked, quick-moving, with rapid utter-ance and screams of humor, quite unlike any English lark or night-ingale. One could hardly call him a crimson macaw among owls,and yet no ordinary contrast availed. Milnes introduced himas Mr. Algernon Swinburne. The name suggested nothing. Milneswas always unearthing new coins and trying to give them cur-rency. He had unearthed Henry Adams who knew himself to beworthless and not current. When Milnes lingered a moment inAdams's room to add that Swinburne had written some poetry,not yet published, of really extraordinary merit, Adams onlywondered what more Milnes would discover, and whether bychance he could discover merit in a private secretary. He wascapable of it.In due course this party of five men sat down to dinner with theusual club manners of ladyless dinner-tables, easy and formal atthe same time. Conversation ran first to Oliphant who told his140The Education of Henry Adamsdramatic story simply, and from him the talk drifted off into otherchannels, until Milnes thought it time to bring Swinburne out.Then, at last, if never before, Adams acquired education. Whathe had sought so long, he found; but he was none the wiser; onlythe more astonished. For once, too, he felt at ease, for the otherswere no less astonished than himself, and their astonishment grewapace. For the rest of the evening Swinburne figured alone; theend of dinner made the monologue only freer, for in 1862, evenwhen ladies were not in the house, smoking was forbidden, andguests usually smoked in the stables or the kitchen; but Monck-ton Milnes was a licensed libertine who let his guests smoke inAdams's bedroom, since Adams was an American-German bar-barian ignorant of manners; and there after dinner all sat —or lay — till far into the night, listening to the rush of Swinburne'stalk. In a long experience, before or after, no one ever approachedit; yet one had heard accounts of the best talking of the time, andread accounts of talkers in all time, among the rest, of Voltaire,who seemed to approach nearest the pattern.That Swinburne was altogether new to the three types of men-of-the-world before him; that he seemed to them quite origi-nal, wildly eccentric, astonishingly gifted, and convulsingly droll,Adams could see; but what more he was, even Milnes hardlydared say. They could not believe his incredible memory andknowledge of literature, classic, mediaeval, and modern; his fac-ulty of reciting a play of Sophocles or a play of Shakespeare, for-ward or backward, from end to beginning; or Dante, or Villon,or Victor Hugo. They knew not what to make of his rhetoricalrecitation of his own unpublished ballads — "Faustine"; the"Four Boards of the Coffin Lid"; the "Ballad of Burdens" —which he declaimed as though they were books of the Iliad.Itwas singular that his most appreciative listener should have beenthe author only of pretty verses like "We wandered by the brook-side," and "She seemed to those that saw them meet"; and whonever cared to write in any other tone; but Milnes took everythingFoes or Friends141into his sympathies, including Americans like young Adams whosestandards were stiffest of all, while Swinburne, though millionsof ages far from them, united them by his humor even more thanby his poetry. The story of his first day as a member of Profes-sor Stubbs's household was professionally clever farce, if not highcomedy, in a young man who could write a Greek ode or a Pro-vencal chanson as easily as an English quatrain.Late at night when the symposium broke up, Stirling of Keirwanted to take with him to his chamber a copy of "Queen Rosa-mund," the only volume Swinburne had then published, whichwas on the library table, and Adams offered to light him downwith his solitary bedroom candle. All the way, Stirling was ejacu-lating explosions of wonder, until at length, at the foot of the stairsand at the climax of his imagination, he paused, and burst out:"He's a cross between the devil and the Duke of Argyll!"To appreciate the full merit of this description, a judiciouscritic should have known both, and Henry Adams knew onlyone — at least in person — but he understood that to a Scotch-man the likeness meant something quite portentous, beyondEnglish experience, supernatural, and what the French call moy-endgeux, or mediaeval with a grotesque turn. That Stirling as wellas Milnes should regard Swinburne as a prodigy greatly com-forted Adams, who lost his balance of mind at first in trying toimagine that Swinburne was a natural product of Oxford, as muf-fins and pork-pies of London, at once the cause and effect of dys-pepsia. The idea that one has actually met a real genius dawnsslowly on a Boston mind, but it made entry at last.Then came the sad reaction, not from Swinburne whose geniusnever was in doubt, but from the Boston mind which, in its utter-most flights, was never moyenageux. One felt the horror of Long-fellow and Emerson, the doubts of Lowell and the humor ofHolmes, at the wild Walpurgis-night of Swinburne's talk. Whatcould a shy young private secretary do about it? Perhaps, in hisgood nature, Milnes thought that Swinburne might find a friend142The Education of Henry Adamsin Stirling or Oliphant, but he could hardly have fancied HenryAdams rousing in him even an interest. Adams could no moreinterest Algernon Swinburne than he could interest Encke'scomet. To Swinburne he could be no more than a worm. Thequality of genius was an education almost ultimate, for one touchedthere the limits of the human mind on that side; but one couldonly receive; one had nothing to give — nothing even to offer.Swinburne tested him then and there by one of his favoritetests — Victor Hugo; for to him the test of Victor Hugo was thesurest and quickest of standards. French poetry is at best a severeexercise for foreigners; it requires extraordinary knowledge of thelanguage and rare refinement of ear to appreciate even the recita-tion of French verse; but unless a poet has both, he lacks some-thing of poetry. Adams had neither. To the end of his life henever listened to a French recitation with pleasure, or felt a senseof majesty in French verse; but he did not care to proclaimhis weakness, and he tried to evade Swinburne's vehement in-sistence by parading an affection for Alfred de Musset. Swin-burne would have none of it; de Musset was unequal; he did notsustain himself on the wing.Adams would have given a world or two, if he owned one, tosustain himself on the wing like de Musset, or even like Hugo; buthis education as well as his ear was at fault, and he succumbed.Swinburne tried him again on Walter Savage Landor. In truththe test was the same, for Swinburne admired in Landor's Eng-lish the qualities that he felt in Hugo's French; and Adams'sfailure was equally gross, for, when forced to despair, he had toadmit that both Hugo and Landor bored him. Nothing more wasneeded. One who could feel neither Hugo nor Landor was lost.The sentence was just and Adams never appealed from it. Heknew his inferiority in taste as he might know it in smell. Keenlymortified by the dullness of his senses and instincts, he knew he wasno companion for Swinburne; probably he could be only an an-noyance; no number of centuries could ever educate him to Swin-Foes or Friends143burne's level, even in technical appreciation; yet he often won-dered whether there was nothing he had to offer that was worththe poet's acceptance. Certainly such mild homage as the Ameri-can insect would have been only too happy to bring, had he knownhow, was hardly worth the acceptance of any one. Only in Franceis the attitude of prayer possible; in England it became absurd.Even Monckton Milnes, who felt the splendors of Hugo andLandor, was almost as helpless as an American private secretary inpersonal contact with them. Ten years afterwards Adams met himat the Geneva Conference, fresh from Paris, bubbling with de-light at a call he had made on Hugo: "I was shown into a largeroom," he said, "with women and men seated in chairs againstthe walls, and Hugo at one end throned. No one spoke. At lastHugo raised his voice solemnly, and uttered the words: 'Quanta moi, je crois en Dieu!' Silence followed. Then a woman re-sponded as if in deep meditation: 'Chose sublime! un Dieu quicroit en Dieu!'"With the best of will, one could not do this in London; theactors had not the instinct of the drama; and yet even a privatesecretary was not wholly wanting in instinct. As soon as hereached town he hurried to Pickering's for a copy of "QueenRosamund," and at that time, if Swinburne was not joking,Pickering had sold seven copies. When the "Poems and Ballads"came out, and met their great success and scandal, he sought oneof the first copies from Moxon. If he had sinned and doubted atall, he wholly repented and did penance before "Atalanta inCalydon," and would have offered Swinburne a solemn worshipas Milnes's female offered Hugo, if it would have pleased thepoet. Unfortunately it was worthless.The three young men returned to London, and each went hisown way. Adams's interest in making friends was somethingdesperate, but "the London season," Milnes used to say, "is aseason for making acquaintances and losing friends"; there wasno intimate life. Of Swinburne he saw no more till Monckton144The Education of Henry AdamsMilnes summoned his whole array of Frystonians to support himin presiding at the dinner of the Authors' Fund, when Adamsfound himself seated next to Swinburne, famous then, but nonearer. They never met again. Oliphant he met oftener; all theworld knew and loved him; but he too disappeared in the waythat all the world knows. Stirling of Keir, after one or two efforts,passed also from Adams's vision into Sir William Stirling-Max-well. The only record of his wonderful visit to Fryston mayperhaps exist still in the registers of the St. James's Club, for im-mediately afterwards Milnes proposed Henry Adams for mem-bership, and unless his memory erred, the nomination was sec-onded by Tricoupi and endorsed by Laurence Oliphant and EvelynAshley. The list was a little singular for variety, but on the wholeit suggested that the private secretary was getting on.