CHAPTER XVIIIFREE FIGHT (1869-1870)THE old New Englander was apt to be a solitary animal,but the young New Englander was sometimes human.Judge Hoar brought his son Sam to Washington, and SamHoar loved largely and well. He taught Adams the charm of Wash-ington spring. Education for education, none ever compared withthe delight of this. The Potomac and its tributaries squanderedbeauty. Rock Creek was as wild as the Rocky Mountains. Hereand there a negro log cabin alone disturbed the dogwood and thejudas-tree, the azalea and the laurel. The tulip and the chestnutgave no sense of struggle against a stingy nature. The soft, fulloutlines of the landscape carried no hidden horror of glaciers in itsbosom. The brooding heat of the profligate vegetation; the coolcharm of the running water; the terrific splendor of the Junethunder-gust in the deep and solitary woods, were all sensual,animal, elemental. No European spring had shown him the sameintermixture of delicate grace and passionate depravity thatmarked the Maryland May. He loved it too much, as though itwere Greek and half human. He could not leave it, but loiteredon into July, falling into the Southern ways of the summer vil-lage about La Fayette Square, as one whose rights of inheritancecould not be questioned. Few Americans were so poor as to ques-tion them.In spite of the fatal deception — or undeception — aboutGrant's political character, Adams's first winter in Washingtonhad so much amused him that he had not a thought of change.He loved it too much to question its value. What did he knowabout its value, or what did any one know? His father knewmore about it than any one else in Boston, and he was amusedto find that his father, whose recollections went back to 1820,Free Fight269betrayed for Washington much the same sentimental weakness,and described the society about President Monroe much as hisson felt the society about President Johnson. He feared its effecton young men, with some justice, since it had been fatal to twoof his brothers; but he understood the charm, and he knew thata life in Quincy or Boston was not likely to deaden it.Henry was in a savage humor on the subject of Boston. Hesaw Boutwells at every counter. He found a personal grief inevery tree. Fifteen or twenty years afterwards, Clarence Kingused to amuse him by mourning over the narrow escape thatnature had made in attaining perfection. Except for two mistakes,the earth would have been a success.' One of these errors was theinclination of the ecliptic; the other was the differentiation ofthe sexes, and the saddest thought about the last was that itshould have been so modern. Adams, in his splenetic temper,held that both these unnecessary evils had wreaked their worston Boston. The climate made eternal war on society, and sex wasa species of crime. The ecliptic had inclined itself beyond recoverytill life was as thin as the elm trees. Of course he was in the wrong.The thinness was in himself, not in Boston; but this is a story ofeducation, and Adams was struggling to shape himself to histime. Boston was trying to do the same thing. Everywhere, ex-cept in Washington, Americans were toiling for the same object.Every one complained of surroundings, except where, as at Wash-ington, there were no surroundings to complain of. Boston keptits head better than its neighbors did, and very little time wasneeded to prove it, even to Adams's confusion.Before he got back to Quincy, the summer was already halfover, and in another six weeks the effects of President Grant'scharacter showed themselves. They were startling — astounding— terrifying. The mystery that shrouded the famous, classicalattempt of Jay Gould to corner gold in September, 1869, hasnever been cleared up — at least so far as to make it intelligibleto Adams. Gould was led, by the change at Washington, into270The Education of Henry Adamsthe belief that he could safely corner gold without interferencefrom the Government. He took a number of precautions, whichhe admitted; and he spent a large sum of money, as he also testi-fied, to obtain assurances which were not sufficient to have satis-fied so astute a gambler; yet he made the venture, Any criminallawyer must have begun investigation by insisting, rigorously,that no such man, in such a position, could be permitted to pleadthat he had taken, and pursued, such a course, without assuranceswhich did satisfy him. The plea was professionally inadmissible.This meant that any criminal lawyer would have been boundto start an investigation by insisting that Gould had assurancesfrom the White House or the Treasury, since none other couldhave satisfied him. To young men wasting their summer atQuincy for want of some one to hire their services at three dollarsa day, such a dramatic scandal was Heaven-sent. Charles andHenry Adams jumped at it like salmon at a fly, with as muchvoracity as Jay Gould, or his dme damnee Jim Fisk, had evershown for Erie; and with as little fear of consequences. Theyrisked something; no one could say what; but the people aboutthe Erie office were not regarded as lambs.The unravelling a skein so tangled as that of the Erie Railwaywas a task that might have given months of labor to the mostefficient District Attorney, with all his official tools to work with.Charles took the railway history; Henry took the so-called GoldConspiracy; and they went to New York to work it up. The sur-face was in full view. They had no trouble in Wall Street, and theypaid their respects in person to the famous Jim Fisk in his Opera-House Palace; but the New York side of the story helped Henrylittle. He needed to penetrate the political mystery, and for thispurpose he had to wait for Congress to meet. At first he fearedthat Congress would suppress the scandal, but the CongressionalInvestigation was ordered and took place. He soon knew all thatwas to be known; the material for his essay was furnished by theGovernment.Free Fight271Material furnished by a government seldom satisfies critics orhistorians, for it lies always under suspicion. Here was a mys-tery, and as usual, the chief mystery was the means of makingAll Adams's great friends —sure that any mystery existed.Fish, Cox, Hoar, Evarts, Sumner, and their surroundings — wereprecisely the persons most mystified. They knew less than Adamsdid; they sought information, and frankly admitted that theirrelations with the White House and the Treasury were not con-fidential. No one volunteered advice. No one offered suggestion.One got no light, even from the press, although press agents ex-pressed in private the most damning convictions with their usualcynical frankness. The Congressional Committee took a quan-tity of evidence which it dared not probe, and refused to analyze.Although the fault lay somewhere on the Administration, andcould lie nowhere else, the trail always faded and died out at thepoint where any member of the Administration became visible.Every one dreaded to press inquiry.. Adams himself feared find-ing out too much. He found out too much already, when he sawin evidence that Jay Gould had actually succeeded in stretchinghis net over Grant's closest surroundings, and that Boutwell'sincompetence was the bottom of Gould's calculation. With theconventional air of assumed confidence, every one in public as-sured every one else that the President himself was the savior ofthe situation, and in private assured each other that if the Presi-dent had not been caught this time, he was sure to be trapped thenext, for the ways of Wall Street were dark and double. All thiswas wildly exciting to Adams. That Grant should have fallen,within six months, into such a morass — or should have letBoutwell drop him into it — rendered the outlook for the nextfour years — probably eight — possibly twelve — mysterious, orfrankly opaque, to a young man who had hitched his wagon, asEmerson told him, to the star of reform. The country mightoutlive it, but not he. The worst scandals of the eighteenth cen-tury were relatively harmless by the side of this, which smirched272The Education of Henry Adamsexecutive, judiciary, banks, corporate systems, professions, andpeople, all the great active forces of society, in one dirty cesspoolof vulgar corruption. Only six months before, this innocent youngman, fresh from the cynicism of European diplomacy, had ex-pected to enter an honorable career in the press as the championand confidant of a new Washington, and already he foresaw a lifeof wasted energy, sweeping the stables of American society cleanof the endless corruption which his second Washington was quitecertain to breed.By vigorously shutting one's eyes, as though one were an As-sistant Secretary, a writer for the press might ignore the Eriescandal, and still help his friends or allies in the Government whowere doing their best to give it an air of decency; but a few weeksshowed that the Erie scandal was a mere incident, a rather vulgarWall Street trap, into which, according to one's point of view,Grant had been drawn by Jay Gould, or Jay Gould had been mis-led by Grant. One could hardly doubt that both of them wereastonished and disgusted by the result; but neither Jay Gouldnor any other astute American mind — still less the complexJew — could ever have accustomed itself to the incredible andinexplicable lapses of Grant's intelligence; and perhaps, on thewhole, Gould was the less mischievous victim, if victims they bothwere. The same laxity that led Gould into a trap which mighteasily have become the penitentiary, led the United States Sen-ate, the Executive departments and the Judiciary into confu-sion, cross-purposes, and ill-temper that would have been scanda-lous in a boarding-school of girls. For satirists or comedians, thestudy was rich and endless, and they exploited its corners withhappy results, but a young man fresh from the rustic simplicityof London noticed with horror that the grossest satires on theAmerican Senator and politician never failed to excite the laughterand applause of every audience. Rich and poor joined in throw-ing contempt on their own representatives.Society laughed avacant and meaningless derision over its own failure. NothingFree Fight273remained for a young man without position or power except tolaugh too.Yet the spectacle was no laughing matter to him, whatever itmight be to the public. Society is immoral and immortal; it canafford to commit any kind of folly, and indulge in any sort of vice;it cannot be killed, and the fragments that survive can alwayslaugh at the dead ; but a young man has only one chance, and brieftime to seize it. Any one in power above him can extinguish thechance. He is horribly at the mercy of fools and cowards. Onedull administration can rapidly drive out every active subordi-nate. At Washington, in 1869-70, every intelligent man about theGovernment prepared to go. The people would have liked to gotoo, for they stood helpless before the chaos; some laughed andsome raved; all were disgusted; but they had to content themselvesby turning their backs and going to work harder than ever ontheir railroads and foundries. They were strong enough to carryeven their politics. Only the helpless remained stranded in Wash-ington.The shrewdest statesman of all was Mr. Boutwell, who showedhow he understood the situation by turning out of the Treasuryevery one who could interfere with his repose, and then lockinghimself up in it, alone. What he did there, no one knew. His col-leagues asked him in vain. Not a word could they get from him,either in the Cabinet or out of it, of suggestion or information onmatters even of vital interest. The Treasury as an active influenceceased to exist. Mr. Boutwell waited with confidence for societyto drag his department out of the mire, as it was sure to do if hewaited long enough.Warned by his friends in the Cabinet as well as in the Treasurythat Mr. Boutwell meant to invite no support, and cared to re-ceive none, Adams had only the State and Interior Departmentsleft to serve. He wanted no better than to serve them. Oppositionwas his horror; pure waste of energy; a union with NorthernDemocrats and Southern rebels who never had much in common274The Education of Henry Adamswith any Adams, and had never shown any warm interest aboutthem except to drive them from public life.If Mr. Boutwellturned him out of the Treasury with the indifference or contemptthat made even a beetle helpless, Mr. Fish opened the StateDepartment freely, and seemed to talk with as much opennessas any newspaper-man could ask. At all events, Adams couldcling to this last plank of salvation, and make himself perhaps therecognized champion of Mr. Fish in the New York press. Henever once thought of his disaster between Seward and Sumnerin 1 86 1. Such an accident could not occur again. Fish and Sum-ner were inseparable, and their policy was sure to be safe enoughfor support. No mosquito could be so unlucky as to be caughta second time between a Secretary and a Senator who were bothhis friends.This dream of security lasted hardly longer than that of 1861.Adams saw Sumner take possession of the Department, and heapproved; he saw Sumner seize the British mission for Motley,and he was delighted; but when he renewed his relations withSumner in the winter of 1869-70, he began slowly to grasp theidea that Sumner had a foreign policy of his own which he pro-posed also to force on the Department. This was not all. Secre-tary Fish seemed to have vanished. Besides the Department ofState over which he nominally presided in the Infant Asylumon Fourteenth Street, there had risen a Department of ForeignRelations over which Senator Sumner ruled with a high hand atthe Capitol; and, finally, one clearly made out a third ForeignOffice in the War Department, with President Grant himselffor chief, pressing a policy of extension in the West Indies whichno Northeastern man ever approved. For his life, Adams couldnot learn where to place himself among all these forces.Offi-cially he would have followed the responsible Secretary of State,but he could not find the Secretary. Fish seemed to be friendlytowards Sumner, and docile towards Grant, but he asserted asyet no policy of his own. As for Grant's policy, Adams never hadFree Fight275a chance to know fully what it was, but, as far as he did know,he was ready to give it ardent support. The difficulty came onlywhen he heard Sumner's views, which, as he had reason to know,were always commands, to be disregarded only by traitors.Little by little, Sumner unfolded his foreign policy, and Adamsgasped with fresh astonishment at every new article of the creed.To his profound regret he heard Sumner begin by imposing hisveto on all extension within the tropics; which cost the islandof St. Thomas to the United States, besides the Bay of Samanaas an alternative, and ruined Grant's policy. Then he listenedwith incredulous stupor while Sumner unfolded his plan for con-centrating and pressing every possible American claim againstEngland, with a view of compelling the cession of Canada to theUnited States.Adams did not then know — in fact, he never knew, or couldfind any one to tell him — what was going on behind the doorsof the White House. He doubted whether Mr. Fish or BancroftDavis knew much more than he. The game of cross-purposeswas as impenetrable in Foreign Affairs as in the Gold Conspiracy.President Grant let every one go on, but whom he supported,Adams could not be expected to divine. One point alone seemedclear to a man — no longer so very young — who had lately comefrom a seven years' residence in London. He thought he knew asmuch as any one in Washington about England, and he listenedwith the more perplexity to Mr. Sumner's talk, because it openedIf war was his object,the gravest doubts of Sumner's sanity.and Canada were worth it, Sumner's scheme showed genius, andAdams was ready to treat it seriously; but if he thought he couldobtain Canada from England as a voluntary set-off to the Ala-bama Claims, he drivelled. On the point of fact, Adams was asperemptory as Sumner on the point of policy, but he could onlywonder whether Mr. Fish would dare say it. When at last Mr.Fish did say it, a year later, Sumner publicly cut his acquaint-ance.276The Education of Henry AdamsAdams was the more puzzled because he could not believe Sum-ner so mad as to quarrel both with Fish and with Grant. A quar-rel with Seward and Andrew Johnson was bad enough, and hadprofited no one; but a quarrel with General Grant was lunacy.Grant might be whatever one liked, as far as morals or temper orintellect were concerned, but he was not a man whom a light-weight cared to challenge for a fight; and Sumner, whether heknew it or not, was a very light weight in the Republican Party,if separated from his Committee of Foreign Relations. As a partymanager he had not the weight of half-a-dozen men whose verynames were unknown to him.Between these great forces, where was the Administration andhow was one to support it? One must first find it, and even thenit was not easily caught. Grant's simplicity was more disconcert-ing than the complexity of a Talleyrand. Mr. Fish afterwardstold Adams, with the rather grim humor he sometimes indulgedin, that Grant took a dislike to Motley because he parted his hairin the middle. Adams repeated the story to Godkin, who mademuch play with it in the Nation, till it was denied. Adams sawno reason why it should be denied. Grant had as good a right todislike the hair as the head, if the hair seemed to him a part of it.Very shrewd men have formed very sound judgments on lessmaterial than hair — on clothes, for example, according to Mr.Carlyle, or on a pen, according to Cardinal de Retz — and ninemen in ten could hardly give as good a reason as hair for theirlikes or dislikes. In truth, Grant disliked Motley at sight, becausethey had nothing in common; and for the same reason he dislikedSumner. For the same reason he would be sure to dislike Adamsif Adams gave him a chance. Even Fish could not be quite sureof Grant, except for the powerful effect which wealth had, orappeared to have, on Grant's imagination.The quarrel that lowered over the State Department did notbreak in storm till July, 1870, after Adams had vanished, butanother quarrel, almost as fatal to Adams as that between FishFree Fight277and Sumner, worried him even more. Of all members of the Cab-inet, the one whom he had most personal interest in cultivatingwas Attorney-General Hoar. The Legal Tender decision, whichhad been the first stumbling-block to Adams at Washington,grew in interest till it threatened to become something more seri-ous than a block; it fell on one's head like a plaster ceiling, andcould not be escaped. The impending battle between Fish andSumner was nothing like so serious as the outbreak betweenHoar and Chief Justice Chase. Adams had come to Washingtonhoping to support the Executive in a policy of breaking down theSenate, but he never dreamed that he would be required to helpin breaking down the Supreme Court. Although, step by step,he had been driven, like the rest of the world, to admit thatAmerican society had outgrown most of its institutions, he stillclung to the Supreme Court, much as a churchman clings to hisbishops, because they are his only symbol of unity; his last rag ofRight. Between the Executive and the Legislature, citizens couldhave no Rights; they were at the mercy of Power. They hadcreated the Court to protect them from unlimited Power, and itwas little enough protection at best. Adams wanted to save theindependence of the Court at least for his lifetime, and could notconceive that the Executive should wish to overthrow it.Frank Walker shared this feeling, and, by way of helping theCourt, he had promised Adams for the North American Reviewan article on the history of the Legal Tender Act, founded on avolume just then published by Spaulding, the putative father ofSecretary Jacob D. Cox, whothe legal-tender clause in 1861.alone sympathized with reform, saved from BoutwelFs decree ofbanishment such reformers as he could find place for, and he savedWalker for a time by giving him the Census of 1870. Walker wasobliged to abandon his article for the North American in orderto devote himself to the Census. He gave Adams his notes, andAdams completed the article.He had not toiled in vain over the Bank of England Restric-278The Education of Henry Adamstion. He knew enough about Legal Tender to leave it alone. If thebanks and bankers wanted fiat money, fiat money was good enoughfor a newspaper-man; and if they changed about and wanted"intrinsic" value, gold and silver came equally welcome to awriter who was paid half the wages of an ordinary mechanic.He had no notion of attacking or defending Legal Tender; hisobject was to defend the Chief Justice and the Court. Walkerargued that, whatever might afterwards have been the necessityfor legal tender, there was no necessity for it at the time the Actwas passed. With the help of the Chief Justice's recollections,Adams completed the article, which appeared in the April numberof the North American. Its ferocity was Walker's, for Adams nevercared to abandon the knife for the hatchet, but Walker reeked ofthe army and the Springfield Republican, and his energy ran awaywith Adams's restraint. The unfortunate Spaulding complainedloudly of this treatment, not without justice, but the article itselfhad serious historical value, for Walker demolished every shredof Spaulding's contention that legal tender was necessary at thetime; and the Chief Justice told his part of the story with convic-tion. The Chief Justice seemed to be pleased. The Attorney-General, pleased or not, made no sign. The article had enoughhistorical interest to induce Adams to reprint it in a volume ofEssays twenty years afterwards ; but its historical value was notits point in education. The point was that, in spite of the bestintentions, the plainest self-interest, and the strongest wish toescape further trouble, the article threw Adams into opposition.Judge Hoar, like Boutwell, was implacable.Hoar went on to demolish the Chief Justice; while HenryAdams went on, drifting further and further from the Adminis-tration. He did this in common with all the world, includingHoar himself. Scarcely a newspaper in the country kept discipline.The New York Tribune was one of the most criminal. Dissolutionof ties in every direction marked the dissolution of temper, andthe Senate Chamber became again a scene of irritated egotismFree Fight279that passed ridicule. Senators quarrelled with each other, and noone objected, but they picked quarrels also with the Executiveand threw every Department into confusion. Among others theyquarrelled with Hoar, and drove him from office.That Sumner and Hoar, the two New Englanders in great posi-tion who happened to be the two persons most necessary for hissuccess at Washington, should be the first victims of Grant's laxrule, must have had some meaning for Adams's education, ifAdams could only have understood what it was. He studied, butfailed. Sympathy with him was not their weakness. Directly,in the form of help, he knew he could hope as little from them asfrom Boutwell. So far from inviting attachment they, like otherNew Englanders, blushed to own a friend. Not one of the wholedelegation would ever, of his own accord, try to help Adams or anyother young man who did not beg for it, although they wouldalways accept whatever services they had not to pay for. Thelesson of education was not there. The selfishness of politics wasthe earliest of all political education, and Adams had nothing tolearn from its study; but the situation struck him as curious —so curious that he devoted years to reflecting upon it. His fourmost powerful friends had matched themselves, two and two, andwere fighting in pairs to a finish; Sumner-Fish; Chase-Hoar; withforeign affairs and the judiciary as prizes! What value had thefight in education?Adams was puzzled, and was not the only puzzled bystander.The stage-type of statesman was amusing, whether as RoscoeConkling or Colonel Mulberry Sellers, but what was his value?The statesmen of the old type, whether Sumners or Conklings orHoars or Lamars, were personally as honest as human nature couldproduce. They trod with lofty contempt on other people's jobs,especially when there was good in them. Yet the public thoughtthat Sumner and Conkling cost the country a hundred times morethan all the jobs they ever trod on; just as Lamar and the oldSouthern statesmen, who were also honest in money-matters, cost280The Education of Henry Adamsthe country a civil war. This painful moral doubt worried Adamsless than it worried his friends and the public, but it affected thewhole field of politics for twenty years. The newspapers discussedlittle else than the alleged moral laxity of Grant, Garfield, andBlaine. If the press were taken seriously, politics turned on jobs,and some of Adams's best friends, like Godkin, ruined their influ-ence by their insistence on points of morals. Society hesitated,wavered, oscillated between harshness and laxity, pitilessly sacri-ficing the weak, and deferentially following the strong. In spiteof all such criticism, the public nominated Grant, Garfield, andBlaine for the Presidency, and voted for them afterwards, notseeming to care for the question; until young men were forced tosee that either some new standard must be created, or none couldbe upheld. The moral law had expired — like the Constitution.Grant's administration outraged every rule of ordinary decency,but scores of promising men, whom the country could not wellspare, were ruined in saying so. The world cared little for decency.What it wanted, it did not know; probably a system that wouldwork, and men who could work it; but it found neither. Adamshad tried his own little hands on it, and had failed. His friendshad been driven out of Washington or had taken to fisticuffs.He himself sat down and stared helplessly into the future.The result was a review of the Session for the July North Ameri-can into which he crammed and condensed everything he thoughthe had observed and all he had been told. He thought it goodhistory then, and he thought it better twenty years afterwards;he thought it even good enough to reprint. As it happened, inthe process of his devious education, this "Session" of 1869-70proved to be his last study in current politics, and his last dyingtestament as a humble member of the press. As such, he stood byit. He could have said no more, had he gone on reviewing everysession in the rest of the century. The political dilemma wasas clear in 1870 as it was likely to be in 1970. The system of 1789had broken down, and with it the eighteenth-century fabric ofFree Fight281a priori, or moral, principles. Politicians had tacitly given it up.Grant's administration marked the avowal. Nine-tenths of men'spolitical energies must henceforth be wasted on expedients to pieceout — to patch — or, in vulgar language, to tinker — the politicalmachine as often as it broke down. Such a system, or want ofsystem, might last centuries, if tempered by an occasional revolu-tion or civil war; but as a machine, it was, or soon would be, thepoorest in the world — the clumsiest — the most inefficient.Here again was an education, but what it was worth he could notguess. Indeed, when he raised his eyes to the loftiest and mosttriumphant results of politics — to Mr. Boutwell, Mr. Conklingor even Mr. Sumner — he could not honestly say that such aneducation, even when it carried one up to these unattainableheights, was worth anything. There were men, as yet standingon lower levels — clever and amusing men like Garfield andBlaine — who took no little pleasure in making fun of the sena-torial demi-gods, and who used language about Grant himselfwhich the North American Review would not have admitted. Oneasked doubtfully what was likely to become of these men in theirturn. What kind of political ambition was to result from thisdestructive political education?Yet the sum of political life was, or should have been, the attain-ment of a working political system. Society needed to reach it. Ifmoral standards broke down, and machinery stopped working,new morals and machinery of some sort had to be invented. Aneternity of Grants, or even of Garfields or of Conklings or of JayGoulds, refused to be conceived as possible. Practical Americanslaughed, and went their way. Society paid them to be practical.Whenever society cared to pay Adams, he too would be practical,take his pay, and hold his tongue; but meanwhile he was drivento associate with Democratic Congressmen and educate them.He served David Wells as an active assistant professor of revenuereform, and turned his rooms into a college. The Administrationdrove him, and thousands of other young men, into active enmity,282The Education of Henry Adamsnot only to Grant, but to the system or want of system, whichtook possession of the President. Every hope or thought whichhad brought Adams to Washington proved to be absurd. Noone wanted him; no one wanted any of his friends in reform; theblackmailer alone was the normal product of politics as of business.All this was excessively amusing. Adams never had been sobusy, so interested, so much in the thick of the crowd. He knewCongressmen by scores and newspaper-men by the dozen. Hewrote for his various organs all sorts of attacks and defences.He enjoyed the life enormously, and found himself as happy asSam Ward or Sunset Cox; much happier than his friends Fishor J. D. Cox, or Chief Justice Chase or Attorney-General Hoaror Charles Sumner. When spring came, he took to the woods,which were best of all, for after the first of April, what Maurice deGuerin called "the vast maternity" of nature showed charms morevoluptuous than the vast paternity of the United States Senate.Senators were less ornamental than the dogwood or even thejudas-tree. They were, as a rule, less good company. Adamsastonished himself by remarking what a purified charm was lentto the Capitol by the greatest possible distance, as one caughtglimpses of the dome over miles of forest foliage. At such momentshe pondered on the distant beauty of St. Peter's and the stepsof Ara Cceli.Yet he shortened his spring, for he needed to get back to Londonfor the season. He had finished his New York "Gold Conspir-acy," which he meant for his friend Henry Reeve and the EdinburghReview, It was the best piece of work he had done, but this wasnot his reason for publishing it in England. The Erie scandal hadprovoked a sort of revolt among respectable New Yorkers, as wellas among some who were not so respectable; and the attack onErie was beginning to promise success. London was a sensitivespot for the Erie management, and it was thought well to strikethem there, where they were socially and financially exposed.The tactics suited him in another way, for any expression aboutFree Fight283America in an English review attracted ten times the attentionin America that the same article would attract in the NorthAmerican. Habitually the American dailies reprinted such articlesin full. Adams wanted to escape the terrors of copyright; his high-est ambition was to be pirated and advertised free of charge, since,in any case, his pay was nothing. Under the excitement of chase,he was becoming a pirate himself, and liked it.