CHAPTER XIIITHE PERFECTION OF HUMAN SOCIETY (1864)MINISTER ADAMS'S success in stopping the rebelrams fixed his position once for all in English society.From that moment he could afford to drop the char-acter of diplomatist, and assume what, for an American Min-ister in London, was an exclusive diplomatic advantage, thecharacter of a kind of American Peer of the Realm. The Britishnever did things by halves. Once they recognized a man's rightto social privileges, they accepted him as one of themselves. Muchas Lord Derby and Mr. Disraeli were accepted as leaders of HerMajesty's domestic Opposition, Minister Adams had a rank ofhis own as a kind of leader of Her Majesty's American Opposi-tion. Even the Times conceded it. The years of struggle wereover, and Minister Adams rapidly gained a position which wouldhave caused his father or grandfather to stare with incredulous envy.This Anglo-American form of diplomacy was chiefly undip-lomatic, and had the peculiar effect of teaching a habit ofdiplomacy useless or mischievous everywhere but in London.Nowhere else in the world could one expect to figure in a role sounprofessional. The young man knew no longer what characterhe bore. Private secretary in the morning, son in the afternoon,young man about town in the evening, the only character he neverbore was that of diplomatist, except when he wanted a card to somegreat function. His diplomatic education was at an end; he seldommet a diplomat, and never had business with one; he could be ofno use to them, or they to him; but he drifted inevitably into so-ciety, and, do what he might, his next education must be one ofEnglish social life. Tossed between the horns of successive dilem-mas, he reached his twenty-sixth birthday without the power ofearning five dollars in any occupation. His friends in the armyThe Perfection of Human Society195were almost as badly off, but even army life ruined a young manless fatally than London society. Had he been rich, this form ofruin would have mattered nothing; but the young men of 1865were none of them rich; all had to earn a living; yet they hadreached high positions of responsibility and power in camps andCourts, without a dollar of their own and with no tenure of office.Henry Adams had failed to acquire any useful education; heshould at least have acquired social experience. Curiously enough,he failed here also. From the European or English point of view,he had no social experience, and never got it. Minister Adamshappened on a political interregnum owing to Lord Palmerston'spersonal influence from i860 to 1865; but this political interreg-num was less marked than the social still-stand during the sameyears. The Prince Consort was dead; the Queen had retired; thePrince of Wales was still a boy. In its best days, Victorian societyhad never been "smart." During the forties, under the influenceof Louis Philippe, Courts affected to be simple, serious and mid-dle class; and they succeeded. The taste of Louis Philippe wasbourgeois beyond any taste except that of Queen Victoria. Stylelingered in the background with the powdered footman behindthe yellow chariot, but speaking socially the Queen had no stylesave what she inherited. Balmoral was a startling revelation ofroyal taste. Nothing could be worse than the toilettes at Courtunless it were the way they were worn. One's eyes might be daz-zled by jewels, but they were heirlooms, and if any lady appearedwell dressed, she was either a foreigner or "fast." Fashion was notfashionable in London until the Americans and the Jews werelet loose. The style of London toilette universal in 1864 was gro-tesque, like Monckton Milnes on horseback in Rotten Row.Society of this sort might fit a young man in some degree forediting Shakespeare or Swift, but had little relation with the so-ciety of 1870, and none with that of 1900. Owing to other causes,young Adams never got the full training of such style as stillexisted. The embarrassments of his first few seasons socially196The Education of Henry Adamsruined him. His own want of experience prevented his askingintroductions to the ladies who ruled society; his want of friendsprevented his knowing who these ladies were; and he had everyreason to expect snubbing if he put himself in evidence. Thissensitiveness was thrown away on English society, where menand women treated each others' advances much more brutallythan those of strangers, but young Adams was son and privatesecretary too; he could not be as thick-skinned as an Englishman.He was not alone. Every young diplomat, and most of the oldones, felt awkward in an English house from a certainty that theywere not precisely wanted there, and a possibility that they mightbe told so.If there was in those days a country house in England whichhad a right to call itself broad in views and large in tastes, it wasBretton in Yorkshire; and if there was a hostess who had a rightto consider herself fashionable as well as charming, it was LadyMargaret Beaumont; yet one morning at breakfast there, sittingby her side — not for his own merits — Henry Adams heard hersay to herself in her languid and liberal way, with her rich voiceand musing manner, looking into her tea-cup: "I don't think Icare for foreigners!" Horror-stricken, not so much on his ownaccount as on hers, the young man could only execute himself asgaily as he might: "But Lady Margaret, please make one smallexception for me!" Of course she replied what was evident, thatshe did not call him a foreigner, and her genial Irish charm madethe slip of tongue a happy courtesy; but none the less she knewthat, except for his momentary personal introduction, he was infact a foreigner, and there was no imaginable reason why she shouldlike him, or any other foreigner, unless it were because she wasbored by natives. She seemed to feel that her indifference neededa reason to excuse itself in her own eyes, and she showed the sub-conscious sympathy of the Irish nature which never feels itselfperfectly at home even in England. She, too, was some shadowyshade un-English.The Perfection of Human Society197Always conscious of this barrier, while the war lasted the priv-ate secretary hid himself among the herd of foreigners till he foundhis relations fixed and unchangeable. He never felt himself in so-ciety, and he never knew definitely what was meant as societyby those who were in it. He saw far enough to note a score of so-cieties which seemed quite independent of each other. The smart-est was the smallest, and to him almost wholly strange. The largestwas the sporting world, also unknown to him except through thetalk of his acquaintances. Between or beyond these lay groups ofnebulous societies. His lawyer friends, like Evarts, frequentedlegal circles where one still sat over the wine and told anecdotesof the bench and bar; but he himself never set eyes on a judge ex-cept when his father took him to call on old Lord Lyndhurst, wherethey found old Lord Campbell, both abusing old Lord Brougham.The Church and the Bishops formed several societies which nosecretary ever saw except as an interloper. The Army; the Navy;the Indian Service; the medical and surgical professions; Citypeople; artists; county families; the Scotch, and indefinite othersubdivisions of society existed, which were as strange to eachother as they were to Adams. At the end of eight or ten seasons inLondon society he professed to know less about it, or how to enterit, than he did when he made his first appearance at Miss BurdettCoutts's in May, 1861.Sooner or later every young man dropped into a set or circle,and frequented the few houses that were willing to harbor him.An American who neither hunted nor raced, neither shot norfished nor gambled, and was not marriageable, had no need tothink of society at large. Ninety-nine houses in every hundredwere useless to him, a greater bore to him than he to them. Thusthe question of getting into — or getting out of — society whichtroubled young foreigners greatly, settled itself after three or fouryears of painful speculation. Society had no unity; one wanderedabout in it like a maggot in cheese; it was not a hansom cab, tobe got into, or out of, at dinner-time.!198The Education of Henry AdamsTherefore he always professed himself ignorant of society; henever knew whether he had been in it or not, but from the ac-counts of his future friends, like General Dick Taylor or GeorgeSmalley, and of various ladies who reigned in the seventies, heinclined to think that he knew very little about it. Certain greathouses and certain great functions of course he attended, likeevery one else who could get cards, but even of these the numberwas small that kept an interest or helped education. In sevenyears he could remember only two that seemed to have any mean-ing for him, and he never knew what that meaning was. Neitherof the two was official; neither was English in interest; and bothwere scandals to the philosopher while they scarcely enlightenedmen of the world.One was at Devonshire House, an ordinary, unpremeditatedNaturally every one went to Devonshireevening reception.House if asked, and the rooms that night were fairly full of theusual people. The private secretary was standing among the rest,when Mme. de Castiglione entered, the famous beauty of theSecond Empire. How beautiful she may have been, or indeed whatsort of beauty she was, Adams never knew, because the company,consisting of the most refined and aristocratic society in the world,instantly formed a lane, and stood in ranks to stare at her, whilethose behind mounted on chairs to look over their neighbors' heads;so that the lady walked through this polite mob, stared completelyout of countenance, and fled the house at once. This was allThe other strange spectacle was at Stafford House, April 13,1864, when, in a palace gallery that recalled Paolo Veronese'spictures of Christ in his scenes of miracle, Garibaldi, in his graycapote over his red shirt, received all London, and three duchessesliterally worshipped at his feet. Here, at all events, a privatesecretary had surely caught the last and highest touch of socialexperience; but what it meant — what social, moral, or mentaldevelopment it pointed out to the searcher of truth — was not amatter to be treated fully by a leader in the Morning Post or evenThe Perfection of Human Society199by a sermon in Westminster Abbey. Mme. de Castiglione andGaribaldi covered, between them, too much space for simplemeasurement; their curves were too complex for mere arithmetic.The task of bringing the two into any common relation with anordered social system tending to orderly development — in Lon-don or elsewhere —-was well fitted for Algernon Swinburne orVictor Hugo, but was beyond any process yet reached by the edu-cation of Henry Adams, who would probably, even then, haverejected, as superficial or supernatural, all the views taken by anyof the company who looked on with him at these two interestingand perplexing sights.From the Court, or Court society, a mere private secretary gotnothing at all, or next to nothing, that could help him on hisroad through life. Royalty was in abeyance. One was tempted tothink in these years, 1860-65, that the nicest distinction betweenthe very best society and the second-best, was their attitude to-wards royalty. The one regarded royalty as a bore, and avoidedit, or quietly said that the Queen had never been in society. Thesame thing might have been said of fully half the peerage. Adamsnever knew even the names of half the rest; he never exchangedten words with any member of the royal family; he never knewany one in those years who showed interest in any member of theroyal family, or who would have given five shillings for the opin-ion of any royal person on any subject; or cared to enter any royalor noble presence, unless the house was made attractive by asmuch social effort as would have been necessary in other countrieswhere no rank existed. No doubt, as one of a swarm, youngAdams slightly knew various gilded youth who frequented ballsand led such dancing as was most in vogue, but they seemed toset no value on rank; their anxiety was only to know where tofind the best partners before midnight, and the best supper aftermidnight. To the American, as to Arthur Pendennis or BarnesNewcome, the value of social position and knowledge was evi-dent enough; he valued it at rather more than it was worth to200The Education of Henry Adamshim; but it was a shadowy thing which seemed to vary with everystreet corner; a thing which had shifting standards, and which noone could catch outright. The half-dozen leaders and beauties ofhis time, with great names and of the utmost fashion, made someof the poorest marriages, and the least showy careers.Tired of looking on at society from the outside, Adams grew toloathe the sight of his Court dress; to groan at every announcementof a Court ball; and to dread every invitation to a formal dinner.The greatest social event gave not half the pleasure that one couldbuy for ten shillings at the opera when Patti sang Cherubino orGretchen, and not a fourth of the education. Yet this was notthe opinion of the best judges. Lothrop Motley, who stood amongthe very best, said to him early in his apprenticeship that theLondon dinner and the English country house were the perfec-tion of human society. The young man meditated over it, uncertainof its meaning. Motley could not have thought the dinner itselfperfect, since there was not then — outside of a few bankers orforeigners — a good cook or a good table in London, and nine outof ten of the dinners that Motley ate came from Gunter's, andall were alike. Every one, especially in young society, complainedbitterly that Englishmen did not know a good dinner when theyate it, and could not order one if they were given carte blanche.Henry Adams was not a judge, and knew no more than they, buthe heard the complaints, and he could not think that Motleymeant to praise the English cuisine.Equally little could Motley have meant that dinners were goodto look at. Nothing could be worse than the toilettes; nothing lessartistic than the appearance of the company. One's eyes might bedazzled by family diamonds, but, if an American woman werepresent, she was sure to make comments about the way the jewelsIf there was a well-dressed lady at table, she waswere worn.either an American or "fast." She attracted as much notice asthough she were on the stage. No one could possibly admire anEnglish dinner-table.The Perfection of Human Society201Least of all did Motley mean that the taste or the manners wereperfect. The manners of English society were notorious, and thetaste was worse. Without exception every American woman rosein rebellion against English manners. In fact, the charm of Lon-don which made most impression on Americans was the violenceof its contrasts; the extreme badness of the worst, making back-ground for the distinction, refinement, or wit of a few, just as theextreme beauty of a few superb women was more effective againstthe plainness of the crowd. The result was mediaeval, and amus-ing; sometimes coarse to a degree that might have startled aroustabout, and sometimes courteous and considerate to a degreethat suggested King Arthur's Round Table; but this artistic con-trast was surely not the perfection that Motley had in his mind.He meant something scholarly, worldly, and modern; he wasthinking of his own tastes.Probably he meant that, in his favorite houses, the tone waseasy, the talk was good, and the standard of scholarship was high.Even there he would have been forced to qualify his adjectives.No German would have admitted that English scholarship washigh, or that it was scholarship at all, or that any wish for scholar-ship existed in England. Nothing that seemed to smell of the shopor of the lecture-room was wanted. One might as well have talkedof Renan's Christ at the table of the Bishop of London, as talkof German philology at the table of an Oxford don. Society, if asmall literary class could be called society, wanted to be amusedin its old way. Sydney Smith, who had amused, was dead ; so wasMacaulay, who instructed if he did not amuse; Thackeray diedat Christmas, 1863; Dickens never felt at home, and seldom ap-peared, in society; Bulwer Lytton was not sprightly; Tennysondetested strangers; Carlyle was mostly detested by them; Darwinnever came to town; the men of whom Motley must have beenthinking were such as he might meet at Lord Houghton's break-fasts: Grote, Jowett, Milman, or Froude; Browning, MatthewArnold, or Swinburne; Bishop Wilberforce, Venables, or Hayward;202The Education of Henry Adamsor perhaps Gladstone, Robert Lowe, or Lord Granville. A rela-tively small class, commonly isolated, suppressed, and lost at theusual London dinner, such society as this was fairly familiar evento a private secretary, but to the literary American it might wellseem perfection since he could find nothing of the sort in America.Within the narrow limits of this class, the American Legation wasfairly at home; possibly a score of houses, all liberal, and all lit-erary, but perfect only in the eyes of a Harvard College historian.They could teach little worth learning, for their tastes were an-tiquated and their knowledge was ignorance to the next genera-tion. What was altogether fatal for future purposes, they wereonly English.A social education in such a medium was bound to be useless inany other, yet Adams had to learn it to the bottom. The one thingneedful for a private secretary, was that he should not only seem,but should actually be, at home. He studied carefully, and prac-tised painfully, what seemed to be the favorite accomplishments ofsociety. Perhaps his nervousness deceived him; perhaps he tookfor an ideal of others what was only his reflected image; but heconceived that the perfection of human society required that a manshould enter a drawing-room where he was a total stranger, andplace himself on the hearth-rug, his back to the fire, with an air ofexpectant benevolence, without curiosity, much as though he haddropped in at a charity concert, kindly disposed to applaud theperformers and to overlook mistakes. This ideal rarely succeededin youth, and towards thirty it took a form of modified insolenceand offensive patronage; but about sixty it mellowed into courtesy,kindliness, and even deference to the young which had extraor-dinary charm both in women and in men. Unfortunately Adamscould not wait till sixty for education; he had his living to earn; andthe English air of patronage would earn no income for him any-where else.After five or six years of constant practice, any one can ac-quire the habit of going from one strange company to anotherThe Perfection of Human Society203without thinking much of one's self or of them, as though silently-reflecting that "in a world where we are all insects, no insect isalien; perhaps they are human in parts"; but the dreamy habitof mind which comes from solitude in crowds is not fitness forsocial success except in London. Everywhere else it is injury. Eng-land was a social kingdom whose social coinage had no currencyelsewhere.Englishwomen, from the educational point of view, could givenothing until they approached forty years old. Then they be-come very interesting — very charming — to the man of fifty.The young American was not worth the young Englishwoman'snotice, and never received it. Neither understood the other. Onlyin the domestic relation, in the country — never in society atlarge — a young American might accidentally make friends withan Englishwoman of his own age, but it never happened to HenryAdams. His susceptible nature was left to the mercy of Americangirls, which was professional duty rather than education as longas diplomacy held its own.Thus he found himself launched on waters where he had nevermeant to sail, and floating along a stream which carried him farfrom his port. His third season in London society saw the endof his diplomatic education, and began for him the social life ofa young man who felt at home in England — more at home therethan anywhere else. With this feeling, the mere habit of going togarden-parties, dinners, receptions, and balls had nothing to do.One might go to scores without a sensation of home. One mightstay in no end of country houses without forgetting that one was atotal stranger and could never be anything else. One might bowto half the dukes and duchesses in England, and feel only the morestrange. Hundreds of persons might pass with a nod and nevercome nearer. Close relation in a place like London is a personalmystery as profound as chemical affinity. Thousands pass, andone separates himself from the mass to attach himself to another,and so make, little by little, a group.204The Education of Henry AdamsOne morning, April 27, 1863, he was asked to breakfast with SirHenry Holland, the old Court physician who had been acquaintedwith every American Minister since Edward Everett, and wasa valuable social ally, who had the courage to try to be of use toeverybody, and who, while asking the private secretary to break-fast one day, was too discreet to betray what he might havelearned about rebel doings at his breakfast-table the day before.He had been friendly with the Legation, in the teeth of society,and was still bearing up against the weight of opinion, so thatyoung Adams could not decline his invitations, although theyobliged him to breakfast in Brook Street at nine o'clock in themorning, alternately with Mr. James M. Mason. Old Dr. Hol-land was himself as hale as a hawk, driving all day bare-headedabout London, and eating Welsh rarebit every night before bed;he thought that any young man should be pleased to take hisearly muffin in Brook Street, and supply a few crumbs of warnews for the daily peckings of eminent patients. Meekly, whensummoned, the private secretary went, and on reaching the frontdoor, this particular morning, he found there another young manin the act of rapping the knocker. They entered the breakfast-room together, where they were introduced to each other, andAdams learned that the other guest was a Cambridge undergrad-uate, Charles Milnes Gaskell, son of James Milnes Gaskell, theMember for Wenlock; another of the Yorkshire Milneses, fromThornes near Wakefield. Fate had fixed Adams to Yorkshire.By another chance it happened that young Milnes Gaskellwas intimate at Cambridge with William Everett who was alsoabout to take his degree. A third chance inspired Mr. Evarts witha fancy for visiting Cambridge, and led William Everett to offerhis services as host. Adams acted as courier to Mr. Evarts, andat the end of May they went down for a few days, when WilliamEverett did the honors as host with a kindness and attention thatmade his cousin sorely conscious of his own social shortcomings.Cambridge was pretty, and the dons were kind. Mr. Evarts en-The Perfection of Human Society205joyed his visit, but this was merely a part of the private secretary'sday's work. What affected his whole life was the intimacy thenbegun with Milnes Gaskell and his circle of undergraduate friends,just about to enter the world.f Intimates are predestined. Adams met in England a thousandpeople, great and small; jostled against every one, from royalprinces to gin-shop loafers; attended endless official functionsand private parties; visited every part of the United Kingdomand was not quite a stranger at the Legations in Paris and Rome;he knew the societies of certain country houses, and acquiredhabits of Sunday-afternoon calls; but all this gave him nothingto do, and was life wasted. For him nothing whatever could begained by escorting American ladies to drawing-rooms or Ameri-can gentlemen to levees at St. James's Palace, or bowing solemnlyto people with great titles, at Court balls, or even by awkwardlyjostling royalty at garden-parties; all this was done for the Govern-ment, and neither President Lincoln nor Secretary Seward wouldever know enough of their business to thank him for doing whatthey did not know how to get properly done by their own servants;but for Henry Adams — not private secretary — all the timetaken up by such duties was wasted. On the other hand, his fewpersonal intimacies concerned him alone, and the chance thatmade him almost a Yorkshireman was one that must have startedunder the Heptarchy.More than any other county in England, Yorkshire retained asort of social independence of London. Scotland itself was hardlymore distinct. The Yorkshire type had always been the strong-est of the British strains; the Norwegian and the Dane were adifferent race from the Saxon. Even Lancashire had not themass and the cultivation of the West Riding. London couldnever quite absorb Yorkshire, which, in its turn had no great lovefor London and freely showed it. To a certain degree, evidentenough to Yorkshiremen, Yorkshire was not English — or wasall England, as they might choose to express it. This must have206The Education of Henry Adamsbeen the reason why young Adams was drawn there rather thanelsewhere. Monckton Milnes alone took the trouble to draw him,and possibly Milnes was the only man in England with whomHenry Adams, at that moment, had a chance of calling out suchan un-English effort. Neither Oxford nor Cambridge nor any re-gion south of the Humber contained a considerable house wherea young American would have been sought as a friend. Eccen-tricity alone did not account for it. Monckton Milnes was a sin-gular type, but his distant cousin, James Milnes Gaskell, wasanother, quite as marked, in an opposite sense.Milnes neverseemed willing to rest; Milnes Gaskell never seemed willing tomove. In his youth one of a very famous group — Arthur Hal-lam, Tennyson, Manning, Gladstone, Francis Doyle — and re-garded as one of the most promising; an adorer of George Canning;in Parliament since coming of age; married into the powerfulconnection of the Wynns of Wynstay; rich according to Yorkshirestandards; intimate with his political leaders; he was one of thenumerous Englishmen who refuse office rather than make the ef-fort of carrying it, and want power only to make it a source ofindolence. He was a voracious reader and an admirable critic;he had forty years of parliamentary tradition on his memory; heliked to talk and to listen; he liked his dinner and, in spite of GeorgeCanning, his dry champagne; he liked wit and anecdote; but hebelonged to the generation of 1830, a generation which could notsurvive the telegraph and railway, and which even Yorkshire couldhardly produce again. To an American he was a character evenmore unusual and more fascinating than his distant cousin LordHoughton.Mr. Milnes Gaskell was kind to the young American whom hisson brought to the house, and Mrs. Milnes Gaskell was kinder, forshe thought the American perhaps a less dangerous friend thansome Englishman might be, for her son, and she was probablyright. The American had the sense to see that she was herself oneof the most intelligent and sympathetic women in England; herThe Perfection of Human Society207sister, Miss Charlotte Wynn, was another; and both were of anage and a position in society that made their friendship a compli-ment as well as a pleasure. Their consent and approval settled thematter. In England, the family is a serious fact; once admitted toit, one is there for life. London might utterly vanish from one'shorizon, but as long as life lasted, Yorkshire lived for its friends.In the year 1857, Mr. James Milnes Gaskell, who had sat forthirty years in Parliament as one of the Members for the boroughof Wenlock in Shropshire, bought Wenlock Abbey and the estatethat included the old monastic buildings. This new, or old, play-thing amused Mrs. Milnes Gaskell. The Prior's house, a charmingspecimen of fifteenth-century architecture, had been long leftto decay as a farmhouse. She put it in order, and went there tospend a part of the autumn of 1864. Young Adams was one ofher first guests, and drove about Wenlock Edge and the Wrekinwith her, learning the loveliness of this exquisite country, andits stores of curious antiquity. It was a new and charming exist-ence; an experience greatly to be envied — ideal repose and ruralShakespearian peace— but a few years of it were likely to com-plete his education, and fit him to act a fairly useful part in lifeas an Englishman, an ecclesiastic, and a contemporary of Chaucer.