CHAPTER XIVDILETTANTISM (1865-1866)THE campaign of 1864 and the reelection of Mr. Lincolnin November set the American Minister on so firm afooting that he could safely regard his own anxieties asover, and the anxieties of Earl Russell and the Emperor Napoleonas begun. With a few months more his own term of four yearswould come to an end, and even though the questions still underdiscussion with England should somewhat prolong his stay, hemight look forward with some confidence to his return home in1865. His son no longer fretted. The time for going into thearmy had passed.If he were to be useful at all, it must be as ason, and as a son he was treated with the widest indulgence andtrust. He knew that he was doing himself no good by staying inLondon, but thus far in life he had done himself no good anywhere,and reached his twenty-seventh birthday without having ad-vanced a step, that he could see, beyond his twenty-first. For themost part, his friends were worse off than he. The war was aboutto end and they were to be set adrift in a world they would findaltogether strange.At this point, as though to cut the last thread of relation, sixmonths were suddenly dropped out of his life in England. The Lon-don climate had told on some of the family; the physicians pre-scribed a winter in Italy. Of course the private secretary wasdetached as their escort, since this was one of his professionalfunctions; and he passed six months, gaining an education asItalian courier, while the Civil War came to its end. As far as othereducation went, he got none, but he was amused. Travelling in allpossible luxury, at some one else's expense, with diplomatic privi-leges and position, was a form of travel hitherto untried. TheCornice in vettura was delightful; Sorrento in winter offered hillsDilettantism209to climb and grottoes to explore, and Naples near by to visit;Rome at Easter was an experience necessary for the education ofevery properly trained private secretary; the journey north byvettura through Perugia and Sienna was a dream; the SplugenPass, if not equal to the Stelvio, was worth seeing; Paris hadalways something to show. The chances of accidental educationwere not so great as they had been, since one's field of experiencehad grown large; but perhaps a season at Baden Baden in theselater days of its brilliancy offered some chances of instruction,if it were only the sight of fashionable Europe and America onthe race-course watching the Duke of Hamilton, in the middle,improving his social advantages by the conversation of CoraPearl.The assassination of President Lincoln fell on the party whilethey were at Rome, where it seemed singularly fitting to that nurs-ery of murderers and murdered, as though America were alsogetting educated. Again one went to meditate on the steps of theSanta Maria in Ara Coeli, but the lesson seemed as shallow asbefore. Nothing happened. The travellers changed no plan ormovement. The Minister did not recall them to London. The sea-son was over before they returned; and when the private secre-tary sat down again at his desk in Portland Place before a mass ofcopy in arrears, he saw before him a world so changed as to bebeyond connection with the past. His identity, if one could call abundle of disconnected memories an identity, seemed to remain;but his life was once more broken into separate pieces; he wasa spider and had to spin a new web in some new place with a newattachment.All his American friends and contemporaries who were stillalive looked singularly commonplace without uniforms, and has-tened to get married and retire into back streets and suburbs untilMinister Adams, too, was goingthey could find employment.home "next fall," and when the fall came, he was going home"next spring," and when the spring came, President Andrew John-210The Education of Henry Adamsson was at loggerheads with the Senate, and found it best to keepAfter the usual manner of public servantsthings unchanged.who had acquired the habit of office and lost the faculty of will,the members of the Legation in London continued the daily rou-tine of English society, which, after becoming a habit, threatenedto become a vice. Had Henry Adams shared a single taste withthe young Englishmen of his time, he would have been lost; butthe custom of pounding up and down Rotten Row every day, ona hack, was not a taste, and yet was all the sport he shared.Evidently he must set to work; he must get a new education; hemust begin a career of his own.Nothing was easier to say, but even his father admitted twocareers to be closed. For the law, diplomacy had unfitted him; fordiplomacy he already knew too much. Any one who had held,during the four most difficult years of American diplomacy, aposition at the centre of action, with his hands actually touchingthe lever of power, could not beg a post of Secretary at Vienna orMadrid in order to bore himself doing nothing until the nextPresident should do him the honor to turn him out. For onceall his advisers agreed that diplomacy was not possible.In any ordinary system he would have been called back toserve in the State Department, but, between the President andthe Senate, service of any sort became a delusion. The choice ofcareer was more difficult than the education which had proved im-practicable. Adams saw no road; in fact there was none. All hisfriends were trying one path or another, but none went a waythat he could have taken. John Hay passed through London inorder to bury himself in second-rate Legations for years, before hedrifted home again to join Whitelaw Reid and George Smalleyon the Tribune, Frank Barlow and Frank Bartlett carried Major-Generals' commissions into small law business.Miles stayed inthe army. Henry Higginson, after a desperate struggle, was forcedinto State Street; Charles Adams wandered about, with brevet-brigadier rank, trying to find employment. Scores of others triedDilettantism211experiments more or less unsuccessful. Henry Adams could seeeasy ways of making a hundred blunders; he could see no likelyway of making a legitimate success. Such as it was, his so-callededucation was wanted nowhere.One profession alone seemed possible — the press. In i860 hewould have said that he was born to be an editor, like at least athousand other young graduates from American colleges whoentered the world every year enjoying the same conviction; butin 1866 the situation was altered; the possession of money hadbecome doubly needful for success, and double energy was essen-tial to get money. America had more than doubled her scale.Yet the press was still the last resource of the educated poor whocould not be artists and would not be tutors. Any man who wasfit for nothing else could write an editorial or a criticism. Theenormous mass of misinformation accumulated in ten years ofnomad life could always be worked off on a helpless public, indiluted doses, if one could but secure a table in the corner of anewspaper office. The press was an inferior pulpit; an anony-mous schoolmaster; a cheap boarding-school; but it was stillthe nearest approach to a career for the literary survivor of awrecked education. For the press, then, Henry Adams decided tofit himself, and since he could not go home to get practical train-ing, he set to work to do what he could in London.He knew, as well as any reporter on the New York Herald, thatthis was not an American way of beginning, and he knew a certainnumber of other drawbacks which the reporter could not see soclearly. Do what he might, he drew breath only in the atmosphereof English methods and thoughts; he could breathe none other.His mother — who should have been a competent judge, sinceband — averred that every woman who lived a certain time inEngland came to look and dress like an Englishwoman, no matterhow she struggled. Henry Adams felt himself catching an Englishtone of mind and processes of thought, though at heart more hos-her success and popularity in England exceeded that of her hus-212The Education of Henry Adamstile to them than ever. As though to make him more helpless andwholly distort his life, England grew more and more agreeable andMinister Adams became, in 1866, almost a historicalamusing.monument in London; he held a position altogether his own. HisLord Palmerston died in October,old opponents disappeared.1865; Lord Russell tottered on six months longer, but then van-ished from power; and in July, 1866, the conservatives came intooffice. Traditionally the Tories were easier to deal with than theWhigs, and Minister Adams had no reason to regret the change.His personal relations were excellent and his personal weight in-creased year by year. On that score the private secretary had nocares, and not much copy. His own position was modest, but itwas enough; the life he led was agreeable; his friends were all hewanted, and, except that he was at the mercy of politics, he feltmuch at ease. Of his daily life he had only to reckon so manybreakfasts; so many dinners; so many receptions, balls, theatres,and country-parties; so many cards to be left; so many Americansto be escorted — the usual routine of every young American in abeen his official duty — which it was not — it was mere routine,Legation; all counting for nothing in sum, because, even if it hada single, continuous, unbroken act, which led to nothing and no-where except Portland Place and the grave.The path that led somewhere was the English habit of mindwhich deepened its ruts every day. The English mind was like theLondon drawing-room, a comfortable and easy spot, filled withbits and fragments of incoherent furnitures, which were nevermeant to go together, and could be arranged in any relation with-out making a whole, except by the square room. Philosophymight dispute about innate ideas till the stars died out in the sky,but about innate tastes no one, except perhaps a collie dog, hasthe right to doubt; least of all, the Englishman, for his tastes arehis being; he drifts after them as unconsciously as a honey-beedrifts after his flowers, and, in England, every one must drift withhim. Most young Englishmen drifted to the race-course or theDilettantism213moors or the hunting-field; a few towards books; one or two fol-lowed some form of science; and a number took to what, for wantof a better name, they called Art. Young Adams inherited a cer-tain taste for the same pursuit from his father who insisted that hehad it not, because he could not see what his son thought he sawin Turner. The Minister, on the other hand, carried a sort of aes-thetic rag-bag of his own, which he regarded as amusement, andnever called art. So he would wander off on a Sunday to attendservice successively in all the city churches built by Sir ChristopherWren; or he would disappear from the Legation day after day toattend coin sales at Sotheby's, where his son attended alternate salesof drawings, engravings, or water-colors. Neither knew enough totalk much about the other's tastes, but the only difference betweenthem was a slight difference of direction. The Minister's mindlike his writings showed a correctness of form and line that hisson would have been well pleased had he inherited.Of all supposed English tastes, that of art was the most alluringand treacherous. Once drawn into it, one had small chance ofescape, for it had no centre or circumference, no beginning, middle,or end, no origin, no object, and no conceivable result as education.In London one met no corrective. The only American who cameby, capable of teaching, was William Hunt, who stopped to paintthe portrait of the Minister which now completes the familyseries at Harvard College. Hunt talked constantly, and was, orafterwards became, a famous teacher, but Henry Adams did notknow enough to learn. Perhaps, too, he had inherited or acquireda stock of tastes, as young men must, which he was slow to out-grow. Hunt had no time to sweep out the rubbish of Adams'smind. The portrait finished, he went.As often as he could, Adams ran over to Paris, for sunshine, andthere always sought out Richardson in his attic in the Rue duBac, or wherever he lived, and they went off to dine at the PalaisRoyal, and talk of whatever interested the students of the BeauxArts. Richardson, too, had much to say, but had not yet seized his214The Education of Henry Adamsstyle. Adams caught very little of what lay in his mind, and theless, because, to Adams, everything French was bad except therestaurants, while the continuous life in England made French artseem worst of all. This did not prove that English art, in 1866,was good; far from it; but it helped to make bric-a-brac of all art,after the manner of England.Not in the Legation, or in London, but in Yorkshire at Thornes,Adams met the man that pushed him furthest in this Englishgarden of innate disorder called taste. The older daughter ofthe Milnes Gaskells had married Francis Turner Palgrave. FewAmericans will ever ask whether any one has described the Pal-graves, but the family was one of the most describable in all Eng-land at that day. Old Sir Francis, the father, had been much thegreatest of all the historians of early England, the only one whowas un-English; and the reason of his superiority lay in his name,which was Cohen, and his mind which was Cohen also, or at leastnot English. He changed his name to Palgrave in order to pleasehis wife. They had a band of remarkable sons: Francis Turner,Gifford, Reginald, Inglis; all of whom made their mark. Giffordwas perhaps the most eccentric, but his "Travels" in Arabia werefamous, even among the famous travels of that generation. Fran-cis Turner — or, as he was commonly called, Frank Palgrave —unable to work off his restlessness in travel like Gifford, and stifledin the atmosphere of the Board of Education, became a critic.His art-criticisms helped to make the Saturday Review a terror tothe British artist. His literary taste, condensed into the "GoldenTreasury," helped Adams to more literary education than he evergot from any taste of his own. Palgrave himself held rank as oneof the minor poets ; his hymns had vogue. As an art-critic he wastoo ferocious to be liked; even Holman Hunt found his temperhumorous; among many rivals, he may perhaps have had a rightto claim the much-disputed rank of being the most unpopularman in London; but he .liked to teach, and asked only for a docilepupil. Adams was docile enough, for he knew nothing and likedDilettantism215to listen. Indeed, he had to listen, whether he liked or not, forPalgrave's voice was strident, and nothing could stop him. Lit-erature, painting, sculpture, architecture were open fields for hisattacks, which were always intelligent if not always kind, and whenthese failed, he readily descended to meaner levels. John RichardGreen, who was Palgrave's precise opposite, and whose Irishcharm of touch and humor defended him from most assaults, usedto tell with delight of Palgrave's call on him just after he hadmoved into his new Queen Anne house in Kensington Square:"Palgrave called yesterday, and the first thing he said was, 'I'vecounted three anachronisms on your front doorstep.'"Another savage critic, also a poet, was Thomas Woolner, a typealmost more emphatic than Palgrave in a society which resoundedwith emphasis. Woolner's sculpture showed none of the roughassertion that Woolner himself showed, when he was not makingsupernatural effort to be courteous, but his busts were remarkable,and his work altogether was, in Palgrave's clamorous opinion, thebest of his day. He took the matter .of British art — or want ofart — seriously, almost ferociously, as a personal grievance andtorture; at times he was rather terrifying in the anarchistic wrathof his denunciation. As Henry Adams felt no responsibility forEnglish art, and had no American art to offer for sacrifice, helistened with enjoyment to language much like Carlyle's, andaccepted it without a qualm. On the other hand, as a third mem-ber of this critical group, he fell in with Stopford Brooke whosetastes lay in the same direction, and whose expression was modi-fied by clerical propriety. Among these men, one wandered offinto paths of education much too devious and slippery for anAmerican foot to follow. He would have done better to go on therace-track, as far as concerned a career.Fortunately for him he knew too little ever to be an art-critic,still less an artist. For some things ignorance is good, and art isone of them. He knew he knew nothing, and had not the trainedeye or the keen instinct that trusted itself; but he was curious, as216The Education of Henry Adamshe went on, to find out how much others knew. He took Palgrave'sword as final about a drawing of Rembrandt or Michael Angelo,and he trusted Woolner implicitly about a Turner; but when hequoted their authority to any dealer, the dealer pooh-poohed it,and declared that it had no weight in the trade. If he went to asale of drawings or paintings, at Sotheby's or Christie's, an hourafterwards, he saw these same dealers watching Palgrave or Wool-ner for a point, and bidding over them. He rarely found twodealers agree in judgment. He once bought a water-color fromthe artist himself, out of his studio, and had it doubted an hourafterwards by the dealer to whose place he took it for framing.He was reduced to admit that he could not prove its authenticity;internal evidence was against it.One morning in early July, 1867, Palgrave stopped at the Lega-tion in Portland Place on his way downtown, and offered to takeAdams to Sotheby's, where a small collection of old drawings wason show. The collection was rather a curious one, said to be thatof Sir Anthony Westcomb, from Liverpool, with an undisturbedrecord of a century, but with nothing to attract notice. Probablynone but collectors or experts examined the portfolios. Somedozens of these were always on hand, following every sale, andespecially on the lookout for old drawings, which became rarerevery year. Turning rapidly over the numbers, Palgrave stoppedat one containing several small drawings, one marked as Rem-brandt, one as Rafael; and putting his finger on the Rafael, aftercareful examination; "I should buy this," he said; "it looks to melike one of those things that sell for five shillings one day, andfifty pounds the next." Adams marked it for a bid, and the nextmorning came down to the auction. The numbers sold slowly, andat noon he thought he might safely go to lunch. When he cameback, half an hour afterwards, the drawing was gone. Muchannoyed at his own stupidity, since Palgrave had expressly saidhe wanted the drawing for himself if he had not in a mannergiven it to Adams, the culprit waited for the sale to close, and thenDilettantism217asked the clerk for the name of the buyer. It was Holloway, the art-dealer, near Covent Garden, whom he slightly knew. Going atonce to the shop he waited till young Holloway came in, withhis purchases under his arm, and without attempt at preface,he said: "You bought to-day, Mr. Holloway, a number that Iwanted. Do you mind letting me have it?" Holloway took outthe parcel, looked over the drawings, and said that he had boughtthe number for the sake of the Rembrandt, which he thoughtpossibly genuine; taking that out, Adams might have the rest forthe price he paid for the lot — twelve shillings.Thus, down to that moment, every expert in London had prob-ably seen these drawings. Two of them — only two — had thoughtthem worth buying at any price, and of these two, Palgrave chosethe Rafael, Holloway the one marked as Rembrandt. Adams, thepurchaser of the Rafael, knew nothing whatever on the subject,but thought he might credit himself with education to the valueof twelve shillings, and call the drawing nothing. Such items ofeducation commonly came higher.He took the drawing to Palgrave. It was closely pasted to anold, rather thin, cardboard mount, and, on holding it up to thewindow, one could see lines on the reverse. "Take it down to Reedat the British Museum," said Palgrave; "he is Curator of thedrawings, and, if you ask him, he will have it taken off the mount."Adams amused himself for a day or two by searching Rafael'sworks for the figure, which he found at last in the Parnasso, thefigure of Horace, of which, as it happened — though Adams didnot know it — the British Museum owned a much finer drawing.At last he took the dirty, little, unfinished red-chalk sketch toReed whom he found in the Curator's room, with some of the finestRafael drawings in existence, hanging on the walls. "Yes!" saidMr. Reed ; " I noticed this at the sale; but it 's not Rafael ! " Adams,feeling himself incompetent to discuss this subject, reported theresult to Palgrave, who said that Reed knew nothing about it.Also this point lay beyond Adams's competence; but he noted that218The Education of Henry AdamsReed was in the employ of the British Museum as Curator of thebest — or nearly the best — collection in the world, especially ofRafaels, and that he bought for the Museum. As expert he hadrejected both the Rafael and the Rembrandt at first-sight, andafter his attention was recalled to the Rafael for a further opinionhe rejected it again.A week later, Adams returned for the drawing, which Mr.Reed took out of his drawer and gave him, saying with whatseemed a little doubt or hesitation: "I should tell you that thepaper shows a water-mark, which I find the same as that of paperused by Marc Antonio." A little taken back by this method ofstudying art, a method which even a poor and ignorant Ameri-can might use as well as Rafael himself, Adams asked stupidly:"Then you think it genuine?" "Possibly!" replied Reed; "butmuch overdrawn."Here was expert opinion after a second revise, with help of water-marks! In Adams's opinion it was alone worth another twelveshillings as education; but this was not all. Reed continued:"The lines on the back seem to be writing, which I cannot read,but if you will take it down to the manuscript-room, they willread it for you."Adams took the sheet down to the keeper of the manuscriptsand begged him to read the lines. The keeper, after a few minutes'study, very obligingly said he could not: "It is scratched with>an artist's crayon, very rapidly, with many unusual abbreviationsand old forms. If any one in Europe can read it, it is the old manat the table yonder, Libri! Take it to him!"This expert broke down on the alphabet! He could not evenjudge a manuscript; but Adams had no right to complain, for hehad nothing to pay, not even twelve shillings, though he thoughtthese experts worth more, at least for his education. Accordinglyhe carried his paper to Libri, a total stranger to him, and asked theold man, as deferentially as possible, to tell him whether the lineshad any meaning. Had Adams not been an ignorant person heDilettantism"219would have known all about Libri, but his ignorance was vast, andperhaps was for the best. Libri looked at the paper, and thenlooked again, and at last bade him sit down and wait. Half an hourpassed before he called Adams back and showed him these lines : —"Or questo credo ben che una elleriaTe offende tanto che te offese il core.Perche sei grande nol sei in tua volia;Tu vedi e gia non credi il tuo valore;Passate gia son tutte gelosie;Tu sei di sasso; non hai piu dolore."As far as Adams could afterwards recall it, this was Libri'sreading, but he added that the abbreviations were many andunusual; that the writing was very ancient; and that the word heread as "elleria" in the first line was not Italian at all.By this time, one had got too far beyond one's depth to askIf Libri could not read Italian, very clearly Adamsquestions.had better not offer to help him. He took the drawing, thankedeverybody, and having exhausted the experts of the British Mu-seum, took a cab to Woolner's studio, where he showed the figureand repeated Reed's opinion. Woolner snorted :he said; "he knows nothing about it; there maybe a rotten lineor two, but the drawing's all right."" Reed 's a fool !For forty years Adams kept this drawing on his mantelpiece,partly for its own interest, but largely for curiosity to see whetherany critic or artist would ever stop to look at it. None ever did,unless he knew the story. Adams himself never wanted to knowmore about it. He refused to seek further light. He never caredto learn whether the drawing was Rafael's, or whether the versewere Rafael's, or whether even the water-mark was Rafael's.The experts — some scores of them including the British Museum,— had affirmed that the drawing was worth a certain moiety oftwelve shillings. On that point, also, Adams could offer no opin-ion, but he was clear that his education had profited by it to thatextent — his amusement even more.220The Education of Henry AdamsArt was a superb field for education, but at every turn he metthe same old figure, like a battered and illegible signpost thatought to direct him to the next station but never did. There wasno next station. All the art of a thousand — or ten thousand —years had brought England to stuff which Palgrave and Woolnerbrayed in their mortars ; derided, tore in tatters, growled at, andhowled at, and treated in terms beyond literary usage. Whistlerhad not yet made his appearance in London, but the others didquite as well. What result could a student reach from it? Once,on returning to London, dining with Stopford Brooke, some oneasked Adams what impression the Royal Academy Exhibitionmade on him. With a little hesitation, he suggested that it wasrather a chaos, which he meant for civility; but Stopford Brookeabruptly met it by asking whether chaos were not better thandeath. Truly the question was worth discussion. For his ownpart, Adams inclined to think that neither chaos nor death wasan object to him as a searcher of knowledge — neither wouldhave vogue in America — neither would help him to a career.Both of them led him away from his objects, into an Englishdilettante museum of scraps, with nothing but a wall-paper tounite them in any relation of sequence. Possibly English taste wasone degree more fatal than English scholarship, but even this ques-tion was open to argument. Adams went to the sales and boughtwhat he was told to buy; now a classical drawing by Rafael orRubens ; now a water-color by Girtin or Cotman, if possible unfin-ished because it was more likely to be a sketch from nature; andhe bought them not because they went together — on the con-trary, they made rather awkward spots on the wall as they did onthe mind — but because he could afford to buy those, and notothers. Ten pounds did not go far to buy a Michael Angelo, butwas a great deal of money to a private secretary. The effect wasspotty, fragmentary, feeble; and the more so because the Britishmind was constructed in that way — boasted of it, and held it tobe true philosophy as well as sound method.Dilettantism221What was worse, no one had a right to denounce the Englishas wrong. Artistically their mind was scrappy, and every oneknew it, but perhaps thought itself, history, and nature, werescrappy, and ought to be studied so. Turning from British art toBritish literature, one met the same dangers. The historical schoolwas a playground of traps and pitfalls. Fatally one fell into thesink of history— antiquarianism. For one who nourished a naturalweakness for what was called history, the whole of British litera-ture in the nineteenth century was antiquarianism or anecdotage,for no one except Buckle had tried to link it with ideas, and com-monly Buckle was regarded as having failed. Macaulay was theEnglish historian. Adams had the greatest admiration for Ma-caulay, but he felt that any one who should even distantly imitateMacaulay would perish in self-contempt. One might as well imi-tate Shakespeare. Yet evidently something was wrong here, forthe poet and the historian ought to have different methods, andMacaulay's method ought to be imitable if it were sound; yet themethod was more doubtful than the style. He was a dramatist; apainter; a poet, like Carlyle. This was the English mind, method,genius, or whatever one might call it; but one never could quiteadmit that the method which ended in Froude and Kinglakecould be sound for America where passion and poetry were eccen-tricities. Both Froude and Kinglake, when one met them at din-ner, were very agreeable, very intelligent; and perhaps the Eng-lish method was right, and art fragmentary by essence.History,like everything else, might be a field of scraps, like the refuse abouta Staffordshire iron-furnace. One felt a little natural reluctanceto decline and fall like Silas Wegg on the golden dust-heap ofBritish refuse; but if one must, one could at least expect a degreefrom Oxford and the respect of the Athenaeum Club.While drifting, after the war ended, many old American friendscame abroad for a holiday, and among the rest, Dr. Palfrey, busywith his " History of New England." Of all the relics of childhood,Dr. Palfrey was the most sympathetic, and perhaps the more so222The Education of Henry Adamsbecause he, too, had wandered into the pleasant meadows of anti-quarianism, and had forgotten the world in his pursuit of the NewEngland Puritan. Although America seemed becoming more andmore indifferent to the Puritan except as a slightly rococo orna-ment, he was only the more amusing as a study for the Monk-barns of Boston Bay, and Dr. Palfrey took him seriously, as hisclerical education required. His work was rather an Apologia inthe Greek sense; a justification of the ways of God to Man, or,what was much the same thing, of Puritans to other men; and thetask of justification was onerous enough to require the occasionalrelief of a contrast or scapegoat. When Dr. Palfrey happened onthe picturesque but unpuritanic figure of Captain John Smith,he felt no call to beautify Smith's picture or to defend his moralcharacter; he became impartial and penetrating. The famousstory of Pocahontas roused his latent New England scepticism.He suggested to Adams, who wanted to make a position for him-self, that an article in the North American Review on Captain JohnSmith's relations with Pocahontas would attract as much atten-tion, and probably break as much glass, as any other stone thatcould be thrown by a beginner. Adams could suggest nothingbetter. The task seemed likely to be amusing. So he plantedhimself in the British Museum and patiently worked over all thematerial he could find, until, at last, after three or four monthsof labor, he got it in shape and sent it to Charles Norton, whowas then editing the North American. Mr. Norton very civillyand even kindly accepted it. The article appeared in January,1867.Surely, here was something to ponder over, as a step in educa-tion; something that tended to stagger a sceptic! In spite of per-sonal wishes, intentions, and prejudices; in spite of civil wars anddiplomatic education; in spite of determination to be actual,daily, and practical, Henry Adams found himself, at twenty-eight,still in English society, dragged on one side into English dilet-tantism, which of all dilettantism he held the most futile; and,Dilettantism223on the other, into American antiquarianism, which of all anti-quarianism he held the most foolish. This was the result of fiveyears in London. Even then he knew it to be a false start. He hadwholly lost his way. If he were ever to amount to anything, hemust begin a new education, in a new place, with a new purpose.