CHAPTER XXIVINDIAN SUMMER (1898-1899)THE summer of the Spanish War began the Indian sum-mer of life to one who had reached sixty years of age,and cared only to reap in peace such harvest as thesesixty years had yielded. He had reason to be more than contentwith it. Since 1864 he had felt no such sense of power and mo-mentum, and had seen no such number of personal friends wield-ing it. The sense of solidarity counts for much in one's content-ment, but the sense of winning one's game counts for more; andin London, in 1898, the scene was singularly interesting to thelast survivor of the Legation of 1861. He thought himself per-haps the only person living who could get full enjoyment of thedrama. He carried every scene of it, in a century and a half sincethe Stamp Act, quite alive in his mind — all the interminabledisputes of his disputatious ancestors as far back as the year 1750— as well as his own insignificance in the Civil War, every stepin which had the object of bringing England into an Americansystem. For this they had written libraries of argument and re-monstrance, and had piled war on war, losing their tempers forlife, and souring the gentle and patient Puritan nature of theirdescendants, until even their private secretaries at times usedlanguage almost intemperate; and suddenly, by pure chance, theblessing fell on Hay. After two hundred years of stupid and greedyblundering, which no argument and no violence affected, the peo-ple of England learned their lesson just at the moment when Haywould otherwise have faced a flood of the old anxieties. Hay him-self scarcely knew how grateful he should be, for to him the changecame almost of course. He saw only the necessary stages that hadled to it, and to him they seemed natural; but to Adams, stillliving in the atmosphere of Palmerston and John Russell, theIndian Summer363sudden appearance of Germany as the grizzly terror which, intwenty years effected what Adamses had tried for two hundredin vain — frightened England into America's arms — seemed asmelodramatic as any plot of Napoleon the Great. He could feelonly the sense of satisfaction at seeing the diplomatic triumph ofall his family, since the breed existed, at last realized under hisown eyes for the advantage of his oldest and closest ally.This was history, not education, yet it taught something ex-ceedingly serious, if not ultimate, could one trust the lesson. Forthe first time in his life, he felt a sense of possible purpose workingitself out in history. Probably no one else on this earthly planet— not even Hay— could have come out on precisely such extremepersonal satisfaction, but as he sat at Hay's table, listening toany member of the British Cabinet, for all were alike now, discussthe Philippines as a question of balance of power in the East, hecould see that the family work of a hundred and fifty years fellat once into the grand perspective of true empire-building, whichHay's work set off with artistic skill. The roughness of the archaicfoundations looked stronger and larger in scale for the refinementand certainty of the arcade. In the long list of famous AmericanMinisters in London, none could have given the work quite thecompleteness, the harmony, the perfect ease of Hay.Never before had Adams been able to discern the working oflaw in history, which was the reason of his failure in teaching it,for chaos cannot be taught; but he thought he had a personal prop-erty by inheritance in this proof of sequence and intelligence inthe affairs of man — a property which no one else had right todispute; and this personal triumph left him a little cold towardsthe other diplomatic results of the war. He knew that Porto Ricomust be taken, but he would have been glad to escape the Philip-pines. Apart from too intimate an acquaintance with the valueof islands in the South Seas, he knew the West Indies well enoughto be assured that, whatever the American people might think orsay about it, they would sooner or later have to police those islands,364The Education of Henry Adamsnot against Europe, but for Europe, and America too. Educationon the outskirts of civilized life teaches not very much, but ittaught this ; and one felt no call to shoulder the load of archipela-goes in the antipodes when one was trying painfully to pluck upcourage to face the labor of shouldering archipelagoes at home.The country decided otherwise, and one acquiesced readily enough,since the matter concerned only the public willingness to carryloads; in London, the balance of power in the East came aloneinto discussion ; and in every point of view one had as much reasonto be gratified with the result as though one had shared in thedanger, instead of being vigorously employed in looking on froma great distance. After all, friends had done the work, if not one'sself, and he too serves a certain purpose who only stands and cheers.In June, at the crisis of interest, the Camerons came over, andtook the fine old house of Surrenden Dering in Kent which theymade a sort of country house to the Embassy. Kent has charmsrivalling those of Shropshire, and, even compared with the manybeautiful places scattered along the Welsh border, few are nobleror more genial than Surrenden with its unbroken descent from theSaxons, its avenues, its terraces, its deer-park, its large repose onthe Kentish hillside, and its broad outlook over what was once theforest of Anderida. Filled with a constant stream of guests, thehouse seemed to wait for the chance to show its charms to the Amer-ican, with whose activity the whole world was resounding; andnever since the battle of Hastings could the little telegraph officeof the Kentish village have done such work. There, on a hot July 4,1898, to an expectant group under the shady trees, came the tele-gram announcing the destruction of the Spanish Armada, as itmight have come to Queen Elizabeth in 1588; and there, later inthe season, came the order summoning Hay to the State Depart-ment.Hay had no wish to be Secretary of State. He much preferred toremain Ambassador, and his friends were quite as cold about it ashe. No one knew so well what sort of strain falls on SecretariesIndian Summer365of State, or how little strength he had in reserve against it. Evenat Surrenden he showed none too much endurance, and he wouldgladly have found a valid excuse for refusing. The discussion onboth sides was earnest, but the decided voice of the conclave wasthat, though if he were a mere office-seeker he might certainlydecline promotion, if he were a member of the Government hecould not. No serious statesman could accept a favor and refusea service. Doubtless he might refuse, but in that case he mustresign. The amusement of making Presidents has keen fascinationfor idle American hands, but these black arts have the old draw-back of all deviltry; one must serve the spirit one evokes, eventhough the service were perdition to body and soul. For him, nodoubt, the service, though hard, might bring some share of profit,but for the friends who gave this unselfish decision, all would proveloss. For one, Adams on that subject had become a little daft.No one in his experience had ever passed unscathed throughthat malarious marsh. In his fancy, office was poison; it killed— body and soul — physically and socially. Office was more pois-onous than priestcraft or pedagogy in proportion as it held morepower; but the poison he complained of was not ambition; heshared none of Cardinal Wolsey's belated penitence for that healthystimulant, as he had shared none of the fruits; his poison wasthat of the will — the distortion of sight — the warping of mind— the degradation of tissue — the coarsening of taste — the nar-rowing of sympathy to the emotions of a caged rat. Hay neededno office in order to wield influence. For him, influence lay aboutthe streets, waiting for him to stoop to it; he enjoyed more thanenough power without office; no one of his position, wealth, andpolitical experience, living at the centre of politics in contact withthe active party managers, could escape influence. His only ambi-tion was to escape annoyance, and no one knew better than hethat, at sixty years of age, sensitive to physical strain, still moresensitive to brutality, vindictiveness, or betrayal, he took officeat cost of life.366The Education of Henry AdamsNeither he nor any of the Surrenden circle made pretence ofgladness at the new dignity for, with all his gaiety of manner andlightness of wit, he took dark views of himself, none the lighterfor their humor, and his obedience to the President's order was thegloomiest acquiescence he had ever smiled. Adams took darkviews, too, not so much on Hay's account as on his own, for, whileHay had at least the honors of office, his friends would share onlythe ennuis of it; but, as usual with Hay, nothing was gained bytaking such matters solemnly, and old habits of the Civil War lefttheir mark of military drill on every one who lived through it.He shouldered his pack and started for home. Adams had no mindto lose his friend without a struggle, though he had never knownsuch sort of struggle to avail. The chance was desperate, but hecould not afford to throw it away; so, as soon as the Surrendenestablishment broke up, on October 17, he prepared for returnhome, and on November 13, none too gladly, found himself againgazing into La Fayette Square.He had made another false start and lost two years more ofeducation; nor had he excuse; for, this time, neither politics norsociety drew him away from his trail. He had nothing to do withHay's politics at home or abroad, and never affected agreementwith his views or his methods, nor did Hay care whether his friendsagreed or disagreed. They all united in trying to help each other toget along the best way they could, and all they tried to save wasthe personal relation. Even there, Adams would have been beatenhad he not been helped by Mrs. Hay, who saw the necessity ofdistraction, and led her husband into the habit of stopping everyafternoon to take his friend off for an hour's walk, followed by acup of tea with Mrs. Hay afterwards, and a chat with any onewho called.For the moment, therefore, the situation was saved, at least inoutward appearance, and Adams could go back to his own pur-suits which were slowly taking a direction. Perhaps they had noright to be called pursuits, for in truth one consciously pursuedIndian Summer367nothing, but drifted as attraction offered itself. The short sessionbroke up the Washington circle, so that, on March 22, Adams wasable to sail with the Lodges for Europe and to pass April in Sicilyand Rome.With the Lodges, education always began afresh. Forty yearshad left little of the Palermo that Garibaldi had shown to the boyof i860, but Sicily in all ages seems to have taught only catastropheand violence, running riot on that theme ever since Ulysses beganits study on the eye of Cyclops. For a lesson in anarchy, withouta shade of sequence, Sicily stands alone and defies evolution.Syracuse teaches more than Rome. Yet even Rome was notmute, and the church of Ara Cceli seemed more and more todraw all the threads of thought to a centre, for every new jour-ney led back to its steps — Karnak, Ephesus, Delphi, Mycenae,Constantinople, Syracuse — all lying on the road to the Capitol.What they had to bring by way of intellectual riches could notyet be discerned, but they carried camel-loads of moral; and NewYork sent most of all, for, in forty years, America had made sovast a stride to empire that the world of i860 stood already on adistant horizon somewhere on the same plane with the republicof Brutus and Cato, while schoolboys read of Abraham Lincolnas they did of Julius Caesar. Vast swarms of Americans knew theCivil War only by school history, as they knew the story of Crom-well or Cicero, and were as familiar with political assassinationas though they had lived under Nero. The climax of empirecould be seen approaching, year after year, as though Sulla werea President or McKinley a Consul.Nothing annoyed Americans more than to be told this simpleand obvious — in no way unpleasant — truth; therefore one satsilent as ever on the Capitol ; but, by way of completing the lesson,the Lodges added a pilgrimage to Assisi and an interview with St.Francis, whose solution of historical riddles seemed the most satis-factory — or sufficient — ever offered; worth fully forty years'more study, and better worth it than Gibbon himself, or even368The Education of Henry AdamsSt. Augustine, St. Ambrose, or St. Jerome. The most bewilderingeffect of all these fresh cross-lights on the old Assistant Professorof 1874 was due to the astonishing contrast between what he hadtaught then and what he found himself confusedly trying to learnfive-and-twenty years afterwards — between the twelfth centuryof his thirtieth and that of his sixtieth years. At Harvard College,weary of spirit in the wastes of Anglo-Saxon law, he had occasion-ally given way to outbursts of derision at shedding his life-bloodfor the sublime truths of Sac and Soc: —HIC JACETHOMUNCULUS SCRIPTORDOCTOR BARBARICUSHENRICUS ADAMSADAE FILIUS ET EVAEPRIMO EXPLICUITSOCNAMThe Latin was as twelfth-century as the law, and he meant assatire the claim that he had been first to explain the legal meaningof Sac and Soc, although any German professor would havescorned it as a shameless and presumptuous bid for immortality;but the whole point of view had vanished in 1900. Not he, but SirHenry Maine and Rudolph Sohm, were the parents or creatorsof Sac and Soc. Convinced that the clue of religion led to nothing,and that politics led to chaos, one had turned to the law, as one'sscholars turned to the Law School, because one could see no otherpath to a profession.The law had proved as futile as politics or religion, or any othersingle thread spun by the human spider; it offered no more conti-nuity than architecture or coinage, and no more force of its own.St. Francis expressed supreme contempt for them all, and solvedthe whole problem by rejecting it altogether. Adams returned toParis with a broken and contrite spirit, prepared to admit that hislife had no meaning, and conscious that in any case it no longerIndian Summer369mattered. He passed a summer of solitude contrasting sadly withthe last at Surrenden ; but the solitude did what the society did not— it forced and drove him into the study of his ignorance insilence. Here at last he entered the practice of his final profession.Hunted by ennui, he could no longer escape, and, by way of asummer school, he began a methodical survey — a triangulation— of the twelfth century. The pursuit had a singular Frenchcharm which France had long lost — a calmness, lucidity, sim-plicity of expression, vigor of action, complexity of local color,that made Paris flat. In the long summer days one found a sortof saturated green pleasure in the forests, and gray infinity of restin the little twelfth-century churches that lined them, as unassum-ing as their own mosses, and as sure of their purpose as their roundarches; but churches were many and summer was short, so thathe was at last driven back to the quays and photographs. Forweeks he lived in silence.His solitude was broken in November by the chance arrival ofJohn La Farge. At that moment, contact with La Farge had a newvalue. Of all the men who had deeply affected their friends since1850 John La Farge was certainly the foremost, and for HenryAdams, who had sat at his feet since 1872, the question how muchhe owed to La Farge could be answered only by admitting that hehad no standard to measure it by. Of all his friends La Farge aloneowned a mind complex enough to contrast against the common-places of American uniformity, and in the process had vastly per-plexed most Americans who came in contact with it. The Americanmind — the Bostonian as well as the Southern or Western — likesto walk straight up to its object, and assert or deny something thatit takes for a fact; it has a conventional approach, a conventionalanalysis, and a conventional conclusion, as well as a conventionalexpression, all the time loudly asserting its unconventionality. Themost disconcerting trait of John La Farge was his reversal of theprocess. His approach was quiet and indirect; he moved round anobject, and never separated it from its surroundings; he prided37 oThe Education of Henry Adamshimself on faithfulness to tradition and convention; he was neverabrupt and abhorred dispute. His manners and attitude towardsthe universe were the same, whether tossing in the middle of thePacific Ocean sketching the trade-wind from a whale-boat in theblast of sea-sickness, or drinking the cha-no-yu in the formal ritesof Japan, or sipping his cocoanut cup of kava in the ceremonial ofSamoan chiefs, or reflecting under the sacred bo-tree at Anaradj-pura.One was never quite sure of his whole meaning until too late torespond, for he had no difficulty in carrying different shades ofcontradiction in his mind. As he said of his friend Okakura, histhought ran as a stream runs through grass, hidden perhaps butalways there; and one felt often uncertain in what direction itflowed, for even a contradiction was to him only a shade of differ-ence, a complementary color, about which no intelligent artistwould dispute. Constantly he repulsed argument: "Adams, youreason too much!" was one of his standing reproaches even in themild discussion of rice and mangoes in the warm night of Tahitidinners. He should have blamed Adams for being born in Boston.The mind resorts to reason for want of training, and Adams hadnever met a perfectly trained mind.To La Farge, eccentricity meant convention; a mind reallyeccentric never betrayed it. True eccentricity was a tone — ashade — a nuance — and the finer the tone, the truer the eccen-tricity. Of course all artists hold more or less the same point ofview in their art, but few carry it into daily life, and often thecontrast is excessive between their art and their talk. One eve-ning Humphreys Johnston, who was devoted to La Farge, askedhim to meet Whistler at dinner. La Farge was ill — more ill thanusual even for him — but he admired and liked Whistler, andinsisted on going. By chance, Adams was so placed as to over-hear the conversation of both, and had no choice but to hear thatof Whistler, which engrossed the table. At that moment the BoerWar was raging, and, as every one knows, on that subject WhistlerIndian Summer371raged worse than the Boers. For two hours he declaimed againstEngland — witty, declamatory, extravagant, bitter, amusing, andnoisy; but in substance what he said was not merely common-place — it was true ! That is to say, his hearers, including Adamsand, as far as he knew, La Farge, agreed with it all, and mostlyas a matter of course; yet La Farge was silent, and this differenceof expression was a difference of art. Whistler in his art carried thesense of nuance and tone far beyond any point reached by LaFarge, or even attempted ; but in talk he showed, above or belowhis color-instinct, a willingness to seem eccentric where no realeccentricity, unless perhaps of temper, existed.This vehemence, which Whistler never betrayed in his paint-ing, La Farge seemed to lavish on his glass. With the relativevalue of La Farge's glass in the history of glass-decoration, Adamswas too ignorant to meddle, and as a rule artists were if possiblemore ignorant than he; but whatever it was, it led him back tothe twelfth century and to Chartres where La Farge not only feltat home, but felt a sort of ownership. No other American had aright there, unless he too were a member of the Church andworked in glass. Adams himself was an interloper, but long habitled La Farge to resign himself to Adams as one who meant well,though deplorably Bostonian; while Adams, though near sixtyyears old before he knew anything either of glass or of Chartres,asked no better than to learn, and only La Farge could help him,for he knew enough at least to see that La Farge alone could useglass like a thirteenth-century artist. In Europe the art had beendead for centuries, and modern glass was pitiable. Even La Fargefelt the early glass rather as a document than as a historical emo-tion, and in hundreds of windows at Chartres and Bourges andParis, Adams knew barely one or two that were meant to holdtheir own against a color-scheme so strong as his. In conversationLa Farge's mind was opaline with infinite shades and refractionsof light, and with color toned down to the finest gradations. Inglass it was insubordinate; it was renaissance; it asserted his per-372The Education of Henry Adamssonal force with depth and vehemence of tone never before seen.He seemed bent on crushing rivalry.Even the gloom of a Paris December at the Elysee Palace Hotelwas somewhat relieved by this companionship, and educationmade a step backwards towards Chartres, but La Farge's healthbecame more and more alarming, and Adams was glad to get himsafely back to New York, January 15, 1900, while he himselfwent at once to Washington to find out what had become ofHay. Nothing good could be hoped, for Hay's troubles had be-gun, and were quite as great as he had foreseen. Adams saw as lit-tle encouragement as Hay himself did, though he dared not sayso. He doubted Hay's endurance, the President's firmness insupporting him, and the loyalty of his party friends; but all thisworry on Hay's account fretted him not nearly so much as theBoer War did on his own. Here was a problem in his politicaleducation that passed all experience since the Treason winter of1860-61! Much to his astonishment, very few Americans seemedto share his point of view; their hostility to England seemed meretemper; but to Adams the war became almost a personal outrage.He had been taught from childhood, even in England, that hisforbears and their associates in 1776 had settled, once for all, theliberties of the British free colonies, and he very strongly objectedto being thrown on the defensive again, and forced to sit down, ahundred and fifty years after John Adams had begun the task, toprove, by appeal to law and fact, that George Washington wasnot a felon, whatever might be the case with George III. For rea-sons still more personal, he declined peremptorily to entertainquestion of the felony of John Adams. He felt obliged to go evenfurther, and avow the opinion that if at any time England shouldtake towards Canada the position she took towards her Boer colo-nies, the United States would be bound, by their record, to inter-pose, and to insist on the application of the principles of 1776.To him the attitude of Mr. Chamberlain and his colleagues seemedexceedingly un-American, and terribly embarrassing to Hay.Indian Summer373Trained early, in the stress of civil war, to hold his tongue, andto help make the political machine run somehow, since it couldnever be made to run well, he would not bother Hay with theo-retical objections which were every day fretting him in practicalforms. Hay's chance lay in patience and good-temper till the luckshould turn, and to him the only object was time; but as politicaleducation the point seemed vital to Adams, who never liked shut-ting his eyes or denying an evident fact. Practical politics con-sists in ignoring facts, but education and politics are two differentand often contradictory things. In this case, the contradictionseemed crude.With Hay's politics, at home or abroad, Adams had nothingwhatever to do. Hay belonged to the New York school, like AbramHewitt, Evarts, W. C. Whitney, Samuel J. Tilden — men whoplayed the game for ambition or amusement, and played it, as arule, much better than the professionals, but whose aims wereconsiderably larger than those of the usual player, and who feltno great love for the cheap drudgery of the work. In return, theprofessionals felt no great love for them, and set them aside whenthey could. Only their control of money made them inevitable,and even this did not always carry their points. The story ofAbram Hewitt would offer one type of this statesman series, andthat of Hay another. President Cleveland set aside the one; Pres-ident Harrison set aside the other. " There is no politics in it,"was his comment on Hay's appointment to office. Hay held adifferent opinion and turned to McKinley whose judgment of menwas finer than common in Presidents. Mr. McKinley brought tothe problem of American government a solution which lay very faroutside of Henry Adams's education, but which seemed to be atleast practical and American. He undertook to pool interests ina general trust into which every interest should be taken, more orless at its own valuation, and whose mass should, under his man-agement, create efficiency. He achieved very remarkable results.How much they cost was another matter; if the public is ever374The Education of Henry Adamsdriven to its last resources and the usual remedies of chaos, theresult will probably cost more.Himself a marvellous manager of men, McKinley found severalmanipulators to help him, almost as remarkable as himself, oneof whom was Hay; but unfortunately Hay's strength was weakestand his task hardest. At home, interests could be easily combinedby simply paying their price; but abroad whatever helped on oneside, hurt him on another. Hay thought England must be broughtfirst into the combine; but at that time Germany, Russia, andFrance were all combining against England, and the Boer Warhelped them. For the moment Hay had no ally, abroad or at home,except Pauncefote, and Adams always maintained that Paunce-fote alone pulled him through.Yet the difficulty abroad was far less troublesome than theobstacles at home. The Senate had grown more and more unman-ageable, even since the time of Andrew Johnson, and this was lessthe fault of the Senate than of the system. "A treaty of peace,in any normal state of things," said Hay, "ought to be ratifiedwith unanimity in twenty-four hours. They wasted six weeks inwrangling over this one, and ratified it with one vote to spare.We have five or six matters now demanding settlement. I cansettle them all, honorably and advantageously to our own side;and I am assured by leading men in the Senate that not one ofthese treaties, if negotiated, will pass the Senate. I should havea majority in every case, but a malcontent third would certainlydish every one of them. To such monstrous shape has the originalmistake of the Constitution grown in the evolution of our politics.You must understand, it is not merely my solution the Senatewill reject. They will reject, for instance, any treaty, whatever,on any subject, with England. I doubt if they would accept anytreaty of consequence with Russia or Germany. The recalcitrantthird would be differently composed, but it would be on hand.So that the real duties of a Secretary of State seem to be three:to fight claims upon us by other States; to press more or less frau-Indian Summer375dulent claims of our own citizens upon other countries; to findoffices for the friends of Senators when there are none. Is it worthwhile — for me — to keep up this useless labor?"To Adams, who, like Hay, had seen a dozen acquaintancesstruggling with the same enemies, the question had scarcely theinterest of a new study. He had said all he had to say about it ina dozen or more volumes relating to the politics of a hundred yearsbefore. To him, the spectacle was so familiar as to be humorous.The intrigue was too open to be interesting. The interference ofthe German and Russian legations, and of the Clan-na-Gael, withthe press and the Senate was innocently undisguised. The charm-ing Russian Minister, Count Cassini, the ideal of diplomatic man-ners and training, let few days pass without appealing throughthe press to the public against the government. The GermanMinister, Von Holleben, more cautiously did the same thing, andof course ^vtry whisper of theirs was brought instantly to theDepartment. These three forces, acting with the regular opposi-tion and the natural obstructionists, could always stop action inthe Senate. The fathers had intended to neutralize the energy ofgovernment and had succeeded, but their machine was nevermeant to do the work of a twenty-million horse-power society inthe twentieth century, where much work needed to be quickly andefficiently done. The only defence of the system was that, asGovernment did nothing well, it had best do nothing; but theGovernment, in truth, did perfectly well all it was given to do;and even if the charge were true, it applied equally to humansociety altogether, if one chose to treat mankind from that pointof view. As a matter of mechanics, so much work must be done;bad machinery merely added to friction.Always unselfish, generous, easy, patient, and loyal, Hay hadtreated the world as something to be taken in block without pull-ing it to pieces to get rid of its defects; he liked it all: he laughedand accepted; he had never known unhappiness and would havegladly lived his entire life over again exactly as it happened. In376The Education of Henry Adamsthe whole New York school, one met a similar dash of humorand cynicism more or less pronounced but seldom bitter. Yet eventhe gayest of tempers succumbs at last to constant friction. Theold friend was rapidly fading. The habit remained, but the easyintimacy, the careless gaiety, the casual humor, the equality ofindifference, were sinking into the routine of office; the mind lin-gered in the Department; the thought failed to react; the wit andhumor shrank within the blank walls of politics, and the irritationsmultiplied. To a head of bureau, the result seemed ennobling.Although, as education, this branch of study was more familiarand older than the twelfth century, the task of bringing the twoperiods into a common relation was new. Ignorance required thatthese political and social and scientific values of the twelfth andtwentieth centuries should be correlated in some relation of move-ment that could be expressed in mathematics, nor did one care inthe least that all the world said it could not be done, or that oneknew not enough mathematics even to figure a formula beyondthe schoolboy s = SL . If Kepler and Newton could take libertieswith the sun and moon, an obscure person in a remote wildernesslike La Fayette Square could take liberties with Congress, andventure to multiply half its attraction into the square of its time.He had only to find a value, even infinitesimal, for its attractionat any given time. A historical formula that should satisfy theconditions of the stellar universe weighed heavily on his mind;but a trifling matter like this was one in which he could look forno help from anybody — he could look only for derision at best.All his associates in history condemned such an attempt as futileand almost immoral — certainly hostile to sound historical sys-tem. Adams tried it only because of its hostility to all that he hadtaught for history, since he started afresh from the new point that,whatever was right, all he had ever taught was wrong. He hadpursued ignorance thus far with success, and had swept his mindclear of knowledge. In beginning again, from the starting-pointIndian Summer377of Sir Isaac Newton, he looked about him in vain for a teacher.Few men in Washington cared to overstep the school conventions,and the most distinguished of them, Simon Newcomb, was toosound a mathematician to treat such a scheme seriously. Thegreatest of Americans, judged by his rank in science, WillardGibbs, never came to Washington, and Adams never enjoyed achance to meet him. After Gibbs, one of the most distinguishedwas Langley, of the Smithsonian, who was more accessible, towhom Adams had been much in the habit of turning whenever hewanted an outlet for his vast reservoirs of ignorance. Langley lis-tened with outward patience to his disputatious questionings; buthe too nourished a scientific passion for doubt, and sentimentalattachment for its avowal. He had the physicist's heinous faultof professing to know nothing between flashes of intense per-Like so many other great observers, Langley was notception.a mathematician, and like most physicists, he believed in physics.Rigidly denying himself the amusement of philosophy, whichconsists chiefly in suggesting unintelligible answers to insolubleproblems, he still knew the problems, and liked to wander pastthem in a courteous temper, even bowing to them distantly asthough recognizing their existence, while doubting their respect-ability. He generously let others doubt what he felt obliged toaffirm; and early put into Adams's hands the "Concepts ofModern Science," a volume by Judge Stallo, which had beentreated for a dozen years by the schools with a conspiracy of si-lence such as inevitably meets every revolutionary work that up-sets the stock and machinery of instruction. Adams read and failedto understand; then he asked questions and failed to get answers.Probably this was education. Perhaps it was the only scientificeducation open to a student sixty-odd years old, who asked to beas ignorant as an astronomer. For him the details of science meantnothing: he wanted to know its mass. Solar heat was not enough,or was too much. Kinetic atoms led only to motion; never to di-rection or progress. History had no use for multiplicity; it needed378The Education of Henry Adamsunity; it could study only motion, direction, attraction, relation.Everything must be made to move together; one must seek newworlds to measure; and so, like Rasselas, Adams set out once more,and found himself on May 12 settled in rooms at the very door ofthe Trocadero.