CHAPTER VBERLIN (1858-1859)AFOURTH child has the strength of his weakness. Be-ing of no great value, he may throw himself away if helikes, and never be missed. Charles Francis Adams, thefather, felt no love for Europe, which, as he and all the worldagreed, unfitted Americans for America. A captious critic mighthave replied that all the success he or his father or his grandfatherachieved was chiefly due to the field that Europe gave them, andit was more than likely that without the help of Europe theywould have all remained local politicians or lawyers, like theirStrictly followed, the rule would haveneighbors, to the end.obliged them never to quit Quincy; and, in fact, so much moretimid are parents for their children than for themselves, that Mr.and Mrs. Adams would have been content to see their childrenremain forever in Mount Vernon Street, unexposed to the tempta-tions of Europe, could they have relied on the moral influences ofBoston itself. Although the parents little knew what took placeunder their eyes, even the mothers saw enough to make themuneasy. Perhaps their dread of vice, haunting past and present,worried them less than their dread of daughters-in-law or sons-in-law who might not fit into the somewhat narrow quarters of home.On all sides were risks. Every year some young person alarmedthe parental heart even in Boston, and although the temptationsof Europe were irresistible, removal from the temptations of Bostonmight be imperative. The boy Henry wanted to go to Europe; heseemed well behaved, when any one was looking at him; he ob-served conventions, when he could not escape them; he was neverquarrelsome, towards a superior; his morals were apparently good,and his moral principles, if he had any, were not known to be bad.Above all, he was timid and showed a certain sense of self-respect,Berlin17when in public view. What he was at heart, no one could say;least of all himself; but he was probably human, and no worse thanTherefore, when he presented to an exceedinglysome others.indulgent father and mother his request to begin at a Germanuniversity the study of the Civil Law — although neither he northey knew what the Civil Law was, or any reason for his studyingit — the parents dutifully consented, and walked with him downto the railway-station at Quincy to bid him good-bye, with a smilewhich he almost thought a tear.Whether the boy deserved such indulgence, or was worth it, heknew no more than they, or than a professor at Harvard College;but whether worthy or not, he began his third or fourth attemptat education in November, 1858, by sailing on the steamer Persia,the pride of Captain Judkins and the Cunard Line; the newest,largest and fastest steamship afloat. He was not alone. Severalof his college companions sailed with him, and the world lookedcheerful enough until, on the third day, the world —'as far asconcerned the young man — ran into a heavy storm. He learnedthen a lesson that stood by him better than any university teach-ing ever did —-the meaning of a November gale on the mid-Atlantic — which, for mere physical misery, passed endurance.The subject offered him material for none but serious treatment;he could never see the humor of sea-sickness; but it united itselfwith a great variety of other impressions which made the firstmonth of travel altogether the rapidest school of education he hadyet found. The stride in knowledge seemed gigantic. One beganat last to see that a great many impressions were needed to makea very little education, but how many could be crowded into oneday without making any education at all, became the pons asinorumof tourist mathematics. How many would turn out to be wrong,or whether any could turn out right, was ultimate wisdom.The ocean, the Persia, Captain Judkins, and Mr. G. P. R.James, the most distinguished passenger, vanished one Sundaymorning in a furious gale in the Mersey, to make place for the72The Education of Henry Adamsdrearier picture of a Liverpool street as seen from the Adelphicoffee-room in November murk, followed instantly by the passion-ate delights of Chester and the romance of red-sandstone archi-tecture. Millions of Americans have felt this succession of emo-tions. Possibly very young and ingenuous tourists feel them still,but in days before tourists, when the romance was a reality, nota picture, they were overwhelming. When the boys went out toEaton Hall, they were awed, as Thackeray or Dickens would havefelt in the presence of a Duke. The very name of Grosvenor strucka note of grandeur. The long suite of lofty, gilded rooms withtheir gilded furniture; the portraits; the terraces; the gardens,the landscape; the sense of superiority in the England of thefifties, actually set the rich nobleman apart, above Americansand shopkeepers. Aristocracy was real. So was the England ofDickens. Oliver Twist and Little Nell lurked in every churchyardshadow, not as shadow but alive. Even Charles the First wasnot very shadowy, standing on the tower to see his army defeated.Nothing thereabouts had very much changed since he lost hisbattle and his head. An eighteenth-century American boy freshfrom Boston naturally took it all for education, and was amusedat this sort of lesson. At least he thought he felt it.Then came the journey up to London through Birminghamand the Black District, another lesson, which needed much moreto be rightly felt. The plunge into darkness lurid with flames; thesense of unknown horror in this weird gloom which then existednowhere else, and never had existed before, except in volcaniccraters; the violent contrast between this dense, smoky, impene-trable darkness, and the soft green charm that one glided into, asone emerged — the revelation of an unknown society of the pit —made a boy uncomfortable, though he had no idea that KarlMarx was standing there waiting for him, and that sooner or laterthe process of education would have to deal with Karl Marx muchmore than with Professor Bowen of Harvard College or his Satanicfree-trade majesty John Stuart Mill. The Black District was aBerlin73practical education, but it was infinitely far in the distance. Theboy ran away from it, as he ran away from everything he disliked.Had he known enough to know where to begin he would haveseen something to study, more vital than the Civil Law, in thelong, muddy, dirty, sordid, gas-lit dreariness of Oxford Street ashis dingy four-wheeler dragged its weary way to Charing Cross.He did notice one peculiarity about it worth remembering. Lon-don was still London. A certain style dignified its grime; heavy,clumsy, arrogant, purse-proud, but not cheap; insular but large;barely tolerant of an outside world, and absolutely self-confident.The boys in the streets made such free comments on the Americanclothes and figures, that the travellers hurried to put on tall hatsand long overcoats to escape criticism. No stranger had rightseven in the Strand. The eighteenth century held its own. His-tory muttered down Fleet Street, like Dr. Johnson, in Adams'sear; Vanity Fair was alive on Piccadilly in yellow chariots withcoachmen in wigs, on hammer-cloths; footmen with canes, on thefootboard, and a shrivelled old woman inside; half the greathouses, black with London smoke, bore large funereal hatchments;every one seemed insolent, and the most insolent structures in theworld were the Royal Exchange and the Bank of England. InNovember, 1858, London was still vast, but it was the London ofthe eighteenth century that an American felt and hated.Education went backward. Adams, still a boy, could not guesshow intensely intimate this London grime was to become to himas a man, but he could still less conceive himself returning to itfifty years afterwards, noting at each turn how the great citygrew smaller as it doubled in size; cheaper as it quadrupled itswealth; less imperial as its empire widened; less dignified as ittried to be civil. He liked it best when he hated it. Educationbegan at the end, or perhaps would end at the beginning. Thus farit had remained in the eighteenth century, and the next step tookit back to the sixteenth. He crossed to Antwerp. As the BaronOsy steamed up the Scheldt in the morning mists, a travelling74The Education of Henry Adamsband on deck began to play, and groups of peasants, workingalong the fields, dropped their tools to join in dancing. Ostadeand Teniers were as much alive as they ever were, and even theDuke of Alva was still at home. The thirteenth-century cathedraltowered above a sixteenth-century mass of tiled roofs, endingabruptly in walls and a landscape that had not changed. Thetaste of the town was thick, rich, ripe, like a sweet wine; it wasmediaeval, so that Rubens seemed modern; it was one of the strong-est and fullest flavors that ever touched the young man's palate;but he might as well have drunk out his excitement in old Malm-sey, for all the education he got from it. Even in art, one can hardlybegin with Antwerp Cathedral and the Descent from the Cross,He merely got drunk on his emotions, and had then to get soberas he best could. He was terribly sober when he saw Antwerphalf a century afterwards. One lesson he did learn without sus-pecting that he must immediately lose it. He felt his middle agesand the sixteenth century alive. He was young enough, and thetowns were dirty enough— unimproved, unrestored, untouristed— to retain the sense of reality. As a taste or a smell, it was edu-cation, especially because it lasted barely ten years longer; but itwas education only sensual. He never dreamed of trying to edu-cate himself to the Descent from the Cross. He was only too happyto feel himself kneeling at the foot of the Cross; he learned onlyto loathe the sordid necessity of getting up again, and going abouthis stupid business.This was one of the foreseen dangers of Europe, but it vanishedrapidly enough to reassure the most anxious of parents. Droppedinto Berlin one morning without guide or direction, the young manin search of education floundered in a mere mess of misunderstand-ings. He could never recall what he expected to find, but whateverhe expected, it had no relation with what it turned out to be. Astudent at twenty takes easily to anything, even to Berlin, and hewould have accepted the thirteenth century pure and simple sincehis guides assured him that this was his right path; but a week'sBerlin75experience left him dazed and dull. Faith held out, but the pathsgrew dim. Berlin astonished him, but he had no lack of friendsto show him all the amusement it had to offer. Within a day ortwo he was running about with the rest to beer-cellars and music-halls and dance-rooms, smoking bad tobacco, drinking poor beer,and eating sauerkraut and sausages as though he knew no better.This was easy. One can always descend the social ladder. Thetrouble came when he asked for the education he was promised.His friends took him to be registered as a student of the university;they selected his professors and courses; they showed him whereto buy the Institutes of Gaius and several German works on theCivil Law in numerous volumes; and they led him to his firstlecture.His first lecture was his last. The young man was not veryquick, and he had almost religious respect for his guides and ad-visers; but he needed no more than one hour to satisfy him thathe had made another failure in education, and this time a fatalone. That the language would require at least three months' hardwork before he could touch the Law was an annoying discovery;but the shock that upset him was the discovery of the universityitself. He had thought Harvard College a torpid school, but itwas instinct with life compared with all that he could see of theUniversity of Berlin. The German students were strange animals,but their professors were beyond pay. The mental attitude of theuniversity was not of an American world. What sort of instructionprevailed in other branches, or in science, Adams had no occasionto ask, but in the Civil Law he found only the lecture system inits deadliest form as it flourished in the thirteenth century. Theprofessor mumbled his comments; the students made, or seemed tomake, notes; they could have learned from books or discussion ina day more than they could learn from him in a month, but theymust pay his fees, follow his course, and be his scholars, if theywanted a degree. To an American the result was worthless. Hecould make no use of the Civil Law without some previous notion76The Education of Henry Adamsof the Common Law; but the student who knew enough of theCommon Law to understand what he wanted, had only to readthe Pandects or the commentators at his ease in America, and behis own professor. Neither the method nor the matter nor themanner could profit an American education.This discovery seemed to shock none of the students. Theywent to the lectures, made notes, and read textbooks, but neverpretended to take their professor seriously. They were much moreserious in reading Heine. They knew no more than Heine whatgood they were getting, beyond the Berlin accent — which wasbad; and the beer — which was not to compare with Munich; andthe dancing — which was better at Vienna. They enjoyed the beerand music, but they refused to be responsible for the education.Anyway, as they defended themselves, they were learning thelanguage.So the young man fell back on the language, and being slow atlanguages, he found himself falling behind all his friends, whichdepressed his spirits, the more because the gloom of a Berlin winterand of Berlin architecture seemed to him a particular sort of gloomnever attained elsewhere. One day on the Linden he caught sightof Charles Sumner in a cab, and ran after him. Sumner was thenrecovering from the blows of the South Carolinian cane or club,and he was pleased to find a young worshipper in the remote Prus-sian wilderness. They dined together and went to hear "WilliamTell" at the Opera. Sumner tried to encourage his friend abouthis difficulties of language: "I came to Berlin," or Rome, or what-ever place it was, as he said with his grand air of mastery, "Icame to Berlin, unable to say a word in the language; and threemonths later when I went away, I talked it to my cabman."Adams felt himself quite unable to attain in so short a time suchsocial advantages, and one day complained of his trials to Mr.Robert Apthorp, of Boston, who was passing the winter in Berlinfor the sake of its music. Mr. Apthorp told of his own similarstruggle, and how he had entered a public school and sat forBerlin77months with ten-year-old-boys, reciting their lessons and catchingtheir phrases. The idea suited Adams's desperate frame of mind.At least it ridded him of the university and the Civil Law andAmerican associations in beer-cellars. Mr. Apthorp took thetrouble to negotiate with the head-master of the Friedrichs-Wilhelm-Werdersches Gymnasium for permissionto HenryAdams to attend the school as a member of the Ober-tertia, a classof boys twelve or thirteen years old, and there Adams went forthree months as though he had not always avoided high schoolswith singular antipathy. He never did anything else so foolish,but he was given a bit of education which served him some pur-pose in life.It was not merely the language, though three months passedin such fashion would teach a poodle enough to talk with a cab-man, and this was all that foreign students could expect to do,for they never by any chance would come in contact with Ger-man society, if German society existed, about which they knewnothing. Adams never learned to talk German well, but thesame might be said of his English, if he could believe Englishmen.He learned not to annoy himself on this account. His difficultieswith the language gradually ceased. He thought himself quiteGermanized in 1859. He even deluded himself with the idea thathe read it as though it were English, which proved that he knewlittle about it; but whatever success he had in his own experi-ment interested him less than his contact with German education.He had revolted at the American school and university; he hadinstantly rejected the German university; and as his last experi-ence of education he tried the German high school. The experi-ment was hazardous. In 1858 Berlin was a poor, keen-witted,provincial town, simple, dirty, uncivilized, and in most respectsLife was primitive beyond what an American boydisgusting.could have imagined. Overridden by military methods and bu-reaucratic pettiness, Prussia was only beginning to free her handsfrom internal bonds. Apart from discipline, activity scarcely8jThe Education of Henry Adamsexisted. The future Kaiser Wilhelm I, regent for his insane brotherKing Friedrich Wilhelm IV, seemed to pass his time looking atthe passers-by from the window of his modest palace on the Lin-den. German manners, even at Court, were sometimes brutal,and German thoroughness at school was apt to be routine. Bis-marck himself was then struggling to begin a career against theinertia of the German system. The condition of Germany wasa scandal and nuisance to every earnest German, all whose ener-gies were turned to reforming it from top to bottom; and Adamswalked into a great public school to get educated, at preciselythe time when the Germans wanted most to get rid of the edu-cation they were forced to follow. As an episode in the search foreducation, this adventure smacked of Heine.The school system has doubtless changed, and at all events theschoolmasters are probably long ago dead; the story has no longera practical value, and had very little even at the time; one couldat least say in defence of the German school that it was neithervery brutal nor very immoral. The head-master was excellentin his Prussian way, and the other instructors were not worsethan in other schools ; it was their system that struck the system-less American with horror. The arbitrary training given to thememory was stupefying; the strain that the memory enduredwas a form of torture; and the feats that the boys performed,without complaint, were pitiable. No other faculty than thememory seemed to be recognized. Least of all was any use madeof reason, either analytic, synthetic, or dogmatic. The Germangovernment did not encourage reasoning.All State education is a sort of dynamo machine for polarizingthe popular mind ; for turning and holding its lines of force in thedirection supposed to be most effective for State purposes. TheGerman machine was terribly efficient. Its effect on the childrenwas pathetic. The Friedrichs-Wilhelm-Werdersches Gymnasiumwas an old building in the heart of Berlin which served the edu-cational needs of the small tradesmen or bourgeoisie of the neigh-Berlin79borhood; the children were Berliner-kinder if ever there were such,and of a class suspected of sympathy and concern in the trou-bles of 1848. None was noble or connected with good society.Personally they were rather sympathetic than not, but as theobjects of education they were proofs of nearly all the evils thata bad system could give. Apparently Adams, in his rigidly illog-ical pursuit, had at last reached his ideal of a viciously logicaleducation. The boys' physique showed it first, but their physiquecould not be wholly charged to the school. German food was badat best, and a diet of sauerkraut, sausage, and beer could neverbe good ; but it was not the food alone that made their faces whiteand their flesh flabby. They never breathed fresh air; they hadnever heard of a playground; in all Berlin not a cubic inch ofoxygen was admitted in winter into an inhabited building; in theschool every room was tightly closed and had no ventilation; theair was foul beyond all decency; but when the American openeda window in the five minutes between hours, he violated the rulesand was invariably rebuked. As long as cold weather lasted, thewindows were shut. If the boys had a holiday, they were apt tobe taken on long tramps in the Thiergarten or elsewhere, alwaysending in over-fatigue, tobacco-smoke, sausages, and beer. Withthis, they were required to prepare daily lessons that would havequickly broken down strong men of a healthy habit, and whichthey could learn only because their minds were morbid. TheGerman university had seemed a failure, but the German highschool was something very near an indictable nuisance.Before the month of April arrived, the experiment of Germaneducation had reached this point. Nothing was left of it exceptthe ghost of the Civil Law shut up in the darkest of closets, neverto gibber again before any one who could repeat the story. Thederisive Jew laughter of Heine ran through the university andeverything else in Berlin. Of course, when one is twenty yearsold, life is bound to be full, if only of Berlin beer, although Ger-man student life was on the whole the thinnest of beer, as an—80The Education of Henry AdamsAmerican looked on it, but though nothing except small frag-ments remained of the education that had been so promising —or promised — this is only what most often happens in life, whenby-products turn out to be more valuable than staples. TheGerman university and German law were failures ; German society,in an American sense, did not exist, or if it existed, never showeditself to an American; the German theatre, on the other hand,was excellent, and German opera, with the ballet, was almostworth a journey to Berlin; but the curious and perplexing resultof the total failure of German education was that the student'sonly clear gain — his single step to a higher life — came from timewasted; studies neglected; vices indulged; education reversed;it came from the despised beer-garden and music-hall; and itwas accidental, unintended, unforeseen.When his companions insisted on passing two or three after-noons in the week at music-halls, drinking beer, smoking Germantobacco, and looking at fat German women knitting, while anorchestra played dull music, Adams went with them for the sakeof the company, but with no pretence of enjoyment; and whenMr. Apthorp gently protested that he exaggerated his indiffer-ence, for of course he enjoyed Beethoven, Adams replied simplythat he loathed Beethoven; and felt a slight surprise when Mr.Apthorp and the others laughed as though they thought it humor.He saw no humor in it. He supposed that, except musicians,every one thought Beethoven a bore, as every one except mathe-maticians thought mathematics a bore. Sitting thus at his beer-table, mentally impassive, he was one day surprised to noticethat his mind followed the movement of a Sinfonie. He could nothave been more astonished had he suddenly read a new language.Among the marvels of education, this was the most marvellous.A prison-wall that barred his senses on one great side of life, sud-denly fell, of its own accord, without so much as his knowingwhen it happened. Amid the fumes of coarse tobacco and poorbeer, surrounded by the commonest of German Haus-frauen, aBerlin18new sense burst out like a flower in his life, so superior to the oldsenses, so bewildering, so astonished at its own existence, thathe could not credit it, and watched it as something apart, acci-dental, and not to be trusted. He slowly came to admit thatBeethoven had partly become intelligible to him, but he was themore inclined to think that Beethoven must be much overratedas a musician, to be so easily followed. This could not be callededucation, for he had never so much as listened to the music. Hehad been thinking of other things. Mere mechanical repetitionof certain sounds had stuck to his unconscious mind. Beethovenmight have this power, but not Wagner, or at all events not theWagner later than "Tannhauser." Near forty years passed beforehe reached the "Gotterdammerung."One might talk of the revival of an atrophied sense — themechanical reaction of a sleeping consciousness — but no othersense awoke. His sense of line and color remained as dull as ever,and as far as ever below the level of an artist. His metaphysicalsense did not spring into life, so that his mind could leap the barsof German expression into sympathy with the idealities of Kantand Hegel. Although he insisted that his faith in German thoughtand literature was exalted, he failed to approach German thought,and he shed never a tear of emotion over the pages of Goethe andSchiller. When his father rashly ventured from time to time towrite him a word of common sense, the young man would listento no sense at all, but insisted that Berlin was the best of educa-tions in the best of Germanies; yet, when, at last, April came, andsome genius suggested a tramp in Thuringen, his heart sang likea bird ; he realized what a nightmare he had suffered, and he madeup his mind that, wherever else he might, in the infinities of spaceand time, seek for education, it should not be again in Berlin.