CHAPTER IVHARVARD COLLEGE (1854-1858) %ONE day in June, 1854, young Adams walked for the lasttime down the steps of Mr. Dixwell's school in BoylstonPlace, and felt no sensation but one of unqualified joythat this experience was ended. Never before or afterwards inhis life did he close a period so long as four years without somesensation of loss — some sentiment of habit — but school waswhat in after life he commonly heard his friends denounce asan intolerable bore. He was born too old for it. The same thingcould be said of most New England boys. Mentally they neverwere boys. Their education as men should have begun at tenyears old. They were fully five years more mature than the Eng-lish or European boy for whom schools were made. For the pur-poses of future advancement, as afterwards appeared, these firstsix years of a possible education were wasted in doing imper-fectly what might have been done perfectly in one, and in anycase would have had small value. The next regular step wasHarvard College. He was more than glad to go. For generationafter generation, Adamses and Brookses and Boylstons and Gor-hams had gone to Harvard College, and although none of them,as far as known, had ever done any good there, or thought him-self the better for it, custom, social ties, convenience, and, aboveall, economy, kept each generation in the track. Any other edu-cation would have required a serious effort, but no one took Har-vard College seriously. All went there because their friends wentthere, and the College was their ideal of social self-respect.Harvard College, as far as it educated at all, was a mild andliberal school, which sent young men into the world with all theyneeded to make respectable citizens, and something of what theywanted to make useful ones. Leaders of men it never tried toHarvard College55make. Its ideals were altogether different. The Unitarian clergy-had given to the College a character of moderation, balance,judgment, restraint, what the French* called mesure; excellenttraits, which the College attained with singular success, so thatits graduates could commonly be recognized by the stamp, butsuch a type of character rarely lent itself to autobiography. Ineffect, the school created a type but not a will. Four years ofHarvard College, if successful, resulted in an autobiographicalblank, a mind on which only a water-mark had been stamped.The stamp, as such things went, was a good one. The chiefwonder of education is that it does not ruin everybody concernedin it, teachers and taught. Sometimes in after life, Adams de-bated whether in fact it had not ruined him and most of his com-panions, but, disappointment apart, Harvard College was prob-ably less hurtful than any other university then in existence. Ittaught little, and that little ill, but it left the mind open, free frombias, ignorant of facts, but docile. The graduate had few strongprejudices. He knew little, but his mind remained supple, readyto receive knowledge.What caused the boy most disappointment was the little hegot from his mates. Speaking exactly, he got less than nothing,a result common enough in education. Yet the College Cataloguefor the years 1854 to *86i shows a list of names rather distin-guished in their time. Alexander Agassiz and Phillips Brooks ledit; H. H. Richardson and O. W. Holmes helped to close it. As arule the most promising of all die early, and never get their namesinto a Dictionary of Contemporaries, which seems to be the onlypopular standard of success. Many died in the war. Adams knewthem all, more or less; he felt as much regard, and quite as muchrespect for them then, as he did after they won great names andwere objects of a vastly wider respect; but, as help towards edu-cation, he got nothing whatever from them or they from himuntil long after they had left college. Possibly the fault was his,but one would like to know how many others shared it. Accident56The Education of Henry Adamscounts for much in companionship as in marriage. Life offersperhaps only a score of possible companions, and it is mere chancewhether they meet as early as school or college, but it is more thajia chance that boys brought up together under like conditionshave nothing to give each other. The Class of 1858, to whichHenry Adams belonged, was a typical collection of young NewEnglanders, quietly penetrating and aggressively commonplace;free from meannesses, jealousies, intrigues, enthusiasms, and pas-sions; not exceptionally quick; not consciously sceptical; singu-larly indifferent to display, artifice, florid expression, but not hos-tile to it when it amused them; distrustful of themselves, butlittle disposed to trust any one else; with not much humor oftheir own, but full of readiness to enjoy the humor of others;negative to a degree that in the long run became positive andtriumphant. Not harsh in manners or judgment, rather liberaland open-minded, they were still as a body the most formidablecritics one would care to meet, in a long life exposed to criti-cism. They never flattered, seldom praised ; free from vanity, theywere not intolerant of it; but they were objectiveness itself; theirattitude was a law of nature; their judgment beyond appeal,not an act either of intellect or emotion or of will, but a sort ofgravitation.This was Harvard College incarnate, but even for HarvardCollege, the Class of 1858 was somewhat extreme. Of unity thisband of nearly one hundred young men had no keen sense, butthey had equally little energy of repulsion. They were pleasant tolive with, and above the average of students — German, French,English, or what not — but chiefly because each individual ap-It seemed a sign of force; yetpeared satisfied to stand alone.to stand alone is quite natural when one has no passions; stilleasier when one has no pains.Into this unusually dissolvent medium, chance insisted on en-larging Henry Adams's education by tossing a trio of Virginiansas little fitted for it as Sioux Indians to a treadmill. By someHarvard College57further affinity, these three outsiders fell into relation with theBostonians among whom Adams as a schoolboy belonged, andin the end with Adams himself, although they and he knew wellhow thin an edge of friendship separated them in 1856 from mor-tal enmity. One of the Virginians was the son of Colonel RobertE. Lee, of the Second United States Cavalry; the two others whoseemed instinctively to form a staff for Lee, were town-Virginiansfrom Petersburg. A fourth outsider came from Cincinnati andwas half Kentuckian, N. L. Anderson, Longworth on the mother'sside. For the first time Adams's education brought him in con-tact with new types and taught him their values. He saw theNew England type measure itself with another, and he was partof the process.Lee, known through life as "Roony," was a Virginian of theeighteenth century, much as Henry Adams was a Bostonian ofthe same age. Roony Lee had changed little from the type of hisgrandfather, Light Horse Harry. Tall, largely built, handsome,genial, with liberal Virginian openness towards all he liked, hehad also the Virginian habit of command and took leadership ashis natural habit. No one cared to contest it. None of the NewEnglanders wanted command. For a year, at least, Lee was themost popular and prominent young man in his class, but thenseemed slowly to drop into the background. The habit of com-mand was not enough, and the Virginian had little else. He wassimple beyond analysis; so simple that even the simple New Eng-land student could not realize him. No one knew enough to knowhow ignorant he was; how childlike; how helpless before the rela-tive complexity of a school. As an animal, the Southerner seemedto have every advantage, but even as an animal he steadily lostground.The lesson in education was vital to these young men, who,within ten years, killed each other by scores in the act of testingtheir college conclusions. Strictly, the Southerner had no mind; hehad temperament. He was not a scholar; he had no intellectual58The Education of Henry Adamstraining; he could not analyze an idea, and he could not even con-ceive of admitting two; but in life one could get along verywell without ideas, if one had only the social instinct. Dozensof eminent statesmen were men of Lee's type, and maintainedthemselves well enough in the legislature, but college was asharper test. The Virginian was weak in vice itself, though theBostonian was hardly a master of crime. The habits of neitherwere good; both were apt to drink hard and to live low lives; butthe Bostonian suffered less than the Virginian. Commonly theBostonian could take some care of himself even in his worst stages,while the Virginian became quarrelsome and dangerous. Whena Virginian had brooded a few days over an imaginary grief andsubstantial whiskey, none of his Northern friends could be surethat he might not be waiting, round the corner, with a knife orpistol, to revenge insult by the dry light of delirium tremens; andwhen things reached this condition, Lee had to exhaust his au-thority over his own staff. Lee was a gentleman of the old school,and, as every one knows, gentlemen of the old school drank al-most as much as gentlemen of the new school; but this was nothis trouble. He was sober even in the excessive violence of poli-tical feeling in those years; he kept his temper and his friendsunder control.Adams liked the Virginians. No one was more obnoxious tothem, by name and prejudice; yet their friendship was unbrokenand even warm. At a moment when the immediate future posedno problem in education so vital as the relative energy and en-durance of North and South, this momentary contact with South-ern character was a sort of education for its own sake; but thiswas not all. No doubt the self-esteem of the Yankee, whichtended naturally to self-distrust, was flattered by gaining theslow conviction that the Southerner, with his slave-owning limi-tations, was as little fit to succeed in the struggle of modern lifeas though he were still a maker of stone axes, living in caves, andhunting the bos primigenius, and that every quality in which heHarvard College59was strong, made him weaker; but Adams had begun to fear thateven in this respect one eighteenth-century type might not differdeeply from another. Roony Lee had changed little from the Vir-ginian of a century before; but Adams was himself a good dealnearer the type of his great-grandfather than to that of a rail-way superintendent. He was little more fit than the Virginiansto deal with a future America which showed no fancy for the past.Already Northern society betrayed a preference for economistsover diplomats or soldiers — one might even call it a jealousy —against which two eighteenth-century types had little chance tolive, and which they had in common to fear.Nothing short of this curious sympathy could have broughtinto close relations two young men so hostile as Roony Lee andHenry Adams, but the chief difference between them as colle-, gians consisted only in their difference of scholarship : Lee wasa total failure; Adams a partial one. Both failed, but Lee felthis failure more sensibly, so that he gladly seized the chance ofescape by accepting a commission offered him by General Win-field Scott in the force then being organized against the Mormons.He asked Adams to write his letter of acceptance, which flat-tered Adams's vanity more than any Northern compliment coulddo, because, in days of violent political bitterness, it showed a cer-tain amount of good temper. The diplomat felt his profession.If the student got little from his mates, he got little more fromhis masters. The four years passed at college were, for his pur-poses, wasted. Harvard College was a good school, but at bot-tom what the boy disliked most was any school at all. He did notwant to be one in a hundred — one per cent of an education. Heregarded himself as the only person for whom his education hadvalue, and he wanted the whole of it. He got barely half of anaverage. Long afterwards, when the devious path of life led himback to teach in his turn what no student naturally cared orneeded to know, he diverted some dreary hours of faculty-meet-ings by looking up his record in the class-lists, and found himself60The Education of Henry Adamsgraded precisely in the middle. In the one branch he most needed— mathematics — barring the few first scholars, failure was sonearly universal that no attempt at grading could have had value,and whether he stood fortieth or ninetieth must have been anaccident or the personal favor of the professor. Here his educa-tion failed lamentably. At best he could never have been a mathe-matician; at worst he would never have cared to be one; but heneeded to read mathematics, like any other universal language,and he never reached the alphabet.Beyond two or three Greek plays, the student got nothingfrom the ancient languages. Beyond some incoherent theoriesof free-trade and protection, he got little from Political Economy.He could not afterwards remember to have heard the name ofKarl Marx mentioned, or the title of "Capital." He was equallyignorant of Auguste Comte. These were the two writers of histime who most influenced its thought. The bit of practical teach-ing he afterwards reviewed with most curiosity was the course inChemistry, which taught him a number of theories that befoggedhis mind for a lifetime. The only teaching that appealed to hisimagination was a course of lectures by Louis Agassiz on the Gla-cial Period and Palaeontology, which had more influence on hiscuriosity than the rest of the college instruction altogether. Theentire work of the four years could have been easily put into thework of any four months in after life.Harvard College was a negative force, and negative forces havevalue. Slowly it weakened the violent political bias of childhood,not by putting interests in its place, but by mental habits whichhad no bias at all. It would also have weakened the literary bias,if Adams had been capable of finding other amusement, but theclimate kept him steady to desultory and useless reading, till hehad run through libraries of volumes which he forgot even totheir title-pages. Rather by instinct than by guidance, he turnedto writing, and his professors or tutors occasionally gave his Eng-lish composition a hesitating approval; but in that branch, asHarvard College6iin all the rest, even when he made a long struggle for recognition,he never convinced his teachers that his abilities, at their best,warranted placing him on the rank-list, among the first third ofhis class. Instructors generally reach a fairly accurate gauge oftheir scholars' powers. Henry Adams himself held the opinionthat his instructors were very nearly right, and when he becamea professor in his turn, and made mortifying mistakes in rankinghis scholars, he still obstinately insisted that on the whole, he wasnot far wrong. Student or professor, he accepted the negativestandard because it was the standard of the school.He never knew what other students thought of it, or what theythought they gained from it; nor would their opinion have muchaffected his. From the first, he wanted to be done with it, andstood watching vaguely for a path and a direction. The worldoutside seemed large, but the paths that led into it were not manyand lay mostly through Boston, where he did not want to go.As it happened, by pure chance, the first door of escape thatseemed to offer a hope led into Germany, and James RussellLowell opened it.Lowell, on succeeding Longfellow as Professor of Belles-Lett res,had duly gone to Germany, and had brought back whatever hefound to bring. The literary world then agreed that truth sur-vived in Germany alone, and Carlyle, Matthew Arnold, Renan,Emerson, with scores of popular followers, taught the Germanfaith. The literary world had revolted against the yoke of comingcapitalism — its money-lenders, its bank directors, and its rail-way magnates. Thackeray and Dickens followed Balzac in scratch-ing and biting the unfortunate middle class with savage ill-tem-per, much as the middle class had scratched and bitten theChurch and Court for a hundred years before. The middle classhad the power, and held its coal and iron well in hand, but thesatirists and idealists seized the press, and as they were agreedthat the Second Empire was a disgrace to France and a dangerto England, they turned to Germany because at that moment62The Education of Henry AdamsGermany was neither economical nor military, and a hundredyears behind western Europe in the simplicity of its standard.German thought, method, honesty, and even taste, became thestandards of scholarship. Goethe was raised to the rank of Shake-speare — Kant ranked as a law-giver above Plato.All seriousscholars were obliged to become German, for German thoughtwas revolutionizing criticism. Lowell had followed the rest, notvery enthusiastically, but with sufficient conviction, and invitedhis scholars to join him. Adams was glad to accept the invitation,rather for the sake of cultivating Lowell than Germany, but stillIt was the first serious attempt he hadin perfect good faith.made to direct his own education, and he was sure of getting someeducation out of it; not perhaps anything that he expected, butat least a path.Singularly circuitous and excessively wasteful of energy thepath proved to be, but the student could never see what otherwas open to him. He could have done no better had he foreseenevery stage of his coming life, and he would probably have doneworse. The preliminary step was pure gain. James RussellLowell had brought back from Germany the only new and valu-able part of its universities, the habit of allowing students to readwith him privately in his study. Adams asked the privilege, andused it to read a little, and to talk a great deal, for the personalcontact pleased and flattered him, as that of older men ought toflatter and please the young even when they altogether exag-gerate its value. Lowell was a new element in the boy's life. Aspractical a New Englander as any, he leaned towards the Con-cord faith rather than towards Boston where he properly be-longed; for Concord, in the dark days of 1856,-glowed with purelight. Adams approached it in much the same spirit as he wouldhave entered a Gothic Cathedral, for he well knew that the priestsregarded him as only a worm. To the Concord Church all Adamseswere minds of dust and emptiness, devoid of feeling, poetry orimagination; little higher than the common scourings of StateHarvard College63Street; politicians of doubtful honesty; natures of narrow scope;and already, at eighteen years old, Henry had begun to feel un-certainty about so many matters more important than Adamsesthat his mind rebelled against no discipline merely personal, andhe was ready to admit his unworthiness if only he might pene-trate the shrine. The influence of Harvard College was beginningto have its effect. He was slipping away from fixed principles;from Mount Vernon Street; from Quincy; from the eighteenthcentury; and his first steps led toward Concord.He never reached Concord, and to Concord Church he, likethe rest of mankind who accepted a material universe, remainedalways an insect, or something much lower — a man. It wassurely no fault of his that the universe seemed to him real; per-haps — as Mr. Emerson justly said — it was so; in spite of thelong-continued effort of a lifetime, he perpetually fell back intothe heresy that if anything universal was unreal, it was himselfand not the appearances; it was the poet and not the banker; itwas his own thought, not the thing that moved it. He did notlack the wish to be transcendental. Concord seemed to him, atone time, more real than Quincy; yet in truth Russell Lowell wasas little transcendental as Beacon Street. From him the boygot no revolutionary thought whatever — objective or subjectiveas they used to call it — but he got good-humored encourage-ment to do what amused him, which consisted in passing twoyears in Europe after finishing the four years of Cambridge.The result seemed small in proportion to the effort, but it wasthe only positive result he could ever trace to the influence ofHarvard College, and he had grave doubts whether HarvardCollege influenced even that. Negative results in plenty he couldtrace, but he tended towards negation on his own account, asone side of the New England mind had always done, and eventhere he could never feel sure that Harvard College had morethan reflected a weakness. In his opinion the education was notserious, but in truth hardly any Boston student took it seriously,64The Education of Henry Adamsand none of them seemed sure that President Walker himself,or President Felton after him, took it more seriously than thestudents. For them all, the college offered chiefly advantagesvulgarly called social, rather than mental.Unluckily for this particular boy, social advantages were hisonly capital in life. Of money he had not much, of mind not more,but he could be quite certain that, barring his own faults, his so-cial position would never be questioned. What he needed was acareer in which social position had value. Never in his life wouldhe have to explain who he was ; never would he have need of ac-quaintance to strengthen his social standing; but he needed greatlysome one to show him how to use the acquaintance he cared tomake. He made no acquaintance in college which proved to havethe smallest use in after life. All his Boston friends he knew be-fore, or would have known in any case, and contact of Bostonianwith Bostonian was the last education these young men needed.Cordial and intimate as their college relations were, they all flewoff in different directions the moment they took their degrees.Harvard College remained a tie, indeed, but a tie little strongerthan Beacon Street and not so strong as State Street. Strangersmight perhaps gain something from the college if they were hardpressed for social connections. A student like H. H. Richardson,who came from far away New Orleans, and had his career beforehim to chase rather than to guide, might make valuable friend-ships at college. Certainly Adams made no acquaintance therethat he valued in after life so much as Richardson, but still morecertainly the college relation had little to do with the later friend-Life is a narrow valley, and the roads run close together.ship.Adams would have attached himself to Richardson in any case,as he attached himself to John LaFarge or Augustus St. Gaudensor Clarence King or John Hay, none of whom were at HarvardCollege. The valley of life grew more and more narrow with years,and certain men with common tastes were bound to come to-gether. Adams knew only that he would have felt himself on aHarvard College65more equal footing with them had he been less ignorant, and hadhe not thrown away ten years of early life in acquiring what hemight have acquired in one.Socially or intellectually, the college was for him negative andin some ways mischievous. The most tolerant man of the worldcould not see good in the lower habits of the students, but thevices were less harmful than the virtues. The habit of drinking— though the mere recollection of it made him doubt his ownveracity, so fantastic it seemed in later life — may have done nosocial relation — an affair of society — did no good. It culti-great or permanent harm; but the habit of looking at life as avated a weakness which needed no cultivation. If it had helpedto make men of the world, or give the manners and instincts ofany profession — such as temper, patience, courtesy, or a facultyof profiting by the social defects of opponents — it would havebeen education better worth having than mathematics or lan-guages; but so far as it helped to make anything, it helped onlyto make the college standard permanent through life. The Bos-tonian educated at Harvard College remained a collegian, if hestuck only to what the college gave him. If parents went on,generation after generation, sending their children to Harvard Col-lege for the sake of its social advantages, they perpetuated aninferior social type, quite as ill-fitted as the Oxford type for suc-cess in the next generation.Luckily the old social standard of the college, as PresidentWalker or James Russell Lowell still showed it, was admirable,and if it had little practical value or personal influence on themass of students, at least it preserved the tradition for those wholiked it. The Harvard graduate was neither American nor Euro-pean, nor even wholly Yankee; his admirers were few, and hiscritics many; perhaps his worst weakness was his self-criticism andself-consciousness; but his ambitions, social or intellectual, werenot necessarily cheap even though they might be negative. Afraidof serious risks, and still more afraid of personal ridicule, he seldom66The Education of Henry Adamsmade a great failure of life, and nearly always led a life more orless worth living. So Henry Adams, well aware that he could notsucceed as a scholar, and finding his social position beyond im-provement or need of effort, betook himself to the single ambitionwhich otherwise would scarcely have seemed a true outcome ofthe college, though it was the last remnant of the old Unitariansupremacy. He took to the pen. He wrote.The College Magazine printed his work, and the College So-cieties listened to his addresses. Lavish of praise the readers werenot; the audiences, too, listened in silence; but this was all theencouragement any Harvard collegian had a reasonable hope toreceive; grave silence was a form of patience that meant possiblefuture acceptance; and Henry Adams went on writing. No onecared enough to criticise, except himself who soon began to sufferfrom reaching his own limits. He found that he could not be this'— or that — or the other; always precisely the things he wantedto be. He had not wit or scope or force. Judges always rankedhim beneath a rival, if he had any; and he believed the judgeswere right. His work seemed to him thin, commonplace, feeble.At times he felt his own weakness so fatally that he could not goon; when he had nothing to say, he could not say it, and he foundthat he had very little to say at best. Much that he then wrote mustbe still in existence in print or manuscript, though he never caredto see it again, for he felt no doubt that it was in reality just whathe thought it. At best it showed only a feeling for form; an in-stinct of exclusion. Nothing shocked — not even its weakness.Inevitably an effort leads to an ambition — creates it — andat that time the ambition of the literary student, which almosttook place of the regular prizes of scholarship, was that of beingchosen as the representative of his class — the Class Orator —at the close of their course. This was political as well as literarysuccess, and precisely the sort of eighteenth-century combinationthat fascinated an eighteenth-century boy. The idea lurked inhis mind, at first as a dream, in no way serious or even possible,Harvard College67for he stood outside the number of what were known as popularmen. Year by year, his position seemed to improve, or perhapshis rivals disappeared, until at last, to his own great astonish-ment, he found himself a candidate. The habits of the college per-mitted no active candidacy; he and his rivals had not a word tosay for or against themselves, and he was never even consultedon the subject; he was not present at any of the proceedings, andhow it happened he never could quite divine, but it did happen,that one evening on returning from Boston he received notice ofhis election, after a very close contest, as Class Orator over thehead of the first scholar, who was undoubtedly a better oratorand a more popular man. In politics the success of the poorercandidate is common enough, and Henry Adams was a fairlytrained politician, but he never understood how he managed todefeat not only a more capable but a more popular rival.To him the election seemed a miracle. This was no mock-modesty; his head was as clear as ever it was in an indifferentcanvass, and he knew his rivals and their following as well as heknew himself. What he did not know, even after four years ofeducation, was Harvard College. What he could never measurewas the bewildering impersonality of the men, who, at twentyyears old, seemed to set no value either on official or personalstandards. Here were nearly a hundred young men who had livedtogether intimately during four of the most impressionable yearsof life, and who, not only once but again and again, in differentways, deliberately, seriously, dispassionately, chose as their rep-resentatives precisely those of their companions who seemed leastto represent them. As far as these Orators and Marshals had anyposition at all in a collegiate sense, it. was that of indifferenceto the college. Henry Adams never professed the smallest faith inuniversities of any kind, either as boy or man, nor had he thefaintest admiration for the university graduate, either in Europeor in America; as a collegian he was only known apart from hisfellows by his habit of standing outside the college; and yet the68The Education of Henry Adamssingular fact remained that this commonplace body of young menchose him repeatedly to express his and their commonplaces.Secretly, of course, the successful candidate flattered himself—and them — with the hope that they might perhaps not be socommonplace as they thought themselves; but this was onlyanother proof that all were identical. They saw in him a rep-representative they wanted — andresentative — the kind ofhe saw in them the most formidable array of judges he could evermeet, like so many mirrors of himself, an infinite reflection of hisown shortcomings.All the same, the choice was flattering; so flattering that itactually shocked his vanity; and would have shocked it more, ifpossible, had he known that it was to be the only flattery of thesort he was ever to receive. The function of Class Day was, in theeyes of nine-tenths of the students, altogether the most importantof the college, and the figure of the Orator was the most conspicu-ous in the function. Unlike the Orators at regular Commence-ments, the Class Day Orator stood alone, or had only the Poetfor rival. Crowded into the large church, the students, theirfamilies, friends, aunts, uncles and chaperones, attended all thegirls of sixteen or twenty who wanted to show their summerdresses or fresh complexions, and there, for an hour or two, in aheat that might have melted bronze, they listened to an Oratorand a Poet in clergyman's gowns, reciting such platitudes as theirown experience and their mild censors permitted them to utter.What Henry Adams said in his Class Oration of 1858 he soon for-got to the last word, nor had it the least value for education; buthe naturally remembered what was said of it. He rememberedespecially one of his eminent uncles or relations remarking that,as the work of so young a man, the oration was singularly wantingin enthusiasm. The young man — always in search of education— asked himself whether, setting rhetoric aside, this absence ofenthusiasm was a defect or a merit, since, in either case, it was allthat Harvard College taught, and all that the hundred youngHarvard College69men, whom he was trying to represent, expressed. Another com-ment threw more light on the effect of the college education. Oneof the elderly gentlemen noticed the orator's "perfect self-pos-session." Self-possession indeed! If Harvard College gave noth-For four years each student had beening else, it gave calm.obliged to figure daily before dozens of young men who kneweach other to the last fibre. One had done little but read papersto Societies, or act comedy in the Hasty Pudding, not to speak ofall sorts of regular exercises, and no audience in future life wouldever be so intimately and terribly intelligent as these. Three-fourths of the graduates would rather have addressed the Coun-cil of Trent or the British Parliament than have acted Sir An-thony Absolute or Dr. Ollapod before a gala audience of theHasty Pudding. Self-possession was the strongest part of Har-vard College, which certainly taught men to stand alone, sothat nothing seemed stranger to its graduates than the paroxysmsof terror before the public which often overcame the graduatesof European universities. Whether this was, or was not, educa-tion, Henry Adams never knew. He was ready to stand up be-fore any audience in America or Europe, with nerves rathersteadier for the excitement, but whether he should ever have any-thing to say, remained to be proved. As yet he knew nothing.Education had not begun.