CHAPTER XVIIPRESIDENT GRANT (1869)THE first effect of this leap into the unknown was a fit oflow spirits new to the young man's education; due inpart to the overpowering beauty and sweetness of theMaryland autumn, almost unendurable for its strain on one whohad toned his life down to the November grays and browns ofnorthern Europe. Life could not go on so beautiful and so sad.Luckily, no one else felt it or knew it. He bore it as well as hecould, and when he picked himself up, winter had come, and hewas settled in bachelor's quarters, as modest as those of a clerkin the Departments, far out on G Street, towards Georgetown,where an old Finn named Dohna, who had come out with theRussian Minister Stoeckel long before, had bought or built a newhouse. Congress had met. Two or three months remained to theold administration, but all interest centred in the new one. Thetown began to swarm with office-seekers, among whom a youngwriter was lost. He drifted among them, unnoticed, glad to learnhis work under cover of the confusion. He never aspired to be-come a regular reporter; he knew he should fail in trying a careerso ambitious and energetic; but he picked up friends on the press— Nordhoff, Murat Halstead, Henry Watterson, Sam Bowles— all reformers, and all mixed and jumbled together in a tidalwave of expectation, waiting for General Grant to give orders.No one seemed to know much about it. Even Senators had nothingto say. One could only make notes and study finance.In waiting, he amused himself as he could. In the amusementsof Washington, education had no part, but the simplicity of theamusements proved the simplicity of everything else, ambitions,Proverbially Washingtoninterests, thoughts, and knowledge.was a poor place for education, and of course young diplomats256The Education of Henry Adamsavoided or disliked it, but, as a rule, diplomats disliked everyplace except Paris, and the world contained only one Paris. Theyabused London more violently than Washington; they praisedno post under the sun; and they were merely describing three-fourths of their stations when they complained that there were notheatres, no restaurants, no monde, no demi-monde, no drives, nosplendor, and, as Mme. de Struve used to say, no grandezza. Thiswas all true; Washington was a mere political camp, as transientand temporary as a camp-meeting for religious revival, but thediplomats had least reason to complain, since they were moresought for there than they would ever be elsewhere. For youngmen Washington was in one way paradise, since they were few,and greatly in demand. After watching the abject unimportanceof the young diplomat in London society, Adams found himself ayoung duke in Washington. He had ten years of youth to makeup, and a ravenous appetite. Washington was the easiest societyhe had ever seen, and even the Bostonian became simple, good-natured, almost genial, in the softness of a Washington spring.Society went on excellently well without houses, or carriages, orjewels, or toilettes, or pavements, or shops, or grandezza of anysort; and the market was excellent as well as cheap. One couldnot stay there a month without loving the shabby town. Eventhe Washington girl, who was neither rich nor well-dressed norwell-educated nor clever, had singular charm, and used it. Ac-cording to Mr. Adams the father, this charm dated back as faras Monroe's administration, to his personal knowledge.Therefore, behind all the processes of political or financial ornewspaper training, the social side of Washington was to be takenfor granted as three-fourths of existence. Its details matter noth-ing. Life ceased to be strenuous, and the victim thanked God forit. Politics and reform became the detail, and waltzing the pro-fession. Adams was not alone. Senator Sumner had as privatesecretary a young man named Moorfield Storey, who becamea dangerous example of frivolity. The new Attorney-General,President Grant257E. R. Hoar, brought with him from Concord a son, Sam Hoar,whose example rivalled that of Storey. Another impenitent wasnamed Dewey, a young naval officer. Adams came far down inthe list. He wished he had been higher. He could have spareda world of superannuated history, science, or politics, to havereversed better in waltzing.He had no adequate notion how little he knew, especially ofwomen, and Washington offered no standard of comparison. Allwere profoundly ignorant together, and as indifferent as childrento education. No one needed knowledge. Washington was happierwithout style. Certainly Adams was happier without it; happierthan he had ever been before; happier than any one in the harshworld of strenuousness could dream of. This must be taken asbackground for such little education as he gained; but the lifebelonged to the eighteenth century, and in no way concernededucation for the twentieth.In such an atmosphere, one made no great pretence of hardwork. If the world wants hard work, the world must pay for it;and, if it will not pay, it has no fault to find with the worker. Thusfar, no one had made a suggestion of pay for any work that Adamshad done or could do; if he worked at all, it was for social considera-tion, and social pleasure was his pay. For this he was willing togo on working, as an artist goes on painting when no one buys hispictures. Artists have done it from the beginning of time, andwill do it after time has expired, since they cannot help themselves,and they find their return in the pride of their social superiorityas they feel it. Society commonly abets them and encourages theirattitude of contempt. The society of Washington was too simpleand Southern as yet, to feel anarchistic longings, and it never reador saw what artists produced elsewhere, but it good-naturedlyabetted them when it had the chance, and respected itself the morefor the frailty. Adams found even the Government at his service,and every one willing to answer his questions. He worked, aftera fashion; not very hard, but as much as the Government would;258The Education of Henry Adamshave required of him for nine hundred dollars a year; and his workdefied frivolity. He got more pleasure from writing than the worldever got from reading him, for his work was not amusing, nor washe. One must not try to amuse money-lenders or investors, andthis was the class to which he began by appealing. He gave threemonths to an article on the finances of the United States, just thena subject greatly needing treatment; and when he had finished it,he sent it to London to his friend Henry Reeve, the ponderouseditor of the Edinburgh Review. Reeve probably thought it goodat all events, he said so; and he printed it in April. Of course itwas reprinted in America, but in England such articles were stillanonymous, and the author remained unknown.The author was not then asking for advertisement, and madeno claim for credit. His object was literary. He wanted to win aplace on the staff of the Edinburgh Review, under the vast shadowof Lord Macaulay; and, to a young American in 1868, such rankseemed colossal — the highest in the literary world — as it hadbeen only five-and-twenty years before. Time and tide hadflowed since then, but the position still flattered vanity, thoughit brought no other flattery or reward except the regular thirtypounds of pay — fifty dollars a month, measured in time and labor.The Edinburgh article finished, he set himself to work on ascheme for the North American Review. In England, Lord RobertCecil had invented for the London Quarterly an annual review ofpolitics which he called the "Session." Adams stole the idea andthe name — he thought he had been enough in Lord Robert'shouse, in days of his struggle with adversity, to excuse the theft—and began what he meant for a permanent series of annual politicalreviews which he hoped to make, in time, a political authority.With his sources of information, and his social intimacies atWashington, he could not help saying something that would com-mand attention. He had the field to himself, and he meant togive himself a free hand, as he went on. Whether the newspapersliked it or not, they would have to reckon with him; for such aPresident Grant259power, once established, was more effective than all the speechesin Congress or reports to the President that could be crammed intothe Government presses.The first of these " Sessions " appeared in April, but it could notbe condensed into a single article, and had to be supplemented inOctober by another which bore the title of "Civil Service Reform,"and was really a part of the same review. A good deal of authentichistory slipped into these papers. Whether any one except hispress associates ever read them, he never knew and never greatlycared. The difference is slight, to the influence of an author,whether he is read by five hundred readers, or by five hundredthousand; if he can select the five hundred, he reaches the fivehundred thousand. The fateful year 1870 was near at hand, whichwas to mark the close of the literary epoch, when quarterlies gaveway to monthlies; letter-press to illustration; volumes to pages. Theoutburst was brilliant. Bret Harte led, and Robert Louis Steven-son followed. Guy de Maupassant and Rudyard Kipling broughtup the rear, and dazzled the world. As usual, Adams found him-self fifty years behind his time, but a number of belated wandererskept him company, and they produced on each other the effect orillusion of a public opinion. They straggled apart, at longer andlonger intervals, through the procession, but they were still withinhearing distance of each other. The drift was still superficiallyconservative. Just as the Church spoke with apparent authority,so the quarterlies laid down an apparent law, and no one couldsurely say where the real authority, or the real law, lay. Sciencedid not know. Truths a priori held their own against truthspurely relative. According to Lowell, Right was forever on theScaffold, Wrong was forever on the Throne; and most people stillthought they believed it. Adams was not the only relic of theeighteenth century, and he could still depend on a certain num-ber of listeners — mostly respectable, and some rich.Want of audience did not trouble him; he was well enough offin that respect, and would have succeeded in all his calculations260The Education of Henry Adamsif this had been his only hazard. Where he broke down was at apoint where he always suffered wreck and where nine adventurersout of ten make their errors. One may be more or less certain oforganized forces; one can never be certain of men. He belongedto the eighteenth century, and the eighteenth century upset all hisplans. For the moment, America was more eighteenth centurythan himself; it reverted to the stone age.As education — of a certain sort — the story had probably acertain value, though he could never see it. One seldom can seemuch education in the buck of a broncho; even less in the kickof a mule. The lesson it teaches is only that of getting out of theanimal's way. This was the lesson that Henry Adams had learnedover and over again in politics since i860.At least four-fifths of the American people — Adams among therest — had united in the election of General Grant to the Presi-dency, and probably had been more or less affected in their choiceby the parallel they felt between Grant and Washington. Noth-ing could be more obvious. Grant represented order. He was agreat soldier, and the soldier always represented order. He mightbe as partisan as he pleased, but a general who had organized andcommanded half a million or a million men in the field, must knowhow to administer. Even Washington, who was, in education andexperience, a mere cave-dweller, had known how to organize agovernment, and had found Jeffersons and Hamiltons to organizehis departments. The task of bringing the Government back toregular practices, and of restoring moral and mechanical order toadministration, was not very difficult; it was ready to do it itself,with a little encouragement. No doubt the confusion, especiallyin the old slave States and in the currency, was considerable, butthe general disposition was good, and every one had echoed thefamous phrase: "Let us have peace."Adams was young and easily deceived, in spite of his diplomaticadventures, but even at twice his age he could not see that thisreliance on Grant was unreasonable. Had Grant been a Con-President Grant261gressman one would have been on one's guard, for one knew thetype. One never expected from a Congressman more than goodintentions and public spirit. Newspaper-men as a rule had no greatrespect for the lower House; Senators had less; and Cabinet officershad none at all. Indeed, one day when Adams was pleading witha Cabinet officer for patience and tact in dealing with Represen-tatives, the Secretary impatiently broke out: "You can't use tactwith a Congressman! A Congressman is a hog! You must take astick and hit him on the snout!" Adams knew far too little, com-pared with the Secretary, to contradict him, though he thought thephrase somewhat harsh even as applied to the average Congress-man of 1869 — he saw little or nothing of later ones — but heknew a shorter way of silencing criticism. He had but to ask: "Ifa Congressman is a hog, what is a Senator?" This innocent ques-tion, put in a candid spirit, petrified any executive officer thatever sat a week in his office. Even Adams admitted that Senatorspassed belief. The comic side of their egotism partly disguisedits extravagance, but faction had gone so far under AndrewJohnson that at times the whole Senate seemed to catch hystericsof nervous bucking without apparent reason. Great leaders, likeSumner and Conkling, could not be burlesqued; they were moregrotesque than ridicule could make them; even Grant, who rarelysparkled in epigram, became witty on their account; but theiregotism and factiousness were no laughing matter. They didpermanent and terrible mischief, as Garfield and Blaine, and evenMcKinley and John Hay, were to feel. The most troublesometask of a reform President was that of bringing the Senate backto decency.Therefore no one, and Henry Adams less than most, felt hopethat any President chosen from the ranks of politics or politicianswould raise the character of government; and by instinct if not byreason, all the world united on Grant. The Senate understoodwhat the world expected, and waited in silence for a struggle withGrant more serious than that with Andrew Johnson. Newspaper-262The Education of Henry Adamsmen were alive with eagerness to support the President against theSenate. The newspaper-man is, more than most men, a doublepersonality; and his person feels best satisfied in its double instinctswhen writing in one sense and thinking in another. All newspaper-men, whatever they wrote, felt alike about the Senate. Adamsfloated with the stream. He was eager to join in the fight whichhe foresaw as sooner or later inevitable. He meant to support theExecutive in attacking the Senate and taking away its two-thirds vote and power of confirmation, nor did he much care howit should be done, for he thought it safer to effect the revolutionin 1870 than to wait till 1920.With this thought in his mind, he went to the Capitol to hearthe names announced which should reveal the carefully guardedsecret of Grant's Cabinet. To the end of his life, he wonderedat the suddenness of the revolution which actually, within fiveminutes, changed his intended future into an absurdity so laugh-able as to make him ashamed of it. He was to hear a long list ofCabinet announcements not much weaker or more futile than thatof Grant, and none of them made him blush, while Grant's nomi-nations had the singular effect of making the hearer ashamed,not so much of Grant, as of himself. He had made another totalmisconception of life — another inconceivable false start. Yet,unlikely as it seemed, he had missed his motive narrowly, andhis intention had been more than sound, for the Senators madeno secret of saying with senatorial frankness that Grant's nomi-nations betrayed his intent as plainly as they betrayed his incom-petence. A great soldier might be a baby politician.Adams left the Capitol, much in the same misty mental condi-tion that he recalled as marking his railway journey to London onMay 13, 186 1 ; he felt in himself what Gladstone bewailed so sadly,"the incapacity of viewing things all round." He knew, withoutabsolutely saying it, that Grant had cut short the life which Adamshad laid out for himself in the future. After such a miscarriage, nothought of effectual reform could revive for at least one generation,President Grant263and he had no fancy for ineffectual politics. What course couldhe sail next ? He had tried so many, and society had barred themall ! For the moment, he saw no hope but in following the streamon which he had launched himself. The new Cabinet, as individ-uals, were not hostile. Subsequently Grant made changes in thelist which were mostly welcome to a Bostonian — or should havebeen — although fatal to Adams. The name of Hamilton Fish,as Secretary of State, suggested extreme conservatism and prob-able deference to Sumner. The name of George S. Boutwell, asSecretary of the Treasury, suggested only a somewhat lugubriousjoke; Mr. Boutwell could be described only as the opposite of Mr.McCulloch, and meant inertia ; or, in plain words, total extinctionfor any one resembling Henry Adams. On the other hand, thename of Jacob D. Cox, as Secretary of the Interior, suggested helpand comfort; while that of Judge Hoar, as Attorney-General,promised friendship. On the whole, the personal outlook, merelyfor literary purposes, seemed fairly cheerful, and the politicaloutlook, though hazy, still depended on Grant himself. No onedoubted that Grant's intention had been one of reform; that hisaim had been to place his administration above politics ; and untilhe should actually drive his supporters away, one might hope tosupport him. One's little lantern must therefore be turned onGrant. One seemed to know him so well, and really knew solittle.By chance it happened that Adam Badeau took the lower suiteof rooms at Dohna's, and, as it was convenient to have one table,the two men dined together and became intimate. Badeau wasexceedingly social, though not in appearance imposing. He wasstout; his face was red, and his habits were regularly irregular;but he was very intelligent, a good newspaper-man, and an ex-cellent military historian. His life of Grant was no ordinary book.Unlike most newspaper-men, he was a friendly critic of Grant, assuited an officer who had been on the General's staff. As a rule,the newspaper correspondents in Washington were unfriendly,264The Education of Henry Adamsand the lobby sceptical. From that side one heard tales that madeone's hair stand on end, and the old West Point army officers wereno more flattering. All described him as vicious, narrow, dull, andvindictive. Badeau, who had come to Washington for a consulatewhich was slow to reach him, resorted more or less to whiskey forencouragement, and became irritable, besides being loquacious.He talked much about Grant, and showed a certain artistic feel-ing for analysis of character, as a true literary critic would nat-urally do. Loyal to Grant, and still more so to Mrs. Grant, whoacted as his patroness, he said nothing, even when far gone, thatwas offensive about either, but he held that no one except himselfand Rawlins understood the General. To him, Grant appearedas an intermittent energy, immensely powerful when awake, butpassive and plastic in repose. He said that neither he nor the restof the staff knew why Grant succeeded; they believed in him be-cause of his success. For stretches of time, his mind seemed torpid.Rawlins and the others would systematically talk their ideas intoit, for weeks, not directly, but by discussion among themselves,in his presence. In the end, he would announce the idea as hisown, without seeming conscious of the discussion; and would givethe orders to carry it out with all the energy that belonged to hisnature. They could never measure his character or be sure when-he would act. They could never follow a mental process in histhought. They were not sure that he did think.In all this, Adams took deep interest, for although he was not,like Badeau, waiting for Mrs. Grant's power of suggestion to acton the General's mind in order to germinate in a consulate or alegation, his portrait gallery of great men was becoming large, andit amused him to add an authentic likeness of the greatest gen-eral the world had seen since Napoleon. Badeau's analysis wasrather delicate; infinitely superior to that of Sam Ward or CharlesNordhoff.Badeau took Adams to the White House one evening and in-troduced him to the President and Mrs. Grant. First and last,President Grant265he saw a dozen Presidents at the White House, and the mostfamous were by no means the most agreeable, but he found Grantthe most curious object of study among them all. About no onedid opinions differ so widely. Adams had no opinion, or occasionto make one. A single word with Grant satisfied him that, for hisown good, the fewer words he risked, the better. Thus far in lifehe had met with but one man of the same intellectual or unin-tellectual type — Garibaldi. Of the two, Garibaldi seemed to hima trifle the more intellectual, but, in both, the intellect countedfor nothing; only the energy counted. The type was pre-in-tellectual, archaic, and would have seemed so even to the cave-dwellers. Adam, according to legend, was such a man.In time one came to recognize the type in other men, withdifferences and variations, as normal; men whose energies werethe greater, the less they wasted on thought; men who sprangfrom the soil to power; apt to be distrustful of themselves and ofothers; shy; jealous; sometimes vindictive; more or less dull inoutward appearance; always needing stimulants, but for whomaction was the highest stimulant — the instinct of fight. Suchmen were forces of nature, energies of the prime, like the Pteraspis,but they made short work of scholars. They had commandedthousands of such and saw no more in them than in others. Thefact was certain; it crushed argument and intellect at once.vAdams did not feel Grant as a hostile force; like Badeau he sawonly an uncertain one. When in action he was superb and safe tofollow; only when torpid he was dangerous. To deal with him onemust stand near, like Rawlins, and practice more or less sympa-Simple-minded beyond the experience of Wallthetic habits.Street or State Street, he resorted, like most men of the same in-tellectual calibre, to commonplaces when at a loss for expression:"Let us have peace!" or, "The best way to treat a bad law is toexecute it"; or a score of such reversible sentences generally tobe gauged by their sententiousness; but sometimes he made onedqubt his good faith; as when he seriously remarked to a partic-266The Education of Henry Adamsularly bright young woman that Venice would be a fine city if itwere drained. In Mark Twain, this suggestion would have takenrank among his best witticisms; in Grant it was a measure ofsimplicity not singular. Robert E. Lee betrayed the same intel-lectual commonplace, in a Virginian form, not to the same degree,but quite distinctly enough for one who knew the American.What worried Adams was not the commonplace; it was, as usual,his own education. Grant fretted and irritated him, like theTerebratula, as a defiance of first principles. He had no right toexist. He should have been extinct for ages. The idea that, associety grew older, it grew one-sided, upset evolution, and madeof education a fraud. That, two thousand years after Alexanderthe Great and Julius Caesar, a man like Grant should be called— and should actually and truly be — the highest product of themost advanced evolution, made evolution ludicrous. One mustbe as commonplace as Grant's own commonplaces to maintainsuch an absurdity. The progress of evolution from PresidentWashington to President Grant, was alone evidence enough toupset Darwin.Education became more perplexing at every phase. No theorywas worth the pen that wrote it. America had no use for Adamsbecause he was eighteenth-century, and yet it worshipped Grantbecause he was archaic and should have lived in a cave and wornskins. Darwinists ought to conclude that America was revertingto the stone age, but the theory of reversion was more absurdthan that of evolution. Grant's administration reverted to nothing.One could not catch a trait of the past, still less of the future.It was not even sensibly American. Not an official in it, exceptperhaps Rawlins whom Adams never met, and who died in Sep-tember, suggested an American idea.Yet this administration, which upset Adams's whole life, wasnot unfriendly; it was made up largely of friends. Secretary Fishwas almost kind; he kept the tradition of New York social values;he was human and took no pleasure in giving pain. Adams feltPresident Grant267no prejudice whatever in his favor, and he had nothing in mind orperson to attract regard; his social gifts were not remarkable;he was not in the least magnetic; he was far from young; but hewon confidence from the start and remained a friend to the finish.As far as concerned Mr. Fish, one felt rather happily suited, andone was still better off in the Interior Department with J. D.Cox. Indeed, if Cox had been in the Treasury and Boutwell inthe Interior, one would have been quite satisfied as far as personalrelations went, while, in the Attorney-General's Office, JudgeHoar seemed to fill every possible ideal, both personal and polit-ical.The difficulty was not the want of friends, and had the wholegovernment been filled with them, it would have helped littlewithout the President and the Treasury. Grant avowed from thestart a policy of drift; and a policy of drift attaches only barnacles.At thirty, one has no interest in becoming a barnacle, but even inthat character Henry Adams would have been ill-seen. His friendswere reformers, critics, doubtful in party allegiance, and he washimself an object of suspicion. Grant had no objects, wanted nohelp, wished for no champions. The Executive asked only to belet alone. This was his meaning when he said: "Let us havepeace!"No one wanted to go into opposition. As for Adams, all hishopes of success in life turned on his finding an administration tosupport. He knew well enough the rules of self-interest. He wasfor sale. He wanted to be bought. His price was excessively cheap,for he did not even ask an office, and had his eye, not on the Gov-ernment, but on New York. All he wanted was something to sup-port; something that would let itself be supported. Luck wentdead against him. For once, he was fifty years in advance of histime.