CHAPTER XXFAILURE (1871)FAR back in childhood, among its earliest memories, HenryAdams could recall his first visit to Harvard College. Hemust have been nine years old when on one of the singularlygloomy winter afternoons which beguiled Cambridgeport, hismother drove him out to visit his aunt, Mrs. Everett. EdwardEverett was then President of the college and lived in the oldPresident's House on Harvard Square. The boy remembered thedrawing-room, on the left of the hall door, in which Mrs. Everettreceived them. He remembered a marble greyhound in the corner.The house had an air of colonial self-respect that impressed evena nine-year-old child.When Adams closed his interview with President Eliot, he askedthe Bursar about his aunt's old drawing-room, for the house hadbeen turned to base uses. The room and the deserted kitchen ad-jacent to it were to let. He took them. Above him, his brotherBrooks, then a law student, had rooms, with a private staircase.Opposite was J. R. Dennett, a young instructor almost as literaryas Adams himself, and more rebellious to conventions.Inquiryrevealed a boarding-table, somewhere in the neighborhood, alsosupposed to be superior in its class. Chauncey Wright, FrancisWharton, Dennett, John Fiske, or their equivalents in learningand lecture, were seen there, among three or four law studentslike Brooks Adams. With these primitive arrangements, all ofthem had to be satisfied. The standard was below that of Wash-ington, but it was, for the moment, the best.For the next nine months the Assistant Professor had no time towaste on comforts or amusements. He exhausted all his strength intrying to keep one day ahead of his duties. Often the stint ran on,till night and sleep ran short. He could not stop to think whether300The Education of Henry Adamshe were doing the work rightly. He could not get it done to pleasehim, rightly or wrongly, for he never could satisfy himself whatto do.The fault he had found with Harvard College as an under-graduate must have been more or less just, for the college wasmaking a great effort to meet these self-criticisms, and had electedPresident Eliot in 1869 to carry out its reforms. Professor Gurneywas one of the leading reformers, and had tried his hand on hisown department of History. The two full Professors of History— Torrey and Gurney, charming men both — could not coverthe ground. Between Gurney's classical courses and Torrey'smodern ones, lay a gap of a thousand years, which Adams wasexpected to fill. The students had already elected courses num-bered 1, 2, and 3, without knowing what was to be taught or whowas to teach. If their new professor had asked what idea was intheir minds, they must have replied that nothing at all was intheir minds, since their professor had nothing in his, and down tothe moment he took his chair and looked his scholars in the face,he had given, as far as he could remember, an hour, more or less,to the Middle Ages.Not that his ignorance troubled him! He knew enough to beignorant. His course had led him through oceans of ignorance;he had tumbled from one ocean into another till he had learnedto swim; but even to him education was a serious thing. A parentgives life, but as parent, gives no more. A murderer takes life,but his deed stops there. A teacher affects eternity; he can nevertell where his influence stops. A teacher is expected to teach truth,and may perhaps flatter himself that he does so, if he stops withthe alphabet or the multiplication table, as a mother teachestruth by making her child eat with a spoon; but morals are quiteanother truth and philosophy is more complex still. A teachermust either treat history as a catalogue, a record, a romance, or asan evolution; and whether he affirms or denies evolution, he fallsinto all the burning faggots of the pit. He makes of his scholarsFailure301either priests or atheists, plutocrats or socialists, judges or anarch-ists, almost in spite of himself. In essence incoherent and immoral,history had either to be taught as such — or falsified.Adams wanted to do neither. He had no theory of evolutionto teach, and could not make the facts fit one. He had no fancyfor telling agreeable tales to amuse sluggish-minded boys, in orderto publish them afterwards as lectures. He could still less compelhis students to learn the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the Vener-able Bede by heart. He saw no relation whatever between hisstudents and the Middle Ages unless it were the Church, and therethe ground was particularly dangerous. He knew better thanthough he were a professional historian that the man who shouldsolve the riddle of the Middle Ages and bring them into the lineof evolution from past to present, would be a greater man thanLamarck or Linnaeus; but history had nowhere broken down sopitiably, or avowed itself so hopelessly bankrupt, as there. SinceGibbon, the spectacle was almost a scandal. History had losteven the sense of shame. It was a hundred years behind the ex-perimental sciences. For all serious purpose, it was less instruc-tive than Walter Scott and Alexandre Dumas.All this was without offence to Sir Henry Maine, Tyler, Mc-Lennan, Buckle, Auguste Comte, and the various philosopherswho, from time to time, stirred the scandal, and made it morescandalous. No doubt, a teacher might make some use of thesewriters or their theories; but Adams could fit them into no theoryof his own. The college expected him to pass at least half his timein teaching the boys a few elementary dates and relations, thatthey might not be a disgrace to the university. This was formal;and he could frankly tell the boys that, provided they passed theirexaminations, they might get their facts where they liked, anduse the teacher only for questions. The only privilege a studenthad that was worth his claiming, was that of talking to the pro-fessor, and the professor was bound to encourage it. His onlydifficulty on that side was to get them to talk at all. He had to302The Education of Henry Adamsdevise schemes to find what they were thinking about, and in-duce them to risk criticism from their fellows. Any large body ofstudents stifles the student. No man can instruct more than half-a-dozen students at once. The whole problem of education is oneof its cost in money.The lecture system to classes of hundreds, which was very muchthat of the twelfth century, suited Adams not at all. Barred fromphilosophy and bored by facts, he wanted to teach his studentssomething not wholly useless. The number of students whoseminds were of an order above the average was, in his experience,barely one in ten; the rest could not be much stimulated by anyinducements a teacher 'could suggest. All were respectable, andin seven years of contact, Adams never had cause to complain ofone; but nine minds in ten take polish passively, like a hard sur-face; only the tenth sensibly reacts.Adams thought that, as no one seemed to care what he did, hewould try to cultivate this tenth mind, though necessarily at theexpense of the other nine. He frankly acted on the rule that ateacher, who knew nothing of his subject, should not pretend toteach his scholars what he did not know, but should join them intrying to find the best way of learning it. The rather pretentiousname of historical method was sometimes given to this process ofinstruction, but the name smacked of German pedagogy, and ayoung professor who respected neither history nor method, andwhose sole object of interest was his students' minds, fell intotrouble enough without adding to it a German parentage.The task was doomed to failure for a reason which he couldnot control. Nothing is easier than to teach historical method,but, when learned, it has little use. History is a tangled skeinthat one may take up at any point, and break when one has un-ravelled enough; but complexity precedes evolution. The Pter-aspis grins horribly from the closed entrance. One may not beginat the beginning, and one has but the loosest relative truths tofollow up. Adams found himself obliged to force his material intoFailure303some shape to which a method could be applied. He could thinkonly of law as subject; the Law School as end; and he took, asvictims of his experiment, half-a-dozen highly intelligent youngmen who seemed willing to work. The course began with thebeginning, as far as the books showed a beginning in primitiveman, and came down through the Salic Franks to the NormanSinpe no textbooks existed, the professor refused toEnglish.profess, knowing no more than his students, and the students readwhat they pleased and compared their results. As pedagogy, noth-ing could be more triumphant. The boys worked like rabbits,and dug holes all over the field of archaic society; no difficultystopped them; unknown languages yielded before their attack,and customary law became familiar as the police court; undoubt-edly they learned, after a fashion, to chase an idea, like a hare,through as dense a thicket of obscure facts as they were likely tomeet at the bar; but their teacher knew from his own experiencethat his wonderful method led nowhere, and they would have toexert themselves to get rid of it in the Law School even more thanthey exerted themselves to acquire it in the college. Their sciencehad no system, and could have none, since its subject was merelyantiquarian. Try as hard as he might, the professor could not makeit actual.What was the use of training an active mind to waste its en-ergy? The experiments might in time train Adams as a professor,but this result was still less to his taste. He wanted to help theboys to a career, but not one of his many devices to stimulate theintellectual reaction of the student's mind satisfied either him orthe students. For himself he was clear that the fault lay in thesystem, which could lead only to inertia. Such little knowledgeof himself as he possessed warranted him in affirming that hismind required conflict, competition, contradiction even more thanthat of the student. He too wanted a rank-list to set his name upon.His reform of the system would have begun in the lecture-room athis own desk. He would have seated a rival assistant professor304The Education of Henry Adamsopposite him, whose business should be strictly limited to express-ing opposite views. Nothing short of this would ever interesteither the professor or the student; but of all university freaks,no irregularity shocked the intellectual atmosphere so much ascontradiction or competition between teachers. In that respectthe thirteenth-century university system was worth the wholeteaching of the modern school.All his pretty efforts to create conflicts of thought among hisstudents failed for want of system. None met the needs of in-struction. In spite of President Eliot's reforms and his steady,generous, liberal support, the system remained costly, clumsy andfutile. The university — as far as it was represented by HenryAdams — produced at great waste of time and money results notworth reaching.He made use of his lost two years of German schooling to in-flict their results on his students, and by a happy chance he wasin the full tide of fashion. The Germans were crowning their newemperor at Versailles, and surrounding his head with a halo ofPepins and Merwigs, Othos and Barbarossas. James Bryce hadeven discovered the Holy Roman Empire. Germany was neverso powerful, and the Assistant Professor of History had nothingelse as his stock in trade. He imposed Germany on his scholarswith a heavy hand. He was rejoiced; but he sometimes doubtedwhether they should be grateful. On the whole, he was contentneither with what he had taught nor with the way he had taughtit. The seven years he passed in teaching seemed to him lost.;The uses of adversity are beyond measure strange. As a pro-fessor, he regarded himself as a failure. Without false modesty hethought he knew what he meant. He had tried a great many ex-periments, and wholly succeeded in none. He had succumbed tothe weight of the system. He had accomplished nothing that hetried to do. He regarded the system as wrong; more mischievousto the teachers than to the students; fallacious from the beginningto end. He quitted the university at last, in 1877, with a feeling,Failure;305that, if it had not been for the invariable courtesy and kindnessshown by every one in it, from the President to the injured stu-dents, he should be sore at his failure.These were his own feelings, but they seemed not to be felt inthe college. With the same perplexing impartiality that had somuch disconcerted him in his undergraduate days, the college in-sisted on expressing an opposite view. John Fiske went so far inhis notice of the family in " Appleton's Cyclopedia," as to say thatHenry had left a great reputation at Harvard College; which wasa proof of John Fiske's personal regard that Adams heartily re-turned; and set the kind expression down to camaraderie. Thecase was different when President Eliot himself hinted that Ad-ams's services merited recognition. Adams could have wept on hisshoulder in hysterics, so grateful was he for the rare good-will thatinspired the compliment; but he could not allow the college tothink that he esteemed himself entitled to distinction. He knewbetter, and his was among the failures which were respectableenough to deserve self-respect. Yet nothing in the vanity of lifestruck him as more humiliating than that Harvard College, whichhe had persistently criticised, abused, abandoned, and neglected,should alone have offered him a dollar, an office, an encourage-ment, or a kindness. Harvard College might have its faults, butat least it redeemed America, since it was true to its own.The only part of education that the professor thought a successwas the students. He found them excellent company. Cast moreor less in the same mould, without violent emotions or sentiment,and, except for the veneer of American habits, ignorant of all thatman had ever thought or hoped, their minds burst open like flow-ers at the sunlight of a suggestion. They were quick to respondplastic to a mould; and incapable of fatigue. Their faith in edu-cation was so full of pathos that one dared not ask them whatthey thought they could do with education when they got it.Adams did put the question to one of them, and was surprised atthe answer: "The degree of Harvard College is worth money to306The Education of Henry Adamsme in Chicago." This reply upset his experience; for the degreeof Harvard College had been rather a drawback to a youngman in Boston and Washington. So far as it went, the answer wasgood, and settled one's doubts. Adams knew no better, althoughhe had given twenty years to pursuing the same education, andwas no nearer a result than they. He still had to take for grantedmany things that they need not — among the rest, that his teach-ing did them more good than harm. In his own opinion the great-est good he could do them was to hold his tongue. They neededmuch faith then; they were likely to need more if they lived long.He never knew whether his colleagues shared his doubts abouttheir own utility. Unlike himself, they knew more or less theirbusiness. He could not tell his scholars that history glowed withsocial virtue; the Professor of Chemistry cared not a chemicalatom whether society was virtuous or not. Adams could not pre-tend that mediaeval society proved evolution; the Professor ofPhysics smiled at evolution. Adams was glad to dwell on thevirtues of the Church and the triumphs of its art: the Profes-sor of Political Economy had to treat them as waste of force.They knew what they had to teach; he did not. They might per-haps be frauds without knowing it; but he knew certainly noth-ing else of himself. He could teach his students nothing; he wasonly educating himself at their cost.Education, like politics, is a rough affair, and every instructorhas to shut his eyes and hold his tongue as though he were a priest.The students alone satisfied. They thought they gained some-thing. Perhaps they did, for even in America and in the twen-tieth century, life could not be wholly industrial. Adams fer-vently hoped that they might remain content; but supposingtwenty years more to pass, and they should turn on him as fiercelyas he had turned on his old instructors — what answer could hemake? The college had pleaded guilty, and tried to reform. Hehad pleaded guilty from the start, and his reforms had failed be-fore those of the college.Failure307The lecture-room was futile enough, but the faculty-room wasworse. American society feared total wreck in the maelstrom ofpolitical and corporate administration, but it could not look forhelp to college dons. Adams knew, in that capacity, both Con-gressmen and professors, and he preferred Congressmen. The samefailure marked the society of a college. Several score of the best-educated, most agreeable, and personally the most sociable peoplein America united in Cambridge to make a social desert that wouldhave starved a polar bear. The liveliest and most agreeable ofmen — James Russell Lowell, Francis J. Child, Louis Agassiz,dozen others, who would have made the joy of London or Paris —tried their best to break out and be like other men in Cambridgeand Boston, but society called them professors, and professorsthey had to be. While all these brilliant men were greedy forcompanionship, all were famished for want of it. Society was afaculty-meeting without business. The elements were there; butsociety cannot be made up of elements — people who are expectedto be silent unless they have observations to make — and all theelements are bound to remain apart if required to make observa-his son Alexander, Gurney, John Fiske, William James and ations.Thus it turned out that of all his many educations, Adamsthought that of school-teacher the thinnest. Yet he was forced toadmit that the education of an editor, in some ways, was thinnerstill. The editor had barely time to edit; he had none to write.If copy fell short, he was obliged to scribble a book-review on thevirtues of the Anglo-Saxons or the vices of the Popes; for he knewmore about Edward the Confessor or Boniface VIII than he didabout President Grant. For seven years he wrote nothing; theReview lived on his brother Charles's railway articles. The editorcould help others, but could do nothing for himself. As a writer,he was totally forgotten by the time he had been an editor fortwelve months. As editor he could find no writer to take his placefor politics and affairs of current concern. The Review became308The Education of Henry Adamschiefly historical. Russell Lowell and Frank Palgrave helped himto keep it literary. The editor was a helpless drudge whose suc-cesses, if he made any, belonged to his writers; but whose failuresmight easily bankrupt himself. Such a Review may be made a sinkof money with captivating ease. The secrets of success as an editorwere easily learned; the highest was that of getting advertise-ments. Ten pages of advertising made an editor a success; fivemarked him as a failure. The merits or demerits of his literaturehad little to do with his results except when they led to adversity.A year or two of education as editor satiated most of his appe-tite for that career as a profession. After a very slight experience,he said no more on the subject. He felt willing to let any one edit,if he himself might write. Vulgarly speaking, it was a dog's lifewhen it did not succeed, and little better when it did. A professorhad at least the pleasure of associating with his students; an edi-tor lived the life of an owl. A professor commonly became a peda-gogue or a pedant; an editor became an authority on advertising.On the whole, Adams preferred his attic in Washington. He waseducated enough. Ignorance paid better, for at least it earned fiftydollars a month.With this result Henry Adams's education, at his entry into life,stopped, and his life began. He had to take that life as he bestcould, with such accidental education as luck had given him;but he held that it was wrong, and that, if he were to begin again,he would do it on a better system. He thought he knew nearlywhat system to pursue. At that time Alexander Agassiz had notyet got his head above water so far as to serve for a model, ashe did twenty or thirty years afterwards; but the editorship ofthe North American Review had one solitary merit; it made theeditor acquainted at a distance with almost every one in the coun-try who could write or who could be the cause of writing. Adamswas vastly pleased to be received among these clever people as oneof themselves, and felt always a little surprised at their treatinghim as an equal, for they all had education; but among them, onlyFailure309one stood out in extraordinary prominence as the type and modelof what Adams would have liked to be, and of what the American,as he conceived, should have been and was not.Thanks to the article on Sir Charles Lyell, Adams passed for afriend of geologists, and the extent of his knowledge mattered muchless to them than the extent of his friendship, for geologists were asa class not much better off than himself, and friends were sorelyfew. One of his friends from earliest childhood, and nearest neigh-bor in Quincy, Frank Emmons, had become a geologist and joinedthe Fortieth Parallel Survey under Government. At Washingtonin the winter of 1869-70, Emmons had invited Adams to go outwith him on one of the field-parties in summer. Of course whenAdams took the Review he put it at the service of the Survey, andregretted only that he could not do more. When the first year ofprofessing and editing was at last over, and his July North Ameri-can appeared, he drew a long breath of relief, and took the nexttrain for the West. Of his year's work he was no judge. He hadbecome a small spring in a large mechanism, and his work countedonly in the sum; but he had been treated civilly by everybody, andhe felt at home even in Boston. Putting in his pocket the Julynumber of the North American, with a notice of the Fortieth Par-allel Survey by Professor J. D. Whitney, he started for the plainsand the Rocky Mountains.In the year 1871, the West was still fresh, and the Union Pacificwas young. Beyond the Missouri River, one felt the atmosphere ofIndians and buffaloes. One saw the last vestiges of an old educa-tion, worth studying if one would; but it was not that which Adamssought; rather, he came out to spy upon the land of the future. TheSurvey occasionally borrowed troopers from the nearest station incase of happening on hostile Indians, but otherwise the topog-raphers and geologists thought more about minerals than aboutSioux. They held under their hammers a thousand miles of mineralcountry with all its riddles to solve, and its stores of possible wealthto mark. They felt the future in their hands.310The Education of Henry AdamsEmmons's party was out of reach in the Uintahs, but ArnoldHague's had come in to Laramie for supplies, and they took chargeof Adams for a time. Their wanderings or adventures matternothing to the story of education. They were all hardened moun-taineers and surveyors who took everything for granted, and sparedeach other the most wearisome bore of English and Scotch life,the stories of the big game they killed. A bear was an occasionalamusement; a wapiti was a constant necessity; but the only wildanimal dangerous to man was a rattlesnake or a skunk. One shotfor amusement, but one had other matters to talk about.Adams enjoyed killing big game, but loathed the labor of cuttingit up ; so that he rarely unslung the little carbine he was in a man-ner required to carry. On the other hand, he liked to wander offalone on his mule, and pass the day fishing a mountain stream orexploring a valley. One morning when the party was campedhigh above Estes Park, on the flank of Long's Peak, he borroweda rod, and rode down over a rough trail into Estes Park, for sometrout. The day was fine, and hazy with the smoke of forest firesa thousand miles away; the park stretched its English beautiesoff to the base of its bordering mountains in natural landscapeand archaic peace; the stream was just fishy enough to temptlingering along its banks. Hour after hour the sun moved west-ward and the fish moved eastward, or disappeared altogether,until at last when the fisherman cinched his mule, sunset wasnearer than he thought. Darkness caught him before he couldcatch his trail. Not caring to tumble into some fifty-foot hole,he "allowed" he was lost, and turned back. In half-an-hour hewas out of the hills, and under the stars of Estes Park, but he sawno prospect of supper or of bed.Estes Park was large enough to serve for a bed on a summernight for an army of professors, but the supper question offereddifficulties. There was but one cabin in the Park, near its entrance,and he felt no great confidence in finding it, but he thought his mulecleverer than himself, and the dim lines of mountain crest againstFailure311the stars fenced his range of error. The patient mule plodded onwithout other road than the gentle slope of the ground, and sometwo hours must have passed before a light showed in the distance.As the mule came up to the cabin door, two or three men cameout to see the stranger.One of these men was Clarence King on his way up to the camp.Adams fell into his arms. As with most friendships, it was never amatter of growth or doubt. Friends are born in archaic horizons;they were shaped with the Pteraspis in Siluria; they have nothingto do with the accident of space. King had come up that day fromGreeley in a light four-wheeled buggy, over a trail hardly fit fora commissariat mule, as Adams had reason to know since he wentback in the buggy. In the cabin, luxury provided a room and onebed for guests. They shared the room and the bed, and talked tillfar towards dawn.King had everything to interest and delight Adams. He knewmore than Adams did of art and poetry; he knew America, espe-cially west of the hundredth meridian, better than any one; heknew the professor by heart, and he knew the Congressman betterthan he did the professor. He knew even women; even the Ameri-can woman; even the New York woman, which is saying much.Incidentally he knew more practical geology than was good forhim, and saw ahead at least one generation further than the text-books. That he saw right was a different matter. Since the be-ginning of time no man has lived who is known to have seen right;the charm of King was that he saw what others did and a greatdeal more. His wit and humor; his bubbling energy which sweptevery one into the current of his interest; his personal charm ofyouth and manners; his faculty of giving and taking, profusely,lavishly, whether in thought or in money as though he were Natureherself, marked him almost alone among Americans. He had inhim something of the Greek — a touch of Alcibiades or Alexander.One Clarence King only existed in the world.A new friend is always a miracle, but at thirty-three years old,312The Education of Henry Adamssuch a bird of paradise rising in the sage-brush was an avatar. Onefriend in a lifetime is much; two are many; three are hardly possi-ble. Friendship needs a certain parallelism of life, a communityof thought, a rivalry of aim. King, like Adams, and all their gener-ation, was at that moment passing the critical point of his career.The one, coming from the west, saturated with the sunshine ofthe Sierras, met the other, drifting from the east, drenched in thefogs of London, and both had the same problems to handle —the same stock of implements — the same field to work in; aboveall, the same obstacles to overcome.As a companion, King's charm was great, but this was not thequality that so much attracted Adams, nor could he affect evendistant rivalry on this ground. Adams could never tell a story,chiefly because he always forgot it; and he was never guilty ofa witticism, unless by accident. King and the Fortieth Parallelinfluenced him in a way far more vital. The lines of their lives con-verged, but King had moulded and directed his life logically, scien-tifically, as Adams thought American life should be directed.He had given himself education all of a piece, yet broad. Stand-ing in the middle of his career, where their paths at last came to-gether, he could look back and look forward on a straight line,with scientific knowledge for its base. Adams's life, past or future,was a succession of violent breaks or waves, with no base at all.King's abnormal energy had already won him great success. Noneof his contemporaries had done so much, single-handed, or werelikely to leave so deep a trail. He had managed to induce Congressto adopt almost its first modern act of legislation. He had organ-ized, as a civil — not military — measure, a Government Survey.He had paralleled the Continental Railway in Geology; a feat asyet unequalled by other governments which had as a rule no con-tinents to survey. He was creating one of the classic scientificworks of the century. The chances were great that he could,whenever he chose to quit the Government service, take the pickof the gold and silver, copper or coal, and build up his fortune;Failure313as he pleased. Whatever prize he wanted lay ready for him —scientific, social, literary, political — and he knew how to takethem in turn. With ordinary luck he would die at eighty the richestand most many-sided genius of his day.So little egoistic he was that none of his friends felt envy of hisextraordinary superiority, but rather grovelled before it, so thatwomen were jealous of the power he had over men; but womenwere many and Kings were one. The men worshipped not somuch their friend, as the ideal American they all wanted to be.The women were jealous because, at heart, King had no faith inthe American woman; he loved types more robust.The young men of the Fortieth Parallel had Californian instinctsthey were brothers of Bret Harte. They felt no leanings towardsthe simple uniformities of Lyell and Darwin; they saw little proof ofslight and imperceptible changes; to them, catastrophe was the lawof change; they cared little for simplicity and much for complexity;but it was the complexity of Nature, not of New York or even ofthe Mississippi Valley. King loved paradox; he started them likerabbits, and cared for them no longer, when caught or lost; butthey delighted Adams, for they helped, among other things, topersuade him that history was more amusing than science. Theonly question left open to doubt was their relative money value.In Emmons's camp, far up in the Uintahs, these talks were con-tinued till the frosts became sharp in the mountains. History andscience spread out in personal horizons towards goals no longerfar away. No more education was possible for either man. Suchas they were, they had got to stand the chances of the world theylived in; and when Adams started back to Cambridge, to takeup again the humble tasks of schoolmaster and editor he was har-nessed to his cart. Education, systematic or accidental, had doneits worst. Henceforth, he went on, submissive.