CHAPTER XVITHE PRESS (1868)AT ten o'clock of a July night, in heat that made thetropical rain-shower simmer, the Adams family and theMotley family clambered down the side of their Cunardsteamer into the government tugboat, which set them ashore inblack darkness at the end of some North River pier. Had theybeen Tyrian traders of the year B.C. 1000, landing from a galleyfresh from Gibraltar, they could hardly have been stranger on theshore of a world, so changed from what it had been ten years before.The historian of the Dutch, no longer historian but diplomatist,started up an unknown street, in company with the private secre-tary who had become private citizen, in search of carriages toconvey the two parties to the Brevoort House. The pursuit wasarduous but successful. Towards midnight they found shelteronce more in their native land.How much its character had changed or was changing, theycould not wholly know, and they could but partly feel. For thatmatter, the land itself knew no more than they. Society in Amer-ica was always trying, almost as blindly as an earthworm, to real-ize and understand itself; to catch up with its own head, and totwist about in search of its tail. Society offered the profile of along, straggling caravan, stretching loosely towards the prairies, itsfew score of leaders far in advance and its millions of immigrants,negroes, and Indians far in the rear, somewhere in archaic time.It enjoyed the vast advantage over Europe that all seemed, forthe moment, to move in one direction, while Europe wasted mostof its energy in trying several contradictory movements at once;but whenever Europe or Asia should be polarized or orientedtowards the same point, America might easily lose her lead.Meanwhile each newcomer needed to slip into a place as near the238The Education of Henry Adamshead of the caravan as possible, and needed most to know wherethe leaders could be found.One could divine pretty nearly where the force lay, since thelast ten years had given to the great mechanical energies —coal, iron, steam — a distinct superiority in power over the oldindustrial elements — agriculture, handwork, and learning; butthe result of this revolution on a survivor from the fifties re-sembled the action of the earthworm; he twisted about, in vain,to recover his starting-point; he could no longer see his own trail;he had become an estray; a flotsam or jetsam of wreckage; a be-lated reveller, or a scholar-gipsy like Matthew Arnold's. His worldwas dead. Not a Polish Jew fresh from Warsaw or Cracow —not a furtive Yacoob or Ysaac still reeking of the Ghetto, snarlinga weird Yiddish to the officers of the customs — but had a keenerinstinct, an intenser energy, and a freer hand than he — Americanof Americans, with Heaven knew how many Puritans and Patriotsbehind him, and an education that had cost a civil war. He madeno complaint and found no fault with his time; he was no worseoff than the Indians or the buffalo who had been ejected from theirheritage by his own people; but he vehemently insisted that hewas not himself at fault. The defeat was not due to him, nor yetto any superiority of his rivals. He had been unfairly forced outof the track, and must get back into it as best he could.One comfort he could enjoy to the full. Little as he might befitted for the work that was before him, he had only to look at hisfather and Motley to see figures less fitted for it than he. All wereequally survivals from the forties — bric-a-brac from the time ofLouis Philippe; stylists; doctrinaires; ornaments that had beenmore or less suited to the colonial architecture, but which never hadmuch value in Desbrosses Street or Fifth Avenue. They couldscarcely have earned five dollars a day in any modern industry.The men who commanded high pay were as a rule not ornamental.Even Commodore Vanderbilt and Jay Gould lacked social charm.Doubtless the country needed ornament — needed it very badlyThe Press239indeed — but it needed energy still more, and capital most of all,for its supply was ridiculously out of proportion to its wants.On the new scale of power, merely to make the continent habitablefor civilized people would require an immediate outlay that wouldhave bankrupted the world. As yet, no portion of the world excepta few narrow stretches of western Europe had ever been tolerablyprovided with the essentials of comfort and convenience; to fitout an entire continent with roads and the decencies of life wouldexhaust the credit of the entire planet. Such an estimate seemedoutrageous to a Texan member of Congress who loved the sim-plicity of nature's noblemen; but the mere suggestion that a sunexisted above him would outrage the self-respect of a deep-seafish that carried a lantern on the end of its nose. From the mo-ment that railways were introduced, life took on extravagance.Thus the belated reveller who landed in the dark at the Des-brosses Street ferry, found his energies exhausted in the effort tosee his own length. The new Americans, of whom he was to beone, must, whether they were fit or unfit, create a world of theirown, a science, a society, a philosophy, a universe, where they hadnot yet created a road or even learned to dig their own iron. Theyhad no time for thought; they saw, and could see, nothing beyondtheir day's work; their attitude to the universe outside them wasthat of the deep-sea fish. Above all, they naturally and intenselydisliked to be told what to do, and how to do it, by men who tooktheir ideas and their methods from the abstract theories of his-tory, philosophy, or theology. They knew enough to know thattheir world was one of energies quite new.All this, the newcomer understood and accepted, since he couldnot help himself and saw that the American could help himself aslittle as the newcomer; but the fact remained that the more heknew, the less he was educated. Society knew as much as this, andseemed rather inclined to boast of it, at least on the stump; butthe leaders of industry betrayed no sentiment, popular or other.They used, without qualm, whatever instruments they found at240The Education of Henry Adamshand. They had been obliged, in 1861, to turn aside and wasteimmense energy in settling what had been settled a thousand yearsbefore, and should never have been revived. At prodigious ex-pense, by sheer force, they broke resistance down, leaving every-thing but the mere fact of power untouched, since nothing else hada solution. Race and thought were beyond reach. Having clearedits path so far, society went back to its work, and threw itself onthat which stood first — its roads. The field was vast; altogetherbeyond its power to control offhand; and society dropped everythought of dealing with anything more than the single fractioncalled a railway system. This relatively small part of its task wasstill so big as to need the energies of a generation, for it requiredall the new machinery to be created — capital, banks, mines,furnaces, shops, power-houses, technical knowledge, mechanicalpopulation, together with a steady remodelling of social and polit-ical habits, ideas, and institutions to fit the new scale and suit thenew conditions. The generation between 1865 and 1895 was al-ready mortgaged to the railways, and no one knew it better thanthe generation itself.Whether Henry Adams knew it or not, he knew enough to actas though he did. He reached Quincy once more, ready for thenew start. His brother Charles had determined to strike for therailroads; Henry was to strike for the press; and they hoped toplay into each other's hands. They had great need, for they foundno one else to play with. After discovering the worthlessness of aso-called education, they had still to discover the worthlessness ofso-called social connection. No young man had a larger acquaint-ance and relationship than Henry Adams, yet he knew no onewho could help him. He was for sale, in the open market. Sowere many of his friends. All the world knew it, and knew too thatthey were cheap; to be bought at the price of a mechanic. There wasno concealment, no delicacy, and no illusion about it. Neither henor his friends complained ; but he felt sometimes a little surprisedthat, as far as he knew, no one, seeking in the labor market, everThe Press241so. much as inquired about their fitness. The want of solidaritybetween old and young seemed American. The young man wasrequired to impose himself, by the usual business methods, as anecessity on his elders, in order to compel them to buy him as aninvestment. As Adams felt it, he was in a manner expected toblackmail. Many a young man complained to him in after lifeof the same experience, which became a matter of curious reflec-tion as he grew old. The labor market of good society was ill-organized.Boston seemed to offer no market for educated labor. A peculiarand perplexing amalgam Boston always was, and although it hadchanged much in ten years, it was not less perplexing. One nolonger dined at two o'clock; one could no longer skate on BackBay; one heard talk of Bostonians worth five millions or more assomething not incredible. Yet the place seemed still simple, andless restless-minded than ever before. In the line that Adams hadchosen to follow, he needed more than all else the help of the press,but any shadow of hope on that side vanished instantly. The lessone meddled with the Boston press, the better. All the newspaper-men were clear on that point. The same was true of politics.Boston meant business. The Bostonians were building railways.Adams would have liked to help in building railways, but had noeducation. He was not fit.He passed three or four months thus, visiting relations, renewingfriendships, and studying the situation. At thirty years old, theman who has not yet got further than to study the situation, is lost,or near it. He could see nothing in the situation that could be ofuse to him. His friends had won no more from it than he. Hisbrother Charles, after three years of civil life, was no better offthan himself, except for being married and in greater need of in-come. His brother John had become a brilliant political leader onthe wrong side. No one had yet regained the lost ground of thewar.He went to Newport and tried to be fashionable, but even in the2\2The Education of Henry Adamssimple life of 1868, he failed as fashion. All the style he had learnedso painfully in London was worse than useless in America whereevery standard was different. Newport was charming, but it askedfor no education and gave none. What it gave was much gayer andpleasanter, and one enjoyed it amazingly; but friendships in thatsociety were a kind of social partnership, like the classes at college;not education but the subjects of education. All were doing thesame thing, and asking the same question of the future. Nonecould help. Society seemed founded on the law that all was forthe best New Yorkers in the best of Newports, and that all youngpeople were rich if they could waltz. It was a new version of theAnt and Grasshopper.At the end of three months, the only person, among the hundredshe had met, who had offered him a word of encouragement orhad shown a sign of acquaintance with his doings, was EdwardAtkinson. Boston was cool towards sons, whether prodigals orother, and needed much time to make up its mind what to do forthem — time which Adams, at thirty years old, could hardlyspare. He had not the courage or self-confidence to hire an officein State Street, as so many of his friends did, and doze there alone,vacuity within and a snowstorm outside, waiting for Fortune toknock at the door, or hoping to find her asleep in the elevator;or on the staircase, since elevators were not yet in use. Whetherthis course would have offered his best chance he never knew;it was one of the points in practical education which most neededa clear understanding, and he could never reach it. His father andmother would have been glad to see him stay with them and beginreading Blackstone again, and he showed no very filial tendernessby abruptly breaking the tie that had lasted so long. After all, per-haps Beacon Street was as good as any other street for his objectsin life; possibly his easiest and surest path was from BeaconStreet to State Street and back again, all the days of his years.Who could tell? Even after life was over, the doubt could not bedetermined.The Press243In thus sacrificing his heritage, he only followed the path thathad led him from the beginning. Boston was full of his brothers.He had reckoned from childhood on outlawry as his peculiarbirthright. The mere thought of beginning life again in MountVernon Street lowered the pulsations of his heart. This is astory of education — not a mere lesson of life — and, with edu-cation, temperament has in strictness nothing to do, although inpractice they run close together. Neither by temperament norby education was he fitted for Boston. He had drifted far awayand behind his companions there; no one trusted his tempera-ment or education; he had to go.Since no other path seemed to offer itself, he stuck to his planof joining the press, and selected Washington as the shortest roadto New York, but, in 1868, Washington stood outside the socialpale. No Bostonian had ever gone there. One announced one'sself as an adventurer and an office-seeker, a person of deplorablybad judgment, and the charges were true. The chances of endingin the gutter were, at best, even. The risk was the greater inAdams's case, because he had no very clear idea what to do whenhe got there. That he must educate himself over again, for ob-jects quite new, in an air altogether hostile to his old educations,was the only certainty; but how he was to do it — how he wasto convert the idler in Rotten Row into the lobbyist of the Cap-ital — he had not an idea, and no one to teach him. The ques-tion of money is rarely serious for a young American unless he ismarried, and money never troubled Adams more than others; notbecause he had it, but because he could do without it, like mostpeople in Washington who all lived on the income of bricklayers;but with or without money he met the difficulty that, after get-ting to Washington in order to go on the press, it was necessaryto seek a press to go on. For large work he could count on theNorth American Review, but this was scarcely a press.For cur-rent discussion and correspondence, he could depend on the NewYork Nation ; but what he needed was a New York daily, and no244The Education of Henry AdamsNew York daily needed him. He lost his one chance by the deathof Henry J. Raymond. The Tribune under Horace Greeley wasout of the question both for political and personal reasons, andbecause Whitelaw Reid had already undertaken that singularlyventuresome position, amid difficulties that would have swampedAdams in four-and-twenty hours. Charles A. Dana had madethe Sun a very successful as well as a very amusing paper, but hadhurt his own social position in doing it; and Adams knew himselfwell enough to know that he could never please himself and Danatoo; with the best intentions, he must always fail as a black-guard, and at that time a strong dash of blackguardism was lifeto the Sun. As for the New York Herald, it was a despotic em-pire admitting no personality but that of Bennett. Thus, for themoment, the New York daily press offered no field except thefree-trade Holy Land of the Evening Post under William CullenBryant, while beside it lay only the elevated plateau of the NewJerusalem occupied by Godkin and the Nation. Much as Adamsliked Godkin, and glad as he was to creep under the shelter ofthe Evening Post and the Nation, he was well aware that he shouldfind there only the same circle of readers that he reached in theNorth American Review.The outlook was dim, but it was all he had, and at Washing-ton, except for the personal friendship of Mr. Evarts who was thenAttorney-General and living there, he would stand in solitudemuch like that of London in 1861. Evarts did what no one inBoston seemed to care for doing; he held out a hand to the youngman. Whether Boston, like Salem, really shunned strangers, orwhether Evarts was an exception even in New York, he had thesocial instinct which Boston had not. Generous by nature, prodi-gal in hospitality, fond of young people, and a born man-of-the-world, Evarts gave and took liberally, without scruple, and ac-cepted the world without fearing or abusing it. His wit was theleast part of his social attraction. His talk was broad and free.He laughed where he could; he joked if a joke was possible; heThe Press245was true to his friends, and never lost his temper or became ill-natured. Like all New Yorkers he was decidedly not a Bostonian;but he was what one might call a transplanted New Englander,like General Sherman; a variety, grown in ranker soil. In thecourse of life, and in widely different countries, Adams incurredheavy debts of gratitude to persons on whom he had no claimand to whom he could seldom make return; perhaps half-a-dozensuch debts remained unpaid at last, although six is a large numberas lives go; but kindness seldom came more happily than whenMr. Evarts took him to Washington in October, 1868.Adams accepted the hospitality of the sleeper, with deep grati-tude, the more because his first struggle with a sleeping-car madehim doubt the value — to him — of a Pullman civilization; buthe was even more grateful for the shelter of Mr. Evarts's housein H Street at the corner of Fourteenth, where he abode in safetyand content till he found rooms in the roomless village. To himthe village seemed unchanged. Had he not known that a greatwar and eight years of astonishing movement had passed over it,he would have noticed nothing that betrayed growth. As of old,houses were few; rooms fewer; even the men were the same. Noone seemed to miss the usual comforts of civilization, and Adamswas glad to get rid of them, for his best chance lay in the eight-eenth century.The first step, of course, was the making of acquaintance, andthe first acquaintance was naturally the President, to whom anaspirant to the press officially paid respect. Evarts immediatelytook him to the White House and presented him to PresidentAndrew Johnson. The interview was brief and consisted in thestock remark common to monarchs and valets, that the youngman looked even younger than he was. The younger man felteven younger than he looked. He never saw the President again,and never felt a wish to see him, for Andrew Johnson was not thesort of man whom a young reformer of thirty, with two or threeforeign educations, was likely to see with enthusiasm; yet, musing246The Education of Henry Adamsover the interview as a matter of education, long years afterwards,he could not help recalling the President's figure with a distinct-ness that surprised him. The old-fashioned Southern Senator andstatesman sat in his chair at his desk with a look of self-esteemthat had its value. None doubted. All were great men; some, nodoubt, were greater than others; but all were statesmen and allwere supported, lifted, inspired by the moral certainty of right-ness. To them the universe was serious, even solemn, but it wastheir universe, a Southern conception of right. Lamar used to saythat he never entertained a doubt of the soundness of the South-ern system until he found that slavery could not stand a war.Slavery was only a part of the Southern system, and the lifeof it all — the vigor — the poetry — was its moral certainty ofself. The Southerner could not doubt; and this self-assurancenot only gave Andrew Johnson the look of a true President, butactually made him one. When Adams came to look back on itafterwards, he was surprised to realize how strong the Executivewas in 1868 — perhaps the strongest he was ever to see. Cer-tainly he never again found himself so well satisfied, or so muchat home.Seward was still Secretary of State. Hardly yet an old man,though showing marks of time and violence, Mr. Seward seemedlittle changed in these eight years. He was the same — with adifference. Perhaps he — unlike Henry Adams — had at last gotan education, and all he wanted. Perhaps he had resigned him-self to doing without it. Whatever the reason, although his man-ner was as roughly kind as ever, and his talk as free, he appearedto have closed his account with the public; he no longer seemedto care; he asked nothing, gave nothing, and invited no support;he talked little of himself or of others, and waited only for hisdischarge. Adams was well pleased to be near him in these lastdays of his power and fame, and went much to his house in theevenings when he was sure to be at his whist. At last, as the enddrew near, wanting to feel that the great man — the only chiefThe Press247he ever served even as a volunteer — recognized some personalrelation, he asked Mr. Seward to dine with him one evening in hisrooms, and play his game of whist there, as he did every night inhis own house. Mr. Seward came and had his whist, and Adamsremembered his rough parting speech: "A very sensible enter-tainment!" It was the only favor he ever asked of Mr. Seward,and the only one he ever accepted.Thus, as a teacher of wisdom, after twenty years of example,Governor Seward passed out of one's life, and Adams lost whatshould have been his firmest ally; but in truth the State Depart-ment had ceased to be the centre of his interest, and the Treasuryhad taken its place. The Secretary of the Treasury was a mannew to politics — Hugh McCulloch — not a person of much im-portance in the eyes of practical politicans such as young membersof the press meant themselves to become, but they all liked Mr.McCulloch, though they thought him a stop-gap rather than aforce. Had they known what sort of forces the Treasury was tooffer them for support in the generation to come, they might havereflected a long while on their estimate of McCulloch. Adams wasfated to watch the Sittings of many more Secretaries than he evercared to know, and he rather came back in the end to the idea thatMcCulloch was the best of them, although he seemed to representeverything that one liked least. He was no politician, he had noparty, and no power. He was not fashionable or decorative. Hewas a banker, and towards bankers Adams felt the narrow prej-udice which the serf feels to his overseer; for he knew he mustobey, and he knew that the helpless showed only their helpless-ness when they tempered obedience by mockery. The world,after 1865, became a bankers' world, and no banker would evertrust one who had deserted State Street, and had gone to Wash-ington with purposes of doubtful credit, or of no credit at all, forhe could not have put up enough collateral to borrow five thousanddollars of any bank in America. The banker never would trusthim, and he would never trust the banker. To him, the banking248The Education of Henry Adamsmind was obnoxious; and this antipathy caused him the moresurprise at finding McCulloch the broadest, most liberal, mostgenial, and most practical public man in Washington.There could be no doubt of it. The burden of the Treasury atthat time was very great. The whole financial system was inchaos; every part of it required reform; the utmost experience,tact, and skill could not make the machine work smoothly. Noone knew how well McCulloch did it until his successor took it incharge, and tried to correct his methods. Adams did not knowenough to appreciate McCulloch's technical skill, but he wasstruck at his open and generous treatment of young men. Of allrare qualities, this was, in Adams's experience, the rarest. As arule, officials dread interference. The strongest often resent itmost. Any official who admits equality in discussion of his officialcourse, feels it to be an act of virtue; after a few months or yearshe tires of the effort. Every friend in power is a friend lost. Thisrule is so nearly absolute that it may be taken in practice as ad-mitting no exception. Apparent exceptions exist, and McCullochwas one of them.McCulloch had been spared the gluttonous selfishness and in-fantile jealousy which are the commoner results of early politicaleducation. He had neither past nor future, and could afford tobe careless of his company. Adams found him surrounded by all theactive and intelligent young men in the country. Full of faith,greedy for work, eager for reform, energetic, confident, capable,quick of study, charmed with a fight, equally ready to defend orattack, they were unselfish, and even — as young men went —honest. They came mostly from the army, with the spirit of thevolunteers. Frank Walker, Frank Barlow, Frank Bartlett weretypes of the generation. Most of the press, and much of thepublic, especially in the West, shared their ideas. No one deniedthe need for reform. The whole government, from top to bottom,was rotten with the senility of what was antiquated and the in-stability of what was improvised. The currency was only oneThe Press249example; the tariff was another; but the whole fabric requiredreconstruction as much as in 1789, for the Constitution had be-come as antiquated as the Confederation. Sooner or later a shockmust come, the more dangerous the longer postponed. The CivilWar had made a new system in fact; the country would have toreorganize the machinery in practice and theory.One might discuss indefinitely the question which branch ofgovernment needed reform most urgently; all needed it enough,but no one denied that the finances were a scandal, and a constant,universal nuisance. The tariff was worse, though more interestsupheld it. McCulloch had the singular merit of facing reform withlarge good-nature and willing sympathy — outside of parties,jobs, bargains, corporations or intrigues — which Adams neverwas to meet again.Chaos often breeds life, when order breeds habit. The CivilWar had bred life. The army bred courage. Young men of thevolunteer type were not always docile under control, but theywere handy in a fight. Adams was greatly pleased to be admittedas one of them. He found himself much at home with them —more at home than he ever had been before, or was ever to beagain — in the atmosphere of the Treasury. He had no strongparty passion, and he felt as though he and his friends owned thisadministration, which, in its dying days, had neither friends norfuture except in them.These were not the only allies; the whole government in all itsbranches was alive with them. Just at that moment the SupremeCourt was about to take up the Legal Tender cases where JudgeCurtis had been employed to argue against the constitutionalpower of the Government to make an artificial standard of valuein time of peace. Evarts was anxious to fix on a line of argumentthat should have a chance of standing up against that of JudgeCurtis, and was puzzled to do it. He did not know which foot toput forward. About to deal with Judge Curtis, the last of thestrong jurists of Marshall's school, he could risk no chances. In250The Education of Henry Adamsdoubt, the quickest way to clear one's mind is to discuss, andEvarts deliberately forced discussion. Day after day, driving,dining, walking he provoked Adams to dispute his positions. Heneeded an anvil, he said, to hammer his ideas on.Adams was flattered at being an anvil, which is, after all, moresolid than the hammer; and he did not feel called on to treat Mr.Evarts's arguments with more respect than Mr. Evarts himselfexpressed for them; so he contradicted with freedom. Like mostyoung men, he was much of a doctrinaire, and the question was,in any event, rather historical or political than legal. He couldeasily maintain, by way of argument, that the required power hadnever been given, and that no sound constitutional reason couldpossibly exist for authorizing the Government to overthrow thestandard of value without necessity, in time of peace. The dis-pute itself had not much value for him, even as education, but itled to his seeking light from the Chief Justice himself. Followingup the subject for his letters to the Nation and his articles in theNorth American Review, Adams grew to be intimate with the ChiefJustice, who, as one of the oldest and strongest leaders of the FreeSoil Party, had claims to his personal regard; for the old FreeSoilers were becoming few. Like all strong-willed and self-assert-ing men, Mr. Chase had the faults of his qualities. He was nevereasy to drive in harness, or light in hand. He saw vividly whatwas wrong, and did not always allow for what was relatively right.He loved power as though he were still a Senator. His positiontowards Legal Tender was awkward. As Secretary of the Treas-ury he had been its author; as Chief Justice he became its enemy.Legal Tender caused no great pleasure or pain in the sum of lifeto a newspaper correspondent, but it served as a subject for let-ters, and the Chief Justice was very willing to win an ally in thepress who would tell his story as he wished it to be read. Theintimacy in Mr. Chase's house grew rapidly, and the alliance wasno small help to the comforts of a struggling newspaper adven-turer in Washington. No matter what one might think of hisThe Press251politics or temper, Mr. Chase was a dramatic figure, of highsenatorial rank, if also of certain senatorial faults; a valuableally.As was sure, sooner or later, to happen, Adams one day metCharles Sumner on the street, and instantly stopped to greet him.As though eight years of broken ties were the natural course offriendship, Sumner at once, after an exclamation of surprise,dropped back into the relation of hero to the school boy. Adamsenjoyed accepting it. He was then thirty years old and Sumnerwas fifty-seven; he had seen more of the world than Sumnerever dreamed of, and he felt a sort of amused curiosity to betreated once more as a child. At best, the renewal of broken rela-tions is a nervous matter, and in this case it bristled with thorns,for Sumner's quarrel with Mr. Adams had not been the mostdelicate of his ruptured relations, and he was liable to be sensitivein many ways that even Bostonians could hardly keep in con-stant mind; yet it interested and fascinated Henry Adams as anew study of political humanity. The younger man knew thatthe meeting would have to come, and was ready for it, if only asa newspaper need; but to Sumner it came as a surprise and a dis-agreeable one, as Adams conceived. He learned something —a piece of practical education worth the effort — by watchingSumner's behavior. He could see that many thoughts — mostlyunpleasant — were passing through his mind, since he made noinquiry about any of Adams's family, or allusion to any of hisfriends or his residence abroad. He talked only of the present.To him, Adams in Washington should have seemed more or lessof a critic, perhaps a spy, certainly an intriguer or adventurerlike scores of others; a politician without party; a writer withoutprinciples; an office-seeker certain to beg for support. All thiswas, for his purposes, true. Adams could do him no good, andwould be likely to do him all the harm in his power. Adams ac-cepted it all; expected to be kept at arm's length; admitted thatthe reasons were just. He was the more surprised to see that252The Education of Henry AdamsSumner invited a renewal of old relations. He found himselftreated almost confidentially. Not only was he asked to makea fourth at Sumner's pleasant little dinners in the house on LaFayette Square, but he found himself admitted to the Senator'sstudy and informed of his views, policy and purposes, which weresometimes even more astounding than his curious gaps or lapsesof omniscience.On the whole, the relation was the queerest that Henry Adamsever kept up. He liked and admired Sumner, but thought hismind a pathological study. At times he inclined to think thatSumner felt his solitude, and, in the political wilderness, cravededucated society; but this hardly told the whole story. Sumner'smind had reached the calm of water which receives and reflectsimages without absorbing them; it contained nothing but itself.The images from without, the objects mechanically perceivedby the senses, existed by courtesy until the mental surface wasruffled, but never became part of the thought. Henry Adamsroused no emotion; if he had roused a disagreeable one, he wouldhave ceased to exist. The mind would have mechanically re-jected, as it had mechanically admitted him. Not that Sumnerwas more aggressively egoistic than other Senators — Conkling,for instance — but that with him the disease had affected thewhole mind; it was chronic and absolute; while, with other Sena-tors for the most part, it was still acute.Perhaps for this very reason, Sumner was the more valuableacquaintance for a newspaper-man. Adams found him most use-ful; perhaps quite the most useful of all these great authori-ties who were the stock-in-trade of the newspaper business; theaccumulated capital of a Silurian age. A few months or yearsmore, and they were gone. In 1868, they were like the town it-self, changing but not changed. La Fayette Square was society.Within a few hundred yards of Mr. Clark Mills's nursery mon-ument to the equestrian seat of Andrew Jackson, one foundall one's acquaintance as well as hotels, banks, markets andThe Press253national government. Beyond the Square the country began. Norich or fashionable stranger had yet discovered the town. Noliterary or scientific man, no artist, no gentleman without office orIt was rural, and its societyemployment, had ever lived there.was primitive. Scarcely a person in it had ever known life in agreat city. Mr. Evarts, Mr. Sam Hooper, of Boston, and perhapsone or two of the diplomatists had alone mixed in that sort ofworld. The happy village was innocent of a club. The one-horsetram on F Street to the Capitol was ample for traffic. Everypleasant spring morning at the Pennsylvania Station, society metto bid good-bye to its friends going off on the single express. TheState Department was lodged in an infant asylum far out onFourteenth Street while Mr. Mullett was constructing his archi-tectural infant asylum next the White House. The value of realestate had not increased since 1800, and the pavements were moreimpassable than the mud. All this favored a young man who hadcome to make a name. In four-and-twenty hours he could knoweverybody; in two days everybody knew him.After seven years' arduous and unsuccessful effort to explorethe outskirts of London society, the Washington world offeredan easy and delightful repose. When he looked round him, fromthe safe shelter of Mr. Evarts's roof, on the men he was to workwith — or against — he had to admit that nine-tenths of his ac-quired education was useless, and the other tenth harmful. Hewould have to begin again from the beginning. He must learn totalk to the Western Congressman, and to hide his own antece-dents. The task was amusing. He could see nothing to prevent himfrom enjoying it, with immoral unconcern for all that had gonebefore and for anything that might follow. The lobby offered aspectacle almost picturesque. Few figures on the Paris stage weremore entertaining and dramatic than old Sam Ward, who knewmore of life than all the departments of the Government together,including the Senate and the Smithsonian. Society had not muchto give, but what it had, it gave with an open hand. For the mo-254The Education of Henry Adamsment, politics had ceased to disturb social relations. All partieswere mixed up and jumbled together in a sort of tidal slack-water.The Government resembled Adams himself in the matter of edu-cation. All that had gone before was useless, and some of it wasworse.