CHAPTER IQUINCY (1838-1848)UNDER the shadow of Boston State House, turning itsback on the house of John Hancock, the little passagecalled Hancock Avenue runs, or ran, from BeaconStreet, skirting the State House grounds, to Mount Vernon Street,on the summit of Beacon Hill ; and there, in the third house belowMount Vernon Place, February 16, 1838, a child was born, andchristened later by his uncle, the minister of the First Church afterthe tenets of Boston Unitarianism, as Henry Brooks Adams.Had he been born in Jerusalem under the shadow of the Templeand circumcised in the Synagogue by his uncle the high priest,under the name of Israel Cohen, he would scarcely have beenmore distinctly branded, and not much more heavily handicappedin the races of the coming century, in running for such stakes asthe century was to offer; but, on the other hand, the ordinarytraveller, who does not enter the field of racing, finds advantage inbeing, so to speak, ticketed through life, with the safeguards ofan old, established traffic. Safeguards are often irksome, but some-times convenient, and if one needs them at all, one is apt to needthem badly. A hundred years earlier, such safeguards as his wouldhave secured any young man's success; and although in 1838 theirvalue was not very great compared with what they would havehad in 1738, yet the mere accident of starting a twentieth-centurycareer from a nest of associations so colonial — so troglodytic —as the First Church, the Boston State House, Beacon Hill, JohnHancock and John Adams, Mount Vernon Street and Quincy, all4The Education of Henry Adamscrowding on ten pounds of unconscious babyhood, was so queeras to offer a subject of curious speculation to the baby long afterhe had witnessed the solution. What could become of such achild of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, when he shouldwake up to find himself required to play the game of the twentieth ?Had he been consulted, would he have cared to play the game atall, holding such cards as he held, and suspecting that the gamewas to be one of which neither he nor any one else back to thebeginning of time knew the rules or the risks or the stakes? Hewas not consulted and was not responsible, but had he been takeninto the confidence of his parents, he would certainly have toldthem to change nothing as far as concerned him. He would havebeen astounded by his own luck. Probably no child, born in theyear, held better cards than he. Whether life was an honest gameof chance, or whether the cards were marked and forced, he couldnot refuse to play his excellent hand. He could never make theusual plea of irresponsibility. He accepted the situation as thoughhe had been a party to it, and under the same circumstances woulddo it again, the more readily for knowing the exact values. To hislife as a whole he was a consenting, contracting party and partnerfrom the moment he was born to the moment he died. Only withthat understanding — as a consciously assenting member in fullpartnership with the society of his age — had his education aninterest to himself or to others.As it happened, he never got to the point of playing the gameat all ; he lost himself in the study of it, watching the errors of theplayers; but this is the only interest in the story, which otherwisehas no moral and little incident. A story of education — seventyyears of it — the practical value remains to the end in doubt,like other values about which men have disputed since the birthof Cain and Abel ; but the practical value of the universe has neverbeen stated in dollars. Although every one cannot be a Gargantua-Napoleon-Bismarck and walk off with the great bells of NotreDame, every one must bear his own universe, and most persons areQuincy5moderately interested in learning how their neighbors have man-aged to carry theirs.This problem of education, started in 1838, went on for threeyears, while the baby grew, like other babies, unconsciously, asa vegetable, the outside world working as it never had workedbefore, to get his new universe ready for him. Often in old agehe puzzled over the question whether, on the doctrine of chances,he was at liberty to accept himself or his world as an accident.No such accident had ever happened before in human experience.For him, alone, the old universe was thrown into the ash-heap anda new one created. He and his eighteenth-century, troglodyticBoston were suddenly cut apart — separated forever — in actif not in sentiment, by the opening of the Boston and AlbanyRailroad; the appearance of the first Cunard steamers in the bay;and the telegraphic messages which carried from Baltimore toWashington the news that Henry Clay and James K. Polk werenominated for the Presidency. This was in May, 1844; he wassix years old ; his new world was ready for use, and only fragmentsof the old met his eyes.Of all this that was being done to complicate his education, heknew only the color of yellow. He first found himself sitting on ayellow kitchen floor in strong sunlight. He was three years oldwhen he took this earliest step in education; a lesson of color.The second followed soon; a lesson of taste. On December 3,1 841, he developed scarlet fever. For several days he was as goodas dead, reviving only under the careful nursing of his family.When he began to recover strength, about January I, 1842, hishunger must have been stronger than any other pleasure or pain,for while in after life he retained not the faintest recollection ofhis illness, he remembered quite clearly his aunt entering the sick-room bearing in her hand a saucer with a baked apple.The order of impressions retained by memory might naturallybe that of color and taste, although one would rather suppose thatthe sense of pain would be first to educate.In fact, the third6The Education of Henry Adamsrecollection of the child was that of discomfort. The moment hecould be removed, he was bundled up in blankets and carried fromthe little house in Hancock Avenue to a larger one which his parentswere to occupy for the rest of their lives in the neighboring MountVernon Street. The season was midwinter, January 10, 1842, andhe never forgot his acute distress for want of air under his blankets,or the noises of moving furniture.As a means of variation from a normal type, sickness in child-hood ought to have a certain value not to be classed under anyfitness or unfitness of natural selection; and especially scarletfever affected boys seriously, both physically and in character,though they might through life puzzle themselves to decidewhether it had fitted or unfitted them for success; but this feverof Henry Adams took greater and greater importance in his eyes,from the point of view of education, the longer he lived. At first,the effect was physical. He fell behind his brothers two or threeinches in height, and proportionally in bone and weight.Hischaracter and processes of mind seemed to share in this fining-down process of scale. He was not good in a fight, and his nerveswere more delicate than boys' nerves ought to be. He exagger-ated these weaknesses as he grew older. The habit of doubt; ofdistrusting his own judgment and of totally rejecting the judgmentof the world; the tendency to regard every question as open; thehesitation to act except as a choice of evils; the shirking of re-sponsibility; the love of line, form, quality; the horror of ennui;the passion for companionship and the antipathy to society —all these are well-known qualities of New England character inno way peculiar to individuals but in this instance they seemedto be stimulated by the fever, and Henry Adams could nevermake up his mind whether, on the whole, the change of characterwas morbid or healthy, good or bad for his purpose. His brotherswere the type; he was the variation.As far as the boy knew, the sickness did not affect him at all,and he grew up in excellent health, bodily and mental, takingQuincy7life as it was given; accepting its local standards without a diffi-culty, and enjoying much of it as keenly as any other boy of hisage. He seemed to himself quite normal, and his companionsseemed always to think him so. Whatever was peculiar abouthim was education, not character, and came to him, directly andindirectly, as the result of that eighteenth-century inheritancewhich he took with his name.The atmosphere of education in which he lived was colonial,revolutionary, almost Cromwellian, as though he were steeped,from his greatest grandmother's birth, in the odor of politicalcrime. Resistance to something was the law of New England na-ture; the boy looked out on the world with the instinct of resist-ance; for numberless generations his predecessors had viewed theworld chiefly as a thing to be reformed, filled with evil forces tobe abolished, and they saw no reason to suppose that they hadwholly succeeded in the abolition; the duty was unchanged. Thatduty implied not only resistance to evil, but hatred of it. Boysnaturally look on all force as an enemy, and generally find it so, butthe New Englander, whether boy or man, in his long struggle witha stingy or hostile universe, had learned also to love the pleasureof hating; his joys were few.Politics, as a practice, whatever its professions, had alwaysbeen the systematic organization of hatreds, and Massachusettspolitics had been as harsh as the climate. The chief charm ofNew England was harshness of contrasts and extremes of sensi-bility — a cold that froze the blood, and a heat that boiled it— so that the pleasure of hating — one's self if no better victimoffered — was not its rarest amusement; but the charm was atrue and natural child of the soil, not a cultivated weed of theancients. The violence of the contrast was real and made thestrongest motive of education. The double exterior nature gavelife its relative values. Winter and summer, cold and heat, townand country, force and freedom, marked two modes of life andthought, balanced like lobes of the brain. Town was winter8The Education of Henry Adamsschool, rule, discipline;straight, gloomy streets,confinement,piled with six feet of snow in the middle; frosts that made thesnow sing under wheels or runners; thaws when the streets be-came dangerous to cross; society of uncles, aunts, and cousinswho expected children to behave themselves, and who were notalways gratified; above all else, winter represented the desire toescape and go free. Town was restraint, law, unity. Country,only seven miles away, was liberty, diversity, outlawry, the end-less delight of mere sense impressions given by nature for no-thing, and breathed by boys without knowing it.Boys are wild animals, rich in the treasures of sense, but theNew England boy had a wider range of emotions than boys ofmore equable climates. He felt his nature crudely, as it wasmeant. To the boy Henry Adams, summer was drunken. Amongsenses, smell was the strongest — smell of hot pine-woods andsweet-fern in the scorching summer noon; of new-mown hay; ofploughed earth; of box hedges; of peaches, lilacs, syringas; ofstables, barns, cow-yards; of salt water and low tide on themarshes; nothing came amiss. Next to smell came taste, and thechildren knew the taste of everything they saw or touched, frompennyroyal and flagroot to the shell of a pignut and the lettersof a spelling-book — the taste of A-B, AB, suddenly revived onLight, line, and colorthe boy's tongue sixty years afterwards.as sensual pleasures, came later and were as crude as the rest.The New England light is glare, and the atmosphere harshenscolor. The boy was a full man before he ever knew what wasmeant by atmosphere; his idea of pleasure in light was the blazeof a New England sun. His idea of color was a peony, with thedew of early morning on its petals. The intense blue of the sea,as he saw it a mile or two away, from the Quincy hills; the cumuliin a June afternoon sky; the strong reds and greens and purplesof colored prints and children's picture-books, as the Americancolors then ran; these were ideals. The opposites or antipathies,were the cold grays of November evenings, and the thick, muddyQuincy9thaws of Boston winter. With such standards, the Bostoniancould not but develop a double nature. Life was a double thing.After a January blizzard, the boy who could look with pleasureinto the violent snow-glare of the cold white sunshine, with itsintense light and shade, scarcely knew what was meant by tone.He could reach it only by education.Winter and summer, then, were two hostile lives, and bred twoseparate natures. Winter was always the effort to live; summer wastropical license. Whether the children rolledin the grass, orwaded in the brook, or swam in the salt ocean, or sailed in thebay, or fished for smelts in the creeks, or netted minnows in thesalt-marshes, or took to the pine-woods and the granite quarries,or chased muskrats and hunted snapping-turtles in the swamps,or mushrooms or nuts on the autumn hills, summer and countrywere always sensual living, while winter was always compulsorylearning. Summer was the multiplicity of nature; winter wasschool.The bearing of the two seasons on the education of HenryAdams was no fancy; it was the most decisive force he ever knew;it ran though life, and made the division between its perplexing,warring, irreconcilable problems, irreducible opposites, with grow-ing emphasis to the last year of study. From earliest childhood theboy was accustomed to feel that, for him, life was double. Winterand summer, town and country, law and liberty, were hostile,and the man who pretended they were not, was in his eyes aschoolmaster — that is, a man employed to tell lies to little boys.Though Quincy was but two hours' walk from Beacon Hill, itbelonged in a different world. For two hundred years, everyAdams, from father to son, had lived within sight of State Street,and sometimes had lived in it, yet none had ever taken kindly tothe town, or been taken kindly by it. The boy inherited hisdouble nature. He knew as yet nothing about his great-grand-father, who had died a dozen years before his own birth : he tookfor granted that any great-grandfather of his must have alwaysioThe Education of Henry Adamsbeen good, and his enemies wicked; but he divined his great-grand-father's character from his own. Never for a moment did he con-nect the two ideas of Boston and John Adams; they were separateand antagonistic; the idea of John Adams went with Quincy. Heknew his grandfather John Quincy Adams only as an old man ofseventy-five or eighty who was friendly and gentle with him, butexcept that he heard his grandfather always called "the Presi-dent," and his grandmother "the Madam," he had no reason tosuppose that his Adams grandfather differed in character from hisBrooks grandfather who was equally kind and benevolent. Heliked the Adams side best, but for no other reason than that itreminded him of the country, the summer, and the absence of re-straint. Yet he felt also that Quincy was in a way inferior to Boston,and that socially Boston looked down on Quincy. The reason wasclear enough even to a five-year old child. Quincy had no BostonLittle enough style had either; a simpler manner of lifestyle.and thought could hardly exist, short of cave-dwelling. Theflint-and-steel with which his grandfather Adams used to lighthis own fires in the early morning was still on the mantelpiece ofhis study. The idea of a livery or even a dress for servants, orof an evening toilette, was next to blasphemy. Bathrooms, water-supplies, lighting, heating, and the whole array of domestic com-forts, were unknown at Quincy. Boston had already a bathroom,a water-supply, a furnace, and gas. The superiority of Bostonwas evident, but a child liked it no better for that.The magnificence of his grandfather Brooks's house in PearlStreet or South Street has long ago disappeared, but perhaps hiscountry house at Medford may still remain to show what impressedthe mind of a boy in 1845 with the idea of city splendor. The Presi-dent's place at Quincy was the larger and older and far the moreinteresting of the two; but a boy felt at once its inferiority infashion. It showed plainly enough its want of wealth. It smackedof colonial age, but not of Boston style or plush curtains. To theend of his life he never quite overcame the prejudice thus drawnQUINCYI Iin with his childish breath. He never could compel himself tocare for nineteenth-century style. He was never able to adoptit, any more than his father or grandfather or great-grandfatherhad done. Not that he felt it as particularly hostile, for he recon-ciled himself to much that was worse; but because, for some remotereason, he was born an eighteenth-century child. The old houseat Quincy was eighteenth century. What style it had was in itsQueen Anne mahogany panels and its Louis Seize chairs and sofas.The panels belonged to an old colonial Vassall who built the house;the furniture had been brought back from Paris in 1789 or 1801or 1 8 17, along with porcelain and books and much else of old diplo-matic remnants ; and neither of the two eighteenth-century styles— neither English Queen Anne nor French Louis Seize — was com-fortable for a boy, or for any one else. The dark mahogany hadbeen painted white to suit daily life in winter gloom. Nothingseemed to favor, for a child's objects, the older forms. On thecontrary, most boys, as well as grown-up people, preferred thenew, with good reason, and the child felt himself distinctly at adisadvantage for the taste.Nor had personal preference any share in his bias. The Brooksgrandfather was as amiable and as sympathetic as the Adamsgrandfather. Both were born in 1767, and both died in 1848.Both were kind to children, and both belonged rather to theeighteenth than to the nineteenth centuries. The child knew nodifference between them except that one was associated withwinter and the other with summer; one with Boston, the otherwith Quincy. Even with Medford, the association was hardlyeasier. Once as a very young boy he was taken to pass a few dayswith his grandfather Brooks under charge of his aunt, but becameso violently homesick that within twenty-four hours he was broughtback in disgrace. Yet he could not remember ever being seriouslyhomesick again.The attachment to Quincy was not altogether sentimental orwholly sympathetic. Quincy was not a bed of thornless roses.12The Education of Henry AdamsEven there the curse of Cain set its mark. There as elsewherea cruel universe combined to crush a child. As though three orfour vigorous brothers and sisters, with the best will, were notenough to crush any child, every one else conspired towards aneducation which he hated. From cradle to grave this problem ofrunning order through chaos, direction through space, disciplinethrough freedom, unity through multiplicity, has always been,and must always be, the task of education, as it is the moral ofreligion, philosophy, science, art, politics, and economy; but aboy's will is his life, and he dies when it is broken, as the colt diesin harness, taking a new nature in becoming tame. Rarely hasthe boy felt kindly towards his tamers. Between him and his mas-ter has always been war. Henry Adams never knew a boy of hisgeneration to like a master, and the task of remaining on friendlyterms with one's own family, in such a relation, was never easy.All the more singular it seemed afterwards to him that his firstserious contact with the President should have been a struggle ofwill, in which the old man almost necessarily defeated the boy,but instead of leaving, as usual in such defeats, a lifelong sting,left rather an impression of as fair treatment as could be expectedfrom a natural enemy. The boy met seldom with such restraint.He could not have been much more than six years old at the time— seven at the utmost — and his mother had taken him to Quincyfor a long stay with the President during the summer. Whatbecame of the rest of the family he quite forgot; but he distinctlyremembered standing at the house door one summer morning ina passionate outburst of rebellion against going to school. Natur-ally his mother was the immediate victim of his rage; that is whatmothers are for, and boys also; but in this case the boy had hismother at unfair disadvantage, for she was a guest, and had nomeans of enforcing obedience. Henry showed a certain tacticalability by refusing to start, and he met all efforts at compulsionby successful, though too vehement protest. He was in fair wayto win, and was holding his own, with sufficient energy, at theQuincy31bottom of the long staircase which led up to the door of the Presi-dent's library, when the door opened, and the old man slowlycame down. Putting on his hat, he took the boy's hand withouta word, and walked with him, paralyzed by awe, up the road tothe town. After the first moments of consternation at this inter-ference in a domestic dispute, the boy reflected that an old gentle-man close on eighty would never trouble himself to walk near amile on a hot summer morning over a shadeless road to take aboy to school, and that it would be strange if a lad imbued with thepassion of freedom could not find a corner to dodge around, some-where before reaching the school door. Then and always, theboy insisted that this reasoning justified his apparent submission;but the old man did not stop, and the boy saw all his strategicalpoints turned, one after another, until he found himself seatedinside the school, and obviously the centre of curious if not malev-olent criticism. Not till then did the President release his handand depart.The point was that this act, contrary to the inalienable rights ofboys, and nullifying the social compact, ought to have made himdislike his grandfather for life. He could not recall that it hadthis effect even for a moment. With a certain maturity of mind,the child must have recognized that the President, though a toolof tyranny, had done his disreputable work with a certain intelli-gence. He had shown no temper, no irritation, no personal feel-ing, and had made no display of force. Above all, he had held histongue. During their long walk he had said nothing; he haduttered no syllable of revolting cant about the duty of obedienceand the wickedness of resistance to law; he had shown no concernin the matter; hardly even a consciousness of the boy's existence.Probably his mind at that moment was actually troubling itselflittle about his grandson's iniquities, and much about the iniquitiesof President Polk, but the boy could scarcely at that age feel thewhole satisfaction of thinking that President Polk was to be thevicarious victim of his own sins, and he gave his grandfather credit14The Education of Henry Adamsfor intelligent silence. For this forbearance he felt instinctive re-spect. He admitted force as a form of right; he admitted eventemper, under protest; but the seeds of a moral education wouldat that moment have fallen on the stoniest soil in Quincy, whichis, as every one knows, the stoniest glacial and tidal drift knownin any Puritan land.Neither party to this momentary disagreement can have feltrancor, for during these three or four summers the old President'srelations with the boy were friendly and almost intimate. Whetherhis older brothers and sisters were still more favored he failed toremember, but he was himself admitted to a sort of familiaritywhich, when in his turn he had reached old age, rather shockedhim, for it must have sometimes tried the President's patience.He hung about the library; handled the books; deranged the papers;ransacked the drawers; searched the old purses and pocket-booksfor foreign coins; drew the sword-cane; snapped the travelling-pistols; upset everything in the corners, and penetrated thePresident's dressing-closet where a row of tumblers, inverted on theshelf, covered caterpillars which were supposed to become mothsor butterflies, but never did. The Madam bore with fortitude theloss of the tumblers which her husband purloined for these hatch-eries ; but she made protest when he carried off her best cut-glassbowls to plant with acorns or peachstones that he might see theroots grow, but which, she said, he commonly forgot like thecaterpillars.At that time the President rode the hobby of tree-culture, andsome fine old trees should still remain to witness it, unless theyhave been improved off the ground; but his was a restless mind,and although he took his hobbies seriously and would have beenannoyed had his grandchild asked whether he was bored like anEnglish duke, he probably cared more for the processes than forthe results, so that his grandson was saddened by the sight andsmell of peaches and pears, the best of their kind, which he broughtup from the garden to rot on his shelves for seed. With the inher-Quincy51ited virtues of his Puritan ancestors, the little boy Henry con-scientiously brought up to him in his study the finest peacheshe found in the garden, and ate only the less perfect. Naturallyhe ate more by way of compensation, but the act showed that hebore no grudge. As for his grandfather, it is even possible thathe may have felt a certain self-reproach for his temporary role ofschoolmaster — seeing that his own career did not offer proof ofthe worldly advantages of docile obedience — for there still existssomewhere a little volume of critically edited Nursery Rhymeswith the boy's name in full written in the President's tremblinghand on the fly-leaf. Of course there was also the Bible, given toeach child at birth, with the proper inscription in the President'shand on the fly-leaf; while their grandfather Brooks supplied thesilver mugs.So many Bibles and silver mugs had to be supplied, that a newhouse, or cottage, was built to hold them. It was "on the hill,"five minutes' walk above "the old house," with a far view east-ward over Quincy Bay, and northward over Boston.Till histwelfth year, the child passed his summers there, and his pleasuresof childhood mostly centred in it. Of education he had as yetlittle to complain. Country schools were not very serious. Noth-ing stuck to the mind except home impressions, and the sharpestwere those of kindred children; but as influences that warped amind, none compared with the mere effect of the back of thePresident's bald head, as he sat in his pew on Sundays, in line withthat of President Quincy, who, though some ten years younger,seemed to children about the same age. Before railways enteredthe New England town, every parish church showed half-a-dozenof these leading citizens, with gray hair, who sat on the main aislein the best pews, and had sat there, or in some equivalent dignity,since the time of St. Augustine, if not since the glacial epoch. Itwas unusual for boys to sit behind a President grandfather, andto read over his head the tablet in memory of a President great-grandfather, who had "pledged his life, his fortune, and his sacred61The Education of Henry Adamshonor" to secure the independence of his country and so forth;but boys naturally supposed, without much reasoning, that otherboys had the equivalent of President grandfathers, and thatchurches would always go on, with the bald-headed leading citi-zens on the main aisle, and Presidents or their equivalents onthe walls. The Irish gardener once said to the child: "You '11 bethinkin' you'll be President too!" The casuality of the remarkmade so strong an impression on his mind that he never forgot it.He could not remember ever to have thought on the subject; tohim, that there should be a doubt of his being President was anew idea. What had been would continue to be. He doubtedneither about Presidents nor about Churches, and no one sug-gested at that time a doubt whether a system of society whichhad lasted since Adam would outlast one Adams more.The Madam was a little more remote than the President, butmore decorative. She stayed much in her own room with theDutch tiles, looking out on her garden with the box walks, andseemed a fragile creature to a boy who sometimes brought her anote or a message, and took distinct pleasure in looking at herdelicate face under what seemed to him very becoming caps. Heliked her refined figure; her gentle voice and manner; her vagueeffect of not belonging there, but to Washington or to Europe,like her furniture, and writing-desk with little glass doors aboveand little eighteenth-century volumes in old binding, labelled"Peregrine Pickle" or "Tom Jones" or "Hannah More." Tryas she might, the Madam could never be Bostonian, and it washer cross in life, but to the boy it was her charm. Even at thatage, he felt drawn to it. The Madam's life had been in truth farfrom Boston. She was born in London in 1775, daughter of JoshuaJohnson, an American merchant, brother of Governor ThomasJohnson of Maryland; and Catherine Nuth, of an English familyin London. Driven from England by the Revolutionary War,Joshua Johnson took his family to Nantes, where they remainedtill the peace. The girl Louisa Catherine was nearly ten yearsQuincy71old when brought back to London, and her sense of nationalitymust have been confused; but the influence of the Johnsons andthe services of Joshua obtained for him from President Washing-ton the appointment of Consul in London on the organization ofthe Government in 1790. In 1794 President Washington appointedJohn Quincy Adams Minister to The Hague. He was twenty-seven years old when he returned to London, and found the Con-sul's house a very agreeable haunt. Louisa was then twenty.At that time, and long afterwards, the Consul's house, far morethan the Minister's, was the centre of contact for travelling Amer-icans, either official or other. The Legation was a shifting point,between 1785 and 1815; but the Consulate, far down in the City,near the Tower, was convenient and inviting; so inviting that itproved fatal to young Adams. Louisa was charming, like a Rom-ney portrait, but among her many charms that of being a NewEngland woman was not one. The defect was serious. Her futuremother-in-law, Abigail, a famous New England woman whoseauthority over her turbulent husband, the second President, washardly so great as that which she exercised over her son, the sixthto be, was troubled by the fear that Louisa might not be made ofstuff stern enough, or brought up in conditions severe enough,to suit a New England climate, or to make an efficient wife forher paragon son, and Abigail was right on that point, as on mostothers where sound judgment was involved; but sound judg-ment is sometimes a source of weakness rather than of force, andJohn Quincy already had reason to think that his mother heldsound judgments on the subject of daughters-in-law which humannature, since the fall of Eve, made Adams helpless to realize.Being three thousand miles away from his mother, and equallyfar in love, he married Louisa in London, July 26, 1797, and tookher to Berlin to be the head of the United States Legation.During three or four exciting years, the young bride lived inBerlin; whether she was happy or not, whether she was contentor not, whether she was socially successful or not, her descend-81The Education of Henry Adamsants did not surely know; but in any case she could by no chancehave become educated there for a life in Quincy or Boston. In1801 the overthrow of the Federalist Party drove her and herhusband to America, and she became at last a member of theQuincy household, but by that time her children needed all herattention, and she remained there with occasional winters inBoston and Washington, till 1809. Her husband was made Sen-ator in 1803, and in 1809 was appointed Minister to Russia. Shewent with him to St. Petersburg, taking her baby, Charles Francis,born in 1807; but broken-hearted at having to leave her two olderboys behind. The life at St. Petersburg was hardly gay for her;they were far too poor to shine in that extravagant society; but shesurvived it, though her little girl baby did not, and in the winterof 1 8 14-15, alone with the boy of seven years old, crossed Europefrom St. Petersburg to Paris, in her travelling-carriage, passingthrough the armies, and reaching Paris in the Cent Jours afterNapoleon's return from Elba. Her husband next went to Englandas Minister, and she was for two years at the Court of the Regent.In 1 8 17 her husband came home to be Secretary of State, and shelived for eight years in F Street, doing her work of entertainer forPresident Monroe's administration. Next she lived four miser-able years in the White House. When that chapter was closed in1829, she had earned the right to be tired and delicate, but shestill had fifteen years to serve as wife of a Member of the House,after her husband went back to Congress in 1833. Then it wasthat the little Henry, her grandson, first remembered her, from1843 to 1848, sitting in her panelled room, at breakfast, with herheavy silver teapot and sugar-bowl and cream-jug, which stillexist somewhere as an heirloom of the modern safety-vault. Bythat time she was seventy years old or more, and thoroughly wearyof being beaten about a stormy world. To the boy she seemedsingularly peaceful, a vision of silver gray, presiding over her oldPresident and her Queen Anne mahogany; an exotic, like herSevres china; an object of deference to every one, and of greatQuincyi gaffection to her son Charles ; but hardly more Bostonian than shehad been fifty years before, on her wedding-day, in the shadowof the Tower of London.Such a figure was even less fitted than that of her old husband,the President, to impress on a boy's mind, the standards of thecoming century. She was Louis Seize, like the furniture. Theboy knew nothing of her interior life, which had been, as the ven-erable Abigail, long since at peace, foresaw, one of severe stress andlittle pure satisfaction. He never dreamed that from her mightcome some of those doubts and self-questionings, those hesitations,those rebellions against law and discipline, which marked morethan one of her descendants; but he might even then have feltsome vague instinctive suspicion that he was to inherit from herthe seeds of the primal sin, the fall from grace, the curse of Abel,that he was not of pure New England stock, but half exotic. Asa child of Quincy he was not a true Bostonian, but even as achild of Quincy he inherited a quarter taint of Maryland blood.Charles Francis, half Marylander by birth, had hardly seen Bos-ton till he was ten years old, when his parents left him there atschool in 1817, and he never forgot the experience. He was to benearly as old as his mother had been in 1845, before he quite ac-cepted Boston, or Boston quite accepted him.A boy who began his education in these surroundings, withphysical strength inferior to that of his brothers, and with a certaindelicacy of mind and bone, ought rightly to have felt at home inthe eighteenth century and should, in proper self-respect, haverebelled against the standards of the nineteenth. The atmos-phere of his first ten years must have been very like that of hisgrandfather at the same age, from 1767 till 1776, barring the battleof Bunker Hill, and even as late as 1846, the battle of Bunker Hillremained actual. The tone of Boston society was colonial. Thetrue Bostonian always knelt in self-abasement before the majestyof English standards; far from concealing it as a weakness, hewas proud of it as his strength. The eighteenth century ruled20The Education of Henry Adamssociety long after 1850. Perhaps the boy began to shake it offrather earlier than most of his mates.Indeed this prehistoric stage of education ended rather abruptlywith his tenth year. One winter morning he was conscious of acertain confusion in the house in Mount Vernon Street, andgathered, from such words as he could catch, that the President,who happened to be then staying there, on his way to Washing-ton, had fallen and hurt himself. Then he heard the word paralysis.After that day he came to associate the word with the figure ofhis grandfather, in a tall-backed, invalid armchair, on one sideof the spare bedroom, fireplace, and one of his old friends, Dr.Parkman or P. P. F. Degrand, on the other side, both dozing.The end of this first, or ancestral and Revolutionary, chaptercame on February 21, 1848 — and the month of February broughtlife and death as a family habit — when the eighteenth century,as an actual and living companion, vanished. If the scene on thefloor of the House, when the old President fell, struck the stillsimple-minded American public with a sensation unusually drama-tic, its effect on a ten-year-old boy, whose boy-life was fading awaywith the life of his grandfather, could not be slight. One had topay for Revolutionary patriots; grandfathers and grandmothers;Presidents; diplomats; Queen Anne mahogany and Louis Seizechairs, as well as for Stuart portraits. Such things warp young life.Americans commonly believed that they ruined it, and perhaps thepractical common-sense of the American mind judged right.Many a boy might be ruined by much less than the emotions ofthe funeral service in the Quincy church, with its surroundings ofnational respect and family pride. By another dramatic chanceit happened that the clergyman of the parish, Dr. Lunt, was anunusual pulpit orator, the ideal of a somewhat austere intellectualtype, such as the school of Buckminster and Channing inheritedfrom the old Congregational clergy. His extraordinarily refinedappearance, his dignity of manner, his deeply cadenced voice, hisremarkable English and his fine appreciation, gave to the funeralQuiNCY2 Iservice a character that left an overwhelming impression on theboy's mind. He was to see many great functions — funerals andfestivals — in after-life, till his only thought was to see no more,but he never again witnessed anything nearly so impressive tohim as the last services at Quincy over the body of one Presidentand the ashes of another.The effect of the Quincy service was deepened by the officialceremony which afterwards took place in Faneuil Hall, when theboy was taken to hear his uncle, Edward Everett, deliver a Eulogy.Like all Mr. Everett's orations, it was an admirable piece of ora-tory, such as only an admirable orator and scholar could create;too good for a ten-year-old boy to appreciate at its value; but al-ready the boy knew that the dead President could not be in it, andhad even learned why he would have been out of place there; forknowledge was beginning to come fast. The shadow of the War of1 8 12 still hung over State Street; the shadow of the Civil War tocome had already begun to darken Faneuil Hall. No rhetoriccould have reconciled Mr. Everett's audience to his subject. Howcould he say there, to an assemblage of Bostonians in the heart ofmercantile Boston, that the only distinctive mark of all theAdamses, since old Sam Adams's father a hundred and fifty yearsbefore, had been their inherited quarrel with State Street, whichhad again and again broken out into riot, bloodshed, personal feuds,foreign and civil war, wholesale banishments and confiscations,until the history of Florence was hardly more turbulent than that ofBoston? How could he whisper the word Hartford Conventionbefore the men who had made it? What would have been said hadhe suggested the chance of Secession and Civil War?Thus already, at ten years old, the boy found himself standingface to face with a dilemma that might have puzzled an earlyChristian. What was he? — where was he going? Even then he feltthat something was wrong, but he concluded that it must be Bos-ton. Quincy had always been right, for Quincy represented amoral principle — the principle of resistance to Boston. His22The Education of Henry AdamsAdams ancestors must have been right, since they were alwayshostile to State Street. If State Street was wrong, Quincy must beright! Turn the dilemma as he pleased, he still came back on theeighteenth century and the law of Resistance; of Truth; of Duty,and of Freedom. He was a ten-year-old priest and politician. Hecould under no circumstances have guessed what the next fiftyyears had in store, and no one could teach him; but sometimes, inhis old age, he wondered — and could never decide — whetherthe most clear and certain knowledge would have helped him.Supposing he had seen a New York stock-list of 1900, and hadstudied the statistics of railways, telegraphs, coal, and steel —would he have quitted his eighteenth-century, his ancestral pre-judices, his abstract ideals, his semi-clerical training, and the rest,in order to perform an expiatory pilgrimage to State Street, andask for the fatted calf of his grandfather Brooks and a clerkshipin the Suffolk Bank?Sixty years afterwards he was still unable to make up his mind.Each course had its advantages, but the material advantages,looking back, seemed to lie wholly in State Street.