CHAPTER XVDARWINISM (1867-1868)POLITICS, diplomacy, law, art, and history had openedno outlet for future energy or effort, but a man must dosomething, even in Portland Place, when winter is darkand winter evenings are exceedingly long. At that moment Dar-win was convulsing society. The geological champion of Darwinwas Sir Charles Lyell, and the Lyells were intimate at the Lega-tion. Sir Charles constantly said of Darwin, what Palgrave said ofTennyson, that the first time he came to town, Adams should beasked to meet him, but neither of them ever came to town, orever cared to meet a young American, and one could not go tothem because they were known to dislike intrusion. The onlyAmericans who were not allowed to intrude were the half-dozenin the Legation. Adams was content to read Darwin, especiallyhis "Origin of Species" and his "Voyage of the Beagle." He wasa Darwinist before the letter; a predestined follower of the tide;but he was hardly trained to follow Darwin's evidences. Frag-mentary the British mind might be, but in those days it wasdoing a great deal of work in a very un-English way, building upso many and such vast theories on such narrow foundations asto shock the conservative, and delight the frivolous. The atomictheory; the correlation and conservation of energy; the mechan-ical theory of the universe; the kinetic theory of gases, and Dar-win's Law of Natural Selection, were examples of what a youngman had to take on trust. Neither he nor any one else knew enoughto verify them; in his ignorance of mathematics, he was partic-ularly helpless ; but this never stood in his way. The ideas werenew and seemed to lead somewhere — to some great general-ization which would finish one's clamor to be educated. That abeginner should understand them all, or believe them all, no oneDarwinism225could expect, still less exact. Henry Adams was Darwinist be-cause it was easier than not, for his ignorance exceeded belief,and one must know something in order to contradict even suchtriflers as Tyndall and Huxley.By rights, he should have been also a Marxist, but some narrowtrait of the New England nature seemed to blight socialism, andhe tried in vain to make himself a convert. He did the next bestthing; he became a Comteist, within the limits of evolution. Hewas ready to become anything but quiet. As though the worldhad not been enough upset in his time, he was eager to see it up-set more. He had his wish, but he lost his hold on the results bytrying to understand them.He never tried to understand Darwin; but he still fancied hemight get the best part of Darwinism from the easier study ofgeology; a science which suited idle minds as well as though itwere history. Every curate in England dabbled in geology andhunted for vestiges of Creation. Darwin hunted only for vestigesof Natural Selection, and Adams followed him, although he carednothing about Selection, unless perhaps for the indirect amuse-ment of upsetting curates. He felt, like nine men in ten, an instinc-tive belief in Evolution, but he felt no more concern in Naturalthan in unnatural Selection, though he seized with greediness thenew volume on the "Antiquity of Man" which Sir Charles Lyellpublished in 1863 in order to support Darwin by wrecking theGarden of Eden. Sir Charles next brought out, in 1866, a new edi-tion of his "Principles," then the highest text-book of geology;but here the Darwinian doctrine grew in stature. Natural Selectionled back to Natural Evolution, and at last to Natural Uniformity.This was a vast stride. Unbroken Evolution under uniform condi-tions pleased every one — except curates and bishops; it wasthe very best substitute for religion; a safe, conservative, practi-cal, thoroughly Common-Law deity. Such a working system forthe universe suited a young man who had just helped to wastefive or ten thousand million dollars and a million lives, more or226The Education of Henry Adamsless, to enforce unity and uniformity on people who objected toit; the idea was only too seductive in its perfection; it had thecharm of art. Unity and Uniformity were the whole motive ofphilosophy, and if Darwin, like a true Englishman, preferred toback into it — to reach God a posteriori — rather than startfrom it, like Spinoza, the difference of method taught only themoral that the best way of reaching unity was to unite. Any roadwas good that arrived.Life depended on it. One had been, from the first, draggedhither and thither like a French poodle on a string, followingalways the strongest pull, between one form of unity or central-ization and another. The proof that one had acted wisely becauseof obeying the primordial habit of nature flattered one's self-Steady, uniform, unbroken evolution from lower toesteem.higher seemed easy. So, one day when Sir Charles came to theLegation to inquire about getting his "Principles" properlynoticed in America, young Adams found nothing simpler thanto suggest that he could do it himself if Sir Charles would tellhim what to say. Youth risks such encounters with the universebefore one succumbs to it, yet even he was surprised at Sir Charles'sready assent, and still more so at finding himself, after half anhour's conversation, sitting down to clear the minds of Americangeologists about the principles of their profession. This was get-ting on fast; Arthur Pendennis had never gone so far.The geologists were a hardy class, not likely to be much hurtby Adams's learning, nor did he throw away much concern ontheir account. He undertook the task chiefly to educate, notthem, but himself, and if Sir Isaac Newton had, like Sir CharlesLyell, asked him to explain for Americans his last edition of the"Principia," Adams would have jumped at the chance. Unfor-tunately the mere reading such works for amusement is quite adifferent matter from studying them for criticism.Ignorancemust always begin at the beginning. Adams must inevitablyhave begun by asking Sir Isaac for an intelligible reason why theDarwinism227apple fell to the ground. He did not know enough to be satisfiedwith the fact. The Law of Gravitation was so-and-so, but whatwas Gravitation? and he would have been thrown quite offhis base if Sir Isaac had answered that he did not know.At the very outset Adams struck on Sir Charles's GlacialTheory or theories. He was ignorant enough to think that theglacial epoch looked like a chasm between him and a uniformita-rian world. If the glacial period were uniformity, what was catas-trophe ? To him the two or three labored guesses that Sir Charlessuggested or borrowed to explain glaciation were proof of noth-ing, and were quite unsolid as support for so immense a super-structure as geological uniformity. If one were at liberty to beas lax in science as in theology, and to assume unity from thestart, one might better say so, as the Church did, and not inviteattack by appearing weak in evidence. Naturally a young man,altogether ignorant, could not say this to Sir Charles Lyell orSir Isaac Newton; but he was forced to state Sir Charles's views,which he thought weak as hypotheses and worthless as proofs.Sir Charles himself seemed shy of them. Adams hinted his here-sies in vain. At last he resorted to what he thought the bold ex-periment of inserting a sentence in the text, intended to provokecorrection. "The introduction [by Louis Agassiz] of this newgeological agent seemed at first sight inconsistent with Sir Charles'sargument, obliging him to allow that causes had in fact existedon the earth capable of producing more violent geological changesthan would be possible in our own day." The hint produced noeffect. Sir Charles said not a word; he let the paragraph stand; andAdams never knew whether the great Uniformitarian was strictor lax in his uniformitarian creed; but he doubted.Objections fatal to one mind are futile to another, and as faras concerned the article, the matter ended there, although theglacial epoch remained a misty region in the young man's Dar-winism. Had it been the only one, he would not have fretted aboutit; but uniformity often worked queerly and sometimes did not228The Education of Henry Adamswork as Natural Selection at all. Finding himself at a loss for somesingle figure to illustrate the Law of Natural Selection, Adamsasked Sir Charles for the simplest case of uniformity on record.Much to his surprise Sir Charles told him that certain forms,like Terebratula, appeared to be identical from the beginningto the end of geological time. Since this was altogether too muchuniformity and much too little selection, Adams gave up the at-tempt to begin at the beginning, and tried starting at the end —himself. Taking for granted that the vertebrates would serve hispurpose, he asked Sir Charles to introduce him to the first verte-Infinitely to his bewilderment, Sir Charles informed himbrate.that the first vertebrate was a very respectable fish, among theearliest of all fossils, which had lived, and whose bones were stillreposing, under Adams's own favorite Abbey on Wenlock Edge.By this time, in 1867, Adams had learned to know Shropshirefamiliarly, and it was the part of his diplomatic education whichLike Catherine Olney in "Northanger Abbey,"he loved best.he yearned for nothing so keenly as to feel at home in a thirteenth-century Abbey, unless it were to haunt a fifteenth-century Prior'sHouse, and both these joys were his at Wenlock. With companionsor without, he never tired of it. Whether he rode about the Wre-kin, or visited all the historical haunts from Ludlow Castle andStokesay to Boscobel and Uriconium; or followed the Roman roador scratched in the Abbey ruins, all was amusing and carried aflavor of its own like that of the Roman Campagna ; but perhapshe liked best to ramble over the Edge on a summer afternoon andlook across the Marches to the mountains of Wales. The peculiarflavor of the scenery has something to do with absence of evolution;it was better marked in Egypt: it was felt wherever time-sequencesbecame interchangeable. One's instinct abhors time. As one layon the slope of the Edge, looking sleepily through the summer hazetowards Shrewsbury or Cader Idris or Caer Caradoc or Urico-nium, nothing suggested sequence. The Roman road was twin tothe railroad; Uriconium, was well worth Shrewsbury; WenlockDarwinism229and Buildwas were far superior to Bridgnorth. The shepherdsof Caractacus or OfTa, or the monks of Buildwas, had they ap-proached where he lay in the grass, would have taken him only foranother and tamer variety of Welsh thief. They would have seenlittle to surprise them in the modern landscape unless it were thesteam of a distant railway. One might mix up the terms of timeas one liked, or stuff the present anywhere into the past, measuringtime by FalstafTs Shrewsbury clock, without violent sense ofwrong, as one could do it on the Pacific Ocean; but the triumph ofall was to look south along the Edge to the abode of one's earliestancestor and nearest relative, the ganoid fish, whose name, accord-ing to Professor Huxley, was Pteraspis, a cousin of the sturgeon,and whose kingdom, according to Sir Roderick Murchison, wascalled Siluria. Life began and ended there. Behind that horizonlay only the Cambrian, without vertebrates or any other organ-ism except a few shell-fish. On the further verge of the Cambrianrose the crystalline rocks from which every trace of organic exist-ence had been erased.That here, on the Wenlock Edge of time, a young American,seeking only frivolous amusement, should find a legitimate par-entage as modern as though just caught in the Severn below,astonished him as much as though he had found Darwin himself.In the scale of evolution, one vertebrate was as good as another.For anything he, or any one else, knew, nine hundred and ninety-nine parts of evolution out of a thousand lay behind or below thePteraspis. To an American in search of a father, it mattered noth-thing whether the father breathed through lungs, or walked onfins, or on feet. Evolution of mind was altogether another mat-ter and belonged to another science, but whether one traced de-scent from the shark or the wolf was immaterial even in morals.This matter had been discussed for ages without scientific result.La Fontaine and other fabulists maintained that the wolf, evenin morals, stood higher than man; and in view of the late civil war,Adams had doubts of his own on the facts of moral evolution : —230The Education of Henry Adams"Tout bien considere, je te soutiens en somme,Que scelerat pour scelerat,II vaut mieux etre un loup qu'un homme."It might well be! At all events, it did not enter into the problemof Pteraspis, for it was quite certain that no complete proof ofNatural Selection had occurred back to the time of Pteraspis, andthat before Pteraspis was eternal void. No trace of any vertebratehad been found there; only starfish, shell-fish, polyps, or trilobiteswhose kindly descendants he had often bathed with, as a childon the shores of Quincy Bay.That Pteraspis and shark were his cousins, great-uncles, orgrandfathers, in no way troubled him, but that either or both ofthem should be older than evolution itself seemed to him per-plexing; nor could he at all simplify the problem by taking the sud-den back-somersault into Quincy Bay in search of the fascinatingcreature he had called a horseshoe, whose huge dome of shelland sharp spur of tail had so alarmed him as a child. In Siluria,he understood, Sir Roderick Murchison called the horseshoe aLimulus, which helped nothing. Neither in the Limulus nor inthe Terebratula, nor in the Cestracion Philippi, any more than inthe Pteraspis, could one conceive an ancestor, but, if one must, thechoice mattered little. Cousinship had limits but no one knewenough to fix them. When the vertebrate vanished in Siluria, it dis-appeared instantly and forever. Neither vertebra nor scale nor printreappeared, nor any trace of ascent or descent to a lower type.The vertebrate began in the Ludlow shale, as complete as Adamshimself — in some respects more so — at the top of the columnof organic evolution: and geology offered no sort of proof that hehad ever been anything else. Ponder over it as he might, Adamscould see nothing in the theory of Sir Charles but pure inference,precisely like the inference of Paley, that, if one found a watch, oneinferred a maker. He could detect no more evolution in life sincethe Pteraspis than he could detect it in architecture since theAbbey. All he could prove was change. Coal-power alone assertedDarwinism231evolution — of power— and only by violence could be forced toassert selection of type.All this seemed trivial to the true Darwinian, and to Sir Charlesit was mere defect in the geological record.Sir Charles laboredonly to heap up the evidences of evolution; to cumulate them tillthe mass became irresistible. With that purpose, Adams gladlystudied and tried to help Sir Charles, but, behind the lesson ofthe day, he was conscious that, in geology as in theology, he couldprove only Evolution that did not evolve; Uniformity that was notuniform; and Selection that did not select. To other Darwinians— except Darwin — Natural Selection seemed a dogma to beput in the place of the Athanasian creed; it was a form of reli-gious hope; a promise of ultimate perfection. Adams wished nobetter; he warmly sympathized in the object; but when he cameto ask himself what he truly thought, he felt that he had no Faith;that whenever the next new hobby should be brought out, heshould surely drop off from Darwinism like a monkey from aperch; that the idea of one Form, Law, Order, or Sequence hadno more value for him than the idea of none; that what he valuedmost was Motion, and that what attracted his mind was Change.Psychology was to him a new study, and a dark corner of edu-cation. As he lay on Wenlock Edge, with the sheep nibbling thegrass close about him as they or their betters had nibbled thegrass — or whatever there was to nibble — in the Silurian king-dom of Pteraspis, he seemed to have fallen on an evolution farmore wonderful than that of fishes. He did not like it; he couldnot account for it; and he determined to stop it. Never since thedays of his Limulus ancestry had any of his ascendants thoughtthus. Their modes of thought might be many, but their thoughtwas one. Out of his millions of millions of ancestors, back to theCambrian mollusks, every one had probably lived and died inthe illusion of Truths which did not amuse him, and which hadnever changed. Henry Adams was the first in an infinite series todiscover and admit to himself that he really did not care whether232The Education of Henry Adamstruth was, or was not, true. He did not even care that it shouldbe proved true, unless the process were new and amusing. Hewas a Darwinian for fun.From the beginning of history, this attitude had been brandedas criminal — worse than crime — sacrilege! Society punishedit ferociously and justly, in self-defence. Mr. Adams, the father,looked on it as moral weakness; it annoyed him; but it did notannoy him nearly so much as it annoyed his son, who had no needto learn from Hamlet the fatal effect of the pale cast of thought onenterprises great or small. He had no notion of letting the cur-rents of his action be turned awry by this form of conscience. Tohim, the current of his time was to be his current, lead where itmight. He put psychology under lock and key; he insisted on main-taining his absolute standards; on aiming at ultimate Unity. Themania for handling all the sides of every question, looking intoevery window, and opening every door, was, as Bluebeard judi-ciously pointed out to his wives, fatal to their practical usefulnessin society. One could not stop to chase doubts as though theywere rabbits. One had no time to paint and putty the surface ofLaw, even though it were cracked and rotten. For the young menwhose lives were cast in the generation between 1867 and 1900,Law should be Evolution from lower to higher, aggregation of theatom in the mass, concentration of multiplicity in unity, com-pulsion of anarchy in order; and he would force himself to followwherever it led, though he should sacrifice five thousand millionsmore in money, and a million more lives.As the path ultimately led, it sacrificed much more than this;but at the time, he thought the price he named a high one, and hecould not foresee that science and society would desert him inpaying it. He, at least, took his education as a Darwinian in goodfaith. The Church was gone, and Duty was dim, but Will shouldtake its place, founded deeply in interest and law. This was theresult of five or six years in England; a result so British as to bealmost the equivalent of an Oxford degree.Darwinism233Quite serious about it, he set to work at once. While confusinghis ideas about geology to the apparent satisfaction of Sir Charleswho left him his field-compass in token of it, Adams turned reso-lutely to business, and attacked the burning question of speciepayments. His principles assured him that the honest way to re-sume payments was to restrict currency. He thought he mightwin a name among financiers and statesmen at home by showinghow this task had been done by England, after the classical sus-Setting himself to the study of this per-pension of 1 797-1 82 1.plexed period, he waded as well as he could through a morass ofvolumes, pamphlets, and debates, until he learned to his confu-sion that the Bank of England itself and all the best British finan-cial writers held that restriction was a fatal mistake, and thatthe best treatment of a debased currency was to let it alone, as theBank had in fact done. Time and patience were the remedies.The shock of this discovery to his financial principles was se-rious; much more serious than the shock of the Terebralula andPteraspis to his principles of geology. A mistake about Evolutionwas not fatal; a mistake about specie payments would destroyforever the last hope of employment in State Street. Six monthsof patient labor would be thrown away if he did not publish, andwith it his whole scheme of making himself a position as a prac-If he did publish, how could he tell vir-tical man-of-bu sines s.tuous bankers in State Street that moral and absolute principlesof abstract truth, such as theirs, had nothing to do with the mat-ter, and that they had better let it alone? Geologists, naturallya humble and helpless class, might not revenge impertinences of-fered to their science; but capitalists never forgot or forgave.With labor and caution he made one long article on BritishFinance in 18 16, and another on the Bank Restriction of 1797-1 82 1, and, doing both up in one package, he sent it to the NorthAmerican for choice. He knew that two heavy, technical, financialstudies thus thrown at an editor's head, would probably return tocrush the author; but the audacity of youth is more sympatheticThe Education of Henry Adams234— when successful — than his ignorance. The editor acceptedboth.When the post brought his letter, Adams looked at it as thoughhe were a debtor who had begged for an extension. He read it withas much relief as the debtor, if it had brought him the loan. Theletter gave the new writer literary rank. Henceforward he hadthe freedom of the press. These articles, following those on Po-cahontas and Lyell, enrolled him on the permanent staff of theNorth American Review. Precisely what this rank was worth, noone could say; but, for fifty years the North American Review hadbeen the stage coach which carried literary Bostonians to suchdistinction as they had achieved. Few writers had ideas whichwarranted thirty pages of development, but for such as thoughtthey had, the Review alone offered space. An article was a smallvolume which required at least three months' work, and was paid,at best, five dollars a page. Not many men even in England orFrance could write a good thirty-page article, and practically noone in America read them; but a few score of people, mostly insearch of items to steal, ran over the pages to extract an ideaor a fact, which was a sort of wild game — a blue-fish or a teal— worth anywhere from fifty cents to five dollars. Newspaperwriters had their eye on quarterly pickings. The circulation ofthe Review had never exceeded three or four hundred copies, andthe Review had never paid its reasonable expenses. Yet it stoodat the head of American literary periodicals; it was a source ofsuggestion to cheaper workers; it reached far into societies thatnever knew its existence; it was an organ worth playing on; and,in the fancy of Henry Adams, it led, in some indistinct future, toplaying on a New York daily newspaper.With the editor's letter under his eyes, Adams asked himself whatbetter he could have done. On the whole, considering his helpless-ness, he thought he had done as well as his neighbors. No one couldyet guess which of his contemporaries was most likely to playa part in the great world. A shrewd prophet in Wall Street mightDarwinism235perhaps have set a mark on Pierpont Morgan, but hardly on theRockefellers or William C. Whitney or Whitelaw Reid. No onewould have picked out William McKinley or John Hay or MarkHanna for great statesmen. Boston was ignorant of the careersin store for Alexander Agassiz and Henry Higginson.PhillipsBrooks was unknown; Henry James was unheard; Howells wasnew; Richardson and LaFarge were struggling for a start. Outof any score of names and reputations that should reach beyondthe century, the thirty-years-old who were starting in the year1867 could show none that was so far in advance as to warrantodds in its favor. The army men had for the most part fallen tothe ranks. Had Adams foreseen the future exactly as it came, hewould have been no wiser, and could have chosen no better path.Thus it turned out that the last year in England was the pleas-antest. He was already old in society, and belonged to the Silu-rian horizon. The Prince of Wales had come. Mr. Disraeli, LordStanley, and the future Lord Salisbury had thrown into the back-ground the memories of Palmerston and Russell. Europe wasmoving rapidly, and the conduct of England during the AmericanCivil War was the last thing that London liked to recall. Therevolution since 1861 was nearly complete, and, for the first timein history, the American felt himself almost as strong as an English-man. He had thirty years to wait before he should feel himselfstronger. Meanwhile even a private secretary could afford to behappy. His old education was finished ; his new one was not be-gun ; he still loitered a year, feeling himself near the end of a verylong, anxious, tempestuous, successful voyage, with another tofollow, and a summer sea between.He made what use he could of it. In February, 1868, he wasback in Rome with his friend Milnes Gaskell. For another seasonhe wandered on horseback over the campagna or on foot throughthe Rome of the middle ages, and sat once more on the steps ofAra Cceli, as had become with him almost a superstition, like thewaters of the fountain of Trevi. Rome was still tragic and solemn236The Education of Henry Adamsas ever, with its mediaeval society, artistic, literary, and clerical,taking itself as seriously as in the days of Byron and Shelley. Thelong ten years of accidental education had changed nothing forhim there. He knew no more in 1868 than in 1858. He had learnednothing whatever that made Rome more intelligible to him, ormade life easier to handle. The case was no better when he gotback to London and went through his last season. London hadbecome his vice. He loved his haunts, his houses, his habits, andeven his hansom cabs. He loved growling like an Englishman,and going into society where he knew not a face, and cared not astraw. He lived deep into the lives and loves and disappointmentsof his friends. When at last he found himself back again at Liver-pool, his heart wrenched by the act of parting, he moved mechan-ically, unstrung, but he had no more acquired education thanwhen he first trod the steps of the Adelphi Hotel in November,1858. He could see only one great change, and this was whollyin years. Eaton Hall no longer impressed his imagination; eventhe architecture of Chester roused but a sleepy interest; he feltno sensation whatever in the atmosphere of the British peerage,but mainly an habitual dislike to most of the people who fre-quented their country houses; he had become English to the pointof sharing their petty social divisions, their dislikes and prejudicesagainst each other; he took England no longer with the awe ofAmerican youth, but with the habit of an old and rather wornsuit of clothes. As far as he knew, this was all that Englishmenmeant by social education, but in any case it was all the educationhe had gained from seven years in London.