CHAPTER VIROME (1859-1860)THE tramp in Thuringen lasted four-and-twenty hours.By the end of the first walk, his three companions —John Bancroft, James J. Higginson, and B. W. Crownin-shield, all Boston and Harvard College like himself — were satis-fied with what they had seen, and when they sat down to rest onthe spot where Goethe had written —Ruhest du audi!" —" Warte nur! baldethe profoundness of the thought and the wisdom of the adviceaffected them so strongly that they hired a wagon and drove toWeimar the same night. They were all quite happy and light-hearted in the first fresh breath of leafless spring, and the beer wasbetter than at Berlin, but they were all equally in doubt why theyhad come to Germany, and not one of them could say why theystayed. Adams stayed because he did not want to go home, andhe had fears that his father's patience might be exhausted if heasked to waste time elsewhere.They could not think that their education required a return toBerlin. A few days at Dresden in the spring weather satisfiedthem that Dresden was a better spot for general education thanBerlin, and equally good for reading Civil Law. They were possi-bly right. There was nothing to study in Dresden, and no educa-tion to be gained, but the Sistine Madonna and the Correggioswere famous; the theatre and opera were sometimes excellent, andthe Elbe was prettier than the Spree. They could always fall backon the language. So he took a room in the household of the usualsmall government clerk with the usual plain daughters, and con-tinued the study of the language. Possibly one might learn some-thing more by accident, as one had learned something of Beet-Rome83hoven. For the next eighteen months the young man pursuedaccidental education, since he could pursue no other; and by greatgood fortune, Europe and America were too busy with their ownaffairs to give much attention to his. Accidental education hadevery chance in its favor, especially because nothing came amiss.Perhaps the chief obstacle to the youth's education, now thathe had come of age, was his honesty; his simple-minded faith inhis intentions. Even after Berlin had become a nightmare, he stillpersuaded himself that his German education was a success. Heloved, or thought he loved the people, but the Germany he lovedwas the eighteenth-century which the Germans were ashamed of,and were destroying as fast as they could. Of the Germany tocome, he knew nothing. Military Germany was his abhorrence.What he liked was the simple character; the good-natured senti-ment; the musical and metaphysical abstraction; the blunderingincapacity of the German for practical affairs. At that time every-one looked on Germany as incapable of competing with France,England or America in any sort of organized energy. Germanyhad no confidence in herself, and no reason to feel it. She had nounity, and no reason to want it. She never had unity. Her reli-gious and social history, her economical interests, her militarygeography, her political convenience, had always tended to eccen-tric rather than concentric motion. Until coal-power and railwayswere created, she was mediaeval by nature and geography, andthis was what Adams, under the teachings of Carlyle and Lowell,liked.He was in a fair way to do himself lasting harm, floundering be-tween worlds passed and worlds coming, which had a habit of crush-ing men who stayed too long at the points of contact. Suddenlythe Emperor Napoleon declared war on Austria and raised a con-fused point of morals in the mind of Europe. France was thenightmare of Germany, and even at Dresden one looked on thereturn of Napoleon to Leipsic as the most likely thing in the world.One morning the government clerk, in whose family Adams was84The Education of Henry Adamsstaying, rushed into his room to consult a map in order that hemight measure the distance from Milan to Dresden. The thirdNapoleon had reached Lombardy, and only fifty or sixty years hadpassed since the first Napoleon had begun his military successesfrom an Italian base.An enlightened young American, with eighteenth-centurytastes capped by fragments of a German education and the mostexcellent intentions, had to make up his mind about the moralvalue of these conflicting forces. France was the wicked spirit ofmoral politics, and whatever helped France must be so far evil.At that time Austria was another evil spirit. Italy was the prizethey disputed, and for at least fifteen hundred years had been thechief object of their greed. The question of sympathy had dis-turbed a number of persons during that period. The question ofmorals had been put in a number of cross-lights. Should one beGuelph or Ghibelline? No doubt, one was wiser than one's neigh-bors who had found no way of settling this question since the daysof the cave-dwellers, but ignorance did better to discard the at-tempt to be wise, for wisdom had been singularly baffled by theproblem. Better take sides first, and reason about it for the restof life.Not that Adams felt any real doubt about his sympathies orwishes. He had not been German long enough for befogging hismind to that point, but the moment was decisive for much tocome, especially for political morals. His morals were the highest,and he clung to them to preserve his self-respect; but steam andelectricity had brought about new political and social concentra-tions, or were making them necessary in the line of his moralprinciples — freedom, education, economic development and soforth — which required association with allies as doubtful asNapoleon III, and robberies with violence on a very extensivescale. As long as he could argue that his opponents were wicked,he could join in robbing and killing them without a qualm; butit might happen that the good were robbed. Education insistedRome85on finding a moral foundation for robbery. He could hope to beginlife in the character of no animal more moral than a monkey unlesshe could satisfy himself when and why robbery and murder werea virtue and duty. Education founded on mere self-interest wasmerely Guelph and Ghibelline over again — Machiavelli translatedinto American.Luckily for him he had a sister much brighter than he ever was— though he thought himself a rather superior person — whoafter marrying Charles Kuhn, of Philadelphia, had come to Italy,and, like all good Americans and English, was hotly Italian. InJuly, 1859, she was at Thun in Switzerland, and there HenryAdams joined them. Women have, commonly, a very positivemoral sense; that which they will, is right; that which they reject,is wrong; and their will, in most cases, ends by settling the moral.Mrs. Kuhn had a double superiority. She not only adored Italy,but she cordially disliked Germany in all its varieties. She sawno gain in helping her brother to be Germanized, and she wantedhim much to be civilized. She was the first young woman he wasever intimate with — quick, sensitive, wilful, or full of will, ener-getic, sympathetic and intelligent enough to supply a score of menwith ideas — and he was delighted to give her the reins — to lether drive him where she would. It was his first experiment ingiving the reins to a woman, and he was so much pleased with theresults that he never wanted to take them back. In after life hemade a general law of experience — no woman had ever driven himwrong; no man had ever driven him right.Nothing would satisfy Mrs. Kuhn but to go to the seat of waras soon as the armistice was declared. Wild as the idea seemed,nothing was easier. The party crossed the St. Gothard andreached Milan, picturesque with every sort of uniform and everysign of war. To young Adams this first plunge into Italy passedBeethoven as a piece of accidental education.Like music, itdiffered from other education in being, not a means of pursuinglife, but one of the ends attained. Further, on these lines, one86The Education of Henry AdamsIt had but one defect — that of attainment. Lifecould not go.had no richer impression to give; it offers barely half-a-dozen such,Exactly what they teach wouldand the intervals seem long.puzzle a Berlin jurist; yet they seem to have an economic value,since most people would decline to part with even their fadedmemories except at a valuation ridiculously extravagant. Theywere also what men pay most for; but one's ideas become hope-lessly mixed in trying to reduce such forms of education to astandard of exchangeable value, and, as in political economy,one had best disregard altogether what cannot be stated in equiv-alents. The proper equivalent of pleasure is pain, which is alsoa form of education.Not satisfied with Milan, Mrs. Kuhn insisted on invading theenemy's country, and the carriage was chartered for Innsbruck byway of the Stelvio Pass. The Valtellina, as the carriage droveup it, showed war. Garibaldi's Cacciatori were the only visibleinhabitants. No one could say whether the pass was open, butin any case no carriage had yet crossed. At the inns the handsomeyoung officers in command of the detachments were delighted toaccept invitations to dinner and to talk all the evening of theirbattles to the charming patriot who sparkled with interest andflattery, but not one of them knew whether their enemies, theabhorred Austrian Jagers, would let the travellers through theirlines. As a rule, gaiety was not the character failing in any partythat Mrs. Kuhn belonged to, but when at last, after climbing whatwas said to be the finest carriage-pass in Europe, the carriageturned the last shoulder, where the glacier of the Ortler Spitzetumbled its huge mass down upon the road, even Mrs. Kuhngasped when she was driven directly up to the barricade andstopped by the double line of sentries stretching on either sideup the mountains, till the flash of the gun barrels was lost in theflash of the snow. For accidental education the picture had itsvalue. The earliest of these pictures count for most, as firstimpressions must, and Adams never afterwards cared much forRome87landscape education, except perhaps in the tropics for the sake ofthe contrast. As education, that chapter, too, was read, and setaside.The handsome blond officers of the Jagers were not to be beatenin courtesy by the handsome young olive-toned officers of theCacciatori. The eternal woman as usual, when she is young,pretty, and engaging, had her way, and the barricade offered noresistance. In fifteen minutes the carriage was rolling down toMais, swarming with German soldiers and German fleas, worse thanthe Italian; and German language, thought, and atmosphere,of which young Adams, thanks to his glimpse of Italy, never againfelt quite the old confident charm.Yet he could talk to his cabman and conscientiously did hiscathedrals, his Rhine, and whatever his companions suggested.Faithful to his self-contracted scheme of passing two winters instudy of the Civil Law, he went back to Dresden with a letterto the Frau Hofrathin von Reichenbach, in whose house Lowell andother Americans had pursued studies more or less serious. Inthose days, "The Initials" was a new book. The charm which itsclever author had laboriously woven over Munich gave also acertain reflected light to Dresden. Young Adams had nothing todo but take fencing-lessons, visit the galleries and go to thetheatre; but his social failure in the line of "The Initials," washumiliating and he succumbed to it. The Frau Hofrathin herselfwas sometimes roused to huge laughter at the total discomfitureand helplessness of the young American in the face of her society.Possibly an education may be the wider and the richer for a largeexperience of the world; Raphael Pumpelly and Clarence King,at about the same time, were enriching their education by a pic-turesque intimacy with the manners of the Apaches and DiggerIndians. All experience is an arch, to build upon. Yet Adamsadmitted himself unable to guess what use his second winter inGermany was to him, or what he expected it to be. Even thedoctrine of accidental education broke down. There were no88The Education of Henry Adamsaccidents in Dresden. As soon as the winter was over, he closedand locked the German door with a long breath of relief, and tookthe road to Italy. He had then pursued his education, as it pleasedhim, for eighteen months, and in spite of the infinite variety ofnew impressions which had packed themselves into his mind, heknew no more, for his practical purposes, than the day he gradu-ated. He had made no step towards a profession. He was asignorant as a schoolboy of society. He was unfit for any careerin Europe, and unfitted for any career in America, and he had notnatural intelligence enough to see what a mess he had thus farmade of his education.By twisting life to follow accidental and devious paths, onemight perhaps find some use for accidental and devious knowl-edge, but this had been no part of Henry Adams's plan when hechose the path most admired by the best judges, and followed ittill he found it led nowhere. Nothing had been further from hismind when he started in November, 1858, than to become a tourist,but a mere tourist, and nothing else, he had become in April, i860,when he joined his sister in Florence. His father had been in theright. The young man felt a little sore about it. Supposing hisfather asked him, on his return, what equivalent he had broughtback for the time and money put into his experiment! The onlypossible answer would be: "Sir, I am a tourist!"The answer was not what he had meant it to be, and he wasnot likely to better it by asking his father, in turn, what equiva-lent his brothers or cousins or friends at home had got out of thesame time and money spent in Boston. All they had put into thelaw was certainly thrown away, but were they happier in science?In theory one might say, with some show of proof, that a pure,scientific education was alone correct; yet many of his friends whotook it, found reason to complain that it was anything but a pure,scientific world in which they lived.Meanwhile his father had quite enough perplexities of his own,without seeking more in his son's errors. His Quincy district hadRome89sent him to Congress, and in the spring of i860 he was in the fullconfusion of nominating candidates for the Presidential electionin November. He supported Mr. Seward. The Republican Party-was an unknown force, and the Democratic Party was torn topieces. No one could see far into the future. Fathers couldblunder as well as sons, and, in i860, every one was consciousof being dragged along paths much less secure than those of theEuropean tourist. For the time, the young man was safe frominterference, and went on his way with a light heart to take what-ever chance fragments of education God or the devil was pleasedto give him, for he knew no longer the good from the bad.He had of both sorts more than he knew how to use. Perhapsthe most useful purpose he set himself to serve was that of hispen, for he wrote long letters, during the next three months, tohis brother Charles, which his brother caused to be printed in theBoston Courier; and the exercise was good for him. He had littleto say, and said it not very well, but that mattered less. The habitof expression leads to the search for something to express. Some-thing remains as a residuum of the commonplace itself, if onestrikes out every commonplace in the expression. Young menas a rule saw little in Italy, or anywhere else, and in after life,when Adams began to learn what some men could see, he shrankinto corners of shame at the thought that he should have be-trayed his own inferiority as though it were his pride, while heinvited his neighbors to measure and admire; but it was still thenearest approach he had yet made to an intelligent act.For the rest, Italy was mostly an emotion and the emotion nat-urally centred in Rome. The American parent, curiously enough,while bitterly hostile to Paris, seemed rather disposed to acceptRome as legitimate education, though abused; but to young menseeking education in a serious spirit, taking for granted thateverything had a cause, and that nature tended to an end, Romewas altogether the most violent vice in the world, and Rome be-fore 1870 was seductive beyond resistance. The month of May,90The Education of Henry Adamsi860, was divine. No doubt other young men, and occasionally-young women, have passed the month of May in Rome sincethen, and conceive that the charm continues to exist. Possiblyit does — in them — but in i860 the lights and shadows werestill mediaeval, and mediaeval Rome was alive; the shadowsbreathed and glowed, full of soft forms felt by lost senses. Nosand-blast of science had yet skinned off the epidermis of history,thought, and feeling. The pictures were uncleaned, the churchesunrestored, the ruins unexcavated. Mediaeval Rome was sor-cery. Rome was the worst spot on earth to teach nineteenth-century youth what to do with a twentieth-century world. One'semotions in Rome were one's private affair, like one's glass ofabsinthe before dinner in the Palais Royal; they must be hurtful,else they could not have been so intense; and they were surelyimmoral, for no one, priest or politician, could honestly read inthe ruins of Rome any other certain lesson than that they wereevidence of the just judgments of an outraged God against all thedoings of man. This moral unfitted young men for every sort ofuseful activity; it made Rome a gospel of anarchy and vice; thelast place under the sun for educating the young; yet it was, bycommon consent, the only spot that the young — of either sexand every race — passionately, perversely, wickedly loved.Boys never see a conclusion; only on the edge of the grave canman conclude anything; but the first impulse given to the boy isapt to lead or drive him for the .rest of his life into conclusionafter conclusion that he never dreamed of reaching. One lookedidly enough at the Forum or at St. Peter's, but one never forgotthe look, and it never ceased reacting. To a young Bostonian,fresh from Germany, Rome seemed a pure emotion, quite freefrom economic or actual values, and he could not in reason orcommon sense foresee that it was mechanically piling up conun-drum after conundrum in his educational path, which seemedunconnected but that he had got to connect; that seemed in-soluble but had got to be somehow solved. Rome was not a beetleRome91to be dissected and dropped; not a bad French novel to be readin a railway train and thrown out of the window after other badFrench novels, the morals of which could never approach theimmorality of Roman history. Rome was actual; it was England;it was going to be America. Rome could not be fitted into anorderly, middle-class, Bostonian, systematic scheme of evolution*No law of progress applied to it. Not even time-sequences —the last refuge of helpless historians — had value for it. TheForum no more led to the Vatican than the Vatican to the Forum.Rienzi, Garibaldi, Tiberius Gracchus, Aurelian might be mixedup in any relation of time, along with a thousand more, and neverlead to a sequence. The great word Evolution had not yet, ini860, made a new religion of history, but the old religion hadpreached the same doctrine for a thousand years without findingin the entire history of Rome anything but flat contradiction.Of course both priests and evolutionists bitterly denied thisheresy, but what they affirmed or denied in i860 had very littleimportance indeed for i960. Anarchy lost no ground meanwhile.The problem became only the more fascinating. Probably it wasmore vital in May, i860, than it had been in October, 1764, whenthe idea of writing the Decline and Fall of the city first started tothe mind of Gibbon, "in the close of the evening, as I sat musingin the Church of the Zoccolanti or Franciscan Friars, while theywere singing Vespers in the Temple of Jupiter, on the ruins of theCapitol." Murray's Handbook had the grace to quote this pas-sage from Gibbon's "Autobiography," which led Adams morethan once to sit at sunset on the steps of the Church of SantaMaria di Ara Cceli, curiously wondering that not an inch had beengained by Gibbon — or all the historians since — towards ex-plaining the Fall. The mystery remained unsolved; the charmremained intact. Two great experiments of Western civilizationhad left there the chief monuments of their failure, and nothingproved that the city might not still survive to express the failureof a third.92The Education of Henry AdamsThe young man had no idea what he was doing. The thoughtof posing for a Gibbon never entered his mind. He was a tourist,even to the depths of his sub-consciousness, and it was well forhim that he should be nothing else, for even the greatest of mencannot sit with dignity, " in the close of evening, among the ruinsof the Capitol," unless they have something quite original to sayabout it. Tacitus could do it; so could Michael Angelo; and so,at a pinch, could Gibbon, though in figure hardly heroic; but, insum, none of them could say very much more than the tourist,who went on repeating to himself the eternal question: — Why!Why!! Why!!! — as his neighbor, the blind beggar, might do, sit-ting next him, on the church steps. No one ever had answered thequestion to the satisfaction of any one else; yet every one who hadeither head or heart, felt that sooner or later he must make up hismind what answer to accept. Substitute the word America forthe word Rome, and the question became personal.i Perhaps Henry learned something in Rome, though he neverknew it, and never sought it. Rome dwarfs teachers. The great-est men of the age scarcely bore the test of posing with Romefor a background. Perhaps Garibaldi — possibly even Cavour —could have sat "in the close of the evening, among the ruins of theCapitol," but one hardly saw Napoleon III there, or Palmerstonor Tennyson or Longfellow. One morning, Adams happened tobe chatting in the studio of Hamilton Wilde, when a middle-agedEnglishman came in, evidently excited, and told of the shock hehad just received, when riding near the Circus Maximus, at com-ing unexpectedly on the guillotine, where some criminal had beenput to death an hour or two before. The sudden surprise hadquite overcome him; and Adams, who seldom saw the point ofa story till time had blunted it, listened sympathetically to learnwhat new form of grim horror had for the moment wiped out thememory of two thousand years of Roman bloodshed, or the con-solation, derived from history and statistics, that most citizensof Rome seemed to be the better for guillotining. Only by slowRome93degrees, he grappled the conviction that the victim of the shockwas Robert Browning; and, on the background of the CircusMaximus, the Christian martyrs flaming as torches, and the morn-ing's murderer on the block, Browning seemed rather in place,as a middle-aged gentlemanly English Pippa Passes; while after-wards, in the light of Belgravia dinner-tables, he never madepart of his background except by effacement. Browning mighthave sat with Gibbon, among the ruins, and few Romans wouldhave smiled.Yet Browning never revealed the poetic depths of Saint Francis;William Story could not touch the secret of Michael Angelo; andMommsen hardly said all that one felt by instinct in the lives ofCicero and Caesar. They taught what, as a rule, needed no teach-ing, the lessons of a rather cheap imagination and cheaper politics.Rome was a bewildering complex of ideas, experiments, ambitions,energies; without her, the Western world was pointless and frag-mentary; she gave heart and unity to it all; yet Gibbon mighthave gone on for the whole century, sitting among the ruins of theCapitol, and no one would have passed, capable of telling himwhat it meant. Perhaps it meant nothing.So it ended; the happiest month of May that life had yet of-fered, fading behind the present, and probably beyond the past,somewhere into abstract time, grotesquely out of place with theBerlin scheme or a Boston future. Adams explained to himselfthat he was absorbing knowledge. He would have put it betterhad he said that knowledge was absorbing him. He was passive.In spite of swarming impressions he knew no more when he leftRome than he did when he entered it. As a marketable object, hisvalue was less. His next step went far to convince him that acci-dental education, whatever its economical return might be, wasprodigiously successful as an object in itself. Everything con-spired to ruin his sound scheme of life, and to make him a vagrantas well as pauper. He went on to Naples, and there, in the hotJune, heard rumors that Garibaldi and his thousand were about94The Education of Henry Adamsto attack Palermo. Calling on the American Minister, Chandlerof Pennsylvania, he was kindly treated, not for his merit, but forhis name, and Mr. Chandler amiably consented to send him to theseat of war as bearer of despatches to Captain Palmer of theAmerican sloop of war Iroquois. Young Adams seized the chance,and went to Palermo in a government transport filled with fleas,commanded by a charming Prince Caracciolo.He told all about it to the Boston Courier, where the narrativeprobably exists to this day, unless the files of the Courier havewholly perished; but of its bearing on education the Courier didnot speak. He himself would have much liked to know whetherit had any bearing whatever, and what was its value as a post-graduate course. Quite apart from its value as life attained, real-ized, capitalized, it had also a certain value as a lesson in some-thing, though Adams could never classify the branch of study.Loosely, the tourist called it knowledge of men, but it was justthe reverse; it was knowledge of one's ignorance of men. CaptainPalmer of the Iroquois, who was a friend of the young man's uncle,Sydney Brooks, took him with the officers of the ship to make anevening call on Garibaldi, whom they found in the Senate Housetowards sunset, at supper with his picturesque and piratic staff,in the full noise and color of the Palermo revolution. As a spec-tacle, it belonged to Rossini and the Italian opera, or to AlexandreDumas at the least, but the spectacle was not its educational side.Garibaldi left the table, and, sitting down at the window, had afew words of talk with Captain Palmer and young Adams. Atthat moment, in the summer of i860, Garibaldi was certainly themost serious of the doubtful energies in the world; the most essen-tial to gauge rightly. Even then society was dividing betweenbanker and anarchist. One or the other, Garibaldi must serve.Himself a typical anarchist, sure to overshadow Europe and alarmempires bigger than Naples, his success depended on his mind;his energy was beyond doubt.v Adams had the chance to look this sphinx in the eyes, and,Rome95for five minutes, to watch him like a wild animal, at the momentof his greatest achievement and most splendid action. One sawa quiet-featured, quiet-voiced man in a red flannel shirt; absolutely-impervious; a type of which Adams knew nothing. Sympatheticit was, and one felt that it was simple; one suspected even that itmight be childlike, but could form no guess of its intelligence. Inhis own eyes Garibaldi might be a Napoleon or a Spartacus; in thehands of Cavour he might become a Condottiere; in the eyes of his-tory he might, like the rest of the world, be only the vigorous playerin the game he did not understand. The student was none the wiser.This compound nature of patriot and pirate had illuminedItalian history from the beginning, and was no more intelligibleto itself than to a young American who had no experience in doublenatures. In the end, if the "Autobiography" tells truth, Gari-baldi saw and said that he had not understood his own acts; thathe had been an instrument; that he had served the purposes of theclass he least wanted to help; yet in i860 he thought himself therevolution anarchic, Napoleonic, and his ambition was unbounded.What should a young Bostonian have made of a character likethis, internally alive with childlike fancies, and externally quiet,simple, almost innocent; uttering with apparent conviction theusual commonplaces of popular politics that all politicians use asthe small change of their intercourse with the public; but neverbetraying a thought?Precisely this class of mind was to be the toughest problem ofAdams's practical life, but he could never make anything of it.The lesson of Garibaldi, as education, seemed to teach the ex-treme complexity of extreme simplicity; but one could havelearned this from a glow-worm. One did not need the vivid recol-lection of the low-voiced, simple-mannered, seafaring captain ofGenoese adventurers and Sicilian brigands, supping in the Julyheat and Sicilian dirt and revolutionary clamor, among the bar-ricaded streets of insurgent Palermo, merely in order to rememberthat simplicity is complex.96The Education of Henry AdamsAdams left the problem as he found it, and came north to stum-ble over others, less picturesque but nearer. He squandered twoor three months on Paris. From the first he had avoided Paris,and had wanted no French influence in his education. He dis-approved of France in the lump. A certain knowledge of the lan-guage one must have; enough to order dinner and buy a theatreticket; but more he did not seek. He disliked the Empire and theEmperor particularly, but this was a trifle; he disliked most theFrench mind. To save himself the trouble of drawing up a longlist of all that he disliked, he disapproved of the whole, oncefor all, and shut them figuratively out of his life. France wasnot serious, and he was not serious in going there.He did this in good faith, obeying the lessons his teachers hadtaught him; but the curious result followed that, being in no wayresponsible for the French and sincerely disapproving them, hefelt quite at liberty to enjoy to the full everything he disapproved.Stated thus crudely, the idea sounds derisive; but, as a matter offact, several thousand Americans passed much of their time thereon this understanding. They sought to take share in every func-tion that was open to approach, as they sought tickets to theopera, because they were not a part of it. Adams did like the rest.All thought of serious education had long vanished. He tried toacquire a few French idioms, without even aspiring to master asubjunctive, but he succeeded better in acquiring a modest tastefor Bordeaux and Burgundy and one or two sauces; for the TroisFreres Provencaux and Voisin's and Philippe's and the CafeAnglais; for the Palais Royal Theatre, and the Varietes and theGymnase; for the Brohans and Bressant, Rose Cheri and GilPerez, and other lights of the stage. His friends were good to him.Life was amusing. Paris rapidly became familiar. In a month orsix weeks he forgot even to disapprove of it; but he studied noth-ing, entered no society, and made no acquaintance. Accidentaleducation went far in Paris, and one picked up a deal of knowl-edge that might become useful; perhaps, after all, the three monthsRome97passed there might serve better purpose than the twenty-onemonths passed elsewhere; but he did not intend it — did notthink it — and looked at it as a momentary and frivolous vaca-tion before going home to fit himself for life. Therewith, afterstaying as long as he could and spending all the money he dared,he started with mixed emotions but no education, for home.