CHAPTER XIXCHAOS (1870)ONE fine May afternoon in 1870 Adams drove again up St.James's Street wondering more than ever at the marvelsof life. Nine years had passed since the historic entranceof May, 1 861. Outwardly London was the same. OutwardlyEurope showed no great change. Palmerston and Russell were for-gotten; but Disraeli and Gladstone were still much alive. One'sfriends were more than ever prominent. John Bright was in theCabinet; W. E. Forster was about to enter it; reform ran riot.Never had the sun of progress shone so fair. Evolution from lowerto higher raged like an epidemic. Darwin was the greatest of proph-ets in the most evolutionary of worlds. Gladstone had over-thrown the Irish Church; was overthrowing the Irish landlords;was trying to pass an Education Act. Improvement, prosperity,power, were leaping and bounding over every country road.Even America, with her Erie scandals and Alabama Claims, hardlymade a discordant note.At the Legation, Motley ruled; the long Adams reign was for-gotten; the rebellion had passed into history. In society no onecared to recall the years before the Prince of Wales. The smartset had come to their own. Half the houses that Adams hadfrequented, from 1861 to 1865, were closed or closing in 1870.Death had ravaged one's circle of friends. Mrs. Milnes Gaskelland her sister Miss Charlotte Wynn were both dead, and Mr.James Milnes Gaskell was no longer in Parliament. That fieldof education seemed closed too.One found one's self in a singular frame of mind -— more eight-eenth-century than ever — almost rococo — and unable to catchanywhere the cog-wheels of evolution.Experience ceased toeducate. London taught less freely than of old. That one badChaos285style was leading to another — that the older men were moreamusing than the younger — that Lord Houghton's breakfast-table showed gaps hard to fill — that there were fewer men onewanted to meet — these, and a hundred more such remarks, helpedlittle towards a quicker and more intelligent activity. For Englishreforms, Adams cared nothing. The reforms were themselvesmediaeval. The Education Bill of his friend W. E. Forster seemedto him a guaranty against all education he had use for. He re-sented change. He would have kept the Pope in the Vatican andthe Queen at Windsor Castle as historical monuments. He didnot care to Americanize Europe. The Bastille or the Ghetto wasa curiosity worth a great deal of money, if preserved; and so wasa Bishop; so was Napoleon III. The tourist was the great con-servative who hated novelty and adored dirt. Adams came backto London without a thought of revolution or restlessness or re-form. He wanted amusement, quiet, and gaiety.Had he not been born in 1838 under the shadow of Boston StateHouse, and been brought up in the Early Victorian epoch, he wouldhave cast off his old skin, and made his court to MarlboroughHouse, in partnership with the American woman and the Jewbanker. Common-sense dictated it; but Adams and his friends wereunfashionable by some law of Anglo-Saxon custom — some innateFiguring himself as already a man of action,atrophy of mind.and rather far up towards the front, he had no idea of makinga new effort or catching up with a new world. He saw nothingahead of him. The world was never more calm. He wanted totalk with Ministers about the Alabama Claims, because he lookedon the Claims as his own special creation, discussed between himand his father long before they had been discussed by Govern-ment; he wanted to make notes for his next year's articles; but hehad not a thought that, within three months, his world was tobe upset, and he under it. Frank Palgrave came one day, morecontentious, contemptuous, and paradoxical than ever, becauseNapoleon III seemed to be threatening war with Germany. Pal-286The Education of Henry Adamsgrave said that "Germany would beat France into scraps" if therewas war. Adams thought not. The chances were always againstcatastrophes. No one else expected great changes in Europe. Pal-grave was always extreme; his language was incautious— violent!In this year of all years, Adams lost sight of education. Thingsbegan smoothly, and London glowed with the pleasant sense offamiliarity and dinners. He sniffed with voluptuous delight thecoal-smoke of Cheapside and revelled in the architecture of Ox-ford Street. May Fair never shone so fair to Arthur Pendennis asit did to the returned American. The country never smiled its vel-vet smile of trained and easy hostess as it did when he was so luckyas to be asked on a country visit. He loved it all — everything —had always loved it! He felt almost attached to the Royal Ex-change. He thought he owned the St. James's Club. He patronizedthe Legation.The first shock came lightly, as though Nature were playingtricks on her spoiled child, though she had thus far not exertedherself to spoil him. Reeve refused the Gold Conspiracy. Adamshad become used to the idea that he was free of the Quarterlies,and that his writing would be printed of course; but he was stunnedby the reason of refusal. Reeve said it would bring half-a-dozenlibel suits on him. One knew that the power of Erie was almost asgreat in England as in America, but one was hardly prepared tofind it controlling the Quarterlies. The English press professed tobe shocked in 1870 by the Erie scandal, as it had professed ini860 to be shocked by the scandal of slavery, but when invitedto support those who were trying to abate these scandals, theEnglish press said it was afraid. To Adams, Reeve's refusal seemedportentous. He and his brother and the North American Reviewwere running greater risks every day, and no one thought of fear.That a notorious story, taken bodily from an official document,should scare the Edinburgh Review into silence for fear of Jay Gouldand Jim Fisk, passed even Adams's experience of English eccen-tricity, though it was large.Chaos287He gladly set down Reeve's refusal of the Gold Conspiracy torespectability and editorial law, but when he sent the manuscripton to the Quarterly, the editor of the Quarterly also refused it.The literary standard of the two Quarterlies was not so high as tosuggest that the article was illiterate beyond the power of anactive and willing editor to redeem it. Adams had no choice butto realize that he had to deal in 1870 with the same old Englishcharacter of i860, and the same inability in himself to under-stand it. As usual, when an ally was needed, the American wasdriven into the arms of the radicals. Respectability, everywhereand always, turned its back the moment one asked to do it aCalled suddenly away from England, he despatched thefavor.article, at the last moment, to the Westminster Review and heardno more about it for nearly six months.He had been some weeks in London when he received a telegramfrom his brother-in-law at the Bagni di Lucca telling him that hissister had been thrown from a cab and injured, and that he hadbetter come on. He started that night, and reached the Bagni diLucca on the second day. Tetanus had already set in.The last lesson — the sum and term of education — beganthen. He had passed through thirty years of rather varied experi-ence without having once felt the shell of custom broken. He hadnever seen Nature — only her surface — the sugar-coating thatshe shows to youth. Flung suddenly in his face, with the harsh bru-tality of chance, the terror of the blow stayed by him thenceforthfor life, until repetition made it more than the will could strugglewith; more than he could call on himself to bear. He found hissister, a woman of forty, as gay and brilliant in the terrors oflockjaw as she had been in the careless fun of 1859, lying in bedin consequence of a miserable cab-accident that had bruised herfoot. Hour by hour the muscles grew rigid, while the mind remainedbright, until after ten days of fiendish torture she died in con-vulsions.One had heard and read a great deal about death, and even seen288The Education of Henry Adamsa little of it, and knew by heart the thousand commonplaces ofreligion and poetry which seemed to deaden one's senses and veilthe horror. Society being immortal, could put on immortality atwill. Adams being mortal, felt only the mortality. Death tookfeatures altogether new to him, in these rich and sensuous sur-roundings. Nature enjoyed it, played with it, the horror addedto her charm, she liked the torture, and smothered her victimwith caresses. Never had one seen her so winning. The hotItalian summer brooded outside, over the market-place and thepicturesque peasants, and, in the singular color of the Tuscanatmosphere, the hills and vineyards of the Apennines seemed burst-ing with mid-summer blood. The sick-room itself glowed with theItalian joy of life; friends filled it; no harsh northern lights piercedthe soft shadows; even the dying woman shared the sense of theItalian summer, the soft, velvet air, the humor, the courage, thesensual fulness of Nature and man. She faced death, as womenmostly do, bravely and even gaily, racked slowly to unconscious-ness, but yielding only to violence, as a soldier sabred in battle.For many thousands of years, on these hills and plains, Naturehad gone on sabring men and women with the same air of sensualpleasure.Impressions like these are not reasoned or catalogued in themind; they are felt as part of violent emotion; and the mind thatfeels them is a different one from that which reasons; it is thoughtof a different power and a different person. The first serious con-sciousness of Nature's gesture — her attitude towards life — tookform then as a phantasm, a nightmare, an insanity of force. For thefirst time, the stage-scenery of the senses collapsed; the humanmind felt itself stripped naked, vibrating in a void of shapelessenergies, with resistless mass, colliding, crushing, wasting, anddestroying what these same energies had created and laboredSociety became fantastic, a vision offrom eternity to perfect.pantomime with a mechanical motion; and its so-called thoughtmerged in the mere sense of life, and pleasure in the sense. The usualChaos289anodynes of social medicine became evident artifice. Stoicism wasperhaps the best; religion was the most human; but the idea thatany personal deity could find pleasure or profit in torturing apoor woman, by accident, with a fiendish cruelty known to manonly in perverted and insane temperaments, could not be held fora moment. For pure blasphemy, it made pure atheism a comfort.God might be, as the Church said, a Substance, but He could notbe a Person.With nerves strained for the first time beyond their power oftension, he slowly travelled northwards with his friends, and stoppedfor a few days at Ouchy to recover his balance in a new world ; forthe fantastic mystery of coincidences had made the world, whichhe thought real, mimic and reproduce the distorted nightmare of hispersonal horror. He did not yet know it, and he was twenty yearsin finding it out; but he had need of all the beauty of the Lake be-low and of the Alps above, to restore the finite to its place. For thefirst time in his life, Mont Blanc for a moment looked to him whatit was — a chaos of anarchic and purposeless forces — and heneeded days of repose to see it clothe itself again with the illu-sions of his senses, the white purity of its snows, the splendor of itslight, and the infinity of its heavenly peace. Nature was kind;Lake Geneva was beautiful beyond itself, and the Alps put oncharms real as terrors; but man became chaotic, and before theillusions of Nature were wholly restored, the illusions of Europesuddenly vanished, leaving a new world to learn.On July 4, all Europe had been in peace; on July 14, Europe wasin full chaos of war. One felt helpless and ignorant, but onemight have been king or kaiser without feeling stronger to dealwith the chaos. Mr. Gladstone was as much astounded as Adams;the Emperor Napoleon was nearly as stupefied as either, and Bis-marck himself hardly knew how he did it. As education, the out-break of the war was wholly lost on a man dealing with deathhand-to-hand, who could not throw it aside to look at it across theRhine. Only when he got up to Paris, he began to feel the approach290The Education of Henry Adamsof catastrophe. Providence set up no affiches to announce thetragedy. Under one's eyes France cut herself adrift, and floatedoff, on an unknown stream, towards a less known ocean. Standingon the curb of the Boulevard, one could see as much as thoughone stood by the side of the Emperor or in command of an armycorps. The effect was lurid. The public seemed to look on thewar, as it had looked on the wars of Louis XIV and Francis I, asa branch of decorative art. The French, like true artists, alwaysLouis XIV practised it;regarded war as one of the fine arts.Napoleon I perfected it; and Napoleon III had till then pursuedit in the same spirit with singular success. In Paris, in July, 1 870,the war was brought out like an opera of Meyerbeer. One feltone's self a supernumerary hired to fill the scene. Every eveningat the theatre the comedy was interrupted by order, and one stoodup by order, to join in singing the Marseillaise to order. For nearlytwenty years one had been forbidden to sing the Marseillaise underany circumstances, but at last regiment after regiment marchedthrough the streets shouting "Marchons!" while the bystanderscared not enough to join. Patriotism seemed to have been broughtout of the Government stores, and distributed by grammes percapita. One had seen one's own people dragged unwillingly intoa war, and had watched one's own regiments march to the frontwithout sign of enthusiasm; on the contrary, most serious, anx-ious, and conscious of the whole weight of the crisis; but in Parisevery one conspired to ignore the crisis, which every one felt athand. Here was education for the million, but the lesson was in-Superficially Napoleon and his Ministers and marshalstricate.were playing a game against Thiers and Gambetta. A bystanderknew almost as little as they did about the result. How couldAdams prophesy that in another year or two, when he spoke of hisParis and its tastes, people would smile at his dotage?As soon as he could, he fled to England and once more tookrefuge in the profound peace of Wenlock Abbey. Only the few re-maining monks, undisturbed by the brutalities of Henry VIII —Chaos291three or four young Englishmen — survived there, with MilnesGaskell acting as Prior. The August sun was warm; the calm of theAbbey was ten times secular; not a discordant sound — hardlya sound of any sort except the cawing of the ancient rookery atsunset — broke the stillness; and, after the excitement of the lastmonth, one felt a palpable haze of peace brooding over the Edgeand the Welsh Marches. Since the reign of Pteraspis, nothing hadgreatly changed; nothing except the monks. Lying on the turf,the ground littered with newspapers, the monks studied the warcorrespondence. In one respect Adams had succeeded in educat-ing himself; he had learned to follow a campaign.While at Wenlock, he received a letter from President Eliotinviting him to take an Assistant Professorship of History, to becreated shortly at Harvard College. After waiting ten or a dozenyears for some one to show consciousness of his existence, even aTerebratula would be pleased and grateful for a compliment whichimplied that the new President of Harvard College wanted hishelp; but Adams knew nothing about history, and much less aboutteaching, while he knew more than enough about Harvard Col-lege; and wrote at once to thank President Eliot, with much re-gret that the honor should be above his powers. His mind wasfull of other matters. The summer, from which he had expectedonly amusement and social relations with new people, had endedin the most intimate personal tragedy, and the most terrific politi-cal convulsion he had ever known or was likely to know. He hadfailed in every object of his trip. The Quarterlies had refused hisbest essay. He had made no acquaintances and hardly picked upthe old ones. He sailed from Liverpool, on September 1, to beginagain where he had started two years before, but with no longer ahope of attaching himself to a President or a party or a press. Hewas a free lance and no other career stood in sight or mind. Tothat point education had brought him.Yet he found, on reaching home, that he had not done quite sobadly as he feared. His article on the Session in the July North292The Education of Henry AdamsAmerican had made a success. Though he could not quite see whatpartisan object it served, he heard with flattered astonishment thatit had been reprinted by the Democratic National Committee andcirculated as a campaign document by the hundred thousand cop-ies. He was henceforth in opposition, do what he might; and aMassachusetts Democrat, say what he pleased; while his only re-ward or return for this partisan service consisted in being for-mally answered by Senator Timothy Howe, of Wisconsin, in aRepublican campaign document, presumed to be also freely cir-culated, in which the Senator, besides refuting his opinions, didhim the honor — most unusual and picturesque in a Senator'srhetoric — of likening him to a begonia.The begonia is, or then was, a plant of such senatorial qualitiesas to make the simile, in intention, most flattering. Far from charm-ing in its refinement, the begonia was remarkable for curious andshowy foliage; it was conspicuous; it seemed to have no usefulpurpose; and it insisted on standing always in the most prominentpositions. Adams would have greatly liked to be a begonia inWashington, for this was rather his ideal of the successful states-still more when the Westminsterman, and he thought about itReview for October brought him his article on the Gold Conspiracy,which was also instantly pirated on a great scale. Piratical he washimself henceforth driven to be, and he asked only to be pirated,for he was sure not to be paid; but the honors of piracy resemble thecolors of the begonia; they are showy but not useful. Here wasa tour de force he had never dreamed himself equal to performing:two long, dry, quarterly, thirty or forty page articles, appearing inquick succession, and pirated for audiences running well into thehundred thousands; and not one person, man or woman, offeringhim so much as a congratulation, except to call him a begonia.Had this been all, life might have gone on very happily as before,but the ways of America to a young person of literary and politicaltastes were such as the so-called evolution of civilized man hadnot before evolved. No sooner had Adams made at WashingtonChaos293what he modestly hoped was a sufficient success, than his wholefamily set on him to drag him away. For the first time since 1861his father interposed; his mother entreated; and his brother Charlesargued and urged that he should come to Harvard College. Charleshad views of further joint operations in a new field. He said thatHenry had done at Washington all he could possibly do; that hisposition there wanted solidity; that he was, after all, an adven-turer; that a few years in Cambridge would give him personalweight; that his chief function was not to be that of teacher, butthat of editing the North American Review which was to be coupledwith the professorship, and would lead to the daily press. In short,that he needed the university more than the university neededhim.Henry knew the university well enough to know that the de-partment of history was controlled by one of the most astuteand ideal administrators in the world — Professor Gurney — andthat it was Gurney who had established the new professorship,and had cast his net over Adams to carry the double load ofmediaeval history and the Review. He could see no relation what-ever between himself and a professorship. He sought educa-tion; he did not sell it. He knew no history; he knew only a fewhistorians ; his ignorance was mischievous because it was literary,accidental, indifferent. On the other hand he knew Gurney, andfelt much influenced by his advice. One cannot take one's selfquite seriously in such matters; it could not much affect the sumof solar energies whether one went on dancing with girls in Wash-ington, or began talking to boys at Cambridge. The good peoplewho thought it did matter had a sort of right to guide. One couldnot reject their advice; still less disregard their wishes.The sum of the matter was that Henry went out to Cambridgeand had a few words with President Eliot which seemed to himalmost as American as the talk about diplomacy with his fatherten years before. "But, Mr. President," urged Adams, "I knownothing about Mediaeval History." With the courteous manner294The Education of Henry Adamsand bland smile so familiar for the next generation of Americans,Mr. Eliot mildly but firmly replied, "If you will point out tome any one who knows more, Mr. Adams, I will appoint him."The answer was neither logical nor convincing, but Adams couldnot meet it without overstepping his privileges. He could notsay that, under the circumstances, the appointment of any pro-fessor at all seemed to him unnecessary.So, at twenty-four hours' notice, he broke his life in halves againin order to begin a new education, on lines he had not chosen, insubjects for which he cared less than nothing; in a place he didnot love, and before a future which repelled. Thousands of menhave to do the same thing, but his case was peculiar because hehad no need to do it. He did it because his best and wisest friendsurged it, and he never could make up his mind whether they wereright or not. To him this kind of education was always false. Forhimself he had no doubts. He thought it a mistake; but hisopinion did not prove that it was one, since, in all probability,whatever he did would be more or less a mistake. He had reachedcross-roads of education which all led astray. What he could gainat Harvard College he did not know, but in any case it was nothinghe wanted. What he lost at Washington he could partly see, butin any case it was not fortune. Grant's administration wreckedmen by thousands, but profited few. Perhaps Mr. Fish was thesolitary exception. One might search the whole list of Congress,Judiciary, and Executive during the twenty-five years 1870 to1895, and find little but damaged reputation. The period was poorin purpose and barren in results.Henry Adams, if not the rose, lived as near it as any politician,and knew, more or less, all the men in any way prominent atWashington, or knew all about them. Among them, in his opin-ion, the best equipped, the most active-minded, and most indus-trious was Abram Hewitt, who sat in Congress for a dozen years,between 1874 and 1886, sometimes leading the House and al-ways wielding influence second to none. With nobody did AdamsChaos295form closer or longer relations than with Mr. Hewitt, whom heregarded as the most useful public man in Washington; and hewas the more struck by Hewitt's saying, at the end of his laboriouscareer as legislator, that he left behind him no permanent result ex-cept the Act consolidating the Surveys. Adams knew no other manwho had done so much, unless Mr. Sherman's legislation is acceptedas an instance of success. Hewitt's nearest rival would probablyhave been Senator Pendleton who stood father to civil servicereform in 1882, an attempt to correct a vice that should neverhave been allowed to be born. These were the men who succeeded.The press stood in much the same light. No editor, no politicalwriter, and no public administrator achieved enough good repu-tation to preserve his memory for twenty years. A number of themachieved bad reputations, or damaged good ones that had beengained in the Civil War. On the whole, even for Senators, diplo-mats, and Cabinet officers, the period was wearisome and stale.None of Adams's generation profited by public activity unlessit were William C. Whitney, and even he could not be induced toreturn to it. Such ambitions as these were out of one's reach, butsupposing one tried for what was feasible, attached one's selfclosely to the Garfields, Arthurs, Frelinghuysens, Blaines, Bayards,or Whitneys, who happened to hold office; and supposing one askedfor the mission to Belgium or Portugal, and obtained it; supposingone served a term as Assistant Secretary or Chief of Bureau; or,finally, supposing one had gone as sub-editor on the New YorkTribune or Times — how much more education would one havegained than by going to Harvard College?These questionsseemed better worth an answer than most of the questions onexamination papers at college or in the civil service; all the morebecause one never found an answer to them, then or afterwards,and because, to his mind, the value of American society alto-gether was mixed up with the value of Washington.At first, the simple beginner, struggling with principles, wantedto throw off responsibility on the American people, whose bare296The Education of Henry Adamsand toiling shoulders had to carry the load of every social orpolitical stupidity; but the American people had no more to doAmerican characterwith it than with the customs of Peking.might perhaps account for it, but what accounted for Americancharacter? All Boston, all New England, and all respectable NewYork, including Charles Francis Adams the father and CharlesFrancis Adams the son, agreed that Washington was no place fora respectable young man. All Washington, including Presidents,Cabinet officers, Judiciary, Senators, Congressmen, and clerks,expressed the same opinion, and conspired to drive away everyyoung man who happened to be there, or tried to approach. Notone young man of promise remained in the Government service.All drifted into opposition. The Government did not want themin Washington. Adams's case was perhaps the strongest becausehe thought he had done well. He was forced to guess it, since heknew no one who would have risked so extravagant a step as thatof encouraging a young man in a literary career, or even in a po-litical one; society forbade it, as well as residence in a politicalcapital; but Harvard College must have seen some hope for him,since it made him professor against his will; even the publishersand editors of the North American Review must have felt a certainamount of confidence in him, since they put the Review in his hands.After all, the Review was the first literary power in America, eventhough it paid almost as little in gold as the United States Treas-ury. The degree of Harvard College might bear a value as ephem-eral as the commission of a President of the United States; butthe government of the college, measured by money alone, andpatronage, was a matter of more importance than that of somebranches of the national service. In social position, the college wasthe superior of them all put together.In knowledge, she couldassert no superiority, since the Government made no claims,and prided itself on ignorance. The service of Harvard Collegewas distinctly honorable; perhaps the most honorable in America;and if Harvard College thought Henry Adams worth employing atChaos297four dollars a day, why should Washington decline his serviceswhen he asked nothing? Why should he be dragged from a careerhe liked in a place he loved, into a career he detested, in a placeand climate he shunned? Was it enough to satisfy him, that allAmerica should call Washington barren and dangerous? Whatmade Washington more dangerous than New York ?The American character showed singular limitations which some-times drove the student of civilized man to despair. Crushed byhis own ignorance — lost in the darkness of his own gropings —the scholar finds himself jostled of a sudden by a crowd of menwho seem to him ignorant that there is a thing called ignorance;who have forgotten how to amuse themselves; who cannot evenunderstand that they are bored. The American thought of him-self as a restless, pushing, energetic, ingenious person, alwaysawake and trying to get ahead of his neighbors. Perhaps this ideaof the national character might be correct for New York or Chicago;it was not correct for Washington. There the American showedhimself, four times in five, as a quiet, peaceful, shy figure, rather inthe mould of Abraham Lincoln, somewhat sad, sometimes pa-thetic, once tragic; or like Grant, inarticulate, uncertain, distrust-ful of himself, still more distrustful of others, and awed by money.That the American, by temperament, worked to excess, was true;work and whiskey were his stimulants; work was a form of vice;but he never cared much for money or power after he earned them.The amusement of the pursuit was all the amusement he got fromit; he had no use for wealth. Jim Fisk alone seemed to know whathe wanted; Jay Gould never did. At Washington one met mostlysuch true Americans, but if one wanted to know them better, onewent to study them in Europe. Bored, patient, helpless; patheti-cally dependent on his wife and daughters.; indulgent to excess;mostly a modest, decent, excellent, valuable citizen ; the Americanwas to be met at every railway station in Europe, carefully ex-plaining to every listener that the happiest day of his life would bethe day he should land on the pier at New York. He was ashamed298The Education of Henry Adamsto be amused; his mind no longer answered to the stimulus of va-riety; he could not face a new thought. All his immense strength,his intense nervous energy, his keen analytic perceptions, wereoriented in one direction, and he could not change it. Congresswas full of such men; in the Senate, Sumner was almost the onlyexception; in the Executive, Grant and Boutwell were varieties ofthe type — political specimens — pathetic in their helplessness todo anything with power when it came to them. They knew nothow to amuse themselves; they could not conceive how otherpeople were amused. Work, whiskey, and cards were life. The at-mosphere of political Washington was theirs — or was supposedby the outside world to be in their control — and this was thereason why the outside world judged that Washington was fataleven for a young man of thirty-two, who had passed through thewhole variety of temptations, in every capital of Europe, for adozen years; who never played cards, and who loathed whiskey.