CHAPTER XXXIIIA DYNAMIC THEORY OF HISTORY (1904)ADYNAMIC theory, like most theories, begins by beg-ging the question: it defines Progress as the develop-ment and economy of Forces. Further, it defines forceas anything that does, or helps to do work. Man is a force; so isthe sun; so is a mathematical point, though without dimensionsor known existence.Man commonly begs the question again by taking for grantedthat he captures the forces. A dynamic theory, assigning attrac-tive force to opposing bodies in proportion to the law of mass,takes for granted that the forces of nature capture man. Thesum of force attracts; the feeble atom or molecule called man isattracted; he suffers education or growth; he is the sum of theforces that attract him; his body and his thought are alike theirproduct; the movement of the forces controls the progress of hismind, since he can know nothing but the motions which impingeon his senses, whose sum makes education.For convenience as an image, the theory may liken man to aspider in its web, watching for chance prey. Forces of naturedance like flies before the net, and the spider pounces on themwhen it can; but it makes many fatal mistakes, though its theoryof force is sound. The spider-mind acquires a faculty of memory,and, with it, a singular skill of analysis and synthesis, taking apartand putting together in different relations the meshes of its trap.Man had in the beginning no power of analysis or synthesis ap-proaching that of the spider, or even of the honey-bee; but he hadacute sensibility to the higher forces. Fire taught him secretsthat no other animal could learn; running water probably taughthim even more, especially in his first lessons of mechanics; theanimals helped to educate him, trusting themselves into his handsA Dynamic Theory of History475merely for the sake of their food, and carrying his burdens orsupplying his clothing; the grasses and grains were academies ofstudy. With little or no effort on his part, all these forces formedhis thought, induced his action, and even shaped his figure.Long before history began, his education was complete, for therecord could not have been started until he had been taught torecord. The universe that had formed him took shape in his mindas a reflection of his own unity, containing all forces except him-self. Either separately, or in groups, or as a whole, these forcesnever ceased to act on him, enlarging his mind as they enlargedthe surface foliage of a vegetable, and the mind needed only torespond, as the forests did, to these attractions. Susceptibility tothe highest forces is the highest genius; selection between them isthe highest science; their mass is the highest educator. Man alwaysmade, and still makes, grotesque blunders in selecting and mea-suring forces, taken at random from the heap, but he never madea mistake in the value he set on the whole, which he symbolizedas unity and worshipped as God. To this day, his attitude to-wards it has never changed, though science can no longer give toforce a name.Man's function as a force of nature was to assimilate otherforces as he assimilated food. He called it the love of power. Hefelt his own feebleness, and he sought for an ass or a camel, a bowor a sling, to widen his range of power, as he sought a fetish or aplanet in the world beyond. He cared little to know its immediateuse, but he could afford to throw nothing away which he couldconceive to have possible value in this or any other existence. Hewaited for the object to teach him its use, or want of use, and theprocess was slow. He may have gone on for hundreds of thousandsof years, waiting for Nature to tell him her secrets; and, to hisrivals among the monkeys, Nature has taught no more than attheir start; but certain lines of force were capable of acting onindividual apes, and mechanically selecting types of race or sourcesof variation. The individual that responded or reacted to lines of476The Education of Henry Adamsnew force then was possibly the same individual that reacts on itnow, and his conception of the unity seems never to have changedin spite of the increasing diversity of forces ; but the theory of varia-tion is an affair of other science than history, and matters nothingto dynamics. The individual or the race would be educated onthe same lines of illusion, which, according to Arthur Balfour, hadnot essentially varied down to the year 1900.To the highest attractive energy, man gave the name of divine,and for its control he invented the science called Religion, a wordwhich meant, and still means, cultivation of occult force whetherin detail or mass. Unable to define Force as a unity, man sym-bolized it and pursued it, both in himself, and in the infinite, asphilosophy and theology; the mind is itself the subtlest of allknown forces, and its self-introspection necessarily created a sciencewhich had the singular value of lifting his education, at the start,to the finest, subtlest, and broadest training both in analysis andsynthesis, so that, if language is a test, he must have reached hishighest powers early in his history; while the mere motive re-mained as simple an appetite for power as the tribal greed whichled him to trap an elephant. Hunger, whether for food or for theinfinite, sets in motion multiplicity and infinity of thought, andthe sure hope of gaining a share of infinite power in eternal lifewould lift most minds to effort.He had reached this completeness five thousand years ago, andadded nothing to his stock of known forces for a very long time.The mass of nature exercised on him so feeble an attraction thatone can scarcely account for his apparent motion. Only a his-torian of very exceptional knowledge would venture to say at whatdate between 3000 B.C. and 1000 a.d., the momentum of Europe wasgreatest; but such progress as the world made consisted in econ-omies of energy rather than in its development; it was proved inmathematics, measured by names like Archimedes, Aristarchus,Ptolemy, and Euclid; or in Civil Law, measured by a number ofnames which Adams had begun life by failing to learn; or in coinage,A Dynamic Theory of History477which was most beautiful near its beginning, and most barbar-ous at its close; or it was shown in roads, or the size of ships, orharbors; or by the use of metals, instruments, and writing; all ofthem economies of force, sometimes more forceful than the forcesthey helped; but the roads were still travelled by the horse, theass, the camel, or the slave; the ships were still propelled by sailsor oars; the lever, the spring, and the screw bounded the regionof applied mechanics. Even the metals were old.Much the same thing could be said of religious or supernaturalforces. Down to the year 300 of the Christian era they were littlechanged, and in spite of Plato and the sceptics were more appa-The experience of three thousandrently chaotic than ever.years had educated society to feel the vastness of Nature, and theinfinity of her resources of power, but even this increase of attrac-tion had not yet caused economies in its methods of pursuit.There the Western world stood till the year a.d. 305, when theEmperor Diocletian abdicated ; and there it was that Adams brokedown on the steps of Ara Coeli, his path blocked by the scandalousfailure of civilization at the moment it had achieved complete suc-cess. In the year 305 the empire had solved the problems of Eu-rope more completely than they have ever been solved since. ThePax Romana, the Civil Law, and Free Trade should, in four hun-dred years, have put Europe far in advance of the point reachedby modern society in the four hundred years since 1500, when con-ditions were less simple.The efforts to explain, or explain away, this scandal had beenincessant, but none suited Adams unless it were the economictheory of adverse exchanges and exhaustion of minerals; butnations are not ruined beyond a certain point by adverse exchanges,and Rome had by no means exhausted her resources. On the con-trary, the empire developed resources and energies quite astound-ing. No other four hundred years of history before a.d. 1800 knewanything like it; and although some of these developments, likethe Civil Law, the roads, aqueducts, and harbors, were rather—478The Education of Henry Adamseconomies than force, yet in northwestern Europe alone the empirehad developed three energies— France, England, and Germanycompetent to master the world. The trouble seemed rather to bethat the empire developed too much energy, and too fast.A dynamic law requires that two masses — nature and man— must go on, reacting upon each other, without stop, as the sunand a comet react on each other, and that any appearance ofstoppage is illusive. The theory seems to exact excess, rather thandeficiency, of action and reaction to account for the dissolution ofthe Roman Empire, which should, as a problem of mechanics,have been torn to pieces by acceleration. If the student means totry the experiment of framing a dynamic law, he must assignvalues to the forces of attraction that caused the trouble; and inthis case he has them in plain evidence. With the relentless logicthat stamped Roman thought, the empire, which had establishedunity on earth, could not help establishing unity in heaven.Itwas induced by its dynamic necessities to economize the gods.The Church has never ceased to protest against the charge thatChristianity ruined the empire, and, with its usual force, haspointed out that its reforms alone saved the State. Any dynamictheory gladly admits it. All it asks is to find and follow the forcethat attracts. The Church points out this force in the Cross, andhistory needs only to follow it. The empire loudly asserted its mo-tive. Good taste forbids saying that Constantine the Great specu-lated as audaciously as a modern stock-broker on values of whichhe knew at the utmost only the volume; or that he merged all un-certain forces into a single trust, which he enormously over-capitalized, and forced on the market; but this is the substance ofwhat Constantine himself said in his Edict of Milan in the year313, which admitted Christianity into the Trust of State Religions.Regarded as an Act of Congress, it runs: "We have resolved togrant to Christians as well as all others the liberty to practise thereligion they prefer, in order that whatever exists of divinity orcelestial power may help and favor us and all who are under ourA Dynamic Theory of History479government." The empire pursued power — not merely spiritualbut physical — in the sense in which Constantine issued his armyorder the year before, at the battle of the Milvian Bridge: In hocsigno vinces! using the Cross as a train of artillery, which, to hismind, it was. Society accepted it in the same character. Eightyyears afterwards, Theodosius marched against his rival Eugenewith the Cross for physical champion; and Eugene raised theimage of Hercules to fight for the pagans; while society on bothsides looked on, as though it were a boxing-match, to decide a finaltest of force between the divine powers. The Church was power-less to raise the ideal. What is now known as religion affected themind of old society but little. The laity, the people, the million,almost to a man, bet on the gods as they bet on a horse.No doubt the Church did all it could to purify the process, butsociety was almost wholly pagan in its point of view, and wasdrawn to the Cross because, in its system of physics, the Cross hadabsorbed all the old occult or fetish-power. The symbol representedthe sum of nature — the Energy of modern science — and societybelieved it to be as real as X-rays; perhaps it was! The emperorsused it like gunpowder in politics; the physicians used it like raysin medicine; the dying clung to it as the quintessence of force, toprotect them from the forces of evil on their road to the nextlife.Throughout these four centuries the empire knew that religiondisturbed economy, for even the cost of heathen incense affectedthe exchanges ; but no one could afford to buy or construct a costlyand complicated machine when he could hire an occult force attrifling expense. Fetish-power was cheap and satisfactory, downto a certain point. Turgot and Auguste Comte long ago fixedthis stage of economy as a necessary phase of social education, andhistorians seem now to accept it as the only gain yet made to-wards scientific history. Great numbers of educated people —perhaps a majority — cling to the method still, and practise itmore or less strictly; but, until quite recently, no other was known.480The Education of Henry AdamsThe only occult power at man's disposal was fetish. Against it,no mechanical force could compete except within narrow limits.Outside of occult or fetish-power, the Roman world was incred-ibly poor. It knew but one productive energy resembling a modern,machine — the slave. No artificial force of serious value was ap-plied to production or transportation, and when society developeditself so rapidly in political and social lines, it had no other meansof keeping its economy on the same level than to extend its slave-system and its fetish-system to the utmost.The result might have been stated in a mathematical formula asearly as the time of Archimedes, six hundred years before Romefell. The economic needs of a violently centralizing society forcedthe empire to enlarge its slave-system until the slave-system con-sumed itself and the empire too, leaving society no resource butfurther enlargement of its religious system in order to compensatefor the losses and horrors of the failure. For a vicious circle, itsmathematical completeness approached perfection. The dynamiclaw of attraction and reaction needed only a Newton to fix it inalgebraic form.At last, in 410, Alaric sacked Rome, and the slave-ridden, agri-cultural, uncommercial Western Empire — the poorer and lessChristianized half — went to pieces.Society, though terriblyshocked by the horrors of Alaric's storm, felt still more deeply thedisappointment in its new power, the Cross, which had failed toprotect its Church. The outcry against the Cross became so loudamong Christians that its literary champion, Bishop Augustineof Hippo — a town between Algiers and Tunis — was led towrite a famous treatise in defence of the Cross, familiar still toevery scholar, in which he defended feebly the mechanical value ofthe symbol — arguing only that pagan symbols equally failed— but insisted on its spiritual value in the Civitas Dei which hadtaken the place of the Civitas Romae in human interest. "Grantedthat we have lost all we had! Have we lost faith? Have we lostpiety? Have we lost the wealth of the inner man who is richA Dynamic Theory of History481before God? These are the wealth of Christians!" The CivitasDei, in its turn, became the sum of attraction for the Westernworld, though it also showed the same weakness in mechanics thathad wrecked the Civitas Romae. St. Augustine and his people per-ished at Hippo towards 430, leaving society in appearance dull tonew attraction.Yet the attraction remained constant. The delight of experi-menting on occult force of every kind is such as to absorb all thefree thought of the human race. The gods did their work; historyhas no quarrel with them; they led, educated, enlarged the mind;taught knowledge; betrayed ignorance; stimulated effort. So littleheritable; whether material or spiritual; whether animal, vegetableis known about the mind — whether social, racial, sexual oror mineral — that history is inclined to avoid it altogether; butnothing forbids one to admit, for convenience, that it may assimi-late food like the body, storing new force and growing, like a for-est, with the storage. The brain has not yet revealed its mysteri-ous mechanism of gray matter. Never has Nature offered it soviolent a stimulant as when she opened to it the possibility ofsharing infinite power in eternal life, and it might well need athousand years of prolonged and intense experiment to prove thevalue of the motive. During these so-called Middle Ages, the West-ern mind reacted in many forms, on many sides, expressing itsmotives in modes, such as Romanesque and Gothic architecture,glass windows and mosaic walls, sculpture and poetry, war andlove, which still affect some people as the noblest work of man, sothat, even to-day, great masses of idle and ignorant tourists travelfrom far countries to look at Ravenna and San Marco, Palermoand Pisa, Assisi, Cordova, Chartres, with vague notions about theforce that created them, but with a certain surprise that a socialmind of such singular energy and unity should still lurk in theirshadows.The tourist more rarely visits Constantinople or studies thearchitecture of Sancta Sofia, but when he does, he is distinctly con-482The Education of Henry Adamsscious of forces not quite the same. Justinian has not the simplic-ity of Charlemagne. The Eastern Empire showed an activity andvariety of forces that classical Europe had never possessed. Thenavy of Nicephoras Phocas in the tenth century would have anni-hilated in half an hour any navy that Carthage or Athens or Romeever set afloat. The dynamic scheme began by asserting ratherrecklessly that between the Pyramids (b.c. 3000), and the Cross(a.d. 300), no new force affected Western progress, and antiquari-ans may easily dispute the fact; but in any case the motive influ-ence, old or new, which raised both Pyramids and Cross was thesame attraction of power in a future life that raised the dome ofSancta Sofia and the Cathedral at Amiens, however much it wasaltered, enlarged, or removed to distance in space. Therefore, nosingle event has more puzzled historians than the sudden, unex-plained appearance of at least two new natural forces of the highesteducational value in mechanics, for the first time within record ofhistory. Literally, these two forces seemed to drop from the skyat the precise moment when the Cross on one side and the Crescenton the other, proclaimed the complete triumph of the Civitas Dei.Had the Manichean doctrine of Good and Evil as rival deities beenorthodox, it would alone have accounted for this simultaneous vic-tory of hostile powers.Of the compass, as a step towards demonstration of the dy-namic law, one may confidently say that it proved, better thanany other force, the widening scope of the mind, since it widenedimmensely the range of contact between nature and thought.The compass educated. This must prove itself as needing noproof.Of Greek fire and gunpowder, the same thing cannot certainlybe said, for they have the air of accidents due to the attractionof religious motives. They belong to the spiritual world; or to thedoubtful ground of Magic which lay between Good and Evil.They were chemical forces, mostly explosives, which acted andstill act as the most violent educators ever known to man, butA Dynamic Theory of History483they were justly feared as diabolic, and whatever insolence manmay have risked towards the milder teachers of his infancy, hewas an abject pupil towards explosives. The Sieur de Joinville lefta record of the energy with which the relatively harmless Greekfire educated and enlarged the French mind in a single night in theyear 1249, when the crusaders were trying to advance on Cairo.The good king St. Louis and all his staff dropped on their kneesat every fiery flame that flew by, praying — "God have pity onus!" and never had man more reason to call on his gods thanthey, for the battle of religion between Christian and Saracen wastrifling compared with that of education between gunpowder andthe Cross.The fiction that society educated itself, or aimed at a consciouspurpose, was upset by the compass and gunpowder which draggedand drove Europe at will through frightful bogs of learning. Atfirst, the apparent lag for want of volume in the new energies lastedone or two centuries, which closed the great epochs of emotion bythe Gothic cathedrals and scholastic theology. The moment hadGreek beauty and more than Greek unity, but it was brief; andfor another century or two, Western society seemed to float inspace without apparent motion. Yet the attractive mass of nature'senergy continued to attract, and education became more rapidSociety began to resist, but the individualthan ever before.showed greater and greater insistence, without realizing what hewas doing. When the Crescent drove the Cross in ignominy fromConstantinople in 1453, Gutenberg and Fust were printing theirfirst Bible at Mainz under the impression that they were helpingthe Cross. When Columbus discovered the West Indies in 1492,the Church looked on it as a victory of the Cross. When Lutherand Calvin upset Europe half a century later, they were trying,like St. Augustine, to substitute the Civitas Dei for the CivitasRomae. When the Puritans set out for New England in 1620, theytoo were looking to found a Civitas Dei in State Street; and whenBunyan made his Pilgrimage in 1678, he repeated St. Jerome. Even484The Education of Henry Adamswhen, after centuries of license, the Church reformed its discipline,and, to prove it, burned Giordano Bruno in 1600, besides condemn-ing Galileo in 1630 — as science goes on repeating to us every day— it condemned anarchists, not atheists. None of the astronomerswere irreligious men; all of them made a point of magnifying Godthrough his works; a form of science which did their religion nocredit. Neither Galileo nor Kepler, neither Spinoza nor Descartes,neither Leibnitz nor Newton, any more than Constantine theGreat — if so much — doubted Unity. The utmost range of theirheresies reached only its personality.This persistence of thought-inertia is the leading idea of modernhistory. Except as reflected in himself, man has no reason forassuming unity in the universe, or an ultimate substance, or aprime-motor. The a priori insistence on this unity ended by fatigu-ing the more active — or reactive — minds; and Lord Bacon triedto stop it. He urged society to lay aside the idea of evolving theuniverse from a thought, and to try evolving thought from theuniverse. The mind should observe and register forces — takethem apart and put them together — without assuming unity atall. "Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed." "The imagina-tion must be given not wings but weights." As Galileo reversedthe action of earth and sun, Bacon reversed the relation of thoughtto force. The mind was thenceforth to follow the movement ofmatter, and unity must be left to shift for itself.The revolution in attitude seemed voluntary, but in fact was asmechanical as the fall of a feather. Man created nothing. After1500, the speed of progress so rapidly surpassed man's gait as toalarm every one, as though it were the acceleration of a fallingbody which the dynamic theory takes it to be. Lord Bacon was asmuch astonished by it as the Church was, and with reason. Sud-denly society felt itself dragged into situations altogether new andanarchic — situations which it could not affect, but which pain-fully affected it. Instinct taught it that the universe in its thoughtmust be in danger when its reflection lost itself in space. The;A Dynamic Theory of History485danger was all the greater because men of science covered it with"larger synthesis/' and poets called the undevout astronomer mad.Society knew better. Yet the telescope held it rigidly standing onits head ; the microscope revealed a universe that defied the sensesgunpowder killed whole races that lagged behind; the compasscoerced the most imbruted mariner to act on the impossible ideathat the earth was round ; the press drenched Europe with anarch-ism. Europe saw itself, violently resisting, wrenched into falsepositions, drawn along new lines as a fish that is caught on a hook;but unable to understand by what force it was controlled. Theresistance was often bloody, sometimes humorous, always con-stant. Its contortions in the eighteenth century are best studiedin the wit of Voltaire, but all history and all philosophy from Mon-taigne and Pascal to Schopenhauer and Nietzsche deal with nothingelse; and still, throughout it all, the Baconian law held good;thought did not evolve nature, but nature evolved thought. Notone considerable man of science dared face the stream of thought;and the whole number of those who acted, like Franklin, as electricconductors of the new forces from nature to man, down to the year1800, did not exceed a few score, confined to a few towns in westernEurope. Asia refused to be touched by the stream, and America,except for Franklin, stood outside.Very slowly the accretion of these new forces, chemical andmechanical, grew in volume until they acquired sufficient mass totake the place of the old religious science, substituting their attrac-tion for the attractions of the Civitas Dei, but the process remainedthe same. Nature, not mind, did the work that the sun does onthe planets. Man depended more and more absolutely on forcesother than his own, and on instruments which superseded his senses.Bacon foretold it: "Neither the naked hand nor the understanding,left to itself, can effect much. It is by instruments and helps thatthe work is done." Once done, the mind resumed its illusion, andsociety forgot its impotence; but no one better than Bacon knewits tricks, and for his true followers science always meant self-486The Education of Henry Adamsto impulse from without.restraint, obedience,"Non fingendum aut excogitandum sed inveniendum quid Naturafaciat aut ferat."sensitivenessapple; like Franklin, flew a kite; like Watt, played with a tea-kettleThe success of this method staggers belief, and even to-day canbe treated by history only as a miracle of growth, like the sportsof nature. Evidently a new variety of mind had appeared. Cer-tain men merely held out their hands — like Newton, watched an— and great forces of nature stuck to them as though she wereplaying ball. Governments did almost nothing but resist. Evengunpowder and ordnance, the great weapon of government, showedlittle development between 1400 and 1800. Society was hostile orindifferent, as Priestley and Jenner, and even Fulton, with reasoncomplained in the most advanced societies in the world, while itsresistance became acute wherever the Church held control; untilall mankind seemed to draw itself out in a long series of groups,dragged on by an attractive power in advance, which even theleaders obeyed without understanding, as the planets obeyedgravity, or the trees obeyed heat and light.The influx of new force was nearly spontaneous. The reactionof mind on the mass of nature seemed not greater than that of acomet on the sun; and had the spontaneous influx of force stoppedin Europe, society must have stood still, or gone backward, as inAsia or Africa. Then only economies of process would have countedas new force, and society would have been better pleased; for theidea that new force must be in itself a good is only an animal orvegetable instinct. As Nature developed her hidden energies, theytended to become destructive. Thought itself became tortured,suffering reluctantly, impatiently, painfully, the coercion of newmethod. Easy thought had always been movement of inertia, andmostly mere sentiment; but even the processes of mathematicsmeasured feebly the needs of force.The stupendous acceleration after 1800 ended in 1900 with theappearance of the new class of supersensual forces, before which theA Dynamic Theory of History487man of science stood at first as bewildered and helpless as, in thefourth century, a priest of Isis before the Cross of Christ.This, then, or something like this, would be a dynamic formulaof history. Any schoolboy knows enough to object at once that itis the oldest and most universal of all theories. Church and State,theology and philosophy, have always preached it, differing onlyin the allotment of energy between nature and man. Whether theattractive energy has been called God or Nature, the mechanismhas been always the same, and history is not obliged to decidewhether the Ultimate tends to a purpose or not, or whether ulti-mate energy is one or many. Every one admits that the will is afree force, habitually decided by motives. No one denies thatmotives exist adequate to decide the will; even though it may notalways be conscious of them. Science has proved that forces, sen-sible and occult, physical and metaphysical, simple and complex,surround, traverse, vibrate, rotate, repel, attract, without stop;that man's senses are conscious of few, and only in a partial degree;but that, from the beginning of organic existence, his consciousnesshas been induced, expanded, trained in the lines of his sensitive-ness; and that the rise of his faculties from a lower power to ahigher, or from a narrower to a wider field, may be due to thefunction of assimilating and storing outside force or forces. Thereis nothing unscientific in the idea that, beyond the lines of forcefelt by the senses, the universe may be — as it has always been —either a supersensuous chaos or a divine unity, which irresistiblyattracts, and is either life or death to penetrate. Thus far, religion,philosophy, and science seem to go hand in hand. The schoolsbegin their vital battle only there. In the earlier stages of progress,the forces to be assimilated were simple and easy to absorb, but,as the mind of man enlarged its range, it enlarged the field of com-plexity, and must continue to do so, even into chaos, until thereservoirs of sensuous or supersensuous energies are exhausted, orcease to affect him, or until he succumbs to their excess.488The Education of Henry AdamsFor past history, this way of grouping its sequences may answerfor a chart of relations, although any serious student would need toinvent another, to compare or correct its errors; but past historyis only a value of relation to the future, and this value is whollyone of convenience, which can be tested only by experiment. Anylaw of movement must include, to make it a convenience, somemechanical formula of acceleration.