CHAPTER XXVIIITHE HEIGHT OF KNOWLEDGE (1902)AMERICA has always taken tragedy lightly. Too busyto stop the activity of their twenty-million-horse-powersociety, Americans ignore tragic motives that wouldhave overshadowed the Middle Ages; and the world learns toregard assassination as a form of hysteria, and death as neurosis,to be treated by a rest-cure. Three hideous political murders, thatwould have fattened the Eumenides with horror, have thrownscarcely a shadow on the White House.The year 1901 was a year of tragedy that seemed to Hay tocentre on himself. First came, in summer, the accidental deathof his son, Del Hay. Close on the tragedy of his son, followed thatof his chief, "all the more hideous that we were so sure of hisrecovery." The world turned suddenly into a graveyard. " I haveacquired the funeral habit." "Nicolay is dying. I went to see himyesterday, and he did not know me." Among the letters of con-dolence showered upon him was one from Clarence King at Pasa-dena, "heart-breaking in grace and tenderness — the old Kingmanner"; and King himself "simply waiting till nature and thefoe have done their struggle." The tragedy of King impressed himintensely: "There you have it in the face!" he said — "the bestand brightest man of his generation, with talents immeasurablybeyond any of his contemporaries; with industry that has oftensickened me to witness it; with everything in his favor but blindluck; hounded by disaster from his cradle, with none of the joy oflife to which he was entitled, dying at last, with nameless suffering,"alone and uncared-for, in a California tavern. Qa vous amuse, la vie ?The first summons that met Adams, before he had even landedon the pier at New York, December 29, was to Clarence King's fu-neral, and from the funeral service he had no gayer road to travelThe Height of Knowledge417than that which led to Washington, where a revolution had oc-curred that must in any case have made the men of his age in-stantly old, but which, besides hurrying to the front the generationthat till then he had regarded as boys, could not fail to break thesocial ties that had till then held them all together.Qa vous amuse, la vie ? Honestly, the lessons of education werebecoming too trite. Hay himself, probably for the first time, felthalf glad that Roosevelt should want him to stay in office, if onlyto save himself the trouble of quitting; but to Adams all was pureloss. On that side, his education had been finished at school. Hisfriends in power were lost, and he knew life too well to risk totalwreck by trying to save them.As far as concerned Roosevelt, the chance was hopeless. Tothem at sixty-three, Roosevelt at forty-three could not be takenseriously in his old character, and could not be recovered in his newone. Power when wielded by abnormal energy is the most seriousof facts, and all Roosevelt's friends know that his restless and com-bative energy was more than abnormal. Roosevelt, more than anyother man living within the range of notoriety, showed the sin-gular primitive quality that belongs to ultimate matter — thequality that mediaeval theology assigned to God — he was pureact. With him wielding unmeasured power with immeasurableenergy, in the White House, the relation of age to youth — ofteacher to pupil — was altogether out of place; and no other waspossible. Even Hay's relation was a false one, while Adams'sceased of itself. History's truths are little valuable now; but humannature retains a few of its archaic, proverbial laws, and the wis-est courtier that ever lived — Lucius Seneca himself — must haveremained in some shade of doubt what advantage he should getfrom the power of his friend and pupil Nero Claudius, until, as agentleman past sixty, he received Nero's filial invitation to killhimself. Seneca closed the vast circle of his knowledge by learningthat a friend in power was a friend lost — a fact very much worthinsisting upon — while the gray-headed moth that had fluttered41 8The Education of Henry Adamsthrough many moth-administrations and had singed his wingsmore or less in them all, though he now slept nine months out ofthe twelve, acquired an instinct of self-preservation that kept himto the north side of La Fayette Square, and, after a sufficienthabitude of Presidents and Senators, deterred him from hoveringbetween them.Those who seek education in the paths of duty are always de-ceived by the illusion that power in the hands of friends is anadvantage to them. As far as Adams could teach experience, hewas bound to warn them that he had found it an invariable dis-aster. Power is poison. Its effect on Presidents had been alwaystragic, chiefly as an almost insane excitement at first, and a worsereaction afterwards; but also because no mind is so well balancedas to bear the strain of seizing unlimited force without habit orknowledge of it; and finding it disputed with him by hungry packsof wolves and hounds whose lives depend on snatching the carrion.Roosevelt enjoyed a singularly direct nature and honest intent,but he lived naturally in restless agitation that would have wornout most tempers in a month, and his first year of Presidencyshowed chronic excitement that made a friend tremble. The effectof unlimited power on limited mind is worth noting in Presidentsbecause it must represent the same process in society, and thepower of self-control must have limit somewhere in face of the con-trol of the infinite.Here, education seemed to see its first and last lesson, but thisis a matter of psychology which lies far down in the depths ofhistory and of science; it will recur in other forms. The personallesson is different. Roosevelt was lost, but this seemed no reasonwhy Hay and Lodge should also be lost, yet the result was mathe-matically certain. With Hay, it was only the steady decline ofstrength, and the necessary economy of force; but with Lodge itwas law of politics. He could not help himself, for his position asthe President's friend and independent statesman at once wasfalse, and he must be unsure in both relations.The Height of Knowledge419To a student, the importance of Cabot Lodge was great —much greater than that of the usual Senator — but it hung on hisposition in Massachusetts rather than on his control of Executivepatronage; and his standing in Massachusetts was highly insecure.Nowhere in America was society so complex or change so rapid.No doubt the Bostonian had always been noted for a certain chronicirritability — a sort of Bostonitis — which, in its primitive Puri-tan forms, seemed due to knowing too much of his neighbors, andthinking too much of himself. Many years earlier William M.Evarts had pointed out to Adams the impossibility of uniting NewEngland behind a New England leader. The trait led to good ends— such as admiration of Abraham Lincoln and George Washing-ton— but the virtue was exacting; for New England standardswere various, scarcely reconcilable with each other, and constantlymultiplying in number, until balance between them threatened tobecome impossible. The old ones were quite difficult enough —State Street and the banks exacted one stamp; the old Congrega-tional clergy another; Harvard College, poor in votes, but rich insocial influence, a third; the foreign element, especially the Irish,held aloof, and seldom consented to approve any one; the newsocialist class, rapidly growing, promised to become more exclusivethan the Irish. New power was disintegrating society, and settingindependent centres of force to work, until money had all it coulddo to hold the machine together. No one could represent it faith-fully as a whole.Naturally, Adams's sympathies lay strongly with Lodge, butthe task of appreciation was much more difficult in his case thanin that of his chief friend and scholar, the President. As a type forstudy, or a standard for education, Lodge was the more interestingof the two. Roosevelts are born and never can be taught; but Lodgewas a creature of teaching — Boston incarnate — the child of hislocal parentage; and while his ambition led him to be more, theintent, though virtuous, was — as Adams admitted in his own case— restless. An excellent talker, a voracious reader, a ready wit,42 oThe Education of Henry Adamsan accomplished orator, with a clear mind and a powerful memory,he could never feel perfectly at ease whatever leg he stood on, butshifted, sometimes with painful strain of temper, from one sensitivemuscle to another, uncertain whether to pose as an uncompromis-ing Yankee; or a pure American; or a patriot in the still pureratmosphere of Irish, Germans, or Jews; or a scholar and historianof Harvard College. English to the last fibre of his thought —saturated with English literature, English tradition, English taste— revolted by every vice and by most virtues of Frenchmen andGermans, or any other Continental standards, but at home andhappy among the vices and extravagances of Shakespeare —standing first on the social, then on the political foot; now wor-shipping, now banning; shocked by the wanton display of im-morality, but practising the license of political usage; sometimesbitter, often genial, always intelligent — Lodge had the singularmerit of interesting. The usual statesmen flocked in swarms likecrows, black and monotonous. Lodge's plumage was varied, and,like his flight, harked back to race. He betrayed the consciousnessthat he and his people had a past, if they dared but avow it, andmight have a future, if they could but divine it.Adams, too, was Bostonian, and the Bostonian's uncertainty ofattitude was as natural to him as to Lodge. Only Bostonians canunderstand Bostonians and thoroughly sympathize with the in-consequences of the Boston mind. His theory and practice werealso at variance. He professed in theory equal distrust of Englishthought, and called it a huge rag-bag of bric-a-brac, sometimesprecious but never sure. For him, only the Greek, the Italian orthe French standards had claims to respect, and the barbarism ofShakespeare was as flagrant as to Voltaire; but his theory neveraffected his practice. He knew that his artistic standard was theillusion of his own mind; that English disorder approached nearerto truth, if truth existed, than French measure or Italian line, orGerman logic; he read his Shakespeare as the Evangel of conserva-tive Christian anarchy, neither very conservative nor very Chris-The Height of Knowledge421tian, but stupendously anarchistic. He loved the atrocities ofEnglish art and society, as he loved Charles Dickens and MissAusten, not because of their example, but because of their humor.He made no scruple of defying sequence and denying consistency— but he was not a Senator.Double standards are inspiration to men of letters, but they areapt to be fatal to politicians. Adams had no reason to care whetherhis standards were popular or not, and no one else cared more thanhe; but Roosevelt and Lodge were playing a game in which theywere always liable to find the shifty sands of American opinionyield suddenly under their feet. With this game an elderly friendhad long before carried acquaintance as far as he wished. Therewas nothing in it for him but the amusement of the pugilist oracrobat. The larger study was lost in the division of interests andthe ambitions of fifth-rate men; but foreign affairs dealt only withlarge units, and made personal relation possible with Hay whichcould not be maintained with Roosevelt or Lodge. As an affairof pure education the point is worth notice from young men whoare drawn into politics. The work of domestic progress is done bymasses of mechanical power — steam, electric, furnace, or other— which have to be controlled by a score or two of individualswho have shown capacity to manage it. The work of internalgovernment has become the task of controlling these men, who aresocially as remote as heathen gods, alone worth knowing, butnever known, and who could tell nothing of political value if oneskinned them alive. Most of them have nothing to tell, but areforces as dumb as their dynamos, absorbed in the development oreconomy of power. They are trustees for the public, and wheneversociety assumes the property, it must confer on them that title;but the power will remain as before, whoever manages it, and willthen control society without appeal, as it controls its stokers andpit-men. Modern politics is, at bottom, a struggle not of men butof forces. The men become every year more and more creatures offorce, massed about central power-houses. The conflict is no longer422The Education of Henry Adamsbetween the men, but between the motors that drive the men, andthe men tend to succumb to their own motive forces.This is a moral that man strongly objects to admit, especially inmediaeval pursuits like politics and poetry, nor is it worth whilefor a teacher to insist upon it. What he insists upon is only that,in domestic politics, every one works for an immediate object,commonly for some private job, and invariably in a near horizon,while in foreign affairs the outlook is far ahead, over a field as wideas the world. There the merest scholar could see what he was doing.For history, international relations are the only sure standards ofmovement; the only foundation for a map. For this reason, Adamshad always insisted that international relation was the only surebase for a chart of history.He cared little to convince any one of the correctness of hisview, but as teacher he was bound to explain it, and as friend hefound it convenient. The Secretary of State has always stood asmuch alone as the historian. Required to look far ahead and roundhim, he measures forces unknown to party managers, and has foundCongress more or less hostile ever since Congress first sat. TheSecretary of State exists only to recognize the existence of a worldwhich Congress would rather ignore; of obligations which Con-gress repudiates whenever it can; of bargains which Congress dis-trusts and tries to turn to its advantage or to reject. Since thefirst day the Senate existed, it has always intrigued against theSecretary of State whenever the Secretary has been obliged toextend his functions beyond the appointment of Consuls in Sena-tors' service.This is a matter of history which any one may approve ordispute as he will; but as education it gave new resources to anold scholar, for it made of Hay the best schoolmaster since 1865.Hay had become the most imposing figure ever known in theoffice. He had an influence that no other Secretary of State everpossessed, as he had a nation behind him such as history hadnever imagined. He needed to write no state papers; he wanted noThe Height of Knowledge423help, and he stood far above counsel or advice; but he could instructan attentive scholar as no other teacher in the world could do; andAdams sought only instruction — wanted only to chart the inter-national channel for fifty years to come; to triangulate the future;to obtain his dimension, and fix the acceleration of movementin politics since the year 1200, as he was trying to fix it in philos-ophy and physics; in finance and force.Hay had been so long at the head of foreign affairs that at lastthe stream of events favored him. With infinite effort he hadachieved the astonishing diplomatic feat of inducing the Senate,with only six negative votes, to permit Great Britain to renounce,without equivalent, treaty rights which she had for fifty yearsdefended tooth and nail. This unprecedented triumph in his ne-gotiations with the Senate enabled him to carry one step furtherhis measures for general peace. About England the Senate couldmake no further effective opposition, for England was won, andCanada alone could give trouble. The next difficulty was withFrance, and there the Senate blocked advance, but England as-sumed the task, and, owing to political changes in France, effectedthe object — a combination which, as late as 1901, had been vi-sionary. The next, and far more difficult step, was to bring Ger-many into the combine; while, at the end of the vista, most un-manageable of all, Russia remained to be satisfied and disarmed.This was the instinct of what might be named McKinleyism; thesystem of combinations, consolidations, trusts, realized at home,and realizable abroad.With the system, a student nurtured in ideas of the eighteenthcentury, had nothing to do, and made not the least pretence ofmeddling; but nothing forbade him to study, and he noticed to hisastonishment that this capitalistic scheme of combining govern-ments, like railways or furnaces, was in effect precisely the socialistscheme of Jaures and Bebel. That John Hay, of all men, shouldadopt a socialist policy seemed an idea more absurd than conserva-tive Christian anarchy, but paradox had become the only ortho-424The Education of Henry Adamsdoxy in politics as in science. When one saw the field, one realizedthat Hay could not help himself, nor could Bebel. Either Germanymust destroy England and France to create the next inevitableunification as a system of continent against continent — or shemust pool interests. Both schemes in turn were attributed to theKaiser; one or the other he would have to choose; opinion wasbalanced doubtfully on their merits; but, granting both to befeasible, Hay's and McKinley's statesmanship turned on thepoint of persuading the Kaiser to join what might be called theCoal-power combination, rather than build up the only possiblealternative, a Gun-power combination by merging Germany inRussia. Thus Bebel and Jaures, McKinley and Hay, were partners.The problem was pretty — even fascinating — and, to an oldCivil-War private soldier in diplomacy, as rigorous as a geometri-cal demonstration. As the last possible lesson in life, it had allsorts of ultimate values. Unless education marches on both feet— theory and practice — it risks going astray; and Hay was prob-ably the most accomplished master of both then living. He knewnot only the forces but also the men, and he had no other thoughtthan his policy.Probably this was the moment of highest knowledge that ascholar could ever reach. He had under his eyes the whole edu-cational staff of the Government at a time when the Governmenthad just reached the heights of highest activity and influence.Since i860, education had done its worst, under the greatest mas-ters and at enormous expense to the world, to train these twominds to catch and comprehend every spring of internationalaction, not to speak of personal influence; and the entire machin-ery of politics in several great countries had little to do but sup-ply the last and best information. Education could be carried nofurther.With its effects on Hay, Adams had nothing to do; but its ef-fects on himself were grotesque. Never had the proportions of hisignorance looked so appalling. He seemed to know nothing —The Height of Knowledge425to be groping in darkness — to be falling forever in space; and theworst depth consisted in the assurance, incredible as it seemed,that no one knew more. He had, at least, the mechanical assuranceof certain values to guide him — like the relative intensities ofhis Coal-powers, and relative inertia of his Gun-powers — buthe conceived that had he known, besides the mechanics, everyrelative value of persons, as well as he knew the inmost thoughtsof his own Government — had the Czar and the Kaiser and theMikado turned schoolmasters, like Hay, and taught him all theyknew, he would still have known nothing. They knew nothingthemselves. Only by comparison of their ignorance could the stu-dent measure his own.