CHAPTER XPOLITICAL MORALITY (1862)ON Moran's promotion to be Secretary, Mr. Seward in-quired whether Minister Adams would like the place ofIt was the first — andAssistant Secretary for his son.last — office ever offered him, if indeed he could claim what wasoffered in fact to his father. To them both, the change seemeduseless. Any young man could make some sort of Assistant Secre-tary; only one, just at that moment, could make an Assistant Son.More than half his duties were domestic; they sometimes requiredlong absences; they always required independence of the Govern-ment service. His position was abnormal. The British Govern-ment by courtesy allowed the son to go to Court as Attache,though he was never attached, and after five or six years' tolera-tion, the decision was declared irregular. In the Legation, as pri-vate secretary, he was liable to do Secretary's work. In society,when official, he was attached to the Minister; when unofficial,he was a young man without any position at all. As the yearswent on, he began to find advantages in having no position atall except that of young man. Gradually he aspired to become agentleman ; just a member of society like the rest. The positionwas irregular; at that time many positions were irregular; yet itlent itself to a sort of irregular education that seemed to be theonly sort of education the young man was ever to get.Such as it was, few young men had more. The spring andsummer of 1863 saw a great change in Secretary Seward's manage-ment of foreign affairs. Under the stimulus of danger, he too goteducation. He felt, at last, that his official representatives abroadneeded support. Officially he could give them nothing but des-patches, which were of no great value to any one; and at best themere weight of an office had little to do with the public. Govern-ments were made to deal with Governments, not with private146The Education of Henry Adamsindividuals or with the opinions of foreign society. In order toaffect European opinion, the weight of American opinion had tobe brought to bear personally, and had to be backed by the weightof American interests. Mr. Seward set vigorously to work andsent over every important American on whom he could lay hishands. All came to the Legation more or less intimately, andHenry Adams had a chance to see them all, bankers or bishops,who did their work quietly and well, though, to the outsider, thework seemed wasted and the "influential classes" more induratedwith prejudice than ever. The waste was only apparent; the workall told in the end, and meanwhile it helped education.Two or three of these gentlemen were sent over to aid theMinister and to cooperate with him. The most interesting of thesewas Thurlow Weed, who came to do what the private secretaryhimself had attempted two years before, with boyish ignorance ofhis own powers. Mr. Weed took charge of the press, and began, tothe amused astonishment of the secretaries, by making what theLegation had learned to accept as the invariable mistake of everyamateur diplomat; he wrote letters to the London Times. Mistakeor not, Mr. Weed soon got into his hands the threads of manage-ment, and did quietly and smoothly all that was to be done. Withhis work the private secretary had no connection; it was he thatinterested. Thurlow Weed was a complete American educationin himself. His mind was naturally strong and beautifully bal-anced; his temper never seemed ruffled; his manners were care-fully perfect in the style of benevolent simplicity, the tradition ofBenjamin Franklin. He was the model of political managementand patient address; but the trait that excited enthusiasm in aprivate secretary was his faculty of irresistibly conquering confi-dence. Of all flowers in the garden of education, confidence wasbecoming the rarest; but before Mr. Weed went away, youngAdams followed him about not only obediently — for obediencehad long since become a blind instinct — but rather with sym-pathy and affection, much like a little dog.Political Morality147The sympathy was not due only to Mr. Weed's skill of manage-ment, although Adams never met another such master, or any onewho approached him; nor was the confidence due to any displayof professions, either moral or social, by Mr. Weed. The traitthat astounded and confounded cynicism was his apparent un-Never, in any man who wielded such power, didselfishness.Adams meet anything like it. The effect of power and publicityon all men is the aggravation of self, a sort of tumor that endsby killing the victim's sympathies; a diseased appetite, like apassion for drink or perverted tastes; one can scarcely use expres-sions too strong to describe the violence of egotism it stimulates;and Thurlow Weed was one of the exceptions; a rare immune.He thought apparently not of himself, but of the person he wastalking with. He held himself naturally in the background. Hewas not jealous. He grasped power, but not office. He distributedoffices by handfuls without caring to take them. He had theinstinct of empire: he gave, but he did not receive. This raresuperiority to the politicians he controlled, a trait that privatesecretaries never met in the politicians themselves, excited Adams'swonder and curiosity, but when he tried to get behind it, and toeducate himself from the stores of Mr. Weed's experience, he foundthe study still more fascinating. Management was an instinctwith Mr. Weed; an object to be pursued for its own sake, as oneplays cards; but he appeared to play with men as though theywere only cards; he seemed incapable of feeling himself one ofthem. He took them and played them for their face-value; butonce, when he had told, with his usual humor, some stories of hispolitical experience which were strong even for the Albany lobby,the private secretary made bold to ask him outright: "Then,Mr. Weed, do you think that no politician can be trusted?" Mr.Weed hesitated for a monent; then said in his mild manner: "Inever advise a young man to begin by thinking so."This lesson, at the time, translated itself to Adams in a moralsense, as though Mr. Weed had said: "Youth needs illusions !"148The Education of Henry AdamsAs he grew older he rather thought that Mr. Weed looked on itas a question of how the game should be played. Young men mostneeded experience. They could not play well if they trusted to ageneral rule. Every card had a relative value. Principles had bet-ter be left aside; values were enough. Adams knew that he couldnever learn to play politics in so masterly a fashion as this : hiseducation and his nervous system equally forbade it, although headmired all the more the impersonal faculty of the political masterwho could thus efface himself and his temper in the game. Henoticed that most of the greatest politicians in history had seemedto regard men as counters. The lesson was the more interestingbecause another famous New Yorker came over at the same timewho liked to discuss the same problem. Secretary Seward sentWilliam M. Evarts to London as law counsel, and Henry beganan acquaintance with Mr. Evarts that soon became intimate.Evarts was as individual as Weed was impersonal; like most men,he cared little for the game, or how it was played, and much forthe stakes, but he played it in a large and liberal way, like DanielWebster, "a great advocate employed in politics." Evarts wasalso an economist of morals, but with him the question was ratherhow much morality one could afford. "The world can absorbonly doses of truth," he said; "too much would kill it." Onesought education in order to adjust the dose.The teachings of Weed and Evarts were practical, and theprivate secretary's life turned on their value. England's powerof absorbing truth was small. Englishmen, such as Palmerston,Russell, Bethell, and the society represented by the Times andMorning Post, as well as the Tories represented by Disraeli,Lord Robert Cecil, and the Standard, offered a study in educa-tion that sickened a young student with anxiety. He had begun— contrary to Mr. Weed's advice — by taking their bad faith forgranted. Was he wrong? To settle this point became the mainobject of the diplomatic education so laboriously pursued, at acost already stupendous, and promising to become ruinous, yfePolitical Morality149changed front, according as one thought one's self dealing withhonest men or with rogues.Thus far, the private secretary felt officially sure of dishonesty.The reasons that satisfied him had not altogether satisfied hisfather, and of course his father's doubts gravely shook his ownconvictions, but, in practice, if only for safety, the Legation putlittle or no confidence in Ministers, and there the private secre-tary's diplomatic education began. The recognition of belligerency,the management of the Declaration of Paris, the Trent Affair,all strengthened the belief that Lord Russell had started in May,1 86 1, with the assumption that the Confederacy was established;every step he had taken proved his persistence in the same idea ; henever would consent to put obstacles in the way of recognition;and he was waiting only for the proper moment to interpose. Allthese points seemed so fixed — so self-evident — that no one inthe Legation would have doubted or even discussed them exceptthat Lord Russell obstinately denied the whole charge, and per-sisted in assuring Minister Adams of his honest and impartialneutrality.With the insolence of youth and zeal, Henry Adams jumpedat once to the conclusion that Earl Russell — like other statesmen— lied ; and, although the Minister thought differently, he had toact as though Russell were false. Month by month the demon-stration followed its mathematical stages; one of the most perfecteducational courses in politics and diplomacy that a young manever had a chance to pursue. The most costly tutors in the worldwere provided for him at public expense — Lord Palmerston,Lord Russell, Lord Westbury, Lord Selborne, Mr. Gladstone,Lord Granville, and their associates, paid by the British Govern-ment; William H. Seward, Charles Francis Adams, William Max-well Evarts, Thurlow Weed, and other considerable professors em-ployed by the American Government; but there was only onestudent to profit by this immense staff of teachers. The privatesecretary alone sought education.—150The Education of Henry AdamsTo the end of his life he labored over the lessons then taught.Never was demonstration more tangled.Hegel's metaphysicaldoctrine of the identity of opposites was simpler and easier tounderstand. Yet the stages of demonstration were clear. Theybegan in June, 1862, after the escape of one rebel cruiser, by theremonstrances of the Minister against the escape of "No. 290,"which was imminent. Lord Russell declined to act on the evi-dence. New evidence was sent in every few days, and with it, onJuly 24, was included Collier's legal opinion: "It appears difficultto make out a stronger case of infringement of the Foreign Enlist-ment Act, which, if not enforced on this occasion, is little betterthan a dead letter." Such language implied almost a charge ofcollusion with the rebel agents — an intent to aid the Confeder-acy. In spite of the warning, Earl Russell let the ship, four daysafterwards, escape.Young Adams had nothing to do with law; that was business ofhis betters. His opinion of law hung on his opinion of lawyers.In spite of Thurlow Weed's advice, could one afford to trust humannature in politics? History said not. Sir Robert Collier seemed tohold that Law agreed with History. For education the point wasvital. If one could not trust a dozen of the most respected privatecharacters in the world, composing the Queen's Ministry, onecould trust no mortal man.Lord Russell felt the force of this inference, and undertook todisprove it. His effort lasted till his death. At first he excusedhimself by throwing the blame on the law officers. This was apolitician's practice, and the lawyers overruled it. Then he pleadedguilty to criminal negligence, and said in his "Recollections":"I assent entirely to the opinion of the Lord Chief Justice ofEngland that the Alabama ought to have been detained duringthe four days I was waiting for the opinion of the law officers.But I think that the fault was not that of the commissioners ofcustoms, it was my fault as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs."This concession brought all parties on common ground. Of coursePolitical MoralityJ 5iit was his fault! The true issue lay not in the question of his fault,but of his intent. To a young man, getting an education in poli-tics, there could be no sense in history unless a constant course offaults implied a constant motive.For his father the question was not so abstruse; it was a practicalmatter of business to be handled as Weed or Evarts handled theirbargains and jobs. Minister Adams held the convenient beliefthat, in the main, Russell was true, and the theory answered hispurposes so well that he died still holding it. His son was seekingeducation, and wanted to know whether he could, in politics, risktrusting any one. Unfortunately no one could then decide; no oneknew the facts. Minister Adams died without knowing them.Henry Adams was an older man than his father in 1862, beforehe learned a part of them. The most curious fact, even then, wasthat Russell believed in his own good faith and that Argyll believedin it also.Argyll betrayed a taste for throwing the blame on Bethell, LordWestbury, then Lord Chancellor, but this escape helped Adamsnot at all. On the contrary, it complicated the case of Russell.In England, one half of society enjoyed throwing stones at LordPalmerston, while the other half delighted in flinging mud at EarlRussell, but every one of every party united in pelting Westburywith every missile at hand. The private secretary had no doubtsabout him, for he never professed to be moral. He was the headand heart of the whole rebel contention, and his opinions on neu-trality were as clear as they were on morality. The private secre-tary had nothing to do with him, and regretted it, for Lord West-bury's wit and wisdom were great; but as far as his authority went,he affirmed the law that in politics no man should be trusted.Russell alone insisted on his honesty of intention and persuadedboth the Duke and the Minister to believe him. Every one in theLegation accepted his assurances as the only assertions theycould venture to trust. They knew he expected the rebels to winin the end, but they believed he would not actively interpose toThe Education of Henry Adams152decide it. On that — on nothing else — they rested their frailhopes of remaining a day longer in England. Minister Adams re-mained six years longer in England; then returned to America tolead a busy life till he died in 1886 still holding the same faith inEarl Russell, who had died in 1878. In 1889, Spencer Walpolepublished the official life of Earl Russell, and told a part of thestory which had never been known to the Minister and whichastounded his son, who burned with curiosity to know what hisfather would have said of it.The story was this: The Alabama escaped, by Russell's con-fessed negligence, on July 28, 1862. In America the Union armieshad suffered great disasters before Richmond and at the secondBull Run, August 29-30, followed by Lee's invasion of Maryland,September 7, the news of which, arriving in England on Sep-tember 14, roused the natural idea that the crisis was at hand.The next news was expected by the Confederates to announcethe fall of Washington or Baltimore. Palmerston instantly, Sep-tember 14, wrote to Russell: "If this should happen, would itnot be time for us to consider whether in such a state of thingsEngland and France might not address the contending partiesand recommend an arrangement on the basis of separation?"This letter, quite in the line of Palmerston's supposed opinions,would have surprised no one, if it had been communicated tothe Legation; and indeed, if Lee had captured Washington, noone could have blamed Palmerston for offering intervention.Not Palmerston's letter but Russell's reply, merited the painfulattention of a young man seeking a moral standard for judgingpoliticians : —My dear Palmerston : —Gotha, September, 17, 1862.Whether the Federal army is destroyed or not, it is clear that itis driven back to Washington and has made no progress in subduingthe insurgent States. Such being the case, I agree with you that thetime is come for offering mediation to the United States Govern-ment with a view to the recognition of the independence of the Con-Political Morality153federates. I agree further that in case of failure, we ought ourselvesto recognize the Southern States as an independent State. For thepurpose of taking so important a step, I think we must have a meetingof the Cabinet. The 23d or 30th would suit me for the meeting.•We ought then, if we agree on such a step, to propose it first toFrance, and then on the part of England and France, to Russia andother powers, as a measure decided upon by us.We ought to make ourselves safe in Canada, not by sending moretroops there, but by concentrating those we have in a few defensibleposts before the winter sets in. ...Here, then, appeared in its fullest force, the practical difficultyin education which a mere student could never overcome; a dif-ficulty not in theory, or knowledge, or even want of experience,but in the sheer chaos of human nature. Lord Russell's coursehad been consistent from the first, and had all the look of rigiddetermination to recognize the Southern Confederacy "with aview" to breaking up the Union. His letter of September 17hung directly on his encouragement of the Alabama and his pro-tection of the rebel navy; while the whole of his plan had its rootin the Proclamation of Belligerency, May 13, 1861. The policyhad every look of persistent forethought, but it took for grantedthe deliberate dishonesty of three famous men : Palmerston, Rus-sell, and Gladstone. This dishonesty, as concerned Russell, wasdenied by Russell himself, and disbelieved by Argyll, Forster, andmost of America's friends in England, as well as by MinisterAdams. What the Minister would have thought had he seenthis letter of September 17, his son would have greatly liked toknow, but he would have liked still more to know what the Min-ister would have thought of Palmerston's answer, dated Sep-tember 23 : —... It is evident that a great conflict is taking place to the north-west of Washington, and its issue must have a great effect on the stateof affairs. If the Federals sustain a great defeat, they may be at onceready for mediation, and the iron should be struck while it is hot.If, on the other hand, they should have the best of it, we may waita while and see what may follow. ..154The Education of Henry AdamsThe roles were reversed.Russell wrote what was expectedfrom Palmerston, or even more violently; while Palmerston wrotewhat was expected from Russell, or even more temperately. Theprivate secretary's view had been altogether wrong, which wouldnot have much surprised even him, but he would have been greatlyastonished to learn that the most confidential associates of thesemen knew little more about their intentions than was known inthe Legation. The most trusted member of the Cabinet was LordGranville, and to him Russell next wrote. Granville replied at oncedecidedly opposing recognition of the Confederacy, and Russellsent the reply to Palmerston, who returned it October 2, with themere suggestion of waiting for further news from America. Atthe same time Granville wrote to another member of the Cabinet,Lord Stanley of Alderley, a letter published forty years after-wards in Granville's "Life" (i, 442) — to the private secretaryson in politics : —altogether the most curious and instructive relic of the whole les-... I have written to Johnny my reasons for thinking it decidedlypremature. I, however, suspect you will settle to do so. Pam., Johnny,and Gladstone would be in favor of it, and probably Newcastle. Ido not know about the others. It appears to me a great mistake. ...Out of a Cabinet of a dozen members, Granville, the best in-formed of them all, could pick only three who would favor recogni-tion. Even a private secretary thought he knew as much as this,or more. Ignorance was not confined to the young and insignifi-cant, nor were they the only victims of blindness. Granville's let-ter made only one point clear. He knew of no fixed policy or con-spiracy. If any existed, it was confined to Palmerston, Russell,Gladstone, and perhaps Newcastle. In truth, the Legation knew,then, all that was to be known, and the true fault of educationwas to suspect too much.By that time, October 3, news of Antietam and of Lee's retreatinto Virginia had reached London. The Emancipation Proclama-Political Morality155tion arrived. Had the private secretary known all that Granvilleor Palmerston knew, he would surely have thought the dangerpast, at least for a time, and any man of common sense wouldhave told him to stop worrying over phantoms. This healthy les-son would have been worth much for practical education, but itwas quite upset by the sudden rush of a new actor upon the stagewith a rhapsody that made Russell seem sane, and all educationsuperfluous.This new actor, as every one knows, was William Ewart Glad-stone, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. If, in the domain ofthe world's politics, one point was fixed, one value ascertained,one element serious, it was the British Exchequer; and if one manlived who could be certainly counted as sane by overwhelminginterest, it was the man who had in charge the finances of England.If education had the smallest value, it should have shown itsforce in Gladstone, who was educated beyond all record of Englishtraining. From him, if from no one else, the poor student couldsafely learn.Here is what he learned! Palmerston notified Gladstone, Sep-tember 24, of the proposed intervention: "If I am not mistaken,you would be inclined to approve such a course." Gladstone re-plied the next day: "He was glad to learn what the Prime Ministerhad told him; and for two reasons especially he desired that theproceedings should be prompt : the first was the rapid progress ofthe Southern arms and the extension of the area of Southern feel-ing; the second was the risk of violent impatience in the cotton-towns of Lancashire such as would prejudice the dignity and dis-interestedness of the proffered mediation."Had the puzzled student seen this letter, he must have con-cluded from it that the best educated statesman England everproduced did not know what he was talking about, an assumptionwhich all the world would think quite inadmissible from a privatesecretary — but this was a trifle. Gladstone having thus arranged,with Palmerston and Russell, for intervention in the American156The Education of Henry Adamswar, reflected on the subject for a fortnight from September 25to October 7, when he was to speak on the occasion of a greatdinner at Newcastle. He decided to announce the Government'spolicy with all the force his personal and official authority couldgive it. This decision was no sudden impulse; it was the result ofdeep reflection pursued to the last moment. On the morning ofOctober 7, he entered in his diary: "Reflected further on what Ishould say about Lancashire and America, for both these subjectsare critical." That evening at dinner, as the mature fruit of hislong study, he deliberately pronounced the famous phrase : —... We know quite well that the people of the Northern Stateshave not yet drunk of the cup — they are still trying to hold itfar from their lips — which all the rest of the world see they never-theless must drink of. We may have our own opinions about slavery;we may be for or against the South; but there is no doubt thatJefferson Davis and other leaders of the South have made an army;they are making, it appears, a navy; and they have made, what ismore than either, they have made a nation. ...Looking back, forty years afterwards, on this episode, oneasked one's self painfully what sort of a lesson a young man shouldhave drawn, for the purposes of his education, from this world-famous teaching of a very great master. In the heat of passionat the moment, one drew some harsh moral conclusions: Werethey incorrect? Posed bluntly as rules of conduct, they led to theworst possible practices. As morals, one could detect no shade ofdifference between Gladstone and Napoleon except to the advan-tage of Napoleon. The private secretary saw none; he accepted theteacher in that sense; he took his lesson of political morality aslearned, his notice to quit as duly served, and supposed his educa-tion to be finished.Every one thought so, and the whole City was in a turmoil.Any intelligent education ought to end when it is complete. Onewould then feel fewer hesitations and would handle a surer world.The old-fashioned logical drama required unity and sense; the ac-Political Morality157tual drama is a pointless puzzle, without even an intrigue. Whenthe curtain fell on Gladstone's speech, any student had the rightto suppose the drama ended ; none could have affirmed that it wasabout to begin ; that one's painful lesson was thrown away.Even after forty years, most people would refuse to believe it;they would still insist that Gladstone, Russell, and Palmerstonwere true villains of melodrama. The evidence against Gladstonein special seemed overwhelming. The word "must" can neverbe used by a responsible Minister of one Government towardsanother, as Gladstone used it. No one knew so well as he that heand his own officials and friends at Liverpool were alone "mak-ing" a rebel navy, and that Jefferson Davis had next to nothingto do with it. As Chancellor of the Exchequer he was the Min-ister most interested in knowing that Palmerston, Russell, andhimself were banded together by mutual pledge to make theConfederacy a nation the next week, and that the Southern lead-ers had as yet no hope of "making a nation" but in them. Suchthoughts occurred to every one at the moment and time onlyadded to their force. Never in the history of political turpitudehad any brigand of modern civilization offered a worse example.The proof of it was that it outraged even Palmerston, who im-mediately put up Sir George Cornewall Lewis to repudiate theChancellor of the Exchequer, against whom he turned his press atthe same time. Palmerston had no notion of letting his hand beforced by Gladstone.Russell did nothing of the kind; if he agreed with Palmerston,he followed Gladstone. Although he had just created a new evan-gel of non-intervention for Italy, and preached it like an apostle,he preached the gospel of intervention in America as though hewere a mouthpiece of the Congress of Vienna. On October 13,he issued his call for the Cabinet to meet, on October 23, for dis-cussion of the "duty of Europe to ask both parties, in the mostfriendly and conciliatory terms, to agree to a suspension of arms."Meanwhile Minister Adams, deeply perturbed and profoundly158The Education of Henry Adamsanxious, would betray no sign of alarm, and purposely delayed toask explanation. The howl of anger against Gladstone becamelouder every day, for every one knew that the Cabinet was calledfor October 23, and then could not fail to decide its policy aboutthe United States. Lord Lyons put off his departure for Americatill October 25 expressly to share in the conclusions to be dis-cussed on October 23. When Minister Adams at last requestedan interview, Russell named October 23 as the day. To the lastmoment every act of Russell showed that, in his mind, the inter-vention was still in doubt.When Minister Adams, at the interview, suggested that anexplanation was due him, he watched Russell with natural in-terest, and reported thus: — •... His lordship took my allusion at once, though not withouta slight indication of embarrassment. He said that Mr. Gladstonehad been evidently much misunderstood. I must have seen in thenewspapers the letters which contained his later explanations. Thathe had certain opinions in regard to the nature of the struggle inAmerica, as on all public questions, just as other Englishmen had,was natural enough. And it was the fashion here for public men toexpress such as they held in their public addresses. Of course it wasnot for him to disavow anything on the part of Mr. Gladstone; buthe had no idea that in saying what he had, there was a serious inten-tion to justify any of the inferences that had been drawn from it ofa disposition in the Government now to adopt a new policy. ...„A student trying to learn the processes of politics in a free gov-ernment could not but ponder long on the moral to be drawn fromthis "explanation" of Mr. Gladstone by Earl Russell. The pointset for study as the first condition of political life, was whetherany politician could be believed or trusted. The question which aprivate secretary asked himself, in copying this despatch of Octo-ber 24, 1862, was whether his father believed, or should believe, oneword of Lord Russell's "embarrassment." The "truth" was notknown for thirty years, but when published, seemed to be the re-verse of Earl Russell's statement. Mr. Gladstone's speech hadPolitical Morality159been drawn out by Russell's own policy of intervention and hadno sense except to declare the "disposition in the Government nowto adopt" that new policy. Earl Russell never disavowed Glad-stone, although Lord Palmerston and Sir George Cornewall Lewisinstantly did so. As far as the curious student could penetrate themystery, Gladstone exactly expressed Earl Russell's intent.As political education, this lesson was to be crucial; it wouldAll these gentlemen were superlativelydecide the law of life.honorable; if one could not believe them, Truth in politics mightbe ignored as a delusion. Therefore the student felt compelledto reach some sort of idea that should serve to bring the case withina general law. Minister Adams felt the same compulsion. Hebluntly told Russell that while he was "willing to acquit" Glad-stone of "any deliberate intention to bring on the worst effects,"he was bound to say that Gladstone was doing it quite as certainlyas if he had one; and to this charge, which struck more sharply atRussell's secret policy than at Gladstone's public defence of it,Russell replied as well as he could : —... His lordship intimated as guardedly as possible that LordPalmerston and other members of the Government regretted thespeech, and Mr. Gladstone himself was not disinclined to correct,as far as he could, the misinterpretation which had been made of it.It was still their intention to adhere to the rule of perfect neutralityin the struggle, and to let it come to its natural end without thesmallest interference, direct or otherwise. But he could not say whatcircumstances might happen from month to month in the future.I observed that the policy he mentioned was satisfactory to us, andasked if I was to understand him as saying that no change of it wasnow proposed. To which he gave his assent. ...Minister Adams never knew more. He retained his belief thatRussell could be trusted, but that Palmerston could not. This wasthe diplomatic tradition, especially held by the Russian diplomats.Possibly it was sound, but it helped in no way the education ofa private secretary. The cat's-paw theory offered no safer clue,160The Education of Henry Adamsthan the frank, old-fashioned, honest theory of villainy. Neitherthe one nor the other was reasonable.No one ever told the Minister that Earl Russell, only a fewhours before, had asked the Cabinet to intervene, and that theCabinet had refused. The Minister was led to believe that theCabinet meeting was not held, and that its decision was informal.Russell's biographer said that, "with this memorandum [of Rus-sell's, dated October 13] the Cabinet assembled from all parts. members of the Cabinetof the country on October 23 ; but .doubted the policy of moving, or moving at that time." The Dukeof Newcastle and Sir George Grey joined Granville in opposi-tion. As far as known, Russell and Gladstone stood alone. "Consid-erations such as these prevented the matter being pursued any.further."Still no one has distinctly said that this decision was formal; per-haps the unanimity of opposition made the formal Cabinet unnec-essary; but it is certain that, within an hour or two before or afterthis decision, "his lordship said [to the United States Minister]that the policy of the Government was to adhere to a strict neu-trality and to leave this struggle to settle itself." When Mr.Adams, not satisfied even with this positive assurance, pressed fora categorical answer: "I asked him if I was to understand thatpolicy as not now to be changed; he said: Yes!"John Morley's comment on this matter, in the "Life of Glad-stone," forty years afterwards, would have interested the Minister,as well as his private secretary: "If this relation be accurate," saidMorley of a relation officially published at the time, and neverquestioned, "then the Foreign Secretary did not construe strictneutrality as excluding what diplomatists call good offices." Fora vital lesson in politics, Earl Russell's construction of neutrality-mattered little to the student, who asked only Russell's intent, andcared only to know whether his construction had any other objectthan to deceive the Minister.In the grave one can afford to be lavish of charity, and possiblyPolitical Morality161Earl Russell may have been honestly glad to reassure his personalfriend Mr. Adams; but to one who is still in the world even if notof it, doubts are as plenty as days. Earl Russell totally deceivedthe private secretary, whatever he may have done to the Minister.The policy of abstention was not settled on October 23. Only thenext day, October 24, Gladstone circulated a rejoinder to G. C.Lewis, insisting on the duty of England, France, and Russia tointervene by representing, "with moral authority and force, theopinion of the civilized world upon the conditions of the case."Nothing had been decided. By some means, scarcely accidental,the French Emperor was led to think that his influence mightturn the scale, and only ten days after Russell's categorical"Yes!" Napoleon officially invited him to say "No!" He wasmore than ready to do so. Another Cabinet meeting was calledfor November 11, and this time Gladstone himself reports thedebate : —Nov. 11. We have had our Cabinet to-day and meet again to-morrow. I am afraid we shall do little or nothing in the business ofAmerica. But I will send you definite intelligence. Both LordsPalmerston and Russell are right.Nov. 12. The United States affair has ended and not well. LordRussell rather turned tail. He gave way without resolutely fightingout his battle. However, though we decline for the moment, theanswer is put upon grounds and in terms which leave the mattervery open for the future.Nov. 13.I think the French will make our answer about Americapublic; at least it is very possible. But I hope they may not take itas a positive refusal, or at any rate that they may themselves actin the matter. It will be clear that we concur with them, that thewar should cease.Palmerston gave to Russell's proposal a feebleand half-hearted support...•*.' Forty years afterwards, when every one except himself, wholooked on at this scene, was dead, the private secretary of 1862read these Hnes with stupor, and hurried to discuss them withJohn Hay, who was more astounded than himself. All the world1 62The Education of Henry Adamshad been at cross-purposes, had misunderstood themselves andthe situation, had followed wrong paths, drawn wrong conclusions,had known none of the facts. One would have done better todraw no conclusions at all. One's diplomatic education was along mistake. &^These were the terms of this singular problem as they presentedthemselves to the student of diplomacy in 1862: Palmerston, onSeptember 14, under the impression that the President was aboutto be driven from Washington and the Army of the Potomac dis-persed, suggested to Russell that in such a case, intervention mightbe feasible. Russell instantly answered that, in any case, he wantedto intervene and should call a Cabinet for the purpose. Palmerstonhesitated; Russell insisted; Granville protested. Meanwhile therebel army was defeated at Antietam, September 17, and drivenout of Maryland. Then Gladstone, October 7, tried to forcePalmerston's hand by treating the intervention as a fait accompli.Russell assented, but Palmerston put up Sir George CornewallLewis to contradict Gladstone and treated him sharply in thepress, at the very moment when Russell was calling a Cabinet tomake Gladstone's words good. On October 23, Russell assuredAdams that no change in policy was now proposed. On the sameday he had proposed it, and was voted down. Instantly NapoleonIII appeared as the ally of Russell and Gladstone with a proposi-tion which had no sense except as a bribe to Palmerston to replaceAmerica, from pole to pole, in her old dependence on Europe, andto replace England in her old sovereignty of the seas, if Palmerstonwould support France in Mexico. The young student of diplo-macy, knowing Palmerston, must have taken for granted thatPalmerston inspired this motion and would support it; knowingRussell and his Whig antecedents, he would conceive that Rus-sell must oppose it; knowing Gladstone and his lofty principles,he would not doubt that Gladstone violently denounced thescheme. If education was worth a straw, this was the only ar-rangement of persons that a trained student would imaginePolitical Morality163possible, and it was the arrangement actually assumed by ninemen out of ten, as history. In truth, each valuation was false.Palmerston never showed favor to the scheme and gave it only"a feeble and half-hearted support." Russell gave way withoutresolutely fighting out "his battle." The only resolute, vehe-ment, conscientious champion of Russell, Napoleon, and Jeffer-son Davis was Gladstone.Complex these gentlemen were not.Other people could afford to laugh at a young man's blunders,but to him the best part of life was thrown away if he learned sucha lesson wrong. Henry James had not yet taught the world to reada volume for the pleasure of seeing the lights of his burning-glassturned on alternate sides of the same figure. Psychological studywas still simple, and at worst — or at best — English characterwas never subtile. Surely no one would believe that complexitywas the trait that confused the student of Palmerston, Russell, andGladstone. Under a very strong light human nature will alwaysappear complex and full of contradictions, but the British states-man would appear, on the whole, among the least complex of men.Disraeli alone might, bycontrast, be called complex, but Palmerston, Russell, and Glad-stone deceived only by their simplicity. Russell was the most in-teresting to a young man because his conduct seemed most states-manlike. Every act of Russell, from April, 1861, to November,1862, showed the clearest determination to break up the Union.The only point in Russell's character about which the studentthought no doubt to be possible was its want of good faith. It wasthoroughly dishonest, but strong. Habitually Russell said onething and did another. He seemed unconscious of his own con-tradictions even when his opponents pointed them out, as theywere much in the habit of doing, in the strongest language. Asthe student watched him deal with the Civil War in America,Russell alone showed persistence, even obstinacy, in a definitedetermination, which he supported, as was necessary, by the usualdefinite falsehoods. The young man did not complain of the false-164The Education of Henry Adamshoods; on the contrary, he was vain of his own insight in detectingthem; but he was wholly upset by the idea that Russell shouldthink himself true.Young Adams thought Earl Russell a statesman of the oldschool, clear about his objects and unscrupulous in his methods —dishonest but strong. Russell ardently asserted that he had noobjects, and that though he might be weak he was above all elsehonest. Minister Adams leaned to Russell personally and thoughthim true, but officially, in practice, treated him as false. Punch,before 1862, commonly drew Russell as a schoolboy telling lies, andafterwards as prematurely senile, at seventy. Education stoppedthere. No one, either in or out of England, ever offered a rationalexplanation of Earl Russell.Palmerston was simple — so simple as to mislead the studentaltogether — but scarcely more consistent. The world thoughthim positive, decided, reckless; the record proved him to be cau-tious, careful, vacillating. Minister Adams took him for pugna-cious and quarrelsome; the "Lives" of Russell, Gladstone, andGranville show him to have been good-tempered, conciliatory,avoiding quarrels. He surprised the Minister by refusing to pur-sue his attack on General Butler. He tried to check Russell. Hescolded Gladstone. He discouraged Napoleon. Except Disraelinone of the English statesmen were so cautious as he in talkingof America. Palmerston told no falsehoods; made no professions;concealed no opinions; was detected in no double-dealing. Themost mortifying failure in Henry Adams's long education was that,after forty years of confirmed dislike, distrust, and detraction ofLord Palmerston, he was obliged at last to admit himself in error,and to consent in spirit— for by that time he was nearly as deadas any of them — to beg his pardon.Gladstone was quite another story, but with him a student'sdifficulties were less because they were shared by all the worldincluding Gladstone himself. He was the sum of contradictions.The highest education could reach, in this analysis, only a reductionPolitical Morality165to the absurd, but no absurdity that a young man could reach in1862 would have approached the level that Mr. Gladstone admit-ted, avowed, proclaimed, in his confessions of 1896, which broughtall reason and all hope of education to a still-stand : —.I have yet to record an undoubted error, the most singular andpalpable, I may add the least excusable of them all, especially sinceit was committed so late as in the year 1862 when I had outlived halfa century. ... I declared in the heat of the American struggle thatJefferson Davis had made a nation. .. Strange to say, this declara-tion, most unwarrantable to be made by a Minister of the Crownwith no authority other than his own, was not due to any feeling ofpartisanship for the South or hostility to the North. ... I really,though most strangely, believed that it was an act of friendliness toall America to recognize that the struggle was virtually at an end. .That my opinion was founded upon a false estimate of the facts wasthe very least part of my fault.I did not perceive the gross impro-priety of such an utterance from a Cabinet Minister of a power alliedin blood and language, and bound to loyal neutrality; the case beingfurther exaggerated by the fact that we were already, so to speak,under indictment before the world for not (as was alleged) havingstrictly enforced the laws of neutrality in the matter of the cruisers.My offence was indeed only a mistake, but one of incredible grossness,and with such consequences of offence and alarm attached to it, thatmy failing to perceive them justly exposed me to very severe blame.It illustrates vividly that incapacity which my mind so long retained,and perhaps still exhibits, an incapacity of viewing subjects allround. .....Long and patiently — more than patiently — sympatheti-cally, did the private secretary, forty years afterwards in thetwilight of a life of study, read and re-read and reflect upon thisconfession. Then, it seemed, he had seen nothing correctly at thetime. His whole theory of conspiracy — of policy — of logic andconnection in the affairs of man, resolved itself into "incrediblegrossness." He felt no rancor, for he had won the game; he for-gave, since he must admit, the "incapacity of viewing subjects allround" which had so nearly cost him life and fortune; he was will-1 66The Education of Henry Adamsing even to believe. He noted, without irritation, that Mr. Glad-stone, in his confession, had not alluded to the understandingbetween Russell, Palmerston, and himself; had even wholly leftout his most "incredible" act, his ardent support of Napoleon'spolicy, a policy which even Palmerston and Russell had sup-All this was indifferent.ported feebly, with only half a heart.Granting, in spite of evidence, that Gladstone had no set plan ofbreaking up the Union; that he was party to no conspiracy; thathe saw none of the results of his acts which were clear to every oneelse; granting in short what the English themselves seemed at lastto conclude — that Gladstone was not quite sane; that Russellwas verging on senility; and that Palmerston had lost his nerve— what sort of education should have been the result of it? Howshould it have affected one's future opinions and acts?Politics cannot stop to study psychology.Its methods arerough; its judgments rougher still. All this knowledge would nothave affected either the Minister or his son in 1862. The sum ofthe individuals would still have seemed, to the young man, oneindividual — a single will or intention — bent on breaking upthe Union "as a diminution of a dangerous power." The Ministerwould still have found his interest in thinking Russell friendlyand Palmerston hostile. The individual would still have beenidentical with the mass. The problem would have been the same;the answer equally obscure. Every student would, like the privatesecretary, answer for himself alone.