CHAPTER XXXIVA LAW OF ACCELERATION (1904)IMAGES are not arguments, rarely even lead to proof, but themind craves them, and, of late more than ever, the keenestexperimenters find twenty images better than one, especiallyif contradictory; since the human mind has already learned to dealin contradictions.The image needed here is that of a new centre, or preponderatingmass, artificially introduced on earth in the midst of a system ofattractive forces that previously made their own equilibrium, andconstantly induced to accelerate its motion till it shall establish anew equilibrium. A dynamic theory would begin by assuming thatall history, terrestrial or cosmic, mechanical or intellectual, wouldbe reducible to this formula if we knew the facts.For convenience, the most familiar image should come first;and this is probably that of the comet, or meteoric streams, likethe Leonids and Perseids; a complex of minute mechanical agen-cies, reacting within and without, and guided by the sum of forcesattracting or deflecting it. Nothing forbids one to assume that theman-meteorite might grow, as an acorn does, absorbing light,heat, electricity — or thought; for, in recent times, such trans-ference of energy has become a familiar idea ; but the simplest fig-ure, at first, is that of a perfect comet — say that of 1843 — whichdrops from space, in a straight line, at the regular acceleration ofspeed, directly into the sun, and after wheeling sharply about it,in heat that ought to dissipate any known substance, turns backunharmed, in defiance of law, by the path on which it came.The mind, by analogy, may figure as such a comet, the betterbecause it also defies law.Motion is the ultimate object of science, and measures of motionare many; but with thought as with matter, the true measure isThe Education of Henry Adams49°mass in its astronomic sense — the sum or difference of attrac-Science has quite enough trouble in measuring itstive forces.material motions without volunteering help to the historian, butthe historian needs not much help to measure some kinds of so-cial movement; and especially in the nineteenth century, societyby common accord agreed in measuring its progress by the coal-output. The ratio of increase in the volume of coal-power mayserve as dynamometer.The coal-output of the world, speaking roughly, doubled everyten years between 1840 and 1900, in the form of utilized power,for the ton of coal yielded three or four times as much power in1900 as in 1840. Rapid as this rate of acceleration in volume seems,it may be tested in a thousand ways without greatly reducing it.Perhaps the ocean steamer is nearest unity and easiest to measure,for any one might hire, in 1905, for a small sum of money, the useof 30,000 steam-horse-power to cross the ocean, and by halvingthis figure every ten years, he got back to 234 horse-power for1835, which was accuracy enough for his purposes. In truth, hischief trouble came not from the ratio in volume of heat, but fromthe intensity, since he could get no basis for a ratio there. Allages of history have known high intensities, like the iron-furnace,the burning-glass, the blow-pipe; but no society has ever usedhigh intensities on any large scale till now, nor can a mere by-stander decide what range of temperature is now in common use.Loosely guessing that science controls habitually the whole rangefrom absolute zero to 3000 Centigrade, one might assume, forconvenience, that the ten-year ratio for volume could be used tem-porarily for intensity; and still there remained a ratio to be guessedfor other forces than heat. Since 1800 scores of new forces had beendiscovered; old forces had been raised to higher powers, as couldbe measured in the navy-gun; great regions of chemistry hadbeen opened up, and connected with other regions of physics.Within ten years a new universe of force had been revealed inradiation. Complexity had extended itself on immense horizons,A Law of Acceleration491and arithmetical ratios were useless for any attempt at accuracy.The force evolved seemed more like explosion than gravitation,and followed closely the curve of steam; but, at all events, the ten-year ratio seemed carefully conservative. Unless the calculatorwas prepared to be instantly overwhelmed by physical force andmental complexity, he must stop there.Thus, taking the year 1900 as the starting point for carrying backthe series, nothing was easier than to assume a ten-year period ofretardation as far back as 1820, but beyond that point the statis-tician failed, and only the mathematician could help. Laplacewould have found it child's-play to fix a ratio of progression inmathematical science between Descartes, Leibnitz, Newton, andhimself. Watt could have given in pounds the increase of powerbetween Newcomen's engines and his own. Volta and BenjaminFranklin would have stated their progress as absolute creationof power. Dalton could have measured minutely his advance onBoerhaave. Napoleon I must have had a distinct notion of hisown numerical relation to Louis XIV. No one in 1789 doubted theprogress of force, least of all those who were to lose their headsby it.Pending agreement between these authorities, theory mayassume what it likes — say a fifty, or even a five-and-twenty-yearperiod of reduplication for the eighteenth century, for the periodmatters little until the acceleration itself is admitted. The sub-ject is even more amusing in the seventeenth than in the eight-eenth century, because Galileo and Kepler, Descartes, Huygens,and Isaac Newton took vast pains to fix the laws of accelerationfor moving bodies, while Lord Bacon and William Harvey werecontent with showing experimentally the fact of acceleration inknowledge; but from their combined results a historian might betempted to maintain a similar rate of movement back to 1600,subject to correction from the historians of mathematics.The mathematicians might carry their calculations back as faras the fourteenth century when algebra seems to have become for49 2The Education of Henry Adamsthe first time the standard measure of mechanical progress inwestern Europe; for not only Copernicus and Tycho Brahe, buteven artists like Leonardo, Michael Angelo, and Albert Diirerworked by mathematical processes, and their testimony wouldprobably give results more exact than that of Montaigne or Shake-speare; but, to save trouble, one might tentatively carry back thesame ratio of acceleration, or retardation, to the year 1400, withthe help of Columbus and Gutenberg, so taking a uniform rateduring the whole four centuries (1400-1800), and leaving to sta-tisticians the task of correcting it.Or better, one might, for convenience, use the formula ofsquares to serve for a law of mind. Any other formula would doas well, either of chemical explosion, or electrolysis, or vegetablegrowth, or of expansion or contraction in innumerable forms; butthis happens to be simple and convenient. Its force increases inthe direct ratio of its squares. As the human meteoroid approachedthe sun or centre of attractive force, the attraction of one centurysquared itself to give the measure of attraction in the next.Behind the year 1400, the process certainly went on, but theprogress became so slight as to be hardly measurable. Whatwas gained in the east or elsewhere, cannot be known; but forces,called loosely Greek fire and gunpowder, came into use in the westin the thirteenth century, as well as instruments like the com-pass, the blow-pipe, clocks and spectacles, and materials like paper;Arabic notation and algebra were introduced, while metaphysicsand theology acted as violent stimulants to mind. An architectmight detect a sequence between the Church of St. Peter's atRome, the Amiens Cathedral, the Duomo at Pisa, San Marcoat Venice, Sancta Sofia at Constantinople and the churches atRavenna. All the historian dares affirm is that a sequence is mani-festly there, and he has a right to carry back his ratio, to repre-sent the fact, without assuming its numerical correctness. On thehuman mind as a moving body, the break in acceleration in theMiddle Ages is only apparent; the attraction worked throughA Law of Acceleration493shifting forms of force, as the sun works by light or heat, elec-tricity, gravitation, or what not, on different organs with differ-ent sensibilities, but with invariable law.The science of prehistoric man has no value except to provethat the law went back into indefinite antiquity. A stone arrow-head is as convincing as a steam-engine. The values were as cleara hundred thousand years ago as now, and extended equally overthe whole world. The motion at last became infinitely slight, butcannot be proved to have stopped. The motion of Newton's cometat aphelion may be equally slight. To evolutionists may be leftthe processes of evolution; to historians the single interest is thelaw of reaction between force and force — between mind andnature — the law of progress.The great division of history into phases by Turgot and Comtefirst affirmed this law in its outlines by asserting the unity of prog-ress, for a mere phase interrupts no growth, and nature showsinnumerable such phases. The development of coal-power in thenineteenth century furnished the first means of assigning closervalues to the elements; and the appearance of supersensual forcestowards 1900 made this calculation a pressing necessity; since thenext step became infinitely serious.A law of acceleration, definite and constant as any law of me-chanics, cannot be supposed to relax its energy to suit the con-venience of man. No one is likely to suggest a theory that man'sconvenience had been consulted by Nature at any time, or thatNature has consulted the convenience of any of her creations, ex-cept perhaps the Terebratula. In every age man has bitterly andjustly complained that Nature hurried and hustled him, for inertiaalmost invariably has ended in tragedy. Resistance is its law, andresistance to superior mass is futile and fatal.Fifty years ago, science took for granted that the rate of accel-eration could not last. The world forgets quickly, but even to-day the habit remains of founding statistics on the faith thatconsumption will continue nearly stationary. Two generations,494The Education of Henry Adamswith John Stuart Mill, talked of this stationary period, whichwas to follow the explosion of new power. All the men who wereelderly in the forties died in this faith, and other men grew oldnursing the same conviction, and happy in it; while science, forfifty years, permitted, or encouraged, society to think that forcewould prove to be limited in supply. This mental inertia of sci-ence lasted through the eighties before showing signs of breakingup; and nothing short of radium fairly wakened men to the fact,long since evident, that force was inexhaustible. Even then thescientific authorities vehemently resisted.Nothing so revolutionary had happened since the year 300.Thought had more than once been upset, but never caught andwhirled about in the vortex of infinite forces. Power leaped fromevery atom, and enough of it to supply the stellar universe showeditself running to waste at every pore of matter. Man could nolonger hold it off. Forces grasped his wrists and flung him aboutas though he had hold of a live wire or a runaway automobile;which was very nearly the exact truth for the purposes of an eld-erly and timid single gentleman in Paris, who never drove downthe Champs Elysees without expecting an accident, and commonlywitnessing one; or found himself in the neighborhood of an offi-cial without calculating the chances of a bomb. So long as therates of progress held good, these bombs would double in forceand number every ten years.Impossibilities no longer stood in the way. One's life had fat-tened on impossibilities. Before the boy was six years old, he hadseen four impossibilities made actual — the ocean-steamer, therailway, the electric telegraph, and the Daguerreotype; nor couldhe ever learn which of the four had most hurried others to come.He had seen the coal-output of the United States grow from noth-ing to three hundred million tons or more. What was far moreserious, he had seen the number of minds, engaged in pursuingforce — the truest measure of its attraction — increase from afew scores or hundreds, in 1838, to many thousands in 1905,A Law of Acceleration495trained to sharpness never before reached, and armed with in-struments amounting to new senses of indefinite power and accu-racy, while they chased force into hiding-places where Nature her-self had never known it to be, making analyses that contradictedbeing, and syntheses that endangered the elements. No onecould say that the social mind now failed to respond to new force,even when the new force annoyed it horribly. Every day Natureviolently revolted, causing so-called accidents with enormousdestruction of property and life, while plainly laughing at man, whohelplessly groaned and shrieked and shuddered, but never for asingle instant could stop. The railways alone approached the car-nage of war; automobiles and fire-arms ravaged society, untilan earthquake became almost a nervous relaxation. An immensevolume of force had detached itself from the unknown universeof energy, while still vaster reservoirs, supposed to be infinite,steadily revealed themselves, attracting mankind with more com-pulsive course than all the Pontic Seas or Gods or Gold that everexisted, and feeling still less of retiring ebb.In 1850, science would have smiled at such a romance as this,but, in 1900, as far as history could learn, few men of sciencethought it a laughing matter. If a perplexed but laborious fol-lower could venture to guess their drift, it seemed in their mindsa toss-up between anarchy and order. Unless they should be morehonest with themselves in the future than ever they were in thepast, they would be more astonished than their followers whenthey reached the end. If Karl Pearson's notions of the universewere sound, men like Galileo, Descartes, Leibnitz, and Newtonshould have stopped the progress of science before 1700, supposingthem to have been honest in the religious convictions they ex-pressed. In 1900 they were plainly forced back on faith in a unityunproved and an order they had themselves disproved. Theyhad reduced their universe to a series of relations to themselves.They had reduced themselves to motion in a universe of motions,with an acceleration, in their own case, of vertiginous violence.496The Education of Henry AdamsWith the correctness of their science, history had no right to med-dle, since their science now lay in a plane where scarcely one ortwo hundred minds in the world could follow its mathematicalprocesses ; but bombs educate vigorously, and even wireless teleg-raphy or airships might require the reconstruction of society.If any analogy whatever existed between the human mind, onone side, and the laws of motion, on the other, the mind had al-ready entered a field of attraction so violent that it must imme-diately pass beyond, into new equilibrium, like the Comet ofNewton, to suffer dissipation altogether, like meteoroids in theearth's atmosphere. If it behaved like an explosive, it must rap-idly recover equilibrium; if it behaved like a vegetable, it mustreach its limits of growth; and even if it acted like the earlier crea-tions of energy — the saurians and sharks — it must have nearlyreached the limits of its expansion. If science were to go on dou-bling or quadrupling its complexities every ten years, even mathe-matics would soon succumb. An average mind had succumbedalready in 1850; it could no longer understand the problem in 1900.Fortunately, a student of history had no responsibility for theproblem; he took it as science gave it, and waited only to betaught. With science or with society, he had no quarrel andclaimed no share of authority. He had never been able to acquireknowledge, still less to impart it; and if he had, at times, felt seri-ous differences with the American of the nineteenth century, hefelt none with the American of the twentieth. For this new crea-tion, born since 1900, a historian asked no longer to be teacher oreven friend; he asked only to be a pupil, and promised to be do-cile, for once, even though trodden under foot; for he could seethat the new American — the child of incalculable coal-power,of new forces yet undetermined — must be a sort of God com-pared with any former creation of nature. At the rate of progresssince 1800, every American who lived into the year 2000 wouldknow how to control unlimited power. He would think in complex-chemical power, electric power, and radiating energy, as well asA Law of Acceleration497ities unimaginable to an earlier mind. He would deal with prob-lems altogether beyond the range of earlier society. To him thenineteenth century would stand on the same plane with the fourth— equally childlike — and he would only wonder how both ofthem, knowing so little, and so weak in force, should have done somuch. Perhaps even he might go back, in 1964, to sit with Gib-bon on the steps of Ara Cceli.Meanwhile he was getting education. With that, a teacher whohad failed to educate even the generation of 1870, dared not inter-fere. The new forces would educate. History saw few lessons inthe past that would be useful in the future; but one, at least, it didsee. The attempt of the American of 1800 to educate the Ameri-can of 1900 had not often been surpassed for folly; and since 1800the forces and their complications had increased a thousand timesor more. The attempt of the American of 1900 to educate theAmerican of 2000, must be even blinder than that of the Con-gressman of 1800, except so far as he had learned his ignorance.During a million or two of years, every generation in turn hadtoiled with endless agony to attain and apply power, all the whilebetraying the deepest alarm and horror at the power they created.The teacher of 1900, if foolhardy, might stimulate; if foolish,might resist; if intelligent, might balance, as wise and foolish haveoften tried to do from the beginning; but the forces would continueto educate, and the mind would continue to react. All the teachercould hope was to teach it reaction.Even there his difficulty was extreme. The most elementary-books of science betrayed the inadequacy of old implements ofthought. Chapter after chapter closed with phrases such as onenever met in older literature: "The cause of this phenomenon isnot understood"; "science no longer ventures to explain causes";"the first step towards a causal explanation still remains to betaken"; "opinions are very much divided"; "in spite of the con-tradictions involved"; "science gets on only by adopting differ-ent theories, sometimes contradictory." Evidently the new Amer-498The Education of Henry Adamsican would need to think in contradictions, and instead of Kant'sfamous four antinomies, the new universe would know no lawthat could not be proved by its anti-law.To educate — one's self to begin with — had been the effort ofone's life for sixty years ; and the difficulties of education had goneon doubling with the coal-output, until the prospect of waitinganother ten years, in order to face a seventh doubling of com-plexities, allured one's imagination but slightly. The law of ac-celeration was definite, and did not require ten years more studyexcept to show whether it held good. No scheme could be sug-gested to the new American, and no fault needed to be found, orcomplaint made; but the next great influx of new forces seemednear at hand, and its style of education promised to be violentlycoercive. The movement from unity into multiplicity, between1200 and 1900, was unbroken in sequence, and rapid in accelera-tion. Prolonged one generation longer, it would require a new socialmind. As though thought were common salt in indefinite solutionit must enter a new phase subject to new laws. Thus far, sincefive or ten thousand years, the mind had successfully reacted, andnothing yet proved that it would fail to react — but it wouldneed to jump.