CHAPTER XXITWENTY YEARS AFTER (1892)ONCE more! this is a story of education, not of adventure!It is meant to help young men— or such as have intel-ligence enough to seek help — but it is not meant toamuse them. What one did — or did not do — with one's edu-cation, after getting it, need trouble the inquirer in no way; it isa personal matter only which would confuse him. Perhaps HenryAdams was not worth educating; most keen judges incline to thinkthat barely one man in a hundred owns a mind capable of re-acting to any purpose on the forces that surround him, and fullyhalf of these react wrongly. The object of education for that mindshould be the teaching itself how to react with vigor and economy.No doubt the world at large will always lag so far behind the activemind as to make a soft cushion of inertia to drop upon, as it didfor Henry Adams; but education should try to lessen the ob-stacles, diminish the friction, invigorate the energy, and shouldtrain minds to react, not at haphazard, but by choice, on the linesof force that attract their world. What one knows is, in youth,of little moment; they know enough who know how to learn.Throughout human history 'the waste of mind has been appalling,and, as this story is meant to show, society has conspired to pro-mote it. No doubt the teacher is the worst criminal, but theworld stands behind him and drags the student from his course.The moral is stentorian. Only the most energetic, the most highlyfitted, and the most favored have overcome the friction or theviscosity of inertia, and these were compelled to waste three-fourths of their energy in doing it.Fit or unfit, Henry Adams stopped his own education in 1871,and began to apply it for practical uses, like his neighbors. At theend of twenty years, he found that he had finished, and couldTwenty Years After315sum up the result. He had no complaint to make against man orwoman. They had all treated him kindly; he had never met withill-will, ill- temper, or even ill-manners, or known a quarrel. Hehad never seen serious dishonesty or ingratitude. He had found areadiness in the young to respond to suggestion that seemed tohim far beyond all he had reason to expect. Considering the stockcomplaints against the world, he could not understand why hehad nothing to complain of.During these twenty years he had done as much work, in quan-tity, as his neighbors wanted ; more than they would ever stop tolook at, and more than his share. Merely in print, he thoughtaltogether ridiculous the number of volumes he counted on theshelves of public libraries. He had no notion whether they serveda useful purpose; he had worked in the dark; but so had most ofhis friends, even the artists, none of whom held any lofty opinionof their success in raising the standards of society, or felt pro-found respect for the methods or manners of their time, at homeor abroad, but all of whom had tried, in a way, to hold the stand-ard up. The effort had been, for the older generation, exhausting,as one could see in the Hunts; but the generation after 1870 mademore figure, not in proportion to public wealth or in the census, butin their own self-assertion. A fair number of the men who wereborn in the thirties had won names — Phillips Brooks; Bret Harte;Henry James; H. H. Richardson; John La Farge; and the list mightbe made fairly long if it were worth while; but from their schoolhad sprung others, like Augustus St. Gaudens, McKim, StanfordWhite, and scores born in the forties, who counted as force evenin the mental inertia of sixty or eighty million people. Among allthese Clarence King, John Hay, and Henry Adams had led modestexistences, trying to fill in the social gaps of a class which, as yet,showed but thin ranks and little cohesion. The combination offeredno very glittering prizes, but they pursued it for twenty years withas much patience and effort as though it led to fame or power, until,at last, Henry Adams thought his own duties sufficiently performed1/316The Education of Henry Adamsand his account with society settled. He had enjoyed his life amaz-ingly, and would not have exchanged it for any other that camein his way; he was, or thought he was, perfectly satisfied withit; but for reasons that had nothing to do with education, he wastired; his nervous energy ran low; and, like a horse that wears out,he quitted the race-course, left the stable, and sought pastures asfar as possible from the old. Education had ended in 1871 ; life wascomplete in 1890; the rest mattered so little!As had happened so often, he found himself in London when thequestion of return imposed its verdict on him after much fruitlesseffort to rest elsewhere. The time was the month of January, 1892;he was alone, in hospital, in the gloom of midwinter. He wasclose on his fifty-fourth birthday, and Pall Mall had forgotten himas completely as it had forgotten his elders. He had not seen Lon-don for a dozen years, and was rather amused to have only abed for a world and a familiar black fog for horizon. The coal-firesmelt homelike; the fog had a fruity taste of youth; anything wasbetter than being turned out into the wastes of Wigmore Street.He could always amuse himself by living over his youth, and driv-ing once more down Oxford Street in 1858, with life before him toimagine far less amusing than it had turned out to be.The future attracted him less. Lying there for a week he re-flected on what he could do next. He had just come up from theSouth Seas with John La Farge, who had reluctantly crawledaway towards New York to resume the grinding routine of studio-work at an age when life runs low. Adams would rather, as choice,have gone back to the east, if it were only to sleep forever in thetrade-winds under the southern stars, wandering over the darkpurple ocean, with its purple sense of solitude and void. Not thathe liked the sensation, but that it was the most unearthly he hadfelt. He had not yet happened on Rudyard Kipling's " Manda-lay," but he knew the poetry before he knew the poem, like millionsof wanderers, who have perhaps alone felt the world exactly as itis. Nothing attracted him less than the idea of beginning a newTwenty Years After317education. The old one had been poor enough; any new one couldonly add to its faults. Life had been cut in halves, and the old halfhad passed away, education and all, leaving no stock to graft on.The new world he faced in Paris and London seemed to himfantastic. Willing to admit it real in the sense of having some kindof existence outside his own mind, he could not admit it reason-In Paris, his heart sank to mere pulp before the dismalable.ballets at the Grand Opera and the eternal vaudeville at the oldPalais Royal; but, except for them, his own Paris of the SecondEmpire was as extinct as that of the first Napoleon. At the gal-leries and exhibitions, he was racked by the effort of art to beoriginal, and when one day, after much reflection, John La Fargeasked whether there might not still be room for something simplein art, Adams shook his head. As he saw the world, it was nolonger simple and could not express itself simply. It should expresswhat it was; and this was something that neither Adams norLa Farge understood.Under the first blast of this furnace-heat, the lights seemed fairlyto go out. He felt nothing in common with the world as it promisedto be. He was ready to quit it, and the easiest path led back to theeast; but he could not venture alone, and the rarest of animals isa companion. He must return to America to get one. Perhaps, whilewaiting, he might write more history, and on the chance as a lastresource, he gave orders for copying everything he could reachin archives, but this was mere habit. He went home as a horsegoes back to his stable, because he knew nowhere else to go.Home was Washington. As soon as Grant's administrationended, in 1877, and Evarts became Secretary of State, Adamswent back there, partly to write history, but chiefly because hisseven years of laborious banishment, in Boston, convinced himthat, as far as he had a function in life, it was as stable-companionto statesmen, whether they liked it or not. At about the same time,old George Bancroft did the same thing, and presently John Haycame on to be Assistant Secretary of State for Mr. Evarts, and3 1 8The Education of Henry Adamsstayed there to write the "Life" of Lincoln. In 1884 Adams joinedhim in employing Richardson to build them adjoining houses onLa Fayette Square. As far as Adams had a home this was it.To the house on La Fayette Square he must turn, for he had noother status — no position in the world.Never did he make a decision more reluctantly than this of goingback to his manger. His father and mother were dead. All hisExcept for two or threefamily led settled lives of their own.friends in Washington, who were themselves uncertain of stay,no one cared whether he came or went, and he cared least. Therewas nothing to care about. Every one was busy; nearly every oneseemed contented. Since 1871 nothing had ruffled the surface ofthe American world, and even the progress of Europe in her side-way track to dis-Europeaning herself had ceased to be violent.After a dreary January in Paris, at last when no excuse could bepersuaded to offer itself for further delay, he crossed the channeland passed a week with his old friend, Milnes Gaskell, at Thornes,in Yorkshire, while the westerly gales raved a warning against go-ing home. Yorkshire in January is not an island in the South Seas.It has few points of resemblance to Tahiti; not many to Fiji orSamoa; but, as so often before, it was a rest between past andfuture, and Adams was grateful for it.At last, on February 3, he drove, after a fashion, down the IrishChannel, on board the Teutonic. He had not crossed the Atlanticfor a dozen years, and had never seen an ocean steamer of the newtype. He had seen nothing new of any sort, or much changed inFrance or England. The railways made quicker time, but wereno more comfortable. The scale was the same. The Channel serv-ice was hardly improved since 1858, or so little as to make noimpression. Europe seemed to have been stationary for twentyyears. To a man who had been stationary like Europe, the Teu-tonic was a marvel. That he should be able to eat his dinner througha week of howling winter gales was a miracle. That he should havea deck stateroom, with fresh air, and read all night, if he chose, byTwenty Years After319electric light, was matter for more wonder than life had yet sup-plied, in its old forms. Wonder may be double — even treble.Adams's wonder ran off into figures. As the Niagara was tothe Teutonic— as i860 was to 1890— so the Teutonic and 1890must be to the next term — and then? Apparently the questionconcerned only America. Western Europe offered no such conun-drum. There one might double scale and speed indefinitely with-out passing bounds.Fate was kind on that voyage. Rudyard Kipling, on his wed-ding trip to America, thanks to the mediation of Henry James,dashed over the passenger his exuberant fountain of gaiety andwit — as though playing a garden hose on a thirsty and fadedbegonia. Kipling could never know what peace of mind he gave, forhe could hardly ever need it himself so much; and yet, in the fulldelight of his endless fun and variety, one felt the old conundrumrepeat itself. Somehow, somewhere, Kipling and the Americanwere not one, but two, and could not be glued together. The Amer-ican felt that the defect, if defect it were, was in himself; he had feltit when he was with Swinburne, and, again, with Robert LouisStevenson, even under the palms of Vailima; but he did not carryself-abasement to the point of thinking himself singular. Whateverthe defect might be, it was American; it belonged to the type; itlived in the blood. Whatever the quality might be that held himapart, it was English; it lived also in the blood; one felt it little ifat all, with Celts, and one yearned reciprocally among Fiji canni-bals. Clarence King used to say that it was due to discord be-tween the wave-lengths of the man-atoms; but the theory offereddifficulties in measurement. Perhaps, after all, it was only thatgenius soars; but this theory, too, had its dark corners. All throughlife, one had seen the American on his literary knees to the Euro-pean; and all through many lives back for some two centuries, onehad seen the European snub or patronize the American; not alwaysintentionally, but effectually. It was in the nature of things. Kip-ling neither snubbed nor patronized; he was all gaiety and good-320The Education of Henry Adamsnature; but he would have been first to feel what one meant.Genius has to pay itself that unwilling self-respect.Towards the middle of February, 1892, Adams found himselfagain in Washington. In Paris and London he had seen nothingto make a return to life worth while; in Washington he saw plentyof reasons for staying dead. Changes had taken place there; im-provements had been made; with time — much time — the citymight become habitable according to some fashionable standard;but all one's friends had died or disappeared several times over,leaving one almost as strange as in Boston or London. Slowly, acertain society had built itself up about the Government; houseshad been opened and there was much dining; much calling; muchleaving of cards; but a solitary man counted for less than in 1868.Society seemed hardly more at home than he. Both Executiveand Congress held it aloof. No one in society seemed to have theear of anybody in Government. No one in Government knew anyreason for consulting any one in society. The world had ceased tobe wholly political, but politics had become less social. A survivorof the Civil War — like George Bancroft, or John Hay — triedto keep footing, but without brilliant success. They were free tosay or do what they liked, but no one took much notice of any-thing said or done.A presidential election was to take place in November, and noone showed much interest in the result. The two candidates weresingular persons, of whom it was the common saying that one ofthem had no friends; the other, only enemies. Calvin Brice, whowas at that time altogether the wittiest and cleverest member ofthe Senate, was in the habit of describing Mr. Cleveland in glow-ing terms and at great length, as one of the loftiest natures andnoblest characters of ancient or modern time; "but," he concluded,"in future I prefer to look on at his proceedings from the safesummit of some neighboring hill." The same remark applied toMr. Harrison. In this respect, they were the greatest of Presi-dents, for, whatever harm they might do their enemies, was asTwenty Years After321nothing when compared to the mortality they inflicted on theirfriends. Men fled them as though they had the evil eye. To theAmerican people, the two candidates and the two parties were soevenly balanced that the scales showed hardly a perceptible dif-ference. Mr. Harrison was an excellent President, a man of abil-ity and force; perhaps the best President the Republican Party-had put forward since Lincoln's death; yet, on the whole, Adamsfelt a shade of preference for President Cleveland, not so muchpersonally as because the Democrats represented to him the lastremnants of the eighteenth century; the survivors of Hosea Big-low's Cornwallis; the sole remaining protestants against a bank-er's Olympus which had become, for five-and-twenty years, moreand more despotic over Esop's frog-empire. One might no longercroak except to vote for King Log, or — failing storks — forGrover Cleveland; and even then could not be sure where KingBanker lurked behind. The costly education in politics had led topolitical torpor. Every one did not share it. Clarence King andJohn Hay were loyal Republicans who never for a moment con-ceived that there could be merit in other ideals. With King, thefeeling was chiefly love of archaic races; sympathy with the negroand Indian and corresponding dislike of their enemies; but withHay, party loyalty became a phase of being, a little like theloyalty of a highly cultivated churchman to his Church. He sawall the failings of the party, and still more keenly those of thepartisans; but he could not live outside. To Adams a WesternDemocrat or a Western Republican, a city Democrat or a cityRepublican, a W. C. Whitney or a J. G. Blaine, were actually thesame man, as far as their usefulness to the objects of King, Hay,or Adams was concerned. They graded themselves as friends orenemies, not as Republicans or Democrats. To Hay, the differ-ence was that of being respectable or not.Since 1879, King, Hay, and Adams had been inseparable. Stepby step, they had gone on in the closest sympathy, rather shun-ning than inviting public position, until, in 1892, none of them322The Education of Henry Adamsheld any post at all. With great effort, in Hayes's administra-tion, all King's friends, including Abram Hewitt and Carl Schurz,had carried the bill for uniting the Surveys and had placed Kingat the head of the Bureau; but King waited only to organize theservice, and then resigned, in order to seek his private fortune inthe West. Hay, after serving as Assistant Secretary of State underSecretary Evarts during a part of Hayes's administration, thenalso insisted on going out, in order to write with Nicolay the"Life" of Lincoln. Adams had held no office, and when hisfriends asked the reason, he could not go into long explanations,but preferred to answer simply that no President had ever in-vited him to fill one. The reason was good, and was also con-veniently true, but left open an awkward doubt of his morals orcapacity. Why had no President ever cared to employ him? Thequestion needed a volume of intricate explanation. There neverwas a day when he would have refused to perform any duty thatthe Government imposed on him, but the American Governmentnever to his knowledge imposed duties. The point was neverraised with regard to him, or to any one else. The Governmentrequired candidates to offer; the business of the Executive beganand ended with the consent or refusal to confer. The social for-mula carried this passive attitude a shade further. Any publicman who may for years have used some other man's house as hisown, when promoted to a position of patronage commonly feelshimself obliged to inquire, directly or indirectly, whether hisfriend wants anything; which is equivalent to a civil act of di-vorce, since he feels awkward in the old relation. The handsom-est formula, in an impartial choice, was the grandly courteousSouthern phrase of Lamar: "Of course Mr. Adams knows thatanything in my power is at his service." A la disposition deUsted! The form must have been correct since it released bothparties. He was right; Mr. Adams did know all about it; a bowand a conventional smile closed the subject forever, and every onefelt flattered.Twenty Years After323Such an intimate, promoted to power, was always lost. Hisduties and cares absorbed him and affected his balance of mind.Unless his friend served some political purpose, friendship was aneffort. Men who neither wrote for newspapers nor made cam-paign speeches, who rarely subscribed to the campaign fund, andwho entered the White House as seldom as possible, placed them-selves outside the sphere of usefulness, and did so with entirelyadequate knowledge of what they were doing. They never ex-pected the President to ask for their services, and saw no reasonwhy he should do so. As for Henry Adams, in fifty years that heknew Washington, no one would have been more surprised thanhimself had any President ever asked him to perform so much ofa service as to cross the square. Only Texan Congressmen imag-ined that the President needed their services in some remote con-sulate after worrying him for months to find one.In Washington this law or custom is universally understood,and no one's character necessarily suffered because he held no of-fice. No one took office unless he wanted it; and in turn the out-sider was never asked to do work or subscribe money. Adams sawno office that he wanted, and he gravely thought that, from hispoint of view, in the long run, he was likely to be a more usefulcitizen without office. He could at least act as audience, and, inthose days, a Washington audience seldom filled even a smalltheatre. He felt quite well satisfied to look on, and from time totime he thought he might risk a criticism of the players ; but thoughhe found his own position regular, he never quite understood thatof John Hay. The Republican leaders treated Hay as one ofthemselves; they asked his services and took his money with afreedom that staggered even a hardened observer; but they neverneeded him in equivalent office. In Washington Hay was the onlycompetent man in the party for diplomatic work. He correspondedin his powers of usefulness exactly with Lord Granville in London,who had been for forty years the saving grace of every Liberaladministration inturn. Had usefulness to the public service been324The Education of Henry Adamsever a question, Hay should have had a first-class mission underHayes; should have been placed in the Cabinet by Garfield, andshould have been restored to it by Harrison. These gentlemenwere always using him; always invited his services, and alwaystook his money.1Adams's opinion of politics and politicians, as he frankly ad-mitted, lacked enthusiasm, although never, in his severest temper,did he apply to them the terms they freely applied to each other;and he explained everything by his old explanation of Grant'scharacter as more or less a general type; but what roused in hismind more rebellion was the patience and good-nature with whichHay allowed himself to be used. The trait was not confined topolitics. Hay seemed to like to be used, and this was one of hismany charms; but in politics this sort of good-nature demandssupernatural patience. Whatever astonishing lapses of socialconvention the politicians betrayed, Hay laughed equally heartily,and told the stories with constant amusement, at his own expense.Like most Americans, he liked to play at making Presidents, but,unlike most, he laughed not only at the Presidents he helped tomake, but also at himself for laughing.One must be rich, and come from Ohio or New York, to gratifyan expensive taste like this. Other men, on both political flanks,did the same thing, and did it well, less for selfish objects than forthe amusement of the game; but Hay alone lived in Washingtonand in the centre of the Ohio influences that ruled the RepublicanParty during thirty years. On the whole, these influences wererespectable, and although Adams could not, under any circum-stances, have had any value, even financially, for Ohio politicians,Hay might have much, as he showed, if they only knew enoughto appreciate him. The American politician was occasionally anamusing object; Hay laughed, and, for want of other resource,Adams laughed too; but perhaps it was partly irritation at seeinghow President Harrison dealt his cards that made Adams wel-come President Cleveland back to the White House.Twenty Years After"325At all events, neither Hay nor King nor Adams had much togain by reelecting Mr. Harrison in 1892, or by defeating him, asfar as he was concerned; and as far as concerned Mr. Cleveland,they seemed to have even less personal concern. The whole coun-try, to outward appearance, stood in much the same frame ofmind. Everywhere was slack-water. Hay himself was almost aslanguid and indifferent as Adams. Neither had occupation. Bothhad finished their literary work. The "Life" of Lincoln had beenbegun, completed, and published hand in hand with the " Historyof Jefferson and Madison, so that between them they had writtennearly all the American history there was to write. The inter-mediate period needed intermediate treatment; the gap betweenJames Madison and Abraham Lincoln could not be judiciallyfilled by either of them. Both were heartily tired of the subject,and America seemed as tired as they. What was worse, the re-deeming energy of Americans which had generally served as theresource of minds otherwise vacant, the creation of new force,the application of expanding power, showed signs of check. Eventhe year before, in 1891, far off in the Pacific, one had met every-where in the East a sort of stagnation — a creeping paralysis —complaints of shipping and producers — that spread throughoutthe whole southern hemisphere. Questions of exchange and sil-ver-production loomed large. Credit was shaken, and a change ofparty government might shake it even in Washington. The mat-ter did not concern Adams, who had no credit, and was alwaysrichest when the rich were poor; but it helped to dull the vibra-tion of society.However they studied it, the balance of profit and loss, on thelast twenty years, for the three friends, King, Hay, and Adams,was exceedingly obscure in 1892. They had lost twenty years,but what had they gained? They often discussed the question.Hay had a singular faculty for remembering faces, and wouldbreak off suddenly the thread of his talk, as he looked out of thewindow on La Fayette Square, to notice an old corps commander326The Education of Henry Adamsor admiral of the Civil War, tottering along to the club for hiscards or his cocktail: "There is old Dash who broke the rebellines at Blankburg! Think of his having been a thunderbolt ofwar!" Or what drew Adams's closer attention: "There goesold Boutwell gambolling like the gambolling kid!" There theywent! Men who had swayed the course of empire as well as thecourse of Hay, King, and Adams, less valued than the ephemeralCongressman behind them, who could not have told whether thegeneral was a Boutwell or Boutwell a general. Theirs was thehighest known success, and one asked what it was worth to them.Apart from personal vanity, what would they sell it for? Wouldany one of them, from President downwards, refuse ten thousanda year in place of all the consideration he received from the worldon account of his success ?Yet consideration had value, and at that time Adams enjoyedlecturing Augustus St. Gaudens, in hours of depression, on itseconomics: "Honestly you must admit that even if you don't payyour expenses you get a certain amount of advantage from doingthe best work. Very likely some of the really successful Ameri-cans would be willing you should come to dinner sometimes, if youdid not come too often, while they would think twice about Hay,and would never stand me." The forgotten statesman had novalue at all; the general and admiral not much; the historian butlittle; on the whole, the artist stood best, and of course, wealthrested outside the question, since it was acting as judge; but, inthe last resort, the judge certainly admitted that considerationhad some value as an asset, though hardly as much as ten — orfive — thousand a year.Hay and Adams had the advantage of looking out of their win-dows on the antiquities of La Fayette Square, with the sense ofhaving all that any one had; all that the world had to offer; allthat they wanted in life, including their names on scores of title-pages and in one or two biographical dictionaries; but this hadnothing to do with consideration, and they knew no more thanTwenty Years After327it success. Hay hadBoutwell or St. Gaudens whether to callpassed ten years in writing the "Life" of Lincoln, and perhapsPresident Lincoln was the better for it, but what Hay got from itwas not so easy to see, except the privilege of seeing popular book-makers steal from his book and cover the theft by abusing theauthor. Adams had given ten or a dozen years to Jefferson andMadison, with expenses which, in any mercantile business, couldhardly have been reckoned at less than a hundred thousand dol-lars, on a salary of five thousand a year; and when he asked whatreturn he got from this expenditure, rather more extravagant inproportion to his means than a racing-stable, he could see nonewhatever. Such works never return money. Even Frank Park-man never printed a first edition of his relatively cheap and popu-lar volumes, numbering more than seven hundred copies, untilquite at the end of his life. A thousand copies of a book that costtwenty dollars or more was as much as any author could expect;two thousand copies was a visionary estimate unless it were can-vassed for subscription. As far as Adams knew, he had but threeserious readers — Abram Hewitt, Wayne McVeagh, and Hayhimself. He was amply satisfied with their consideration, andcould dispense with that of the other fifty-nine million, nine hun-dred and ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred and ninety-seven;but neither he nor Hay was better off in any other respect, andtheir chief title to consideration was their right to look out of theirwindows on great men, alive or dead, in La Fayette Square, aprivilege which had nothing to do with their writings.The world was always good-natured; civil; glad to be amused;open-armed to any one who amused it; patient with every onewho did not insist on putting himself in its way, or costing itmoney; but this was not consideration, still less power in any ofits concrete forms, and applied as well or better to a comic actor.Certainly a rare soprano or tenor voice earned infinitely moreapplause as it gave infinitely more pleasure, even in America; butone does what one can with one's means, and casting up one's328The Education of Henry Adamsbalance sheet, one expects only a reasonable return on one's capi-tal. Hay and Adams had risked nothing and never played forhigh stakes. King had followed the ambitious course. He hadplayed for many millions. He had more than once come closeto a great success, but the result was still in doubt, and meanwhilehe was passing the best years of his life underground. For com-panionship he was mostly lost.Thus, in 1892, neither Hay, King, nor Adams knew whetherthey had attained success, or how to estimate it, or what to callit; and the American people seemed to have no clearer idea thanthey. Indeed, the American people had no idea at all; they werewandering in a wilderness much more sandy than the Hebrews hadever trodden about Sinai; they had neither serpents nor goldencalves to worship. They had lost the sense of worship; for theidea that they worshipped money seemed a delusion. Worship ofmoney was an old-world trait; a healthy appetite akin to worshipof the Gods, or to worship of power in any concrete shape; but theAmerican wasted money more recklessly than any one ever didbefore; he spent more to less purpose than any extravagant courtaristocracy; he had no sense of relative values, and knew not whatto do with his money when he got it, except use it to make more,or throw it away. Probably, since human society began, it hadseen no such curious spectacle as the houses of the San Franciscomillionaires on Nob Hill. Except for the railway system, the enor-mous wealth taken out of the ground since 1840, had disappeared.West of the Alleghenies, the whole country might have been sweptclean, and could have been replaced in better form within one ortwo years. The American mind had less respect for money thanthe European or Asiatic mind, and bore its loss more easily; butit had been deflected by its pursuit till it could turn in no otherIt shunned, distrusted, disliked, the dangerous attrac-direction.tion of ideals, and stood alone in history for its ignorance of thepast.Personal contact brought this American trait close to Adams'sTwenty Years After329notice. His first step, on returning to Washington, took him outto the cemetery known as Rock Creek, to see the bronze figurewhich St. Gaudens had made for him in his absence. Naturallyevery detail interested him; every line; every touch of the artist;every change of light and shade; every point of relation; everypossible doubt of St. Gaudens's correctness of taste or feeling;so that, as the spring approached, he was apt to stop there oftento see what the figure had to tell him that was new; but, in allthat it had to say, he never once thought of questioning what itmeant. He supposed its meaning to be the one commonplaceabout it — the oldest idea known to human thought. He knewthat if he asked an Asiatic its meaning, not a man, woman, orchild from Cairo to Kamtchatka would have needed more thana glance to reply. From the Egyptian Sphinx to the KamakuraDaibuts; from Prometheus to Christ; from Michael Angelo toShelley, art had wrought on this eternal figure almost as thoughit had nothing else to say. The interest of the figure was not inits meaning, but in the response of the observer. As Adams satthere, numbers of people came, for the figure seemed to have be-come a tourist fashion, and all wanted to know its meaning. Mosttook it for a portrait-statue, and the remnant were vacant-mindedin the absence of a personal guide. None felt what would havebeen a nursery-instinct to a Hindu baby or a Japanese jinricksha-runner. The only exceptions were the clergy, who taught a lessoneven deeper. One after another brought companions there, and,apparently fascinated by their own reflection, broke out passion-ately against the expression they felt in the figure of despair, ofatheism, of denial. Like the others, the priest saw only what hebrought. Like all great artists, St. Gaudens held up the mirrorand no more. The American layman had lost sight of ideals; theAmerican priest had lost sight of faith. Both were more Ameri-can than the old, half-witted soldiers who denounced the wast-ing, on a mere grave, of money which should have been given fordrink.22°The Education of Henry AdamsLanded, lost, and forgotten, in the centre of this vast plain ofself-content, Adams could see but one active interest, to which allothers were subservient, and which absorbed the energies of somesixty million people to the exclusion of every other force, real orimaginary. The power of the railway system had enormously in-creased since 1870. Already the coal output of 160,000,000 tonsclosely approached the 180,000,000 of the British Empire, and oneheld one's breath at the nearness of what one had never expectedto see, the crossing of courses, and the lead of American energies.The moment was deeply exciting to a historian, but the railwaysystem itself interested one less than in 1868, since it offered lesschance for future profit. Adams had been born with the railwaysystem; had grown up with it; had been over pretty nearly everymile of it with curious eyes, and knew as much about it as hisneighbors; but not there could he look for a new education. In-complete though it was, the system seemed on the whole to satisfythe wants of society better than any other part of the social ma-chine, and society was content with its creation, for the time, andwith itself for creating it. Nothing new was to be done or learnedthere, and the world hurried on to its telephones, bicycles, andelectric trams. At past fifty, Adams solemnly and painfully learnedto ride the bicycle.Nothing else occurred to him as a means of new life. Nothingelse offered itself, however carefully he sought. He looked for nochange. He lingered in Washington till near July without notic-ing a new idea. Then he went back to England to pass his summeron the Deeside. In October he returned to Washington and thereawaited the reelection of Mr. Cleveland, which led to no deeperthought than that of taking up some small notes that happenedto be outstanding. He had seen enough of the world to be a coward,and above all he had an uneasy distrust of bankers. Even deadmen allow themselves a few narrow prejudices.