CHAPTER VIITREASON (1860-1861)WHEN, forty years afterwards, Henry Adams lookedback over his adventures in search of knowledge, heasked himself whether fortune or fate had ever dealtits cards quite so wildly to any of his known antecessors as whenit led him to begin the study of law and to vote for AbrahamLincoln on the same day.He dropped back on Quincy like a lump of lead; he reboundedlike a football, tossed into space by an unknown energy whichplayed with all his generation as a cat plays with mice. Thesimile is none too strong. Not one man in America wanted theCivil War, or expected or intended it. A small minority wantedsecession. The vast majority wanted to go on with their occupa-tions in peace. Not one, however clever or learned, guessed whathappened. Possibly a few Southern loyalists in despair mightdream it as an impossible chance; but none planned it.As for Henry Adams, fresh from Europe and chaos of anothersort, he plunged at once into a lurid atmosphere of politics, quiteheedless of any education or forethought. His past melted away.The prodigal was welcomed home, but not even his father askeda malicious question about the Pandects. At the utmost, he hintedat some shade of prodigality by quietly inviting his son to act asprivate secretary during the winter in Washington, as though anyyoung man who could afford to throw away two winters on theCivil Law could afford to read Blackstone for another winterwithout a master. The young man was beyond satire, and askedonly a pretext for throwing all education to the east wind. No-vember at best is sad, and November at Quincy had been fromearliest childhood the least gay of seasons. Nowhere else doesthe uncharitable autumn wreak its spite so harshly on the frailTreason99wreck of the grasshopper summer; yet even a Quincy Novemberseemed temperate before the chill of a Boston January.This was saying much, for the November of i860 at Quincystood apart from other memories as lurid beyond description.Although no one believed in civil war, the air reeked of it, and theRepublicans organized their clubs and parades as Wide-Awakes ina form military in all things except weapons. Henry reached homein time to see the last of these processions, stretching in ranks oftorches along the hillside, file down through the November nightto the Old House, where Mr. Adams, their Member of Congress,received them, and, let them pretend what they liked, their airwas not that of innocence.Profoundly ignorant, anxious, and curious, the young manpacked his modest trunk again, which had not yet time to be un-packed, and started for Washington with his family. Ten yearshad passed since his last visit, but very little had changed. As in1800 and 1850, so in i860, the same rude colony was camped inthe same forest, with the same unfinished Greek temples for work-rooms, and sloughs for roads. The Government had an air of so-cial instability and incompleteness that went far to support theright of secession in theory as in fact; but right or wrong, seces-sion was likely to be easy where there was so little to secede from.The Union was a sentiment, but not much more, and in December,i860, the sentiment about the Capitol was chiefly hostile, so faras it made itself felt. John Adams was better off in Philadelphiain 1776 than his great-grandson Henry in i860 in Washington.Patriotism ended by throwing a halo over the Continental Con-gress, but over the close of the Thirty-sixth Congress in 1860-61,no halo could be thrown by any one who saw it. Of all the crowdswarming in Washington that winter, young Adams was surelyamong the most ignorant and helpless, but he saw plainly that theknowledge possessed by everybody about him was hardly greaterthan his own. Never in a long life did he seek to master a lessonso obscure. Mr. Sumner was given to saying after Oxenstiern:iooThe Education of Henry Adams"Quantula sapientia mundus regitur!" Oxenstiern talked of aworld that wanted wisdom; but Adams found himself seekingeducation in a world that seemed to him both unwise and igno-rant. The Southern secessionists were certainly unbalanced inmind — fit for medical treatment, like other victims of hallu-cination — haunted by suspicion, by idees fixes, by violent mor-bid excitement; but this was not all. They were stupendouslyignorant of the world. As a class, the cotton-planters were men-tally one-sided, ill-balanced, and provincial to a degree rarelyknown. They were a close society on whom the new fountains ofpower had poured a stream of wealth and slaves that acted likeoil on flame. They showed a young student his first object-lessonof the way in which excess of power worked when held by inade-quate hands.This might be a commonplace of 1900, but in i860 it was para-dox. The Southern statesmen were regarded as standards ofstatesmanship, and such standards barred education.CharlesSumner's chief offence was his insistence on Southern ignorance,and he stood a living proof of it. To this school, Henry Adams hadcome for a new education, and the school was seriously, honestly,taken by most of the world, including Europe, as proper for thepurpose, although the Sioux Indians would have taught less mis-chief. From such contradictions among intelligent people, whatwas a young man to learn?He could learn nothing but cross-purpose. The old and typicalSouthern gentleman developed as cotton-planter had nothing toteach or to give, except warning. Even as example to be avoided,he was too glaring in his defiance of reason, to help the educationof a reasonable being. No one learned a useful lesson from theConfederate school except to keep away from it. Thus, at onesweep, the whole field of instruction south of the Potomac wasshut off; it was overshadowed by the cotton planters, from whomone could learn nothing but bad temper, bad manners, poker, andtreason.TreasonioiPerforce, the student was thrown back on Northern preceptand example; first of all, on his New England surroundings. Re-publican houses were few in Washington, and Mr. and Mrs.Adams aimed to create a social centre for New Englanders. Theytook a house on I Street, looking over Pennsylvania Avenue, wellout towards Georgetown — the Markoe house — and there theprivate secretary began to learn his social duties, for the politicalwere confined to committee-rooms and lobbies of the Capitol.He had little to do, and knew not how to do it rightly, but heknew of no one who knew more.The Southern type was one to be avoided; the New EnglandIt had nothing to show except one's owntype was one's self.features. Setting aside Charles Sumner, who stood quite aloneand was the boy's oldest friend, all the New Englanders weresane and steady men, well-balanced, educated, and free from mean-ness or intrigue — men whom one liked to act with, and who,whether graduates or not, bore the stamp of Harvard College.Anson Burlingame was one exception, and perhaps Israel Wash-burn another; but as a rule the New Englander's strength was hispoise which almost amounted to a defect. He offered no moretarget for love than for hate; he attracted as little as he repelled;even as a machine, his motion seemed never accelerated. Thecharacter, with its force or feebleness, was familiar; one knew itto the core; one was it — had been run in the same mould.There remained the Central and Western States, but there thechoice of teachers was not large and in the end narrowed itself toPreston King, Henry Winter Davis, Owen Lovejoy, and a fewother men born with social faculty. Adams took most kindly toHenry J. Raymond, who came to view the field for the New YorkTimes, and who was a man of the world. The average Congress-man was civil enough, but had nothing to ask except offices, andnothing to offer but the views of his district. The average Senatorwas more reserved, but had not much more to say, being always,excepting one or two genial natures, handicapped by his ownimportance.102The Education of Henry AdamsStudy it as one might, the hope of education, till the arrivalof the President-elect, narrowed itself to the possible influenceof only two men — Sumner and Seward.Sumner was then fifty years old. Since his election as Senatorin 185 1 he had passed beyond the reach of his boy friend, and,after his Brooks injuries, his nervous system never quite recov-ered its tone; but perhaps eight or ten years of solitary existence asSenator had most to do with his development. No man, howeverstrong, can serve ten years as schoolmaster, priest, or Senator,and remain fit for anything else. All the dogmatic stations in lifehave the effect of fixing a certain stiffness of attitude forever, asthough they mesmerized the subject. Yet even among Senatorsthere were degrees in dogmatism, from the frank South Caro-linian brutality, to that of Webster, Benton, Clay, or Sumnerhimself, until in extreme cases, like Conkling, it became Shake-spearian and bouffe — as Godkin used to call it — like Malvolio.Sumner had become dogmatic like the rest, but he had at least themerit of qualities that warranted dogmatism. He justly thought,as Webster had thought before him, that his great services and sac-rifices, his superiority in education, his oratorical power, his polit-ical experience, his representative character at the head of thewhole New England contingent, and, above all, his knowledge ofthe world, made him the most important member of the Senate;and no Senator had ever saturated himself more thoroughly withthe spirit and temper of the body.Although the Senate is much given to admiring in its membersa superiority less obvious or quite invisible to outsiders, oneSenator seldom proclaims his own inferiority to another, andstill more seldom likes to be told of it. Even the greatest Senatorsseemed to inspire little personal affection in each other, and be-trayed none at all. Sumner had a number of rivals who held hisjudgment in no high esteem, and one of these was Senator Seward.The two men would have disliked each other by instinct had theylived in different planets. Each was created only for exasperat-Treason103ing the other; the virtues of one were the faults of his rival, untilno good quality seemed to remain of either. That the public serv-ice must suffer was certain, but what were the sufferings of thepublic service compared with the risks run by a young mosquito— a private secretary— trying to buzz admiration in the ears ofeach, and unaware that each would impatiently slap at him forbelonging to the other? Innocent and unsuspicious beyond whatwas permitted even in a nursery, the private secretary courtedboth.Private secretaries are servants of a rather low order, whosebusiness is to serve sources of power. The first news of a profes-sional kind, imparted to private secretary Adams on reachingWashington, was that the President-elect, Abraham Lincoln, hadselected Mr. Seward for his Secretary of State, and that Sewardwas to be the medium for communicating his wishes to his fol-lowers. Every young man naturally accepted the wishes of Mr.Lincoln as orders, the more because he could see that the newPresident was likely to need all the help that several millionyoung men would be able to give, if they counted on having anyPresident at all to serve. Naturally one waited impatiently forthe first meeting with the new Secretary of State.Governor Seward was an old friend of the family. He pro-fessed to be a disciple and follower of John Quincy Adams. Hehad been Senator since 1849, when his responsibilities as leader hadseparated him from the Free Soil contingent, for, in the dry lightof the first Free Soil faith, the ways of New York politics and ofThurlow Weed had not won favor; but the fierce heat whichwelded the Republican Party in 1856 melted many such barriers,and when Mr. Adams came to Congress in December, 1859, Gov-ernor Seward instantly renewed his attitude of family friend, be-came a daily intimate in the household, and lost no chance offorcing his fresh ally to the front.A few days after their arrival in December, i860, the Governor,as he was always called, came to dinner, alone, as one of the104The Education of Henry Adamsfamily, and the private secretary had the chance he wanted towatch him as carefully as one generally watches men who disposeof one's future. A slouching, slender figure; a head like a wisemacaw; a beaked nose; shaggy eyebrows; unorderly hair andclothes; hoarse voice; offhand manner; free talk, and perpetualcigar, offered a new type — of western New York — to fathom;a type in one way simple because it was only double — politicaland personal; but complex because the political had become na-ture, and no one could tell which was the mask and which thefeatures. At table, among friends, Mr. Seward threw off restraint,or seemed to throw it off, in reality, while in the world he threwit off, like a politician, for effect. In both cases he chose to appearas a free talker, who loathed pomposity and enjoyed a joke; buthow much was nature and how much was mask, he was himselftoo simple a nature to know. Underneath the surface he wasconventional after the conventions of western New York andAlbany.Bostoniansthought it provincial. Henry Adams thought it charming. Fromthe first sight, he loved the Governor, who, though sixty years old,had the youth of his sympathies. He noticed that Mr. Sewardwas never petty or personal; his talk was large; he generalized;he never seemed to pose for statesmanship; he did not requirean attitude of prayer. What was more unusual — almost sin-gular and quite eccentric — he had some means, unknown toPoliticians thought it unconventionality.other Senators, of producing the effect of unselfishness.Superficially Mr. Seward and Mr. Adams were contrasts; es-sentially they were much alike. Mr. Adams was taken to berigid, but the Puritan character in all its forms could be suppleenough when it chose; and in Massachusetts all the Adamses hadbeen attacked in succession as no better than political mercenaries.Mr. Hildreth, in his standard history, went so far as to echo withapproval the charge that treachery was hereditary in the family.Any Adams had at least to be thick-skinned, hardened to everycontradictory epithet that virtue could supply, and, on the whole,Treason105armed to return such attentions; but all must have admitted thatthey had invariably subordinated local to national interests, andwould continue to do so, whenever forced to choose. C. F. Adamswas sure to do what his father had done, as his father had followedthe steps of John Adams, and no doubt thereby earned his epi-thets.The inevitable followed, as a child fresh from the nurseryshould have had the instinct to foresee, but the young man onthe edge of life never dreamed. What motives or emotions drovehis masters on their various paths he made no pretence of guess-ing; even at that age he preferred to admit his dislike for guess-ing motives; he knew only his own infantile ignorance, beforewhich he stood amazed, and his innocent good-faith, alwaysCritics who know ultimatematter of simple-minded surprise.truth will pronounce judgment on history; all that Henry Adamsever saw in man was a reflection of his own ignorance, and he neversaw quite so much of it as in the winter of 1860-61. Every oneknows the story; every one draws what conclusion suits his tem-per, and the conclusion matters now less than though it concernedthe merits of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden; but in 1861the conclusion made the sharpest lesson of life; it was condensedand concentrated education.Rightly or wrongly the new President and his chief advisersin Washington decided that, before they could administer theGovernment, they must make sure of a government to admin-ister, and that this chance depended on the action of Virginia.The whole ascendancy of the winter wavered between the effortof the cotton States to drag Virginia out, and the effort of thenew President to keep Virginia in. Governor Seward represent-ing the Administration in the Senate took the lead; Mr. Adamstook the lead in the House; and as far as a private secretary knew,the party united on its tactics. In offering concessions to theborder States, they had to run the risk, or incur the certainty,of dividing their own party, and they took this risk with open106The Education of Henry Adamseyes. As Seward himself, in his gruff way, said at dinner, afterMr. Adams and he had made their speeches: "If there's no seces-sion now, you and I are ruined."They won their game; this was their affair and the affair of thehistorians who tell their story; their private secretaries had nothingto do with it except to follow their orders. On that side a sec-retary learned nothing and had nothing to learn. The suddenarrival of Mr. Lincoln in Washington on February 23, and the lan-guage of his inaugural address, were the final term of the win-ter's tactics, and closed the private secretary's interest in the mat-ter forever. Perhaps he felt, even then, a good deal more interestin the appearance of another private secretary, of his own age,a young man named John Hay, who lighted on La Fayette Squareat the same moment. Friends are born, not made, and Henrynever mistook a friend except when in power. From the firstslight meeting in February and March, 1861, he recognized Hayas a friend, and never lost sight of him at the future crossing oftheir paths; but, for the moment, his own task ended on March 4when Hay's began. The winter's anxieties were shifted uponnew shoulders, and Henry gladly turned back to Blackstone. Hehad tried to make himself useful, and had exerted energy thatseemed to him portentous, acting in secret as newspaper corre-spondent, cultivating a large acquaintance and even haunting ball-rooms where the simple, old-fashioned, Southern tone was pleas-ant even in the atmosphere of conspiracy and treason. The sumwas next to nothing for education, because no one could teach;all were as ignorant as himself; none knew what should be done,or how to do it; all were trying to learn and were more bent onasking than on answering questions. The mass of ignorance inWashington was lighted up by no ray of knowledge.Society,from top to bottom, broke down.From this law there was no exception, unless, perhaps, that ofold General Winfield Scott, who happened to be the only mili-tary figure that looked equal to the crisis. No one else eitherTreason107looked it, or was it, or could be it, by nature or training. Hadyoung Adams been told that his life was to hang on the correct-ness of his estimate of the new President, he would have lost. Hesaw Mr. Lincoln but once; at the melancholy function called anInaugural Ball. Of course he looked anxiously for a sign of char-acter. He saw a long, awkward figure; a plain, ploughed face;a mind, absent in part, and in part evidently worried by whitekid gloves; features that expressed neither self-satisfaction norany other familiar Americanism, but rather the same painfulsense of becoming educated and of needing education that tor-mented a private secretary; above all a lack of apparent force.Any private secretary in the least fit for his business would havethought, as Adams did, that no man living needed so much educa-tion as the new President but that all the education he could getwould not be enough.As far as a young man of anxious temperament could see, noone in Washington was fitted for his duties; or rather, no dutiesin March were fitted for the duties in April. The few people whothought they knew something were more in error than those whoknew nothing. Education was matter of life and death, but allthe education in the world would have helped nothing. Only oneman in Adams's reach seemed to him supremely fitted by knowl-edge and experience to be an adviser and friend. This was SenatorSumner; and there, in fact, the young man's education began;there it ended.Going over the experience again, long after all the great actorswere dead, he struggled to see where he had blundered. In theeffort to make acquaintances, he lost friends, but he would haveliked much to know whether he could have helped it. He hadnecessarily followed Seward and his father; he took for grantedthat his business was obedience, discipline, and silence; he sup-posed the party to require it, and that the crisis overruled allpersonal doubts. He was thunderstruck to learn that SenatorSumner privately denounced the course, regarded Mr. Adams108The Education of Henry Adamsas betraying the principles of his life, and broke off relationswith his family.Many a shock was Henry Adams to meet in the course of along life passed chiefly near politics and politicians, but the pro-foundest lessons are not the lessons of reason; they are suddenstrains that permanently warp the mind. He cared little or noth-ing about the point in discussion; he was even willing to admitthat Sumner might be right, though in all great emergencies hecommonly found that every one was more or less wrong; he likedlofty moral principle and cared little for political tactics; he felta profound respect for Sumner himself; but the shock opened achasm in life that never closed, and as long as life lasted, he foundhimself invariably taking for granted, as a political instinct, with-out waiting further experiment — as he took for granted thatarsenic poisoned — the rule that a friend in power is a friend lost.On his own score, he never admitted the rupture, and neverexchanged a word with Mr. Sumner on the subject, then or after-wards, but his education — for good or bad — made an enor-mous stride. One has to deal with all sorts of unexpected moralsin life, and, at this moment, he was looking at hundreds of South-ern gentlemen who believed themselves singularly honest, butwho seemed to him engaged in the plainest breach of faith andthe blackest secret conspiracy, yet they did not disturb his edu-cation. History told of little else; and not one rebel defection —not even Robert E. Lee's — cost young Adams a personal pang;but Sumner's struck home.This, then, was the result of the new attempt at education,down to March 4, 1 861; this was all; and frankly, it seemed tohim hardly what he wanted. The picture of Washington in March,1 861, offered education, but not the kind of education that led togood. The process that Matthew Arnold described as wander-ing between two worlds, one dead, the other powerless to be born,helps nothing. Washington was a dismal school. Even before thetraitors had flown, the vultures descended on it in swarms thatTreason109darkened the ground, and tore the carrion of political patronageinto fragments and gobbets of fat and lean, on the very steps ofthe White House. Not a man there knew what his task was tobe, or was fitted for it; every one without exception, Northern orSouthern, was to learn his business at the cost of the public. Lin-coln, Seward, Sumner, and the rest, could give no help to theyoung man seeking education; they knew less than he; within sixweeks they were all to be taught their duties by the uprising ofsuch as he, and their education was to cost a million lives and tenthousand million dollars, more or less, North and South, beforethe country could recover its balance and movement. Henrywas a helpless victim, and, like all the rest, he could only wait forhe knew not what, to send him he knew not where.With the close of the session, his own functions ended. Ceas-ing to be private secretary he knew not what else to do but re-turn with his father and mother to Boston in the middle of March,and, with childlike docility, sit down at a desk in the law-officeof Horace Gray in Court Street, to begin again: "My Lords andGentlemen"; dozing after a two o'clock dinner, or waking to dis-cuss politics with the future Justice. There, in ordinary times, hewould have remained for life, his attempt at education in treasonhaving, like all the rest, disastrously failed.