CHAPTER VIIIDIPLOMACY (1861)HARDLY a week passed when the newspapers announcedthat President Lincoln had selected Charles FrancisAdams as his Minister to England. Once more, silently,Henry put Blackstone back on its shelf. As Friar Bacon's headsententiously announced many centuries before: Time had passed!The Civil Law lasted a brief day; the Common Law prolonged itsshadowy existence for a week. The law, altogether, as path ofeducation, vanished in April, 1 861, leaving a million young menplanted in the mud of a lawless world, to begin a new life with-out education at all. They asked few questions, but if they hadasked millions they would have got no answers. No one could help.Looking back on this moment of crisis, nearly fifty years after-wards, one could only shake one's white beard in silent horror. Mr.Adams once more intimated that he thought himself entitled tothe services of one of his sons, and he indicated Henry as the onlyone who could be spared from more serious duties. Henry packedhis trunk again without a word. He could offer no protest. Ridic-ulous as he knew himself about to be in his new role, he was lessridiculous than his betters. He was at least no public official, likethe thousands of improvised secretaries and generals who crowdedtheir jealousies and intrigues on the President. He was not a vul-ture of carrion — patronage. He knew that his father's appoint-ment was the result of Governor Seward's personal friendship;he did not then know that Senator Sumner had opposed it, or thereasons which Sumner alleged for thinking it unfit; but he couldhave supplied proofs enough had Sumner asked for them, thestrongest and most decisive being that, in his opinion, Mr. Adamshad chosen a private secretary far more unfit than his chief. ThatMr. Adams was unfit might well be, since it was hard to find a fitDiplomacyhiappointment in the list of possible candidates, except Mr. Sumnerhimself; and no one knew so well as this experienced Senator thatthe weakest of all Mr. Adams's proofs of fitness was his consentto quit a safe seat in Congress for an exceedingly unsafe seat inLondon with no better support than Senator Sumner, at the headof the Foreign Relations Committee, was likely to give him. Inthe family history, its members had taken many a dangerous risk,but never before had they taken one so desperate.The private secretary troubled himself not at all about the un-fitness of any one; he knew too little; and, in fact, no one, exceptperhaps Mr. Sumner, knew more. The President and Secretaryof State knew least of all. As Secretary of Legation the Executiveappointed the editor of a Chicago newspaper who had applied forthe Chicago Post-Office; a good fellow, universally known asCharley Wilson, who had not a thought of staying in the post, orof helping the Minister. The Assistant Secretary was inheritedfrom Buchanan's time, a hard worker, but socially useless. Mr.Adams made no effort to find efficient help; perhaps he knew noname to suggest; perhaps he knew too much of Washington; buthe could hardly have hoped to find a staff of strength in his son.The private secretary was more passive than his father, for heknew not where to turn. Sumner alone could have smoothed hispath by giving him letters of introduction, but if Sumner wroteletters, it was not with the effect of smoothing paths. No one, atthat moment, was engaged in smoothing either paths or people.The private secretary was no worse off than his neighbors exceptin being called earlier into service. On April 13 the storm burstand rolled several hundred thousand young men like Henry Adamsinto the surf of a wild ocean, all helpless like himself, to be beatenabout for four years by the waves of war. Adams still had time towatch the regiments form ranks before Boston State House inthe April evenings and march southward, quietly enough, withthe air of business they wore from their cradles, but with few signsor sounds of excitement. He had time also to go down the harborii2The Education of Henry Adamsto see his brother Charles quartered in Fort Independence beforebeing thrown, with a hundred thousand more, into the furnace ofthe Army of the Potomac to get educated in a fury of fire. Fewthings were for the moment so trivial in importance as the soli-tary private secretary crawling down to the wretched old Cu-nard steamer Niagara at East Boston to start again for Liverpool.This time the pitcher of education had gone to the fountain oncetoo often; it was fairly broken; and the young man had got tomeet a hostile world without defence — or arms.The situation did not seem even comic, so ignorant was theworld of its humors ; yet Minister Adams sailed for England, May I,1861, with much the same outfit as Admiral Dupont would haveenjoyed if the Government had sent him to attack Port Royalwith one cabin-boy in a rowboat. Luckily for the cabin-boy, hewas alone. Had Secretary Seward and Senator Sumner given toMr. Adams the rank of Ambassador and four times his salary, apalace in London, a staff of trained secretaries, and personal let-ters of introduction to the royal family and the whole peerage, theprivate secretary would have been cabin-boy still, with the extraburden of many masters; he was the most fortunate person in theparty, having for master only his father who never fretted, neverdictated, never disciplined, and whose idea of American diplo-macy was that of the eighteenth century. Minister Adams re-membered how his grandfather had sailed from Mount Wollastonin midwinter, 1778, on the little frigate Boston, taking his eleven-year-old son John Quincy with him, for secretary, on a diplomacyof adventure that had hardly a parallel for success. He remem-bered how John Quincy, in 1809, had sailed for Russia, with him-self, a baby of two years old, to cope with Napoleon and the CzarAlexander single-handed, almost as much of an adventurer asJohn Adams before him, and almost as successful. He thought itnatural that the Government should send him out as an adven-turer also, with a twenty-three-year-old son, and he did not evennotice that he left not a friend behind him. No doubt he couldDiplomacy113depend on Seward, but on whom could Seward depend? Cer-tainly not on the Chairman of the Committee of Foreign Rela-tions. Minister Adams had no friend in the Senate; he could hopefor no favors, and he asked none. He thought it right to play theadventurer as his father and grandfather had done before him,without a murmur. This was a lofty view, and for him answeredhis objects, but it bore hard on cabin-boys, and when, in time, theyoung man realized what had happened, he felt it as a betrayal.He modestly thought himself unfit for the career of adventurer,and judged his father to be less fit than himself. For the first timeAmerica was posing as the champion of legitimacy and order.Her representatives should know how to play their role; theyshould wear the costume; but, in the mission attached to Mr.Adams in 1 861, the only rag of legitimacy or order was the privatesecretary, whose stature was not sufficient to impose awe on theCourt and Parliament of Great Britain.One inevitable effect of this lesson was to make a victim of thescholar and to turn him into a harsh judge of his masters. If theyoverlooked him, he could hardly overlook them, since they stoodwith their whole weight on his body. By way of teaching himquickly, they sent out their new Minister to Russia in the sameship. Secretary Seward had occasion to learn the merits of CassiusM. Clay in the diplomatic service, but Mr. Seward's educationprofited less than the private secretary's, Cassius Clay as ateacher having no equal though possibly some rivals. No youngman, not in Government pay, could be asked to draw, from suchlessons, any confidence in himself, and it was notorious that, forthe next two years, the persons were few indeed who felt, orhad reason to feel, any sort of confidence in the Government; few-est of all among those who were in it. At home, for the most part,young men went to the war, grumbled and died ; in England theymight grumble or not; no one listened.Above all, the private secretary could not grumble to his chief.He knew surprisingly little, but that much he did know. He neverii4The Education of Henry Adamslabored so hard to learn a language as he did to hold his tongue,and it affected him for life. The habit of reticence — of talkingwithout meaning — is never effaced. He had to begin it at once.He was already an adept when the party landed at Liverpool,May 13, 1 861, and went instantly up to London: a family of earlyChristian martyrs about to be flung into an arena of lions, underthe glad eyes of Tiberius Palmerston. Though Lord Palmerstonwould have laughed his peculiar Palmerston laugh at figuring asTiberius, he would have seen only evident resemblance in theChristian martyrs, for he had already arranged the ceremony.Of what they had to expect, the Minister knew no more thanhis son. What he or Mr. Seward or Mr. Sumner may have thoughtis the affair of history and their errors concern historians. Theerrors of a private secretary concerned no one but himself, andwere a large part of his education. He thought on May 12 thathe was going to a friendly Government and people, true to theanti-slavery principles which had been their steadiest profession.For a hundred years the chief effort of his family had aimed atbringing the Government of England into intelligent cooperationwith the objects and interests of America. His father was aboutto make a new effort, and this time the chance of success waspromising. The slave States had been the chief apparent obstacleto good understanding. As for the private secretary himself, hewas, like all Bostonians, instinctively English. He could not con-ceive the idea of a hostile England. He supposed himself, as oneof the members of a famous anti-slavery family, to be welcomeeverywhere in the British Islands.On May 13, he met the official announcement that Englandrecognized the belligerency of the Confederacy. This beginningof a new education tore up by the roots nearly all that was leftof Harvard College and Germany. He had to learn — the soonerthe better — that his ideas were the reverse of truth; that inMay, 1 861, no one in England — literally no one — doubted thatJefferson Davis had made or would make a nation, and nearly allDiplomacy115were glad of it, though not often saying so. They mostly imitatedPalmerston, who, according to Mr. Gladstone, "desired the sev-erance as a diminution of a dangerous power, but prudently heldhis tongue." The sentiment of anti-slavery had disappeared. LordJohn Russell, as Foreign Secretary, had received the rebel emis-saries, and had decided to recognize their belligerency before thearrival of Mr. Adams in order to fix the position of the BritishGovernment in advance. The recognition of independence wouldthen become an understood policy; a matter of time and occasion.Whatever Minister Adams may have felt, the first effect of thisshock upon his son produced only a dullness of comprehension—a sort of hazy inability to grasp the missile or realize the blow.Yet he realized that to his father it was likely to be fatal. Thechances were great that the whole family would turn round andgo home within a few weeks. The horizon widened out in endlesswaves of confusion. When he thought over the subject in the longleisure of later life, he grew cold at the idea of his situation hadhis father then shown himself what Sumner thought him to be —unfit for his post. That the private secretary was unfit for his —trifling though it were — was proved by his unreflecting confi-It never entered his mind that his fatherdence in his father.might lose his nerve or his temper, and yet in a subsequent knowl-edge of statesmen and diplomats extending over several genera-tions, he could not certainly point out another who could havestood such a shock without showing it. He passed this long day,and tedious journey to London, without once thinking of the pos-sibility that his father might make a mistake. Whatever theMinister thought, and certainly his thought was not less activethan his son's, he showed no trace of excitement. His mannerwas the same as ever; his mind and temper were as perfectlybalanced; not a word escaped; not a nerve twitched.The test was final, for no other shock so violent and sudden couldpossibly recur. The worst was in full sight. For once the privatesecretary knew his own business, which was to imitate his fathern6The Education of Henry Adamsas closely as possible and hold his tongue. Dumped thus intoMaurigy's Hotel at the foot of Regent Street, in the midst of aLondon season, without a friend or even an acquaintance, he pre-ferred to laugh at his father's bewilderment before the waiter's" 'amhandheggsir" for breakfast, rather than ask a question orexpress a doubt. His situation, if taken seriously, was too ap-palling to face. Had he known it better, he would only havethought it worse.Politically or socially, the outlook was desperate, beyond re-trieving or contesting. Socially, under the best of circumstances,a newcomer in London society needs years to establish a position,and Minister Adams had not a week or an hour to spare, while hisson had not even a remote chance of beginning. Politically theprospect looked even worse, and for Secretary Seward and Sena-tor Sumner it was so; but for the Minister, on the spot, as he cameto realize exactly where he stood, the danger was not so immi-nent. Mr. Adams was always one of the luckiest of men, both inwhat he achieved and in what he escaped. The blow, which pros-trated Seward and Sumner, passed over him. Lord John Russellhad acted — had probably intended to act — kindly by him inforestalling his arrival. The blow must have fallen within threemonths, and would then have broken him down. The BritishMinisters were a little in doubt still — a little ashamed of them-selves — and certain to wait the longer for their next step inproportion to the haste of their first.This is not a story of the diplomatic adventures of CharlesFrancis Adams, but of his son Henry's adventures in search of aneducation, which, if not taken too seriously, tended to humor.The father's position in London was not altogether bad; the son'swas absurd. Thanks to certain family associations, CharlesFrancis Adams naturally looked on all British Ministers as ene-mies; the only public occupation of all Adamses for a hundredand fifty years at least, in their brief intervals of quarrelling withState Street, had been to quarrel with Downing Street; and theDiplomacy117British Government, well used to a liberal unpopularity abroad,even when officially rude liked to be personally civil. All diplo-matic agents are liable to be put, so to speak, in a corner, and arenone the worse for it. Minister Adams had nothing in especialto complain of; his position was good while it lasted, and he hadonly the chances of war to fear. The son had no such compensa-tions. Brought over in order to help his father, he could con-ceive no way of rendering his father help, but he was clear thathis father had got to help him. To him, the Legation was socialostracism, terrible beyond anything he had known. Entire soli-tude in the great society of London was doubly desperate be-cause his duties as private secretary required him to know every-body and go with his father and mother everywhere they neededescort. He had no friend, or even enemy, to tell him to be patient.Had any one done it, he would surely have broken out with thereply that patience was the last resource of fools as well as ofsages ; if he was to help his father at all, he must do it at once, forhis father would never so much need help again. In fact he nevergave his father the smallest help, unless it were as a footman,clerk, or a companion for the younger children.He found himself in a singular situation for one who was to beuseful. As he came to see the situation closer, he began to doubtwhether secretaries were meant to be useful. Wars were too com-mon in diplomacy to disturb the habits of the diplomat. Mostsecretaries detested their chiefs, and wished to be anything butuseful. At the St. James's Club, to which the Minister's son couldgo only as an invited guest, the most instructive conversation heever heard among the young men of his own age who hung aboutthe tables, more helpless than himself, was: "Quel chien de pays!"or, "Que tu es beau aujourd'hui, moncher!" No one wanted todiscuss affairs; still less to give or get information. That was theaffair of their chiefs, who were also slow to assume work not spe-cially ordered from their Courts. If the American Minister was introuble to-day, the Russian Ambassador was in trouble yesterday,118The Education of Henry Adamsand the Frenchman would be in trouble to-morrow. It would allcome in the day's work. There was nothing professional in worry.Empires were always tumbling to pieces and diplomats were al-ways picking them up.This was his whole diplomatic education, except that he foundrich veins of jealousy running between every chief and his staff.His social education was more barren still, and more trying to hisvanity. His little mistakes in etiquette or address made him writhewith torture. He never forgot the first two or three social functionshe attended : one an afternoon at Miss Burdett Coutts's in Strat-ton Place, where he hid himself in the embrasure of a window andhoped that no one noticed him; another was a garden-party givenby the old anti-slavery Duchess Dowager of Sutherland at Chis-wick, where the American Minister and Mrs. Adams were keptin conversation by the old Duchess till every one else went awayexcept the young Duke and his cousins, who set to playing leap-frog on the lawn. At intervals during the next thirty years HenryAdams continued to happen upon the Duke, who, singularlyenough, was always playing leap-frog.Still another nightmare hesuffered at a dance given by the old Duchess Dowager of Somer-set, a terrible vision in castanets, who seized him and forced himto perform a Highland fling before the assembled nobility and gen-try, with the daughter of the Turkish Ambassador for partner.This might seem humorous to some, but to him the world turnedto ashes.When the end of the season came, the private secretary had notyet won a private acquaintance, and he hugged himself in hissolitude when the story of the battle of Bull Run appeared in theTimes. He felt only the wish to be more private than ever, forBull Run was a worse diplomatic than military disaster. All thisis history and can be read by public schools if they choose; but thecurious and unexpected happened to the Legation, for the effectof Bull Run on them was almost strengthening. They no longerfelt doubt. For the next year they went on only from week toDiplomacy119week, ready to leave England at once, and never assuming morethan three months for their limit. Europe was waiting to see themgo. So certain was the end that no one cared to hurry it.So far as a private secretary could see, this was all that savedhis father. For many months he looked on himself as lost or fin-ished in the character of private secretary; and as about to begin,without further experiment, a final education in the ranks of theArmy of the Potomac where he would find most of his friendsenjoying a much pleasanter life than his own. With this ideauppermost in his mind, he passed the summer and the autumn,and began the winter. Any winter in London is a severe trial;one's first winter is the most trying; but the month of December,1 86 1, in Mansfield Street, Portland Place, would have gorged aglutton of gloom.One afternoon when he was struggling to resist complete nervousdepression in the solitude of Mansfield Street, during the absenceof the Minister and Mrs. Adams on a country visit, Reuter's tele-gram announcing the seizure of Mason and Slidell from a Britishmail-steamer was brought to the office. All three secretaries, pub-lic and private were there — nervous as wild beasts under thelong strain on their endurance — and all three, though theyknew it to be not merely their order of departure — not merelydiplomatic rupture — but a declaration of war — broke intoshouts of delight. They were glad to face the end. They saw itand cheered it! Since England was waiting only for its own mo-ment to strike, they were eager to strike first.They telegraphed the news to the Minister, who was stayingwith Monckton Milnes at Fryston in Yorkshire. How Mr. Adamstook it, is told in the "Lives" of Lord Houghton and William E.Forster who was one of the Fryston party. The moment was forhim the crisis of his diplomatic career; for the secretaries it wasmerely the beginning of another intolerable delay, as though theywere a military outpost waiting orders to quit an abandonedposition. At the moment of sharpest suspense, the Prince Consort120The Education of Henry Adamslong.sickened and died. Portland Place at Christmas in a black fogwas never a rosy landscape, but in 1861 the most hardened Lon-doner lost his ruddiness. The private secretary had one sourceof comfort denied to them — he should not be private secretaryHe was mistaken — of course! He had been mistaken at everypoint of his education, and, on this point, he kept up the samemistake for nearly seven years longer, always deluded by thenotion that the end was near. To him the Trent Affair wasnothing but one of many affairs which he had to copy in a delicateround hand into his books, yet it had one or two results personalto him which left no trace on the Legation records. One of these,and to him the most important, was to put an end forever to theidea of being "useful." Hitherto, as an independent and freecitizen, not in the employ of the Government, he had kept up hisrelations with the American press. He had written pretty fre-quently to Henry J. Raymond, and Raymond had used his lettersin the New York Times. He had also become fairly intimate withthe two or three friendly newspapers in London, the Daily News,the Star, the weekly Spectator ; and he had tried to give them newsand views that should have a certain common character, and pre-vent clash. He had even gone down to Manchester to study thecotton famine, and wrote a long account of his visit which hisbrother Charles had published in the Boston Courier. Unfortu-nately it was printed with his name, and instantly came back uponhim in the most crushing shape possible — that of a long, satiri-cal leader in the London Times. Luckily the Times did not knowits victim to be a part, though not an official, of the Legation, andlost tne chance to make its satire fatal; but he instantly learnedthe narrowness of his escape from old Joe Parkes, one of the tradi-tional busy-bodies of politics, who had haunted London since1830, and who, after rushing to the Times office, to tell them allthey did not know about Henry Adams, rushed to the Legation totell Adams all he did not want to know about the Times. For aDiplomacy121moment Adams thought his "usefulness" at an end in other re-spects than in the press, but a day or two more taught him thevalue of obscurity. He was totally unknown; he had not even aclub; London was empty; no one thought twice about the Timesarticle; no one except Joe Parkes ever spoke of it; and the worldhad other persons — such as President Lincoln, Secretary Sew-ard, and Commodore Wilkes — for constant and favorite ob-jects of ridicule. Henry Adams escaped, but he never tried to beuseful again. The Trent Affair dwarfed individual effort. Hiseducation at least had reached the point of seeing its own pro-portions. "Surtout point de zele!" Zeal was too hazardous a pro-fession for a Minister's son to pursue, as a volunteer manipulator,among Trent Affairs and rebel cruisers. He wrote no more lettersand meddled with no more newspapers, but he was still young,and felt unkindly towards the editor of the London Times,Mr. Delane lost few opportunities of embittering him, and hefelt little or no hope of repaying these attentions; but the TrentAffair passed like a snowstorm, leaving the Legation, to its sur-prise, still in place. Although the private secretary saw in thisdelay — which he attributed to Mr. Seward's good sense — noreason for changing his opinion about the views of the BritishGovernment, he had no choice but to sit down again at his table,and go on copying papers, filing letters, and reading newspaperaccounts of the incapacity of Mr. Lincoln and the brutality ofMr. Seward — or vice versa. The heavy months dragged on andwinter slowly turned to spring without improving his position orspirits. Socially he had but one relief; and, to the end of life, henever forgot the keen gratitude he owed for it. During this tedi-ous winter and for many months afterwards, the only gleams ofsunshine were on the days he passed at Walton-on-Thames as theguest of Mr. and Mrs. Russell Sturgis at Mount Felix.His education had unfortunately little to do with bankers, al-though old George Peabody and his partner, Junius Morgan, werestrong allies. Joshua Bates was devoted, and no one could be122The Education of Henry Adamskinder than Thomas Baring, whose little dinners in Upper Gros-venor Street were certainly the best in London; but none offereda refuge to compare with Mount Felix, and, for the first time,the refuge was a liberal education. Mrs. Russell Sturgis was one ofthe women to whom an intelligent boy attaches himself as closelyas he can. Henry Adams was not a very intelligent boy, and hehad no knowledge of the world, but he knew enough to understandthat a cub needed shape. The kind of education he most requiredwas that of a charming woman, and Mrs. Russell Sturgis, a dozenyears older than himself, could have good-naturedly trained aschool of such, without an effort, and with infinite advantage tothem. Near her he half forgot the anxieties of Portland Place.During two years of miserable solitude, she was in this social polarwinter, the single source of warmth and light.Of course the Legation itself was home, and, under such pres-sure, life in it could be nothing but united. All the inmates madecommon cause, but this was no education. One lived, but wasmerely flayed alive. Yet, while this might be exactly true of theyounger members of the household, it was not quite so with theMinister and Mrs. Adams. Very slowly, but quite steadily, theygained foothold. For some reason partly connected with Ameri-can sources, British society had begun with violent social pre-judice against Lincoln, Seward, and all the Republican leadersexcept Sumner. Familiar as the whole tribe of Adamses had beenfor three generations with the impenetrable stupidity of the Brit-ish mind, and weary of the long struggle to teach it its own in-terests, the fourth generation could still not quite persuade itselfthat this new British prejudice was natural. The private secre-tary suspected that Americans in New York and Boston had some-thing to do with it. The Copperhead was at home in Pall Mall.Naturally the Englishman was a coarse animal and liked coarse-ness. Had Lincoln and Seward been the ruffians supposed, theaverage Englishman would have liked them the better. The ex-ceedingly quiet manner and the unassailable social position ofDiplomacy123Minister Adams in no way conciliated them. They chose to ignorehim, since they could not ridicule him. Lord John Russell set theexample. Personally the Minister was to be kindly treated ; politi-cally he was negligible; he was there to be put aside. London andParis imitated Lord John. Every one waited to see Lincoln andhis hirelings disappear in one vast debacle. All conceived that theWashington Government would soon crumble, and that MinisterAdams would vanish with the rest.This situation made Minister Adams an exception among dip-lomats. European rulers for the most part fought and treated asmembers of one family, and rarely had in view the possibility oftotal extinction; but the Governments and society of Europe, fora year at least, regarded the Washington Government as dead,and its Ministers as nullities. Minister Adams was better receivedthan most nullities because he made no noise. Little by little,in private, society took the habit of accepting him, not so muchas a diplomat, but rather as a member of opposition, or an emi-nent counsel retained for a foreign Government. He was to bereceived and considered; to be cordially treated as, by birth andmanners, one of themselves. This curiously English way of get-ting behind a stupidity gave the Minister every possible advan-tage over a European diplomat. Barriers of race, language, birth,habit, ceased to exist. Diplomacy held diplomats apart in orderto save Governments, but Earl Russell could not hold Mr. Adamsapart. He was undistinguishable from a Londoner. In societyfew Londoners were so widely at home. None had such doublepersonality and corresponding double weight.The singular luck that took him to Fryston to meet the shockof the Trent Affair under the sympathetic eyes of MoncktonMilnes and William E. Forster never afterwards deserted him.Both Milnes and Forster needed support and were greatly re-lieved to be supported. They saw what the private secretary inMay had overlooked, the hopeless position they were in if theAmerican Minister made a mistake, and, since his strength was124The Education of Henry Adamstheirs, they lost no time in expressing to all the world their esti-mate of the Minister's character. Between them the Minister wasalmost safe.One might discuss long whether, at that moment, Milnes orForster were the more valuable ally, since they were influencesof different kinds. Monckton Milnes was a social power in London,possibly greater than Londoners themselves quite understood, forin London society as elsewhere, the dull and the ignorant made alarge majority, and dull men always laughed at Monckton Milnes.Every bore was used to talk familiarly about "Dicky Milnes,"the "cool of the evening"; and of course he himself affected socialeccentricity, challenging ridicule with the indifference of one whoknew himself to be the first wit in London, and a maker of men —of a great many men. A word from him went far. An invitationto his breakfast-table went farther. Behind his almost FalstafHanmask and laugh of Silenus, he carried a fine, broad, and highintelligence which no one questioned. As a young man he hadwritten verses, which some readers thought poetry, and whichwere certainly not altogether prose. Later, in Parliament he madespeeches, chiefly criticised as too good for the place and too highfor the audience. Socially, he was one of two or three men whowent everywhere, knew everybody, talked of everything, and hadthe ear of Ministers ; but unlike most wits, he held a social positionof his own that ended in a peerage, and he had a house in UpperBrook Street to which most clever people were exceedingly gladof admission. His breakfasts were famous, and no one liked todecline his invitations, for it was more dangerous to show timiditythan to risk a fray. He was a voracious reader, a strong critic,an art connoisseur in certain directions, a collector of books, butabove all he was a man of the world by profession, and loved thecontacts — perhaps the collisions — of society. Not even HenryBrougham dared do the things he did, yet Brougham defied rebuff.Milnes was the good-nature of London; the Gargantuan type of itsrefinement and coarseness; the most universal figure of May Fair.Diplomacy125Compared with him, figures like Hayward, or Delane, or Vari-ables, or Henry Reeve were quite secondary, but William E.Forster stood in a different class. Forster had nothing whateverto do with May Fair. Except in being a Yorkshireman he wasquite the opposite of Milnes. He had at that time no social orpolitical position; he never had a vestige of Milnes's wit or variety;he was a tall, rough, ungainly figure, affecting the singular form ofself-defense which the Yorkshiremen and Lancashiremen seem tohold dear — the exterior roughness assumed to cover an internal,emotional, almost sentimental nature. Kindly he had to be, ifonly by his inheritance from a Quaker ancestry, but he was aFriend one degree removed. Sentimental and emotional he musthave been, or he could never have persuaded a daughter of Dr.Arnold to marry him. Pure gold, without a trace of base metal;honest, unselfish, practical; he took up the Union cause and madehimself its champion, as a true Yorkshireman was sure to do,partly because of his Quaker anti-slavery convictions, and partlybecause it gave him a practical opening in the House. As a newmember, he needed a field.Diffidence was not one of Forster's weaknesses. His practicalsense and his personal energy soon established him in leadership,and made him a powerful champion, not so much for ornamentas for work. With such a manager, the friends of the Union inEngland began to take heart. Minister Adams had only to lookon as his true champions, the heavy-weights, came into action,and even the private secretary caught now and then a stray gleamof encouragement as he saw the ring begin to clear for these burlyYorkshiremen to stand up in a prize-fight likely to be as brutal asever England had known. Milnes and Forster were not exactlylight-weights, but Bright and Cobden were the hardest hitters inEngland, and with them for champions the Minister could tackleeven Lord Palmerston without much fear of foul play.In society John Bright and Richard Cobden were never seen,and even in Parliament they had no large following. They wereThe Education of Henry Adams126classed as enemies of order, — anarchists, — and anarchists theywere if hatred of the so-called established orders made them so.About them was no sort of political timidity. They took bluntlythe side of the Union against Palmerston whom they hated.Strangers to London society, they were at home in the AmericanLegation, delightful dinner-company, talking always with recklessfreedom. Cobden was the milder and more persuasive; Brightwas the more dangerous to approach; but the private secretarydelighted in both, and nourished an ardent wish to see them talkthe same language to Lord John Russell from the gangway of theHouse.With four such allies as these, Minister Adams stood no longerquite helpless. For the second time the British Ministry felt alittle ashamed of itself after the Trent Affair, as well it might, anddisposed to wait before moving again. Little by little, friendsgathered about the Legation who were no fair-weather compan-ions. The old anti-slavery, Exeter Hall, Shaftesbury clique turnedout to be an annoying and troublesome enemy, but the Duke ofArgyll was one of the most valuable friends the Minister found,both politically and socially, and the Duchess was as true as hermother. Even the private secretary shared faintly in the socialprofit of this relation, and never forgot dining one night at theLodge, and finding himself after dinner engaged in instructingJohn Stuart Mill about the peculiar merits of an American pro-tective system. In spite of all the probabilities, he convincedhimself that it was not the Duke's claret which led him to thissingular form of loquacity; he insisted that it was the fault of Mr.Mill himself who led him on by assenting to his point of view.Mr. Mill took no apparent pleasure in dispute, and in that re-spect the Duke would perhaps have done better; but the secre-tary had to admit that though at other periods of life he wassufficiently and even amply snubbed by Englishmen, he couldnever recall a single occasion during this trying year, when hehad to complain of rudeness.Diplomacy127Friendliness he found here and there, but chiefly among hiselders; not among fashionable or socially powerful people, eithermen or women; although not even this rule was quite exact,for Frederick Cavendish's kindness and intimate relations madeDevonshire House almost familiar, and Lyulph Stanley's ardentAmericanism created a certain cordiality with the Stanleys ofAlderley whose house was one of the most frequented in London.Lome, too, the future Argyll, was always a friend. Yet the regu-lar course of society led to more literary intimacies. Sir CharlesTrevelyan's house was one of the first to which young Adamswas asked, and with which his friendly relations never ceased fornear half a century, and then only when death stopped them.Sir Charles and Lady Lyell were intimates. Tom Hughes cameinto close alliance. By the time society began to reopen its doorsafter the death of the Prince Consort, even the private secretaryoccasionally saw a face he knew, although he made no more effortof any kind, but silently waited the end. Whatever might be theadvantages of social relations to his father and mother, to him thewhole business of diplomacy and society was futile. He meantto go home.