CHAPTER XXXIIVIS NOVA (1903-1904)PARIS after midsummer is a place where only the indus-trious poor remain, unless they can get away; but Adamsknew no spot where history would be better off, and thecalm of the Champs Elysees was so deep that when Mr. de Wittewas promoted to a powerless dignity, no one whispered that thepromotion was disgrace, while one might have supposed, from thesilence, that the Viceroy Alexeieff had reoccupied Manchuria asa fulfilment of treaty-obligation. For once, the conspiracy ofsilence became crime. Never had so modern and so vital a riddlebeen put before Western society, but society shut its eyes. Man-churia knew every step into war; Japan had completed everypreparation; Alexeieff had collected his army and fleet at PortArthur, mounting his siege guns and laying in enormous stores,ready for the expected attack; from Yokohama to Irkutsk, thewhole East was under war conditions; but Europe knew nothing.The banks would allow no disturbance; the press said not aword, and even the embassies were silent. Every anarchist inEurope buzzed excitement and began to collect in groups, but theHotel Ritz was calm, and the Grand Dukes who swarmed thereprofessed to know directly from the Winter Palace that therewould be no war.As usual, Adams felt as ignorant as the best-informed states-man, and though the sense was familiar, for once he could see thatthe ignorance was assumed. After nearly fifty years of experience,he could not understand how the comedy could be so well acted.Even as late as November, diplomats were gravely asking everypasser-by for his opinion, and avowed none of their own exceptwhat was directly authorized at St. Petersburg. He could makenothing of it. He found himself in face of his new problem — theVis Nova463workings of Russian inertia — and he could conceive no way offorming an opinion how much was real and how much was comedy-had he been in the Winter Palace himself. At times he doubtedwhether the Grand Dukes or the Czar knew, but old diplomatictraining forbade him to admit such innocence.This was the situation at Christmas when he left Paris. OnJanuary 6, 1904, he reached Washington, where the contrast ofatmosphere astonished him, for he had never before seen hiscountry think as a world-power. No doubt, Japanese diplomacyhad much to do with this alertness, but the immense superiorityof Japanese diplomacy should have been more evident in Europethan in America, and in any case, could not account for the totaldisappearance of Russian diplomacy. A government by inertiagreatly disconcerted study. One was led to suspect that Cassininever heard from his Government, and that Lamsdorf knewnothing of his own department; yet no such suspicion could beadmitted. Cassini resorted to transparent blague : " Japan seemedinfatuated even to the point of war! But what can the Japanesedo? As usual, sit on their heels and pray to Buddha !'• One of theoldest and most accomplished diplomatists in the service couldnever show his hand so empty as this if he held a card to play;but he never betrayed stronger resource behind. " If any Japanesesucceed in entering Manchuria, they will never get out of it alive/The inertia of Cassini, who was naturally the most energetic ofdiplomatists, deeply interested a student of race-inertia, whosemind had lost itself in the attempt to invent scales of force.5The air of official Russia seemed most dramatic in the air of theWhite House, by contrast with the outspoken candor of thePresident. Reticence had no place there. Every one in Americasaw that, whether Russia or Japan were victim, one of the deci-sive struggles in American history was pending, and any pretenceof secrecy or indifference was absurd. Interest was acute, andcuriosity intense, for no one knew what the Russian Governmentmeant or wanted, while war had become a question of days. To464The Education of Henry Adamsan impartial student who gravely doubted whether the Czar him-self acted as a conscious force or an inert weight, the straight-forward avowals of Roosevelt had singular value as a standard ofmeasure. By chance it happened that Adams was obliged to takethe place of his brother Brooks at the Diplomatic Reception im-mediately after his return home, and the part of proxy includedhis supping at the President's table, with Secretary Root on oneside, the President opposite, and Miss Chamberlain betweenthem. Naturally the President talked and the guests listened;which seemed, to one who had just escaped from the Europeanconspiracy of silence, like drawing a free breath after stifling.Roosevelt, as every one knew, was always an amusing talker, andhad the reputation of being indiscreet beyond any other man ofgreat importance in the world, except the Kaiser Wilhelm and Mr.Joseph Chamberlain, the father of his guest at table; and thisevening he spared none. With the usual abuse of the quos ego,common to vigorous statesmen, he said all that he thought aboutRussians and Japanese, as well as about Boers and British, with-out restraint, in full hearing of twenty people, to the entire satis-faction of his listener; and concluded by declaring that war wasimminent; that it ought to be stopped; that it could be stopped:"I could do it myself; I could stop it to-morrow!" and he went onto explain his reasons for restraint.That he was right, and that, within another generation, his suc-cessor would do what he would have liked to do, made no shadowof doubt in the mind of his hearer, though it would have beenfolly when he last supped at the White House in the dynasty ofPresident Hayes; but the listener cared less for the assertion ofpower, than for the vigor of view. The truth was evident enough,ordinary, even commonplace if one liked, but it was not a truthof inertia, nor was the method to be mistaken for inert.«Nor could the force of Japan be mistaken for a moment as aforce of inertia, although its aggressive was taken as methodi-cally — as mathematically — as a demonstration of Euclid, ^ndVis Nova465Adams thought that as against any but Russians it would havelost its opening. Each day counted as a measure of relative energyon the historical scale, and the whole story made a Grammar ofnew Science quite as instructive as that of Pearson.The forces thus launched were bound to reach some new equi-librium which would prove the problem in one sense or another,and the war had no personal value for Adams except that it gaveHay his last great triumph. He had carried on his long contestwith Cassini so skillfully that no one knew enough to understandthe diplomatic perfection of his work, which contained no error;but such success is complete only when it is invisible, and his vic-tory at last was victory of judgment, not of act. He could donothing, and the whole country would have sprung on him hadhe tried. Japan and England saved his "open door" and foughthis battle. All that remained for him was to make the peace, andAdams set his heart on getting the peace quickly in hand, for Hay'ssake as well as for that of Russia. He thought then that it couldbe done in one campaign, for he knew that, in a military sense, thefall of Port Arthur must lead to negotiation, and every one feltthat Hay would inevitably direct it; but the race was close, andwhile the war grew every day in proportions, Hay's strength everyday declined.St. Gaudens came on to model his head, and Sargent paintedhis portrait, two steps essential to immortality which he borewith a certain degree of resignation, but he grumbled when thePresident made him go to St. Louis to address some gathering atthe Exposition; and Mrs. Hay bade Adams go with them, forwhatever use he could suppose himself to serve. He professed thereligion of World's Fairs, without which he held education to bea blind impossibility; and obeyed Mrs. Hay's bidding the morereadily because it united his two educations in one; but theory andpractice were put to equally severe test at St. Louis. Ten yearshad passed since he last crossed the Mississippi, and he foundeverything new. In this great region from Pittsburgh through466The Education of Henry AdamsOhio and Indiana, agriculture had made way for steam; tallchimneys reeked smoke on every horizon, and dirty suburbs filledwith scrap-iron, scrap-paper and cinders, formed the setting ofevery town. Evidently, cleanliness was not to be the birthmarkof the new American, but this matter of discards concerned themeasure of force little, while the chimneys and cinders concernedit so much that Adams thought the Secretary of State shouldhave rushed to the platform at every station to ask who were thepeople; for the American of the prime seemed to be extinct withthe Shawnee and the buffalo.The subject grew quickly delicate. History told little aboutthese millions of Germans and Slavs, or whatever their race-names,who had overflowed these regions as though the Rhine and theDanube had turned their floods into the Ohio. John Hay was asstrange to the Mississippi River as though he had not been bredon its shores, and the city of St. Louis had turned its back on thenoblest work of nature, leaving it bankrupt between its ownbanks. The new American showed his parentage proudly; he wasthe child of steam and the brother of the dynamo, and already,within less than thirty years, this mass of mixed humanities,brought together by steam, was squeezed and welded into ap-proach to shape; a product of so much mechanical power, andbearing no distinctive marks but that of its pressure. The newAmerican, like the new European, was the servant of the power-house, as the European of the twelfth century was the servant ofthe Church, and the features would follow the parentage.The St. Louis Exposition was its first creation in the twentiethcentury, and, for that reason, acutely interesting. One saw here athird-rate town of half-a-million people without history, educa-tion, unity, or art, and with little capital — without even anignored — but doing what London, Paris, or New York wouldhave shrunk from attempting. This new social conglomerate,with no tie but its steam-power and not much of that, threw awayelement of natural interest except the river which it studiouslyVis Nova467thirty or forty million dollars on a pageant as ephemeral as a stageflat. The world had never witnessed so marvellous a phantasm;by night Arabia's crimson sands had never returned a glow halfso astonishing, as one wandered among long lines of white palaces,exquisitely lighted by thousands on thousands of electric candles,soft, rich, shadowy, palpable in their sensuous depths; all in deepsilence, profound solitude, listening for a voice or a foot-fall orthe plash of an oar, as though the Emir Mirza were displaying thebeauties of this City of Brass, which could show nothing half sobeautiful as this illumination, with its vast, white, monumentalsolitude, bathed in the pure light of setting suns. One enjoyedit with iniquitous rapture, not because of exhibits but ratherbecause of their want. Here was a paradox like the stellar uni-verse that fitted one's mental faults. Had there been no exhibitsat all, and no visitors, one would have enjoyed it only the more.Here education found new forage. That the power was wasted,the art indifferent, the economic failure complete, added just somuch to the interest. The chaos of education approached a dream.One asked one's self whether this extravagance reflected the pastor imaged the future ; whether it was a creation of the old Ameri-can or a promise of the new one. No prophet could be believed,but a pilgrim of power, without constituency to flatter, mightallow himself to hope. The prospect from the Exposition waspleasant; one seemed to see almost an adequate motive for power;almost a scheme for progress. In another half-century, the peopleof the central valleys should have hundreds of millions to throwaway more easily than in 1900 they could throw away tens; andby that time they might know what they wanted. Possibly theymight even have learned how to reach it.This was an optimist's hope, shared by few except pilgrims ofWorld's Fairs, and frankly dropped by the multitude, for, eastof the Mississippi, the St. Louis Exposition met a deliberate con-spiracy of silence, discouraging, beyond measure, to an optimisticdream of future strength in American expression. The party got468The Education of Henry Adamsback to Washington on May 24, and before sailing for Europe,Adams went over, one warm evening, to bid good-bye on thegarden-porch of the White House. He found himself the first per-son who urged Mrs. Roosevelt to visit the Exposition for itsbeauty, and, as far as he ever knew, the last.He left St. Louis May 22, 1904, and on Sunday, June 5, foundhimself again in the town of Coutances, where the people of Nor-mandy had built, towards the year 1250, an Exposition whicharchitects still admired and tourists visited, for it was thoughtsingularly expressive of force as well as of grace in the Virgin. Onthis Sunday, the Norman world was celebrating a pretty church-feast — the Fete Dieu — and the streets were filled with altarsto the Virgin, covered with flowers and foliage; the pavementsstrewn with paths of leaves and the spring handiwork of nature;the cathedral densely thronged at mass. The scene was graceful.The Virgin did not shut her costly Exposition on Sunday, or anyother day, even to American senators who had shut the St. LouisExposition to her — or for her; and a historical tramp wouldgladly have offered a candle, or even a candle-stick in her honor,if she would have taught him her relation with the deity of theSenators. The power of the Virgin had been plainly One, em-bracing all human activity; while the power of the Senate, or itsdeity, seemed — might one say — to be more or less ashamed ofman and his work. The matter had no great interest as far as itconcerned the somewhat obscure mental processes of Senatorswho could probably have given no clearer idea than priests ofthe deity they supposed themselves to honor — if that was indeedmeasure its manifestations. Apparently the Virgin — or her Son— had no longer the force to build expositions that one cared tovisit, but had the force to close them. The force was still real,serious, and, at St. Louis, had been anxiously measured in actualmoney-value.their purpose; but it interested a student of force, curious toThat it was actual and serious in France as in the Senate Cham-Vis Nova469ber at Washington, proved itself at once by forcing Adams tobuy an automobile, which was a supreme demonstration becausethis was the form of force which Adams most abominated. Hehad set aside the summer for study of the Virgin, not as a senti-ment but as a motive power, which had left monuments widelyscattered and not easily reached. The automobile alone couldunite them in any reasonable sequence, and although the force ofthe automobile, for the purposes of a commercial traveller, seemedto have no relation whatever to the force that inspired a Gothiccathedral, the Virgin in the twelfth century would have guidedand controlled both bag-man and architect, as she controlled theIn his mind the problem offered itself as toseeker of history.Newton; it was a matter of mutual attraction, and he knew it,in his own case, to be a formula as precise as s = gj, if he couldbut experimentally prove it. Of the attraction he needed no proofon his own account; the costs of his automobile were more thansufficient : but as teacher he needed to speak for others than him-self. For him, the Virgin was an adorable mistress, who led theautomobile and its owner where she would, to her wonderful pal-aces and chateaux, from Chartres to Rouen, and thence to Amiensand Laon, and a score of others, kindly receiving, amusing, charm-ing and dazzling her lover, as though she were Aphrodite herself,worth all else that man ever dreamed. He never doubted herforce, since he felt it to the last fibre of his being, and could notmore dispute its mastery than he could dispute the force of gravi-tation of which he knew nothing but the formula. He was onlytoo glad to yield himself entirely, not to her charm or to anysentimentality of religion, but to her mental and physical energyof creation which had built up these World's Fairs of thirteenth-century force that turned Chicago and St. Louis pale."Both were faiths and both are gone," said Matthew Arnold ofthe Greek and Norse divinities; but the business of a student wasto ask where they had gone. The Virgin had not even altogether470The Education of Henry Adamsgone; her fading away had been excessively slow. Her adorerhad pursued her too long, too far, and into too many manifesta-tions of her power, to admit that she had any equivalent eitherof quantity or kind, in the actual world, but he could still lessadmit her annihilation as energy.So he went on wooing, happy in the thought that at last he hadfound a mistress who could see no difference in the age of herlovers. Her own age had no time-measure. For years past, in-cited by John La Farge, Adams had devoted his summer schoolingto the study of her glass at Chartres and elsewhere, and if theautomobile had one vitesse more useful than another, it was thatof a century a minute; that of passing from one century to anotherwithout break. The centuries dropped like autumn leaves in one'sroad, and one was not fined for running over them too fast. Whenthe thirteenth lost breath, the fourteenth caught on, and the six-teenth ran close ahead. The hunt for the Virgin's glass openedrich preserves. Especially the sixteenth century ran riot in sen-suous worship. Then the ocean of religion, which had floodedFrance, broke into Shelley's light dissolved in star-showers thrown,which had left every remote village strewn with fragments thatflashed like jewels, and were tossed into hidden clefts of peace andforgetfulness. One dared not pass a parish church in Champagneor Touraine without stopping to look for its window of fragments,where one's glass discovered the Christ-child in his manger, nursedby the head of a fragmentary donkey, with a Cupid playing intoits long ears from the balustrade of a Venetian palace, guarded bya legless Flemish leibwache, standing on his head with a broken hal-bert; all invoked in prayer by remnants of the donors and theirchildren that might have been drawn by Fouquet or Pinturicchio,in colors as fresh and living as the day they were burned in, andwith feeling that still consoled the faithful for the paradise theyhad paid for and lost. France abounds in sixteenth-century glass.Paris alone contains acres of it, and the neighborhood withinfifty miles contains scores of churches where the student may stillVis Nova471imagine himself three hundred years old, kneeling before the Vir-gin's window in the silent solitude of an empty faith, crying hisculp, beating his breast, confessing his historical sins, weigheddown by the rubbish of sixty-six years' education, and still des-perately hoping to understand.He understood a little, though not much. The sixteenth cen-tury had a value of its own, as though the One had become sev-eral, and Unity had counted more than Three, though the Mul-tiple still showed modest numbers. The glass had gone back tothe Roman Empire and forward to the American continent; itbetrayed sympathy with Montaigne and Shakespeare; but theVirgin was still supreme. At Beauvais in the Church of St. Ste-phen was a superb tree of Jesse, famous as the work of Engrandle Prince, about 1570 or 1580, in whose branches, among the four-teen ancestors of the Virgin, three-fourths bore features of theKings of France, among them Francis I and Henry II, who werehardly more edifying than Kings of Israel, and at least unusualas sources of divine purity. Compared with the still more famousTree of Jesse at Chartres, dating from 11 50 or thereabouts, mustone declare that Engrand le Prince proved progress ? and in whatdirection? Complexity, Multiplicity, even a step towards Anarchy,it might suggest, but what step towards perfection?One late afternoon, at midsummer, the Virgin's pilgrim waswandering through the streets of Troyes in close and intimateconversation with Thibaut of Champagne and his highly intelli-gent seneschal, the Sieur de Joinville, when he noticed one or twomen looking at a bit of paper stuck in a window. Approaching,he read that M. de Plehve had been assassinated at St. Peters-burg. The mad mixture of Russia and the Crusades, of the Hippo-drome and the Renaissance, drove him for refuge into the fascinat-ing Church of St. Pantaleon near by. Martyrs, murderers, Caesars,saints and assassins — half in glass and half in telegram; chaosof time, place, morals, forces and motive — gave him vertigo.Had one sat all one's life on the steps of Ara Cceli for this?47 2The Education of Henry Adamsmurdered ?Was assassination forever to be the last word of Progress? Noone in the street had shown a sign of protest; he himself feltnone; the charming Church with its delightful windows, in itsexquisite absence of other tourists, took a keener expression ofcelestial peace than could have been given it by any contrastshort of explosive murder; the conservative Christian anarchisthad come to his own, but which was he — the murderer or theThe Virgin herself never looked so winning — so One — as inthis scandalous failure of her Grace. To what purpose had sheexisted, if, after nineteen hundred years, the world was bloodierthan when she was born? The stupendous failure of Christianitytortured history. The effort for Unity could not be a partial suc-cess; even alternating Unity resolved itself into meaningless mo-tion at last. To the tired student, the idea that he must give itup seemed sheer senility. As long as he could whisper, he wouldgo on as he had begun, bluntly refusing to meet his creator withthe admission that the creation had taught him nothing exceptthat the square of the hypothenuse of a right-angled triangle mightfor convenience be taken as equal to something else. Every manwith self-respect enough to become effective, if only as a machine,has had to account to himself for himself somehow, and to in-vent a formula of his own for his universe, if the standard formulasfailed. There, whether finished or not, education stopped. Theformula, once made, could be but verified.The effort must begin at once, for time pressed. The old for-mulas had failed, and a new one had to be made, but, after all,the object was not extravagant or eccentric. One sought no abso-lute truth. One sought only a spool on which to wind the threadof history without breaking it. Among indefinite possible orbits,one sought the orbit which would best satisfy the observed move-ment of the runaway star Groombridge, 1838, commonly calledHenry Adams. As term of a nineteenth-century education, onesought a common factor for certain definite historical fractions.Vis Nova473Any schoolboy could work out the problem if he were given theright to state it in his own terms.Therefore, when the fogs and frosts stopped his slaughter of thecenturies, and shut him up again in his garret, he sat down asthough he were again a boy at school to shape after his own needsthe values of a Dynamic Theory of History.