CHAPTER XXXVIS INERTIAE (1903)WASHINGTON was always amusing, but in 1900, asin 1800, its chief interest lay in its distance from NewYork. The movement of New York had become plane-tary — beyond control — while the task of Washington, in 1900as in 1800, was to control it. The success of Washington in thepast century promised ill for its success in the next.To a student who had passed the best years of his life in pon-dering over the political philosophy of Jefferson, Gallatin, andMadison, the problem that Roosevelt took in hand seemed alivewith historical interest, but it would need at least another half-century to show its results. As yet, one could not measure the forcesor their arrangement; the forces had not even aligned themselvesexcept in foreign affairs; and there one turned to seek the chan-nel of wisdom as naturally as though Washington did not exist.The President could do nothing effectual in foreign affairs, butat least he could see something of the field.Hay had reached the summit of his career, and saw himself onthe edge of wreck. Committed to the task of keeping China"open," he saw China about to be shut. Almost alone in the world,he represented the "open door," and could not escape being crushedby it. Yet luck had been with him in full tide. Though Sir JulianPauncefote had died in May, 1902, after carrying out tasks thatfilled an ex-private secretary of 1861 with open-mouthed astonish-ment, Hay had been helped by the appointment of Michael Herbertas his successor, who counted for double the value of an ordinarydiplomat. To reduce friction is the chief use of friendship, and inpolitics the loss by friction is outrageous. To Herbert and his wife,the small knot of houses that seemed to give a vague unity toforeign affairs opened their doors and their hearts, for the HerbertsVis Inertiae437were already at home there; and this personal sympathy prolongedHay's life, for it not only eased the effort of endurance, but it alsoled directly to a revolution in Germany. Down to that moment,the Kaiser, rightly or wrongly, had counted as the ally of the Czarin all matters relating to the East. Holleben and Cassini weretaken to be a single force in Eastern affairs, and this supposed alli-ance gave Hay no little anxiety and some trouble. SuddenlyHolleben, who seemed to have had no thought but to obey withalmost agonized anxiety the least hint of the Kaiser's will, re-ceived a telegram ordering him to pretext illness and come home,which he obeyed within four-and-twenty hours. The ways of theGerman Foreign Office had been always abrupt, not to say ruth-less, towards its agents, and yet commonly some discontent hadbeen shown as excuse; but, in this case, no cause was guessed forHolleben's disgrace except the Kaiser's wish to have a personalrepresentative at Washington. Breaking down all precedent, hesent Speck von Sternburg to counterbalance Herbert.Welcome as Speck was in the same social intimacy, and valuableas his presence was to Hay, the personal gain was trifling comparedwith the political. Of Hay's official tasks, one knew no more thanany newspaper reporter did, but of one's own diplomatic educationthe successive steps had become strides. The scholar was studying,not on Hay's account, but on his own. He had seen Hay, in 1898,bring England into his combine; he had seen the steady movementwhich was to bring France back into an Atlantic system ; and nowhe saw suddenly the dramatic swing of Germany towards the west— the movement of all others nearest mathematical certainty.Whether the Kaiser meant it or not, he gave the effect of meaningto assert his independence of Russia, and to Hay this change offront had enormous value. The least was that it seemed to isolateCassini, and unmask the Russian movement which became morethreatening every month as the Manchurian scheme had to berevealed.Of course the student saw whole continents of study opened to438The Education of Henry Adamshim by the Kaiser's coup <Fetat. Carefully as he had tried to followthe Kaiser's career, he had never suspected such refinement ofpolicy, which raised his opinion of the Kaiser's ability to thehighest point, and altogether upset the centre of statesmanship.That Germany could be so quickly detached from separate objectsand brought into an Atlantic system seemed a paradox more para-doxical than any that one's education had yet offered, though ithad offered little but paradox. If Germany could be held there, acentury of friction would be saved. No price would be too greatfor such an object; although no price could probably be wrung outof Congress as equivalent for it. The Kaiser, by one personal actof energy, freed Hay's hands so completely that he saw his prob-lems simplified to Russia alone.Naturally Russia was a problem ten times as difficult. The his-tory of Europe for two hundred years had accomplished little butto state one or two sides of the Russian problem. One's year ofBerlin in youth, though it taught no Civil Law, had opened one'seyes to the Russian enigma, and both German and French histo-rians had labored over its proportions with a sort of fascinatedhorror. Germany, of all countries, was most vitally concerned init; but even a cave-dweller in La Fayette Square, seeking only ameasure of motion since the Crusades, saw before his eyes, in thespring of 1903, a survey of future order or anarchy that wouldexhaust the power of his telescopes and defy the accuracy of histheodolites.The drama had become passionately interesting and grew everyday more Byzantine; for the Russian Government itself showedclear signs of dislocation, and the orders of Lamsdorf and de Wittewere reversed when applied in Manchuria. Historians and stu-dents should have no sympathies or antipathies, but Adams hadprivate reasons for wishing well to the Czar and his people. Atmuch length, in several labored chapters of history, he had toldhow the personal friendliness of the Czar Alexander I, in 18 10,saved the fortunes of J. Q. Adams, and opened to him the brilliantVis Inertiae.439diplomatic career that ended in the White House. Even in hisown effaced existence he had reasons, not altogether trivial, forgratitude to the Czar Alexander II, whose firm neutrality hadsaved him some terribly anxious days and nights in 1862; while hehad seen enough of Russia to sympathize warmly with PrinceKhilkoff's railways and de Witte's industries. The last and highesttriumph of history would, to his mind, be the bringing of Russiainto the Atlantic combine, and the just and fair allotment of thewhole world among the regulated activities of the universe. Atthe rate of unification since 1840, this end should be possible withinanother sixty years; and, in foresight of that point, Adams couldalready finish — provisionally — his chart of international unity;the whole field. No one — Czar or diplomat, Kaiser or Mikado —seemed to know anything. Through individual Russians one couldalways see with ease, for their diplomacy never suggested depth;and perhaps Hay protected Cassini for the very reason that Cassinicould not disguise an emotion, and never failed to betray that, insetting the enormous bulk of Russian inertia to roll over China,he regretted infinitely that he should have to roll it over Hay too.He would almost rather have rolled it over de Witte and LamsdorfHis political philosophy, like that of all Russians, seemed fixed inthe single idea that Russia must fatally roll — must, by her irre-but, for the moment, the gravest doubts and ignorance coveredsistible inertia, crush whatever stood in her way.For Hay and his pooling policy, inherited from McKinley, thefatalism of Russian inertia meant the failure of American intensity.When Russia rolled over a neighboring people, she absorbed theirenergies in her own movement of custom and race which neitherCzar nor peasant could convert, or wished to convert, into anyWestern equivalent. In 1903 Hay saw Russia knocking away thelast blocks that held back the launch of this huge mass into theChina Sea. The vast force of inertia known as China was to beunited with the huge bulk of Russia in a single mass which noamount of new force could henceforward deflect. Had the Russian44-0The Education of Henry AdamsGovernment, with the sharpest sense of enlightenment, employedscores of de Wittes and Khilkoffs, and borrowed all the resourcesof Europe, it could not have lifted such a weight; and had no ideaof trying.These were the positions charted on the map of political unityby an insect in Washington in the spring of 1903 ; and they seemedto him fixed. Russia held Europe and America in her grasp, andCassini held Hay in his. The Siberian Railway offered checkmateto all possible opposition. Japan must make the best terms shecould; England must go on receding; America and Germany wouldlook on at the avalanche. The wall of Russian inertia that barredEurope across the Baltic, would bar America across the Pacific;and Hay's policy of the open door would infallibly fail.Thus the game seemed lost, in spite of the Kaiser's brilliantstroke, and the movement of Russia eastward must drag Germanyafter it by its mere mass. To the humble student, the loss of Hay'sgame affected only Hay; for himself, the game — not the stakes —was the chief interest; and though want of habit made him objectto read his newspapers blackened — since he liked to blacken themhimself — he was in any case condemned to pass but a short spaceof time either in Siberia or in Paris, and could balance his endlesscolumns of calculation equally in either place. The figures, not thefacts, concerned his chart, and he mused deeply over his nextequation. The Atlantic would have to deal with a vast continentalmass of inert motion, like a glacier, which moved, and consciouslymoved, by mechanical gravitation alone. Russia saw herself so, andso must an American see her; he had no more to do than measure,if he could, the mass. Was volume or intensity the stronger? Whatand where was the vis nova that could hold its own before thisprodigious ice-cap of vis inertiae? What was movement of inertia,and what its laws ?Naturally a student knew nothing about mechanical laws, buthe took for granted that he could learn, and went to his books toask. He found that the force of inertia had troubled wiser men thanVis Inertiae441he. The dictionary said that inertia was a property of matter, bywhich matter tends, when at rest, to remain so, and, when inmotion, to move on in a straight line. Finding that his mind re-fused to imagine itself at rest or in a straight line, he was forced,as usual, to let it imagine something else; and since the questionconcerned the mind, and not matter, he decided from personalexperience that his mind was never at rest, but moved — whennormal — about something it called a motive, and never movedwithout motives to move it. So long as these motives were habit-ual, and their attraction regular, the consequent result might, forconvenience, be called movement of inertia, to distinguish it frommovement caused by newer or higher attraction; but the greaterthe bulk to move, the greater must be the force to accelerate ordeflect it.This seemed simple as running water; but simplicity is the mostdeceitful mistress that ever betrayed man. For years the studentand the professor had gone on complaining that minds were un-equally inert. The inequalities amounted to contrasts. One classof minds responded only to habit; another only to novelty. Raceclassified thought. Class-lists classified mind. No two men thoughtalike, and no woman thought like a man.Race-inertia seemed to be fairly constant, and made the chieftrouble in the Russian future. History looked doubtful when askedwhether race-inertia had ever been overcome without destroyingthe race in order to reconstruct it; but surely sex-inertia had neverbeen overcome at all. Of all movements of inertia, maternity andreproduction are the most typical, and women's property of mov-ing in a constant line forever is ultimate, uniting history in its onlyunbroken and unbreakable sequence. Whatever else stops, thewoman must go on reproducing, as she did in the Siluria of Pter-aspis; sex is a vital condition, and race only a local one. If thelaws of inertia are to be sought anywhere with certainty, it is inthe feminine mind. The American always ostentatiously ignoredsex, and American history mentioned hardly the name of a woman,44 2The Education of Henry Adamswhile English history handled them as timidly as though they werea new and undescribed species; but if the problem of inertiasummed up the difficulties of the race question, it involved thatof sex far more deeply, and to Americans vitally. The task ofaccelerating or deflecting the movement of the American womanhad interest infinitely greater than that of any race whatever,Russian or Chinese, Asiatic or African.On this subject, as on the Senate and the banks, Adams was con-scious of having been born an eighteenth-century remainder. Ashe grew older, he found that Early Institutions lost their interest,but that Early Women became a passion. Without understandingmovement of sex, history seemed to him mere pedantry. So in-sistent had he become on this side of his subject that with womenhe talked of little else, and — because women's thought is mostlysubconscious and particularly sensitive to suggestion — he triedtricks and devices to disclose it. The woman seldom knows herown thought; she is as curious to understand herself as the man tounderstand her, and responds far more quickly than the man toa sudden idea. Sometimes, at dinner, one might wait till talkflagged, and then, as mildly as possible, ask one's liveliest neigh-bor whether she could explain why the American woman was a fail-ure. Without an instant's hesitation, she was sure to answer:"Because the American man is a failure!" She meant it.Adams owed more to the American woman than to all theAmerican men he ever heard of, and felt not the smallest call todefend his sex who seemed able to take care of themselves; butfrom the point of view of sex he felt much curiosity to know howfar the woman was right, and, in pursuing this inquiry, he caughtthe trick of affirming that the woman was the superior. Apartfrom truth, he owed her at least that compliment. The habit ledsometimes to perilous personalities in the sudden give-and-take oftable-talk. This spring, just before sailing for Europe in May,1903, he had a message from his sister-in-law, Mrs. Brooks Adams,to say that she and her sister, Mrs. Lodge, and the Senator wereVis Inertiae443coming to dinner by way of farewell; Bay Lodge and his lovelyyoung wife sent word to the same effect; Mrs. Roosevelt joinedthe party; and Michael Herbert shyly slipped down to escape thesolitude of his wife's absence. The party were too intimate forreserve, and they soon fell on Adams's hobby with derision whichstung him to pungent rejoinder: "The American man is a fail-ure! You are all failures!" he said. "Has not my sister here moresense than my brother Brooks? Is not Bessie worth two of Bay?Would n't we all elect Mrs. Lodge Senator against Cabot? Wouldthe President have a ghost of a chance if Mrs. Roosevelt ranagainst him? Do you want to stop at the Embassy, on your wayhome, and ask which would run it best — Herbert or his wife?"The men laughed a little — not much ! Each probably made allow-ance for his own wife as an unusually superior woman. Some oneafterwards remarked that these half-dozen women were not a fairaverage. Adams replied that the half-dozen men were above allpossible average; he could not lay his hands on another half-dozentheir equals.Gay or serious, the question never failed to stir feeling. Thecleverer the woman, the less she denied the failure. She was bitterat heart about it. She had failed even to hold the family together,and her children ran away like chickens with their first feathers;the family was extinct like chivalry. She had failed not only tocreate a new society that satisfied her, but even to hold her ownin the old society of Church or State; and was left, for the mostpart, with no place but the theatre or streets to decorate. Shemight glitter with historical diamonds and sparkle with wit asbrilliant as the gems, in rooms as splendid as any in Rome at itsbest; but she saw no one except her own sex who knew enough tobe worth dazzling, or was competent to pay her intelligent homage.She might have her own way, without restraint or limit, but sheknew not what to do with herself when free. Never had the worldknown a more capable or devoted mother, but at forty her taskwas over, and she was left with no stage except that of her old444The Education of Henry Adamsduties, or of Washington society where she had enjoyed for a hun-dred years every advantage, but had created only a medley wherenine men out of ten refused her request to be civilized, and thetenth bored her.On most subjects, one's opinions must defer to science, but onthis, the opinion of a Senator or a Professor, a chairman of a StateCentral Committee or a Railway President, is worth less than thatof any woman on Fifth Avenue. The inferiority of man on this,the most important of all social subjects, is manifest. Adams hadhere no occasion to deprecate scientific opinion, since no woman inthe world would have paid the smallest respect to the opinionsof all professors since the serpent. His own object had little to dowith theirs. He was studying the laws of motion, and had strucktwo large questions of vital importance to America — inertia ofrace and inertia of sex. He had seen Mr. de Witte and PrinceKhilkofF turn artificial energy to the value of three thousand mil-lion dollars, more or less, upon Russian inertia, in the last twentyyears, and he needed to get some idea of the effects. He had seenartificial energy to the amount of twenty or five-and-twenty millionsteam horse-power created in America since 1840, and as muchmore economized, which had been socially turned over to theAmerican woman, she being the chief object of social expenditure,and the household the only considerable object of American ex-travagance. According to scientific notions of inertia and force,what ought to be the result?In Russia, because of race and bulk, no result had yet shownitself, but in America the results were evident and undisputed. Thewoman had been set free — volatilized like Clerk Maxwell's perfectgas; almost brought to the point of explosion, like steam. Onehad but to pass a week in Florida, or on any of a hundred hugeocean steamers, or walk through the Place Vendome, or join aparty of Cook's tourists to Jerusalem, to see that the woman hadbeen set free; but these swarms were ephemeral like clouds of but-terflies in season, blown away and lost, while the reproductiveVis Inertiae445sources lay hidden. At Washington, one saw other swarms as gravegatherings of Dames or Daughters, taking themselves seriously,or brides fluttering fresh pinions; but all these shifting visions, un-known before 1840, touched the true problem slightly and super-ficially. Behind them, in every city, town, and farmhouse, weremyriads of new types— or type-writers — telephone and telegraph-girls, shop-clerks, factory-hands, running into millions of millions,and, as classes, unknown to themselves as to historians. Eventhe schoolmistresses were inarticulate. All these new women hadbeen created since 1840; all were to show their meaning before1940.Whatever they were, they were not content, as the ephemeraproved; and they were hungry for illusions as ever in the fourthcentuiy of the Church; but this was probably survival, and gaveno hint of the future. The problem remained — to find out whethermovement of inertia, inherent in function, could take directionexcept in lines of inertia. This problem needed to be solved in onegeneration of American women, and was the most vital of allproblems of force.The American woman at her best — like most other women —exerted great charm on the man, but not the charm of a primitivetype. She appeared as the result of a long series of discards, andher chief interest lay in what she had discarded. When closelywatched, she seemed making a violent effort to follow the man,who had turned his mind and hand to mechanics. The typicalAmerican man had his hand on a lever and his eye on a curve in hisroad; his living depended on keeping up an average speed of fortymiles an hour, tending always to become sixty, eighty, or a hun-dred, and he could not admit emotions or anxieties or subconsciousdistractions, more than he could admit whiskey or drugs, withoutbreaking his neck. He could not run his machine and a woman too;he must leave her, even though his wife, to find her own way, andall the world saw her trying to find her way by imitating him.; The result was often tragic, but that was no new thing in femi-446The Education of Henry Adamsnine history. Tragedy had been woman's lot since Eve. Herproblem had been always one of physical strength and it was asphysical perfection of force that her Venus had governed nature.The woman's force had counted as inertia of rotation, and her axisof rotation had been the cradle and the family. The idea that shewas weak revolted all history; it was a palaeontological falsehoodthat even an Eocene female monkey would have laughed at; butit was surely true that, if her force were to be diverted from itsaxis, it must find a new field, and the family must pay for it. Sofar as she succeeded, she must become sexless like the bees, andmust leave the old energy of inertia to carry on the race.The story was not new. For thousands of years women had re-belled. They had made a fortress of religion — had buried them-selves in the cloister, in self-sacrifice, in good works — or even inbad. One's studies in the twelfth century, like one's studies in thefourth, as in Homeric and archaic time, showed her always busyin the illusions of heaven or of hell — ambition, intrigue, jealousy,magic — but the American woman had no illusions or ambitionsor new resources, and nothing to rebel against, except her ownmaternity; yet the rebels increased by millions from year to yeartill they blocked the path of rebellion. Even her field of goodworks was narrower than in the twelfth century. Socialism, com-munism, collectivism, philosophical anarchism, which promisedparadise on earth for every male, cut off the few avenues of escapewhich capitalism had opened to the woman, and she saw beforeher only the future reserved for machine-made, collectivist females.From the male, she could look for no help; his instinct of powerwas blind. The Church had known more about women than sciencewill ever know, and the historian who studied the sources of Chris-tianity felt sometimes convinced that the Church had been madeby the woman chiefly as her protest against man. At times, thehistorian would have been almost willing to maintain that theman had overthrown the Church chiefly because it was feminine.After the overthrow of the Church, the woman had no refugeVis Inertiae447except such as the man created for himself. She was free; she hadno illusions; she was sexless; she had discarded all that the maledisliked ; and although she secretly regretted the discard, she knewthat she could not go backward. She must, like the man, marrymachinery. Already the American man sometimes felt surpriseat finding himself regarded as sexless; the American woman wasoftener surprised at finding herself regarded as sexual.No honest historian can take part with — or against — theforces he has to study. To him even the extinction of the humanrace should be merely a fact to be grouped with other vital statis-tics. No doubt every one in society discussed the subject, impelledby President Roosevelt if by nothing else, and the surface currentof social opinion seemed set as strongly in one direction as the silentundercurrent of social action ran in the other; but the truth laysomewhere unconscious in the woman's breast. An elderly man,trying only to learn the law of social inertia and the limits of socialdivergence could not compel the Superintendent of the Census toask every young woman whether she wanted children, and howmany; he could not even require of an octogenarian Senate thepassage of a law obliging every woman, married or not, to bear onebaby — at the expense of the Treasury — before she was thirtyyears old, under penalty of solitary confinement for life; yet thesewere vital statistics in more senses than all that bore the name, andtended more directly to the foundation of a serious society in thefuture. He could draw no conclusions whatever except from thebirth-rate. He could not frankly discuss the matter with the youngwomen themselves, although they would have gladly discussed it,because Faust was helpless in the tragedy of woman. He couldsuggest nothing. The Marguerite of the future could alone decidewhether she were better off than the Marguerite of the past;whether she would rather be victim to a man, a church, or amachine.Between these various forms of inevitable inertia — sex andrace — the student of multiplicity felt inclined to admit that —The Education of Henry Adams448ignorance against ignorance — the Russian problem seemed tohim somewhat easier of treatment than the American. Inertia ofrace and bulk would require an immense force to overcome it,but in time it might perhaps be partially overcome. Inertia of sexcould not be overcome without extinguishing the race, yet animmense force, doubling every few years, was working irresistiblyto overcome it. One gazed mute before this ocean of darkestignorance that had already engulfed society. Few centres of greatenergy lived in illusion more complete or archaic than Washingtonwith its simple-minded standards of the field and farm, its Southernand Western habits of life and manners, its assumptions of ethicsand history; but even in Washington, society was uneasy enoughto need no further fretting. One was almost glad to act the partof horseshoe crab in Quincy Bay, and admit that all was uniform— that nothing ever changed — and that the woman would swimabout the ocean of future time, as she had swum in the past, withthe gar-fish and the shark, unable to change.