CHAPTER XXVTHE DYNAMO AND THE VIRGIN (1900)UNTIL the Great Exposition of 1900 closed its doors inNovember, Adams haunted it, aching to absorb knowl-edge, and helpless to find it. He would have liked toknow how much of it could have been grasped by the best-informedman in the world. While he was thus meditating chaos, Langleycame by, and showed it to him. At Langley's behest, the Exhibi-tion dropped its superfluous rags and stripped itself to the skin,for Langley knew what to study, and why, and how; while Adamsmight as well have stood outside in the night, staring at the MilkyWay. Yet Langley said nothing new, and taught nothing that onemight not have learned from Lord Bacon, three hundred yearsbefore; but though one should have known the "Advancement ofScience" as well as one knew the "Comedy of Errors," the liter-ary knowledge counted for nothing until some teacher should showhow to apply it. Bacon took a vast deal of trouble in teachingKing James I and his subjects, American or other, towards theyear 1620, that true science was the development or economy offorces; yet an elderly American in 1900 knew neither the formulanor the forces; or even so much as to say to himself that his his-torical business in the Exposition concerned only the economiesor developments of force since 1893, when he began the study atChicago.Nothing in education is so astonishing as the amount of igno-rance it accumulates in the form of inert facts. Adams had lookedat most of the accumulations of art in the storehouses called ArtMuseums; yet he did not know how to look at the art exhibits of1900. He had studied Karl Marx and his doctrines of history withprofound attention, yet he could not apply them at Paris. Lang-ley, with the ease of a great master of experiment, threw out of the380The Education of Henry Adamsfield every exhibit that did not reveal a new application of force,and naturally threw out, to begin with, almost the whole art ex-hibit. Equally, he ignored almost the whole industrial exhibit.He led his pupil directly to the forces. His chief interest was innew motors to make his airship feasible, and he taught Adamsthe astonishing complexities of the new Daimler motor, and ofthe automobile, which, since 1893, had become a nightmare at ahundred kilometres an hour, almost as destructive as the electrictram which was only ten years older; and threatening to becomeas terrible as the locomotive steam-engine itself, which was almostexactly Adams's own age.Then he showed his scholar the great hall of dynamos, and ex-plained how little he knew about electricity or force of any kind,even of his own special sun, which spouted heat in inconceivablevolume, but which, as far as he knew, might spout less or more,at any time, for all the certainty he felt in it. To him, the dynamoitself was but an ingenious channel for conveying somewhere theheat latent in a few tons of poor coal hidden in a dirty engine-housecarefully kept out of sight; but to Adams the dynamo became asymbol of infinity. As he grew accustomed to the great gallery ofmachines, he began to feel the forty-foot dynamos as a moral force,much as the early Christians felt the Cross. The planet itselfseemed less impressive, in its old-fashioned, deliberate, annual ordaily revolution, than this huge wheel, revolving within arm's-length at some vertiginous speed, and barely murmuring —scarcely humming an audible warning to stand a hair's-breadthfurther for respect of power — while it would not wake the babylying close against its frame. Before the end, one began to pray toit; inherited instinct taught the natural expression of man beforesilent and infinite force. Among the thousand symbols of ultimateenergy, the dynamo was not so human as some, but it was themost expressive.Yet the dynamo, next to the steam-engine, was the most fa-miliar of exhibits. For Adams's objects its value lay chiefly in itsThe Dynamo and the Virgin381occult mechanism. Between the dynamo in the gallery of machinesand the engine-house outside, the break of continuity amounted toabysmal fracture for a historian's objects. No more relation couldhe discover between the steam and the electric current than be-tween the Cross and the cathedral. The forces were interchange-able if not reversible, but he could see only an absolute fiat in elec-tricity as in faith. Langley could not help him. Indeed, Langleyseemed to be worried by the same trouble, for he constantly re-peated that the new forces were anarchical, and especially thathe was not responsible for the new rays, that were little short ofparricidal in their wicked spirit towards science. His own rays,with which he had doubled the solar spectrum, were altogetherharmless and beneficent; but Radium denied its God — or, whatwas to Langley the same thing, denied the truths of his Science.The force was wholly new.A historian who asked only to learn enough to be as futile asLangley or Kelvin, made rapid progress under this teaching, andmixed himself up in the tangle of ideas until he achieved a sort ofParadise of ignorance vastly consoling to his fatigued senses. Hewrapped himself in vibrations and rays which were new, and hewould have hugged Marconi and Branly had he met them, as hehugged the dynamo; while he lost his arithmetic in trying to figureout the equation between the discoveries and the economies offorce. The economies, like the discoveries, were absolute, super-sensual, occult; incapable of expression in horse-power. Whatmathematical equivalent could he suggest as the value of a BranlyFrozen air, or the electric furnace, had some scale ofcoherer?measurement, no doubt, if somebody could invent a thermometeradequate to the purpose; but X-rays had played no part whateverin man's consciousness, and the atom itself had figured only as afiction of thought. In these seven years man had translated himselfinto a new universe which had no common scale of measurementwith the old. He had entered a supersensual world, in which hecould measure nothing except by chance collisions of movements382The Education of Henry Adamsimperceptible to his senses, perhaps even imperceptible to his in-struments, but perceptible to each other, and so to some knownray at the end of the scale. Langley seemed prepared for anything,even for an indeterminable number of universes interfused —physics stark mad in metaphysics.Historians undertake to arrange sequences, — called stories, orhistories — assuming in silence a relation of cause and effect.These assumptions, hidden in the depths of dusty libraries, havebeen astounding* but commonly unconscious and childlike; somuch so, that if any captious critic were to drag them to light, his-torians would probably reply, with one voice, that they had neversupposed themselves required to know what they were talkingabout. Adams, for one, had toiled in vain to find out what hemeant. He had even published a dozen volumes of American his-tory for no other purpose than to satisfy himself whether, by theseverest process of stating, with the least possible comment, suchfacts as seemed sure, in such order as seemed rigorously consequent,he could fix for a familiar moment a necessary sequence of humanmovement. The result had satisfied him as little as at HarvardCollege. Where he saw sequence, other men saw something quitedifferent, and no one saw the same unit of measure. He cared littleabout his experiments and less about his statesmen, who seemedto him quite as ignorant as himself and, as a rule, no more honest;but he insisted on a relation of sequence, and if he could not reachit by one method, he would try as many methods as science knew.Satisfied that the sequence of men led to nothing and that thesequence of their society could lead no further, while the mere se-quence of time was artificial, and the sequence of thought waschaos, he turned at last to the sequence of force; and thus it hap-pened that, after ten years' pursuit, he found himself lying in theGallery of Machines at the Great Exposition of 1900, his historicalneck broken by the sudden irruption of forces totally new.Since no one else showed much concern, an elderly person with-out other cares had no need to betray alarm. The year 1900 wasThe Dynamo and the Virgin383not the first to upset schoolmasters. Copernicus and Galileo hadbroken many professorial necks about 1600; Columbus had stoodthe world on its head towards 1500; but the nearest approach tothe revolution of 1900 was that of 310, when Constantine set upthe Cross. The rays that Langley disowned, as well as those whichhe fathered, were occult, supersensual, irrational; they were arevelation of mysterious energy like that of the Cross ; they werewhat, in terms of mediaeval science, were called immediate modesof the divine substance.The historian was thus reduced to his last resources. Clearlyif he was bound to reduce all these forces to a common value, thiscommon value could have no measure but that of their attractionon his own mind. He must treat them as they had been felt; asconvertible, reversible, interchangeable attractions on thought.He made up his mind to venture it; he would risk translating raysinto faith. Such a reversible process would vastly amuse a chemist,but the chemist could not deny that he, or some of his fellowphysicists, could feel the force of both. When Adams was a boy inBoston, the best chemist in the place had probably never heardof Venus except by way of scandal, or of the Virgin except asidolatry; neither had he heard of dynamos or automobiles or ra-dium; yet his mind was ready to feel the force of all, though therays were unborn and the women were dead.Here opened another totally new education, which promised tobe by far the most hazardous of all. The knife-edge along whichhe must crawl, like Sir Lancelot in the twelfth century, dividedtwo kingdoms of force which had nothing in common but attrac-tion. They were as different as a magnet is from gravitation, sup-posing one knew what a magnet was, or gravitation, or love.The force of the Virgin was still felt at Lourdes, and seemed to beas potent as X-rays; but in America neither Venus nor Virgin everhad value as force — at most as sentiment. No American hadever been truly afraid of either.This problem in dynamics gravely perplexed an American his-384The Education of Henry Adamstorian. The Woman had once been supreme; in France she stillseemed potent, not merely as a sentiment, but as a force. Why wasshe unknown in America? For evidently America was ashamed ofher, and she was ashamed of herself, otherwise they would nothave strewn fig-leaves so profusely all over her. When she was atrue force, she was ignorant of fig-leaves, but the monthly-maga-zine-made American female had not a feature that would havebeen recognized by Adam. The trait was notorious, and oftenhumorous, but any one brought up among Puritans knew thatsex was sin. In any previous age, sex was strength. Neither artnor beauty was needed. Every one, even among Puritans, knewthat neither Diana of the Ephesians nor any of the Oriental god-desses was worshipped for her beauty. She was goddess becauseof her force; she was the animated dynamo; she was reproduction— the greatest and most mysterious of all energies; all she neededSingularly enough, not one of Adams's manywas to be fecund.schools of education had ever drawn his attention to the openinglines of Lucretius, though they were perhaps the finest in all Latinliterature, where the poet invoked Venus exactly as Dante in-voked the Virgin : —"Quae quoniam rerum naturam sola gubernas."The Venus of Epicurean philosophy survived in the Virgin of theSchools : —" Donna, sei tanto grande, e tanto vali,Che qual vuol grazia, e a te non ricorre,Sua disianza vuol volar senz' ali."All this was to American thought as though it had never existed.The true American knew something of ,the facts, but nothing ofthe feelings; he read the letter, but he never felt the law. Beforethis historical chasm, a mind like that of Adams felt itself help-less; he turned from the Virgin to the Dynamo as though he werea Branly coherer. On one side, at the Louvre and at Chartres,as he knew by the record of work actually done and still before hisThe Dynamo and the Virgin385eyes, was the highest energy ever known to man, the creator offour-fifths of his noblest art, exercising, vastly more attractionover the human mind than all the steam-engines and dynamosever dreamed of; and yet this energy was unknown to the Ameri-can mind. An American Virgin would never dare command; anAmerican Venus would never dare exist.The question, which to any plain American of the nineteenthcentury seemed as remote as it did to Adams, drew him almostviolently to study, once it was posed; and on this point Langleyswere as useless as though they were Herbert Spencers or dynamos.The idea survived only as art. There one turned as naturally asthough the artist were himself a woman. Adams began to ponder,asking himself whether he knew of any American artist who hadever insisted on the power of sex, as every classic had always done;but he could think only of Walt Whitman; Bret Harte, as far asthe magazines would let him venture; and one or two painters,for the flesh-tones. All the rest had used sex for sentiment, neverfor force; to them, Eve was a tender flower, and Herodias an un-feminine horror. American art, like the American language andAmerican education, was as far as possible sexless.Society re-garded this victory over sex as its greatest triumph, and the his-torian readily admitted it, since the moral issue, for the moment,did not concern one who was studying the relations of unmoralforce. He cared nothing for the sex of the dynamo until he couldmeasure its energy.Vaguely seeking a clue, he wandered through the art exhibit,and, in his stroll, stopped almost every day before St. Gaudens'sGeneral Sherman, which had been given the central post of honor.St. Gaudens himself was in Paris, putting on the work his usualinterminable last touches, and listening to the usual contradic-tory suggestions of brother sculptors. Of all the American artistswho gave to American art whatever life it breathed in the seven-ties, St. Gaudens was perhaps the most sympathetic, but cer-tainly the most inarticulate. General Grant or Don Cameron:The Education of Henry Adams386had scarcely less instinct of rhetoric than he. All the others —the Hunts, Richardson, John La Farge, Stanford White — wereexuberant; only St. Gaudens could never discuss or dilate on anemotion, or suggest artistic arguments for giving to his work theforms that he felt. He never laid down the law, or affected thedespot, or became brutalized like Whistler by the brutalities ofhis world. He required no incense; he was no egoist; his simpli-city of thought was excessive; he could not imitate, or give anyform but his own to the creations of his hand. No one felt morestrongly than he the strength of other men, but the idea that theycould affect him never stirred an image in his mind.This summer his health was poor and his spirits were low. Forsuch a temper, Adams was not the best companion, since his owngaiety was not folle; but he risked going now and then to thestudio on Mont Parnasse to draw him out for a stroll in the Boisde Boulogne, or dinner as pleased his moods, and in return St.Gaudens sometimes let Adams go about in his company.Once St. Gaudens took him down to Amiens, with a party ofFrenchmen, to see the cathedral. Not until they found them-selves actually studying the sculpture of the western portal, didit dawn on Adams's mind that, for his purposes, St. Gaudens onthat spot had more interest to him than the cathedral itself. Greatmen before great monuments express great truths, provided theyare not taken too solemnly. Adams never tired of quoting thesupreme phrase of his idol Gibbon, before the Gothic cathedrals"I darted a contemptuous look on the stately monuments ofsuperstition." Even in the footnotes of his history, Gibbon hadnever inserted a bit of humor more human than this, and onewould have paid largely for a photograph of the fat little historian,on the background of Notre Dame of Amiens, trying to persuadehis readers — perhaps himself — that he was darting a contemp-tuous look on the stately monument, for which he felt in fact therespect which every man of his vast study and active mind alwaysfeels before objects worthy of it; but besides the humor, one feltThe Dynamo and the Virgin387also the relation. Gibbon ignored the Virgin, because in 1789religious monuments were out of fashion. In 1900 his remarksounded fresh and simple as the green fields to ears that had hearda hundred years of other remarks, mostly no more fresh and cer-tainly less simple. Without malice, one might find it more instruc-tive than a whole lecture of Ruskin. One sees what one brings,and at that moment Gibbon brought the French Revolution.St. GaudensRuskin brought reaction against the Revolution.had passed beyond all. He liked the stately monuments muchmore than he liked Gibbon or Ruskin; he loved their dignity; theirunity; their scale; their lines; their lights and shadows; their deco-rative sculpture; but he was even less conscious than they of theforce that created it all — the Virgin, the Woman — by whosegenius "the stately monuments of superstition" were built,through which she was expressed. He would have seen more mean-ing in Isis with the cow's horns, at Edfoo, who expressed the samethought. The art remained, but the energy was lost even uponthe artist.Yet in mind and person St. Gaudens was a survival of the 1500;he bore the stamp of the Renaissance, and should have carried animage of the Virgin round his neck, or stuck in his hat, like LouisXL In mere time he was a lost soul that had strayed by chanceinto the twentieth century, and forgotten where it came from.He writhed and cursed at his ignorance, much as Adams did athis own, but in the opposite sense. St. Gaudens was a child ofBenvenuto Cellini, smothered in an American cradle. Adams wasa quintessence of Boston, devoured by curiosity to think likeBenvenuto. St. Gaudens's art was starved from birth, and Adams'sinstinct was blighted from babyhood. Each had but half of anature, and when they came together before the Virgin of Amiensthey ought both to have felt in her the force that made them one;but it was not so. To Adams she became more than ever a chan-nel of force; to St. Gaudens she remained as before a channel oftaste.388The Education of Henry AdamsFor a symbol of power, St. Gaudens instinctively preferred thehorse, as was plain in his horse and Victory of the Sherman monu-ment. Doubtless Sherman also felt it so. The attitude was soAmerican that, for at least forty years, Adams had never realizedthat any other could be in sound taste. How many years had hetaken to admit a notion of what Michael Angelo and Rubens weredriving at? He could not say; but he knew that only since 1895had he begun to feel the Virgin or Venus as force, and not every-where even so. At Chartres — perhaps at Lourdes — possiblyat Cnidos if one could still find there the divinely naked Aphro-dite of Praxiteles — but otherwise one must look for force to thegoddesses of Indian mythology. The idea died out long ago inthe German and English stock. St. Gaudens at Amiens was hardlyless sensitive to the force of the female energy than MatthewArnold at the Grande Chartreuse. Neither of them felt goddessesas power — only as reflected emotion, human expression, beauty,purity, taste, scarcely even as sympathy. They felt a railwaytrain as power; yet they, and all other artists, constantly com-plained that the power embodied in a railway train could neverbe embodied in art. All the steam in the world could not, like theVirgin, build Chartres.Yet in mechanics, whatever the mechanicians might think, bothenergies acted as interchangeable forces on man, and by actionon man all known force may be measured. Indeed, few men ofscience measured force in any other way. After once admittingthat a straight line was the shortest distance between two points,no serious mathematician cared to deny anything that suited hisconvenience, and rejected no symbol, unproved or unproveable,that helped him to accomplish work. The symbol was force, as acompass-needle or a triangle was force, as the mechanist mightprove by losing it, and nothing could be gained by ignoring theirvalue. Symbol or energy, the Virgin had acted as the greatestforce the Western world ever felt, and had drawn man's activitiesto herself more strongly than any other power, natural or super-The Dynamo and the Virgin11389natural, had ever done; the historian's business was to follow thetrack of the energy; to find where it came from and where it wentto; its complex source and shifting channels; its values, equiva-lents, conversions. It could scarcely be more complex than ra-dium; it could hardly be deflected, diverted, polarized, absorbedmore perplexingly than other radiant matter. Adams knew noth-ing about any of them, but as a mathematical problem of influ-ence on human progress, though all were occult, all reacted on hismind, and he rather inclined to think the Virgin easiest to handle.The pursuit turned out to be long and tortuous, leading at lastinto the vast forests of scholastic science. From Zeno to Descartes,hand in hand with Thomas Aquinas, Montaigne, and Pascal, onestumbled as stupidly as though one were still a German studentof i860. Only with the instinct of despair could one force one'sself into this old thicket of ignorance after having been repulsedat a score of entrances more promising and more popular. Thusfar, no path had led anywhere, unless perhaps to an exceedinglymodest living. Forty-five years of study had proved to be quitefutile for the pursuit of power; one controlled no more force in1900 than in 1850, although the amount of force controlled bysociety had enormously increased. The secret of education stillhid itself somewhere behind ignorance, and one fumbled over itas feebly as ever. In such labyrinths, the staff is a force almostmore necessary than the legs; the pen becomes a sort of blind-man'sdog, to keep him from falling into the gutters. The pen works foritself, and acts like a hand, modelling the plastic material overand over again to the form that suits it best. The form is neverarbitrary, but is a sort of growth like crystallization, as any artistknows too well; for often the pencil or pen runs into side-pathsand shapelessness, loses its relations, stops or is bogged. Thenit has to return on its trail, and recover, if it can, its line of force.The result of a year's work depends more on what is struck outthan on what is left in ; on the sequence of the main lines of thought,than on their play or variety. Compelled once more to lean heavily3 goThe Education of Henry Adamson this support, Adams covered more thousands of pages withfigures as formal as though they were algebra, laboriously strikingout, altering, burning, experimenting, until the year had expired,the Exposition had long been closed, and winter drawing to itsend, before he sailed from Cherbourg, on January 19, 1901, forhome.