CHAPTER XXVITWILIGHT (1901)WHILE the world that thought itself frivolous, andsubmitted meekly to hearing itself decried as vain,fluttered through the Paris Exposition, jogging thefutilities of St. Gaudens, Rodin, and Besnard, the world thatthought itself serious, and showed other infallible marks of com-ing mental paroxysm, was engaged in weird doings at Peking andelsewhere such as startled even itself. Of all branches of educa-tion, the science of gauging people and events by their relativeimportance defies study most insolently. For three or four gen-erations, society has united in withering with contempt and op-probrium the shameless futility of Mme. de Pompadour and Mme.du Barry; yet, if one bid at an auction for some object that hadbeen approved by the taste of either lady, one quickly found thatit were better to buy half-a-dozen Napoleons or Frederics, or MariaTheresas, or all the philosophy and science of their time, than tobid for a cane-bottomed chair that either of these two ladies hadadorned. The same thing might be said, in a different sense, ofVoltaire; while, as every one knows, the money-value of anyhand-stroke of Watteau or Hogarth, Nattier or Sir Joshua, is outof all proportion to the importance of the men. Society seemed todelight in talking with solemn conviction about serious values,and in paying fantastic prices for nothing but the most futile.The drama acted at Peking, in the summer of 1900, was, in theeyes of a student, the most serious that could be offered for hisstudy, since it brought him suddenly to the inevitable strugglefor the control of China, which, in his view, must decide the con-trol of the world; yet, as a money-value, the fall of China waschiefly studied in Paris and London as a calamity to Chineseporcelain. The value of a Ming vase was more serious than uni-versal war.392The Education of Henry AdamsThe drama of the Legations interested the public much as thoughit were a novel of Alexandre Dumas, but the bearing of the dramaon future history offered an interest vastly greater. Adams knewno more about it than though he were the best-informed states-man in Europe. Like them all, he took for granted that the Lega-tions were massacred, and that John Hay, who alone championedChina's "administrative entity," would be massacred too, since hemust henceforth look on, in impotence, while Russia and Germanydismembered China, and shut up America at home. Nine states-men out of ten, in Europe, accepted this result in advance, seeingno way to prevent it. Adams saw none, and laughed at Hay forhis helplessness.When Hay suddenly ignored European leadership, took the leadhimself, rescued the Legations and saved China, Adams lookedon, as incredulous as Europe, though not quite so stupid, since,on that branch of education, he knew enough for his purpose.Nothing so meteoric had ever been done in American diplomacy.On returning to Washington, January 30, 1901, he found mostof the world as astonished as himself, but less stupid than usual.For a moment, indeed, the world had been struck dumb at seeingHay put Europe aside and set the Washington Government at thehead of civilization so quietly that civilization submitted, by mereinstinct of docility, to receive and obey his orders; but, after thefirst shock of silence, society felt the force of the stroke throughits fineness, and burst into almost tumultuous applause.In-stantly the diplomacy of the nineteenth century, with all its pain-ful scuffles and struggles, was forgotten, and the American blushedto be told of his submissions in the past. History broke in halves.Hay was too good an artist not to feel the artistic skill of hisown work, and the success reacted on his health, giving him freshlife, for with him as with most men, success was a tonic, and de-pression a specific poison; but as usual, his troubles nested athome. Success doubles strain. President McKinley's diplomaticcourt had become the largest in the world, and the diplomaticTwilight393relations required far more work than ever before, while the staffof the Department was little more efficient, and the friction in theSenate had become coagulated. Hay took to studying the " Diary"of John Quincy Adams eighty years before, and calculated thatthe resistance had increased about ten times, as measured bywaste of days and increase of effort, although Secretary of StateJ. Q. Adams thought himself very hardly treated. Hay cheer-fully noted that it was killing him, and proved it, for the effort ofthe afternoon walk became sometimes painful.For the moment, things were going fairly well, and Hay's un-ruly team were less fidgety, but Pauncefote still pulled the wholeload and turned the dangerous corners safely, while Cassini andHolleben helped the Senate to make what trouble they could,without serious offence, and the Irish, after the genial Celtic nature,obstructed even themselves. The fortunate Irish, thanks to theirsympathetic qualities, never made lasting enmities; but the Ger-mans seemed in a fair way to rouse ill-will and even ugly temperin the spirit of politics, which was by no means a part of Hay'splans. He had as much as he could do to overcome domestic fric-tion, and felt no wish to alienate foreign powers. Yet so muchcould be said in favor of the foreigners that they commonly knewwhy they made trouble, and were steady to a motive. Cassini hadfor years pursued, in Peking as in Washington, a policy of his own,never disguised, and as little in harmony with his chief as with Hay;he made his opposition on fixed lines for notorious objects; but Sena-tors could seldom give a reason for obstruction. In every hundredmen, a certain number obstruct by instinct, and try to inventreasons to explain it afterwards. The Senate was no worse thanthe board of a university; but incorporators as a rule have not madethis class of men dictators on purpose to prevent action. In theSenate, a single vote commonly stopped legislation, or, in commit-tee, stifled discussion.Hay's policy of removing, one after another, all irritations, andclosing all discussions with foreign countries, roused incessant394The Education of Henry Adamsobstruction, which could be overcome only by patience and bar-gaining in executive patronage, if indeed it could be overcome atall. The price actually paid was not very great except in the physi-cal exhaustion of Hay and Pauncefote, Root and McKinley. Noserious bargaining of equivalents could be attempted; Senatorswould not sacrifice five dollars in their own States to gain fivehundred thousand in another; but whenever a foreign country waswilling to surrender an advantage without an equivalent, Hay hada chance to offer the Senate a treaty. In all such cases the pricepaid for the treaty was paid wholly to the Senate, and amountedto nothing very serious except in waste of time and wear of strength."Life is so gay and horrid!" laughed Hay; "the Major will havepromised all the consulates in the service; the Senators will allcome to me and refuse to believe me dis-consulate; I shall see allmy treaties slaughtered, one by one, by the thirty-four per centof kickers and strikers; the only mitigation I can foresee is beingsick a good part of the time; I am nearing my grand climacteric,and the great culbute is approaching."He was thinking of his friend Blaine, and might have thought ofall his predecessors, for all had suffered alike, and to Adams ashistorian their sufferings had been a long delight — the solitarypicturesque and tragic element in politics — incidentally requir-ing character-studies like Aaron Burr and William B. Giles, Cal-houn and Webster and Sumner, with Sir Forcible Feebles likeJames M. Mason and stage exaggerations like Roscoe Conkling.The Senate took the place of Shakespeare, and offered realBrutuses and Bolingbrokes, Jack Cades, Falstaffs, and Malvolios— endless varieties of human nature nowhere else to be studied,and none the less amusing because they killed, or because they"Life is so gay and hor-were like schoolboys in their simplicity.rid!" Hay still felt the humor, though more and more rarely, butwhat he felt most was the enormous complexity and friction of thevast mass he was trying to guide. He bitterly complained that ithad made him a bore — of all things the most senatorial, and toTwilight395him the most obnoxious. The old friend was lost, and only theteacher remained, driven to madness by the complexities andmultiplicities of his new world.To one who, at past sixty years old, isstill passionately seek-ing education, these small, or large, annoyances had no greatvalue except as measures of mass and motion. For him the prac-tical interest and the practical man were such as looked forwardto the next election, or perhaps, in corporations, five or ten years.Scarcely half-a-dozen men in America could be named who wereknown to have looked a dozen years ahead; while any historianwho means to keep his alignment with past and future must covera horizon of two generations at least.If he seeks to align him-self with the future, he must assume a condition of some sort fora world fifty years beyond his own. Every historian — sometimesunconsciously, but always inevitably — must have put to him-self the question: How long could such-or-such an outworn systemlast? He can never give himself less than one generation to showthe full effects of a changed condition. His object is to triangulatefrom the widest possible base to the furthest point he thinks he cansee, which is always far beyond the curvature of the horizon.To the practical man, such an attempt is idiotic, and probablythe practical man is in the right to-day; but, whichever is right —if the question of right or wrong enters at all into the matter — thehistorian has no choice but to go on alone. Even in his own pro-fession few companions offer help, and his walk soon becomes soli-tary, leading further and further into a wilderness where twilightis short and the shadows are dense. Already Hay literally stag-gered in his tracks for weariness. More worn than he, ClarenceKing dropped. One day in the spring he stopped an hour in Wash-ington to bid good-bye, cheerily and simply telling how his doc-tors had condemned him to Arizona for his lungs. All three friendsknew that they were nearing the end, and that if it were not theone it would be the other; but the affectation of readiness fordeath is a stage role, and stoicism is a stupid resource, though396The Education of Henry Adamsthe only one. Non dolet, Paete ! One is ashamed of it even in theacting.The sunshine of life had not been so dazzling of late but that ashare of it flickered out for Adams and Hay when King disap-peared from their lives; but Hay had still his family and ambi-tion, while Adams could only blunder back alone, helplessly,wearily, his eyes rather dim with tears, to his vague trail acrossthe darkening prairie of education, without a motive, big or small,except curiosity to reach, before he too should drop, some pointthat would give him a far look ahead. He was morbidly curiousto see some light at the end of the passage, as though thirty yearswere a shadow, and he were again to fall into King's arms at thedoor of the last and only log cabin left in life. Time had becometerribly short, and the sense of knowing so little when others knewso much, crushed out hope.|He knew not in what new direction to turn, and sat at his desk,idly pulling threads out of the tangled skein of science, to seewhether or why they aligned themselves. The commonest andoldest toy he knew was the child's magnet, with which he hadplayed since babyhood, the most familiar of puzzles. He coveredhis desk with magnets, and mapped out their lines of force bycompass. Then he read all the books he could find, and tried invain to makes his lines of force agree with theirs. The booksconfounded him. He could not credit his own understanding.Here was literally the most concrete fact in nature, next to gravi-tation which it defied; a force which must have radiated lines ofenergy without stop, since time began, if not longer, and whichmight probably go on radiating after the sun should fall into theearth, since no one knew why — or how — or what it radiated —or even whether it radiated at all. Perhaps the earliest knownof all natural forces after the solar energies, it seemed to have sug-gested no idea to any one until some mariner bethought himselfthat it might serve for a pointer. Another thousand years passedwhen it taught some other intelligent man to use it as a pump,Twilight397supply-pipe, sieve, or reservoir for collecting electricity, still with-out knowing how it worked or what it was. For a historian,the story of Faraday's experiments and the invention of thedynamo passed belief; it revealed a condition of human ignoranceand helplessness before the commonest forces, such as his mindrefused to credit. He could not conceive but that some one, some-where, could tell him all about the magnet, if one could but findthe book —- although he had been forced to admit the same help-lessness in the face of gravitation, phosphorescence, and odors;and he could imagine no reason why society should treat radiumas revolutionary in science when every infant, for ages past, hadseen the magnet doing what radium did; for surely the kind ofradiation mattered nothing compared with the energy that ra-diated and the matter supplied for radiation. He dared not ven-ture into the complexities of chemistry, or microbes, so long as thischild's toy offered complexities that befogged his mind beyondX-rays, and turned the atom into an endless variety of pumpsendlessly pumping an endless variety of ethers. He wanted to askMme. Curie to invent a motor attachable to her salt of radium,and pump its forces through it, as Faraday did with a magnet.He figured the human mind itself as another radiating matterthrough which man had always pumped a subtler fluid.In all this futility, it was not the magnet or the rays or themicrobes that troubled him, or even his helplessness before theforces. To that he was used from childhood. The magnet inits new relation staggered his new education by its evidence ofgrowing complexity, and multiplicity, and even contradiction, inlife. He could not escape it; politics or science, the lesson was thesame, and at every step it blocked his path whichever way heturned. He found it in politics; he ran against it in science; hestruck it in everyday life, as though he were still Adam in the Gar-den of Eden between God who was unity, and Satan who wascomplexity, with no means of deciding which was truth. Theproblem was the same for McKinley as for Adam, and for the398The Education of Henry AdamsSenate as for Satan. Hay was going to wreck on it, like King andAdams.All one's life, one had struggled for unity, and unity had alwayswon. The National Government and the national unity had over-come every resistance, and the Darwinian evolutionists weretriumphant over all the curates; yet the greater the unity and themomentum, the worse became the complexity and the friction.One had in vain bowed one's neck to railways, banks, corporations,trusts, and even to the popular will as far as one could under-stand it — or even further; the multiplicity of unity had steadilyincreased, was increasing, and threatened to increase beyondreason. He had surrendered all his favorite prejudices, and fore-sworn even the forms of criticism — except for his pet amusement,the Senate, which was a tonic or stimulant necessary to healthylife; he had accepted uniformity and Pteraspis and ice age andtramways and telephones; and now — just when he was ready tohang the crowning garland on the brow of a completed education— science itself warned him to begin it again from the beginning.Maundering among the magnets he bethought himself thatonce, a full generation earlier, he had begun active life by writinga confession of geological faith at the bidding of Sir Charles Lyell,and that it might be worth looking at if only to steady his vision.He read it again, and thought it better than he could do at sixty-three; but elderly minds always work loose. He saw his doubtsgrown larger, and became curious to know what had been saidabout them since 1870. The Geological Survey supplied stacks ofvolumes, and reading for steady months; while, the longer heread, the more he wondered, pondered, doubted what his delight-ful old friend Sir Charles Lyell would have said about it.Truly the animal that is to be trained to unity must be caughtyoung. Unity is vision; it must have been part of the process oflearning to see. The older the mind, the older its complexities,and the further it looks, the more it sees, until even the starsresolve themselves into multiples; yet the child will alwaysTwilight399see but one. Adams asked whether geology since 1867 had driftedtowards unity or multiplicity, and he felt that the drift woulddepend on the age of the man who drifted.Seeking some impersonal point for measure, he turned to seewhat had happened to his oldest friend and cousin the ganoidfish, the Pteraspis of Ludlow and Wenlock, with whom he hadsported when geological life was young; as though they had allremained together in time to act the Mask of Comus at LudlowCastle, and repeat "how charming is divine philosophy!" He feltalmost aggrieved to find Walcott so vigorously acting the part ofComus as to have flung the ganoid all the way off to Colorado andfar back into the Lower Trenton limestone, making the Pteraspisas modern as a Mississippi gar-pike by spawning an ancestry forhim, indefinitely more remote, in the dawn of known organic life.A few thousand feet, more or less, of limestone were the liveliestamusement to the ganoid, but they buried the uniformitarian alive,under the weight of his own uniformity. Not for all the ganoidfish that ever swam, would a discreet historian dare to hazardeven in secret an opinion about the value of Natural Selection byMinute Changes under Uniform Conditions, for he could knowno more about it than most of his neighbors who knew nothing;but natural selection that did not select — evolution finishedbefore it began — minute changes that refused to change any-thing during the whole geological record — survival of the highestorder in a fauna which had no origin — uniformity under condi-tions which had disturbed everything else in creation — to anhonest-meaning though ignorant student who needed to proveNatural Selection and not assume it, such sequence brought nopeace. He wished to be shown that changes in form caused evo-lution in force; that chemical or mechanical energy had by nat-ural selection and minute changes, under uniform conditions,converted itself into thought. The ganoid fish seemed to prove —to him — that it had selected neither new form nor new force,but that the curates were right in thinking that force could be4-00The Education of Henry Adamsincreased in volume or raised in intensity only by help of outsideforce. To him, the ganoid was a huge perplexity, none the lessbecause neither he nor the ganoid troubled Darwinians, but themore because it helped to reveal that Darwinism seemed to sur-vive only in England. In vain he asked what sort of evolu-tion had taken its place. Almost any doctrine seemed orthodox.Even sudden conversions due to mere vital force acting on its ownlines quite beyond mechanical explanation, had cropped up again.A little more, and he would be driven back on the old independenceof species.What the ontologist thought about it was his own affair, likethe theologist's views on theology, for complexity was nothing tothem; but to the historian who sought only the direction of thoughtand had begun as the confident child of Darwin and Lyell in 1867,the matter of direction seemed vital. Then he had entered gailythe door of the glacial epoch, and had surveyed a universe ofunities and uniformities. In 1900 he entered a far vaster universe,where all the old roads ran about in every direction, overrunning,dividing, subdividing, stopping abruptly, vanishing slowly, withside-paths that led nowhere, and sequences that could not beproved. The active geologists had mostly become specialists deal-ing with complexities far too technical for an amateur, but theold formulas still seemed to serve for beginners, as they hadserved when new.So the cause of the glacial epoch remained at the mercy ofLyell and Croll, although Geikie had split up the period into half-a-dozen intermittent chills in recent geology and in the northernhemisphere alone, while no geologist had ventured to assert thatthe glaciation of the southern hemisphere could possibly be re-ferred to a horizon more remote. Continents still rose wildly andwildly sank, though Professor Suess of Vienna had written anepoch-making work, showing that continents were anchored likecrystals, and only oceans rose and sank. Lyell's genial uniform-ity seemed genial still, for nothing had taken its place, though,Twilight401in the interval, granite had grown young, nothing had been exrplained, and a bewildering system of huge overthrusts had up-set geological mechanics. The textbooks refused even to discusstheories, frankly throwing up their hands and avowing that prog-ress depended on studying each rock as a law to itself.Adams had no more to do with the correctness of the sciencethan the gar-pike or the Port Jackson shark, for its correctnessin no way concerned him, and only impertinence could lead himto dispute or discuss the principles of any science; but the historyof the mind concerned the historian alone, and the historian hadno vital concern in anything else, for he found no change to recordin the body. In thought the Schools, like the Church, raised ig-norance to a faith and degraded dogma to heresy. Evolutionsurvived like the trilobites without evolving, and yet the evolu-tionists held the whole field, and had even plucked up courage torebel against the Cossack ukase of Lord Kelvin forbidding themto ask more than twenty million years for their experiments. Nodoubt the geologists had always submitted sadly to this last andutmost violence inflicted on them by the Pontiff of Physical Reli-gion in the effort to force unification of the universe; they hadprotested with mild conviction that they could not state the geo-logical record in terms of time; they had murmured Ignoramusunder their breath; but they had never dared to assert the Ignora-bimus that lay on the tips of their tongues.Yet the admission seemed close at hand. Evolution was be-coming change of form broken by freaks of force, and warped attimes by attractions affecting intelligence, twisted and torturedat other times by sheer violence, cosmic, chemical, solar, super-sensual, electrolytic — who knew what? — defying science, ifnot denying known law; and the wisest of men could but imi-tate the Church, and invoke a "larger synthesis" to unify theanarchy again. Historians have got into far too much troubleby following schools of theology in their efforts to enlarge theirsynthesis, that they should willingly repeat the process in science.402The Education of Henry AdamsFor human purposes a point must always be soon reached wherelarger synthesis is suicide.Politics and geology pointed alike to the larger synthesis ofrapidly increasing complexity; but still an elderly man knew thatthe change might be only in himself. The admission cost nothing.Any student, of any age, thinking only of a thought and not ofhis thought, should delight in turning about and trying the oppo-site motion, as he delights in the spring which brings even to atired and irritated statesman the larger synthesis of peach-blooms,cherry-blossoms, and dogwood, to prove the folly of fret. Everyschoolboy knows that this sum of all knowledge never saved himfrom whipping; mere years help nothing; King and Hay and Adamscould neither of them escape floundering through the corridors ofchaos that opened as they passed to the end; but they could atleast float with the stream if they only knew which way thecurrent ran. Adams would have liked to begin afresh with theLimulus and Lepidosteus in the waters of Braintree, side by sidewith Adamses and Quincys and Harvard College, all unchangedand unchangeable since archaic time; but what purpose would itserve? A seeker of truth — or illusion — would be none the lessrestless, though a shark!