CHAPTER XXIXTHE ABYSS OF IGNORANCE (1902)THE years hurried past, and gave hardly time to note theirwork. Three or four months, though big with change,come to an end before the mind can catch up with it.Winter vanished; spring burst into flower; and again Paris openedits arms, though not for long. Mr. Cameron came over, and tookthe castle of Inverlochy for three months, which he summoned hisfriends to garrison. Lochaber seldom laughs, except for its children,such as Camerons, McDonalds, Campbells and other products ofthe mist; but in the summer of 1902 Scotland put on fewer airsof coquetry than usual. Since the terrible harvest of 1879 whichone had watched sprouting on its stalks on the Shropshire hillsides,nothing had equalled the gloom. Even when the victims fled toSwitzerland, they found the Lake of Geneva and the Rhine notmuch gayer, and Carlsruhe no more restful than Paris; until atlast, in desperation, one drifted back to the Avenue of the Boisde Boulogne, and, like the Cuckoo, dropped into the nest of abetter citizen. Diplomacy has its uses. Reynolds Hitt, transferredto Berlin, abandoned his attic to Adams, and there, for long sum-mers to come, he hid in ignorance and silence.Life at last managed of it.s own accord to settle itself into a work-ing arrangement. After so many years of effort to find one's drift,the drift found the seeker, and slowly swept him forward andback, with a steady progress oceanwards. Such lessons as summertaught, winter tested, and one had only to watch the apparentmovement of the stars in order to guess one's declination. Theprocess is possible only for men who have exhausted auto-motion.Adams never knew why, knowing nothing of Faraday, he began tomimic Faraday's trick of seeing lines of force all about him, wherehe had always seen lines of will. Perhaps the effect of knowing noThe Abyss of Ignorance427mathematics is to leave the mind to imagine figures — images —phantoms; one's mind is a watery mirror at best; but, once con-ceived, the image became rapidly simple, and the lines of forcepresented themselves as lines of attraction. Repulsions countedonly as battle of attractions. By this path, the mind stepped intothe mechanical theory of the universe before knowing it, and en-tered a distinct new phase of education.like Darwin's survival of the fittest; and one of the greatest minds,This was the work of the dynamo and the Virgin of Chartres.Like his masters, since thought began, he was handicapped by theeternal mystery of Force — the sink of all science. For thousandsof years in history, he found that Force had been felt as occultattraction — love of God and lust for power in a future life.After 1500, when this attraction began to decline, philosophersfell back on some vis a tergo — instinct of danger from behind,between Descartes and Newton — Pascal — saw the master-motorof man in ennui, which was also scientific : " I have often said thatall the troubles of man come from his not knowing how to sit still."Mere restlessness forces action."So passes the whole of life.We combat obstacles in order to get repose, and, when got, therepose is insupportable; for we think either of the troubles wehave, or of those that threaten us; and even if we felt safe on everyside, ennui would of its own accord spring up from the depths of theheart where it is rooted by nature, and would fill the mind with itsvenom.""If goodness lead him not, yet wearinessMay toss him to My breast."Ennui, like Natural Selection, accounted for change, but failedto account for direction of change. For that, an attractive forcewas essential; a force from outside; a shaping influence.Pascaland all the old philosophies called this outside force God or Gods.Caring but little for the name, and fixed only on tracing the Force,Adams had gone straight to the Virgin at Chartres, and asked her428The Education of Henry Adamsto show him God, face to face, as she did for St. Bernard. Shereplied, kindly as ever, as though she were still the young motherof to-day, with a sort of patient pity for masculine dulness: "Mydear outcast, what is it you seek? This is the Church of Christ!If you seek him through me, you are welcome, sinner or saint;but he and I are one. We are Love ! We have little or nothing todo with God's other energies which are infinite, and concern us theless because our interest is only in man, and the infinite is not know-able to man. Yet if you are troubled by your ignorance, you seehow I am surrounded by the masters of the schools! Ask them!"The answer sounded singularly like the usual answer of Britishscience which had repeated since Bacon that one must not try toknow the unknowable, though one was quite powerless to ignoreit; but the Virgin carried more conviction, for her feminine lack ofinterest in all perfections except her own was honester than theformal phrase of science; since nothing was easier than to follow heradvice, and turn to Thomas Aquinas, who, unlike modern phy-sicists, answered at once and plainly: "To me," said St. Thomas," Christ and the Mother are one Force — Love — simple, single,and sufficient for all human wants; but Love is a human interestwhich acts even on man so partially that you and I, as philosophers,need expect no share in it. Therefore we turn to Christ and theSchools who represent all other Force. We deal with Multiplicityand call it God. After the Virgin has redeemed by her personalForce as Love all that is redeemable in man, the Schools embracethe rest, and give it Form, Unity, and Motive."This chart of Force was more easily studied than any other pos-sible scheme, for one had but to do what the Church was alwayspromising to do — abolish in one flash of lightning not onlyman, but also the Church itself, the earth, the other planets, andthe sun, in order to clear the air; without affecting mediaevalscience. The student felt warranted in doing what the Churchthreatened — abolishing his solar system altogether — in orderto look at God as actual; continuous movement, universal cause,The Abyss of Ignorance429and interchangeable force. This was pantheism, but the Schoolswere pantheist; at least as pantheistic as the Energetik of theGermans ; and their deity was the ultimate energy, whose thoughtand act were one.Rid of man and his mind, the universe of Thomas Aquinasseemed rather more scientific than that of Haeckel or Ernst Mach.Contradiction for contradiction, Attraction for attraction, Energyfor energy, St. Thomas's idea of God had merits. Modern scienceoffered not a vestige of proof, or a theory of connection be-tween its forces, or any scheme of reconciliation between thoughtand mechanics; while St. Thomas at least linked together thejoints of his machine. As far as a superficial student could follow,the thirteenth century supposed mind to be a mode of force directlyderived from the intelligent prime motor, and the cause of all formand sequence in the universe — therefore the only proof of unity.Without thought in the unit, there could be no unity; withoutThought aloneunity no orderly sequence or ordered society.was Form. Mind and Unity flourished or perished together.This education startled even a man who had dabbled in fiftyeducations all over the world ; for, if he were obliged to insist on aUniverse, he seemed driven to the Church. Modern science guar-anteed no unity. The student seemed to feel himself, like all hispredecessors, caught, trapped, meshed in this eternal drag-net ofreligion.In practice the student escapes this dilemma in two ways:the first is that of ignoring it, as one escapes most dilemmas;the second is that the Church rejects pantheism as worse thanatheism, and will have nothing to do with the pantheist at anyprice. In wandering through the forests of ignorance, one neces-sarily fell upon the famous old bear that scared children at play;but, even had the animal shown more logic than its victim, onehad learned from Socrates to distrust, above all other traps, thetrap of logic — the mirror of the mind. Yet the search for a unitof force led into catacombs of thought where hundreds of thou-43°The Education of Henry Adamssands of educations had found their end. Generation after genera-tion of painful and honest-minded scholars had been content tostay in these labyrinths forever, pursuing ignorance in silence, incompany with the most famous teachers of all time. Not one ofthem had ever found a logical highroad of escape.Adams cared little whether he escaped or not, but he felt clearthat he could not stop there, even to enjoy the society of Spinozaand Thomas Aquinas. True, the Church alone had asserted unitywith any conviction, and the historian alone knew what oceansof blood and treasure the assertion had cost; but the only honestalternative to affirming unity was to deny it; and the denial wouldrequire a new education. At sixty-five years old a new educationpromised hardly more than the old.Possibly the modern legislator or magistrate might no longerknow enough to treat as the Church did the man who denied unity,unless the denial took the form of a bomb; but no teacher wouldknow how to explain what he thought he meant by denying unity.Society would certainly punish the denial if ever any one learnedenough to understand it. Philosophers, as a rule, cared little whatprinciples society affirmed or denied, since the philosopher com-monly held that though he might sometimes be right by goodluck on some one point, no complex of individual opinions couldpossibly be anything but wrong; yet, supposing society to be ig-nored, the philosopher was no further forward. Nihilism had nobottom. For thousands of years every philosopher had stood onthe shore of this sunless sea, diving for pearls and never findingthem. All had seen that, since they could not find bottom, theymust assume it. The Church claimed to have found it, but, since1450, motives for agreeing on some new assumption of Unity,broader and deeper than that of the Church, had doubled in forceuntil even the universities and schools, like the Church and State,seemed about to be driven into an attempt to educate, thoughspecially forbidden to do it.Like most of his generation, Adams had taken the word of sci-The Abyss of Ignorance431ence that the new unit was as good as found. It would not be anintelligence — probably not even a consciousness — but it wouldserve. He passed sixty years waiting for it, and at the end of thattime, on reviewing the ground, he was led to think that the finalsynthesis of science and its ultimate triumph was the kinetictheory of gases; which seemed to cover all motion in space, andto furnish the measure of time. So far as he understood it, thetheory asserted that any portion of space is occupied by mole-cules of gas, flying in right lines at velocities varying up to a milein a second, and colliding with each other at intervals varying upto 17,750,000 times in a second. To this analysis — if one under-stood it right — all matter whatever was reducible, and the onlydifference of opinion in science regarded the doubt whether a stilldeeper analysis would reduce the atom of gas to pure motion.Thus, unless one mistook the meaning of motion, which mightwell be, the scientific synthesis commonly called Unity was thescientific analysis commonly called Multiplicity. The two thingswere the same, all forms being shifting phases of motion. Grant-ing this ocean of colliding atoms, the last hope of humanity, whathappened if one dropped the sounder into the abyss — let it go— frankly gave up Unity altogether? What was Unity? Whywas one to be forced to affirm it?Here everybody flatly refused help.Science seemed contentwith its old phrase of "larger synthesis," which was well enoughfor science, but meant chaos for man. One would have been gladto stop and ask no more, but the anarchist bomb bade one go on,and the bomb is a powerful persuader. One could not stop, evento enjoy the charms of a perfect gas colliding seventeen milliontimes in a second, much like an automobile in Paris. Science itselfhad been crowded so close to the edge of the abyss that its attemptsto escape were as metaphysical as the leap, while an ignorant oldman felt no motive for trying to escape, seeing that the only es-cape possible lay in the form of vis a tergo commonly called Death.He got out his Descartes again; dipped into his Hume and Berke-432The Education of Henry Adamsley; wrestled anew with his Kant; pondered solemnly over hisHegel and Schopenhauer and Hartmann; strayed gaily awaywith his Greeks — all merely to ask what Unity meant, and whathappened when one denied it.Apparently one never denied it. Every philosopher, whethersane or insane, naturally affirmed it. The utmost flight of anarchyseemed to have stopped with the assertion of two principles, andeven these fitted into each other, like good and evil, light anddarkness. Pessimism itself, black as it might be painted, had beencontent to turn the universe of contradictions into the humanthought as one Will, and treat it as representation. Metaphysicsinsisted on treating the universe as one thought or treating thoughtas one universe; and philosophers agreed, like a kinetic gas, that theuniverse could be known only as motion of mind, and thereforeas unity. One could know it only as one's self; it was psychology.Of all forms of pessimism, the metaphysical form was, for a his-torian, the least enticing. Of all studies, the one he would ratherhave avoided was that of his own mind. He knew no tragedyso heartrending as introspection, and the more, because — asMephistopheles said of Marguerite — he was not the first. Nearlyall the highest intelligence known to history had drowned itselfin the reflection of its own thought, and the bovine survivors hadrudely told the truth about it, without affecting the intelligent.One's own time had not been exempt. Even since 1870 friendsby scores had fallen victims to it. Within five-and-twenty years,a new library had grown out of it. Harvard College was a focusof the study; France supported hospitals for it; England publishedmagazines of it. Nothing was easier than to take one's mind inone's hand, and ask one's psychological friends what they madeof it, and the more because it mattered so little to either party,since their minds, whatever they were, had pretty nearly ceasedto reflect, and let them do what they liked with the small remnant,they could scarcely do anything very new with it. All one askedwas to learn what they hoped to do.The Abyss of Ignoi^ance433Unfortunately the pursuit of ignorance in silence had, by thistime, led the weary pilgrim into such mountains of ignorancethat he could no longer see any path whatever, and could not evenunderstand a signpost. He failed to fathom the depths of the newpsychology, which proved to him that, on that side as on themathematical side, his power of thought was atrophied, if, indeed,it ever existed. Since he could not fathom the science, he couldonly ask the simplest of questions: Did the new psychology holdthat the tyvxi — soul or mind — was or was not a unit? Hegathered from the books that the psychologists had, in a few cases,distinguished several personalities in the same mind, each con-scious and constant, individual and exclusive. The fact seemedscarcely surprising, since it had been a habit of mind from earliestrecorded time, and equally familiar to the last acquaintance whohad taken a drug or caught a fever, or eaten a Welsh rarebit be-fore bed ; for surely no one could follow the action of a vivid dream,and still need to be told that the actors evoked by his mind werenot himself, but quite unknown to all he had ever recognized asself. The new psychology went further, and seemed convincedthat it had actually split personality not only into dualism, butalso into complex groups, like telephonic centres and systems,that might be isolated and called up at will, and whose physicalaction might be occult in the sense of strangeness to any knownform of force. Dualism seemed to have become as common asbinary stars. Alternating personalities turned up constantly, evenamong one's friends. The facts seemed certain, or at least ascertain as other facts; all they needed was explanation.This was not the business of the searcher of ignorance, who felthimself in no way responsible for causes. To his mind, the com-pound ifrvxv took at once the form of a bicycle-rider, mechanicallybalancing himself by inhibiting all his inferior personalities, and sureto fall into the sub-conscious chaos below, if one of his inferiorpersonalities got on top. The only absolute truth was the sub-con-scious chaos below, which every one could feel when he sought it.434The Education of Henry AdamsWhether the psychologists admitted it or not, mattered littleto the student who, by the law of his profession, was engaged instudying his own mind. On him, the effect was surprising. Hewoke up with a shudder as though he had himself fallen off hisbicycle. If his mind were really this sort of magnet, mechanicallydispersing its lines of force when it went to sleep, and mechani-cally orienting them when it woke up — which was normal, thedispersion or orientation? The mind, like the body, kept its unityunless it happened to lose balance, but the professor of physics,who slipped on a pavement and hurt himself, knew no more thanan idiot what knocked him down, though he did know— what theidiot could hardly do — that his normal condition was idiocy,or want of balance, and that his sanity was unstable artifice. Hisnormal thought was dispersion, sleep, dream, inconsequence; thesimultaneous action of different thought-centres without centralcontrol. His artificial balance was acquired habit. He was anacrobat, with a dwarf on his back, crossing a chasm on a slack-rope, and commonly breaking his neck.By that path of newest science, one saw no unity ahead —nothing but a dissolving mind — and the historian felt himselfdriven back on thought as one continuous Force, without Race,Sex, School, Country, or Church. This has been always the fateof rigorous thinkers, and has always succeeded in making themfamous, as it did Gibbon, Buckle, and Auguste Comte. Theirmethod made what progress the science of history knew, whichwas little enough, but they did at last fix the law that, if historyever meant to correct the errors she made in detail, she mustagree on a scale for the whole. Every local historian might defythis law till history ended, but its necessity would be the samefor man as for space or time or force, and without it the historianwould always remain a child in science.Any schoolboy could see that man as a force must be measuredby motion, from a fixed point. Psychology helped here by sug-gesting a unit — the point of history when man held the highestThe Abyss of Ignorance:435idea of himself as a unit in a unified universe. Eight or ten yearsof study had led Adams to think he might use the century 1150-1250, expressed in Amiens Cathedral and the Works of ThomasAquinas, as the unit from which he might measure motion downto his own time, without assuming anything as true or untrue,except relation. The movement might be studied at once in phi-losophy and mechanics. Setting himself to the task, he begana volume which he mentally knew as "Mont-Saint-Michel andChartres: a Study of Thirteenth-Century Unity." From thatpoint he proposed to fix a position for himself, which he could label"The Education of Henry Adams: a Study of Twentieth-CenturyMultiplicity." With the help of these two points of relation, hehoped to project his lines forward and backward indefinitely, sub-ject to correction from any one who should know better. There-upon, he sailed for home.