CHAPTER IIIWASHINGTON (1850-1854)EXCEPT for politics, Mount Vernon Street had the meritof leaving the boy-mind supple, free to turn with theworld, and if one learned next to nothing, the little onedid learn needed not to be unlearned. The surface was ready-to take any form that education should cut into it, though Boston,with singular foresight, rejected the old designs. What sort ofeducation was stamped elsewhere, a Bostonian had no idea, buthe escaped the evils of other standards by having no standard atall; and what was true of school was true of society. Boston offerednone that could help outside. Every one now smiles at the badtaste of Queen Victoria and Louis Philippe — the society of theforties — but the taste was only a reflection of the social slack-water between a tide passed, and a tide to come. Boston belongedto neither, and hardly even to America.Neither aristocraticnor industrial nor social, Boston girls and boys were not nearlyas unformed as English boys and girls, but had less means ofacquiring form as they grew older. Women counted for little asmodels. Every boy, from the age of seven, fell in love at frequentintervals with some girl — always more or less the same littlegirl — who had nothing to teach him, or he to teach her, exceptrather familiar and provincial manners, until they married andbore children to repeat the habit. The idea of attaching one'sself to a married woman, or of polishing one's manners to suit thestandards of women of thirty, could hardly have entered the mindof a young Bostonian, and would have scandalized his parents.From women the boy got the domestic virtues and nothing else.He might not even catch the idea that women had more to give.The garden of Eden was hardly more primitive.To balance this virtue, the Puritan city had always hidden aWashington41darker side. Blackguard Boston was only too educational, and tomost boys much the more interesting. A successful blackguardmust enjoy great physical advantages besides a true vocation, andHenry Adams had neither; but no boy escaped some contact withvice of a very low form. Blackguardism came constantly underboys' eyes, and had the charm of force and freedom and superi-ority to culture or decency. One might fear it, but no one honestlydespised it. Now and then it asserted itself as education moreroughly than school ever did. One of the commonest boy-gamesof winter, inherited directly from the eighteenth-century, was agame of war on Boston Common. In old days the two hostileforces were called North-Enders and South-Enders. In 1850 theNorth-Enders still survived as a legend, but in practice it was abattle of the Latin School against all comers, and the Latin School,for snowball, included all the boys of the West End. Whenever,on a half-holiday, the weather was soft enough to soften the snow,the Common was apt to be the scene of a fight, which began indaylight with the Latin School in force, rushing their opponentsdown to Tremont Street, and which generally ended at dark bythe Latin School dwindling in numbers and disappearing. As theLatin School grew weak, the roughs and young blackguards grewstrong. As long as snowballs were the only weapon, no one wasmuch hurt, but a stone may be put in a snowball, and in the darka stick or a slungshot in the hands of a boy is as effective as aknife. One afternoon the fight had been long and exhausting. Theboy Henry, following, as his habit was, his bigger brother Charles,had taken part in the battle, and had felt his courage much de-pressed by seeing one of his trustiest leaders, Henry Higginson— "Bully Hig," his school name — struck by a stone over theeye, and led off the field bleeding in rather a ghastly manner. Asnight came on, the Latin School was steadily forced back to theBeacon Street Mall where they could retreat no further withoutdisbanding, and by that time only a small band was left, headedby two heroes, Savage and Marvin. A dark mass of figures could be42The Education of Henry Adamsseen below, making ready for the last rush, and rumor said thata swarm of blackguards from the slums, led by a grisly terror calledConky Daniels, with a club and a hideous reputation, was go-ing to put an end to the Beacon Street cowards forever. Henrywanted to run away with the others, but his brother was too bigto run away, so they stood still and waited immolation. The darkmass set up a shout, and rushed forward. The Beacon Streetboys turned and fled up the steps, except Savage and Marvinand the few champions who would not run. The terrible ConkyDaniels swaggered up, stopped a moment with his body-guard toswear a few oaths at Marvin, and then swept on and chased theflyers, leaving the few boys untouched who stood their ground.The obvious moral taught that blackguards were not so black asthey were painted; but the boy Henry had passed through as muchterror as though he were Turenne or Henri IV, and ten or twelveyears afterwards when these same boys were fighting and fallingon all the battle-fields of Virginia and Maryland, he wonderedwhether their education on Boston Common had taught Savageand Marvin how to die.If violence were a part of complete education, Boston was notincomplete. The idea of violence was familiar to the anti-slaveryleaders as well as to their followers. Most of them suffered fromit. Mobs were always possible. Henry never happened to beactually concerned in a mob, but he, like every other boy, was sureto be on hand wherever a mob was expected, and whenever heheard Garrison or Wendell Phillips speak, he looked for trouble.Wendell Phillips on a platform was a model dangerous for youth.Theodore Parker in his pulpit was not much safer. Worst of all,the execution of the Fugitive Slave Law in Boston — the sightof Court Square packed with bayonets, and his own friends obligedto line the streets under arms as State militia, in order to return anegro to slavery — wrought frenzy in the brain of a fifteen-year-old, eighteenth-century boy from Quincy, who wanted to miss noreasonable chance of mischief.Washington43One lived in the atmosphere of the Stamp Act, the Tea Tax, andthe Boston Massacre. Within Boston, a boy was first an eight-eenth-century politician, and afterwards only a possibility; be-yond Boston the first step led only further into politics. AfterFebruary, 1848, but one slight tie remained of all those that, since1776, had connected Quincy with the outer world. The Madamstayed in Washington, after her husband's death, and in herturn was struck by paralysis and bedridden. From time to timeher son Charles, whose affection and sympathy for his mother inher many tribulations were always pronounced, went on to seeher, and in May, 1850, he took with him his twelve-year-old son.The journey was meant as education, and as education it servedthe purpose of fixing in memory the stage of a boy's thought in1850. He could not remember taking special interest in the rail-road journey or in New York; with railways and cities he wasfamiliar enough. His first impression was the novelty of crossingNew York Bay and finding an English railway carriage on theCamden and Amboy Railroad. This was a new world; a sugges-tion of corruption in the simple habits of American life; a step toexclusiveness never approached in Boston; but it was amusing.The boy rather liked it. At Trenton the train set him on boarda steamer which took him to Philadelphia where he smelt othervarieties of town life; then again by boat to Chester, and by trainto Havre de Grace; by boat to Baltimore and thence by rail toWashington. This was the journey he remembered. The actualjourney may have been quite different, but the actual journey hasno interest for education. The memory was all that mattered ; andwhat struck him most, to remain fresh in his mind all his lifetime,was the sudden change that came over the world on entering aslave State. He took education politically. The mere raggednessof outline could not have seemed wholly new, for even Boston hadits ragged edges, and the town of Quincy was far from being avision of neatness or good-repair; in truth, he had never seen afinished landscape; but Maryland was raggedness of a new kind.44The Education of Henry AdamsThe railway, about the size and character of a modern tram,rambled through unfenced fields and woods, or through villagestreets, among a haphazard variety of pigs, cows, and negro babies,who might all have used the cabins for pens and styes, had theSouthern pig required styes, but who never showed a sign of care.This was the boy's impression of what slavery caused, and, forhim, was all it taught. Coming down in the early morning fromhis bedroom in his grandmother's house — still called the AdamsBuilding — in F Street and venturing outside into the air reek-ing with the thick odor of the catalpa trees, he found himselfon an earth-road, or village street, with wheel-tracks meanderingfrom the colonnade of the Treasury hard by, to the white marblecolumns and fronts of the Post Office and Patent Office whichfaced each other in the distance, like white Greek temples in theabandoned gravel-pits of a deserted Syrian city. Here and therelow wooden houses were scattered along the streets, as in otherSouthern villages, but he was chiefly attracted by an unfinishedsquare marble shaft, half-a-mile below, and he walked down toinspect it before breakfast. His aunt drily remarked that, at thisrate, he would soon get through all the sights; but she could notguess — having lived always in Washington — how little thesights of Washington had to do with its interest.The boy could not have told her; he was nowhere near an under-standing of himself. The more he was educated, the less he under-stood. Slavery struck him in the face; it was a nightmare; a hor-ror; a crime; the sum of all wickedness ! Contact made it only morerepulsive. He wanted to escape, like the negroes, to free soil. SlaveStates were dirty, unkempt, poverty-stricken, ignorant, vicious!He had not a thought but repulsion for it; and yet the picture hadanother side. The May sunshine and shadow had something todo with it; the thickness of foliage and the heavy smells had more;the sense of atmosphere, almost new, had perhaps as much again;and the brooding indolence of a warm climate and a negro popu-lation hung in the atmosphere heavier than the catalpas. TheWashington45impression was not simple, but the boy liked it: distinctly it re-mained on his mind as an attraction, almost obscuring Quincyitself. The want of barriers, of pavements, of forms; the loose-ness, the laziness; the indolent Southern drawl; the pigs in thestreets; the negro babies and their mothers with bandanas; thefreedom, openness, swagger, of nature and man, soothed hisJohnson blood. Most boys would have felt it in the same way,but with him the feeling caught on to an inheritance. The soft-ness of his gentle old grandmother as she lay in bed and chattedwith him, did not come from Boston. His aunt was anythingrather than Bostonian. He did not wholly come from Bostonhimself. Though Washington belonged to a different world, andthe two worlds could not live together, he was not sure that heenjoyed the Boston world most. Even at twelve years old he couldsee his own nature no more clearly than he would at twelve hun-dred, if by accident he should happen to live so long.His father took him to the Capitol and on the floor of the Sen-ate, which then, and long afterwards, until the era of tourists,was freely open to visitors. The old Senate Chamber resembleda pleasant political club. Standing behind the Vice-President'schair, which is now the Chief Justice's, the boy was presented tosome of the men whose names were great in their day, and asfamiliar to him as his own. Clay and Webster and Calhoun werethere still, but with them a Free Soil candidate for the Vice-Presi-dency had little to do; what struck boys most was their type.Senators were a species ; they all wore an air, as they wore a bluedress coat or brass buttons; they were Roman. The type ofSenator in 1850 was rather charming at its best, and the Senate,when in good temper, was an agreeable body, numbering onlysome sixty members, and affecting the airs of courtesy. Its vicewas not so much a vice of manners or temper as of attitude. Thestatesman of all periods was apt to be pompous, but even pom-posity was less offensive than familiarity — on the platform asin the pulpit — and Southern pomposity, when not arrogant, was46The Education of Henry Adamsgenial and sympathetic, almost quaint and childlike in its simple-mindedness; quite a different thing from the Websterian or Conk-linian pomposity of the North. The boy felt at ease there, moreat home than he had ever felt in Boston State House, though hisacquaintance with the codfish in the House of Representativeswent back beyond distinct recollection. Senators spoke kindlyto him, and seemed to feel so, for they had known his family so-cially; and, in spite of slavery, even J. Q. Adams in his later years,after he ceased to stand in the way of rivals, had few personalDecidedly the Senate, pro-slavery though it were,enemies.seemed a friendly world.This first step in national politics was a little like the walk be-fore breakfast; an easy, careless, genial, enlarging stride into afresh and amusing world, where nothing was finished, but whereeven the weeds grew rank. The second step was like the first,except that it led to the White House. He was taken to see Presi-dent Taylor. Outside, in a paddock in front, "Old Whitey," thePresident's charger, was grazing, as they entered; and inside, thePresident was receiving callers as simply as if he were in the pad-dock too. The President was friendly, and the boy felt no sense ofstrangeness that he could ever recall. In fact, what strangenessshould he feel? The families were intimate; so intimate that theirfriendliness outlived generations, civil war, and all sorts of rupture.President Taylor owed his election to Martin Van Buren and theFree Soil Party. To him, the Adamses might still be of use. Asfor the White House, all the boy's family had lived there, and,barring the eight years of Andrew Jackson's reign, had been moreor less at home there ever since it was built. The boy half thoughthe owned it, and took for granted that he should some day live init. He felt no sensation whatever before Presidents. A Presidentwas a matter of course in every respectable family; he had twoin his own; three, if he counted old Nathaniel Gorham, who,was the oldest and first in distinction. Revolutionary patriots,or perhaps a Colonial Governor, might be worth talking about,Washington47but any one could be President, and some very shady characterswere likely to be. Presidents, Senators, Congressmen, and suchthings were swarming in every street.Every one thought alike whether they had ancestors or not.No sort of glory hedged Presidents as such, and, in the wholecountry, one could hardly have met with an admission of respectfor any office or name, unless it were George Washington. Thatwas — to all appearance sincerely — respected. People made pil-grimages to Mount Vernon and made even an effort to buildWashington a monument. The effort had failed, but one stillwent to Mount Vernon, although it was no easy trip. Mr. Adamstook the boy there in a carriage and pair, over a road that gavehim a complete Virginia education for use ten years afterwards.To the New England mind, roads, schools, clothes, and a cleanface were connected as part of the law of order or divine system.Bad roads meant bad morals. The moral of this Virginia road wasclear, and the boy fully learned it.Slavery was wicked, andslavery was the cause of this road's badness which amounted tosocial crime — and yet, at the end of the road and product ofthe crime stood Mount Vernon and George Washington.Luckily boys accept contradictions as readily as their elders do,or this boy might have become prematurely wise. He had only torepeat what he was told — that George Washington stood alone.Otherwise this third step in his Washington education would havebeen his last. On that line, the problem of progress was notsoluble, whatever the optimists and orators might say — or, forthat matter, whatever they might think. George Washingtoncould not be reached on Boston lines. George Washington was aprimary, or, if Virginians liked it better, an ultimate relation, likethe Pole Star, and amid the endless restless motion of every othervisible point in space, he alone remained steady, in the mind ofHenry Adams, to the end.All the other points shifted theirbearings; John Adams, Jefferson, Madison, Franklin, even JohnMarshall, took varied lights, and assumed new relations, but48The Education of Henry AdamsMount Vernon always remained where it was, with no practicableroad to reach it; and yet, when he got there, Mount Vernon wasonly Quincy in a Southern setting. No doubt it was much morecharming, but it was the same eighteenth-century, the same oldfurniture, the same old patriot, and the same old President.The boy took to it instinctively. The broad Potomac and thecoons in the trees, the bandanas and the box-hedges, the bedroomsupstairs and the porch outside, even Martha Washington herselfin memory, were as natural as the tides and the May sunshine;he had only enlarged his horizon a little; but he never thought toask himself or his father how to deal with the moral problem thatdeduced George Washington from the sum of all wickedness. Inpractice, such trifles as contradictions in principle are easily setaside; the faculty of ignoring them makes the practical man; butany attempt to deal with them seriously as education is fatal.Luckily Charles Francis Adams never preached and was singu-larly free from cant. He may have had views of his own, but helet his son Henry satisfy himself with the simple elementary factthat George Washington stood alone.Life was not yet complicated. Every problem had a solution,even the negro. The boy went back to Boston more political thanever, and his politics were no longer so modern as the eighteenthcentury, but took a strong tone of the seventeenth.Slaverydrove the whole Puritan community back on its Puritanism. Theboy thought as dogmatically as though he were one of his ownancestors. The Slave power took the place of Stuart kings andRoman popes. Education could go no further in that course, andran off into emotion; but, as the boy gradually found his surround-ings change, and felt himself no longer an isolated atom in a hostileuniverse, but a sort of herring-fry in a shoal of moving fish, hebegan to learn the first and easier lessons of practical politics.Thus far he had seen nothing but eighteenth-century statesman-ship. America and he began, at the same time, to become awareof a new force under the innocent surface of party machinery.Washington49Even at that early moment, a rather slow boy felt dimly consciousthat he might meet some personal difficulties in trying to reconcilesixteenth-century principles and eighteenth-century statesmanshipwith late nineteenth-century party organization. The first vaguesense of feeling an unknown living obstacle in the dark came in1851.The Free Soil conclave in Mount Vernon Street belonged, asalready said, to the statesman class, and, like Daniel Webster,had nothing to do with machinery. Websters or Sewards dependedon others for machine work and money — on Peter Harveys andThurlow Weeds, who spent their lives in it, took most of the abuse,and asked no reward. Almost without knowing it, the subordin-ates ousted their employers and created a machine which no onebut themselves could run. In 1850 things had not quite reachedthat point. The men who ran the small Free Soil machine werestill modest, though they became famous enough in their ownright. Henry Wilson, John B. Alley, Anson Burlingame, and theother managers, negotiated a bargain with the MassachusettsDemocrats giving the State to the Democrats and a seat in theSenate to the Free Soilers. With this bargain Mr. Adams and hisstatesman friends would have nothing to do, for such a coalitionwas in their eyes much like jockeys selling a race. They did notcare to take office as pay for votes sold to pro-slavery Democrats.Theirs was a correct, not to say noble, position; but, as a matterof fact, they took the benefit of the sale, for the coalition choseCharles Sumner as its candidate for the Senate, while George S.Boutwell was made Governor for the Democrats. This was theboy's first lesson in practical politics, and a sharp one; not thathe troubled himself with moral doubts, but that he learned thenature of a flagrantly corrupt political bargain in which he wastoo good to take part, but not too good to take profit. CharlesSumner happened to be the partner to receive these stolen goods,but between his friend and his father the boy felt no distinction,and, for him, there was none. He entered into no casuistry on the50The Education of Henry Adamsmatter. His friend was right because his friend, and the boyshared the glory. The question of education did not rise while theconflict lasted. Yet every one saw as clearly then as afterwardsthat a lesson of some sort must be learned and understood, oncefor all. The boy might ignore, as a mere historical puzzle, thequestion how to deduce George Washington from the sum of allwickedness, but he had himself helped to deduce Charles Sumnerfrom the sum of political corruption. On that line, too, educationcould go no further. Tammany Hall stood at the end of the vista.Mr. Alley, one of the strictest of moralists, held that his objectin making the bargain was to convert the Democratic Party toanti-slavery principles, and that he did it. Henry Adams couldrise to no such moral elevation. He was only a boy, and his objectin supporting the coalition was that of making his friend a Sen-ator. It was as personal as though he had helped to make his frienda millionaire. He could never find a way of escaping immoralconclusions, except by admitting that he and his father andSumner were wrong, and this he was never willing to do, for theconsequences of this admission were worse than those of the other.Thus, before he was fifteen years old, he had managed to get him-self into a state of moral confusion from which he never escaped.As a politician, he was already corrupt, and he never could seehow any practical politician could be less corrupt than himself.Apology, as he understood himself, was cant or cowardice. Atthe time he never even dreamed that he needed to apologize,though the press shouted it at him from every corner, and thoughthe Mount Vernon Street conclave agreed with the press; yethe could not plead ignorance, and even in the heat of the conflict,he never cared to defend the coalition. Boy as he was, he knewenough to know that something was wrong, but his only interestwas the election. Day after day, the General Court balloted;and the boy haunted the gallery, following the roll-call, and won-dered what Caleb Cushing meant by calling Mr. Sumner a "one-eyed abolitionist." Truly the difference in meaning with the phraseWashington15"one-ideaed abolitionist," which was Mr. Cushing's actual ex-pression, is not very great, but neither the one nor the other seemedto describe Mr. Sumner to the boy, who never could have madethe error of classing Garrison and Sumner together, or mistakingCaleb Cushing's relation to either. Temper ran high at thatmoment, while Sumner every day missed his election by only oneor two votes. At last, April 24, 185 1, standing among the silentcrowd in the gallery, Henry heard the vote announced which gaveSumner the needed number. Slipping under the arms of the by-standers, he ran home as hard as he could, and burst into the dining-room where Mr. Sumner was seated at table with the family. Heenjoyed the glory of telling Sumner that he was elected; it wasprobably the proudest moment in the life of either.The next day, when the boy went to school, he noticed numbersof boys and men in the streets wearing black crape on their arm.He knew few Free Soil boys in Boston; his acquaintances werewhat he called pro-slavery; so he thought proper to tie a bit ofwhite silk ribbon round his own arm by way of showing that hisfriend Mr. Sumner was not wholly alone. This little piece ofbravado passed unnoticed; no one even cuffed his ears; but inlater life he was a little puzzled to decide which symbol was themore correct. No one then dreamed of four years' war, but everyone dreamed of secession. The symbol for either might well bematter of doubt.This triumph of the Mount Vernon Street conclave capped thepolitical climax. The boy, like a million other American boys, wasa politician, and what was worse, fit as yet to be nothing else.He should have been, like his grandfather, a protege of GeorgeWashington, a statesman designated by destiny, with nothingto do but look directly ahead, follow orders, and march. On thecontrary, he was not even a Bostonian; he felt himself shut outof Boston as though he were an exile; he never thought of himselfas a Bostonian; he never looked about him in Boston, as boyscommonly do wherever they are, to select the street they like best,52The Education of Henry Adamsthe house they want to live in, the profession they mean to prac-tise. Always he felt himself somewhere else; perhaps in Washing-ton with its social ease; perhaps in Europe; and he watched withvague unrest from the Quincy hills the smoke of the Cunardsteamers stretching in a long line to the horizon, and disappearingevery other Saturday or whatever the day might be, as though thesteamers were offering to take him away, which was precisely whatthey were doing.Had these ideas been unreasonable, influences enough were athand to correct them; but the point of the whole story, whenHenry Adams came to look back on it, seemed to be that the ideaswere more than reasonable; they were the logical, necessary, mathe-matical result of conditions old as history and fixed as fate —invariable sequence in man's experience. The only idea whichwould have been quite unreasonable scarcely entered his mind.This was the thought of going westward and growing up with thecountry. That he was not in the least fitted for going West madeno objection whatever, since he was much better fitted than mostof the persons that went. The convincing reason for staying inthe East was that he had there every advantage over the West.He could not go wrong. The West must inevitably pay an enor-mous tribute to Boston and New York. One's position in the Eastwas the best in the world for every purpose that could offer anobject for going westward. If ever in history men had been ableto calculate on a certainty for a lifetime in advance, the citizensof the great Eastern seaports could do it in 1850 when their railwaysystems were already laid out. Neither to a politician nor to abusiness-man nor to any of the learned professions did the Westpromise any certain advantage, while it offered uncertainties inplenty.At any other moment in human history, this education, includ-ing its political and literary bias, would have been not only good,but quite the best. Society had always welcomed and flattered menso endowed. Henry Adams had every reason to be well pleasedWashington5 3with it, and not ill-pleased with himself. He had all he wanted.He saw no reason for thinking that any one else had more. Hefinished with school, not very brilliantly, but without finding faultwith the sum of his knowledge. Probably he knew more than hisfather, or his grandfather, or his great-grandfather had knownat sixteen years old. Only on looking back, fifty years later, athis own figure in 1854, and pondering on the needs of the twen-tieth century, he wondered whether, on the whole, the boy of 1854stood nearer to the thought of 1904, or to that of the year 1. Hefound himself unable to give a sure answer. The calculation wasclouded by the undetermined values of twentieth-century thought,but the story will show his reasons for thinking that, in .essentialslike religion, ethics, philosophy; in history, literature, art; in theconcepts of all science, except perhaps mathematics, the Americanboy of 1854 stood nearer the year 1 than to the year 1900. Theeducation he had received bore little relation to the education heneeded. Speaking as an American of 1900, he had as yet no edu-cation at all. He knew not even where or how to begin.