CHAPTER XIIECCENTRICITY (1863)KNOWLEDGE of human nature is the beginning and endof political education, but several years of arduousstudy in the neighborhood of Westminster led HenryAdams to think that knowledge of English human nature hadlittle or no value outside of England. In Paris, such a habit stoodin one's way; in America, it roused all the instincts of nativejealousy. The English mind was one-sided, eccentric, systemati-cally unsystematic, and logically illogical. The less one knew ofit, the better.This heresy, which scarcely would have been allowed to pene-trate a Boston mind — it would, indeed, have been shut out byinstinct as a rather foolish exaggeration — rested on an experi-ence which Henry Adams gravely thought he had a right to thinkconclusive — for him. That it should be conclusive for any oneanybody else. For him — alone — the less English education heelse never occurred to him, since he had no thought of educatinggot, the better!For several years, under the keenest incitement to watchfulness,he observed the English mind in contact with itself and otherEspecially with the American the contact was interest-minds.ing because the limits and defects of the American mind were oneof the favorite topics of the European. From the old-world pointof view, the American had no mind; he had an economic think-ing-machine which could work only on a fixed line. The Americanmind exasperated the European as a buzz-saw might exasperatea pine forest. The English mind disliked the French mind be-cause it was antagonistic, unreasonable, perhaps hostile, but rec-ognized it as at least a thought. The American mind was nota thought at all; it was a convention, superficial, narrow, aridEccentricityi 8 iignorant; a mere cutting instrument, practical, economical, sharp,and direct.The English themselves hardly conceived that their mind waseither economical, sharp, or direct; but the defect that moststruck an American was its enormous waste in eccentricity.Americans needed and used their whole energy, and applied itwith close economy; but English society was eccentric by law andfor sake of the eccentricity itself.The commonest phrase overheard at an English club or din-ner-table was that So-and-So "is quite mad." It was no offenceto So-and-So; it hardly distinguished him from his fellows; andwhen applied to a public man, like Gladstone, it was qualifiedby epithets much more forcible. Eccentricity was so general asto become hereditary distinction. It made the chief charm of Eng-lish society as well as its chief terror.The American delighted in Thackeray as a satirist, but Thack-eray quite justly maintained that he was not a satirist at all, andthat his pictures of English society were exact and good-natured.The American, who could not believe it, fell back on Dickens, who,at all events, had the vice of exaggeration to extravagance, butDickens's English audience thought the exaggeration rather inmanner or style, than in types. Mr. Gladstone himself went tosee Sothern act Dundreary, and laughed till his face was dis-torted — not because Dundreary was exaggerated, but becausehe was ridiculously like the types that Gladstone had seen — ormight have seen — in any club in Pall Mall.Society swarmedwith exaggerated characters; it contained little else.Often this eccentricity bore all the marks of strength; perhapsit was actual exuberance of force, a birthmark of genius. Bostonthought so. The Bostonian called it national character — na-tive vigor — robustness — honesty — courage. He respected andBritish self-assertion, bluff, brutal, blunt as it was,feared it.seemed to him a better and nobler thing than the acuteness ofthe Yankee or the polish of the Parisian. Perhaps he was right.1 82The Education of Henry AdamsThese questions of taste, of feeling, of inheritance, need no settle-ment. Every one carries his own inch-rule of taste, and amuseshimself by applying it, triumphantly, wherever he travels. What-ever others thought, the cleverest Englishmen held that the na-tional eccentricity needed correction, and were beginning to cor-rect it. The savage satires of Dickens and the gentler ridicule ofMatthew Arnold against the British middle class were but a part ofthe rebellion, for the middle class were no worse than their neigh-bors in the eyes of an American in 1863; they were even a verylittle better in the sense that one could appeal to their interests,while a university man, like Gladstone, stood outside of argument.From none of them could a young American afford to borrow ideas.The private secretary, like every other Bostonian, began byregarding British eccentricity as a force. Contact with it, in theshape of Palmerston, Russell, and Gladstone, made him hesitate;he saw his own national type — his father, Weed, Evarts, forinstance — deal with the British, and show itself certainly notthe weaker; certainly sometimes the stronger. Biassed thoughhe were, he could hardly be biassed to such a degree as to mistakethe effects of force on others, and while — labor as he might —Earl Russell and his state papers seemed weak to a secretary, hecould not see that they seemed strong to Russell's own followers.Russell might be dishonest or he might be merely obtuse —• theEnglish type might be brutal or might be only stupid— but strong,in either case, it was not, nor did it seem strong to Englishmen.Eccentricity was not always a force; Americans were deeply in-terested in deciding whether it was always a weakness. Evidently,on the hustings or in Parliament, among eccentricities, eccentricitywas at home; but in private society the question was not easy toanswer. That English society was infinitely more amusing becauseof its eccentricities, no one denied. Barring the atrocious insolenceand brutality which Englishmen and especially Englishwomenshowed to each other — very rarely, indeed, to foreigners —English society was much more easy and tolerant than American.Eccentricity183One must expect to be treated with exquisite courtesy this weekand be totally forgotten the next, but this was the way of theworld, and education consisted in learning to turn one's back onothers with the same unconscious indifference that others showedamong themselves. The smart of wounded vanity lasted no longtime with a young man about town who had little vanity to smart,and who, in his own country, would have found himself in no bet-ter position. He had nothing to complain of. No one was everbrutal to him. On the contrary, he was much better treated thanever he was likely to be in Boston — let alone New York or Wash-ington — and if his reception varied inconceivably between ex-treme courtesy and extreme neglect, it merely proved that he hadbecome, or was becoming, at home. Not from a sense of personalgriefs or disappointments did he labor over this part of the socialproblem, but only because his education was becoming English,and the further it went, the less it promised.in the Southern Confederacy because of its combined attributesBy natural affinity the social eccentrics commonly sympa-thized with political eccentricity. The English mind took naturallyto rebellion — when foreign — and it felt particular confidence— foreign rebellion of English blood — which came nearer idealeccentricity than could be reached by Poles, Hungarians, Ital-ians or Frenchmen. All the English eccentrics rushed into theranks of rebel sympathizers, leaving few but well-balanced mindsto attach themselves to the cause of the Union. None of theEnglish leaders on the Northern side were marked eccentrics. Wil-liam E. Forster was a practical, hard-headed Yorkshireman, whosechief ideals in politics took shape as working arrangements on aneconomical base. Cobden, considering the one-sided conditions ofhis life, was remarkably well balanced. John Bright was strongerin his expressions than either of them, but with allhis self-assertion he stuck to his point, and his point was practical. Hedid not, like Gladstone, box the compass of thought; "furiouslyearnest," as Monckton Milnes said, "on both sides of every184The Education of Henry Adamsquestion " ; he was rather, on the whole, a consistent conservativeof the old Commonwealth type, and seldom had to defend in-consistencies. Monckton Milnes himself was regarded as an ec-centric, chiefly by those who did not know him, but his fanciesand hobbies were only ideas a little in advance of the time; hismanner was eccentric, but not his mind, as any one could seewho read a page of his poetry. None of them, except Milnes, wasa university man. As a rule, the Legation was troubled very little,if at all, by indiscretions, extravagances, or contradictions amongits English friends. Their work was largely judicious, practical,well considered, and almost too cautious. The "cranks" were allrebels, and the list was portentous. Perhaps it might be headedby old Lord Brougham, who had the audacity to appear at aJuly 4th reception at the Legation, led by Joe Parkes, and claimhis old credit as "Attorney General to Mr. Madison." The Churchwas rebel, but the dissenters were mostly with the Union. Theuniversities were rebel, but the university men who enjoyed mostpublic confidence — like Lord Granville, Sir George CornewallLewis, Lord Stanley, Sir George Grey — took infinite pains to beneutral for fear of being thought eccentric. To most observers,as well as to the Times, the Morning Post, and the Standard, avast majority of the English people seemed to follow the profes-sional eccentrics ; even the emotional philanthropists took that di-rection; Lord Shaftesbury and Carlyle, Fowell Buxton, and Glad-stone, threw their sympathies on the side which they shouldnaturally have opposed, and did so for no reason except theireccentricity; but the "canny" Scots and Yorkshiremen werecautious.This eccentricity did not mean strength. The proof of it wasthe mismanagement of the rebel interests. No doubt the firstcause of this trouble lay in the Richmond Government itself. Noone understood why Jefferson Davis chose Mr. Mason as his agentfor London at the same time that he made so good a choice asMr. Slidell for Paris. The Confederacy had plenty of excellentEccentricity185men to send to London, but few who were less fitted than Mason.Possibly Mason had a certain amount of common sense, but heseemed to have nothing else, and in London society he countedmerely as one eccentric more. He enjoyed a great opportunity;he might even have figured as a new Benjamin Franklin with allsociety at his feet; he might have roared as lion of the season andmade the social path of the American Minister almost impassable;but Mr. Adams had his usual luck in enemies, who were always hismost valuable allies if his friends only let them alone. Masonwas his greatest diplomatic triumph. He had his collision withPalmerston; he drove Russell off the field; he swept the boardbefore Cockburn; he overbore Slidell; but he never lifted a fingeragainst Mason, who became his bulwark of defence.Possibly Jefferson Davis and Mr. Mason shared two defects incommon which might have led them into this serious mistake.Neither could have had much knowledge of the world, and bothmust have been unconscious of humor. Yet at the same time withMason, President Davis sent out Slidell to France and Mr. Lamarto Russia. Some twenty years later, in the shifting search forthe education he never found, Adams became closely intimate atWashington with Lamar, then Senator from Mississippi, who hadgrown to be one of the calmest, most reasonable and most amiableUnion men in the United States, and quite unusual in social charm.In i860 he passed for the worst of Southern fire-eaters, but he wasan eccentric by environment, not by nature; above all his South-ern eccentricities, he had tact and humor; and perhaps this wasa reason why Mr. Davis sent him abroad with the others, on afutile mission to St. Petersburg. He would have done betterin London, in place of Mason. London society would have de-lighted in him; his stories would have won success; his mannerswould have made him loved; his oratory would have swept everyaudience; even Monckton Milnes could never have resisted thetemptation of having him to breakfast between Lord Shaftesburyand the Bishop of Oxford.1 86The Education of Henry AdamsLamar liked to talk of his brief career in diplomacy, but henever spoke of Mason. He never alluded to Confederate manage-ment or criticised Jefferson Davis's administration. The subjectthat amused him was his English allies. At that moment — theearly summer of 1863 — the rebel party in England were full ofconfidence, and felt strong enough to challenge the AmericanLegation to a show of power. They knew better than the Lega-tion what they could depend upon: that the law officers and com-missioners of customs at Liverpool dared not prosecute the iron-clad ships; that Palmerston, Russell, and Gladstone were readyto recognize the Confederacy; that the Emperor Napoleon wouldoffer them every inducement to do it. In a manner they ownedLiverpool and especially the firm of Laird who were building theirThe political member of the Laird firm was Lindsay,about whom the whole web of rebel interests clung — rams, cruis-ers, munitions, and Confederate loan; social introductions andparliamentary tactics. The firm of Laird, with a certain dignity,claimed to be champion of England's navy; and public opinion,in the summer of 1863, still inclined towards them.ships.Never was there a moment when eccentricity, if it were a force,should have had more value to the rebel interest; and the mana-gers must have thought so, for they adopted or accepted as theirchampion an eccentric of eccentrics; a type of 1820; a sort of Broug-ham of Sheffield, notorious for poor judgment and worse temper.Mr. Roebuck had been a tribune of the people, and, like tribunesof most other peoples, in growing old, had grown fatuous. He wasregarded by the friends of the Union as rather a comical person-age — a favorite subject for Punch to laugh at — with a bittertongue and a mind enfeebled even more than common by theIn all England they could havepolitical epidemic of egotism.found no opponent better fitted to give away his own case. NoAmerican man of business would have paid him attention; yetthe Lairds, who certainly knew their own affairs best, let Roebuckrepresent them and take charge of their interests.Eccentricity187With Roebuck's doings, the private secretary had no concernexcept that the Minister sent him down to the House of Com-mons on June 30, 1863, to report the result of Roebuck's motionto recognize the Southern Confederacy. The Legation felt noanxiety, having Vicksburg already in its pocket, and Bright andForster to say so; but the private secretary went down and wasadmitted under the gallery on the left, to listen, with great content,while John Bright, with astonishing force, caught and shook andtossed Roebuck, as a big mastiff shakes a wiry, ill-conditioned,toothless, bad-tempered Yorkshire terrier. The private secretaryfelt an artistic sympathy with Roebuck, for, from time to time,by way of practice, Bright in a friendly way was apt to shake himtoo, and he knew how it was done. The manner counted for morethan the words. The scene was interesting, but the result was notin doubt.All the more sharply he was excited, near the year 1879, inWashington, by hearing Lamar begin a story after dinner, which,little by little, became dramatic, recalling the scene in the Houseof Commons. The story, as well as one remembered, began withLamar's failure to reach St. Petersburg at all, and his consequentdetention in Paris waiting instructions. The motion to recognizethe Confederacy was about to be made, and, in prospect of thedebate, Mr. Lindsay collected a party at his villa on the Thamesto bring the rebel agents into relations with Roebuck. Lamar wassent for, and came. After much conversation of a general sort,such as is the usual object or resource of the English Sunday, find-ing himself alone with Roebuck, Lamar, by way of showing inter-est, bethought himself of John Bright and asked Roebuck whetherhe expected Bright to take part in the debate: "No, sir!" saidRoebuck sententiously; "Bright and I have met before.It wasthe old story — the story of the sword-fish and the whale! No,sir! Mr. Bright will not cross swords with me again!"Thus assured, Lamar went with the more confidence to theHouse on the appointed evening, and was placed under the gallery,1 88The Education of Henry Adamson the right, where he listened to Roebuck and followed the debatewith such enjoyment as an experienced debater feels in these con-tests, until, as he said, he became aware that a man, with a singu-larly rich voice and imposing manner, had taken the floor, andwas giving Roebuck the most deliberate and tremendous poundinghe ever witnessed, "until at last," concluded Lamar, "it dawnedon my mind that the sword-fish was getting the worst of it."Lamar told the story in the spirit of a joke against himself ratherthan against Roebuck; but such jokes must have been unpleasantlycommon in the experience of the rebel agents. They were sur-rounded by cranks of the worst English species, who distortedtheir natural eccentricities and perverted their judgment. Roe-buck may have been an extreme case, since he was actually in hisdotage, yet this did not prevent the Lairds from accepting his lead,or the House from taking him seriously. Extreme eccentricity wasno bar, in England, to extreme confidence; sometimes it seemeda recommendation; and unless it caused financial loss, it ratherhelped popularity."°The question whether British eccentricity was ever strengthweighed heavily in the balance of education. That Roebuck shouldmislead the rebel agents on so strange a point as that of B right'scourage was doubly characteristic because the Southern peoplethemselves had this same barbaric weakness of attributing wantof courage to opponents, and owed their ruin chiefly to such igno-rance of the world. Bright's courage was almost as irrational asthat of the rebels themselves. Every one knew that he had thecourage of a prize-fighter. He struck, in succession, pretty nearlyevery man in England that could be reached by a blow, and whenhe could not reach the individual he struck the class, or when theclass was too small for him, the whole people of England. Attimes he had the whole country on his back. He could not act onthe defensive; his mind required attack. Even among friends atthe dinner-table he talked as though he were denouncing them, orsome one else, on a platform; he measured his phrases, built hisEccentricity189sentences, cumulated his effects, and pounded his opponents, realor imagined. His humor was glow, like iron at dull heat; his blowwas elementary, like the thrash of a whale.One day in early spring, March 26, 1863, the Minister requestedhis private secretary to attend a Trades-Union Meeting at St.James's Hall, which was the result of Professor Beesly's patientefforts to unite Bright and the Trades-Unions on an Americanplatform. The secretary went to the meeting and made a reportwhich reposes somewhere on file in the State Department to thisday, as harmless as such reports should be; but it contained no men-tion of what interested young Adams most— B right's psychology.With singular skill and oratorical power, Bright managed at theoutset, in his opening paragraph, to insult or outrage every classof Englishman commonly considered respectable, and, for fearof any escaping, he insulted them repeatedly under consecutiveheads. The rhetorical effect was tremendous : —"Privilege thinks it has a great interest in the American con-test," he began in his massive, deliberate tones; "and every morn-ing with blatant voice, it comes into our streets and curses theAmerican Republic. Privilege has beheld an afflicting spectaclefor many years past. It has beheld thirty million of men happyand prosperous, without emperors — without king {cheers) —without the surroundings of a court {renewed cheers) — withoutnobles, except such as are made by eminence in intellect andvirtue — without State bishops and State priests, those vendorsof the love that works salvation {cheers) — without great armiesand great navies — without a great debt and great taxes — andPrivilege has shuddered at what might happen to old Europe ifthis great experiment should succeed."\An ingenious man, with an inventive mind, might have man-aged, in the same number of lines, to offend more Englishmen thanBright struck in this sentence; but he must have betrayed artificeand hurt his oratory. The audience cheered furiously, and theprivate secretary felt peace in his much troubled mind, for he knew190The Education of Henry Adamshow careful the Ministry would be, once they saw Bright talkrepublican principles before Trades-Unions; but, while he did not,like Roebuck, see reason to doubt the courage of a man who, afterquarrelling with the Trades-Unions, quarreled with all the worldoutside the Trades-Unions, he did feel a doubt whether to classBright as eccentric or conventional. Every one called Bright "un-English," from Lord Palmerston to William E. Forster; but to anAmerican he seemed more English than any of his critics. He wasa liberal hater, and what he hated he reviled after the manner ofMilton, but he was afraid of no one. He was almost the only manin England, or, for that matter, in Europe, who hated Palmerstonand was not afraid of him, or of the press or the pulpit, the clubsor the bench, that stood behind him. He loathed the whole fabricof sham religion, sham loyalty, sham aristocracy, and sham social-ism. He had the British weakness of believing only in himself andhis own conventions. In all this, an American saw, if one may makethe distinction, much racial eccentricity, but little that was per-sonal. Bright was singularly well poised; but he used singularlystrong language.Long afterwards, in 1880, Adams happened to be living again inLondon for a season, when James Russell Lowell was transferredthere as Minister; and as Adams's relations with Lowell had be-come closer and more intimate with years, he wanted the newMinister to know some of his old friends. Bright was then in theCabinet, and no longer the most radical member even there, buthe was still a rare figure in society. He came to dinner, along withSir Francis Doyle and Sir Robert Cunliffe, and as usual did mostof the talking. As usual also, he talked of the things most on hismind. Apparently it must have been some reform of the criminallaw which the Judges opposed, that excited him, for at the end ofdinner, over the wine, he took possession of the table in his oldway, and ended with a superb denunciation of the Bench, spokenin his massive manner, as though every word were a hammer,smashing what it struck: —Eccentricity191"For two hundred years, the Judges of England sat on theBench, condemning to the penalty of death every man, woman,and child who stole property to the value of five shillings; and,during all that time, not one Judge ever remonstrated against thelaw. We English are a nation of brutes, and ought to be extermi-nated to the last man."As the party rose from table and passed into the drawing-room,Adams said to Lowell that Bright was very fine. "Yes!" repliedLowell; "but too violent!"Precisely this was the point that Adams doubted. Bright knewhis Englishmen better than Lowell did — better than England did.He knew what amount of violence in language was necessary todrive an idea into a Lancashire or Yorkshire head. He knew thatno violence was enough to affect a Somersetshire or Wiltshirepeasant. Bright kept his own head cool and clear. He was notexcited; he never betrayed excitement. As for his denunciationof the English Bench, it was a very old story, not original withhim. That the English were a nation of brutes was a commonplacegenerally admitted by Englishmen and universally accepted byforeigners; while the matter of their extermination could be treatedonly as unpractical, on their deserts, because they were probablynot very much worse than their neighbors. Had Bright said thatthe French, Spaniards, Germans, or Russians were a nation ofbrutes and ought to be exterminated, no one would have foundfault; the whole human race, according to the highest authority,has been exterminated once already for the same reason, and onlythe rainbow protects them from a repetition of it. What shockedLowell was that he denounced his own people.Adams felt no moral obligation to defend Judges, who, as far ashe knew, were the only class of society specially adapted to defendthemselves; but he was curious — even anxious — as a point ofeducation, to decide for himself whether Bright's language wasviolent for its purpose. He thought not. Perhaps Cobden didbetter by persuasion, but that was another matter. Of course,192The Education of Henry Adamseven Englishmen sometimes complained of being so constantly-told that they were brutes and hypocrites, although they weretold little else by their censors, and bore it, on the whole, meekly;but the fact that it was true in the main troubled the ten-poundvoter much less than it troubled Newman, Gladstone, Ruskin,Carlyle, and Matthew Arnold. Bright was personally disliked byhis victims, but not distrusted. They never doubted what hewould do next, as they did with John Russell, Gladstone, andDisraeli. He betrayed no one, and he never advanced an opinionin practical matters which did not prove to be practical.The class of Englishmen who set out to be the intellectual oppo-sites of Bright, seemed to an American bystander the weakest andmost eccentric of all. These were the trimmers, the political econ-omists, the anti-slavery and doctrinaire class, the followers of deTocqueville, and of John Stuart Mill. As a class, they were timid— with good reason — and timidity, which is high wisdom in phi-losophy, sicklies the whole cast of thought in action. Numbers ofthese men haunted London society, all tending to free-thinking, butnever venturing much freedom of thought. Like the anti-slaverydoctrinaires of the forties and fifties, they became mute and uselesswhen slavery struck them in the face. For type of these eccentrics,literature seems to have chosen Henry Reeve, at least to the extentof biography. He was a bulky figure in society, always friendly,good-natured, obliging, and useful; almost as universal as Milnesand more busy. As editor of the Edinburgh Review he had author-ity and even power, although the Review and the whole Whigdoctrinaire school had begun — as the French say — to date;and of course the literary and artistic sharpshooters of 1867 —like Frank Palgrave — frothed and foamed at the mere mentionof Reeve's name. Three-fourths of their fury was due only to hisponderous manner. London society abused its rights of personalcriticism by fixing on every too conspicuous figure some word orphrase that stuck to it. Every one had heard of Mrs. Grote as"the origin of the word grotesque." Every one had laughed atEccentricity193the story of Reeve approaching Mrs. Grote, with his usual some-what florid manner, asking in his literary dialect how her husbandthe historian was: "And how is the learned Grotius?" "Prettywell, thank you, Puffendorf !" One winced at the word, as thoughit were a drawing of Forain.No one would have been more shocked than Reeve had he beencharged with want of moral courage. He proved his courage after-wards by publishing the "Greville Memoirs," braving the dis-pleasure of the Queen. Yet the Edinburgh Review and its editoravoided taking sides except where sides were already fixed. Amer-icanism would have been bad form in the liberal Edinburgh Review;it would have seemed eccentric even for a Scotchman, and Reevewas a Saxon of Saxons. To an American this attitude of oscillat-ing reserve seemed more eccentric than the reckless hostility ofBrougham or Carlyle, and more mischievous, for he never could besure what preposterous commonplace it might encourage.The sum of these experiences in 1863 left the conviction thateccentricity was weakness. The young American who shouldadopt English thought was lost. From the facts, the conclusionwas correct, yet, as usual, the conclusion was wrong. The yearsof Palmerston's last Cabinet, 1859 to 1865, were avowedly yearsof truce — of arrested development. The British system like theFrench, was in its last stage of decomposition. Never had theBritish mind shown itself so decousu — so unravelled, at sea,floundering in every sort of historical shipwreck. Eccentricitieshad a free field. Contradictions swarmed in State and Church.England devoted thirty years of arduous labor to clearing awayonly a part of the debris. A young American in 1 863 could see lit-tle or nothing of the future. He might dream, but he could notforetell, the suddenness with which the old Europe, with Englandin its wake, was to vanish in 1870. He was in dead-water, andthe parti-colored, fantastic cranks swam about his boat, as thoughhe were the ancient mariner, and they saurians of the prime.