CHAPTER XITHE BATTLE OF THE RAMS (1863)MINISTER ADAMS troubled himself little about whathe did not see of an enemy. His son, a nervous ani-mal, made life a terror by seeing too much. MinisterAdams played his hand as it came, and seldom credited his oppo-nents with greater intelligence than his own. Earl Russell suitedhim; perhaps a certain personal sympathy united them; and in-deed Henry Adams never saw Russell without being amused byhis droll likeness to John Quincy Adams. Apart from this shad-owy personal relation, no doubt the Minister was diplomaticallyright; he had nothing to lose and everything to gain by making afriend of the Foreign Secretary, and whether Russell were true orfalse mattered less, because, in either case, the American Lega-tion could act only as though he were false. Had the Ministerknown Russell's determined effort to betray and ruin him in Oc-tober, 1862, he could have scarcely used stronger expressions thanRussell must have been greatly annoyed by Sirhe did in 1863.Robert Collier's hint of collusion with the rebel agents in theAlabama Case, but he hardened himself to hear the same innu-endo repeated in nearly every note from the Legation. As time wenton, Russell was compelled, though slowly, to treat the Ameri-can Minister as serious. He admitted nothing so unwillingly, forthe nullity or fatuity of the Washington Government was hisidee fixe; but after the failure of his last effort for joint interven-tion on November 12, 1862, only one week elapsed before he re-ceived a note from Minister Adams repeating his charges aboutthe Alabama, and asking in very plain language for redress.Perhaps Russell's mind was naturally slow to understand the forceof sudden attack, or perhaps age had affected it; this was one ofthe points that greatly interested a student, but young men have1 68The Education of Henry Adamsa passion for regarding their elders as senile, which was only inpart warranted in this instance by observing that Russell's gen-eration were mostly senile from youth. They had never got be-yond 1815. Both Palmerston and Russell were in this case. Theirsenility was congenital, like Gladstone's Oxford training andHigh Church illusions, which caused wild eccentricities in hisjudgment. Russell could not conceive that he had misunder-stood and mismanaged Minister Adams from the start, and when,after November 12, he found himself on the defensive, with Mr.Adams taking daily a stronger tone, he showed mere confusionand helplessness.Thus, whatever the theory, the action of diplomacy had to bethe same. Minister Adams was obliged to imply collusion betweenRussell and the rebels. He could not even stop at criminal neg-If, by an access of courtesy, the Minister were civilligence.enough to admit that the escape of the Alabama had been due tocriminal negligence, he could make no such concession in regardto the ironclad rams which the Lairds were building; for no onecould be so simple as to believe that two armored ships-of-warcould be built publicly, under the eyes of the Government, andgo to sea like the Alabama, without active and incessant collu-sion. The longer Earl Russell kept on his mask of assumed ig-norance, the more violently in the end, the Minister would haveto tear it off. Whatever Mr. Adams might personally think ofEarl Russell, he must take the greatest possible diplomatic liber-ties with him if this crisis were allowed to arrive.As the spring of 1863 drew on, the vast field cleared itself foraction. A campaign more beautiful — better suited for train-ing the mind of a youth eager for training — has not often un-rolled itself for study, from the beginning, before a young manperched in so commanding a position. Very slowly, indeed, aftertwo years of solitude, one began to feel the first faint flush ofnew and imperial life. One was twenty-five years old, and quiteready to assert it; some of one's friends were wearing stars onThe Battle of the Rams169their collars; some had won stars of a more enduring kind. AtOne began to dream themoments one's breath came quick.sensation of wielding unmeasured power. The sense came, likevertigo, for an instant, and passed, leaving the brain a littledazed, doubtful, shy. With an intensity more painful than thatof any Shakespearean drama, men's eyes were fastened on theLittle by little, at first only as a shadowyarmies in the field.chance of what might be, if things could be rightly done, onebegan to feel that, somewhere behind the chaos in Washingtonpower was taking shape; that it was massed and guided as it hadnot been before. Men seemed to have learned their business —at a cost that ruined — and perhaps too late. A private secre-tary knew better than most people how much of the new powerwas to be swung in London, and almost exactly when; but thediplomatic campaign had to wait for the military campaign tolead. The student could only study.Life never could know more than a single such climax. In thatform, education reached its limits. As the first great blows beganto fall, one curled up in bed in the silence of night, to listen withincredulous hope. As the huge masses struck, one after another,with the precision of machinery, the opposing mass, the worldshivered. Such development of power was unknown. The mag-nificent resistance and the return shocks heightened the sus-pense. During the July days Londoners were stupid with unbelief.They were learning from the Yankees how to fight.».An American saw in a flash what all this meant to England,for one's mind was working with the acceleration of the machineat home; but Englishmen were not quick to see their blunders. Onehad ample time to watch the process, and had even a little time togloat over the repayment of old scores. News of Vicksburg andGettysburg reached London one Sunday afternoon, and it hap-pened that Henry Adams was asked for that evening to somesmall reception at the house of Monckton Milnes. He went earlyin order to exchange a word or two of congratulation before the170The Education of Henry Adamsrooms should fill, and on arriving he found only the ladies in thedrawing-room; the gentlemen were still sitting over their wine.Presently they came in, and, as luck would have it, Delane ofthe Times came first. When Milnes caught sight of his youngAmerican friend, with a whoop of triumph he rushed to throwboth arms about his neck and kiss him on both cheeks. Men oflater birth who knew too little to realize the passions of 1863— backed by those of 1813 — and reenforced by those of 1763— might conceive that such publicity embarrassed a private sec-retary who came from Boston and called himself shy; but thatevening, for the first time in his life, he happened not to be think-ing of himself. He was thinking of Delane, whose eye caughthis, at the moment of Milnes's embrace. Delane probably regardedit as a piece of Milnes's foolery; he had never heard of youngAdams, and never dreamed of his resentment at being ridiculedin the Times; he had no suspicion of the thought floating in themind of the American Minister's son, for the British mind is theslowest of all minds, as the files of the Times proved, and thecapture of Vicksburg had not yet penetrated Delane's thickcortex of fixed ideas. Even if he had read Adams's thought, hewould have felt for it only the usual amused British contempt forall that he had not been taught at school.It needed a wholegeneration for the Times to reach Milnes's standpoint.«Had the Minister's son carried out the thought, he would surelyhave sought an introduction to Delane on the spot, and assuredhim that he regarded his own personal score as cleared off — suf-ficiently settled, then and there — because his father had assumedthe debt, and was going to deal with Mr. Delane himself. "Youcome next!" would have been the friendly warning. For nearlya year the private secretary had watched the board arrangingitself for the collision between the Legation and Delane who stoodbehind the Palmerston Ministry. Mr. Adams had been steadilystrengthened and reenforced from Washington in view of the finalstruggle. The situation had changed since the Trent Affair. TheThe Battle of the Rams171work was efficiently done; the organization was fairly complete.No doubt, the Legation itself was still as weakly manned and hadas poor an outfit as the Legations of Guatemala or Portugal. Con-gress was always jealous of its diplomatic service, and the Chair-man of the Committee of Foreign Relations was not likely topress assistance on the Minister to England. For the Legation notan additional clerk was offered or asked. The Secretary, the Assis-tant Secretary, and the private secretary did all the work that theMinister did not do. A clerk at five dollars a week would have donethe work as well or better, but the Minister could trust no clerk;without express authority he could admit no one into the Lega-tion; he strained a point already by admitting his son. Congressand its committees were the proper judges of what was best forthe public service, and if the arrangement seemed good to them, itwas satisfactory to a private secretary who profited by it morethan they did. A great staff would have suppressed him. Thewhole Legation was a sort of improvised, volunteer service, and hewas a volunteer with the rest. He was rather better off than therest, because he was invisible and unknown. Better or worse, hedid his work with the others, and if the secretaries made anyremarks about Congress, they made no complaints, and knew thatnone would have received a moment's attention.If they were not satisfied with Congress, they were satisfiedwith Secretary Seward. Without appropriations for the regularservice, he had done great things for its support. If the Ministerhad no secretaries, he had a staff of active consuls; he had a well-organized press; efficient legal support; and a swarm of social alliesAll he needed was a victory in the field,permeating all classes.and Secretary Stanton undertook that part of diplomacy. Vicks-burg and Gettysburg cleared the board, and, at the end of July,1863, Minister Adams was ready to deal with Earl Russell orLord Palmerston or Mr. Gladstone or Mr. Delane, or any oneelse who stood in his way; and by the necessity of the case, wasobliged to deal with all of them shortly.172The Education of Henry AdamsEven before the military climax at Vicksburg and Gettysburg,the Minister had been compelled to begin his attack; but thiswas history, and had nothing to do with education. The privatesecretary copied the notes into his private books, and that was allthe share he had in the matter, except to talk in private.No more volunteer services were needed; the volunteers werein a manner sent to the rear; the movement was too serious forskirmishing. All that a secretary could hope to gain from the af-fair was experience and knowledge of politics. He had a chance tomeasure the motive forces of men; their qualities of character;their foresight; their tenacity of purpose.In the Legation no great confidence was felt in stopping the rams.Whatever the reason, Russell seemed immovable. Had his effortsfor intervention in September, 1862, been known to the Legationin September, 1863, the Minister must surely have admitted thatRussell had, from the first, meant to force his plan of interven-tion on his colleagues. Every separate step since April, 1861, ledto this final coercion. Although Russell's hostile activity of 1862was still secret — and remained secret for some five-and-twentyyears — his animus seemed to be made clear by his steady refusalto stop the rebel armaments. Little by little, Minister Adamslost hope. With loss of hope came the raising of tone, until at last,after stripping Russell of every rag of defence and excuse, he closedby leaving him loaded with connivance in the rebel armaments,and ended by the famous sentence: "It would be superfluous inme to point out to your lordship that this is war!"What the Minister meant by this remark was his own affair;what the private secretary understood by it, was a part of hiseducation. Had his father ordered him to draft an explanatoryparagraph to expand the idea as he grasped it, he would havecontinued thus : —"It would be superfluous: 1st. Because Earl Russell not onlyknows it already, but has meant it from the start. 2d. Becauseit is the only logical and necessary consequence of his unvaryingThe Battle of the Rams173action. 3d. Because Mr. Adams is not pointing out to him that'this is war,' but is pointing it out to the world, to complete therecord."* •-•••••'•This would have been the matter-of-fact sense in which the pri-vate secretary copied into his books the matter-of-fact statementwith which, without passion or excitement, the Minister an-nounced that a state of war existed. To his copying eye, as clerk,the words, though on the extreme verge of diplomatic propriety,merely stated a fact, without novelty, fancy, or rhetoric. The facthad to be stated in order to make clear the issue. The war wasRussell's war — Adams only accepted it.Russell's reply to this note of September 5 reached the Legationon September 8, announcing at last to the anxious secretaries that"instructions have been issued which will prevent the departureof the two ironclad vessels from Liverpool." The members of themodest Legation in Portland Place accepted it as Grant hadaccepted the capitulation of Vicksburg. The private secretaryconceived that, as Secretary Stanton had struck and! crushedby superior weight the rebel left on the Mississippi, so SecretarySeward had struck and crushed the rebel right in England, and henever felt a doubt as to the nature of the battle. Though MinisterAdams should stay in office till he were ninety, he would neverfight another campaign of life and death like this ; and though theprivate secretary should covet and attain every office in the giftof President or people, he would never again find education tocompare with the life-and-death alternative of this two-year-and-a-half struggle in London, as it had racked and thumb-screwed himin its shifting phases; but its practical value as education turnedon his correctness of judgment in measuring the men and theirforces. He felt respect for Russell as for Palmerston because theyrepresented traditional England and an English policy, respectableenough in itself, but which, for four generations, every Adams hadfought and exploited as the chief source of his political fortunes.As he understood it, Russell had followed this policy steadily, ably,174The Education of Henry Adamseven vigorously, and had brought it to the moment of execution.Then he had met wills stronger than his own, and, after perseveringto the last possible instant, had been beaten. Lord North andGeorge Canning had a like experience. |This was only the idea of a boy, but, as far as he ever knew, itwas also the idea of his Government. For once, the volunteersecretary was satisfied with his Government. Commonly the self-respect of a secretary, private or public, depends on, and is propor-tional to, the severity of his criticism, but in this case the Englishcampaign seemed to him as creditable to the State Department asthe Vicksburg campaign to the War Department, and more deci-sive. It was well planned, well prepared, and well executed. Hecould never discover a mistake in it. Possibly he was biassed bypersonal interest, but his chief reason for trusting his own judg-ment was that he thought himself to be one of only half a dozenpersons who knew something about it. When others criticisedMr. Seward, he was rather indifferent to their opinions becausehe thought they hardly knew what they were talking about, andcould not be taught without living over again the London life of1862. To him Secretary Seward seemed immensely strong andsteady in leadership; but this was no discredit to Russell or Palm-erston or Gladstone. They, too, had shown power, patience andsteadiness of purpose. They had persisted for two years and ahalf in their plan for breaking up the Union, and had yielded atlast only in the jaws of war. After a long and desperate struggle,the American Minister had trumped their best card and won thegame.Again and again, in after life, he went back over the ground tosee whether he could detect error on either side. He found none.At every stage the steps were both probable and proved. All themore he was disconcerted that Russell should indignantly and withgrowing energy, to his dying day, deny and resent the axiom ofAdams's whole contention, that from the first he meant to breakup the Union. Russell affirmed that he meant nothing of the sort;The Battle of the Rams175that he had meant nothing at all; that he meant to do right; thathe did not know what he meant. Driven from one defence afteranother, he pleaded at last, like Gladstone, that he had no defence.Concealing all he could conceal — burying in profound secrecyhis attempt to break up the Union in the autumn of 1862 — heaffirmed the louder his scrupulous good faith. What was worsefor the private secretary, to the total derision and despair of thelifelong effort for education, as the final result of combined prac-tice, experience, and theory — he proved it.Henry Adams had, as he thought, suffered too much from Russellto admit any plea in his favor; but he came to doubt whether thisadmission really favored him. Not until long after Earl Russell'sdeath was the question reopened. Russell had quitted office in1866; he died in 1878; the biography was published in 1889. Dur-ing the Alabama controversy and the Geneva Conference in 1872,his course as Foreign Secretary had been sharply criticised, andhe had been compelled to see England pay more than £3,000,000penalty for his errors. On the other hand, he brought forward —or his biographer for him — evidence tending to prove that he wasnot consciously dishonest, and that he had, in spite of appearances,acted without collusion, agreement, plan, or policy, as far as con-cerned the rebels. He had stood alone, as was his nature. LikeGladstone, he had thought himself right.In the end, Russell entangled himself in a hopeless ball of admis-sions, denials, contradictions, and resentments which led even hisold colleagues to drop his defence, as they dropped Gladstone's;but this was not enough for the student of diplomacy who hadmade a certain theory his law of life, and wanted to hold Russellup against himself; to show that he had foresight and persistenceof which he was unaware. The effort, became hopeless when thebiography in 1889 published papers which upset all that HenryAdams had taken for diplomatic education; yet he sat down oncemore, when past sixty years old, to see whether he could unravelthe skein.176The Education of Henry AdamsOf the obstinate effort to bring about an armed intervention,on the lines marked out by Russell's letter to Palmerston fromGotha, 17 September, 1862, nothing could be said beyond Glad-stone's plea in excuse for his speech in pursuance of the sameeffort, that it was "the most singular and palpable error," "theleast excusable," "a mistake of incredible grossness," which passeddefence; but while Gladstone threw himself on the mercy of thepublic for his speech, he attempted no excuse for Lord Russell wholed him into the "incredible grossness" of announcing the For-eign Secretary's intent. Gladstone's offence, "singular and palpa-ble," was not the speech alone, but its cause — the policy that in-spired the speech. "I weakly supposed ... I really, though moststrangely, believed that it was an act of friendliness." Whateverabsurdity Gladstone supposed, Russell supposed nothing of thesort. Neither he nor Palmerston "most strangely believed" inany proposition so obviously and palpably absurd, nor did Napo-leon delude himself with philanthropy. Gladstone, even in hisconfession, mixed up policy, speech, motives, and persons, asthough he were trying to confuse chiefly himself.There Gladstone's activity seems to have stopped. He did notreappear in the matter of the rams. The rebel influence shrank in1863, as far as is known, to Lord Russell alone, who wrote onSeptember 1 that he could not interfere in any way with those ves-sels, and thereby brought on himself Mr. Adams's declaration ofwar on September 5. A student held that, in this refusal, he wasmerely following his policy of September, 1862, and of every stephe had taken since 1861.;The student was wrong. Russell proved that he had been feeble,timid, mistaken, senile, but not dishonest. The evidence is con-vincing. The Lairds had built these ships in reliance on the knownopinion of the law-officers that the statute did not apply, and ajury would not convict. Minister Adams replied that, in this case,the statute should be amended, or the ships stopped by exerciseof the political power. Bethell rejoined that this would be a viola-The Battle of the Rams177tion of neutrality; one must preserve the status quo. Tacitly Rus-sell connived with Laird, and, had he meant to interfere, he wasbound to warn Laird that the defect of the statute would no longerprotect him, but he allowed the builders to go on till the shipswere ready for sea. Then, on September 3, two days before Mr.Adams's "superfluous" letter, he wrote to Lord Palmerston beg-ging for help; "The conduct of the gentlemen who have contractedfor the two ironclads at Birkenhead is so very suspicious," — hebegan, and this he actually wrote in good faith and deep con-fidence to Lord Palmerston, his chief, calling "the conduct" ofthe rebel agents "suspicious" when no one else in Europe orAmerica felt any suspicion about it, because the whole questionturned not. on the rams, but on the technical scope of the For-eign Enlistment Act, — "that I have thought it necessary todirect that they should be detained," not, of course, under thestatute, but on the ground urged by the American Minister, ofinternational obligation above the statute. " The Solicitor Gen-eral has been consulted and concurs in the measure as one of policythough not of strict law. We shall thus test the law, and, if wehave to pay damages, we have satisfied the opinion which pre-vails here as well as in America that that kind of neutral hostilityshould not be allowed to go on without some attempt to stop it."For naivete that would be unusual in an unpaid attache of Lega-tion, this sudden leap from his own to his opponent's ground, aftertwo years and a half of dogged resistance, might have rousedPalmerston to inhuman scorn, but instead of derision, well earnedby Russell's old attacks on himself, Palmerston met the appealwith wonderful loyalty. "On consulting the law officers he foundthat there was no lawful ground for meddling with the ironclads,"or, in unprofessional language, that he could trust neither his lawofficers nor a Liverpool jury; and therefore he suggested buyingthe ships for the British Navy. As proof of "criminal negligence"in the past, this suggestion seemed decisive, but Russell, by thistime, was floundering in other troubles of negligence, for he had178The Education of Henry Adamsneglected to notify the American Minister. He should have doneso at once, on September 3. Instead he waited till September 4,and then merely said that the matter was under "serious andanxious consideration." This note did not reach the Legation tillthree o'clock on the afternoon of Septembers — after the "su-perfluous" declaration of war had been sent. Thus, Lord Russellhad sacrificed the Lairds : had cost his Ministry the price of twoironclads, besides the Alabama Claims — say, in round numbers,twenty million dollars — and had put himself in the position ofappearing to yield only to a threat of war. Finally he wrote tothe Admiralty a letter which, from the American point of view,would have sounded youthful from an Eton schoolboy: —My Dear Duke : —September 14, 1863.It is of the utmost importance and urgency that the ironclads build-ing at Birkenhead should not go to America to break the blockade.They belong to Monsieur Bravay of Paris.If you will offer to buythem on the part of the Admiralty you will get money's worth if heaccepts your offer; and if he does not, it will be presumptive proofthat they are already bought by the Confederates. I should statethat we have suggested to the Turkish Government to buy them;but you can easily settle that matter with the Turks. ...The hilarity of the secretaries in Portland Place would havebeen loud had they seen this letter and realized the muddle of dif-ficulties into which Earl Russell had at last thrown himself underthe impulse of the American Minister; but, nevertheless, theseletters upset from top to bottom the results of the private secre-tary's diplomatic education forty years after he had supposed itcomplete. They made a picture different from anything he hadconceived and rendered worthless his whole painful diplomaticexperience.To reconstruct, when past sixty, an education useful for anypractical purpose, is no practical problem, and Adams saw no usein attacking it as only theoretical. He no longer cared whetherThe Battle of the Rams179he understood human nature or not; he understood quite as muchof it as he wanted; but he found in the "Life of Gladstone"(11, 464) a remark several times repeated that gave him matter forcurious thought. "I always hold," said Mr. Gladstone, "that poli-ticians are the men whom, as a rule, it is most difficult to compre-hend"; and he added, by way of strengthening it: "For my ownpart, I never have thus understood, or thought I understood,above one or two?'Earl Russell was certainly not one of the two.Henry Adams thought he also had understood one or two; butthe American type was more familiar. Perhaps this was the suf-ficient result of his diplomatic education; it seemed to be thewhole.