CHAPTER XXVIITEUFELSDROCKH (1901)INEVITABLE Paris beckoned, and resistance became moreand more futile as the store of years grew less; for the worldcontains no other spot than Paris where education can bepursued from every side. Even more vigorously than in the twelfthcentury, Paris taught in the twentieth, with no other school ap-proaching it for variety of direction and energy of mind. Of theteaching in detail, a man who knew only what accident had taughthim in the nineteenth century, could know next to nothing, sincescience had got quite beyond his horizon, and mathematics hadbecome the only necessary language of thought; but one couldplay with the toys of childhood, including Ming porcelain, salonsof painting, operas and theatres, beaux-arts and Gothic architec-ture, theology and anarchy, in any jumble of time; or totter aboutwith Joe Stickney, talking Greek philosophy or recent poetry,or studying "Louise" at the Opera Comique, or discussing thecharm of youth and the Seine with Bay Lodge and his exquisiteyoung wife. Paris remained Parisian in spite of change, mistressScores of artists — sculptors andof herself though China fell.painters, poets and dramatists, workers in gems and metals, de-signers in stuffs and furniture — hundreds of chemists, physicists,even philosophers, philologists, physicians, and historians — wereat work, a thousand times as actively as ever before, and the massand originality of their product would have swamped any pre-vious age, as it very nearly swamped its own; but the effect wasone of chaos, and Adams stood as helpless before it as before thechaos of New York. His single thought was to keep in front ofthe movement, and, if necessary, lead it to chaos, but never fallbehind. Only the young have time to linger in the rear.The amusements of youth had to be abandoned, for not even404The Education of Henry Adamspugilism needs more staying-power than the labors of the pale-faced student of the Latin Quarter in the haunts of Montparnasseor Montmartre, where one must feel no fatigue at two o'clock inthe morning in a beer-garden even after four hours of MounetSully at the Theatre Francais. In those branches, education mightbe called closed. Fashion, too, could no longer teach anythingworth knowing to a man who, holding open the door into the nextworld, regarded himself as merely looking round to take a lastglance of this. The glance was more amusing than any he hadknown in his active life, but it was more — infinitely more —chaotic and complex.Still something remained to be done for education beyond thechaos, and as usual the woman helped. For thirty years or there-abouts, he had been repeating that he really must go to Baireuth.Suddenly Mrs. Lodge appeared on the horizon and bade himcome. He joined them, parents and children, alert and eager andappreciative as ever, at the little old town of Rothenburg-on-theTaube, and they went on to the Baireuth festival together.Thirty years earlier, a Baireuth festival would have made animmense stride in education, and the spirit of the master wouldhave opened a vast new world. In 1901 the effect was altogetherdifferent from the spirit of the master. In 1 876 the rococo set-ting of Baireuth seemed the correct atmosphere for Siegfried andBriinhilde, perhaps even for Parsifal. Baireuth was out of theworld, calm, contemplative, and remote. In 1901 the world hadaltogether changed, and Wagner had become a part of it, as fa-miliar as Shakespeare or Bret Harte. The rococo element jarred.Even the Hudson and the Susquehanna — perhaps the Potomacitself — had often risen to drown out the gods of Walhalla, andone could hardly listen to the "Gotterdammerung" in New York,among throngs of intense young enthusiasts, without paroxysmsof nervous excitement that toned down to musical philistinism atBaireuth, as though the gods were Bavarian composers. NewYork or Paris might be whatever one pleased — venal, sordid,Teufelsdrockh405vulgar — but society nursed there, in the rottenness of its decay,certain anarchistic ferments, and thought them proof of art. Per-haps they were; and at all events, Wagner was chiefly responsiblefor them as artistic emotion. New York knew better than Bai-reuth what Wagner meant, and the frivolities of Paris had morethan once included the rising of the Seine to drown out the Etoileor Montmartre, as well as the sorcery of ambition that casts spellsof enchantment on the hero. Paris still felt a subtile flattery inthe thought that the last great tragedy of gods and men wouldsurely happen there, while no one could conceive of its happen-ing at Baireuth, or would care if it did. Paris coquetted withcatastrophe as though it were an old mistress — faced it almostgaily as she had done so often, for they were acquainted sinceRome began to ravage Europe; while New York met it with aglow of fascinated horror, like an inevitable earthquake, and heardTernina announce it with conviction that made nerves quiver andthrill as they had long ceased to do under the accents of popularoratory proclaiming popular virtue. Flattery had lost its charm,but the Fluch-motif went home.Adams had been carried with the tide till Briinhilde had becomea habit and Ternina an ally. He too had played with anarchy;though not with socialism, which, to young men who nourishedartistic emotions under the dome of the Pantheon, seemed hope-lessly bourgeois, and lowest middle-class. Bay Lodge and JoeStickney had given birth to the wholly new and original party ofConservative Christian Anarchists, to restore true poetry underthe inspiration of the "Gotterdammerung." Such a party sawno inspiration in Baireuth, where landscape, history, and audiencewere — relatively — stodgy, and where the only emotion was amusical dilettantism that the master had abhorred.Yet Baireuth still amused even a conservative Christian anar-chist who cared as little as "Grane, mein Ross," whether thesingers sang false, and who came only to learn what Wagner hadsupposed himself to mean. This end attained as pleased Frau406The Education of Henry AdamsWagner and the Heiliger Geist, he was ready to go on; and theSenator, yearning for sterner study, pointed to a haven at Mos-cow. For years Adams had taught American youth never to travelwithout a Senator who was useful even in America at times, butindispensable in Russia where, in 1901, anarchists, even thoughconservative and Christian, were ill-seen.This wing of the anarchistic party consisted rigorously of buttwo members, Adams and Bay Lodge. The conservative Christiananarchist, as a party, drew life from Hegel and Schopenhauerrightly understood. By the necessity of their philosophical de-scent, each member of the fraternity denounced the other as un-equal to his lofty task and inadequate to grasp it. Of course, nothird member could be so much as considered, since the greatprinciple of contradiction could be expressed only by opposites;and no agreement could be conceived, because anarchy, by defini-tion, must be chaos and collision, as in the kinetic theory of a per-fect gas. Doubtless this law of contradiction was itself agreement,a restriction of personal liberty inconsistent with freedom; butthe "larger synthesis" admitted a limited agreement provided itwere strictly confined to the end of larger contradiction. Thusthe great end of all philosophy — the "larger synthesis" — wasattained, but the process was arduous, and while Adams, as theolder member, assumed to declare the principle, Bay Lodge neces-sarily denied both the assumption and the principle in order toassure its truth.Adams proclaimed that in the last synthesis, order and anarchywere one, but that the unity was chaos. As anarchist, conserva-tive and Christian, he had no motive or duty but to attain theend; and, to hasten it, he was bound to accelerate progress; toconcentrate energy; to accumulate power; to multiply and in-tensify forces; to reduce friction, increase velocity and magnifymomentum, partly because this was the mechanical law of theuniverse as science explained it; but partly also in order to getdone with the present which artists and some others complainedTeufelsdrockh407of; and finally — and chiefly — because a rigorous philosophy re-quired it, in order to penetrate the beyond, and satisfy man'sdestiny by reaching the largest synthesis in its ultimate contra-diction.Of course the untaught critic instantly objected that this schemewas neither conservative, Christian, nor anarchic, but such ob-jection meant only that the critic should begin his education inany infant school in order to learn that anarchy which should belogical would cease to be anarchic. To the conservative Christiananarchist, the amiable doctrines of Kropotkin were sentimentalideas of Russian mental inertia covered with the name of anarchymerely to disguise their innocence; and the outpourings of EliseeReclus were ideals of the French ouvrier, diluted with absinthe,resulting in a bourgeois dream of order and inertia. Neither madea pretence of anarchy except as a momentary stage towards orderand unity. Neither of them had formed any other conceptionof the universe than what they had inherited from the priestlyclass to which their minds obviously belonged. With them, aswith the socialist, communist, or collectivism the mind that fol-lowed nature had no relation; if anarchists needed order, theymust go back to the twelfth century where their thought hadenjoyed its thousand years of reign. The conservative Christiananarchist could have no associate, no object, no faith except thenature of nature itself; and his "larger synthesis" had only thefault of being so supremely true that even the highest obligationof duty could scarcely oblige Bay Lodge to deny it in order toprove it. Only the self-evident truth that no philosophy of order— except the Church — had ever satisfied the philosopher recon-ciled the conservative Christian anarchist to prove his own.Naturally these ideas were so far in advance of the age that hardlymore people could understand them than understood Wagner orHegel; for that matter, since the time of Socrates, wise men havebeen mostly shy of claiming to understand anything; but suchrefinements were Greek or German, and affected the practical408The Education of Henry AdamsAmerican but little. He admitted that, for the moment, the dark-ness was dense. He could not affirm with confidence, even to him-self, that his "largest synthesis" would certainly turn out to bechaos, since he would be equally obliged to deny the chaos. Thepoet groped blindly for an emotion. The play of thought forthought's sake had mostly ceased. The throb of fifty or a hun-dred million steam horse-power, doubling every ten years, andalready more despotic than all the horses that ever lived, and allthe riders they ever carried, drowned rhyme and reason. No onewas to blame, for all were equally servants of the power, andworked merely to increase it; but the conservative Christiananarchist saw light.Thus the student of Hegel prepared himself for a visit to Russiain order to enlarge his "synthesis" — and much he needed it! InAmerica all were conservative Christian anarchists; the faith wasnational, racial, geographic. The true American had never seensuch supreme virtue in any of the innumerable shades betweensocial anarchy and social order as to mark it for exclusively humanand his own. He never had known a complete union either inChurch or State or thought, and had never seen any need for it.The freedom gave him courage to meet any contradiction, andintelligence enough to ignore it. Exactly the opposite conditionhad marked Russian growth. The Czar's empire was a phase ofconservative Christian anarchy more interesting to history thanall the complex variety of American newspapers, schools, trusts,sects, frauds, and Congressmen. These were Nature — pure andanarchic as the conservative Christian anarchist saw Nature —active, vibrating, mostly unconscious, and quickly reacting onforce; but, from the first glimpse one caught from the sleeping-carwindow, in the early morning, of the Polish Jew at the accidentalrailway station, in all his weird horror, to the last vision of theRussian peasant, lighting his candle and kissing his ikon beforethe railway Virgin in the station at St. Petersburg, all was logi-cal, conservative, Christian and anarchic. Russia had nothing inTeufelsdrockh:409common with any ancient or modern world that history knew;she had been the oldest source of all civilization in Europe, andhad kept none for herself; neither Europe nor Asia had ever knownsuch a phase, which seemed to fall into no line of evolution what-ever, and was as wonderful to the student of Gothic architecturein the twelfth century, as to the student of the dynamo in theStudied in the dry light of conservative Christiantwentieth.anarchy, Russia became luminous like the salt of radium; but witha negative luminosity as though she were a substance whose ener-gies had been sucked out — an inert residuum — with movementof pure inertia. From the car window one seemed to float past un-dulations of nomad life — herders deserted by their leaders andherds — wandering waves stopped in their wanderings — waitingfor their winds or warriors to return and lead them westward;tribes that had camped, like Khirgis, for the season, and had lostthe means of motion without acquiring the habit of permanence.They waited and suffered. As they stood they were out of place,and could never have been normal. Their country acted as a sinkof energy like the Caspian Sea, and its surface kept the uniformityof ice and snow. One Russian peasant kissing an ikon on a saint'sday, in the Kremlin, served for a hundred million. The studenthad no need to study Wallace, or re-read Tolstoy or Tourguenieffor Dostoiewski to refresh his memory of the most poignant analysisof human inertia ever put in words ; Gorky was more than enoughKropotkin answered every purpose.The Russian people could never have changed — could theyever be changed ? Could inertia of race, on such a scale, be brokenup, or take new form? Even in America, on an infinitely smallerscale, the question was old and unanswered. All the so-calledprimitive races, and some nearer survivals, had raised doubtswhich persisted against the most obstinate convictions of evolu-tion. The Senator himself shook his head, and after surveyingWarsaw and Moscow to his content, went on to St. Petersburg toask questions of Mr. de Witte and Prince Khilkoff . Their conver-41 oThe Education of Henry Adamssation added new doubts ; for their efforts had been immense, theirexpenditure enormous, and their results on the people seemed tobe uncertain as yet, even to themselves. Ten or fifteen yearsof violent stimulus seemed resulting in nothing, for, since 1898,Russia lagged.The tourist-student, having duly reflected, asked the Senatorwhether he should allow three generations, or more, to swing theRussian people into the Western movement. The Senator seemeddisposed to ask for more. The student had nothing to say. Forhim, all opinion founded on fact must be error, because the factscan never be complete, and their relations must be always infinite.Very likely, Russia would instantly become the most brilliant con-stellation of human progress through all the ordered stages ofgood; but meanwhile one might give a value as movement ofinertia to the mass, and assume a slow acceleration that would,at the end of a generation, leave the gap between east and westrelatively the same.This result reached, the Lodges thought their moral improve-ment required a visit to Berlin; but forty years of varied emotionshad not deadened Adams's memories of Berlin, and he preferred,at any cost, to escape new ones. When the Lodges started forGermany, Adams took steamer for Sweden and landed happily,in a day or two, at Stockholm.Until the student is fairly sure that his problem is soluble, hegains little by obstinately insisting on solving it. One might doubtwhether Mr. de Witte himself, or Prince Khilkoff, or any GrandDuke, or the Emperor, knew much more about it than theirneighbors; and Adams was quite sure that, even in America, heshould listen with uncertain confidence to the views of any Secre-tary of the Treasury, or railway president, or President of theUnited States whom he had ever known, that should concern theAmerica of the next generation. The mere fact that any manshould dare to offer them would prove his incompetence to judge.Yet Russia was too vast a force to be treated as an object ofTeufelsdrockh411unconcern. As inertia, if in no other way, she represented three-fourths of the human race, and her movement might be the truemovement of the future, against the hasty and unsure accelerationof America. No one could yet know what would best suit human-ity, and the tourist who carried his La Fontaine in mind, caughthimself talking as bear or as monkey according to the mirror heheld before him. "Am I satisfied?" he asked: —"Moi? pourquoi non?N'ai-je pas quatre pieds aussi bien que les autres?Mon portrait jusqu'ici ne m'a rien reproche;Mais pour mon frere Fours, on ne l'a qu'ebauche;Jamais, s'il me veut croire, il ne se fera peindre. ,,Granting that his brother the bear lacked perfection in details,his own figure as monkey was not necessarily ideal or decorative,nor was he in the least sure what form it might take even in onegeneration. He had himself never ventured to dream of three. Noman could guess what the Daimler motor and X-rays would doto him; but so much was sure; the monkey and motor were terriblyafraid of the bear; how much, only a man close to their foreigndepartments knew. As the monkey looked back across the Balticfrom the safe battlements of Stockholm, Russia looked more por-tentous than from the Kremlin.The image was that of the retreating ice-cap — a wall of archaicglacier, as fixed, as ancient, as eternal, as the wall of archaic icethat blocked the ocean a few hundred miles to the northward, andmore likely to advance. Scandinavia had been ever at its mercy.Europe had never changed. The imaginary line that crossed thelevel continent from the Baltic to the Black Sea, merely extendedthe northern barrier-line. The Hungarians and Poles on one sidestill struggled against the Russian inertia of race, and retainedtheir own energies under the same conditions that caused inertiaacross the frontier. Race ruled the conditions; conditions hardlyaffected race; and yet no one could tell the patient tourist whatrace was, or how it should be known. History offered a feeble and412The Education of Henry Adamsdelusive smile at the sound of the word; evolutionists and ethnol-ogists disputed its very existence; no one knew what to make ofit; yet, without the clue, history was a nursery tale.The Germans, Scandinavians, Poles and Hungarians, energeticas they were, had never held their own against the heterogeneousmass of inertia called Russia, and trembled with terror wheneverRussia moved. From Stockholm one looked back on it as thoughit were an ice-sheet, and so had Stockholm watched it for centu-ries. In contrast with the dreary forests of Russia and the sternstreets of St. Petersburg, Stockholm seemed a southern vision, andSweden lured the tourist on. Through a cheerful New Englandlandscape and bright autumn, he rambled northwards till he foundhimself at Trondhjem and discovered Norway. Education crowdedupon him in immense masses as he triangulated these vast surfacesof history about which he had lectured and read for a life-time.When the historian fully realizes his ignorance — which some-times happens to Americans — he becomes even more tiresome tohimself than to others, because his naivete is irrepressible. Adamscould not get over his astonishment, though he had preached theNorse doctrine all his life against the stupid and beer-swillingSaxon boors whom Freeman loved, and who, to the despair ofscience, produced Shakespeare. Mere contact with Norway startedvoyages of thought, and, under their illusions, he took the mailsteamer to the north, and on September 14, reached Hammerfest.Frivolous amusement was hardly what one saw, through theequinoctial twilight, peering at the flying tourist, down the deepfiords, from dim patches of snow, where the last Laps and reindeerwere watching the mail-steamer thread the intricate channels out-side, as their ancestors had watched the first Norse fishermen learnthem in the succession of time; but it was not the Laps, or the snow,or the arctic gloom, that impressed the tourist, so much as thelights of an electro-magnetic civilization and the stupefying con-trast with Russia, which more and more insisted on taking thefirst place in historical interest. Nowhere had the new forcesTeufelsdrockh413so vigorously corrected the errors of the old, or so effectively re-dressed the balance of the ecliptic. As one approached the end—the spot where, seventy years before, a futile Carlylean Teufels-drockh had stopped to ask futile questions of the silent infinite— the infinite seemed to have become loquacious, not to sayfamiliar, chattering gossip in one's ear. An installation of electriclighting and telephones led tourists close up to the polar ice-cap,beyond the level of the magnetic pole; and there the newer Teu-felsdrockh sat dumb with surprise, and glared at the permanentelectric lights of Hammerfest.He had good reason —-better than the Teufelsdrockh of 1830, inhis liveliest Scotch imagination, ever dreamed, or mortal man hadever told. At best, a week in these dim Northern seas, withoutmeans of speech, within the Arctic circle, at the equinox, lentitself to gravity if not to gloom; but only a week before, break-fasting in the restaurant at Stockholm, his eye had caught, acrossthe neighboring table, a headline in a Swedish newspaper, an-nouncing an attempt on the life of President McKinley, and fromStockholm to Trondhjem, and so up the coast to Hammerfest, dayafter day the news came, telling of the President's condition, andthe doings and sayings of Hay and Roosevelt, until at last a littlejournal was cried on reaching some dim haven, announcing thePresident's death a few hours before. To Adams the death ofMcKinley and the advent of Roosevelt were not wholly void ofpersonal emotion, but this was little in comparison with his depthof wonder at hearing hourly reports from his most intimate friends,sent to him far within the realm of night, not to please him, but tocorrect the faults of the solar system. The electro-dynamo-socialuniverse worked better than the sun.i No such strange chance had ever happened to a historian before,and it upset for the moment his whole philosophy of conservativeanarchy. The acceleration was marvellous, and wholly in the linesof unity. To recover his grasp of chaos, he must look back acrossthe gulf to Russia, and the gap seemed to have suddenly become414The Education of Henry Adamsan abyss. Russia was infinitely distant. Yet the nightmare of theglacial ice-cap still pressed down on him from the hills, in full vision,and no one could look out on the dusky and oily sea that lappedthese spectral islands without consciousness that only a day'ssteaming to the northward would bring him to the ice-barrier,ready at any moment to advance, which obliged tourists to stopwhere Laps and reindeer and Norse fishermen had stopped so longago that memory of their very origin was lost. Adams had neverbefore met a ne plus ultra, and knew not what to make of it; buthe felt at least the emotion of his Norwegian fishermen ancestors,doubtless numbering hundreds of thousands, jammed with theirfaces to the sea, the ice on the north, the ice-cap of Russian inertiapressing from behind, and the ice a trifling danger compared withthe inertia. From the day they first followed the retreating ice-cap round the North Cape, down to the present moment, theirproblem was the same.The new Teufelsdrockh, though considerably older than the oldone, saw no clearer into past or future, but he was fully as muchperplexed. From the archaic ice-barrier to the Caspian Sea, a longline of division, permanent since ice and inertia first took possession,divided his lines of force, with no relation to climate or geographyor soil.The less a tourist knows, the fewer mistakes he need make, forhe will not expect himself to explain ignorance. A century ago hecarried letters and sought knowledge; to-day he knows that noone knows; he needs too much and ignorance is learning. He wan-dered south again, and came out at Kiel, Hamburg, Bremen, andCologne. A mere glance showed him that here was a Germanynew to mankind. Hamburg was almost as American as St. Louis.In forty years, the green rusticity of Diisseldorf had taken on thesooty grime of Birmingham. The Rhine in 1900 resembled theRhine of 1858 much as it resembled the Rhine of the Salic Franks.Cologne was a railway centre that had completed its cathedralwhich bore an absent-minded air of a cathedral of Chicago. TheTeufelsdrockh415thirteenth century, carefully strained-off, catalogued, and lockedup, was visible to tourists as a kind of Neanderthal, cave-dwelling,curiosity. The Rhine was more modern than the Hudson, as mightwell be, since it produced far more coal; but all this counted forlittle beside the radical change in the lines of force.In 1858 the whole plain of northern Europe, as well as the Dan-ube in the south, bore evident marks of being still the prehistorichighway between Asia and the ocean. The trade-route followedthe old routes of invasion, and Cologne was a resting-place betweenWarsaw and Flanders. Throughout northern Germany, Russiawas felt even more powerfully than France. In 1901 Russia hadvanished, and not even France was felt; hardly England orAmerica. Coal alone was felt— its stamp alone pervaded the Rhinedistrict and persisted to Picardy — and the stamp was the sameas that of Birmingham and Pittsburgh. The Rhine produced thesame power, and the power produced the same people — thesame mind — the same impulse. For a man sixty-three yearsold who had no hope of earning a living, these three months ofeducation were the most arduous he ever attempted, and Russiawas the most indigestible morsel he ever met; but the sum of it,viewed from Cologne, seemed reasonable. From Hammerfest toCherbourg on one shore of the ocean — from Halifax to Norfolkon the other — one great empire was ruled by one great emperor— Coal. Political and human jealousies might tear it apart ordivide it, but the power and the empire were one. Unity had gainedthat ground. Beyond lay Russia, and there an older, perhaps asurer, power, resting on the eternal law of inertia, held its own.As a personal matter, the relative value of the two powers be-came more interesting every year; for the mass of Russian inertiawas moving irresistibly over China, and John Hay stood in itspath. As long as de Witte ruled, Hay was safe. Should de Wittefall, Hay would totter. One could only sit down and watch thedoings of Mr. de Witte and Mr. de Plehve.