CHAPTER XXIIISILENCE (1894-1898)THE convulsion of 1893 left its victims in dead-water, andclosed much education. While the country braced itselfup to an effort such as no one had thought within itspowers, the individual crawled as he best could, through thewreck, and found many values of life upset. But for connectingthe nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the four years, 1893 to1897, had no value in the drama of education, and might be leftout. Much that had made life pleasant between 1870 and 1890perished in the ruin, and among the earliest wreckage had beenthe fortunes of Clarence King. The lesson taught whatever thebystander chose to read in it; but to Adams it seemed singularlyfull of moral, if he could but understand it. In 1871 he had thoughtKing's education ideal, and his personal fitness unrivalled. Noother young American approached him for the combination ofchances — physical energy, social standing, mental scope andtraining, wit, geniality, and science, that seemed superlativelyAmerican and irresistibly strong. His nearest rival was AlexanderAgassiz, and, as far as their friends knew, no one else could beclassed with them in the running. The result of twenty years'effort proved that the theory of scientific education failed wheremost theory fails — for want of money. Even Henry Adams, whokept himself, as he thought, quite outside of every possible fi-nancial risk, had been caught in the cogs, and held for monthsover the gulf of bankruptcy, saved only by the chance that thewhole class of millionaires were more or less bankrupt too, and thebanks were forced to let the mice escape with the rats; but, insum, education without capital could always be taken by thethroat and forced to disgorge its gains, nor was it helped by theknowledge that no one intended it, but that all alike suffered.Silence347Whether voluntary or mechanical the result for education wasthe same. The failure of the scientific scheme, without money toback it, was flagrant.The scientific scheme in theory was alone sound, for scienceshould be equivalent to money; in practice science was helplesswithout money. The weak holder was, in his own language, sureto be frozen out. Education must fit the complex conditions of anew society, always accelerating its movement, and its fitnesscould be known only from success. One looked about for exam-ples of success among the educated of one's time — the men bornin the thirties, and trained to professions. Within one's immediateacquaintance, three were typical : John Hay, Whitelaw Reid, andWilliam C. Whitney; all of whom owed their free hand to marriage,education serving only for ornament, but among whom, in 1893,William C. Whitney was far and away the most popular type.Newspapers might prate about wealth till commonplace printwas exhausted, but as matter of habit, few Americans envied thevery rich for anything the most of them got out of money. NewYork might occasionally fear them, but more often laughed orsneered at them, and never showed them respect. Scarcely oneof the very rich men held any position in society by virtue of hiswealth, or could have been elected to an office, or even into a goodclub. Setting aside the few, like Pierpont Morgan, whose socialposition had little to do with greater or less wealth, riches were inNew York no object of envy on account of the joys they broughtin their train, and Whitney was not even one of the very rich;yet in his case the envy was palpable. There was reason for it.Already in 1893 Whitney had finished with politics after havinggratified every ambition, and swung the country almost at hiswill; he had thrown away the usual objects of political ambitionlike the ashes of smoked cigarettes; had turned to other amuse-ments, satiated every taste, gorged every appetite, won everyobject that New York afforded, and, not yet satisfied, had carriedhis field of activity abroad, until New York no longer knew what348The Education of Henry Adamsmost to envy, his horses or his houses. He had succeeded pre-cisely where Clarence King had failed.Barely forty years had passed since all these men started in abunch to race for power, and the results were fixed beyond rever-sal; but one knew no better in 1894 than in 1854 what an Ameri-can education ought to be in order to count as success. Evengranting that it counted as money, its value could not be calledgeneral. America contained scores of men worth five millions orupwards, whose lives were no more worth living than those oftheir cooks, and to whom the task of making money equivalentto education offered more difficulties than to Adams the task ofmaking education equivalent to money. Social position seemed tohave value still, while education counted for nothing. A mathe-matician, linguist, chemist, electrician, engineer, if fortunate,might average a value of ten dollars a day in the open market.An administrator, organizer, manager, with mediaeval qualitiesof energy and will, but no education beyond his special branch,would probably be worth at least ten times as much.Society had failed to discover what sort of education suited itbest. Wealth valued social position and classical education ashighly as either of these valued wealth, and the women still tendedto keep the scales even. For anything Adams could see he washimself as contented as though he had been educated; whileClarence King, whose education was exactly suited to theory,had failed; and Whitney, who was no better educated than Adams,had achieved phenomenal success.Had Adams in 1894 been starting in life as he did in 1854, hemust have repeated that all he asked of education was the facileuse of the four old tools: Mathematics, French, German, andSpanish. With these he could still make his way to any objectwithin his vision, and would have a decisive advantage over ninerivals in ten. Statesman or lawyer, chemist or electrician, priestor professor, native or foreign, he would fear none.King's breakdown, physical as well as financial, brought theSilence349indirect gain to Adams that, on recovering strength, King in-duced him to go to Cuba, where, in January, 1894, they driftedinto the little town of Santiago. The picturesque Cuban society,which King knew well, was more amusing than any other thatone had yet discovered in the whole broad world, but made noprofession of teaching anything unless it were Cuban Spanish orthe danza; and neither on his own nor on King's account did thevisitor ask any loftier study than that of the buzzards floating onthe trade-wind down the valley to Dos Bocas, or the colors of seaand shore at sunrise from the height of the Gran Piedra; but, asthough they were still twenty years old and revolution were asyoung as they, the decaying fabric, which had never been solid, fellon their heads and drew them with it into an ocean of mischief.In the half-century between 1850 and 1900, empires were alwaysfalling on one's head, and, of all lessons, these constant politicalconvulsions taught least. Since the time of Rameses, revolutionshave raised more doubts than they solved, but they have some-times the merit of changing one's point of view, and the Cubanrebellion served to sever the last tie that attached Adams to aDemocratic administration. He thought that President Cleve-land could have settled the Cuban question, without war, had hechosen to do his duty, and this feeling, generally held by the Demo-cratic Party, joined with the stress of economical needs and thegold standard to break into bits the old organization and to leaveno choice between parties. The new American, whether con-sciously or not, had turned his back on the nineteenth centurybefore he was done with it; the gold standard, the protective sys-tem, and the laws of mass could have no other outcome, and, asso often before, the movement, once accelerated by attemptingto impede it, had the additional, brutal consequence of crushingequally the good and the bad that stood in its way.The lesson was old — so old that it became tedious. One hadstudied nothing else since childhood, and wearied of it. For yetanother year Adams lingered on these outskirts of the vortex,35°The Education of Henry Adamsamong the picturesque, primitive types of a world which had neverbeen fairly involved in the general motion, and were the moreamusing for their torpor. After passing the winter with King inthe West Indies, he passed the summer with Hay in the Yellow-stone, and found there little to study. The Geysers were an oldstory; the Snake River posed no vital statistics except in its ford-ings; even the Tetons were as calm as they were lovely; while thewapiti and bear, innocent of strikes and corners, laid no traps. Inreturn the party treated them with affection. Never did a bandless bloody or bloodthirsty wander over the roof of the continent.Hay loved as little as Adams did, the labor of skinning and butcher-ing big game; he had even outgrown the sedate, middle-aged, medi-tative joy of duck-shooting, and found the trout of the Yellowstonetoo easy a prey. Hallett Phillips himself, who managed the party,loved to play Indian hunter without hunting so much as a field-mouse; Iddings the geologist was reduced to shooting only for thetable, and the guileless prattle of Billy Hofer alone taught thesimple life. Compared with the Rockies of 187 1, the sense of wild-ness had vanished; one saw no possible adventures except to breakone's neck as in chasing an aniseed fox. Only the more intelligentponies scented an occasional friendly and sociable bear.When the party came out of the Yellowstone, Adams went onalone to Seattle and Vancouver to inspect the last American rail-way systems yet untried. They, too, offered little new learning,and no sooner had he finished this debauch of Northwestern geog-raphy than with desperate thirst for exhausting the Americanfield, he set out for Mexico and the Gulf, making a sweep of theCaribbean and clearing up, in these six or eight months, at leasttwenty thousand miles of American land and water.He was beginning to think, when he got back to Washington inApril, 1895, that he knew enough about the edges of life — tropi-cal islands, mountain solitudes, archaic law, and retrograde types.Infinitely more amusing and incomparably more picturesquethan civilization, they educated only artists, and, as one's sixtiethSilence351year approached, the artist began to die; only a certain intensecerebral restlessness survived which no longer responded to sen-sual stimulants; one was driven from beauty to beauty as thoughart were a trotting-match. For this, one was in some degree pre-pared, for the old man had been a stage-type since drama began;but one felt some perplexity to account for failure on the oppositeor mechanical side, where nothing but cerebral action was needed.Taking for granted that the alternative to art was arithmetic,he plunged deep into statistics, fancying that education wouldfind the surest bottom there; and the study proved the easiesthe had ever approached. Even the Government volunteered un-limited statistics, endless columns of figures, bottomless aver-ages merely for the asking. At the Statistical Bureau, Worthing-ton Ford supplied any material that curiosity could imagine forfilling the vast gaps of ignorance, and methods for applying theplasters of fact. One seemed for a while to be winning ground,and one's averages projected themselves as laws into the future.Perhaps the most perplexing part of the study lay in the attitudeof the statisticians, who showed no enthusiastic confidence intheir own figures. They should have reached certainty, but theytalked like other men who knew less. The method did not resultin faith. Indeed, every increase of mass — of volume and velocity— seemed to bring in new elements, and, at last, a scholar, freshin arithmetic and ignorant of algebra, fell into a superstitiousterror of complexity as the sink of facts. Nothing came out as itshould. In principle, according to figures, any one could set upor pull down a society. One could frame no sort of satisfactoryanswer to the constructive doctrines of Adam Smith, or to thedestructive criticisms of Karl Marx or to the anarchistic impre-cations of Elisee Reclus. One revelled at will in the ruin of everysociety in the past, and rejoiced in proving the prospective over-throw of every society that seemed possible in the future; but mean-while these societies which violated every law, moral, arithmetical,and economical, not only propagated each other, but produced352The Education of Henry Adamsalso fresh complexities with every propagation and developed masswith every complexity.The human factor was worse still.Since the stupefying dis-covery of Pteraspis in 1867, nothing had so confused the student asthe conduct of mankind in the fin-de-siecle. No one seemed verymuch concerned about this world or the future, unless it mightbe the anarchists, and they only because they disliked the present.Adams disliked the present as much as they did, and his interestin future society was becoming slight, yet he was kept alive byirritation at finding his life so thin and fruitless. Meanwhile hewatched mankind march on, like a train of pack-horses on theSnake River, tumbling from one morass into another, and atshort intervals, for no reason but temper, falling to butchery, likeCain. Since 1850, massacres had become so common that so-ciety scarcely noticed them unless they summed up hundreds ofthousands, as in Armenia; wars had been almost continuous, andwere beginning again in Cuba, threatening in South Africa, andpossible in Manchuria; yet impartial judges thought them allnot merely unnecessary, but foolish — induced by greed of thecoarsest class, as though the Pharaohs or the Romans were stillrobbing their neighbors. The robbery might be natural and in-evitable, but the murder seemed altogether archaic.At one moment of perplexity to account for this trait of Pteraspis,or shark, which seemed to have survived every moral improvementof society, he took to study of the religious press. Possibly growthin human nature might show itself there. He found no need tospeak unkindly of it; but, as an agent of motion, he preferred onthe whole the vigor of the shark, with its chances of betterment;and he very gravely doubted, from his aching consciousness ofreligious void, whether any large fraction of society cared for afuture life, or even for the present one, thirty years hence. Not anact, or an expression, or an image, showed depth of faith or hope.The object of education, therefore, was changed. For manyyears it had lost itself in studying what the world had ceased toSilence353care for; if it were to begin again, it must try to find out what themass of mankind did care for, and why. Religion, politics, sta-tistics, travel had thus far led to nothing. Even the Chicago Fairhad only confused the roads. Accidental education could go nofurther, for one's mind was already littered and stuffed beyondhope with the millions of chance images stored away without orderin the memory. One might as well try to educate a gravel-pit. Thetask was futile, which disturbed a student less than the discoverythat, in pursuing it, he was becoming himself ridiculous. Nothingis more tiresome than a superannuated pedagogue.For the moment he was rescued, as often before, by a woman.Towards midsummer, 1895, Mrs. Cabot Lodge bade him followher to Europe with the Senator and her two sons. The study ofhistory is useful to the historian by teaching him his ignorance ofwomen; and the mass of this ignorance crushes one who is familiarenough with what are called historical sources to realize how fewwomen have ever been known. The woman who is known onlythrough a man is known wrong, and excepting one or two likeMme. de Sevigne, no woman has pictured herself. The Americanwoman of the nineteenth century will live only as the man sawher; probably she will be less known than the woman of the eight-eenth ; none of the female descendants of Abigail Adams can everbe nearly so familiar as her letters have made her; and all this ispure loss to history, for the American woman of the nineteenthcentury was much better company than the American man;she was probably much better company than her grandmothers.With Mrs. Lodge and her husband, Senator since 1893, Adams'srelations had been those of elder brother or uncle since 1871 whenCabot Lodge had left his examination-papers on Assistant Pro-fessor Adams's desk, and crossed the street to Christ Church inCambridge to get married. With Lodge himself, as scholar, fellowinstructor, co-editor of the North American Review, and politicalreformer from 1873 to 1878, he had worked intimately, but withhim afterwards as politician he had not much relation; and since354The Education of Henry AdamsLodge had suffered what Adams thought the misfortune of becom-ing not only a Senator but a Senator from Massachusetts — asingular social relation which Adams had known only as fatal tofriends — a superstitious student, intimate with the laws of his-torical fatality, would rather have recognized him only as anenemy; but apart from this accident he valued Lodge highly, andin the waste places of average humanity had been greatly de-pendent on his house. Senators can never be approached withsafety, but a Senator who has a very superior wife and several su-perior children who feel no deference for Senators as such, maybe approached at times with relative impunity while they keephim under restraint.Where Mrs. Lodge summoned, one followed with gratitude,and so it chanced that in August one found one's self for the firsttime at Caen, Coutances, and Mont-Saint-Michel in Normandy.If history had a chapter with which he thought himself familiar,it was the twelfth and thirteenth centuries; yet so little has laborto do with knowledge that these bare playgrounds of the lecturesystem turned into green and verdurous virgin forests merelythrough the medium of younger eyes and fresher minds. His Ger-man bias must have given his youth a terrible twist, for the Lodgessaw at a glance what he had thought unessential because un-Ger-man. They breathed native air in the Normandy of 1200, a com-pliment which would have seemed to the Senator lacking in taste oreven in sense when addressed to one of a class of men who passedlife in trying to persuade themselves and the public that theybreathed nothing less American than a blizzard; but this atmos-phere, in the touch of a real emotion, betrayed the unconscioushumor of the senatorial mind. In the thirteenth century, by anunusual chance, even a Senator became natural, simple, interested,cultivated, artistic, liberal — genial.Through the Lodge eyes the old problem became new and per-sonal; it threw off all association with the German lecture-room.One could not at first see what this novelty meant; it had the airSilence355of mere antiquarian emotion like Wenlock Abbey and Pteraspis;but it expelled archaic law and antiquarianism once for all, with-out seeming conscious of it; and Adams drifted back to Washing-ton with a new sense of history. Again he wandered south, andin April returned to Mexico with the Camerons to study thecharms of pulque and Churriguerresque architecture. In May heran through Europe again with Hay, as far south as Ravenna.There came the end of the passage. After thus covering once more,in 1896, many thousand miles of the old trails, Adams went homein October, with every one else, to elect McKinley President andto start the world anew.For the old world of public men and measures since 1870,Adams wept no tears. Within or without, during or after it, aspartisan or historian, he never saw anything to admire in it, oranything he wanted to save; and in this respect he reflected onlythe public mind which balanced itself so exactly between the un-popularity of both parties as to express no sympathy with either.Even among the most powerful men of that generation he knewnone who had a good word to say for it. No period so thoroughlyordinary had been known in American politics since ChristopherColumbus first disturbed the balance of American society; butthe natural result of such lack of interest in public affairs, in asmall society like that of Washington, led an idle bystander todepend abjectly on intimacy of private relation. One draggedone's self down the long vista of Pennsylvania Avenue, by leaningheavily on one's friends, and avoiding to look at anything else.Thus life had grown narrow with years, more and more concen-trated on the circle of houses round La Fayette Square, whichhad no direct or personal share in power except in the case of Mr.Blaine whose tumultuous struggle for existence held him apart.Suddenly Mr. McKinley entered the White House and laid hishand heavily on this special group. In a moment the whole nestso slowly constructed, was torn to pieces and scattered over theworld. Adams found himself alone. John Hay took his orders356The Education of Henry Adamsfor London. Rockhill departed to Athens. Cecil Spring-Rice hadbeen buried in Persia. Cameron refused to remain in public lifeeither at home or abroad, and broke up his house on the Square.Only the Lodges and Roosevelts remained, but even they wereat once absorbed in the interests of power. Since 1 861, no suchsocial convulsion had occurred.Even this was not quite the worst. To one whose interests laychiefly in foreign affairs, and who, at this moment, felt most stronglythe nightmare of Cuban, Hawaiian, and Nicaraguan chaos, theman in the State Department seemed more important than theman in the White House. Adams knew no one in the UnitedStates fit to manage these matters in the face of a hostile Europe,and had no candidate to propose; but he was shocked beyond allrestraints of expression to learn that the President meant to putSenator John Sherman in the State Department in order to makea place for Mr. Hanna in the Senate. Grant himself had done noth-ing that seemed so bad as this to one who had lived long enoughto distinguish between the ways of presidential jobbery, if notbetween the jobs. John Sherman, otherwise admirably fitted forthe place, a friendly influence for nearly forty years, was noto-riously feeble and quite senile, so that the intrigue seemed toAdams the betrayal of an old friend as well as of the State Depart-ment. One might have shrugged one's shoulders had the Presidentnamed Mr. Hanna his Secretary of State, for Mr. Hanna was aman of force if not of experience, and selections much worse thanthis had often turned out well enough; but John Sherman mustinevitably and tragically break down.The prospect for once was not less vile than the men. One canbear coldly the jobbery of enemies, but not that of friends, and toAdams this kind of jobbery seemed always infinitely worse thanall the petty money bribes ever exploited by the newspapers.Nor was the matter improved by hints that the President mightcall John Hay to the Department whenever John Sherman shouldretire. Indeed, had Hay been even unconsciously party to such anSilence357intrigue, he would have put an end, once for all, to further con-cern in public affairs on his friend's part; but even without thislast disaster, one felt that Washington had become no longerhabitable. Nothing was left there but solitary contemplation ofMr. McKinley's ways which were not likely to be more amusingthan the ways of his predecessors; or of senatorial ways, whichoffered no novelty of what the French language expressively callsembetement; or of poor Mr. Sherman's ways which would surelycause anguish to his friends. Once more, one must go!Nothing was easier! On and off, one had done the same thingsince the year 1858, at frequent intervals, and had now reachedthe month of March, 1897; yet, as the whole result of six years'dogged effort to begin a new education, one could not recommendit to the young. The outlook lacked hope. The object of travel hadbecome more and more dim, ever since the gibbering ghost of theCivil Law had been locked in its dark closet, as far back as i860.Noah's dove had not searched the earth for resting-places so care-fully, or with so little success. Any spot on land or water satis-fies a dove who wants and finds rest; but no perch suits a doveof sixty years old, alone and uneducated, who has lost his tasteeven for olives. To this, also, the young may be driven, as educa-tion, and the lesson fails in humor; but it may be worth knowing tosome of them that the planet offers hardly a dozen places where anelderly man can pass a week alone without ennui, and none at allwhere he can pass a year.Irritated by such complaints, the world naturally answers thatno man of sixty should live, which is doubtless true, though notoriginal. The man of sixty, with a certain irritability proper to hisyears, retorts that the world has no business to throw on him thetask of removing its carrion, and that while he remains he has aright to require amusement — or at least education, since this costsnothing to any one — and that a world which cannot educate,will not amuse, and is ugly besides, has even less right to exist thanhe. Both views seem sound; but the world wearily objects to be358The Education of Henry Adamscalled by epithets what society always admits in practice; for noone likes to be told that he is a bore, or ignorant, or even ugly;and having nothing to say in its defence, it rejoins that, what-ever license is pardonable in youth, the man of sixty who wishesconsideration had better hold his tongue. This truth also has thedefect of being too true. The rule holds equally for men of half thatage. Only the very young have the right to betray their ignoranceElderly people commonly know enough not toor ill-breeding.betray themselves.Exceptions are plenty on both sides, as the Senate knew to itsacute suffering; but young or old, women or men, seemed agreedon one point with singular unanimity; each praised silence inothers. Of all characteristics in human nature, this has been oneof the most abiding. Mere superficial gleaning of what, in the longhistory of human expression, has been said by the fool or unsaidby the wise, shows that, for once, no difference of opinion has everexisted on this. "Even a fool," said the wisest of men, "when heholdeth his peace, is counted wise," and still more often, the wisestof men, when he spoke the highest wisdom, has been counted afool. They agreed only on the merits of silence in others. Socratesmade remarks in its favor, which should have struck the Atheniansas new to them; but of late the repetition had grown tiresome.Thomas Carlyle vociferated his admiration of it. Matthew Arnoldthought it the best form of expression; and Adams thought Mat-thew Arnold the best form of expression in his time. AlgernonSwinburne called it the most noble to the end. Alfred de Vigny'sdying wolf remarked: —"A voir ce que Ton fut sur terre et ce qu'on laisse,Seul le silence est grand; tout le reste est faiblesse.""When one thinks what one leaves in the world when one dies,Only silence is strong, — all the rest is but lies."Even Byron, whom a more brilliant era of genius seemed to haveSilence359decided to be but an indifferent poet, had ventured to affirmthat —"The Alp's snow summit nearer heaven is seenThan the volcano's fierce eruptive crest;"with other verses, to the effect that words are but a "temporarytorturing flame"; of which no one knew more than himself. Theevidence of the poets could not be more emphatic: —"Silent, while years engrave the brow!Silent, — the best are silent now!"Although none of these great geniuses had shown faith in silenceas a cure for their own ills or ignorance, all of them, and all philos-ophy after them, affirmed that no man, even at sixty, had everbeen known to attain knowledge; but that a very few were believedto have attained ignorance, which was in result the same. Morethan this, in every society worth the name, the man of sixty hadbeen encouraged to ride this hobby— the Pursuit of Ignorancein Silence — as though it were the easiest way to get rid of him.In America the silence was more oppressive than the ignorance;but perhaps elsewhere the world might still hide some haunt offutilitarian silence where content reigned— although long searchhad not revealed it — and so the pilgrimage began anew!The first step led to London where John Hay was to be estab-lished. One had seen so many American Ministers received inLondon that the Lord Chamberlain himself scarcely knew moreabout it; education could not be expected there; but there Adamsarrived, April 21, 1897, as though thirty-six years were so manydays, for Queen Victoria still reigned and one saw little change inSt. James's Street. True, Carlton House Terrace, like the streetsof Rome, actually squeaked and gibbered with ghosts, till one feltlike Odysseus before the press of shadows, daunted by a "bloodlessfear"; but in spring London is pleasant, and it was more cheerythan ever in May, 1897, when every one was welcoming the return360The Education of Henry Adamsof life after the long winter since 1893. One's fortunes, or one'sfriends' fortunes, were again in flood.This amusement could not be prolonged, for one found one'sself the oldest Englishman in England, much too familiar withfamily jars better forgotten, and old traditions better unknown.No wrinkled Tannhauser, returning to the Wartburg, needed awrinkled Venus to show him that he was no longer at home, andthat even penitence was a sort of impertinence. He slipped away toParis, and set up a household at St. Germain where he taught andlearned French history for nieces who swarmed under the vener-able cedars of the Pavilion d'Angouleme, and rode about the greenforest-alleys of St. Germain and Marly. From time to time Haywrote humorous laments, but nothing occurred to break the sum-mer-peace of the stranded Tannhauser, who slowly began to feelat home in France as in other countries he had thought more home-like. At length, like other dead Americans, he went to Paris be-cause he could go nowhere else, and lingered there till the Hayscame by, in January, 1898; and Mrs. Hay, who had been a stanchand strong ally for twenty years, bade him go with them to Egypt.Adams cared little to see Egypt again, but he was glad to seeHay, and readily drifted after him to the Nile. What they sawand what they said had as little to do with education as possible,until one evening, as they were looking at the sun set across theNile from Assouan, Spencer Eddy brought them a telegram toannounce the sinking of the Maine in Havana Harbor. This wasthe greatest stride in education since 1865, but what did it teach?One leant on a fragment of column in the great hall at Karnakand watched a jackal creep down the debris of ruin. The jackal'sancestors had surely crept up the same wall when it was building.What was his view about the value of silence? One lay in thesands and watched the expression of the Sphinx. Brooks Adamshad taught him that the relation between civilizations was thatof trade. Henry wandered, or was storm-driven, down the coast.He tried to trace out the ancient harbor of Ephesus. He wentSilence361over to Athens, picked up Rockhill, and searched for the harborof Tiryns; together they went on to Constantinople and studiedthe great walls of Constantine and the greater domes of Justin-ian. His hobby had turned into a camel, and he hoped, if he rodelong enough in silence, that at last he might come on a city ofthought along the great highways of exchange.