CHAPTER XXIICHICAGO (1893)DRIFTING in the dead-water of the fin-de-siecle — andduring this last decade every one talked, and seemedto fed fin-de-siecle — where not a breath stirred the idleair of education or fretted the mental torpor of self-content, onelived alone. Adams had long ceased going into society. For yearshe had not dined out of his own house, and in public his face wasas unknown as that of an extinct statesman. He had often noticedthat six months' oblivion amounts to newspaper-death, and thatresurrection is rare. Nothing is easier, if a man wants it, than rest,profound as the grave.His friends sometimes took pity on him, and came to share ameal or pass a night on their passage south or northwards, butexistence was, on the whole, exceedingly solitary, or seemed so tohim. Of the society favorites who made the life of every dinner-table and of the halls of Congress — Tom Reed, Bourke Cockran,Edward Wolcott — he knew not one. Although Calvin Brice washis next neighbor for six years, entertaining lavishly as no one hadever entertained before in Washington, Adams never entered hishouse. W. C. Whitney rivalled Senator Brice in hospitality, andwas besides an old acquaintance of the reforming era, but Adamssaw him as little as he saw his chief, President Cleveland, or Presi-dent Harrison or Secretary Bayard or Blaine or Olney. One hasno choice but to go everywhere or nowhere. No one may pick andchoose between houses, or accept hospitality without returning it.He loved solitude as little as others did; but he was unfit for socialwork, and he sank under the surface.Luckily for such helpless animals as solitary men, the world isnot only good-natured but even friendly and generous; it lovesto pardon if pardon is not demanded as a right. Adams's social33 2The Education of Henry Adamsoffences were many, and no one was more sensitive to it thanhimself; but a few houses always remained which he could enterwithout being asked, and quit without being noticed. One wasJohn Hay's; another was Cabot Lodge's; a third led to an intimacywhich had the singular effect of educating him in knowledge ofthe very class of American politician who had done most to blockhis intended path in life. Senator Cameron of Pennsylvania hadmarried in 1880 a young niece of Senator John Sherman of Ohio,thus making an alliance of dynastic importance in politics, andin society a reign of sixteen years, during which Mrs. Cameronand Mrs. Lodge led a career, without precedent and without suc-cession, as the dispensers of sunshine over Washington. Both ofthem had been kind to Adams, and a dozen years of this intimacyhad made him one of their habitual household, as he was of Hay's.In a small society, such ties between houses become political andsocial force. Without intention or consciousness, they fix one'sstatus in the world. Whatever one's preferences in politics mightbe, one's house was bound to the Republican interest when sand-wiched between Senator Cameron, John Hay, and Cabot Lodge,with Theodore Roosevelt equally at home in them all, and CecilSpring-Rice to unite them by impartial variety. The relation wasdaily, and the alliance undisturbed by power or patronage, sinceMr. Harrison, in those respects, showed little more taste than Mr.Cleveland for the society and interests of this particular band offollowers, whose relations with the White House were sometimescomic, but never intimate.In February, 1893, Senator Cameron took his family to SouthCarolina, where he had bought an old plantation at Coffin's Pointon St. Helena Island, and Adams, as one of the family, was taken,with the rest, to open the new experience. From there he went onto Havana, and came back to Coffin's Point to linger till nearApril. In May the Senator took his family to Chicago to see theExposition, and Adams went with them. Early in June, all sailedfor England together, and at last, in the middle of July, all foundChicago333themselves in Switzerland, at Prangins, Chamounix, and Zermatt.On July 22 they drove across the Furka Pass and went down byrail to Lucerne.Months of close contact teach character, if character has inter-est; and to Adams the Cameron type had keen interest, ever sinceit had shipwrecked his career in the person of President Grant.Perhaps it owed life to Scotch blood ; perhaps to the blood of Adamand Eve, the primitive strain of man ; perhaps only to the bloodof the cottager working against the blood of the townsman; butwhatever it was, one liked it for its simplicity. The Pennsylvaniamind, as minds go, was not complex; it reasoned little and nevertalked; but in practical matters it was the steadiest of all Ameri-can types; perhaps the most efficient; certainly the safest.Adams had printed as much as this in his books, but had neverbeen able to find a type to describe, the two great historical Penn-sylvanians having been, as every one had so often heard, BenjaminFranklin of Boston and Albert Gallatin of Geneva. Of AlbertGallatin, indeed, he had made a voluminous study and an elabo-rate picture, only to show that he was, if American at all, aNew Yorker, with a Calvinistic strain — rather Connecticut thanPennsylvanian. The true Pennsylvanian was a narrower type; asnarrow as the kirk; as shy of other people's narrowness as a Yankee;as self-limited as a Puritan farmer. To him, none but Pennsyl-vanians were white. Chinaman, negro, Dago, Italian, English-man, Yankee — all was one in the depths of Pennsylvanian con-sciousness. The mental machine could run only on what it tookfor American lines. This was familiar, ever since one's study ofPresident Grant in 1869; but in 1893, as then, the type was admir-ably strong and useful if one wanted only to run on the same lines.Practically the Pennsylvanian forgot his prejudices when he alliedhis interests. He then became supple in action and large in motive,whatever he thought of his colleagues. When he happened to beright — which was, of course, whenever one agreed with him — hewas the strongest American in America. As an ally he was worth334The Education of Henry Adamsall the rest, because he understood his own class, who were alwaysa majority; and knew how to deal with them as no New Englandercould. If one wanted work done in Congress, one did wisely toavoid asking a New Englander to do it. A Pennsylvanian notonly could do it, but did it willingly, practically, and intelligently.Never in the range of human possibilities had a Cameron be-lieved in an Adams — or an Adams in a Cameron — but they hadcuriously enough, almost always worked together. The Cameronshad what the Adamses thought the political vice of reaching theirobjects without much regard to their methods. The loftiest virtueof the Pennsylvania machine had never been its scrupulous purityor sparkling professions. The machine worked by coarse means oncoarse interests; but its practical success had been the most curi-ous subject of study in American history. When one summed upthe results of Pennsylvanian influence, one inclined to think thatPennsylvania set up the Government in 1789; saved it in 1861;created the American system; developed its iron and coal power;and invented its great railways. Following up the same line, inhis studies of American character, Adams reached the result —to him altogether paradoxical — that Cameron's qualities anddefects united in equal share to make him the most useful memberof the Senate.In the interest of studying, at last, a perfect and favorable speci-men of this American type which had so persistently suppressedhis own, Adams was slow to notice that Cameron strongly influ-enced him, but he could not see a trace of any influence which heexercised on Cameron. Not an opinion or a view of his on anysubject was ever reflected back on him from Cameron's mind;not even an expression or a fact. Yet the difference in age wastrifling, and in education slight. On the other hand, Cameronmade deep impression on Adams, and in nothing so much as onthe great subject of discussion that year — the question of silver.Adams had taken no interest in the matter, and knew nothingabout it, except as a very tedious hobby of his friend Dana Horton;Chicago335but inevitably, from the moment he was forced to choose sides, hewas sure to choose silver. Every political idea and personal preju-dice he ever dallied with held him to the silver standard, and madea barrier between him and gold. He knew well enough all that wasto be said for the gold standard as economy, but he had never inhis life taken politics for a pursuit of economy. One might havea political or an economical policy; one could not have both atthe same time. This was heresy in the English school, but it hadalways been law in the American. Equally he knew all that was tobe said on the moral side of the question, and he admitted that hisinterests were, as Boston maintained, wholly on the side of gold;but, had they been ten times as great as they were, he could nothave helped his bankers or croupiers to load the dice and packthe cards to make sure his winning the stakes. At least he wasbound to profess disapproval — or thought he was. From earlyests, but he was certain of one law that ruled all others — massesof men invariably follow interests in deciding morals. Moralityis a private and costly luxury. The morality of the silver or goldstandards was to be decided by popular vote, and the popularvote would be decided by interests; but on which side lay thelarger interest? To him the interest was political; he thought itprobably his last chance of standing up for his eighteenth-centuryprinciples, strict construction, limited powers, George Washington,John Adams, and the rest. He had, in a half-hearted way, strug-gled all his life against State Street, banks, capitalism altogether,as he knew it in old England or new England, and he was fatedto make his last resistance behind the silver standard.childhood his moral principles had struggled blindly with his inter-vFor him this result was clear, and if he erred, he erred in com-pany with nine men out of ten in Washington, for there was littledifference on the merits. Adams was sure to learn backwards, butthe case seemed entirely different with Cameron, a typical Pennsyl-vanian, a practical politician, whom all the reformers, includingall the Adamses, had abused for a lifetime for subservience to336The Education of Henry Adamsmoneyed interests and political jobbery. He was sure to go withthe banks and corporations which had made and sustained him.On the contrary, he stood out obstinately as the leading championof silver in the East. The reformers, represented by the EveningPost and Godkin, whose personal interests lay with the gold stand-ard, at once assumed that Senator Cameron had a personal interestin silver, and denounced his corruption as hotly as though he hadbeen convicted of taking a bribe. -More than silver and gold, the moral standard interested Ad-ams. His own interests were with gold, but he supported silver;the Evening Post 's and Godkin's interests were with gold, and theyfrankly said so, yet they avowedly pursued their interests even intopolitics; Cameron's interests had always been with the corporations,yet he supported silver. Thus morality required that Adams shouldbe condemned for going against his interests; that Godkin was vir-tuous in following his interests; and that Cameron was a scoundrelwhatever he did.Granting that one of the three was a moral idiot, which was it:—Adams or Godkin or Cameron? Until a Council or a Pope or aCongress or the newspapers or a popular election has decided aquestion of doubtful morality, individuals are apt to err, especiallywhen putting money into their own pockets; but in democracies,the majority alone gives law. To any one who knew the relativepopularity of Cameron and Godkin, the idea of a popular votebetween them seemed excessively humorous; yet the popular votein the end did decide against Cameron, for Godkin.qThe Boston moralist and reformer went on, as always, like Dr.Johnson, impatiently stamping his foot and following his interests,or his antipathies; but the true American, slow to grasp new andcomplicated ideas, groped in the dark to discover where his greaterinterest lay. As usual, the banks taught him. In the course of fiftyyears the banks taught one many wise lessons for which an insecthad to be grateful whether it liked them or not; but of all thelessons Adams learned from them, none compared in dramaticChicago337effect with that of July 22, 1893, when, after talking silver all themorning with Senator Cameron on the top of their travelling-carriage crossing the Furka Pass, they reached Lucerne in theafternoon, where Adams found letters from his brothers request-ing his immediate return to Boston because the community wasbankrupt and he was probably a beggar.If he wanted education, he knew no quicker mode of learning alesson than that of being struck on the head by it; and yet he washimself surprised at his own slowness to understand what hadstruck him. For several years a sufferer from insomnia, his firstthought was of beggary of nerves, and he made ready to face asleepless night, but although his mind tried to wrestle with theproblem how any man could be ruined who had, months before,paid off every dollar of debt he knew himself to owe, he gave upthat insoluble riddle in order to fall back on the larger principlethat beggary could be no more for him than it was for others whowere more valuable members of society, and, with that, he wentto sleep like a good citizen, and the next day started for Quincywhere he arrived August 7.As a starting-point for a new education at fifty-five years old, theshock of finding one's self suspended, for several months, over theedge of bankruptcy, without knowing how one got there, or howto get away, is to be strongly recommended. By slow degrees thesituation dawned on him that the banks had lent him, amongothers, some money — thousands of millions were — as bank-ruptcy — the same — for which he, among others, was respon-sible and of which he knew no more than they. The humor of thissituation seemed to him so much more pointed than the terror, asto make him laugh at himself with a sincerity he had been longstrange to. As far as he could comprehend, he had nothing to losethat he cared about, but the banks stood to lose their existence.Money mattered as little to him as to anybody, but money wastheir life. For the first time he had the banks in his power; he couldafford to laugh; and the whole community was in the same posi-338The Education of Henry Adamstion, though few laughed. All sat down on the banks and askedwhat the banks were going to do about it. To Adams the situa-tion seemed farcical, but the more he saw of it, the less he under-stood it. He was quite sure that nobody understood it muchbetter. Blindly some very powerful energy was at work, doingsomething that nobody wanted done. When Adams went to hisbank to draw a hundred dollars of his own money on deposit, thecashier refused to let him have more than fifty, and Adams ac-cepted the fifty without complaint because he was himself refusingto let the banks have some hundreds or thousands that belonged tothem. Each wanted to help the other, yet both refused to pay theirdebts, and he could find no answer to the question which was re-sponsible for getting the other into the situation, since lenders andborrowers were the same interest and socially the same person.Evidently the force was one; its operation was mechanical; itseffect must be proportional to its power; but no one knew what itmeant, and most people dismissed it as an emotion — a panic —that meant nothing.Men died like flies under the strain, and Boston grew suddenlyold, haggard, and thin. Adams alone waxed fat and was happy,for at last he had got hold of his world and could finish his educa-tion, interrupted for twenty years. He cared not whether it wereworth finishing, if only it amused; but he seemed, for the first timesince 1870, to feel that something new and curious was about tohappen to the world. Great changes had taken place since 1870 inthe forces at work; the old machine ran far behind its duty; some-where — somehow— it was bound to break down, and if it hap-pened to break precisely over one's head, it gave the better chancefor study.For the first time in several years he saw much of his brotherBrooks in Quincy, and was surprised to find him absorbed in thesame perplexities. Brooks was then a man of forty-five years old;a strong writer and a vigorous thinker who irritated too many Bos-ton conventions ever to suit the atmosphere; but the two brothersChicago339could talk to each other without atmosphere and were used toaudiences of one. Brooks had discovered or developed a law ofhistory that civilization followed the exchanges, and having workedit out for the Mediterranean was working it out for the Atlantic.Everything American, as well as most things European andAsiatic, became unstable by this law, seeking new equilibriumand compelled to find it. Loving paradox, Brooks, with the ad-vantages of ten years' study, had swept away much rubbish inthe effort to build up a new line of thought for himself, but hefound that no paradox compared with that of daily events. Thefacts were constantly outrunning his thoughts. The instabilitywas greater than he calculated; the speed of acceleration passedbounds. Among other general rules he laid down the paradox that,in the social disequilibrium between capital and labor, the logicaloutcome was not collectivism, but anarchism; and Henry madenote of it for study.By the time he got back to Washington on September 19, thestorm having partly blown over, life had taken on a new face, andone so interesting that he set off to Chicago to study the Exposi-tion again, and stayed there a fortnight absorbed in it. He foundmatter of study to fill a hundred years, and his education spreadover chaos. Indeed, it seemed to him as though, this year, educa-tion went mad. The silver question, thorny as it was, fell intorelations as simple as words of one syllable, compared with theproblems of credit and exchange that came to complicate it; andwhen one sought rest at Chicago, educational game started likerabbits from every building, and ran out of sight among thousandsof its kind before one could mark its burrow. The Expositionitself defied philosophy. One might find fault till the last gateclosed, one could still explain nothing that needed explanation.As a scenic display, Paris had never approached it, but theinconceivable scenic display consisted in its being there at all— more surprising, as it was, than anything else on the continent,Niagara Falls, the Yellowstone Geysers, and the whole railway34-0The Education of Henry Adamssystem thrown in, since these were all natural products in theirplace; while, since Noah's Ark, no such Babel of loose and ill-joined, such vague and ill-defined and unrelated thoughts andhalf-thoughts and experimental outcries as the Exposition, hadever ruffled the surface of the Lakes.speculative growth and product of the Beaux Arts artisticallyThe first astonishment became greater every day. That theExposition should be a natural growth and product of the North-west offered a step in evolution to startle Darwin; but that itshould be anything else seemed an idea more startling still; andeven granting it were not — admitting it to be a sort of industrial,induced to pass the summer on the shore of Lake Michigan —could it be made to seem at home there ? Was the American madeto seem at home in it? Honestly, he had the air of enjoying it asthough it were all his own; he felt it was good; he was proud ofit; for the most part, he acted as though he had passed his lifein landscape gardening and architectural decoration. If he hadnot done it himself, he had known how to get it done to suit him,as he knew how to get his wives and daughters dressed at Worth'sor Paquin's. Perhaps he could not do it again; the next time hewould want to do it himself and would show his own faults; but forthe moment he seemed to have leaped directly from Corinth andSyracuse and Venice, over the heads of London and New York,to impose classical standards on plastic Chicago. Critics had notrouble in criticising the classicism, but all trading cities had al-ways shown traders' taste, and, to the stern purist of religiousfaith, no art was thinner than Venetian Gothic. All trader's tastesmelt of bric-a-brac; Chicago tried at least to give her taste a lookof unity.One sat down to ponder on the steps beneath Richard Hunt'sdome almost as deeply as on the steps of Ara Cceli, and much to thesame purpose. Here was a breach of continuity— a rupture inhistorical sequence! Was it real, or only apparent ? One's personaluniverse hung on the answer, for, if the rupture was real and theChicago341new American world could take this sharp and conscious twisttowards ideals, one's personal friends would come in, at last, aswinners in the great American chariot-race for fame. If the peopleof the Northwest actually knew what was good when they saw it,they would some day talk about Hunt and Richardson, La Fargeand St. Gaudens, Burnham and McKim, and Stanford Whitewhen their politicians and millionaires were otherwise forgotten.The artists and architects who had done the work offered littleencouragement to hope it; they talked freely enough, but not interms that one cared to quote; and to them the Northwest refusedto look artistic. They talked as though they worked only for them-selves; as though art, to the Western people, was a stage decora-tion; a diamond shirt-stud; a paper collar; but possibly the archi-tects of Paestum and Girgenti had talked in the same way, and theGreek had said the same thing of Semitic Carthage two thousandyears ago.Jostled by these hopes and doubts, one turned to the exhibits forhelp, and found it. The industrial schools tried to teach so muchand so quickly that the instruction ran to waste. Some millionsof other people felt the same helplessness, but few of them wereseeking education, and to them helplessness seemed natural andnormal, for they had grown up in the habit of thinking a steam-engine or a dynamo as natural as the sun, and expected to under-stand one as little as the other. For the historian alone the Expo-sition made a serious effort. Historical exhibits were common, butthey never went far enough; none were thoroughly worked out.One of the best was that of the Cunard steamers, but still a studenthungry for results found himself obliged to waste a pencil andseveral sheets of paper trying to calculate exactly when, accordingto the given increase of power, tonnage, and speed, the growth ofthe ocean steamer would reach its limits. His figures brought him,he thought, to the year 1927; another generation to spare beforeforce, space, and time should meet. The ocean steamer ran thesurest line of triangulation into the future, because it was the34 2The Education of Henry Adamsnearest of man's products to a unity; railroads taught less becausethey seemed already finished except for mere increase in number;explosives taught most, but needed a tribe of chemists, physi-cists, and mathematicians to explain; the dynamo taught leastbecause it had barely reached infancy, and, if its progress was tobe constant at the rate of the last ten years, it would result ininfinite costless energy within a generation. One lingered longamong the dynamos, for they were new, and they gave to historya new phase. Men of science could never understand the ignoranceand naivete of the historian, who, when he came suddenly on anew power, asked naturally what it was; did it pull or did itpush? Was it a screw or thrust? Did it flow or vibrate? Was it awire or a mathematical line? And a score of such questions towhich he expected answers and was astonished to get none.Education ran riot at Chicago, at least for retarded mindswhich had never faced in concrete form so many matters of whichthey were ignorant. Men who knew nothing whatever — whohad never run a steam-engine, the simplest of forces — who hadnever put their hands on a lever — had never touched an electricbattery — never talked through a telephone, and had not theshadow of a notion what amount of force was meant by a wattor an ampere or an erg, or any other term of measurement intro-duced within a hundred years — had no choice but to sit down onthe steps and brood as they had never brooded on the benches ofHarvard College, either as student or professor, aghast at whatthey had said and done in all these years, and still more ashamedof the childlike ignorance and babbling futility of the societythat let them say and do it. The historical mind can think onlyin historical processes, and probably this was the first time sincehistorians existed, that any of them had sat down helpless beforeBefore a metaphysical or a theologicala mechanical sequence.or a political sequence, most historians had felt helpless, but thesingle clue to which they had hitherto trusted was the unity ofnatural force.Chicago343Did he himself quite know what he meant? Certainly not! Ifhe had known enough to state his problem, his education wouldhave been complete at once. Chicago asked in 1893 for the firsttime the question whether the American people knew where theywere driving. Adams answered, for one, that he did not know, butwould try to find out. On reflecting sufficiently deeply, under theshadow of Richard Hunt's architecture, he decided that the Amer-ican people probably knew no more than he did; but that theymight still be driving or drifting unconsciously to some point inthought, as their solar system was said to be drifting towardssome point in space; and that, possibly, if relations enough couldbe observed, this point might be fixed. Chicago was the first ex-pression of American thought as a unity; one must start there.Washington was the second. When he got back there, he fellheadlong into the extra session of Congress called to repeal theSilver Act. The silver minority made an obstinate attempt toprevent it, and most of the majority had little heart in the creationof a single gold standard. The banks alone, and the dealers inexchange, insisted upon it; the political parties divided according tocapitalistic geographical lines, Senator Cameron offering almostthe only exception; but they mixed with unusual good-temper, andmade liberal allowance for each others' actions and motives. Thestruggle was rather less irritable than such struggles generallywere, and it ended like a comedy. On the evening of the final vote,Senator Cameron came back from the Capitol with Senator Brice,Senator Jones, Senator Lodge, and Moreton Frewen, all in thegayest of humors as though they were rid of a heavy responsibility.Adams, too, in a bystander's spirit, felt light in mind. He had stoodup for his eighteenth century, his Constitution of 1789, his GeorgeWashington, his Harvard College, his Quincy, and his PlymouthPilgrims, as long as any one would stand up with him. He hadsaid it was hopeless twenty years before, but he had kept on, in thesame old attitude, by habit and taste, until he found himself alto-gether alone. He had hugged his antiquated dislike of bankers and344The Education of Henry Adamscapitalistic society until he had become little better than a crank.He had known for years that he must accept the regime, but hehad known a great many other disagreeable certainties — like age,senility, and death — against which one made what little resist-ance one could. The matter was settled at last by the people.For a hundred years, between 1793 and 1893, tne American peoplehad hesitated, vacillated, swayed forward and back, between twoforces, one simply industrial, the other capitalistic, centralizing, andmechanical. In 1893, the issue came on the single gold standard,and the majority at last declared itself, once for all, in favor ofthe capitalistic system with all its necessary machinery. All one'sfriends, all one's best citizens, reformers, churches, colleges, edu-cated classes, had joined the banks to force submission to capi-talism; a submission long foreseen by the mere law of mass. Ofall forms of society or government, this was the one he liked least,but his likes or dislikes were as antiquated as the rebel doctrine ofState rights. A capitalistic system had been adopted, and if it wereto be run at all, it must be run by capital and by capitalisticmethods; for nothing could surpass the nonsensity of trying torun so complex and so concentrated a machine by Southern andWestern farmers in grotesque alliance with city day-laborers, ashad been tried in 1800 and 1828, and had failed even under simpleconditions.There, education in domestic politics stopped. The rest wasquestion of gear; of running machinery; of economy; and involvedno disputed principle. Once admitted that the machine must beefficient, society might dispute in what social interest it should berun, but in any case it must work concentration. Such great revo-lutions commonly leave some bitterness behind, but nothing inpolitics ever surprised Henry Adams more than the ease with whichhe and his silver friends slipped across the chasm, and alighted onthe single gold standard and the capitalistic system with itsmethods; the protective tariff; the corporations and trusts; thetrades-unions and socialistic paternalism which necessarily madeChicago345their complement; the whole mechanical consolidation of force,which ruthlessly stamped out the life of the class into whichAdams was born, but created monopolies capable of controllingthe new energies that America adored.Society rested, after sweeping into the ash-heap these cindersof a misdirected education. After this vigorous impulse, nothingremained for a historian but to ask — how long and how far!