


iSSBSSSSSSSSSOSEH^ 


I 

1 
1 

I 
I 


Woods  Hole,  Mass. 


u/*^«»'=SJ 


Presented  by 
Dr.   Wm,   Amberson 


Marine  Biological  Laboratory  Library     I 


I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

1 

I 


3E3^S^^^^E 


3^E 


3^SE 


m 


John  Jacob  Abel,  M.D. 

.  . .  .  in  his  laboratory  in  the  old 
Physiology  Building  at  Hopkins 


John  Jacob  Ah  el,  m.d. 


A  Collection  of 

Papers  by  and  about 

The  Father  of 

American 

Pharmacology 


John 


INVESTIGATOR    • 


G/ 


-3 


ft  19 


Jacob  AheL  m.d. 


TEACHER    «     PROPHET     •     1857-1938 


THE     WILLIAMS     &amp;:     WILKINS     COMPANY 

Baltimore,  1957 


} 
» 


composed  and  printed  by 

Waverly  Press,  Inc. 
Mt.  Royal  &amp;  Guilford  Aves. 

Baltimore  2,  Md.,  U.S.A. 


Publishers  Foreword 

This  limited  edition  of  a  collection  of  papers  by  and  about  John 
Jacob  Abel  is,  like  many  of  Dr.  Abel's  own  endeavors,  a  labor  of  love. 
It  has  been  prepared  and  published  as  a  memorial  to  Dr.  Abel  on  the 
occasion  of  the  one-hundredth  anniversary  of  his  birth.  It  is  intended 
for  distribution  to  members  of  the  American  Society  for  Pharmacology 
and  Experimental  Therapeutics,  to  others  who  have  been  associated 
with  Dr.  Abel  and  his  work,  and  to  friends  of  ours  who  will,  we  think, 
be  interested. 

The  brief  recitation  of  a  bit  of  history  seems  requisite  for  two  rea- 
sons of  quite  unequal  importance.  The  first  and  least  important,  is  to 
justify  our  association  with  this  enterprise.  The  second  is  to  exhibit 
a  facet  in  the  career  of  Dr.  Abel  that  could  easily  be  quite  unknown 
to  many. 

In  1908  or  1909,  Dr.  Abel  conceived  the  idea  of  a  journal  to  serve 
as  means  of  communication  in  the  field  of  pharmacology.  In  his 
casting  about  for  means  of  bringing  the  idea  to  practical  result,  he 
encountered  Edward  B.  Passano,  then  proprietor  of  a  printing  concern 
called  Williams  &amp;:  Wilkins  Co.  That  company  had,  a  few  years  earlier, 
begun  to  specialize  in  the  printing  of  the  literature  of  science;  but  it 
had  done  no  publishing— i.e.,  it  had  not  assumed  the  risks  of  an  en- 
trepreneur. 

Dr.  Abel  convinced  Mr.  Passano  that  American  facilities  for  the 
communication  of  science  results  were  sadly  lacking,  and  persuaded 
him  that  such  a  field  of  endeavor  could  be  most  rewarding  and  might 
one  day  be  profitable. 

The  practical  result  was  that  the  printing  company  began,  in  1909, 
to  publish  The  Journal  of  Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Thera- 
peutics, Dr.  Abel  being  its  founder  and  editor  (1909-1932),  and  has 
continued  to  do  so  ever  since.  A  concomitant  result  was  the  inception 
during  the  next  decade,  under  the  aegis  of  Williams  &amp;  Wilkins,  of  a 
number  of  new  American  journals  in  science.  The  publishing  ven- 
ture was  extended  to  books  in  1920,  and  by  1925  it  appeared  to  be  of 
sufficient  volume  and  extent  to  justify  separate  corporate  existence. 
The  old  name,  with  a  slight  change,  was  retained  for  the  publishing 
business;  the  manufacturing  or  printing  branch  took  the  style, 
Waverly  Press,  Inc. 


Thus  Dr.  Abel  was  instrumental  in  bringing  a  publishing  house 
into  existence,  one  that  has  not  been  without  importance  to  American 
science;  at  least  it  did  pioneer  in  a  field  which,  in  the  early  years  of  the 
century,  was  anything  but  attractive  to  business  entrepreneurs.  To  be 
sure,  Dr.  Abel  did  not  work  alone.  But  without  his  interposition  and 
his  inspiration,  nothing  would  have  been  done.  Many  others  must 
have  deplored  the  lack  of  publishing  facilities  as  he  did.  But  he  had  the 
percipience  to  look  a  little  more  clearly  into  the  future  and  the  con- 
fidence that  enabled  him  to  make  others  share  his  vision. 

Probably  Dr.  Abel  himself  would  not  have  counted  the  establish- 
ment of  a  publishing  business  among  his  achievements.  Yet  it  is  cer- 
tain that  he  planted  the  seed  from  which  one  grew  and  equally  certain 
that  he  read  the  future  correctly. 

The  Williams  k  Wilkins  Company 
Waverly  Press,  Inc. 


VI 


Contents 


Abel  the  Prophet.  E.  K.  Marshall,  Jr 1 

John  Jacob  Abel— A  Portrait.  Paul  D.  Lamson 8 

On  the  Blood-Pressure-Raising  Constituent  of  the  Suprarenal  Cap- 
sule. John  J.  Abel  and  Albert  C.  Crawford 43 

On  the  Teaching  of  Pharmacology,  Materia  Medica,  and  Thera- 
peutics in  our  Medical  Schools.  John  J.  Abel 57 

On  the  Removal  of  Diffusible  Substances  from  the  Circulating 
Blood  by  Means  of  Dialysis.  Jofln  J.  Abel,  L.  G.  Rowntree, 
AND  B.  B.  Turner 73 

Crystalline  Insulin.  John  J.  Abel 76 


Vll 


Acknowledgment 


Grateful  acknowledgement  is  made  to  the  authors  and  original 
publishers  of  the  articles  in  this  book.  Without  their  permissions  to 
reprint  so  extensively  from  their  copyrighted  publications  this  tribute 
to  Dr.  Abel  would  not  have  been  possible. 

Abel  the  Prophet.  E.  K.  Marshall^  Jr. 

Reprinted  from  "The  Johns  Hopkins  Magazine,"  Volume  1, 
1950. 
John  Jacob  Abel— A  Portrait.  Paul  D.  Lamson. 

Reprinted  from  "Bulletin  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital,"  Vol- 
ume 68,  1941. 
On  the  Blood-Pressure-Raising  Constituent  of  the  Suprarenal 
Capsule.  John  J.  Abel  and  Albert  C.  Crawford. 
Reprinted  from  "Bulletin  of  The  Johns  Hopkins  Hospital,"  Vol- 
ume 8,  1897. 
On  the  Teaching  of  Pharmacology,  Materia  Medica,  and  Thera- 
peutics in  our  Medical  Schools.  John  J.  Abel. 
Reprinted  from  "The  Philadelphia  Medical  Journal,"  special 
number  on  Medical  Education,  September  1,  1900. 
On  the  Removal  of  Diffusible  Substances  from  the  Circulating 
Blood  by  Means  of  Dialysis.  John  J.  Abel,  L.  G.  Rowntree 
and  B.  B.  Turner. 
Reprinted  from  "Transactions  of  the  Association  of  American 
Physicians,"  Volume  28,   1913. 
Crystalline  Insulin.  John  J.  Abel. 

Reprinted    from    "Proceedings    of    the    National    Academy   of 
Sciences,"  Volume  12,  1926. 


VIU 


Abel  the  Prophet 


E.  K.  MARSHALL,  JR.,  M.D. 


In  the  fall  of  1936,  the  sulfa  drugs  were  just  beginning  to  be  used  in 
this  country.  Within  a  decade,  better  sulfa  drugs  were  introduced  and 
less  toxic  and  more  effective  remedies  like  penicillin  and  streptomycin 
cured  many  forms  of  infectious  disease.  However,  in  that  autumn  of 
1936,  I  knew  that  few  appreciated  that  the  introduction  of  the  sulfa 
drugs  would  completely  revolutionize  the  treatment  and  importance 
of  infectious  disease,  that  they  would  make  Ehrlich's  dream  of  a  harm- 
less magic  bullet  with  which  to  cure  disease  almost  come  true. 

On  Christmas  Eve  of  that  year,  I  called  on  my  old  teacher,  colleague, 
and  friend,  John  J.  Abel,  and  found  him  very  busy  in  his  laboratory. 
Having  known  him  for  over  a  quarter  of  a  century,  I  realized  that  the 
time  was  not  ripe  to  sit  for  a  long  chat,  and  without  removing  over- 
coat, I  sat  down  and  talked  with  him  for  the  duration  of  one  cigarette. 

When  I  arose,  the  old  gentleman  in  a  fatherly  way  put  his  arm 
around  my  shoulder  and  very  politely  piloted  me  to  the  door.  When 
we  arrived  there,  he  stopped  for  a  moment  and,  more  as  a  gesture  of 
politeness  than  anything  else,  he  asked  me  what  I  was  doing  now.  I 
told  him  I  had  been  very  busy  all  fall  with  the  pharmacology  of  the 
new  antibacterial  remedy,  sulfanilamide.  He  said,  "That's  fine,"  then 
jerked  up  and  with  a  characteristic  lift  of  the  eyebrows,  "What's  this 
all  about?" 

He  asked  a  couple  of  searching  questions  and  then  led  me  back 
into  the  room.  "Sit  down,  take  off  that  coat,  smoke  a  cigarette,  and  tell 
me  all  about  it." 

"Oh,  but  you're  very  busy,  Professor.  I'll  come  over  some  other 
time,"  I  replied. 

"Never  too  busy  to  hear  about  things  like  this,  my  boy,"  he  said. 

For  a  half  hour  or  more,  I  told  him  what  I  knew  about  this  new 
development  in  medicine.  He  asked  some  very  pertinent  questions, 
and  then  raised  his  head  and  with  a  faraway  look  said,  "My  God, 
Marshall,  wouldn't  Paul  Ehrlich  turn  over  in  his  grave? 

This  seventy-nine-year-old  scientist  sa\v  at  once  the  great  signifi- 


cance  of  what  had  happened  and  had  such  a  vision  of  the  future  that 
the  miracles  of  the  next  decade  might  not  have  surprised  him  if 
he  had  lived  to  see  them.  This  breadth  of  vision  in  foreseeing  im- 
portant developments  of  medicine  was  one  of  the  qualities  which  was 
responsible  for  much  of  Abel's  success  and  greatness. 

John  Jacob  Abel  belonged  to  that  small  group  of  men  who  made 
up  the  first  faculty  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  School  of  Medicine,  and,  in 
addition,  was  one  of  the  pioneers  who  helped  build  up  scientific 
medicine  in  America  to  the  high  place  which  it  now  occupies  in  the 
world.  This  is  not  the  place  to  review  Abel's  contributions  to  science, 
which  covered  many  subjects  during  a  period  no  less  than  half  a  cen- 
tury. However,  I  shall  try  to  point  out  many  instances  of  his  prophetic 
vision  in  regard  to  the  future  developments  which  were  to  take  place 
in  medicine. 

The  life  of  this  first  professor  of  pharmacology  in  the  Johns  Hop- 
kins University  began  on  a  farm  near  Cleveland,  Ohio,  on  the  nine- 
teenth of  May,  1857,  and  ended  in  Baltimore  on  May  26,  1938,  after 
a  long  career  in  American  experimental  medicine.  His  family  came 
from  the  Rhine  Valley  of  the  Palatinate.  He  had  no  scientific  fore- 
bears on  either  side.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  owed  his 
college  education  to  his  initiative 

He  received  his  Ph.B.  degree  from  the  University  of  Michigan  in 
1883,  but  had  an  interim  of  three  years  in  his  college  course,  during 
which  he  served  as  principal  of  a  high  school  at  La  Porte,  Indiana, 
Avhere  he  taught  Latin,  mathematics,  physics,  and  chemistry.  Abel 
must  have  looked  back  on  these  years  with  satisfaction,  for  it  was  in 
La  Porte  that  he  met  a  teacher  in  his  school,  whom  he  once  described 
as  a  "very  sweet,  mild  little  lady  with  a  great  deal  of  force."  This 
lady,  Mary  Hinman,  became  his  wife  and  was  his  companion  for  fifty- 
five  years.  She  stood  by  his  side  through  many  tribulations  and  en- 
couraged her  husband  to  acquire  a  broad  medical  and  scientific  edu- 
cation. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Abel's  happy  family  life  was  a 
potent  factor  in  his  scientific  career. 

After  graduation,  Abel  set  his  course  definitely  for  scientific  medi- 
cine as  his  life's  work.  Two  things  which  he  did  at  that  time  indicate 
his  ability  to  see  what  scientific  medicine  was  to  be  like  in  the  future. 
He  submitted  himself  to  a  prolonged,  broad,  fundamental  training, 
which  consisted  of  a  year  with  Newell  Martin  in  physiology  at  the 
Johns  Hopkins  and  then  seven  years  with  some  leading  teachers  in 
the  medical  schools  of  Europe.  He  thus  acquired  not  only  a  medical 

2 


degree,  but  a  broad  scientific  education,  and  Avas  prepared  tor  scien- 
tific medicine  in  a  way  which  in  this  country  was  only  recognized  as 
the  correct  one  some  thirty  or  forty  years  later. 

Also,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  at  this  time  Abel  had  a  clear 
vision  of  what  a  tremendous  role  chemistry  was  to  play  in  the  future 
of  scientific  medicine.  Irrespective  of  the  expense,  which  he  could 
ill  afford,  he  determined  to  be  prepared  for  this  coming  development. 
While  in  Europe  in  1889,  he  frequently  mentions  in  his  letters  the 
need  of  medical  chemistry  in  the  hospitals  in  this  country  and  wants 
to  come  back  to  the  States  with  some  entirely  "new  line"  of  work 
as  well  as  to  get  "ready  for  the  twentieth  century."  Although  many 
of  his  colleagues  at  that  time  thought  his  ideas  absurd  and  visionary, 
everyone  now  realizes  how  justified  this  vision  of  his  in  regard  to 
chemistry  in  medicine  was. 

Very  soon  after  coming  to  the  Hopkins  in  1893,  his  interest  de- 
veloped in  the  glands  of  internal  secretion  (the  endocrine  glands) 
and  indeed  in  the  isolation  of  their  active  principles  or  hormones. 
He  first  tackled  the  thyroid  gland  and  was  busily  engaged  on  this 
project  when  news  of  Baumann's  work  on  the  iodine-containing  iodo- 
thyroglobulin  came  out.  He  stopped  the  thyroid  work,  but  soon  be- 
came interested  in  the  hormone  of  the  adrenal  medulla,  which  had  a 
remarkable  blood-pressure-raising  action. 

When  one  considers  the  tremendous  importance  in  medicine  of 
this  field  of  the  endocrines  (or  hormones)  at  the  present  time,  one 
can  only  think  of  Abel's  early  interest  as  prophetic.  It  is  now  well 
recognized  that  the  key  to  many  problems  connected  with  each  endo- 
crine gland  is  to  be  found  in  the  isolation  of  the  pure  active  principle. 
That  he  early  appreciated  the  importance  of  stich  contributions  is 
shown  by  the  foUo^ving  sentence  in  one  of  his  addresses:  "The  actual 
finding  of  definite  and  specific  chemical  principles  in  the  organs  of 
internal  secretion  has  in  each  case  an  importance  in  the  way  of  ex- 
plaining and  correlating  a  large  number  of  disconnected  facts,  only 
to  be  likened  to  the  discovery  of  the  etiological  cause  of  an  infectious 
disease."  He  was  fond  of  emphasizing  the  importance  of  the  powerful 
drugs  present  in  the  human  body  in  the  aphorism,  "We  are  walking 
drug  stores." 

To  rettirn  to  Abel's  first  published  research  on  the  hormones,  it 
is  well  known  that  in  1897,  he  isolated  the  active  principle  or  hormone 
of  the  adrenal  medulla  in  the  form  of  a  benzoyl  derivative.  This  was 
the  first  instance  of  the  isolation  of  a  hormone  of  any  endocrine  gland. 
Later,  the  pure  substance  was  isolated  without  the  benzoyl  radical. 

3 


This  substance  has  been  called  epinephrine  or  adrenaline  and  has 
been  used  in  medicine  for  the  past  half  century. 

Scarcely  a  night  passes  in  the  accident  room  of  any  large  hospital 
that  patients  suffering  from  asthma  are  not  given  an  injection  of  epi- 
nephrine, which  gives  dramatic  relief  to  these  sufferers  in  the  course 
of  a  few  minutes.  Many  individuals  covered  with  urticaria  (hives) 
obtain  complete  relief  from  this  troublesome  condition  by  an  in- 
jection of  epinephrine.  Due  to  the  fact  that  this  substance  causes  a 
marked  constriction  of  blood  vessels,  it  is  used  thousands  of  times 
every  day  in  connection  with  local  anesthetics.  Every  time  a  tooth 
is  extracted,  every  time  a  minor  surgical  operation  is  performed,  this 
substance  is  used  in  connection  with  the  local  anesthetic. 

Opinions  may  differ  as  to  how  much  credit  should  be  given  to  Abel 
as  the  one  responsible  for  the  isolation  of  the  first  pure  hormone.  It 
is  quite  true  that  he  did  not  obtain  the  hormone  of  the  adrenal 
medulla  as  such  but  only  in  the  form  of  a  derivative,  and  it  is  equally 
evident  that  during  the  decade  in  which  he  was  engaged  in  this 
problem,  he  fell  into  many  pitfalls  and  made  mistakes.  It  is  now 
well  known  that  the  so-called  pure  hormone  obtained  from  the  ad- 
renals is  a  mixture  of  two  substances,  epinephrine  and  nor-epineph- 
rine.  Be  that  as  it  may  no  one  can  detract  from  the  importance  of 
Abel's  pioneering  work  in  making  available  this  valuable  medicinal 
for  research  and  therapy. 

Shortly  after  the  hormone  insulin,  which  has  revolutionized  the 
treatment  and  progress  of  diabetes,  was  discovered,  Abel  interested 
himself  in  an  attempt  to  obtain  the  hormone  in  chemically  pure 
crystalline  form.  This  he  succeeded  in  doing  in  1926,  in  spite  of  his 
sixty-nine  years  and  his  quaint  and  antiquated  methods  of  chemical 
procedure.  This  was  the  first  isolation  in  pure  crystalline  form  of  a 
hormone  which  must  be  considered  as  a  protein. 

Abel's  announcement  of  the  crystallization  of  insulin  was  received 
with  skepticism  by  many  chemists  as  a  final  proof  of  the  isolation  of 
the  pure  hormone.  The  criticism  was  made  that  the  highly  potent 
true  hormone  was  adsorbed  on  a  crystalline  protein.  But  all  criti- 
cisms were  finally  met  and  Abel's  great  achievement  of  the  chemical 
isolation  of  insulin  in  pure  crystalline  form  was  soon  completely 
established.  It  is  amusing  to  recall  that  for  many  months  after  the 
preparation  of  the  crystals,  Abel  himself  was  unable  to  repeat  the 
performance.  He  never,  however,  lost  faith.  Ultimately,  he  found  the 
answer  and  crystalline  insulin  is  now  commercially  prepared. 

This  great  optimism  in  regard  to  the  outcome  of  his  researches  is 


well  illustrated  by  incidents  which  occurred  during  his  efforts  to 
isolate  in  pure  form  the  hormone  of  the  posterior  pituitary  gland. 
An  assistant  who  was  testing  Abel's  preparations  for  pharmacological 
activity  tells  me  that  after  he  had  tested  dozens  of  preparations  and 
found  them  all  inactive,  Abel  would  come  to  him  with  a  new  one  and 
confidently  say,  "I've  got  it  this  time."  After  an  evening  of  testing, 
the  assistant  informed  Abel  the  next  morning  that  the  preparation 
was  completely  inactive  and  was  greeted,  "It's  probably  left  in  the 
mother  liquor.  We'll  be  sure  to  get  it  next  time."  This  abiding  faith, 
optimism,  and  enthusiasm  in  spite  of  great  difficulties  and  disappoint- 
ments marked  Abel's  career. 

In  1913,  Abel  became  interested  in  a  potential  method  for  the  re- 
moval of  diffusible  substances  from  the  circulating  blood  of  living 
animals  by  dialysis.  At  the  first  inception  of  the  work,  he  discussed 
his  idea  and  plans  with  his  staff  at  the  luncheon  table.  The  author 
can  clearly  recall  this  particular  luncheon  meeting.  The  professor  used 
small  cylinders  of  bread  to  illustrate  how  the  apparatus  was  to  be 
made  and  talked  glibly  about  how  this  "artificial  kidney"  would  be 
valuable  to  provide  means  for  the  removal  of  substances  detrimental 
to  the  body  in  order  to  relieve  the  kidneys  of  their  function  and  tide 
over  a  crisis.  At  this  conception  of  the  idea,  he  clearly  saw  the  possi- 
bility of  the  use  of  his  "artificial  kidney"  as  a  therapeutic  measure  for 
man. 

The  task  was  to  pass  the  blood  of  an  animal  from  an  artery  through 
a  series  of  collodion  tubes  surrounded  by  saline  solution  back  into 
a  vein.  Many  technical  difficulties  had  to  be  overcome  but  in  No- 
vember, 1913,  the  first  successful  experiment  was  performed  on  a 
rabbit.  [See  illustration  between  pages  16  and  17.]  When  the  "old 
man"  talked  of  the  clinical  application  of  the  measure  for  the  treat- 
ment of  intoxications  or  to  tide  over  when  the  kidneys  were  not  func- 
tioning, his  associates,  including  the  author,  considered  him  a  bit  of  a 
visionary.  In  1926,  Haas  of  Giessen  actually  used  an  "artificial  kidney" 
on  three  htmian  patients.  It  was  not,  however,  until  1946  that  Kolff  in 
Holland  and  Murray  in  Toronto  were  able  to  put  the  "artificial 
kidney"  on  what  appears  to  be  a  workable  basis.  Great  technical  im- 
provement has  been  made,  but  the  idea  and  general  principles  are 
the  same  as  those  developed  by  Abel  a  third  of  a  century  before. 

In  connection  with  his  studies  on  the  "artificial  kidney,"  Abel  found 
from  experiments  on  dogs  that  very  large  quantities  of  blood  can  be 
withdrawn  repeatedly,  if  the  red  corpuscles  of  the  blood  are  separated 
and  reinjected  in  salt  solution.  The  paper  (1914)  dealing  with  this 

5 


work  contains  the  following  prophetic  sentence:  "In  view  of  the  fact 
that  mammalian  corpuscles  retain  their  stability  for  three  or  four  days 
when  kept  on  ice,  a  supply  of  human  corpuscles  might  possibly  be  kept 
in  this  manner  in  operating  rooms  for  rapid  injection  in  emergencies 
that  would  otherwise  prove  fatal."  Here  we  have  the  fundamental 
idea  of  the  "blood  bank"  which  came  into  use  only  recently  and  which 
was  of  such  great  value  in  the  treatment  of  wounded  soldiers  in  World 
War  II. 

In  the  summer  and  fall  of  1921,  he  became  very  much  interested 
in  biophysics,  and  wanted  a  department  established  in  the  Medical 
School.  Actually,  during  the  academic  year  1921-22,  biophysics  is 
listed  in  the  catalogue  as  a  department  of  instruction.  It  was  in  charge 
of  a  lecturer  in  biophysics  but  ^vas  really  under  Abel  in  the  Depart- 
ment of  Pharmacology.  Fortunately  or  unfortunately  for  the  School  at 
this  time,  the  department  only  lasted  a  year,  and  Abel's  attempts  to  get 
his  colleagues  to  continue  it  proved  unsuccessful.  Today,  biophysics 
is  recognized  as  an  important  University  department  at  Hopkins.  It 
may  be  mentioned  that  at  the  time  of  his  biophysical  enthusiasm, 
Abel  purchased  from  his  limited  funds  an  infrared  spectroscope  and 
had  an  assistant  for  two  or  three  years  working  with  it.  Today,  infra- 
red spectroscopy  is  recognized  as  a  valuable  tool  in  organic  chemistry. 

Lastly,  in  a  prophetic  way,  I  can  mention  his  intense  interest  in 
scientific  journals  and  in  the  organization  of  national  scientific  so- 
cieties. In  view  of  the  fact  that  he  refused  to  allow  himself  to  be  side- 
tracked from  his  devotion  to  research  to  figure  in  the  usual  accompani- 
ments of  a  successful  scientist,  medical  meetings,  committee  meetings, 
and  board  meetings,  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  explain  his  interest  in 
scientific  journals  and  scientific  societies.  The  answer  appears  to  be 
that  he  saw  clearly  the  necessities  of  journals  and  societies  in  bio- 
chemistry and  pharmacology  and  interested  himself  in  them  so  that 
they  might  be  properly  launched. 

Abel  was  first  and  foremost  an  investigator.  His  great  enthusiasm 
and  passionate  devotion  to  research  dominated  his  whole  life.  In  one 
of  his  addresses,  after  discussing  the  training  necessary  for  the  medical 
investigator,  wherein  an  extended  chemical  training  is  emphasized, 
he  writes: 

"But  to  what  end  is  all  this  preparation  for  our  yoimg  man?  Is  it 
solely  that  he  may  solve  problems  whose  solution  is  of  practical  value 
to  mankind?  Is  his  mind  to  shape  itself  only  to  the  insistent  demands  of 
utility?  Even  then  our  method  of  training  will  yield  the  largest  profit. 

"But  it  does  vastly  more  than  that.  Thus  trained,  our  young  scholar 

6 


\vill  be  able  to  see  beyond  the  immediately  practical  problem,  even 
though  it  be  as  great  a  thing  as  the  discovery  of  the  cause  and  cure  of 
the  plague  that  decimates  a  people.  Greater  even  than  the  greatest 
discovery  is  it  to  keep  open  the  way  to  future  discoveries.  This  can  only 
be  done  when  the  investigator  freely  dares,  moved  as  by  an  inner  pro- 
pulsion, to  attack  problems  not  because  they  give  promise  of  immedi- 
ate value  to  the  human  race,  but  because  they  make  an  irresistible 
appeal  by  reason  of  an  inner  beauty. 

"Some  of  the  greatest  investigators  indeed  have  been  fascinated  by 
problems  of  immediate  utility  as  well  as  by  those  that  deal  with  ab- 
stract conceptions  only.  Helmholtz  invented  the  ophthalmoscope  and 
thus  made  modern  ophthalmology  possible,  and  at  the  same  time  did 
work  of  the  highest  order  in  theoretical  physics  and  wrote  on  the 
nature  of  mathematical  axioms  and  the  principles  of  psychology.  Lord 
Kelvin  took  out  patents  on  great  improvements  in  the  compass  and  on 
oversea  telegraphy  and  also  made  contributions  to  our  knowledge  of 
the  ultimate  constitution  of  the  atom  and  the  properties  of  the  ether. 

From  this  point  of  view  the  investigator  is  a  man  whose  inner  life 
is  free  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word.  In  short,  there  should  be  in  re- 
search work  a  cultinal  character,  an  artistic  quality,  elements  that  give 
to  painting,  music,  and  poetry  their  high  place  in  the  life  of  man." 


John  Jacob  Abel:  A  Portrait 


PAUL  D.  LAMSON,  M.D. 


I 


N  1913  I  was  working  at  the  University  of  London,  the  sole  occu- 
pant of  a  new  chemical  laboratory  attached  to  the  Department  of 
Pharmacology.  I  was  swishing  salt  solution  from  one  end  of  a  dog's 
gut  to  the  other,  whistling  to  myself,  and  dancing  a  bit  to  keep  warm, 
when  I  chanced  to  turn  around  and  saw  in  the  doorway  with  Professor 
Cushny  a  rather  tall,  thin  man  dressed  in  a  morning  coat,  top  hat, 
and  spats,  with  an  umbrella  in  one  hand,  a  wire  cage  with  two  enor- 
mous toads  in  the  other,  and  wearing  on  his  face  a  composite  expres- 
sion of  interest,  surprise,  and  amusement  which  I  shall  never  forget. 
It  was  in  this  way  that  I  first  met  Dr.  Abel,  who  was  looking  for 
someone  who  would  deposit  his  precious  Bujo  agua  in  the  Zoological 
Gardens  until  he  demonstrated  them  at  the  International  Physio- 
logical Congress  which  was  to  be  held  that  year  in  London. 

Several  biographical  sketches  of  Dr.  Abel  have  already  been  written 
(1),  the  most  complete  of  which  is  that  by  Dr.  Carl  Voegtlin,  who 
has  given  us  an  exceptionally  well-chosen  outline  of  Abel's  life  beside 
an  expert  analysis  of  his  work.  Dr.  Abel's  personal  correspondence 
from  the  time  of  his  marriage  was  carefully  saved  by  Mrs.  Abel  and 
is  now  in  the  hands  of  competent  custodians,  and  it  is  expected  that 
these  letters  from  scientific  men  of  all  types  in  all  parts  of  the  world, 
covering  a  period  from  approximately  1885  to  the  time  of  his  death 
in  1938,  will  be  analyzed  and  published  eventually  in  some  form  as 
an  historical  document,  which  should  be  of  great  value  as  giving  us  a 
picture  not  only  of  this  truly  great  man  but  of  the  times  in  which  he 
lived  as  well. 

Although  short.  Dr.  Voegtlin's  biography  is  so  complete  that  when 
I  was  asked  to  write  this  note  for  the  Bulletin,  I  felt  that  there  was 
nothing  which  I  could  add  except  my  own  impressions  of  Dr.  Abel 
as  I  saw  him  during  the  years  1914  to  1925.  One  should  realize,  how- 
ever, that  this  was  a  very  brief  period  in  Abel's  long  life,  that  he 
was  almost  sixty  when  I  first  went  to  his  laboratory,  and  that  this  was 
at  a  time  when  he  had  completed  his  active  years  of  teaching  and 

8 


organization.  In  his  early  life  he  must  have  been  a  very  different  man 
from  the  one  whom  I  saw.  I  have  heard  much  from  those  who  came 
before  me,  but  it  was  always  the  same— amusing  anecdotes  mixed  with 
the  utmost  admiration  and  in  many  cases  an  almost  religious  devo- 
tion for  this  man  whom  we  all  loved. 

Dr.  Abel's  contributions  to  science  were  recognized  the  world  over, 
as  can  be  seen  from  the  honors  which  he  received.  These  are  sum- 
marized as  follows  by  Dr.  Voegtlin: 

He  was  awarded  the  Willard  Gibbs,  Conne  and  Kober  medals  and  the  medal 
of  the  Society  of  Apothecaries,  London.  Honorary  degrees  were  bestowed  upon 
him  by  the  Universities  of  Michigan,  Pittsburgh,  Harvard,  Yale,  Lwow  (Poland), 
Cambridge  and  Aberdeen.  He  was  an  honorary  fellow  or  member  of  the  follow- 
ing societies:  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  Association  of  American  Physi- 
cians, Chemist's  Club,  Institute  of  Medicine  of  Chicago,  Philadelphia  College  of 
Pharmacy,  American  Institute  of  Chemists,  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Kaiser- 
liche  Deutsche  Akademie  der  Naturforscher,  Physiological  Society  of  Great 
Britain,  British  Pharmacological  Society,  Society  for  Biology  of  Buenos  Aires, 
Chinese  Physiological  Society,  Soci^t^  de  cliimie  biologiques,  Wiener  Biologische 
Gesellschaft.  He  was  a  member  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  and  in  1932 
served  as  President  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science. 
On  the  last  day  of  his  life  he  received  notification  of  his  election  to  a  foreign 
membership  of  the  Royal  Society. 

John  Jacob  Abel  will  be  remembered  as  the  first  pharmacologist 
in  this  country  and  a  member  of  that  remarkable  group  of  men  who 
made  up  the  first  complete  faculty  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  School  of 
Medicine,  and  for  the  part  that  he  played  in  the  founding  of  three 
of  our  most  important  medical  publications,  the  Journal  of  Experi- 
mental Medicine,  the  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry,  and  The 
Journal  of  Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Therapeutics.  He  was  the 
pharmacological  editor  of  the  first  of  these,  joint  editor  of  the  Journal 
of  Biological  Chemistry  with  Dr.  Christian  Herter,  and  the  first  editor 
of  The  Journal  of  Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Therapeutics. 
He  organized  both  the  American  Society  of  Biological  Chemists  and 
the  American  Society  for  Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Thera- 
peutics. His  pioneer  work  on  the  isolation  of  epinephrine,  the  active 
principle  of  the  medulla  of  the  suprarenal  gland,  is  known  to  every- 
one. His  ideas  of  plasmapheresis  and  his  so-called  artificial  kidney  are 
equally  well  known,  and  his  work  on  the  phthaleins  which  culminated 
in  kidney  and  liver  function  tests  should  be  known  by  clinicians  the 
world  over,  as  they  use  these  tests  daily.  The  last  work  which  received 
general  recognition  was  his  isolation  of  crystalline  insulin.  Besides 

9 


this  there  were  innumerable  investigations  which  cannot  be  gone  into 
here. 

In  order  to  obtain  an  insight  into  Dr.  Abel's  character  it  is  neces- 
sary to  consider  his  early  training.  As  Dr.  Voegtlin  has  done  this  so 
well,  with  his  permission  I  am  quoting  him  at  length: 

The  life  of  this  true  scientist  began  on  a  farm  near  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he 
was  born  on  the  19th  of  May,  1857.  Little  is  known  about  his  parents  save  that 
his  ancestors  came  from  Germany. ...  At  the  age  of  19  he  began  his  college  work 
at  the  University  of  Michigan.  It  was  here  that  he  took  a  course  in  physiological 
chemistry  under  Vaughan  and  physiology  under  Sewall.  His  college  education 
was  interrupted  for  three  years  during  which  time  he  was  Principal  of  the  high 
school  and  later  Superintendent  of  Public  Schools  at  La  Porte,  Indiana.  He 
received  his  Ph.  B.  degree  from  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1883.  After  gradua- 
tion he  married  Miss  Mary  Hinman,  a  teacher  in  his  school  at  La  Porte. . . . 

The  first  academic  year  after  graduation  was  spent  in  the  Department  of 
Biology  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University  under  Newell  Martin,  the  able  pupil  of 
Michael  Foster. . . . 

At  this  time,  in  1884,  at  the  age  of  27,  he  made  the  important  decision  to  study 
medicine  in  Europe.  Throughout  his  seven  years  of  European  study  he  showed 
a  remarkable  ability  to  select  as  his  teachers  many  of  the  distinguished  men  of 
this  period.  From  1884  to  1886  he  was  in  Leipzig,  studying  physiology  under 
Ludwig  and  von  Frey,  histology  under  His,  pharmacology  under  Boehm,  pathol- 
ogy under  Striimpell,  and  inorganic  and  organic  chemistry  under  Wislicenus.  At 
the  same  time  he  completed  his  doctor's  dissertation  in  Ludwig's  laboratory. 
The  winter  semester  of  1886-87  was  spent  in  Strassburg  under  Kussmaul  in  inter- 
nal medicine,  under  v.  Recklinghausen  in  pathology  and  infectious  diseases. 
The  following  summer  semester  he  studied  at  Heidelberg  with  Erb  in  medicine 
and  Czerny  in  surgery.  During  the  summer  vacation  he  attended  clinics  at 
Wiirzburg;  1887-88  brought  Abel  back  to  Strassburg  where  he  took  courses  under 
Kussmaul,  Naunyn,  Hoppe-Seyler  and  Schmiedeberg.  It  was  Schmiedeberg  who 
aroused  Abel's  first  interest  in  pharmacological  research,  particularly  in  its  chemi- 
cal aspects.  In  1888  he  received  his  M.D.  degree  from  Strassburg.  On  October 
30th  of  the  same  year  he  suffered  the  loss  of  his  infant  daughter,  a  severe  blow. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  loss  determined  him  to  leave  Strassburg,  where  he  had 
found  so  much  inspiration  and  had  made  many  friends,  in  order  to  pursue  a  year 
of  postgraduate  clinical  work  in  Vienna  with  Nothnagel  and  others.  But  his 
yearning  for  laboratory  research  found  Abel  in  1889  to  1890  working  in  the 
laboratory  of  the  outstanding  biochemist  v.  Nencki  in  Berne,  Switzerland.  It  was 
here  that  Abel  obtained  his  first  training  in  chemical  research.  In  later  years  he 
often  enthusiastically  referred  to  this  stimulating  experience.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that  at  that  time  Abel  had  a  clear  vision  of  what  a  tremendous  part  chem- 
istry was  to  play  in  the  future  of  scientific  medicine.  Therefore,  he  resolutely 
determined  to  be  prepared,  irrespective  of  the  expense  involved  which  he  could 
hardly  afford.  In  Berne  he  completed  a  research  on  the  "molecular  weight  of 
cholic  acid,  cholesterol  and  hydrobilirubin."  Using  Raoult's  method  he  called 
attention  to  the  limitations  of  this  method  for  the  purpose  in  view.  Another  paper 
dealt  with  the  chemical  composition  of  the  melanins  from  hair  and  melanotic 

10 


tumors,  showing  that  these  pigments  did  not  contain  iron  in  significant  amounts. 
In  Berne  he  formed  a  hfe  long  friendship  with  Cushny,  who  at  that  time  was  work- 
ing in  the  laboratory  of  the  Physiologist  Kronecker. 

After  this  year  with  v.  Nencki,  it  was  Abel's  intention  to  return  home  where  he 
expected  "to  carry  on  medical  practice  and  to  do  some  research  work,  if  possible, 
in  internal  medicine  in  connection  with  one  of  our  American  medical  schools." 
This  decision  was  partly  due  to  the  advice  given  in  a  letter  by  H.  C.  Wood,  who, 
though  recognizing  Abel's  "extraordinary  training,"  told  him  he  must  first  be 
known  in  America  as  a  lecturer  and  independent  investigator  in  order  to  have  a 
chance  to  get  a  professorship  of  from  $1,500  to  $3,000  a  year.  However,  the 
outlook  for  a  clinical  career  would  be  more  "promising."  Having  used  up  all  his 
funds  Abel  decided  reluctantly  to  enter  clinical  work.  Then  in  the  late  summer 
while  still  in  Berne,  Abel  received  a  cable  from  Vaughan  which  was  the  turning 
point  in  his  life.  On  Schmiedeberg's  recommendation  Vaughan  offered  him  the 
Chair  of  Materia  Medica  and  Therapeutics  in  the  University  of  Michigan,  with 
the  understanding  that  he  was  to  establish  a  modern  department  of  pharmacology; 
materia  medica  and  therapeutics  being  retained  in  name  only.  Here  was  the 
chance  Abel  had  looked  for  to  enter  a  career  in  experimental  research  and  with  v. 
Nencki's  advice  he  accepted  the  offer  to  return  to  his  Alma  Mater.  But  before 
returning  home  he  induced  Vaughan  to  let  him  have  a  last  fling  at  biochemical 
research  with  the  able  biochemist  Drechsel  in  Ludwig's  laboratory.  Drechsel 
at  that  time  was  doing  important  work  on  the  chemistry  of  proteins  and  on  pro- 
tein metabolism.  Drechsel  and  Abel  thus  began  a  joint  research  on  the  occurrence 
of  carbamic  acid  in  alkaline  horse  urine.  This  association  led  to  a  close  friendship 
which  lasted  until  Drechsel's  death  in  1897. 

On  his  homeward  journey  Abel  stopped  at  Berlin  to  obtain  first-hand  informa- 
tion on  Koch's  tuberculin  treatment,  which  had  attracted  international  attention. 
This  was  the  subject  of  his  first  lecture  at  Michigan  in  January,  1891.  In  a 
letter  to  C.  W.  Edmunds  he  writes:  "Here  at  Ann  Arbor  I  was  given  the  oppor- 
tunity of  starting  the  first  professorship  of  pharmacology  in  the  United  States, 
whose  holder  should  devote  himself  entirely  to  giving  students  the  best  possible 
instruction  by  means  of  lectures,  demonstrations  and  quizzes,  in  the  manner  in 
which  my  European  teachers  (Schmiedeberg  and  Boehm)  had  long  carried  on 
their  work.  All  my  energy  that  was  not  given  to  this  kind  of  instruction  to 
students  was  devoted  to  research  work  and  to  arousing  the  enthusiasm  of  others 
for  it. . . .  There  was  no  laboratory  of  any  kind  at  my  disposal.  There  was  not  a 
scrap  of  apparatus,  not  even  a  test  tube,  a  flask  or  a  beaker."  But  soon  he  had 
organized  his  small  laboratory  and  with  a  senior  student,  Muirhead,  he  imme- 
diately gave  demonstrations  on  animals  and  carried  out  a  research  on  the  occur- 
rence of  carbamic  acid  in  human  and  dog  urine  following  the  administration  of 
large  amounts  of  lime  water. . . . 

While  Abel  was  active  in  Michigan  the  Johns  Hopkins  University  under  Presi- 
dent Oilman  began  the  organization  of  its  medical  school.  Welch,  Osier,  Halsted, 
and  Kelly  had  already  been  appointed,  and  equally  outstanding  men  were  needed 
to  fill  the  chairs  of  the  preclinical  subjects.  In  January  of  1893  Abel  received  a 
letter  from  Osier  inquiring  whether  he  would  be  a  candidate  for  the  chair  of 
Pharmacology.  Ele  replied  that  he  was  strongly  attracted  by  the  prospective 
intellectual  contacts  with  Osier,  Martin,  Welch  and  Remsen.  His  main  concern, 

11 


however,  was  the  provision  for  adequate  laboratory  facilities.  His  appointment 
to  the  Professorship  of  Pharmacology  went  into  effect  for  the  academic  year 
starting  in  the  autumn  of  1893  and  with  it  Abel  reluctantly  also  assumed  the 
responsibility  of  giving  the  course  in  physiological  chemistry.  Before  assuming 
his  duties  he  obtained  a  few  months  of  leave  to  complete  some  research  with 
Drechsel  and  to  consult  his  old  teachers  in  Europe. 

What  was  it  that  caused  Abel  to  make  such  effort  and  sacrifices 
for  this  very  advanced  education,  and  how  was  it  that  he  showed 
such  extraordinarily  good  judgment  in  choosing  the  men  with  whom 
he  worked  and  in  training  himself  along  the  lines  which  he  did?  That 
he  was  not  content  with  a  safe  and  respectable  position  as  Superin- 
tendent of  Public  Schools  in  a  small  city  shows  that  at  an  early  age 
he  was  in  some  way  inspired  to  go  further.  Was  it  his  association  with 
Vaughan  or  Sewall  at  the  University  of  Michigan  which  led  him  to 
go  to  the  Johns  Hopkins  University  under  Newell  Martin,  and  was 
it  Martin  who  suggested  that  he  take  up  medicine?  Regardless  of  who 
may  have  given  him  such  ideas  or  advice,  it  is  obvious  that  Abel  was 
no  ordinary  student  but  one  filled  with  an  intense  desire  for  the  best. 
His  ability  at  the  time  of  his  studying  medicine,  to  choose  the  best 
men  in  the  world,  was  no  mere  accident,  but  this  trait  continued 
throughout  his  long  life,  and  when  his  life  is  written  in  full,  it  will  be 
found  that  the  greatest  men  of  these  times  were  among  his  friends 
and  correspondents. 

In  these  days  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  comprehend  the  difference 
which  existed  in  1885  between  medical  science  in  Europe  and  in  this 
country.  Here,  biological  chemistry  was  not  then  sufficiently  differ- 
entiated from  physiology  to  warrant  the  formation  of  a  separate  group 
of  biochemists,  and  pharmacology  did  not  exist.  It  is  safe  to  say  that 
chemistry  was  hardly  known  to  the  clinicians,  who  at  about  that  time 
were  beginning  to  take  up  the  new  field  of  pathology.  As  late  as  1911 
Dr.  Reginald  Heber  Fitz,  then  Professor  of  Theory  and  Practice  at 
the  Harvard  Medical  School,  who  was  one  of  the  outstanding  men  in 
clinical  medicine  in  those  days,  advised  me  strongly  not  to  take  up 
chemistry  in  relation  to  medicine.  He  said  he  realized  that  someday 
it  was  coming  into  medicine  but  that  he  had  watched  it  all  his  life  and 
was  sure  that  it  never  would  amount  to  much  in  my  day.  Yet  twenty- 
five  years  before  this.  Dr.  Abel  with  his  medical  training  and  medical 
degree  realized  the  importance  of  chemistry  and  specialized  in  it.  He 
was  probably  one  of  the  very  rare  men  in  this  country  who  then  had 
anything  like  this  training,  and  it  was  this  knowledge,  which  others 
did  not  have  and  could  only  partially  appreciate,  that  had  a  great  deal 
to  do  with  the  foresight  attributed  to  him.  He  had  worked  in  Europe 

12 


Avith  experienced  biological  chemists  and  pharmacologists  and  had 
read  their  journals,  all  of  which  impressed  upon  him  the  need  of 
similar  organizations  and  publications  in  this  country.  His  knowl- 
edge of  chemistry  allowed  him  to  go  more  deeply  into  fundamentals 
than  was  possible  for  many  others.  Then,  too,  the  whole  scientific  life 
of  the  remarkable  group  of  German  medical  men  who  lived  at  that 
time  made  a  deep  impression  on  Abel.  Their  almost  monastic  devo- 
tion to  medicine,  their  ability,  modesty,  the  care  and  exactness  with 
which  they  did  their  work  in  infinite  detail,  and  their  desire  to  find 
out  the  truth  of  matters  gave  him  very  high  standards  for  his  own 
development. 

To  Professor  Abel  this  group  always  remained  different  and  above 
all  others.  He  would  speak  in  a  hushed  voice  of  the  great  Naunyn 
or  the  great  Nencki,  and  in  a  discussion  the  last  word  had  always  to 
be  found  in  a  German  reference  book  or  article.  This  was  a  great 
group,  and  those  must  have  been  wonderful  times  when,  as  Abel  put 
it,  he  "walked  the  wards  with  v.  Recklinghausen."  But  all  of  these 
men  and  these  days  have  gone,  and  one  wonders  whether  a  professor 
will  ever  be  as  much  of  a  professor  as  he  used  to  be  then,  whether  the 
professorial,  broad-brimmed,  black  felt  hat  will  ever  again  attract 
the  same  awe  and  respect  that  it  did,  and  whether  it  will  be  possible 
as  it  then  was  to  determine  the  departmental  rank  of  a  group  by 
their  relative  positions  as  they  walked  down  the  street. 

Professor  Abel's  work  was  largely  of  a  biochemical  nature,  for  ex- 
ample, that  on  the  chemical  composition  of  the  melanins  from  hair, 
the  occurrence  of  carbamic  acid  in  alkaline  horse  urine  as  well  as  in 
human  and  dog  urine,  the  chemistry  of  the  pigment  of  the  negro's 
skin  and  hair,  the  isolation  of  ethyl  sulfide  from  the  dog's  urine,  and 
an  attempt  to  isolate  the  active  principle  of  the  thyroid,  his  isolation 
of  the  active  principle  of  the  thyroid,  his  isolation  of  the  active  prin 
ciple  of  the  adrenal  medulla,  his  work  with  Ford  on  the  poison  oi 
Amanita  phalloides,  a  study  of  the  active  principles  of  the  secretion 
from  the  parotid  gland  of  the  tropical  toad  Bufo  agua,  his  classical 
experiment  demonstrating  with  his  "vividiffusion"  apparatus  the 
presence  of  amino  acids  in  the  blood.  Then  there  was  his  work  with 
Pincoffs  and  Rouiller  on  the  presence  of  albumoses  in  the  tissues 
and  in  the  blood  as  well  as  in  the  gastrointestinal  mucosa,  his  work 
with  Gelling  on  Witte's  peptone,  as  well  as  that  on  the  active  prin- 
ciples of  the  pituitary  gland,  his  chemical  studies  of  and  isolation  of 
crystalline  insulin.  These  indicate  Professor  Abel's  real  interests.  His 
work  on  the  phthaleins  and  their  use  in  kidney  and  liver  function 

13 


tests,  his  entrance  for  a  short  time  into  the  field  of  chemotherapy  with 
his  studies  of  the  antimony  thioglycollates,  his  plasmapheresis  and 
his  vividiflfiision  ideas  were  more  or  less  side  interests  which  kept 
him  from  his  main  line  of  work  for  a  short  time  only. 

The  fact  that  Dr.  Abel  had  to  take  over  the  teaching  and  laboratory 
work  in  physiological  chemistry  when  he  first  went  to  Johns  Hopkins 
probably  had  little  to  do  with  this  biochemical  point  of  view.  His 
interest  was  definitely  chemical  before  he  went  there,  and  although 
he  was  always  attracted  to  a  great  variety  of  problems  having  to  do 
with  medicine  in  general,  his  primary  interest  seemed  to  be  in  the 
fundamentals  of  the  living  organism  rather  than  in  the  secondary 
changes  brought  about  by  disease  or  intoxications  produced  by  drugs. 
It  will  be  noted  that,  except  in  very  fe^v  instances.  Dr.  Abel  paid  little 
attention  to  studying  the  action  on  the  organism  of  the  substances 
with  which  he  worked,  that  is,  their  so-called  pharmacological  action. 
True  it  is  that  he  used  the  reactions  of  the  organism  to  separate  his 
various  fractions  and  eventually  his  pure  principles  from  complex 
mixtures,  but  it  was  his  aim  to  discover  what  these  principles  were 
chemically  rather  than  to  study  the  complex  reactions  of  the  organism 
after  their  injection. 

On  returning  to  this  country  in  1914  after  two  years  in  Europe,  I 
found  that  my  hearing  would  not  allow  me  to  go  on  with  the  clinical 
work  which  I  was  then  doing  at  the  Peter  Bent  Brigham  Hospital  in 
Boston,  and  while  wondering  what  could  be  done  about  it  I  suddenly 
thought  of  how  Professor  Abel  looked  when  I  had  seen  him  that 
morning  with  Cushny  in  London.  I  immediately  wrote  to  Dr.  Abel 
and  asked  if  I  might  come  to  work  in  his  laboratory.  He  replied 
at  once  in  the  most  friendly  manner  urging  me  to  come  there,  and  I 
left  for  Baltimore  wondering  what  I  would  find  to  do.  After  the  white 
marble  walls  of  the  Harvard  Medical  School  and  the  new  Brigham 
Hospital,  the  Johns  Hopkins  Medical  School  building  of  that  day 
was  not  an  impressive  sight.  My  spirits  went  down  as  I  climbed  the 
three  long  flights  of  stairs  to  the  pharmacological  laboratory  where 
I  found  Professor  Abel  in  his  small  corner  room,  a  test  tube  in  one 
hand  and  a  capillary  pipette  in  the  other,  in  the  process  of  adding  a 
minute  drop  of  some  extract  to  a  solution.  He  immediately  put  these 
down  and  greeted  me  with  the  utmost  cordiality.  In  one  corner  of 
the  laboratory  was  an  old,  roll-top  desk  piled  high  with  papers  of  all 
kinds;  and  every  available  and  unavailable  space  on  the  desk,  a  re- 
volving bookcase,  and  a  rather  large  table  was  heaped  with  books  and 
current  periodicals.  Within  three  feet  of  his  desk  was  a  standard 

14 


chemical  bench,  behind  which  was  an  ordinary  canvas  army  cot. 
There  was  a  hood  in  one  corner  and  a  sink  next  to  the  door.  There 
was  no  room  for  anything  else.  There  was  notliing  new  in  the  room; 
everything  in  it  looked  as  though  it  had  been  used  continuously  for 
many  years.  I  later  found  that  there  was  one  exception  to  this— a 
new,  large  Webster's  Dictionary  which  had  escaped  my  attention,  as 
it  was  kept  rolled  up  in  a  green  cloth  and  tied  with  a  string.  In  spite 
of  this,  however,  it  was  very  often  used. 

After  a  word  or  two  of  greeting  I  started  to  tell  Dr.  Abel  about  my 
forced  change  of  plans,  but  he  interrupted  me  almost  at  once,  saying, 
"That  is  too  bad,  but  let  us  put  that  off  until  we  have  an  evening  at 
our  house  together.  If  you  have  no  problem  on  hand  at  the  present 
minute,  let  us  start  on  something  which  has  become  of  the  greatest 
importance  on  account  of  the  war."  He  then  suggested  that  we  at- 
tempt to  treat  pig's  blood  so  that  it  could  be  used  in  man  to  replace 
human  blood  without  causing  hemolysis  and  reactions  of  one  sort  and 
another.  This  sounded  a  bit  wild  to  me,  but  I  did  not  dare  to  say  so. 
He  gave  me  a  white  coat  of  his  own,  hung  mine  on  a  hook  on  his  door, 
sent  the  laboratory  boy  to  the  nearby  slaughter  house  for  pig's  blood, 
and  within  fifteen  minutes  after  I  came  into  his  room  I  was  actually 
at  work  and  on  a  problem  which  kept  me  busy  for  over  ten  years  al- 
though it  was  not  two  days  before  I  gave  up  the  pig's  blood  idea 
forever.  How  many  men  would  have  been  able  to  diagnose  instantly 
the  state  of  confusion  brought  about  by  such  a  change  in  one's  life 
and  without  a  word  have  started  one  off  on  a  course  which  effected  a 
cure  almost  instantaneously? 

At  just  the  time  I  went  there,  Baltimore  was  starting  to  grow  up 
and  to  lose  much  of  its  old  charm,  which,  however,  has  been  replaced 
by  much  of  beauty.  The  automobile  was  just  coming  in,  and  a  few 
people  were  moving  out  of  town,  but  many  of  the  best  families  still 
lived  in  the  city  and  sat  on  their  doorsteps  after  dinner  on  warm 
evenings;  and  on  the  way  home  it  was  the  custom  for  one  to  drop 
into  the  Maryland,  Baltimore,  or  University  Clubs,  where  one  was 
sure  to  find  friends.  The  University  had  not  moved  out  to  Home- 
wood,  and  I  lived  and  dined  with  a  very  pleasant  group  at  the  Johns 
Hopkins  Club  on  the  corner  of  Monument  and  Howard  Streets. 
Each  morning  we  would  walk  across  town  to  the  School.  As  we  began 
our  pilgrimage  we  would  pass  houses  with  beautiful  doorways,  the 
brass  knockers  and  nameplates  of  which  were  being  polished  by  those 
fine  old  colored  men  of  the  old  school,  and  before  we  had  passed 
the  Washington  monument,  we  were  sure  to  have  been  greeted  with  a 

15 


"good  morning,  Major,  Colonel,  General,  or  Admiral,"  which,  in  spite 
of  slight  exaggeration,  gave  one  a  sense  of  importance  with  which  to 
begin  the  day's  work.  Going  over  the  hill  and  past  the  railroad  tracks 
one  saw  those  marvelous,  great  horses,  eight  or  ten  at  a  time,  which 
pulled  freight  cars  through  the  streets,  but  after  this  the  glamour 
disappeared,  as  one  had  to  watch  his  step  to  avoid  the  sewage  drains 
which  ran  uncovered  across  the  sidewalks  in  the  famous  Baltimore 
sewage  system,  and  there  was  nothing  left  but  a  long  climb  up  to  the 
hospital,  which  tapered  off  from  a  very  imposing  front,  to  Dr.  Welch's 
laboratory  across  the  street  from  Hanselmann's  saloon,  to  which  was 
attributed  the  entire  success  of  the  early  Johns  Hopkins  group. 

Professor  Abel  was  at  that  time  very  comfortably  settled  in  an  old- 
fashioned  house  with  high-ceilinged  rooms  and  a  cupola,  just  off 
Charles  Street  very  near  where  St.  Paul  Street  comes  into  it.  Guilford 
itself  had  not  been  developed  at  that  time  although  the  streets  were 
laid  and  a  few  houses  started.  The  Professor  kept  a  cow,  for  which 
there  was  plenty  of  room,  as  his  land  ran  down  across  the  railroad 
track  and  up  a  hill  on  the  other  side  and  must  have  covered  between 
ten  and  twenty  acres.  I  had  been  in  Baltimore  for  a  day  or  so  only 
when  I  was  asked  to  dine  at  Dr.  Abel's  house  and  went  there  part  way 
by  trolley  and  the  rest  by  bus  and  was  most  cordially  greeted  by  Mrs. 
Abel  and  the  Professor.  The  house  was  to  my  mind  an  almost  ideal 
place  for  a  professor;  everything  about  it  was  livable,  inside  and  out. 
There  was  a  large  study  on  one  side  of  the  front  hall,  a  living  room 
on  the  other,  behind  which  was  the  dining  room.  In  the  study  there 
was  an  old-fashioned,  marble  fireplace  with  a  coal  grate  and  a  fire 
always  burning.  The  walls  were  very  high  and  completely  lined  with 
bookshelves.  The  Professor's  old-fashioned  armchair  was  pulled  up 
casually  before  the  fire,  and  in  front  of  it  was  a  footstool  high  enough 
to  make  it  possible  to  put  one's  feet  on  it  and  stretch  out  comfortably 
in  the  chair,  which  the  Professor  used  to  do  on  less  formal  occasions. 
Pulled  up  beside  the  chair  was  a  table  piled  with  books,  periodicals, 
and  papers.  The  furnishings  of  his  house,  like  his  laboratory,  were 
ample  but  simple  and  looked  as  though  they  had  been  chosen  for  use 
and  used.  I  went  to  many  evening  and  Sunday  dinners  at  this  house, 
and  those  whom  I  met  there  were  almost  always  workers  in  the  lab- 
oratory or  out-of-town  or  foreign  visitors,  of  whom  there  were  many. 
There  was  always  so  much  of  immediate  interest  going  on  in  Dr. 
Abel's  mind  in  connection  with  his  own  work  or  that  of  his  guests 
that  conversation  usually  centered  about  such  matters.  This  always 
came  about  most  naturally  and  was  in  no  way  forced. 

16 


FiGURi:  1.  "Artificial  Kidney"  was  envisioned  by  Dr.  Abel  years  before  one  was 
finally  de\eloped  which  would  work  on  human  patients.  The  \iew  abo^•e,,  re- 
jnoduced  from  an  old  drawing,  shows  the  artificial  kidney  used  by  Dr.  Abel  on 
animals  in  1913.  A  cannula  (tube)  was  inserted  in  the  animal's  artery  (A)  to  lead 
blood  into  the  device's  apparatus  (C),  a  series  of  collodion  tubes  through  which 
the  blood  flowed  and  from  which  substances  in  the  blood  were  diffused  into  a 
Huid  introduced  from  outside.  A  cross-section  of  these  tubes  is  shown  in  the 
circle  at  upper  left  (E).  Anticoagulant  was  introduced  through  the  burette  in 
center  of  drawing  (D).  Blood  was  returned  to  vein  of  animal  through  upper 
cannula  at  left  (B). 


First  Crystals  of  Insulin 
prepared  by 
Dr.  John  J.  Abel 


1% 


s-j 


&gt;  -tt^' 


Figure  2.  Dr.  Abel  was  the  first  to  obtain  insulin  in  chemically  pure  crystal- 
line form.  He  isolated  the  hormone  when  he  was  sixty-nine  years  old.  For 
months  after  he  first  did  it,  he  was  unable  to  repeat  the  performance,  and  many 
chemists  were  skeptical  of  his  achievement.  Ultimately  he  found  the  answer  and 
crystalline  insulin  is  now  commercially  prepared. 


Figure  3.  How  Abel's  first  insulin  crystals  (still  kept  at  Johns  Hopkins) 

appeared  under  the  microscope. 


Then,  of  course,  there  was  the  war,  at  that  time  in  its  early  stages, 
before  the  United  States  took  part  in  it.  Professor  Abel  was  very 
pro-German,  which  may  have  been  on  account  of  his  ancestry  but 
much  more  likely  on  account  of  what  he  knew  of  Germany  as  he 
had  seen  it.  This  made  it  utterly  impossible  for  him  to  believe  that 
the  Germans  were  what  they  were  made  out  to  be  at  that  time,  and 
it  was  equally  hard  for  me  to  believe  it  then.  The  Avar  had  a  great 
effect  on  the  Professor  and  upset  his  life  tremendously.  At  first  it  Avas 
very  stimulating  to  him,  as  the  Germans  made  neAV  advances  almost 
every  day,  and  this  Avas  reflected  in  the  Avay  he  Avalked  as  Avell  as  talked. 
Both  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Abel  Avere  extremely  kind  to  me  and  treated  me 
almost  as  a  son.  In  fact,  they  asked  me  after  a  time  to  live  at 
their  house  Avith  them,  but  I  did  not  accept  this  invitation  for  tAvo  rea- 
sons: one  was  that  although  I  Avas  fond  of  medicine,  I  did  not  Avant  to 
give  up  everything  in  life  to  the  Avhims  of  this  man  as  all  Avho  came 
very  close  to  him  had  to  do  on  account  of  his  complete  absorption  in 
Avhat  he  was  doing  to  the  consequent  oversight  of  everything  else;  the 
other  Avas  that  my  love  for  the  Germans  became  less  and  less,  and, 
finally,  in  order  that  there  could  be  no  mistmderstanding  on  this  point 
in  Professor  Abel's  mind,  I  Avrote  him  a  letter  telling  him  that  I 
thought  he  should  knoAV  of  my  having  lost  all  faith  in  the  Germans 
and  that  I  Avas  going  to  take  the  part  of  the  other  side.  Although  I 
did  this  as  kindly  as  I  could,  I  do  not  think  that  the  Professor  ever 
quite  got  over  it. 

For  a  time,  after  the  Avar  Avas  over,  he  Avas  much  depressed  and  very 
bitter,  but  Avith  his  usual  and  extraordinary  ability  to  take  reverses 
he  shook  off  this  depression  and  Avent  to  Avork  Avith  rencAved  vigor. 
Unfortimately,  at  just  this  time  the  laboratory  was  overAvhelmed  by 
a  grotip  of  South  Africans  Avho  were  extraordinarily  anti-British  in 
their  sentiments.  For  several  years  the  lunch-table  conA^ersation  de- 
generated into  anti-British  tales  raked  up  from  all  possible  quarters 
by  this  South  African  group.  I,  Avho  Avas  no  historian,  could  stand  this 
only  so  long  and  then  Avould  blow  up,  to  be  put  in  my  place  again  on 
account  of  lack  of  evidence  on  my  side,  and  since  there  was  no  one 
there  to  back  me,  I  became  less  popular  daily.  But  this  group  and  this 
period  passed,  and  in  his  later  years  I  heard  nothing  more  of  the  Avar 
from  Professor  Abel.  I  am  sure  that  his  anti-English  remarks  Avere 
purely  an  attempt  to  justify  Avhat  the  Germans  had  done,  because  he 
told  me  many  times  that  Avhen  he  retired,  his  one  desire  Avas  to  go 
to  England  and  spend  his  last  days  Avith  "that  Avonderful  group  of 
English  physiologists." 

17 


I  had  been  told  that  it  would  be  a  waste  of  time  to  go  to  Baltimore 
to  work  with  Abel,  because  he  was  always  too  busy  with  his  own  work 
and  I  would  see  nothing  of  him.  When  I  arrived,  he  had  just  been 
asked  to  write  the  first  Mellon  lecture  (2)  and  devoted  the  better  part 
of  a  year  to  the  preparation  of  this.  Anyone  wishing  to  get  an  idea 
of  the  thoroughness  with  which  he  did  things,  and  of  the  breadth  of 
view  which  he  had,  would  do  well  to  read  this  as  well  as  his  other  ad- 
dresses. This  would  also  give  one  an  idea  of  Dr.  Abel's  feeling  that 
one  should  give  all  that  one  had  to  whatever  was  being  done.  Dur- 
ing the  first  year  that  I  was  in  his  laboratory  he  carried  out  almost  no 
experimental  work  and  would  drop  in  to  talk  for  hours  at  a  time. 
We  would  often  leave  the  laboratory  early  and  drive  about  the  coun- 
try, ending  up  at  his  house  for  tea  or  supper;  but  after  this  first  year 
things  were  very  different,  and  except  when  he  came  out  of  the  se- 
clusion of  his  corner  laboratory  for  lunch  or  to  carry  out  an  animal 
experiment  in  the  large  laboratory,  one  saw  very  little  of  him. 

I  shall  never  forget  the  day  Dr.  Abel  decided  he  should  move. 
A  real  estate  company  made  plans  to  develop  what  is  now  Guilford. 
This  involved  the  house  and  land  where  Dr.  Abel  lived.  They  tried 
to  induce  him  to  build  another  house,  but  he  was  afraid  of  'being 
crowded',  as  he  put  it,  and  decided  to  go  else^vhere.  I  had  an  old 
car  at  that  time  and  spent  many  afternoons  driving  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Abel  all  over  the  country  looking  for  another  house.  One  afternoon 
as  the  day  was  getting  on  and  with  a  violent  thunderstorm  coming 
up,  we  drove  out  some  ten  miles  from  the  middle  of  the  city  and  up 
a  hill  where  there  was  an  enormous  unoccupied  house  very  similar 
to  the  one  in  which  he  used  to  live  on  Charles  Street.  This  was  off 
the  Windsor  Mill  Road  and  had  fine  groimds  with  wonderful,  great 
trees,  a  driveway  lined  with  hemlocks,  the  same  type  of  cupola  on 
the  house,  and  goodness  knows  how  many  rooms.  The  house  was 
by  no  means  in  the  best  state  of  repair,  and  neither  were  the  grounds. 
The  Professor  jumped  out  of  the  car  and  rushed  into  the  house,  leav- 
ing Mrs.  Abel  and  me  behind  in  the  rain.  Mrs.  Abel  got  slowly  out 
of  the  car,  stood  looking  at  the  house  in  a  horrified  manner,  and, 
turning  to  me,  said  in  her  quiet  way,  "My  goodness.  Dr.  Lamson, 
did  you  ever  see  anything  so  awful?"  A  few  minutes  later  Dr.  Abel 
came  dashing  out  of  the  door  shouting,  "Mary,  this  is  just  exactly 
what  we  want."  Mrs.  Abel  then  went  in,  looked  the  house  over,  and 
said,  "Yes,  I  think  this  will  do  very  well  indeed."  This  was  typical 
of  Mrs.  Abel.  I  have  never  seen  such  devotion  in  anyone  as  she  had 
for  the  Professor.  It  made  no  difference  what  his  plans  might  be, 

18 


they  were  accepted  at  once  by  Mrs.  Abel,  who  not  only  willingly  but 
with  genuine  enthusiasm  cooperated  with  him.  If  it  were  a  minor 
matter  such  as  unexpectedly  bringing  people  to  dinner,  giving  up 
engagements,  taking  a  train  for  other  parts,  or  changing  the  entire 
way  of  living,  it  made  no  difference  whatever,  Mrs.  Abel  agreed  at 
once,  and  never  did  any  of  us  hear  her  complain.  Until  Mrs.  Abel  died, 
she  lived  on  this  hill.  At  first  she  had  a  colored  boy  to  help  her,  but 
he  was  a  character  and  more  trouble  than  help,  and  she  soon  gave  him 
up. 

Among  the  letters  which  came  to  me  at  the  time  of  Dr.  Abel's 
death  was  one  from  Professor  Walther  Straub,  who  told  of  his  com- 
ing to  this  country  to  lecture  and  being  met  at  the  station  by  Professor 
Abel.  It  was  some  minutes  after  the  train  came  in  before  Professor 
Straub  saw  him  hurrying  down  the  platform;  Dr.  Abel  greeted  him 
in  an  excited  manner,  saying.  "I  am  sorry  to  be  late,  but  Columbus 
only  just  arrived."  Straub  said  that  he  was  much  shocked  and  thought 
that  the  Professor  was  losing  his  mind,  and  it  ^vas  only  when  they 
reached  the  car  that  he  found  that  Columbus  was  Dr.  Abel's  colored 
boy. 

In  these  days  of  new  schools  and  perfect  ecpiipment  it  might  be 
interesting  to  consider  the  surroundings  in  which  Professor  Abel 
carried  out  the  work  which  has  made  him  famous  the  world  over. 
As  I  have  said  before,  the  Medical  School  was  by  no  means  an  im- 
pressive sight.  Each  story  was  very  high,  and  Dr.  Abel's  laboratory 
was  on  the  third  floor.  There  was  no  elevator  except  a  small  freight 
affair  which  had  to  be  pulled  up  by  hand.  There  was  a  hallway 
around  the  stair-well  from  which  the  various  laboratories  radiated. 
I  have  no  doubt  but  that  everything  Avas  done  very  systematically 
when  Dr.  Abel  was  younger,  but  when  I  reached  tiiere,  it  was  a  case 
of  every  man  for  himself,  and  there  certainly  was  no  system  about 
anything.  There  was  only  one  kymograph  in  the  laboratory  which 
worked,  and  that  was  a  long  paper  electrical  affair,  and  to  do  a  blood 
pressure  experiment  involved  as  much  as  a  major  surgical  operation. 
Since  I  was  the  youngest  and  newest  arrival,  I  was  not  allowed  to  take 
part  in  such  an  important  event  as  doing  a  blood  pressure  experiment 
on  a  dog,  but  I  was  allowed  to  watch.  Dr.  Rowntree  had  just  left, 
and  Dr.  Marshall,  who  at  that  time  did  not  even  know  where  the 
kidney  Avas,  and  a  physical  chemist  from  Europe,  'who  was  not  quite 
sure  whether  a  dog  had  a  kidney,  supervised  the  operation,  which  was 
done  by  Charlie  Kamphaus. 

Outside  Professor  Abel's  laboratory  Charlie  was  the  Department 

19 


of  Pharmacology.  If  you  wanted  anything,  you  asked  Charlie  for  it, 
and  if  he  happened  to  be  out,  you  simply  did  nothing  until  he  re- 
turned. I  asked  him  once  how  it  was  that  none  of  the  large  stock 
bottles  had  labels  on  them,  and  he  said  in  the  most  hurt  manner 
imaginable,  "Why,  Dr.  Lamson,  if  we  had  labels  on  them,  everyone 
would  know  what  was  in  them."  At  another  time  I  asked  him  to  re- 
turn something  which  we  had  borrowed  from  another  department, 
and  he  said,  "Don't  do  that  now.  If  you  wait  a  little  longer,  they  won't 
remember  that  you  have  it."  Charlie  was  a  German,  short,  well-fed, 
but  not  fat,  then.  He  was  the  most  good-natured,  willing,  hard-working 
soul  I  have  ever  seen.  He  existed  for  one  thing  only,  and  that  was  to 
serve  Professor  Abel.  Sundays,  week  days,  or  holidays  the  Professor 
would  merely  say,  "Charlie,  keep  your  eye  on  this  dog,  you  must  look 
at  him  every  two  hours,"  and  Charlie  would  be  there  day  and  night. 
If  the  Professor  suddenly  wanted  a  dog  and  there  were  no  dogs  in  the 
animal  house,  it  never  occurred  to  Charlie  that  this  could  be  anyone's 
fault  but  his  own,  and  with  tears  in  his  eyes  he  would  dash  about 
from  one  department  to  another  looking  for  a  dog.  Charlie  liked  to 
work  and  confided  to  me  once  that  the  height  of  his  ambition  was  to 
be  a  waiter  in  a  beer  garden  where  there  would  be  twice  as  many 
people  as  one  could  possibly  serve,  and  just  as  you  had  supplied  one 
table  with  beer  they  would  shout  for  you  to  fill  up  the  glasses  again, 
and  you  would  know  that  you  could  not  possibly  do  it. 

Charlie  was  assisted  in  these  blood  pressure  operations  by  Charlie, 
Charlie  Drain,  a  devout  Irish  Catholic  with  the  good  and  bad  qual- 
ities of  a  bulldog,  very  fond  of  liquor,  who  died  of  delirium  tremens 
during  the  prohibition  period.  He  worshipped  the  Professor  but  was 
not  as  sophisticated  as  Charlie  Kamphaus.  His  one  desire  was  to  find 
someone  who  would  say  something  against  Dr.  Abel  so  that  he  could, 
as  he  put  it,  "knock  his  block  ofE."  Together  the  two  Charlies  would 
put  the  dog  under  ether  and  hitch  up  the  blood  pressure  apparatus 
and  kymograph.  Things  would  usually  have  worked  fairly  well  had  it 
not  been  for  the  fact  that  the  recording  was  done  by  means  of  glass  pens 
blown  by  everyone  who  had  ever  been  in  the  laboratory.  The  experi- 
ment would  start,  and  then  the  pen  would  weep  and  the  ink  run  down 
the  paper,  whereupon  both  Charlies  would  discuss  the  advisability  of 
putting  on  another  pen,  and  this  as  likely  as  not  would  refuse  to  write. 
In  the  excitement  one  or  the  other  Charlie  \vould  blow  through  it. 
z\fter  a  very  short  time  both  of  them  were  red  ink  from  ear  to  ear. 
If  the  experiment  were  a  long  one  and  artificial  respiration  were 
needed,  another  assistant  was  called  in,  Mrs.  Thomas,   the  scrub- 

20 


woman.  Mrs.  Thomas  was  getting  on  in  years,  was  very  fat  and  very 
polite,  and  also  a  devout  Catholic.  She  would  sit  on  a  stool  at  the  dog's 
head  and  pump  away  on  a  pair  of  hand  bello^vs,  but  she  had  a  habit  of 
dozing  oft  very  frequently  and  had  to  be  ^vaked  up,  usually  by  Charlie 
Drain,  Avith  a  polite  nudge  and  the  remark,  "A  little  more  air,  Mrs. 
Thomas,  please."  At  one  time  Mrs.  Thomas'  husband  had  to  be  dug 
up  and  moved,  and  for  years  after  this  during  lulls  in  an  experiment 
she  would  describe  in  great  detail  just  how  he  looked  and  the  various 
colors  of  his  face.  This  always  ended  in  tears,  and  w'e  had  to  distract 
her  with  a  call  for  more  air.  After  all  was  well  under  way,  and  while 
the  chemists  were  giving  general  directions,  entirely  unheeded  by  the 
operating  staff,  Professor  Abel  would  be  ceremoniously  called  by 
Charlie  Kamphaus,  and  he  would  appear  with  his  little  glass  evaporat- 
ing dish,  his  capillary  pipette,  and  his  notebook.  A  hush  would  come 
over  this  scene  of  blood,  red  ink,  and  artificial  respiration,  and  the 
Professor,  entirely  oblivious  of  everything,  would  fill  a  syringe,  and 
someone  ^\•ould  make  the  injection  for  him. 

In  the  early  days  when  I  first  went  there,  Professor  Abel  wore  a 
white  laboratory  coat.  Later,  he  added  to  this  a  white  apron  which 
he  had  become  interested  in,  because  Dr.  Binger  wore  these.  As  time 
went  on  and  as  the  laboratory  was  none  too  well  heated,  Professor 
Abel  added  an  ordinary  sack  coat  over  the  apron,  and  some  years 
later  discovered  a  very  long,  heavy,  red  rubber  apron,  'which  he  then 
wore  underneath  the  white  one.  At  about  this  time  Dr.  Abel  had  his 
portrait  painted  in  a  gown  with  which  there  was  a  black  velvet  hat 
^vhich  pleased  him  a  great  deal.  He  often  spoke  to  me  about  what  a 
nice  thing  this  hat  was  and  how  he  thought  it  a  splendid  custom  to 
wear  such  a  hat.  One  day  a  member  of  the  surgical  staff  came  into 
the  laboratory  for  luncheon  wearing  a  Avhite  operating  cap,  and  I 
noticed  that  Dr.  Abel  was  particularly  abstracted  that  day  and  kept 
looking  at  our  visitor  ^^'ith  an  interest  all  out  of  proportion  to  what  the 
surgeon's  conversation  seemed  to  merit.  After  lunch  the  Professor 
took  me  aside  and  asked  if  I  could  manage  to  get  him  one  of  those 
little  white  hats.  I  did,  and  he  ^vore  it  to  the  end  of  his  days. 

On  the  street  and  around  his  house  Professor  Abel  was  always  very 
spry  and  walked  with  great  alertness  and  rapidity,  but  for  several 
years  I  had  been  semiconscious  of  the  fact  that  he  went  about  the 
laboratory  in  a  decrepit  manner.  He  would  come  out  of  his  room  and 
shuffle  across  the  laboratory  with  very  short  steps,  almost  on  his  toes, 
and  ahvays  holding  his  evaporating  dish  in  one  hand  and  his  pipette 
or  his  notebook  in  the  other.  One  day  I  happened  to  notice  that  he 

21 


held  up  his  apron  with  one  hand,  as  one  would  a  skirt,  and  becoming 
interested  in  this  phenomenon,  I  saw  that  the  band  around  his  neck 
was  so  long  that  the  rubber  apron  nearly  touched  the  floor,  and  the 
string,  which  should  have  gone  around  his  waist,  tied  his  knees  to- 
gether so  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  take  a  long  step.  I  asked 
if  I  could  not  shorten  the  neck  band  for  him  and  explained  what 
seemed  to  me  to  be  the  advantage  of  doing  this,  but  he  only  looked 
at  it  in  a  dreamy  sort  of  way  and  said  that  it  was  all  right  as  it  was, 
and  it  stayed  that  way  as  long  as  I  was  there. 

When  one  of  these  blood  pressure  experiments  was  over,  the  record 
was  rolled  out  on  the  floor,  often  rimning  the  entire  length  of  the  large 
laboratory  and  even  out  into  the  hall.  Everyone  would  very  seriously 
gather  about  it  and  walk  up  and  down  the  record  looking  for  results. 
No  one  ever  seemed  to  be  the  least  bit  aware  that  this  was  not  the 
accepted  method  of  carrying  out  such  experiments. 

The  laboratory  was  well  equipped  for  special  chemical  work,  but 
except  for  this  one  kymograph  there  was  almost  nothing  in  the  way  of 
apparatus.  There  was  one  microscope  in  the  department  in  use,  and 
that  belonged  to  me.  After  some  ten  years  when  I  needed  a  micro- 
scope badly  and  everyone  was  using  mine,  I  asked  the  Professor  if 
the  one  which  he  had  in  his  laboratory  could  not  be  turned  to  gen- 
eral use.  I  had  seen  this  in  action  only  once.  It  was  kept  in  a  wooden 
box  done  up  in  a  brown  cloth,  tied  with  a  stout  cord,  and  the  whole 
thing  wrapped  in  an  old,  white  laboratory  coat  and  locked  in  a  case 
in  Professor  Abel's  room.  He  looked  very  much  taken  aback  at  such 
a  request  on  my  part  and  asked  what  was  the  matter  with  the  one  we 
were  using.  I  told  him  that  there  was  nothing  the  matter  with  it,  but 
that  it  was  mine  and  that  we  needed  another.  He  said,  "But,  Lamson, 
the  microscope  that  I  have  is  a  good  one."  When  I  answered  that  mine 
was  also,  ten  years  ago  before  everyone  used  it,  he  looked  at  me  hard 
without  saying  anything,  and  then  a  quiet  smile  came  over  his  face, 
and  he  turned  and  walked  away.  In  a  few  minutes  he  came  back  to 
my  room  with  the  precious  machine  of  his  own  and  left  it  without  a 
word. 

We  had  no  shop,  and  when  I  tried  to  make  a  perfusion  apparatus 
and  needed  to  make  a  thermostat,  the  only  tools  which  could  be  found 
were  a  hammer  with  a  split  handle,  a  screwdriver,  and  a  keyhole  saw 
with  half  the  blade  broken  off.  With  this  outfit  I  managed  to  put 
together  a  thermostat  made  out  of  a  soap  box,  which  worked  sur- 
prisingly well  until  one  day  when  I  was  out  of  the  room  I  heard  a 
great  commotion  and  someone  shouting,  'Tire!"  I  came  in  just  in 

22 


time  to  see  Professor  Abel  emptying  the  last  of  the  contents  of  a  large 
fire  extinguisher  into  the  middle  of  my  precious  apparatus,  of  which 
there  was  nothing  left. 

At  night  the  heat  went  off  in  the  laboratory,  and  it  became  ex- 
tremely cold.  Someone  broke  into  the  Medical  School  at  one  time, 
after  which  rather  luiusual  precautions  were  taken  to  keep  a  further 
break  from  occurring.  These  consisted  in  locking  up  the  gate  to  the 
high  iron  fence  which  surrounded  the  Medical  School,  and  no  keys 
were  given  to  any  members  of  the  faculty  regardless  of  our  pleas. 
When  one  came  over  in  the  evenings  to  work,  on  an  icy,  snowy  night, 
and  had  to  climb  this  high,  iron  fence  with  its  arrow-shaped  spikes, 
then  feel  one's  way  into  the  basement  in  utter  darkness,  locate  the 
main  switch  of  the  building,  turn  that  on,  and  then  climb  three 
flights  of  stairs  in  the  dark  on  account  of  an  economical  lighting 
system  which  had  been  developed,  it  often  took  some  time  to  quiet 
one's  resentment  against  the  powers  that  had  developed  such  plans, 
especially  those  who  did  not  have  to  climb  the  fence. 

In  spite  of  all  this,  the  laboratory  was  one  of  the  finest  to  work  in 
that  I  have  ever  seen.  Everything  was  informal,  and  Professor  Abel 
had  that  very  rare  faculty  of  being  willing  to  see  a  change  made  in 
anything  at  any  time.  Once  while  I  was  there,  a  plan  was  developed 
to  move  the  Department  of  Pharmacology  to  the  new  Himterian 
Building,  which  to  my  mind  would  have  ruined  the  spirit  of  the 
Medical  School,  as  it  would  have  separated  biochemistry,  physiology, 
and  pharmacology,  but  when  this  was  suggested  to  Dr.  Abel,  he  was 
perfectly  willing  to  make  the  change  if  others  thought  it  best  for  the 
School,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  would  upset  his  work  for  a  consider- 
able length  of  time. 

If  the  Professor  was  a  trifle  thoughtless  about  the  comforts  of  his 
assistants,  he  was  eqtially  thoughtless  about  his  own.  For  instance, 
he  had  no  telephone  in  his  room,  and  for  a  long  time,  in  order  to  use 
one,  he  had  to  come  out  into  the  hallway  and  squeeze  into  a  horribly 
small  closet  which  was  a  sort  of  dump  for  dirty  laboratory  coats,  the 
janitors'  shoes,  etc.  For  a  great  many  years  he  had  no  secretary,  and 
it  took  a  lot  of  persuading  in  order  to  get  him  to  take  on  even  a  half- 
time  one.  The  Professor  immediately  installed  a  telephone  on  her 
desk,  but  he  himself  still  had  to  go  through  Dr.  Marshall's  laboratory, 
out  into  the  hall,  and  carry  on  his  telephone  conversation  in  this 
stuffy  closet.  As  it  became  annoying  for  the  secretary  to  go  constantly 
to  the  Professor's  room  and  call  him  to  the  telephone,  she  installed  a 
buzzer  on  his  desk  so  that  it  was  only  necessary  for  her  to  press  a  but- 

23 


ton  and  the  Professor  would  scurry  out  to  the  telephone.  It  was  sev- 
eral years  before  we  could  convince  him  that  he  deserved  to  have  an 
extension  telephone  on  his  desk,  which  he  finally  did  with  great 
reluctance. 

To  me  it  seemed  that  Professor  Abel  lived  in  the  clouds  rather  than 
in  this  world.  However,  he  was  an  extremely  practical  person  when 
his  attention  was  focused  on  something,  as  can  be  seen  from  his  or- 
ganization of  scientific  societies,  journals,  his  laboratories,  and  courses 
for  both  biological  chemistry  and  pharmacology.  It  was  he  who  ad- 
vised Mr.  Passano  of  the  Waverly  Press  to  specialize  in  the  publica- 
tion of  scientific  periodicals,  a  thing  which  had  not  been  done  in  this 
country  before  and  which  was  followed  with  very  great  success,  on 
account  of  which  Mr.  Passano  has  ^vritten  a  very  fine  tribute  to  Pro- 
fessor Abel.  But  everything  having  to  do  with  the  laboratory,  his 
work,  and  science  had  a  supernatural  interest  for  him.  When  he 
would  come  in  to  see  an  experiment.  Professor  Abel  would  talk  in  a 
hushed  voice.  He  would  speak  with  the  greatest  reverence  of  scien- 
tific publications  and  men,  as  well  as  their  Avork.  He  gave  to  science 
a  certain  halo,  which  at  times  seemed  out  of  place  in  our  humdrum 
life  of  America  but  which  corresponded  to  that  aura  which  enveloped 
a  German  professor  in  Europe.  This  was  very  greatly  appreciated  by 
some  who  worked  with  him,  and  I  am  sure  that  it  was  entirely  sincere 
and  natural  to  Professor  Abel  but  not  in  others  who  attempted  to  copy 
him. 

That  Dr.  Abel  had  courage  is  well  known  to  anyone  who  had  any- 
thing to  do  with  him.  After  months  of  work  when  he  fully  expected 
that  a  final  experiment  would  prove  what  he  had  been  seeking  for  all 
this  time  and  it  proved  the  exact  opposite,  he  would  draw  himself  up, 
shake  his  rather  frail  shoulders,  and  say,  "Oh,  well,  there  are  many 
fish  in  the  sea,"  and  immediately  begin  on  his  work  again.  In  the 
course  of  his  early  w^ork  on  epinephrine  an  explosion  occurred  which 
filled  his  eye  with  glass  and  must  have  been  an  extraordinarily  painful 
affair,  but  those  who  were  with  him  at  the  time  told  of  his  great  cour- 
age then  and  during  the  removal  of  his  eye  under  local  anesthesia. 
He  almost  never  spoke  of  this  in  any  way,  but  one  time  did  tell  me 
that  it  was  quite  interesting  when  they  cut  through  his  optic  nerve. 
In  minor  matters,  however,  I  think  he  more  or  less  enjoyed  having 
something  happen  which  made  him  exert  himself  against  circum- 
stances. He  used  to  tell  the  most  extraordinary  story  of  how  a  nurse 
accidentally  poisoned  him  with  atropine  in  the  hospital.  After  he 
underwent  a  rather  serious  operation  at  one  time  and,  again,  when  he 

24 


broke  his  leg,  there  was  no  reason  for,  and  much  against,  his  hurrying 
back  to  his  laboratory,  but  I  think  he  more  or  less  enjoyed  seeing 
Avhether  he  could  do  it  or  not. 

Dr.  Abel  belonged  to  that  generation  Avhich  has  just  passed,  in 
which  men  still  liked  to  think  that  they  might  know  about  everything 
althotigh  they  were  perfectly  well  a^vare  of  the  fact  that  they  could 
not.  I  believe,  however,  that  this  irritated  Professor  Abel  consider- 
ably. He  seemed  a  trifle  jealous  of  Dr.  Welch,  who  had  such  an  un- 
believable memory  and  who  seemed  to  have  had  some  firsthand  ex- 
perience with  almost  everything  that  had  happened  in  medicine. 
When  a  new  edition  of  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica  came  out,  he 
confided  to  me  that  he  had  heard  that  Dr.  Welch  was  reading  it  from 
cover  to  cover,  but  I  know  that  he  read  a  great  deal  of  it  himself 
with  a  great  deal  of  interest,  for  he  used  to  point  out  the  mistakes  in 
it  and  tell  me  how  much  better  the  German  encyclopedias  ^vere.  He 
used  to  like  to  dabble  with  Greek  and  Latin  and  has  sent  me  post- 
cards written  in  Greek,  ivhich  I  hope  were  more  intelligible  to  him 
than  to  me.  I  dropped  in  on  him  one  time  at  Randolph,  New  Hamp- 
shire, where  he  used  to  spend  the  summers,  and  foimd  him  studying 
Latin  grammar.  He  explained  to  me  how  he  had  tramped  over  the 
whole  Presidential  range  with  his  sons,  and  another  time  he  told  me 
how  he  had  spent  several  smnmers  cruising  from  Baltimore  up  to  the 
coast  of  Maine  and  back.  This  was  no  mean  undertaking  for  a  man 
unaccustomed  to  the  sea.  He  apparently  went  at  it  with  gieat  thor- 
oughness, however,  hired  a  skipper  and  a  good-sized  boat,  and  took 
his  family  over  these  many  miles  of  ocean  without  a  mishap.  I  found, 
however,  that  Mrs.  Abel  was  none  too  pleased  with  some  of  these  trips. 
When  a  storm  came  up,  the  Professor  felt  that  the  deck  Avas  no  place 
for  a  woman,  and  he  not  only  put  her  below  but  shut  all  the  hatches 
in  a  supposedly  seamanship  manner,  and  Mrs.  Abel  admitted  that 
these  were  not  the  best  days  she  had  ever  enjoyed. 

The  Professor  also  had  a  fondness  for  mathematics  and  physics, 
but  I  never  realized  what  a  sacred  field  this  was  until  one  day,  while 
we  were  having  luncheon,  Rouiller  was  extracting  a  vacuum  desic- 
cator by  means  of  a  very  noisy  water  pump,  and  Professor  Abel  got 
into  an  argument  with  one  of  the  staff  members  as  to  Avhether  mole- 
cules could  or  could  not  pass  through  a  hole  in  the  desiccator  in  a 
certain  way.  I  do  not  remember  what  the  argument  Avas  about  but 
only  that  I  heard  the  Professor  say  that  molecules  could  not  pass 
through  this  hole,  and  I  made  the  unfortunate  statement  that  I 
thought  I  could  make  them  pass  through  so  fast  that  they  would 

25 


whistle.  My  remark  was  an  entirely  casual  one,  based  on  no  knowl- 
edge of  the  matter  whatever,  but  it  upset  the  Professor  as  much  as  if 
Einstein  had  said  it.  He  immediately  pulled  out  a  pencil  and  paper 
and  started  to  prove  to  me  how  I  must  be  wrong.  I  then  became 
enough  interested  to  believe  that  he  could  not  be  right,  and  we  dis- 
cussed this  matter  all  of  one  afternoon  without  leaving  the  lunch 
table.  I  kept  trying  to  get  out  of  this  by  saying  that  it  made  no 
difference  what  the  molecules  did,  but  the  Professor  kept  saying, 
"But  this  is  a  very  serious  matter  with  me.  You  know  I  taught 
physics  once."  At  about  the  time  we  should  have  left  for  dinner,  I 
became  exhausted  and  told  the  Professor  that  since  he  was  an  older 
man  I  could  not  say  what  I  wanted  to  him  and  I  thought  that  he  had 
an  unfair  advantage.  Whereupon  he  said  to  go  ahead  and  say  what 
I  pleased,  which  we  both  proceeded  to  do  for  another  hour  or  so,  but 
when  I  reached  the  Johns  Hopkins  Club  after  everyone  had  finished 
dinner,  I  found  a  group  of  my  associates  in  the  middle  of  an  even 
more  violent  discussion  about  these  molecules,  which  continued  until 
well  after  midnight.  When  I  arrived  at  the  laboratory  in  the  morn- 
ing, a  bit  late  after  the  efforts  of  the  preceding  day.  Dr.  Abel  came 
into  my  room  with  triumph  written  all  over  his  face  and  handed 
me  a  book,  saying,  "Read  that  and  see  if  I'm  not  right."  On  looking 
it  over,  I  found  it  to  be  a  book  on  how  to  square  the  circle. 

The  laboratory  lunch  table  became  famous  among  the  pharma- 
cologists and  visitors  from  many  lands.  Adjoining  Professor  Abel's 
laboratory  was  a  fairly  large  room  in  which  Dr.  Rouiller  had  a  chem- 
ical bench  and  in  which  Dr.  Marshall  was  carrying  out  his  experi- 
ments on  the  kidney.  The  lunch  table  itself  was  a  small  kitchen 
table  covered  with  a  Avhite  oilcloth,  and,  except  for  the  Professor,  who 
had  a  chair  at  the  head  of  the  table,  we  sat  on  laboratory  stools. 
Charlie  Kamphaus  supplied  us  with  a  long  roll  of  bread,  some  cheese, 
and  "hot  dogs"  which  I  would  not  eat.  This  irritated  the  Professor 
greatly.  He  tried  for  years  by  every  means  he  could  think  of  to  get 
me  to  eat  them  and  usually  ended  his  arguments  by  saying,  "Oh, 
well,  you  are  prejudiced,  as  all  Ne^v  Englanders  are  prejudiced." 
We  made  our  own  coffee.  As  far  as  I  know,  every  member  of  the 
staff  suggested  at  one  time  or  another  having  something  else  for  lunch, 
and  the  Professor  always  allowed  him  to  try  it,  but  every  time  we 
came  back  to  the  bread,  cheese,  and  coffee  luncheons,  and  all  agreed 
that  these  were  the  best.  We  would  have  almost  finished  luncheon 
when  Professor  Abel  would  appear  from  his  room,  having  removed 
his  rubber  apron  but  not  his  white  hat.  It  was  never  more  than  a 
26 


few  moments  before  he  would  bring  up  some  topic  of  conversation 
which  was  always  interesting.  He  had  an  enormous  amount  of  infor- 
mation about  matters  relating  to  his  work  as  well  as  to  the  work  of 
others,  and  he  was  always  very  much  interested  in  historical  matters, 
particularly  in  relation  to  the  war.  When  we  had  such  visitors  as 
Sir  Gowland  Hopkins,  Sir  Henry  Dale,  Barger,  and  others  who  were 
working  on  biochemical  problems,  they  would  sit  at  the  table  half  the 
afternoon  going  to  the  very  bottom  of  these  problems.  But  when 
we  had  visitors  of  other  types  who  could  not  discuss  fundamentals, 
the  conversation  soon  lagged,  and  it  became  obvious  that  the  Professor 
was  anxious  to  get  back  to  work. 

There  was  nothing  formal  about  these  affairs  or  about  the  labora- 
tory. We  were  usually  surroiuided  by  several  dogs  in  a  state  of  anes- 
thesia due  to  paraldehyde,  whose  ureters  had  been  cannulated  by 
Dr.  Marshall  for  his  kidney  experiments.  The  odor  from  the  paral- 
dehyde as  well  as  the  dogs  was  not  too  pleasing,  but  this  made  no 
difference.  There  were  more  roaches  in  that  laboratory  than  in  any 
place  that  I  have  ever  been  in,  and  I  have  been  in  bad  ones.  Several 
times  we  tried  concerted  gas  attacks  with  sprays  on  these  roaches  and 
collected  several  buckets  of  them,  but  they  came  back  almost  at  once. 
Then  we  tried  putting  the  legs  of  the  lunch  table  in  tin  cans  of  kero- 
sene to  see  if  that  would  keep  the  roaches  out  of  our  food,  but  even 
this  was  none  too  successful.  The  Professor  always  knocked  his  chair 
on  the  floor  and  shook  out  his  coffee  cup  before  sitting  down.  For 
years  the  coffee  cups  were  Cross  and  Blackwell  crockery  marmalade 
jars.  One  day  I  noticed  the  Professor  wiping  his  knife  back  and 
forth  over  the  oilcloth  on  the  table  in  a  dreamy  sort  of  way  when  he 
suddenly  called  out,  "Charlie,  Charlie,  what  is  this?  Haven't  we 
oot  a  new  oilcloth?"  When  Charlie  answered  in  the  affirmative,  he 
said  in  his  far-off  manner,  "I  thought  so.  I  couldn't  hear  any  roaches 
crackle  underneath  it."  The  roaches  ate  the  backs  off  our  books. 
They  were  so  thick  that  anyone  who  had  been  in  the  laboratory  any 
length  of  time  automatically  stepped  back  when  opening  a  door  to 
allow  the  roaches  to  fall,  and  we  all  turned  the  inside  bands  of  our  hats 
down  before  leaving  for  the  night  and  shook  the  roaches  out.  I 
tried  to  clean  the  laboratory  once  and  found  that  the  drawers  re- 
semljled  the  streets  of  Pompeii.  They  contained  layers  of  papers  and 
old  notebooks  between  which  rats  had  died,  had  become  desiccated, 
and  were  flattened  out  by  the  accumulating  material.  By  such  excava- 
tions it  was  almost  possible  to  tell  the  order  in  which  Dr.  Abel's  as- 
sistants had  come  to  the  laboratory.   It  was  only  after  a  Spanish 

27 


Avoman  supplanted  Mrs.  Thomas  as  laboratory  scrubwoman  that  we 
managed  to  clean  the  place  up  and  get  rid  of  the  roaches  by  means 
of  a  roach  food  rather  than  a  spray. 

These  remarks  may  sound  a  bit  exaggerated,  but  it  is  a  fact  that 
when  in  fearful  heat  I  was  cleaning  out  the  storeroom  in  the  attic 
immediately  under  the  roof  on  a  very  hot  day  with  both  Charlies, 
Charlie  Drain  was  about  to  toss  me  a  rather  large,  wooden  box  when 
Charlie  Kamphaus  shouted  at  him  in  a  horrified  manner  and  he 
stopped.  It  turned  out  that  this  was  a  box  of  T.N.T.  which  had 
been  put  aside  and  forgotten  after  a  few  experiments  by  Professor 
Abel.  There  was  enough  there  to  have  removed  not  only  the  Depart- 
ment of  Pharmacology  but  the  entire  Medical  School  as  well. 

A  great  deal  of  Professor  Abel's  charm  was  due  to  his  intense  in- 
terest in  his  work  and,  as  I  have  said,  his  behaving  as  though  every- 
thing that  went  on  in  the  laboratory  was  on  a  plane  far  removed 
from  everything  else  on  this  earth.  I  shall  never  forget  his  experi- 
ment on  plasmapheresis  which  I  saw  when  I  first  went  to  the  labora- 
tory. He  had  already  carried  out  his  preliminary  work  on  dogs  and 
asked  me  to  join  Dr.  Marshall  and  Dr.  Turner  in  further  experiments 
which  he  wished  to  have  done.  Dr.  Marshall  was  at  that  time  an 
expert  organic  chemist  with  several  years'  training  with  Dr.  Jones  in 
biochemistry,  but  he  had  not  yet  had  any  pharmacology  or  medicine. 
Dr.  Turner  was  a  physical  chemist  from  England  who  appealed  to 
Dr.  Abel's  soul  by  calculating  everything  that  went  on,  no  matter 
what  it  might  be.  They  had  just  bought  a  large  centrifuge  Avith  which 
to  centrifuge  the  blood  taken  from  the  dogs,  and  Dr.  Turner  proceeded 
to  calculate  just  what  would  happen  if  the  centrifuge  should  break 
while  running  at  full  speed.  Each  day,  with  his  sleeves  rolled  up  and 
a  stop  watch  in  his  hand,  he  would  push  up  the  starting  lever  step  by 
step,  which  took  him  the  greater  part  of  an  hour,  and  calculate  just 
where  in  Baltimore  the  different  parts  of  the  machine  would  land  if 
things  went  to  pieces.  As  Dr.  Marshall  and  I  were  interested  in  get- 
ting these  experiments  done  and  as  it  took  almost  an  hour  to  speed 
up  the  centrifuge,  we  were  not  so  interested  in  these  calculations,  but 
the  Professor,  much  to  my  surprise,  put  the  utmost  faith  in  them  and 
told  us  never  to  use  the  centrifuge  except  under  Turner's  directions. 
Finally,  we  slipped  in  one  day  when  Dr.  Turner  was  away  and  found 
that  speed  could  be  obtained  in  from  three  to  five  minutes  with 
perfect  safety,  a  procedure  which  was  adopted  in  the  future. 

After  many  preliminary  trials  Professor  Abel  decided  to  carry  out 
one  of  his  plasmapheresis  experiments  on  a  patient  in  the  hospital 

28 


who  had  nephritis,  the  idea  being  to  remove  a  pint  or  so  of  blood  at 
a  time,  add  an  anticoagulant,  bring  it  back  to  the  laboratory,  centri- 
fuge it,  and  replace  the  plasma  with  salt  solution,  returning  the  blood 
to  the  patient  and  repeating  the  process  as  often  as  it  was  necessary 
to  do  so.  It  was,  of  course,  necessary  to  sterilize  everything  used  for 
this  work.  I  found  that  a  physical  chemist's  idea  of  sterility  was  a 
curious  one.  Everything  was  passed  through  a  flame,  some  slowly, 
others  fast,  depending  on  their  nature,  until  they  were  "about  sterile." 
Having  collected  a  supply  of  this  "about  sterile"  apparatus,  we  all 
repaired  to  the  hospital.  The  patient  was  lying  on  an  operating  table 
with  a  donor  next  to  him  in  case  of  accident,  and  the  surgical  benches 
were  filled  with  interested  spectators.  A  surgeon  asked  the  Professor 
if  he  would  not  care  to  put  on  a  cap  and  gown  and  take  part  in  the 
experiment.  Dr.  Abel  stepped  up  to  the  nurse  and  proceeded  to  get 
into  his  gown  backwards,  much  to  the  consternation  of  the  nurse. 
He  finally  got  it  on  right  side  round,  then  his  rubber  gloves,  and,  on 
top  of  all,  one  of  his  much  beloved  operating  caps.  The  Professor 
went  about  on  tiptoe,  talking  in  a  hushed  voice  and  watching  the 
drawing  of  the  blood  with  the  greatest  interest.  During  the  first  part 
of  the  time,  he  walked  about  with  both  hands  high  in  the  air,  his 
mind  centered  on  asepsis,  but  then  he  would  see  someone  in  one  of 
the  stands  to  whom  he  wished  to  speak,  and  would  go  over  and  take 
hold  of  the  iron  railing  with  both  hands,  and  then  come  back  to  the 
operating  table  again  with  his  hands  held  high  in  the  air.  It  was 
difficult  for  those  watching  the  experiment  to  restrain  themselves 
under  these  circumstances,  but  they  did  extremely  well.  After  the 
blood  was  drawn.  Professor  Abel  rushed  about  in  a  very  excited 
manner  seeing  that  everything  was  ready  to  take  the  blood  back  to  the 
laboratory,  and  in  a  low,  excited  whisper  gave  Turner  directions  as 
to  just  what  to  do.  When  all  was  ready,  he  disappeared  out  of  the 
operating  room,  with  both  hands  still  high  in  the  air.  The  moment 
the  door  closed  there  was  a  sigh  of  relief,  but  it  was  not  more  than 
thirty  seconds  after  this  Avhen  the  Professor  came  rushing  back  still 
wearing  his  rubber  gloves,  his  operating  gown  and  cap,  but  with  his 
derby  hat  stuffed  on  over  it.  Absolutely  unconsciotisly  he  came  up  to 
the  operating  table,  stood  there  talking  very  excitedly  in  whispers  to 
the  surgeon,  and  every  few  moments  adjusted  his  derby  hat  with 
his  rubber-gloved  hands.  About  the  time  we  all  thought  we  could 
stand  it  no  longer,  he  dashed  out  of  the  room  after  the  blood,  and  on 
looking  out  of  the  window,  we  saw  him  tearing  up  Monument  Street 
after  Dr.  Turner  with  his  gown  flapping  in  the  wind,  his  derby  hat 
on  the  back  of  his  head,  and  his  rubber  gloves  held  high  in  the  air. 

29 


Tlie  laboratory  course  for  the  students  was  something  never  for- 
gotten by  anyone  who  took  it.  The  course  was  given  in  a  large 
laboratory  with  chemical  benches  all  around  the  side,  and  two  sets  of 
these  in  the  center  of  the  room.  I  always  tried  to  get  the  Professor 
to  give  the  opening  lecture  in  Pharmacology,  and  he  would  promise 
that  he  would,  but  on  that  particular  day  something  would  always 
come  up,  and  as  far  as  I  can  remember  he  never  gave  the  lecture.  He 
did,  however,  give  a  lecture  occasionally,  which  was  the  cause  of  great 
excitement  throughout  the  laboratory.  Preparation  on  the  lecture 
was  put  off  until  the  last  minute,  and  then  everyone  was  sent  rushing 
for  one  thing  and  another.  The  Professor  would  pull  out  from  the 
top  drawer  of  his  desk  a  set  of  very  ancient  notes  in  which  he  would 
become  deeply  absorbed.  He  would  send  for  twice  as  many  articles 
as  he  could  even  look  at  in  the  time  left  before  the  lecture,  and  when 
the  time  finally  did  arrive,  he  was  keyed  up  to  such  a  state  of  excite- 
ment that  his  voice  often  broke  and  he  told  me,  "The  only  way  that  I 
can  lecture  is  to  wait  imtil  shortly  beforehand  and  then  saturate 
my  mind  with  material,"  but  the  result  on  the  students  was  worth 
seeing.  They  instantly  became  absorbed  in  what  he  had  to  say  or 
it  may  have  been  in  the  man  who  was  saying  it.  In  any  case,  they 
were  unanimous  in  their  praise  of  his  lectures.  Of  course,  at  times  he 
would  give  a  special  lecture  on  epinephrine,  vividiffusion,  or  the  pitu- 
itary, which  he  would  prepare  with  very  great  care  and  exactness. 

But  to  return  to  the  laboratory  course.  There  were  laboratory 
exercises  occupying  one  afternoon  each  week.  Each  year  about  two 
weeks  before  the  course  began,  the  two  Charlies  would  go  through  the 
innumerable  cupboards,  drawers,  research  rooms,  and  so  forth,  and 
pull  out  what  apparatus  they  could  find  for  the  laboratory  experi- 
ments. Tambours,  respiratory  tanks,  rubber  tubing,  cannulae,  ether 
cones,  kymographs  were  all  put  in  a  great  heap  on  a  large  table 
in  the  corner  of  the  laboratory  with  the  idea  of  sorting  these  be- 
fore the  course  began,  but  this  was  never  known  to  have  taken 
place.  In  another  corner  of  the  large  laboratory  there  was  a  small 
research  room  which  had  been  turned  into  a  stock  room  in  which 
the  unlabeled  bottles  were  kept,  and  this  room  had  one  of  those 
doors  which  was  cut  across  the  middle  so  that  the  bottom  could  be 
kept  closed  when  opening  the  top.  About  the  time  that  the  students 
began  to  arrive,  the  two  Charlies  would  appear  puffing  up  the  three 
long  flights  of  stairs  with  gunny  sacks  full  of  dogs  on  their  backs, 
which  were  unceremoniously  dumped  over  the  half  door  into  the 

30 


corner  room,  but,  like  the  apparatus,  enough  dogs  were  never  brought 
up  before  the  students  arrived,  so  that  half  of  the  students  would 
leave  for  the  animal  house  and  come  trudging  back  with  the  dogs  of 
all  sizes,  which  were  also  dumped  into  the  corner  room. 

There  was  a  worse  jam  at  the  apparatus  table  than  at  a  bargain 
counter,  members  of  the  different  groups  shouting  when  they  found 
a  tambour  or  some  other  necessary  object  which  all  four  members  of 
their  group  were  looking  for.  The  scene  around  the  table  took  on 
the  aspects  of  the  stock  exchange  in  a  panic,  members  of  the  different 
groups  diving  into  the  melee  and  signaling  or  shouting  about  the 
various  parts  of  apparatus  which  they  sought.  It  was  the  custom  to 
shave  the  dog  before  operating,  but  there  was  only  one  razor  for  the 
entire  class.  Elaborate  methods  of  matching  or  tossing  a  penny  for 
the  razor  were  devised  to  see  who  could  get  it  first.  When  you 
dump  a  dozen  unacquainted  dogs  into  a  small  room  after  they  have 
been  tossed  about  in  a  gunny  sack  together,  and  let  a  crowd  of  excited 
students  in  to  see  who  can  get  the  best  dog,  the  floor  is  not  always  in 
the  best  of  condition,  and  after  a  student  managed  to  get  a  dog,  it 
made  little  difference  to  him  what  else  he  took  to  the  big  laboratory. 
After  this  preliminary  fight  and  when  the  dogs  were  under  ether, 
things  quieted  down  for  a  bit  until  the  injection  of  drugs  began. 
The  students  attempted  to  obtain  records  of  their  experiments,  using 
German  roll  paper  kymographs,  ^vhich  one  wound  up  with  a  key; 
the  recording  was  done  with  the  same  red-ink  pens  as  were  used  in 
research  experiments.  These  kymographs  must  have  been  out  of  date 
when  they  were  bought  at  the  opening  of  the  Medical  School  in  1893. 
It  was  impossible  to  make  any  of  them  run  for  any  length  of  time, 
and  you  would  hear  a  cheer  from  any  group  which  managed  to 
get  a  complete  record  of  a  single  injection  of  a  drug.  The  spirit  of 
chance  seemed  to  pervade  the  whole  procedure  in  the  laboratory. 
There  was  not  only  matching  for  the  razor,  the  dog,  and  apparatus, 
but  you  would  find  different  groups  betting  on  whether  their  kymo- 
graph would  or  would  not  run  through  the  next  injection.  In  fact, 
as  only  half  the  class  could  take  the  course,  there  was  a  good  deal  of 
gambling  on  how  to  get  into  it,  and  I  heard  that  at  one  time  students 
were  buying  places  for  as  much  as  twenty-five  dollars. 

When  my  turn  came  to  take  charge  of  the  laboratory  course,  I 
went  to  Professor  Abel  and  asked  if  I  might  not  improve  it  a  bit  by 
buying  new  apparatus.  Dr.  Abel  seemed  quite  hurt  and  said  that  as 
far  as  he  could  see,  the  course  was  all  right.  In  those  years  he  never 
came  into  the  laboratory.  However,  as  in  all  things,  he  was  very 

31 


cooperative  and  took  me  to  the  Dean,  who  was  good  enough  to  let 
me  buy  a  whole  new  set  of  apparatus,  a  Harvard  kymograph  for  each 
group,  and  later  allowed  me  to  put  in  a  small  shop  and  to  obtain 
the  services  of  an  excellent  machinist.  Dr.  Abel  was  not  anxious  to 
have  the  shop  and  tried  to  dissuade  me  by  pointing  out  that  there  was 
no  place  to  put  it.  When  I  suggested  a  corner  of  the  large  labora- 
tory, he  admitted  that  this  would  be  all  right  and  became  quite  de- 
spondent; but  all  of  a  sudden  he  remembered  that  the  fire  escape  was 
right  outside  of  the  window  where  I  proposed  to  put  the  shop,  and 
he  told  me  that  it  would  never  do  to  put  it  there.  When  I  pointed 
out  that  there  was  already  a  chemical  bench  in  front  of  this  window 
as  well  as  two  shelves  and  three  lines  of  pipes  across  it,  which  made  it 
impossible  to  get  out,  he  gave  up  and  let  me  have  the  shop. 

I  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  on  this  laboratory  course,  systematized 
the  whole  procedure,  and  arranged  for  the  entire  class  to  take  the 
course.  I  had  drawers  put  in  so  that  each  group  could  lock  up  its 
own  set  of  apparatus,  and  saw  that  a  razor  as  well  as  the  necessary 
apparatus  for  each  experiment  was  supplied  to  each  group.  The  result 
was  very  striking.  Everything  ran  perfectly,  the  students  obtained 
good  records  and  went  ahead  in  a  very  orderly  fashion,  and  I  was 
extremely  proud  of  what  I  had  done.  But  one  day  the  Professor 
happened  to  come  into  the  laboratory  in  the  middle  of  the  after- 
noon to  ask  me  a  question.  In  the  midst  of  what  he  was  saying, 
he  suddenly  stopped  and  looked  around  the  room  in  a  dreamy  kind 
of  way  at  the  quietly  working  students  and  after  a  time  said,  "My 
goodness,  Lamson,  you  certainly  have  ruined  this  course.  The  stu- 
dents used  to  have  a  good  time  here."  There  was  much  in  this.  Too 
much  refinement  can  obliterate  all  initiative,  but  where  the  line  is 
to  be  drawn  is  something  for  each  generation  to  decide. 

After  my  first  year  in  the  laboratory,  during  which  Professor  Abel 
was  largely  occupied  with  the  writing  of  his  Mellon  lecture,  I  had  a 
chance  to  see  him  at  work  on  research.  He  became  interested  in 
secretin  and  with  Dr.  Pincoffs  made  more  and  more  concentrated 
extracts  of  the  intestinal  mucosa  until  he  obtained  fractions  that  were 
^ery  active.  Endless  such  fractions  were  separated,  and  each  needed 
io  be  tested  by  its  effect  on  the  rate  of  pancreatic  secretion  in  the 
dog.  Dr.  Pincoffs  became  very  expert  at  preparing  these  animals. 
The  pancreatic  duct  was  cannulated,  the  trachea  connected  with  an 
ether  bottle,  and  the  dog  left  to  reach  a  state  of  equilibrium  while 
everyone  had  lunch.  Everything  worked  perfectly  for  a  time,  and 
then  the  dogs  developed  a  peculiar  habit  of  dying  during  the  lunch 

32 


hour.  Everyone  had  his  OAvn  idea  as  to  why  this  happened.  When 
they  did  die,  they  died  at  almost  the  same  minute  each  day,  but 
there  were  certain  days  on  which  they  did  not  die  at  all.  This  became 
a  problem  of  almost  as  much  interest  as  the  nature  of  secretin  itself. 
It  was  solved,  as  many  other  things  were  in  the  laboratory,  by  Charlie 
Kamphaus,  who  discovered  that  the  sun  came  around  the  corner  of 
the  building  at  the  same  time  each  day,  shone  on  the  ether  bottle, 
and  raised  the  ether  concentration  to  a  lethal  level. 

According  to  Charlie,  it  was  also  he  who  discovered  the  fact  that 
the  liver  could  concentrate  phenoltetrachlorphthalein.  Dr.  Abel  and 
Dr.  Rowntree  were  working  on  this  substance  and  studying  its  pos- 
sible action  as  a  cathartic.  Charlie  was  cleaning  up  after  one  of 
Dr.  Abel's  experiments  and  was  about  to  put  the  dog  in  a  bucket  when 
he  noticed  that  this  dye  was  pouring  out  of  the  bile  duct  which  had 
accidentally  been  cut  across.  He  called  Dr.  Abel's  attention  to  this, 
and  if  what  he  says  is  so,  and  ^ve  could  trust  Charlie  implicitly,  we 
again  have  an  example  of  an  important  medical  discovery  being  made 
by  chance,  combined  with  the  foreknowledge  and  altertness  of  the 
observer. 

Although  Dr.  Abel's  experiments  on  secretin,  Witte's  peptone, 
albumoses,  and  so  forth,  were  painstaking  and  tedious,  they  were  as 
nothing  compared  with  his  work  on  the  pituitary.  The  preliminary 
pituitary  extracts  were  made  by  Dr.  Rouiller,  Dr.  Helen  Graham, 
or  Dr.  Gelling  and  then  worked  up  further  by  Dr.  Abel  himself.  They 
were  tested  either  on  the  blood  pressure  or  on  the  guinea  pig  uterus  or 
both,  and  here  again  the  pharmacological  tests  were  extremely  simple 
and  needed  no  complicated  apparatus.  By  that  time  more  modern 
methods  of  doing  blood  pressures  had  been  introduced  into  the 
laboratoi7,  and  these  were  run  off  in  great  numbers.  I  well  remember 
Professor  Abel's  great  delight  when  he  managed  to  get  rid  of  a  pre- 
liminary fall  in  blood  pressure  and  obtained  pituitary  fractions  which 
gave  nothing  but  an  instantaneous  and  beautiful  rise  of  pressure. 

The  uterine  experiments  were  carried  out  by  Dr.  Rouiller,  who  was 
a  man  for  whom  I  had  the  utmost  respect.  He  was  an  ideal  person 
for  Dr.  Abel  to  have  associated  with  him.  He  was  not  only  an  or- 
ganic chemist  of  exceptional  ability,  but  during  the  years  in  which  he 
worked  with  Dr.  Abel  he  was  editing  the  Section  on  Organic  Chem- 
istry of  Chemical  A hstracts,  and  it  seemed  that  there  was  nothing  on 
earth  of  which  he  had  not  heard.  It  was  Dr.  Rouiller  who  convinced 
me  that  it  was  impossible  to  have  an  original  idea.  Every  time  I 
had  one,  it  would  not  be  two  days  before  he  would  come  quietly  into 

S3 


my  room,  an  open  journal  in  his  hand,  and  almost  apologetically  show 
me  where  this  had  already  been  done  some  time  before.  As  far  as  I 
know.  Dr.  Rouiller  never  did  anything  but  work,  except  to  read  on 
the  streetcars  to  and  from  the  laboratory.  He  was  always  there  the 
first  thing  in  the  morning  and,  as  far  as  I  know,  never  left  the  labora- 
tory until  at  least  twelve  o'clock  at  night.  He  had  an  even  greater 
dislike  than  Dr.  Abel  for  changing  methods  and  an  utter  scorn  for 
biological  methods,  particularly  the  one  on  which  he  worked  for  some 
eight  or  ten  years  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  This  consisted  in 
comparing  the  activity  of  Professor  Abel's  pituitary  fractions  with 
that  of  histamine  by  recording  their  effects  upon  the  guinea  pig 
uterus.  Although  Rouiller  was  a  very  quiet  and  self-contained  per- 
son, what  he  had  to  say  about  the  guinea  pig's  uterus  cannot  be 
recorded  here.  Anyone  who  knows  these  organs  well,  knows  that  it 
takes  more  than  a  saint  to  put  up  with  their  erratic  behavior.  They 
were  strung  up  in  a  bath  of  Locke's  solution  and  tied  at  one  end  to  a 
writing  lever,  which  needed  to  be  constantly  agitated  so  that  it  would 
not  stick  on  the  smoked  paper  of  the  kymogiaph.  In  order  to  produce 
this  agitation  Dr.  Abel  and  Dr.  Rouiller  devised  an  apparatus  con- 
sisting of  a  pencil  stuck  through  the  hole  of  a  rubber  stopper,  and  it 
Avas  the  experimenter's  task  to  sit  there  and  pound  the  desk  with  this 
rubber  stopper,  often  for  five  or  six  hours  at  a  time,  while  the  uterus 
was  trying  to  decide  whether  to  behave  itself  or  not.  It  was  utterly 
impossible  for  me  to  convince  either  Dr.  Abel  or  Dr.  Rouiller  that  a 
mechanical  agitator  would  work  just  as  well,  and  I  will  admit  that  it 
was  none  of  my  business,  but  hammering  a  bench  for  hours  at  a  time 
was  one  of  those  things  which  seemed  to  me  to  be  obviously  incom- 
patible with  the  abilities  of  a  great  man. 

For  many  years  Dr.  Abel  carried  out  this  work  in  spite  of  continued 
setbacks.  He  used  to  drop  into  my  room  at  the  end  of  the  day  and 
talk  over  his  experiments  while  putting  on  his  coat.  Although  at 
times  he  was  discouraged,  it  was  much  more  likely  that  he  would  say, 
"I've  got  it  this  time.  I'll  show  it  to  you  in  the  morning,"  but  in 
the  morning  the  fractions  of  which  he  had  expected  so  much  were 
apt  to  turn  out  in  as  disappointing  a  way  as  ever.  This  would  never 
upset  him,  and  he  would  begin  all  over  again  with  as  exactly  as  much 
enthusiasm  as  ever. 

For  a  time  Dr.  Abel  was  assisted  by  Dr.  Helen  Graham,  and  as 
a  sidelight  on  Dr.  Abel's  character  it  might  be  interesting  to  record 
a  remark  which  he  made  about  her.  He  said  one  evening  to  me, 
"Lamson,  I  have  seen  a  good  many  women  in  science,  and,  to  tell 

34 


the  truth,  I  have  not  felt  that  they  were  particularly  well  fitted  for  it, 
but  Dr.  Graham  is  different.  She  has  upset  all  of  my  ideas  on  the 
matter,  and  she  is  as  good  if  not  better  than  any  man  whom  I  have 
ever  had  with  me  in  the  laboratory." 

Anyone  who  has  read  Dr.  Abel's  work  on  histamine,  the  active 
principle  of  the  pituitary  gland,  as  well  as  his  early  work  on  epi- 
nephrine, must  wonder  why  Dr.  Abel  published  certain  things  that 
he  did,  why  he  was  apparently  in  such  a  hurry  about  publication, 
and  why  he  was  so  vague  in  his  description  of  his  work  that  it  is  al- 
most impossible  to  repeat  it.  This  seems  incompatible  with  his  crit- 
ical judgment,  the  exactness  which  he  required  of  others,  and  the 
standards  which  he  set  for  his  own  journals.  Personally,  I  think 
that  it  was  Dr.  Abel's  terrifically  intense  interest  in  the  outcome  of 
his  work  which  allowed  him  to  do  this.  He  was  so  interested  in  an 
absolutely  honest  way  that  this  at  times  warped  his  judgment.  I 
know  that  this  was  so  about  his  conclusions  of  the  part  that  histamine 
played  in  the  activity  of  the  pituitary  gland.  He  would  not  listen 
to  suggestions  made  to  him  by  Dr.  Marshall  and  others  in  the  labora- 
tory but  dashed  off  this  paper  and  published  it  without  showing  it  to 
anyone. 

It  was  very  interesting  to  see  the  inner  workings  of  The  journal  of 
Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Therapeutics  at  such  times  as  when 
Dr.  Abel  got  hot  on  the  trail  of  something  in  which  he  was  particu- 
larly interested.  Before  he  reached  the  end,  he  would  get  more 
and  more  excited  about  his  work  and  become  suddenly  convinced 
that  he  was  going  to  settle  everything  the  next  day.  He  would  call 
his  secretary,  ask  for  the  publishers  on  the  line,  and  have  them  hold 
the  next  number  of  the  Journal  until  hearing  from  him.  The  entire 
laboratory  would  then  be  upset  in  an  attempt  to  finish  his  w^ork  and 
rush  a  publication  through.  Every  time  the  expected  result  was  not 
found,  and  after  a  considerable  delay  of  the  Journal,  Dr.  Abel  would 
reluctantly  give  the  order  to  print  the  next  number  without  his  con- 
tribution. When  a  piece  of  work  was  really  ready  to  be  written  up, 
the  procedme  was  very  different  and  involved  weeks  of  poring  over 
endless  periodicals  by  Dr.  Abel  and  his  associates.  Certainly  no  one 
would  accuse  him  of  having  done  this  superficially. 

I  cannot  go  into  details  of  the  pituitary  controversy,  but  after  the 
finding  that  histamine  was  not  the  internal  secretion  of  the  pituitary 
gland  and  the  finding  by  others  suggesting  that  there  were  at  least 
tTVo,  if  not  more,  active  principles  rather  than  the  one  which  he  had 
postulated.  Dr.  Abel  set  out  to  sho^v  that  his  opponents  could  not  be 

35 


right.  The  discussions  at  the  lunch  table  took  on  the  character  of  a 
religious  controversy,  the  Professor  laying  down  the  law  about  his 
unitarian  doctrine  and  the  absurdity  of  that  held  by  the  trinitarians. 
He  insisted  that  it  was  the  methods  used  by  his  opponents  which  gave 
them  their  multiple  active  principles.  For  years  it  has  seemed  that 
the  Professor  could  not  be  right,  but  recent  work  indicates  that  there 
is  a  ray  of  hope  for  his  doctrine. 

In  the  previous  sketches  of  Dr.  Abel's  life  everyone  has  referred  to 
how  hard  he  worked.  This,  I  think,  can  be  gathered  from  what  I 
have  said  already.  During  my  stay  in  the  laboratory  Dr.  Abel  never 
spent  the  evenings  there,  for  he  was  getting  on  in  years,  but  I  never 
dropped  in  on  him  at  home  but  what  I  found  him  reading  either 
history  or  something  bearing  on  his  work.  I  never  saw  him  read  a 
current  novel.  I  have  seen  him  work  when  he  was  so  exhausted  that 
he  could  hardly  stand  or  speak  above  a  whisper,  particularly  in  the 
years  after  he  had  undergone  an  operation.  At  one  time  matters 
came  to  such  a  pass  that  he  could  not  remember  the  names  of  anyone 
in  the  laboratory;  he  developed  a  very  definite  droop  on  one  side  of 
his  face  which  made  his  speech  indistinct,  and  I  felt  almost  certain 
that  if  he  kept  on  he  would  have  a  cerebral  hemorrhage.  I  was  un- 
able to  induce  his  clinical  colleagues  to  talk  to  him  about  this,  for 
they  felt  that  it  was  interfering  with  his  personal  affairs,  so  I  finally 
wrote  the  Professor  a  letter  telling  him  just  what  I  thought  might 
happen  to  him  if  he  kept  on  working  as  he  was  doing,  explaining  that 
if  he  should  suddenly  die,  it  would  not  be  such  a  serious  matter,  but 
that  if  he  were  paralyzed,  it  would  be.  I  also  offered  to  resign  from 
the  laboratory  if  he  did  not  wish  to  have  someone  around  who  was 
interfering  with  his  life.  Dr.  Abel  was  indisposed  on  this  day,  and 
I  left  the  note  with  Mrs.  Abel  at  his  house,  wondering  what  the  out- 
come would  be.  At  about  five  in  the  afternoon  Mrs.  Abel  called  me, 
saying  the  professsor  read  my  letter,  remained  silent  for  a  few  mo- 
ments, and  then  said,  "Mary,  find  out  when  the  next  train  goes  to 
Atlantic  City."  After  a  few  weeks'  rest  he  was  a  different  person. 

At  this  particular  time  Professor  Abel  had  worked  himself  into  a 
state  of  collapse  over  the  matter  of  a  biophysicist.  He  was  then  very 
much  interested  in  the  application  of  the  infrared  spectroscope  to 
the  analysis  of  his  pituitary  fractions.  He  was  so  impressed  by  the 
results  of  the  experiments  reported  to  him  (although  they  were  later 
found  to  be  valueless,  since  they  were  not  correctly  obtained)  and  by 
the  realization  of  the  fact  that  those  trained  in  physics  might  add  as 
much  to  medicine  as  those  trained  in  chemistry  had  already  done, 

36 


that  he  set  out  to  bring  about  the  organization  of  a  department  of 
biophysics  in  tlie  Medical  School.  He  encountered  great  opposition 
to  his  plan,  which  he  attempted  to  overcome  by  sheer  strength  of 
character,  but  this  failed,  and  his  efforts  nearly  killed  him.  Many 
times  he  said  to  me  that  he  was  going  to  put  this  through  if  it  was 
the  last  thing  that  he  did  in  this  world,  but  finally  it  was  definitely 
settled  that  there  would  be  no  such  department,  and  he  went  back 
to  work  once  more.  The  success  of  such  ventures  in  other  places 
since  has  proven  that  there  was  more  in  what  Dr.  Abel  suggested 
than  was  realized  by  his  colleagues. 

After  his  work  on  the  pituitary  he  turned  to  the  problem  of  insulin. 
He,  Rouiller,  and  Geiling  worked  as  indefatigably  on  this  as  they 
had  on  the  pituitary  gland.  In  Dr.  Geiling,  Professor  Abel  found 
another  devoted  soul.  Dr.  Geiling  gave  up  everything  else  in  life 
for  the  Professor,  as  Mrs.  Abel  and  Charlie  Kamphaus  both  had  done. 
He  tested  endless  insulin  fractions  on  rabbits,  he  looked  out  for  all  of 
Dr.  Abel's  affairs,  both  in  and  out  of  the  laboratory,  such  as  his 
traveling  arrangements,  his  tickets,  his  taxicabs,  and  countless  little 
things.  He  went  with  him  to  California  for  this  work.  He  shared 
with  Dr.  Rouiller  the  terrible  drives  that  Dr.  Abel  made  on  his  prob- 
lem, which  always  seemed  to  come  at  Christmas,  Easter,  or  during 
the  summer  vacation,  when  one  naturally  wished  to  let  down  a  bit, 
but  in  spite  of  Dr.  Ceiling's  remarking  that  he  wished  the  Professor 
could  time  these  drives  a  little  differently,  he  was  always  there, 
working  with  as  great  intensity  as  the  Professor  himself.  Dr.  Geiling 
was  a  very  great  help  to  Professor  Abel  in  his  latter  years. 

As  said  before,  I  have  thought  of  Professor  Abel  as  a  mystic,  some- 
one whose  mind  was  in  the  clouds  and  yet  who  was  absolutely  aware 
of  what  was  going  on  in  the  particular  field  in  which  he  was  interested, 
whatever  this  might  be,  whether  it  was  medical  science,  the  war,  or 
historical  affairs.  No  one,  whether  it  was  a  new  assistant,  one  of  his 
past  associates,  one  of  his  colleagues,  or  a  visiting  foreigner,  ever  came 
into  the  laboratory  without  immediately  feeling  the  friendship  of  this 
man  and  his  real  interest  in  what  one  came  to  see  him  about.  If 
his  visitor  was  of  the  first  order,  himself  interested  in  some  problem, 
the  Professor  would  spend  any  amount  of  time  discussing  it  with  him 
regardless  of  his  station  in  life.  On  the  other  hand  it  did  not  take  but 
a  few  moments  for  Dr.  Abel  to  recognize  a  second-rate  man.  He  did 
not  exactly  like  to  turn  such  a  man  out  but  devised  a  convenient 
method  of  doing  this.  He  ^vould  appear  in  my  doorway  with  the  visitor 
on  his  arm  and  would  introduce  him  to  me  with  the  remark,  "I 

37 


want  you  to  meet  Dr.  Lamson,  who  is  doing  some  extraordinarily 
interesting  work  whicli  I  am  sure  he  would  be  glad  to  tell  you  about," 
and  with  a  wink  of  his  one  eye  he  would  return  to  his  laboratory. 
I  would  like  to  know  how  many  such  visitors  I  have  had  to  dispose 
of  for  him  in  this  way. 

In  his  last  years,  time  became  the  most  precious  thing  for  Dr.  Abel. 
He  would  not  relax  but  seemed  to  work  harder  than  ever  in  the  hope 
of  accomplishing  something  in  what  he  knew  was  an  ever-diminishing 
period  of  time.  He  frequently  spoke  of  hoping  to  last  long  enough 
to  accomplish  some  particular  object.  We  would  take  our  manu- 
scripts to  him  as  Editor  of  The  Journal  of  Pharmacology  and  Experi- 
mental Therapeutics,  and  although  he  was  critical  of  outside  publica- 
tions, he  assumed  that  the  papers  which  we  had  written  were  worth 
publishing  and  he  hated  to  waste  time  on  them.  I  would  go  into  his 
room  with  a  manuscript,  which  he  would  take  very  giaciously  and 
with  an  air  of  intense  interest.  After  opening  it  to  one  or  two  pages, 
or  not  at  all,  he  would  hand  it  back  with  a  pat  on  the  back  and  the 
remark,  "That  certainly  is  a  fine  piece  of  work.  Just  give  it  to  our 
secretary,  and  we  will  put  it  in  the  next  number,"  and  even  while 
handing  it  back,  he  would  turn  to  his  work  once  more.  But  if  some- 
thing needed  attention,  no  matter  what  it  was,  he  would  drop  every- 
thing for  it.  After  I  had  been  in  the  laboratory  for  about  a  year,  I 
found  that  shutting  off  the  arterial  blood  supply  to  the  liver  prevented 
the  production  of  polycythemia  after  the  intravenous  injection  of 
epinephrine,  and  I  published  this  work  in  Dr.  Abel's  Journal.  After 
returning  to  the  laboratory  I  tried  to  repeat  these  experiments,  and 
in  the  first  two  dogs  which  I  used  I  was  unable  to  do  so.  I  was  horri- 
fied at  having  published  something  from  Dr.  Abel's  laboratory  that 
was  apparently  not  true,  and  decided  that  the  best  thing  to  do  was 
to  resign  and  get  it  over  with  as  soon  as  possible,  so  I  immediately 
went  to  Dr.  Abel  and  told  him  what  had  happened.  He  listened  to 
what  I  had  to  say  with  much  interest,  and  to  my  utter  surprise 
said,  "But,  Lamson,  you  must  be  right.  Have  you  thrown  away  the 
dogs  on  which  you  carried  out  these  experiments?"  Such  absolute 
confidence  in  an  assistant  not  only  endeared  him  to  me  for  life  but 
made  it  an  absolute  necessity  that  what  I  might  do  in  the  future  must 
be  well  controlled.  When  I  told  him  that  I  still  had  the  dogs,  he 
said,  "You  must  have  some  collateral  blood  supply  which  you  did 
not  tie  off."  We  went  out  to  the  laboratory,  and  he  injected  dye  into 
the  aorta,  and  sure  enough  in  both  instances  the  dye  immediately 
went  into  the  liver,  showing  that  the  blood  supply  had  not  been  prop- 

38 


erly  cut  off,  and  we  were  able  to  trace  out  collateral  circulation.  It 
was  not  only  such  trust  and  kindness  as  this  but  Dr.  Abel's  sympathy 
and  understanding  for  all  those  who  had  the  truth  of  things  at  heart 
that  gave  one  faith,  faith  in  the  value  of  scientific  ideals. 

During  the  many  years  that  I  was  with  him  I  never  heard  Dr.  Abel 
speak  of  trying  to  find  a  man  for  his  laboratory  or  showing  interest 
in  promising  young  men  who  might  make  good  pharmacologists.  As 
far  as  I  knew,  men  simply  came  there  as  1  did,  delighted  with  the  op- 
portunity of  being  allowed  to  work  there.  Everyone  always  seemed 
welcome,  and  a  place  was  made  for  him.  Dr.  Abel's  love  of  foreigners 
was  obvious.  Japanese,  Chinese,  South  Africans,  Englishmen,  Swiss, 
Poles,  and  Spaniards  worked  there  in  even  the  few  years  that  I  was  in 
the  department.  His  recommendation  to  his  assistants  of  new  ar- 
rivals was  the  closest  to  falsification  that  I  ever  knew  Dr.  Abel  to 
come.  He  brought  me  one  man,  for  instance,  whom  he  assured  me 
would  be  of  invaluable  assistance,  and  introduced  him  as  an  expert 
biological  chemist  with  a  splendid  training  in  medicine.  This  was  a 
Spanish  priest  who,  beside  Spanish,  spoke  nothing  but  German  and 
very  little  of  that.  I  told  this  new  associate  that  my  work  was  on 
the  liver,  which  seemed  to  interest  him,  and  he  confided  to  me  that 
he  was  a  "non-conformist  on  the  liver,  that  it  was  the  cause  of  tuber- 
culosis." When  I  asked  him  why,  he  replied  that  he  would  have  to 
consult  his  notebooks,  but  they  were  in  Spain.  On  getting  to  know 
him  better,  I  found  that  he  had  had  five  years  of  lectures  in  chemistry 
and  medicine  but  had  never  held  a  test  tube  in  his  hand  or  done  a 
single  experiment  of  any  description.  However,  he  turned  out  to  be 
a  most  delightful  person,  of  whom  I  became  very  fond. 

With  the  exception  of  those  who  came  to  work  ^vith  Professor  Abel 
on  his  own  problem,  men  were  simply  turned  loose  and  allowed  to 
sink  or  swim.  Some  went  through  a  great  deal  of  mental  anguish  be- 
fore finding  a  problem,  but  it  was  surprising  how  each  did,  how  they 
absorbed  the  spirit  of  the  Professor,  and  after  a  very  short  time  were 
working  day  and  night.  One  needs  only  to  go  over  the  list  of  those 
who  worked  in  his  laboratory  and  their  accomplishments  to  see  that 
whatever  the  methods  of  education  were  which  the  Professor  used, 
they  certainly  were  successful. 

Finally,  I  should  like  to  consider  what  Abel  did  for  pharmacology, 
that  special  field  of  medicine  for  which  he  was  responsible.  It  is 
often  said  that  he  paid  no  attention  to  organization,  that  he  entirely 
neglected  the  training  of  his  assistants  as  well  as  the  students,  and 
that  in  spite  of  his  intense  interest  in  research  he  let  pharmacology 

39 


run  down.  There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  but  that  pharmacology 
did  run  down  in  this  country  during  the  latter  years  of  Professor 
Abel's  life,  and  it  is  also  true  that  no  effort  was  made  by  him,  during 
the  years  that  I  was  in  his  laboratory,  to  see  to  it  that  assistants  Avere 
put  through  any  sort  of  training  or  that  a  policy  of  any  kind  was 
carried  out  in  relation  to  the  student  course.  In  fact,  the  Professor 
used  to  preach  to  me  against  spending  too  much  time  on  lectures  and 
the  organization  of  pharmacology  and  advised  me  to  put  my  efforts 
into  research  and  let  other  matters  take  care  of  themselves.  But  was 
this  not  the  reaction  of  a  man  who  had  been  through  much  himself 
and  had  forgotten  that  others  did  not  have  the  training  which  he 
himself  had? 

I  do  not  feel  that  pharmacology  would  continue  to  exist  as  an 
entity  if  all  departments  were  organized  as  Dr.  Abel's  was  when  I  was 
there,  for  they  would  not  be  headed  by  Abels;  but  we  must  not  forget 
that  the  state  of  pharmacology  in  his  laboratory  was  more  or  less  the 
fault  of  his  assistants  rather  than  of  Dr.  Abel.  He  had  been  through 
the  years  of  effort  which  it  took  to  develop  the  first  pharmacological 
laboratory  in  this  country,  a  series  of  lectures  and  demonstrations  as 
well  as  laboratory  experiments,  the  organization  of  a  course  not  only 
in  pharmacology  but  in  toxicology,  prescription  writing,  materia 
medica,  and  dosage,  and  a  course  in  pharmacy  given  by  a  group  of  the 
best  pharmacists  in  this  country.  Anyone  wishing  to  obtain  an  idea 
of  the  care  with  which  he  did  this  needs  only  to  read  his  papers,  "On 
the  Teaching  of  Pharmacology,  Materia  Medica,  and  Therapeutics  in 
our  Medical  Schools"  (3),  "Report  on  the  Teaching  of  Pharmacody- 
namics, in  the  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Medical  Education  of  the 
American  Medical  Association"  (4)  and  "The  Education  of  the  Su- 
perior Student"  (5).  There  were  enough  relics  of  these  days  in  the 
Pompeian  layers  of  the  laboratory  drawers  to  indicate  what  had  been 
done  in  the  past,  but  Dr.  Abel's  primary  interest  was  not  in  organiza- 
tion. As  soon  as  he  had  taken  care  of  the  organization  of  pharma- 
cology in  this  country,  not  only  in  teaching  but  in  the  provision  of  a 
journal  for  the  recording  of  experimental  work  and  a  society  which 
would  bring  pharmacologists  together,  he  left  it  to  others  to  continue 
along  the  line  which  he  had  planned  and  himself  turned  to  research, 
which  he  kept  emphasizing  as  the  basis  of  everything  worth  ^vhile. 

We  are  apt  to  think  of  Abel  as  a  biochemist  rather  than  what  many 
consider  a  pharmacologist  to  be.  I  know  that  Dr.  Abel  believed  most 
thoroughly  in  the  method  employed  by  the  pharmacologist  of  using 
the  reaction  of  the  organism  in  isolating  active  principles  from  plants 

40 


and  tissues.  At  the  time  when  epinephrine  and  thyroxin  were  about 
the  only  hormones  known,  he  fek  that  we  had  just  made  a  beginning 
in  the  study  of  those  processes  of  the  body  which  are  under  chemical 
control.  True  it  is  that  he  Avas  not  interested  in  the  superficial  'ac- 
tions' of  drugs,  which  are  studied  by  many  who  are  satisfied  to  go 
no  further.  His  interest  was  in  the  'nature  of  things,'  the  nature  of 
the  great  chemical  laboratory,  the  living  organism.  If  he  knew  that 
something  in  some  plant,  some  animal  poison,  some  gland,  or  some 
bacterial  toxin  brought  about  a  change  when  introduced  into  the 
body,  he  wanted  terribly  to  know  the  nature  of  this  chemical  sub- 
stance, as  necessarily  it  must  bear  some  relationship  to  one  of  the 
chemical  constituents  of  the  cell  with  which  it  reacted  to  bring  about 
the  secondary  reactions  observed,  as  changes  in  muscle  tone,  respira- 
tion, and  so  forth.  Abel  was  as  close  to  the  bottom  of  things  as  one 
could  go.  He  was  a  biologist  of  the  most  fundamental  type.  If  one 
wishes  to  obtain  in  Abel's  own  words  his  concepts  of  these  matters, 
they  may  be  found  in  his  presidential  address  to  the  American 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  (Science,  1934),  as  well 
as  in  his  letter  on  pharmacology  to  Dr.  Abraham  Flexner,  which  is 
given  in  Dr.  Voegtlin's  biography  of  Dr.  Abel  (1,  p.  397). 

During  the  long  life  of  a  man  such  as  Dr.  Abel  things  are  certain 
to  change,  and  the  problems  of  today  are  entirely  different  from  those 
Avhich  he  encountered  in  his  most  active  years.  If  pharmacology  has 
retrogressed  since  Dr.  Abel  began  it  in  this  country,  those  of  us  who 
have  followed  should  not  put  the  blame  on  him  but  on  ourselves, 
possibly  for  not  taking  our  share  of  the  organization  and  the  atten- 
tion to  general  principles,  which  is  necessary  for  the  well  being  of 
any  medical  discipline,  and  perhaps  more  than  for  any  other  reason 
our  failure  to  grasp  just  what  was  uppermost  in  Abel's  mind  as  the 
function  of  the  pharmacologist— the  solution  of  the  innermost  chem- 
ical secrets  of  the  living  organism. 

In  all  that  is  going  on  in  the  world  today,  with  the  utter  chaos  of 
thought,  in  spite  of  the  terrific  increase  in  scientific  knowledge  and 
technical  ability,  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  apparent  that  it  is 
the  man  that  is  needed,  rather  than  knowledge  alone,  the  man  with 
ideals  and  the  courage  to  maintain  them.  But  constructive  ideals 
need  knowledge,  which  can  come  only  with  study,  training,  and  ex- 
perience. All  of  these  Abel  had.  It  was  this  which  made  it  possible 
for  him  to  see  what  was  best  in  medicine  in  his  time,  and  '^vhat  prob- 
lems were  of  the  most  importance  for  investigation.  Abel  was  ahead 
of  his  time  in  this  country.  His  desire  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  matters 

41 


showed  him  the  need  of  chemistry  in  medicine,  and  he  took  the  time 
and  staked  his  savings  to  get  a  training  in  chemistry  before  settling 
down  to  work.  It  was  this  which  made  it  possible  for  him  to  see  prob- 
lems quite  invisible  to  many  of  his  colleagues  and  to  visualize  the  com- 
ing of  the  present-day  knowledge  of  hormones  and  the  importance  of 
chemistry  in  all  life.  He  was  equally  well  aware  of  the  coming  of 
physics  in  medicine  but  was  unable  to  convince  enough  others  of 
this  to  allow  him  to  do  for  biophysics  what  he  did  for  biological 
chemistry  and  pharmacology.  When  the  life  of  this  man  is  fully 
written,  students  of  science  as  well  as  of  medicine  will  do  well  to 
study  it.  Dr.  Abel  gave  the  world  much  by  his  investigations,  but 
more  than  that  he  has  given  us  ideals— lived  up  to— which  anyone 
would  do  well  to  follow. 

REFERENCES 

(1)  Clark,  W.  M.:  /.  Biol  Chem.,  124,  (n.  p.)  August  1938. 

Dale,  H.  H.:  Obituary  Notices  of  the  Roy.  Soc.  of  London,  2,  577,  1939. 
Ceiling,  E.  M.  K.,  and  Evans,  E.  A.,  Jr.:  Scient.  Monthly,  47,  185,  1938. 
Ceiling,  E.  M.  K.,  and  Evans,  E.  A.,  Jr.:  Arch,  internal,  de  phartnacodyn. 

et  de  therap.,  60,  240,  1938. 
Cunn,  J.  A.:  Nature,  London,  142,  242,  1938. 
Marshall,  E.  K.,  Jr.:  Science,  87,  566,  1938. 
Voegtlin,  C:  /.  Pharmacol,  ir  Exper.  Therap.,  67,  373,  1939. 


(2)  Abel,  J.  J. 

(3)  Abel,  J.  J. 

(4)  Abel,  J.  J. 

(5)  Abel,  J.  J. 


Science,  42,  135  and  165,  1915. 
Philadelphia  Med.  J..  6,  384,  1900. 
A.  M.  A.  Bull.,  5,  54,  1909. 
/.  Che7n.  Education,  7,  283,  1930. 


42 


f^f    J-IBRARv    '^ 


On  the  Blood-Pressure  Raising    \^ 
Constituent  of  the  Suprarenal 
CapsuM 


JOHN  J.  ABEL,  M.D.  AND  ALBERT  C.  CRAWFORD,  M.D. 


B 


OTH  clinical  experience  and  laboratory  research  have  shown  that 
the  suprarenal  capsule  is  an  organ  of  vital  importance. 

Physiologistsf  have  proved  that  a  very  small  quantity  of  an  aqueous 
extract  of  the  medullary  substance  raises  the  blood  pressure  to  a  great 
height  above  the  normal.  It  has  also  unequaled  power  in  reviving  a 
poisoned  heart.  Gottlieb,]:  for  example,  has  shown  that  it  will  revive 
the  heart  of  a  rabbit  which  has  practically  stopped  beating  in  conse- 
quence of  an  intravenous  injection  of  chloral  hydrate. 

Bates§  applied  an  aqueous  solution  to  the  eye  and  found  that  it 
exerted  a  marked  vaso-constricting  action.  In  numerous  cases  of  con- 
gestion a  small  quantity  dropped  into  the  conjunctival  sac  brought 
about  an  immediate  pallor,  lasting  for  some  time.  According  to  this 
writer  the  extract  is  very  useful  in  prolonged  operations,  for,  when 
repeatedly  applied,  haemorrhage  is  prevented  and  cocaine  anaesthesia 
is  in  consequence  indefinitely  prolonged.  As  the  result  of  his  two  years' 
use  of  the  extract  Bates  concludes  "that  within  the  limits  of  its  sphere 
of  activity  there  is  absolutely  no  other  substance  which  can  take  its 
place." 

Other  experiments  ||  go  to  show  that  the  aqueous  extract  is  a  power- 
ful poison  when  injected  directly  into  the  circulation  and  may  lead  to 
fatal  results. 

*  Read  before  the  Association  of  American  Physicians,  May  6,  1897. 

f  Schafer  and  Oliver,  Journal  of  Physiology,  xvi  (1894)  and  xvii  (1895);  Szy- 
monowicz  and  Cybulski,  Wien.  med.  Wochenschrift,  1896,  No.  6. 

:|:Arch.  f.  exp.  Pathol,  u.  Pharmakol.,  xxxviii,  106. 

§  New  York  Medical  Journal,  Ixiii  (1896),  647. 

II  Foa  and  Pellacani,  cited  in  Maly's  Jahresb.  d.  Thier-Chemie,  xiii,  129;  Marino- 
Zuco,  ibid.,  xviii,  231;  Gourfein,  Rev.  M^d.  de  la  Suisse  Romande,  Oct.  20,  1895; 
Compt.  rend.,  cxxi  (1895),  311-314. 

43 


M(\^. 


The  various  extracts  that  have  been  used  in  these  experiments  were 
mixtures  of  unknown  substances,  and  it  is  as  yet  an  unsolved  question 
whether  the  various  actions  at  present  ascribed  to  the  gland  are  due 
to  one  and  the  same  substance. 

We  are  at  present  interested  in  the  isolation  of  the  blood-pressure- 
raising  constituent,  for  in  a  purified  state,  separated  from  all  other 
constituents,  it  might  become  a  therapeutic  agent  of  great  importance. 

On  the  chemical  side  but  little  advance  has  been  made  over  Vul- 
pian's*  striking  original  contribution  more  than  forty  years  ago.  Vul- 
pian  observed  that  the  juice  expressed  from  the  suprarenal  capsule 
of  many  different  animals  behaved  in  a  striking  manner  toward  ferric 
chloride  and  toward  solutions  of  iodine,  giving  with  the  former  rea- 
gent an  emerald  green  color,  and  Avith  the  latter  a  beautiful  rose 
carmine  tint.  No  other  tissue  of  the  body,  so  far  as  investigated  by  Vul- 
pian,  gave  these  reactions. 

Virchowf  substantiated  Vulpian's  statements,  but  added  nothing 
new.  A  year  after  Vulpian's  first  announcement  his  second  paper  ap- 
peared in  conjunction  with  Cloez,:};  verifying  and  extending  his  first 
observations  and  stating  his  failure  to  isolate  the  chromogenic  sub- 
stance or  substances  to  which  the  above  reactions  are  due. 

Equally  unsuccessful  were  Arnold§  and  Holm.||  Krukenberg,** 
years  after,  repeated  the  work  of  Arnold  and  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  chromogen  of  the  suprarenal  capsule  is  a  non-volatile,  nitro- 
genous and  ferruginous  organic  acid  which  is  probably  related  to  the 
turacin  of  the  musophagidae  and  to  chlorophyll.  He  assumed  that  the 
substance  giving  the  green  color  with  ferric  chloride  is  not  the  chromo- 
genic substance  of  Vulpian,  but  more  likely  pyrocatechin  accompany- 
ing the  chromogen.  Attention  being  thus  attracted  to  the  possible 
occurrence  of  pyrocatechin  in  the  suprarenal  capsule,  others  took  up 
the  subject. 

Brunnerj-f  found  that  an  alcoholic  extract  can  be  made  to  give 
nearly  all  of  the  reactions  of  pyrocatechin;  thus,  it  gives  the  well- 
known  green  color  with  ferric  chloride,  passing  into  a  fine  red  on  the 

*  Note  sur  quelques  reactions  propres  i  la  substance  des  capsules  surr^nales, 
Compt.  rend,  xliii  (1856),  663-665. 

fVirchow's  Archiv,  xii  (1857),  481-483. 
+  Compt.  rend.,  xlv  (1857),  340-343. 
§Virchow's  Archiv,  xxxv  (1866),  64-107. 

Journ.  f.  prakt.  Chemie,  c  (1867),  150. 
**  Virchow's  Archiv,  ci  (1885),  542-591. 
-|-f  Schweizer.  Wochenschr.  f.  Pharmacie,  xxx  (1892),  121-123. 

44 


addition  of  ammonium  tartrate  and  a  few  drops  of  an  alkali;  it  re- 
duces silver  nitrate  at  room  temperature,  and  Fehling's  solution  on 
boiling.  The  addition  of  an  alkali  soon  causes  it  to  take  on  a  dark 
brown  color,  lead  acetate  gives  a  precipitate,  nitroprusside  and  very 
dilute  ammonia  give  a  wine-red  color.  All  of  the  above  reactions  be- 
ing given  also  by  pyrocatechin,  Brunner  concluded  that  Krukenberg 
was  right  in  his  belief  that  pyrocatechin  is  present  in  the  suprarenal 
gland. 

After  the  discovery  of  the  blood-pressure-raising  property  of  the 
suprarenal  gland,  B.  Moore,*  working  in  Schafer's  laboratory,  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  Vulpian's  chromogen  and  the  blood-pressure- 
raising  constituent  are  identical.  He  based  his  opinion  on  the  fact  that 
chemical  operations  which  destroy  the  color  reactions  by  oxidizing  the 
reducing  agent  appear  also  to  destroy  the  blood-pressure-rasing  con- 
stituent. That  the  solubilities  of  the  active  principle  are  the  same  as 
those  of  the  reducing  agent  appears  also  to  support  this  opinion. 

Fraenkelf  worked  with  residues  obtained  with  the  help  of  alcohol 
and  acetone  as  solvents.  These  residues  raise  the  blood  pressure  and  do 
not  contain  pyrocatechin,  and  on  the  strength  of  the  ferric  chloride 
reaction  and  its  reducing  po^ver  he  concludes  that  the  essential  prin- 
ciple of  the  residue  is  a  nitrogenous  derivative  of  the  or//?odihydroxy- 
benzene  series. 

According  to  Fraenkel  both  Krukenberg  and  Brunner  are  wrong  in 
their  opinion  that  the  suprarenal  gland  contains  pyrocatechin. 
Fraenkel  concludes,  like  Moore,  that  the  blood-pressure-raising  con- 
stituent and  Vulpian's  chromogen  are  one  and  the  same  substance. 

More  recently  still,  Miihlmann:|:  has  attempted  to  prove  that  the 
blood-pressure-raising  constituent  is  a  pyrocatechin  derivative.  He 
asserts  that  on  boiling  fresh  suprarenal  capsules  with  dilute  hydro- 
chloric acid  the  active  principle  is  decomposed  and  the  pyrocatechin 
which  is  split  off  may  be  taken  up  with  ether.  Miihlmann  has  not, 
however,  furnished  conclusive  chemical  proofs  for  his  assertion.  Both 
Miihlmann  and  Brunner  might  have  settled  this  point  by  precipitating 
the  supposed  pyrocatechin  with  lead  acetate  and  analyzing  the  lead 
salt  thus  obtained.  Pyrocatechin  may  be  present  in  small  amounts  in 
the  gland,  but  no  proof  of  this  has  yet  been  furnished. 

There  is  therefore  at  present  great  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the 

*  Journal  of  Physiology,  xvii  (1895),  Proc.  Physiol.  Soc,  p.  xiv. 

f  Wiener  med.  Blatter,  1896,  No.  14-16. 

+  Deutsche  med.  Wochenschr.,  1896,  No.  26,  409-411. 

45 


chemical  character  of  the  blood-pressure-raising  constituent  of  the 
gland. 

Whatever  the  probability  may  be  of  the  correctness  of  this  or  that 
view,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  all  of  the  above-named  investigators  have 
based  their  conclusions  on  reactions  made  with  aqueous,  alcoholic  or 
acetonic  extracts;  none  of  them  have  even  roughly  isolated  a  definite 
chemical  compound.  The  subject  is  one  of  great  difficulty,  and  our 
own  work  is  at  present  merely  preliminary,  but  we  have  arrived  at  the 
following  conclusions  which  we  believe  to  be  borne  out  by  our  ex- 
periments. 

First,  we  have  found  by  isolating  the  blood-pressure-raising  con- 
stituent in  the  form  of  a  benzoyl  compound  and  decomposing  it,  that 
the  active  principle  is  a  substance  with  basic  characteristics  and  that  it 
must  in  all  probability  be  classed  with  the  pyrrol  compounds  or  with 
the  pyridine  bases  or  alkaloids. 

Second,  that  pyrocatechin  cannot  be  split  off  from  the  isolated  ac- 
tive compound  by  boiling  with  acids,  as  has  been  asserted. 

Third,  we  have  found  that  a  carmine-red  pigment  can  be  separated 
from  the  sulphate  of  the  active  principle  without  destroying  its 
power  to  raise  the  blood  pressure. 

Fourth,  in  addition  to  this,  we  have  isolated  from  the  crude  benzoyl 
product  a  volatile  basic  body  which  fumes  in  the  air  and  which  emits 
an  odor  very  much  like  that  of  coniine. 

Method  of  Isolating  the  Active  Principle  in  the 
Form  of  a  Benzoyl  Compound 

We  have  used  sheep's  glands  in  large  quantity.  The  medullary  sub- 
stance of  the  fresh  glands  was  scraped  out,  dried  on  the  water-bath 
at  60°  C,  ground  up  finely,  and  extracted  with  ether  for  several  days 
until  the  fats  and  the  substance  known  as  Manasse's  jecorin  were  re- 
moved. In  this  way  a  fine  dry  powder  of  a  grayish  white  appearance 
is  obtained,  the  aqueous  extract  of  which  is  very  active  in  raising  the 
blood  pressure. 

With  100  grammes  or  more  of  this  powder,  representing  one  kg.  in 
weight  or  about  1000  fresh  glands,  we  proceeded  as  follows:  The  pow- 
der is  repeatedly  extracted  with  warm  ^vater  acidulated  with  a  few 
drops  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid  until  the  gland  has  yielded  up  all  of 
its  chromogenic  substances,  as  tested  by  Vulpian's  reactions.  This 
aqueous  extract  is  evaporated  on  the  water-bath  to  a  small  bulk,  a 
large  excess  of  strong  alcohol  is  then  added  and  the  whole  allowed  to 
stand  24  hours,  by  which  time  the  proteids  have  all  settled  out.  The 

46 


alcoholic  fluid  is  then  filtered  and  the  gieater  part  of  the  alcohol  re- 
moved by  distillation;  the  remainder  is  driven  off  on  the  water-bath. 
The  entire  removal  of  the  alcohol  is  necessary,  and  in  order  to  avoid 
too  great  concentration  of  the  acid  fluid,  which  seems  to  destroy  some 
of  the  active  principle,  water  has  now  and  then  to  be  added.  The 
brownish  fluid  when  filtered  gives  all  the  well-known  reactions  char- 
acteristic of  Vulpian's  chromogen,  and  on  neutralizing  the  sulphuric 
acid  we  found  the  filtrate  to  be  physiologically  very  active. 

This  filtered  fluid  is  next  treated  with  the  proper  quantity  of 
benzoyl  chloride  and  sodium  hydrate  according  to  the  Baumann- 
Schotten  method  of  forming  a  benzoyl  compound.  There  results  a 
tarry  substance  of  a  light  yellow  color  which  sticks  to  the  sides  of  the 
separator  funnel  and  which  is  collected  and  washed  until  the  wash 
fluid  no  longer  gives  an  alkaline  reaction.  It  is  next  dissolved  as  far 
as  possible  in  alcohol  and  the  alcohol  evaporated.  The  residue  is 
then  treated  with  ether,  which  takes  up  the  greater  part  of  it,  the 
ethereal  solution  is  filtered  and  the  ether  driven  off. 

The  residue,  ^vhich  is  of  tarry  consistence  and  amber  color,  is 
taken  up  in  strong  alcohol  from  which  all  basic  substances  have  been 
removed  by  distilling  from  tartaric  acid.  It  is  then  boiled  for  two  hours 
with  animal  charcoal  previously  well  washed  with  purified  alcohol. 
After  filtration  and  the  evaporation  of  the  alcohol  a  considerable 
quantity  of  crystalline  residue  is  obtained  which  is  found  to  consist 
of  the  benzoyl  compound  of  the  active  principle  contaminated  with 
other  benzoyl  derivatives  and  which  \\'e  may  call  the  crude  benzoyl 
product.  It  is  insoluble  in  ^vater,  alkalies  or  acids  of  ordinary  strength, 
is  soluble  in  alcohol,  ether,  glacial  acetic  acid  and  concentrated  sul- 
phuric acid. 

It  is  of  interest  in  this  connection  to  note  that  benzoyl  chloride 
effects  the  complete  removal  of  the  blood-pressure-raising  constituent 
from  an  aqueous  solution.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  the  filtrate 
from  the  insoluble  benzoate  no  longer  gives  the  characteristic  chemi- 
cal reactions  of  the  active  principle,  and  that  chemical  manipulations 
no  longer  yield  a  blood-pressure-raising  constituent.  Indeed,  an  injec- 
tion of  a  sufficient  amount  of  the  material  left  after  the  sodium  benzo- 
ate and  the  excess  of  alkali  have  been  removed,  causes  a  sharp  and 
sudden  fall  of  pressure  instead  of  a  rise. 

It  was  not  until  long  after  we  had  made  use  of  benzoyl  chloride  as 
a  precipitant  of  the  active  principle  that  we  obtained  access  to 
Fraenkel's*  paper.  From  it  we  learned  that  a  syrupy  substance  is 

*  Wien.  med.  Blatter,  1896,  No.  14-16. 

47 


thrown  out  when  benzoyl  chloride  is  shaken  up  with  a  pyridine  solu- 
tion of  an  extract  of  the  gland.  Fraenkel  did  not  succeed  in  crystallizing 
this  benzoyl  compound,  nor  did  he  attempt  to  decompose  it  in  order 
to  ascertain  whether  it  was  in  reality  a  benzoate  of  the  blood-pressure- 
raising  principle. 

Methods  of  Decomposing  the  Benzoyl  Compound 

A  quick  method  always  used  by  us  as  a  qualitative  test  is  as  follows: 
The  compound  is  dissolved  in  as  little  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  as 
possible,  crushed  ice  is  slowly  added,  and  the  benzoic  acid  which  has 
been  split  off  is  shaken  out  with  ether.  On  neutralizing  the  solution 
we  found  it  to  give  the  reactions  characteristic  of  aqueous  solutions  of 
the  medullary  substance.  We  have  not  considered  this  method  adapted 
to  the  decomposition  of  large  quantities  of  the  product. 

Decomposition  of  this  benzoyl  product  was  effected  by  means  of  an 
alcoholic  solution  of  sodium  alcoholate,  and  also  with  strong  hydro- 
chloric acid  and  alcohol,  but  these  methods  were  found  to  be  less 
satisfactory  in  practice  than  the  following,  \vhich  is  the  method  on 
which  we  now  rely.  The  benzoyl  compound  is  dissolved  in  glacial 
acetic  acid,  the  solution  heated  to  near  the  boiling  point,  and  an  equal 
volume  of  a  25  per  cent  solution  of  sulphuric  acid  actively  boiling 
is  slowly  poured  into  the  hot  acetic  acid  solution,  the  whole  being 
shaken  meanwhile.  The  flask  is  now  attached  to  a  back-flow  condenser 
and  heated  on  a  small  flame  for  about  ten  minutes. 

The  solution  is  next  diluted  with  water  and  allowed  to  cool,  the 
benzoic  acid,  which  has  been  thrown  out,  is  filtered  off  and  the  rest 
is  removed  with  the  help  of  ether. 

Mixed  with  the  benzoic  acid  which  has  been  removed  by  filtration 
is  found  a  dark  brittle  substance  which  softens  on  the  water-bath,  and 
which  we  assume  to  be  a  benzoyl  compound  of  unknown  composition 
Avhich  was  apparently  unaffected  by  the  dilute  sulphuric  acid.  On  dis- 
solving it  in  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  and  diluting  with  crushed 
ice,  the  resulting  fluid  gives  none  of  the  reactions  characteristic  of 
suprarenal  extracts. 

After  decomposing  the  benzoyl  product  with  hot  dilute  sulphuric 
acid  and  removing  the  benzoic  acid  thus  split  off,  we  next  get  rid  of 
the  acetic  acid  by  repeated  partial  evaporations,  taking  care  not  to 
let  the  solution  become  too  concentrated  and  thus  perhaps  injure  the 
active  principle.  After  the  removal  of  the  acetic  acid  the  sulphuric 
acid  is  precipitated  with  the  help  of  lead  carbonate.  The  lead  sul- 
phate is  removed  and  the  filtrate  is  allowed  to  stand  in  vacuo  over 

48 


sulphuric  acid  until  it  has  become  of  tarry  consistency.  It  is  then  ex- 
hausted with  ether,  acetone  and  absolute  alcohol  in  succession. 

The  residue  is  physiologically  very  active,  and  it  gives  all  the  reac- 
tions characteristic  of  an  aqueous  solution  of  the  gland— a  beautiful 
rose  color  on  the  addition  of  an  alkali,  a  green  color  with  ferric  chlo- 
ride, reducing  silver  nitrate,  etc. 

However,  we  are  not  yet  dealing  with  a  pure  substance.  If  we  neu- 
tralize an  aqueous  solution  of  the  product  thus  obtained  with  a  free 
alkali  or  with  a  carbonate  of  the  alkalies,  an  overpowering  odor  much 
like  that  of  coniine  is  perceived.  As  this  odor  passes  that  of  pyridine 
seems  to  take  its  place.  The  basic  substance  thus  liberated  fumes  in  the 
air  or  when  a  glass  rod  moistened  with  hydrochloric  acid  is  brought 
into  its  neighborhood.  To  remove  this  basic  substance  we  made  an 
aqueous  solution  of  the  active  principle  as  above  isolated,  rendered 
it  faintly  alkaline  with  sodium  carbonate  and  shook  out  ether  sev- 
eral times  in  succession.  But  this  method  does  not  remove  all  of  the 
coniine-like  substance.  To  effect  this  we  were  obliged  to  make  the 
active  principle  strongly  alkaline  with  sodium  hydrate  before  shaking 
out  with  ether.  The  acjueous  solution,  in  consequence  of  the  addition 
of  the  free  alkali,  takes  on  a  deep  red  color,  and  carmine  red  flocks  are 
thrown  out.  After  the  removal  of  the  coniine-like  substance  with 
ether,  the  fluid  containing  the  red  flocks  was  acidulated  with  sul- 
phuric acid  and  the  carmine-red  substance  was  filtered  off.  The  clear 
filtrate,  which  was  a  pale  straw  color,  was  concentrated  in  vacuo,  and 
the  active  principle  taken  up  in  weak  alcohol.  On  account  of  the  in- 
solubility of  the  sulphate  of  the  active  principle  in  absolute  alcohol 
it  is  difficult  to  obtain  this  entirely  free  of  sodium  sulphate.  We  hope 
in  future  to  remove  both  the  coniine-like  substance  and  the  pig- 
ment ^vith  the  help  of  ammonia.  The  presence  of  pyridine  in  our 
ammonia  prevented  our  using  it  for  this  purpose. 

This  volatile  base  of  a  coniine-like  odor  has  not  hitherto  been  de- 
scribed as  a  constituent  of  the  suprarenal  capsule.  The  beautiful 
carmine-red  pigment  we  take  to  be  identical  with  the  red  substance 
which  many  other  observers  have  found  to  be  thrown  out  as  a  pre- 
cipitate when  ammonia  is  added  to  a  concentrated  aqueous  solution 
of  the  gland,  or  when  a  solution  is  evaporated  in  the  presence  of  lead 
acetate.*  Others  have  believed  this  red  precipitate  to  be  the  oxidation 
product  of  the  active  principle  of  the  gland,  but  we  shall  presently 
see  that  the  active  principle  is  still  present  in  the  filtrate  from  the 

*  Holm,  Journ.  f.  prakt.  Chemie,  c  (1867),  150. 

49 


carmine-red  body.  We  have  as  yet  made  no  experiments  with  this  pig- 
ment except  to  note  that  it  is  but  slightly  soluble  in  dilute  alkalies 
and  insoluble  in  dilute  acids,  and  that  iodine  destroys  the  color.  Our 
method  appears  to  make  the  further  study  of  this  substance  possible. 

The  coniine-like  substance  we  have  secured  in  the  form  of  its  hy- 
drochlorate,  and  with  it  we  have  made  certain  studies  which  will  be 
published  at  a  later  date. 

Characteristics  of  the  Blood-Pressure-Raising  Constituent 

as  obtained  by  decomposing  its 

Benzoyl  Compound 

We  have  now  obtained  the  active  principle  in  the  form  of  a  sul- 
phate. As  thus  far  isolated  it  is  a  hygroscopic,  straw-colored  residue 
which  tends  to  crystallize  on  standing  over  sulphuric  acid,  agglomer- 
ates of  small  crystals  forming  on  the  edge  of  the  bowl  and  the  entire 
residue  taking  on  a  semi-crystalline  appearance.  This  sulphate  does 
not  contain  the  volatile  coniine-like  substance,  nor  do  we  find  the 
carmine-red  pigment  which  falls  out  on  the  addition  of  an  alkali. 
Alkalies  no  longer  liberate  the  coniine-like  substance,  nor  do  they 
throw  out  the  red  pigment,  but  they  cause  a  brownish  discoloration, 
and  on  heating,  alkaline  vapors,  probably  ammonia,  are  given  off. 

Our  sulphate  is  very  active  physiologically.  A  small  quantity  suf- 
fices to  raise  the  blood-pressure  and  it  is  therefore  evident  that  we 
have  isolated  the  active  principle  but  slightly  contaminated  with  other 
substances. 

A  final  product  even  more  active  in  small  quantities  is  that  whose 
action  is  shown  where  the  mercury  is  driven  out  of  the  manometer. 
This  more  active  compound  still  contains  much  of  the  coniine-like 
substance,  and  at  once  throws  out  the  carmine-red  pigment  on  the 
addition  of  alkalies.  The  sulphate  of  the  coniine-like  substance  does 
not,  as  we  have  seen,  raise  the  blood  pressure;  it  therefore  remains 
for  us  to  consider  whether  the  carmine-red  substance  Avhich  is  pre- 
cipitated on  the  addition  of  alkalies,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction 
with  small  quantities  of  oxidizing  agents,  has  any  physiological  sig- 
nificance or  stands  in  any  chemical  relation  to  the  blood-pressure- 
raising  constituent.  We  incline  to  the  opinion  that  this  substance, 
which  in  the  original  aqueous  solution  of  the  gland  gives  with  iodine 
water  the  "teinte  rose-carmin  tout  a  fait  remarquable"  of  Vulpian,  is 
in  nowise  connected  with  the  blood-pressure-raising  constituent.  We 
have  repeatedly  removed  or  destroyed  this  substance  by  boiling  solu- 
tions containing  it  with  strong  ammonia  or  with  sodium  hydrate, 

50 


and  have  always  been  able  to  separate  subsequently  an  active  material. 
After  such  treatment  with  alkalies,  care  must  be  taken  in  the  sub- 
sequent evaporation  of  the  alcohol  with  which  the  active  principle 
is  removed,  to  keep  an  acid  reaction,  as  otherwise  the  greater  part,  if 
not  all  of  it,  will  be  destroyed  by  oxidation.  And  unless  all  evaporations 
are  carried  on  under  reduced  pressure,  much  material  will  be  lost, 
even  with  the  above  precaution. 

Although  somewhat  contaminated  with  its  own  decomposition 
products,  this  final  sulphate  has  all  the  characteristics  of  an  active 
substance.  As  shown  by  repeated  experiments,  it  promptly  raises  the 
blood  pressure,  it  constricts  the  vessels  of  an  inflamed  eye,  and  when 
injected  into  the  dorsal  lymph  sac  of  the  frog  it  acts  like  a  narcotic 
or  cerebrospinal  poison. 

As  freed  of  the  red  substance  the  sulphate  of  the  active  principle 
behaves  as  follows:  It  is  very  soluble  in  water,  fairly  soluble  in  weak 
alcohol  (50  per  cent),  almost  insoluble  in  absolute  alcohol,  and  quite 
insoluble  in  ether,  acetone,  ligroine  and  chloroform.  Its  aqueous  solu- 
tion, even  when  freed  from  adherent  sulphuric  acid,  has  a  slightly 
acid  reaction.  The  addition  of  iodine  water  to  a  neutral  solution  does 
not  give  a  rose-red  color.  Alkalies  added  to  a  strong  solution  give  a 
brown  color  which  deepens  on  heating.  Ferric  chloride  gives  a  pur- 
plish brown,  almost  black  in  concentrated  solution,  which  on  the  ad- 
dition of  tartaric  acid  and  an  alkali  passes  into  a  deep  red  color.  Before 
the  removal  of  the  carmine-red  substance  the  addition  of  ferric  chlo- 
ride gives  the  well-known  emerald  green  color,  w^hich  passes  into  red 
on  the  addition  of  an  alkali. 

It  is  evident  that  our  sulphate  gives  Vulpian's  ferric  chloride  re- 
action, though  somewhat  changed  by  the  removal  of  what  we  take  to 
be  the  chromogenic  substance  which  gave  his  iodine  reaction.  It  also 
promptly  reduces  silver  nitrate  in  alkaline  solution,  but  does  not  re- 
duce Fehling's  solution  even  on  boiling. 

Probable  Relation  to  the  Alkaloids 

More  than  a  year  ago,  during  our  first  studies  with  suprarenal  ex- 
tract, we  were  struck  with  the  fact  that  every  extract  entirely  free  of 
proteids  and  physiologically  active  gave  a  fine  pyrrol  reaction  when 
subjected  to  dry  distillation.  This  is  evidenced  both  by  the  odor  and 
by  the  pine  sliver  reaction.  A  small  quantity  of  the  isolated  sulphate 
also  gives  the  pyrrol  reaction  when  heated  either  alone  or  with  zinc 
dust. 

We  attach  considerable  importance  to  this  reaction.  As  is  well 

51 


known,  alkaloids  in  general  give  pyrrol  on  dry  distillation;  morphine, 
for  instance,  on  being  heated  with  10  parts  of  zinc  dust  gives  off 
pyrrol,  ammonia,  trimethylamine,  pyridine,  phenanthrene,  etc.*  Dur- 
ing the  past  winter  we  made  several  attempts  to  prove  the  presence  of 
pyridine  among  the  products  of  dry  distillation  of  the  active  principle 
as  above  isolated,  as  its  detection  would  prove  that  our  principle  was  to 
be  classed  among  the  alkaloids. 

In  attempting  to  show  the  presence  of  pyridine  we  heated  the  active 
principle  with  zinc  dust  in  a  current  of  dry  hydrogen  and  passed  the 
distillation  products  through  a  test  tube  and  two  small  flasks,  the  tube 
being  placed  in  a  cooling  mixture,  the  first  flask  being  partly  filled 
with  dilute  sodium  hydrate,  and  the  second  with  dilute  hydrochloric 
acid. 

At  the  close  of  the  experiment  the  test  tube  gave  off  alkaline  vapors 
that  smelled  strongly  of  trimethylamine  and  had  in  addition  a  peculiar 
sweetish  odor.  The  contents  of  the  test  tube  diluted  with  water  gave 
a  precipitate  with  bromine  water  and  with  copper  sulphate,  but  with 
the  latter  reagent  the  fine  blue  color  characteristic  of  pyridine  did 
not  appear.  The  presence  of  amines  seems  to  render  difficult  the  de- 
tection of  small  quantities  of  pyridine.  The  contents  of  the  third  flask 
on  exposure  to  the  air  took  on  a  rose-red  color  and  after  a  time  threw 
out  a  precipitate  of  the  same  tint.  Both  flasks  gave  off  the  odor  of 
benzaldehyde. 

The  following  experiment  was  also  made  with  a  little  of  the  sul- 
phate, which  no  longer  gave  the  rose-red  reaction  with  iodine  but 
which  still  contained  a  little  of  the  coniine-like  substance.  For  two 
hours  it  was  kept  at  150°  C.  in  a  sealed  tube  with  25  per  cent  hydro- 
chloric acid.  On  shaking  out  with  ether  a  considerable  crystalline 
residue  was  obtained  which,  without  much  purification,  melted 
sharply  at  120°  C.  and  had  all  the  properties  of  benzoic  acid. 

In  the  above  decomposition  experiments  the  quantity  of  material 
at  command  was  small,  perhaps  not  more  than  one-fifth  of  a  gramme 
at  a  time,  and  not  entirely  pure.  We  do  not,  therefore,  lay  much  stress 
on  our  failure  to  detect  pyridine. 

The  fact  that  the  nitrogen  of  our  compound  is  given  off  in  the  form 
of  amines  and  pyrrol  gives  strong  gTound  to  believe  that  our  substance 
is  to  be  classed  with  the  pyridine  bases,  using  this  term  in  a  broad 
way.  Its  basic  character,  its  ability  to  take  up  acid  radicles,  as  illus- 

*  We  are  well  aware  that  certain  salts  of  glutaminic,  pyromuci'c  and  its  re- 
lated acids  also  yield  pyrrol  on  dry  distillation.  These  compounds,  however,  like 
the  proteids  and  their  allies,  appear  to  us  to  be  excluded. 

52 


traced  by  the  formation  of  a  benzoyl  product,  its  reducing  power  and 
its  color  reaction  with  ferric  chloride  are  all  points  which  can  be  urged 
in  support  of  this  view.  Furthermore,  cupric  acetate,  the  serviceable- 
ness  of  which  as  a  precipitant  of  carbo-pyridine  bases  has  been  shown 
by  Gautier  and  Landi,*  also  precipitates  our  active  principle;  and 
iodine  chloride,  which  Dittmarf  found  to  give  brown  or  yellow  halo- 
gen addition-derivatives  with  a  large  number  of  the  alkaloids,  gives 
with  a  neutral  or  slightly  acid  solution  of  our  active  sulphate  a  brown- 
ish flocculent  precipitate. 

Of  less  weight  in  this  connection,  but  nevertheless  of  some  value, 
is  the  fact  that  its  physiological  action  and  its  power  in  small  doses  is 
again  in  accord  with  what  is  known  of  alkaloids.  Strychnine,  thebaine 
and  other  alkaloids  are  readily  called  to  mind  as  able  to  raise  the 
blood  pressure,  and  recently  Tunnicliffe;{:  has  placed  piperidine  in  the 
same  list.  The  pyrrol§  bases  are  also  physiologically  active,  although 
less  attention  has  been  paid  to  them. 

Pyrocatechin  cannot  be  split  off  from  the 
Blood-Pressure-Raising  Constituent 

As  already  said,  Muhlmann  has  stated  with  great  positiveness  that 
the  blood-pressure-raising  constituent  is  pyrocatechin  joined  to  some 
other  substance,  probably  an  acid.  Muhlmann  does  not  offer  sufficient 
proof  for  his  conclusion;  and  even  had  he  proved  the  presence  of 
pyrocatechin  in  the  gland  itself,  this  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
showing  that  it  enters  into  the  chemical  constitution  of  the  blood- 
pressure-raising  constituent. 

We  have  repeated  Miihlmann's  work  and  have  found  that  after 
boiling  the  medullary  substance  with  hydrochloric  acid,  the  ether 
takes  up  a  trace  of  Vulpian's  substance,  as  well  as  a  substance  that  re- 
duces Fehling's  solution. 

The  ether  residue  also  gives  a  precipitate  with  neutral  lead  acetate 
which,  on  decomposition  with  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  sets  free  a  com- 
pound that  gives  with  ferric  chloride  the  reaction  so  characteristic 
of  pyrocatechin.  Our  blood-pressure-raising  constituent  is  not  pre- 
cipitated by  lead  acetate  and  could  not,  therefore,  have  been  responsi- 
ble for  this  result. 

*Compt.  rend.,  cxiv  (1892),  1154-1159. 
f  Berichte  d.  deutsch.  chem.  Gesellsch.,  xviii,  1612. 
+  Centralbl.  f.  Physiol.,  x,  No.  25,  777. 

§  Jac.  Ginzberg,  Ueber  das  Verhalten  des  Pyrrols,  etc.,  Inaug.  Diss.,  Konigs- 
berg.  1890. 

53 


Furthermore,  on  decomposing  a  fairly  large  quantity  of  the  crude 
benzoyl  product  before  referred  to  and  shaking  out  the  resulting 
benzoic  acid  with  ether,  we  have  twice  found  that  the  ether  has  taken 
up  in  addition  to  the  benzoic  acid  a  small  quantity  of  a  substance 
which  reduces  Fehling's  solution  and  gives  a  precipitate  with  neutral 
lead  acetate.  On  decomposing  the  resulting  lead  compound  with 
dilute  sulphuric  acid  and  neutralizing  the  filtrate,  we  obtained  a 
solution  which  behaved  with  ferric  chloride  in  the  way  characteristic 
of  pyrocatechin.  The  quantity  of  this  lead  compound  obtained  has 
been  too  small  for  analytical  purposes. 

We  consider  it,  therefore,  still  imcertain  whether  or  not  a  little 
pyrocatechin  is  present  in  the  gland. 

That  the  blood-pressure-raising  constituent  is,  however,  not  a  pyro- 
catechin derivative  seems  to  us  certain.  To  prove  this  we  used,  not  the 
entire  gland  nor  the  medullary  substance,  but  the  active  principle 
itself,  as  isolated  by  us  by  decomposing  the  benzoyl  compound. 

We  have  used  large  quantities  of  material  representing  in  each 
experiment  the  active  principle  of  several  thousand  glands.  We  have 
boiled  this  with  hydrochloric  acid  of  varying  strength  and  for  varying 
lengths  of  time,  and  in  no  case  have  we  been  able  to  find  in  the  ether 
used  as  a  solvent  any  trace  of  a  substance  that  would  reduce  Fehling's 
solution  or  give  a  precipitate  with  lead  acetate.  Inasmuch  as  some  of 
the  chromogenic  substance  always  passes  into  the  ether  from  acid 
solutions,  these  two  reactions  are  both  necessary  to  establish  the  pres- 
ence of  pyrocatechin.  In  other  words,  we  have  failed  to  split  off  pyro- 
catechin from  the  active  principle  as  isolated  by  us.  If  present,  it 
could  hardly  have  eluded  our  search,  for  even  a  minute  quantity  may 
be  made  to  give  a  precipitate  with  neutral  lead  acetate. 

We  propose  during  the  coming  autumn  to  continue  this  work.  Hav- 
ing made  arrangements  for  the  use  of  a  large  amount  of  material,  we 
hope  to  secure  both  the  benzoate  and  the  sulphate  in  a  form  pure 
enough  for  analysis  and  for  further  chemical  study. 

Summary 

We  may  summarize  the  results  of  our  work  as  follows: 
The  blood-pressure-raising  constituent  of  the  suprarenal  capsule 
may  be  completely  precipitated  from  an  aqueous  extract  by  treat- 
ment with  benzoyl  chloride  and  sodium  hydrate,  according  to  the 
Schotten-Baumann  method. 

On  decomposing  the  resulting  benzoyl  products,  a  residue  is  ob- 
tained which  possesses  great  physiological  activity.  It  gives  the  color 

54 


reactions  of  Vulpian,  reduces  silver  nitrate  and  possesses  the  other 
specific  qualities  of  suprarenal  extracts. 

With  the  help  of  alkalies  a  carmine-red  pigment  may  also  be  sepa- 
rated from  these  decomposition  products.  We  take  this  pigment  to  be 
that  one  of  the  chromogenic  substances  of  Vtilpian  which  gives  the 
rose-carmine  color  when  suprarenal  extracts  are  treated  with  oxidizing 
agents  or  alkalies. 

A  volatile,  basic  substance  of  a  coniine-like  odor  is  always  found  to 
accompany  the  crude  benzoate.  When  these  substances  are  removed 
the  active  principle  is  left  as  a  highly  active  sulphate  or  hydrochlorate, 
as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  therefore  a  basic  substance.  Its  salts  give  a  color 
reaction  with  ferric  chloride;  they  also  reduce  silver  nitrate,  but  not 
Fehling's  solution. 

It  is  not  possible  to  split  off  pyrocatechin  from  this  isolated  active 
principle.  The  fact  that  dry  distillation  causes  the  appearance  of 
amines  and  pyrrol  in  abtnidance,  taken  in  connection  with  its  ability 
to  take  up  acid  radicles,  its  reducing  power,  its  precipitability  by 
cupric  acetate  and  iodine  chloride,  and  its  physiological  action,  lead 
us  to  conclude  that  our  active  principle  is  to  be  classed  with  the  pyri- 
dine bases  or  alkaloids. 

Addendum,  June  15,   1897 

Since  the  foregoing  paper  was  read  before  the  Association  of  Ameri- 
can Physicians  on  May  6,  1897,  B.  Moore  has  published  a  paper  in  the 
Journal  of  Physiology,  vol.  xxi,  Nos.  4  and  5,  May  12,  1897,  entitled, 
"On  the  Chromogen  and  on  the  active  Physiological  Substance  of  the 
Suprarenal  Gland."  In  this  paper  it  is  suggested  that  the  active  prin- 
ciple may  be  a  pyridine  derivative.  Moore's  conjecture  is  based,  first, 
on  a  formula  calculated  by  him  from  a  combustion  analysis  of  Kruken- 
berg,  made  Avith  an  impine,  hygroscopic,  noncrystalline  residue  ob- 
tained by  merely  decomposing  and  drying  a  precipitate  seemed  oiu 
of  an  alcoholic  extract  of  the  gland  with  the  help  of  basic  lead  acetate. 
The  calculated  formula,  the  carbon  content  of  which  differs  by  1.33 
per  cent  from  that  actually  found  by  Krukenberg,  is  C^H^^NO^,  and 
Moore  points  out  that  in  it  the  ratio  in  which  the  elements  carbon  and 
nitrogen  stand  to  each  other  is  the  same  as  in  pyridine,  C5H-N.  Now 
such  a  calculation,  though  suggestive  to  the  investigator,  furnishes  no 
proof  of  the  presence  of  pyridine,  for  Krukenberg  could  not  possibly 
have  had  in  hand  a  chemical  individual  uncontaminated  with  other 
constituents  of  the  gland.  Krukenberg  himself  admits  that  his  ma- 
terial was  a  mixture  of  unaltered  pigment  and  its  decomposition  prod- 

55 


ucts.  It  is  also  certain  that  it  was  contaminated  with  other  constituents 
of  the  gland.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  basic  lead  acetate  precipi- 
tates several  of  the  constituents  of  the  gland  which  pass  into  alcohol, 
and  also  by  the  fact  that  the  analyzed  material  contained  0.068  per  cent 
of  sulphur  and  from  1.18  per  cent  to  1.44  per  cent  of  ash. 

A  second  reason  given  by  Moore  in  support  of  his  conjecture  is 
that  when  "some  suprarenal  extract  was  cautiously  fused  with  caustic 
potash  so  as  to  avoid  charring,  the  peculiar  odor  of  pyridine  was  at 
once  obtained."  He  admits  that  proteids  were  present  in  this  extract, 
and  that  pyridine  and  its  homologues  are  formed  in  the  destructive  dis- 
tillation of  proteids,  but  states  that  the  experiment  was  "conducted 
so  as  to  avoid  charring,"  and  considers  this  a  sufficient  safeguard.  This 
experiment  has  also  no  value,  for  the  odor  of  pyridine  can  always  be 
obtained  when  a  mixture  of  dry,  powdered  proteid  and  po\vdered 
caustic  potash  are  fused  together  so  as  to  avoid  charring.  This  experi- 
ment, therefore,  must  be  made  with  material  entirely  free  of  proteids. 
Since  reading  Moore's  paper  we  have  fused  a  little  of  our  active  prin- 
ciple with  caustic  potash,  but  have  failed  to  detect  pyridine.  If  present 
in  the  molecule  of  the  active  principle,  it  is  evident  that  larger  quan- 
tities of  the  material  must  be  used  to  prove  it.  Only  indisputable 
chemical  proofs  can  establish  the  presence  of  pyridine;  the  odor  is 
not  enough.  We  have  frequently  in  various  manipulations  with  the 
active  substance  met  with  what  we  took  to  be  the  odor  of  pyridine, 
but  on  shaking  out  with  ether  and  adding  an  ethereal  solution  of 
hydrochloric  acid  and  evaporating  the  ether  we  have  been  unable  to 
detect  pyridine  in  the  residue. 


On  the  Teaching  of 
Pharmacology,  Materia  Medica, 
and  Therapeutics  in  Our  Medical 
Schools 


JOHN  J.  ABEL,  M.D. 


I 


T  WOULD  seem  unnecessary  to  define  in  the  columns  of  a  medical 
journal  what  is  meant  by  pharmacology,  but  the  frequent  confusion 
of  this  term  with  pharmacy  by  those  who  are  not  teachers  of  medicine 
must  serve  as  a  reason  for  a  brief  statement  of  the  methods  and  aims 
of  this  branch  of  medical  science.  The  vague  and  often  erroneous  use 
of  the  word  pharmacology  seen  in  earlier  writings,  as  in  the  definition 
of  Nathan  Bailey  (1736),  "a  treatise  concerning  drugs,"  or  in  that  of 
Samuel  Johnson  (1755),  "an  equivalent  of  pharmacy  or  pharmaceu- 
tics," is  still  frequently  met  with  in  our  own  time.  Briefly  stated, 
pharmacology  tries  to  discover  and  explain  all  of  the  more  obvious 
functional,  and  the  less  noticeable  chemical  and  physical  changes 
that  occur  in  a  living  thing  that  has  absorbed  a  substance  capable  of 
producing  such  changes,  and  it  is  also  its  province  to  learn  the  fate 
of  the  substance  thus  incorporated.  It  is  not,  therefore,  an  applied 
science  like  therapeutics;  it  is  one  of  the  biological  sciences,  using  that 
term  in  its  widest  sense. 

The  interested  student  of  the  history  of  medicine  discovers  in  every 
epoch  some  man  far  in  advance  of  his  contemporaries  who  may  be 
looked  upon  as  a  leader  in  one  phase  or  another  of  our  subject.  Such 
were  Erasistratus,  Dioscorides,  Mesua,  Avenzoar,  Paracelsus,  and  Hal- 
ler;  and  when  we  turn  our  attention  to  the  modern  laboratory  methods 
of  pharmacology  and  the  lasting  achievements  gained  by  their  aid, 
we  find  that  the  first  great  impulse  was  given  by  Magendie.  That 
great  experimenter's  classical  research  on  the  physiological  action  of 
upas,  undertaken  early  in  the  present  century,  was  the  first  instance 
of  the  completely  successful  application  of  the  analytic  method  in  the 

57 


study  of  the  coarser  changes  of  function  which  follow  on  the  use  of 
drugs.  As  early  as  1813  he  had  also  proved  that  the  blood  is  capable 
of  taking  up  and  carrying  metallic  poisons,  but  it  was  not  until  the 
middle  of  the  century  that  the  pernicious  doctrine  of  the  "action  of 
poisons  by  sympathy"  received  its  death-blow.  About  the  middle  of 
the  century,  too,  the  memorable  experiments  of  Claude  Bernard  and 
of  KoUiker  proving  that  the  paralyzing  action  of  curare  centers  in  the 
end  plates  of  the  motor  nerves  gave  further  evidence  of  the  value  of 
physiological  analysis  as  applied  to  the  study  of  drugs. 

Brilliant  discoveries  of  a  similar  character  have  followed  from  time 
to  time,  and  we  have  now  innumerable  instances  of  the  rational  analy- 
sis and  at  least  partial  comprehension  of  the  more  obvious  functional 
changes  that  follow  upon  the  administration  of  drugs  and  poisons. 
One  has  but  to  recall  atropin,  pilocarpin,  muscarin,  eserin,  cocain, 
digitalis,  amyl  nitrite,  chloral,  chloroform,  ether,  salicylic  acid,  ergot, 
and  other  well-known  drugs  and  poisons,  to  appreciate  how  great  is 
the  store  of  knowledge  relating  to  the  action  of  drugs  which  is  at  the 
disposal  of  the  modern  student. 

It  was  experiments  like  those  of  Magendie  and  his  successors  that 
induced  Mitscherlich  (1847)  and  later  Buchheim,  to  insist  on  the  in- 
sufficiency of  the  mere  bedside  study  of  the  action  of  drugs  and  led  to 
the  erection  of  special  laboratories  in  which  experimenters  can  build 
up  their  science  undisturbed  by  the  intrusive  demands  of  practical 
utility.  Buchheim's  pharmacological  laboratory  founded  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Dorpat  in  1849,  was  the  first  public  institution  of  the  kind 
in  the  world  and  was  long  the  best  equipped  in  Germany.  But  it  was 
not  alone  in  Germany  that  attention  was  called  to  the  new  methods. 
The  medical  literature  of  our  own  country  contains  some  eloquent 
pleas  in  favor  of  the  analyses  of  medical  problems  by  means  of  ex- 
periments. From  among  these  I  would  call  attention  to  that  of  Dr. 
R.  Cresson  Stiles,  contained  in  a  ^vorthy  but  little-known  research, 
published  in  1865,  entitled:  On  the  Direct  Influence  of  Medicinal  and 
Morbific  Agents  upon  the  Muscular  Tissues  of  the  Bloodvessels.  This 
physician  was  interested  in  the  problem  as  to  how  the  blood,  in  febrile 
conditions,  acts  upon  the  circulatory  mechanism.  He  evinced  consider- 
able experimental  skill,  as  shown  by  his  use  of  the  "surviving"  um- 
bilical artery  in  his  transfusion  experiments,  and  he  seems  to  have 
had  some  premonitions  of  our  later  theories,  for  he  subjected  the 
umbilical  artery  to  the  action  of  blood  drawn  from  a  patient  with 
typhoid  fever  and  compared  the  results  thus  obtained  with  those 
noted  when  normal  blood  was  used. 

58 


In  one  part  of  his  paper  he  defends  and  justifies  his  methods  in  the 
following  words:  "Moreover,  it  is  not  to  mere  clinical  experience 
that  we  must  look  for  a  revelation  of  the  laws  of  disease.  The  laws  of 
chemistry  were  not  discovered  in  blazing  fires  or  crumbling  rocks; 
the  laws  of  hydrostatics  and  hydraidics  were  not  revealed  in  torrents, 
tides,  or  ocean  currents,  nor  those  of  pneumatics  and  electricity  in 
^vinds,  whirlwinds,  and  thunderstorms;  much  less  coidd  it  be  ration- 
ally expected  that  the  laws  of  pathology  should  be  discovered  amid 
the  much  greater  complexity  and  more  multitudinous  conflicts  of 
elements  presented  to  the  physician  at  the  bedside  of  a  diseased  or 
dying  patient.  It  is  in  the  laboratory,  and  by  artifically  contrived  ex- 
periments that  the  clue  has  ever  been  spun  and  the  torch  lighted  to 
guide  through  the  labyrinths  which  hide  the  arcana  of  nature." 

By  means  of  "artificially  contrived  experiments"  we  are  today  en- 
abled to  demonstrate  in  detail  how  drugs  act  on  the  various  organs 
of  the  body  and  what  is  their  immediate,  specific  action  on  the  parts 
of  a  compound  mechanism  like  the  circulatory  apparatus.  Thus  we 
teach  the  student  of  our  day  the  method  by  which  is  analyzed  the 
action  of  a  drug  on  the  heart  and  arteries,  on  the  vasomotor,  cardio- 
inhibitory  and  respiratory  centers,  on  the  terminals  of  the  vagus,  on 
the  spinal  cord  and  brain,  on  the  intestines,  the  uterus,  the  salivary 
and  other  glands,  the  iris,  ciliary  body,  etc.  Conceptions  familiar  to 
the  therapeutician  are  thus  resolved  into  their  elements  and  made 
accessible  to  the  beginner. 

The  empiricist  may  perhaps  assert  that  an  experimental  demonstra- 
tion and  analysis  of  the  manner  in  which  atropin,  for  example,  causes 
dilation  of  the  pupil  is  of  little  service  to  him,  that  the  clinical  fact 
is  all-sufficient.  A  physician  of  this  practical  turn  of  mind  may  long 
use  ^vith  safety  his  corrosive  sublimate,  his  ether,  his  salicylic  acid, 
his  homatropin,  eserin,  and  other  drugs;  but,  sooner  or  later,  if  he 
is  an  observing  man,  he  will  find  himeslf  confronted  by  doubtful  and 
obscure  questions  which  directly  concern  the  welfare  of  his  patient, 
questions  that  can  only  be  cleared  up  with  the  help  of  the  "artificially 
contrived  experiment."  No  branch  of  practical  medicine  can  afford 
to  neglect  the  study  of  the  principles  and  methods  of  pharmacology. 
For,  like  other  branches  of  experimental  science,  it  teaches  conserva- 
tism by  pointing  out  how  vastly  complex  are  the  phenomena  of  the 
action  of  drugs  and  sho^ving  how  little  is  clearly  understood  aside 
from  the  grosser  and  visible  changes  which  follow  upon  their  ad 
ministration.  The  dogmatic  use,  in  symptomatic  treatment,  of  cardiac 
stimidants,  depressants,  antipyretics,  and  innumerable  other  remedies 

59 


whose  extraordinary  virtues  are  lauded  in  commercial  circulars,  finds 
no  justification  in  the  teachings  of  pharmacology.  Its  teachings  are 
not  always  or  immediately  convertible  into  bedside  dogmas. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  the  therapeutic  nihilist  who  uses  only 
what  is  indispensable  among  drugs,  but  who  is  wise  in  the  curative 
power  of  air,  water,  food,  rest,  and  exercise,  will  have  less  to  answer 
for  in  the  final  reckoning  than  his  drug-enslaved  colleague  who  prates 
of  controlling  disease  in  its  every  symptom  with  this  or  that  panacea 
and  who  is  guilty  of  the  premature  application  to  practice  of  what 
are  only  unproved  theories. 

Pharmacology  gives  no  support  to  the  unthinking  worship  of  ca- 
nonical authority.  In  instances  when  true  specifics  and  well-founded 
remedies  are  manifestly  powerless,  the  plan  outlined  by  John  Locke 
is  as  applicable  now  as  it  was  when  he  wrote:  "You  cannot  imagine 
how  far  a  little  observation  carefully  made  by  a  man  not  tied  up  to 
the  four  humours,  or  sal  sulphur  and  mercury,  or  to  acid  and  alkali, 
which  has  of  late  prevailed,  will  carry  a  man  in  the  curing  of  diseases 
though  very  stubborn  and  dangerous;  and  that  with  very  little  and 
common  things,  and  almost  no  medicine  at  all." 

In  an  age  which  pathology  and  diagnosis  are  so  far  advanced  and 
in  which  more  genuine  help  is  derived  from  the  rational  use  of  drugs 
than  ever  before  in  the  history  of  medicine,  haphazard  drugging  is 
unpardonable,  and  still  more  to  be  condemned  is  a  fanatical  and 
conceited  adherence  to  dogmas  based  on  a  superficial  understanding 
of  complex  physiological  principles. 

I  have  spoken  thus  far  only  of  the  older  and  well-tried  methods  of 
pharmacology,  methods  that  are  still  fruitful,  although  newer  tend- 
encies are  now  followed  and  fresher  fields  are  being  tilled.  The  more 
detailed  examination  by  means  of  modern  physiological  methods  of 
the  respiratory,  circulatory,  muscular,  nervous,  and  other  functional 
derangements  which  are  met  in  "intoxications"  will  surely  lead  to 
most  important  results.  One  of  my  younger  colleagues,  who  is  now 
carefully  reviewing  the  list  of  drugs  that  act  on  the  heart,  tells  me 
that  not  a  single  one  of  them  has  been  studied  on  all  sides  from  a 
modern  physiological  standpoint.  Digitalis  alone  of  the  list  has  been 
the  object  of  a  fairly  complete  physiological  examination,  but  every- 
where in  this  field  of  the  cardiaca  there  seems  to  be  a  great  accumula- 
tion of  physiological  facts  ready  for  the  coordinating  hand  of  the 
pharmacologist.  As  elsewhere,  judgment  and  special  knowledge  are 
required,  and  the  day  has  long  passed  when  he  who  knows  the  drugs 
of  the  pharmacopeia  and  their  clinical  uses  and  who  is  able  only  to 

60 


set  up  a  kymograph  and  attach  a  few  registering  instruments  can 
claim  to  be  a  pharmacologist.  Such  an  one  will  not  travel  far  beyond 
the  region  of  mere  routine,  a  region  chiefly  of  pedagogical  interest. 

Thoughtful  pharmacologists  have  also  made  it  the  object  of  their 
investigations  to  understand  more  fully  the  chemical  and  chemico- 
molecular  phenomena  that  underlie  and  accompany  the  coarser 
changes  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made.  The  principles  of 
physics  and  chemistry  must  furnish  the  pharmacologist  with  pro- 
visional or  permanent  explanations  of  these  phenomena.  Like  the 
physicist,  he  is  well  aware,  however,  of  the  "futility  of  attempting  an 
ultimate  explanation  of  natural  phenomena,"  and  fully  recognizes  the 
limitations  of  his  method.  At  present  we  make  use  of  a  hundred 
terms  which  convey  anything  but  a  clear  idea  to  the  mind.  Take  so 
old  a  drug  as  ethyl  alcohol,  for  example,  and  endeavor  to  explain 
why  it  is  not  a  dynamogenic  substance  for  muscle-tissue.  We  hide 
behind  such  expressions  as  "protoplasm  poison"  and  the  like.  We 
know  that  alcohol  is  oxidized  in  the  tissues  and  that  liberation  of 
energy  folloAvs,  but  a  more  careful  study  of  the  subject  shows  that 
oxidizability  and  the  liberation  of  energy  are  not  alone  the  measure 
of  dynamogenic  value.  A  closer  study  of  the  intermediate  steps  in 
the  oxidation  and  of  the  chemico-molecular  processes  which  are  in- 
itiated by  these  products  and  by  the  alcohol  itself  will  alone  clear  up 
a  problem  of  this  sort. 

Knowledge  of  the  "chemical  architecture"  and  constitution  of  a 
given  drug  often  enables  the  pharmacologist  to  trace  it  in  its  passage 
through  the  body,  and  in  studying  its  chemical  fate  and  final  dis- 
position, valuable  facts  bearing  on  the  synthetic,  oxidative,  reductive, 
or  splitting  powers  of  various  tissues  and  organs  have  been  brought 
to  light.  In  this  way,  too,  intermediate  products  of  metabolism  are 
discovered  and  glimpses  of  hidden  chemical  processes  are  obtained 
which  throw  light  on  deep  problems  of  pathology  and  clinical  medi- 
cine. The  results  of  the  study  of  the  relation  of  chemical  constitution 
to  physiological  action  as  yet  apply  only  to  certain  families  of  chem- 
icals. They  have  not  led  to  any  principles  of  universal  application. 
Recently  a  clearer  statement  of  the  action  of  whole  series  of  drugs 
and  poisons  has  been  given  in  the  language  of  physical  chemistry. 
Thus,  this  or  that  feature  of  the  pharmacologic  action  of  many  acids 
is  in  proportion  to  the  concentration  of  their  hydrogen  ions  and  de- 
pends to  a  lesser  degree  on  the  specific  properties  of  their  anions.  The 
toxic  or  disinfecting  action  of  a  series  of  dilute  metal  hydroxides  stands 
in  relation  to  the  concentration  of  the  OH  ions.  The  theory  of  electro- 

61 


lytic  dissociation,  on  the  other  hand,  plays  but  a  subordinate  part 
in  determining  the  toxic  properties  of  phenylic  and  other  compounds. 
But  whenever  this  theory  is  applicable  to  the  problems  of  our  science, 
it  has  put  them  in  a  new  light.  Yet  it  must  be  remembered  that  when 
we  say  the  pharmacologic  action  in  a  given  case  is  ionic,  we  are  still 
far  from  the  last  possible  analysis  and  explanation  of  the  observed 
phenomena. 

A  new  epoch  began  with  the  belief  that  many  diseases  are  but 
instances  of  acute  or  chronic  intoxication.  The  growth  of  the  doctrine 
of  toxins  forced  upon  us  by  modern  experimentation  in  bacteriology 
is  seen  in  pharmacological  literature  and  methods.  The  recent  studies 
in  the  action  of  toxins  and  antitoxins,  on  the  nature  of  immunity,  on 
the  nature  and  cause  of  diabetic  coma,  uremic  poisoning,  and  other 
pathologic  conditions  in  which  poisons  generated  within  the  body 
play  a  role,  are  all  instances  of  researches  in  which  repeated  use  of 
pharmacologic  methods  and  principles  is  made.  It  is  evident,  then, 
that  pharmacology  deals  with  the  most  fundamental  conceptions  of 
medicine,  that  it  conserves  and  augments  a  variety  of  facts,  methods 
and  principles  which  are  of  service  not  alone  to  every  branch  of  the 
medical  art,  but  also  to  other  branches  whose  subject-matter  confines 
them  to  the  laboratory,  the  private  study,  and  the  lecture  hall. 

When  and  how  shall  this  subject  be  taught  in  our  medical  schools? 

First,  as  to  the  time  when  it  should  be  taught.  I  hold  that  this 
should  be  when  the  student  begins  his  clinical  studies  and  not  before. 
I  do  not  deny  that  it  is  often  difficult  to  make  room  for  this  subject 
in  the  first  clinical  year,  but  the  argument  which  in  reality  excludes 
it  is  that  pharmacology,  like  physiology,  is  so  capable  of  illustration 
by  laboratory  experiments  and  of  presentation  in  the  form  of  lec- 
turers, that  it  can  be  taught  as  soon  as  the  student  has  the  needful 
foundation  in  the  way  of  physiologic  chemistry,  anatomy  and  phys- 
iology. 

But  this  argument  ignores  the  fact  that  every  drug  has  its  clinical 
uses,  that  the  teacher  of  pharmacology  is  expected  to  point  out  what 
these  uses  are,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  reference  to  diseases 
and  their  symptoms.  In  the  interest  of  the  student,  by  way  of  lighten- 
ing his  work  and  making  it  more  profitable  to  him,  it  is  imperative 
to  teach  pharmacology  hand  in  hand  with  the  early  clinical  Avork. 
For  now  he  begins  to  see  drugs  used;  he  notes,  for  example,  how  a 
patient  behaves  under  ether;  for  what  conditions  the  clinician  pre- 
scribes iron,  quinin,  mercury,  salicylic  acid,  codein,  digitalis,  potas- 
sium iodid,  amyl  nitrite  and  the  like;  what  antiseptics  and  local  an- 

62 


esthetics  are  used  by  the  surgeon.  He  perhaps  sees  an  outpatient 
with  a  gangrenous  finger  due  to  his  having  swathed  it  in  5%  carbolic 
acid;  he  learns  of  mercurial  stomatitis,  of  palsies  and  neuritic  affec- 
tions and  anemias  caused  by  the  heavy  metals,  of  exanthems  due  to 
drugs;  he  sees  examples  of  iodism,  cinchonism,  etc.,  and  specimens  of 
urine  that  show  misleading  features  in  consequence  of  certain  drugs. 
Though  only  a  beginner,  he  meets  at  every  turn  Avith  some  practical 
application  of  the  articles  of  our  materia  medica.  Drugs  now  have 
some  significance  for  him,  an  interest  is  aroused  in  their  action, 
important  data  and  conceptions  are  gathered  by  actual  experience. 

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  a  description  of  the  symptoms 
that  appear  when  more  than  the  therapeutic  dose  of  a  drug  is  given 
is  an  integral  part  of  the  teaching  of  the  pharmacologist.  In  a  word, 
toxicology  is  inseparable  from  pharmacology,  and  instruction  in  this 
branch,  so  far  as  it  is  not  of  a  chemical  or  medicolegal  character, 
deals  with  clinical  and  pathological  data.  How  wasteful  of  energy  is 
it  to  teach  this  part  of  the  subject  at  a  time  when  all  practical  knowl- 
edge of  such  data,  with  the  exception  of  that  gained  by  experiments 
on  animals,  is  lacking!  What  does  the  student  profit  from  descrip- 
tions, for  example,  of  the  nature  of  cocain,  atropin,  opium,  or  arsenical 
poisoning,  at  a  time  when  he  has  seen  nothing  whatever  of  bedside 
medicine? 

To  say  that  the  practical  examples  of  the  uses  of  drugs  and  of  their 
toxic  action  can  be  as  well  learned  by  the  student  after  he  has  taken 
the  course  in  pharmacology  is  to  deny  the  principle  of  economy  in 
intellectual  work,  and  indicates  a  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  fact 
that  the  applied  and  the  theoretical  parts  of  pharmacology  are  not 
capable  of  a  sharp  separation  in  courses  intended  for  medical  students. 

The  question  as  to  how  we  shall  teach  pharmacology  may  now  be 
considered.  But  first,  a  few  words  concerning  instruction  in  toxi- 
cology. It  has  already  been  stated  that,  from  a  scientific  point  of  vie^v, 
no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  can  be  drawn  between  this  subject  and 
pharmacology.  Only  ^vhen  the  medicolegal,  the  industrial,  or  the 
chemical  sides  of  toxicology  are  considered  is  it  advisable  to  make  a 
distinction.  But  these  aspects  of  toxicology  should  not  be  neglected 
in  our  medical  schools.  Even  in  institutions  in  which  the  general 
principles  and  methods  of  toxicological  analysis  are  taught  in  connec- 
tion with  the  work  in  chemistry,  or  in  which  extensive  courses  in  legal 
medicine  and  in  hygiene  are  given,  there  Avill  still  be  left  a  large  field 
to  be  covered  by  the  pharmacologist.  In  my  own  experience  I  have 
found  it  advantageous  to  give  a  brief  course  in  toxicology  as  a  pre- 

63 


liminary  to  the  work  in  pharmacology.  My  students  begin  their  work 
with  me  at  the  conclusion  of  the  first  third  of  their  second  year,  at 
a  time,  therefore,  when  they  have  had  no  clinical  work  and  but  little 
pathology.  The  course  requires  eight  weeks,  and  there  are  two  after- 
noon sessions  and  a  Saturday  morning  recitation  or  conference.  The 
points  aimed  at  in  the  course  are:  First,  the  acquisition  and  compre- 
hension of  the  physiological  phenomena  of  intoxications;  second, 
certain  important  phases  of  the  subject  regarded  as  a  part  of  forensic 
medicine;  third,  the  more  important  chronic  intoxications  which  are 
met  with  in  the  arts  and  industries;  and  fourth,  the  general  principles 
of  toxicological  analysis  as  illustrated  by  actual  practice  at  the  labora- 
tory desk. 

Nothing  in  the  way  of  vivisection  is  done  by  the  student  himself 
in  this  course. 

The  afternoon's  work  begins  with  a  brief  lecture  and  with  demon- 
strations of  a  physiological  character.  In  these  a  number  of  circum- 
stances bearing  on  the  action  of  a  given  substance,  whether  used  as  a 
poison  or  as  a  drug,  are  clearly  set  forth.  These  demonstrations  con- 
stitute the  best  introduction  to  pharmacology.  Some  of  the  points 
illustrated  are  the  varied  symptoms  of  poisoning,  such,  for  example, 
as  the  paralysis  of  the  respiratory  center  by  hydrocyanic  acid  or 
morphin;  the  influence  of  the  place  of  application,  as  illustrated  by 
the  fact  that  not  all  mucous  surfaces  absorb  poisons  with  equal  ra- 
pidity; the  rapidity  of  dispersion  of  poisons  throughout  the  body; 
the  paths  of  elimination  for  drugs  and  poisons,  and  the  storage  of 
drugs  in  various  tissues  and  organs,  and  the  great  differences  that 
obtain  in  these  two  fields;  changes  in  the  blood;  the  anatomical  lesions 
produced  by  powerful  poisons,  such  as  arsenic,  phosphorus,  nitric 
acid,  carbolic  acid,  alkalies,  etc.  A  wide  range  of  demonstrations,  in 
which  organisms  ranging  from  paramecia  to  dogs  and  rabbits  may 
be  employed,  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  instructor,  who  has  access  to 
original  literature.  In  this  way  the  beginner  receives  ocular  proof  of 
the  fact  that  an  intoxication,  whether  acute  or  chronic,  is  as  complex 
a  matter  as  any  of  the  clinical  conditions  that  he  will  later  study  in 
the  hospital;  that  drugs  can  produce  fever,  convulsions,  paralysis,  and 
other  symptoms;  lesions  of  the  various  organs,  alterations  of  the  secre- 
tions and  of  the  blood— in  short,  an  interest  in  the  manifold  problems 
of  medicine  can  here  be  aroused.  It  is,  of  course,  understood  that  the 
rules  of  the  physiological  laboratory  in  regard  to  anesthesia  are  to  be 
observed  in  work  of  the  above  character.  During  the  first  week  of  this 
course  the  demonstrations  extend  so  far  into  the  afternoon  that  the 

64 


student  has  no  time  left  for  laboratory  work,  and  can  only  arrange 
his  desk  for  the  chemical  work. 

The  chemical  work  of  the  student  is  so  planned  that  it  shall  in- 
struct him  in  certain  methods  which  will  be  of  use  to  him  in  his 
later  work  in  clinical  medicine  and  will  enable  him  also  to  make  at 
least  the  necessary  preliminary  tests  in  a  case  of  suspected  poisoning. 
A  small  laboratory  manual  drawn  up  by  the  instructor  is  placed  in 
his  hands  and  its  directions  are  modified  from  year  to  year.  The 
ground  covered  in  the  laboratory  includes  the  methods  of  isolating 
volatile  poisons  and  the  analytical  methods  applicable  to  the  detec- 
tion of  small  quantities  of  this  class  of  poisons;  the  search  for  alkaloids 
and  glucosids  by  the  methods  of  Draggendorff,  Brouardel,  Kippen- 
berger,  and  others,  some  typical  poisons  of  these  classes  being  mixed 
with  foods  and  subjected  by  the  student  to  processes  suitable  to  their 
extraction;  the  search  for  metallic  poisons  and  non-volatile  acids;  a 
study  of  blood-stains  and  the  separation  of  blood  from  rust-spots,  etc.; 
a  spectroscopic  and  simple  chemical  study  of  the  various  hemoglobin 
derivatives  as  methemglobin,  hematin,  reduced  hematin,  hematopor- 
phyrin,  carbon  monoxid  hemoglobin,  etc.;  a  study  of  the  changes  in 
the  urine  induced  by  drugs. 

In  a  course  of  this  kind  a  Avise  selection  of  examples  must  be  made 
and  assistance  must  be  given  to  the  student  by  means  of  class  demon- 
strations and  informal  talks,  as  ^vell  as  by  instruction  at  the  laboratory 
desk. 

In  the  past  few  years  our  students  have  come  to  us  with  a  better 
preparation  in  chemistry,  and  many  of  them  have  already  had  a  special 
course  in  the  detection  of  metallic  and  other  poisons. 

To  avoid  repetition  we  have  therefore  arranged  a  few  class  dem- 
onstrations showing  the  best  methods  of  oxidizing  organic  matter  and 
of  detecting  arsenic,  antimony,  lead,  mercury,  and  phosphorus,  pay- 
ing especial  attention  to  the  simpler  preliminary  tests  which  shall 
enable  the  physician,  if  need  be,  to  ascertain  ^vith  certainty  whether 
one  or  another  of  these  poisons  is  present.  The  object  of  this  chemical 
course  is,  therefore,  mainly  to  give  the  student  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the 
field,  with  a  certain  technic  of  an  elementary  sort  and  to  further 
improve  his  chemical  knowledge,  something  for  which  the  modern 
physician  finds  more  and  more  practical  uses.  Should  the  student  who 
has  taken  such  a  course  ever  find  himself  involved  as  a  medical  expert 
in  a  medicolegal  case  he  wdll  not  be  entirely  incapable  of  compre- 
hending the  controversial  points  which  are  agitating  the  chemical 
experts  in  the  trial. 

65 


Along  with  this  chemical  work  goes  the  reading  of  selected  chapters 
of  a  good  textbook,  recitations,  and  informal  talks  by  the  instructor 
on  special  subjects,  as  the  commoner  poisonous  plants  of  the  country, 
or  the  intoxications  met  in  the  modern  arts  and  industries.  The  talk 
or  the  recitation,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  held  early  in  the  afternoon, 
before  the  laboratory  work  is  begun.  An  hour  on  one  other  day  on 
which  no  laboratory  work  is  done  is  also  given  up  to  a  recitation  on 
assigned  subjects. 

It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  little  in  the  way  of  didactic  lectures. 
The  student  profits  most  when,  for  example,  he  has  himself  detected 
opium  in  some  mixture  and  has  read  his  Blyth,  Kobert  or  Lewin  and 
tiien  meets  his  instructor,  to  discuss  with  him,  in  an  informal  manner, 
the  chief  points  in  the  physiologic  action  of  the  poison  in  its  chronic 
use,  or  in  its  medicolegal  significance  and  chemical  detection.  His 
previous  reading  has  aroused  his  interest,  and  taken  in  connection 
with  his  chemical  experiments  and  the  demonstration  on  the  living 
animal,  it  has  prepared  him  for  a  conference  whose  chief  aim  is  to 
help  him  to  separate  the  essentials  from  the  nonessentials. 

The  remainder  of  the  year  is  devoted  to  pharmacology.  This  course 
is  only  in  part  a  laboratory  course,  the  class  working  in  sections  of 
four.  Even  if  it  is  impossible  for  the  student  to  perform  more  than  a 
half-dozen  experiments,  this  kind  of  work  is  too  valuable  to  be  omit- 
ted. Nowadays,  when  simple  apparatus  can  be  had  at  a  comparatively 
low  cost,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  to  give  every  four  students 
out  of  a  class  of  75  a  number  of  highly  instructive  experiments.  These 
may  be  so  arranged  that  the  student  himself  learns  the  chief  pharmaco- 
logical facts  involved,  say,  in  the  action  of  ether  and  chloroform, 
the  diuretics  and  purgatives,  atropin,  morphin  and  chloral,  or  dig- 
italis, the  nitrites  and  other  agents  that  have  a  pronounced  action  on 
the  circulatory  apparatus. 

I  would,  therefore,  urge  that  at  least  5  or  6  topics  be  made  the 
subject  of  laboratory  experiments  to  be  preformed  by  the  students 
themselves  under  competent  direction.  The  "artifically  contrived  ex- 
periment" has  made  the  subject  what  it  is;  it  is  that  instrument  of 
knowledge  with  which  the  teacher  and  investigator  tests  the  theories 
of  the  day;  it  is  his  very  shortest  road  to  certainty  of  opinion.  Why, 
then,  should  it  not  give  a  clearer  insight  to  the  student  also?  As 
Porter  so  tersely  puts  it,  "the  meat  on  which  professors  are  nourished 
is  just  the  diet  for  students." 

As  for  the  rest  of  the  experimental  work,  numerous  class  demon- 
strations are  necessary.  The  work  in  physiology,  perhaps  going  on  at 

66 


the  same  time,  has  prepared  the  student  to  grasp  the  principles  to  be 
illustrated  by  the  more  complicated  experiments  and  perhaps  also 
made  it  unneccessary  for  the  student  himself  to  perform  the  many 
simple  experiments  to  which  he  is  equal,  but  which  can  be  more 
quickly  performed  for  him.  For  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  as  Pro- 
fessor Welch  has  said,  "Laboratory  methods  are  extremely  time-taking 
and  are  not  adapted  to  teach  the  whole  contents  of  any  of  the  medical 
sciences."  I  need  not  recount  the  list  of  practicable  class  demonstra- 
tions. There  is  hardly  a  drug  of  importance  for  which  a  good  demon- 
stration is  not  to  be  found  in  the  various  scientific  journals.  We  know 
that  the  list  of  drugs  in  actual  use  is  very  large,  but  if  we  ask  what  are 
those  that  have  been  found  to  be  really  indispensable  to  the  surgeon, 
the  gynecologist  and  obstetrician,  the  internist,  the  ophthalmologist, 
dermatologist  and  other  specialists,  we  can  easily  reduce  our  por- 
tentous list  to  some  fifty  instances.  Let  these  constitute  the  basis  of 
instruction  and  serve  as  types;  take  these  up  in  great  detail,  and  when- 
ever possible  connect  with  them  less  important  ones  of  similar  action. 

But  to  assist  the  student  to  master  the  contents  of  his  particular  sub- 
ject should  not  be  the  only  aim  of  the  medical  teacher;  he  should  seek 
to  arouse  an  appetite  for  all  that  is  fundamental  in  the  science  of 
medicine;  he  should  stimulate  to  inquiry,  to  a  searching  and  logical 
analysis  of  the  phenomena  to  be  grappled  with,  be  it  in  the  laboratory 
or  at  the  bedside.  And  in  striving  to  carry  out  this  high  purpose,  his 
own  life  work,  his  spoken  words  and  his  attitude  toward  his  pupils 
are  his  chief  means  of  influence. 

I  have  thus  far  said  nothing  on  the  subject  of  Materia  Medica.  I  do 
not  believe  that  special  instruction  in  this  branch  is  called  for.  In 
the  day  when  the  student  to  the  medical  school  entered  with  little 
knowledge  of  chemistry,  botany,  and  other  sciences,  it  may  have  been 
^vell  enough  to  give  special  courses  on  the  physical,  chemical,  and 
botanical  characteristics  of  drugs,  but  the  result  in  general  was  to 
overburden  the  student's  mind  with  a  multitude  of  dry  details  of 
interest  or  value  solely  to  the  pharmacist  or  to  the  student  of  pharma- 
cognosy. When  I  began  to  teach  pharmacology  ten  years  ago,  I  dis- 
carded all  separate  instruction  in  materia  medica.  My  plan  has  been 
to  give  only  those  points  which  are  of  actual  importance  to  the  stu- 
dent of  medicine  or  which  he  ought  to  know  for  historical  reasons. 
The  drugs  and  preparations  which  are  discussed  in  lectures  and  recita- 
tions are  placed  on  a  table  where  all  may  examine  them,  and  the  more 
important  ones  are  passed  from  hand  to  hand  while  they  are  being 
described.  In  speaking,  for  example,  of  rhubarb,  digitalis,  cinchona, 

67 


ergot,  or  opium,  only  brief  historical  remarks,  with  short  accounts 
of  their  chemical  composition  and  their  behavior  toward  solvents  are 
introduced. 

Certainly  all  unnecessarily  detailed  description  of  crude  drugs,  of 
their  active  principles,  or  of  the  modern  synthetic  remedies,  is  out  of 
place  in  a  medical  school.  The  instructor  should  allow  himself  but 
the  briefest  introduction  as  to  the  physical  and  chemical  properties 
of  a  drug  before  he  begins  the  more  important  discussion  of  its 
pharmacological  action.  Thus,  when  chloral  is  the  subject,  he  will 
describe  its  chemical  relationship  to  the  other  anesthetics  and  hyp- 
notics, its  solubilities,  its  deliquescence,  its  decomposability  by  alka- 
lies, etc.  A  rapidly-performed  test-tube  experiment  showing  how  chlo- 
roform is  split  off  when  it  is  brought  into  contact  with  an  alkali  will 
prevent  the  student  from  prescribing  it  in  this  form.  Such  a  method 
of  treatment  consumes  but  little  time  and  is  easily  comprehended  by 
the  student  who  has  had  a  suitable  preliminary  course  in  chemistry. 
In  a  word,  I  would  teach  materia  medica  in  direct  connection  with 
pharmacology,  letting  it  serve  in  the  case  of  each  drug  or  class  of  drugs 
as  a  brief  introduction  to  the  latter  and  giving  only  such  parts  as  are 
indispensable  to  the  physician  in  his  administration  of  drugs  or  of 
such  historical  significance  that  they  ought  not  to  be  neglected  from 
the  culture  point  of  view.  Here,  as  everywhere  in  our  crowded  courses, 
wise  selection  is  our  only  safeguard.  With  regard  to  the  pharmacopeial 
preparations  it  has  always  been  my  plan  to  require  only  a  knowledge 
of  the  more  important  ones,  the  student  being  requested  merely  to 
read  over  those  of  lesser  importance.  There  is  much  truth  in  the  re- 
mark made  by  William  Withering  more  than  a  century  ago,  that  "the 
ingenuity  of  man  has  ever  been  fond  of  exerting  itself  to  vary  the  forms 
and  combinations  of  medicines.  Hence  we  have  spirituous,  vinous,  and 
acetous  tinctures;  extracts  hard  and  soft,  syrups  with  sugar  or  honey, 
etc.,  but  the  more  we  multiply  the  form  of  any  medicine  the  longer  we 
shall  be  in  ascertaining  the  real  dose." 

Certain  chemical  and  physical  points  which  have  a  bearing  on  the 
combination  of  drugs  as  called  for  in  prescriptions,  or  official  prepara- 
tions may  be  taken  up  again  in  a  brief  course  in  pharmacy.  I  cannot 
believe  that  the  art  of  preparing  drugs  for  therapeutic  use  requires  a 
prominent  place  in  the  better  medical  schools  of  the  day.  The  young 
physician  who  is  fairly  well  trained  in  chemistry  can  get  all  that  is 
necessary  in  the  way  of  pharmacy  out  of  a  course  of  at  most  a  dozen 
or  fifteen  lectures  in  which  systems  of  weights  and  measures,  incom- 
patibles,  and  special  points  relating  to  prescriptions  are  dealt  with, 

68 


and  in  which  demonsiiations  are  given  of  how  pills,  tablets,  supposi- 
tories, tinctures,  and  other  official  preparations  are  prepared. 

In  schools  where  the  student  is  admitted  with  but  a  poor  elementary 
training  much  more  than  this  may  be  necessary.  But,  even  under  the 
most  favorable  conditions  the  limited  course  above  outlined  will 
leave  much  to  be  desired,  even  then  the  physician  is  not  ensured 
against  the  commission  of  grave  enors  in  prescribing.  Without  further 
study  he  must  often  rely  upon  the  friendly  hand  of  the  professional 
pharmacist  to  correct  his  mistakes. 

Here,  too,  then,  the  question  is  one  of  selection,  of  just  how  much 
will  suffice  in  a  field  which  is  occupied  by  an  allied  profession. 

There  are  gieat  differences  of  opinion  in  regard  to  instruction  in 
Therapeutics.  In  teaching  pharmacology  the  therapeutic  uses  of  drugs 
must  necessarily  be  considered  in  more  or  less  detail  and  pharma- 
cological discoveries  harmonized  Avhenever  possible  with  clinical  prac- 
tice. It  is,  therefore,  necessary  that  the  teacher  of  pharmocology  shall 
be  familiar  with  clinical  work  and  with  the  actual  effect  of  drugs  and 
poisons  on  human  beings.  It  is  not  necessary,  however,  that  he  should 
be  an  active  practitioner,  and  it  is  only  a  man  of  unusual  powers  and 
exceptional  training  in  science  who  can  successfully  combine  practice 
with  the  demands  made  on  the  pharmacologist  of  the  present  day  as 
an  investigator  and  a  teacher.  In  all  the  leading  universities  of  the 
world  it  is  becoming  more  and  more  the  custom  for  teachers  of  physi- 
ology, anatomy,  pathology,  physiological  chemistry,  and  hygiene  to 
devote  themselves  wholly  to  the  duties  of  their  chairs,  and  this  practice 
will  prevail  more  and  more  among  pharmacologists  as  the  wealth  of 
medical  foundations  increases.  No  one  individual,  even  if  he  has  the 
widest  clinical  experience,  can  hope  to  teach  the  whole  art  of  thera- 
peutics. Is  it  necessary  to  attempt  this?  Is  not  the  clinical  teacher  who 
is  well  grounded  in  the  fundamental  sciences  the  only  one  who  can 
rightly  train  the  medical  student  in  the  correct  choice  of  drugs  and 
other  agents  whose  employment  falls  within  his  province? 

Who,  for  example,  can  better  teach  the  student  how  to  treat  the 
various  acute  and  chronic  forms  of  skin  disease  than  the  dermatologist; 
who  better  to  treat  the  diseases  of  young  children  than  the  pediatrist; 
who  better  the  details  of  drug  application  in  diseases  of  the  eye,  throat, 
and  nose  than  the  specialist  in  these  branches;  who  give  wiser  coun- 
sel in  the  use  of  drugs,  foods,  and  other  agents  in  the  wide  field  of  the 
internist  than  he  who  daily  grapples  with  difficult  problems  in  the 
cure  and  alleviation  of  disease?  A  practical  mastery  of  therapeutics 
can  only  be  obtained  from  contact  with  these  men  and  their  work. 

69 


In  a  limited  way,  a  special  course  in  practical  therapeutics  in  the 
field  of  internal  medicine  may  be  given  in  a  medical  school,  and  it  is 
of  great  assistance  to  the  medical  student  who  is  obliged  to  enter  upon 
practice  immediately  and  without  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from 
a  year  or  two  of  hospital  practice.  A  course  of  this  kind  is  a  part  of  the 
curriculum  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  Medical  School  and  is  given  by  an 
instructor  in  clinical  medicine.  It  occupies  a  period  of  15  weeks  and 
consists  of  lectures  and  demonstrations  given  twice  a  week;  as  stated 
in  the  announcement  of  the  gentleman  in  charge,  this  course  com- 
prises the  clinical  study  of  a  number  of  the  more  common  and  useful 
drugs,  their  dosage,  administration,  and  effects,  methods  of  prescrip- 
tion-writing and  illustrative  formula,  demonstrations  of  practical 
therapeutic  measures,  the  use  of  hydrotherapy,  the  preparation  of 
simple  and  useful  forms  of  diet,  the  care  of  patients  considered  from 
the  nursing  point  of  view,  the  treatment  of  various  emergencies  and  of 
special  diseases  by  climate,  rest,  and  other  practical  procedures. 

The  clinical  work  of  the  third  and  fourth  years  affords  abundant 
opportunities  for  further  training  in  practical  therapeutics. 

This  brings  me  to  the  subject  of  lectures  and  recitations  or  con- 
ferences. 

Some  didactic  teaching,  be  it  in  the  form  of  lectures,  recitations  or 
conferences,  is  necessary  in  most,  if  not  all,  branches  of  medicine.  In 
these  exercises,  the  teacher  not  only  clears  up  doubtful  points  and  sum- 
marizes scientific  evidence,  but  he  also  has  an  opportunity  to  so  di- 
rect "the  unwary  understanding"  of  the  young,  as  Sir  Thomas  Browne 
has  it,  that  some  perchance  will  escape  intellectual  sclerosis  at  forty. 

My  own  experience  with  students  has  led  me  to  believe  that  they 
profit  most  if  they  have  first  read  their  textbooks  before  attending  a 
lecture  on  a  given  subject.  The  teacher's  own  experience  is  that  he 
derives  most  advantage  from  a  consultation  with  a  specialist  in  some 
other  branch  of  science  when  he  has  first  informed  himself  on  the 
points  at  issue.  It  is  then  that  a  short  talk  with  a  man  of  wide  experi- 
ence easily  clears  up  an  obscure  point.  The  student  should  be  put 
into  a  similar  attitude  of  mind  by  proving  to  him  that  he  will  get 
more  out  of  an  hour  with  his  teacher  than  out  of  an  hour  with  his 
books  at  home.  If  the  subject  under  discussion  is  one  that  is  well 
treated  in  textbooks,  the  established  points  may  be  passed  in  rapid 
review  and  then  the  latest  researches,  the  newer  theories  brought  out 
by  the  instructor.  Whenever  it  is  possible  to  do  so,  demonstrations 
and  experiments  should  be  used  to  illustrate  the  points  under  discus- 
sion, and  these  may  be  given  either  during  the  talk  or  immediately 
after. 

70 


No  matter  how  well  a  textbook  may  be  written,  the  teacher  who  is 
himself  a  ^vorker  in  the  laboratory  and  who  follows  attentively  the 
researches  of  his  contemporaries,  will  be  able  to  clear  up  doubtful 
points  and  also  to  daily  anticipate  the  author's  second  edition,  for  the 
last  chapter  of  a  textbook  is  hardly  completed  before  the  first  needs 
revision.  Aside  from  this,  he  is  likely  to  have  the  advantage  of  the 
author  of  the  book  in  certain  fields,  for  no  man  is  able  to  cover  the 
whole  ground  with  equal  authority. 

Now  as  to  the  student's  part.  I  hold  that  only  the  laboratory  work 
and  attendance  on  such  demonstrations  as  are  of  the  highest  impor- 
tance should  be  obligatory.  With  such  attendance  and  diligent  reading 
of  the  best  textbooks  on  the  subject,  the  student  will  be  able  to  bring 
himself  up  to  the  "pass"  mark,  since  the  examination  should  only 
cover  the  essential  points,  aiming  like  the  later  State  examination  to 
test  and  insure  an  average  of  attainment  and  an  ability  to  make  use  of 
acquired  knowledge.  Of  course  the  student  will  not  in  this  way  get 
the  utmost  possible  out  of  the  course,  but  to  do  this  may  not  be  a  part 
of  his  plan  of  study. 

He  should  be  plainly  told  that  he  need  not  attend  the  lectures  and 
recitations  unless  convinced  that  he  will  profit  by  them,  and  the  head 
of  the  department  and  his  corps  of  assistants  will  surely  be  above  any 
small  resentment  ^vhen  the  student  accepts  this  permission  in  good 
faith.  The  mutual  attitude  of  teacher  and  student  is  of  far  more  im- 
portance than  rigidity  of  examinations  or  any  tests  or  credentials  what- 
ever. I  firmly  believe  in  the  liberty  of  both  teacher  and  student.  It  is 
but  fair  to  require  of  the  former  that  he  be  a  worker  in  some  part  of  his 
held,  and  that  he  shall  meet  Avith  enthusiasm  and  give  his  best  to  those 
who  elect  to  go  deeply  into  the  subject  as  well  as  to  do  his  duty  to 
those  Avho  choose  only  the  minimum  or  required  work. 

The  immediate  result  of  this  frank  understanding  between  teacher 
and  student  will  be  that  the  latter  is  free  to  give  additional  time  and 
energy  to  some  other  line  of  ^vork  for  which  he  may  have  a  decided 
bent.  But  much  more,  he  has  the  freedom  of  personal  choice,  with 
all  the  development  that  it  brings  to  one  who  understands  his  own 
mental  habits  and  needs.  Petty  and  irritating  restraints  are  removed 
and  also  the  undue  weight  of  authority  sometimes  attached  to  a  cur- 
riculum stipposed  to  be  the  result  of  the  wisest  judgment  of  his  elders. 
We  are  apt  to  forget  that  we  are  dealing  with  men  and  women  of  some 
maturity  ^vhose  plan  for  their  life-work  is  made  and  who  have  a  clear 
idea  in  general,  of  w^hat  their  time  is  worth.  They  should  have,  as 
Bo^vditch,  Mall,  and  other  writers  on  this  subject  have  pointed  out, 

71 


the  advantages  of  an  elective  system  and  also,  I  maintain,  have  some 
freedom  as  to  method  of  work  in  the  field  chosen. 

Have  childish  restrictions,  such  as  marking  for  daily  attendance, 
and  all  the  hateful  machinery  of  the  factory  time-card  system,  by 
which  some  teachers  attempt  diurnal  estimates  of  the  student's  mental 
status,  resulted  in  such  a  remarkable  elevation  of  the  average  student, 
that  we  should  cling  blindly  to  our  present  system? 

As  to  examinations,  that  "necessary  evil,"  I  believe  it  will  be  ad- 
mitted that,  in  subjects  like  that  now  under  discussion,  they  should 
not  be  conducted  as  if  the  student  were  intending  to  make  a  specialty 
of  each  branch.  They  must  be  fair  to  the  class  as  a  whole.  In  my  own 
opinion,  a  combination  of  written  and  oral  insures  the  best  results. 
Personal  knowledge  of  the  student's  laboratory  work,  and  also  of  the 
intelligence  shown  by  him  in  recitations,  is  of  great  importance  in 
enabling  the  instructor  to  judge  of  a  student's  right  to  his  pass  certifi- 
cate. The  ideal  examiner  for  a  given  student  is  not  always  the  man 
who  has  taught  him,  but  may  well  be  a  specialist  of  equal  rank  in 
some  other  university.  Such  a  change,  so  stimulating  to  the  intellectual 
independence  of  the  student,  and  so  broadening  to  the  teacher,  could 
only  be  based  on  a  better  agreement  than  now  exists  in  our  country 
as  to  the  teaching  of  a  given  branch  in  schools  of  equal  grade.  As  long  as 
faculties  issue  diplomas,  they  assume  a  responsibility  toward  the  world 
of  learning.  How  they  shall  discharge  this  duty  is  too  large  a  subject 
for  full  discussion  here,  but  it  is  very  desirable  that  the  method  used 
shall  involve  a  minimum  of  worry  and  strain  on  the  part  of  the  student, 
and  of  police  duty  on  the  part  of  the  teacher. 


72 


On  the  Removal  of  Diffusible 
Substances  from  the  Circulating 
Blood  by  Means  of  Dialysis 


JOHN  J.  ABEL,  M.D..  L.  G.  ROWNTREE,  M.D.,  AND 

B.  B.  TURNER,  M.D. 


HERE  are  numerous  toxic  states  in  which  the  eliminating  organs  of 
the  body,  more  especially  the  kidneys,  are  incapable  of  removing  from 
the  body,  at  an  adequate  rate,  the  natural  or  unnatural  substances 
whose  accumulation  is  detrimental  to  life.  In  the  hope  of  providing 
a  substitute  in  such  emergencies,  which  might  tide  over  a  dangerous 
crisis,  as  well  as  for  the  important  information  which  it  might  be  ex- 
pected to  provide,  concerning  the  substances  normally  present  in  the 
blood,  and  also  for  the  light  that  might  thus  be  thrown  on  intermediary 
stages  of  metabolism,  a  method  has  been  devised  by  which  the  blood  of 
a  living  animal  may  be  submitted  to  dialysis  outside  the  body,  and 
again  returned  to  the  natural  circulation  without  exposure  to  air,  in- 
fection by  microorganisms,  or  any  alteration  which  would  necessarily 
be  prejudicial  to  life.  The  process  may  be  appropriately  referred  to  as 
"vividiffusion." 

Essentially,  the  method  consists  in  passing  the  blood  of  an  animal 
which  has  been  made  incoagulable  in  injection  of  hirudin  from  a 
cannula  connected  to  an  artery  through  a  tube  or  a  series  of  tubes, 
made  of  celloidin  or  other  suitable  dialyzing  membrane,  contained 
in  a  jacket  filled  ^vith  a  saline  solution  or  artificial  serum,  and  back  by 
another  cannula  into  a  vein  of  the  same  animal.  The  tubes  and 
cannulae  before  connection  are  filled  with  a  saline  solution  approxi- 
mating to  the  composition  of  the  blood,  like  Locke's  or  Ringer's 
solutions,  which  is  displaced  into  the  system  when  the  circulation  is 
established.  Except  that  the  blood-pressure  falls  somewhat,  according 
to  the  proportion  of  the  blood  outside  the  body,  the  animal  shows  no 
immediate  symptoms,  and  with  due  regard  to  asepsis,  makes  a  rapid 
and  complete  recovery  after  an  experiment  that  may  last  several  hours. 

73 


In  one  instance,  where  recovery  was  not  aimed  at,  a  dog  anesthetized 
with  chloretone  was  kept  alive  during  a  dialyzing  period  of  sixteen 
hours  with  about  one-third  of  its  blood  outside  the  body.  At  the  end 
of  an  experiment  the  larger  proportion  of  the  blood  in  the  apparatus 
may  be  driven  back  into  the  body  by  air-pressure  or  by  means  of  a 
saline  solution  which  is  allowed  to  flow  into  the  dialyzing  tubes  from 
a  higher  level  and  which  thus  drives  the  blood  ahead  of  it  into  the 
body. 

Many  experiments  have  been  made  to  determine  the  best  form  of 
apparatus  combining  maximum  diffusing  surface  with  minimum  vol- 
ume, absolute  freedom  from  leaks,  ease  of  construction,  uniformity  of 
flow,  minimum  exposures  to  surfaces  of  glass  or  other  substance  liable 
to  favor  clotting,  etc.  The  most  efficient  type  in  use  at  present  has 
thirty-two  celloidin  tubes  of  8  mm.  diameter,  40  cm,  long,  fastened 
by  tying  with  a  string  to  a  system  of  glass  tubes  branching  dichoto- 
mously,  so  that  the  flow  of  blood  takes  place  horizontally  twice  in 
each  direction  through  eight  tubes  in  parallel.  (An  apparatus  of  this 
size  can  only  be  attached  to  animals  of  at  least  fifty  pounds'  weight.) 
Flattened  tubes  and  other  types  are  being  tried,  while  very  small  tubes 
will  undoubtedly  prove  valuable  when  the  necessary  time  and  trouble 
are  not  prohibitive.  [See  illustration  between  pages  16  and  17.] 

Such  an  apparatus  can  obviously  be  used  in  the  solution  of  many 
problems,  both  therapeutic  and  physiological,  and  is  especially  valu- 
able in  the  latter  case  because,  apart  from  the  necessary  anesthetic, 
the  normal  physiological  condition  is  in  nowise  disturbed,  as  by 
bleeding  to  obtain  large  amounts  of  blood.  Diffusible  substances, 
present  in  only  small  proportion  at  one  time,  may  be  isolated  in  con- 
siderable quantities  provided  they  are  regenerated  in  the  body  as  fast 
as  they  are  removed.  Evidence  of  this  has  already  been  obtained  in  the 
case  of  the  dialyzable  (non-proteid)  nitrogen  which  is  extracted  in 
large  quantities  in  prolonged  experiments.  Determinations  by  Van 
Slyke's  method  have  shown  a  high  proportion  of  nitrogen  in  the  form 
of  amino  gioups  (NHo),  and  experiments  are  in  progress  for  the  iso- 
lation of  individual  amino-acids  by  Fischer's  esterification  method. 
Several  grams  of  the  esters  have  been  obtained  by  distillation  in  a 
vacuum  of  1  to  16  mm.  at  temperatures  from  70°  to  180°  C.  Bases 
precipitated  by  phosphotungstic  acid  have  also  been  obtained,  but 
they  apparently  constitute  a  more  complex  mixture  than  those  usu- 
ally obtained  in  the  digestion  of  proteins  by  acids,  and  the  discovery 
of  new  bodies,  possibly  including  polypeptids,  seems  probable. 

Quantitative  data  have  been  obtained  with  a  view  to  comparing  the 

74 


efficiency  of  the  apparatus  in  the  elimination  of  poisons  with  the 
natural  kidney.  Administering  to  a  rabbit  1  gram  of  sodium  salicylate, 
an  extraction  as  rapid  as  3  per  cent  in  one-half  hour  has  been  observed, 
which  compares  very  favorably  with  the  normal  action  of  the  kidneys; 
in  the  case  of  a  dog  ^vith  the  same  dose,  using  another  apparatus,  4 
per  cent  was  obtained  in  the  first  hour  and  a  total  of  about  20  per  cent 
in  sixteen  hours.  Better  results  may  be  confidently  expected  with  an 
apparatus  having  more  surface  in  proportion  to  the  volume.  Potas- 
sium iodide  also  passes  through  the  membrane  readily  as  does  phenol- 
sulphonphthalein.  Of  the  substances  naturally  present  in  the  body, 
sugar,  phosphates,  diastase  and  other  substances  diffuse  in  notable 
amount. 

Ethyl  sulphide,  (C^H5)^S,  which  is  so  readily  evolved  from  dogs' 
urine  on  the  addition  of  lime-water  or  other  alkali,  may  be  obtained 
in  like  manner  from  the  diffusate,  showing  that  the  mother-substance 
of  this  malodorous  compound  is  freely  eliminated  by  our  apparatus. 

A  wide  field  of  investigation  is  opened  up  by  the  use  of  this  apparatus 
in  a  comparative  study  of  the  blood  flowing  to  and  from  various  or- 
gans ^vith  reference  both  to  the  substances  which  they  extract  from, 
or  add  to,  the  general  circulation  and  to  the  special  active  principles 
(hormones,  etc.)  which  may  be  present  in  their  internal  secretions.  A 
beginning  in  this  direction  has  been  made  by  attaching  the  apparattis 
to  the  portal  vein,  (four  experiments),  the  blood  of  which  gave  by 
diffusion  considerably  more  amino-acids  (determined  by  Van  Slyke's 
method)  than  that  of  the  carotid.  Work  in  this  direction,  as  well  as 
in  the  improvement  of  the  apparatus  for  the  various  purposes  above 
outlined  and  accumulation  of  the  experience  necessary  along  these 
lines,  is  being  pushed  actively  forward.  A  full  description  of  the  ap- 
paratus, with  directions  for  its  use,  together  with  the  results,  will  ap- 
pear in  the  January  number  (1914)  of  the  Journal  of  Pharmacology 
and  Experimental  Therapeutics. 


75 


Crystalline  Insulin 


JOHN  J.  ABEL,  M.D. 

In  two  preceding  communications^-  ^  it  has  been  told  how  my  col- 
laborators and  I  were  induced  to  attack  the  problem  of  the  isolation 
of  insulin  and  what  progress  had  been  made  toward  its  solution  to 
within  a  few  months  past.  It  was  there  pointed  out  that  a  clue  had 
been  found,  the  following  out  of  which  promised  to  lead  to  the  desired 
goal.  This  clue  eventuated  from  the  observation  that  when  the  highly 
impure  and  complex,  though  therapeutically  serviceable  insulin  ex- 
tracts of  commerce  are  boiled  for  a  short  time  with  N/IO  sodium 
carbonate  the  resulting  physiological  inactivation  of  the  extracts  is 
always  associated  with  an  alteration  of  a  part  of  their  sulphur,  an  ele- 
ment which  our  experiments  justified  us  in  believing  to  be  an  integral 
constituent  of  the  hormone  itself.  After  such  treatment  ^vith  a  weak 
alkali  a  new  property  appears  in  the  altered  insulin  in  that  it  now 
shows  an  extraordinary  sensitivity  to  very  dilute  acids  which  immedi- 
ately, and  contrary  to  their  usual  action,  liberate  hydrogen  sulphide 
from  it.  It  was  found  that  inert  fractions  prepared  from  such  extracts 
of  the  pancreas  contain  very  little  of  this  labile  sulphur  and  a  table 
was  constructed  which  showed  that  the  labile  sulphur  of  a  preparation 
is  directly  proportional  to  its  hypoglycaemic  activity  for  experimental 
animals.  In  other  words,  the  higher  the  amount  of  labile  sulphur  in  a 
given  preparation  the  greater  its  potency  in  lowering  the  percentage 
of  blood  sugar. 

The  methods  usually  employed  in  fractioning  and  purifying  bio- 
logical mixtures  have  been  found  to  be  quite  useless  in  the  attempt 
to  separate  the  hormone  from  the  numerous  impurities  that  are  asso- 
ciated with  it  in  even  the  best  of  the  extracts  employed  in  medical 
practice.  Equally  unsuitable  to  the  purpose  in  mind  was  the  employ- 
ment of  the  method  of  isoelectric  precipitation  from  pH  4.7  to  5.0  no 
matter  how  frequently  repeated,  as  likewise  the  analogous  method  of 
electro-dialysis— a  method  which  has  not  yielded  results  of  any  particu- 
lar value  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  tried  it  out  on  insulin  ex- 
tracts. We  are  here  dealing  with  an  ampholyte  present  in  very  small 

76 


amount  in  a  solution  of  other  ampholytes  whose  solubility  and  pre- 
cipitation coefficients  lie  very  close  to  one  another.  It  seemed  worth 
while  to  the  writer  therefore  to  employ  only  weak  bases  and  acids, 
more  especially  such  as  can  act  as  buffers,  in  the  hope  that  there  might 
result  from  their  use  such  an  alteration  of  solubilities,  that  impurities 
would  either  fall  out  of  or  remain  in  solution  while  the  hormone  in 
each  case  took  the  opposite  course.  The  successful  outcome  of  the 
experiments  proved  the  essential  correctness  of  the  idea. 

For  a  description  of  our  earlier  methods  of  purification  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  first  paper  of  this  series.  The  employment  of  the 
simple  method  there  described,  led  uniformly  to  the  preparation  of 
an  insulin  fraction.  Fraction  IV,  with  a  rabbit  unitage  of  40  or  more 
units  to  the  milligram,  a  unitage  that  has  lately  been  increased  by  a 
more  skilful  use  of  these  earlier  methods.  The  next  steps  in  the  process 
leading  directly  to  the  crystallization  of  insulin  are  as  follows. 

One  gram,  approximately,  of  the  so-called  Fraction  IV,  is  dissolved 
in  a  little  more  than  the  required  volume  of  N/6  acetic  acid,  enough 
water  is  added  to  bring  the  volume  up  to  60  cc.  or  thereabout,  and  the 
contaminating  substances  (together  with  some  insulin)  are  then  pre- 
cipitated by  the  addition  of  an  acidulated  solution  of  brucine  contain- 
ing 6  gms.  of  brucine  in  95  cc.  of  N/6  acetic  acid.  The  resulting  clear 
supernatant  fluid  which  contains  nearly  pure  insulin  is  separated 
from  the  precipitate  by  centrifugalization.  Insulin  remaining  in  the 
precipitate  may  be  removed  by  dissolving  in  N/6  acetic  acid  and 
precipitating  with  the  brucine  solution  as  before.  How  profitable  it 
may  be  to  repeat  the  process  has  not  been  determined  at  the  moment. 
The  clear  colorless  centrifugalate  containing  the  insulin  is  then  pre- 
cipitated ^vith  iV/6  pyridine  and  the  precipitate  and  fluid  are  immedi- 
ately centrifuged.  The  precipitate  which  settles  out  is  largely  crystal- 
line in  character,  the  sides  of  the  tube  are  found  to  be  coated  with 
glistening  highly  refractive  crystals  and  the  topmost  layer  of  the  pre- 
cipitate consists  of  similar  crystals.  It  is  not  a  difficult  matter  to  remove 
this  topmost  layer  of  crystals  by  means  of  a  rubber-mounted  pipette 
and  to  free  them  from  adherent  pyridine  and  acetic  acid  by  frequently 
washing  them  with  distilled  water  at  room  temperature  in  which 
medium  pure  crystalline  insulin  is  quite  insoluble.  The  crystals  may 
be  recrystallized  by  dissolving  them  in  N/6  acetic  acid  and  reprecipitat- 
ing  with  N'/6  pyridine.  It  has  been  my  practice,  however,  of  late  to 
dissolve  this  crystalline  insulin  together  with  whatever  fine  granular 
material  there  happens  to  be  mixed  with  it  in  M/15  disodium  hydro- 
gen phosphate.  To  the  clear  solution  xV/6  acetic  acid  is  added  drop  by 

77 


drop  with  vigorous  shaking  in  order  tliat  any  insulin  thrown  out  will 
at  once  pass  into  solution  again,  and  this  addition  of  the  acid  is  con- 
tinued until  a  slight  amount  of  turbidity  persists  permanently.  The 
flask  is  then  carefully  set  aside  overnight.  On  the  following  morning 
the  bottom  of  the  flask  as  well  as  its  sides  are  coated  with  an  abundance 
of  colorless,  highly  refractive  crystals.  The  small  amount  of  amor- 
phous insulin  that  falls  out  in  very  minute  granules  or  floccules— an 
expression  of  the  above-mentioned  turbidity— is  readily  separated  by 
means  of  the  pipette  during  the  washing  with  cold  water,  as  the  com- 
pact crystals  obtained  by  this  method  sink  quickly  to  the  bottom  of  the 
tube  like  so  much  sea  sand.  This  process  of  crystallization  may  be  re- 
peated as  often  as  is  thought  to  be  necessary.  Only  a  few  experiments 
have  as  yet  been  made  with  the  object  of  crystallizing  the  compound 
from  hot  solvents,  and  to  prepare  crystalline  derivatives. 

Professor  Swartz  of  the  Department  of  Geology  of  the  Johns  Hop- 
kins University  has  kindly  examined  samples  of  the  insulin  crystals 
and  reports  them  as  being  very  uniform  in  character  suggesting  a 
high  degree  of  purity,  as  doubly  refracting  and  as  belonging  to  the 
rhombohedral  division  of  the  hexagonal  system.  [See  illustration  be- 
tween pages  16  and  17.]  The  crystals  which  are  allowed  to  form  more 
slowly  out  of  acidulated  disoditim  hydrogen  phosphate  solution  are 
very  much  larger  than  those  precipitated  quickly  by  pyridine  out  of 
an  acetic  acid  solution,  such  crystals  being  readily  perceptible  to  the 
naked  eye  as  individual  crystals.  Irrespective  of  the  manner  of  their 
preparation  the  crystals  melt  sharply  at  233 °C.  with  slight  browning 
occurring  at  215°C.  The  melting  point  has  remained  constant  on  re- 
crystallization. 

Chemical  Reactions.— A  large  fraction  of  the  sulphur  of  the  mole- 
cule is  in  the  labile  state  previously  described  as  characteristic  of  all 
insulin  fractions  of  high  rabbit  unitage.  Quantitative  analyses  of  both 
the  labile  and  more  firmly  bound  sulphur  are  in  progress.  The  com- 
pound gives  a  beautiful  biuret  reaction  passing  from  a  clear  pink  to  a 
fine  purple  on  further  addition  of  copper  sulphate  to  the  alkaline 
solution.  Millon's  reaction  is  unequivocal  and  positive.  The  Pauly 
and  the  ninhydrin  reactions  are  also  positive.  This  pure  insulin  is 
very  sensitive  to  alkali,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that  boiling  for  1 5  minutes 
with  iV/10  sodium  carbonate  deprives  it  entirely  of  its  hypoglycaemic 
activity.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  chemical  reactions  here  described  are 
of  considerable  significance  as  shedding  light  on  the  chemical  struc- 
ture of  the  compound.  It  is  now  being  examined  in  respect  to  its  other 

78 


physical  and  chemical  properties  and  efforts  will  also  be  made  to  iden- 
tify its  various  cleavage  products. 

Animal  Experiments.— Numerous  tests  have  already  been  made  in 
order  to  establish  the  exact  rabbit  unitage  of  the  crystalline  compound. 
The  rabbit  unit  employed  by  us  is  that  fraction  of  a  milligram  per 
kilogram  of  body  weight  which  will  cause  convulsions  or  lower  the 
blood  sugar  to  0.045  per  cent  within  5  hours.  This  corresponds  to  ap- 
proximately IV2  times  the  "clinical  unit"  used  at  present. 

The  exact  dosage  of  the  crystalline  material  has  not  yet  been  estab- 
lished, but  for  the  present,  as  is  shown  in  the  subjoined  table  (1), 
amounts  as  small  asi^Qgof  a  milligram  per  kilo  lowered  the  blood 

