CHAPTER  IV.OUR FIRST CAMPAIGN.BATTLE OF FAIR OAKS.About the middle of March we broke camp and took upour line of march for our first campaign. We bade good-byto our tents, which had sheltered us since we left Massachu-setts, and sent them to Washington with our extra personalbaggage, where I expect they are to-day, as we never receivedthem again. We marched to the river, then up the tow-path of the canal to Harper's Ferry, forded the Potomac atPoint of Rocks, and for the first time our feet pressed thesacred soil of Virginia. We saw here the devastations ofwar, — the ruins of the old arsenal that had been burned bythe reliels, the dilapidated and vacant houses, — but mostinteresting to us was the old engine-house, where JohnBrown made his gallant fight.This we found filled with"Truly," we said, "his soul is marchingrel)el prisoners.on." As soon as arms were stacked we rushed to the arsenalI found an old gun-lock and several otherruins for relics.These I packed in my knapsack, — andparts of muskets.With other regimentsthe next day threw them away.we marched up the valley to join Banks's division, andliivouacked at Charlestown in the field where John Brownwas hanged.The next morning Company A was ordered back to Har-The rest of the regimentper's Ferry for provost duty.24NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEOIMENT.marched on, but in a few days returned and took positionon Bolivar Heights, occupying deserted houses.CaptainMerritt was appointed provost marshal at the ferry andeverything was soon in military order, the company quar-tered in houses, the officers boarding in the town. One dayCaptain Merritt, with a detail from the company, made aseizure of several barrels of whiskey and a keg of gin, whichwere taken to a vacant store and a guard placed over them.Somehow the keg of gin disappeared ; where it had goneThe next day was our last in town, havingno one knew.been ordered to join the regiment quite early in the morning..I noticed some of the men were very happy, but as wehad been called by the other companies '' Merritt's Sabbathschool children," I thought it possible they were rehearsingThe increase of the spiritualfor a Sabbath school concert.manifestations told me that the cause of the inspiration mustbe the gin, and that it was not far away.After searchingUnlike manyawhile I found the missing keg in the cellar.of the men, it was nearly empty.In the midst of the seanceCaptain Merritt arrived. He came to order me to have thecompany in line ready to move at once. When he saw thecondition of some of the men I guess he thought we hadbetter move in ambulances.As we were going the roundsof the rooms we met Ben Falls, perfectly sober, having justbeen relieved from guard.Captain Merritt (referring to thecondition of the company) said, "Ben, I am astonished.""Well," said Ben, "it is not my fault; I have been onguard, but I will get just as full as the rest as soon as Ifind the stuff." When the time came to march all were infair condition, and before we reached Bolivar Heights, asAs it was the first ofience the men were letgood as ever.OUB FIBST CAMPAIGN.25off with a lecture from the captain, and as the opportunitywas never again presented, the offence was not repeated.With Captain Devereaux, who joined us at Muddy Branch,came more recruits, and the regiment was now full. Com-pany A having had for a few days one hundred and twoenlisted men, several of the old men were discharged, bring-ing us down to the required number. A fine band wasattached to the regiment, and ha\ang become very welldrilled in the manual, our dress parades were ahnost perfect,and were witnessed by nearly all the soldiers and citizens inthe town.March 24 we received marching orders.Crossing theriver we took cars at Point of Rocks for Washington, wherewe arrived the next day. We remained in Washington twodays, then marched to the navy yard and took the old trans-port "North America" for Fortress Monroe.In no place is the life of a soldier so hard as on a trans-Crowded between decks like cattle, unable to cookport.or even make coflee, they must subsist on what rations areThe crews areissued and drink the water from the casks.always liberally supplied with miserable whiskey, whichthey sell at a high price to those who will buy, and a fewmen are always found in every regiment who will get drunkif they have a chance. On shore the guard-house can beresorted to, but on board ship there is no relief from thisI do not want it understood thatunbearable nuisance.drunkenness was general in the army, for many men wentthrough the war without touching liquor, and in my fouryears' experience I never saw an oflicer or enlisted manintoxicated when going into battle.I believe that what wastrue during the war has been true since, and that in no26NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.organization — not temperance — can be found so manytotal abstainers to the number of men as can be found in theranks of the Grand Army of the Republic.Our trip down the Potomac was pleasant, but soon afterleaving the river a sudden storm struck us ; our old craftleaked badly and we feared we should })e swamped.Thecaptain dared not continue, and put back to Point Lookout.Here we found a deserted hotel and several cottages. Wedid not stop to register, but took possession of the roomsNext morning we re-and passed a comfortable night.embarked, and reached Fortress Monroe during the night.The following day we landed and marched to Hampton,where we found the Army of the Potomac awaiting thearrival of our division. We encamped here about twoweeks, quartered in Sibley tents. We were not requiredto drill often, and the time was pleasantly passed in visitingthe several Massachusetts regiments in the army.full quota.Early in April the grand Army of the Potomac movedIt ivas a grand army, every regimenttowards Yorktown.The experience of the previoushaving itsmonths had made them reliable as soldiers.Incompetentofficers and disabled men had been discharged, and thosenow on duty were filled with patriotic enthusiasm.Theyonly desired a chance to fight, clear up the war and goEvery man had confidence in General McClellan,home.and almost l^elieved that he was sent l)y the Lord to lead usWhenever he appeared every head was uncov-to victory.ered and every voice raised in loud hurrahs.We marched two days and encamped about two milesfrom the enemy's works before Yorktown. We pitched ourshelter tents for the first time, and began army life inOUB FIRST CAMPAIGN.27Our rations were served to us uncooked, andearnest.company cooks ordered to the ranks. A company cook isa peculiar being ; he generally knows less about cookingthan any man in the company.Not being able to learn thedrill, and too dirty to appear on inspection, he is sent tothe cook house to get him out of the ranks. We were notsorry when the cook house was abolished.The first day after our arrival the 19th and 20th Massa-chusetts regiments, under command of General Dana, wereordered to reconnoitre the enemy's works. We discovereda fortification near Winn's Mill, and the 19th was orderedto march through a piece of woods, then along the front,and discern its extent. We did this under a sharp fire ofIt was not our intention to attack, but as Com-musketry.pany E, commanded by the brave but impulsive CaptainMahoney, was fired upon, he ordered the men to charge theworks, and would have done so had not Colonel HincksLike a true Irishman that he was, he did notrecalled him.The regimentpropose to be fired upon and not fight.behaved splendidly under fire ; when the musketry wasthe hottest the clear voice of Colonel Hincks was heard.'' Change front, forward on first company !" was the order,and it was executed as correctly as on drill. We lost thefirst man killed in this skirmish.Andrew Fountain ofCompany D, Captain Wass, and several of Company Kwere wounded.We went into camp and began to erect fortifications ; fornearly a month we were engaged in that work, besidesWhile onbuilding corduroy roads and doing picket duty.picket Wm. Morgan was badly wounded by a piece of shell.He was the first man wounded in Company A.28NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.Our camp was located in a swamp ; the rain was almostconstant, and the ground like a sponge.Sickness prevailedto an alarming extent; it was not an uncommon thing tomarch half of the company to sick call, but not all who wentActive service had tired some who, when wewere sick.were in camp in Maryland, were anxious to fight, and wereconstantly grumbling because we were not ordered in.Picket duty under fire had given these few the " shellLoss of voice was the trouble with many, causedfever."One day I marched my squad of invalidsby severe colds.to the hospital tent ; with them was one of the loudesttalking men in the company, but that morning he couldAfter the doctor had examined them all heonly whisper.gave me the list of excused, and my voiceless comrade was"Hasn't he excused me?" said B.not down."No," wasmy reply, in a voice that could be heard a quarter of a mile."D—n him, I am the sickest man in the company," was hisindignant answer ; but he went on duty just the same, andSuch casesnever again answered sick call until wounded.were the exception, however, and every day the numbergrew less, as our men were ordered back to general hospital.The works we were erecting were of the strongest kind,as it was intended to besiege Yorktown, and the heaviestSunday morning,guns were mounted for that purpdse.May 4, found the regiment on picket duty.It had been alively night, as the shelling had been constant.LieutenantHume, in charge of an outpost, believed that the rebels hadleft the works in his front ; sending his opinion back to thecommanding officer, he started to cross the field. No gunThe regiment was thenwas fired and he continued on.ordered forward double quick, as others had seen LieutenantOUR FIRST CAMPAIGN.29Hume and were anxious to be first in the works, ])ut the19th could run either to the front or rear and our flags werethe first to float from the fortifications. We found the port-holes filled with Quaker guns (logs of wood). Men ofstraw were stationed as gunners.Every indication of ahasty retreat was shown, as in the camps in the rear of theworks we found fires and breakfast smoking hot, which weeagerly disposed of. We also found letters ready for mail-ing, which went by northern mail instead of southern, as wesent them home.We marched back to our old camp, packed up, and Mon-day morning, in a drenching rain, marched from Winn'sMill to Yorktown. We were on the road all night and onlyThe mud was knee deep ; we could notmade three miles.go out of line as the ground was full of torpedoes, yet, inall our misery. Company A started one of our old campsongs, which was taken up by other companies in the regi-ment, then by other regiments in the brigade, and soon theentire army was singing.This continued nearly all night.The next day we took steamers, and at night arrived atWest Point. We remained on Ijoard until morning, thenlanded, and finding our forces engaged we were orderedto support Captain Porter, 1st Massachusetts battery.AtWest Point we saw a feature that we never saw before, or atany other time during the war.It was a human telegraph.A line of men was deployed some twenty feet apart, andextended from the line of battle to headquarters.The menat the front would start the message, and it would berepeated by each turning the head to the rear as he spoke.One message I remember, — " Send a man to take DanielWebster's place." We supposed Daniel had been shot, but30NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.if a man was wanted to fill the place of our lamented DanielWebster, we did not think Company A could spare the man.After a sharp fight the rebels fell back and we began theThe condition of the roads wasmarch up the peninsula.such that we halted more than we marched, but at last wereached the banks of the Chickahominy River, and wereordered on picket between Bottom and Grape Vine bridges.Saturday, May 31, the battle of Fair Oaks began. Wewere not relieved from picket until Sunday morning, whenwe were ordered to the front ; here we were marched fromright to left and left to right, constantly under fire but notreally engaged. We were at times passing over portions ofthe field that had been held by the rebels, and the groundwas strewn with the dead and wounded. When the battleended we were ordered on picket, where we remained tendays, having a brush with the rebel pickets every day. Wewere then given a few days' rest and ordered to the front,where we threw up a line of works and remained there whilethe army held the advance position.On the 25th of June General Hooker asked for one regi-ment from Sumner's corps to assist in the attack on theThe 19th was selected. Werebel lines in our front.advanced in front of our intrenchments and were soon hotlyLed on by our gallant colonel, we soon had theengaged.rebels in full retreat, and had the army advanced at thattime I am confident we could have marched into Richmondin five hours, as we were only a few miles from the city.Just as we were ready to make the final charge an aid cameto Colonel Hincks and said, " You are ordered to fall back.""What for?" said the colonel."Don't you see we have gotBut the order was peremptory andthem on the run ? "BATTLE OF FAIB OAKS.31back we went.Our loss was very heavy for the short timeLieutenant Warner of Company H and severalengaged.men were killed ; Lieut. J. H. Rice, Sergt. Samuel H.Smith, William R. Meldon, Benjamin Jellison and others,in all about sixty, badly wounded.While we had been under fire nearly all the time sincearriving at Yorktown, this w^as the first square fight inwhich we had been engaged. We had no chance for the useof tactics as the woods were thick and we could see little ofthe enemy ; but the oflScers and men behaved splendidly,and our only regret was to lose so many and accomplishnothing, an experience that the Army of the Potomac oftenhad in the battles that followed.32NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.