CHAPTER  X.BATTLES OF THE WILDERNESS, TODD'S TAVERN AND LAURELHILL.ENGAGEMENT AT THE BLOODY ANGLE.We had now quite a respectable regiment, numbering twofield, ten line officers, and about three hundred and fifty men.We broke camp the 2d of May, were ordered to move, andsoon found ourselves crossing the river to engage in the Bat-tle of the Wilderness, before W'C realized it being in line ofbattle moving forward. Our first order was to deploy as skir-mishers and let the line which was being hotly pressed passin rear to receive a fresh supply of ammunition, while weheld the line.I had al)out twenty men in my command. We advancedas ordered, but soon received a fire from our flank and rear,and found that the reljels had broken our lines.I gave theorder "By the right flank, double quick," and we wentquicker than that. We dodged behind trees as we ran, andthe rebels were so near that in looking back I saw them cap-ture Thompson of Company B ; with the exception of oneother, wounded, all escaped ; and the boys thought me asafe man to follow. We rejoined the regiment, and wereordered in again. We fought all day.Sometimes the reb-els drove us, sometimes we drove them. The woods were soThe dead andthick it was hard to tell friend from foe.wounded of both armies were strewn all through the woods,It was a terril)le sight. We knew M^herewhich caught fire.88NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.the poor fellows were, but could not reach them, and the airwas suffocating with the smell of burning human flesh.Night came on ;None knew the result of the battle. We changed front theit wasnext day, and continued the light.so dark you could not see a rod before you, but we wereordered to hold our position in the advanced line untilrecalled. We remained until midnight, then as it grew a lit-tle lighter, the moon having broken through the clouds,Colonel Kice went to the right and found we were not con-At the left he found thenected with any other regiment.The officers held a consultation ; all agreed that wesame.should obey orders, but should we allow the regiment to becaptured because some one had made a mistake? We con-cluded to fall back until we connected with something, andafter a while struck a German brigade.The Dutch com-mander undertook to drive us back, but w^e knew our busi-ness, and when Colonel Rice found our brigade commander,he was informed that an aid had been sent to recall us sev-eral hours before, and in the darkness must have passed ourThe conversation was on theregiment without seeino; us.Most of us thought it was anotherresult of the battle.Chancellorsville, and that the next day we should recross the"river ; but when the order came, " By the left flank, march !we found that Grant was not made that way, and we mustcontinue the fight.Our loss was not very heavy in the Wilderness. We hadseveral wounded and captured, but only three killed. Amongthe wounded the first day was Color-Sergeant Ben Falls,struck in the leg, and being in command of the color com-The following day he reportedpany I sent him to the rear.back, and I asked why he did not stay."Oh," he said.BATTLES OF TODD'S TAVEBN AND LAUREL HILL.8^" some fool will get hold of the color and lose it.had better stand by."I guess IWe marched to Williams's Tavern, where we went intoFrom this time on weline of battle and threw up works.The 8th, we had a lively brushwere engaged every day.at Todd's Tavern, and drove the rebels a mile ; the 9th,crossed Po River ;the 10th, recrossed and engaged theenemy at Laurel Hill. We found them strongly intrenchedThe opinion of every officer andand a charge was ordered.man was that we could not dislodge them, as we must chargea long distance over an open field.General Barlow was tolead and the 19th was to be the directino; battalion.Theorder to our division was, "Follow the colors of the 19th."With cheers for General Barlow we advanced over the crestof the hill, the rebels opening on us with a terrible fire.Grape and cannister ploughed through our ranks.Bothcolor-bearers were shot down, and for a moment our linemelted away ; but other hands grasped the colors, and werenewed the charge, only to be again repulsed. No army onearth could capture the works with such odds against it, butwe charged once more, then gave it up.Among the first to go down was Color-Sergeant Ben Falls.He was in advance of me, and as he fell he said, "John, yourold uncle has got his quietus this time."I could not stop toreply then, but in the lull of the battle went to him, andfound that he was shot through the body ; he was carried tothe rear, and died the next day. No man in the ranks ofthe Union army rendered better service than Benj. F. Falls.Always ready for duty, ever cheerful, his influence for goodextended through the regiment.Another to fall that dayUntil this campaign he hadwas Sergt. William H. Ross.90NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.been detailed at the headquarters of the division quartermas-ter, and one would think he was making up for lost time.From the day we entered the Wilderness until he gave uphis life he was conspicuous for his bravery.Corp. GeorgeE. Breed of Company C, a brave little fellow, not muchlarger than his knapsack, was serving his second enlistment,and was not twenty years old when killed.were killed, besides many wounded.Several othersWe remained here until the night of the 11th, when menwere detailed to keep up the skirmish firing while the brigadeIt was a dark, dreary night, and we fellwas withdrawn.over stumps and fallen trees as we moved to the left.Atfour o'clock on the morning of the 12th we formed in line.Our orders were to give commands in whispers, have dippersso hung that they would not rattle against bayonets, andmove forward. We were soon in front of the rebel works,which were protected by al)atis. We tore these aside andOne regiment, forgetting the orders, gave apassed on.cheer, and the re])els were aroused, yet over the works wewent, and the fiercest hand-to-hand fight of the war ensued.We captured Gen. Bushrod Johnson and his entire division,including twenty-two pieces of artillery and seventeen standsof colors.The woods were so thick that in advancing our linesbecame broken. When we reached a clearing the only offi-cers in sight were Colonel Rice, Lieutenant Thompson and"Where are the colors?" said Colonel Rice. Wemyself.could not answer the question. At that moment we saw sev-eral hundred rebels running back to their lines.ColonelRice said, " I see a Massachusetts color and will go after it.You and Lieutenant Thompson try to capture those rebels."ENGAGEMENT AT THE BLOODY ANGLE.91Hastily gathering men from nearly every regiment in thecorps we threw forward a skirmish line and captured nearlyfour hundred prisoners.After turning them over to theprovost guard we returned to the line, found the colors, butthe colonel was not there, and the rest of the day we foughtwhere we could get a chance. As I was standing behind theworks, waiting for something to do, Capt. Harry Hale, whowas serving on General Webb's staff, rode up and said, " Wewant to get two guns that the rebels have abandoned, whichunless we bring them in, will be retaken.Can't you getthem ? " Calling to the mob (there was no organization ofregiments at that moment), " Come on, boys," we rushed outTurning them on the rebels, we loadedand brought them in.them with everything we could find, — ammunition that didnot fit, old musket barrels, etc., — ])ut not knowing how towork the guns we were in about as much danger as therebels.While engaged here the rebels had recaptured a small partof their works on our right, and we were ordered to move toCollecting as many men of the regiment as wethat point.could find, we marched by the flank to what has since beenknown as the " Bloody Angle ; " here we found hot work.While we were firing the rebels ran up a white flag, and weadvanced to receive their surrender, but as soon as we wereover the brow of the little hill that had protected us, theyFrom that timefired a volley, killing several of our men.until dark the cry was "No quarter."Part of the time wewere on one side of the works and they on the other, eachI saw Ed. Fletcher of Company C shoottrying to fire over.a man who was trying to get a shot at one of our boys, andwas so near that Fletcher's musket was covered with l)lood.92NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.We continued to iire until our ammunition was exhausted,then were relieved by men of the 6th corps.Just as long aswe could see a man the firing continued. We slept on thefield, ready to renew the battle in the morning, and at day-light waited for the rebels to open. Not a shot was fired andwe advanced. What a sight met our eyes as we went overthe works ! Rebels lay four and five deep in the trenches.Many were alive but unable to move, as the dead were piledon top of them. Our better natures were aroused. We laidout the dead for burial, cared for the wounded, then with-drew to the rear to reorganize our regiments.While resting in the rear a man from the 6th corps cameto me and said, " Is this the 19th Massachusetts ? " I answered," Yes." "Have you a Lieutenant Adams in your regiment?"" Well, he is dead. He liesI again made the same reply.just over the little hill. Here is his revolver case that I tookI then understood what he meant. A few daysfrom him."before, finding that it was impossible to carry my revolveron account of my wounds, I had given it to Lieut. JohnnieFerris, and he must have been the one whom the man hadfound. We had been fighting so hard that we had no timeto think of each other, and I then remembered that I had notseen Ferris since we charged on the morning of the previousI went with the man and found Johnnie, shot throughday.the head, in front of the rebel Avorks. He had fallen over atree that the rebels had cut down, and must have been killedas we rushed through the abatis.His death was a se^^ere lossto the regiment. He had been promoted from the ranks forgood conduct ; was loved by the ofiicers and worshipped bythe men. With sad hearts Ave laid him to rest near where hefell. We could not find Colonel Rice and feared he must beENGAGEMENT AT THE BLOODY ANGLE.93dead on the field, but after searching and not finding hisbody, concluded he must have been captured with some ofour men when the rebels made the dash on our right flank.This was true.Colonel Rice was captured, but escaped, andrejoined the regiment in August.One little incident occurring in the fight at the "BloodyAngle," although not connected with the regiment, is worthyof mention. When we were relieved by the 6tli corps theOne of their men was an6th Wisconsin was in our front.Indian. He would crawl up near the rebel line, wait untilthey fired, then fire and drag himself back. He could hardlyI became much interested in hisbe seen above the ground.mode of fighting, and his face was impressed upon my mind.One day in 1867, while working in a shoe factory at Lynn,an Indian came into the place selling l)askets.The momentI saw him I thought his countenance was familiar and won-It came to me that hedered where I had seen him before.was the Spottsylvania Indian.I asked if he was in theThen I wasarmy, and he replied, "Yes, 6th Wisconsin."sure he was the man. We talked over the battle and becamegood fi'iends. He was a very bright fellow, a member ofthe Masonic brotherhood, but he said, " East no place forIndian," and I assisted him to return west.We were under fire nearly all the time, marching fromright to left, and on the 17th occupied the works taken onWhile here we learned that Lieut. Moses Shack-the 12th.ley, who was a first sergeant in the 59th Massachusetts,The 18th we fought allhad Ijeen killed the day Ijefore.day, charged twice on the enemies" works, and lost severalmen. On the 21st occurred one of the sad events of theyear.94NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEOIMENT.John D. Starbird of Company K was one of the threedeserters who returned with the regiment.The chargesagainst him had been placed on file on condition that heWhile he had prom-serve ftiithfully to the end of the war.ised to do tliis, he did not intend to, and was only kept inbattle at the Wilderness by fear of death from the oflicers.On the 18th he deserted while under fire, was captured the19th, tried by drum-head court-martial the 20th, and orderedEarly in the morning ofto be shot at 7 a.m. on the 21st.that day Adjutant Curtis came to me and said, " Jack, youare detailed to take charge of the shooting of Starbird."Iwas not pleased with the order, and Captain Mumford, whowas ever ready to do a kind act for a friend, exchanged dutyThe detail consistedwith me, I going on picket for him.of eight men from our regiment.Their muskets were loadedby Captain Mumford, seven with ball cartridges, one with aStarbird was seated on his coffin, blindfolded. Theblank.Six shots struck him near theorder was given to fire.heart ; the other musket hung fire, and the ball entered hisleg. He died at once.Those who read this, and do not understand the situationat the time, may think the killing of Starbird unjust andAt that time there were in the rankscruel, but it was not.of every regiment, men who had no interest in the cause.They had enlisted for the bounty, and did not intend toThey not only shirked duty, but theirrender any service.Theacts and conversation were demoralizing good men.shooting of Starbird changed all this. Men who had strag-gled and kept out of battle now were in the ranks, and theresult to our corps alone was as good as if we had beenre-enforced by a full regiment.BATTLE AT TOTOPOTOMOT CBEEK.95CELiPTER XI.BATTLES AT TOTOPOTOMOY CREEK AND COLD HARBOE.From the 21st to the 24th of May we were engaged inskirmishing, picket fighting, with now and then a charge.On the morning of the 24th we crossed the North AnnaRiver, and about noon advanced in line, our regiment beingon the left of Smith's division.Finding the rebels stronglyintrenched on the edge of the woods, we charged across anopen field and drove them out.It was one of the bravestAs soon as weacts of the war, but it counted for nothing.captured the works we sent word back that we must be rein-forced or we could not hold them ; but no one in the rearseemed to be in a hurry. We could hear the rebels reorgan-izing their men, and knew that we should be unable to resistthe charge, as we were only a skirmish line.I lay on theworks by the side of Captain Hincks.Both of us had mus-kets, and resolved to make the best fight possible.Therebels came in over the works at our left, at the same timeadvancing in front. We waited until the skirmish line cameso near that we could get a good shot.Captain Hincks said,"What is it. Jack; Richmond or legs?"I said, "Legs."We covered our man, fired and fell back.The rebels cameon in force ; we retreated until we came to a brook, andstanding in the water used the bank for a breast-work, andheld them until re-enforcements came up. A more angryset of men than we were never wore Union blue. We had96NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.done a ])rilliant thing, had captured and held a line of worksfor two hours against heavy odds, and could have been sup-ported in fifteen minutes as well as not.As we were falling back after our relief had advanced, andwere safe in the rear, a staff officer rode up and swinging hissword said, "Go back, you cowards, go back." We requestedhim to go where he would require the constant use of a fan,— and kept on. We reorganized our companies and wereordered on picket for the night. We were so disgusted thatwe paid little attention to duty, but came to our senses thenext morning upon finding we were all there was betweenour army and the rebels.About day-break I heard thepicket cry, " Halt ! who comes there ? " and going to his postThe darkey had a letterfound he had a negro in waiting.from the rebel commander ; it read :" Send Cora to Richey."I did not understand it and sent it to headquarters.The boy was very intelligent, l)ut he was a strange-look-ing mortal ; had not as much clothing on as the prodigal sonwore home from his excursion, but he could sing and dance,besides knowing all al)out the rebel army.Orders came tosend him to headquarters of the division, and I reluctantlyparted with G..AVashington, whom I had intended to keepI saw him several times in the next fewas a servant.weeks, then he went out of my mind.One day soon afterthe close of the war I was standing on the street in Lynn,It struck me I hadwhen a negro boy went past whistling.I asked himheard that whistle before, and I called to him.if he were from the South, and he said he was. "How cameyou here? " was my next question." Oh, I was captured byLieutenant Adams of the 19th on the North Anna, and camehome with Colonel Palmer of Salem." "What became ofBATTLE AT TOTOPOTOMOY CHEEK.97"Guess he is dead.Lieutenant Adams?" I asked.Therebels done caught him, and we never heard from himagain." "Look up here," I said."Did you ever see mebefore?""Golly, you are Lieutenant Adams," and herushed for me.George Washington remained in Lynnseveral years. When the war ended he could not read orwrite, but he passed through all grades to the high school,and after two years there went South ; was a member of theVirginia Legislature two terms ; and the last I heard of him,he was with an Uncle Tom's Cabin Company whistling inthe plantation scene, being the best whistler in the country.We were constantly moving by the left flank, marchingevery night, fighting every day. On the 30th we were onthe Washington Jones plantation, near Totopotomoy Creek,the rebels advancing at night, but being repulsed.CaptainMumford and myself, with our companies G and I, were onthe outpost all night ; we were very near the rebel lines andpicket firing was constant.In the morning we advancedand they returned to their works.Captain Hume, com-manding Company K, was on our right, a swamp beingCaptain Mumford and I had muskets, as itbetween us.was poor fun being fired at with no chance to reply. Wemade up our minds to charge the works, so arranged withCaptain Hume that he should go to the right around theswamp and we would advance and connect with liim on theWith a yell we started and the rebels retiredother side.before us, some of them to an old church. When wearrived at the crest of the hill we opened on them. Mum-ford was behind a tree, and had just fired his piece when hefell at my feet, shot through the head.All the fire of therebels was concentrated on this spot. No man could live a;98NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.moment unless he lay close to the ground.Assisted by oneof my sergeants I placed a rubber blanket under the captainand dragged him to the rear. He was nearly gone.Thesurgeon came but could do nothing, and in a short time heAs the firing ceased for a time, we made apassed away.rude coffin and laid him to rest. We nailed a wooden slabThen Ion the tree, enclosing the grave with a little fence.must perform the saddest duty of all, — write to his lovedones at home.Captain Mumford and I had been warm friends for morethan two years, had shared the same blanket on the march,and while at home had been constantly together. He joinedthe regiment at Lynnfield, a young boy just out of schoolhad been promoted from second lieutenant to captain, andhad shared every march and battle in which the regiment hadKind-hearted, generous and brave, I lovedbeen engaged.In December, 1865, I went to the placehim as a brother.where we laid him and brought the body to Providence, R. I.,where it now rests."By the left flank" we marched on, arriving at ColdHarbor on the morning of June 2. We were deployed asskirmishers and lay in line until three a.m. the 3d, then wereordered to advance in three lines of battle, charging theenemy, who were intrenched. We stood inline threehours, waiting for the order to advance, and when it camethe rebels were ready and waiting for us, yet over the fieldwe went. Men were mowed down by hundreds.MajorDunn, who now commanded the regiment, was struck by aThe colors of the regi-bullet and fell, but rallied again.ment were shot down, but Mike Scannell picked them upMike always had an eye toand carried them forward.BATTLE AT COLD HARBOB.99business. When we halted Major Dunn said, " Mike, keep"Not as a corporal," said Mike; "too manythe colors.""I"That iscorporals have been killed already carrying colors."make you a sergeant on the spot," said the major.business," replied Mike ; "I'll carry the colors."We changed brigade conmianders several times that fore-noon ;first one colonel would fall, then another, until atlast a lieutenant-colonel commanded. We reached a ravinewithin a few yards of the rebel works and lay down. Byforming line to the rear, the men lying flat on the ground,we were able during the night to get a few rails and beforemorning had quite a good breastwork.Lieutenant Thomp-son and many men were killed on the charge.After thedeath of Captain Mumford I had slept with LieutenantThompson ; only three days and another must share myLike other officers we had lost, Thompson wasblanket.remarkable for his bravery, had been promoted from theranks for good conduct, and had distinguished himself inevery battle of the campaign.We were in a peculiar position, — so near the rebel worksthat we could throw a stone over, and no man on either sidecould show his head without getting a shot.Eations couldnot be brought to us until we dug a trench over the hill tothe rear, which we did the second night.The second daywe were in this place we saw a pile of dirt in our front, on alittle knoll, and once in a while a shot would be fired, fol-Mark Kimball, Gus Bridges, Franklowed by a yell.Osborne and Milt Ellsworth dug out and found Alonzo W.Bartlett of Andrews, Mass., sharpshooter.Bart, had comeout after the body of the colonel of the 8th New York, whofell at the foot of the rebel works. He had managed to get100NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.a rope around the body, but the rebels made it so hot that hewas forced to intrench, which he did with his dipper, andwas fighting the war on his own hook.His face was cut andbleeding from gravel stones which had struck him, l)ut hehad held his own, and having a good rifle with plenty ofammunition thought he could hold out as long as they.fire.For four days the little fort kept up a constant musketryEvery man was a dead shot, and the result must haveThe rebels were also doing much damage tobeen fearful.our side. No man could stand erect without being shot, andwe lost several as they crossed to the spring for water.Among the killed was the boy William Fee, who had followedthe regiment from Massachusetts. He was a brave little fel-low and had done the full duty of a soldier.On the 7th a truce was held. A white flag was raised onthe rel)el works and firing ceased on both sides.Generalofficers met between the lines, and it was agreed to suspendfiofhtino; until the dead who had lain between the lines for theThis was welcome news, as thepast four days were l)uried.stench was terrible. The men of ])oth armies were soon overthe works and mingled together freely. Had they the powerto settle the war, not another shot would have been fired.By mutual agreement not a shot was fired by either side forthe next two days. On the morning of the 9tli a rebel stoodupon the works and in a loud voice said, "Keep down,Yanks, we uns are going away ;" and the firing was soonresumed as before.While bringing in the dead we found one man woundedmany times, but yet alive. He was first shot in the leg, andbeing unable to move had taken shots from })oth sides ; hadbeen without food or water four days, yet he revived in a fewBATTLE AT COLD HABB OR.101hours and was able to talk. He had lost all trace of time,but said that he had suffered little, being unconscious mostDuring the day Bartlett took the body of theof the time.colonel to the rear, and was returning to his old place when asharpshooter fired, hitting him over the eye, which placed himon the retired list for a time.The duty was very hard.From the 9th to the 12th the firing was constant day andnight; men were killed every hour in the day.CaptainHincks was severely wounded while lying in rear of theOne-half the men mustworks.be on guard during the night, and all in line at three a.m.The officer in charge was obliged to go from right to left, asthe men would drop to sleep as soon as they were posted,being exhausted from long hours of duty. The mental strainwas unspeakable.While at Cold Harbor about one hundred recruits joinedThey were not brought to the front, butthe regiment.placed in the rear line, with Lieutenant McGinnis in charge.At nine p.m. on the 12th we quietly moved out of the worksand marched towards the Chickahominy.This was oldground to us. We had been here with McClellan in 1862.Lieutenant McGinnis had quite a time with his recruits ; nothalf of them could speak or understand the English language,and Bill tauaht them by the kinderofarten method.Stan dins:in front he would say, "Look at me. Put on your bayonets,put 'em on." He would go through the motions, they fol-After a few days liis " army of all nations '' waslowing.disbanded, the men being assigned to companies.Arriving at the James River we crossed on a steamer andhalted for rations, but before they could be served wereordered forward, and marched twenty-five miles without a102NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.This was a great day for some of us.hard tack. We reached the first line of works before Peters-burg, and relieved a division of colored troops commandedby our old colonel, now General Hincks, who had been fight-It hading all day.been said that the negro would not fight, but here we foundthem dead on the field side by side with the rebels they hadThe stock of the negro as a soldier was high in theWith no time for rations we went into line andmarket.waited until nearly morning, when the detail brought us oUrhard tack and pork.killed.Hard fighting every day since the Battle of the Wilder-ness had reduced our officers to major, adjutant and fourline officers, with the addition of First Sergeant Osborne ofOurCompany B, who had been promoted on the march.men had been reduced to one hundred and forty, includingthe recruits who had joined us at Cold Harbor.The morn-ing: of June 22 we were ordered to advance through a thicketto the edge of an open field. We found the enemy in force,several batteries being so posted that they could protect thefield, while the infantry was well cared for behind works.We threw up slight works and both sides were active allOur regiment was so small that we were in singleday.rank and the formation was tw^o companies instead of ten,Captain Hume commanding the right and I the left wing.At noon the officers withdrew a little to the rear for din-ner, and in conversation Major Dunn said, "I fell asleep alittle while ago, and had a queer dream. We were lyingjust as we are here, and the rebels came in our rear and cap-tured the entire regiment." We laughed at his story, saidwe guessed we should not go to Richmond that way, andThe firing in our frontreturned to our places in line.BATTLE AT COLD HARBOR.103increased, the batteries doing good service for the rebels.About four P.M. we heard loud talking and cheering on ourThe woods were so thick weleft and the firing ceased.could not see through them, but knowing something was up,I went to the right of the line and reported to Major Dunn.Returning to my place, I met Billy Smith of Company F,who said, " Come with me ; if you go farther you are sure toWhile I was talking with Smith, Colonelbe captured."Hooper passed us, on the way to the rear.The colonel hadbeen there and escaped through the tunnel at Libby. Hedid not propose to go again.I told Smith to go on, but Imust return to the company.I soon met two rebels whoI saw my menordered me to surrender, but I declined.standing up and the rebels as thick as mosquitoes. A majorof a Georgia regiment demanding my sword, I presented itWith the rebelsto him, omitting the presentation speech.Captain Hume was standing on theI went to the right.I called to him, '' They have us,works looking to the left.Hume." Quick as a flash he stamped his sword into thedirt, broke the scabbard against a tree, saying, "There isthe second one the cusses haven't got."In less time than ittakes to tell the story we were driven to the rebel rear, andmy story for a time will be my experiences in rebel prisons.104NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.