CHAPTER  III.BATTLES OF BALL's BLUFF AND EDWAED's FERRY.RIENCES AT DARNESTOWN AND ROCKVILLE.EXPE-march to the front.In a few weeks we broke camp and took up our line ofOur destination was the Potomac, near"It was our first march and to us "tender feetsPoolsville.side.The older men of the company laughed at usa hard one.boys, said we would never ])e alile to march that distance,but before night we left those who had laughed l)y the road-(I think our experience, that the boys fresh fromschool or from indoor life were able to endure more thanmen of mature years, was general.)Just before we arrivedat Rockville, Md., we received ten rounds of ball cartridgesand the command was given, "Load at will! Load!" Ishall never forget the sensation I experienced as my ramrodforced home the first Ijall. We were told that at Rockvillea strong secession sentiment existed, and I expected tokill a rebel or be a dead Yankee before night. We marchedthrough the town and found it as quiet as a New EnglandThe second night of our march we arrived atvillage.Here we met the 15th Massachusetts, andPoolsville.Company A of the 19th was entertained l)y Company ANext morning we marched to Camp Benton,of the 15th.which was to be our home for several months.We were brigaded with the 20th Massachusetts, 7thMichigan, 42d New York (Tammany regiment), CaptainBALL'S BLUFF AND EDWABD'S FEBBY.13Saunders's company of sharpshooters and Captain Vaughn'sRhode Island battery.Our brigade was commanded byGen. F. W. Lander; the headquarters of the division wereat Pools ville, called "corps of observation," commanded byAt Camp Benton the discipline wasGen. Chas. P. Stone.brought to the regular army standard ;drills were almostconstant ; each afternoon we were drilled in battalion move-ments, in heavy marching order, and in every possible wayDress coats with brass shoulderfitted for active service.scales and leather neck stocks were issued, and when not inline or on guard our spare moments were spent in cleaningIf any men ever earned thirteen dollars a monthbrasses.we did.Besides the camp guard we mounted what wascalled grand guard, consisting of a detail from each regimentin the brigade posted on the outskirts of the camp, the tourof duty being twenty-four hours.Often the long roll wouldbeat after we had retired for the night ; we would turn outand double quick to Edward's Ferry, march up the tow pathof the canal, lay on our arms the rest of the night, and thenext morning march back to camp. At first we expected therebels were crossing the river, but as we saw no movementin that direction we looked upon these excursions as a partof the drill, the days not being long enough to give us theThe enlisted men were not the onlydesired instructions.ones who had to work, as the line officers came in for theirWell do I remember day after day marcliing to ex-share.ecute the movement "To the rear by the right flank passAt last Colonel Hincks became discouraged,the defile."and throwing down his sword said, " Let every officer o-q tohis tent, take his tactics and study them, and to-morrow ifany one fails to understand this movement there will be a14NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT.vacancy in this regiment." We came out next day and infair shape executed the movement.McGinnis went into the woods with the man.Many incidents occurred at Camp Benton that are pleasantto recall. We were in a country where there were manyslaves, all anxious to serve our officers, and nearly everyday some citizen would come into camp hunting for his run-One day a man came to the colonel and wasaway negro.Colonel Hinckssure one of his negroes Avas in our camp.sent for Sergeant McGinnis of Company K and ordered himto assist in the search. By the look the colonel gaveMcGinnis it was understood that the slave was not to beAsfound.soon as they were out of sight he halted and cut a switch."Look here!" said McGinnis, "do you suppose we leftMassachusetts and came out here to hunt negroes ? " andto add force to his argument he touched the old fellow upThe man was indignant and said he would" Go ahead and I will goBoth went to the colonel, and the citizen toldColonel Hincks turned tohis story with tears in his eyes.McGinnis and said, "Sergeant McGinnis, is this true?""" Colonel, do you think I would he seen doing such a thing ?"No," said the colonel; "Sergeant McGin-was the reply.nis is a man of truth and I must take his word. You havedeceived me, sir; leave this camp and never enter it again."The man, fearing McGinnis might get another chance at him,left as quickly as possible.with the switch.report McGinnis to the colonel.with you."Here is another instance of the ready wit of a soldier.We had in Company A an Irishman, who was one dayThe night was dark anddetailed for headquarters guard.rainy and the morning found Mike, pacing his beat in frontBALL'S BLUFF AND EDWABD'S FEBBY.15Colonel Hincks cameof the colonel's tent, wet to his skin.out and Mike said, " Colonel, will you allow me to speak" What isa word with you ? "it ? " said the colonel."Well, colonel, I wish you believed as you did before theThen you Ijelieved in putting none 1)ut Americans onwar.guard and here I am, an Irishman, wet to the skin, havingbeen on guard all nio-ht." The colonel lauo-hed and retired.(Colonel Hincks had edited a Know-Nothing paper whosemotto was, "Put none but Americans on guard.")Early in October we were ordered to the river andpicketed it from Edward's Ferry to a point above Harrison'sIsland. By visits of general and field officers we could seethat a movement against the enemy was intended. On the20th, ten of the best shots of the regiment were selected forWith our officers they crossed tosome important service.Early the next morningHarrison's Island to reconnoitre.the regiments began to arrive. Two small scows werebrought to a jDoint opposite the island and Company A wasAt first we pushed thedetailed to ferry the troops across.boats over with long poles, l)ut the current being verystrong they drifted down the river and it was hard to land.After one or two trips a rope was obtained from a passingcanal l)oat and stretched across the river, making transporta-tion much easier.In a short time we heard musketry on the other side andknew that the ])attle had begun.The 19th regiment wasAs we landed on the island the sound ofthe last to cross.the minie balls greeted us for the first time. We met fourmen bearing a stretcher, on which was the lifeless form ofColonel Baker of the 1st California. He was the first manwe had seen killed in battle. We were marched across the16NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEC4IMENT.land.They rushed down the hill and into the boat.island, meeting wounded and half-naked men who swam theriver. On arriving at the other side we found there wasThe only transportation from thework for us to do.island to the Virginia shore was one scow. By this a loadcould be sent over, then marched up a steep bank calledThe rebels, being strongly intrenched at theBall's Bluff.top, could kill or capture our men before another load couldAt last a retreat was ordered as our men were stam-Thepeded.little craft being overloaded was soon swamped, men wereswimming the river to escape, and many a poor fellow, notable to swim, went down before our eyes ; others were shotby the rebels when almost within our lines. At night thosenot required at the landing were deployed to the right andleft. A drenching rain set in and without overcoats orblankets we remained shivering until morning.LieutenantDodge and twelve men, under a flag of truce, were sent overAlex. Short was the volunteer from Com-to bury the dead.pany A, and he received injuries from which he never fullyWhile the flag of truce was out a rebel horse-recovered.man was seen pursuing a Union soldier who was running tothe river. A man in Company H on the island fired and theImmediately the rebels closed in on the burialhorseman fell.party and held them as prisoners.It required all the energyand courage that Colonel Hincks possessed to have them re-The next day we picketed the island, cared for theleased.men we had rescued, and on the morning of the 23d recrossedto the Maryland side, wet, cold and disheartened. A fewshots from our batteries told that Ball's Blufl' battle was over.For the number of men engaged this was the most disas-trous battle of the war. No man in his right mind would haveBALL'S BLUFF AND FBWABD'S FEBBY.;17The movement was condemned by every one.sent out such an expedition.There was no way to retreatand no chance to send reinforcements, except a scow load ata time.Itwas said that General Stone was a traitor, that signal lightswould be placed at a house on the Virginia side and that hewould go down to the river and meet men from the rebelThe truth we never knew, but General Stone wasarmy.relieved, and it was late in the war before he was givenanother command.While we were engaged at the 1)luff Company K crossedat Edward's Ferry with General Lander.They had a sharpskirmish with the rebels and our brave brigade commanderreceived the wound which resulted in his death soon after.We returned to our old camp and were soon busy gettino-ready for winter.About this time we were called upon to bear our first loss,not by death but by the resignation of Captain Stanwood,Lieutenant Merritt was promoted to the vacant position.Second Lieutenant Boyd to first lieutenant and Quarter-master Sergeant O. F. Briggs to second lieutenant.We were about to undergo our first winter in camp andhad not learned to stockade our tents ; we pinned them closeto the ground, dug a flue for a fireplace, building a chimneyoutside topped with a barrel, and had plenty of smoke butNeither had we yet learned the art of sleeping inlittle fire.tents ; we would put on all our clothes, including overcoats,bring the capes up over our heads, lie down and shiver.Experience soon taught us that to undress and throw ourclothing over us was much the better way.On Thanksgiving the ofiicers of the regiment gave a ballmen were detailed to build a ball-room, and quite a nice18NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.Ladies came frombuilding was the result of their labors.Washington and Baltimore and a good time was enjoyed.We enlisted men looked on from a distance and thought ofthe pleasures we had surrendered for a chance to serve ourcountry.After getting snugly fixed for winter an order came tomove, and soon we were on the march for Muddy Branch,to take the place of General Banks's division, which hadHere the regiment wasbeen ordered to Harper's Ferry.assigned various duties. A part of Company A was sent toFirst Sergeant Cook, myself as corporal, andKockville.ten men were ordered to Darnestown.Our quarters atDarnestown were in an old barn on the main street, andOur dutyat Rockville in buildings on the fair ground.at Darnestown was to prevent men coming to town fromcamp and to allow none to pass towards Washington, belowthe rank of a brigadier-general, without proper papers. WeThe citizens of the townhad three posts, each at a store.were in sympathy with the South, but as we behaved likegentlemen they were very kind, often sending us biscuitsfor breakfast and at Christmas furnishing a liberal supply ofegg-nog. We were welcomed at any house, and often whenoff duty spent a pleasant hour by their firesides.Soonafter we began duty Sergeant Cook received a furlough ofthirty days and I was commander-in-chief of the Darnes-town army.I had no trouble with the enlisted men, but the officers"kicked" when I asked them to show their leave of absence.My duty was to inspect the coach when it arrived on itsway to Washington, and if any officer or soldier was onboard to ask him to show his pass.I will relate oneDARNESTOWN AND BOCKVILLE.19I opened the coach door one morning and said,instance."I will see your leave of absence, if you please," to anofficer who wore the strap of a major. He growled out," Call your officer ; I don't show my leave of absence to anyI replied, "I am the only officer here; Ienlisted man."have my orders in writing fi-om headquarters and know myduty." He put his head out of the coach window and said,"Driver, go on."I called to the sentry on duty, "If thatdriver starts, shoot him off the box." The driver did notstart, and after swearing awhile the major gave in, butdeclared he would report me, — and he did.In a few daysMajor How rode up.I turned out the guard, and after pre-" Corporal, dismiss yoursenting arms stood at attention.Taking me one sideguard, I want to see you a moment."he said, "You have been reported to the headquarters ofI explained the case to him. He patted methe regiment."on the shoulder and said, " Corporal, you are right ; youare in command of this post, and if the Apostle Paul under-takes to go through this town, unless he wears the uniformof a brigadier-general, don't you let him go without showinghis pass, and if he refuses bring him to camp." No corporalin the Union army felt better than I did that day, and I wasglad that the major had reported me.In February we were relieved by another detail from theThe night before weregiment and ordered to Rockville.left, Mrs. Hayes, of one of the first families of the town,gave us an oyster supper, and her daughter, who was apleasant young lady but a red-hot "reb," presented me with aThirty-eight years have passed since those days,rebel flag.but I shall never forget the kindness of those Darnestownpeople, and trust that to-day they are prosperous and happy.20NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS EEGIMENT.the colonel.After a time we reported to the company at Rockville andfound the three field officers examining the non-commis-Althougli we had been acting as " non-coms "sioned officers.since we left Massachusetts, none had received warrants ft'omFirst Sergeant Cook and I joined the proces-I was never more ft-ightened in my life, as I had neversion.spoken to the colonel or lieutenant-colonel, and the examina-The marks were from one to five.tion was unexpected.In a few days, at dress parade. Captain Merritt read the list.I thought he meant myHe called First Sergeant Adams.brother Isaac, who had been examined as a sergeant, and Iwas pleased with his good fortune, when the captain called"First Sergeant J. G. B. Adams," and explained to thecompany that I had passed the best examination and waspromoted to that position.FirstSergeant Cook was a good man and was my friend.I wentto the captain, told him I would prefer to be second sergeantand let First Sergeant Cook remain.This arrangement wasmade and I was happy.I did not want the place.Our duty at Rockville was very light.The boys hadmade the acquaintance of many agreeal)le people there ; Iwas introduced, and the time passed pleasantly.The colored people were holding revival meetings.Aswe had never witnessed anything of the Idnd before weTheall attended, without regard to religious convictions.singing was of that wild, melodious nature that only coloredThe clapping of hands and stamping ofpeople can render.feet, all in time, cause a thrill of excitement to run throughWith the colored people the effect issuch that they are lost to all else but the emotions of thehour. When striving with the spirit it is a strife in reality.the coldest veins.DABNESTOWN AND BOCKVILLE.21spirit.One night they held a meeting of unusual interest, and Com-pany A was represented by a large delegation. Among thenumber was Uncle Ben Falls.Ben had joined the companyjust before we left Lynnfield. He had been a sailor andhis kind heart and ready wit made him a favorite Avith all.That night Ben was deeply interested. He joined in thehjonn, and although his voice might not accord with therest there was no doubt but what he sang with the sameSoon the excitement reached its height; sobs andgroans were heard in all parts of the room, shouts ofThe spirit took pos-" Glory !session of a girl named Malinda, who was owned at the hotelwhere our officers boarded, and was acquainted with ourShe shrieked and groaned and in her striving fell toboys.The people shouted, " Hold Malinda I Oh, Lord,Oh, Lord,This was too much forhold her !Ben. He rushed to the front, sat on her and held her down.This brought Malinda and the rest to their senses and themeeting soon closed.The spirit has got jNIalinda !" went up from every heart." but none went near her.hold Malinda !the floor.We enjoyed the pleasures of Rockville but a short timeafter our detail joined the company, as we were ordered backto camp. A new company, recruited in Salem and com-manded by Capt. Chas. U. Devereaux, a brother of ourThey werelieutenant-colonel, had joined the regiment.given the letter H and nicknamed the " Lapstone LightInfantry," old Company H being disbanded and the mentransferred to other companies.March 1, by order of Colonel Hincks, I assumed the dutiesof first sergeant, and of all the trying positions I have everfilled this was the most so.If any one thinks that the life22NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.of an orderly sergeant in active service is an amiable one lethim try it. When the men are not growling about you thecaptain is growling at you, and you are constantly betAveenAbout one-third of the men in Company A hadtwo fires.been members of the "Old Battalion," and the town meet-ing tactics that prevailed in the militia had not quite died out.I was a recruit, and my promotion was not hailed with joyby the old men. It was said by them that they were detailedfor guard rainy days, and that in other ways I favored thenew men.They drew up a petition asking for a change,and some twenty men signed it and, through a committee," What is this ? " said thepresented it to Captain Merritt."A petition for a change in first sergeant," was theThis is mutiny. Go to your quarters,reply.and if I hear more of this I will have every man court-marshalled and sent to ' Dry Tortugus !That settled theyoungsters, and I was ever after obeyed and respected." Petition !captain.' "OUB FIRST CA3IPAIGN.23