CHAPTER  XVII.THE EXCHANGE AND RETURN NORTH.We left Columbia, but no one knew where we were going.After a slow run of three hours the engine struck a cow ; asthe cow would not get otf the track the engine did, and wewere delayed several hours, but we did not mind that.Having no destination, we might as well be in one place asAfter being two days on the cars we arrived atanother.Charlotte, N. C.It was quite evident that the rebels were near the lastOur South Carolina guard would not go into Northditch.Carolina, and we had a new guard from the latter State. Weleft the cars and marched to camp, where an order was read,sio-ned by Adjutant-General Cooper, that a general exchangeof prisoners would begin at once. Many took no stock inthe order and escaped, but the guard did little or nothing toprevent them, and the next day the officers commanding inthe city requested us to remain in camp, as they had a strongpolice guard in the city and we might get into trouble.We had had some fun mixed with our misery.Our bandhad retained their instruments, and while they had not playedat Camp Sorghum for want of strings, with the money wereceived they bought new ones, and our glee club was asThe citizens often came from the city to hearo-ood as ever.them sins;.CAPTAIN "JACK" ADAMS.July, 1865.THE EXCHANGE AND BETUBN NOBTH.175One day we had a rich treat.The adjutant of an Ohioregiment T\Tote a song called " Sherman's March to the Sea,"Major Isitt and Lieutenant Rockwell arranged the music,and one night the glee club sang it from the steps of theThe boys went wild over it, and even the rebelshospital.could not fail to appreciate it. We also organized the I. O.of M. E. (Independent Order of Mush Eaters), and met inIt was not a charitable organization, as wehouse No. 9.Our meetings were opened byhad no charity for any one.the prisoners forming a circle, one man in the centre with astick. He must do something for the entertainment of thebrothers, then give the stick to another, who must do thesame, and so on, until all had done their part.We brought out some fine talent, and were the liveliestOften we would go out and catch somecrowd in prison.fellow, who was despondent and nearly dead with the blues,bring him before the Grand Mogul and try him for someoffence by court-martial.While he would get mad, kickand swear, it revived him, gave us lots of fun, and as weelected him a Mush Eater, it gave him a chance to enjoy theI rememl^er one lieutenant of an Illinois regi-meetings.ment who had dug a hole in the ground and declared that hewould not come out, but would die there.One night hecame out, was tried and sentenced to be marched around theThe sentence was duly executed, the comb bandeamp.playing the "Rogue's March." He began to improve afterthat, attended the meetings regularly, and, I believe, waselected to the ofl3ce of Deputy High Grand M. E. Weundertook to capture a captain of a Tennessee regiment,called "Puddinghead Hayes," but, as he could whip any twoof us, we let him alone.176NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.:Said heOne afternoon at three o'clock the order was given to "fallIt was an uncommon call at this hour, and "exchange"in."thoughts came to all.Soon the adjutant introduced us to anew commander, a Dutchman who had just come from thenorth, having been captured at Gettysburg." Ghentlemens, I comes to take command of you.I havebeen in Fort Delaware fifteen months. You peoples teachme how to behave myself.I does for you all I can. Youtreats me like ghentleman, I treats you like ghentlemen.I sends in one hundred load ofThis place not fit for hogs." He wentstraw, right away, quick.through our quarters and swore worse than we could at ourHe then went to the hospital, had a row withtreatment.the surgeon because he had done nothing to make us comfort-able, and kicked up a row generally in our behalf. We feltthat "the morning light was breaking" for us, and that weshould now be made comfortable.The major came in thenext day with more suggestions, but in a day or two we sawhim no more. He was not the man the rebels wanted, asthey were not anxious for our comfort, and his ofiicial headwas removed as soon as he made requisition for the straw.Break ranks, march !On the 20th, two hundred of us left to be exchanged.We had quite a pleasant ride to Salisbury. Here I saw someof my men, the first I had seen since we left them at Macon,I remember two, my first sergeant, James Smith,in July.and Private Jerry Kelly.I dare not undertake to describetheir condition ; they were nearly starved to death and couldThey told me of the otheronly walk by the aid of sticks.boys captured, — that Lubin, a young recruit, had died threethat Sergt. Geo. E.days after entering Andersonville ;Morse and Levi Wooffindale of Company G, and many;THE EXCHANGE AND BE TURN NORTH.Illothers, had died at Andersonville, Florence and other pris-ons ; for, like us, they had been carted from one place toanother, but their faces brightened as they said, " Not one ofI had been proud of thethe boys went back on the old flag."19th regiment from the first day I joined it, but never did Isee the time when I loved and respected those boys morethan that day.More than thirty thousand were crowded into the pen atAndersonville. They had seen their comrades die at the rateof two hundred a day ; they had been ofiered plenty of foodand clothing, and no fighting, if they would renounce theirallegiance to the old flag and join the southern Confederacy,but they said, "JVof JSTof Death before dishonor!" andwaited to join their comrades beneath the starry flag if theylived to be free, if not to join those who had been loyal andtrue in the camp on the other shore.We went from Charlotte to Goldsboro, where we arrivedHere we saw the worst sight that thethe next morning.eyes of mortal ever gazed upon. Two long trains of plat-They had beenform cars, loaded with our men, came in.three days on the road, expecting to be exchanged at Wil-mington, but as the city was being bombarded, were turnedAs they were unloaded not one in fifty was able toback.stand. Many were left dead on the cars, the guards rollingthem oft' as they would logs of wood ; most of them werenearly naked, and their feet and hands were frozen ; they hadlost their reason ; could not tell the State they came from,their regiment or company. We threw them what rationswe had, and they would fight for them like dogs, rollingover each other in their eagerness to get the least morsel.Iremember one poor fellow who had lost his teeth by scurvy;178NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS EEGIMENT.he would pick raw corn out of the dirt by the railroad trackand try to eat it. We gave them everything we had.I tookmy only shirt from my back and threw it to them ; othersThe rebels allowed us to mingle with them,did the same.and with tears streaming down our cheeks we did what wecould.Lieutenant McGinnis and I were looking for our men,when we found one named Thompson, of his company. Hewas a noble fellow, one of the largest men in the regimentthe only clothing he had on was part of a shirt and that wascovered with vermin ; he had lost his sight and was almostgone ; he died while we were with him.I took a little fel-low in my arms and carried him across the street ; he couldnot have been over sixteen years old, and did not weighmore than fifty pounds ; he died just as I laid liim down.The men were marched to a camp, and the route was strewnThe citizens gathered around, but Iwith dead and dying.One of our offi-saw or heard no expressions of sympathy.cers said, " My time is out, but all I ask is a chance to oncemore take the field; I would try and get square." A rebelofficer heard him, and replied, "You are just the man I wouldlike to meet." Our officer stepped out and said, "Here Iam, I have been more than a year in prison, but I will whipyou or any other rebel you can furnish." The rebel sneakedaway, and said he would not disgrace himself by fighting aYankee except in battle. We wished he had given our mana chance.We were again ordered on board the cars, and it was reportedthat we were going to Richmond for exchange. We went asfar as Raleigh, where we halted, left the train and marchedThere were a few houses standing, but notto an old camp.THE EXCHANGE AND BETUBN NOBTH.179enough to hold one-fourth of our number.down in torrents and we stood all night under the trees.never passed a more uncomfortable night, for besides beingwet and cold, I suffered with hunger.The rain cameIOn the 23d they loaded us on the cars again, and had juststarted, when the engine ran off the track.This time thecause was an open switch. We believed that the switch wasintentionally left open, but the train ran so slowly that wewere off the cars as soon as the engine left the track, and noone was hurt. We were then taken to Camp Holmes, somethree miles out of the city, and paroles were made out andThis settled the question of escape and we begansigned.to feel happy. We remained here until the 26th, and beganto think that the parole was another trap to keep us with aAll were excited, and had they not movedsmall guard.three hundred at noon I don't believe a man able to travelwould have remained in camp that night.On the morning of the 27th we found ourselves in Golds-Here we had toboro again, and were marched to camp.sign another parole, as the first was not made out properly.All these delays were terrible ; our nervous condition wassuch that we could not sleep, and days were as long as weeks.We received very little food, and here I sold the last thingthat would bring a dollar, — the buttons on my jacket.Thesebrought me eio:hteen dollars, — two dollars each.It wouldAt night the rebelsbuy just food enough to sustain life.gave us some rations, but, hungry as we were, we sent all tothe enlisted men.The 28th, at five p.m., we again went on board the train,and at daylight, March 1, were at Rocky Point, three milesHere we left the cars, the rebel guard formedfrom our lines.180NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.As soon as we passedin line and we were counted through.the rebel lines we ran down the road, cheering and singing.About a quarter of a mile further on the guard stopped usAlthough we wereand formed us in some kind of order.with the boys in blue we did not fully realize that we werefree, and clung to all our prison outfit. We marched abouta mile to the northeast bridge on the Cape Fear River, and onthe other side saw an arch covered with the stars and stripes.In the centre of the arch, surrounded by a wreath of ever-green, were the words, "Welcome, Brothers ! "I have noidea what the joy will be when I pass through the pearlygates and march up the golden streets of the New Jerusalem,but if it is half as great as it was the morning of March 1,1865, when for the first time for nearly nine months I sawthe old flag, I shall be satisfied.One who did not understand the situation would havethought that an insane asylum had been turned loose. Wehugged each other, laughed, cried, prayed, rolled over in thedirt, and expressed our joy, each in his own way.Thosewho had clung to their meal threw it high in air, and foronce meal was plenty.The 6th Connecticut were encamped near, and their bandplayed national airs as we marched over the bridge. Wealso found our true friend, the colored man, not as a slave,but as a man and a comrade, clothed in loyal blue and fight-ing for a flag that never, until President Lincoln signed theAs soonEmancipation Proclamation, had protected him.as we were over the bridge they began to provide for ourHard-tack boxes were burst open, coff*ee and meatwants.were furnished in abundance ; but we had been starving soIons: that we did not think it would last, and I rememberTHE EXCHANGE AND BETUBN NORTH.that I packed my old jacket — now fastened together withwooden pins — full, and as it settled down crowded in more.We drank so much coffee that we were nearly intoxicated.181We cheered the boys who had provided so well for us,and started for Wilmington. We did not march, but hob-bled along as best we could, anxious to get as far as possiblefrom the rebels. We clung to our instruments, and carriedIt was my turn to carry it, andthe big base viol by turns.McGinnis and I started down the railroad. We had gonebut a short distance when we met an officer, who asked meI told him I had played it inwhere I got the big fiddle.church before I enlisted ; that I carried it with me when Ileft home and had it on picket ; was in the middle of a tunewhen the rebels came on me, and as I could not stop playingThe man looked at me and said, " I believewas captured.that's a d—d lie.""Well," I said, "you have a right tothink so," and we moved along.I do not remember whatbecame of the instrument.Arriving at Wilmington, we were collected together andHere we were placed under guard torations were served.prevent our eating too much, but we would capture theAs soon as werations each side of us and fill our pockets.had eaten all we could, we would pass out, and in half anThe sanitary commission werehour try to flank in again.on hand with barrels of weak milk punch and gave us all wewanted ; as we wanted everything to eat or drink that wesaw we destroyed large quantities of it.While standingon the street an officer rode up whom I recognized as Col.Henry A. Hale, formerly a captain in my regiment. Hewas serving on the staff" of the general commanding thedepartment. He took me to a gunboat in the river and182NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT.bought me a suit of sailor's clothes.After a good bath Iwas transformed from a dirty prisoner into a respectableI threw my old clothes overboard, and theyJack Tar.floated down the stream freighted with a crew which hadclung to me closer than a brother for the past nine months,and whose united voices I thought I heard singing " A lifeon the ocean wave " as they passed out to sea.I returned to the city and walked about, often meetingsome of the men of my regiment, among them MichaelO'Leary of Company F, who looked as though he had justcome off dress parade, having a new uniform and his shoesnicely polished. He was delighted to see me, said that therebels had urged him to take the oath of allegiance, but hehad told them he could never look Mary Ann in the face ifhe went back on the old flag. He told me of a number ofthe men who had died, among them my old friend MikeThat night I stood in front of the theatre, myScannell.hands in my empty pockets, wondering if I should ever havemoney enough to purchase a ticket.March 3, Ave went on board the transport "General Sedg-wick," bound for Annapolis. We pulled out near FortSome of us went on shore atFisher and lay over night.Smithfield and had a nice time. On the 4th we got underIt was the second inauguration of President Lincoln,way.and all the ships were gaily decked with flags. We passedThe ship was crowded ; my berth was onout over the bar.I find the last entry in my diarythe floor between decks.is, " Oh, how sick I am !I did not come on deck for fourdays, and suffered more than I can tell. The sea broke overthe ship, and the water came down the hatchway. A west-ern officer, suflering near, aroused me by exclaiming, " My"THE EXCHANGE AND RETURN NORTH.183God ! Jack, there is a board off somewhere ; don't you seethe water coming in ? " I didn't care if they were all off.We arrived at Annapolis and quartered in the severalIhotels. The following day we received two months' pay.bought a good uniform of a Jew for seventy-five dollars.Itwas a nice blue when I first put it on, but before I arrivedhome it was as brown as a butternut. We ate from six to tenmeals a day for a week, then received thirty days' furloughand came home to friends who had almost given us up fordead.I never looked better than when I arrived home.I hadbloated so that I was the picture of health, and no matterwhat account I gave of prison life my face contradicted it, soAfter thirty days at home I did not feel ableI said little.The war was nearlyto return, and received an extension.over, Richmond had fallen, and I was miles away, a paroledprisoner, not allowed to bear arms until exchanged.While at home I had the pleasure of meeting my old com-rade, Isaac H. Boyd. He had started as a private in Com-pany A, and was now major of the regiment.I left himone Saturday at the Providence depot in Boston, he return-In two weeks I received his body at theing to the front.same depot. He was killed in the last battle of the war, theday before Lee surrendered, — one of the bravest officerswho ever drew a sword.Early in May I returned to Annapolis, and was pleasantlyquartered in the house of a Mr. Harper, the only man in thecity who voted for President Lincoln in 1860. While stand-ing on the street one day a small squad of prisoners passed.This was an unusual sight, as all had come through the linesI heard a voice say, " How are you, captain ?"weeks before.184NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT.and looking up saw a white head sticking out of a bundle ofrags, and recognized Sergt. Mike Scannell.I said, "Mike," Not yet," was the reply ;" but I have beenyou are dead."I was sent out to die at Andersonville, frommighty near it.there was taken to Blackshire, Fla., kept until the war wasover, then taken within several miles of our lines and turnedloose." With him was Mike O'Brien of my company, — hardlooking, but full of courage.On the 15th of May I was discharged ])y general order,went to Washington, received my full pay, with transportationto West Newbury, Mass.I waited to see the grand reviewThe first day theof the armies before returning home.Army of the Potomac passed. As the 2d corps drew near Ibecame anxious, and walked towards the Capitol. The whitetrefoil came in sight, and at the head of the dear old regimentrode Colonel Rice. He saw me and turned out of the lineNext came Captain Hume, — the only lineto shake hands.officer commissioned when we were captured. He stopped,and the boys came from every company ; for a few momentsColonel Rice urged me to come to theI held a reception.regiment, saying he had found a place for me.I informedhim that I was discharged, and was going home, but he said,"Come and see me day after to-morrow."In compliancewith his request I went out to Munson's Hill to visit the regi-ment, and before night was mustered as captain, and assignedto the command of Company B.The duty was very pleasant.I was in command of theregiment a few days during the absence of Colonel Rice andCaptain Hume, and was two weeks on courts-martial detail.June 30 the regiment was mustered out of service, and leftfor Massachusetts, arriving at Readville July 3. We wereTHE EXCHANGE AND RETURN NORTH185invited to take part in the parade in Boston July 4, andColonel Rice was quite anxious that we should.After wewent to our quarters for dinner Colonel Rice was called toNearly all the officers had business there, and whenBoston.we boarded the train found the men taken the same way.The colonel did not blame them, and said it was all right ifwe would report at 9 a.m. the next day at the ProvidenceI did not expect they would comedepot.but went to the station at the hour named.I found ColonelRice and one private. We waited a while, but no morereported, and as we three would not make much of a show,concluded to give it up.All promised.July 20 we assembled at Readville for final pay. The menreturned to their homes and took up the duties of citizenswhich they had laid down to become soldiers, — and the 19thRegiment Massachusetts Volunteers became a thing of thepast.The regiment had been frequently complimented by itssuperior officers for soldierly conduct, and the followingGeneral Orders will show the opinion in which we wereheld : —Headquarters 2d Army Corps, July 23, 1862.General Order No. 21.The general commanding would hereby announce to this corps d'armeethe fjne appearance on the review to-day of the 19th Massachusetts and1st Minnesota regiments. The condition of these regiments is an honorto their States, and reflects great credit upon their commanders.By command ofOfficial.Major-General Sumner,L, Kip, A. D. C. and A. A. O.W. D. Sedgwick, A. A O.186NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.Headquarters 2d Division, 2d Corps,Edward's Ferry, Va., June 26, 1863.General Order No. 105.The 15th and 19th Massachusetts Volunteers, for marching to-day inthe best and most compact order, and with the least straggling fromtheir ranks, are excused from all picket duty and outside details for fourdays.By command ofBrigadier General Gibbons.Of the thirty-seven commissioned officers who left Massa-chusetts with the regiment in 1861 only one returned, —Col. Edmund Rice, who went out as captain and came homecolonel commanding the regiment.Fourteen officers and two hundred fifty men were eitherkilled or died of wounds received in action, and four hun-dred forty-nine were discharged for disability, occasioned bywounds or disease contracted in the service.from the 1865 report of Adjutant-General Schouler : —In no better way can I close my story than by quoting" No regiment has had a more eventful history, or has fought more,fought better, or performed its duties with more promptitude and alacrity.During its existence the regiment has been engaged in forty-five battlesand skirmishes, in six of which it has lost from one-third to five-sixthsIt has captured and turned over to the War Departmentof its men.seven stands of colors (1st Texas, 14th, 19th, 53d, and 57th Virginia,12th South Carolina and 47th North Carolina) and six pieces of artillery.When it is said that the regiment has been characterized by the mostkindly and brotherly feeling, the best discipline and alacrious obediencein all ranks, that it has been frequently commended and never censuredby its superior commanders — the story is done."n^t 178x\^^^^." ') N O^^^. ^"^^ V^^-^V s^.^0>H -r-^v^^•.^^A V^'^0 o^^.x^''^^ ,^^^"%<^'^''>./>.oV<?q5 ^^_o^-'\^^ '-''/,^•'V^^O^^^^^^?."^x.x^^-^-..^^<o-.V^^.'?0'X'o 0'V ,/A^-^''c*-^.^^ -^^'^^.^^'nX^'^c.s^-^' /, . V *•V'^,^".S^^^...V^ A\.-^^'.N t ^ V". 'o..f V,0 o,0o.>.s*'