CHAPTER  II.OUR JOURNEY SOUTH.Upon our arrival in Philadelphia we heard a signal gunand learned that it was to inform the people connected withthe cooper's shop that we were coming. We marched tothat place and found a nice breakfast served by the first ladiesThis was the only home-like meal we had re-of the city.ceived since leaving Massachusetts, and our hearts went outto the loyal people, and our thanks were expressed in threeBut we hastened on, and soonrousing cheers for them.At Baltimore we left the carstook the cars for Washington.and marched across the city. We passed through Pitt Street,where the sixth Massachusetts, a few months before, hadmarked the route with their blood.Every throat wasopened as we sang "John Brown," but our knees were alittle weak, for we expected a stone would strike us at anymoment. We found the roof of the depot on the Washing-ton side of the city filled with bullet holes, the result of theriot of April 19.From Baltimore to Washington we passed soldiers doingguard duty on the railroad, and for the first time saw menbeing punished at the guard-house. We saw one man withhis head through a barrel, another carrying a heavy log ofAt night we arrived in Washington and were landedwood.at the Soldiers' Rest. A Pennsylvania regiment was aheadof us, so we were obliged to wait until they had been to sup-8NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.per. We marched into the Ijarracks before the tables wereThe waiters removed the tin dishes, then jumpedreset.on to the tables and with dirty brooms began to sweep asTliis was too much for Massachusetts.they walked along.On the tables not cleared were remnants of the meal left bySoon the air was filled with bread,the Pennsylvanians.The waiters were unable to standpork and tin dippers.After quiet wasthe attack and retreated in good order.restored our men cleared the tables and the rations werebrought in, consisting of mouldy soft bread, boiled salt porkand very poor coffee.Colonel Hincks being informed ofour treatment found the officer in charge and gave him relig-ious instructions. We received nothing better that night,but the next morning when the 19th marched in to breakfastour colonel's " draft had been honored " and we had a squaremeal.The Pennsylvania regiment occupying the barracks, weThe night was warm, and beinghad to sleep on the ground.very tired we were soon fast asleep.About four o'clock wewere awakened by something grunting around us, and foundthat we were in the midst of a drove of hogs. We had neverseen hogs running at large at home, and believing someone's swine had escaped from the pen, we concluded to do aThe race began, liut withneighborly act and catch them.poor success for us, as they could run a mile in 2.40 or less.After our sport we found an old pump, where we madeour morning toilet. We boys did not mind this new modeof living much ; we sang, said " it was all in the threeXot soyears," and was nothing after you got used to it.with the older men.I rememl)er one instance : returnino:from the pump I saw one of the men leaning against theOUB JOUBNET SOUTH.9barracks, the tears streaming down Ms cheeks.I said,"What is the matter, Peter?" He replied, "I didn't thinkI was coming out here to be rooted over hj d—d hogs.""Oh," I said, "if we get nothing worse than this I won't"Well," said he, "if we do I won't stay." Hecomplain."was discharged soon after.After ])reakfast we slung knapsacks and marched downPennsylvania Avenue to our camp ground on Meridian Hill.We had brought our tents from Massachusetts and all ourcamp equipage, including bed sacks, but we could findnothing to fill them with, so we spread them on the groundThe ground was filled with gravel stones and wasempty.not as " soft as downy pillows are," but so hard that Ibelieve the imprints of those stones are on me yet.AtMeridian Hill we l)eo;an active drillinof.The duties of thefield officers were divided. Colonel Hincks taking chargeof the battalion drills, Lieutenant-Colonel Devereaux themanual, while Major How had the instruction of the guard.We were encamped on the side of the hill, and marchingdrill was very hard, 3'et "from early mornin Ijattaliontill dewy eve " we were executing company or battalionmovements.Since our arrival in Washino^on all had a fear of beius;poisoned ; we hesitated to buy camp pies of any but oldnegro aunties, and a guard was constantlj' posted with loadedOnemusket over the spring which supplied us with water.night a nervous comrade was on duty, and thinking that, inthe darkness, he saw some one approacliing to poison theImmediately the camp wasWithout waiting to fall in line the cry went up" and without muskets all rushed for thealarmed." Row ! Row !spring, discharged his piece.10NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.The officers cried " Halt ! Halt ! Fall in !" but youspring.might as well have undertaken to stop a Dakota blizzard,and not till the men had been to the spring and investigatedwas order restored.The next day a square was formed anda short but impressive address was delivered by ColonelHincks which had the desired effect.On Sundays at this camp we were marched out by com-panies, seated in the shade and the Articles of War wereread to us by our officers. As I remember them whateveryou did you were to be shot, " or such other punishment asmay be inflicted by courts-martial."At Meridian Hill we had our first Sunday morning inspec-tion ; the order was for all men to be in line.Tliis includedTo thecooks, teamsters, clerks and all other detailed men.regular members of the company it was a grand sight to seethese extra duty men in line.Fowler, the wagoner, hadnot seen his musket since it was given him at Lynnfield andknew nothing of the manual, neither did Uncle Burrill, whowas regimental mail carrier.Lieutenant-Colonel Devereauxcame down the line and the men threw up their guns forFowler had watched the men on his right, andinspection.when his turn came threw his gun up in fair shape.Thecolonel took it, looked at the musket, then at Fowler." What do you mean by bringing such a musket for inspec-tion?""It ought to be all right," said Fowler, "it is brannew and I have never used it since it was given to me."With a reprimand the colonel, passing on, soon came toUncle Burrill, who was not quite as sharp as Fowler, andhad not watched the men on his right. When the colonelstood before him uncle remained quiet and modestly blushed.The colonel surveyed him from head to foot. "Why don'tOUR JOURNEY SOUTH.11you bring up your musket ? "Uncle took it in his right"Don't you know anyhand and pushed it towards him."No," saidbetter than that? " asked the lieutenant-colonel.Uncle B. ; "I wish that I hadn't come out here, I was surethat I should get into trouble if I did." With a smile thelieutenant-colonel passed on, and after that, extra duty menwere excused from Sunday morning inspections.12NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT.