PREFACEby W. Somerset MaughamI HAVE KNOWN the Aga Khan for many years. He has been a kind and helpful friend. Theintroductions he gave me when I spent a winter in India enabled me to profit by the richexperience of my sojourn in that wonderful country as otherwise I could never have done, sothat when he paid me the compliment of asking me to write a preface to his autobiography Iwas glad to be given the opportunity to do him this small, and really unnecessary, service.For the book speaks for itself. It was not till I had read it that it was borne upon me howdifficult a task I was undertaking. The Aga Khan has led a full life. He has been a greattraveler and there are few parts of the world that he has not visited either for pleasure orbecause his political and religious interests made it necessary. He has been a great theatergoer; he has loved the opera and the ballet. He is an assiduous reader. He has been occupiedin affairs in which the fate of nations was involved. He has bred horses and raced them. Hehas been on terms of close friendship with kings and princes of the blood royal, maharajahs,viceroys, field marshals, actors and actresses, trainers, golf professionals, society beauties andsociety entertainers. He has founded a university. As head of a widely diffused sect, theIsmailis, he has throughout his life sedulously endeavored to further the welfare, spiritual andmaterial, of his countless followers. Toward the end of this autobiography he remarks that hehas never once been bored. That alone is enough to mark the Aga Khan out as a remarkableman.I must tell the reader at once that I am incompetent to deal with some of his multifariousactivities. I know nothing of racing. I am so little interested in it that one day when I waslunching with the Aga Khan just before Tulyar won the Derby we talked only of India and Inever thought of asking him whether his horse had a chance of winning. I know no more ofpolitics than the ordinary newspaper reader. For long years the Aga Khan was intimatelyconcerned with them. His advice was constantly sought, and it was generally sound. Hebelieved in moderation: "Of one fact," he writes, "my years in public life have convinced me;that the value of a compromise is that it can supply a bridge across a difficult period, and laterhaving employed it it is often possible to bring into effect the fullscale measures of reformwhich, originally, would have been rejected out of hand." He knew well the statesmen onwhose decisions during the last fifty years great events depended. It is seldom he passes aharsh judgment on them. He pays generous tribute to their integrity, intelligence, patriotism,wide knowledge and experience. It seems strange that with these valuable qualities theyshould have landed us all in the sorry mess in which we now find ourselves.The Aga Khan is a charitable man, and it goes against his grain to speak ill of others. Theonly occasion in this book of his on which he betrays bitterness is when he animadverts onthe behavior of our countrymen in their dealings with the inhabitants of the countries inwhich in one way and another they held a predominant position, in Egypt and India and in thetreaty ports of China. During the eighties relations between British and Indians were ingeneral easy, amiable and without strain, and had they continued to be as they were then, "Igreatly doubt,"he writes, "whether political bitterness would have developed to the extent itdid, and possibly something far less total than the severance of the Republic of India from theImperial connection would have been feasible." It is a disquieting thought. He goes on asfollows: "What happened to the Englishman has been to me all my life a source of wonderand astonishment. Suddenly it seemed that his prestige as a member of an imperial, governingrace would be lost if he accepted those of a different color as fundamentally his equals. Thecolor bar was no longer thought of as a physical difference, but far more dangerously -- in theend disastrously -as an intellectual and spiritual difference.... The pernicious theory spreadthat all Asiatics were a second-class race, and 'white men' possessed some intrinsic andunchallengeable superiority." According to the Aga Khan the root-cause of the attitudeadopted by the ruling class was fear and a lack of inner self-confidence. Another was thepresence in increasing numbers of British wives with no knowledge of or interest in thecustoms and outlook of Indians. They were no less narrow and provincial when forty yearsafter the time of which the Aga Khan writes I myself went to India. These women who forthe most part came from modest homes in the country and, since taxation was already high,had at the most a maid of all work to do the household chores found themselves in spaciousquarters, with a number of servants to do their bidding. It went to their heads. I rememberhaving tea one day with the wife of a not very important official. In England she might havebeen a manicurist or a stenographer. She asked me about my travels and when I told her that Ihad spent most of my time in the Indian States, she said: "You know, we don't have anythingmore to do with Indians than we can help. One has to keep them at arm's length."The rest of the company agreed with her.The clubs were barred to Indians till by the influence of Lord Willingdon some werepersuaded to admit them, but so far as I could see, it made little difference since even in themwhite and colored kept conspicuously apart.When I was in Hyderabad the Crown Prince asked me to lunch. I had spent some time inBombay and was then on my way to Calcutta."I suppose you were made an honorary member of the Club when you were in Bombay," hesaid, and when I told him I was, he added: "And I suppose you'll be made an honorarymember of the Club at Calcutta?""I hope so," I answered."Do you know the difference between the Club at Bombay and the Club at Calcutta?" heasked me. I shook my head. "In one they don't allow either dogs or Indians; in the other theydo allow dogs."I couldn't for the life of me think what to say to that.But it was not only in India that these unhappy conditions prevailed.In the foreign concessions in China there was the same arrogant and hidebound colonialismand the general attitude toward the Chinese was little short of outrageous. "All the best hotelsrefused entry to Chinese, except in wings specially set aside for them. It was the same inrestaurants. From European clubs they were totally excluded. Even in shops a Chinesecustomer would have to stand aside and wait to be served when a European or an Americancame in after him and demanded attention." Lord Cromer was the British Resident when theAga Khan went to Egypt. He found the British were not merely in political control of thecountry, but assumed a social superiority which the Egyptians appeared humbly to accept."There was no common ground of social intercourse. Therefore inevitably behind the façadeof humility there developed a sullen and brooding, almost personal, resentment which lateron needlessly, bitterly, poisoned the clash of Egyptian nationalism with Britain's interests asthe occupying power." Now that the foreign concessions in China exist no more, now that thelast British soldiers are leaving Egypt, now that, as the Aga Khan puts it, British rule in Indiahas dissolved and passed away like early morning mist before strong sunlight, the Britishhave left behind them a legacy of hatred. We too may ask ourselves what happened toEnglishmen that caused them so to act as to arouse an antagonism which was bound in theend to have such untoward consequences. I am not satisfied with the explanation which theAga Khan gives. I think it is to be sought rather in that hackneyed, but consistentlydisregarded aphorism of Lord Acton's: Power corrupts and absolute power corruptsabsolutely.It is no good crying over spilt milk, so the determinists tell us, and if I have dwelt on thissubject it is with intention. In the world of today the Americans occupy the position whichthe British so long, and for all their failings not ingloriously, held. Perhaps it would be totheir advantage to profit by our example and avoid making the errors that have cost us sodearly. A brown man can fire a Sten gun and shoot as straight as a white man; a yellow mancan drop an atom bomb as efficiently. What does this mean but that the color bar is now acrass absurdity? The British wanted to be loved and were convinced that they were; theAmericans want to be loved too, but are uneasily, distressingly, conscious that they are not.They find it hard to understand. With their boundless generosity they have poured money intothe countries which two disastrous wars have reduced to poverty and it is natural that theyshould wish to see it spent as they think fit and not always as the recipients would like tospend it. It is true enough that the man who pays the piper calls the tune, but if it is a tune thecompany finds it hard to dance to, perhaps he is well-advised to do his best so to modify itthat they find it easy. Doubtless it is more blessed to give than to receive, but it is also morehazardous, for you put the recipient of your bounty under an obligation and that is a conditionthat only the very magnanimous can accept with good will. Gratitude is not a virtue thatcomes easily to the human race. I do not think it can be denied that the British conferred greatbenefits on the peoples over which they ruled; but they humiliated them and so earned theirhatred. The Americans would do well to remember it.But enough of that. The Aga Khan is descended from the Prophet Mohammed through hisdaughter Fatima and is descended also from the Fatimite Caliphs of Egypt. He is justifiablyproud of his illustrious ancestry. His grandfather, also known as Aga Khan, by inheritancespiritual head of the Ismailis, was a Persian nobleman, son-in-law of the powerful monarch,Fateh Ali Shah and hereditary chieftain of Kerman. Smarting under an insult that had beenput upon him he took up arms against a later Shah, Mohammed by name, was worsted andforced to make his escape, attended by a few horsemen, through the deserts of Baluchistan toSind. There he raised a troop of light horse and after various vicissitudes eventually reachedBombay with his two hundred horsemen, his relations, clients and supporters. He acquired avast estate upon which he built palaces, innumerable smaller houses for his dependents andoutbuildings, gardens and fountains. He lived in feudal state and never had less than ahundred horses in his stables. He died when the author of this book was a child and wassucceeded by his son who, however, only survived him a short time, upon which the AgaKhan whom we know, at the age of eight, inherited his titles, wealth and responsibilities,spiritual and temporal. His education was conducted to prepare him for the sacred charge towhich he was born. He was taught English, French, Arabic and Persian. Religious instructionwas imparted to him by a renowned teacher of Islamic lore. No holidays were allowed him.The only relief from work was on Saturdays and feast days when he received his followerswho came to offer gifts and do him homage.The Aga Khan, raised to such eminence at so early an age, was fortunate in that his motherwas a highly cultivated woman. She was deeply versed in Persian and Arabic poetry, as wereseveral of her ladies in waiting, and at mealtimes at her table "our conversation was ofliterature, of poetry; or perhaps one of the elderly ladies who traveled to and from Teheran agreat deal would talk about her experiences at the Court of the Shah." The Begum was amystic and habitually spent a great deal of time in prayer for spiritual enlightenment andunion with God. "I have, in something near ecstasy," he writes, "heard her read perhaps someverses by Roumi or Hafiz, with their exquisite analogies between man's beatific vision of theDivine and the temporal beauty and colors of flowers, the music and magic of the night, andthe transient splendors of the Persian dawn." The Aga Khan is a deeply religious man. One ofthe most interesting chapters in this book is that in which after telling of his personal beliefs,he gives a concise exposition of Islam as it is understood and practiced today. It is there forthe reader to read and I will say no more about it than that it is sympathetic and persuasive. Itmay be that it will occur to him that the duties of man as he may learn them from the versesof the Koran and the Traditions of the Prophet are not very different from those he may learnfrom the Sermon on the Mount. But man is an imperfect creature, at the mercy of hispassions, and it should surprise no one that too often these duties are no more practiced byMuslim than by Christian.The general public knows the Aga Khan chiefly as a racing man and it is not unlikely that thereader of the book, remembering pages in which he narrates his experiences as a breeder ofbloodstock and the happy winner of many classical events, will be a trifle taken aback by thismoving, thoughtful and sincere chapter. There is no reason why he should be. The chase wasthe main occupation of the Iranian nobles from which he is descended. It is part of thetradition he inherited and the environment in which he was brought up. His grandfather, hisfather, had hounds, hawks and horses, the swiftest and finest money could buy or they couldbreed. On the death of his father only twenty or thirty of the ninety race horses he hadpossessed were kept and they, through the Aga Khan's minority, were raced under his colorsall over Western India. Racing is in his blood. But first and foremost he is the spiritual headof a sect of Islam which counts its adherents by the million. He has a secure belief in the faithwhich was the faith of his great ancestors and he is ever mindful of the sacred charge, withthe great responsibilities it entails, which is his by right of birth. We are none of us all of apiece. The Aga Khan says somewhere that we are all composed of diverse and conflictingelements: of few men could this be more truly said than of himself. But he is fortunate in thatthe elements in him only superficially conflict; they are resolved by the strength andconsistency of his character.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSI MUST RECORD my deep and warm gratitude to my old friend, Mr. Somerset Maugham,for the foreword which he has been kind enough to write for this book, and for the agreeableand gracious observations that he has made. To Miss Merioneth Whitaker go my thanks forher invaluable skill and patience in the preparation of the manuscript, without which it wouldhave been a far more arduous labor.A recent portrait of His Highness the Aga Khan.A recent portrait of Her Highness the Begum Aga Khan.The Aga Khan's grandfather, Aga Khan I.Aly Shah, the Aga Khan's father.Her Highness Lady Aly Shah, mother of the Aga Khan.The Aga Khan as a young boy.At his installation as Imam, the Aga Khan ascends the Gadi (the seat of office) in Bombay in1885.The Aga Khan as a young man.A portrait of the Aga Khan taken during the reign of George V. Created G.C.I.E. in 1902, heis shown wearing the Badge of the Order of the Indian Empire.The Aga Khan with his younger son, Prince Sadruddin, and his two grandsons, Prince KarinAga and Prince Amyn Mahomed.The Aga Khan leads in Blenheim, winner of the 1930 Derby (Associated Press).With Mahatma Gandhi and Mrs. Sarojani Naidu in London during the Round TableConference of 1931 (Planet News).The Aga Khan's being weighed against diamonds at his Diamond Jubilee celebration inBombay, 1946. The diamonds are in plastic boxes on the scale (Associated Press).With the Begum Aga Khan and Prince Sadruddin at the Diamond Jubilee celebration.Part OneCHILDHOOD AND YOUTHIA Bridge Across the YearsTHE TRUTH about a man as much as about a country or an institution is better than legend,myth and falsehood. I am someone about whom a whole fabric of legend has been woven inmy own lifetime. Of recent years I have often been urged by editors and publishers to writemy memoirs, my own account of my life and experiences, of my beliefs and opinions, and theway in which they have been molded. Friends have advised me that it is my duty to my ownreputation, now and in the future, to tell the truth about myself as I see it, and to refute thefalsehoods that have gained credence. Flattering this persuasion may have been, kind inintention certainly.There are certain obvious and gross fictions which need to be corrected -- the grandioseestimates, for example, of my own and my family's wealth. I have seen estimates both of mycapital and my income so inaccurate that not one but two noughts at the end should have beenknocked off. Not long ago an alleged biography was published; in the matter of dates themargin of error in it was anything from one to ten years. If there is this amount ofmisinformation on simple, easily discoverable fact, what sort of veracity is likely in wider,more profound and more intangible matters?My life in many ways has been a bridge across vastly differing epochs. Looking at it for themoment simply from the Western point of view -- I had a full life in the Victorian era, and Iam leading now an equally full life in this new Elizabethan era. When I was a young man Isat next to Queen Victoria at a dinner party and talked to her throughout it; the other day I satnext to Queen Elizabeth II at a tea party and talked to her throughout it. In my youth theinternal combustion engine was in its early, experimental phase, and the first motorcars wereobjects of ridicule; now we all take supersonic jet propulsion for granted, and interplanetarytravel is far more seriously discussed today than was even the smallest flying venture at atime when I was quite grown up and had already lived a full and active life. I had the greathonor of knowing Lord Kelvin, in his time the greatest physicist in the world; he assured mesolemnly and deliberately that flying was a physical impossibility for human beings and quiteunattainable. Even H. G. Wells in his early book, Anticipations, put off the conquest of theair and the discovery of atomic power for two or three centuries. Yet these and much morehave come to pass in a brief half century.During this period I have been not only an onlooker but by the accident of birth an activeparticipant in affairs. The extent of the revolution which I have witnessed is not yet to bemeasured, but we can see manifestations of it at many levels of human experience.Throughout the Western world the whole way of life has undergone fundamental and far-reaching changes, perhaps the greatest of which is that the expectation of life has beenincreased by nearly twenty years. Old age begins for men and women in the West at anythingfrom ten to twenty years later than it did in my youth, and in India and in the East generally asimilar, though at present smaller, extension of the span can be noted. In Europe and Americait is most marked. There are far, far more old men and women alive and active. Walkingalong a busy street like Piccadilly or any of the Paris boulevards, a man of my age sees thedifference. In Europe there has been a widespread restriction of families among the upper andmiddle classes; the family of the nineties, with seven or eight children, has almost completelydisappeared. In no European country is divorce looked upon as anything unusual; when I wasyoung, men of the stature of Charles Dilke and Charles Stewart Parnell were driven out ofpublic life -- Dilke not indeed because he was a "guilty party," nor even as a principal, butsolely on the grounds of association with a divorce case. Today all over Europe men to whomthe strictly legal term "guilty party" is applicable are to be found in the highest, mostresponsible positions in the state. Indeed the only penalty to which they are subject seems tobe nonadmission to the Royal Enclosure at Ascot -- a privilege which, I daresay, few of themcare about anyway.The changes in the status of women, economic and social, have been enormous; fifty or sixtyyears ago almost the only career open to them was marriage or indirect dependence on man'sprotection, but today they possess the avenues of countless honorable and profitable callings,and they carry themselves with selfconfidence and self-assurance. Homosexuality was lookedupon very much like leprosy. Today in most European countries either there is Freudian pityor there are excuses, and by men like André Gide and others, open justification if notglorification.I was a grown-up man in that old world. I feel that it is therefore my duty to give an accountin some detail of my experience over this long, momentous epoch, and to record my personalacquaintance -often indeed my real and deep friendship -- with some of those who have hadtheir share in bringing about its vast political, social and economic changes.England -- we still talked naturally of England when I was young -dwelt then in "splendidisolation," a state of affairs which stimulated a far deeper, stronger pride than did the moreextreme American isolationism of the twenties and the early thirties. To that England, Francewas the traditional enemy and Germany the only potential friend in Europe. Only a handful ofmen whose thoughts converged from very different origins -- Sir Charles Dilke, imperialistslike Admiral Maxse, and a few radical "Little Englanders" -- championed friendship withFrance and distrust of Germany.In vast regions of the East, England's hegemony was virtually undisputed, and her IndianEmpire seemed among the most solidly based and most durable of contemporary politicalorganizations. A man like Lord Curzon -- and indeed I should say ninety-nine per cent of theBritish ruling class -- would have been horror-struck at the thought of the formation of anIndian Republic, or its inevitable corollary, and even more appalled by the prospect of thepartition of the enormous Indian Empire and the emergence of two healthy national stateseach with its own historic personality. Even as late as the 1930's, when the promise ofeventual Dominion status had been made, this same British ruling class permitted itself to beobsessed with the childish delusion that the Indian Empire, which their predecessors had builtup, could be handed on -- like an estate after the owner's death -- to successors who wouldpreserve the artificial unity of the structure as if it were a true unity rooted in spiritual andintellectual foundations. Even in the 1940's men like Lord Wavell and others hoped andbelieved that even after the British quitted India, it would be possible to maintain a unitedIndian Army. Other European colonial powers nourished delusions no less futile. Less than adecade ago it was seriously held in France that the three Indo-Chinese states would join,humbly and as junior partners, in a French Union of which Paris must be the head and heart.I have seen the long revolution of Asia against European rule. In the nineties it was a cloudno bigger than a man's hand. What did it seem to amount to then? The mild little hope of afew jobs, and a few honorific titles. Today in Asia the revolution is accomplished,everywhere east of the Middle East there has been an end of European rule in fact and inname; and I have lived long enough to see the same process begin in Africa. But fortunatelythe western European governing classes have learned the lesson of Asia. The British in WestAfrica, the Belgians in the Congo and the French in their African Equatorial possessions arepreparing and planning that transfer of power for which in Asia they were never prepared.I have had my share in these changes. However, I must stress that whatever part I may haveplayed in public affairs and in political developments in India and elsewhere, none of it hasbeen my main task or duty. Since my childhood my chief concern, my chief responsibility,throughout the whole of my life, has been the great charge which I have inherited as Imam ofthe Ismaili branch of the Shia sect of Muslims. Elsewhere in this book I shall give a detailedaccount of what I mean by this statement. Here, however, I must only affirm that my duties inthis task have always been my prime concern; in all aspects -- in a vast and variedcorrespondence, in the maintenance of countless links of personal and religious loyalty andaffection -- they have occupied a large part of every day of my life.As I look back, there is one memory, one piece of self-knowledge, which gives me the utmostsatisfaction. I was myself personally responsible for the conversion to Islam of some thirtythousand to forty thousand caste Hindus, many of them of the upper and professional classes.They had been people without a faith, and they found a faith. Neither my father nor mygrandfather had attempted a religious task of this magnitude. Its fulfillment has had oneimportant and interesting effect: the great majority of these converts lived in what is nowPakistan; had they remained Hindu they would in all probability have been involved in andsuffered by the mass displacement and all the other terrible and horrible happenings thataccompanied Partition in 1947.Everything else that I have done or striven to do, enjoyed or suffered, has been of necessitysecondary. With this important reservation clearly stated, I think I can give an account ofmany of the other events and experiences of my life. I have tried all the years I spent in publiclife to do my best so far as I could. It is not possible for me to assess the success or failure ofwhat I have tried to do; final judgment lies elsewhere.But since I have witnessed this rapid and all-developing process of change in every domainof human interest and experience -- the technical and mechanical revolution of our time,man's developing mastery of natural forces, the recognition of the importance of thesubconscious, the vast increase in longevity, the rise of new moral standards and thecorresponding profound changes in outlook, and great political changes undreamed of in myyouth -- I hope in these coming chapters to give some picture of each epoch as it unfoldedbefore the eyes and in the mind and heart of one who was usually an onlooker but sometimesand actively a participant.IIIslam, the Religion of My AncestorsTHE ORIGINS of man's religious aspirations are to be found in what we nowadays callscience. Those who have studied mythology and primitive psychology know that magic invarious forms started various trains of thought in primitive man by which he achieved whatseemed to him to be rational accounts of the natural phenomena around him. It seemed to himrational that these phenomena, these events like the rising and the setting of the sun, thepassage of the seasons, the flowering of the bud and the ripening of the fruit, the wind and therain, were caused and controlled by deities or superior beings. Primitive religious experienceand primitive scientific reasoning were linked together in magic, in wizardry. Thus, at oneand the same time mankind's experiences in the realm of sensation and his strivings toexplain and co-ordinate those experiences in terms of his mind led to the birth of both scienceand religion. The two remained linked throughout prehistoric and ancient times, and in thelife of the early empires of which we have knowledge. It was difficult to separate what I maycall proto-religion from proto-science; they made their journey like two streams, sometimesmingling, sometimes separating, but running side by side.Such is the background to Greek and Roman thought and culture as well as to ancient Iranianand Hindu philosophy before the beginning of the Christian era. Aristotle, however, gave amore scientific turn to this mingling, introducing categories and concepts which were purelyreasonable, and shedding those vestiges of religious awe and mystery which are visible evenin Plato.With the decline of the Roman Empire and the break-up of the great and elaborate system ofcivilization which Roman law and administration had sustained for so many centuries, theDark Ages enfolded Europe. In the seventh century of the Christian era there was a rapid andbrilliant new flowering of humanity's capacity and desire for adventure and discovery in therealms of both spirit and intellect. That flowering began in Arabia; its origin and impetuswere given to it by my Holy ancestor, the Prophet Mohammed, and we know it by the nameof Islam. From Arabia the tide of its influence flowed swiftly and strongly to North Africaand thence to Spain.Ibn-Rushd, the great Muslim philosopher, known to Europe as Averroes, established clearlythe great distinction between two kinds of apprehensible human experience: on the one hand,our experience of nature as we recognize it through our senses, whence comes our capacity tomeasure and to count (and with that capacity all that it brought in the way of new events andnew explanations); and on the other hand, our immediate and immanent experience ofsomething more real, less dependent on thought or on the processes of the mind, but directlygiven to us, which I believe to be religious experience. Naturally, since our brain is material,and its processes and all the consequences of its processes are material, the moment that weput either thought or spiritual experience into words, this material basis of the brain must givea material presentation to even the highest, most transcendent spiritual experience. But mencan study objectively the direct and subjective experiences of those who have had spiritualenlightenment without material intervention.It is said that we live, move and have our being in God. We find this concept expressed oftenin the Koran, not in those words of course, but just as beautifully and more tersely. But whenwe realize the meaning of this saying, we are already preparing ourselves for the gift of thepower of direct experience. Roumi and Hafiz, the great Persian poets, have told us, each inhis different way, that some men are born with such natural spiritual capacities andpossibilities of development that they have direct experience of that great love, that all-embracing, all-consuming love, which direct contact with reality gives to the human soul.Hafiz indeed has said that men like Jesus Christ and Muslim mystics like Mansour andBayezid and others have possessed that spiritual power of the greater love; that any of us, ifthe Holy Spirit * ever present grants us that enlightenment, can, being thus blessed, have thepower which Christ had, but that to the overwhelming majority of men this greater love is nota practical possibility. We can, however, make up for its absence from our lives by worldly,human love for individual human beings; and this will give us a measure of enlightenmentattainable without the intervention of the Holy Spirit. Those who have had the good fortuneto know and feel this worldly, human love should respond to it only with gratitude and regardit as a blessing and as, in its own way, a source of pride. I firmly believe that the higherexperience can to a certain extent be prepared for by absolute devotion in the material worldto another human being. Thus from the most worldly point of view and with nocomprehension of the higher life of the spirit, the lower, more terrestrial spirit makes usaware that all the treasures of this life, all that fame, wealth and health can bring are nothingbeside the happiness which is created and sustained by the love of one human being foranother. This great grace we can see in ordinary life as we look about us, among ouracquaintances and friends.But as the joys of human love surpass all that riches and power may bring a man, so does thatgreater spiritual love and enlightenment, the fruit of that sublime experience of the directvision of reality which is God's gift and grace, surpass all that the finest, truest human lovecan offer. For that gift we must ever pray.Now I am convinced that through Islam, through the ideal of Allah, as presented by Muslims,man can attain this direct experience which no words can explain but which for him areabsolute certainties. I have not discussed experience of this order with nonMuslims, but Ihave been told that Buddhists, Brahmins, Zoroastrians and Christians -- I have often heard itof Jews, except perhaps Spinoza -- have also attained this direct, mystical vision. I am certainthat many Muslims, and I am convinced that I myself, have had moments of enlightenmentand of knowledge of a kind which we cannot communicate because it is something given andnot something acquired.To a certain extent I have found that the following verse of the Koran, so long as it isunderstood in a purely nonphysical sense, has given assistance and understanding to myselfand other Muslims. However, I must warn all who read it not to allow their material criticaloutlook to break in with literal, verbal explanations of something that is symbolic andallegorical. I appeal to every reader, whether Muslim or not, to accept the spirit of this versein its entirety:Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, andthe lamp is in a glass, the glass is as though it were a glittering star; it is lit from a blessedtree, an Olive neither of east nor of the west, the oil of which would well-nigh give lightthough no fire touched it, -- light upon light; -- Allah guides to His light whom He pleases;and Allah strikes our parables for men; and Allah all things doth know.(CHAPTER XXIV "Light," 35)From that brief statement of my own personal beliefs, I move on to as concise and asuncontroversial an exposition as I can give of Islam as it is understood and practiced today.The present condition of mankind offers surely, with all its dangers and all its challenges, achance too -- a chance of establishing not just material peace among nations but that betterpeace of God on earth. In that endeavor Islam can play its valuable constructive part, and theIslamic world can be a strong and stabilizing factor provided it is really understood and itsspiritual and moral power recognized and respected.I shall try to give in a small compass a clear survey of the fundamentals of Islam, by which Imean those principles, those articles of faith, and that way of life, all of which are universallyaccepted among all Muslim sects. First therefore, I shall propound those Islamic tenets whichare held in common by the larger community of Sunnis, and by Shias as well. Having thusmade as clear as I can the faith which binds us all as Muslims, I shall then give a brief sketchof Shia doctrine and of those special tenets held by that sub division of the Shias known asthe Ismailis, the sect of which I am the Imam.First it must be understood that, though these fundamental ideals are universally accepted byMuslims, there does not exist in Islam and there has never existed any source of absoluteauthority; we have no Papal Encyclical to propound and sanction a dogma, such as RomanCatholics possess, and no Thirty-nine Articles like those which state the doctrinal position ofthe Church of England. The Prophet Mohammed had two sources of authority, one religiouswhich was the essential one of his life, and the other secular which, by the circumstances andaccidents of his career, became joined to his essential and Divinely inspired authority inreligion.According to the Sunni school -- the majority of Muslims -- the Prophet's religious authoritycame to an end at his death, and he appointed no successor to his secular authority. Accordingto Sunni teaching, the faithful, the companions of the Prophet, the believers, elected AbuBakr as his successor and his Khalif; but Abu Bakr assumed only the civil and secular power.No one had the authority to succeed to the religious supremacy, which depended on directDivine inspiration, because the Prophet Mohammed and the Koran declared definitely that hewas the final messenger of God, the Absolute. Thus, say the Sunnis, it was impossible toconstitute an authority similar to that of the Papacy; it remained for the Faithful to interpretthe Koran, the example and the sayings of the Prophet, not only in order to understand Islambut to ensure its development throughout the centuries. Fortunately the Koran has itself madethis task easy, for it contains a number of verses which declare that Allah speaks to man inallegory and parable. Thus the Koran leaves the door open for all kinds of possibilities ofinterpretation so that no one interpreter can accuse another of being non-Muslim. A felicitouseffect of this fundamental principle of Islam that the Koran is constantly open to allegoricalinterpretation has been that our Holy Book has been able to guide and illuminate the thoughtof believers, century after century, in accordance with the conditions and limitations ofintellectual apperception imposed by external influences in the world. It leads also to agreater charity among Muslims, for since there can be no cut-and-dried interpretation, allschools of thought can unite in the prayer that the Almighty in His infinite mercy may forgiveany mistaken interpretation of the Faith whose cause is ignorance or misunderstanding.I am trying to put before my Western readers, not the doctrine of the Ismaili sect to which Ibelong, not Shia doctrine, nor the teachings of the Sufi school of Islamic mysticism, of mensuch as Jalaleddin Roumi or Bayazid Bostami, nor even the views of certain modern Sunniinterpreters who, not unlike certain Christian sects, look for literal guidance in the Koran asChristians of these sects find it in the Old and New Testaments; but the main and centralSunni stream of thought, whose source is in the ideas of the school founded by al-Ghazali andwhose influence and teaching have flowed on from century to century.First, however, we must ask ourselves why this final and consummate appearance of theDivine Will was granted to mankind, and what were its causes. All Islamic schools of thoughtaccept it as a fundamental principle that for centuries, for thousands of years before theadvent of Mohammed, there arose from time to time messengers, illumined by Divine Grace,for and among those races of the earth which had sufficiently advanced intellectually tocomprehend such a message. Thus Abraham, Moses, Jesus and all the Prophets of Israel areuniversally accepted by Islam. Muslims indeed know no limitation merely to the Prophets ofIsrael; they are ready to admit that there were similar Divinely inspired messengers in othercountries -- Gautama Buddha, Shri Krishna and Shri Ram in India, Socrates in Greece, thewise men of China, and many other sages and saints among peoples and civilizations, trace ofwhich we have lost. Thus man's soul has never been left without a specially inspiredmessenger from the soul that sustains, embraces and is the universe. Then what need wasthere for a Divine revelation to Mohammed? The answer of Islam is precise and clear. Inspite of its great spiritual strength, Jewish monotheism has retained two characteristics whichrender it essentially different from Islamic monotheism: God has remained, in spite of all, anational and racial God for the children of Israel, and His personality is entirely separate fromits supreme manithere can be no cut-and-dried interpretation, all schools of thought can unitein the prayer that the Almighty in His infinite mercy may forgive any mistaken interpretationof the Faith whose cause is ignorance or misunderstanding.I am trying to put before my Western readers, not the doctrine of the Ismaili sect to which Ibelong, not Shia doctrine, nor the teachings of the Sufi school of Islamic mysticism, of mensuch as Jalaleddin Roumi or Bayazid Bostami, nor even the views of certain modern Sunniinterpreters who, not unlike certain Christian sects, look for literal guidance in the Koran asChristians of these sects find it in the Old and New Testaments; but the main and centralSunni stream of thought, whose source is in the ideas of the school founded by al-Ghazali andwhose influence and teaching have flowed on from century to century.First, however, we must ask ourselves why this final and consummate appearance of theDivine Will was granted to mankind, and what were its causes. All Islamic schools of thoughtaccept it as a fundamental principle that for centuries, for thousands of years before theadvent of Mohammed, there arose from time to time messengers, illumined by Divine Grace,for and among those races of the earth which had sufficiently advanced intellectually tocomprehend such a message. Thus Abraham, Moses, Jesus and all the Prophets of Israel areuniversally accepted by Islam. Muslims indeed know no limitation merely to the Prophets ofIsrael; they are ready to admit that there were similar Divinely inspired messengers in othercountries -- Gautama Buddha, Shri Krishna and Shri Ram in India, Socrates in Greece, thewise men of China, and many other sages and saints among peoples and civilizations, trace ofwhich we have lost. Thus man's soul has never been left without a specially inspiredmessenger from the soul that sustains, embraces and is the universe. Then what need wasthere for a Divine revelation to Mohammed? The answer of Islam is precise and clear. Inspite of its great spiritual strength, Jewish monotheism has retained two characteristics whichrender it essentially different from Islamic monotheism: God has remained, in spite of all, anational and racial God for the children of Israel, and His personality is entirely separate fromits supreme manifestation, the Universe. In far-distant countries such as India and China, thepurity of the Faith in the one God had been so vitiated by polytheism, by idolatry and even bya pantheism which was hardly distinguishable from atheism that these popular and folklorereligions bore little resemblance to that which emanated from the true and pure Godhead.Christianity lost its strength and meaning for Muslims in that it saw its great and gloriousfounder not as a man but as God incarnate in man, as God made Flesh. Thus there was anabsolute need for the Divine Word's revelation, to Mohammed himself, a man like the others,of God's person and of his relations to the Universe which he had created. Once man has thuscomprehended the essence of existence, there remains for him the duty, since he knows theabsolute value of his own soul, of making for himself a direct path which will constantly leadhis individual soul to and bind it with the universal Soul of which the Universe -- as much ofit as we perceive with our limited vision -- is one of the infinite manifestations. Thus Islam'sbasic principle can only be defined as monorealism and not as monotheism. Consider, forexample, the opening declaration of every Islamic prayer: "Allah-o-Akbar." What does thatmean? There can be no doubt that the second word of the declaration likens the character ofAllah to a matrix which contains all and gives existence to the infinite, to space, to time, tothe Universe, to all active and passive forces imaginable, to life and to the soul. Imam Hassanhas explained the Islamic doctrine of God and the Universe by analogy with the sun and itsreflection in the pool of a fountain; there is certainly a reflection or image of the sun, but withwhat poverty and with what little reality; how small and pale is the likeness between thisimpalpable image and the immense, blazing, white-hot glory of the celestial sphere itself.Allah is the sun; and the Universe, as we know it in all its magnitude, and time, with itspower, are nothing more than the reflection of the Absolute in the mirror of the fountain.There is a fundamental difference between the Jewish idea of creation and that of Islam. Thecreation according to Islam is not a unique act in a given time but a perpetual and constantevent; and God supports and sustains all existence at every moment by His will and Histhought. Outside His will, outside His thought, all is nothing, even the things which seem tous absolutely self-evident such as space and time. Allah alone wishes: the Universe exists;and all manifestations are as a witness of the Divine will. I think that I have sufficientlyexplained the difference between the Islamic doctrine of the unity of God and, on one side,the theistic ideas, founded upon the Old Testament, and on the other, the pantheistic anddualistic ideas of the Indian religion and that of Zoroaster. But having known the real, theAbsolute, having understood the Universe as an infinite succession of events, intended byGod, we need an ethic, a code of conduct in order to be able to elevate ourselves toward theideal demanded by God.Let us then study the duties of man, as the great majority interpret them, according to theverses of the Koran and the Traditions of the Prophet. First of all, the relations of man toGod: there are no priests and no monks. There is no confession of sins, except directly toGod.A man who does not marry, who refuses to shoulder the responsibilities of fatherhood, ofbuilding up a home and raising a family through marriage, is severely condemned. In Islamthere are no extreme renunciations, no asceticism, no maceration, above all no flagellations tosubjugate the body. The healthy human body is the temple in which the flame of the HolySpirit burns, and thus it deserves the respect of scrupulous cleanliness and personal hygiene.Prayer is a daily necessity, a direct communication of the spark with the universal flame.Reasonable fasting for a month in every year, provided a man's health is not impairedthereby, is an essential part of the body's discipline through which the body learns torenounce all impure desires. Adultery, alcoholism, slander and thinking evil of one's neighborare specifically and severely condemned. All men, rich and poor, must aid one anothermaterially and personally. The rules vary in detail, but they all maintain the principle ofuniversal mutual aid in the Muslim fraternity. This fraternity is absolute, and it comprisesmen of all colors and all races: black, white, yellow, tawny; all are the sons of Adam in theflesh and all carry in them a spark of the Divine Light. Everyone should strive his best to seethat this spark be not extinguished but rather developed to that full "Companionship-on-High" which was the vision expressed in the last words of the Prophet on his deathbed, thevision of that blessed state which he saw clearly awaiting him. In Islam the Faithful believe inDivine justice and are convinced that the solution of the great problem of predestination andfree will is to be found in the compromise that God knows what man is going to do, but thatman is free to do it or not.Wars are condemned. Peace ought to be universal. Islam means peace, God's peace with manand the peace of men one to another. Usury is condemned, but free and honest trade andagriculture -- in all its forms -- are encouraged, since they manifest a Divine service, and thewelfare of mankind depends upon the continuation and the intensification of these legitimatelabors. Politically a republican form of government seems to be the most rightful; for inIslamic countries, which have witnessed the development of absolute monarchies with a greatconcentration of power within them, the election of the monarch has always remained alifeless formula which has simply legitimized the usurpation of power.After death Divine justice will take into consideration the faith, the prayers and the deeds ofman. For the chosen there is eternal life and the spiritual felicity of the Divine vision. For thecondemned there is hell, where they will be consumed with regret for not having known howto merit the grace and the blessing of Divine mercy.Islamic doctrine goes further than the other great religions, for it proclaims the presence ofthe soul, perhaps minute but nevertheless existing in an embryonic state, in all existence -- inmatter, in animals, trees, and space itself. Every individual, every molecule, every atom hasits own spiritual relationship with the All-Powerful Soul of God. But men and women, beingmore highly developed, are immensely more advanced than the infinite number of otherbeings known to us. Islam acknowledges the existence of angels, of great souls who havedeveloped themselves to the highest possible planes of the human soul and higher, and whoare centers of the forces which are scattered throughout the Universe. Without going as far asChristianity Islam recognizes the existence of evil spirits which seek by means of their secretsuggestions to us to turn us from good, from that straight way traced by God's finger for theeternal happiness of the humblest as of the greatest -- Abraham, Jesus, Mohammed.Thus far I have described those tenets of Islam which are professed and held in common byall Muslims of any and every sect or subsect. I now come to the divergence of the streams ofthought. The Sunnis are the people of the Sonna or tradition. Their Kalama or profession offaith is "There is no God but God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God." To this the Shiasadd: "And Ali, the companion of Mohammed, is the Vicar of God." Etymologically the word"Shia" means either a stream or a section.The Prophet died without appointing a Khalif or successor. The Shia school of thoughtmaintains that although direct Divine inspiration ceased at the Prophet's death, the need ofDivine guidance continued and this could not be left merely to millions of mortal men,subject to the whims and gusts of passion and material necessity, capable of beingmomentarily but tragically misled by greed, by oratory, or by the sudden desire for materialadvantage. These dangers were manifest in the period immediately following our HolyProphet's death. Mohammed had been, as I have shown, both a temporal and a spiritualsovereign. The Khalif or successor of the Prophet was to succeed him in both thesecapacities; he was to be both Emir-al-Momenin or "commander of the true believers" andImam-al-Muslimin or "spiritual chief of the devout." Perhaps an analogy from the Latin,Western world will make this clearer: he would be Supreme Pontiff as well as Imperator ortemporal ruler.Ali, the Prophet's cousin and son-in-law, the husband of his beloved and only surviving child,Fatima, his first convert, his bold champion in many a war, who the Prophet in his lifetimesaid would be to him as Aaron was to Moses, his brother and right-hand man, in the veins ofwhose descendants the Prophet's own blood would flow, appeared destined to be that truesuccessor; and such had been the general expectation of Islam. The Shias have thereforealways held that after the Prophet's death, Divine power, guidance and leadership manifestedthemselves in Hazrat Ali as the first Imam or spiritual chief of the devout. The Sunnis,however, consider him the fourth in the succession of Khalifs to temporal power. The Imamis thus the successor of the Prophet in his religious capacity; he is the man who must beobeyed and who dwells among those from whom he commands spiritual obedience. TheSunnis have always held that this authority is merely temporal and secular, and is exertedonly in the political sphere; they believe therefore that it appertains to any lawfullyconstituted political head of a state, to a governor or to the president of a republic. The Shiassay that this authority is all-pervading and is concerned with spiritual matters also, that it istransferred by inherited right to the Prophet's successors of his blood.How this came about is best described in the words of Mr. Justice Arnold in his judgmentdelivered in the High Court of Bombay on November 12, 1866, in the great lawsuit broughtagainst my grandfather, to which I later refer."The influence of Ayesha, the young and favorite wife of Mohammed, a rancorous enemy ofFatima and of Ali, procured the election of her own father Abu Bakr; to Abu Bakr succeededOmar, and to him Osman, upon whose death, in the year 655 of the Christian era, Ali was atlast raised to the Khalifat. He was not even then unopposed; aided by Ayesha, Moawiyah ofthe family of the Ummayads, contested the Khalifat with him, and while the strife was stilldoubtful, in the year A.D. 660, Ali was slain by a Kharegite, or Muslim fanatic, in themosque of Cufa, at that time the principal Muslim city on the right or west bank of theEuphrates -- itself long since a ruin, at no great distance from the ruins of Babylon."Mr. Justice Arnold's judgment gives a lucid and moving account of the effect on Muslim lifeand thought of this assassination and of the subsequent murders -- nine years and twentyyears after their father -- of Ali's two sons, Hassan and Hussein, the Prophet's belovedgrandchildren whom he himself had publicly hailed as "the foremost among the youths ofParadise"; of the tragic and embittered hostility and misunderstanding that developedbetween the two main Muslim sects, and all the sorrow and the strife that afflicted succeedinggenerations.Of the Shias there are many subdivisions; some of them believe that this spiritual headship,this Imamat which was Hazrat Ali's, descended through him in the sixth generation to Ismailfrom whom I myself claim my descent and my Imamat. Others believe that the Imamat is tobe traced from Zeid, the grandson of Imam Hussein, the Prophet's grandson martyred atKerbela. Still others, including the vast majority of the people of Persia, and Indian Shias,believe that the Imamat is now held by a living Imam, the twelfth from Ali, who has neverdied, who is alive and has lived thirteen hundred years among us, unseen but seeing; thosewho profess this doctrine are known as the Asna Asharis. The Ismailis themselves are dividedinto two parties, a division which stems from the period when my ancestors held the FatimiteKhalifat of Egypt. One party accepts my ancestor, Nozar, as the rightful successor of theKhalif of Egypt Mustansir; whereas the other claims as Imam his other son the KhalifMustalli.Thenceforward the story of the Ismailis, of my ancestors and their followers, moves throughall the complexities, the ebb and flow, of Islamic history through many centuries. Gibbon, ithas been said, abandoned as hopeless the task of clearing up the obscurities of an Asiaticpedigree; there is, however, endless fascination in the study of the web of characters and ofevents, woven across the ages, which unites us in this present time with all these far-distantglories, tragedies and mysteries. Often persecuted and oppressed, the faith of my ancestorswas never destroyed; at times it flourished as in the epoch of the Fatimite Khalifs, at times itwas obscure and little understood.After the loss of the Fatimite Khalifat in Egypt my ancestors moved first to the highlands ofSyria and the Lebanon; thence they journeyed eastward to the mountains of Iran. Theyestablished a stronghold on the craggy peak of Alamut in the Elburz Mountains, the rangewhich separates from the rest of Persia the provinces lying immediately to the south of theCaspian. Legend and history intertwine here in the strange tale of the Old Man of theMountains, and of those hereditary Grand Masters of the Order of the Assassins who heldAlamut for nearly two hundred years. In this period the Ismaili faith was well known in Syria,in Iraq, in Arabia itself, and far up into Central Asia. Cities such as Samarkand and Bokharawere then great centers of Muslim learning and thought. A little later in the thirteenth centuryof the Christian era, Ismaili religious propaganda penetrated into what is Sinkiang andChinese Turkestan. There was a time in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries when theIsmaili doctrine was the chief and most influential Shi'ite school of thought; but later with thetriumph of the Saffevi Dynasty in Iran (particularly in its northwest province, Azerbaijan) theAsna Ashari, or Twelfth Imam, sect established its predominance. Remnants of the Ismailifaith remained firm and are still to be found in many parts of Asia, North Africa and Iran. Thehistorical centers of Ismailism indeed are scattered widely over all the Islamic world. In themountainous regions of Syria, for example, are to be found the Druzes, in their fastness in theJebel Druze. They are really Ismallis who did not originally follow my family in theirmigration out of Egypt but remained with the memory of my ancestor, Al Hakem, theFatimite Khalif of Egypt, but they established their doctrines on lines very similar to those ofthe Syrian Ismailis, who, in present times, are my followers. Similar Ismaili "islands" exist insouthern Egypt, in the Yemen and of course in Iraq. In Iran the centers are around Mahalat,westward toward Hamadan and to the south of Tehran; others are in Khorassan to the northand east around about Yezd, around Kerman and southward along the coast of the PersianGulf from Bandar Abbas to the borders of Pakistan and Sind, and into Baluchistan. Others arein Afghanistan, in Kabul itself; there are many in Russia and Central Asia, around Yarkand,Kashgar and in many villages and settlements in Sinkiang. In India certain Hindu tribes wereconverted by missionaries sent to them by my ancestor, Shah Islam Shah, and took the nameof Khojas; a similar process of conversion occurred in Burma as recently as the nineteenthcentury.Now that I have brought this brief record of Ismaili origin, vicissitudes and wanderingswithin sight of the contemporary world, it may be timely to give an account in some detail ofthe life and deeds of my grandfather, the first to be known as the Aga Khan, who emergedinto the light of history early in the nineteenth century of the Christian era. His life was (asMr. Justice Arnold observed) "adventurous and romantic." He was the hereditary chieftain ofthe important city of Kerman and the son-in-law of the powerful and able Persian monarch,Fateh Ali Shah, holding considerable territorial possessions in addition to his inheritedImamat of the Ismailis.In 1838 he was involved in conflict with the then ruling Emperor Mohammed Shah, forreasons of which Mr. Justice Arnold gave the following account: "Hadji Mirza Ahasi, whohad been the tutor of Mohammed Shah, was during the whole reign of his royal pupil (from1834 to 1848) the Prime Minister of Persia. A Persian of very low origin formerly in theservice of the Aga Khan, had become the chief favorite and minion of the all-powerfulminister. This person, though his patron, had the impudence to demand in marriage for hisson one of the daughters of the Aga Khan, a granddaughter of the late Shah-in-Shah! This,says the Persian historian, was felt by the Aga Khan to be a great insult; and the request,though strongly pressed by the Prime Minister, was indignantly refused. Having thus madethe most powerful man in Persia his deadly enemy, the Aga Khan probably felt that his bestchance of safety was to assert himself in arms -- a course not uncommon with the greatfeudatories of disorganized Persia. Making Kerman his headquarters, he appears to have keptup the fight with varying fortunes through the years 1838-1839 and part of 1840. In the latteryear, overpowered by numbers, he was forced to flight and with difficulty made his escape,attended by a few horsemen, through the deserts of Baluchistan to Sind."In his wanderings of the next few years my grandfather encountered and rendered stoutassistance to the British in their process of military and imperial expansion northward andwestward from the Punjab. In Sind he raised and maintained a troop of light horse (thedescendants of whose survivors were so grave an anxiety to me many years later) and duringthe latter stages of the first Afghan War, in 1841 and 1842, he and his cavalry were of serviceto General Nott in Kardahar and to General England when he advanced out of Sind to joinNott. For these services and for others which he rendered to Sir Charles Napier in hisconquest of Sind in 1843-1844, my grandfather received a pension from the BritishGovernment.In 1845 my grandfather reached Bombay where -- as Mr. Justice Arnold expressed it -- "hewas received by the cordial homage of the whole Khoja population of this city and itsneighborhood." For a year or two from 1846 he was in Calcutta as a political prisonerbecause Mohammed Shah had remonstrated to the British Government about his presence ina port of such ready access to Persia as Bombay. However, in 1848 Mohammed Shah's reigncame to an end, and my grandfather settled peaceably in Bombay and there established hisdurkhana or headquarters. Not only was this a wise and happy personal decision, but it had anadmirable effect on the religious and communal life of the whole Ismaili world. It was as ifthe heavy load of persecution and fanatical hostility, which they had had to bear for so long,was lifted. Deputations came to Bombay from places as remote as Kashgar, Bokhara, all partsof Iran, Syria, the Yemen, the African coast and the then narrowly settled hinterland behindit.Since then there has been no fundamental or violent change in the Ismaili way of life or in theconditions in which my followers can pursue their own religion. At present no deputationscome from Russia, but Ismailis in Russia and in Central Asia are not persecuted and are quitefree in their religious life; they cannot of course send the tribute, which is merely a tokentribute and never has been the sort of mulcting which a few fanatical enemies of the Ismailishave alleged it to be.With Sinkiang, Kashgar and Yarkand we have no communication at present, since thefrontier is closed -- no more firmly against Ismailis than against anyone else -- but we knowthat they are free to follow their religion and that they are firm and devoted Ismailis with agreat deal of self-confidence and the feeling that they constitute by far the most importantIsmaili community in the whole world. From Iran representatives and commissions come andgo; from Syria they used to come to India regularly, but now from time to time members ofmy family go to Syria, or my Syrian followers come and visit me in Egypt. Not long ago Iwent to Damascus where a great number of my followers came to pay their respects. Innearly all those countries the greater part of the tribute to the Imam is spent on schools, orprayer houses, and on the administration of various religious and social institutions. Aconsiderable measure of local responsibility prevails; questions of marriage and divorce, forexample, are entirely the concern of the local representative of the Imam. At times prosperouscommunities among the Ismailis help less prosperous ones in respect to similar institutions. Iissue general instructions and orders; but the actual day-to-day administrative work of eachlocal community is done by the Imam's representative and local chief. Many of these localheadsbips throughout Central Asia, for example, are hereditary. But we have no general,regular system. Sometimes a son succeeds, sometimes a grandson. Sometimes he is known asVizir, or Kamdar (a title which by constant use has degenerated into Kamria). Sometimes heis Rais or Rai. In Syria the Imam's representatives are known as Amirs; in some parts ofCentral Asia such as Hunza, the word "Amir" has been colloquialized and shortened to Mir.The headship of a religious community spread over a considerable part of the world surface --from Cape Town to Kashgar, from Syria to Singapore -- cannot be sustained in accordancewith any cut-anddried system. Moral conditions, material facilities, national aspirations andoutlook and profoundly differing historical backgrounds have to be borne in mind, and thenecessary mental adjustments made.There is therefore great variety and great flexibility of administration. In the British,Portuguese and French colonies of East Africa, in Uganda, Portuguese East Africa,Madagascar, Natal and Cape Colony there is a highly developed and civilized administrativesystem of councils. Educational administrators, property agents, executive and judicialcouncils all perform an immense amount of day-today administrative work, and under mygeneral orders vast financial administration as well.In India and Pakistan there is a similar technique of administration but in a less developedand looser form. In Burma and Malaya the organization closely resembles that of the Ismailisin Africa. Syria, Iran and the Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan are all countries withtheir strongly marked individuality, historical background and traditions. These historicalvariations over centuries, the accessibility, or lack of it, for many of the more isolatedcommunities, and the development of communications between my family and my followershave all had their effect.In Central Asia the leadership of the Ismailis is by inheritance in the hands of certain familiesand has been handed down in continuous line through centuries. This is true of my followersin Afghanistan, and in Russia and Chinese Turkestan, where certain families have been sincetheir conversion to Islam administrators and representatives of the Imam. The localleadership passes down in a close connection of kinship from one generation to another.Sometimes it is the hereditary chieftain and occasionally -- as in the case of Hunza -- thesecular king, himself an Ismaili, who is the administrator of the religious brotherhood.The correspondence which I maintain with all these far-scattered communities is affected bylocal circumstances. In Baghdad I have special representatives who deal with Arabianmatters; in Iran I have special representatives in every province who deal with Ismaili affairs,who are also generally members of families that have as a matter of inheritance supplied localIsmaili leaders for probably as long as these people have been linked with my family. InSyria, one such family of representatives has retained an unbroken connection with myfamily for more than a thousand years.Ismailism has survived because it has always been fluid. Rigidity is contrary to our wholeway of life and outlook. There have really been no cut-and-dried rules; even the set ofregulations known as the Holy Laws are directions as to method and procedure and notdetailed orders about results to be obtained. In some countries -India and Africa for example -the Ismailis have a council system, under which their local councilors are charged with allinternal administrative responsibility, and report to me what they have done. In Syria, CentralAsia and Iran, leadership, as I have said, is vested in hereditary recommended leaders andchiefs, who are the Imam's the organization closely resembles that of the Ismailis in Africa.Syria, Iran and the Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan are all countries with theirstrongly marked individuality, historical background and traditions. These historicalvariations over centuries, the accessibility, or lack of it, for many of the more isolatedcommunities, and the development of communications between my family and my followershave all had their effect.In Central Asia the leadership of the Ismailis is by inheritance in the hands of certain familiesand has been handed down in continuous line through centuries. This is true of my followersin Afghanistan, and in Russia and Chinese Turkestan, where certain families have been sincetheir conversion to Islam administrators and representatives of the Imam. The localleadership passes down in a close connection of kinship from one generation to another.Sometimes it is the hereditary chieftain and occasionally -- as in the case of Hunza -- thesecular king, himself an Ismaili, who is the administrator of the religious brotherhood.The correspondence which I maintain with all these far-scattered communities is affected bylocal circumstances. In Baghdad I have special representatives who deal with Arabianmatters; in Iran I have special representatives in every province who deal with Ismaili affairs,who are also generally members of families that have as a matter of inheritance supplied localIsmaili leaders for probably as long as these people have been linked with my family. InSyria, one such family of representatives has retained an unbroken connection with myfamily for more than a thousand years.Ismailism has survived because it has always been fluid. Rigidity is contrary to our wholeway of life and outlook. There have really been no cut-and-dried rules; even the set ofregulations known as the Holy Laws are directions as to method and procedure and notdetailed orders about results to be obtained. In some countries -India and Africa for example -the Ismailis have a council system, under which their local councilors are charged with allinternal administrative responsibility, and report to me what they have done. In Syria, CentralAsia and Iran, leadership, as I have said, is vested in hereditary recommended leaders andchiefs, who are the Imam’s representatives and who looks after the administration of thevarious Jamats, or congregations.From all parts of the Ismaili world with which regular contact is politically possible aconstant flow of communications and reports comes to me. Attending to these, answeringthem, giving my solutions of specific problems presented to me, discharging my duties ashereditary Imam of this far-scattered religious community and association -- such is myworking life, and so it has been since I was a boy.Much of the work of the Ismaili councils and of the Imam's representatives nowadays ispurely social, and is concerned with the proper contractual arrangement of matters such asmarriage and divorce. On this subject I should perhaps say that nowhere in the world whereIsmailis are now settled is there any persecution of them or interference with their faith andcustoms except if and when the general laws of the country are contrary to institutions, suchas plurality of wives. It is generally overlooked that among Ismailis no one can take a secondwife or divorce his first wife for a whim or -- as is sometimes falsely imagined in the West --some frivolous or erratic pretext. There are usually, to our way of thinking, some very goodreasons for either action. To beget children is a very proper need and desire in everymarriage; if after many years of married life there is still no issue, often a wife herself longsto see her home brightened by the presence of children with all the laughter, hope, joy anddeep contentment that they bring with them. In other instances there is so profound adifference of character that a divorce is found to be the best solution for the happiness of bothparties. But in every case -- whether a second wife is taken or a divorce is granted -- thevarious councils or (where there are no councils) the representatives of the Imam have anabsolute duty to safeguard the interests of the wife; if a second wife is taken, it is a matter ofseeing that full financial protection is assured to the first wife, or if there is a divorce, ofseeing that there is a generous, adequate and seemly monetary settlement. It is important thatit should be realized among non-Muslims that the Islamic view of the institution of marriage -and of all that relates to it, divorce, plurality of wives and so on -- is a question solely ofcontract, of consent and of definite and mutually accepted responsibilities. The sacramentalconcept of marriage is not Islam's; therefore except indirectly there is no question of itsreligious significance, and there is no religious ceremony to invest it with the solemnity andthe symbolism which appertain to marriage in other religions, like Christianity and Hinduism.It is exactly analogous to -- in the West -- an entirely civil and secular marriage in a registryoffice or before a judge. Prayers of course can be offered -- prayers for happiness, prosperityand good health -- but there can be no religious ritual beyond these, and they indeed aresolely a matter of personal choice. There is therefore no kind of marriage in Islam, or amongthe Ismallis, except the marriage of mutual consent and mutual understanding. And as I haveindicated, much of the work of the Ismaili councils and of the Imam's representatives in allour Ismaili communities is to see that marriages are properly registered and to ensure thatdivorce, though not a sin, is so executed that the interests of neither party suffer from it, thatas much protection as possible is given to women, and most of all that the maintenance ofyoung children is safeguarded.The past seventy years have witnessed steady, stable progress on the part of the Ismailiswherever they have settled. Under the Ottoman Empire, in the reign of Abdul Hamid, therewas a considerable degree of persecution. A minority, like several other minorities in hisempire, they suffered hardship, and many of their leaders endured imprisonment in the latteryears of his despotic rule. With the Young Turk revolution, however, the period ofpersecution ended. And now, in spite of all the vast political shifts and changes which theworld has undergone, I think it may reasonably be claimed that the lot of the Ismailis ingeneral throughout the world is a fairly satisfactory one; wherever they are settled theircommunities compose a happy, self-respecting, law-abiding and industrious element insociety.What has been my own policy with my followers? Our religion is our religion, you eitherbelieve in it or you do not. You can leave a faith but you cannot, if you do not accept itstenets, remain within it and claim to "reform" it. You can abandon those tenets, but youcannot try to change them and still protest that you belong to the particular sect that holdsthem. Many people have left the Ismaili faith, just as others have joined it throughout theages. About a score of people out of many millions -- a small group in Karachi and in India --pretended to be Ismailis but called themselves "reformers." The true Ismailis immediatelyexcommunicated them. There has never been any question of changing the Ismaili faith; thatfaith has remained the same and must remain the same. Those who have not believed in ithave rightly left it; we bear them no ill-will and respect them for their sincerity.What about political guidance? It has been the practice of my ancestors, to which I havestrictly adhered, always to advise Ismailis to be absolutely loyal and devoted subjects of theState -- whatever its constitution, monarchical or republican -- of which they are citizens.Neither my ancestors nor I have ever tried to influence our followers one way or another, butwe have told them that the constituted legal authority of any country in which they abidemust have their full and absolute loyalty. Similarly if any government approaches me andasks me for my help and my advice to its subjects, this advice is invariably -- as was myfather's and my grandfather's -- that they must be loyal and law-abiding, and if they have anypolitical grievances they must approach their government as legally constituted, and inloyalty and fidelity to it. All my teaching and my guidance for my followers has been infulfillment of this principle: render unto God the things which are God's and to Caesar thosewhich are Caesar's.In matters of social reform I have tried to exert my influence and authority sensibly andprogressively. I have always sought to encourage the emancipation and education of women.In my grandfather's and my father's time the Ismailis were far ahead of any other Muslim sectin the matter of the abolition of the strict veil, even in extremely conservative countries. Ihave absolutely abolished it; nowadays you will never find an Ismaili woman wearing theveil. Everywhere I have always encouraged girls' schools, even in regions where otherwisethey were completely unknown. I say with pride that my Ismaili followers are, in this matterof social welfare, far in advance of any other Muslim sect. No doubt it is possible to findindividuals equally advanced, but I am convinced that our social conditions as a body --education for both boys and girls, marriage and domestic outlook and customs, the controlover divorce, the provision for children in the event of divorce, and so forth -- are far ahead.We were pioneers in the introduction of midwifery, and long before any other Muslimcommunity in the Middle East, we had trained nurses for childbirth. With the support andhelp of Lady Dufferin's nursing association in India, I was able -- at a time when normalconditions in these matters were terribly unsanitary -- to introduce a modern outlook onchildbirth, with trained midwives, not only in India and Burma but in Africa and (so far asgeneral conditions permitted) in Syria and Iraq.In Africa, where I have been able to give active help as well as advice, we have put thefinances of individuals and of the various communities on a thoroughly safe basis. Weestablished an insurance company -- the Jubilee Insurance -- whose shares have greatlyincreased in value. We also set up what we called an investment trust, which is really a vastassociation for receiving money and then putting it out on loan, at a low rate of interest, toIsmaili traders and to people who want to buy or build their own houses.About my own personal wealth a great deal of nonsense has been written. There must behundreds of people in the United States with a larger capital wealth than mine; and the sameis true of Europe. Perhaps not many people, in view of the incidence of taxation, even in theUnited States, have the control over an income that I exercise; but this control carries with it -as an unwritten law -- the upkeep of all the various communal, social and religiousinstitutions of my Ismaili following, and in the end only a small fraction of it -- if any -- isleft for members of my family and myself.When I read about the "millions of pounds a year" I am supposed to possess, I know only thatif I had an income of that size I should be ashamed of myself. There is a great deal of truth inAndrew Carnegie's remark: "The man who dies rich, dies disgraced." I should add: The manwho lives rich, lives disgraced. By “lives rich" I mean the man who lives and spends for hisown pleasure at a rate and on a scale of living in excess of that customary among those callednowadays "the upper income group" in the country of which he is a citizen. I am not acommunist, nor do I believe that a high standard of private life is a sin and an affront tosociety. I feel no flicker of shame at owning three or four cars; in India, where a great manypeople from outside come and go, I always have more cars for their use.Nor am I ashamed of being the owner of a big racing stable, about which I propose to saysomething in a later chapter. My family, as I have indicated, have had a long, honorable andaffectionate association with horsemanship in all its forms. Had I to contemplate either givingup a considerable number of horses in training or turning the stable into a paying concern, Ihave no doubt that by selling a considerable proportion of my stock I could turn it into apaying business any day of the week. Neither my grandfather, my father nor I have everlooked on our racing as simply a money-making matter, but as a sport which, by carefulattention and thoughtful administration, could become self-supporting and a permanentsource of pleasure not only for ourselves, as owners, but for thousands -- indeed for millions -who follow our colors on the turf; and we have considered our studs and our training stablesas sources of wealth for the countries in which they are maintained and of practicalusefulness from the point of view of preserving and raising the standard of bloodstock.A specific charge of extravagance against our family related to the period in which some twothousand people a day were living and feeding at our expense. These two thousand were,after all, descendants and dependents of people who had exiled themselves from Iran with mygrandfather and had given up their homes and estates, and in the conditions of the time we, asheads of the Ismaili community, were responsible for their welfare and maintenance. As soonas I could, and as thoroughly as I could, I dealt with that problem, so that now theirdescendants are far happier and far more self-reliant than they were, and I have nothing onmy conscience about the way in which I dealt with it.I would have been a profoundly unhappy man if I had possessed one tenth of the fabulousamount of wealth which people say that I have at my disposal, for then indeed I should havefelt all my life that I was carrying a dead weight -- useless alike to my family and my friendsor, for that matter, to my followers. Beyond a certain point wealth and the materialadvantages which it brings do more harm than good, to societies as to individuals.So far as their way of life is concerned, I have tried to vary the advice which I have given tomy followers in accordance with the country or state in which they live. Thus in the Britishcolony of East Africa I strongly urge them to make English their first language, to found theirfamily and domestic lives along English lines and in general to adopt British and Europeancustoms -- except in the matter of alcohol and slavery to tobacco. I am convinced that livingas they must in a multiracial society, the kind of social life and its organization which givesthem the greatest opportunities to develop their personalities and is the most practicallyuseful is the one which they ought to follow. On the other hand, to those who live in Burma Ihave given the same sort of advice -- but that they should follow a Burman way of life ratherthan any other. In Muslim countries like Syria, Egypt, Iraq and Iran of course there are nodifficulties at all. My own family's home and social life has always followed an Iranian-Muslim pattern; this has involved no violent or radical readjustment wherever I have lived, sothat the European ladies whom I have married, one after the other, have in fact easily andhappily acquired an Iranian-Muslim outlook and rhythm of life.In Africa, however, my followers faced a much more acute problem. They arrived there withAsiatic habits and an Asiatic pattern of existence, but they encountered a society in process ofdevelopment which is, if anything, European-African. To have retained an Asiatic outlook inmatters of language, habits and clothing would have been for them a complication andsocially a dead weight of archaism in the Africa of the future. In Pakistan and modern Bharatthe Ismailis are likely in the future to assume two totally different patterns of culture. In WestPakistan they will probably speak Urdu or what used to be called Hindustani, and their socialhabits and customs will be molded accordingly. In East Pakistan Bengali dress and languagewill play a major part in Ismaili life. In Bharat the languages which they will speak willprobably be Gujerati and Marathi, and their outlook and way of life similarly will take on aGujerati-Marathi shape. Yet I am certain that so long as they retain their faith the brotherhoodof Islam will unite all these people of varying social outlook and patterns of behavior and willkeep them together in spirit.31-IIIBoyhood in IndiaMY FIRST CONSCIOUS MEMORY is of something that happened when I was a child ofthree and a half. I have a clear recollection of an old man, almost blind, seated on a gray Arabhorse, peering to watch a line of horses galloping in training. The time was February orMarch, 1881; the old man was my grandfather, the Aga Khan, whose name, title, privilegesand responsibilities I was to inherit. I too was on a pony, standing near my grandfather, and Iwas held up in the saddle by a man on either side of me. The scene was Bombay, where mygrandfather, after the years of wandering and various vicissitudes described earlier, hadsettled with most of his family and a considerable retinue.I was born in Karachi on November 2, 1877, but I spent the whole of my boyhood and youthin Bombay and Poona. That was a Bombay in countless respects inconceivably different fromthe huge, glittering, commercial and industrial city that is present-day Bombay. It is true thatit was a large and prosperous port, the capital of the Bombay Presidency, one of the leadingprovinces of British India, the seat of a Governor and his Administration, and of animpressive judicature, and the headquarters of a not inconsiderable army. The outstandingdifference between that Bombay and Bombay today lies, of course, in the two words "BritishIndia." If the capital and focus of the British Raj in India lay, in those days, many hundreds ofmiles to the northeast in Calcutta (and in the summers in the hill town of Simla), there was inBombay a long and close tradition of association with Britain. Had not indeed Bombay firstbeen joined to the possessions of the British Crown as part of the dowry of Catherine ofBraganza, the wife of Charles II?The Bombay of the mid-nineteenth century in which my grandfather settled was a muchsmaller, more compact city than its present-day descendant. The home -- or homes -- of myfamily covered a great deal of some of the more densely populous and prosperous parts; evenin my childhood in the eighties it was a huge rambling place, taking in most of two divisionsof the present city, Mazagaon and Byculla, stretching from Nesbit Road to Hassanarbad, mygrandfather's tomb. This would be comparable to a large part of the West End of London ordowntown Manhattan being a single enclosed estate; or to put it in terms of Paris, anenclosure in length from, say, the Madeleine to well beyond the Opéra, and in breadth fromthe Madeleine to the Pont d'Iena. Within this great area there were several big palaces andinnumerable smaller houses and outbuildings; there were gardens and fountains and also asmall zoo. There were many stables, since the equine population of the estate -- evidence ofmy grandfather's inherited and persistent interest in and love for horse racing and horsebreeding -- never numbered less than a hundred.The human population, of course, was far more numerous, and with endless ramifications,divisions and subdivisions. It was the household of a political pretender (in the proper senseof that word) of accepted standing. My grandfather in his migration from Persia had broughtwith him more than a thousand relatives, dependents, clients, associates, personal andpolitical supporters, ranging from the humblest groom or servant to a man of princely stature,a direct near-descendant of Nadirshah of Delhi fame, who had taken my grandfather's side inthe disputes and troubles in Persia and with him had gone into exile.With the passage of years, however, it had become no longer exile. My grandfather had beenconfirmed in his rights and titles by a judgment of the Bombay High Court in 1886. * He wasan accepted and honored leader of the community, accorded princely status by the British Rajand its representatives in India. Aga Hall, our Bombay home, was his chief seat, but he hadanother palace, or group of palaces, in Poona, whither we all made seasonal migrations. Hislife and his world, the life and world into which I was born, were feudal in a fashion farremoved from, and indeed not understood by, people of the present day. He was the head andcenter of a loose but clearly comprehended system of allegiance and adherence; wherever hewent, his home, even if only temporary, was a focus of loyalty and homage -- in the Ismailiword, a durkhana, a place of pilgrimage to be visited from time to time by as many of hisassociates and supporters as possible. This necessitated the maintenance of an impressiveestablishment -- a need reinforced by the circumstances of my grandfather's departure fromPersia and by the number of dependents whom he brought with him.His family and his dependents, his sons and their wives, his officials, servants and followers,were disposed in a series of houses and palaces around him, both in Bombay and in Poona. Incourse of time many of his Persian followers married Indian wives, many of them of Ismailifamilies. They and their children remained under my grandfather's protection and, after hisdeath, under my father's and then under mine. When my grandfather died, there was a rough-and-ready and unofficial division of property, though not of leadership and responsibility,between my father -- his sole rightful heir as Imam -- and my various uncles and aunts. I wasmy father's sole and unique heir in accordance with Muslim law -- unlike my father inrelation to his grandfather.From my earliest childhood I was trained to be conscious of my inheritance, and of themagnitude of its responsibilities. My early years were in many ways difficult, even harsh. Iwas the only surviving heir, for my two full brothers both died in infancy and my two half-brothers in their young manhood. I was known to be delicate -a succession of English doctorshad prophesied, with somber unanimity, that I would not live to be twenty-five. I wastherefore watched over by my mother with extreme vigilance and trepidation. I was pettedand spoiled by nurses and foster-mothers and by a group of my mother's ladies in waiting,many of whom were already elderly, in whose eyes I was the "petit prince chériThe judgment delivered on November 12, 1866 by Mr. Justice Arnold, contains a classic,fully detailed account of the origins of Ismailism and of the beginnings of my family.My childhood was saddened -- and complicated -- by my father's sudden death frompneumonia, only a little over four years after my grandfather's. My father had inherited to thefull my grandfather's sporting interests, not only in horse breeding and racing but as a shotand hunter of big game. In this latter pastime he was extremely skilled and utterly fearless,for his bag over years consisted not only of thousands of deer of every kind and every sort ofgame bird but of a great many tigers. In tiger shooting his courage was as great as his skill.When the Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII) paid his state visit to India, he wasentertained at Aga Hall by my grandfather, and commented with interest on the number oftiger skins displayed. How, he asked, did my father get them?Perhaps I should explain that ordinarily a tiger-shoot in India is conducted either (in thenorth) from the back of a specially trained elephant or (elsewhere) from a platformconstructed in a tree overlooking a tiger's known or suspected haunt or lay."Do you go up trees?" asked the Prince of Wales, who -- being stout -- had doubtless recentand rueful memories of being pushed and pulled up trees in this most exciting and aristocraticof all varieties of big-game shooting."No," said my father, whose girth, though considerable, was not as great as his guest's, "I amtoo fat for tree work. I can't climb up. I stand and shoot."My father's death was occasioned not by any mishap when he was out after tiger, but by along day's water-fowling near Poona in August, 1885. There were several hours' heavy rain,the going under foot was heavy and wet and my father was soaked to the skin. He caught asevere chill which turned swiftly and fatally to pneumonia. He was dead eight days later.This was, I can see now, the first big emotional and spiritual crisis of my life. It ended theonly carefree period I had ever known. There was at once a forlorn and kindly attempt toprevent me from missing my father or being allowed to feel unhappy. But the prevalent senseof deep mourning and sadness enveloped the eight-yearold boy that I was. As his heir I wasin a sense the immediate focus of a great new and pressing sense of responsibility. Ourfamily, our émigré dependents, our Ismaili supporters all over the Islamic world deeplymourned my father's death, but they also turned to me, child as I was, now and for the rest ofmy life henceforth entrusted with the sacred charge to which I had been born. The change inmy circumstances came home to me early and insistently. My father's body was embalmedand brought from Poona to Bombay and thence sent to be buried at Nejaf on the west bank ofthe Euphrates, near Cufa and the tomb of our ancestor the Imam Ali -- One of the holiestplaces on earth for the Shias. No sooner were these rites accomplished than a new regime wasimmediately instituted for me.It was, of course, a direct consequence of my new station, but to this day I cannot understandwhy I did not die or turn into an utter dunce under the treatment which I was given. Myeducation for the responsibilities and tasks which I had inherited was serious and strenuous,and it had to be fitted into a regular system of seasonal family migration. From November toApril during the cold weather of each year we were in Bombay; in April and May we were atMahabaleshwar; from June to October we were in Poona and in October we went for a shortspell to one of the smaller hill stations, thence back to Bombay. For ten years -- from 1885 to1895 -- this system continued unchanged; there was no room for a holiday for me, a month, afortnight, even a week off the chain -- at the most a rare day. And relentlessly was I held onthe chain.This was the typical and unchanging pattern of my days: I was called between six and halfpast and had my breakfast -- a weak tea, bread, butter, jam and a Persian sweet. At seven,whether I wanted to or not, I had an hour's riding -- a canter or sometimes a gallop on one ofthe Poona rides or on the racecourse or, at Bombay, along the sands. From eight to half-pasteleven I had lessons with my English and French teachers. Then I had luncheon, and I wasfree until two o'clock. Thereafter I had three hours' instruction in Arabic. A drive or sometennis in the garden or some sort of relaxation was then permitted until dinner at seveno'clock. After dinner came the horror of horrors. I was set down to two hours of calligraphyof the dreariest and most soul-destroying kind. My mother had been impressed by the advice- the foolish advice as it turned out -- of Arabic and Persian scholars and pedants, who hadassured her that calligraphy in the classical Persian and Arabic scripts was of the highestimportance, and they pointed out to her that my two halfbrothers who had died had both hadbeautiful handwriting. My mother, my uncles and everyone else in our household united incompelling me to this horrible calligraphy. It was in fact a very real martyrdom for mebecause no one had realized that I was from birth so shortsighted that to read or write I had tohold a book or paper an inch or two from my nose, and in my vision of the world further thanthose few inches from my nose there was no definition and no delight, for everything I saw --gardens, hills, sea or jungle -was a haze. The simplicity and the sadness of my affliction werefor years unnoticed, and how in the end it came to be rectified I shall describe a little later.The discipline to which I was subjected was rigid, and even the little free time that I wasallowed was subject to invasion. For it was my duty, young as I was, to receive those of myfollowers who came to our home to offer their loyal respect. Saturdays and feast days werethe usual occasions of the receptions, and my guests would sit in the garden, bowing andpaying compliments, bringing gifts and receiving thanks, blessings and benedictions. My partin these ceremonies was august and ordained by tradition -- but a child resented the fact thatthey came in the small amount of free time allowed by the curriculum and never, never inlesson time.Such was the regime to which, at eight, I was subjected. Perhaps it might be appropriate togive a brief account of my way of life in later years. However, I must stress that although Ihave not changed my basic principles in outlook, there have obviously been certain markedmodifications in my pattern of existence. The Aga Khan who dined with Queen Victoria in1898 was not quite the same person as the Aga Khan who had tea with Queen Elizabeth in1953. But throughout this long period I snatched hours out of my daily routine as even now Isnatch them for reading poetry, fiction, newspapers and literary and critical periodicals. Thishas been a persistent trait in my character for sixty years. In the same way I have daily givena certain amount of time to physical exercise. Until I was about fifty, the time that I gave tophysical exercise was devoted to boxing, Sandow's exercises, Indian clubs, long walks, and,in the early years of the century, long cycling tours through France, Italy, Germany, and otherEuropean countries. After I was fifty I had to substitute tennis and golf for these more violentforms of exercise. And since I became sixty I have had to confine myself to golf and walking.My social life also has naturally varied -- not only because I myself have grown older butbecause the economic conditions of the world before 1914 were totally different from thoseof today. In the spheres in which I lived forty years ago and more, social activity was intense.If not daily, certainly four or five days a week there were either dinner parties or luncheonparties wherever I happened to find myself, and there was the same round of theater andopera parties. Between the two wars this part of life very much decreased, and I might saythat social engagements dropped in the ratio of twenty to one hundred. After the SecondWorld War these social engagements have withered away -- except when my wife and I ask afew friends wherever I may be to lunch or opera or theater parties. The great social epoch wasbetween 1898 and the opening of the 1914 war. I knew most of the members of the royalfamilies of Europe whom I met over and over again, with the aristocracy and plutocracy thatwere like satellites revolving about major planets whether in London or Paris, Rome, Berlin,Monte Carlo or Cannes, Nice or Saint-Moritz. That social life is a thing of the past for me.Really it came to an end with the outbreak of the 1914 war because the society I met betweenthe two wars was fundamentally a different one. To give an idea of the social change I mightsay that between 1898 and 1914 I was a guest ninety-nine times out of one hundred and onlyone per cent a host -- between the two wars it became about fifty-fifty and gradually it camedown to be less and less; and since the last war I find that it is I who am the host nine timesout of ten.Now with the changes in my own life and the society in which I move thus briefly assessedagainst the background of nearly sixty years, how do I live now, when I am at home in myvilla at Cannes, when we are in our house in Bombay, or when we are in hotels in London orParis, in Venice, Geneva or Evian -- some eight months in every year?The day begins for me -- as it has begun since my early youth -- at 4 A.M. I wake upautomatically about that time and spend the first hour -- between four and five -- at intenseprayer. There are no statues in my bedroom but a special prayer carpet is always prepared andmy tasbee, my rosary, is always with me. At five I go back again to sleep and wake up sometime between eight and nine when I have immediately a breakfast of toast, tea, and honey --but no butter. By ten I have looked at the newspapers, had a wash, am dressed and thenusually go out for a walk of anything between one and two miles, or I play nine holes of golf.If there is rain I do not go out. Until about one o'clock I am at work with my secretaries,dealing with my correspondence, writings and various business matters. I rarely leaveanything undone from one day to another and usually have very little leftovers. At one or onethirty I lunch at Cannes in our own house, but everywhere else at some restaurant or other -rarely in the hotel restaurant. Lunch is my main meal of the day and consists of fish, eggs ormeat, but only one of the three, and never a combination of the three -- rice regularly, twovegetables and cooked fruit, ice cream or sometimes pudding.When in Paris or London, sometimes in the afternoon I may go to a race meeting, or I maycatch up with activities such as my correspondence, or my reading. About five or six a cup oftea and then until seven or eight I usually try to read again, poetry, works of fiction,magazines of literary criticism, and I read thoroughly the morning and evening newspapers.Dinner consists only of fresh fruit. I never take anything cooked or salty at night. If the fruitis not good, then a salad. When on rare occasions I am asked to dinner, I usually ask the hostto give me salad and fruit or such raw vegetables as celery, tomatoes, etc.Both my wife and I are devoted to the theater, the opera, and the ballet. In towns like Londonand Paris we go to one or the other four or five times a week and usually take a few friendswith us. In places like Cannes we occasionally go to the local theater during the season --sometimes to the Nice opera or to Monte Carlo or similar places. I usually go to bed quicklyafter the theater. My lifelong experience has taught me that sleep is like walking -- you canderive from four or five hours of sleep as much benefit as you can from eight or nine hours,just as in twenty minutes' brisk walk you can get as much benefit as from two hours ofloitering about the streets and looking in shop windows. In a word, you can either sleep slowor sleep fast. I am a firm believer in brisk sleeping. I am happy to say that while I sleep Isleep; when I go to bed I have no time to lose -- even if they wake me up for anything, Iimmediately fall back; and practically all my life I have never had dreams. I think that isowing to the fact that I have rationalized my sleep as I have rationalized my exercise. Thosewho suffer from dreams may find a measure of peace and may overcome physical and moralstrain if they can so arrange their habits as to concentrate on the business at hand.To return to earlier days and disciplines: I had three English tutors -- a Mr. Gallagher, whowas Irish, a Mr. Lawrence and another Irishman, Mr. Kenny. All three were found for me bythe Jesuits in Bombay. It may seem strange that my family turned to the Jesuits for myeducation in Western matters, but both in Bombay and in Poona there are big and importantJesuit schools, and both quite near where we lived -- St. Mary's in Bombay and t. Vincent's inPoona. All the children of our considerable household -- the evermultiplying descendants ofmy grandfather's hangers-on, pensioners, relatives and old soldiers -- went to these Jesuitschools. The whole household knew the Jesuit fathers well, and nothing was easier than to gettheir advice and help.Incidentally, there was never a hint of their attempting to convert any of our Muslim childrento their own creed. They respected Islam, and never by open argument, by suggestion orinsinuation did they seek to weaken a Muslim's faith. This is one of the clearest recollectionsof my childhood, and I have seen the same phenomenon repeated in contemporary Egypt andPakistan. One day a few years ago I discussed it with an eminent Jesuit, a Spaniard, andcross-examined him about it."What the devil do you want to come and waste your time for?" I said. "You're a missionary,and you've got all these opportunities to do your missionary work, but you never try toconvert a single boy! What are you here for? What do you get out of all these huge sumsyou're spending on teachers and building? What's it all about?"The Jesuit, who was an old friend of mine, smiled his sidelong smile and said: "Don't you seewhat we're getting out of it?""No.""You are paying us. To every Muslim and non-Christian boy we give the best education wecan. But we make them pay through the nose for it. For those who pay, our school fees areenormous, but our poor Catholic children get their education free. So indirectly you're payingfor it, and our poor get a first-class education at your expense."So far as I was concerned, the three teachers the Jesuits found for me were all excellent men.The schooling which they gave me was not in the least narrow or restricted. They lifted mymind to wide horizons, they opened my eyes to the outside world. They were wise, broad-minded men, with a stimulating zest for knowledge and the ability to impart it -- whether inscience, history or politics. Most important of all perhaps they encouraged me to read formyself, and from the time I was ten or thereabouts, I burrowed freely into our vast library ofbooks in English, French, Persian and Arabic. My three tutors gave me the key to knowledge,and for that I have always been profoundly grateful to Mr. Gallagher, Mr. Lawrence and Mr.Kenny.Of them I can say nothing but good. But, alas, of the man responsible for my education inArabic and Persian and in all matters Islamic I have nothing but bad to say. He was extremelylearned, a profound scholar, with a deep and extensive knowledge of Arabic literature and ofIslamic history, but all his learning had not widened his mind nor warmed his heart. He was abigoted sectarian, and in spite of his vast reading his mind was one of the darkest andnarrowest that I have ever encountered. If Islam had indeed been the thing he taught, thensurely God had sent Mohammed not to be a blessing for all mankind but a curse.It was saddening and in a sense frightening to listen to him talk. He gave one the feeling thatGod had created men solely to send them to hell and eternal damnation. However deep andprecise his knowledge -- and I admit that in both these respects it was almost unique -- it hadwithered into bitterness and hate. In later years he returned to Tehran, where he became agreat and renowned teacher of Islamic lore and acquired the reputation of being one of themost learned scholars in all Iran; yet to the end, I think, he must have remained the bigotedmullah whom I knew.Perhaps it was this early experience which for the rest of my life has given me a certainprejudice against professional men of religion -- be they mullahs or maulvis, curates, vicarsor bishops. Many of them I admit are exemplary people. The simple religious -- village curésin France, the humbler priesthood in rural Italy, humble, pious and gentle sisters in hospitalsall over the world -- I have known, admired and revered. In England I have had many friendsall my life among the Quakers, and I am aware of a tranquil sense of mental and spiritualcommunion with them, for our mutual respect for each other's beliefs -- mine for theirQuakerism, theirs for my Islamic faith -- is absolute. The vast majority of Muslim believersall over the world are charitable and gently disposed to those who hold other faiths, and theypray for divine forgiveness and compassion for all. There developed however in Iran and Iraqa school of doctors of religious law whose outlook and temper -- intolerance, bigotry andspiritual aggressiveness -- resembled my old teacher's, and in my travels about the world Ihave met too many of their kind -- Christian, Muslim and Jew -- who ardently andostentatiously sing the praises of the Lord, and yet are eager to send to hell and eternaldamnation all except those who hold precisely their own set of opinions. For many years, Imust confess, I have sought to avoid this sort of person.It was strange and it was out of place that a boy, whose home and upbringing were such asmine in India, should have been submitted in adolescence to a course of this narrow andformalist Islamic indoctrination. For my early environment was one of the widest tolerance;there was in our home never any prejudice against Hindus or Hinduism, and a great many ofour attendants and servants -- our gardeners, messengers, sepoys and guards, and many ofthose whose work was connected with buying and selling, marketing and rent collection --were Hindus.In addition, my mother was herself a genuine mystic in the Muslim tradition (as were most ofher closest companions); and she habitually spent a great deal of time in prayer for spiritualenlightenment and for union with God. In such a spirit there was no room for bigotry. Likemany other mystics my mother had a profound poetic understanding. I have, in somethingnear ecstasy, heard her read perhaps some verses by Roumi or Hafiz, with their exquisiteanalogies between man's beatific vision of the Divine and the temporal beauty and colors offlowers, the music and magic of the night, and the transient splendors of the Persian dawn.Then I would have to go back to my gloomy treadmill and hear my tutor cursing and railingas was his habit. Since he was a Shia of the narrowest outlook, he concentrated his mostferocious hatred not on non-Muslims, not even on those who persecuted the Prophet, but onthe caliphs and companions of the Prophet, his daughter and two grandchildren, his son-in-law Ali and about four or five of the closest companions of Hazrat Ali; all others wereenemies of God and of His Prophet, who had striven to encompass the Prophet's death andafter his death had brutally murdered Ali -- his adopted son and natural successor -- and Ali'ssons, his beloved grandchildren. This form of Shiaism attains its climax during the month ofMuharram with its lamentations and its dreadful cursings. Reaction against its hatred,intolerance and bigotry has, I know, colored my whole life, and I have found my answer inthe simple prayer that God in His Infinite mercy will forgive the sins of all Muslims, theslayer and the slain, and that all may be reconciled in Heaven in a final total absolution. And Ifurther pray that all who truly and sincerely believe in God, be they Christian, Jew, Buddhistor Brahmin, who strive to do good and avoid evil, who are gentle and kind, will be joined inHeaven and be granted final pardon and peace. I could wish that all other creeds would havethis same charity toward Muslims; but -- with those honorable, humble exceptions whom Ihave mentioned -- this is not an attitude that I have encountered among Christian divines. It isa sad and harsh thing to say, but I believe it to be true that, in general, the higher a man'sposition in any of the various churches, the more severe and the less charitable is his attitudeto Muslims and to Islam.The home in which I was brought up was, as you can see, a literary one. I have referred to mymother's poetic sense. She was deeply versed in Persian and Arabic literature, as were severalof her ladies in waiting and closest women friends. My mother knew a great deal of poetry byheart and she had a flair for the appropriate classical quotation -- a flair which, I may say, shenever lost throughout her long life. Even when she was nearly ninety she was never at a lossfor the right and apt quotation, not merely from one of the great poets such as Hafiz andFirdausi or Roumi but from many a minor or little-known writer.One little anecdote may explain it. Shortly before she died a cousin of mine quoted one nightat dinner a verse of Persian poetry which is rarely heard. In order not to bother my mother orworry her, I attributed it to Hafiz. Not at all, said my mother, that is not by Hafiz, and shegave the name of the poem and the name of the rather obscure poet who had written it.A consequence of this characteristic was that mealtimes at my mother's table were nooccasions of idle gossip or tittle-tattle. Our conversation was of literature, or poetry; orperhaps one of the elderly ladies who traveled to and from Tehran a great deal would talkabout her experiences at the Court of the Shah.A clear light shines on this phase of my boyhood. Was I happy or unhappy? I was solitary, inthe sense that I had no companions of my own age, except my beloved cousin AgaShamsuddin and his brother Abbas who were of the same age and the same outlook and werethe closest and dearest friends of my youth, but I had so few holidays and so little free time,what could I have done with a host of friends? One fact stands out extremely clearly -- Iworked hard, a great deal harder than most young schoolboys. By the time I was thirteen Icould read and write English, tolerable French, perfect Persian and fair Arabic; I had a soundknowledge of Roman history as well as of Islamic history. I was well grounded in at least theelements of science -- chemistry and physics, botany, biology and zoology. Nor was myscientific education merely theoretical; in each of our houses I had a small laboratory and Ihad a set period of practical, experimental laboratory work every day.As I have remarked, I early acquired an insatiable taste for reading. It developed rapidly fromthe time that I was ten or so, and when I had temporarily, at any rate, plumbed the resourcesof our library, I looked elsewhere. I wanted to buy books for myself. But there was one smallimpediment: my mother allowed me no pocket money. My cousin and I organized ourselvesa brilliant way around this difficulty. Each of us put on an abba (a wide, all-enveloping cloakwhich is, or used to be, a universal piece of clothing in Persia and the Arab countries). Thusgarbed we made our way to a wellknown Bombay bookshop. One of us engaged theshopkeeper in eager conversation, and the other slid some books into the folds of his abba.Our little device was pretty soon spotted, and the proprietor of the shop told my uncle and mymother. Naturally our bill was promptly settled, but the family decided that we should betaught a lesson. Nothing was said to us and we continued our naughty little game. We were atit one day when into the shop walked my uncle."Take off your abbas!" he ordered sternly.As we did so, the books which we had stolen tumbled to the floor. Our shame and ourmortification were immediate and complete, and from that day to this I don't think I have everso much as picked a flower in anyone else's garden without telling him.I continued my reading -- but not with stolen books. And a year or two later my reading andindeed my whole outlook on life were profoundly and permanently transformed by a small,wise decision; much that had hitherto been pain and hardship became pleasure and delight,my health was immediately improved, and I am sure I was saved much trouble andmisfortune in later life. Mr. Kenny, the third and last of my European tutors, had at one timebeen employed by a firm of opticians. As soon as he saw me settle down to work he realizedhow terrible -- and how dangerous -- was the torture to which, through my congenital shortsightedness and the ignorance on these matters of those by whom I was surrounded, I wasbeing daily and hourly submitted.It is strange and sad to recall that already, more than once before Mr. Kenny's arrival, I had infun picked up and put on a pair of glasses left lying about by one of our family or friends.The moment I put them on I discovered the joy of a new and exciting world: a world ofhuman beings of definite and different shapes, a world of green trees and brightly coloredflowers, and of sharp, strong light instead of the perpetual haze and fog, the world blurred atthe edges, which was all that an extremely myopic little boy could see. But those minutes ofjoy were of short duration, and were indeed forbidden, for the servants had orders to take theglasses away from me, since my family could not believe that a child could be short-sightedand thought that I was being self-indulgent and silly. Mr. Kenny immediately recognized mypresent plight and its implications for my future. He insisted on taking me to the firm ofopticians whose employee he had been; he had my eyes tested and had me fitted with properglasses both for reading and for distance. My uncles strove to interfere, but Mr. Kenny wasadamant; he carried with him the prestige of the West, and he won the day. This sensible andkindly action saved me infinite pain and worry, and gave me a new world in which to live.What sort of world was it to which my boyish eyes were thus opened? What sort of life was itto which I was being educated? First and most important, I was by inheritance the spiritualhead and leader of a far-flung, extremely diverse community of far from negligiblesignificance in the Islamic world. As soon as I was capable of doing so, I had to assumeresponsibility and take decisions. I was installed on the Gadi of Imams in 1885, when I waseight years old, and there is a photograph in existence of this ceremony, which vividly recallsa vanished epoch. A few years later I found myself exercising my influence and authority in amatter of considerable importance in the life of Bombay -- a security matter as we should saynowadays. In the early nineties there was an outburst of savage communal rioting in Bombay.I issued strict orders to all my followers that they were to avoid participation in thedisturbance. The effect of my order was not merely negative; it helped to abate anger and re-establish peace in Bombay between Muslims and Hindus. This -- my first independentpolitical action -- earned the thanks of the Governor and the Commissioner of Police inBombay, and boy though I still was, it did much to win for me the regard of political leadersof all communities.For by this time my household, followers, supporters, relatives and hangers-on made up animportant element in the population of Bombay, and (as I shall have to relate shortly) theyultimately eated a security problem of their own. My grandfather, conscious that he was anexile from Persia, and conscious perhaps that the greater part of his adventurous and excitingcareer was over when he settled in Bombay, took no part in Indian politics. My father, duringthe Governorship of Sir James Fergusson, accepted a seat on the Bombay LegislativeCouncil. In my maturity my political interests and ideals were to take me far afield, but thedomain to which in the late eighties and early nineties I was growing up was not without itsown political, administrative, social and economic problems and perplexities.My grandfather, both in Poona and Bombay, had been able to lead a largely insulated life ofhis own, almost medieval in its style and pattern, the like of which has long since passedaway. He brought with him from Persia the pastimes of Persian noblemen of that era, and thesplendid and feudal manner of organizing those pastimes. Field sports were a major passionin the society in which he grew up; lavish racing stables were maintained; packs of houndswere bred, and there was continual searching for the best hawks to be found in Iran and Iraq.All these interests he brought with him into exile -- and a great retinue of followers who wereidentified with them. As soon as he settled in Bombay he bought and raced horses -- Arab,English, Australian, even Turkoman; he collected hawks and hounds anew; and the pattern ofhis life was arranged round these diversions. His day began at six in the morning either with adeer hunt or after birds, or -- in the racing season -- a visit to the training grounds to watch hishorses being put through their paces. By nine o'clock he would be home. He would have asubstantial breakfast, and then go to bed. In the middle of the afternoon he would get up, goto a race meeting or more hunting until dusk. Then he would come home and spend the nighton his tasks as the leader of his community -- receiving his followers, conducting hiscorrespondence, looking into matters of finance and the like. He would break for a fairly bigmeal about nine o'clock, and then work on until five in the morning, when he would have alight meal before beginning the day's round again. These were habits familiar to him andmany others of the ruling class of his time in Iran and Afghanistan, and he saw no reason notto maintain them in the surroundings of his later life.I may say, incidentally, that my grandfather had a run of success as an owner on the Indianturf, in the fifties, sixties and seventies of the last century, very similar to my own in Englandand France from the twenties to the fifties of this century.My father, during his brief reign, continued much the same manner of living, widening andincreasing the stud and organizing his hawks and his hounds in a fashion and on a scale thatevoked the admiration of everyone who understood these matters, travelers from Europe, forexample, and members of the British ruling class who held high official positions in India. Itwas to fall to me to adapt and modify this outlook and way of life to changing times.It was inevitable that during my minority the British Raj and its representatives in Bombayshould take a close interest in my welfare and my upbringing. My boyhood coincided withwhat was no doubt the heyday of British paternalism in India. The Raj seemed effortlesslysecure and unshakable; its representatives and officials -- most of whom were enlightenedand liberal men whose minds were in tune with the temper of the high Victorian age in whichthey had matured -- were serenely self-confident. Their actions and their decisions found theirsource in a mental and spiritual strength which their successors were to lose. The mutiny wasa far-off memory, and indeed its effect had seemed to be almost totally confined to NorthernIndia. Nationalism was only just beginning to stir in the womb of time. Congress existed,having been brought into being in the early eighties by the energy and effort of a Britishmember of the Indian Civil Service, a Mr. Hume. A similar Muslim organization wasestablished a little later, and my eldest half-brother was one of its founders. But few wouldhave believed that these were the first portents of all the stress and upheaval of later years.Relations between British and Indians were in general easy, amiable and without strain. Thethen Governor of Bombay, Lord Reay, was a Gladstonian Liberal, high principled,benevolent and affable, and sustained in his duty by a charming and talented wife. And theBombay Army Commander was no other than H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught, QueenVictoria's youngest son, who made soldiering his career, as befitted a godson and namesakeof Arthur, first Duke of Wellington. From the first it was my particular good fortune that theDuke and Duchess of Connaught took in me a close, affectionate and continuing interest.They would come to tea at our house several times a year, and I, as a child, was morefrequently asked to their home and there agreeably spoiled and given perhaps more toffee andchocolate than was altogether good for me. These visits back and forth were red-letter daysfor me. At Poona and at Mahabaleshwar the Duke was a very near neighbour; every day, andoften several times a day, we would encounter him out riding, and we would stop and theDuke would have a talk with me. Thus in a fashion I was brought up close to the BritishRoyal Family and in later years, when I met Queen Victoria, she said at once, I remember,that she had heard all about me and my home from her son.Similar frequent and informal visits were exchanged between my family and the Governor;and as a boy in the Reays' time I was often taken to tea at Government House. There was inthese relationships at this period no sense of tension, no standoffishness and nocondescension; they were cordial and confident -- very different relationships from those thatdeveloped in later years. The narrow, intolerant "imperialistic" outlook associated withKipling's name, and with some of his more unfortunate observations (of the order of "East isEast and West is West and never the twain shall meet," for example), had not then emerged.Had social life and relations between British and Indians continued to be as they were in theeighties, I greatly doubt whether political bitterness would have developed to the extent it did,and possibly something far less total than the severance of the Republic of India from theImperial connection would have been feasible.Queen Victoria herself was of course sharply conscious of the responsibilities, not onlypolitical but personal and social, which she had assumed with the splendid title of Empress ofIndia. She insisted that Indian Princes and Indian gentlefolk should receive the respect andthe dignified status accorded in those days to European princes and gentlefolk. The Duke ofConnaught faithfully practiced her principles during his time in India. The Viceroy andVicereine, Lord and Lady Dufferin, were, like Lord and Lady Reay, people of kind andgentle sensibility, warm hearts and graceful manners. A tone thus set could not be ignored,and Indo-British relationships in general were in this pattern. There was agreeable andunstrained social mixing at receptions, on the racecourse, or on the polo ground.There is an outstanding example that I recall: Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, a notable figure in theParsee community in Bombay, gave a reception for the Viceroy and Vicereine, Lord andLady Dufferin, for the Governor of Bombay and his wife, Lord and Lady Reay, and for theDuke and Duchess of Connaught. All the leading representatives of all the communities inBombay were present, and just as would have happened in England or any other country, SirJeejeebhoy, as host, offered his arm to Lady Dufferin and went into the supper room, and theViceroy followed with his hostess, Lady Jeejeebhoy, and everyone else went after in turn. Afew years later -and thereafter, until the end of the Indian Empire -- it would have beeninconceivable that the Viceroy, a Prince of the British Royal House and the Governor of thegreat province of British India, would have gone to a reception at the house of a Parseegentleman, however distinguished, and allowed him to lead the Vicereine in first and thenhave followed with his hostess. Rigid protocol replaced easy good manners -- to the gravedetriment not only of social life but of something, in the end, much more important. But inthose happy days Empire did not mean "imperialism" -- social vulgarity, and worse, socialaggressiveness and highhandedness. It is true that the clubs were closed to Indians but thatfact had none of the neurotic significance which it took on subsequently; nobody mindedEuropeans having a small enclave of their own, and social relations outside were on a basis offree equality.A curious fact not without a tinge of irony is that in the eighties many Indian ladies on theirown initiative were coming out of purdah and were receiving Europeans in their homes withcordial hospitality. It was the result of a spontaneous feeling among Indian ladies that theycould not keep back in the general atmosphere of good will and the removal of restraint. Hadthis atmosphere been maintained it is possible that, in Western India at any rate, purdahwould have broken down gradually among the upper classes decades before it did.This was a happy period whose temper and outlook I have sought to evoke in some detail, forin the harsh and strained years which followed, it was forgotten. The change, it seems to me,set in sharply in 1890. The Duke of Connaught went home and his great influence for good inall social matters was lost. He was followed as Army Commander by General Sir GeorgeGreaves (reputedly the original of General Bangs in Kipling's "A Code of Morals"). * LordReay too retired and was succeeded by Lord Harris, a famous and enthusiastic cricketer, but aConservative of the rising new imperialist school of thought. Our relations with GovernmentHouse, though perfectly friendly, became more formal and less familiar. The whole tone ofrelationships stiffened. No longer were the easy, frequent receptions and entertainmentsattended by people of all communities. At Government House there were merely a fewrigidly formal garden parties at which social mingling began to be discouraged. Less and lessdid Europeans invite Indians to their houses, and soon it became rare for the races to meetaround a luncheon or dinner table. Even on occasions where rigid separation was obviouslyimpossible, as at race meetings, color differences began to show themselves. Sets wereformed, not on the natural basis of personal sympathy and antipathy, but on the artificial andunwholesome basis of race and color. This is an outlook against which I, who had spent mymost impressionable years in a totally different atmosphere, was to react strongly.Years later, long after he had retired, I encountered General Greaves on the DoverCalaissteamer. He was alone, and I put the conventional question that courtesy prompted: "Is LadyGreaves going with you to Paris?" To which the warrior replied, "I don't take a ham sandwichwhen I go to a banquet."In Bombay in the nineties perhaps the first sufferers were the Parsees. Energetic, efficient,socially as well as commercially gifted and adapted, they played an important role in easingand smoothing relations between British and Indians. They now suffered the fate of the go-between who is no longer wanted. They were looked down on by both sides, and were moreand more isolated to their own company and that of a few advanced Hindu and Muslimfamilies. Europeans would no longer associate with them because they were Asiatics; Hindusand Muslims considered that they had thrown in their lot with the Europeans and then hadbeen cast aside. It was a disagreeable and unjust plight.An even unhappier change -- and much more far-reaching in its effects -- came over theofficial British view of nascent political feeling. Congress, benevolently encouraged in itsbeginnings in the eighties and regarded (probably rightly) as a sign of maturity in one or moremembers of the great Imperial family, was now thought to be a hostile political organizationwhose ultimate aim could only be to weaken and destroy the British connection. Thealienation of the British ruling classes (or at any rate, the greater number of those they sent toIndia) from India's educated classes, who were growing in numbers and capacity, was bothmental and spiritual. There was frigidity where there had been warmth; and in this processthere were sown almost all the seeds of future bitterness.What happened to the Englishman has been to me all my life a source of wonder andastonishment. Suddenly it seemed that he felt his prestige as a member of an imperial,governing race would be lost if he accepted those of a different color as fundamentally hisequals. The color bar was no longer thought of as a physical difference, but far moredangerously -- in the end disastrously -- as an intellectual and spiritual difference. As long asIndians who adopted and imitated the European way of life were few, it was possible for aservant and upholder of the Raj to feel that there was little danger that his unique positionwould be undermined by familiarity and overthrown by numbers. But now racialism -- onboth sides -marched on with giant's strides. It was soon not merely a matter of therelationship between British rulers and the Indian ruled. The pernicious theory spread that allAsiatics were a second-class race and "white men" possessed some intrinsic andunchallengeable superiority.The infection had, I will admit, its ridiculous aspects. The Turkish Consul General inBombay happened -- like many of the ruling and official classes in Ottoman Turkey -- to be aBosnian, a Slav, of one hundred per cent European stock, but because he was a Muslimignorant prejudice set him down as an "Asiatic"! Some English acquaintances took him intoone of their clubs. Other members made such a row about it that the Consul General saidflatly that, as a Muslim and the representative of a semi-Asiatic Empire, he had been treatedwith discourtesy and contempt on racial grounds, and while he would do his duties as ConsulGeneral, his contacts with the British in Bombay would henceforth be severely official and hewould have no personal relations with them. The Persian Consul shared his experience andhis sentiments. The Japanese, who were emerging from their long seclusion from outsidecontact, moved cannily; they established their own commercial undertakings first, so thatwhen their Consul came he found Japanese clubs and social gatherings already organized anddid not feel isolated or dependent on the good graces of the Anglo-Indian community -- in theoldfashioned sense of that word, Anglo-Indian.A root cause of the new attitude was fear and lack of inner selfconfidence. A contributoryfactor was the presence, in increasing numbers, of British wives, with no knowledge of orinterest in the customs and outlook of Indians. Fear afflicted people in trade and commercejust as much as-perhaps even more than -- officials. The rift deepened and widened as timewent on. The color bar had to be kept rigid and absolute, or (so fear nagged at those in itsgrip) some mysterious process of contamination would set in, and their faith in their ownsuperiority and in their right -- their moral, intellectual and biological right -- to rule otherswould be sapped.It was a neurotic attitude, very different from that of earlier times when men like Sir JohnMalcolm, Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone and, later, Lord Ripon and Lord Reay, took itsublimely for granted that England's duty -- once she had brought peace, unity and prosperityto India and had taught its peoples the secrets of liberal government -- would be in thefullness of time to depart. There was no talk then of Dominion status, but the precedents ofCanada and of the rapidly growing colonies of Australia and New Zealand were clear to see.But by the nineties all ideas of this sort had been thrown overboard as inimical to the securityof the Raj, disloyal and seditious.I recall a breakfast party which I gave in Bombay for some senior British officials. Anotherguest was a cousin of mine -- a devoted and loyal subject of the Queen and profoundly pro-British. But he was a student of history. He discoursed on the fact that an Asiatic race, theArabs, had ruled Spain for five hundred years and, after their departure, had left indelible andsplendid marks of their civilization all over southern Spain; and on the fact that anotherAsiatic race, the Turks, had established a major empire in the Balkans and around the EasternMediterranean and were still ruling it after several centuries. My British guests took this as anaffront."We will not have such comparisons made," they said. "Our rule is permanent, not somethingthat lasts a few centuries and then disappears. Even to think as you think is disloyal." Ideaslike these seem strange indeed now in the 1950's, when we have seen British rule in Indiadissolve and pass away like early morning mist before strong sunlight. But this was theatmosphere in which my later boyhood was spent, with its unhappy, brooding awareness ofdeepening difference and of growing misunderstanding and hostility.IVI Visit the Western WorldWITH APPROACHING MANHOOD my life shaped itself into new channels of its own.More and more the duties and decisions implicit in my inherited position devolved on me. Iwas never indeed subject to any Regency, in the accepted sense, and as my capacity to makedecisions increased, so my mother and my uncles encouraged me to accept responsibility. Mymother, who had insisted on the educational discipline of my early boyhood, was as shrewdand watchful as she was loving. She and I remained, throughout her long life, in the closest,most affectionate intimacy. Every night in those years I would go to her apartments and joinwith her in prayer -- that prayer for unity, for companionship on high, which is the core ofMuslim faith. This shared experience gave us both, I think, the strength to bear our load offatigue and anxiety, mental and spiritual, which was by no means light during these difficultyears. But my mother's religion was resolutely practical as well; she saw no virtue in faithwithout works, and from the outset of my public career I accepted and sought to practice thesame standards.My education continued until I was eighteen. Mr. Kenny, my English tutor, once moreexerted his beneficent influence and persuaded my mentors that I could give up my hatedcalligraphy. My mind was opening rapidly to new horizons; in my reading I began to rangewidely, in English and French as well as in Persian and Arabic; I discovered the intellectualdelight -- the precision and clarity -- of Mill's system of logic. I read voraciously in historyand biography, and with my cousin Shamsuddin I became an insatiable reader of novels -- adiversion, I may say, whose pleasures have never faded.On my father's death his racing stables, of course, became my property; and although I was aminor my horses raced under my name year after year, and long before I was out of my teensHis Highness the Aga Khan's horses were well known -- and not without their successes -- onthe turf of Western India. There my inherited and environmental influences made themselvesobvious from the first. All my family -- my mother not excluded -- were keen followers ofracing form, English as well as Indian. We were knowledgeable about the English turf;Ormone's glorious triumphs, for example, meant almost as much to us as they did to hisbackers on English racecourses. I well remember that when I was quite small the victor inany pony races between myself and my cousins was hailed for the rest of the day as "FredArcher." Archer's death in tragic circumstances plunged us all in gloom, almost as if a closefriend had committed suicide.My successes as an owner were not insignificant. I may claim that for a time I -- and mycousin Aga Shamsuddin, who was part owner with me of a number of excellent horses --dominated the turf in Western India. Four times in succession I won the Nizam's Gold Cup --the most important and valuable race in Western India. With a horse called Yildiz I won theGovernor's Cup in Poona during these years, and again somewhat later.I took up hunting, not of course fox hunting as in England, but jackal hunting both in Poonaand Bombay. It happens that I have never hunted the fox in England, but frankly I know nomore exhilarating sport than jackal hunting over the rice fields in Bombay on an early, coldwinter morning when the scent is good and the hounds get a good long run after the wilyjackal.I was a pioneer of another sport in India -- hockey, which nowadays is one of the mainnational games of both India and Pakistan. I began to play it with my cousin and othercompanions of my own age in the early nineties. I encouraged interest in the game; I gave thecups; I got the Indian Army to play. Teams were built up among the various communities inBombay, and competitions extended steadily all over India. Hockey and cricket developed atmuch the same time in India, cricket fostered and encouraged by the then Governor ofBombay, Lord Harris; young Indians who had been to England for some part of theireducation continued the game when they came home, and it exerted an appeal which it hasnever lost and which has extended to wider and wider circles in India and Pakistan, both ofwhich now produce teams of Test Match caliber and quality.In my late teens I took up boxing, and made a serious study and use of Eugene Sandow'sSystem of Physical Culture. All my life I have been a keen advocate and practitioner ofsimple, forthright principles of physical fitness. I have always been a believer in steadyexercise. I was a great walker, I took up golf after I was fifty, and one of the catchphraseswhich journalists used about me was that my two great ambitions were "to win the Derby andthe Open Golf Championship." Well, I have won the Derby -- and more than once; the otherambition (if it was ever more than a journalist's invention!) is unfulfilled, but my handicap foryears was twelve. I have never believed, as many Englishmen do, in cramming a great deal ofexercise into a few hours over the week end, and taking little or none during the rest of theweek; a certain amount of steady exercise every day has been my habit -- exercise to be fittedinto the program of a busy day.A memorable experience of my later boyhood was meeting Mark Twain. I spent a wholeafternoon in his company and finished by having dinner with him at Watson's Hotel inBombay, where he was staying. He had a pleasant, utterly unassuming charm and afriendliness of manner which captivated the serious-minded lad that I was.He had amassed a considerable fortune, I believe, and had lost it in bad speculation. Now inold age he had to begin to earn his living all over again; therefore he was traveling around theworld and interviewing people on the way. * He showed absolutely no sign of bitter ness orresentment against his misfortune. He seemed to me dear, gentle and saintly, sad andimmensely modest for so great and famous a genius.Incidentally, he refers to our encounter in his subsequent book, Following the Equator.More and more as my teens advanced, my days were busy. I was keenly aware that Ipossessed a dual responsibility, perhaps a dual opportunity: first, in India, as the leader of aninfluential group within the wide Muslim community at an epoch when political aspirationswere stirring and second, as the head of a far-ranging international community, a spiritualchief whose authority extended, in a tenuous yet sensitive network, into the heart of manylands and many peoples. I could never be solely an Indian nationalist, although from 1892,under the influence of wise and good men such as Sir Pherozeshah Mehta and Mr. BadruddinTyebjee, I took the standpoint of moderate Indian nationalism of that time. My unique task, ina world in which the first hints and rumbles of impending conflict were to be discerned, wassurely international. My followers were to be found in Burma and Southeast Asia, in greaterand greater numbers along the East African seaboard from Mombasa to East London andinland in South Africa; in Syria, Persia, Afghanistan, in Chinese Turkestan, in Russianterritories in the heart of Central Asia, and the Mesopotamian provinces of Turkey whichwere later to be known as Iraq. My home inevitably was a sounding board of ideas andbeliefs, hopes, fears and aspirations from all over the Islamic world. My primary advice,indeed my mandate, to my followers who were citizens of many countries had to be then --and always has been -- that the loyalty which they owe to my house and person is a spiritualand nontemporal loyalty, that their temporal allegiance is fully engaged to the State of whichthey are citizens, and that it is an absolute part of their duty to be good citizens. All my work,in politics and diplomacy all my life, is comprehensible in terms of this dual responsibilitywith which from my earliest days I have been charged.At the end of 1895 and the beginning of 1896 I was on the verge of manhood. The reins ofmy life's task were now fully in my hands. My tutors took their farewell and bowed their wayout of my life.I, like many youths of my age in the East, thought of marriage; and naturally enough I lookedaround me in the small, confined family circle in which I had grown up. One of my earliestplaymates in my childhood had been my cousin, Shahzadi Begum, whose father, AgaJungishah, was my uncle and one of my early mentors and exemplars. In our adolescence, aswas usual in our time and society, we saw little or nothing of each other, but as I approachedmanhood I became sharply aware of my cousin's beauty and charm, and I fell in love withher. It has been alleged, unkindly and unjustly, that my first marriage was a "state marriage,"arranged for my cousin and myself by our parents for dynastic reasons. Nothing could befurther from the truth. I was a youth in love, groping toward that experience, that mingling ofjoy and pain, which turns a boy into a man. Mine and mine only was the initiative in thematter of marriage. I told my mother of my feelings and begged her to approach my uncleand his wife on my behalf, and ask their permission for me to marry Shahzadi. The overtureswere made, my formal proposal was accepted. We were to be married within the year.Meanwhile my uncle and aunt, with their daughter and her brother, Shah Abbas, set forth ona pilgrimage to Mecca. The party, having made the Haj, set out for home, and on their waystayed for a time, as was customary, in Jeddah, the port on the Red Sea through which thevast majority of pilgrims to Mecca come and go. My uncle and cousin were assassinated inbrutal and violent circumstances; and my aunt and her daughter were in the house when themurders were committed. Police investigation in the Western sense did not exist in Jeddah inthose days; communications were scanty and unreliable. The Bombay police closelyquestioned returning Indian pilgrims and though much about the affray was, and has alwaysremained, obscure, and although the assailants were said either to have immediately poisonedthemselves or to have been beaten to death by the horror-struck attendants and bystanders, itis at least clear that my uncle and his son were the victims of dastardly religious fanaticism.This ghastly tragedy had a profound effect on me, both physically and emotionally. Allthrough that summer I was seriously ill, a prey to a succession of fevers, with painfulrheumatic symptoms. In October, when the great heat of the summer was over and themonsoon rains had passed, I made my first journey to Northern India. Hitherto my travelingoutside Western and Southern India, except for visits to Baghdad and to Bushire and Muscat,had been extremely restricted. I now, however, acquired a taste for travel which I havecertainly never abandoned. On this first trip I visited the great shrines and centers of MuslimIndia at Agra, Delhi and Lahore: that magnificent group of monuments to Islamic civilizationand culture -- the Taj Mahal, the Red Fort in Delhi, and the Friday Mosque, and thoseexquisite gems, the Pearl Mosques at Delhi and Agra. My way led me, too, to the Anglo-Muslim College (as it then was) at Aligarh, where I met Sir Syed Ahmed and NawabMohsen-ul-Molk. This was the origin of what was for many years one of the crucial concernsof my life -- my interest in the extension and improvement of Muslim higher education, andspecially the college and university at Aligarh.I took up its cause then with a youthful fervor which I have never regretted. Aligarh in the1890's was an admirable institution, but it was hampered and restricted by lack of funds andlack of facilities. Did I realize then, young as I was, that it had in it to become a greatpowerhouse of Muslim thought and culture and learning, in full accord with Islamic traditionand teaching, yet adapted to the outlook and the techniques of our present age? No one couldhave foretold all that did in fact happen; but I do know that I was on fire to see Aligarh'sscope widened and its usefulness extended, and to find the money for it, by any short-cutmeans if necessary. Why not, said I in my youthful rashness, go to some great Americanphilanthropist -- Mr. Rockefeller or Mr. Carnegie -- and ask for a substantial grant?My new friends were older and sager. It was our responsibility, they said, within our ownsixty or seventy million-strong Muslim community in India; if we sought for outside help,even from the richest and most philanthropically inclined of American multimillionaires, weshould be dishonored for all time. They were right, of course. For this was an age which hadnot experienced two world wars and had never heard of Point Four. But that decision, and myown zeal in the cause which I had taken up, led (as such decisions are apt to lead) to years ofarduous and all-demanding toil, the journeyings, the speechmaking, the sitting oncommittees, the fight against apathy and the long, long discussions with those in high places,which are the lot of those who commit themselves to such an endeavor.Often in civilized history a university has supplied the springboard for a nation's intellectualand spiritual renascence. In our time it has been said that the American Robert MissionaryCollege in Constantinople led to the re-emergence of Bulgaria as an independent, sovereignnation. Who can assess the effect on Arab nationalism of the existence of the AmericanUniversity of Beirut? Aligarh is no exception to this rule. But we may claim with pride thatAligarh was the product of our own efforts and of no outside benevolence; and surely it mayalso be claimed that the independent, sovereign nation of Pakistan was born in the MuslimUniversity of Aligarh.Reinvigorated and restored to health by my travels I went home at the end of the year to ourwedding ceremonies and celebrations. It was a double wedding. For at the same timeShahzadi's brother, my trusted friend Aga Shamsuddin, was married to another of ourcousins. Our nuptials were celebrated with all the appropriate ritual and rejoicing; and thensorrow beset myself and my bride.It is a long-ago story of young unhappiness, and it can be briefly and sadly told. We wereboth ignorant and innocent; our ignorance and innocence set a gulf between us whichknowledge, wisely and salutarily applied, could have bridged. We were too shy to acquirethat knowledge, too innocent even to know how to set about getting it. Tenderness anddiffused affection -- and my wife had all that I could give -- were no use for our forlornplight. Ours was no less a tragedy because, under the iron conventions of the time, it was bothcommonplace and concealed. Mine, I thought, was the blame for the grief andmisunderstanding that embroiled us; and this deepened my affection for my wife; but for her,baffled and bewildered as she was, the affection I offered was no substitute nor atonement.Inevitably we drifted apart, she to a private purgatory of resentment and reproach, and I to theactivities and interests of the outside world.For me relief was legitimately much easier, for my official and political life rapidly becamefull and vigorous, and there was a great deal of sheer hard work to be done. If my marriagewas a sour sham, my duties and responsibilities were real and earnest in this year of 1897.During the previous year there had been sinister rumors that an epidemic of bubonic plaguewas sedulously and remorselessly spreading westward across Asia. There had been a badoutbreak in Hong Kong; sporadically it appeared in towns and cities farther and farther west.When in the late summer of 1897 it hit Bombay there was a natural and general tendency todiscredit its seriousness; but within a brief time we were all compelled to face the fact that itwas indeed an epidemic of disastrous proportions. Understanding of the ecology of plaguewas still extremely incomplete in the nineties. The medical authorities in Bombay wereoverwhelmed by the magnitude, and (as it seemed) the complexity, of the catastrophe thathad descended on the city. Their reactions were cautious and conservative. Cure they hadnone, and the only preventative that they could offer was along lines of timid generalhygiene, vaguely admirable but unsuited to the precise problem with which they had to deal.Open up, they said; let fresh air and light into the little huts, the hovels and the shanties inwhich hundreds of thousands of the industrial and agricultural proletariat in BombayPresidency lived; and when you have let in fresh air, sprinkle as much strong and strong-smelling disinfectant as you can. These precautions were not only ineffective; they randirectly counter to deep-rooted habits in the Indian masses. Had they obviously worked, theymight have been forgiven, but as they obviously did not, and the death roll mounted day byday, it was inevitable that there was a growing feeling of resentment.It was a grim period. The plague had its ugly, traditional effect on public morals. Respect forlaw and order slipped ominously. There were outbreaks of looting and violence. Drunkennessand immorality increased; and there was a great deal of bitter feeling against the Governmentfor the haphazard and inefficient way in which it was tackling the crisis. The climax wasreached with the assassination (on his way home from a Government House function) of oneof the senior British officials responsible for such preventative measures as had beenundertaken.Now it happened that the Government of Bombay had at its disposal a brilliant scientist andresearch worker, Professor Haffkinez, a Russian Jew, who had come to work on problemsconnected with cholera; he had induced the authorities to tackle cholera by mass inoculationand had had in this sphere considerable success. He was a determined and energetic man. Hewas convinced that inoculation offered a method of combating bubonic plague. He pressedhis views on official quarters in Bombay -- without a great deal of success. Controversyseethed around him, but he had little chance to put his views into practice. Meanwhile peoplewere dying like flies -- among them many of my own followers.I knew that something must be done, and I knew that I must take the initiative. I was not, as Ihave already recounted, entirely without scientific knowledge; I knew something of Pasteur'swork in France. I was convinced that the Surgeon General's Department was working alongthe wrong lines. I by-passed it and addressed myself directly to Professor Haffkine. He and Iformed an immediate alliance and a friendship that was not restricted solely to the grimbusiness that confronted us. This, by now, was urgent enough. I could at least and at oncegive him facilities for his research and laboratory work. I put freely at his disposal one of mybiggest houses, a vast, rambling palace not far from Aga Hall (it is now a part of St. Mary'sCollege, Mazagaon); here he established himself, and here he remained about two years untilthe Government of India, convinced of the success of his methods, took over the wholeresearch project and put it on a proper, adequate and official footing.Meanwhile I had to act swiftly and drastically. The impact of the plague among my ownpeople was alarming. It was in my power to set an example. I had myself publicly inoculated,and I took care to see that the news of what I had done was spread as far as possible and asquickly as possible.My followers could see for themselves that I, their Imam, had in full view of many witnessessubmitted myself to this mysterious and dreaded process; hence there was no danger infollowing my example. The immunity, of which my continued health and my activities wereobvious evidence, impressed itself on their consciousness and conquered their fear.I was twenty years old. I ranged myself (with Haffkine, of course) against orthodox medicalopinion of the time -- among Europeans no less than among Asiatics. And if the doctors wereopposed to the idea of inoculation, what of the views of ordinary people, in my ownhousehold and entourage, in the public at large? Ordinary people were extremely frightened.Looking back across more than half a century, may I not be justified in feeling that the youngman that I was showed a certain amount of courage and resolution?At any rate it worked. Among my own followers the news circulated swiftly, as I hadintended it to do, that their Imam had been inoculated and that they were to follow myexample. Deliberately I put my leadership to the test. It survived and vindicated itself in anew and perhaps dramatic fashion. My followers allowed themselves to be inoculated, not ina few isolated instances, but as a group. Within a short time statistics were firmly on my side;the death rate from plague was demonstrably far, far lower among Ismailis than in any othersection of the community; the number of new cases, caused by contamination, was sharplyreduced; and finally the incidence of recovery was far higher.A man's first battle in life is always important. Mine had taught me much, about myself andabout other people. I had fought official apathy and conservatism, fear and ignorance -- mypast foretold my future, for they were foes that were to confront me again and againthroughout my life.By the time the crisis was passed I may have seemed solemn beyond my years, but Ipossessed an inner self-confidence and strength that temporary and transient twists of fortunehenceforth could not easily shake. A by-product of the influence and the authority which Ihad exerted was that others than my own Ismaili followers looked to me for leadership. Theyear 1897 was Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee. It was natural enough that I should go toSimla to present to the Viceroy, Lord Elgin, an address of loyalty and congratulations to HerMajesty as hereditary Imam of my own Ismaili sect; but, in fact, I went in a triple capacity. Ipresented three addresses, one from my own community, another as leader and representativeof the Muslims of Western India, and a third on behalf of a representative assemblage of thecitizens of Bombay and Poona.Lord Elgin received me graciously and hospitably. I was invited to luncheon by FieldMarshal Sir George White, then Commander in Chief in India. The Field Marshal's nicknamewas Sir George the Dragon Killer, and no man could have better looked the part than thisgauntly handsome, old warrior -- immensely tall, strong and stern of visage. Sitting therebeside him at luncheon I had a sudden vision of the old man kilted, claymore in hand, fiercelychallenging all comers, human and animal, a dragon or two, a squadron of cavalry or a herdof rhinoceros. There was still, you see, a vein of romanticism in the young man who had withgravity and propriety presented his three official addresses to His Excellency, the Viceroy.I returned to Bombay to prepare for my biggest and most important journey hitherto.I set out to discover the Europe of which I had read and heard so much, which beckoned withso insistent and imperious an attraction.In our distracted and war-battered epoch there is a deep, nostalgic sadness in recalling thesplendors and the security-both seemingly unshakable -- which Western Europeancivilization had attained in the last decade of the nineteenth century. As a young man I sawthat old world at its zenith. I have lived to watch all the vicissitudes of its strange and swiftdecline. When I first set foot on the soil of Europe, just half a century had elapsed since theconvulsions of 1848. Peace, prosperity and progress seemed universal and allenveloping.True enough the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871 had flashed grim warnings for thoseprescient enough to see them, but to many that conflict seemed a temporary and regrettabledivagation from the general and steady trend toward human betterment. Britain, whose worldhegemony, founded on absolute naval supremacy, seemed unchallengeable, was powerfuland prosperous as never before under the rule of her august Queen; not since 1815 had shebeen compelled to intervene in any major Continental conflict, and generations of herstatesmen and diplomats were trained in the essential art and duty of retaining the balance ofpower in Europe. In spite of a few minatory signs of military, social and economic danger ordiscontent, the dominant notes in the Europe of 1898 were those of serenity and affluence.Thither I set out from Bombay early in February. I was a little more than twenty years of age.Two members of my household accompanied me as personal attendants. We traveled toMarseilles in a brand-new liner of the Messageries Maritime fleet. In passing I may say that -at any rate so far as the routes to India, Africa and the Far East are concerned -- the crackships of the late nineties were really much better to travel in than their alleged "luxury"twentieth-century successors. Their cabins were more spacious and comfortable and all theiramenities were on a far more civilized scale. A great deal of show and chromium plate doesnot, to my mind, compensate for a decrease in solid comfort.From Marseilles I went straight to Nice. It was the height of the Riviera winter season; inthose days the south of France had no summer season. Every hotel in every resort along theCôte d'Azur was packed, and I had the greatest difficulty in finding accommodation. Afterall, a considerable proportion of the royalty, nobility and gentry of Europe was concentratedalong this strip of coast line. Queen Victoria was at Cimiez; and at length I found myself aroom in the hotel in which the Queen was staying. Of pretty small account I was in the vast,glittering, aristocratic and opulent company gathered for the Riviera season: the EmperorFranz Joseph at Cap Martin, a score or so of Russian grand dukes and Austrian archdukes intheir villas and palaces, half the English peerage with a generous sprinkling of millionairesfrom industry and finance; and most of the Almanach de Gotha from Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Balkan countries lately "emancipated" from Ottoman rule, and CzaristRussia. The young man from Bombay was dazzled and awed.I knew nobody. I think the only people, other than my own personal attendants, to whom Ispoke half a dozen words were the hotel staff and the officials at the Casino in Monte Carlo.But I enjoyed myself enormously -- looking and listening. I went out for long drives fromCimiez along the coast to Monte Carlo and Menton. I stared at the shop windows -- and whatshop windows, those of jewelers especially! After more than fifty years I have a vividrecollection of the solid wealth on display for the eyes of the wealthiest people in Europe,whether they were financiers or landowners from England or Moscow millowners. Therewere none of your present-day bits and pieces of gold and silver and worthless stones madeup into trumpery trinkets; no -- this was real jewelry, great sparkling diamonds, pearls, rubies,emeralds and sapphires winking and gleaming in the bright winter sun.At Cannes, at Nice, at Monte Carlo the streets were packed in the fashionable hours with thecarriages of the great and the wealthy, handsome landaus and victorias with fine, high-stepping horses and coachmen and footmen in dashing liveries. I remember that there wereone or two automobiles on show as curiosities in front of the Hôtel de Paris at Monte Carlo.How elegant was the disdain with which the fashionable crowd regarded these noisy, smellytoys! Few then had the foresight to see in them the predecessors not only of today's Concoursd'Élégance but of the great, silver-winged, jetpropelled aircraft which shoot across the sky.Though prosperity was to some extent diffused through all the towns and villages along theCôte d'Azur and though there was no hunger and there were no rags, and the poorest had atleast one solid meat meal a day, it cannot be said that living was cheap on the Riviera in thenineties. For accommodations and service at the best hotel for myself and two valets, mydaily bill -- with no extravagance and no entertainment of any kind -- was about two hundredgold francs. That translated into present-day terms would be nearly forty thousand francs aday. But were it possible to live at the same rate and on the same scale as I did on that firsttrip of mine, I daresay my bill -in contemporary terms -- would work out at about sixthousand to seven thousand francs a day. So in relation to the gold standard of the nineties,the cost of living -- my sort of living in those days -- was five or six times as high as it isnow.Since I was staying in the same hotel as Queen Victoria, I had frequent opportunities ofwatching her go out to and return from her daily drives in her landau. She was helped in andout of her carriage by Indian servants from her personal household. I and my own attendantsreached the same, rather strange conclusion, and, I may say, it was reinforced later when Isaw her servants at closer quarters at Windsor: they were distinctly second-class servants, ofthe kind that you find around hotels and restaurants, the kind that the newly arrived ortransient European is apt to acquire in the first hotel in which he stays -- very different fromand very inferior to the admirable, trustworthy and very high-grade men whom, throughoutthe years of British rule in India, one would encounter at Viceregal Lodge or at GovernmentHouse in any of the provinces. It seemed highly odd, and frankly it still does. Was theexplanation possibly that the pay offered was not good enough to attract the first-rate manoverseas? Of course after Queen Victoria's death there was a change; successive King-Emperors had no Indian menial servants, but there were several posts of honor in the RoyalHousehold for Indian aides-de-camp and orderly officers.I had ten memorable days on the Riviera, and then off I set for Paris. I have praised thecomfort of the liners of those days, but no, not the sleeping cars -- anyone who knows themodern wagon-lits or Pullman car, and the glories perhaps of the Blue Train, can have noidea of the cramped, primitive, alleged sleeping car of the nineties and the early 1900's.However, it took me to Paris. I repeat: I was twenty years old, I had steeped myself in Frenchliterature and French history of the whole nineteenth century and earlier. I knew the names ofthe streets, I knew the way Parisians lived, acted and thought. Mine in dreams and in readingwas the Paris of the two Napoleons, the Paris of Balzac and of Barrès, of the boulevards andthe barricades. Where did I stay but at the famous Hôtel Bristol? What did I do on my firstmorning in Paris but pay my call at the British Embassy?I have hinted that I was a solemn young man, very serious about my cultural and scientificinterests. In the absence of the Ambassador, the Minister gave me the introductions that Iwanted and supplemented those that I had brought with me. To the Carnavalet Museum Iwent, to the Louvre, to the Bibliothèque Nationale. There I was shown around by the curatorof Oriental books and manuscripts, accompanied by M. Solomon Reinach, an eminentarchaeologist. He was astonished, he said, that a young man who spoke English and Frenchso fluently could read with case ancient classical Persian and Arabic manuscripts. I wasastonished in my turn (though I did not say so) that so distinguished a savant should forgetthat Persian and Arabic were, after all, my native languages, the languages which myforebears had spoken for hundreds of years.My friend Professor Haffkine in Bombay had given me a letter of introduction to Dr. Roux ofthe Pasteur Institute. In the evenings I sallied forth to the theater and the opera. It was not theseason in Paris, and therefore there was not the display and the elegance that I had seen at theRiviera. Still I saw Madam Bartet at the Comédie Française and thought her the mostenchanting and accomplished actress I had ever seen -- and now with a lifetime in between,that is a verdict which I see no reason to alter. I saw Sarah Bernhardt, but frankly shedisappointed me. I never thought she came up to Bartet. I went several times to the opera andexcept for Faust, every opera that I saw was by Meyerbeer. Who ever hears an opera byMeyerbeer nowadays? His reputation suddenly dropped like a plummet, and yet I think hehas been unfairly treated, with a fierce contempt which he does not merit. I know that he is noWagner; I know that he cannot compare with the best of Mozart or Verdi, but I have ahankering belief that a Meyerbeer revival might prove quite a success.Not all my time in Paris was spent on culture. I did have letters of introduction to membersof the Jockey Club; I did go to the races. And after a fortnight I headed for London.The private, incognito status in which I had hitherto traveled was no longer possible. I hadreached the capital and center of the Empire. At the station to meet me when I arrived was anequerry from Buckingham Palace, representing Her Majesty; and from the India Office,representing the Secretary of State, there was the Political Aide-de-Camp, Sir GeraldFitzgerald. I went to the Albemarle Hotel in Piccadilly, which was my headquarters and basethroughout that spring and summer.Soon after I reached the hotel the Duke of Connaught, who had known me in my childhoodand boyhood at home, paid a call and stayed for a long time. The British Royal Family'swatchful and friendly interest in me had not abated.London in the nineties has been written about ad nauseam, yet it is difficult to exaggerate themagnetic effect and the splendor of London in that sunlit heyday of the Victorian age -- theease, the security, the affluence, the self-confidence. The City was the financial center of thecivilized world, immensely rich, immensely powerful. From Westminster a great Empire wasgoverned with benevolent assurance. If the Foreign Office were dowdy and inconvenient, ifthe India Office's methods of administering a subcontinent were tortuous and archaic, whocould deny the irresistible sense of power and authority concentrated in those few smallacres? The outward show of that power and that authority was magnificently impressive. Thepound sterling was a gold sovereign, and purchased about eight times what its paperequivalent does today. The gradations from rich to poor were steep; yet throughout much ofsociety there was diffused a general sense of prosperity. There was no welfare state, but therewas a robust, genial feeling that Britain was top dog, and there was gaiety, vigor andadventurousness about life for the mass of the people.Real power, political and economic, was in the hands of a few. The rulers of England and theEmpire consisted of a small closed circle of the aristocracy and those members of the risingplutocracy who had attached themselves to, and got themselves accepted by, the aristocracy.To that circle my own rank and the august connections which I possessed gave me a directand immediate entry. I who have lived to see the demagogue and the dictator in power in alarge part of what was once civilized Europe saw in my young manhood, at very closequarters, the oligarchy which controlled Victorian England and the Empire.The London season was just beginning when I arrived. I was immediately swept into themiddle of it all. All doors in society were open to me. I took my place in a glittering, superblyorganized round and ritual: Epsom, Ascot, Newmarket; a dinner at Lansdowne House, atLord Ripon's or Lord Reay's; the opera and a ball at a great ducal mansion; garden parties,country-house week ends. Formal clothes were de rigueur in London, a frock coat or amorning coat, a stiff collar and a silk hat and gloves, however hot the weather. Church paradeon a Sunday morning in Hyde Park was a stately occasion, with its own elaborate ceremony.There was the detailed ritual of calling. From royalty downward the whole of society wasorganized with a care and a rigidity inconceivable today. To recall it all now is indeed toevoke a vanished world.In due course I was summoned to an audience with Her Majesty at Windsor Castle. Shereceived me with the utmost courtesy and affability. The only other person in the room duringthis first audience was my old patron, the Duke of Connaught, in whose presence I did notfeel shy or overawed. The Queen, enfolded in voluminous black wraps and shawls, wasseated on a big sofa. Was she tall or short, was she stout or not? I could not tell; her postureand her wraps made assessments of that kind quite impossible. I kissed the hand which sheheld out to me. She remarked that the Duke of Connaught was a close friend of my familyand myself. She had an odd accent, a mixture of Scotch and German -- the German wasperfectly explicable by the fact that she was brought up in the company of her mother, aGerman princess, and a German governess, Baroness Lehzen. She also had the Germanconversational trick of interjecting "so" -- pronounced "tzo" -- frequently into her remarks.She observed that since I was a prince myself and the descendant of many kings, she wouldnot ask me to kneel, or to receive the acco lade and the touch of the sword upon my shoulder,but she would simply hand the order to me. I was greatly touched by her consideration andcourtesy. This, the K.C.I.E. was the first British Order which I received.A little later I was bidden to stay the night at the castle and dine with Her Majesty. This toowas a memorable experience. I sat at dinner between the Queen and her daughter PrincessBeatrice -Princess Henry of Battenberg, mother of Queen Ena of Spain. The Queen waswearing her customary black -- that mourning which, from the day after her husband died,she never put off. On her wrist she wore a large diamond bracelet set in the center of whichwas a beautiful miniature of the Prince Consort, about three inches long and two inches wide.The Queen was then seventy-nine; the vigor of her bearing and the facility and clarity of herconversation were astonishing.There were several high officers of State present, including the Lord Chancellor, the Earl ofHalsbury, a small, squat, unimpressive looking man. I was both surprised and amused whenthe Queen murmured to me that Lord Halsbury, though not much to look at, was a formidablelawyer and statesman. The Queen talked to me especially about India. Were British seniorofficials and representatives, she asked, civil or were they wanting in manners toward IndianPrinces and gentry? I replied truthfully that so far as I and my family were concerned, we hadalways been treated with impeccable kindness and courtesy by British officials with whomwe came in contact. Throughout dinner the Queen and the two guests to right and left of her -myself and the Lord Chancellor -- were served by her Indian attendants, who were the samekind of rather second-rate servants whom I had noticed in her entourage at Nice.The dinner was long and elaborate -- course after course, three or four choices of meat, a hotpudding and an iced pudding, a savory and all kinds of hothouse fruit -- slow and stately in itsserving. We sat down at a quarter past nine, and it must have been a quarter of eleven beforeit was all over. The Queen, in spite of her age, ate and drank heartily -- every kind of winethat was offered and every course, including both the hot and the iced pudding. After dinner,in the state drawing room each guest was presented to Her Majesty and had a few moments'conversation with her. She gave me a jeweled portrait of herself, decorated with the rose ofEngland, the thistle of Scotland and the harp of Ireland -- and the harp was in emeralds. Nextmorning her munshi, her Indian secretary, came to me and gave me something which theQueen had herself written in Urdu and Arabic characters.To be Queen-Empress was for Queen Victoria to possess no formal and remote title. She waskeenly alert and sensitive to the views and needs of her Indian subjects, and her liking andsympathy for them were warm and genuine. I particularly remember that at dinner she said tome with great earnestness she hoped that when British people in India visited mosques andtemples, they conducted themselves with respect and reverence as they would in cathedrals intheir own land.During this visit to England I first made the acquaintance of various other members of theBritish Royal Family -- first among them, of course, the Prince of Wales, later to becomeKing Edward VII. From the first the Prince was extremely kind to me. He had me at oncemade an honorary member of his own club, the Marlborough, and some months later, early in1899, he himself nominated me for full membership. In those days membership in theMarlborough, thus conferred, had a special social and personal significance; one wasstamped, as it were, as a personal friend of the Prince of Wales. I may mention in passing thatI am still, after more than fifty years, a member of the Marlborough-Windham; and when Iam in London, I still drop in there to look at the newspapers. The head hallporter and I are bynow quite the oldest inhabitants; he entered the service of the Club in, I think, 1896 or 1897.Together he and I recall old times, and our conversation evokes many, many ghosts whoseliving presence, as we knew them in our youth, are very real to us.For the last decade of his life I was honored with the warm, personal friendship of KingEdward VII. My association with him was far from formal. He was elderly and I was young,and at the outset a stranger, but he treated me always with the greatest kindness andbenevolence. Indeed if I search for a word in which to sum up King Edward's character, theanswer is to be found in "benevolent." He wished everybody well. It is perfectly true that hehad a great taste for the good things in life, that he enjoyed having a good time; but sincerelyand steadily he wanted everyone else -- the humblest as well as the highest of his subjects --to have a good time too.He cared a great deal about the alleviation of pain and suffering. His patronage of hospitalswas something which he undertook not as a mere Royal duty, nor for that matter as a fad orpersonal fancy; it was one expression of a deeply felt attitude toward life, a spontaneous andgenerous sympathy with suffering in all its forms.Two of his remarks on this subject have been often quoted. I who knew him so well knowthat they came from the bottom of his heart. "The man who discovers a cure for cancer oughtto have a statue to his memory in every capital of Europe." I can bear the very inflexion in hisvoice as he said that; and the other, about certain diseases which doctors describe aspreventable, "If preventable, why not prevented?"In 1904, when a state visit to India by the then Prince of Wales -later King George V -- wasbeing discussed, I happened to be in England, and the King sent for me in private audience atBuckingham Palace. He questioned me closely and at length about hospital conditions inIndia, and disclosed considerable knowledge as well as great concern. He was especiallyworried about the terrible state of hospitals in the big cities, particularly Calcutta, and he toldme that he proposed to brief his son thoroughly on this subject and make him insist on aclose, personal report on several city hospitals. He said too that he advocated theestablishment of homes in the mountains, and in healthier areas of the country, for theprevention and early treatment of tuberculosis.Nearly two years later, in the summer of 1906, the King, in another long private conversation,reverted in great detail to this subject. He commended the Prince of Wales' work along thelines he had himself indicated, and it was a commendation which I could support from myown knowledge. The King had also had a series of independent reports, and he knew that I,with a group of friends, had established a sanatorium in a hill station for the treatment oftuberculosis in its earlier stages.King Edward's close interest in pain and sickness and their alleviation (had it something to doperhaps with his own attack of typhoid, which so nearly proved fatal?) was not prompted byhis sense of kingly duty, but sprang -- I am convinced -- from his real humanity. It issignificant, I think, that it was enhanced and deepened after his own other grave illness, justbefore his Coronation. He himself was dignified and brave in face of physical pain; but hedisliked it exceedingly and sought to diminish its assaults -- for others more than for himself.It has been widely held that King Edward was anti-German, and that he had a prejudiceagainst Germany as a nation because he did not get on well with his nephew, the KaiserWilliam II. The evidence to the contrary is strong, both from the King's own lips and fromwitnesses as reliable as Baron von Eckardstein and Count Wolf Metternich -- both of whomheld positions of influence and authority in their respective periods in the Embassy in London- who went out of their way to tell me that the King was completely sincere in his desire forfriendship between Britain and Germany, and that he strove, to the utmost of his ability, toremain on good terms with his nephew. That there were deep and subtle personal differencesand difficulties between them cannot be denied. The relationship was almost bound to bestrained. The Kaiser acceded to his throne as a very young man, and for a decade or more hewas in full control of all the affairs of state in his own country; whereas his uncle, a middle-aged man, chafed at not being allowed any sort of responsibility and indeed not beingallowed even to read the Foreign Office papers. The Kaiser was never the most tactful or self-effacing of men; in twentieth-century terms he suffered from an enormous inferioritycomplex. He never forgot to assert himself. His uncle strove valiantly to repress his naturalirritation; it was rarely indeed that he blew up, or behaved toward his nephew other than withcourtesy and consideration, albeit tinged with the irony which a sage and experienced man ofthe world could command.King Edward had a stern sense of decorum; he knew what was fitting in a King and what wasfitting in behavior toward a King. He strongly disliked anybody's taking liberties or takingadvantage of his own urbanity and kindness. But I do know of several examples of lapseswhich earned his peremptory disapproval; yet when the delinquent either wrote directly toHis Majesty and apologized or asked for pardon through one of the officials of the palace,and demonstrated that he sincerely regretted his offense, the King not only forgave but forgot,and the offender was never shown the slightest hostility or coldness. King Edward wasgenuinely magnanimous.He also possessed a great fund of considerate tact in matters great and small. One winter awealthy and well-known American resident in Paris, a Mrs. Moore, who was the King'sfriend and mine (the King was often her guest at dinner at Biarritz), was visiting London. TheKing called on her one bleak afternoon, when there had been a hard frost all day. Mrs. Moorereceived the King in her warm drawing room upstairs, and he stayed to tea by her fireside. Afew minutes after he had taken his leave there was a knock on the drawing-room door. ARoyal footman came in and gave her a note. It was a habit of the King always to have paper,pencils and small envelopes close at hand so that he might jot down any ideas that occurredto him. The King's note to Mrs. Moore that winter afternoon warned her that when she wentout she must be very careful because the pavement was slippery and she might easily fall andhurt herself. The King sat waiting in his car until the footman came back from delivering themessage.I recall one occasion when he showed the same tact toward me, and after forty-four years Ican still give the precise time and place. It was the Friday of Ascot Week in 1909. The Kinghad asked me to luncheon in the Royal Box. I was sitting at His Majesty's table. When themain dish was served, the waiters by-passed me, a little to my surprise, and then a couple ofcutlets were put in front of me.The King called to me across the table in his strong, deep voice. "I thought you wouldn't likethe thing on the menu," he said, "so I ordered those cutlets for you."I glanced at my neighbor's plate and saw a piece of ham on it. The King had realized that I,as a Muslim, would not want to eat the ham, nor would I like to refuse what was put beforeme at his table, so carefully he had made his own arrangements.Digressing for a moment, may I say this sort of tact is essential for people in high places.During Lord Curzon's viceroyalty the eldest son of the then Amir of Afghanistan paid a statevisit to Calcutta. On the night of his arrival a special state banquet was given in his honor. Iwas one of the guests; I sat opposite the Afghan Prince and had a front-row view of alamentable affair. To my dismay I realized that the soup was well laced with sherry; beforethe Prince had time to lift his first spoonful to his lips, the political agent who was sittingbeside him said in officious and self-important tones: "Your Highness, there is sherry in thissoup."In supposed strict conformity with Muslim canons, the Prince put aside his soup untouched.His fish course had nothing obnoxious about it and he tucked into it happily enough. The firstentree had some slices of ham in it, and sadly the Prince watched that go past him. Then therewas a vegetable dish, and it was clearly, blatantly decorated with bits of bacon fat. All themain part of the dinner was thus an unprofitable blank for the poor Prince. At last came theice cream. Eagerly the Prince prepared to attack it."Your Highness," said the officious politico, "it's got chartreuse in it."Resignedly the Prince put his spoon down again -- and compensated himself, in the end, witha cheese savory and some dessert. It was curious that Lord Curzon never had the slightestawareness that his chief guest left the table hungry. It was all the more odd in that LordCurzon in his own house -- I was more than once his guest at Hackwood -- was the mostconsiderate and thoughtful host imaginable. The explanation was, I suppose, that as Viceroyhe left the day-to-day running of his house to his staff, and someone blundered -- in a fashionwhich Lord Curzon would never have permitted in his own home.I will confess that I myself have been embroiled in a similar disaster -- in Bombay, and at theWillington Club of all places, whose head steward was a Parsee. I gave a big dinner party atwhich a number of Hindu Maharajahs were my guests. I went to the Club beforehand andtold the steward who my guests were to be; I said that they were very strict about their foodand that of course on no account should beef be served."I understand, Your Highness," said he. "I shall be very careful. Nothing wrong will happen, Iassure you."We sat down to dinner, quite an assemblage of Hindu Maharajahs, some of them Rajputs ofthe most orthodox religious outlook. Everything went along agreeably until the main coursewas served. Then to my horror I saw plate after big plate of ox-tongue. My guests could wellconstrue this miserable faux-pas as a direct and studied insult; I apologized abjectly. As soonas dinner was over, I found the steward and rated him soundly."What on earth were you up to? I warned you not to serve beef!""But, Your Highness," he expostulated, "they were ox-tongues." He was a Parsee, he hadlived in India all his life, and incredible as it may seem, he still thought that ox-tongue wouldnot count as beef.The effect of this kind of prohibition or instruction about diet, imposed in one's childhood,with the sanction of religion to support it and the tradition probably of many centuries, isstrong and long enduring. I remember that I was once dining in Europe with an Indian friend,a Hindu, a man of profound learning and wide culture, whose reaction when a calf's head wasput on the table was one of obvious shock and deep distress. He seemed to be almost on theedge of a nervous collapse. A few days later when I asked him why -- apart from a quiteunderstandable religious disapproval -he had been so upset, he said that for him to see a calf'shead thus displayed on a table was as immediately horrifying as if a human baby's head hadbeen offered."How would you feel," he said, "if the chef cooked you a baby's head and served it in aspic,tastefully garnished?"There is no ready answer. I once asked another friend, a wise and highly educated Brahmin, aCambridge scholar, whether he -who had never had any animal food in his life, except milkproducts, and whose ancestors for two thousand years or so had never touched eggs, fish ormeat -- had any instinctive feeling of repulsion to this kind of food.He hesitated for a long time and at length answered, "You know, if you had been brought upas I have been, I doubt if you would ever, all your life, get over the instinctive horror of thestink of meat or fish or eggs."Well, I have wandered some distance from London in that faroff summer of 1898, a long wayfrom my first introduction to London society. I have spoken of its gaieties, its splendors, itsrace meetings, its garden parties, its great dinners, its nights at the opera, perhaps after theopera a final, late-night call at the Marlborough, and a chat with the Prince of Wales -- he hada way of dropping in at the club on his way home for a last drink (hot water, lemon and gin italways was) -- but I must not give the impression that I spent all my time frivolously.My friend Professor Haffkine in Bombay had given me more than one introduction todistinguished scientists in England, including Lord Lister, the great surgeon, who was mosthospitable. I also met Lord Kelvin, then the doyen of English scientists, who (as I haveremarked elsewhere) assured me that flying in heavier-than-air machines was a physicalimpossibility. I was often the guest of the Baroness Burdett-Coutts, at whose house I metseveral of the leading spiritualists of the period.I called too on Miss Florence Nightingale. She and the Baroness, next to Queen Victoriaherself, were the most eminent women of the time. Though by now advanced in years and acomplete invalid, confined to a sofa in her drawing room in her Park Lane home, MissNightingale retained a formidable interest in affairs. One of the topics on which she keptherself most closely and fully informed was the British administration of India -- especiallyso far as it concerned matters of health and hygiene. Over the years she had constitutedherself an august unofficial adviser to the Raj, although she had never been to India. Both theIndia Office and the War Office knew the strength and urgency of Miss Nightingale'smemoranda. No newly appointed Viceroy would have dared, before he left England to takeup his appointment, to omit a call on Miss Nightingale, and for all of them a profitable andhelpful experience it proved to be. She laid out the plans for the system of militarycantonments established for British garrisons all over India; she devised a medicaladministrative system, and systems of pay and allowances which subsisted almost withoutchange in detail, certainly without change in principle, until the end of British rule in India.It was perfectly natural that I should call on her. Lytton Strachey, that entertaining but farfrom reliable historian, chose in his essay on Miss Nightingale in Eminent Victorians to givean account of my first visit to her which is a ludicrous caricature. What he omits to mention isthat we became fast friends and that I went back to see her again and again. Naturally enoughshe talked at length, eloquently and earnestly, about what could and could not be done for thebetterment of health in India, particularly among women and children.I ventured, however, on more general topics. I was, as I have indicated, a serious young man,and I asked Miss Nightingale whether she thought that there had been any real improvementin human affairs since her youth, whether faith in God had extended and deepened. LyttonStrachey waxed sarcastic about my question, but I still think it was very much to the point.Miss Nightingale, anyway, saw it as such, and discussed it with the gravity with which I hadpropounded it. After all, there had occurred in Miss Nightingale's lifetime (and in mine it hasbeen redoubled) a vast and rapid increase in man's power to exploit his natural resources --from steam propulsion to the internal combustion engine and thence to atomic fission --whose relation to or divorce from faith in God and all that such faith means in action, is atopic of some importance. Miss Nightingale did not see fit, like Mr. Lytton Strachey, todismiss it with a snigger; she gave me her views on it and she honored me henceforth withher friendship.That same summer I met another great figure in the history of the British Army, FieldMarshal Lord Wolseley. Sir Alfred Lyall gave a breakfast party at which the guests wereLeonard Courtney, the Liberal writer and politician (later Lord Courtney), Mr. Paul,historian and editor, Lord Wolseley and myself. Somebody mentioned Mr. Gladstone, and theField Marshal immediately launched into a passionate denunciation of Gladstone and all hisworks; there was no word too bad for him, none of us could get a sentence in, and we satlistening to an unbridled tirade. Gladstone was the most evil and destructive influence of histime, responsible for a catastrophic decline in Britain's prestige and authority in Europe andthroughout the world, responsible for the disaster in the Sudan, personally accountable for thedeath of General Gordon -in short and despite the fact that at least half the population ofEngland idolized him (irrespective of what the other half thought), a malefactor who oughtnot to be at large in civilized society.Although Lord Wolseley's depth of feeling and degree of outspokenness surprised me greatlyat Sir Alfred Lyall's breakfast table, I subsequently came to recognize this attitude andmanner, in regard to Gladstone, as not unusual. I remember that when Gladstone died,although the tone of public comment was respectful, society's private remarks as I heard themat dinner parties or in great country houses (and the most influential sections of society wereConservative and Unionist) were fiercely critical and unforgiving. In latter years too I recallhow the same people talked about Lloyd George (of whom I shall have a good deal to say).Even now, so I believe, a certain member of the Labor party, of Welsh origin like LloydGeorge, is a ferocious bogey to his Tory opponents.Of course in purely liberal circles one heard very different opinions. I was the guest thatsummer of Lord Spencer, who had been a close colleague of Gladstone's and a member of hisCabinet. He took a small house near Birmingham for the agricultural show. On the last nightof my stay, when all the other guests had gone, Lord Spencer talked freely if somberly aboutthat perennially critical issue in British politics in the Victorian Age, the Irish Question. Thiswas 1898; Gladstone's attempt to introduce Home Rule had long been shipwrecked; LordSalisbury's Unionist Government was securely in power, and its Irish policy consisted of"firm government" -- associated with Arthur Balfour's name -- and attempts to tackle thethorny problem of land tenure. Lord Spencer insisted that there was no way of settlingIreland's problems except by giving her full political freedom, that twenty years -- or twohundred years -- of police rule would not make the Irish "loyal" or submissive; that a greatchance had been missed in 1886 and that it would not occur again; the inevitableconsequences, soon or late, would be an armed rebellion, with all its accompanyingbloodshed and murder, and at the end the loss of Ireland to the Empire. Within a quarter of acentury every detail of the prophecy to which I listened that summer night in 1898 was to bemeticulously fulfilled. And in India there were those who watched the working out ofIreland's destiny and were fully cognizant of the lessons it taught, the message it signaledacross the world.Back in London I saw the season through to the end; and then in August when Englishsociety began its stately annual exodus to Cowes and to Scotland, I set forth on my Europeantravels again, to Paris once more and thence to Geneva and Lausanne, to Italy and to Vienna,still then the capital city of a great, historic Empire.During this otherwise pleasant summer I was greatly shocked and saddened by a grievouspiece of news from India. A near kinsman, Hashim Shah, whose father was my elder half-brother, was murdered by a steward in my house in Poona. Mercifully this was not, as theassassinations in Jeddah in 1896 had been, prompted by motives of religious fanaticism, butthe outcome of personal resentment and some personal grudge. However, its warning couldnot be discounted; there was an element of lawlessness and violence in my own closesurroundings which would, sooner or later, have to be dealt with firmly if it were not tobecome a running sore in the life of Bombay and Poona.Part TwoYOUNG MANHOODVMonarchs, Diplomats and PoliticiansMY EXPERIENCES IN LONDON and during my Continental tour widened my horizonsand stimulated my growing interest in -and desire to play my part in -- the world of politicsand diplomacy. Not long after my arrival in England I was in touch with and was soon fullyin the confidence of Sir William Lee Warner, the head of the Political Department of theIndia Office, the department which handled all the secret and confidential aspects of foreignrelations. Through my friendship with a leading race horse owner, Sir J. B. Maple (founderand head of the big furniture store which bears his name), I made the acquaintance of his son-in-law, Baron von Eckardstein, who, since the Ambassador was a sick man, was in virtualcharge of the German Embassy.In the close and frequent company of these friends of mine I was able to observe at first handthe working out of a series of diplomatic moves of considerable importance. There was agrowing awareness in certain circles in Britain that that "splendid isolation," which hadseemed so natural and desirable only a short time before, had its grave disadvantages. TheSouth African crisis was soon to reveal sharply how truly isolated Britain was; the depth andbitterness of anti-British feeling throughout Europe were far too pronounced to ignore. Theleading spirit in Lord Salisbury's Cabinet in these years was Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, theColonial Secretary, a realist, despite the sometimes visionary nature of his imperialist ideals,who was acutely cognizant of the dangers of Britain's situation. Surveying the trends of worldpower at that time he believed that it might be possible to reach an understanding withGermany, and he saw clearly the perils ahead if that understanding were not reached. Hisofficial biography * has lately revealed the extent and the pertinacity of Chamberlain's effortsto secure an Anglo-German entente.The Life of Joseph Chamberlain, Vol. III, by J. L. Garvin; Vol. IV, by Julian Amery (London, Macmillan & Co. Ltd.).My own recollections confirm this to the hilt. It was a sincere and strenuous effort onBritain's part to achieve an understanding; and it failed solely because of the German attitude,which was the result of the outlook and prejudices of the chief German negotiators, Princevon Bülow and Herr von Holstein. Not only did I watch the British approaches; I was fullycognizant of the German reactions to them, through my friendship with von Eckardstein. Icould see how sad Eckardstein became at the constant rejection of Britain's sincere hand offriendship -- a rejection always based on new and artificial pretexts and evasions. It is sadindeed to reflect on the long-term results of the breakdown of these negotiations. Might notthe course of history in the twentieth century have been profoundly different hadChamberlain succeeded in averting the steady, implacable growth of Anglo-Germanantagonism? Would we not quite possibly have avoided two world wars? Had the Germansplayed the game, this would certainly have happened; but the great question mark forEuropean peace lay always in Germany's attitude.The temperament of the two Germans involved in these negotiations prevented them fromrising to the greatness of the chance they were given. They had grown up in the shadow ofthe great Bismarck, but they were not of his quality of statesmanship. They were essentiallysmall bureaucrats with all of Bismarck's arrogance, and they were ineradicably suspicious ofwhat they thought of as British cunning and perfidy.Long, long afterward Lord Rennell -- formerly Sir Rennell Rodd, and for many years BritishAmbassador in Rome -- told me that after the First World War, when Prince von Bülow wasliving in retirement in Rome, they discussed this whole episode. Von Bülow admitted withgreat hesitation and ruefully that he had been wrong to reject the hand of friendship whichhad been offered by Britain in sincerity and earnestness of purpose.When my first European tour ended, I set off for East Africa. This, however, was no pleasurejaunt. One or two delicate and important tasks demanding the exertion of a certain amount ofdiplomatic skill and finesse awaited me there. There were several Ismaili settlements downthe coast, which were rapidly increasing in numbers and in wealth; and more than one ofthese communities was involved in disputes -- by no means of a trifling character -with thelocal authorities.East Africa was at the beginning of its rapid, even sensational, opening up and development,but at the turn of the century it presented a very different picture from that which it presentstoday. Several European powers with colonial aspirations were embroiled, down thethousands of miles from the Red Sea to the Cape, in what proved to be a late but dramaticphase of the scramble for Africa. Abyssinia, the only native African state with expansionistambitions, had lately collided, bloodily but victoriously, with the Italians. At the Battle ofAduwa in 1896 Ras Makonen, the able lieutenant and ultimate successor of the EmperorMenelik, had heavily defeated an Italian army and put an end, for over thirty years, to Italy'sefforts to extend her somewhat precarious coastal foothold. The British, having entered into atreaty with the Sultan of Zanzibar, established what was then known as the East AfricanProtectorate (today the flourishing colony of Kenya with its complex multiracial community),with its base at Mombasa, under the supervision of the Foreign Office; and shortly afterwardthere were projects of settlement being put forward by Lord Delamere and others, in whatcame to be called "the white highlands" in the hinterland of the Protectorate.Southward the Germans had staked their claims inland from Dar es Salaam in the territoriesnow known as Tanganyika. Farther south the Portuguese, who were the first Europeans toventure into these regions in the great age of exploration, had an old-established colony. Andinland from this, Jameson and his pioneers were carving out of the empty veld and savannahsthe lands which were to become Northern and Southern Rhodesia. And to the south again theBritish and the Boers were already committed to the long, grim struggle of the South AfricanWar.If the beginnings of future economic prosperity and greatness were already visible in theAfrica which I visited for the first time in 1899, no less noticeable were the seeds of futurepolitical and social difficulties and problems.Zanzibar, which I visited first, was an ancient seat of Arab culture. The Sultan no longerexercised absolute powers but was a constitutional sovereign, acting on the advice of hisBritish Resident and officials. Between these officials and my Ismaili followers there hadarisen a complicated dispute concerning the ownership and tenure of a tract of land on theseashore, the value of which had rapidly increased but which was an Ismaili burial ground.The dispute had been stubborn and protracted. I was able, however, to arrange a settlementwhich was admittedly a compromise. I confess that I have worked all my life on the principlethat a compromise is better than rigid and unyielding disagreement. The compromise whichwe reached in Zanzibar was workable to this extent that there has never been any other majordispute in the years since then between the Ismailis and the British authorities.In Dar es Salaam I was faced with a similar sort of conflict, in this case between the Germanauthorities and my followers over land trading rights. This dispute had smoldered andflickered throughout the nineties; the Germans were suspicious of my Ismaili followers, andthere were accusations that they were smuggling in arms and had had a hand in the Arabrebellion of some ten years before. There was a certain stiffness on the part of the GermanGovernor and his officials when I first arrived. However I persevered, and before I left I wasable to see the dispute settled and the suspicions (which were probably one cause of thestubbornness of the dispute) thoroughly dissipated. When I left, it was in the knowledge thatthere was a clean slate, so far as differences between my followers and the Germanadministration were concerned.From East Africa I went back to Europe for a short time. Then, as winter set in, I turned southand east. On my way home to India I visited Egypt for the first time. Those who have notexperienced it, who have not been lucky enough to fall under Egypt's spell, will find itdifficult, I suppose, to realize the sheer magic of the first sight of Egypt. Add that my firstsight was on a perfect early winter day, and need I say that all my life since then I have had aspecial corner in my heart for Egypt and that I have returned there as often as I could.There is a unique quality about Egypt's charm; the wide, tranquil skies, the extraordinaryclarity of its light and atmosphere, the glories of its sunsets and its starlit nights, and itstremendous monuments of a majestic past. But I had other objects than mere sightseeing. Iwanted to make personal contact with the large Ismaili community of Syria and the remnantof Egyptian Ismailis who had not yet come to see me in India. I also visited the great seat ofMuslim learning, the Al Azbar University.It was a time of momentous and stirring events. Lord Kitchener's great victory at Omdurmanin the Sudan was still fresh in everyone's mind. General Wingate had just returned from thesouth. The Khalifeh had been killed, and the last of his dervish following exterminated.I called on Lord Cromer, the British Resident in Egypt, whose power and authority in Egyptat that time were paramount. He said that Egypt badly needed a man like Sir Syed Ahmed, todo for its Muslim population the sort of educative and regenerative work which he had donein Aligarh. There was in Egypt at that time a deep rift between, on the one hand, the old-fashioned conservative, pious Muslim, who was contemptuous of modern science andtechniques and who spoke and read Arabic and, on the other hand, the Frenchified upperclasses, whose reading matter was mainly French yellow-back novels, whose meeting placewas the club, whose diversions were cards and nocturnal gambling, who detested the British,yearned to see them out and longed for a return to the regime of the Khedive Ismaili. Therewas nothing like Aligarh to show the vast Muslim population the way toward a compromisewith and understanding of modern, Western science, and to raise an elite capable of co-operating with British administrators and technicians in that process of economic and socialuplift of which the country was in such desperate need.Unfortunately the Khedive Abbas Hilmi was ill at the time -- it was suspected that he hadsome form of paratyphoid -- and I was therefore unable to see him. In later years we becamegreat and intimate friends and I admired the brilliance of his intellect and his wide and deepknowledge of politics and history. I will have occasion to refer to him later. The EgyptianMinisters whom I met were merely nominees of the British -- of Lord Cromer, in fact.People who know only the Cairo of today can have no idea of the social conditions of theearly 1900's. The hotels were full of rich foreigners, who were "wintering in Egypt," then ahighly fashionable pastime. They would make trips up the Nile in hired dahabiyehs or in oneof Messrs. Thomas Cook's steamers. They spent money profusely and had a high old time,surrounded by magnificent-looking Egyptian guides and alleged interpreters, who were apt tospeak the most grotesque pidgin variety of every European language.The contents of the Cairo Museum were as fascinating as they have always been, and alwayswill be; although of course Lord Carnarvon's magnificent Tutankhamen discoveries had notyet been made, there was more then enough to see, but the arrangement of it all was lessconvenient than it is today. A disagreeable and irreverent custom prevailed of exposing in fullview, for anyone who wanted to see them, the actual mummies -- not merely the sarcophagi -of all the great Pharaohs. You could see Rameses II, with his noble hawklike features, lyingin his coffin -- looking almost as he had in life all those centuries ago -- and other formermighty kings and conquerors, at the feet of any chance passer-by.To me, however, more concerned with the present than the past, possibly the mostremarkable fact about Cairo in those days was that it was for all practical purposes anotherPoona or Simla. It was even more of a citadel of British supremacy than India. The Britishwere not merely in political control of the country; they assumed a social superiority whichthe Egyptians appeared humbly to accept. What little political agitation that existed wasattributed to the "machinations of the Palace." The general attitude of all classes toward theBritish Occupying Power -- its agents and officials, the British Army officers and thegrowing number of employees of British firms -- was one of outward submissiveness andobedience. Unhappily, just as in India in the late nineties and early nineteen hundreds, therewas scarcely a link between the British community, political, military and commercial, andeither the Egyptian aristocracy or the well-to-do bourgeoisie of Cairo and Alexandria. Whenrich Egyptians came to Europe, they went to Paris, to Switzerland, to Austria or Germany orItaly; they carefully kept clear of England. Few of the winter tourists, except for someindividuals from the Continent, bothered to get to know Egypt's upper and middle classes.Even the Gezira Sporting Club, in the heart of the metropolitan Cairo, barred Egyptians fromits membership other than in very exceptional cases. The only non-British whom the Britishencountered -- except for their office subordinates and their servants -- were the members ofa few wealthy Levantine families who sought to identify themselves completely with theruling power and were thus accepted. The depth and virulence of this social division can beseen in the fact that I myself, who naturally in my European travels met Egyptians -- largelyof the aristocracy and members of the ruling dynasty -- seldom met one of them when I wasin Cairo except in their own homes. There was really no common ground of socialintercourse. Inevitably, therefore, behind the façade of humility there developed a sullen andbrooding, almost personal, resentment which later on needlessly, bitterly poisoned the clashof Egyptian nationalism with Britain's interests as the Occupying Power. After three weeks orso in Cairo I went home to India, where the work I had done had not passed unnoticed bythose concerned. The Sultan of Zanzibar bestowed on me the highest order in his gift, theBrilliant Star of Zanzibar, and later the German Emperor awarded me the Royal PrussianOrder of the Crown (First Class).From India I made a brief tour of Burma and met my follow ers there for the first time. Irecall one somewhat daunting experience. A Muslim of my acquaintance -- not one of myfollowers -- had been very kind to me and had helped me in a variety of ways. I called on himto thank him, and as we exchanged courtesies he sent for a glass of sherbet for me. It wasbrought. The tall tumbler was held out toward me by a servant, and I saw that the hands thatheld it were the hands of a leper. Time seemed suspended as I stared horror-struck. I foundevery excuse I could, said that I was not thirsty, tried to get out of accepting the tumbler stillheld out toward me. But my host earnestly pressed me and went on pressing me. At last I shutmy eyes, took the tumbler and gulped the sherbet down; but the horror of those handsremained.I was back in Europe in 1900, and in Paris in that year -- the year of the Great Exhibition --met the Shah Musafaradin of Persia. No other Shah, in my view, did more to harm Persiathan he did. He was sickly, he was weak and he was grossly ignorant. He was capricious andextravagant, squandering gifts on his favorites, and incapable of any awareness of his dutiesand obligations as Shah. All the treasure which his father, Nasruddin, had amassed in fiftyyears of prudent and capable rule, he dissipated in folly and waste. He had a childish, pitiablepassion for the silliest, most costly gadgets -- musical boxes, for example, adorned withjewels and gold and silver, and on these and similar trumpery objects he spent a fortune. Itwas no wonder that making a pun on his name, Musafaradin, the Persian intelligentsianicknamed him "mauvaise affaire," and their gibe was taken up by foreigners in Tehran.He was indeed a "mauvaise affaire" for his country. Since I was his relative, connected withhim on my father's and my mother's sides of the family, he received me with eager affection,gave me one of his highest decorations and made me presents of diamond ornaments. But hewas a sad nincompoop. Talking to him was like talking to a child -- and not a very intelligentchild at that. His infantile outlook and behavior were sustained and exploited, for his ownpurposes, by his Prime Minister, the all-powerful Atabeg, who in his morning audiences withhis sovereign did not give him serious reports but told him the sort of fantastic fairy tales agrown-up man will tell a small child to keep him entertained.When I saw the poor man I happened to mention that I had just been to Burma. "Oh!" said he,"haven't the Burmans heads far bigger than other human beings?"When he was in Paris he heard about Monsieur and Madame Curie and their discovery ofradium. He asked to be shown radium at work. The two distinguished scientists said that theywould come to his hotel and give him a demonstration of the properties of radium; but theyexplained that absolute darkness would be necessary for the demonstration. One of the hotelcellars was turned into a dark room; black curtains were put up and all light was completelyshut out. The Shah and some of his courtiers went down to the cellar. Monsieur and MadameCurie arrived and produced a piece of radium whose vivid glow lit up the whole room.Suddenly the Shah took fright. He began to scream and shout and run round the room. Heraved and ranted and accused the Curies of trying to murder him.The Curies were not used to this kind of treatment and, much affronted, they took their leave.The Shah was at last made to understand that he had gravely hurt their feelings. As arecompense he awarded each of them one of his highest decorations, and for good measure heordered each star to be set in diamonds. Off went the baubles to the Curies, who stifflyreturned them with formal thanks, pointing out that they had been exposed to far too gross aninsult to be able to accept anything of this kind.Naturally the Shah had to go up the Eiffel Tower, and, naturally, about halfway up hepanicked; the lift had to be stopped and he had to be brought down again.His behavior in public and in private was deplorable. Since I am myself of Iranian descentand a member of the then ruling dynasty, the Kajar family, I was acutely aware of the shameand humiliation of it. So too were Iranian statesmen and diplomats, who were scandalized atwhat he was doing to his own and his country’s reputation. We all tried to cloak it as much aswe could and made excuses about his ill health, which had a certain basis of truth because hewas a chronic sufferer from kidney trouble.His folly, of course, had different, deeper roots. He exhibited, in an especially lurid light, allthe dangers of the old-fashioned autocratic Oriental monarchy. However incompetent, silly orcriminal such a despot was, not one of the able and intelligent statesmen of the world aroundhim ever stood up to him and told him the truth about himself. The mysterious prestigesurrounding kingship and the blood of kings induced a kind of mental paralysis even in goodand sincere men, so that they were quite unable -- in the interests of their king and theircountry, even in their own interests -- to give true advice and guidance. From what I havebeen told by distinguished Russian friends, this sort of atmosphere prevailed in CzaristRussia. Did it disappear, I wonder, even in Stalinist Russia? You could not call the men whowere thus paralyzed cowards; they were not time-servers, they were not utterly lacking incourage or scruples. It was simply that for them such divinity hedged their king that it wasnot a matter merely of pardoning his follies and weaknesses -- for them those follies andweaknesses simply did not exist. Again and again history teaches this lesson: a tough, self-made man founds a dynasty, his frailer descendants bolster themselves with this atmosphereof semidivinity, and then the dynasty collapses and the process starts anew, unless, ashappened in Japan for centuries, the semidivine monarch is shut up in his palace,unapproachable, invisible, and all power is exercised on his behalf by mayors of the palace.Poor Musafaradin was a glaring example of the more pitiable defects of this kind ofdespotism.From Paris I went on to Berlin. There I met von Holstein at luncheon -- one of the two menresponsible for frustrating the attempts to achieve an Anglo-German understanding. He was agray, withdrawn, taciturn man who ate heartily and said little. I also had an audience with theKaiser at Potsdam. William II was then, I suppose, at the summit of his strange and ill-starredcareer. To me he was gracious and cordial. I had been warned that he was acutely sensitiveabout his physical deformity and disliked having his withered left arm looked at. Butmembers of his court and others who knew him said that the curiosity of human beings issuch that everybody, meeting the Kaiser for the first time, found his gaze drawnautomatically and irresistibly to the left side of his uniform. While I awaited my audience Isaid to myself over and over again, "You won't look at his arm, you won't look at his arm."He strode into the room; my eyes became a law unto themselves, and there I was staring athis left arm. Fortunately for me, I suppose, he must have been so accustomed to this that hedid not let it diminish the warmth and courtesy of his greeting.He held out his right hand and shook hands with me. This was literally a crushing experience.As a compensation for his deformity the Kaiser had, from childhood, determined that hisright hand and arm should be so strong that they would do the work of two. He took constant,vigorous exercise; every day he had at least twenty minutes' fencing; he played lawn tennisoften for two hours at a time, and undertook all manner of other remedial exercises. Theresult was an immense development of strength in his right hand and arm; one of its effectswas this appallingly powerful handshake. I am told that mine was no unusual experience. TheDuchess of Teck (later the Marchioness of Cambridge) told me that she -- like most otherwomen with whom His Imperial Majesty shook hands -- had the greatest difficulty in notletting out a cry of pain as he took her hand in his.I am sure that he was quite unconscious of what he was doing. He was far too great agentleman to do it on purpose; but just as our eyes went to his withered arm, so hissubconscious made him exert this violent physical strength.Looking back, I realize that I was having a good many audiences with monarchs at this time.Later in this same year I went to Constantinople. The Sultan, Abdul Hamid, made me hisguest at the Pera Palace Hotel, and I had a long audience with him at the Yildiz Palace. Thisencounter was the subject of a good deal of rather wild political speculation -- most of itarrant guesswork -- at the time and subsequently. The Sultan was also Caliph and thereforethe recognized head of the whole Sunni branch of the Islamic world, and I was the head ofthe Ismaili section of the Shias. The grounds for speculation were obvious.Our meeting had for me, I must say, its own rather curious flavor of drama. Abdul Hamidlived then in neurotic fear of assassination. * He was a chain smoker, and I have all my lifebeen, as they say, allergic to cigarettes. When I was ushered into his room, the doors wereimmediately locked, and the Sultan and I were alone except for an interpreter. I do not speakTurkish and Abdul Hamid, though I believe he could read both Arabic and Persian, refused tospeak either of these languages. The room was warm and cigarette smoke hung stale andheavy in the air. The Sultan sat huddled in an enormous greatcoat, with field marshal'sepaulettes heavy on its shoulders. Slowly I realized that this bulky and cumbrous garmentwas armored, and about as bulletproof as was possible in those days. Did he think, Iwondered, that I had come there to murder him?It is interesting and not without irony to realize that the word "assassin," which has itsspecial contemporary meaning, was first applied many centuries ago to my ancestors andtheir Ismaili followers. From time immemorial, small and oppressed minorities have had tobe given a bad name -- after all, you cannot kill a dog unless you give it a bad name -- and inthe Middle Ages the Ismailis were such a minority, fighting for their lives and their rights.Their oppressors had to give them a bad name, they associated the Ismailis with themanufacture and use of the drug hashish, and it was alleged that they were addicts. The badname, thus invented, stuck.Over the lapels of the overcoat a strange and somewhat sinister countenance confronted me.For Abdul Hamid wore heavy make-up -- his beard dyed black, his lips carmined, his cheeksrouged and his eyebrows made up to an extent that was comic. He might have been a clownin a circus, but his eyes glowed in this preposterous make-up. Yet this maquillage was noexpression of the effeminacy of perversion; he was most virile, the sire of many children andthe affectionate husband and protector of a large harem.Our conversation was amiable and courteous. I recall that he was interested and impressed bythe fact that I, by way of Kashgar and Sinkiang, had up-to-date and reliable information aboutthe Muslims of western China.It was said that as an aspect of his neurosis about assassination, every particle of food sent upto him had to be tasted by several people on the way, including the cook. As I had no mealwith him I cannot vouch fully for the truth of this story, but I do know that he had an idea thatthe food at my hotel was not particularly good, so twice every day a landau drove up from thepalace with a cargo of china wash basins filled with excellent dishes, both Turkish andPersian, prepared for me in the palace and sent to me by Abdul Hamid's express command.From Constantinople I made my way home to India to tackle a task in my household andentourage -- a cleaning-up job of nightmare complexity which was to demand a great deal ofenergy, patience and endurance for many months to come.VIThe Edwardian Era BeginsTHE MURDER of my kinsman at Poona in the summer of 1898 had emphasized, in the mostsensational and unpleasant fashion, the disruptive qualities latent in the huge, ramshackle,feudally extravagant household and entourage which I had inherited, and which I have inprevious chapters described at some length.I was responsible by now for a dependent population of about two thousand people in myhouseholds in Bombay and Poona. I actually supported them -- most of them in idleness.They were housed and fed at my expense. The financial burden, considerable as it was, wasnot as worrying as certain other thoroughly undesirable aspects of their manner of life.When my grandfather left Persia, he took with him -- as seemed to him natural and proper --the train of a medieval prince. But in Bombay in the last years of the nineteenth century wewere not living in the Middle Ages.There was not only the immediate family, which was large enough. During the earlier part ofhis wanderings my grandfather was accompanied by a troop of cavalry, who fought under hiscommand in Persia and in Afghanistan, and later rendered redoubtable assistance to SirCharles Napier in his conquest of Sind. At the beginning these numbered probably some twohundred, some of princely birth, some knights and peasants, but all devoted in theirallegiance to my grandfather. When he settled in Bombay they settled around him -- werethey not his liegemen who had endured and fought in his company? -- and long before I wasborn and throughout my childhood, there they were, aging warriors whose battles were done,in houses or rooms dotted about the rambling estate, with their families growing up aroundthem. Some of them, after they had settled down, sent for their wives from Iran, but most ofthem married Indian wives.These ex-soldiers and their families were not all. During the fifties followers came in fairnumbers from Central Asia, from Turkestan and Sinkiang, from Bokhara and Afghanistan, tooffer their loyalty and bring their tribute to my grandfather. Some returned to their owndistant homes, but some stayed, and those who stayed took Indian wives or married thedaughters of those who had settled earlier. Some Ismailis came from Africa and they broughtNegro slaves, but when they went home some of their slaves refused to go and stayed inBombay. Intermarrying and multiplying, all these diverse elements had grown, by 1898 orthereabouts, into a vast assembly of two thousand people, men, women and children, withlittle or nothing to do and nothing to occupy them, with no background and no roots. In mygrandfather's time and in my father's time (though they were not of course as numerous), theirdependent status was taken for granted, and throughout my long minority my mother reallyhad no choice but to go on housing and feeding them. As one generation aged and anothergrew up (after all, half a century and more had gone by since my grandfather exiled himselffrom Persia), the whole affair took on, in the view of those who accepted our bounty, the airof a custom established in right.The old soldiers, of course, took pensions from my grandfather. As they died off, thepensions continued to be paid, first by my father and then by my mother during my minority;but the original sum had to be divided among its first recipient's descendants. These wereoften so numerous that by the late nineties the actual incomes received by all thesebeneficiaries were small. Most of them augmented their incomes in one way or another -- asracecourse tipsters or as stable-hands, for example. Long years of this rather raffish,irresponsible life, in and around the rapidly growing city and port of Bombay, had not tendedto make particularly worthy or useful citizens of them. But they came of high-spirited, proudstock, and their natural energies and abilities were now being dissipated in intrigues andfeuds. Quick to take offense, they were apt to be quick, too, in drawing the knife.Dangerous as the potentialities were, the situation had not been too bad until the murder ofmy kinsman in Poona. This, as it were, touched off a fuse. From then on any attempt tocontrol this nest of hornets, internally by the household or from the outside by the police, metwith fierce threats. While I was on my travels I was warned that if I tried to clear up a clutterof ne'er-do-wells, who had become a scandal and a menace, my life too would be in danger.I was determined however to put an end to this situation. The police in Bombay wereextremely anxious for me to do nothing too summary or too rash, such as stopping allpensions and turning the lot out into the street. Idle, well-fed, unruly, two thousand of themfrom half-a-dozen races in Africa, Central Asia, Persia and Afghanistan, suddenly looseamong the population of Bombay as vagrants, would be a real public danger. And it was adanger which the Government -- as I was given firmly to understand -- was not prepared toallow.It was essential, therefore, that if I were to deal with my problem, I must act all the time withthe full support of the Government and in close co-operation with the police. It wasparticularly fortunate that I was on terms of warm friendship and understanding with SirWilliam Lee Warner at the India Office. He was a tower of strength in the background. InBombay itself a new Governor, Lord Northcote, had succeeded Lord Sandhurst; he toosustained me with his constant friendship and helped me through an extremely difficult task.Without allies of this stature and authority it would have been immeasurably more difficult.As it was, I went at it gradually and persistently. Some of the rowdiest and unruliest of allwere technically not British subjects; these were deported to the Persian Gulf and turnedloose in regions where their propensities were less dangerous than in populous, urbanBombay. To a number I gave lump-sum gratuities, on condition that they too took themselvesoff. One group I got sent off, with the help of the police, to remote hill stations, whence theywere forbidden to make their way back to Bombay. With the removal of the worst among theolder malcontents, we were able to get down to the more agreeable task of reclaiming andeducating their children. We set up schools for them and some went to the Jesuit schoolsnearby; some who were conspicuously bright went on to a higher university education. Theyall went out to work, and the majority of them are now, I am glad to say, and have long sincebeen, worthy and law-abiding citizens. Among them may be counted barristers, engineers,senior officers of the I.M.S. and prosperous members of other professions.But the clean-up was not an easy job, and it was not completed in a day. It was a longstruggle that was with me for many months.Meanwhile, engrossed as I was in this arduous and unpleasant job, I had not lost touch withthe wider world. Queen Victoria's death in January, 1901, seemed the end of an age to thoseof us who had been born and had grown up under the ample and glorious shade of her longreign. We were conscious that Finis had been written to a mighty chapter.My friend and patron, the Prince of Wales, was now upon the throne, with the title of EdwardVII. He graciously honored me with a personal invitation to be present at his Coronation in1902. Therefore, to London I returned that summer, to a London which I knew well, to asociety in which I had many friends and where I was made warmly and happily welcome.Already it was possible to recognize that the Edwardian Age was opening. There was a newtone noticeable in society, a shift of standards, a recognition of the meaning and challenge ofthe new century.At first it was a gay and eventful summer. There was a whole round of shows andentertainments, and a great deal of hospitality was shown to me and the other Indian Princesand Maharajahs who had been invited. Suddenly on the eve of the Coronation the King, whowas no longer a young man, was taken ill. Few, I think, at the time were really aware of thegravity of the King's illness, and the narrowness of his escape. Appendicitis was not in thosedays the almost routine affair it is considered today, and an appendectomy was a serious anddanger-fraught operation. The Coronation had to be postponed; the ceremonies and rejoicingswere held in suspense; many of the distinguished foreign Royal guests, unable to wait as longas was obviously necessary, took their leave and went home. The King made a wonderful,rapid recovery from his operation, and by August was willing, nay eager, to face the strainand fatigue of the elaborate and beautiful Coronation ceremony. It was not generally realizedat the time that during much of the service the King, who bore himself with great dignitythroughout, was in considerable pain.For myself there was one particularly gratifying circumstance connected with the Coronation.The King advanced me from the rank of K.C.I.E. to G.C.I.E. in his Coronation Honors.In accordance with custom there was a great Coronation naval review at Spithead, which Ihad the privilege of attending as the King's guest aboard his own yacht. Among the otherguests there was, I remember, the thin, slight but formidable figure of Ras Makonen, theAbyssinian feudal chieftain who was the victorious general, right-hand man and Viceroy ofthe Emperor Menelik, whom he subsequently succeeded. He possessed the quality ofinscrutability. I recall that the British Minister in Addis Ababa told me that he could alwaysread Menelik's mind and divine his intentions, but never Ras Makonen's. The mutability ofhuman affairs is aptly illustrated by the vicissitudes endured by his son, Ras Tafari, whobecame the Emperor Haile Selassie, resisted the Italian invasion of his country in 1935, wasdefeated and driven into exile, pleaded his cause before the League of Nations in Geneva,then bided his time in exile and in 1941, when the Italians were crushingly defeated in EastAfrica (by a small, valiant army to which India contributed magnificently), returned intriumph to his throne. Surely this is one of the most extraordinary romances of our time, indanger of being forgotten because there have been so many other romantic and strangestories.I returned to India in November of that year, 1902. I was surprised to find waiting for me aletter from the Viceroy, Lord Curzon, asking me to become a member of his LegislativeCouncil. This was a considerable honor to a young man still in his twenties (I was by far theyoungest member), for the Viceroy's Legislative Council in those days was a small, selectbody of influential people, wielding real authority. My acceptance necessitated my moving,for the time being, to Calcutta, which was then the seat of British power in India.The two years in which I was a member of the Legislative Council (I was asked if I wouldaccept nomination a second time, but I refused) had a profound and permanent effect on mylife and character, in their private and personal as well as their public aspects. For the firsttime in my life I had a real, normal home of my own, with the ordinary complement ofservants and the ordinary social and domestic life of a man in my station, free of theextraordinary accretion of hangers-on and ne'er-do-wells (remnants of whom never entirelydisappeared from Bombay and Poona) whose disruptive and menacing activities I havedescribed earlier in this chapter.The effect on my public and political life was hardly less marked. I found myself workingalongside men of the caliber and quality of Lord Curzon himself and of the Commander inChief, the redoubtable Field Marshal Lord Kitchener of Khartoum. Among my Indiancolleagues there was the brilliant Mr. G. K. Gokhale, the outstanding Indian nationaliststatesman until the rise of Mahatma Gandhi and the Nehrus, father and son. Gokhale and Istruck up a friendship which ended only with his death. He was a caste Hindu and I was aMuslim, but our friendship crossed the barriers of creed and race. He was a man of vision,courage and generosity. His influence on my thought and outlook was probably considerable.Not of course that he was the first political thinker of a different background from my ownwith whom I had come in contact, or with whom I found the exchange of ideas stimulating.Some years previously in Bombay I had come to know and like Mr. Navroji Dumasia, atalented Parsee in the service of The Times of India and Mr. (later Sir) Frank Brown, aBritish journalist and publicist who was on the staff of The Bombay Gazette andsubsequently of The Times; to these friends I owe a great deal, both in what I have done andwhat I have tried to do in my political work.In Gokhale I encountered a powerful as well as a lovable personality. I realized how deep andstrong were the forces in India of which he was the spokesman. I also saw that theGovernment had become remote from the people of India, not the masses only, but theincreasing and ever more articulate and active intelligentsia. I saw at close quarters howforeign the Government was in spirit and in atmosphere. On the other side, I saw that India'spolitical leaders, dissatisfied at not having succeeded in obtaining their earlier moderatedemands, had begun to seek not merely administrative reforms but the full control of theirown political destiny.For myself, I continued to pin a great deal of faith on educational advancement. Illiteracy Isaw as a menace to people and Government alike. Poverty and disease were its sinisterconsequences and accompaniments. More than once my speeches in the Legislative Councilturned into strong pleas for generous and judicious expenditures on education. I urged theadoption of a system of universal primary education such as almost every civilized countrypossessed, and pointed out as often as I could that in my view the fundamental cause ofIndia's extreme poverty was India's extreme ignorance.At the same time I began to realize, during these two crucial years, that the Congress party,the only active and responsible political organization in the country, would prove itselfincapable -was already proving itself incapable -- of representing India's Muslims, or ofdealing adequately or justly with the needs and aspirations of the Muslim community. Thepressure of Hindu extremism was too strong. Already that artificial unity which the BritishRaj had imposed from without was cracking. Deep-seated and ineradicable differencesexpressed themselves, once political activity and aspirations had advanced beyond the mostelementary stage. The breach was there -- in Hindu intransigence and lack of perception ofbasic Muslim ideals and hopes. I did all I could to prevent the breach's being widened. Imaintained a campaign of remonstrance with Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, who was high in thecounsels of the Congress party, who was a friend of my family and who had known me sincechildhood. I begged him to use his influence and to make Congress realize how important itwas to win Muslim confidence, but all to no avail.Whatever the reason for their attitude, the Congress leaders persisted in ignoring the realitiesof the communal situation. There were provinces in which the Muslims were in a clearmajority: in Bengal, for example, and in the Punjab, out of which the Northwest FrontierProvince had not then been carved. And about Delhi, Agra and Aligarh there had been builtup a spiritual home, sanctified by some of the most valuable of Muslim traditions andadorned with imperishable treasures of Islamic art and culture. Some comprehension of whatthis meant in Muslim minds was all we asked. And the time was propitious -- as never again -for an understanding; earlier grave differences of opinion with Congress had dwindled intocomparative insignificance, and even the memory of them that remained could have beenwiped out -- as I argued as forcibly as I could -- if certain of our proposals for equitablerepresentation and a fair ratio of Government employment for Muslims had been acceptedand acted upon.The primary step was that Congress should choose as its representative on the Viceroy'sLegislative Council a Muslim from Bengal or the Punjab. We drew a blank there. ForCongress obstinately continued to send third-rate Muslims from preponderantly Hinduprovinces like Madras and Bombay. Gokhale, I am convinced, was sincerely anxious to do allhe could to change his party's attitude. He could never publicly admit it, but privately he wasdeeply distressed to watch his political friends and associates thus deliberately sowing theseeds of permanent disunity between Hindu and Muslim. I made frequent, urgentrepresentations of practical, feasible steps by which we could have integrated Muslimpolitical feeling into the Congress party and presented a united front to the BritishGovernment. Yet even the private support which Gokhale gave to my representations broughtno change of mind or heart.I turned to my friends at Aligarh, and in particular to Nawab Mohsen-ul-Molk, who hadsucceeded Sir Syed Ahmed as Muslim leader. Mohsen-ul-Molk was not hidebound; he wasmoderate and realistic and not at all antagonistic either to Congress or to Hindus in general. Ifthere had been give-and-take in what were then quite minor matters, he would have beenwilling to join forces with Congress. In such an atmosphere -- assisted by the existence of ajoint electorate and joint representation -- a political alliance between the two communitieswas possible. Our hopes were dashed again and again. Conditions deteriorated at the nextelections; and by 1906 Mohsen-ul-Molk and I, in common with other Muslim leaders, hadcome to the conclusion that our only hope lay along the lines of independent organization andaction, and that we must secure independent political recognition from the BritishGovernment as a nation within a nation.While I lived in Calcutta, I came to know the Right Honorable Syed Amir Ali, later a PrivyCouncilor, then a Judge of the High Court in Calcutta. I had of course read his famous bookson Islam; my admiration for his learning, and for his capacity to expound and interpret ourMuslim religion, was unstinted. Although he was excluded from any participation in politics,I had no hesitation in going to him for advice and help in my own political endeavors -aboveall, to secure equitable representations of Muslims and to open the eyes of the Congress HighCommand to the perils of the course on which they seemed set. But when our hopes werefrustrated, it was encouraging that Syed Amir Ali, with all his personal prestige, and his greatknowledge of Hindu-Muslim political relations (especially in Bengal), urged us on in ourefforts for the establishment of a separate Muslim organization and gave us quiet, constantsupport when Nawab Mohsen-ul-Molk and I argued that our only hope of getting a fair dealfrom the British was to convince them of the width of the gulf -- historical, cultural andreligious -between us and our neighbors.The Congress party, by its blindness to legitimate claims and aspirations, and by itspersistence in its ridiculous habit of choosing Muslim yes-men from Madras and Bombay asits representatives on the Viceroy's Legislative Council, lost a great opportunity which wasnot to occur again. These then were critical years, not merely in my own politicaldevelopment but in that vast and complex process which brought about, in little more thanforty years, the partition of the Indian subcontinent into the separate states of Bharat andPakistan.A notable event during my period of service on the Viceroy's Legislative Council was theCoronation Durbar in Delhi, the climax of which was a magnificent parade of some fortythousand troops who, headed by the Commander in Chief, Lord Kitchener, marched past therepresentative of the King-Emperor. That representative was the King's brother, my watchfuland kind friend since my childhood, the Duke of Connaught. Immediately after the Durbarwe held a Muslim Educational Conference in Delhi, at which I spoke at some length onseveral of the educational projects in whose furtherance I was active -- most important of all,Aligarh.I ventured to make a direct plea to my friends and colleagues: "I beg of you that the cause ofa Central University -- a university which, please Heaven, may rank some day with Oxfordand Leipzig and Paris as a home of great ideas and noble ideals -- a university where ouryouth may receive the highest instruction in the sciences of the West, a university where theteaching of the history and literature of the East may not be scamped over for a mereparrotlike knowledge of Western thought, a university where our youth may also enjoy, inaddition to such advantages, a Muslim atmosphere. I earnestly beg of you that the cause ofsuch a university should not be forgotten in the shouts of the market place that daily riseamong us."Those sentences of mine, spoken fifty years ago, sum up the aspirations which I cherishedfrom the outset on behalf of Aligarh and which I have been happy to live to see fulfilled.I had had two arduous and formative years on the Viceroy's Legislative Council. In thesummer of 1904 I returned to Europe and picked up the threads of my social and personal lifethere. In the political sphere there were big changes impending. Arthur Balfour hadsucceeded his uncle, Lord Salisbury, as Prime Minister and leader of the Conservative party,but it was obvious that the long epoch of Conservative dominance in British politics wasdrawing to a close. The dynamic Joseph Chamberlain had flung the issue of Protectionisminto the ring, and in so doing had gravely split the Conservative party. The Liberals weresteadily gathering their forces; the Irish Question, after some years of deceptive calm, wassimmering again; and the emergence of the Labor party -still very small in numbers -- was aportent well worth noting.I had as yet formed no intention of racing or breeding horses in Europe, and was not to do sountil many years had elapsed, but my interest in these matters was unabated. I went regularlyto race meetings while I was in England, and it was during this summer, as I recall, that I firstmade the acquaintance of Colonel Hall Walker (later Lord Wavertree), who was one of theoutstanding personalities of the British turf, immensely knowledgeable about everything todo with horses, independent in his judgment, outspoken and didactic. Some peopleconsidered his views and his methods so eccentric that he was nicknamed "WhimsicalWalker," but I would be the last to impugn his wisdom, his sagacity and experience. He wasthen the owner of the famous Tully Stud in Ireland, which later became the Irish NationalStud, and with which in afteryears I had much to do.I returned to Bombay that winter and set out in the following year, 1905, on my second visitto East Africa. I urged on my Ismaili followers there some of the ideas, in intellectual andphysical education, which I was practicing and preaching in India. I was especially distressedby the low standards of physique noticeable in Zanzibar; the incidence of tuberculosis washigh. If it was argued that the fierce tropical climate enervated those who lived in it andinduced listlessness and apathy, I could point out that the same could be said of India, andthere we were beginning to take energetic steps to combat it. In Zanzibar I had consultationswith the mukhis, the leaders of the local communities. I had a palace turned into a sports cluband center for physical training, with a running track and football and cricket pitches. I gaveprizes in all sorts of competitions, from billiards to cycling. I am glad to say that myinnovations proved a marked success.While I was in Africa a suit was brought against me in the Bombay High Court by certaindiscontented members of my family, collateral descendants of my grandfather. A series ofclaims, financial and otherwise, were made against me. This case, which dragged on formany months, was not so much a sequel of the earlier case brought against my grandfather inthe sixties, by dissident elements among the Khojas (to which I have referred in a previouschapter), as a consequence of the generous, feudal manner in which my grandfather'sestablishment in Bombay had been set up and maintained. During the protracted proceedingsa great deal of the history and background of my family and the Ismaili sect were gone intoagain, commissions of inquiry were sent into distant regions of Asia and Africa to collectevidence about my ancestors' property and affairs. My mother gave evidence on my behalfand was complimented by the judge, who said that she had "displayed an extraordinarymemory." I was fortunate in my counsel, Mr. Inverarity, a keen and able lawyer. When atlength the hearings ended and the presiding judge, Mr. Justice Russell, summed up, hisjudgment proved to be a classic example of its kind -- a masterly, lucid, wide-ranging surveyof Islamic history, religion, custom and law. At the conclusion of the long and costlybusiness, I was fully and finally confirmed in my rights and status, and have never thereafterbeen subjected to a similar challenge.I returned to India for the cold weather of 1905-1906, in time to pay my respects to the Princeof Wales (later King George V) in Calcutta. He was there, of course, in the middle of thatstate visit to India which had been under discussion when I was in England in 1904. This wasnot my first meeting with His Royal Highness (as he then was). My friendship with him andwith his beloved consort, Queen Mary, was of long standing. I first met Queen Mary in 1898when she was Duchess of York; she was at home in England with her three young children (King Edward VIII, later the Duke of Windsor, the late King George VI, and the PrincessRoyal) while her husband was out of the country on his first tour of duty as a naval officer.All my memories of this good and gracious pair are warmly affectionate. I have always beenproud that I won King George V's friendship and maintained it to the end of his life. He gaveme his confidence to the same degree as his father had done. He talked to me always withutter frankness on all sorts of subjects, personal, political, sporting and social. I often had thehonor of being his guest at luncheon, first at Marlborough House when he was Prince ofWales, and after his accession at Buckingham Palace. Luncheon was an informal, quietfamily affair, with Queen Mary and one or two of their children and myself the only guest.Usually these luncheons were noted in the Court Circular; but from time to time, for specialreasons, public reference was not made to them. King George carried all his life the stamp ofhis early training as a professional officer in the Royal Navy, with his trim and elegant figure,his strong, fresh complexion, his nautical beard, and the tone and accent of his admirablyclear voice -- an especially vivid reminder that he had exercised command at sea for manyyears before the death of his elder brother had placed him directly in the succession to theThrone. He had a short temper and was apt to show it when small things went wrong, but hequickly got over his anger. He had a very kind heart that was easily stirred to sympathy bythe suffering of others.I know of one example of the spontaneity and generosity of his sympathy. During the King-Emperor's Coronation Durbar in Delhi, the Maharajah of Baroda resented the fact that he hadto go and make a public bow to the King. He demonstrated his resentment by performing hishomage in a haphazard and casual fashion. This shocked everyone who saw it, British andIndian alike, because there was no justification for his showing open discourtesy to the King-Emperor. He apologized in writing to the Viceroy, and, although the apology was accepted,the King naturally felt sore about the episode and went on feeling sore for some years. Butlater misfortune descended upon the Maharajah of Baroda; more than one of his sons died intheir young manhood, and then another fell grievously ill. When the King learned of thesesorrows, he forgave the Maharajah wholeheartedly, blotted out the memory of the insult, andmore than once I heard him refer to the Maharajah of Baroda as "that poor, unfortunate man"in tones of sincere commiseration.King George V, like his father, was extremely meticulous about the way in which orders anddecorations were worn, and, again like his father, had an extraordinarily keen eye for theslightest mistake in their arrangement on anyone's chest.He once remarked to me: "Some people are surprised that my father and I are so particularabout these things. But wouldn't it be peculiar if in ordinary society people turned up withtheir shirts outside their trousers, their collars or their neckties on back to front, and thebuttons of their coats and waistcoats all wrong? Just as ordinary society has its rules for theproper wearing of clothes, so a King and his Court must have their rules for the properwearing of unifoms, decorations and orders."Once at some big Court function the late Maharajah of Rajpipla appeared in the King'spresence not wearing -- as he should have worn -- the collar of one of his decorations becauseit caused him discomfort. The King was angry and showed that he was angry, but QueenMary made a quick, conciliatory gesture toward the unhappy young man, as if to say, "Don'tworry, it'll blow over." It did, and the King soon forgave him.In connection with this same Maharajah of Rajpipla, I can give an example of King GeorgeV's pertinacious and all-round interest in all sorts of matters. The Maharajah won the Derbyin 1934 with a horse called Windsor Lad. He had somehow delayed giving to his trainer thepresent which it is customary for a winning owner to give to his trainer after the Derby. Histrainer was Mr. Marcus Marsh, the son of King George's former trainer. Weeks passed andthe Maharajah still gave no present. One afternoon I was at a solemn and imposing stateceremony, where Ambassadors, Cabinet Ministers and exalted Court functionaries abounded.The King caught sight of me in the august throng, took me quietly into a corner and told methat he knew Marsh had not had his present."You were a great friend of his father's, weren't you?" he said earnestly, "and you know theyoung man himself. Do please tackle him and make him see that this present is a normalaffair, and he's got to give it."Naturally I did as the King asked, and the Maharajah belatedly sent Marsh his present. Nearlytwenty years afterward I told Marsh my side of the episode. Now, although Marsh was theson of the King's trainer and quite often saw the King, he had never mentioned it to the Kingbut had told a friend of his about the Maharajah's curious absence of mind. The friend was ageneral on the King's staff; he told the King and the King decided to use me as a gobetween.During the thirty-four years that I knew him I saw a great deal of King George V, at hishome, at race meetings at Ascot and Epsom and elsewhere, and on his two visits to India asPrince of Wales and as King.On the former visit in 1905, which has set me off on this train of reminiscences, there was astate ball in the Viceroy's House in Calcutta. The Prince of Wales took me into his room andtold me that he was fully in favor of the appointment of Indians to the Viceroy's ExecutiveCouncil and that he considered it most unfortunate that there were no Indians on it at themoment. He said, "I have strongly urged both Lord Morley and Lord Minto that an Indian beappointed."He went on to talk to me at length about the Calcutta hospitals, to which his father hadreferred a year before; he was not at all happy about them.The Morley-Minto reforms (of which I shall have much to say a little later) were promulgatedin the following year. In private the Prince of Wales made no secret of the fact that heregarded these reforms as necessary and right. Like Queen Victoria, he had a quick and realsympathy for his Indian subjects, and he understood the real needs of India, above all, for avigorous, united drive against ignorance and poverty and the appallingly low standard ofliving. During the Round Table Conferences he sent me more than one message urging me onand encouraging me in my efforts to bring about a settlement of Hindu-Muslim differences inorder that we might then get on with the practical, economic and social reforms which wereso long overdue. One day after I had the honor of lunching with him at Ascot, he spoke to mewarmly along the same lines.I remember that when the news leaked out from Berlin during the First World War thatIndian anarchists were being trained in Germany, the King was shocked and grieved at thethought that the Kaiser could demean himself to countenance such underhanded and savagetactics. In the same way his grief was profound but private at the dreadful murder of thewhole Russian Royal Family, his cousins, the Czar and Czarina and all their children, atEkaterinburg in 1918. He never made any public reference to it, but more than once in ourprivate talks he had no hesitation in opening his heart to me and telling me of his sorrow.Sir Harold Nicolson, in his recently published biography of King George V, lays stress on thefact that the King was always fully aware of the constitutional proprieties, and of his inabilityto intervene in politics, however strong his private wishes or feelings might be. Sir Haroldgives a vivid account of the way in which, after he had aired his views -- vigorously,doubtless, and with singular pungency of phrase -- he would make a gentle gesture, his righthand passing across his body, and say with a resigned smile, "It's not for me to have opinions,or to interfere." I so well remember that gesture and that smile. I have seen them so often, inmany an after-luncheon talk. The most industrious, diligent and hard-worked of men, KingGeorge yet possessed the delightful faculty of collecting and remembering small personaldetails about his friends' private lives. Some years before the First World War the Maharajahof Gwalior was affianced to the Maharajah of Baroda's daughter (now the Maharani of CoochBehar). During the Delhi Durbar of 1912 she broke off the engagement. Outwardly theMaharajah of Gwalior took his disappointment bravely, but inwardly he was greatlydistressed. The King heard about it. He knew that Gwalior and I were close friends. At one ofthe state functions he sent for me, told me how grieved he was for Gwalior, and asked me todo all I could to ease matters.As I have said, I knew Queen Mary even before I met her husband. For well over fifty years Iwas proud and glad to be counted among her friends. In 1952 -- less than a year before shedied -- I had two affectionate personal messages from her; the first, a telegram ofcongratulations after my horse Tulyar won the Derby, and with it a solicitous inquiry aboutmy health, for she knew that I had been gravely ill and was glad to hear that I was on themend; and the other (the last message I ever had from her) was when the same horse, Tulyar,won the King George and Queen Elizabeth Cup at Ascot, and she got an equerry to conveyher congratulations and her regards to me.She was a staunch, invaluable support to King George; a truly great English lady, she seemedto me to mingle in herself all the best qualities of royalty in the constitutional pattern, ofwifely, maternal, domestic excellence, and of sturdy middle-class realism.One of the most touching -- in a way, one of the most painful -- experiences of my life was aconversation which I had with Queen Mary shortly before King Edward VIII's abdication. Ihad just had a long audience with King Edward VIII, having returned to London fromGeneva after one of the interminable conferences of the League of Nations, and in thisaudience I made my report to the King. I spoke fervently and sincerely to Queen Mary of mygreat admiration for King Edward, for his clarity of view, for his realism, and, above all, forhis full appreciation of the dangers of the coming war. I could see that she was immenselyproud of her son, yet I could see too that she was holding back tears -- tears which were anindication of her awareness of the sorrow that impended for the Royal Family. No open hintdid she give of it, and no reference could I make, or would I have made, to it. Having comefrom abroad I had had no sense of how near and how great was King Edward's danger.Realization in that sad silence was all the more shocking. In all that we did not say, in thequiet of her drawing room, there was a profound and tragic apprehension, a sense of theclouds massing for the terrible storm that was to burst around her and around those she dearlyloved.In the summer of 1906 I was again in England. There had been a General Election since mylast visit, the Conservatives had been heavily defeated, and the Liberals were in power with arecord majority and a Government under the Premiership of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.Assembled in the Cabinet room and on the Front Bench was a galaxy of brilliant and ablemen, unequaled in recent British history: Asquith, Grey, Haldane, Lloyd George, JohnMorley, Herbert Samuel, and Winston Churchill, to name only a few of that memorableAdministration. Morley -- Gladstone's intimate friend, Cabinet colleague and biographer, thepossessor of one of the most powerful, constructive intellects of his day -- held what was tome and my political associates the supremely important post of Secretary of State for India.Soon his name was to be associated with that of the Viceroy, the Earl of Minto, a Scottishnobleman of Liberal outlook, sagacity and equability, in the Morley-Minto reforms, whichmarked so momentous an advance in India's journey to political emancipation. Asquith wasChancellor of the Exchequer, Lloyd George was president of the Board of Trade; andWinston Churchill, then just turned thirty, and a recent recruit from the other side of theHouse, held at first a minor ministerial post but was soon to rocket into prominence.I have had the privilege and pleasure of Sir Winston Churchill's friendship for over half acentury. As I recall, it was at Poona in the late summer of 1896 that our paths first crossed. Agroup of officers of a British cavalry regiment, the Fourth Hussars, then stationed atBangalore, called on me. I was ill at the time and did not meet them, but my cousinShamsuddin entertained them and showed them my race horses. When he later told me oftheir visit he said that among the officers none had a keener, more discriminating eye, nonewas a better judge of a horse, than a young subaltern by the name of Winston SpencerChurchill. My cousin described him as perhaps a little over twenty, boyish-looking, eager,irrepressible, and already an enthusiastic, courageous and promising polo player.It is impossible to think of the young Winston Churchill without recalling his mother, thebrilliant and much-loved Lady Randolph Churchill. Her beauty, her grace and her wit havenow a legendary quality. The wife of one famous man, the mother of another, she herself wasa woman of the utmost distinction.From many recollections of Lady Randolph, on many occasions and in many places, I chooseone saying of hers that seems to me especially typical of the felicity and the pointedness ofher wit. One day at Aix-les-Bains, Sir Rufus Isaacs (later the first Marquis of Reading)observed, about some particular action of which he disapproved, "No man would respect awoman who would do that.""No woman," said Lady Randolph gently, "wants to be respected."In later life our paths were destined to cross again and again. We met in the summer of 1902,King Edward VII's Coronation Year, at Warwick Castle as guests of Lord and Lady Warwickover a long week end. In six years the ebullient cavalry subaltern had traveled far andachieved much; wherever there had been fighting he had contrived to be, regardless of theviews of senior officers -Malakand, about which he wrote the first of his many books,Kitchener's "River War" along the upper reaches of the Nile, the cavalry charge atOmdurman; as a war correspondent in South Africa he had been taken prisoner, escaped andhad had a price put on his head by Kruger; and by 1902 he was Conservative member ofParliament for Oldman. At Warwick that week end he was in a holiday mood. He and Iinvolved ourselves in a vigorous argument about the comparative merits, in sheer sportingquality, of polo and hunting. He was firmly for polo; I who had followed hounds fromboyhood was as stubbornly for hunting. But I recall another conversation that same summerweek end which was less lighthearted. He, with his imperialist traditions and outlook,reverted -- as so many politically minded Englishman had to in those days -- to the questionof Ireland; he echoed something that Lord Spencer had said to me some years earlier:"Twenty years of firm government is no solution of the Irish problem."So long as the people of Ireland are dissatisfied," continued the young Tory M.P, thenominal supporter of Arthur Balfour, "there can be no solution. Only when the Irish peopleare politically satisfied will we be able to solve the Irish problem."As young men will, we talked a great deal about a great many subjects. Churchill, whoseverbal memory is one of his many remarkable characteristics, quoted freely from Fitzgerald'stranslation of Omar Khayyám. He assured me that he knew virtually the whole poem byheart. I remember being genuinely surprised by the enthusiasm which he displayed, for tothose of us whose mother tongue is Persian, Omar Khayyám seems a minor poet with a verylimited outlook. I tackled Churchill along those lines, and he countered me by saying thatwhat he admired in Omar Khayyám was not his philosophy but his poetic power. Thensuddenly he made a dialectical volte-face and said: "You know, there's a great deal in hisphilosophy. After all, it doesn't greatly matter what we do now -- it'll be all the same in ahundred years."I took strong exception to this flippant observation."What you do now," I said, "may be of little account a thousand years from now. Butcertainly events a hundred years hence will very much be the direct results of our presentdeeds and misdeeds."As I remember, he came round into agreement with me. Now a good deal older, and with agood deal more experience behind me, I think that I would argue that events a thousand yearshence can be strongly affected by what we do now -- or leave undone.Think of my own august ancestor, Mohammed the Prophet of Islam. If Mohammed had beenkilled in his first encounter with his enemies, Islam would never have arisen; Arabia mighthave been the home of a number of minor Christian sects; the Middle East would have beenChristian instead of predominantly Muslim; and that part of the Indian subcontinent whichbecame Muslim might have been converted to some version of Christianity. I go further: ifafter our Holy Prophet's Ascension into Heaven the succession had gone to the Ansar ofMedina -- a kindly, steadfast clan of yeomen, content to live on and work by the land --instead of to the Prophet's own tribe, the Quraish of Mecca -- internationally minded, virile,reckless folk with a lust for travel and adventure, who journeyed to Constantinople andAlexandria, to Rome even, to Iran and by sea to India in search of trade -- then Islam wouldhave taken a totally different turn. Under the leadership of the Ansar of Medina it would havebeen today -- if indeed it still survived -- one of many minor, little-known Eastern sects.It needed the imagination, the international experience of the trade-conscious Quraish, thecitizens of Mecca, to have made Islam a world religion whose call was spread abroad to allmankind.In our own time too, there are many examples of decisions -political and otherwise -- whoseinfluence stretches far beyond the immediate present into a distant future. If in 1871Bismarck had left Alsace and Lorraine out of the peace terms which he imposed on France inhis hour of victory, would there ever have been the cry of "Revanche, revanche!" whichechoed fiercely down the years afterward? The Franco-Prussian War might have slipped intooblivion with the other vainglorious follies of the Second Empire; and that United Europe,which is the eager hope and desire of us all today, would have come to pass without the bitterexperience of two world wars. Even after the First World War had the Western Powershearkened to the advice of men like Lord D'Abernon during the early, critical years of theWeimar Republic, we might never have heard of Adolf Hitler; the old League of Nationswhich had many good points -- not least of which was its rapid acceptance of Stresemann'sGermany into full membership -- would have gone a long way to heal the wounds of the FirstWorld War. But there were other less enlightened counselors to whom the peoples ofWestern Europe listened, and in the succeeding years nothing was left undone to show theGerman people that there was one way in which they could get what they wanted, and thatwas by power politics.Ah, well, the two young men who sat talking so ardently at Warwick Castle long ago hadmuch to learn; and, if I may say so, one of Sir Winston Churchill's outstanding characteristics- perhaps the most valuable of all to him in his career as a statesman -- has been his capacityto learn by experience and, having learned, to wipe the slate clean.In 1906, four years after our memorable encounter at Warwick Castle, he was a juniorMinister in Campbell-Bannerman's Liberal Government, and I remember that John Morley,his senior Cabinet colleague, said to me, "The young Churchill, like the young JosephChamberlain that I knew, possesses the greatest natural political sense. There is in Churchillthe same innate and natural readiness to tackle and solve problems as they arise that there wasin Joe."Sir Winston Churchill unites and blends in his strong personality two usually conflictingstrands: the romantic, the deeply emotional and poetic interpreter of history and the commonsense, practical, down-to-earth realist, the hardheaded and coolly calculating strategist. It isan irresistible, at times a majestic, combination.And he accepted the fact that India was to remain in the Commonwealth on her own termsand as a republic. As he himself has said to me, "Half a loaf is better than none."His whole relationship with the problem of India is a manifestation on the highest politicalplane of these two interlinked facets of Churchill's character. Part of his being responds withinstantaneous romanticism to a highly colored conception of Empire, to the Union Jackunfurled to the breeze in some distant outpost, to the vigilant picket-keeping guard in thedesolate Khyber, to all the trumpet calls of more than a century of British Imperial history.But in another part of his being he is capable of resolute practicality and common sense, solidand realistic yet magnanimous. It is this latter facet which has predominated since 1947; hehas cheerfully accepted a political fact for what it is, and has striven -- with a good deal ofsuccess -- to make the best of a quite new situation.I would have wished, though, that his connection with India (after his brief period ofsoldiering there was over) had been closer, and his responsibility for decisions on Indianmatters more immediate, at some time or another in his career.I saw a good deal of him during the First World War, and we often discussed politics. Notlong after the end of the war, when Lord Chelmsford's term as Viceroy was ending andbefore the appointment of Lord Reading, Lloyd George asked two of us, myself and anintimate friend of mine, Mr. Bassou, a member of the Council of India, to come and see himon the matter of a successor. I suggested to Mr. Lloyd George, on behalf of the pair of us, twocandidates for this great post: Lord Derby and Winston Churchill. He did not turn downeither of them outright. He then turned to Mr. Bassou. Mr. Bassou's suggestions of coursecoincided with mine. To me Lloyd George had made no comment on either name. With Mr.Bassou, as with me, he passed over Lord Derby's name in silence. Then he turned roundsharply and said to Mr. Bassou, "Do you know Churchill?"Mr. Bassou admitted that he had not the pleasure of Mr. Churchill's personal acquaintance."I know Churchill," said Lloyd George with finality.Looking back, and with the knowledge of all the great positions under the Crown which SirWinston Churchill has occupied with such luster, I still think that it was a pity Lloyd Georgedid not accede to our joint suggestion. If Churchill had had direct and recent Indianexperience, his whole outlook at the time of the Indian Round Table Conference from 1930on, and his speeches in the Parliamentary debates leading up to the passing of theGovernment of India Act in 1935, would, I am certain, have been different. And the effect ofthat changed outlook would have been felt throughout the whole later history of Anglo-Indianrelations. I go further; I believe that with the direct knowledge of India which he would haveacquired as Viceroy, he might have found other and far less terrible means of bringing aboutthe downfall of Hitler and the saving of Germany for Western civilization.Every time that I have discussed political matters with Sir Winston, I have been impressedanew by the extraordinarily practical realism of his outlook. He is never the slave of his pastideas, his desires or his dreams; he is their master.During the First World War, when so many British statesmen were anxious to save Turkeyfrom the doom which seemed bound to engulf her, I remember Churchill's telling mebrusquely that Turkey would be the victor's prize. Turkey, he said, was the sick man ofEurope, dying and degenerate, whom it was no use trying to save.Who in the Second World War and since has been a warmer admirer, a more staunchsupporter and friend of modern Turkey than Winston Churchill? He has come round to a firmbelief in the vitality and stubborn strength of the contemporary Turkish character, nurtured inthe Anatolian Highlands, and to a genuine admiration for the vigor of Turkey's revival underKemal Ataturk -- a revival like that of the phoenix out of the ashes of the Ottoman Empire,whose disasters were the result of the blind and foolish policy of her leaders.So far as India is concerned, the evolution in Churchill's outlook is even more startling. Iremember his attitude at the time of the Round Table Conference, the whole tone in which headdressed us, and his determined opposition to the very idea of Dominion status. Yet this wasthe Churchill who in 1942 sent Sir Stafford Cripps to India with a directive which could onlylead in the end to complete independence and to the emergence of the Indian Republic. Andwhen the severance was finally accomplished, when the highest jewel in the British Crownwas no more, when the last British soldier and the last British administrator had left Indiansoil, Churchill's acceptance of the fact of Indian independence was made sincerely and withgood grace.Churchill, as leader of the Conservative party, faced with equanimity the momentoussequence of events which brought about Indian independence, the partition of thesubcontinent into the two new and sovereign states of Bharat and Pakistan, and the divisionof the Indian Army.As I look back down the long vista of the years that I have known Sir Winston, I am sure thatthe greatest blessing God has given him has been his health. He has a constitution of iron, andall his life he has taxed it to the uttermost. He has disregarded all the do's and don't's whichdoctors impose. He has worked unceasingly; he has played hard, he has excelled in countlessactivities from polo to painting, and have I ever seen him refuse any good dish put in front ofhim, or a liqueur glass of brandy, or a cigar? This gusto and this vitality have been sustainedby his magnificent constitution. The young subaltern who came to look at my horses had it,and the veteran statesman, honored and revered by the whole civilized world, has it.The electoral change in England in that crucial year 1906 had its effect on India. While I wasin England that summer my friends in India wrote and told me that at last the Governmentwas beginning to realize that there was something called a Muslim problem in India and thatthey could no longer dismiss it as an idle fabrication.Since 1857 and the transference of authority in India from the East India Company to theCrown, the Muslims had, in a political sense, been more or less ignored by the British.Perhaps not unnaturally the new rulers of India turned away from those who, by religion andby language, were connected with the rulers who had been ousted. Muslims were not broughtinto the administration or into politics; few studied or read English. If the end of the Moghulemperors was pitiable, its effects lingered on for two generations in the sense of isolation andpowerlessness which enveloped the Muslims of India in their own land. The Hindu majoritywere in an advantageous position under their new rulers; and they made full use of it. TheMuslims had been for long what the French call "quantité negligeable," but at long last wewere going to be heard. The Viceroy, Lord Minto, had agreed to receive a deputation from usand I was to lead that deputation.We were acutely aware that we had long been neglected, that to the Hindu majority -- asrepresented by its leaders in the Congress party -- we seemed a tiresome splinter in the fleshof the body politic, and that though there was great talk of nationalism, we were not everconsidered in the aspirations that were being fostered, the plans that were being laid. Theycontinued to send to the Viceroy's Legislative Council third-rate yes-men instead of trulyrepresentative Muslims, with the result that our separate identity as a community and thestatus that would have appertained to it had been forgotten by the British.Now we decided that the time had come to make a stand for a change in attitude. Ifconstitutional advancements were to be mooted, we must have our say in their disposition.Reform was in the air, but it must be understood -- in the utterly different politicalatmosphere of more than forty years later -- that it was reform within extremely limited termsof reference. British supremacy in India, administrative and legislative, was to remainuninfringed, unaltered. In the Morley-Minto reforms, as they came to be known, and in theIndian Councils Act of 1907 in which they were embodied, there was no hint of a process ofevolution toward ultimate Indian self-government, no hint of transference of power fromBritish to Indian hands. John Morley himself said, "A fur coat may be all very well inCanada, but no use at all in India" -- the political and constitutional evolution which had beenCanada's experience was thus by implication rejected for India (though not, of course, byIndia). All that the Morley-Minto proposals were intended to achieve, and did achieve, was amodest devolution in communal and local matters and the admittance of Indians, on a rigidlyrestricted basis, to consultation -- though not to decision -- about their own affairs.Within these limits, however, they were an advance, and from the Muslim point of view theywere especially significant. Our experience from the time of the Cross-Lansdowne reforms in1892 had pointed the way; there was no hope of a fair deal for us within the fold of theCongress party or in alliance with it. Now in 1906 we boldly asked the Viceroy to look factsin the face; we asked that the Muslims of India should be regarded not as a mere minority,but as a nation within a nation whose rights and obligations should be guaranteed by statute.History has amply demonstrated since then, after the First World War and again and againlater, that the existence of minorities -- of one nationally conscious community withinanother, numerically weaker perhaps but not less firmly aware of itself as a nation than themajority -- is one of the major issues of our time. Ireland, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia- the world's maps are plentifully dotted with these minority problems, with all theircomplexity and difficulty.For ourselves in 1906 we asked for the establishment of a principle, a principle which wouldhave to be embodied in any legislation as a consequence of these proposals for reform. Weasked for adequate and separate representation for Muslims both on local bodies and on thelegislative councils, we asked that this representation be secured by a separate communalfranchise and electoral roll. In short, we Muslims should have the right of electing our ownrepresentatives on it. We conceded that in areas where we were in the majority, like thePunjab and what was then the Province of Eastern Bengal, we would give a certain number ofextra seats to the Hindus, in order to safeguard their interests, but in return we asked that inareas in which there was a big Hindu majority we likewise should be conceded a certainnumber of extra seats.Lord Minto listened with sympathy to the statement of our case. He assured us that thepolitical rights and interests of the Muslim community would be safeguarded in any changein administration that might occur. Our principle was accepted. Most of our demands in detailwere conceded, though not all. It would, in my view, have been better had there beenprovision for two Indian members of the Viceroy's Executive Council -- one Muslim and oneHindu -- instead of the one finally provided for. But after all, it was John Morley himself whosaid to me when I raised this point, "You mustn't get too much power, you know."It is perhaps unnecessary to stress the irony of history's comment on that observation. Butwithin their own time, the Morley-Minto reforms were a genuine step forward. We had hadestablished a major political principle; its application was henceforward to be a permanentfeature of all constitutional developments in India. It was not conceded however withoutopposition. And if in retrospect there is an element of irony about Lord Morley's remarkwhich I have just quoted, there is a much more freakishly ironic flavor about the name andpersonality of the chief Muslim opponent of the stand which we took. For Lord Minto'sacceptance of our demands was the foundation of all future constitutional proposals made forIndia by successive British Governments, and its final, inevitable consequence was thepartition of India and the emergence of Pakistan.Who then was our doughtiest opponent in 1906? A distinguished Muslim barrister inBombay, with a large and prosperous practice, Mr. Mohammed All Jinnah. We first becameacquainted when he, having been called to the English Bar, settled in Bombay and -- entirelywithout private fortune and without influence -- rapidly built up his successful practice there.We had always been on friendly terms, but at this juncture he came out in bitter hostilitytoward all that I and my friends had done and were trying to do. He was the only well-knownMuslim to take this attitude, but his opposition had nothing mealy-mouthed about it; he saidthat our principle of separate electorates was dividing the nation against itself, and for nearlya quarter of a century he remained our most inflexible critic and opponent. In a later chapter Ishall discuss more fully the circumstances -- most of all the stubborn folly and intransigenceof the Hindu majority in Congress -- which converted this stoutest champion of Indian unityinto its most determined opponent; and I shall trace in detail the paths of destiny whichbrought him, as the unchallenged leader of eighty million Muslims, that victory -- thecreation of the separate and independent State of Pakistan -- for which we at the beginningwere working unconsciously and indirectly, and he at the end consciously and directly andwith all the force of his will and intellect. For the moment I merely reflect upon the ironyimplicit in it all.Our achievement in 1906 seemed important enough; and it was obvious to those of us mostclosely associated with it -- especially Nawab Mohsen-ul-Molk and myself -- that since wehad obtained separate electoral recognition, we must have the political organization to makethat separate representation effective. The All-India Muslim League was therefore founded ata meeting at Dacca later that year at which, as it happened, I was unable to be present. I was,however, elected its first President, and as such I remained until 1912.All these events -- our deputation to the Viceroy, his acceptance of our demands, thesubsequent foundation of the All-India Muslim League and my election as its President --marked for me the culmination of a period of concentrated political effort. The strain hadshown itself physically and during our visit to Simla to see the Viceroy, I fainted. I neededphysical recuperation and I thought that I would combine this with widening my experienceand knowledge. I set out on a world tour in the company of a French friend of mine,Monsieur Rene Talomon, who subsequently became a professor of French literature in theUnited States, and who died recently. We headed east, going first to Malaya and Singaporeand then on to China.China's condition at that time was saddening. In Peking the aged Dowager-Empress dwelt inseclusion within the vast confines of the summer palace; beyond its walls her Empire wascrumbling in confusion and decay. In towns along the seaboard and far up the great navigablerivers that were the arteries of China's lifeblood, foreign -- European -- trading communitieshad established an elaborate system of treaty ports and concessions. Here on the territory of acountry which was in no sense a colony of any of the European nations involved, it wasastonishing, and disquieting, to see that the most arrogant and hidebound kind of colonialismprevailed. The foreign concessions in towns like Shanghai, Hankow and others were aliencities and strongholds of power, political and financial. It was indeed merely a matter ofextraterritorial foreign administration within the various concessions and settlements; thepower and prestige of the foreigner was so great, and the authority of the ManchuGovernment so feeble, that the real rulers of China in those days were the consuls of theEuropean Powers, chief among them the British Consul General in Shanghai. In thedisintegration from which China's administration was suffering, wealthy Chinese broughttheir money and their investments into the foreign settlements for safety and protection -- justas today many Europeans send their capital to the United States and Canada.The atmosphere of colonialism was as nauseating as it was allpervasive. In the P & O ship inwhich I traveled from Hong Kong to Shanghai, one of my fellow passengers was the ImperialViceroy of the Province of Yunnan -- a personage, one would have supposed, of someconsequence in his own country. When we reached Shanghai I was genuinely astonished, anda good deal shocked, to see the way in which the officials of the so-called Chinese ImperialMaritime Customs -- after all, they were nominally the servants of the Chinese Government -treated this dignitary, compared with their attitude toward the British passengers, myselfand even my Indian servants.For us there was every mark of consideration and courtesy. He was dealt with brusquely andrudely, all his baggage was opened, and the customs officials ruffled busily through his robesand his mandarin orders. It was a nastily enlightening comparison which I have neverforgotten.Within the foreign settlements the general attitude toward the Chinese was little short ofoutrageous. All the better hotels refused entry to Chinese, except in wings specially set asidefor them. It was the same in restaurants. From European clubs they were totally excluded.Even in shops a Chinese customer would have to stand aside and wait to be served when aEuropean or an American came in after him and demanded attention. We hear a great dealabout the color bar in South Africa today. In the early years of this century in China the colorbar was rigidly imposed -- not least offensively in discrimination against officials of the verygovernment whose guests, under international law, all foreigners were supposed to be. Is itany wonder that the Chinese intelligentsia long retained bitter memories of this attitude?The old mandarin class, of course, did not travel and knew little of the world outside China,but already, even in 1906, there were a number of Chinese students attending universities inthe United States and then returning home. Their bitterness was probably sharper and deeperthan the cool, self-isolating disdain which was the natural reaction of the mandarin class.In Shanghai Talomon and I were entertained at dinner -- Chinese style -- by some wealthyChinese merchants to whom we had letters of introduction from a Chinese friend inSingapore.We had the usual chicken dishes and something which they called tartar grilled meat, whichwas really a kebab similar to that which is eaten in Persia, Turkey, Egypt and all the MiddleEastern countries, and even in the Caucasus. When we remarked that it was a well-knowndish in a large part of the world and a part with which I particularly was familiar, our hostssaid, "Yes, it has been prepared for us by a Chinese Muslim cook." There followed theclassical Chinese dishes, such as bamboo shoots and buried eggs. And then we were offered adish which at first we thought was eel.Luckily -- oh, how luckily! -- Talomon said, "We know this very well."Our host laughed in courteous deprecation of Talomon's little mistake. "Oh, no," he said,"this is snake."There is a limit, and for us this went beyond it. Under the cover of our napkins, and with whatwe hoped was the greatest care so that we should not be seen, we got rid of it. I remember,long years later, reading a newspaper account of the effect of a similar dish on someforeigners at a Chinese official dinner. All were very ill and some died.Students of sociology may be interested in the existence in those days, both in Shanghai andHong Kong, of what were called "welcome houses," maintained by small groups of Americanwomen. There was not a hint of coarseness or vulgarity about these establishments; they wereenveloped in an almost oppressive atmosphere of decorum. The first impression on anynovice who walked into one of them for the first time was that he had entered an agreeablebut fairly strait-laced social gathering. Only Europeans and Americans of impeccable socialbackground were admitted. The women who ran them -- many of whom were known to bewell-to-do, several indeed owning race horses in Shanghai -- were regarded with a properdegree of respect. They resembled, shall I say, the Greek hetaera rather than the fashionablelady of the European demimonde of that time. Most of the women were of Scandinavianorigin and had come, I believe, from the vicinity of Minnesota where there is a considerabledegree of Scandinavian settlement. The current theory in the Far East was that they camethither with one set purpose: to accumulate a dowry which their families could not afford togive them and that having in a few years piled up quite sizable fortunes, home they went tobe absorbed into a respectable and blameless family life.Talomon and I went on to Japan. Since the world picture has changed so irrevocably in theyears since then, it may perhaps be necessary to recall two important facts in connection withJapan in 1906: first, that Britain and Japan were allies, under the terms of an agreementsigned early in the century and, second, that Japan had just emerged victorious from theRusso-Japanese War, the first in modern times in which an Asiatic Power had taken on andsoundly defeated a European Great Power in a combat on modern terms and with modernarms and equipment. The Foreign Minister, Count Hayashi, who had been Ambassador inLondon at the time of the signature of the Treaty of Anglo-Japanese alliance, gave a bigluncheon in my honor. During the course of the meal he and I discussed the Anglo-Japanesealliance; and Count Hayashi, whom I had known quite well in London, assured me thatinfluential military circles in Japan had been opposed to the idea of an alliance with Britainand had advocated an alliance with Russia. Simultaneous negotiations had in fact beenconducted, and the Russian plan failed only because Russia's acceptance of the termsproposed arrived after the treaty with Britain had been initialed. It is interesting and a littleawe-inspiring to speculate on how different the history of our century would have been hadthe Czar's Government moved more speedily. There would have been no Russo-JapaneseWar to weaken -- as it in fact did irreparably -- the Czarist regime; might not Lenin haveremained an obscure agitator in permanent exile?Among Japanese leaders whom I met was Field Marshal Oyama. I remember being struck byhis modesty of demeanor, absence of self-satisfaction and lack of any display of power, and Iremember thinking -- for, after all, he was one of the men who had just led their country tovictory in the war against Russia -- that his bearing was very different from that which aEuropean or American military leader would have adopted in a like situation. Friends told methat the bearing of Admiral Togo, the victorious commander in the great naval battle ofTsushima, was very similar to that of the Field Marshal.I was fortunate enough to be granted an audience with the old Emperor, the great Mikado ofJapan's revolution, the Emperor during whose reign Japan had stepped at one bound from amedieval way of life to a modern industrial and military power able to challenge the West inits own terms. As a boy before the Revolution, although he was the Mikado, he had been keptin Kyoto by the Shogun in obscurity and something near poverty, rationed daily to a smallissue of rice by those who were supposed to be his servants. He threw off this overweeningtyranny -- with tremendous results. What surprised me was that he was a tall, powerful,robust man; he would have been thought a big man anywhere, but in Tokyo his size seemedmuch more conspicuous. My audience with him was a noisy affair. He talked at the top of hispowerful voice, shouting questions at me and shouting back his answering comments. Whenhe wasn't shouting he was uttering loud, explosive exclamations. The courtier who acted asinterpreter told me afterward that these exclamations indicated that the Emperor approved ofmy answers to his questions.We took a Japanese boat across the Pacific and called at Honolulu. People who knowHonolulu nowadays can have no idea of what it was like then -- its charm and its quiet air ofabsolute peace and happiness. There were no trans-Pacific clippers bringing holidaymakersovernight from the United States. It had not been discovered and exploited by the cinema; itsromance was genuine. There was no tourist industry, and there were no vast naval and airbases.All the young women of the island went about garlanded, and whenever we were introducedto any of them they took off their garlands -- so gay and beautiful were their smiles, sograceful and delicate the movements and touch of their hands -- and put them round ournecks. Talomon and I were still young and impressionable; we were both pleased andgratified by this courteous custom.On we went toward the United States and reached San Francisco in December, 1906, in theaftermath of the earthquake. The whole city was one vast ruin. People talk of the materialhavoc of war in France and in Germany, and I myself have seen, at the conclusion of twoworld wars, many cities and towns in ruins, but San Francisco in 1906 exceeded anything Ihave ever seen. It was difficult to find a shop open, but we chanced on a drugstore; it was acurious experience -- amid all this devastation -- to be served with ice cream and cold drinksin what elsewhere in the world we call a chemist's shop. One or two hotels and restaurantswere open, but in general life and work were only just beginning again in that terrible andpitiable havoc.From California we crossed the continent by train, stopping off from time to time and stayinga day or two in various cities on the way. In Chicago we were taken on a conducted tour ofthe stockyards and slaughter houses. Not long before this, Upton Sinclair's propagandistnovel about the slaughter houses had been published and caused a considerable sensation. Imust say the conditions in the slaughter houses which I was shown bore no similarity to thelurid horrors described in the novel.Perhaps I ought to point out that such knowledge of America as I then possessed was notderived from novels. I had read Lord Bryce's classic work on the American Constitution, Iknew the writings of authors as diverse as Walt Whitman, Hawthorne, Thoreau, Henry andWilliam James and Mark Twain (whom, as I have recorded, I had met in Bombay). I hadmany American friends and acquaintances in Europe. Like all visitors to the United States Isuppose I had my preconceived notions, but they were founded on some real, if academic,knowledge of the structure of American social, economic and political life.Just after the New Year of 1907 we reached New York. It was the height of the city's winterseason. Talomon and I went to stay at the St. Regis; forty years later it was the habit of myyounger son, Sadruddin, when he was a Harvard undergraduate, to stay there whenever hewas in New York.From all that my friends tell me, there is no comparison between the social life of New Yorkas it was in those days and the swift, swirling existence of the city today. Of course I hadmany introductions, largely from my American friends in Europe, and I was immediately andgenerously entertained. Americans are the most hospitable people in the world, and theyreceive foreigners with so much kindness, their welcome is so open and so goodhearted, thatanyone who has once been to the United States never forgets his time there. I seemed to beinvited out to luncheon and dinner every day, and night after night I was someone's guest atthe opera. The Metropolitan Opera House in those days was like a superb exhibition ofjewelry and fashion. I knew the Opera in Paris and London, but for elegance and opulenceamong the audience neither was comparable with New York's Metropolitan in the early yearsof this century.One New Yorker of some consequence to whom I had an introduction was the then DistrictAttorney, Mr. Jerome, Lady Randolph Churchill's cousin. He was kind enough to arrange forme a special pass which enabled me to watch one of the most interesting and sensationalcauses célèbres of the time. This was the trial of Harry K. Thaw, accused of the murder ofStanford White, the architect and designer of skyscrapers.At his trial Thaw was found guilty but insane and thus escaped execution. It seemed that Mrs.Thaw had confessed to her husband that before her marriage she had been taken by StanfordWhite to his apartment, given drugged champagne, and seduced. This confession arousedThaw to maniacal jealousy, all the more ferocious because he suspected (groundlessly) thatWhite was still pursuing his wife. In the ballroom of Madison Square Roof Garden Whitewas waltzing with a girl friend when Harry Thaw strode across the floor and fired six shotsinto his body.I was especially interested in this melodramatic and colorful affair, for two years before I hadmet Thaw and the former Evelyn Nesbit together in Paris. Thaw, whose fortune was derivedfrom railroads, cut something of a figure in international society at that time. He had,however, an uncontrollable temper and was an extremely jealous and possessive individual. Imet them once at dinner and later on that evening I was talking pleasantly and lightheartedlywith the young woman, who was extremely beautiful and attractive. Thaw in the backgroundlooked grim and preoccupied, and a friend who was in the party quietly warned me that therewas a dangerous streak in Thaw.There was a grim but bewildering fascination about the trial. I had grown up accustomed toBritish methods in a court of justice; the whole system of questioning and cross-examinationand all the rules of evidence in an American court were startlingly different. It took me a littletime to realize that, although the basis of the criminal law is the same in the United States asin England, it has developed along different lines since the eighteenth century and theAmerican legal profession has evolved its own technique and traditions.By 1907 the motorcar was coming into its own and was no longer the despised and smellytoy it had been a decade earlier, New York was still a city of fine carriages and glossy andwell-groomed horses, and the taxi had not yet replaced the elegant hansom cab. How affableand good-tempered American people of all classes were in those days. The clerks and theassistants in the shops and stores seemed friendly and alert, never giving one those sour,disapproving looks that one got in shops in Europe. The policemen on the beat, the New Yorkcops, were genial and talkative when you asked them the way, not curt like the Parisgendarme or aloof and majestic like the old-fashioned London bobby.I realize that I was extremely fortunate both in the time of this my single visit to New Yorkand in the social world -- now almost entirely vanished -- to which I had the entree. I met thegreat hostesses and leaders of society of those days: Mrs. Cornelius Vanderbilt, Mrs. JohnJacob Astor, Mrs. Whitelaw Reid, Mrs. Phipps, Mrs. Ogden Mills and others. How kind andhospitable they were, how stately were the parties and the dances they gave -- more than one,I may add, in my honor.I spent a good deal of time in the museums, as I always do in any city that I visit for the firsttime. Many of the wealthier private houses, of course, were museums and art galleries in theirown right. It was curious, I remember remarking, that although in Europe the heyday of theFrench impressionists had dawned and connoisseurs were already beginning to collect theirwork, American taste remained still classical and traditional, and the walls of many of the bighouses that I visited were hung with examples of English, Italian, German, Flemish andDutch painting of many epochs.I was made an honorary member of the Union Club. I discovered the joys of native Americancooking; surely canvasback duck and terrapin are two of the best dishes in the world. I wentto the theater a great deal, and here "modernism" -- as it was then understood -- had certainlyhit New York. Ibsen was the rage, and several of his plays were being performed at theatersaround the town. But it was also, of course, the day of the musical comedy, before it had beendisplaced by other noisier, more synthetic forms of amusement.It was a time of great expansion and prosperity for New York and for America generally, anoutward and visible sign of which was the rising skyline of New York. We talked aboutskyscrapers then, but they were modest little affairs of twenty or thirty floors -- still, theyseemed to us gigantic.Altogether I had a wonderful time in New York. I have never forgotten it. I only wish that Ihad been able to go back again. That this has never proved possible has been my misfortuneand, I may say, a cause of great and lasting regret.My tour had set me up in health and in spirits. The year 1907 saw the Morley-Mintoconstitutional reforms in India turned from tentative proposals, whose shape and pattern wehad been able effectively to influence, into law. John Morley, with his liberal background andoutlook of the purest theoretical and academic kind, was extremely reluctant to accept theprinciple of separate electoral representation for the Muslims. It went against the grain of hischaracter. However, the Viceroy, Lord Minto, had given his assent to the undertaking, andMorley -- however scrupulous his theoretical objections -- could not be permitted to go backon it. For Syed Amir Ali and myself, 1907 was a period of what I can best describe asguerrilla warfare, whose aim was to keep up to the mark. We won in the end, but it was hardgoing.In my personal life I was able to effect radical and permanent adjustments. Any hope ofreconciliation with my wife, Shahzadi Begum, had unhappily but finally receded; we agreedto a deed of separation and, not long afterward, to a divorce under Muslim law. While ofcourse I remained responsible for her maintenance until her death, she passed completely outof my life and we never met again.From 1907 I visited Europe every year. My life moved in an agreeable and spacious round.As a shy, raw young man on my first visit to Europe in 1898, I had lost my heart to theFrench Riviera. Now in my maturity my affection for it had deepened and ripened, and Ifound myself returning to it again and again. In 1908 this affection found a personal focus. Imade the acquaintance of Mlle. Theresa Magliano, one of the most promising young dancersof the Ballet Opéra of Monte Carlo, a ballerina who -- in the opinion of the teachers of boththe Paris Opéra and of La Scala in Milan -- was assured of a brilliant future in her profession.She was then just nineteen. We fell deeply in love. In the spring of that year she accompaniedme to Egypt and we were married in Cairo in accordance with Muslim law.My new marriage brought me spiritual and mental satisfaction and enrichment. It also openedfor me a path into a new and absorbing world. My young wife's nature was intenselyaesthetic. She was a truly creative artist. Although inevitably she gave up the stage after ourmarriage, she turned to a serious study first of painting and later of sculpture. It was here thather talents flowered. She took the professional name of Yla. Her work was exhibited on theContinent and in England.Before she died in 1926, at the tragically early age of thirtyseven, my wife had attainedrecognition as a sculptor of merit and high artistic capacity. She had been asked to design anumber of war memorials in England and France and also a number of those monuments toUnknown Soldiers which so poignantly expressed the emotions of the interwar years. The lastcommission which she was offered gave her especial satisfaction; it was from the city ofVienna, obtained in open competition with a strong candidature of more than a hundred, todesign a fountain in which statuary was an important part of the decorative scheme.My wife's aesthetic interests and tastes encouraged me to explore the world of art for myself.My own first loves in the world of aesthetic experience were always music and the ballet. Myreactions to music and to dancing have been emotional and sensuous. I have a vividrecollection of the first time I ever heard a waltz played and watched it danced. I was a boy ofthirteen or fourteen at the time. The scene was a ball at Government House in Poona. Idaresay the orchestra was worse than mediocre; I doubt if the dancers were particularlyexpert. I had no standards to judge by. My taste was utterly unformed. But there in thebrightly lit ballroom the dancers swirled before me; it was as if the figures on somebeautifully carved frieze had come suddenly to warm and glowing life; the lilt and sway ofthe music swept into my heart like a flooding tide of joy. The lights that shone in thatballroom have been extinguished sixty years and more, and the dancers are all gone, but thememory of the music and movement has never faded.I had discovered a source of happiness which I was never to lose. As life has gone on I havebecome more and more interested and I have found more and more refreshment and solace inmusic, in the ballet, the opera and the theater. These for me have ranked first among the arts.Pictures I have liked, but in a comparatively restricted field. Like many others of mygeneration I was brought up on the work of the great masters of the Italian and, to a lesserextent, the Dutch and British schools; but dutifully though I went around the art galleries,they never stirred me. It was when I first saw Turner's work that I saw what painting reallycould mean. Then about 1904 I saw my first French impressionists; here for me was anextension and development of the same satisfaction that Turner gave me -- their earlylandscapes, not their portraits. Turner, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, those are my painters. Insculpture and in furniture my taste is sheerly Egyptian -- the great statuaries of ancient Egypt,the simple, pure, formal yet flowing lines of the ordinary, day-to-day furniture that you seeexhibited in the Cairo Museum, those are enough for me. English and French furniture, evenof the "great" periods, leaves me cold. I care little for jewelry or work in precious metals,except silver; beautiful silver has always held a considerable attraction for me.But in those realms of aesthetic experience that I do care about, much have I traveled andmuch have I profoundly enjoyed. I am proud to recall that I have counted among my personalfriends many of the great artists of this century. I know Stravinsky well, and my knowledgeof much of his early work was close and intimate. In his association with Diaghilev he wrote,as everyone knows, the music for some of the finest ballets ever created by that masterimpresario; I heard much of that music before it was orchestrated.I knew Puccini quite well. I think I must have been one of the first of his friends to notice atroublesome and increasing hoarseness in Puccini's voice, a hoarseness which was the firstindication of the malady which ultimately killed him -- as tactfully as I could, I suggested tohim that instead of perpetually sucking cough lozenges, he ought to go to see a doctor.Massenet was another friend of mine, and we often dined together at the Hôtel de Paris inMonte Carlo. Once when he was, as I had been given to understand, laid low with bronchitis,I drove over from Cannes to see him at the Hôtel de Paris. I was shown up immediately to hissitting room. He was stark naked in the room next door in a marble bathtub before a blazingfire. He was busily dictating music to a woman secretary. Neither he nor she seemed at alldiscomposed; I was, I must confess, somewhat taken aback. Massenet, however, was volublein his explanation. He had had a rush of creative ideas which had to be put down on paper.Since I had come all the way from Cannes to call on him, would it not have beendiscourteous to refuse to see me?"Please sit down," he said. "I must just finish this piece of work."For nearly an hour he sat on in the bath, turning the hot tap on from time to time, repeatingand trying out bars and single notes of music, and making his secretary sing them back tohim, so that it began to sound as if he were giving her a singing lesson. At last the flow ofinspiration ceased, the young woman shut her notebook and hurried away, and only then didthe old gentleman -- he was, after all, about seventy -- realize that he was sitting there nakedand that the water had grown chilly. He jumped out of the bath, ran into his bedroom, put ona bathrobe, and came back to bid me a friendly and courteous good-by.I have known many actors and singers: Madame Bartet of the Comédie Française; Jean deReszke, the great tenor and teacher of a new generation of singers; Caruso, whosemagnificent voice seemed literally to shake Covent Garden to its foundations when he soaredto his highest notes. Though perhaps not as pure an artist as Tomagno, I think that he was,without doubt, the greatest tenor of my time. I remember Melba in her magnificent prime; itwas told of her that when she first presented herself at the Opéra in Paris the director, thoughhe recognized the potentialities of her voice, said that her Australian accent was soformidable that he would be able to do nothing with her. Like many other great singers Melbawas a hearty eater; she liked a good, rich supper after the opera, and to top it off she had ahabit of ordering ice cream, a fresh peach, strawberries, and cream and consuming the lottogether. Escoffier, the famous restaurateur, heard about this habit, made an established dishof it and named it in her honor. So was born the now universally known Pècbe Melba.In England I knew well many of the most famous figures of the stage, from Sir Henry Irving(whom I often visited in his dressing room at the Lyceum Theater) to the George Alexanders,the Trees, Sir Seymour Hicks and his wife Ellaline Terriss, and many, many others. I madethe acquaintance of Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson through a friend of mine, a fellowmember of the Marlborough, Douglas Ainsley. Ainsley himself was a man of originality ofcharacter and some talent; formerly a member of the diplomatic service, he established in hisown person a kind of unofficial liaison between the world of society and the world of thestage. Forbes-Robertson suggested that I should write an Oriental tragedy for him on anhistorical theme, leaving it to me to choose my subject out of the great mass of Islamic loreand legend. I chose the sad and stirring story of the murder of the Prophet's grandson, myancestor, Hussein, at Kerbela, and made a beginning with it. One day in the summer of 1904at Douglas Ainsley's house I read Forbes-Robertson what I had written; I don't think he likedit very much. Thenceforward I abandoned any idea of writing dramatic poetry.To return to composers -- when I first arrived in Europe the great controversy about Wagnerwas still in full swing. But it was of course, as all musical appreciation was in those days inevery Western European country except Italy, restricted to a comparatively few. One of thegreat changes that I have seen in my lifetime has been the vast extension of musicalunderstanding, taste and appreciation through all sections of society. The old, snobbishglamour may have departed; but the breakdown of class distinction not only in England but inFrance and Switzerland too has, in my opinion, done a great deal of good. It is especiallynoticeable over the ballet; and here I may claim that I have watched, from very close quarters,an immense revolution in taste from its beginnings.Diaghilev was the creator and inspirer of this revolution. As Caesar in Britain, so was theRussian, Diaghilev, in prewar Western Europe -- he came, he saw, he conquered. He himselfmaintained that he would never have had a chance to demonstrate his originality or exert hisinfluence as he did in Western Europe had he remained in Russia, where -- although it wasthe home of the ballet in a certain sense -- the classical mold was firmly fixed, and there wasno opportunity for that creative fire which, once he was abroad, Diaghilev set burning sofuriously.From the first I was one of Diaghilev's enthusiastic and unwavering supporters, and so Iremained till his untimely death. I doubt if the magnitude of Diaghilev's achievement isgenerally realized today. A new generation takes it all for granted. Ballet, as it wasunderstood and practiced in Western Europe, before he came on the scene, was a sterile andvirtually static minor art form from which real vitality and excitement -- as distinct from mererepetitive prettiness -- seemed to have ebbed away. Then in 1909 and 1910 Diaghilev burstlike a bomb on the aesthetic consciousness of Europe. His dynamic influence was notconfined to the ballet; it spilled over into all the allied arts and revolutionized theirfundamental ideas, creative and critical. On the concepts of uniting music and motion and therepresentation of abstract ideas and ideals through movement as much as through music,Diaghilev's influence was tremendous and lasting. This obviously was the core of his uniqueachievement; but what would stage décor, costume design, feminine fashion, furnishings andinterior decorations have been in the first half of this century without Diaghilev? His impacton the major plastic arts of sculpture and painting was no less revolutionary. Yet hiswonderful, unique quality was one of indirect creativeness. It is possible to argue that hehimself in fact never created anything, but the truth is that the creative work of everyone whocollaborated with him was, profoundly and really, his creation too. How many artists didwhat the world now recognizes to be their best work for him and with him? Not only dancerslike Karsavina, Nijinsky, Lifar and Massine, but a painter like Bakst, a musician likeStravinsky. He was an impresario of genius, and he was something more. He so infused andinspired others that, working for him, they were better and bigger than they ever could havebeen without him and the result of the association has been that some of them have becometoday the most famous and wonderful choreographers in the world. Nijinsky was the supremeand tragic example of this mysterious power which he exerted, of genius evoking genius. Buthis influence was no less important on many others, over whom his hold was not soobviously hypnotic. Imposing his strong, original taste on a band of talented artists andextracting from them their best and most original work, he imposed that taste on Europe --with unforgettable, immeasurable effect.I often used to be present at his conferences with all of his leading associates -- "heads ofdepartments" as he called them: Stravinsky, Bakst, Nijinsky, Karsavina, his ballet master, hischoreographer in chief, a young poet perhaps, a venerable and venerated artist like Rodin. Aconference was like a council of war. Each would pour out his ideas into a common pool, butDiaghilev -- have no doubt of it -was the supreme commander; he imposed a unity of formand aesthetic conception, he turned a mass of brilliant projects into an ordered and coherentwork of art. The clash of ideas was subdued and hammered into shape, and the final result,far more often than not, was a masterpiece.The practical foundation, on which this exuberance of talent was based, seemed at first sightfragile in the extreme. Diaghilev was always in debt; he never -- apparently -- had a penny inhand. His creative imagination -- and his own faith in it -- outsoared these (as it seemed tohim) minor considerations. He knew that he was creating a masterpiece, a series ofmasterpieces; he trusted implicitly that his audiences would recognize the value of his work.He possessed that faith which moves mountains -- and mountains of difficulty dissolved as hewent along. Whenever the financial situation looked most desperate, some new wealthypatron, some Maecenas would turn up; the most immediate and pressing difficulties would besmoothed away; and he would sweep in confidence to his next triumph. On the stage, too, hiscapacity for improvisation and his total reliance on it were all-pervasive. Until the last minuteevery new production bore the appearance of total chaos, but somehow by some magic of hisown, between the final rehearsal and the first night, when everyone else around him wasdespairing and on the edge of nervous collapse, Diaghilev would induce order out of thehurly-burly; and another thunderously acclaimed success would be added to the lengtheningroll. Night after night the HOUSE FULL board would go out in front of the theater. Thewhole season would be triumphant. At its close, off Diaghilev and the company would go toLondon and to other capitals and provincial centers, to the same acclamation, with the samestory of success, until the money ran out. He was indeed unique, but the revolution in artwhich his genius precipitated has continued to run its course since his death. The revitalizedand flourishing art of the ballet all over the world -- in Paris, London and the United States --is the beautiful and fruitful tree whose seeds this strange, turbulent and brilliant man solavishly sowed. It is a profound cause of satisfaction to those who, like myself, saw his workat close quarters and almost from its inception to know that this great aesthetic revolution, asfundamental and as far-reaching as that which Wagner brought about in the world of music,was the work of a genius whom we were privileged to know as a friend.Diaghilev and the ballet were the center of that fascinating world of highly sophisticated,highly cultivated creative work and critical appreciation in which, during those yearsimmediately before the First World War, I lived so full and so zestful a life. Time, chance,war, economic and social change have wreaked havoc with the rich fabric and pattern of acivilization and a way of life which then seemed indestructible. However, if much is lost,much has been gained in those magnificent and widespread effects of the revolution in allartistic matters achieved by Diaghilev. While the classes have lost, the masses have gained.The diffusion of culture is not just a textbook phrase nowadays; it is a reality. When I think ofthe theaters and opera houses, the concert halls and art galleries of Western Europe today,and of the people of all social classes (and not just a wealthy and leisured few) who throngthem, whose pleasure and mental and spiritual enrichment are so obvious; when I think ofhow real and eager understanding and appreciation of the arts have extended in recentdecades to every level of society -- then I see far more reason to rejoice than to lament. Thereare some, however, who cannot share my optimism. The sadness of one facet of the years oftransition is for me summed up and symbolized in an encounter which I had in the theater inZurich, in the middle of the Second World War, with Richard Strauss. I had known him wellat the height of his international fame. Around us there was a continent, a world, locked inrelentless conflict, a nightmare projection into grim reality of all Wagner's most terribleimaginings and forebodings. Strauss was an old, heartbroken man. He saw me, flung up bothhis arms in a sad, despairing gesture, rolled his eyes upward and muttered some incoherentphrase in which I could just catch the word "God," and stumbled forlornly away.From 1907 until the outbreak of war I was in Europe for some part of every year. Movementfrom country to country, from continent to continent, though more leisurely than it is today,was also a great deal easier and freer. Civilization had not learned all the tortuous refinementsof passports and visas, of exchange control and security regulations. The number ofAmericans who were coming to Europe was increasing year by year; many of them wereaffluent; many were people of cultivated and sophisticated tastes; some stayed permanently,some came back and forth, some maintained largescale establishments on the Riviera orelsewhere. Many of them were "characters" in their own right -- the remarkable JamesGordon Bennett, for example, the famous proprietor of the New York Herald who had a villaat Beaulieu-sur-Mer. He was then an old man, and he looked his age. He was apt to be short-tempered and peppery, but he had a warm, kind heart. The hospitality which he and hisdelightful wife most liked to dispense was breakfast, big and elaborate meal with every kindof characteristic American dish. I recall that during the First World War he developed thestrongest antipathy to bad news of any kind. If his attention were drawn to any tactical orstrategic reverse suffered by the Western Allies, his temper became terrible, the unhappybringer of bad tidings was so abused and berated that it was difficult not to believe that hewas not actually responsible for the reverse which he had been so rash as to mention.Others whose acquaintance and friendship I made at this time included Mr. Harjes, ofMorgan's Bank, a staunch supporter of the Allied cause from the day war broke out, and hiswife -- one of the world's most beautiful women, a queenly, glorious, magnificent woman;Mr. Ralph Curtis -- a lively amusing conversationalist -and his wife; Mr. and Mrs. James H.Hyde; Mr. and Mrs. Bernard Berenson; and Walter Berry, who had been a judge of the mixedcourts in Cairo, and who was a lifelong friend of Edith Wharton, the novelist-historian ofNew York.Bernard Berenson took considerable pride in the care and precision with which hepronounced the English language. His verbal armor, however, had one curious chink in it; hepronounced the simple word "corkscrew" as if it had a third syllable in it -- "corkerscrew."Some of his friends who knew of this little vagary, having got him off his guard,mischievously put him to the test one April Fool's Day. To everyone's delight out popped"corkerscrew"; and for years afterward if he dared to take up a stand on correctpronunciation, he would be vociferously reminded of that intrusive syllable.Ralph Curtis had an addiction to puns; years before I knew him he happened to be in Bombaywhen Mr. W. K. Vanderbilt (the father of Consuelo, Duchess of Marlborough, later MadameBalsan) arrived in his yacht. Lord Harris, then Governor, held the erroneous opinion,frequently held by Englishmen, that American society was built on money. Aware that theVanderbilts were very rich, he condescendingly asked Ralph Curtis if he knew Mr.Vanderbilt, clearly implying that it would be quite an honor if he did."I never knew the Vanderbilts," said Ralph Curtis, demurely, "for when I lived in New Yorkthey were still Vanderbuilding."At James Hyde's house I met several times Monsieur Hanotaux, the famous historian,member of the Académie Française, and statesman, who had been France's Foreign Ministerfrom 1894 to 1898. He took a fancy to me and often we found ourselves discussing politics. Iremember that he affirmed with great earnestness that if the Méline Cabinet of 1898, ofwhich he had been a member, had not fallen, and if the coalition of parties that had putMéline in office had maintained their support of him instead of backing Delcassé, it mighthave proved possible to achieve a fair and friendly solution of the problem of Alsace-Lorraine which would have been honorable and satisfying to both France and Germany. IfHanotaux's assertion was right, here was another of those missed chances in diplomacy,another wrong turning, where if the right decision had been taken, the First World War neednever have happened.Walter Berry brought me into acquaintanceship with Mrs. Edith Wharton and with MarcelProust. Walter Berry, a bachelor and an agreeable and charming conversationalist, hadsomehow or another achieved among the women members of the little circle in which he andI then moved the reputation of being the greatest marital submarine torpedo that had everexisted. The ladies averred that he had told each of them separately that she was far too goodfor her husband; he was a distinguished man, a famous lawyer -- what could they do butbelieve him? And every time there was another marriage torpedoed. It was the kind of jokewhich a small, sophisticated society can get hold of, work almost to death and never let go.But Walter Berry had one remarkable claim to fame. He was one of the few people in theworld who could at any time ask Proust to dinner and always be sure of an acceptance. Oddlyenough, I never met Proust at the Ritz, where he used to go a great deal, but I did meet himseveral times at dinner at Walter Berry's. What I remember most about Proust was hissilences; I recall only one remark of his. A Mademoiselle Atoucha, an Argentine lady whowas affianced to a French Marquis, was Berry's fourth guest. Proust surveyed her, observedthat she looked like Cleopatra, and said nothing else for the rest of the dinner. On this, as onother occasions, Berry and I did our best to sustain the conversation, and the great novelist satsilently watching and listening to us; it was a slightly disconcerting experience.This was the society, these were some of the friends of my leisure in these happy andagreeable years. Work, of course, continued unabated. I spent a considerable part of each yearin India, concerned not only with my duties toward my followers but with the interests andthe responsibilities which I had acquired in Indian politics. These were the years in which theMorley-Minto reforms were being put into practice. It was proved that the principle ofseparate electoral representation for Muslims, which we had fought so hard to haveestablished, was sound and workable as well as theoretically just. Muslim politicalconsciousness, under the leadership of men like Nawab Ali Chowdry and the Nawab ofDacca in Bengal, and of Sir Mohammed Shaffi and Sir Sulfiqar Ali Khan in the Punjab,matured and strengthened steadily.I myself was devoting a good deal of time, energy and interest to the affairs of Aligarh. Isuppose that I was a sort of one-man "ginger group" on behalf of the project of convertingAligarh into a great Muslim university. Steadily during these years we aroused interest in andextended support for our project. Of course it provoked opposition from that powerful Britishelement whose argument was that a Muslim university would be undesirable and that itstendencies and teachings would be narrowly sectarian and particularist. I strove hard tocounter these criticisms, making it a cardinal point of all my appeals for help, all my speechesand articles, that the sons of Aligarh University would go forth "through the length andbreadth of the land to preach the gospel of free inquiry, of large-hearted toleration and of puremorality."I was not without support in high places. Lord Minto was succeeded by Viceroy LordHardinge of Penshurst, a statesman and diplomat with a wide and long experience of life withand among Muslim people in Iran and throughout the Near East. As the member of theViceroy's Executive Council responsible for education there was a brilliant and devotedadministrator, Sir Harcourt Butler, uncle of Mr. R. A. Butler, Chancellor of the Exchequer inSir Winston Churchill's Government of 1951 onward, and the minister responsible forBritain's great Education Act of 1944. Interest in education is a tradition in the Butler family.Both Lord Hardinge and Sir Harcourt understood our Muslim position and were aware of thefundamental differences in the social, cultural and spiritual background of Muslim andHindu. For myself, I tried again and again to make it clear that I regarded Muslim educationaladvancement not as an end in itself, but as a means to an end. If we were to advance down theroad toward independence and self-government -- however distant that goal might seem -- wemust, as a community, possess the knowledge and the intellectual equipment to cope with thepolitical responsibilities to which we were beginning to aspire. I had no narrow sectarianpurpose in view. I urged from the outset that Sanskrit should be taught, and with it the historyand evolution of Hindu civilization, religion and philosophy, in order that our people shouldbe able better to understand their neighbors. A university of our own was essential because itwas the best and most enduring means of developing the spiritual unity of Islam.The work of converting others to this belief which I held so ardently, of building up supportfor it and of raising funds was extremely strenuous. I traveled all over India. I went to greatMuslim leaders, to the poor and to the rich, to princes and to peasants. My own monetarycontribution was one hundred thousand rupees, which was quite a sum in those days; in all Icollected more than three million rupees. These were years of unremitting hard work. Fordays and weeks at a time, it seemed, I lived in railway trains. In every town at which the trainstopped I would address Muslim gatherings on the platform of the railway station. At everyopportunity I preached the cause of Aligarh. My honorary private secretary, and my right-hand man throughout the campaign, was the late Maulana Shakak Ali; without his steadfast,unwearying helpI doubt if I should ever have been able to make a success of it.We reached a climax in the long campaign with the Muslim Educational Conference atNagpur in 1910 at which the Aligarh project was the principal item on the agenda, and indeeddominated the proceedings. Our aims were well expressed by the chairman of the conference,Mr. Yusuf Ali, who defined the scope of the university which we hoped to establish in thesewords: "It will have no tests; freedom and originality of thought will be encouraged. It will bea Muslim university in the sense that it will promote the ideals which the Muslims of Indiahave evolved out of the educational experience of two generations."Now when all is said and done, when I look back on all that the Muslim University ofAligarh has stood for and achieved in the past forty years, this is without doubt one of thefacets of my life which I can record and contemplate with real and abiding satisfaction. I donot want to stress only its political consequences, momentous as those have been. Where elsethan in a Muslim university would it have been possible to establish and maintain, alongsideand fully integrated with the libraries, the laboratories and all the facilities essential for a fullunderstanding of our world and our time, a true center of Islamic faith and culture, in whichcan be expounded and practiced the principles of our religion, its universality and its realmodernity, its essential reasonableness, its profound spirit of tolerance and charity andrespect for other faiths? That I played my part in establishing such a center is for me one ofthe happiest, most consoling and most fortifying thoughts to take into old age.VIIIn Czarist RussiaTHE YEARS 1910 to 1914 were eventful, busy and active. Joy and sorrow, work and travel,disappointment and fulfillment, sport and friendship -- I had my ample share of them allduring these years. My wife lived largely in France. In 1909 my first son was born to her, towhom I gave the name Mehdi. His brief little life ended in February, 1911, and my secondson, Aly, was born in the following June. His birth was a profound solace and joy to my wifeand me, but for her the happiness of his babyhood was tinged with a solemn sense ofresponsibility. Long years had passed since there had been a son in our family. The grief wefelt at the loss of our first-born gave an especial sharpness and watchfulness to the care whichwe exercised over his brother's upbringing. When he was quite little he was pronounced to bedelicate; one of the leading child specialists of the time had a great belief in the healthgivingand health-maintaining properties of the Normandy coast in summertime, especially the seaair and bathing. From the time that he was two or three, therefore, my wife took him eachsummer to Deauville, and their winters they spent in the south of France. For some years mywife lived in Monte Carlo and then she moved to Cimiez.In May, 1910, my great and good friend, King Edward VII, died in London. As loyal dutyand friendship bade, I hastened to attend his funeral; and I had an audience with hissuccessor, King George V.The King was buried in St. George's Chapel at Windsor; myplace in the procession and myseat in the chapel were near the Royal Family and the Royal guests from foreign countries. Inthe procession the German Emperor walked beside King George V. This placing provoked aminor but significant diplomatic incident. When a number of sovereigns are assembledtogether in one place, the protocol is that they take precedence, not according to the size orimportance of their countries nor alphabetically (as do delegates at an internationalconference), but according to seniority of accession to the throne. Thus if the King ofBulgaria (in the days when there was a reigning King of Bulgaria) had been longest on thethrone, he would take the head of any procession, and if the sovereign of the United Kingdomor the Emperor of Japan had only just acceded, he would go last. But on this occasion theGerman Emperor was put next to King George V, the principal mourner, and all the othermonarchs followed him. The storm arose indirectly because the King of Greece, who wassenior in the matter of accession, walked ahead of the King of Spain. Now the King of Spainhad acceded to his throne in babyhood, before the German Emperor had come into hisinheritance; and King Alfonso considered himself every whit as good as the Kaiser, if not hissuperior. As soon as the various sovereigns had taken leave and were on their way home, theSpanish Ambassador made a formal protest on behalf of his Royal Master and hisGovernment against the affront offered by the placing of the German Emperor ahead of HisMost Catholic Majesty, and added that since the King of Greece had been put ahead of theKing of Spain on the grounds of seniority of accession, then both the King of Greece and theKing of Spain should have preceded the German Emperor if protocol were to be properlyobserved. This put the Foreign Office and the Court in a quandary. An apology would havebeen worse than useless because high officials of Court and State are not expected to makemistakes of this sort. Finally the problem reached the King. He solved it diplomatically andingeniously: the Kaiser, he said, was King Edward's nephew and his own first cousin, and forthese reasons alone he had been given precedence, not as a reigning sovereign, but as afamily mourner. This rather pitiable little complication aside, the whole ceremony wasdeeply affecting.Later there was trouble too about the precedence accorded to the former President of theUnited States, Mr. Theodore Roosevelt, who was his country's official representative. Sincehe was not a Royal personage, his place in the funeral procession and at other solemnfunctions was a lowly one. The United States and France both protested at this procedurewhich, although it was in full accord with international custom in those days, seemed eventhen both undignified and anachronistic. From that time on, the representatives of republicswere deemed to rank with royalty and a new and more fitting order of precedence wasestablished.There were many wet eyes that day -- mine, I am not ashamed to admit, among them. Shortlyafterward King George V issued instructions to the India Office that I was to be invited to theCoronation as a special and honored guest of his own, and the invitation was to cover notmerely the ceremony but all the functions, banquets, state receptions and so forth. I sat in hisbox at the special gala performances at the Royal Opera House.The Coronation of King George V was held in June, 1911. It was one of great pomp andsplendor, a stately showing forth of all Britain's grandeur, wealth and power. The year 1911,however, was a year of increasing international tension; and the internal political conflict inBritain over Mr. Lloyd George's budgetary measures, over Ireland and over the constitutionalposition of the House of Lords had become extremely embittered. Against the dark clouds ofthe approaching storm, the Coronation Season shone with a special brightness of its own. Ihave two vivid recollections of this time. The first is of the ballet that was given at the galaperformance at Covent Garden; it was Pavilion d'Armide -- surely the most appropriate balletpossible for such an occasion -- and the principal dancers included Nijinsky and Karsavina. Itwas of unforgettable beauty and grace; it stands out in my memory as one of the mostexquisite theatrical experiences that I have ever seen.My other lasting impression is of the presence of the Crown Prince of Germany, of theattention that was paid to him, of the real and sincere effort made by everyone, from theKing and Queen down, to convince him of Britain's good will and peaceful intentions towardhis country. I recall that at Covent Garden he sat on Queen Mary's right, and I saw that sheengaged him in earnest conversation and that her courtesy to him was not formal or chilly.A few months later the King and Queen set out on their journey to India -- the first and onlyreigning Sovereign and his Consort to visit India during the period of British rule. Early in1912 the magnificent Coronation Durbar was held in Delhi; it was announced that the capitaland seat of government were to be transferred to Delhi from Calcutta, and a new city builtcommensurate with the dignity, authority and (as it seemed then) permanence of the IndianEmpire. The partition of Bengal was annulled, and -as a climax and crown to my work in pastyears, and the work of those who had co-operated with me zealously and so steadfastly -Aligarh was given the status of a university. The King-Emperor personally bestowed on methe highest decoration which it was possible for any Indian subject of the Crown to receive, aKnight Grand Commander of the Star of India.Splendid as were the Durbar ceremonies, they were marred by two curious contretemps. Atthe great state banquet, to which most of the notables of India had been invited, some disasteroccurred in the kitchen, and the food that emerged was just enough to give the King and ahandful of people sitting near him a full meal. For almost all of the guests it was the onlychance in their lives that they would ever have of dining in the King's company, but most ofthem had no dinner.The other had far more alarming implications. The investiture, at which I received mydecoration of the G.C.S.I., was held at night in an enormous and brilliantly lighted tent. It wasa full state ceremony: the King-Emperor and his Consort sat enthroned; the Viceroy, theProvincial Governors, the Commander in Chief and the senior military commanders, a superbassemblage of Ruling Princes, all the leading officials, Indian and British, from every cornerof India, were gathered in honor of a stately and memorable occasion. Suddenly one of theelectric light bulbs, high up near the canvas canopy of the roof, began to play pranks. All eyeswent to its flickerings. Suppose it were to explode -- in that instant the same silent, horrifyingthought occurred to almost everyone present. Whistles were blowing, we could hear fireengines clanking up; behind their Majesties' thrones officers had already drawn their swordsand were hacking at the hangings and the canvas to make a way out for the King and Queen.But the rest of us were trapped. Had the tent caught fire it would have blazed up like acelluloid pingpong ball put near the hearth, and scarcely one of us inside would havesurvived. The humanitarian aspect of the disaster which we contemplated was appallingenough. Even more fearful to most of us was the thought of the political, administrative andsocial chaos all over India that would have followed. The country would have been leftwithout a single leading figure. Next day both the King and the Viceroy told me that instantorders had gone forth that no ceremony of this sort was ever to be held again by night in atent.A great military parade was a central feature of the Durbar celebrations. Many of us, Indianand British alike, were becoming more acutely aware of the importance of the Indian Army inBritain's world-wide imperial strategy, with her vast commitments and the growing sense ofinternational tension. Britain's own Regular Army, a considerable portion of which washabitually stationed in India, was -- though well trained and of admirable morale -- small incomparison with those of any of her possible challengers. Haldane, as Secretary of State forWar, had thoroughly reorganized the military machine and had brought into being thevolunteer and part-time Territorial Army; but Britain had refused to heed the urgent pleas ofthe veteran Field Marshal, Lord Roberts, for a Continental system of universal nationalservice. I was able to link the developing recognition of Britain's military needs and of India'sposition in relation to those needs with my own passion for Indian education.In an article which I contributed to Leo Maxse's National Review in July, 1911 (it was not ajournal whose imperialist politics I shared, but it was widely read by people whom I waseager to reach with my views), I put my arguments as forcefully as I could.Educate, educate, educate. Look for a passing moment at the question of manpower. Indiacould put troops into South Africa as quickly as they could be sent from England; she couldland soldiers in Australia long before England could so do; and forces from India could reachwestern Canada almost as soon as from England. If by education the myriads of India can betaught that they are guardians and supporters of the Crown, just as are the white citizens ofthe Empire, then the realization that India and the self-governing dominions stand and falltogether, bound by a community of interests and a common cause to maintain, will havecome. It is imperative to give Indians the education to fit them for their future role in theBritish Empire.In two world wars, one of which was to break out only three years after these words werewritten, my arguments were justified to the hilt.The autumn of 1912 found me on my travels again -- this time to Russia. The Czar NicholasII, in appearance almost the double of his cousin, King George V, had visited India when hewas Czarevitch; however, that was a good many years earlier, and I had never met him since.Many of his relatives habitually visited the south of France -- the Grand Dukes Boris andNicholas among them, and the Czar's own brother, the Grand Duke Michael -- and withseveral I was on terms of warm friendship; they had often asked me to visit them at home.Patrician and aristocratic life in England and in many other European countries had its ownmagnificence and stateliness; but they were as nothing compared with the luxury andopulence of the elaborate and gilded existence that was led by the Russian aristocracy inSaint Petersburg, as I saw it that winter.More than thirty years have passed since the Revolution shattered their world; many weremurdered, many went into exile, in towns like Harbin and Shanghai, in Constantinople, inBerlin, Paris and the south of France. Among those who had to refashion life from itsfoundations was a distinguished soldier, formerly Military Attache in London, GeneralPolovtsoff, who for many years has been a well-known and much-liked figure in MonteCarlo. Like many of his companions in exile, he has borne his vicissitudes with courage,dignity and a fine, high spirit. It happened that in 1912 I was the guest of General Polovtsoffand his brother in the house -- the palace -- which they had inherited from their father whohad been a minister of the Czar.The splendor of that house was beyond description. The banquet hall, in which my hosts gavea luncheon party in my honor, was, I am sure, fully three times the size of the great salon ofany eighteenth-century Italian palazzo. Its walls were hung with magnificent pictures andtapestry; there were great, many-colored, strongly scented banks of hothouse flowers, and theluncheon itself was on a prodigious scale. And this was only one of many similar functions atwhich I was entertained in similar houses of almost fairy tale magnificence that I visited.Life was adjusted to a curious and, at first, somewhat unsettling timetable, for which --accustomed as I was to social life in London and Paris -- I was not immediately prepared. Thefirst of my many invitations to supper showed me what I had to learn. I had been asked towhat I knew was to be a big supper party at a famous general's house, to be attended byseveral of the grand dukes and a number of leading ladies of the theater. With my notions ofthis kind of entertainment in London or in Paris, I arrived at the house a little after midnight.To my surprise there was no one else there; even the servants looked as if they had justawakened, as they scurried around turning on the lights. For an hour or thereabouts I waitedin some embarrassment until at last my host and hostess came downstairs. Between half pastone and two the other guests began to arrive and the vast salon began to look a little lessempty. It was well after two o'clock when we went in to supper. After supper there was somemusic, and it was nearing half past four when the party broke up and we went home. This, Iquickly learned, was the normal convention.Saint Petersburg was a winter capital. Its season was a winter season. I arrived there near itsbeginning, in late November. The cold was already intense. The days were dark and short, thenights long and bitter, and the city itself snowbound. Here are -- to me -- the reasons for theunusual tempo and rhythm of life there. The day ordinarily began about noon; shops, banksand offices remained open until late in the evening. Work was done and business transactedfrom midday on; and the nights were given up to the varied and elegant pursuits anddistractions of a gay, cultivated and sophisticated society. The theaters were excellent, sowere the opera and the ballet. There were innumerable parties; there were moonlight drives introikas across the icebound Neva to some of the islands that were not too far distant from thecapital. In the few hours of daylight there were often shooting parties in the surroundingcountryside; enthusiastic sportsmen hunted not only game birds and deer but also bears.All the houses were, to my way of thinking, grossly overheated and thoroughlyunderventilated. In cities like London and Paris I had grown accustomed to houses in which,even in cold weather, the windows and the doors were constantly open, and I was shockedand not a little disgusted by Russian habits in this matter. All houses were built with doubleglass windows. Some time in early November, when winter was setting in, workmen wouldnail down all these windows so that they could not be opened again until the end of April.One small pane was left free at the top of each window; every morning this would be openedfor an hour or so and then shut again. This was all the fresh air that any room got. On myvery first night at the British Embassy I said to my hostess, the Ambassador's wife, LadyBuchanan, that I thought this a most unhygienic and most unpleasant custom. She answeredme that when she and her husband first went to Saint Petersburg, they tried to live as theywould in England with the windows hardly ever fully shut, either by day or by night.However, the whole family fell ill. They had had to adopt the custom of the country, andsince then there had been no illness. She told me too that in all the big houses, at whichparties were given and large numbers of people gathered together, the rooms were scentedand the air specially sweetened and purified.The corollary of this permanent overheating of the houses was that Russians of all classes hadcomparatively light indoor clothing. But when they went out of doors everyone piled onheavy furs. The well-to-do would be thickly wrapped in sables, the poorer classes insheepskin. Everyone had sheepskin caps, thick warm gloves and snow boots. I had beenaccustomed to being told that one ought not to go suddenly from warm rooms into bitter coldoutside, and at first I thought the whole Russian way of life -- similar to some extent, Isuppose, to that in Canada in the winter and in many of the northerly states of the UnitedStates -- "unhealthy"; but a few weeks in Saint Petersburg and Moscow rid me of thisprejudice.I soon came to the conclusion that the Hermitage Museum was the finest I had ever seen, farsuperior to the Louvre, the National Gallery or New York's Metropolitan Museum. Itssuperiority lay in its rigid selectivity. There was nothing indifferent or third-rate on view;everything shown was of supreme merit. There was no need, as in every other big museum orart gallery that I have ever been to, to trudge mile after mile past inferior works, questionableattributions, copies and studies by the pupils of great masters. At the Hermitage, under thedirection of Count Tolstoy, a relative of the great novelist, all this had been sternly relegatedto the vaults. He had instituted, so I was given to understand, a regime whereby everythingwas taken off the walls which, whether by a great artist or merely alleged to be by him, didnot possess its own intrinsic beauty and merit. The effect therefore was of a small, purecollection of masterpieces, and it was extraordinarily refreshing.One of the treasures of the Hermitage was a wonderful collection of old English silver of theperiod of Charles II, when the art of the silversmith in England was at its height. Thecollection, so I believe, was made by Peter the Great, who visited England as a young manand worked in the shipyards at Deptford. Half savage, half genius, he had a strong andgenuine aesthetic streak in him, excellent taste -- witness the pictures which he chose whilehe was in Holland -- and sure, clear judgment.I remember being transported with delight by the choral singing in the Cathedral of St. Isaacin Saint Petersburg. I have often listened to fine singing in both Catholic and Anglicancathedrals in Western Europe, but never have I heard a choir whose singing was as pure andas majestic as that. Boys were recruited, I was told, from all over Russia, trained from anearly age and given sound professional or technical schooling at the same time.Despite the full social life that I led with the Czar's brother, the Grand Duke Michael, hiscousins, and the officers of his crack regiments, I never met or had an audience with the Czar.He lived a strangely secluded existence; and in the last years of his sad and troubled reign hisseclusion deepened and his circle narrowed. He was of a nervous, shy and naturallymelancholy disposition; his Empress was superstitiously pious, courageous and dignified bututterly out of touch with reality; his son and heir was delicate and ailing. All thecircumstances of his life combined to encourage him in a somber remoteness. I was told thatif I wanted to see him, an official approach and a request for an audience would have to bemade through diplomatic channels and that it would have to have the character of an officialvisit. I did not, therefore, even make the attempt. One of the Czar's few sociablecharacteristics, so I was informed, was his love and enjoyment of the theater, especially balletand the opera. He had a habit of coming into a theater after the performance had started,accompanied only by one or two officer friends, and would slip unobserved into a small stagebox. The only indication of his presence would be the loud and enthusiastic applause, thehurrahs and bravos, which were heard behind the curtain of his box. Perhaps only there, a fewfeet from the make-believe world beyond the footlights, could this shy, sad, solitary manforget his sorrows and shed his inhibitions.From Saint Petersburg I went on to Moscow. Moscow's prosperity in those days was foundedon commerce and industry. The court and the aristocracy made Saint Petersburg theirheadquarters; rich industrialists were the chief citizens of Moscow. Their wealth was derivedfrom various sources: sugar, the rapidly developing oil industry of the Caspian Sea region,and piece goods from the cotton factories of Moscow. They bore a considerable similarity tothe same powerful capitalist class in the United States. They lived in magnificent style; theirhouses were virtually palaces and museums, for, like the nobles of Saint Petersburg, many ofthese merchant princes were connoisseurs of the arts. I noticed, incidentally, that Moscow'stastes seemed more catholic than Saint Petersburg's; my favorite French impressionists had tosome extent taken their fancy, whereas in Saint Petersburg all the paintings that I saw were ofthe classical schools.The gulf between rich and poor was truly appalling. I took some trouble to study laborconditions in the mills and textile factories; they resembled in many ways Bombay's cottonmills, but conditions in them were infinitely worse. I have no hesitation in saying that, poor,miserable and ill-fed as were the Bombay mill hands of those days, they looked happier andlivelier than the Moscow workers of the same sort. In Bombay you could at least see smiles;every Moscow mill hand looked drawn, haggard and tired to death. Yet I doubt if either in thematter of wages or diet the Moscow worker was worse off than his Bombay counterpart. Thereason for the difference lay, I think in one simple fact -- the climate. In his hours off work,for at least eight months of the year, the Bombay mill hand, however poor and downtrodden,could walk in the fresh air, could see the sun and the moon and the stars. For eight months ofthe year life for the Moscow worker, on the other hand, was only possible indoors -- in thehot, steamy atmosphere of the mill or in an overheated, overcrowded little room in one of thegreat, grim barracklike buildings that served so many of them as homes.An odd custom prevailed in those days in the public baths of Russia's great cities -- I visitedone in Moscow, so I am not talking from hearsay -- in the administration of what were knownas Russian steam baths, really very like our Turkish baths. The attendants who looked afteryou, who gave you your soap and your towels, massaged you, looked after all your wants,were women -- but elderly and of so plain and sour a visage that it would have been utterlyimpossible to imagine even the slightest misbehavior with them. Nor, I was assured, didmisbehavior occur. This was simply regarded as useful employment for women past middleage; and no one -- except the raw foreign visitor like myself -- thought it in the slightestdegree unusual.While I was still in Russia the first match was set to the conflagration that soon was to engulfthe whole world. The Balkan Wars -first the attack by a combination of small Balkancountries on the Ottoman Empire, and then their ferocious quarrels with each other -- werenot then merely localized conflicts, which many tried to convince themselves that they were;in fact they were unmistakable indications of what was to come. Turkey, whose internaldifficulties and troubles had accumulated and deepened in recent years, reeled undersuccessive blows from her enemies. Day after day news of fresh disasters reached the outsideworld. By the time I returned to Paris and before I left for India the extent of Turkey's plightwas obvious; it seemed to be only a matter of time before her foes had her completely at theirmercy. The feelings of Muslim India, indeed of the whole Islamic world, were deeply stirred.I made as much haste as I could to get back to Bombay. My closest political friends andassociates were active on behalf of the Turks. An organization had been set up, representingall branches of Muslim opinion in India and including many of those most closely concernedwith Aligarh, the purpose of which was to render all possible assistance to Turkey and tobring maximum pressure to bear on the British Government in order that Britain's influenceshould be exerted in the Concert of Europe to make defeat tolerable and honorable for theTurks. A practical gesture of help had been made in the equipment and dispatch to the wararea of a Red Crescent medical mission, led by Dr. Ansari -- one of India's outstandingmedical practitioners. This was the kind of worthwhile, humane work which I was happy tosupport. I contributed too to Turkey's war loans; but I found myself involved in a distressingdifference of opinion with the majority of my Muslim brethren in India over our attitudetoward this conflict -- a difference of opinion which, I am sorry to say, disrupted for sometime the hitherto close and intimate associations, in thought and action, which had subsistedbetween myself and other Muslim leaders in India.We were giving as much aid as we could to Turkey, but how much, in fact, did it amount to?The honest answer was -- very little. We were not, of course, our own masters; and our realinfluence on British policy toward the whole Turco-Balkan issue was negligible. TheGovernment lent a courteous if distant ear to our earnest supplications, but they could wellafford to pay no practical attention to us. British opinion in general about the OttomanEmpire -- "the Sick Man of Europe," as portrayed by the political cartoonists of Punch andother papers -- was at best lukewarm. The European political situation was tense andprecarious. Britain's friends in the Concert of Europe -- France, Russia and to a lesser extentItaly -- were anything but pro-Turkish, and the main concern of all of them was to avoid anopen breach with Germany and Austria. A delicate but chilly policy of nonintervention wasthe furthest that Britain was willing to go. But the general run of Muslim opinion in India wasfar more fiery; the honor and integrity of Islam were at stake; and we should urge the Turksto hold on, to face every risk and accept every sacrifice and to carry the war on to the utmostend.Fine sentiments, but I demurred from them. I pointed out that it was not really in our power tohelp the Turks; great and generous as our emotions doubtless were, we were quite incapableat that time of turning our feelings into action. To call on the Turks to stand, fight and die forthe cause of Islam, to the last piastre and the last Turk, while we survived was unfair andunjust to the Turks. Far from helping them, it was actually worsening their plight.I did not mince my words. I gave an interview along these lines to The Times of India, themost widely read and most responsible newspaper in the subcontinent. I observed that it wasall very well to send heartening telegrams to the Turks: GO ON, FIGHT ON! DO NOTACCEPT DEFEAT, WHATEVER THE SACRIFICE! But we who had sent the telegramcould then go home and sleep soundly in our peaceful beds. These were not popularcomments, and they evoked a storm of protest from Muslims all over India. However, as suchstorms will, it passed, and soon enough this controversy was forgotten in the whirlwind ofperils and problems of the First World War.VIIIThe First World WarTHE EARLY MONTHS of 1914 found me on another visit to Burma. I then took a step ofsome importance in respect to my Ismaili followers. I advised them to undertake aconsiderable measure of social and cultural assimilation. Burma, although annexed to theBritish Empire and at this time under the control of the India Office, was a country in whichnational, patriotic sentiment was strong, and nationalism a spontaneous, natural andcontinuous growth. I was convinced that the only prudent and proper policy for my followerswas to identify themselves as closely as possible with the life of Burma socially andpolitically, to give up their Indo-Saracen names, habits and customs and to adopt,permanently and naturally, those of the people alongside whom they lived, and whose destinythey shared.From Burma I made a brief trip to Europe in that last spring and early summer of the oldepoch; and thence I went to East Africa. Somewhat to my surprise and greatly to the distressand indignation of my followers there, the authorities in German East Africa requested menot to visit their territory. While I was on my way to Africa, the Archduke Francis Ferdinandand his wife were assassinated in the little Bosnian border town of Sarajevo; and the casusbelli had been provided. By the time I reached Zanzibar the situation had become critical; inthe last days of July and the first days of August there was an exchange of ever graver andmore grave telegrams. Russia and Germany were at war; the Germans invaded Belgium; andon August fourth Britain declared war on Germany. I had no hesitations, no irresolution.Ambitions, aspirations, hopes and interests narrowed down to one or two intensely personal,solitary decisions. I had one overruling emotion -- to go to England as fast as I could andoffer my services in whatever capacity they could best be used. I was in good health; I wasstill young and strong; my place was with the British. I returned immediately and withoutcomment the insignia of the Prussian Order of the Crown (First Class), which the Kaiser hadconferred on me. I telegraphed instructions to my followers in and on the borders of allBritish territories that they were to render all possible help and support to the Britishauthorities in their area. I offered my personal services to the British Resident in Zanzibar,and I took the first steps in organizing, from among members of the Indian community, atransport corps to assist in maintaining communications from the coast to the interior. Then Imade haste to get to England. There were rumors -- well-founded as it proved -- of a Germansea-raider at large in the Indian Ocean, and the authorities in Zanzibar asked me not to go toMombasa as I had intended and thence to England by the first available ship, but to proceedby way of South Africa. From the Union I got passage to England, and I was in London bymid-September. I had had no practical military experience, so it seemed to me that myimmediate contribution to the war effort was likely to be humble. I volunteered for service inthe ranks in any unit in the British or Indian Army. I called on Lord Kitchener, the Secretaryof State for War, whom I had known well in India and with whom I had served on theViceroy's Legislative Council more than a decade earlier; I urged that I should be enlisted asa private in the Indian contingent then on its way to the Western Front.Kitchener, however, whose knowledge and experience of the East were massive andprofound, had other views as to the sort of service I could render. He was fully cognizant ofboth the perils and the possibilities latent in the involvement of Eastern, predominantlyIslamic, peoples in a conflict of these dimensions. Germany's intrigues and influence inConstantinople had greatly increased in recent years; the great dream of a German hegemonyextending from Berlin to Baghdad was one of the many fantasies on which Germanimperialist thinkers and teachers had dwelt eagerly and lovingly. The Turkish Governmentseemed deeply disrupted and drained of the capacity to take independent and effectivedecisions of its own. For Britain it was essential to retain control over the then vital artery ofEmpire: the seaway through the Mediterranean, the Suez Canal, the Red Sea and the IndianOcean, which led not only to India but to Australia and New Zealand and to the Colonialterritories of Southeast Asia. In all this complex of political and strategic needs andobligations, it seemed to the British Government that I held a position of considerableimportance. Soldiering in the ranks was not, Kitchener gave me firmly to understand, for me.Most significant of all, it had not passed unnoticed by the British Government that I had wonand held the respect and trust of many important Turks. Lord Kitchener requested me to useall my influence with the Turks to persuade them not to join the Central Powers, and topreserve their neutrality. I discovered that Kitchener was by no means alone in his idea of thesort of employment to which I could best be put. His opinion was shared and supported bythe Secretary of State for India, by the Foreign Secretary, Sir Edward Grey, and by the PrimeMinister, Mr. Asquith. Indeed even the King, when I had the honor of lunching with him,referred to it.Therefore while overtly I busied myself with rallying young Indians in England -- of whomthere were considerable numbers -to volunteer for the Indian Field Ambulance Corps, and inraising a comforts fund for them, discreetly and urgently I got in touch with the TurkishAmbassador, Tawfiq Pasha. At my request he sent an invitation to the Young Turks, who hadassumed power in Turkey's revolution of 1908, to send a ministerial delegation to London toenter into direct negotiations with His Majesty's Government. Britain was prepared, on herown behalf and on behalf of Russia and her other allies, to give Turkey full guarantees andassurances for the future.We had high hopes of bringing off what would have been, fromevery point of view, adiplomatic victory of first-rate importance. I was quite aware that my own emotions weredeeply involved. As a Muslim I was most anxious that Turkey should be spared the trials andthe horrors of renewed war, not against a ramshackle alliance of small Balkan states, butagainst the mighty combination of some of the greatest industrial and military nations in theworld. The Turks had but lately emerged from their earlier ordeal; they were in desperateneed of a breathing space; it seemed impossible that they could enter a new struggle and notface almost illimitable catastrophe. It had to be admitted that the Turks were justifiablysuspicious of "guarantees," however specific, offered by the Western Powers; they had hadtoo recent and too rueful an experience of similar guarantees which seemed to them promisesmade only to be broken. Yet even allowing for the most cynically realistic appreciation of thesituation, as it existed in the last months of 1914, neutrality (which was all the WesternPowers asked of Turkey) would have given the Young Turks the time they needed in whichto carry out their program of social, economic and military reform.Tawfiq Pasha was a key figure in our approaches. He had been for many years the SultanAbdul Hamid's Foreign Minister. The Young Turk Revolution had displaced him from thatoffice; nevertheless the new regime maintained their trust in a most experienced and capablestatesman. In London and other Western capitals he was held in the highest esteem.Venerable, sage and shrewd, he was a good friend of mine; he and I trusted each otherimplicitly. What was even more important, he was in full agreement with my attitude in thisbusiness.He took occasion immediately, however, to warn me that our negotiations would have had amuch greater chance of success if the Allies had asked Turkey to come in on their side ratherthan proposed mere neutrality, for which at the end of the conflict nobody would thank her.He went on to say that he was convinced also that Russia would never agree to Turkey'sjoining the Allies, as such a step would put an end to all Russia's hopes of expansion atTurkey's expense, either in the northeast, around Erzerum, or southward from the Black Sea.In confidence I communicated these observations to Lord Kitchener. Within a few hours hetold me that the Allies had no desire to bring Turkey into the war on their side. In view of thispreliminary exchange, we entered negotiations under a considerable handicap. Nevertheless Iwas an optimist for several days, and my optimism seemed far from groundless.Suddenly it became known that two German warships, the Goeben and the Breslau, hadevaded Allied naval vigilance and were lying at anchor off Constantinople. Their presencedrastically altered the whole situation. The Turks accorded them hospitality and protection.They were a visible sign of German naval vigor and capacity. Combined with the remarkablemoral ascendancy which had been established in Constantinople by the German MilitaryMission, under its extremely able and resolute commander, General Liman von Sanders, theships presented the gravest possible menace to our hopes -- lately so high -- of maintainingTurkish neutrality. By the close of 1914 the Central Powers were confident of a quick victoryon their own terms; an elderly Prussian general named von Hindenburg had inflicted acrushing defeat on the immensely gallant but incompetently led Russian armies in themarshes of Tannenberg in East Prussia; in the west the German armies, held almost withinthe sight of Paris, had stabilized themselves along that six hundred-mile front which, withpitiably little variation and at appalling cost of life on both sides, was to be maintained untilAugust, 1918; a solitary cruiser, the Emden, at large in the Indian Ocean, had inflictedspectacular shipping losses on the Allies, and turned up impudently in Madras Roads.Tragically misled by all these signs and portents dangled before their eyes by the exultantGermans, the Turkish Government took the irrevocable step of declaring war on Russia. Thisautomatically involved the Ottoman Empire in war with Great Britain and France.To a strategist like Churchill this decision offered an opportunity (which was never fullyseized) of ending the slaughterous deadlock on the Western Front and of striking at Germanyand Austria from the southeast. To me at that moment it was a shattering blow. Its sharpnessand severity were mortifying in the extreme; and when the Turkish Government, striving toput a respectable and popular façade on what was in fact unprovoked, inexcusableaggression, proclaimed this a jehad, a holy war against Christendom, my distress anddisappointment crystallized into bitter resentment against the irreligious folly of Turkey'srulers. My resentment was given a razor edge by my knowledge of how near we had been tosuccess in our negotiations. The fruit was just about to be plucked from the tree when notmerely the tree but the whole garden was blown to pieces.I reacted strongly. I joined with other Muslim leaders in an earnest appeal to the wholeIslamic world to disregard the socalled jehad, to do their duty and stand loyally with andbeside the Western Allies -- especially Britain and France in whose overseas possessions theMuslim population could be counted in many millions. On my own responsibility I publisheda manifesto setting out my view of the grievous error committed by Turkey. I pointed out thatthe Ottoman Government and such forces as it would dispose of were bound to be regardedas pawns in Germany's aggressive, imperialist strategy; that in declaring war on Britain andthe Allies the Turks were acting under the orders of their German masters; and that the Sultanand his advisers had been compelled by German officers and other non-Muslims to take thisstep. I stressed the fact that neither Turkey in particular nor Islam in general need have anyapprehension about the purely defensive actions of the Western Powers."The British and Russian Empires and the French Republic," I said, "have offered toguarantee Turkey all her territories in complete independence on the sole condition that sheremain neutral. Turkey is the trustee of Islam, and the whole world is content to let her holdthe holy cities in her keeping. All men must see that Turkey's position was not imperiled inany way and that she has not gone to war for the cause of Islam or in defense of herindependence. Thus our only duty as Muslims is to remain loyal, faithful and obedient to ourtemporal and secular allegiance."It is not, I think, an unjustifiable claim that these words of mine, coming when they did andwhence they did, had a genuine and steadying effect when it was needed. The vast majorityof Muslim subjects of the Western Powers faithfully preserved their allegiance; Muslimsoldiers fought and died alongside their Christian comrades on battlefields all over the world.The whole ugly idea of a jehad, manufactured and exploited by the Kaiser and his advisersfor their own purposes, collapsed and little more was heard of it after the early months of1915.However, I do still regard the failure of our attempt to open my negotiations with the SublimePorte in the last months of 1914 as a tragic turning point in modern history. Had Turkeyremained neutral, the history of the Near East and of the whole Islamic world, in the pastforty years, might have been profoundly different. What had been Islam's natural center andrallying point for hundreds of years, the Sultanate in Constantinople, was destroyed. Turkey,as we shall see later, emerged from her tribulations under the inspiring leadership of MustafaKemal, restored and purified in spirit, but shorn of her Empire. Millions of Arabs, who hadlived for centuries under the tolerant suzerainty of the Turks, discovered, not only on the highplateau of central Arabia but in the lands of the fertile crescent, the joys and sorrows, thedifficulties and the ardors of nationalism. And the British Empire, in the years from 1918 on,fell heir -- by accident rather than by intention -- to that Near and Middle Eastern hegemonyso long exercised by the Ottoman Empire; and to vilayet and pashalik succeeded mandatorygovernment. French involvement in Syria, the Greek adventures and disasters in Asia Minor,the clash of Zionism and Arab aspirations, Ibn Saud's carving of a new kingdom in Arabia,the emergence of the Sharifi family from a local chieftainship in Mecca to the foundation ofruling dynasties in two kingdoms -- all these complex consequences and many more were toflow from the Young Turks' rejection, under German pressure, of the advances made to themat the end of 1914.Kitchener, whatever doubts may have begun to make themselves felt in early 1915 as to hiscapacity to organize and conduct Britain's war effort in the West, was certainly alert to everycontingency in the East. It was not long before he sent for me with another proposal, for adiplomatic or quasi-diplomatic task, which had Cabinet backing, and indeed the personalapproval and interest of King George V. This concerned Egypt, where the political situationwas confused and delicate. Kitchener himself had been peremptorily recalled to take up hisduties at the War Office, when he was about to board the cross-Channel steamer on his wayback to his post as British Representative in Cairo. Egypt was nominally part of the domainof the Ottoman Emperor, the Khedive was nominally his viceroy. This status had beenpreserved -- in name, though in nothing else -- after the British Occupation in 1882. As everyEgyptian statesman and politician for many years past has had occasion to point out timeswithout number, the British Occupation of Egypt was always said -- by the British -- to bepurely temporary. Yet somehow in defiance of logic and in defiance of promises andundertakings, it continued; until in the early years of this century, as I have recorded in anearlier chapter, Egypt looked to all intents and purposes like a British colony.In the First World War, as in the Second World War, Egypt was a military base of the higheststrategic and logistical importance for Britain and her allies. By the beginning of 1915 thenumber of British, Indian and Dominion troops stationed in Egypt was large and growingsteadily. Alexandria was a great naval harbor and dockyard. The Suez Canal was a vitalstrategic waterway. On its Sinai banks, however, although Sinai was theoretically part ofEgypt, were units of the Turkish Army, whose role at this time was purely static anddefensive. But British strategic thinking had not cast Egypt for any quiescent, nonactive role.It was to be the base whence every offensive against Turkey was to be launched. Alreadythousands of transports were bringing to Alexandria, Port Said, Kantara and Ismailia the menfrom Britain, from Australia and New Zealand and from India, who were to fight and die,with unforgettable heroism and to no avail, on a barren, rocky little peninsula that guardedthe European shore of the Dardanelles Straits leading to Constantinople. As great a degree ofcertainty and stability as possible in Egypt's internal political situation was, from the militarypoint of view, a prerequisite if this huge operational base was to be preserved in good order.The confusion began at the top. There was no Egyptian political leader of any caliber, and theKhedive himself, Abbas Hilmi, was in, of all places, Constantinople. Since he had notreturned to Egypt when called, it was perhaps inevitable that Allied opinion should believehim to be pro-German and that Allied propaganda should portray him as such in the crudestterms. However, I came to know Abbas Hilmi well in later years during his long exile inEurope, and I am convinced that he was wronged and misjudged. I developed a real affectionfor him and a real admiration for the clarity and brilliance of his intellect. He told me what Iam convinced was the true story of his "defection." Shortly before the Turkish declaration ofwar, he was attacked by a would-be assassin and wounded in the face and jaw. For the rest ofhis life he carried the heavy scar which was the effect of this attack.From 1920 until his sudden death at the end of the Second World War, I saw a great deal ofAbbas Hilmi and we became very firm friends. He had a beautiful yacht called Nimat Ullahwhich was more or less his home on the Riviera during the winter months and the earlyspring; and he usually spent the late spring and summer in Paris and Switzerland. I oftenlunched with him aboard the Nimat Ullah, and in Switzerland I saw a great deal of him. Ofone thing I am convinced; he was never anti-British, and he had the greatest affection for hisEnglish friends. Naturally when he was Khedive he greatly resented the fact that, without anylegal right or authority and no moral claim to power and prestige, the British occupationauthorities were treating his country as a colony and he himself more or less as a glorifiedmaharajah. This brought him constantly into conflict with Lord Cromer, who was in factthough not in name the absolute ruler of Egypt. However, he always told me that Cromer wasa great gentleman, that his word was his bond and that however bitter their personal relationsbecause of their political differences, he for his part never lost his respect for Lord Cromer.With Lord Kitchener the personal differences had led to bitterness, and he never forgaveKitchener for the strife between them. He told me that he thought it most unfortunate thatLord Kitchener was never grateful to him for having helped him to become Sirdar of theEgyptian Army at the beginning. When Kitchener's predecessor retired, there were two orthree candidates for the post; and Abbas Hilmi maintained that he himself sent a telegram toQueen Victoria particularly asking for Kitchener's appointment.He told me that had he not been wounded, he would certainly have escaped fromConstantinople. He had no wish nor desire to remain, and as soon as he got better he wantedto go to Egypt; but the British authorities were by no means keen to have him there. It was hisopinion that while he was shown that he was not wanted, he was at the same time made thescapegoat. However there was no bitterness toward the English either as a people or asindividuals. He accepted the whole episode as a game of cricket in which he had been theloser; and as a good sportsman he said, "The game is over and done with -- now let's have adrink together."Though he was a good Muslim, a real believer who said his prayers regularly, he also had agreat admiration for the Catholic hierarchy and was in touch with them in Paris; and I believethat his donations to their charities and good works were on a large scale. He always told methat the Church of Rome could do far more for their friends when they were in trouble thanany freemasonry. He was a brilliant financier; he made a large fortune for himself even afterhe had lost the greater part of his original capital in Egypt. He had, however, a curious trait.After his death it became apparent that he had often put his money on the wrong horse.Shrewdly suspicious of all respectable bankers, high-class agents de change on the Continentor stockbrokers in England, he was yet capable of being taken in by a lot of fourth-rateintriguers, and he would hand over large sums of money to them for all kinds of wild-gooseprojects. Apart from this, he had some extremely doubtful characters in his entourage --hangers-on who won his confidence, goodness knows how. I believe that after his death hisheirs found that he was nothing like as rich as he had been and that a considerable portion ofhis fortune had disappeared. I think I can explain how this must have happened. Before andduring the Second World War he often told me that in view of the uncertainty of the futureand the possible difficulties of movement or of getting control of his investments in Americaor Canada or even in South America (though he knew all the tricks of forming holdingcompanies in harmless places such as Cuba or Tangiers and transferring large blocks ofstocks and securities to them), he felt that he might be stranded in wartime without getting thebenefits of his investments. He dreaded the possibility of years of want and difficulty inwhich, like Midas, he might be full of gold and yet die of hunger.In telling me these things he was really advising me to follow his example. I asked himtherefore how he got around it. Was it by having a considerable part of his fortune with himin safes and vaults? Naturally I pointed out that bank notes in such amounts in wartime wouldbe a real hindrance, whereas gold in the quantities that he wanted would be too heavy and notpracticable except for comparatively small sums. Ah, he said, but the finest type of jewelry --that which is the very best and free from taint -- like gold maintains its value. If it is perfect --large or small -- jewelry can always find a purchaser; and it has the advantage that itspossessor has a large fortune at his disposal wherever he happens to be. I naturally concludedfrom this argument that he had vast sums invested in jewelry, particularly since he frequentlyurged me to do likewise.He died of heart failure suddenly about three o'clock one morning in an apartment in Geneva;and it was not until much later, about mid-morning, that people came and opened his variousboxes and vaults. I naturally informed his son and his heir of what he had told me abouthaving large amounts of jewelry with him, but to my surprise and rather to my distress hisson told me that they found nothing except small amounts of cash. There are two possiblesolutions: first, that if he had had the jewelry he had sold it at the end of the Second WorldWar when he thought there was no immediate possibility of a third war, or, second, that it hadvanished during the hours between his death and the official opening of his personal effects.To return to his miscalculations in 1914-1915, in the fog of war the Allies could not beexpected to have any accurate knowledge either of Abbas Hilmi's real views or intentions, orof the way in which those intentions were frustrated. The result in Egypt, however, wassomething near chaos; the confusion was deepest about Muslim opinion, and for the reasonswhich I have outlined it was essential to maintain the internal security of Egypt.My mission therefore was to clarify and stabilize opinion. I was asked to take a colleaguewith me, and I therefore turned to an old and dear friend, Sir Abbas Ali Baig, who was thenthe Indian member of the permanent Council which advised the Secretary of State for India inLondon. We set off for Cairo as soon as we could; and we were received there with almostroyal honors. We were there as the official guests of the British Commander in Chief; and weaddressed ourselves forthwith to a delicate and difficult task, with many ramifications intomany levels of Egyptian society.First there was the palace to be won over, or rather the principal personages in the Egyptianruling dynasty. There was the Sultan who had been nominated in Abbas Hilmi's absence;there was his brother, Prince Fuad, who later became King Fuad I, who had both German andItalian affiliations; there were several other influential princes, and most important of all theSultan's son who was married to the Khedive's sister. There were the Ulema, the Muslimdivines who were the heads of Al Azhar University, the great, intensely conservative andtraditional theological school which is a center of religious life not only in Egypt but in thewhole of Islam. And there were the ordinary people of Egypt -- the literate who sit in theircafes endlessly and eagerly discussing every edition of every newspaper, and the villages andpeasants, the fellahin who from time immemorial have been the real source of Egypt'sstrength.We conceived of our task as one of explanation and exhortation. We had to convince those towhom we spoke, in private as well as in public, that not only their interest but their duty, asgood Muslims, lay in supporting and sustaining the cause of the Allies. I could, of course,speak with authority, from recent and personal knowledge; I pointed out that the Turks hadhad every possible chance of fair terms from the Allies, that Great Britain and France werewilling to exert all their influence on Russia to safeguard Turkey's interests for the future, andmost important of all, that neutrality would have given Turkey that breathing space sheneeded. While Europe was engaged on its grim process of selfdestruction, Turkey wouldhave had time to reorganize the whole loose, vast system of provincial administration, toconciliate the increasing discontent of the Arab nationalists, and to carry out all those social,political and economic reforms which would have strengthened and unified the Empire. Allthese advantages had been lost in a single gambler's throw; gamblers, after all, are notwinners, and history shows that political punters have as little chance of success as punters onthe racecourse or at the casino.Our mission produced the effects for which we had hoped. The internal stability of Egyptthroughout the First World War and the assistance that this tranquillity gave to the Allieswere factors of notable and continuing importance right up to the time of General Allenby'sfinal victorious advance across Palestine and Syria to Aleppo and the foothills of theAnatolian mountains.From Egypt I made my way to India, having visited the Indian forces -- already ofconsiderable strength -- who were encamped in the Canal Zone, having encouraged them(many, of course, were Muslims) and having exhorted them to do their duty, to fight loyallyfor the King-Emperor, the Sovereign to whose service they were bound by oath. In India Irealized -- by the volume of enthusiastic praise and thanks that greeted me, from the Viceroydownward -- that we had done a good job. One particularly agreeable personal consequenceof this mission to Egypt was the strengthening of my affection for Sir Abbas Ali Baig, whobecame and thenceforward remained one of my closest, lifelong friends. In a new generationhis sons, incidentally, are no less distinguished public servants than he was; one is nowPakistan's Minister in Moscow and the other, formerly permanent head of the Foreign Officein Karachi, is now High Commissioner in Ottawa.Later in the year I went back to London, and once more was heartened by the sense ofsuccess in our mission in Egypt. The Kinghimself, the Prime Minister and other members ofthe Cabinet thanked me warmly, and I was genuinely gratified to feel that I had been of realservice.In April 1916, His Majesty accorded me an honor of very special personal significance. Hesanctioned the grant to me of a salute of eleven guns and the rank and precedence of a FirstClass Ruling Prince of the Bombay Presidency. The end of the Indian Empire, and the vastpolitical and social changes consequent on that passing, have deprived this gesture of anycontemporary meaning, but in the circumstances and conditions of 1916 it was a high honorand a most generous and thoughtful action on the part of the King. The salute granted to aRuling Prince, and the number of guns in it, was an important matter of precedence andprestige; there was only one previous instance of such a salute being granted to anyone whowas not a territorial Prince, and that was to Sir Salar Jung, the Prime Minister of Hyderabad,who in 1857 was chiefly responsible for keeping Central India and the Deccan loyal toBritish authority. The Times, commenting on this honor in an editorial, observed: "It hasfallen to the Aga Khan to serve in vastly wider fields than Sir Salar Jung and to exert muchmore than local or provincial influence in a crisis of British rule even greater than that of themutiny."Inevitably sorrow and loss came, as the result of war, to me and to my family, as to so manyother families across the width of the world in those harsh times. My cousin, Aga FarrokhShah, while engaged at my request on a political mission to the tribes and my own Ismailifollowers in Kerman, was assassinated at the instigation of German agents. India's losses onthe battlefield in Flanders and in Mesopotamia were grievous. I myself was laid low with adifficult, painful and protracted illness. Early in 1916 I began to be aware of considerableocular distress and difficulty; my pulse was extremely irregular, and although I was on nodiet and was eating well, I began to lose weight rapidly. A physician in Paris diagnosed mymalady as Graves' disease, of which the symptoms were protruding eyes and a small goiter. Iwent to Switzerland to the famous Dr. Kocher at Berne, who was the greatest contemporaryauthority on all forms of goiter, to see if my case was operable. After I had been underobservation in a Swiss sanatorium for several weeks, I was told that it was inoperable.Frankly I seemed to be going downhill fast; for eighteen months and more I stayed inSwitzerland, making no progress at all but rather deteriorating steadily.Suddenly the British Government took urgent and alarmed cognizance of what subsequentlybecame known, in Swiss legal history, as the affair of the Lucerne bomb. The German SecretService did not believe that I was really ill. They thought, however, that their country's causewould be well served were I put out of the way for good. They arranged to have a bombthrown at me; and to make the operation certain of success they also arranged, with typicalGerman thoroughness, to have my breakfast coffee poisoned. The bomb did not go off; I didnot drink the coffee. For years after the war ended the Swiss painstakingly investigated thewhole episode and the inquiry attained a good deal of notoriety at the time. In 1917, however,all that the British Government saw fit to do was to request me to leave Switzerland. So Ireturned to Paris.My host of friends there, including those of the American colony to whom I have referredelsewhere, were thoroughly shocked and alarmed; I was (so they told me later) in their view alost case. For myself, I still kept hope -- though it flickered feebly. It seemed to me that manyfamous doctors had seen me in Switzerland and in France. All kinds of treatments, batteriesof drugs, had been tried on me to no avail. Then a Professor Pierremarie examined me andproduced a startlingly novel diagnosis. I had not been suffering from goiter at all. He began afresh line of treatment, and within a year I was thoroughly on the mend. One effect remained,however, in that my eyes never quite resumed their normal position.However, this long illness meant that I was of necessity withdrawn from all public activityfor more than three years, until the summer of 1919.It was a long seclusion which I ameliorated slightly in its later stages by writing a book,called India in Transition, which set forth my views on the future of India and of all SoutheastAsia, and to which I shall have occasion to refer later.Part ThreeTHE MIDDLE YEARSIXThe End of the Ottoman EmpireTHE WORLD to which I, restored at last to health and eager to get back into harness again,returned in that summer of 1919 had undergone vast and far-reaching changes in the threeyears of my seclusion: the collapse of the Czarist regime in Russia, and the passage grantedby the Germans to Lenin and his fellow conspirators to let them loose in their native land; theTreaty of Brest-Litovsk; the complete defeat of the Central Powers on all fronts in 1918; theabdication of the Kaiser and the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire; the emergence of themilitant Socialist revolutions in sundry European countries; in the Near and Middle East theend of the Ottoman Empire. President Wilson seemed in those months an almost apocalypticfigure of deliverance, with his doctrine of "selfdetermination" for all peoples. Everywhere thewar had unleashed huge tides of political feeling which were not to be smoothed or subdued.The peacemakers assembled in Paris to contemplate, with profoundly mingled andcomplicated emotions, a world scene bristling with difficulties and dangers, an awe-inspiringchaos which the peoples of many nations looked to them to resolve immediately and tidilyinto an ordered millennium. Relief at the end of the long, bloodstained nightmare of the warmingled with a naïve but vigorous optimism. Peace was to usher in an epoch of unmarredpolitical, social and economic tranquillity. Even so august a figure as my old friend, LordCurzon, then Leader of the House of Lords, was affected by the prevailing mood, and in hisspeech in the House of Lords, in November, 1918, announcing the Armistice he intoned withfervor Shelley's lines which begin: "The world's great age begins anew."India was far from unaffected by all that had happened. In 1917 when the conflict was at itssternest, there was a general feeling in Britain, official and unofficial, that India's contributionto the Empire's war effort, the valor of her soldiers, the staunchness of her leaders and people,earned more than formal recognition. On the strong recommendation of the Viceroy and ofthe Secretary of State for India, Edwin Montagu, the Government on August 20, 1917,published a statement of its aims in respect to India."The policy of His Majesty's Government," said this statement, "is that of increasingassociation of Indians in every branch of the administration and the gradual development ofself-governing institutions with a view to the progressive realization of responsiblegovernment in India as an integral part of the British Empire."This was a momentous pronouncement. It marked the explicit commitment of the then BritishGovernment and its successors to a radical departure from what, in conflict with theprinciples of the Act of 1833, had grown to be the basic and accepted purposes of British rulein India. In the earlier schemes of administrative reform, the Cross-Lansdowne proposals ofthe 1890's and the Morley-Minto of the early 1900's, there had been no hint of any intentionto transfer fundamental power and responsibility from British to Indian hands; self-government in India had never been mentioned. Now, there it was in words that all couldread. I have been told that in the original draft which went to the Cabinet the words "self-government" were used; Lord Curzon -- of all people -changed them to "responsiblegovernment." He thus made it inevitable that when the constitutional reforms to implementthe declaration were introduced, they took the pattern which came to be known as "dyarchy";for the word "responsible" implies in those who exercise it, responsibility to someone -- towhom? To Governor or Viceroy, and thus to Britain and British Parliament, or to the Indianelectorate and people? Dyarchy, workable compromise though it was sometimes made, wasbound to present this dilemma to ministers, both in the provinces and at the center. It was theexpression, in terms of practical and day-to-day administration of that almost schizophrenicduality of outlook -- that split between ideal intention and workaday application -- whichhenceforth characterized the British attitude toward India. Schizophrenia is not a basis forhappy relations; in it, however, is to be found much of the explanation of the estrangement,deepening to embittered hostility which ended only, and then with miraculous swiftness andcompleteness, with the final and total withdrawal of British rule in India.In 1919 all this lay in the future, and I for my part was taken up with a wider, bolder vision inwhich -- formulated first in my book, India in Transition -- I sought to interest everyone whohad any responsibility for Indo-British relations, principally, of course, Edwin Montagu, theSecretary of State. Edwin Montagu was a Jew, totally assimilated into the British pattern andway of life, brilliant and lovable, a member of that interlocked Montagu-Samuel-IsaacsAnglo-Jewish group of families which has made so notable a contribution to British life inthe past half century.I was eager in 1919 that under British inspiration and guidance there should be built up aSouth Asian federation of self-governing states extending from the Malayan Peninsula to theconfines of Egypt -- a federation on what may loosely be termed Commonwealth lines, andwithin the framework of the British Empire (Commonwealth, of course, was a word whichhad not come into use in 1919). It seemed to me -- it still seems to me now -- that this wasthen a feasible scheme and a better solution to world troubles than that adopted. Had theBritish Government accepted it, and had it been executed resolutely, I am certain that therewould have developed in southern Asia a strong power -- an association of powers -- inwhich healthy democratic institutions would have evolved naturally and easily and whichwould have provided effective support for Britain and (as it turned out) the United States andthe Southern Dominions in an hour of grave need and a permanent bulwark againstaggression.In a measure these proposals of mine were a fulfillment and an extension of ideas and hopeswhich had been implanted in my mind during my years of close association with Gokhale. Inthe autumn of 1914 when I hastened back to London from Africa to make as effective acontribution as I could to the war effort, I was met by Gokhale, who, though extremely ill atthe time with diabetes -- and constitutionally averse to London's mild, foggy climate -- hadprolonged his stay there in order to see me. Amid the pressure of a great deal of other work,we saw much of each other and discussed freely and frankly all our hopes and fears for India.We strove to compose a draft memorandum which we intended to address to the Governmentembodying the very large measure of agreement which we had hammered out in ourconversations.Early in 1915 Gokhale was dead. But before he died he completed his political testamentwhich he addressed to me, with the request that I should make it public in two years' time,when (as he hoped) the war might be over and India capable of facing the supreme task ofworking out her own destiny.In due course I published Gokhale's testament as he bade; and on my own behalf I added amemorandum pleading that after the war East Africa might be reserved for Indiancolonization and development in recognition of India's war services.However these were and are dreams of what might have been. History has taken a differentroad. The final scheme of reform, as it was promulgated in the Government of India Act of1919, was very different, on a far smaller scale, and limited only to India. And, alas, itproduced not the peaceful, gradual evolution, slow step by step, toward responsiblegovernment that had been hoped for, but instead a phase of extreme unrest and violentpolitical turbulence. Moderate, constitutional-minded leaders in Indian politics, such as myfriends Sir Pherozeshah Mehta and Gokhale, were dead. A new generation sought for newmethods of achieving much more farreaching aims -- and in a hurry.Even before Parliament considered the Government of India Bill, the situation in India hadtaken several turns for the worse. A committee set up under the chairmanship of Lord JusticeRowlatt to consider the juridical aspects of political agitation issued its report whichrecommended the establishment of special courts to deal with acts of sedition. The report hada hostile reception. The example of Ireland was not lost on India. Extremism on both sidestook charge. The Rowlatt Committee's recommendations were accepted by Parliament; andas soon as the bill embodying them became law Congress declared a hartal, a general strike,in protest. More than once during these harsh and distressing months, I urged restraint, notonly on the part of my followers but of the Muslim community in general; less than afortnight later, however, occurred the dreadful "Amritsar incident" which set back by manyyears any hope of constructive and abiding amity between Britain and India.The shock of this episode and the bitter memories it left behind poisoned relations for years. Isuppose that if I had been the sort of person to despair, I should have despaired then. But Iwas so actively engaged in seeking from the British Government a clear and honorable line ofconduct on a matter involving the highest political principles that despair was a luxury forwhich I had neither the will nor the time.One effect of dyarchy was that it involved the transference of a good deal of authority ininternal matters in India from the center to responsible officials in the provinces. The effectsof a centralized bureaucracy were as notable in the India Office in London as they were inSimla or New Delhi. I was asked to be a member of a committee in London charged with thetask of decentralizing and reorganizing the work of the India Office. It was mainly a matter ofclearing some of the channels by which the Secretary of State got his information anddefended his department and himself in the eyes of those to whom he was ultimatelyresponsible, the elected members of the British House of Commons. It was hard work, but itgave me a clear picture from the inside of the workings of the great administrative machineby which a modern State is conducted.It coincided, as I had indicated, with a period of strenuous political activity, in which Idirected my efforts mainly to trying to prevent the complete dismemberment of the OttomanEmpire and to establishing a peace settlement in the Near and Middle East which would benot only just and equitable but also practical.I must therefore describe in some detail the background to the swirl of political anddiplomatic work in which I was caught up. One of the countless major questions which facedthe victorious Powers in the immediate postwar period was. What was to be done about theOttoman Empire, over vast regions of which the Allies were, by the end of 1918, in militaryoccupation? It was true that the Turks retained control of their own homeland, Anatolia, andof the historic, ancient capital, Constantinople, but from Tripolitania in the west to Kurdistanin the east, from north of Aleppo to Wadi Halfa, in enormous territories whose populations,in a great diversity of races and culture but predominantly Muslim, had once owed allegianceto the Sultan of Turkey, the controlling authority was now an Allied Military Governor.In the heat of the war many promises of spoils in the hour of victory -- spoils to be torn offthe vanquished body of Turkey -- had been made; by the beginning of 1919 few were capableof fulfillment, nearly all were irreconcilable one with another. The MacMahon letters,addressed by the acting High Commissioner in Egypt in 1915 to the Sharif Husan in Mecca,could not possibly be reconciled with the Balfour Declaration issued in 1917; both conflictedsharply with the Sykes-Picot agreement, by which Britain and France shared out huge areasof the Ottoman Empire as "spheres of influence." The most flagrantly impossible undertakingof all was that Constantinople (since Czarist Russia had retained an historic interest in whathad once been the Graeco-Roman city of Byzantium) should be given to Russia. This at leastcould be ignored, since the Bolshevik leaders had made their own peace arrangements withthe Germans in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and since the Soviet regime and the WesternAllies were in a state of undisguised hostility. But for Turkey as a whole the hopes of atolerable peace settlement looked slender.Almost all the British political leaders who were to have any influence over the peacediscussions were markedly anti-Turkish. Lloyd George, the Prime Minister, was a friend andadmirer of Venizelos, the Greek leader; he saw certain similarities in historical experienceand outlook between Greece and his own Wales; he was therefore enthusiastically pro-Greek,and though not actively anti- Turkish, he was quite indifferent to the fate of the OttomanEmpire. Arthur Balfour, the signatory of the letter to Lord Rothschild announcing that it wasBritain's intention to establish a National Home in Palestine for the Jews, was openly andactively pro-Zionist, and he was also extremely prejudiced against the Turks historically andracially.Now Zionism, I may say in passing, was something of which I had had long and by no meansunsympathetic experience. My friend of the early and strenuous days in Bombay, ProfessorHaffkine, was a Zionist -- as were many other brilliant and talented Russian Jews of hisgeneration who escaped into Western Europe from the harsh and cruel conditions imposedupon them by Czarist Russia. Haffkine, like many of the earlier Zionists, hoped that somearrangement could be made with the Turkish Sultan whereby peaceful Jewish settlementcould be progressively undertaken in the Holy Land -- a settlement of a limited number ofJews from Europe (mainly from the densely populated areas then under Russian rule) inagricultural and peasant holdings; the capital was to be provided by wealthier members of theJewish community, and the land would be obtained by purchase from the Sultan's subjects.As Haffkine propounded it, I thought this sort of Zionism useful and practical. It contained nohint, of course, of the establishment of a Jewish National State, and it seemed to me worthputting before the Turkish authorities. There were, after all, precedents for populationresettlement of this kind within the Ottoman Empire, notably the Circassians -- of Muslimfaith, but of purely European blood -who were established by Abdul Hamid in villages, inwhat is today the Kingdom of Jordan, with excellent results. Abdul Hamid could well havedone with the friendship and alliance of world Jewry; and on the broader ground of principle,there is every natural reason for the Jews and the Arabs, two Semitic peoples with a greatdeal in common, to be close friends rather than the bitter enemies which unfortunately forboth sides the events of the past thirty years or so have made them. In furtherance of whatwas then a shared interest in Zionism, Haffkine gave me, when I first went to Paris in 1898,letters of introduction to a number of his Jewish friends including the savant and Rabbi ZadekKahn, * and through him I met the famous Baron Edmond de Rothschild. Baron Edmond wasa princely benefactor of the early Zionist experiments; some of the first settlements inPalestine were financed by him and owed their ultimate prosperity to his generous supportand interest. When I called on him I was introduced to his two sons, James, then anundergraduate at Cambridge, and Maurice, a boy in the uniform of a naval cadet. BaronEdmond remained my friend until his death; and for well over fifty years now both JamesRothschild and Baron Maurice de Rothschild have been good and close friends of mine.There are sometimes complications in nomenclature. Long afterward in London I wasintroduced to a well-known American society woman, Mrs. Corrigan, by a friend of minesimply as "Aga Khan" with no titles and no further explanation. Brightly smiling Mrs.Corrigan said that she was a great friend of my brother, Otto Kahn, of New York'sMetropolitan Opera House!Rabbi Kahn prepared a statement of his and his friends' ideas on Jewish settlement inPalestine. It was an elaborate plan for colonization on a scale and in a manner which wouldhave helped and strengthened Turkey; and one of its most logical claims to consideration wasthat the Ottoman Empire was not a national state but multinational and multiracial. With theRabbi's proposal I made my approaches to Abdul Hamid through Munir Pasha, the TurkishAmbassador in Paris, and through Izzet Bey, the Sultan's confidential secretary. However, thescheme, good or bad as it may have been, was turned down by the Sultan, and I heard nomore of it. I must say its rejection has always seemed to me one of Abdul Hamid's greatestblunders.But just as the defeated Turkey of 1917-1918 was a different country from the OttomanEmpire of the nineties, so the Zionism of 1917-1918 and on was, of course, a very differentmatter. And the Zionists were only one group among many, anxious to extract all they couldfrom the carve-up of Turkey. Arab nationalism was scarcely less strongly in the ascendant,and it possessed many powerful friends and zealous advocates in and near the BritishGovernment. Sir Gilbert Clayton, T. E. Lawrence and many other socalled "political officers"who had served in the Middle East had -- I must say, from my own knowledge -- encouragedArab nationalism in and out of season, sometimes openly and sometimes secretly, long beforethe fall of Turkey. The British had already established a military administration in Palestine.The French advanced the remarkable claim that they had an historic right to protect the HolyPlaces in Jerusalem. The Greeks, encouraged by another group of romantic, philhelleneEnglishmen, were in a mood of dangerous expansionism. And at the very heart of real powerin the Peace Conference, Clemenceau had no love for the Turks; and President Wilson, in theone interview which I had with him, frankly admitted that he really knew very little about thewhole problem.Almost the only support on the side of the victors that Turkey could muster was Indian. Thegreater part of Muslim interest in India in the fate of Turkey was natural and spontaneous,and there was a considerable element of sincere non-Muslim agitation, the object of which,apart from the natural revolt of any organized Asiatic body against the idea of Europeanimperialism, was further to consolidate and strengthen Indian nationalism in its struggleagainst the British.The reasons for Muslim concern were profound and historic. Turkey stood almost alone inthe world as the sole surviving independent Muslim nation, with all its shortcomings; theImperial regime in Constantinople was a visible and enduring reminder of the temporalgreatness of Islam's achievements. In the Khalifate there was too, for all of the Sunni sect orpersuasion, a spiritual link of the utmost significance. As the war drew to its close, anxietyhad intensified in India in regard to the safety of the Holy Places of Islam and the future ofthe Khalifate. Gandhi, who had succeeded my old and dear friend, Gokhale, as leader ofCongress' political movement and organization, shrewdly seized what he saw to be a chanceof maintaining and heightening anti-British sentiment throughout the whole subcontinent.The storm of agitation that swept India on this issue was formidable. The Indian delegates atthe Peace Conference, the Maharajah of Bikaner and Lord Sinha, heartily and sincerelysupported by Edwin Montagu, the Secretary of State for India, made an emphatic protestagainst the various proposals for the partition of Turkey and the practical dissolution of theKhalifate that were being eagerly canvassed around and about the conference.It had been decided to settle the fate of defeated Germany first. This thorny task wasaccomplished in considerable haste, and the Treaty of Versailles was signed on June 28,1919. Thereafter protracted discussions continued about the treatment of the other vanquishednations. My friend Syed Amir Ali and I began an energetic campaign to put the real issues, sofar as Turkey was concerned, before British and indeed world public opinion. I had privateinterviews with numerous influential statesmen, together we wrote long letters to The Times;on every possible public and private occasion we made our views known.We drew vigorous attention to certain specific pledges given by the Prime Minister, and in aletter to The Times quoted these pledges verbatim:"We are not fighting," Lloyd George had said, "to deprive Turkey of its capital or of the richand renowned lands of Asia Minor and Thrace. While we do not challenge the maintenanceof the Turkish Empire in the homelands of the Turkish race with its capital at Constantinople,the passage between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea being internationalized andneutralized, Arabia, Armenia, Mesopotamia, Syria and Palestine are in our judgment entitledto a recognition of their separate national condition."We tried to sum up the outlook of those for whom we knew we had a right to speak:What do the Muslims want? What do we plead for? Neither they nor we ask for any newstatus for Turkey. We consider it, however, our duty to urge, for the fair name of England,nay of the British Empire, that the pledge the Prime Minister in the name of England gave tothe world, and in particular to the world of Islam, should be maintained; and that the TurkishSovereign, as the Khalif of the vast Sunni congregation, should be left in absolute possessionof Constantinople, Thrace and Asia Minor stretching from the north of Syria proper along theAegean coast to the Black Sea -- a region predominantly Turkish in race. It would, in ouropinion, be a cruel act of injustice to wrench any portion of this tract from Turkishsovereignty to satisfy the ambitions of any other people.Instead of bringing peace to Western Asia, such a settlement will sow the seeds of constantwars, the effect of which cannot be expected to remain confined to the country where theyhappen to be waged. For the defection of the adventurers who dragged their stricken people,who had already undergone great misery, into the world war, Turkey has been sufficientlypunished by the secular expropriation of some of her richest provinces. But we submit thatthe maintenance of the Ottoman Sovereign' spiritual suzerainty in these countries, whilstmaintaining his prestige and thus conciliating Muslim feeling, would be the means of makingthe position of the Muslim rulers or governors of those countries unimpugnable. But so far asThrace, Constantinople and the homelands of the Turkish race are concerned, Muslim feelingis absolutely opposed to any interference under any shape with the Sultan' sovereignty.In India itself, as the months wore on, and as the time came near for signing a treaty withTurkey, the agitation grew to such proportions and was of so unanimous a character asgravely to worry the Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford and the Secretary of State, Edwin Montagu(whose personal sympathies, as I well knew, were warmly engaged on the Turkish or Asiaticside). Most of all they were disturbed at the thought that the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms,on which such high hopes had been pinned, were to be launched in practice into thisatmosphere of turbulence and hostility.In the Viceroy' Legislative Council it was proposed that I should be sent to London as theleader of a deputation to the Prime Minister, representing the views not only of Muslims butof the whole articulate population of India.The other members of the deputation were the president of the Khilafat movement, Mr.Chatani; one of India' most eminent advocates, Hassan Imam; and Dr. Ansari, a leadingmember of Congress. Lloyd George saw us, but we realized that our mission was doomed tofailure, for meanwhile the Turkish treaty, known to history as the Treaty of Sèvres, was beingprepared, with strangely little regard for the realities which, within a few years, were to shapethe Near East anew. The unfortunate Sultan was under rigorous supervision, a solitary andhelpless prisoner in Constantinople. Turkish, Arab and Greek deputations were hurrying backand forth between the Mediterranean and London. Sometimes their arguments were listenedto; often they were not. The Treaty of Sèvres was to be an imposed, not a negotiated, treaty.Constantinople was at first promised to the Greeks; then this promise was taken back. It wasat last decided that Thrace and Adrianople in European Turkey should be Greek, and Smyrnain Asia Minor. Turkey was reduced to a sort of "rump" state in the highlands of Asia Minor,with a strip of coastline along the Black Sea. There was even talk of an independent,sovereign State of Armenia in the far Northeast -- if the Russians could be persuaded tostomach it. Some sort of order was hacked out of all these conflicting claims. In August,1920, the hapless Turkish representatives appended their signatures to the document whichembodied them all.This concluded in a sense the first phase of my own campaign for a just treatment of defeatedTurkey. Before I record the events of the second phase which rapidly followed, it may beproper to consider the effect of the decisions which the peacemaking politicians took in 1919-1920, in stubborn and bland disregard of the advice which we proffered them.Muslim opposition to the break-up of the Turkish Empire had a basis -- however muchmisunderstood it may have been -- of true statesmanship and understanding of the absorbingpolitical realities of the Middle East. First we felt that the separation of the Arabs from theTurks (hailed at the time as emancipation from a tyranny, but within a few years all Arabnationalists were singing a very different tune) would not lead to the emergence of a singlestrong Arab nation extending from Egypt to Persia and from Alexandretta to Aden and theIndian Ocean. We foresaw in large measure what actually happened: the formation of anumber of small Arab nations, for many years of little more than colonial status, underBritish and French overlordship. We predicted that the Arabs would in fact merely bechanging masters, and where these masters had been Muslim Turks, they would now beChristians or (as ultimately happened in a large part of Palestine) Jews. Even now after thelapse of thirty years or more, the Arab states that succeeded the Ottoman Empire -- thoughthe ignominious protectorate and mandated status has been abolished -- are nothing but anaggregation of small kingdoms and republics, not one of them capable of standing up alone inthe face of any powerful opposition and, despite the Arab League, incapable of maintainingeither individually or collectively real resistance to the influence of Soviet Russia or theWestern democracies. Neutrality in any conflict between these two is a forlorn dream.Consider for a moment how different matters might have been had these emerged after theFirst World War a federal union of Turkey, the Arab states of the Middle East and Egypt,with a single defense force and a united foreign policy. Our instinctive Muslim faith in theidea of the continuance of Turkey as a great power had wisdom in it, for it would haveachieved practical results, in the security and the stability of the Middle East, far transcendinganything that the makeshift, haphazard policies of the years since the end of the SecondWorld War -- piecemeal withdrawal of political suzerainty by Britain, piecemeal financial,economic and military aid by the United States -- have been able to effect. Consider thedisruption and the political malaise which have been the lot of the Middle East in recentyears; consider all the unavailing effort that has gone into the attempt to build up a MiddleEast Defense Organization, in any degree paralleling NATO, and ponder how easily, howhonorably all this might have been avoided.It is, however, no use crying over spilled milk. The victors of the First World War, unlike thevictors of the Second World War, were intoxicated with their triumph and the sense of theirown victory and believed that they could build a brave new world according to their heart'desire. History was as tragically as categorically to give the lie to that belief.The Treaty of Sèvres, harsh though it was, was practically stillborn. Even by the followingspring of 1921 events had overtaken it, and it was obvious that it must be urgentlyreconsidered. A new conference was called in London. At the Viceroy' request I put theMuslim point of view to this gathering. Its sittings however proved abortive. For whateveryone in West and East alike had ignored was the emergence from the ruin of Turkey of asoldier and statesman of genius, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who in the time of their deepesttribulation had rallied his sorely stricken but indomitable people. Denied access toConstantinople, he had set up a provisional capital at Angora -- now Ankara -- high on theAnatolian plateau; he had rebuilt, re-equipped and retrained the shattered Turkish Army.Having obtained a secret understanding with Russia, he could arm his troops, and he wasassured of protection in his rear. He was thus prepared to defend his country' cause, notaround some distant conference table, but in his homeland and on the field of battle. Fewwere at first aware of the magnitude of this new development.The Greeks who, being nearest of all to the scene, should have known most, were blinded bytheir own lust for military victory and territorial expansion. Taking exception to theestablishment of the Turkish provisional government in Angora, they began an ambitious,grandiose, and as it proved, utterly disastrous series of military operations in Asia Minor.To add to the complications, the British Government became restive over their demands forthe release of certain British prisoners held in Turkey. Over this, at least, I was able by directintervention and a direct appeal to the new Turkish authorities to secure a certain relief in anincreasingly critical situation. The Turks released the prisoners, and this crisis blew over.By the late summer of 1922, however, the prospect looked blacker than ever. Mustafa Kemal'tattered but valiant armies had stood at bay in their own hill country, had stemmed the tide ofGreek invasion, and now were in the full flush of victorious advance. They captured Smyrna,the great Graeco-Levantine port on the coast of Asia Minor, put it to the sack, and before theeyes of the crews of Allied warships lying in the harbor, set whole areas of it on fire. It wasthe Greek army now which was a tattered, defeated remnant in flight. Mustafa Kemal' forcesstood at the gates of Constantinople and demanded the right of free, unimpeded passage toreoccupy Thrace and Adrianople.The whole situation was both ominous and confused. A mixed Allied military force, underthe command of a British General, Sir Charles Harington, held Chanak and the approaches toConstantinople, which the Turks had already renamed Istanbul. A vigilant, cautious butresolute man, Harington awaited orders from London. A single reckless or inconsideredaction on his part, even a stray shot developing into a fusillade, might precipitate a generalconflict a little less than four years after the cease fire at the end of the First World War. Butthe character of the military commander on the spot was not the only factor in this grave anddelicate crisis. The British Government was in a curiously unrealistic and bellicose mood. Along, trying period of industrial unrest, with a protracted coal strike and a huge roll ofunemployed, had been succeeded by the difficult and involved negotiations which ended theworst of the "troubles" in Ireland and which were clinched by the signing of the Irish treaty.But Lloyd George' second Coalition Government, returned to power with a huge majority inthe "coupon" election of 1918, had run its course. The Liberals had never really forgivenLloyd George for his brusque ousting of Asquith in December, 1916, in the central politicalcrisis of the war. The Conservatives supplied the bulk of his Parliamentary support, but theywere becoming increasingly restive and suspicious of the Prime Minister' incurable politicaladventurism. Did he think that in the Chanak crisis, as it was called, he perceived anopportunity to end the dissension and dissolution in the ranks of his supporters, to prevent hisown increasing isolation and to rally Parliament and people behind him in a great unitedeffort? Was it a gambler' throw or was it gross miscalculation?I was in London when the crisis was at its worst, and I exerted every effort to prevent itsculminating in what I knew would be a disastrous as well as an unjust war. This time I wasnot fighting a solitary battle against an overwhelming tide of contrary opinion. Now I hadpowerful allies and supporters. The columns of The Times, as so often in my public career,were open to me. The first Lord Rothermere, who had just assumed personal control of thegroup of newspapers built up by his brother, Viscount Northcliffe, was my staunch supporter.And Lord Beaverbrook, the man by whose influence and eager advocacy exercised at theright moment Lloyd George had come to supreme power as Prime Minister in 1916, was nowas sincerely convinced that Lloyd George was set on a course that would bring nothing butsuffering and hardship. However, the first concern was not to encompass Lloyd George' fallbut to prevent -- of all unnecessary wars -- the most unnecessary that could ever have beenwaged.Early in September the British Government issued a statement on Chanak which was bothpugnacious and injudicious, and ended with an appeal to the Dominions for their help in theevent of another war with Turkey. The tone of this pronouncement thoroughly alarmedBritish public opinion, which was in no mood to contemplate all the pain and sacrificeinvolved in another war in support of what could only be described as Greek intransigenceand stubbornness. Protests were loud from all sides. The faction that was pro-Governmentand philhellene had only one strong card to play: Turkish forces were then almost in contactwith the Allied -predominantly British -- occupying forces in the Straits of Constantinoplearea. General Harington on his side was quietly determined to avoid any action which mightinvolve his slender forces and commit them to any form of hostilities with the veteran, toughand resolute forces which Mustafa Kemal had already deployed with skill. On the other hand,at the earnest request of my friend, Lord Derby, * I was able to get in touch with the Turkishleaders and point out the grave perils inherent in any attack on the Allied forces; and Iassured them that, pending a provisional settlement, their troops' strategic position would notin any way be prejudiced if they abstained from any offensive action. I pressed theseconsiderations on my Turkish friends with all the urgency I could command. I am glad to saythat sanity prevailed. An important contributory factor was that France had come to a secretunderstanding with Kemal and his Government; and French influence exerted by MonsieurRaymond Poincaré was all for a peaceful settlement. The decision for war could only havebeen a rushed one; once British public opinion had time to ponder the issues, it couldcrystallize and express itself, and it was firmly for peace. The very real menace of anotherwar in the Middle East was averted.We met, I remember, at Newmarket, and Lord Derby asked me to use all the influencewhich I possessed.A vivid account of the handling of this crisis has been given by Lord Beaverbrook. *Throughout it Lord Beaverbrook was as active as he was staunch. Seriously worried by thedrift in affairs, he often discussed this matter with me. I was happy to see that we were in fullagreement and that in all my endeavors to assist the Turks I had his moral support. He toohad reached the eminently sound and practical conclusion that "for Britain to fight Turkey inpursuance of the exploded policy of supporting Greek imperialism was a monstrous errorwhich must be avoided at all costs." Beaverbrook sought the support of his friend and fellowCanadian, Bonar Law, then leader of the Conservative party, which supplied the bulk of theGovernment' voting strength in the House of Commons.In Politicians and the Press.Beaverbrook' words to Bonar Law were blunt. "These men mean war," he said.Those four words spelled doom for Lloyd George' Coalition Government. A meeting of theConservative party was held at the Carlton Club, the party' great sociopolitical stronghold;the speech that swayed the meeting and brought about its decision to withdraw support fromLloyd George was made, not by Bonar Law, who was already an extremely sick man, but bya comparatively unknown back bench M.P., Stanley Baldwin, who less than a year later wasto succeed Bonar Law as Prime Minister.Lord Beaverbrook maintained his onslaught on the pro-Greek, anti-Turkish policy of theCoalition Government. On December 16, 1922, the day after the House of Commons hadadjourned for the Christmas recess, The Daily Express gave a sensationally detailed accountof the happenings of the previous September. It said that within ten days of the fall ofSmyrna, when the Greek rout had already begun and it had been recognized by the GreekGovernment in Athens that their military position in Asia Minor was hopeless, Lloyd Georgeencouraged them to continue fighting. Lloyd George (said The Daily Express) took this stepafter having inquiries made by his principal private secretary, Sir Edward Grigg, * ofsomeone attached to the Greek Legation, who had said that the Greek army could notpossibly hold out longer without active British assistance in munitions and in credit. OnSeptember second, The Daily Express went on, when the Athens Government appealed toLloyd George to arrange an armistice, another of his private secretaries telephoned the GreekLegation advising them that "their government should be very careful to avoid the mistakemade by the Germans in 1918 and not conclude an abject armistice in a moment of panic."Now Lord Altrincham.Lloyd George never returned to office. In spite of our difference over Turkey, I am glad tothink that he and I, even as late as 1940, when he came and lunched with me at Antibes,remained on terms of firm and sincere friendship until the very end of his life. Lloyd Georgewas a man of infinitely compelling charm. His effective career as a politician was short, from1905 to 1922. Its brevity may be explicable in terms of his personality, which was like adiamond cut in many facets; every facet had a brilliant light to throw out, but their numberand their variety were so great that often contradictions occurred. There was only one phasein his life in which these contradictions and conflicts were resolved, and he appeared -- andwas -- wholly consistent; this of course was during his first two years as Prime Minister, from1916 to 1918 -- a period of supreme effort and greatness. Then, in spite of all the efforts ofhis critics to belittle him, he was as much "the man who won the war" as his great successorChurchill was in the Second World War. With the exception of that one triumphant phase, thebrilliant and powerful manysidedness of Lloyd George' character prevented him frominfluencing the history of his time to the extent which his talents -- his imagination, hispractical capabilities and his intellectual superiority -- gave his admirers (such as myself)every hope to expect. As one of the Big Four who formulated the Treaty of Versailles, he wasconvinced -- a conviction which I fully shared -- that he would have used the power overGermany, which under its terms were given to the victorious nations, in a very differentmanner from that employed by his less imaginative and competent successors. Of all thestatesmen of that time whom I knew, Lloyd George alone, I feel sure, was capable of evokingand sustaining in the Weimar Republic in Germany of the late 1920' and early 1930' that self-respect and that genuine understanding and use of democratic institutions which could havesaved it and the world from Adolf Hitler and the Second World War. But, alas, by then thevolcano was exhausted not by its internal weakness but by its brilliance. The views which Ihave expressed here about Lloyd George and Germany were shared, I know, by LordD'Abernon with all his profound knowledge and experience of Germany.For myself an eventful period of close association with the politics and diplomacy of theMiddle East in general and Turkey in particular drew to a close. The first abortive LausanneConference was followed by a second, more fruitful, during which I held what may bedescribed as a watching brief. Britain' new Conservative Government was represented byLord Curzon, the Foreign Secretary; the Turks sent a strong and capable delegation. Britain'mood was realistic and sensible. It was decided to accept the facts, to give de jure as well asde facto recognition to the new Turkey, and to let this revived and vigorous Uninational Stateretain not merely its homeland in Anatolia, and the sea coast of Asia Minor, but also Thrace,Adrianople and Istanbul. Along these lines agreement was reached and the Treaty ofLausanne signed. Subsequently the Montreux Convention regularized arrangements fordealing with the passage of international shipping through the Dardanelles.It might be possible to construe all this as a diplomatic defeat for Britain, but what in factwere its main results? A long period of growing harmony and understanding between Britainand Turkey and a Brito-Turkish relationship in the Second World War which, despite severestrain put upon it, was of great assistance to Britain and her allies. Think too what might havehappened had Turkey been rebuffed once more: Russia would long since have been installedin Istanbul and, if not in Smyrna itself, along the coast to the north with her ships and aircraftranging far out into the Medi terranean. The statesmen of the West, heady with the sense oftheir own political and military power, would have brought about endless complications andmisery in an important and sensitive region; destiny and history itself, tugging the other way,gave Asia Minor years of tranquil development and reorganization, social, economic andspiritual. A complement to and a striking contrast with the new Turkey' experience was thatof the Arab states in this same epoch -a story of division and weakness, of active nationalistelements in the various countries in constant conflict with Britain and France, and of arelatively submissive minority, installed in office, and therefore loyal to their British orFrench masters. Such in brief was the history of the Near East from the rise of Ataturk to theoutbreak of the Second World War. Of all that happened in those sad and troublous years Iwas a spectator -- occasionally in the columns of The Times a critic -- but thenceforward Iceased to be, as I had so long been, an active participant.One other political issue of some complexity and importance to which I devoted a good dealof time and interest in those immediate postwar years was the question of Indians in EastAfrica, especially in the rapidly developing colony of Kenya. As I have narrated in earlierchapters there had long been Indian settlements along the coastline of East Africa; thesesettlements contained a considerable and growing number of my own Ismaili followers, whocontributed an influential and stabilizing element to the community. In Kenya, where in the1950' race relations became a political issue of the most crucial significance, there werealready clear signs, thirty years ago, of the dangers that were looming ahead. In the so-called"White Highlands" of Kenya there was a rapidly developing area of European --predominantly British -- settlement, on the high rolling plateaus which lie between the coastalbelt and the Rift Valley and Africa' great lakes and which constitute a temperate region inequatorial latitudes, fertile, climatically agreeable and eminently suitable to intensiveagricultural development. The whole of Kenya was administered by the British ColonialOffice as a Crown Colony. The British settlers, whose unofficial leader was Lord Delamere, atal ented and highly individualistic English peer, had of recent years been demanding anincreasing measure of self-government for themselves. They differed from the usual Britishcommunity in a tropical country in that they were settlers, and they intended to make -- anddid make -- Kenya their permanent home, bringing up their children there, and not merelylive there for short tours of duty as did (in general) British officials, traders and planters inIndia, the Far East and West Africa. But the Indians, rapidly growing in numbers, saw in thesettlers' agitation for self-government the imposition of racial, "white" supremacy, and theirown permanent political and social exclusion and subjugation. They in their turn demandedcomplete political and electoral equality. The Colonial Office officials wavered; and theywere not themselves competent to take the effective decisions which were made in Whitehalland Downing Street. At no time has it been possible for Kenya to settle its own destiny foritself; all of Kenya's problems have been subject to outside interference, influence and -- inthe final analysis -- external decision.The end of the First World War had seen in Kenya, as elsewhere, a release of pent-up andsharply conflicting political ambitions and emotions. The British electorate and itsrepresentatives in the House of Commons were -- although theirs was the final decision inKenya's affairs -- in the great majority massively ignorant of Kenya's problems. From 1920 aseries of decisions was made within the Colonial Office in respect to Kenya; each newdecision appeared to cancel its predecessor. Matters were not helped by the fact that therewere several Governors of Kenya and several Secretaries of State for the Colonies within avery few years. By the end of 1922 and the beginning of 1923 the situation in Kenya wasconfused and inflammatory. So strong were the sentiments of the British settlers that they hadestablished a militant, secret organization of their own with which -- in the event of theBritish Government's deciding, as they thought, against them -- they proposed to take overthe administration of the country. Indian opinion, both in Kenya and at home, was greatlyagitated. It is fair to say, however, that even in the period of greatest tension no singleincident of violence, involving a European and an Asiatic, was recorded in Kenya; in spite ofthe deep political gulf between them, the communities remained on good personal terms.To me the whole situation -- had I not in my addendum to my friend Gokhale's politicalstatement suggested that East Africa be set aside for Indian colonization? -- was deplorable. Itook my customary step of making my views known in a letter to The Times. The immediatedanger, as I saw it, was that a few hotheads might commit acts that would affect the mind andimagination of Indians not only there and then but all over India and far into the future. Inparticular I urged that if the settlers really accepted the view that the British Empire of thefuture (we still had not evolved the concept of the Commonwealth, but we were movingrapidly toward it) was to be a truly co-operative association between men of all races andcreeds and customs, then indeed in East Africa more than anywhere else in the Empire theyshould use their full influence and power to bring about a better general feeling andwholeheartedly accept the fact that, short-term feelings apart, in the long run their owninterests made it necessary that the Indian community in Kenya should be as prosperous andas happy as it was large.The Government of India was fully alive to the dangers of the whole situation. Lord Reading,the Viceroy, Lord Peel, the Secretary of State, and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru who was one ofIndia's representatives at the Imperial Conference of 1923, urged that there should be aconference -- or if necessary a number of conferences -between representatives of India andall concerned with the administration of colonial territories, such as Kenya, Uganda and Figi,where there was any sizable element of Indian settlement, to establish the political rights andresponsibilities of Indians in those regions.Faced with this cogent and powerful request, faced too with the grim possibility of armedrebellion by British settlers in a Crown Colony, the British Government was by now far fromunaware of the urgent need for action that would end the dispute. In this somewhat explosiveatmosphere I was asked by the Government of India if I would lead the Indian delegation to acommittee under the chairmanship of Lord Zetland, charged with the task of finding asolution to the whole delicate and difficult problem.By the time we were appointed, Lord Zetland had become a member of Mr. Baldwin's short-lived first Government. I was asked to take the chair, but I felt that since I was a party to thedispute and the chief spokesman of the Indian viewpoint, it would be unfortunate for me to bechairman of the committee. We therefore had as our chairman Mr. J. Hope Simpson, M.P.;the other members were Sir Benjamin Robertson, a member of the Viceroy's ExecutiveCouncil who had paid an official visit to Kenya in 1920, Diwan Bahadur T. Rangachariar andMr. K. C. Roy. We began our work in April and finished it in July; and by August of thatyear, 1924, a Labor Government -- Britain's first -- was in office, and when our report waspresented to the House of Commons, the Minister who presented it was Mr. J. H. Thomas,the new Secretary of State for the Colonies.Jim Thomas and I became fast friends and remained so to the end of his life. I never believedthat in the unhappy affair which cut short his political career he acted otherwise than in goodfaith. His open and genial nature may have landed him in a difficult and distressing situation,from which the only way out -- resignation -- was the one which he took unhesitatingly. JimThomas was a greathearted man, of fine and generous feelings, whom I always admired andrespected.Though we had spent many weeks of that summer in committee rooms in the India Officeand in long discussions with the Colonial Office, our discussions did not receive the seal orhall-mark of any Act of Parliament embodying our suggestions and recommendations. Yetthey had, I think, as a compromise, their own genuine value; true, they were only halfmeasures, but they were all that we had either the power or the authority to recommend.Of one fact my years in public life have convinced me: the value of a compromise is that itcan supply a bridge across a difficult period, and later having employed that bridge, it is oftenpossible to bring into effect the full-scale measures of reform which originally would havebeen rejected out of hand.On the questions of electoral equality and of unrestricted settlement in the highlands therewas no change; Delamere and his friends held their position. But on immigration we securedthe abandonment of an offensive ordinance which the Kenya Government had alreadyadopted and which would virtually have put an end to Indian immigration into East Africa;the Secretary of State, however, retained the right to enact any measure at any time shouldAfrican interests appear to be threatened by the influx of immigrants from abroad. Mr.Thomas announced that certain districts in the coastal lowlands were to be reserved foragricultural immigrants from India. These were to some extent gains. But it was obvious thenand it is obvious now that logicality and permanence are impossible of attainment in thewhole difficult and complex racial situation which, because of half measures andcompromises, has been allowed to develop in East Africa. In some measure, I think, we mayclaim that we did create a better atmosphere and a wider understanding of the Indianviewpoint, and the fairly practicable modus vivendi which subsisted in Kenya for manyyears, and also in Uganda and Tanganyika, was the result of our committee work and thedetailed recommendations which we made.One fact was apparent then and still deserves emphasis thirty years later: East Africa'sproblems must not be allowed to become a matter of contention between opposing politicalparties in Britain. I cannot be disinterested in this issue, for my own followers of purelyIndian origin number in East Africa nowadays some fifty thousand -- seventeen thousand inKenya, twenty-seven thousand in Tanganyika and six thousand in Uganda. As recently asJuly, 1953, I contributed a turnover article to The Times in which I set out my views, inprinciple unchanged by all that had happened in the years between."For as long as we can foresee," I said, "the British people are the trustees of the populationof East Africa, irrespective of race and color. That trusteeship can never be adequatelyexercised unless there is a firm bipartisan understanding and interpretation of that dutybetween the two main political parties and informed public opinion among all classes inGreat Britain. There can be no real union in East Africa among the races if any portion ofthem believes that the trustees are divided or that they have particular favorite wards. Thetrusteeship of the African colonies is a great responsibility, a touchstone of success or failurefor the British race in one of the greatest challenges placed before it by destiny."Time alone will show how that responsibility is discharged. As a tailpiece to my account ofthese happenings in East Africa, however, it may be agreeable to mention that Sir EvelynBaring, the Governor of Kenya, issued a statement on the occasion of the sixtyeighthanniversary of my inheriting the Imamate of the Ismailis, which was of the greatest warmth,kindness and courtesy.The year 1924 marked the conclusion of a phase of my public life, of five or six years ofstrenuous and varied activity. Thereafter until 1929 or thereabouts I entered a period devotedalmost exclusively to my own personal and private life.I think, however, that I should make it clear that in public affairs I have always been in asense an amateur. My public life, as I have shown, has moved in successive, fairly clearlydefined phases. But the duties and the responsibilities which are mine by inheritance havenever for an instant abated. My normal work as Imam of the Ismailis consists of aconstitutional leadership and supervision of the various councils and institutions of all thenumerous and farscattered Ismaili communities, self-administered as they are in each region.In addition, I am in constant communication with thousands of individuals in the community,on all sorts of diverse matters about which they seek guidance, and it is -- as I have indicateda community spread across the globe from the Great Wall of China to South Africa. This ismy job, and it has been a regular part of my daily life for nearly seventy years, fromchildhood into old age.XA Respite from Public LifeMY INTEREST in horses, their breeding, training and racing, has been with me all my lifeand is of course also part of the tradition which I have inherited, the environment in which Iwas bred. Persian art, in the various exhibitions which have been held in London andelsewhere, has perhaps helped to make the Western public realize the large and importantpart which sport played in the lives of that old Iranian ruling class whence I am descended.The chase in its many forms was for them not just a distraction; it was a major occupation alltheir lives; their hounds, their hawks, their horses were the most beautiful, the swiftest andthe finest that they could breed or procure. My grandfather in his young manhood, at thecourt of Fateh Ali Shah, as the favored son-in-law of that powerful monarch, was as fullyabsorbed in all the accustomed open-air and athletic sports and pursuits of a sophisticated yetvirile society as were any of his contemporaries. After his tribulations and his wanderingsceased and he settled in Bombay, he naturally and happily resumed a way of life not verydissimilar from that which he had known in his youth. And as I have tried to show earlier inthis book, such was the atmosphere in which, from the dawning of conscious experience, Ispent my childhood and boyhood.When my father died he left a large and imposing sporting establishment in being -- hawks,hounds, and between eighty and ninety race horses. A good deal of this establishment mymother naturally pared down, but she kept twenty or thirty of the horses; and throughout myminority these were raced at meetings all over Western India in my name and under mycolors. I have earlier given a brief account of some of the successes which I -- and with mycousin and racing partner, Aga Shamsuddin -- enjoyed during those years.One effect of this early and sustained prominence on the Indian turf was that by the time Iwas in my late teens I had a number of friends who were important and influential in racingcircles, two of whom were the brothers Lord William and Lord Marcus Beresford. They wereyounger sons of the Marquis of Waterford; and Lord William in particular was a powerfuland original personality in his own right; he was military secretary to three Viceroys of Indiain succession, Lord Ripon, Lord Dufferin and Lord Lansdowne. His long tenure of this keypost, in which he had won and maintained the confidence of each of his chiefs, gave himunchallenged influence and authority over a diverse and far-ranging field of affairs, military,social, political and diplomatic, in relations with foreign dignitaries and potentates whovisited India, and of course with the Ruling Princes. He was an utterly fearless horseman ofwhom it was said that he had broken every bone in his body in falls sustained while hunting,playing polo or steeplechasing. During his fourteen years as military secretary he became oneof India's leading race horse owners, on his own and in association with two princes, with theMaharajah Darbhanga, an immensely wealthy landlord, and with the Maharajah of Patiala,the leading Sikh prince. The bookmakers, it was always said, lived in fear and trembling ofLord William, for he was a past master in the difficult art of bringing off big betting coups.He was a friend of my family's and of mine from an early age; and whenever he came toBombay we saw a great deal of him.When I first went to England in 1898 I discovered therefore -and I was young enough to beagreeably surprised by my discovery -that a good deal was known about my hereditary andpersonal interest in the breeding of horses and in the turf generally, not merely in exclusivelyracing circles but in the India Office, at Court and in the personal entourage of the Prince ofWales. Either Lord William Beresford or his brother Lord Marcus -- and I have never beenable to find out which of them -- had taken steps to have my colors as an owner registered inEngland. They both knew that in India my family's racing colors had always been green andred; they are also the colors of the Ismaili flag, and when my ancestors were temporalsovereigns -- both in Egypt and in Iran -- green and red were the colors of their standards.Some years later I discovered that my colors in England were registered as green andchocolate; I made inquiries from Messrs. Wetherby, who told me that when the registrationoccurred, green and red were not available; but they could never tell me whether it was LordWilliam or Lord Marcus -- or indeed someone else -- who had chosen green and chocolate.Many years later my elder son was able to get a combination of green and red; no doubt bythat time I too could have changed, but by then my green and chocolate had become so luckyand so well known that it would have been neither politic nor practicable to change them. InFrance, I may say, and in Europe generally, my racing colors are and have always been greenand red.I was at once made an honorary member of the Grand Stand at Epsom. My first seriousracing, I well remember, was the Epsom Spring Meeting of 1898, when I saw the great RayRonald win the City and Suburban. I am proud to think that I told my friends that this was afine horse who was sure to make his mark in the history of bloodstock breeding -- especiallyproud because this particular win, considering his age and weight, was nothing verywonderful. A few weeks later I went to the Derby; I had a small bet of a sovereign at sixty-sixto one on a horse called Jeddah. Though my own bet was at sixty-six to one, the horseactually started at one hundred to one, and then to everybody's astonishment won the Derby.My friend the Prince of Wales happened to spot me in the enclosure and called across to mewith a laugh that a horse called Jeddah ought certainly to have belonged to me.At Ascot I have had a Royal Household badge for well over fifty years; I was first given mybadge by Queen Victoria, and it has successively been re-bestowed on me by King EdwardVII, King George V, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth II.From the beginning, however, my interest in racing has never been merely idle or transient.From 1898 I went to race meetings in England or on the continent of Europe and I followedthe form of the horses very carefully. In India, at Bombay, Poona or Calcutta, I never, if Icould possibly avoid it, missed a meeting.In France in 1905 I made the acquaintance of Mr. W. K. Vanderbilt, then the leading ownerin the country. Although he was a great deal older than I was, he took a special interest inletting me into all the secrets of the administration of his great racing stables. He introducedme to his trainer, William Duke, to whom he gave strict instructions that I was to be allowedto visit his stables for the trials and training of his horses whenever I wished. Mr. Vanderbiltsaid to me, "I think you'll get more pleasure out of a free run of my stables than out of a freerun of my house."Whenever I was in Paris William Duke would send me word if he had any important trials onhand, and often in the early morning I would go out to the stables and watch these trials.During these sixteen years from 1898 to the outbreak of the First World War, while I watchedEuropean racing, breeding and training but took no active part myself, my imagination wasstirred by, and I have retained vivid impressions of, a few great horses; there were, of course,many others just as good, great and successful, but they and their performances have notstayed in my memory in the same way. I say without hesitation that of all the horses which Isaw in England, Tetrarch and Spearmint were the two that impressed me most. I saw mareslike Sceptre and Pretty Polly and horses like Ardpatrick and Sunstar in England andSardanapale in France. Sceptre and Pretty Polly are the only two mares I have ever knownthat, in quality and character, were comparable with the great horses I have named. They bothpossessed speed, strength and soundness of wind and limb on a scale equal to any male horse;so good were they that they were raced until they were five years old, and their descendantshave left their mark on bloodstock in England. In general, however, there can be no doubtthat the male thoroughbred is greatly superior to the mare. Not one of these mares left on methe durable impression of power that I derived from Spearmint and Tetrarch in England, andone outstanding French horse, Prestige. I am not at all sure that Prestige was not the mostimpressive race horse that I ever saw. Mr. Vanderbilt owned another horse called Maintenonat the same time as Prestige and they were often tried out in gallops together. Maintenon wasa good horse and he won the French Derby, but in a hard gallop he could never get withintwenty lengths of Prestige. William Duke, who trained both of them, told me again and againthat no weight, not even three stone, could have brought the two horses together.Unfortunately Prestige was never entered in a single important race; if he had been he wouldhave won in a canter. He was never defeated and he was never out of a gentle gallop, becausenobody seemed to realize the reserve power which he had and could have shown if he hadever been called on to do so. It was the same story with his morning gallops. The jockeyswho rode him told Duke that they were actually afraid of pushing him, even to a fraction ofhis best, lest he run away with them. He was a beautiful-tempered horse; and to this day Ihave never been able to understand why Mr. Vanderbilt sold him very cheaply and kept farless impressive horses as stallions. True, Prestige never got good mares, but still he siredSardanapale. When Sardanapale was at the height of his power and his glory, having just wonthe Grand Prix de Paris and the French Derby, the First World War came. I was then, as Ihave recorded, in Africa. When I returned to Europe I found that racing for all practicalpurposes was dead; I myself was busy and intensely preoccupied with the events and doingswhich I have described. I did not go to a racecourse or follow racing form again until 1921,when the first postwar Derby was run at Epsom. From then until 1921 I got back into thehabit of going to any important race meeting, wherever I happened to be, England, France,Belgium, Italy, India or Egypt. I had long ago made up my mind, back in the nineties, to havea few horses in Europe, but the death of my dearly beloved cousin, Aga Shamsuddin, withwhom I had intended to open a stable in Europe in 1910, had put an end to all my hopes andideas on this matter.Then one day in the spring of 1921 at dinner at Mrs. Edwin Montagu's house, I found myselfsitting next to Mrs. Asquith, a daughter-in-law of the former Prime Minister and a sister ofMrs. George Lambton. We talked horses and she urged me as vigorously as she could to takeup breeding bloodstock and racing in England."Why don't you," she said, "send for my brother-in-law, George, and ask him to buy a fewmares and yearlings for you?"Back in my room at the Ritz I sat down and wrote a note to George Lambton asking him tocall on me. Our conversation bore fruit. He introduced me to Richard Dawson, a well-knownIrish sportsman, and recommended him to take up my training for me, while he himselfagreed to buy me a few yearlings. When I went back to Paris I sent for William Duke, whosepatron, Mr. Vanderbilt, was dead, and who therefore was free to work for someone else. Hebegan to train and buy yearlings for me in France; in England Mr. Lambton did the buyingand Mr. Dawson the training. Then I myself began to study the breeding of the yearlings thatcame up for sale at Deauville and Doncaster. Among the Doncaster yearlings I chose one inparticular that became one of the mares on which I founded my stud, the filly to which I gavethe name Teresina. At the same time I picked out another yearling by the same sire Tracery; Iwired Lambton and I wrote posthaste to Dawson urging the purchase of this colt. The coltwas none other than Papyrus, the Derby winner of 1923 -- my first. Mr. Lambton did not likehim, finding him too small and on the stocky side.That shows how little we ought to go by the make and the shape of a yearling, so long as hislegs are sound and he is neither a giant nor a lilliputian. Apart from the all-important factor ofhis breeding, I have one rule by which to judge a yearling: is he going to be very tall andheavy or will he never be more than a pony? Do his legs look strong enough to stand the hardleg exercises, gallops and so forth of training?The general public take a great interest in racing; they have their favorites, their likes andtheir dislikes, but very few people really understand the foundation of the art of training arace horse. The object is precisely the same as that of training a boxer. Your boxer, yourwrestler, your weightlifter, by various muscular exercises and movements undertaken daily,in a carefully thought-out and planned program, gets his whole body, his nerves, his muscles,his capacity to give and take punishment all brought to their fullest, most perfect pitch ofdevelopment -- for the day of his crucial contest.With a horse, of course, there is no question of putting him down on his back to do all thescientifically planned and disciplined exercises that a human athlete can be put through.There is only one way of building up a horse's muscles -- and the nervous energy that musttake charge of those muscles -- and that is by walking, running and, if necessary, a certainamount of jumping. The great trainer is the one who knows how to adjust the pattern of theseexercises so that his horses will attain the height of their physical power, fresh and vigorousand with their nervous energy at its peak, on the most important day of their racing careers,just as the prize fighter who wins is the one who is at the top of his form when he steps intothe ring in Madison Square Garden.My recollections of thirty years of European racing, from 1922, when my colors were firstseen on English and French racecourses, to 1952, are countless in their variation, both inrespect of men and of horses.Across memory's screen so many great sportsmen come and go -- English, American, French,with all their individual characteristics, their quirks of outlook and temperament. I recallimmediately, for example, Mr. Joseph Widener, of Philadelphia, one of my closest andkindest friends, among American owners. He had strong opinions about breeding, particularlyon the subject of the importance of the dam, as against the sire, in bloodstock. I once said tohim that since he was convinced that the maternal was much more important than thepaternal, if he applied his theories to human beings, a family would rapidly degenerate unlessits young men married Widener girls. Was my joke in good taste? At any rate he was goodenough to laugh at it.My friend the late Lord Wavertree was another who attached little importance to the sire andgreat importance to the dam. Lord Wavertree indeed went further than anyone else I haveknown, holding that if your mares are good, it really does not matter what sort of sire youmate them with. My own view is that you must try to secure the best and most suitablebreeding through both sire and dam, bring it by both inbreeding and outcrossing as nearlyperfect in the abstract as you can. Success will depend on whether any particular foal takesafter his dam and the majority of her maternal ascendants or after his sire and the majority ofhis paternal ascendants. Thus with two horses which are full brothers, unless they areidentical twins, it is not possible to say with certainty whether they will possess similar ordissimilar characteristics. One may display the paternal ascendant qualities of the sire and bea very great horse; the other may have the maternal ascendants of the dam and be a poorhorse. On the other hand, both or either may possess the maternal ascendants of sire or damand be a failure. Thus after a great deal of study and careful thought and weighing-up ofmuch experience, I have come to the conclusion that I still must leave it to chance, for it isquite impossible to say in advance that a horse, possessing the best blood in the world, willturn out any good, and this despite anything his own brother or sister may have done.I advised Mr. Lambton to buy some excellent mares, and he himself picked out some fineones, like Mumtaz Mahal and Cos; and he picked up a couple of very good colts, Diophonand Salmon Trout. My immediate success, I am convinced, was owing to the fact that I beganmy European racing career with two of the greatest trainers of all time to look after myhorses, William Duke and Richard Dawson.Trainers as capable as Richard Dawson no doubt exist today, but I do not think there isanyone who has his supreme courage -- unless it be Madame Tesio of Italy. Dawson's greatquality was that he would risk everything in order that his horse should be at his very best,muscled up to perfection, for the most important event of his life. From all I hear today, themethods that are fashionable both in England and with the majority of French trainers are farmore tender. In general, trainers now spare their horses a great deal more than did men likeDawson and Duke, or, for that matter, the man whom I consider the greatest trainer of all,Frank Butters. There is far too much coddling at present, far too much cotton wool. Sincenearly all trainers subscribe to the current fashionable views, it does not matter greatly, but Ithink if any of them came up against one of the hard men of the past or Madame Tesio, theywould show up badly. The reason given is doubtless that in the old days many horses werebroken down in the process of training. I have been told that Gilpin, one of the greatest ofold-time trainers, only a few days before the Derby broke down the filly with which he hadexpected to win it. Gilpin was not in the slightest bit ruffled; he did not even apologize to theowner. He said, quite rightly, that if he had spared her the gallop in which she broke down,she would never have won the Derby, and that it was his job to take every chance for a winrather than by insufficient preparation ensure defeat.From 1931 I had the great good fortune of having my very dear friend, Mr. Frank Butters, forwhom my family have the greatest affection, train for me. Mr. Buttersx, one of the mostdelightful human beings one could ever hope to meet, with a nature as clean and clear as adiamond but without its harshness, was one of the greatest and most successful trainers in theworld. He began his career in Austria and Hungary and rose immediately to the top of hisprofession. He moved on to Italy and there too in no time he was at the top again. Later hetook Lord Derby's stable in hand, and with horses like Fairway and others he was the leadingtrainer in Britain for several years and made his patron the leading owner. When he left LordDerby and came to me, the tables were quickly turned and I took the front again as leadingowner and breeder. For me he trained a succession of magnificent horses like Bahram,Mahmoud, Tehran and Firdaussi, and a great many splendid twoyear-olds. Even morewonderful than his success with great horses was his way with quite moderate ones. He had awonderful knack of getting out of any horse the very best that horse could do.In some ways Butters and Duke were alike, particularly in that neither of them attached theimportance that most other trainers attach to the detailed appearance of the yearlings whichcame to them. Mr. Duke used to go out of his way to pooh-pooh people who chose yearlingson appearance and make and shape; he held that one yearling was as good as another if itwere properly trained and had in it the natural qualities of health and nervous energy and --most important of all -- the capacity to rest and to sleep. When he bought yearlings for me henever bothered to make any elaborate inspection of them; in fact I doubt if he ever gave thema second thought. If while an auction was in progress he failed to buy one yearling for whichhe had been bidding, he was never disappointed but would laugh it off and say that the nextwould probably be better still. To him it was almost like putting numbers in a hat and pullingthem out -- plus, of course, absolute confidence in his own methods of training. He believedin himself, not in his yearlings. Long before they were in general use he employed vitaminsand other natural methods of sustaining a horse's health and nervous energies. Duke was aman who had a number of enemies, the source of whose hostility was jealousy. Those whoseexpensive yearlings had been beaten by the ones that Duke had picked up cheaply were apt tohint that he doped his horses. Nothing could be further from the truth. He would laugh andtell me that his dope was first-class food, a great deal of fresh lucerne grass, fresh vitamins,lots of fresh air in the loose-boxes and hard work for every horse.French training grounds were very bad in those days, though I am told that they have muchimproved of late. Duke therefore had more or less to train his horses on the racecourse. Hehad one very honorable rule: that in countries in which the training grounds were impossible,the public had no business judging a horse until he had shown his true form at least once;thereafter any marked inequalities of form were against the public interest, and a good trainerought not to keep a horse that ran thus but should turn him out of the stable. A horse shouldbe consistent in his form once he had shown it, but the public had no right to expect a traineror an owner to break his horse on impossible training grounds.Frank Butters, on the other hand, never needed races as preparation for his horses. If his two-year-olds were ever capable of winning, they won the first time they were out. The greatBahram, for example, before his Derby had one race -- the Two Thousand Guineas -- and hecantered away with that as he did with the Derby. No nonsense about his needing two or threeeye-openers.I have often been asked which I considered to be the greatest horse I ever bred. Until Tulyarcame on the scene I would unhesitatingly have said Bahram. But Tulyar has shown a certaincapacity for always doing just enough, which makes it difficult to assess his limits ascompared with Bahram's. Bahram was probably the most dominating horse I ever saw. Fromthe first, he looked and acted the champion. Tulyar running is a greyhound. In my youth Isaw the great Flying Fox as a two- and three-year-old -curiously like Tulyar, he ran with hishead in line with his body or perhaps even lower; practically every horse runs with his neckcarried higher than his body, and some with their heads up. Tulyar and Flying Fox have beenthe only two exceptions to this rule that I have ever seen. But the present Lord Rosebery, thatgreat figure in English racing -- and how widespread is the regret that he does not take a moreleading and active part in its administration -has told me that the famous Eclipse, the ancestorof almost all the good horses in the world, used to gallop with his head down, almost as if hewere smelling the ground. When Tulyar gallops, he is straight as an arrow. We must howeverface the fact that Tulyar -unlike Bahram -- is on the small side for a great race horse. Bahramwas the tallest Derby winner of modern times, and Tulyar is probably one of the shortest.And there is no getting away from the old, old saying: "A big good 'un is better than a littlegood 'un."I am not sure, however, that there is not another side to this question. Many sound judges --like Mr. Frank Butters and the late Captain Greer -- have told me that English breeders havegone too much for size and bone and that we need a smaller run of stallions to achieve thatconcentration of vitality which is so often found in small men and animals. I think that thereis a great deal in this, and I am therefore glad to think that Tulyar will remain in Ireland toinfluence new generations and to check this overemphasis on size and bone. Many of us hadhoped that the Derby winner, Manna -also a small horse -- would help to bring down size, butManna un fortunately was a comparative failure. The great Hyperion of course was a smallhorse, and one of the greatest stallions of all time. But we need more than one Hyperion if weare to prevail against the present tendency to sacrifice vitality and nervous energy to muscleand bone.Looking back in this fashion over my memories of owning, breeding and racing horses, I donot propose to give a detailed account of my wins, my prizes, my bloodstock sales and soforth. For those who want that sort of record it is admirably supplied by Ruff's Guide to theTurf. My own recollections stretch back well over fifty years, to the late nineties, to ageneration of jockeys, owners and trainers long since departed, and to methods of ridingentirely forgotten except in old prints and pictures. There was the first Duke of Westminster,for example, gentle and kind in appearance, yet with a strain of irascibility in him. When Mr.Gladstone, who had many years before given him his dukedom, announced his support ofIrish Home Rule, the Duke unceremoniously bundled Mr. Gladstone's portrait out of hishouse and into a public auction. He was small and lightly built and -- so I was told -- actuallyrode some of his own best horses at trials. He had one odd sartorial whim: always, whateverthe occasion, he wore, either with a morning coat or a frock coat, a blue shirt, a blue collarand a blue necktie.One day the Duke of Westminster went into his stables, and a mare, Vampire, attacked him.He at once ordered Vampire to be destroyed. He was begged to reprieve her and finallyagreed. Two or three years later she got him The Bat and later Flying Fox.There was the Duke of Portland, whom in later years I came to know very well; after theDerby of 1935 he listed for me the points of resemblance between his great St. Simon and mygreat Bahram. There was Sir J. B. -- "Blundell" -- Maple, the father-in-law of my friendBaron von Eckardstein, big of build, loud of voice, self-confident, even perhaps self-satisfied,certainly self-made, but withal a truly kindhearted and generous person. However, as founderand owner of his furniture store in Tottenham Court Road, he was not popular with thesupremely aristocratic little clique which in those days ruled the Jockey Club; time and againthey blackballed him. One day it became known that he was dying; there was remorse allround, and he was elected to the Jockey Club posthaste. There were the brothers Reuben andArthur Sassoon, two of the kindliest old men I ever met, generous and gentle. They had nohint of snobbishness in them, but they were extremely well liked in society at its highestlevels, and were both close personal friends of King Edward. I have always understood thatthey did his modest betting for him at race meetings; his stakes ranged from twenty-five tofifty pounds, but the Sassoons placed them with as much care and trouble and anxious inquiryas if they had been for thousands of pounds.The great event in racing in the late nineties, of course, was the revolution in riding that camefrom America. Lord William Beresford brought over Tod Sloan with his American mount.All the leading owners, like the Dukes of Westminster and Portland, pooh-poohed it at first.But it upset every applecart. Race after race was won by Sloan and his American imitators,who invaded both England and France. The old-fashioned champions, if they were too old ortoo stubborn to move with the times and change, had to give up and retire altogether. Notlong after this, doping was introduced -- also from across the Atlantic. This also upseteverybody, and it took several years to get it finally barred in England and in France and itsperpetrators sternly punished. The American mount, however, was a quite different matter. Ithad come to stay, and nobody thereafter thought of returning to the old cavalry seat in racing,with its erect posture. In its own way this was as big a revolution in racing as the discovery ofgunpowder in warfare. It is undoubtedly true that the results are an immense improvement onthose of the past, but aesthetically the disappearance of the old seat, with its dignity and gracein the rider as much as in the horse, is a great loss.I have often been asked how the best horses of today compare with the best horses of the latenineties and the early years of this century. Are today's best really much superior to theirpredecessors? I personally have not the least hesitation in saying that great progress has beenmade in the past fifty years. And why not? If it had not been, racing, with its countless andelaborate methods of breeding and selection, would be senseless and time-wasting. Thewhole object of picking and choosing in mating horses is constantly to improve the breed byletting artificial selection assist natural selection. We who breed race horses firmly believethat the combination of these two, if it is carried out conscientiously and scientifically, canand does produce steady and marked improvement in racial characteristics and qualities.There is a time test not only of record performances but of average races over long butcomparable periods of weeks in, let us say, 1914 and the present day. Statistically tested thus,there is no doubt that today's horses do run faster. The exceptional horse apart, the averagespeed has increased out of all recognition.We are told that the horses of the past could sustain a gallop twice or three times as long asthe ordinary course of today. The veterinary services in India too produced a crank of theirown who maintained that the ordinary Indian horse -- the Katty -- is superior to thethoroughbred because he can jog along at a regular pace for miles and miles and mileswithout stopping. Well, what of it? We have bred for speed, and surely the answer to thesecroakers and cranks is that the English thoroughbred is not called on to sustain a six- or nine-mile gallop, or to keep going all day; he can sprint a few furlongs and then lie down and sleep- let the Katty horse amble away -- and in that brief sprint he has done all the work that theother horse could have done, without the same long draw on his constitution and vitality.Whatever the distance, long or short, the thoroughbred will defeat the jogger because he hasthat extra vitality which will produce the effort needed. The race horse is bred for a highlyspecialized purpose, and he fulfills that purpose very well. The sheer facts sustain all thetheories about breeding and selection and prove -- it seems to me beyond the possibility ofcontradiction -- that there is a steady and continuing improvement in the quality of theEnglish thoroughbred race horse. Even if you compare the pictures of the horses of today andthose of fifty years ago, you will see that the horse of today obviously looks faster, if there isanything in looks.XIForeshadowings of Self-Government in IndiaFOR SEVERAL YEARS, from the end of 1924 on, I took little part in public life. In Indiathe strength of nationalist sentiment grew steadily throughout these years. The personalleadership and authority of Mahatma Gandhi in the Congress party intensified; the Nehrus,father and son, and Vallabhai Patel were the only leaders approaching him in stature. Therewere periods of fierce conflict and sullen repression; there were periods of comparativequiescence. The consciousness among Muslims that they must work out their own destinystrengthened steadily. To Lord Chelmsford succeeded Lord Reading; to Lord Reading, LordIrwin, * who, as Edward Wood, had been a Minister in Mr. Baldwin's first Government, aprofoundly sincere and serious-minded man of deep religious convictions. Britain's promiseof self-government by stages still stood out as the crucial decision in Indo-British relations.Agitation increased, as successive Governments seemed equally reluctant to take the firststeps toward implementing this promise.Of these events and trends I was an interested observer but little more. A full, active andeventful private and personal life engrossed me. I went to India every year; my wife wassettled in the south of France; my son, Aly, his childish delicacy overcome, lived in Englandwith his tutor, Mr. C. W. Waddington. † In the winter of 1923-1924 my wife and son camewith me to India. My own interest in racing during this period was extremely active; my wifefollowed my racing in France but not in England.Now Lord Halifax.† Formerly Principal of the Mayo College at Ajmer.In 1926 she fell ill, and was an invalid throughout that year. The doctors offered all sorts ofdiagnoses, ranging from indigestion to "nerves." Later in the year she was in a great deal ofpain; and now at last the doctors paid some attention to her condition, and an operation forappendicitis was suggested. The operation was performed in December. It was discoveredthat she was not suffering from appendicitis. She seemed to make a steady recovery. But oneafternoon I was out driving in the Bois, and when I went back to the hospital I was told thatshe had died during my absence. A small blood clot had escaped, traveled to her heart, andkilled her. She was thirty-seven years old.More than a year passed. Early in 1928 I proposed marriage to Mlle. Andrée Carron ofChambéry, Aix-les-Bains. I had known Mlle. Carron and her family for twelve or fourteenyears, indeed since she was quite a young girl. She was thirty when I proposed to her. Shehesitated for a long time before accepting me; and it was not until nearly two years later --December, 1929 -- that we were married at Aix-les-Bains. There arose a ridiculous legend --created and fostered by the newspapers -- that I met her serving behind the counter in achocolate shop whither I had gone to buy sweets. There was never a word of truth in it. Whathappened was this: when the news of our intended marriage reached the papers, all they knewwas that I was going to marry someone called Carron from Chambéry. The reportersdescended on Chambéry, looking for a Mlle. Carron. At last they found one -- selling candyin a sweet shop."There she is," they said and scurried off to telephone their newspapers that they haddiscovered the Mlle. Carron whom the Aga Khan was going to marry.The girl in the candy shop had never met me; she did not know me; my Mlle. Carron wassomeone quite different, who for several years had had a dressmaking shop in Paris with hersister, and she had never in her life had anything to do with chocolates. But the legend gotaway to a flying start, and the truth never seemed to catch up with it.Ours was for many years a happy and well-knit marriage. We had one child, my second sonSadruddin, who was born on January 17, 1933. My wife went everywhere with me. InEngland in 1930 she was received by Their Majesties and was invited to luncheon at Ascot.She shared my social life actively and fully for many years.Meanwhile I was being drawn back into political and public life. Lord Irwin, the Viceroy, ina momentous pronouncement, had shown Indians what -- in the British view -- was to betheir ultimate goal in their constitutional evolution, but he had omitted to indicate with anyprecision the steps or the road to that goal."In view of the doubts which have been expressed," said Lord Irwin, "both in Great Britainand India regarding the interpretation to be placed on the intentions of the BritishGovernment in enacting the statute of 1919, I am authorized to state clearly that in theirjudgment, it is implicit in the Declaration of 1917 that the natural issue of India'sconstitutional progress as there contemplated is the attainment of Dominion status."The two words "Dominion status" were to focus and bind Indian ambitions and aspirationsfor a decade and more, in an ever more forceful and dynamic drive toward independence; andin the end there emerged not one but two independent and sovereign states -Muslim andHindu -- the latter of which was, almost immediately, to throw away even the vestigial andnominal link of being called a Dominion and proclaim itself (as it had the constitutional rightand ability to do) a republic within the Commonwealth.In 1928-1929, however, all this was to be striven for. Congress met in Calcutta and preparedits own scheme for self-government and Dominion status; but it was marred by the fatal,obsessive flaw of all such Congress schemes to the end, that of underrating -- indeed ignoring- Muslim claims to be considered as a nation within a nation. Muslim opinion was thereforealert. A Royal Commission -- that classic British instrument for tackling a grave political orconstitutional problem at home or overseas -- was by now touring India, taking evidence inimpressive quantities and with vast thoroughness; its chairman was Sir John Simon, * thegreat lawyer-poli tician, then almost at the zenith of his dazzling career; among its memberswas the pertinacious but personally self-effacing Mr. Clement Attlee, on whose knowledge ofIndia this experience was to have a profound and lasting effect. The Viceroy had announcedthat after the Simon Commission issued its report it was intended that a conference should beheld between the Government, the representatives of British India, and the representatives ofthe Indian states, in order to try to reach agreement on the way in which constitutionalprogress should be ensured.Now Viscount Simon.It was decided therefore to hold an All- India Muslim Conference in Delhi at the end of 1928,to formulate Muslim views on the way in which Indian independence should evolve. I wasasked to preside over this conference. It proved to be, I am convinced, one of the mostimportant in the long series of such assemblies which marked the road toward total and finalindependence for the whole subcontinent. It was a vast gathering representative of all shadesof Muslim opinion. I can claim to be the parent of its important and lasting politicaldecisions. After long, full and frank discussions we were able to adopt unanimously a seriesof principles which we set out in a manifesto. They were as follows:In view of India's vast extent and its ethnological divisions, the only form of governmentsuitable to Indian conditions is a federal system with complete autonomy and residuarypowers vested in the constituent states.The right of Muslims to elect their representatives in the various Indian legislatures is nowthe law of the land, and Muslims cannot be deprived of that right without their consent.In the Provinces in which Muslims constitute a minority they shall have a representation inno case less than that enjoyed by them under the existing law (a principle known asweightage).It is essential that Muslims shall have their due share in the Central and Provincial Cabinets.We agreed to concede a similar kind of "weightage" to the Hindu minorities in Sind and otherpredominantly Muslim provinces, but we insisted that a fair proportion of Muslims should beadmitted into the Civil Service and into all statutory self-governing bodies. I myselfdemanded appropriate safeguards for "the promotion and protection of Muslim education,languages, religion, personal law and charitable institutions" -- all causes for which, overyears, I had fought as strenuously as I could. I also thought it right to warn my co-religionistsand compatriots of the perils of being too easily taken in by Congress' protestations ofundefined good will.The principles which we had enunciated were henceforward to be our guiding lights in all ourencounters with British or Hindu representatives and negotiators, with the Government ofIndia or with the Congress party, in every discussion of schemes of reform and new projectsfor the administration of the country. We now had our code book, and we did not intend todeviate from it.The unanimity of this conference was especially significant, for it marked the return -- longdelayed and for the moment private and with no public avowal of his change of mind -- ofMr. M. A. Jinnah to agreement with his fellow Muslims. Mr. Jinnah had attended theCongress party's meeting in Calcutta shortly before, and had come to the conclusion that forhim there was no future in Congress or in any camp -- allegedly on an All-India basis --which was in fact Hindu-dominated. We had at last won him over to our view.If India's political and constitutional evolution could be likened to a protracted and hard-fought chess contest (the analogy is imperfect, I know, for there were always at least threeplayers in this game), then it may be said that the board had now been set for an especiallycrucial game, the pieces were in place, and there was a considerable lull while everyonethought out his next move. The Simon Commission set about the task of preparing its report.A General Election in Britain resulted in the resignation of Mr. Baldwin, and the formationby Mr. Ramsay MacDonald of his second Labor Administration; but although the Labor partywere numerically the strongest, they did not command an absolute majority in the House ofCommons and were dependent, as five years before, on Liberal support. The world scenechanged rapidly and startlingly during 1929. The Wall Street crash ushered in the years ofeconomic depression, the slump which was to send unemployment figures steadily mountingin practically every Western coun try and which was to lead desperate men -- in Germany andelsewhere -- to seek desperate remedies. The brief and deceptively sunlit epoch of the 1920'swas over; we were on the threshold of what Sir Winston Churchill has described as "theterrible thirties."I spent the first three months of 1929 in Egypt making a close study of Egyptology, having asmy guide and instructor Professor Newbury, a distinguished Egyptologist, who accompaniedme on a tour of all the monuments of the Nile Valley right up to Abu Simbal and back.The British High Commissioner in Egypt was Lord Lloyd, whom I had known well in Indiaduring his highly successful time as Governor of Bombay. A strong-minded imperialist of theschool of Cromer and Curzon, George Lloyd was very shortly to come into conflict with hisGovernment at home and resign the post in which he felt that he had lost their confidence. Hewas a man of remarkable intellectual gifts and great tenacity of purpose. Since he believed sofervently and with so deep and unswerving a passion in the greatness of Britain's imperialdestiny, it was perhaps a blessing in disguise that he died early in the Second World Warwhile still -as statesmen are reckoned -- a comparatively young man, for bitter indeed wouldhave been his feelings had he lived to see the final hauling down of the British flag in Indiaand the partition of the subcontinent into the republic of Bharat and the eventual republic ofPakistan.To me personally he was the kindest and most generous of hosts, but I could not help beinguncomfortably aware of his unpopularity with all sections of the Egyptian governing class.King Fuad, whom I had known for more than thirty years and with whom I had been inparticularly close contact when the British Government sent me on my mission to Egypt earlyin the First World War, made a special point of asking me to call and see him. He receivedme in private at the Abdin Palace. We were alone together for a long time and we had arevealing, if saddening, conversation. The King was already a sick man, though nobodyrealized the seriousness of his malady. He wept openly at the way in which he himself wasrebuffed and neglected, and at the British High Commissioner's relentless refusal to permithim to have any effective voice in the governing of his own country.“Lloyd," he said, "pulls the strings while the marionettes dance. Cromer turned Abbas Hilmiinto a puppet. Lloyd is turning me into a corpse!"At the Mohammed Ali Club, which was the great meeting place of Egypt's leaders, wherethey could talk, play their beloved cards, and canvass all their countless political and businessschemes and plans, I heard -- from one friend and acquaintance after another -the same story:Field Marshal Lord Allenby, for whose inflexible sense of justice they had a profoundadmiration, had made promises which had led them to expect increasing independence; butnow they found that the "strings" which Allenby had reserved for the High Commissionerhad been converted by Lloyd into iron chains -- not, I may say, my own words but the precisephrase used to me by more than one Egyptian Minister.Why had Lord Lloyd, who in India had been quite liberal and had always acted in the spirit aswell as the letter of the constitution under which he governed, shown so different a face inEgypt? Why had he indeed acted not as a High Commissioner but as a Viceroy with plenarypowers? May the answer not be that when he was in India as Governor of Bombay, theMontagu-Chelmsford constitution, whose principles he applied liberally and generously,limited home rule to certain clearly specified spheres of activity and administration, andwithin those well-defined limits there was neither need nor excuse for Lloyd to interfere? Butin Egypt the glove came off his iron hand; for there the whole relationship was fluid andindeterminate, and there were no clear-cut lines of demarcation to divide and define therespective spheres of authority of the King and his Ministers and of the British HighCommissioner. The Egyptians considered that their country was an independent sovereignstate and that the King and his advisors were absolutely their own masters, not only in allmatters of internal, executive, day-to-day control and administration of their country's affairs,but indeed in external relations, whereas the High Commis sioner's function was merely towatch Great Britain's interests and see that Egypt took no action and joined no diplomaticcombination hostile or injurious to Britain. George Lloyd, on the other hand, saw no cleardefinition of his powers or of those of the King and his Ministers, and he realized that if hedid not keep a close watch and a firmly guiding hand, the whole team might get out ofcontrol.In the summer of 1930 the Simon Commission issued its report. Its analysis of India'spolitical history under British rule and of her contemporary situation was as masterly as itwas lucid; it was however on the constructive side of its task that the Commission's report fellsharply short of the high expectations and hopes which its appointment had aroused. Itparticularly disappointed the Congress leaders, and their resentment of it was loudly andunequivocally expressed. Lord Irwin, the Viceroy, was on leave in England in the earlier partof 1930, and when he returned to India he announced that His Majesty's Governmentproposed to convene a Round Table Conference in London to consider the future of thecountry and to reform its constitution. The announcement came at a time of considerabletension, when a civil disobedience campaign, launched by Mahatma Gandhi, was at itsheight. It eased the tension for the time being; and the Viceroy was able to receive, in acalmer political atmosphere than had seemed possible a few weeks before, a representativedelegation * to discuss the date and the personnel of the Round Table Conference and thequestion of an amnesty for political offenders jailed in connection with the civil disobediencecampaign. Agreement, however, was not reached at this preliminary meeting; MahatmaGandhi withdrew and refused to give any undertaking that Congress would attend the RoundTable Conference. The Indian National Congress, in session at Lahore, passed a resolution infavor of a renewed resort to civil disobedience.The members of the delegation were Mahatma Gandhi, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, PanditMotilal Nehru, Mr. M. A. Jinnah and Mr. V. J. Patel, then President of the Indian NationalAssembly.The Viceroy pertinaciously maintained his hopeful, sympathetic and wise attitude. IfCongress would not, at the outset at any rate, co-operate in the attempt to find a way out ofIndia's political perplexities, the attempt would still be made. As many eminent andrepresentative leaders of Indian political thought and feeling as possible -- outside the ranksof Congress -- would be invited. Mr. Nehru, in his Autobiography which was published in1936 (when the whole issue of Indian independence was still unsettled), made some causticobservations about the personal qualifications of the delegates to the conference; in the longerperspective of history, however, it can be seen as a remarkable assemblage of men andwomen of widely differing background and outlook, all genuinely anxious to discover apeaceful and honorable path to the independence and self-government which had explicitlybeen proclaimed to be the objectives of Britain's rule in India.The British representatives included the Prime Minister, Mr. Ramsay MacDonald; the LordChancellor, Lord Sankey; the Secretary of State for India, Mr. Wedgwood Benn * ; and --representing the Conservative Opposition -- Sir Samuel Hoare, † who was later, in someyears that were crucial to India's destiny, to be Secretary of State for India; and LordReading, a Liberal leader and former Viceroy. The British-Indian delegation, of which I hadbeen appointed a member, included Muslim, Hindu and Parsee representatives drawn frommany shades of political opinion and other delegates representing numerous smallercommunities; among the Muslims, Mr. M. A. Jinnah, Sir Mohammed Shaffi, Sir ZafrullahKhan and Maulana Mohammed Ali; and two women delegates, the Begum Shah Nawaz andMrs. Subbaroyan; among the Hindus, Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, the Rt. Hon. V. S. SrinivasaSastri; Sir C. P. Ramaswami Alyar, Sir Chimanlal Setalvad, Mr. M. R. Jayakar and DiwanBahadur Rama Mudaliyar; among the Parsees, Sir Phiroze Sethna, Sir Cowasji Jehangir andSir H. P. Mody. Mr. Ambedkar, himself born an "untouchable," represented the DepressedClasses; Sir Henry Gidney, the Anglo-Indian community.Now Lord Stansgate.† Now Lord Templewood.The rep resentation of Ruling Princes was as impressive as it was stately, including as it didmany of the bearers of the greatest and most famous names in Indian chivalry. TheMaharajah Gaekwar of Baroda was their leader, and others with him were the Maharajahs ofBikaner, Patiala, Bhopal, Kashmir, Rewa and Jamnagar -- better known perhaps to millionsof British citizens as the unforgettable "Ranji" of cricket fame. The Princes wereaccompanied, many of them, by their Diwans -- their Prime Ministers -- who includedstatesmen of the quality and distinction of Sir Akbar Hydari and Sir Mirza Ismail, and othereminent men.We assembled in London in the autumn of 1930 I had the honor of being elected leader of theMuslim delegation. We established our headquarters in the Ritz Hotel, where it has long beenmy custom to stay whenever I am in London. It is no formality to say that it was an honor tobe chosen to lead so notable a body of men -- including personalities of the caliber of Mr. M.A. Jinnah, later to be the creator of Pakistan and the Quaid-i-Azam, or Sir MohammedZafrullah Khan, for many years India's representative at numerous international conferencesand first Foreign Minister of Pakistan, or my old and tried friend, Sir Mohammed Shaffi, oneof the founders of the Muslim League.The happiness of being thus chosen was for me one of the many joys of an exceptionallyhappy, as well as eventful, period of my life. It was the first twelvemonth of my marriage toMlle. Andrée Carron, and I had also had the by no means negligible experience of winningthe Derby with Blenheim.Later, then, in this memorable year the full first Round Table Conference began with a formalinaugural session in the House of Lords, presided over by His Majesty, King George V. Mycolleagues then accorded me the further honor of electing me to be chairman of the British-Indian section of the conference, that is, of all the Indian representatives except the RulingPrinces, who had come, of course, as their own representatives and in their own capacity asthe sovereigns of their various principalities and states.The King, not long recovered from his extremely serious illness, made of his opening speecha most moving appeal to us all to con template the momentous character of the task to whichwe had set our hands."I shall follow the course of your proceedings," said the King, "with the closest and mostsympathetic interest, not indeed without anxiety but with a greater confidence. The materialconditions which surround the lives of my subjects in India affect me dearly, and will be everpresent in my thoughts during your forthcoming deliberations. I have also in mind the justclaims of majorities and minorities, of men and women, of town dwellers and tillers of thesoil, of landlords and tenants, of the strong and the weak, of the rich and poor, of the races,castes and creeds of which the body politic is composed. For those things I care deeply. Icannot doubt that the true foundation of self-government is in the fusion of such divergentclaims into mutual obligations and in their recognition and fulfillment. It is my hope that thefuture government of India based on its foundation will give expression to her honorableaspirations."Other eloquent and stirring orations followed; and the conference, moving to St. James'sPalace, settled down to its complex and formidable task. We achieved a surface harmony, butunderneath there were deep and difficult rifts of sentiment and of outlook whose effect wasbound to be felt from the outset. In order to understand this it is necessary to restate brieflythe political situation and the state of Indo-British relations as they both stood in this autumnof 1930. The Simon Commission's Report advanced a scheme which denied centralresponsibility and also relegated the idea of a federation of India to a distant and undefinedfuture. This could not really be satisfactory to anybody, for it offered, not a workablecompromise, but an evasion of an existing -- indeed a pressing -political conflict. For whilethe whole drive of the Hindu movement to self-government was concentrated on the idea of astrong central government and the establishment of an immediate democracy, conceivedsolely in terms of numbers, in which religious differences counted as such and as nothingmore, Muslim opinion had crystallized steadily in favor of a distribution of powers from thecenter to virtually self-governing and autonomous provincial governments. Finally, no onehad as yet evolved the conception of an All-India federation in which the states would bepartners. Therefore none of the major parties at the conference arrived with any definitescheme -- only with conflicting claims. The British Government, not unnaturally, wassomewhat at sea when presented with what seemed to be a series of contradictory andirreconcilable claims and counterclaims.The first essential task, as I saw it, was to find some way of bridging the gulf between theMuslim and Hindu sections of the BritishIndian delegation. Only when we had achieved thatbridge did it seem to me that we could offer to the British representatives our conjointproposals for the constitutional development of India.Pre-eminent among those whose efforts were devoted with zeal and enthusiasm to the sameor closely similar ends was my friend, His Highness the Nawab of Bhopal. He was anoutstanding figure among the Ruling Princes of his time -- a devout Muslim, a man of drivingenergy and will power, of great physical strength, a sportsman and athlete and a first-classpolo player. He was also a convinced Indian nationalist, eager to throw off India'ssemicolonial yoke and do away with her dependent status. He agreed with me entirely that ifwe of British India could not find ways and means of settling our own differences of opinion,we could not go to His Majesty's Government with any formulated set of demands; and thiswas leaving out of consideration altogether the protected states. From the first moment thatwe met at the Nawab's house, it was my deep conviction that this was what mattered most,which made me a champion of a Muslim-Hindu understanding about our ultimate view of anindependent India -- on the one hand, a truly confederate state or on the other, a state such asCanada in which the principal and overriding authority and power are reserved for the centralgovernment.As a preliminary to reaching agreement with our Hindu colleagues we had to secureagreement inside our own Muslim delegation. At first several of the Muslim delegates, inparticular Mr. Jinnah, were -- as they had long been before the conference -- suspicious of theidea of federation. Its dangers were, I well knew, neither remote nor unimportant; to associatea growing democracy with a number of states in which personal rule was the established and,as it then seemed, inalienable custom might well be a risky as well as complex innovation;and also there was the danger that since the majority of Ruling Princes were Hindu, theremight be a serious diminution of the political influence of the Muslim community within thefederation as a whole. However I was convinced that whatever the temporary difficulties andrisks involved in a federal scheme, it still offered the best and the most acceptable solution ofIndia's political problems, that it offered an opportunity which might never recur, and that if itrequired compromise to make it effective, it would be a small price to pay for its obvious andnumerous advantages.I am happy to think that when within the Muslim delegation we had made our decision infavor of federation, Mr. Jinnah, who had been its doughtiest opponent, was an inflexibly loyaland irreproachably helpful colleague throughout all the subsequent discussions andnegotiations.Since the Ruling Princes had signified their assent to some federal form of government, itremained now only to win the agreement of the Hindu representatives. I strove to convincethem that if they made the concession of accepting the principle of a federated and not aunited India they -- and we -- would reap the harvest of the benefits of immediate and large-scale political advancement for the country as a whole. The guarantees which we askedconsisted of a truly federal constitution; understandings that the Muslim majorities in thePunjab and Bengal would not, by artificial "rigging" of the constitution, be turned intominorities; the separation of the Sind from Bombay and its establishment as a separateProvince; the introduction of a full-scale system of constitutional government in theNorthwest Frontier Province; and the assurance of the statutory reservation of a certainproportion of places in the Army and in the Civil Service for Muslims. If they gave usassurances of this character, we in our turn would offer them a united front in face of theBritish. I even went further and offered, as a special concession, unity of command under achosen Indian leader whose orders we would bind the Muslim community to accept. In hismemoirs Sir Chimanlal Setalvad has referred to these offers of mine, and his evidence at leaststands firmly on record that if the first Round Table Conference did not achieve all that wasexpected of it, and if, ultimately, not only was Dominion status not brought about but Indiahad to be partitioned, some at least of the beginnings of these momentous happenings are tobe found in the Hindu delegations' refusal to accept my offer. I am certain that Sapru andSastri, in their heart of hearts, wanted to accept our Muslim proposals, but they were afraid oftheir Hindu colleagues and, above all, the influence of the Mahasabha. I must formally recordmy solemn conviction that had my views been accepted then and there, later history wouldhave taken a profoundly different course, and there would now have long since been inexistence a Federal Government of India, in which Muslims and Hindus would have beenpartners in the day-to-day administration of the country, politically satisfied and contentedlyworking together for the benefit of India as a whole. In a subsequent chapter I shall haveoccasion to refer to the continued stubbornness and intransigence of Hindu opinion, which ata much later date rejected the constitution offered it by the British Cabinet Mission. Theformulation of this constitution, in outline and in principle, should have marked the beginningof the Round Table Conference, if the Hindu representatives, when we met them in theNawab of Bhopal's house, had accepted my offer on behalf of the Muslims with the sinceritywith which I put it forward.That acceptance denied us, the rest of the first Round Table Conference was not of muchessential or practical importance, since the foundation on which its deliberations should havebeen built was vague and fragile instead of strong and firm.One successful step forward seemed then to be of great importance, but time and a train ofgreat events have shown it to have been minor and transient. This was the Princes'announcement of their acceptance of the idea of federation. The British representatives at theConference hailed it -- perhaps not unnaturally from their point of view -- as a significant andconstructive advance, of real assistance in the task of securing a devolution of power from theUnited Kingdom Parliament to a so-called Indian Federal Parliament.It gained in impressiveness from the fact that Lord Reading, leader of the Liberal party in theHouse of Lords, enfolded with the august aura of prestige which his status as an ex-Viceroygave him, and strongly convinced as he was of the importance of a centralized responsibilityin all major spheres of administration and executive authority, gave it his hearty if measuredapproval. To the Prime Minister, Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, it seemed salvation and successfor the conference rather than the shipwreck which, so it appeared at the time, would havebeen disastrous. Mr. MacDonald's situation throughout the conference was complicated anddelicate, though hardly unique, for it was the kind of situation which he frequently had to facein his career. At the height of his power he faced it with aplomb and adroitness, but it wasdifficult to disregard the fact that, despite all his diplomatic skill and finesse, he was notunlike the driver who has eight spirited horses in his coaching team and is aware that anycouple can and probably will go off on its own and seek to pull the coach in a totally differentdirection from that which he intends.To the Indian representatives at the conference Mr. MacDonald had to be -- and was -- ourchairman, presiding with shrewd and benevolent impartiality over our deliberations, wise andvenerated, our guide, philosopher and friend in the tricky mazes of democratic, constitutionalprocedure and theory in which we were having our protracted initiation. To his own party,burdened with office -- in 1930, that year of dark foreboding and hints of the turbulence andthe sorrow that were imminent -- but without that support of a solid and unthreatenedmajority in the House of Commons which alone could ensure effectiveness and permanenceto its decisions, he had to appear as the leader in the long crusade against out-of-dateimperialism, obstructive vested interests, and the emancipator, the creator of Indian freedomand independence which he sincerely desired to be. In this role he was conscious that his wasan ad vanced and most progressive view of India's problems and that he and his party wereeager to travel swiftly the whole road to Dominion status, with few and minor reservations orrestrictions. But the Conservative Opposition, whose patience he could not possibly afford totest too highly, was jealously watchful of Britain's imperial interests; and both in Parliamentand in the Press the right-wing "die-hard" element of the Conservative party possessedpowerful and authoritative citadels whence to challenge-perhaps to overthrow-him, if he tooflagrantly disregarded their views.In these circumstances it was perhaps inevitable that an especial atmosphere of hopefulnessand optimism should envelop this, the conference's one major tangible achievement.Something, it was felt, above and beyond mere provincial autonomy had been established andensured. The lawyers among us, like Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, let themselves become zestfullyabsorbed in the details of what they then believed would lead to a serious and permanentadvance along the road to Indian self-government. I must say that I in my heart of hearts wasalways suspicious that our work might not procure any real or lasting results because thegreat realities of India in 1930 were being forgotten.It was forgotten that there were, first and foremost and all the time, fundamental differencesbetween the Muslim and Hindu peoples that inhabited the subcontinent, and that thesedifferences were most apparent between the Muslims of the two Northwestern and Easternsections of India and the Hindu majority in the rest.It was forgotten that the intelligentsia -- although only ten per cent of the total Hindupopulation -- numbered between forty and fifty million, and could not possibly be dismissedas "a mere microscopic minority." It was forgotten that they desired the British to quit India,bag and baggage, finally and forever; this was the aim for which they labored and strove, andindeed it was brought to pass in 1947. All the minutiae of an elaborate paper constitution,with all its cautious safeguards, its neat balancing of power by abstract and theoreticalformulas which were to be embodied in it, seemed to them a pack of cunning and perniciousnonsense, a lot of irksome tricks by which all that the British seemed with one hand to givecould be -- and would be -- snatched back with the other.It was forgotten that the Princes, for all their wealth, ability, personal charm, prestige andsincere loyalty to the British connection, had in fact very little power or influence. They werenot, of course, the sinister stooges that hostile propaganda often dubbed them, but both theiractual authority and their capacity to sway opinion by their influence had been sapped in longyears during which their subjects -- and the Indian people at large -- had come to realize thatthey were powerless, and incapable of holding an independent view or making anindependent decision, if that view or that decision conflicted with the policy of the all-powerful British Residents. Thus gradually their support of the federal constitution -though ittook in the British ruling class -- was shown to possess very little reality, and to be a shadowwithout the substance of power.By the time the second Round Table Conference assembled in the autumn of 1931 the worldsituation had changed vastly, and so had the state of Indo-British relations. The economiccrisis, in all its sharpness and severity, had hit Europe and the United Kingdom. The collapseof the famous Austrian Credit-Anstalt Bank had led to a general and hasty restriction of creditand a long steep tumble in world trade. In Britain the number of unemployed mounted to avast, grim total in the region of three millions; the publication of the May Report, anauthoritative, officially ordered survey of the country's economic, financial and fiscalcondition, which contained a number of recommendations for economy measures totallyinacceptable to the majority of Mr. Ramsay MacDonald's Cabinet colleagues, precipitated amajor political crisis. In September the King interrupted his annual and cherished holiday atBalmoral and returned to London, summoning to meet him the various leaders of the politicalparties. Thereafter a National Government was formed, charged with the task of dealing withthe crisis; Mr. MacDonald was Prime Minister, supported by Conservatives and Liberals likeMr. Baldwin, Sir Austen Chamberlain, Sir John Simon and Sir Herbert Samuel. In theGeneral Election which followed quickly on the formation of this government its supporters,mainly Conservatives and National Liberals, were returned to power with an overwhelmingmajority, and Labor representation in the Commons was reduced to "rump" propositions --almost the only ex-Ministers left in the House being Mr. George Lansbury, the veteranpacifist, and Mr. Attlee.These changes could not but affect the second Round Table Conference; but, grave andpreoccupying as were the events in which Britain and the British Government were involved,they did not cause its postponement. Meanwhile the patience and the considerable powers ofpersuasion of the Viceroy, Lord Irwin -- "the tall Christian" as Mr. Mohammed Ali calledhim in an historic phrase -- had prevailed and Mahatma Gandhi agreed to come to London.He went in his own personal capacity, but it was generally felt that, even if he did not comeas the nominated leader and representative of Congress, his was the voice of authority anddecision so far as the vast majority of Hindus were concerned.We Muslims for our part hoped that Mahatma Gandhi, with his unique political flair allied tohis vast personal prestige, would appreciate the fact (and act upon it) that to make a combinedfront of Hindus and Muslims would in itself be a major step forward, and that all wouldrealize that it would offer an unparalleled opportunity for extracting out of the Round TableConference a constitution which would be a genuine transference of power from British toIndian hands and which would give India the status of a world Power. Though MahatmaGandhi could not possibly in 1930 have foreseen or hoped for anything like the final solutionof 1947, he must, when he arrived, have hoped -- as did most of us from the East at theConference -- that real power would be transferred, even if India and Whitehall were stilllinked by one or two silken strings.Mahatma Gandhi arrived in London in November, 1931, as the sole representative ofCongress. He was accompanied by the eminent Indian poet, Mrs. Sarojini Naidu. Our firstmeeting in our capacity as delegates to the second Round Table Conference occurred atmidnight in my own room at the Ritz Hotel. It may be a suitable moment therefore to pausein my narrative and sum up my im pressions and recollections of two truly remarkablepersonalities.In one way or another I knew and was in touch with Mahatma Gandhi for more than forty-five years. I first heard of him about 1899 or 1900 when both he and I were activelyconcerned with the status and future of Indians in South Africa, a perennial problem whichwas to engage our attention across many years. At that time his philosophy was onlybeginning to coalesce, and he had not made the major personal decision of his life, which wasthe break with, and the turning away from, modern material progress. On and off we were intouch for the next ten or twelve years, usually on some facet of the Indian problem in SouthAfrica. We were in London at the same time shortly after the outbreak of the First WorldWar; as he had done at the beginning of the South African War he offered his assistance tothe British Government for ambulance and field hospital work. Already he had, however,traveled far along his own mental and spiritual road, and I was aware that he had decided thatsalvation for India and for his fellow countrymen lay in renouncing contemporary,industrialized and materialistic so-called civilization. I have given an account of our contactsat the time of the Khilafat agitation in 1920-1921; thereafter Mahatma Gandhi was, for therest of his life, a major figure in world history.I believe that both in Mahatma Gandhi's philosophical outlook and in his political work therewere certain profound inconsistencies, which all his life he strove, without complete success,to reconcile. The chief, formative spiritual influences of his life were Christ, as revealed inthe New Testament, Tolstoy, Thoreau, and certain exponents of various forms of Hinduasceticism; yet he was not, in the ordinarily accepted sense, a pure ascetic; he had littlepatience and no sympathy with the merely contemplative life of the mystic totally withdrawnfrom the world, or with monks, whether Buddhist or Christian, who accept the rule of anenclosed order. If I may say so, I am convinced that Gandhi's philosophy was notrenunciation of this world but its reformation, with mutual and associative human love as thedynamic spark in that reformation. Yet this involved for him a certain degree of renunciation.This attitude toward the products of the industrial and technical revolution of our time wascharacteristically ambivalent. He believed that all men ought to have the full benefits -- ingenerally diffused well-being -- of the power over nature which science has put at man'sdisposal. Yet he felt that, at man's present level of social and spiritual development, if someindividuals accepted these benefits, then the vast majority would be deprived of them andwould be both proportionally and absolutely worse off than before.This ambivalence, rooted as it was in a profound mental and spiritual contradiction, wasalways evident throughout his life, in his relations with his nearest and dearest friends and inhis teaching and in his practice.I remember that I once had a long conversation with him in Poona after he had been gravelyill and had undergone an operation. He was in bed at the Sassoon Hospital, where I went tosee him. His praise and his admiration for the hospital, for the British surgeon who hadoperated on him, for the consultants and the nursing staff were unstinted. Yet he could not butfeel that since such a standard of treatment and attention could not be given to every singleone of the millions of India's population, it must be wrong for it to be at his disposal inPoona. Just as much as everyone else, however, he realized that it would be a crime to abolishthe Sassoon Hospital -- and everything which it symbolized and represented -- that itsbenefits must go to some, since they could not go to all, but to whom? And yet, he felt, andyet, and yet...his philosophy trailed off into a question mark that was also a protest.There in his bed in that Poona hospital he faced the impossibility of complete adjustment. Itwas this hard fact of incomplete adjustment, in the world as it is, which made him appear atsome moments "for" material progress, and at others "against" it. It gave some critics cause todoubt either the sincerity of his Christian Tolstoyan ideals or the efficacy of his activities onthe world of practical politics and economics. It would perhaps be more just as well as morecharitable to realize that Mahatma Gandhi was far from alone in the contradictions and theconflicts of his inner and his outer life. Are not such contradictions the very foundation of lifefor all of us, in its spiritual as well as its material aspects; and if we seek to be of any use orservice to ourselves and to our fellow men, can we do otherwise than live, as best we may, inthe light of these contradictions?Our last talk in 1945-1946 was in its way a reflection in miniature of the whole of MahatmaGandhi's spiritual and intellectual life. Its setting and its circumstances illustrated, forcefullyenough, the simple fact that in our world as it is we can never get away from contradictions. Ihad come to talk politics with Gandhi; since I was no longer actively a participant in Indianpolitics, I had to some extent come as a companion of my old and valued friend, the Nawabof Bhopal. Bhopal, Chancellor of the still existent Chamber of Princes, was a free lance in theMuslim ranks of the time, for he had not accepted the Quaid-i-Azam's conviction that only apartition of the subcontinent could give the Muslims what they wanted. I for my part stillcherished some hopes that the full and final amputation could be avoided, if something on thelines of the constitution proposed by the last British Cabinet Mission could have beenacceptable. Now I see clearly that I was wrong; amputation was the only remedy. MahatmaGandhi and I talked of these matters; we talked of South Africa; then as I walked out, Ichanged the subject and asked: "What really is your opinion of Marxism -of Marx himself, ofEngels, of Lenin and of Stalin?"His answer was as characteristic as it was adroit: "I," he said, "would be a hundred per centcommunist myself -- if Marx's final stage were the first stage, and if Lenin's economic idealswere put immediately into practice."If -- there lay the contradiction. If, as Marx had laid it down, the state would "wither away"not as the last phase of the revolution but as the first; and if Lenin's economic axiom, "Fromeveryone according to his capacity; to everyone according to his needs," could be putimmediately into practice, then indeed the Marxist millennium would begin. I countered himwith the orthodox Stalinist argument: the world as it is today contains capitalist-imperialiststates, whose productive capacity is geared not to peace and utility but as a means to thepossible end of aggressive and imperialist war; in such a world the communist state must beorganized in its own defense; and how can there be a free society in which the state hasindeed "withered away" without the essential preliminary phase of the world triumph oforganized socialism?"Well," said Gandhi, "let one country do it. Let one country give up its state organization, itspolice and its armed forces, its sanctions and its compulsions. Let one state really witheraway. The happiness that would there prevail would be so great and so abiding that othercountries would, for very shame, let their capitalist-imperialist societies and states witheraway."Mahatma Gandhi no more than anyone else could evade the contradiction that lies at the baseof life in this epoch. We have constantly to put up with second-best and probably worse,since we cannot achieve our full ideal. Gandhi too realized this, despite his hope thatmankind could attain Marx's final phase -- a goal which, if it is ever attainable at all, will bereached by another route than an immediate short cut by way of selected portions of the livesof Christ, Mohammed and Buddha.Mrs. Naidu, Gandhi's companion in his midnight conference with me at the Ritz that autumnnight in 1931, was in her way hardly less fascinating a personality. She was one of the mostremarkable women I have ever met, in some ways as remarkable as Miss Nightingale herself.Her home after her marriage was in Hyderabad. Although her original inclinations and herupbringing were extremely democratic, she was a poet. Her sensitive and romanticimagination was impressed by the originality and strangeness as well as the glamour of thecharacter of the then Nizam of Hyderabad -- the father of His present Exalted Highness -agentle and timorous man, of a delicate and refined sensibility and sentiment, yet endowedwith great clarity of vision, independence of judgment, and generosity and withal thepossessor of a great heart in a sadly frail frame. He too had poetic aspirations, and some ofhis Urdu writings could indeed almost be dignified with the name of poetry. Mrs. Naidu sanghis praises; but she herself was a real poet, who wrote strongly and tenderly of love and oflife, of the world of the spirit and the passions. In that linking of tenderness and strengthwhich was her nature there was no room for malice, hatred or ill-will. She was a vigorousnationalist, determined that the British must leave India and her destiny in the hands ofIndia's children, yet her admiration for Western civilization and Western science -- above allfor English literature -- was deep and measureless. Her proud freedom from prejudice shedemonstrated at the time of the death of Rudyard Kipling. Kipling's out-andout imperialism,the rigid limitations of his view of India's political capacity and potentialities -- despite hisrecognition of their qualities of intelligence and fidelity -- were inevitably at the opposite polefrom Mrs. Naidu's outlook. Yet when he died Mrs. Naidu published a statement in which shepaid her full and generous tribute of admiration to his genius -- to the poet, the novelist, theunequaled teller of tales -- making it clear beyond all argument that this recognition of theartist by the artist was utterly distinct from and unaffected by her profound and abidingdislike of his racial and political philosophy.Such then were the notable pair who were ushered into my sitting room at the Ritz atmidnight. We posed together for the press photographers, and then settled down to ourconversation. I opened it by saying to Mahatmaji that were he now to show himself a realfather to India's Muslims, they would respond by helping him, to the utmost of their ability,in his struggle for India's independence.Mahatmaji turned to face me. "I cannot in truth say," he observed, "that I have any feelings ofpaternal love for Muslims. But if you put the matter on grounds of political necessity, I amready to discuss it in a co-operative spirit. I cannot indulge in any form of sentiment."This was a cold douche at the outset; and the chilly effect of it pervaded the rest of ourconversation. I felt that, whereas I had given prompt and ready evidence of a genuineemotional attachment and kinship, there had been no similar response from the Mahatmaji.Years later -- in 1940 -- I reminded him of this. He said that he completely recollected theepisode. "I am very, very sorry," he said then, "that you misunderstood that answer of mine. Ididn't mean that I was aware of no emotional attachment, no feeling for the welfare ofMuslims; I only meant that I was conscious of full blood brotherhood, yes, but not of thesuperiority that fatherhood would imply."And I, on my side, had only meant in that word "father" to show respect for the frailty of hisage -- not, of course, frailty in health or mental capacity -- and not to hint at any superiority.This unfortunate initial misunderstanding over words had more than a passing effect. For itleft the impression, which persisted not only that night but throughout the Round TableConference, that our attempts to reach a Muslim-Hindu entente were purely political andwithout the stabilizing emotional ties of long fellow citizenship and admiration for oneanother's civilization and culture. Thus there could be no cordiality about any entente wemight achieve; we were driven back to cold politics, with none of the inspiring warmth ofemotional understanding to suffuse and strengthen our discussions.This preliminary talk did not take us far. Thereafter we had a further series of conversations -usually at midnight in my rooms at the Ritz -- I myself presiding as host, and Mr. Jinnahand Sir Mohammed Shaffi negotiating on one side, and Mahatma Gandhi on the other. Thestory of these discussions is long and not, alas, particularly fruitful.They were informal talks and no record was kept. I said little and left the bulk of thediscussion to Mr. Jinnah and Sir Mohammed Shaffi, and to other delegates who from time totime took part, notably Sir Zafrullah Khan, Mr. Shaukat Ali and the late Shaffat Ali Khan.Much of the disputation vividly recalled Fitzgerald's quotation:Myself when young did eagerly frequentDoctor and Saint, and heard great argumentAbout it and about: but evermoreCame out by the same door as in I went.Always the argument returned to certain basic points of difference: Was India a nation or twonations? Was Islam merely a religious minority, or were Muslims in those areas in whichthey were in a majority to have and to hold special political rights and responsibilities? TheCongress attitude seemed to us doctrinaire and unrealistic. They held stubbornly to their one-nation theory, which we knew to be historically insupportable. We maintained that before thecoming of the British Raj the various regions of the Indian subcontinent had never been onecountry, that the Raj had created an artificial and transient unity, and that when the Raj went,that unity could not be preserved and the diverse peoples, with their profound racial andreligious differences, could not remain fellow-sleepers for all time but they would awake andgo their separate ways.However close therefore we might come to agreement on points of detail, this ultimatedisagreement on principle could not be bridged.The Mahatma sought to impose a first and fundamental condition: that the Muslims should,before they asked for any guarantees for themselves, accept Congress' interpretation ofSwaraj -self-government -- as their goal. To which Mr. Jinnah very rightly answered that,since the Mahatma was not imposing this condition on the other Hindu members of thevarious delegations attending the Round Table, why should he impose it on the Muslims?Here was another heavy handicap.Our conditions were the same throughout: very few powers at the center, except in respect ofdefense and external affairs; all other powers to be transferred, and especially to thoseprovinces in which there were Muslim majorities -- the Punjab, Bengal, Sind, Baluchistanand the Northwest Frontier. We were adamant because we knew that the majority of theMuslims who lived in Bengal and the Punjab were adamant.Mahatma Gandhi fully recognized the importance of having us in his camp. Who knows? --perhaps he might have seen his way to accept our viewpoint, but Pundit Malaviya and theHindu Mahasabha exerted great pressure against us, deploying arguments based on abstractpolitical doctrines and principles which, as the partition of 1947 proved, were totallyunrelated to the realities of India.As time went on the hair-splitting became finer and finer, the arguments more and moreabstract: a nation could not hand over unspecified powers to its provinces; there was noconstitutional way of putting a limit on the devices by which a majority could be turned into aminority -- fascinating academic issues, but with little or no connection with the real facts andfigures of Indian life.In fairness I ought to mention one practical reform which did emerge from all our discussionsand in the end contributed something to the settlement of 1947. This was the separation ofSind from Bombay and its establishment as a Province with a Governor and administration ofits own. For at least thirty years previously the continued connection of these two had been ananachronism; its existence explains much of Sind's so-called backwardness, and the rivalryand the jealousy that arose between Bombay, the older city which ruled, and Karachi, theyounger city which was ruled.In the Province of Bombay the I.C.S. officials who attained the highest ranks of the servicetended to have spent years in Marathi or Gujerati districts. Sind differed from other parts ofthe Province in race, language, religion and the physical shape of the land, and service in itrequired a quite different outlook, mentality and training. Sind had been neglected in matterslike communications, roads and internal development, by an administrative center fromwhich it was far distant and with which its only connections were by sea or across theterritories of princely states.A special committee was set up to consider the whole question of the separation of Sind. TheMuslim representatives on it -- of whom I was one -- did not argue the case on communallines; we urged that Sind be separated from Bombay as an act of common justice to itsinhabitants, and on practical and administrative grounds. Apart from one or two memberswho represented Bombay and were anti-separation, our other Hindu colleagues supported us,and our proposal was carried.The chairman of this particular committee was the late Earl Russell, the elder brother of thepresent Earl, better known as Bertrand Russell. He was a lively and interesting personality,who had endured -- and surmounted -- the difficulties and the legal and social complicationsof a stormy marital career in his early life. He was a grandson of the first Earl -- Lord JohnRussell, Queen Victoria's famous Whig Prime Minister. Born and reared in this inmost circleof the old Whig oligarchy of England, he was himself supremely unclass-conscious, endowedwith a wonderful memory, richly stored, and with great gifts as a raconteur.He died in the south of France not long after the end of the conference; the news of his deathcame as a shock, for I had looked forward to our friendship continuing and enriching itselffor the rest of our lives.One of his former wives, who lived not far from my own home at Antibes, was no lessremarkable and original a character -- the tiny, inimitable and indomitable Elizabeth, ofElizabeth and her German Garden. She maintained her passion for garden-building to theend. She lived not far from the country club and golf course at Mougins; she designed muchof its landscape gardening and floral planning; and my wife, Princess Andrée, and I consultedher more than once about our own garden.To return to the Round Table Conferences: in the end, their many long sessions achievedlittle. The Mahatmaji returned to India; the sum total of all our work was a vast array ofstatistics and dates, a great many speeches and little or no positive understanding. The secondconference finished, all the delegates dispersed, and we awaited what was in fact the thirdRound Table Conference -- it was officially known as the Joint Select Committee appointedby Parliament under the chairmanship of the Marquis of Linlithgow -- to draw up the IndianFederal Constitution.Meanwhile my ordinary life outside politics had continued tranquilly and eventfully. Mywife, Princess Andrée, had throughout the exhausting and protracted sessions of the first twoRound Table Conferences been of quite invaluable support and help to me. For theconferences had a circumambience of hospitality and sociability, parties, receptions anddinners innumerable, at which my wife was my constant, graceful and accomplished partner.In January, 1933, my second son, Sadruddin, was born in the American Hospital at Neuilly,just outside Paris. At the end of that year Princess Andrée paid her first visit to India with me,leaving our son in the south of France. We traveled all over the country, seeing most of thefamous, beautiful and historical sights; stayed several days with the renowned old Maharajahof Bikaner; stayed in Calcutta as the guests of the Governor, Sir John Anderson * ; went up tothe hills for a time and traveled on to Burma. We were home in Cannes by April, 1934,delighted to be greeted by a much-grown, healthy, strong little boy.Now Lord Waverley.Then I found myself fully back in political harness. The third of the series of Indian RoundTable Conferences was upon us. On the British side there had been changes, consequent uponthe formation of the MacDonald-Baldwin National Government. Mr. Ramsay MacDonaldwas still Prime Minister, but his support in the House of Commons came now from theenormous Conservative majority of which Mr. Baldwin was the master. This removed Mr.MacDonald from direct and close concern in our deliberations about India; consulted in allimportant matters he doubtless continued to be, but the effective decisions were, one couldnot help feeling, being made by the man in charge of the India Office. This, of course, wasSir Samuel Hoare, a sensitive, sagacious, broadminded and keenly intelligent statesman, whowas acutely aware of the realities of our mid-twentieth-century world, and -- so far as Indiawas concerned -- fully realized that the day of the die-hard imperialist was ended.The Joint Select Committee assembled in London in the spring of 1934. The Chairman, LordLinlithgow, was later to be Viceroy of India. The composition of the committee was as variedas it was strong. The British representation contained inevitably a heavy Conservativepreponderance; the knowledge and experience of India of individual members varied inquantity and quality. Respected and influential leaders like Lord Derby and Sir AustenChamberlain were at the outset noncommittal; there were others who were frankly opposed tothe whole idea of a federal solution to India's problems. India's representation was on thewhole good; Mahatma Gandhi did not attend, but there was a sizable element of advancedIndian nationalism, drawn from outside the ranks of Congress. Looking back now on whathappened in the course of this committee, I think I regret Mr. Jinnah's absence as much asthat of the Mahatmaji. It was, I think, extremely unfortunate that we Muslims did not insiston having Mr. Jinnah with us; had he been a member of the delegation he might havesubscribed to what I consider was the most valuable result of these Round TableConferences.This was the Joint Memorandum, which -- for the first time in the history of Indo-Britishrelations -- put before the British Government a united demand on behalf of all communities,covering practically every important political point at issue. It propounded what would havebeen, in effect, a major step forward -- the penultimate step indeed before Dominion status.By it we sought to ensure continuity in the process of the further transfer of responsibility. Itwas signed by all the nonofficial Indian delegates; it had been drafted by the delegation'sbrilliant official secretary and myself. It was a claim for the transfer to Indian hands ofpractically every power except certain final sanctions which would be reserved to the BritishGovernment. Had a constitution been granted along these lines, later critical situations --India's declaration of war in 1939, the problems which faced the Cripps Mission in 1942, andthe final and total transfer of authority -- might all have been much less difficult. Had thisconstitution been fully established and an accepted and going concern, it would have been indue course a comparatively simple operation to lop off those reserve powers which in ourdraft marked the final stage of constitutional devolution.As I said in the course of evidence which I gave before the Joint Committee on theGovernment of India Bill:"I accept the term 'Responsible Government,' though as an ideal my preference is for self-government either on the American federal plan or on Swiss lines leaving ultimate powerthrough the Initiative, the Referendum, and perhaps the Recall. But the facts of the situa tionhave to be recognized.... 'Responsible Government' must be our way toward evolving in thefuture some plan more suited to a congeries of great states, such as India will become, and Ibelieve the way will be found in something akin to the American federal plan."Despite all (as we thought) its merits, our Joint Memorandum was disowned by Congress,and therefore the British Government felt compelled in their turn to reject it. In its stead theybrought into being the constitution adumbrated by the Government of India Act of 1935,which left far too many loopholes for British interference, and indeed actual decision, onmatters which every Indian patriot believed should have been solely for India to decide -- forexample, India's entry into the Second World War. Its grossest failing was that it offered nofoundation on which to build; Sir Stafford Cripps, during his mission in 1942, and LordsAlexander of Hillsborough and Pethick-Lawrence on their subsequent mission were halted bythis unpalatable fact. Neither did the Act supply an impetus to any effort to bridge the riftbetween Hindus and Muslims; and in the testing times of 1942 and 1946-1947, the emptinessin the Act was glaringly revealed. By its reservations and by its want of clarity about the realmeaning of Indian independence, the 1935 Act made a United India an impossibility. It hadto be set aside and the effort made to build up Indian independence from scratch. Then itbecame harshly clear that Indian unity was impossible unless it were based on extremelywide federal, or confederate, foundations.The second Cabinet Mission of 1947 did finally propose a constitution which would havemaintained the unity of India, but at the price of handing over all ultimate power to the threeconfederate states of a Federal India. This was the sort of constitution for which our JointMemorandum of 1934 could have naturally and steadily prepared the ground. Congress'attitude to this last effort was, to say the least, lukewarm; and it too fell by the wayside. In theend the only solution was that which occurred, and those strange Siamese twins -- MuslimIndia and Hindu India -- that had lived together so restlessly and so uncomfortably, wereparted by a swift, massive surgical operation.XIIPolicies and Personalities at the League of NationsWITH the Joint Memorandum, and with the termination of the work of the Joint SelectCommittee in 1934, my own connection with Indian politics ended. However, I found myselfstriking out along a new line in public affairs and taking up new activities which were to bemy main concern and interest in life from the early 1930's until the outbreak of the SecondWorld War.These developed from my close association at the India Office with Sir Samuel Hoare. Heand I, in the intervals between our official discussions on the Indian problem, found ourselvesmore and more frequently exploring world affairs -- in the 1930's an absorbing if formidabletheme.The curiously facile yet plausible optimism which had buoyed up the hopes of so many in the1920's broke down rapidly; it gave place to an increasing and deepening anxiety. It is pitiablenow to recall some of the illusions which were fostered in the years immediately after theFirst World War. I heard supposedly intelligent people, who habitually moved in circleswhich were considered to be well informed, remark, for example, that the war "had notimpoverished but enriched the world and that its apparent cost had been more than met by asuperior system of price control and economic adjustment." Only when the slump came wasit realized that a war has to be paid for. As that realization dawned, it became harshlyapparent that the world was lurching toward a new catastrophe.Then as now there was no getting away from the question of Ger many and the Germans.Today as we are all aware, the crux of Europe's difficulties and problems is to be found inGermany. There is indeed no hope of a real and abiding world peace without a final solutionof the problem of Germany, to be achieved either by a frank and sincere understandingbetween Russia on the one hand and the Western Powers under American leadership on theother, or by the consolidation of a Germany allied with and integrated with Western Europe.Just as grimly the problem of Germany was with us in the 1930's; questions about where theWestern world was moving, and of how it would work out its destiny, and the great issue ofpeace or war were quite inseparable from the question of what was going to happen toGermany.Eighty million highly intelligent, industrious, efficient and welleducated people, cooped up ina comparatively small area between the Rhine and the Vistula, the North Sea and the Alps,with "colonies" of their kinsfolk settled outside the Reich's borders, in the Sudetenland, inAustria, and as far away as Rumania and parts of Russia, seeking unity yet conscious of along history of religious and dynastic strife, constituted a permanent and enormous questionmark in the very heart and center of Europe. Nor was it the only one of its kind. Fascist Italyloomed very large -- Mussolini's imperial ambitions, his attitude toward Ethiopia andAlbania, his talk of the Mediterranean as "mare nostrum."Mussolini, for all his crimes and follies for which he paid in his ignominious fall and death,was in many ways a man of brilliant and powerful individuality. He achieved in the Italy ofthe period between the wars a political revival analogous in some respects to the Wesleys'religious revival in England in the eighteenth century. His revival did not touch every sectionof the populace -- nor did Methodism. But many of its emotions suffused Italian society as awhole -- far outside the ranks of the Fascist party itself. There was, for example, the longingfor a place in the sun, the feeling that while nations like England, Spain and Portugal hadbuilt up vast daughter-nations overseas, Italy -- Rome's successor and inheritor -banned fromexpansion in Europe outside the confines of her own peninsula, now had the sacred right andduty of renewing Rome's imperial mission overseas. Therefore there was a passionateconcentration on Ethiopia -- first to wipe out Aduwa's shame and, second and far moreimportant, to build up in those high Equatorial lands (climatically so similar to many of thecountries of South America) a vast European colony whose people might one day mingletheir blood with that of the native Amharic aristocracy -- as the Spaniards had mingled theirswith the Incas -- reducing those whom they considered racially inferior to permanent helot orpeon status.Away in the Far East Japan was engaged in what came to be known as "the China incident";the need of a policy of colonial expansion seemed imperative to her leaders; she was alreadydeeply committed in Manchuria. To topics such as these, real, insistent and ugly as they were,Hoare and I found ourselves reverting again and again whenever we turned aside from theconstitutional niceties of India's political development.Hoare gradually became aware that from the moment India began to play a part -- howeverlimited -- in international politics, I (so far as making any use of me was concerned) had beendeliberately neglected and cold-shouldered by the Government of India. The reasons for thispolicy in New Delhi and Simla were not difficult to analyze; Hoare took their measurequickly enough. The exalted mandarins of the Indian Civil Service, that all-powerful andclosely knit bureaucracy which governed India, had neither the desire nor the capacity toappreciate a man of independent position and views like myself, who had first-handknowledge of a great many of these problems. They were painfully aware too that were I tobe given any official diplomatic status and be therefore in a position to receive the Viceroy'sinstructions, I would not hesitate to make known to the Viceroy my own views and ifnecessary to criticize official policy, and that if I were overruled unreasonably, I shouldsimilarly have no hesitation in resigning and in giving my reasons for resignation fully andwith conviction to both the Viceroy and the Secretary of State. If I represented India at anyinternational conference, there would be no chance of my being a ventriloquist's dummy forofficialdom. Officialdom therefore considered that I would be far more of a liability than anasset -- after all, I might prove the officials to be wrong.Not unnaturally the bureaucrats rationalized their distaste for me and their fear of me. Theypointed out that I was a race horse owner, that I was an amateur of literature and the arts, thatI had founded Aligarh University as a sectional, if cultural, institution, that since I was Imamof the Ismailis, my first loyalty would always be to my followers and therefore Governmentcould not take the risk of employing me. The files in the Secretariat were, I daresay, heavywith minutes and memoranda about me; and they all added up to the one word "no." SirSamuel Hoare saw through the whole elaborate façade and recognized it for what it was --arrant prejudice.When arrangements were in train for the Disarmament Conference and the Indian delegationto the League of Nations was in process of being appointed, Sir Samuel Hoare took the wholematter up with characteristic energy and thoroughness, drew the Viceroy's attention to thefact that I had deserved more useful employment, and insisted that I be given a chance toserve India in the international field. Someone has used about me the phrase "Ambassadorwithout Portfolio." The Secretary of State urged that it was high time for me to be givenofficial status.I think I may claim that I brought to my new task a mind fairly well versed in its main issues.My grounding in European as well as Eastern political and social history had been thorough.Ever since adolescence I had read widely and steadily. I was -- and still am -- a diligentstudent of the newspapers, and of those political magazines and quarterlies which, in Britainand France especially, give an authoritative and often scholarly commentary on all the mainevents and trends of our time. I had also for many years lived an active life in both nationaland international affairs.Let me recall the international atmosphere of the spring of 1932, and some of the maininternational trends and factors. The U.S.S.R. was seeking to establish at least a superficialappearance of respectability. We know now that the internal situation in Russia, after theappalling disruptive efforts of the first Five Year Plan, was parlous. Stalin, by now solemaster of his country's destiny, desired a period of relaxed external tension. In Litvinov hehad a Foreign Minister who knew England well, who had an English wife, who had personalcognizance of the shrewdness and practical wisdom of British statesmanship and of thepossibilities it afforded, if properly handled, of securing Russia her fit place in the comity ofnations.Litvinov was himself unaffectedly eager in his desire to promote the idea of his country'srespectability, and to present her to the world as a thoroughly honest woman; the matronherself stood somewhat hesitant on the threshold -- for reasons which became apparent later.However, social relations with Litvinov and with other members of his mission were at leastpossible. On my own initiative I broke the ice (somewhat, I suspect, to the surprise and secretamusement of my British colleagues, accustomed to the hesitations of previous Indianmembers of the delegation), and I gave a special dinner party in Litvinov's honor. Hisgratification was obvious. That dinner laid the foundation of a friendship which lasted as longas Litvinov was in Geneva; and it extended to embrace other Russian diplomats, who neverfailed in return to invite me to their social functions. Litvinov indeed began to appear in therole of a dinnertable diplomat and achieved his own quite real social success. My old friend,Baron Maurice de Rothschild, who had a beautiful chateau not far from Geneva, took togiving small informal luncheon parties, bringing together Litvinov and his colleagues withleading British and French delegates and with representatives of other countries.The United States had disowned President Wilson and refused to join the League of Nations,and had proclaimed in sternly isolationist terms America's faith in her own destiny. But by1932 the effects of the depression were being acutely felt all over the North Americancontinent; the epoch of Harding-Coolidge isolationism was drawing to a close. The StateDepartment had become increasingly aware that America could not afford to wash its handsof the rest of the world; it was decided that the Disarmament Conference offered a convenientmethod of exploring the long-unfamiliar international atmosphere of Geneva. WeimarGermany -- unlike the U.S.S.R. -- was now a respectable member of the internationalfraternity, on terms of at least superficial equality with Britain and France. Had notStresemann, Briand and Austen Chamberlain met in heart-stirring amity at Locarno, and hadnot Briand signalized the event with the tremendous oration which began "À bas lescannons..."?In 1932 the key word was "disarmament." Disarmament was the concept to which so manyhigh and noble hopes were pinned. Optimism still ran high: get the representatives of thenations around a table, agreeing in principle on disarmament, and let them work out thepractical details of disarming -- the melting down of the guns and the rifles, the scrapping ofthe battle cruisers, the limitations on the use and the armament of aircraft -- and surely worldpeace could be made sure and stable.Yet beneath this optimism there ran an undercurrent of doubt and fear. Were prospects asbright as many tried to believe? Was Weimar Germany all that she seemed to be? Ebert andStresemann were gone; Brüning battled against a strange swirl of increasingly hostile forces,some of which were economic but many blatantly and violently political. Had all the effortthat had gone into trying to woo Germany for democracy been in vain? Had the mountainlabored and brought forth merely a negligible mouse?A new word had come into current political phraseology: Nazism, which we were told meantNational Socialism; it seemed a confused and extremely German version of Italy's Fascism,was already capturing the loyalty and the imaginative and romantic idealism of thousands ofGermany's youth, and was associated with a man called Adolf Hitler.Now the military adviser to the German mission in Geneva at this time was none other thanGeneral -- later Field Marshal -- von Blomberg, the man who later became chief of Hitler'sReichswehr, was Hitler's representative at King George VI's Coronation, and finally fell intodisgrace in somewhat mysterious circumstances -allegedly because of his unsuitablemarriage. This Prussian soldier and I established quite friendly relations. From him I heard agood deal about the men who were then trying to rule Germany -- tiny midgets, he calledthem contemptuously, who had stepped into Stresemann's man-sized shoes. He was impatientwith what he thought their combination of doctrinaire liberalism and practical incompetencein statecraft.Such then was the troublous sea onto which I now was launched. The Secretary of State'swishes prevailed in the Secretariat in New Delhi. I was appointed a member of the Indiandelegation to the Disarmament Conference, nominally as second-in-command to Sir SamuelHoare, but to take charge as soon as he left. I was also appointed chief Indian representativeat the 1932 Assembly of the League. Thus began a phase in my public life which wasprotracted, with little or no intermission, until Hitler's armies marched into Poland and thefabric of world peace which the League strove so hard to maintain was violently shattered.The optimism that was prevalent in Geneva in 1932 was a mood which I could not fullyshare. A more strenuous and a more realistic effort was needed, I felt sure, to bring about thefruition of our hopes. As best I could, I sought to expound my own ideas and beliefs in thisnew arena to which I had been summoned. I made a speech of some length, and with all theearnestness that I could muster, at the fourteenth plenary session of the League:We have found that armaments still hold sway and that the feeling of insecurity still persists.It is by no means certain that the war to end war has been fought and won. On the moral sidewe must set ourselves to remove the paralyzing effects of fear, ill-will and suspicion. On thematerial side it is absolutely essential that the nonproductive effort devoted to warlikepreparations should be reduced to the bare minimum. In distant India, no less than in Europe,the world war created a host of mourners and left a legacy of bitter tragedy. Over a million ofmy fellow countrymen were called to arms, of whom more than fifty thousand laid downtheir lives. India's own scale of armaments allows no margin for aggressive uses. The size ofher forces has to be measured with reference to the vastness of her area and the diversity ofher conditions. The fact is so often forgotten that the area of India is more than half that of thewhole of Europe, and her population nearly one-fifth of that of the entire globe. There is a crygoing up from the heart of all the peaceloving citizens of every country for the lessening oftheir military burdens, for a decrease of the financial load which those burdens impose, forthe security of civil populations against indiscriminate methods of warfare, and above all,for security against the very idea of war.The words of many of us who, in those years, spoke out in the effort to prevent a SecondWorld War have gone down the wind. But that is not to say that the effort was not worthmaking or that we were not right to make it. The vast palace in Geneva that housed theLeague of Nations is no longer put to the purpose for which it was built, but the UnitedNations Organization, which has arisen out of the ruin and the tragedy which we strove toavert, shows -- by continuing our work in a new era and with new techniques -- that we didnot labor entirely in vain.For the rest of the thirties the work of the League, and of its offshoot the DisarmamentConference, absorbed most of my time and my interest. I found myself in Geneva for monthsat a time, through many harassing and disillusioning happenings -- Japan's aloof snubbing ofthe League, Germany's dramatic exit from it, and then the direct challenge of Mussolini'saggression in Ethiopia. Early in this period I cemented a close friendship with Mr. ArthurHenderson, the President of the Disarmament Conference. Henderson was perhaps one of themost remarkable statesmen who have come out of the British Labor Movement. He had beena conspicuously successful and much-liked Foreign Secretary in Mr. Ramsay MacDonald'ssecond Labor administration, but he had not found himself able to support his leader in therapid and dramatic change-over which resulted in the formation of the National Government.Therefore he retained the passionate and proud loyalty of Labor in Britain, but the immediateeffect of his decision was to deprive him of power and of office. It was universally felt that itwould be disastrous, for the world as for Britain, to lose his sagacity, his experience and hisflair in the spheres of international affairs in which he had made so notable a mark. He wastherefore appointed permanent President of the Disarmament Conference and until hisuntimely death he discharged his duties in this post -- in face of much disappointment and aheartbreakingly uphill struggle -- with courage and distinction. Our acquaintance ripenedrapidly into a sincere and mutually affectionate friendship of great warmth. His mind and hisachievements were as remarkable as his character was lovable. Like most of the Laborleaders of his generation, he was a genuine son of the people who from humble beginningshad made his way upward in the world to the high, onerous and lonely position which heoccupied. He was modest and forthright, shrewd, imperturbable, quiet of speech, and ofrocklike integrity. A labor leader of a younger generation, Mr. Morgan Phillips, has said thatthe origins of the British Labor movement are to be found in Methodism rather thanMarxism; this was certainly true of Arthur Henderson, for he remained all his life a serenelydevoted Methodist. His wife had been his faithful companion on his long and strenuous road;she was a woman of great sweetness and generosity of character, staunch and true and, in herown fashion, very wise.Henderson was often my guest at my villa at Antibes; Bernhard Baron, the millionaire andphilanthropist, would sometimes drive to Monte Carlo to spend an hour or two in the Casino,and Henderson would happily go along for the ride. When they reached the Casino, however,Henderson sat contentedly in the car, waiting till Baron came out again. Henderson was assteadfast as he was good, as selfless as he was courageous. We came to rely on each other foradvice and support in the difficult and trying times through which we steered our way inGeneva.The year 1935 was a memorable one. It was the year of Mussolini's attack on Ethiopia. It wasthe year in which the Government of India Act came into being -- the last major piece ofIndian legislation enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom until the brief, dramaticstatute of twelve years later which ended the British Raj in India. It was the year of my greatand good friend King George V's Silver Jubilee; and I fully shared the sentiments ofgratitude, affection and loyalty with which his people so signally greeted the King and QueenMary. For me it was Bahram's year, for during that summer that magnificent horse won theTwo Thousand Guineas, the Derby and the St. Leger -- the Triple Crown of the Turf, as thesporting journalists called this feat -- the first horse to achieve it since Rock Sand, thirty-twoyears before.I was able to be present at Epsom when he won his Derby -Freddie Fox was the jockey -- andof course I led him in after his victory. I was immensely honored by being the guest (incompany with other members of the Jockey Club) of Their Majesties, the King and Queen, ata celebration dinner at Buckingham Palace. Queen Mary herself had ordered that the tabledecorations should be in my racing colors, green and chocolate.I was not in quite such happy surroundings when Bahram won the St. Leger. By then I wasback at my duties in Geneva. I can at least however claim a record: I am sure I must havebeen the only member of the Assembly of the League ever to be called away to hear that hishorse had won the St. Leger.But the international scene by now was gloomy and its skies were darkly overcast. The little,glimmering lights of peace and hope which had been set burning since the end of the FirstWorld War were going out, one by one. Exactly a fortnight before Mussolini launched hisattack on Ethiopia, I spoke in the Assembly of the League of Nations. The time had passed, Iwas convinced, for smooth glib words. On my own and my country's behalf I spoke asfrankly and as gravely as I could:India is troubled by the League's lack of universality and by the great preponderance ofenergy which the League devotes to Europe and European interests. India is troubled by thesedramatic failures, by the long-drawn-out and fruitless Disarmament Conference and by thefact that the rearmament of States members is in full swing. India's criticism of the League isdirected to its shortcomings and not its ideals. The world is at the parting of the ways. Letwisdom guard her choice.As 1935 drew to its close I went to Bombay to celebrate my Golden Jubilee as hereditaryImam of the Ismailis. Half a century had passed since I, a small, shortsighted, solemn boy,surrounded by my bearded elders, had ascended the gadi. The climax of the celebration wasthe ancient ritual of weighing me against gold. Earlier we had a special ladies' party at theJamat Khana, at which my beloved mother sat on my right and my wife on my left. Theactual weighing ceremony was both stately and heart stirring, evok ing as it did strongcurrents of reciprocal affection between my followers and myself.Our rejoicings, however, were cut short by the grievous news of the passing of my old,staunch and good friend, the King-Emperor, George V, who died at Sandringham in January,1936. I thought of all the years of our friendship, of the many tests and trials it had undergonein war and in peace, of his constant kindness and consideration to me in all matters great andsmall. The last word which I had had from him, indeed, had been a warm message ofcongratulation on my Jubilee. We immediately abandoned all further festivities out of respectto his memory, and I read out this brief statement to my assembled followers:I am deeply touched to hear the terrible news of the death of the KingEmperor. I havedecided to stop all activities in connection with my Golden Jubilee celebrations, except thepurely religious rites. We are in deep mourning. I myself will wear black clothes, and mypeople will wear their national mourning dress. The King-Emperor was not only a great ruler,but he was in the true sense a great man. His Majesty was always most kind to me personally.I am sure that the new King-Emperor will, with his knowledge of the world and of the wholeEmpire, be a worthy successor to Queen Victoria, to King Edward and to King George.Although within a few brief months events had turned out sadly different, I do not for aninstant regret or withdraw that last sentence of my statement. I had long known the attractive,brilliant and lovable man who acceded to his father's throne, that January day in 1936,surrounded by an Empire's loyalty and affectionate high hopes of a long and illustrious reign.I first met him at York House, St. James's Palace in 1898, when he was a child of four. Hismother, then Duchess of York, brought two little sailor-suited boys into the drawing room toshake hands with me -- David and Bertie, as they were known within their family. The elderboy's vivid personality stamped itself instantly on my imagination; he had a look of bothintelligence and kindness, and a limpid clarity of expression, which were most impressive. Istill possess a photograph of the two boys as they were then, with their names written acrossit by their mother.In the years that followed I encountered him often, in successive phases of that long anddevoted career of patriotic public service of which the culmination was his accession to theThrone and to the duties for which he had so arduously prepared himself. I recall the shy,slim lad staying in Paris to learn French in his late teens, wondering (he who later in life wasto become a devoted Parisian) "what my grandfather saw in Paris." I remember his earlyyears as Prince of Wales. I remember the gallant young soldier, who strove in every way toevade Lord Kitchener's stern order that the heir to the Throne not be allowed near the frontline. I knew the man whose spirit was stamped forever by the sense of slaughter and waste ofthose years of trench warfare, the man who has said so poignantly and so truly, in his ownmemoirs, "I learned about war on a bicycle" -- endlessly trundling his heavy Army bicyclealong the muddy roads of Flanders, to places like Poperinghe and Montauban and the villagesaround Ypres, the man who in after years in that annual ceremony at the Royal Albert Hallrecited Laurence Binyon's "For the Fallen" with so rapt a sense of dedication and of loss.I remember in the years after the First World War the "Ambassador of Empire" whoceaselessly traveled the Commonwealth and Empire and the whole world in the service of hiscountry and his people. In the early twenties I met him more than once, strained and tired outas he was, during his extremely testing visit to India. At a big state banquet at St. James'sPalace, given in honor of the then Crown Prince of Japan -- the present Emperor -- I sat nextto the Prince of Wales. I remember his saying to me then that if Japan's request for therenewal of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance were refused -- for this was the real reason of theCrown Prince's visit -the Japanese would never forgive us. His voice had not the robust, far-hailing quality that was in his father's and his grandfather's; his tone was in comparison withtheirs always quiet and restrained, but he spoke with their earnestness, conviction and faith inthe importance of what he said.It was a commonplace of the 1920's to say that the Prince of Wales made friends wherever hewent. That was no formal tribute but a simple statement of the truth. Why was it? What wasthe source of his immense and irresistible attraction, which won the sympathy and admirationof the masses no less than the respect of the powerful few? The Times correspondent whoaccompanied him on one of his many journeys found, I am convinced, the true explanation.The Prince of Wales, he said, was an artist. There lies the real secret of his temperament, ofhis tragedy as much as of his achievements; he was a born artist. He won the affection andthe understanding of millions as only the greatest of artists can do, not by dramatic orthaumaturgic technique, but as a receiving and an "offering up" anew to and for others of thatwhich he received from them and evoked in them. That is why all his state visits, with theirnumerous mass encounters, drained so much out of him. When he came back after a longdrive through thousands of cheering people, the exhaustion which he felt had causes fardeeper than the merely physical. He always was in profound nervous, mental and spiritualaccord with those who so eagerly surrounded his slowly moving car.In the early spring of 1936 I had my first audience with him after his accession. He was fullyaware of my recent and current activities. He knew that for the past few years I had beenIndia's chief delegate at the Disarmament Conference and at successive sessions of theAssembly of the League. He knew that I was gravely perturbed by the increasingly menacingstate of world affairs; burdened -- like so many of us who to any extent were behind thescenes in those years -- by a deepening sense of the doom which we sought to avert; aware ofthe cancer at the heart of international, especially European, politics; alarmed too at whatlooked like American indifference and at the existence of what in those days we calledRussia's Gunpowder Plot, her supposed plan to blow up capitalist civilization by a war inwhich the Soviet Union would take no sides but at the end of which she would appear asbeneficiary and all-powerful arbitrator.The Lords-in-waiting and the India Office officials who had come with me expected, Idaresay, that I would have the ordinary perfunctory and brief audience. However, they cooledtheir heels for an hour and a half or more in the anteroom, while I underwent at the King'shands one of the most searching, serious and well-informed cross-examinations that I haveever experienced. I walked out at last filled with admiration not only for his knowledge,gleaned by his wide and deep reading of all the official and Cabinet papers which came tohim, but even more for the seriousness of his outlook and the penetration of his insight.During 1936 I met the King several times, at private cocktail parties and at luncheon in thehouses of one or two close friends. At the bigger gatherings, even in the midst of flippantpeople, I was greatly struck with the King's utter lack of flippancy, his seriousness and hisconcentration on his duties. After my first audience and whenever I met him on these privateand unofficial occasions during those months, he was accompanied by Mrs. Wallis Simpson,now the Duchess of Windsor. I found her as intelligent as she was charming, admirably wellinformed, devoid too of flippancy, and seriously and conscientiously striving to adjust heroutlook to the King's. At two different houses I met them at luncheon, and on each occasionthe only other person present, beside our host and hostess was my old friend -- himself anardent and persevering seeker after spiritual enlightenment -- Philip Kerr, Marquis ofLothian. * Our conversation could not have been in its general tone more serious and moreanxious.Subsequently H. M. Ambassador to Washington; died 1940.Naturally neither the King nor Mrs. Simpson ever mentioned their personal affairs to me or inmy hearing, but of course wherever one went in London that year, the whispers and therumors abounded. I have already mentioned a poignant conversation which I had had withQueen Mary on my return to London from Geneva. Later in the year, in July I think, a greatfriend of Queen Mary's told me that every day she wept bitterly when she thought of thishidden, unspoken catastrophe which loomed for her dearly loved son.It was during this same critical period that Lord Wigram, when the two of us were lunchingalone, said something which struck me greatly. “King Edward VIII," he said, "has it in him tobe the greatest King in the history of our country. With his charm and his personal prestige hecan carry with him the whole population -- regardless of class."Lord Wigram, after all, spoke out of long and deep experience. He had been King George V'sprivate secretary, in succession to Lord Stamfordham, and a calm, wise, loyal counselor andfriend he was; but before he became a courtier he had been a serving officer in the IndianArmy and then on Lord Curzon's staff when he was Viceroy. His equable and unimpassionedjudgment seemed to me of considerable importance; yet I could see that, even as he spoke, hewas mastering strong and extremely painful and anxious emotions.By the autumn I was back in Geneva. The King spoke to me once on the telephone; ourconversation necessarily was guarded; yet I was aware once more of the profound sadnessand the complexity of the drama in his own life and in the life of the country, whose bleakclimax was then so near. The swiftness and the completeness of the final irrevocable decisionwere utterly tragic. Years have passed, and they have brought inevitably a new perspective toour view of those somber happenings of the first weeks of December, 1936. After KingEdward VIII's abdication, his younger brother acceded as George VI. We are all nowgratefully and gladly conscious of the magnitude of his selfless and steadfast service to hiscountry and to the cause of human freedom in his sixteen years' reign, and of the immense,quiet goodness of his character, so like his father's.George VI was blessed -- as his elder brother was impelled to remark in the most poignantpublic utterance of his life -- in a supremely happy marriage. His gracious Consort, nowQueen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, was as persevering and as selfless in public service as hewas, always at his side to sustain and support him through many testing years, which coveredthe dangers and the ardors of the Second World War and the postwar period of farreachingsocial and economic change.Now a beloved, charming young Queen reigns as Head of the Commonwealth. She brings toher task mental and spiritual qual ities of the highest order, and it is already obvious that shehas earned the deep loyalty and devotion of her peoples all over the world. She is sustainedby the steadfast love of her husband; and her home, like that of her father before her, is amodel of tranquil and affectionate family life. The omens are auspiciously set for a splendidnew Elizabethan era in Britain's long, eventful history. The institution of the Crown in Britainand the Commonwealth has quickly and triumphantly survived its severest test; on this scoretherefore there is no reason for regret.Yet considered as a human happening in its own right, apart altogether from its constitutionaland political consequences, surely the story of Edward, Duke of Windsor and his Duchess isone of the very great love stories of all time. Set it alongside the imperishable, tragic andbeautiful stories of Persian or Arabian legend, alongside the stories of Anthony and Cleopatraand of Romeo and Juliet, and does it not stand forth as perhaps the most moving of them all?When I was discussing my religious views, I quoted the saying of the poet Hafiz to the effectthat those who are not granted the grace and aid of the Holy Spirit to achieve directcommunion with that Divine Presence in which we live, move and have our being, may yetattain blessed and pure felicity if they achieve the heights of human love and companionship- something not won lightly or easily, but the crown of a lifelong attachment, in which onehuman being devotes all that he has, knows and feels to the love and service of another.Surely his former Majesty, King Edward VIII, who lost and sacrificed so much, has beengranted, if not the supreme, at any rate the lesser and by no means unworthy, blessing andillumination of a durable and all-enfolding love.I have one personal postscript to add to this sad yet stirring story. In the autumn of 1937 I wasstaying in Berlin at the same time as the Duke and Duchess of Windsor. I called on them andwe had a long, extremely intimate and extremely revealing conversation. I was deeplyaffected by the obvious and transparently sincere loyalty and devotion with which the Duketalked of his brother, speaking of him always as the King; the whole tenor of his remarks wasthat of fidelity from a devoted subject to his sovereign. Later that year when I was in LondonI had an audience with King George VI; the ostensible reason for my being summoned to thepalace was that I should give His Majesty an account of the interview which I had had withHitler. Before I left, the King asked me, "You saw my brother?" I then told him the substanceof the Duke of Windsor's conversation with me, and I stressed the warmth and the obvioussincerity of the Duke's loyalty. The King was clearly most deeply moved by his elderbrother's willing and complete acceptance of the new situation -- so moved in fact that Imyself was equally stirred.Can we sustain the peace, or must there in the end be war? This was the question with whichwe were faced at Geneva, year after year. To understand its intensity, and to understand theway in which each of us, as individuals or as representatives of our countries, strove to findour own answer, it is necessary to explore a good deal of the historical and politicalbackground. Munich has constantly been hotly attacked as a single, unparalleled andcauseless act of appeasement, and Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, whosename is forever associated with Munich, who thought it his greatest triumph and found it tobe his greatest tragedy, has been criticized in the most unmeasured and ferocious terms. Yetwho are, in fact, the "guilty men," whom partisan propaganda so vituperatively pursued?What are the real reasons, not the superficial "blame," for Munich?We must first probe far back into the story of Germany's relations with the rest of Europe.We must look afresh at that unfortunate, false, and unjust assertion, made at the end of theFirst World War and given explicit formulation in the Versailles Treaty, that Germany's andGermany's alone, was the war guilt. Whatever strict apportionment of guilt there should be, itis by no means all Germany's. Nearly half the responsibility was Russia's. What about thefolly, the incompetence, the insane ambition and the revengeful self-satisfaction of a man likeIsvolsky who, as Czarist Ambassador in Paris, said to me -- not to me alone, for he said it toeveryone he could -- "C'est ma guerre"? What about the same idiot boast on the lips ofSazunov, that weak and foolish man who, despite all the warnings given him by abler menlike Witte and Rosen, did not shrink in anticipation from a war that was to ruin his country,his Emperor and his own class?However at the end of the war, to millions in the victorious nations, blinded by their ownpropaganda, Imperial Germany seemed a convenient scapegoat. Germany was branded as theonly criminal. And then, almost before the ink had dried on the signatures to the VersaillesTreaty, a significant development occurred in political thought. The intellectuals of the Leftin Britain, profoundly affected by the limpidly persuasive writings of John Maynard Keynes,discovered that their consciences were troubled over Versailles' injustice, and over theadmission written into it, above the enforced signature of Germany's representatives, thatGermany alone was to blame for all the horrors and miseries of the First World War; anduntil Hitler came to power, they were very vocal in their criticisms of the 1919 settlement.Doubts about not merely the wisdom but the morality of the Versailles Treaty were by nomeans limited to the highbrows of the Left. Many a conscientious political thinker on theRight -- though perhaps more pragmatic, more inclined to see the issue in terms of powerpolitics -- had severe misgivings about the justification, at the price even perhaps of a war, ofmaintaining a status quo founded upon a falsehood. The constitution of the League ofNations, which formed part of the Versailles Treaty, was similarly questioned. Under thisConstitution the League was endowed in theory with absolute authority to right all wrongs --"to break down this sorry scheme of things and replace it by something nearer heart's desire"- but, as familiarity with the actual processes of the League quickly made clear, itsconstitution was in fact so pliable that it was impossible for the League to right any wrong,however glaring.The status quo had everything on its side. There was as much chance of achieving any realrectification of frontiers, any adjustment of conflicting national claims, through the League,as there would have been of successfully steering a bill providing for uni versal suffragethrough the House of Lords of 1820. The ideologues of the immediate postwar eraworshipped the constitution of the League, but like most idols it had feet of clay. It was, infact though not in name, a repetition of Alexander I's Holy Alliance of 1815. It wasMetternich's system, dressed up anew as democracy, freedom and -- sacred word -- self-determination. But it had been so adjusted that the "haves" among the nations had things alltheir own way, and the only hope for the "have-nots" of changing their inferior status layeither in sowing disunity among the "haves" or in building up their military power,sedulously and secretly, until they were able to launch direct and open aggression. Thisfailing in the League was as durable as it was palpable. As I said later to Lord Halifax whenhe was Foreign Secretary, "You cannot make a silk purse out of a sow's ear."Defects of this character could not long be hidden. The bloodstained Gran Chaco disputebetween Bolivia and Paraguay was in a remote -- and at the time strategically insignificant --region, but the difficulties it presented were real and grave, and those of us who had anyshare in reaching a fairly just solution of this problem were acutely conscious of them.Then there arose the protracted Sino-Japanese trouble. Here the slate was, from the outset, thereverse of clean. At the conclusion of their successful campaign against Czarist Russia earlyin this century, the Japanese had built up a special and powerful position for themselves inManchuria, from Port Arthur almost to the walls of Peking itself, under which China'ssovereignty was still recognized but the country was administered and exploited by Japan asif it were a Japanese protectorate. The warlords of northern China had, in Bismarck's phrase,"a telegraph wire" with Tokyo -- indeed a full and constant connection by telephone andradio as well. Though China was for years torn by internal strife, this relationship becamemore and more bitterly hostile as the extent and the determination of Japan's ambitions weredisclosed. For a long time it was customary to talk politely about "the differences" betweenChina and Japan; but they were in fact a war, to which we in Geneva strove to put an end.From the League's point of view China's legal case was utterly unanswerable. Japan had noright in China except in the various concessions -- the ports, railway lines, commercialdepots, and bases -- which she had received from China, or won from Russia to whom Chinahad voluntarily given them. Her territorial pretensions, open or veiled, were without a shredof legal justification.But when the League rebuked Japan and sought to intervene, it seemed to Japan's rulers thatthe pot was loudly calling the kettle black. Were they not, the Japanese argued, doing in thetwentieth century precisely what countries like Britain and France had done in building uptheir empires a century or two earlier? They would not and could not accept the claim that,under the constitution of the League, a new world had come into being and with it a newinternational morality binding on all nations, under which the only way to effect any politicalchange was through the League's elaborate, complicated and devious machinery. It was, inthe Scriptural phrase, far easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for Japan toprocure de jure recognition by the League of her de facto position on the northern Asiaticmainland. The "haves" said No; it was only open to the "have-nots" to break through or tocircumvent this wall of negatives.When the Sino-Japanese dispute was brought before the League, I approached Sir JohnSimon, then British Foreign Secretary, on my own initiative and told him that I felt it was myduty as India's representative -- as an Asiatic -- to do all I could to bring about a directunderstanding by conversations between China and Japan. Lord Simon has been bitterlyassailed in many quarters, but he possessed -- he still possesses -- the mind of a statesman,not a bureaucrat. He saw immediately that although such a departure by an Indianrepresentative, at a time when India was still without selfgovernment, might seem unusual ifunaccompanied by overt British support, the value of an Asiatic intermediary in a solelyAsiatic dispute might be considerable. I was authorized to see what I could effect. I hadseveral conversations with both Chinese and Japanese representatives. On one final occasionI got together the heads of the Chinese and Japanese delegations in a supreme effort to bringabout an understanding; the three of us were actually photographed together.However, a good deal more than the flash of a press photographer's bulb was required. Thenegotiations broke down. Subsequently hostilities in Asia were renewed on a large scale. The"China incident" became all-out war in Shanghai and in central China. Ultimately Japan leftthe League. Manchuria was separated from China, and the Japanese set up a puppet Emperorin Manchuria in the person of a scion of the old Manchu imperial dynasty, the man who,according to legitimist views, ought to have been Emperor of China. In central China conflictcontinued without cessation thereafter between the Japanese and the forces of General ChiangKai-shek until, with Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 -- the extension of the SecondWorld War to the Far East.Personalities as well as policies were of significance in those difficult years. I came to knowmany remarkable men in Geneva, as we battled with successive problems and crises. The firstSecretary General of the League was Sir Eric Drummond * -- an ideal man in a difficult, awell-nigh impossible, position. He was not only aware that there were two sides to anyargument, he saw every question fully in the round. In my many conversations with him Ibegan to appreciate the complexity and the far-reaching effects of every apparently smallmove or decision made by the League. It seemed that we were forever watching the wideningripples on the pool caused by the throwing of seemingly small pebbles. Yet I must not givethe impression that Eric Drummond was in favor of immobility in international affairs, or ofstubbornly preserving the status quo. No one, I daresay, had better appreciated the lessons ofhistory than he; no one realized more clearly, for example, that -- in spite of all thatAlexander I and Metternich strove to establish -- the European system established in 1815had collapsed in something near chaos by 1830. Drummond had a flexible mind and highlydeveloped powers of persuasion; I know that many a dispute that might have grown seriouswas settled in his office simply by his exercise of tact and sagacious foresight. However, hisinfluence and authority were limited, for the tradition had transferred itself from the nationalto the international plane that permanent officials had no views of their own, and therefore asSecretary General he had no right to initiate policy on his own.Later the Earl of Perth.Brüning, the German Chancellor, was a forlorn, pathetic figure. A sincere Christian, a devoutRoman Catholic, he was obviously beset, in the midst of our troubles, by a genuine Christianconscience, by his patriotism as a German, by the growing difficulties of keeping democracyafloat in Germany, by the mounting challenge of the Nazis, and by the increasing feeblenessof the aged Hindenburg's attachment to the republic which had elected him as its President.Beneš of Czechoslovakia was in his different way a no less tragic figure. He fully realized thedangers to which his country was exposed. More than once over a coffee or at luncheon hetalked to me of his troubles and his difficulties. He knew that the German minority inCzechoslovakia had to be won over, persuaded to give up their Pan-German dreams andbecome loyal and sincere citizens alongside the other racial groups in the country; but herealized that a heavy price had to be paid for such an achievement. He continued, however, topin high hopes to it. Yet whenever he went into the Sudetenland, to places like Carlsbad orMarienbad, he was faced with the limitations and the potential breakdown of his policybecause the Czechs in those areas, although in a minority, strove to assert their superiority --politically and economically, and by the use of educational and linguistic barriers -- to theGerman-speaking majority. His was a classic example of the way in which a wellmeaningpolitical leader cannot persuade his followers to carry out his express and sincere intentions.Someone who was then embarking on his great career I encountered first in Geneva in thoseyears -- Mr. Anthony Eden. An immediate point of sympathy and understanding between uswas that the subject in which he had taken honors at Oxford, immediately after the FirstWorld War, was Oriental languages; he had studied Persian and had known my very oldfriend Dr. E. G. Browne, the Orientalist and authority on Persian, who was Professor ofArabic. This shared friendship and our shared knowledge and understanding of, and fellowfeeling for, Islamic literature, thought and philosophy, were special ties, uniting us moreclosely than the normal affiliations and social propinquity natural between a representative ofthe British Government and a representative of India at a meeting of the Assembly of theLeague. It has not been difficult for someone who has watched, as I have, the careers of somany eminent statesmen, past and present, to foresee Mr. Eden's ultimate and splendiddestiny. Today I join my prayers with those of so many others that, when at length the greatcall comes and he takes up the highest position of all, he will have regained in full the healthand the strength which, over past years, he has expended so generously in the service of hiscountry and of humanity in general.The next great crisis which faced the League was Italy's assault on Ethiopia in 1935. Itpresented an even more serious challenge than the Sino-Japanese dispute, for howeveraggressive Japan's actions were, there were explanatory, if hardly ameliorative, factorsinvolved, which, as I have indicated, made it impossible for any of the Great Powers at leastto regard that as a clean-cut case. All the various concessions, with all their legalequivocations about status, and (since the Japanese occupation of Korea) a common frontieralong the Yalu River, were in themselves occasions for quarrels in which lack of diplomaticsatisfaction could -- and usually was -made the excuse for military action. The wholesituation was morally indefensible, of course, but it had centuries of usage to sustain it andgive it at least the superficial appearance of respectability.Italy, however, possessed none of these opportunities or facilities for whitewashing heraggressive, imperialistic designs on Ethiopia. Italy's only case was one of naked need forliving space for her ever-increasing population, if they were to remain Italian. Libya'spossibilities of intensive and large-scale exploitation and colonization were few; fertile areasin this long stretch of the Mediterranean littoral were limited, and the desert was vast. Italy'ssurplus population seemed therefore faced with one of two possibilities. Either they couldemigrate across the Atlantic to North or South America or to neighboring Mediterraneanlands like Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Algeria, and be lost to Italy as citizens; or they couldremain in Italy, millions too many for her limited soil to bear, with a standard of living farbelow that of any of their western European neighbors and thoroughly unworthy of the nationthat had succeeded Imperial Rome.Mussolini made no secret of his intentions. He made stirring speeches in towns and cities allover Italy, and his eloquence roused thousands to passionate enthusiasm and sympathy. Atthe diplomatic level he gave more than one warning, couched in terms, however, which wereambiguous enough for him to be able to interpret the silence with which France and Britaingreeted them as consent, if not as direct encouragement to him. Whatever the shadowybackground of the Duce's mental processes, there could be no ignoring the blatant opennessof his preparations, throughout the summer of 1935, for the military conquest and annexationof the free, independent and sovereign state of Ethiopia, on pretexts which were flimsy in theextreme. The Ethiopians were faced with a tragic choice: either to accept an ultimatum fromMussolini or, rejecting it, to wage a hopeless war which could only end in total militarydefeat and subjection.The League was thus thrust into a hopelessly difficult situation; and there developed that deepand catastrophic division of opinion in Britain and in France and indeed throughout much ofthe world, which was to persist with such unfortunate results until the outbreak of the SecondWorld War four years later. In two countries, however, there was no chance for any divisionof opinion to show itself: the U.S.S.R. and Nazi Germany. Russian policy was simple andmonolithic; Litvinov had proclaimed Russia's doctrine, "Peace is indivisible." Whateverweaknesses and drawbacks communist policy may possess, there has nearly always beenabout it a façade of logical unity between dogma and practice. The Nazis, of course, saw asuperb opportunity to break up what remained of unity among the Powers that had beenvictorious over Germany in the First World War and had sought to make their victorypermanent by the guarantees written into the Versailles Treaty. They had the shrewdness notto proclaim their satisfaction too loudly; public opinion in Britain and France was thereforenot alert to the hidden dangers in the German attitude, any more than it recognized the hiddendangers in Russia's expressions of shocked virtue.In Britain confusion and irresolution were woefully apparent. There was the "realism " --grossly mistaken, as the naval history of the Second World War was to demonstrate -- of old-fashioned imperialists like the late Lord Lloyd, then president of the Navy League, whoargued that the Royal Navy had been so weakened by the years of disarmament andeconomic stringency that it could not risk being brought into the open conflict which severeand legitimate action against Italy's aggression would be bound to entail. Therefore theimperialists were opposed to any resolute policy.Another school of thought argued that to annoy Italy would be -as the phrase went -- "to driveher into the arms of Germany," and saw in this plea reason enough to submit to Mussolini'shighhandedness. There were others who saw a practical political escapeladder in what cameto be known as the Hoare-Laval arrangements.In Geneva there was a deep and widespread resentment and sense of humiliation at the easysuccess which apparently attended this shameless policy of aggression, on condottieri lines,with a twentieth-century technique in international relations and propaganda.I saw my friend Mr. Eden and said to him: "If you want international politics to have afoundation of justice, if you want the League really to be what it is supposed to be, if youwant to give it a chance to grow into a real society of nations, deciding matters of right andwrong among themselves, then here is an outstanding case which must be tackled. Here thereis no valid excuse of any kind. There is no large Italian minority in Ethiopia deprived of theirindependence or their civic and economic rights. Here is a case of open and inexcusableaggression. And the remedy is in our hands. All we need do is shut the Suez Canal. Or if wemust have sanctions, let them be applied to oil as well, and thus make them a reality and putsome teeth into them. But I still think the best solution is a simple, unanimous resolution bythe League to close the Canal."Instead we found ourselves passing resolutions in favor of sanctions, which I found silly andfutile. Yet ineffective as we knew them to be, we had to vote in support of them, for if we didnot, we would seem to be condoning Italy's aggression; but the only sanction which wouldhave achieved anything -- the sanction of withholding petrol -- was barred. I could foreseethat it was inevitable from that moment on that there would come a bitter day when those ofus who had once held such high hopes for the League would have to go to the Assembly and,with misery in our hearts, ask for the removal of sanctions. I saw too -- and I have nohesitation in admitting it -- that once the moment came for us to submit to the Italianconquest of Ethiopia, it would be much better for us to swallow our pride and our anger anddo it with a good grace.Here then was an important phase in the development of the policy and practice ofappeasement. Here was an instance in which appeasement and conciliation of the aggressorwere morally wrong; but once the Great Powers had appeased on this issue -- a thoroughlybad and unjustified issue -- there would follow the inevitable consequence that sooner or laterwe should have to stomach a new dose of appeasement, either in the matter of Japan inChina, where there were loopholes both historical and juridical, or in the matter of some sortof German aggression, where there would be the pleas of oppressed minorities, of plebiscitesdemanding reunion, and a whole specious façade of legality and morality.Was it, however, entirely specious? This was the grave and conscientious doubt whichcomplicated relations with Germany both for individual nations and for the collectiveAssembly of the League -- almost as soon as the Versailles Treaty was signed. Earlier in thischapter I have referred to the inevitable changes in mood and outlook toward Germany whichoccurred in opinion forming and influential circles among the victorious Powers, mostnotably in Britain and to a lesser extent in the United States and Italy.Now in general I greatly admire Britain and the British people, but my deepest admirationand respect I reserve for one abiding characteristic which they possess -- the existence in asubstantial and usually influential part of the population of an acutely sensitive conscience,which prevents their accepting as a national responsibility any unjust or violent act or policyhowever advantageous it may seem to the country's material welfare. No doubt in Britishhistory there have been phases of ruthlessness, violence and conquest; but has any healthyand virile race not passed through such phases in its long national life? It is fundamental tothe British character and the British way of life that this voice of conscience is always heard;it may at the outset be still and small and belong only to a few, but in the end the majority hasbeen persuaded by it. The naked code of the harsh struggle for existence, with its assertionthat life is only maintained by the survival of the fittest, must in the British view beameliorated by a still higher and nobler instinct -- as the great Victorian scientist, Professor T.H. Huxley, said in a famous speech toward the end of his life. This quality of conscience hasbeen far more persistently manifested among the British people and their cousins in theUnited States than among any other great nation that I know.Among most of the human race this scrupulous conscience about external events is a personaland individual matter. In England it has long been a national possession; and this is true alsoof the United States. The cause of this phenomenon lies, I believe, in the influence of theQuakers; always numerically a fairly small minority, they have from the nineteenth centuryexerted a moral and spiritual influence out of all relation to their numbers. Through theirconnections with other nonconformist groups, this influence, even in the era of Britain'sgreatest industrial and commercial expansion at home and overseas, was diffused throughoutthe whole population, and the persistence and strength of its effect on British policy andactions have been remarkable.During the 1920's the man who voiced these conscientious scruples about Germany mostfrequently and forcefully was Lloyd George. In the Press the campaign gathered strength andinfluence over the years, and it focused especially on the way in which Germany had beendeprived of her colonies. J. L. Garvin and others made eloquent pleas for the return toGermany of one or more of the lost colonies. The British mind was never closed to thepractical possibilities, as well as the abstract virtue, of such a step.Now if in Britain there were these conscientious doubts about the wisdom of maintaining thestatus quo which had been imposed by the Peace Treaty, Germany's view of Versailles fromthe beginning was that it was a Diktat, which must be circumvented, challenged and finallyoverthrown by every means available to the German people. Germans in general believedneither that they alone had made the war nor that they were in fact defeated. Therefore assoon as Germany returned to the comity of civilized nations -- long before the rise of Hitler --her attitude on all major questions should have been warning enough. Even the terms of theLocarno Treaty, for all the fervor and optimism with which they were acclaimed, wereexplicit only about the renunciation of war as a means of settling disputes in the west;German claims vis-à-vis Poland were left expressly undefined.Not long after Locarno, Lord D'Abernon, the great British Ambassador in Berlin, who withhis beautiful wife had long been among my dearest and closest friends, was staying in MonteCarlo when Stresemann came there. Lord D'Abernon asked me to meet Stresemann at aluncheon at the Hotel Metropole, at which, besides the three of us, the only other personpresent was Stresemann's secretary. Stresemann did not beat about the bush. He held that thepostwar period had witnessed the establishment of certain general principles: the freedom ofall European peoples to unite if they so desired and the right to self-determination of"colonies," racial minorities separated from their mother countries. He said that theseprinciples had been applied to Jugoslavia, Italy and Czechoslovakia; and now, he argued, theimplication of Lo carno was that they must be extended to Germany by peaceful means.Locarno had fully and finally rectified the injustice of Germany's annexation of Alsace-Lorraine in 1871; henceforth Germany had no further claims in the west of Europe.Stresemann made no threats, and his arguments were based on grounds of justice and fairplay."Rectification" was indeed the idea which for years obsessed Germany's statesmen anddiplomats. At Geneva they canvassed it in and out of season. I recall from my ownexperience at least one instance of its being pushed forward regardless of the appropriatenessof either time or place: a big official reception, with everyone in full evening dress, a stifflyformal occasion, when M. Tardieu, then leader of the French delegation to the Assembly,was, in full public view, relentlessly tackled by his opposite number on the German side.The failure of the Disarmament Conference was an opportunity which the Germansexploited. In the thesis that the Versailles Treaty had been intended to be a step towardgeneral and progressive disarmament among the nations, and that the Allies had broken theundertakings which they had then given, they found an excuse to rearm.From 1933 on Hitler merely shouted what his democratic and nonrevolutionary predecessorshad often said before, not in shy whispers, but in ordinary conversational tones. There wasnothing particularly new in the substance of his demands; what was novel was the arrogant,aggressive and violent way in which he made them. His claims were as vague and asmenacingly undefined as theirs had been, but he also made certain quite specificpronouncements. The last thing he wanted, he said, was another war. He would shed no moreGerman blood. The German people had not recovered from the appalling bloodshed from theFirst World War. Such claims as he made, he said, were humble and reasonable. As I havesaid, in the autumn of 1937 I myself went to Berlin and saw him, not at the suggestion of theBritish Foreign Office, but with their full knowledge of what I was doing. By this time he hada fairly detailed list of demands: that an Austro German Anschluss should be permitted, if aplebiscite of the Austrian people showed a majority to be in favor of such a union; that therelations between the Czechs and the German-speaking community in the Sudetenland shouldbe similar to those between Great Britain and the Irish Free State; and that Germany shouldhave the right to a colonial empire, if not in the same territories as before, then in theirequivalent elsewhere. He held that Germany had a moral claim to Tanganyika becauseAfrican soldiers had fought valiantly on the German side, and therefore German rule musthave been popular with them. He made no threat of going to war on this issue.Six months later the whole picture had changed sharply. The Nazis had marched into Austria,and Hitler had been rapturously acclaimed in his native town of Linz and in Vienna. TheSudeten problem was no longer remote or academic. In the early summer of 1938 a majorcrisis occurred; Europe buzzed with rumors of a large-scale German mobilization along theCzechoslovak frontier; over a tense week end statesmen and officials were anxiously at workin embassies and foreign ministries. The crisis passed without a decisive flare-up, but it hadindicated the depth and the malignancy of the disease from which Europe was suffering. Mr.Eden had resigned from the Foreign Office and had been succeeded by Lord Halifax, theformer Viceroy. However, the Prime Minister, Mr. Neville Chamberlain, exercised a vigilanteye over foreign affairs; he, who -- quite justly -- had described the League's policy ofsanctions against Italy as "midsummer madness," strove now with energy and sincerity toeffect a practical easement of the difficulties and the dangers which beset Europe. He soughtby finding specific solutions to specific problems to build anew, if necessarily brick by brick,a new structure of peace. The grievances of the Sudeten Germans were one such specificproblem. Konrad Henlein, the Nazi leader and spokesman in the Sudetenland, visitedEngland that summer and put his case to leading British statesmen. At Mr. Chamberlain'srequest and with the agreement of the Prague Government, Lord Runciman, a leadingmember of the Liberal party, an ex-Cabinet Minister of unblemished reputation and a longrecord of success as a negotiator on both the political and economic front, headed a smallmission to Czechoslovakia in order to investigate the whole problem of the Sudeten Germans'future, and if possible to recommend a solution. Apart altogether from any military threat,Lord Runciman's mission was in no doubt as to what the result of a plebiscite in theSudetenland would be.A strong and influential current of opinion was running in England in favor of a radical butpeaceful, just and permanent settlement of Germany's demands. Among those most closelyconcerned in the effort to achieve such a settlement was an old and intimate friend. By acoincidence two of Britain's outstanding Ambassadors in Berlin have been my dear andvalued friends. I have already referred to Lord D'Abernon, whom I had known well since theearly 1900's. Now the British Ambassador was Sir Nevile Henderson. He and I had first met,and had struck up a warm and lasting friendship, when he was a comparatively junior officialin the British Embassy in Saint Petersburg in 1912. In Paris a few years later he and I wereboth members of the small, well-to-do, predominantly American set of agreeable, literary,artistic, sporting and cultured folk, whom I have mentioned earlier; and later again we hadbeen in touch in Egypt. A quarter of a century after our first encounter he had reached thepeak of his career as a diplomat, charged -- as his own frank autobiographical record * hasdisclosed -with what could have been a uniquely important responsibility. He and I metseveral times after he had gone to Berlin. He assured me that sentiment in Carlsbad andMarienbad was overwhelmingly pro-German, having seen for himself on a visit there; he wasconvinced that a fair plebiscite would reveal a large majority in favor of unity with Germany.Failure of a Mission, by Sir Nevile Henderson.Almost all the advice to which the British Cabinet hearkened was on similar lines. The bulkof the Conservative party supported the Cabinet. So did the City. In the Press the mostpowerful and influential support for a just and equitable settlement of Germany's demands --and of the demands of the people in the Sudeten land themselves -- came from The Times.This great newspaper, in its recently published history of itself, has revealed with remarkablecandor and forthrightness the part which it played in the whole Munich crisis. Contrary to abelief which has been widely held in Britain and abroad, there was no prompting by theGovernment of the attitude which The Times adopted. Geoffrey Dawson, then editor, andRobin Barrington-Ward, his assistant and eventual successor -- both of whom are now dead --had themselves, by utterly independent processes of reasoning and judgment, come to theconclusion that it was not only politic but just and fair to seek to secure, if necessary by far-reaching concessions, a settlement with Germany, and they hoped that such a settlementwould prevent the outbreak of a war.There has of late been a curious shift of emphasis among those who defend Munich. It isfashionable to argue (as a correspondence in The Daily Telegraph in the summer of 1953demonstrated) that Munich was justified, not on moral grounds, but on military grounds, as astrategic and logistic necessity imposed by Britain's weakness on land and sea and most of allin the air. This, I think, can be summed up as the "Munich-bought-much-needed-time" schoolof thought. This is a post-hoc thesis shaped to fit the pattern of subsequent events. It was notthe argument which was deployed at the time. Then the case for Munich, as I heard it statedby members of the Government and by other champions of the settlement, and with allsincerity by myself, was proposed as a moral question and ran as follows: would GreatBritain be justified in going to war to prevent the Germans of Czechoslovakia from declaringtheir choice by plebiscite, and in consequence to compel them to remain under Czech rule?Looking back on it all now, I suppose that I was subconsciously influenced in favor of theidea of separating the Germans from the Czechs in the regions in which they were in amajority by my close personal connection with and understanding of the Muslim-Hindu issuein India, which afforded, on a much larger scale, an almost incredibly exact analogy. Here inminiature was what was to happen nearly a decade later in India. Konrad Hen lein played atthe time (though history was later to submerge him entirely) the decisive role which, in thePakistan-Bharat issue, was Jinnah's.Whatever the subconscious background to my conscious thought then, I had no doubt where Istood. At Geoffrey Dawson's invitation I wrote a Times leader-page article in unstinted praiseof the agreement with which Mr. Chamberlain returned -- in triumph and to a rapturouswelcome, let it be rememberedfrom his last visit to Germany. I stand before history thereforeas a strong, avowed supporter of Munich. And now, all these years later, after all the violentand troublous happenings since then, I say without hesitation that I thank God that we did notgo to war in 1938. Apart altogether from any highly debatable question of militarypreparedness or the lack of it, if Great Britain had gone to war in 1938, the doubt about themoral justification of the decision would have remained forever, and doubt would have bredmoral uncertainty about the conduct and the conclusion of the war. In the perspective ofhistory Britain would be seen to have gone to war, not on a clear-cut, honorable and utterlyunavoidable issue, but in order to maintain the status quo and to prevent a plebiscite by whicha regional racial majority might seek to be united with their brothers by blood, language andculture.An easy haze of forgetfulness enfolds many of the details of that period. An important, butfrequently ignored, part of the Munich settlement as it was negotiated by Mr. Chamberlainwas that there should be a plebiscite in doubtful areas in Czechoslovakia where the two raceswere mixed. In the subsequent turmoil of events this important provision was forgotten, andthe plebiscite never happened; perhaps it can be argued that its result would anyway havebeen a foregone conclusion.Perhaps, but I merely know now that I, like many others in that autumn of 1938, had theillusion that we were indeed going to have "peace in our time." Neville Chamberlain, whohad brought this about, was our hero, and for a short time he was adulated as few statesmenhave ever been before or since. It was a tragically brief period. Hitherto Hitler had --whatever methods he had used to attain his ends -- based his claims on the principle of self-determination as laid down in the peace treaties and in the constitution of the League ofNations. In the spring of 1939, however, he ripped off the veil of respectability. His forcesentered what remained of Czechoslovakia, and the country was termed a "protectorate" of theReich. Baron von Neuradt -- a survivor from the pre-Nazi era -- was sent to Prague asProtector to rule a country which had indeed been annexed and totally subjugated.This destroyed in a single stroke the whole moral basis of Germany's case before history, andit united in a common resolution many who, in 1937-1938, had held very different views.There was now no doubt; there were no questionings. It was perfectly obvious to everyone --even to those who a year before had been the stoutest supporters of Munich -- that Hitler'swar in 1939 was a deliberate act of aggression. However, it was not only Hitler's war. Theterrible fact is that it was the German people's war. This time the allocation of blame iscorrect. In the vast majority the German people were with Hitler in his attempt either toimpose his "New Order," which was to last for a thousand years or to bring all Europeancivilization crashing down in ruin with him in a final Wagnerian climax.It is true that there were attempts to assassinate Hitler. But the only one that got beyondvague talk was the coup of July 20, 1944, which was the work of a group of senior Armyofficers and which very nearly succeeded. Even this effort -- despite the sincere patriotism,the dignity and the courage under torture of the men involved -- was not made until the Nazis'defeat was a certainty. Not one of the generals raised a finger in 1939, or in 1940 and 1941when the Axis straddled the world. It needed the imminence of total defeat to convert them. Ifa genuine and consistent sense of responsibility had animated them, they would have plotted,not to avert the consequences of the war in 1944-1945, but to have prevented the warbreaking out in 1939. Someone may say: "A coup by a handful of soldiers would not havehelped in 1939; the German people would have gone to war all the same."If that is so -- if offered all they demanded, the German people deliberately chose war insteadof peace, aggressive conquest instead of shared prosperity -- it is the most completecondemnation of Germany, the most complete justification of every act of retributioninflicted on her -- the cutting off from the East, the loss of territory, the destruction of hercities.The argument may be continued a stage further: "What about Danzig? That was a Germancity -- why wasn't the principle of the plebiscite applied there?"The answer is that Germany never wanted, never asked for an honest plebiscite in raising theDanzig issue or in any of her other claims on Poland. When Ribbentrop, Hitler's ForeignMinister, made his formal statement of those claims, how did he do it? Instead of taking anyof the normal steps by which negotiations are ordinarily initiated, he summoned my friend SirNevile Henderson to witness a scene as tragic as it was futile. Rapidly and harshly, inGerman, he read his ultimatum to the Ambassador in the neurotic yet reckless way in which acriminal tries to arrange an alibi. He turned away abruptly without even handing Hendersonthe document to read. It was therefore as a criminal's alibi that Henderson interpreted it. TheGerman mood in 1939 was a mood of criminal folly and a gambler's pride. To allege nowthat this was Hitler's war, the Nazis' war, the generals' war, the war of a handful, is an evasionof the truth. This was a war of the German people, for which the overwhelming majority mustbe held responsible, particularly the governing classes.Is there a moral? Is there an explanation? I have come to believe this about the Germans: thatin spite of all their great qualities, their ability, their capacity for hard work, their discipline,their intelligence and their passion for education, they are afflicted with a romantic, self-immolatory streak in their character which is never satisfied with mere success. Perhaps theSecond World War was fought because other nations forgot about Wagner.After 1870 Bismarck said again and again, "We are satisfied." Surely after 1938 that is what,in realistic terms, the German leaders and people should have said. Thinking in those terms,Neville Chamberlain believed that he had bought peace in our time. Instead, less than a yearlater he was saying in a sad, grave voice: "It is the evil things we fight against." Why? Was itnot that Wagnerian, death-desiring streak which drove an allegedly civilized race into themost blatantly aggressive war ever launched? At least now no one on the Allied side can havea single twinge of conscience, a single doubt that we were justified in fighting. This was arighteous war.My years of work at Geneva did not, I am glad to think, go unrecognized. In 1937 I wasunanimously elected President of the League of Nations. When that year's session concludedI was asked to continue to hold the Presidency for another year, until just before the openingof the 1938 session. This was a rare honor and a responsibility, for mine would have been theduty of summoning a special session and presiding over it, had one been found necessary.My work in this international field, and its crown and climax in my year as President of theLeague, had especially delighted my beloved mother. When I first went to Geneva she wasover eighty, and she followed my work there with unflagging interest. Each year that I wentto India we talked together as fully and as frankly about this as we had, throughout my life,shared our interests, our joys and our sorrows. For a very long time she retained her health,all her faculties, her keen zest for life and all its concerns, whether public and political orfamily and domestic. When the 1937 session of the Assembly ended, I went to my home inthe south of France, with no reason to believe that my mother's health-she was by then in hereighty-eighth year -- was causing any serious anxiety. Nor indeed was it, for she wasmaintaining her accustomed tranquil and happy way of life.She had seen both my sons, Aly and Sadruddin, the latter of whom, as a little boy, was aspecial joy and comfort to her, both when she came to Europe and during a summer whichhe and his mother spent with her in the Lebanon. He bore, too, the name of my elder brotherwho had died in infancy, and this particularly rejoiced my mother's heart. She did not see hergreat-grandchildren, Aly's two boys, Karim and Amyn, but she knew all about them and shechose both their names, the younger bearing that of her brother who died as a young man inthe 1880's. She had, as I have recorded, been present at my first Jubilee, and had been madeespecially happy by the congratulatory telegram sent by Lord Wigram, on behalf of KingGeorge V, just before the news of the King's death cut short our celebrations. Eager,affectionate, pious, alert to every new happening and new interest, my mother in her lastyears was someone who radiated a sense of joy and goodness among all who knew her.It was at the end of 1937 that I had a cable from India saying that she had been takenseriously ill and bidding me hasten to come to see her. I flew to India at once, in the fastestaircraft of those times, which took three and a half days to reach Bombay.All her life my mother had retained the habit of a Turkish bath. In each of our houses in Indiawe had a regularly equipped Turkish bath, with dry, properly heated alcoves, the correctwater system, and, as its climax, a hot pool and a small and very cold pool. My mother had aregular bath once a week, with all its traditional accompaniments of Turkish and Persianmassage; she had a manicure and a pedicure, and in the Eastern fashion she had her hair dyedwith henna. Coming from her bath one day in November she had a stroke; she recoveredconsciousness but thereafter her mental faculties were impaired and her memory was gone,except for brief periods of clarity and vision.She was at our house at Malabar Hill. Her doctor -- incidentally a descendant of one of mygrandfather's original followers from Iran who had become a member of the Indian MedicalService -warned me that I must expect to find a great change in her. I was surprised to findthat her physical health seemed excellent, but the mental breakdown -- except for themoments of lucidity which I have just mentioned -- was almost complete. I spent most of mytime with her; and it was a great joy when occasionally she fully recognized me and talked tome.All her long life my mother had been animated by one simple, sincere desire: that when thetime came, she should die and be buried on Muslim soil, by which she meant a land ruled bya free, independent and sovereign Muslim government. To this was knit one more longing:that in death she should lie beside my father, whom she had dearly and deeply loved, and forwhom her mourning from the moment of his death more than fifty years before had been asprofound, as durable and as touching as Queen Victoria's for her beloved Prince Albert.As soon as I could, therefore, I made preparations to have my mother taken to Iraq, where anindependent Muslim government ruled, and where my father's body rested at Nejef nearKerbela. There were obviously considerable difficulties and problems about her journeythither. Medical advice ruled out air travel, though I have always believed that my mother, inspite of the various stops that the two-day journey to Baghdad would have involved, wouldhave stood it better than the sea trip. However, it was by boat that she went to Basra andthence by train to Baghdad. I had been to Cairo in the meantime, and I flew back to Baghdadto find her at the house of a cousin of mine, Aga Mustafa Khan, close by the holy shrine ofKadhamin.A few minutes after I reached her bedside, her eyes opened, and she recognized me. Then inthe way that all true Muslims would ask, who seek to follow the Prophet's example and attaina safe and quiet journey from the midst of the living, she achieved peace and happiness andthat final "Companionship on High" for which all yearn. In accordance with Ismaili traditionI did not accompany her body to its last resting place, but certain nephews and cousins laidher lovingly beside my father, and they were -- as she had long and ardently desired -- finallyreunited.Part FourA NEW ERAXIIIThe Second World WarTHE OUTBREAK of the Second World War meant for me the shattering of the hopes of alifetime. The great Palace of the League of Nations at Geneva, which I had opened, wasdeserted and shuttered. Its emptiness and its silence were sharply symbolic. However, it wasin Switzerland that I found myself in those late summer and early autumn days of 1939 whenHitler's armies swept over Poland, and Britain and France, for the second time in ageneration, went to war against an aggressive and conquest-hungry Germany.Although later in the war, when I was permanently resident in Switzerland, the SwissGovernment -- in the difficult and delicate conditions of the time -- had to ask me to refrainfrom political activity of any kind, that provision was not in force in September, 1939. I wasable therefore to address manifestoes to my followers everywhere bidding them give all thesupport and help of which they were capable to Britain and the British cause. There was,however, no occasion for diplomatic or political activity on my part such as I had undertakenin the First World War. No great Muslim Power was involved, as the Ottoman Empire badbeen involved. There was no Khalif; there was no proclamation of a jehad. My duties and myresponsibilities were no more and no less than those of any other private citizen.I had at that time a considerable number of horses in training and at stud. In the belligerentcountries racing on any scale was obviously off for the duration and probably for a long timeafterward. However, in 1939 Italy was not a belligerent. It occurred to me that I might be ableto negotiate a deal which would not be unhelpful to the Italian Government and -- if I made aprofit, as I hoped to do -- would supply me with a considerable sum to invest in British WarLoans. With my wife I went to Florence, and offered to sell all my horses to the ItalianGovernment. I found that my offer had considerable support among people of standing,particularly those who wanted Italy to stay out of the war; Ciano himself, I have sincediscovered, was in favor of it. However, at the highest level, and on the edge of completion,the deal was forbidden by Mussolini himself.To me this was a clear indication of Mussolini's intentions, for in addition to the large sumwhich I asked, I imposed two conditions, the money was to be paid immediately, but thehorses were not to be delivered in Italy until after the end of hostilities.Before I made this approach to the Italian Government, I had offered my stallions and maresto the British National Stud. In those days, I ought perhaps to point out, my son Aly had noshare in the ownership of my stables, and I was therefore at liberty to do exactly what I likedwithout consulting anyone else. My terms in this offer were however very different fromthose which I later proposed to the Italian Government. For my whole stable, includingBahram, Mahmoud, and every race horse I had, I asked not one tenth of their real value, andless than a fifth of the price which I was on the verge of getting from the Italian Government.The Ministry of Agriculture however, for reasons best known to themselves, rejected an offerwhich I believe to have been unique and one which would also have been of enormousbenefit to agriculture, one of Britain's most vital industries in peace and in war. To this day Ihave never understood this decision. They did not even bother to look in the gift horse'smouth.In the winter of 1939-1940 I went to India, spending some months there seeing and staying inDelhi with the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow. I gave him an account of the failure of mynegotiations with the Italian Government. In April I went with my wife and my young son tomy villa at Antibes in the south of France, as I had been accustomed to do for years. Thecataclysmic events of May and June, 1940, took me, like so many others, utterly by surprise.During my years at Geneva I had come to know many French statesmen, and always theirconfidence in the French Army's strength was so supreme and so unshakable that whenFrench resistance collapsed along almost the whole front from the Rhine to the Channel, andthe Nazi motorized divisions swept south and west across France, I was shocked and appalledbeyond belief. When Italy declared war on the Allies, and the French Government,abandoning Paris as an open city, took refuge in Bordeaux, I saw that we were in peril ofbeing trapped in a totally vanquished country. With my wife and my son I made my way asquickly as I could to Switzerland, by almost the last remaining door out of France before theend. My elder son Aly had taken a commission in a British Yeomanry Regiment and withofficial approval had been attached to the French, and he was at this time with their forces inSyria. My daughter-in-law, with her small boys, was in Cairo.Neutral Switzerland was a haven, but for several years it was an isolated and solitary haven. Iwas barred from political activity; I was cut off from most of my contacts with the outsideworld; and these years saw the beginning of my series of grave illnesses. From the BritishConsul General in Geneva, Mr. Henry Livingston, and from his colleague in Zurich, Ireceived a great deal of kindness and help in times that were difficult and trying enough forus all.The origins of my illness lay several years back. From about 1935 I had been aware of certaintroublesome internal symptoms, but various doctors whom I consulted did not take aparticularly serious view of them. In Switzerland in 1940 I took the advice of a number ofeminent surgeons; I underwent examination after examination, and the doctors' view grewgraver and graver, with more than a hint that the tumor, which was the cause of the trouble,might be malignant. Its position was such, however, that they considered it dangerous tooperate. Hemorrhages were an almost daily experience; I lost strength steadily and inconsequence was greatly depressed. Only after the war, when I was able to go to Paris, didthe great French surgeon, Professor François de Gaudard d'Allaines, operate on me and,removing the tumor, discover that it was non malignant. This however did not entirely endmy trouble; of my subsequent bouts of illness I shall have something to say later.Meanwhile during my enforced stay in Switzerland there was one profoundly importantchange in my private life. I have referred before to the differences between the Christian andthe Muslim view of marriage and to the misunderstandings which arise. Whereas thosebrought up in the Christian tradition, with its sacramental concept of marriage, find it hard tounderstand the practical and contractual basis of the Islamic idea of marriage, for Muslims itis just as difficult to comprehend the laws in the West which compel the continuance of anunhappy marriage and insist on the artificial and arranged sin of adultery in order to bring toan end an association that has become insupportable and to permit both partners to make afresh start in life.Maritally my third wife, Princess Andrée, and I drifted apart, although our affection, ourrespect and our true friendship for each other were in no way impaired. In thesecircumstances by mutual consent we were divorced in a civil court in Geneva in 1943.Thirteen months later I married my present wife, whom I had first met in Cairo and whom Ihad known for many years. I can only say that if a perfectly happy marriage be one in whichthere is a genuine and complete union and understanding, on the spiritual, mental andemotional planes, ours is such.As a good Muslim I have never asked a Christian to change her religion in order to marry me,for the Islamic belief is that Christians, Jews -- and, according to some tenets, Zoroastriansand reformed Hindu unitarians -- may marry Muslims and retain their own religion. With noattempt on my part at influencing her mind, my present wife had already been converted toIslam while she lived in Cairo. Perhaps each of several motives and impulses played its partin her conversion: the quiet fervor of Muslim believers in their Friday prayers; the completeabsence of snobbery, prejudice and racial pride that is fundamental to Islam's practice andpreaching; and no doubt the serene, consolatory beauty -- a beauty that seems spiritual as wellas physical -- of a mosque like that of Sultan Hassan in Cairo.Our marriage came then at a time when I badly needed my wife's support and understanding.She has been my strong and gentle help and comforter through all my serious illnesses ofrecent years. I have at last been granted the real and wonderful haven of finding in and withmy wife a true union of mind and soul.My only political activity of any importance in the war years concerned the Allies' entry intoPersia in 1941, with the double intention of opening up a less vulnerable line ofcommunication with the Soviet Union than the route taken by the Arctic convoys toMurmansk and Archangel, and of preventing Persia's being used as a base for Axis intrigueand espionage against the Allies' position in the Middle East. This action, strategicallynecessary as it doubtless was, involved the deposition of that remarkable monarch, RezaShah, and precipitated a long period of unrest, resentment and frustration in relations betweenPersia and the West which only reached (let us hope) its end in the events of August, 1953.It may be timely, therefore, if I give a brief character sketch of Reza Shah, whom I knewwell, before I describe the steps by which I attempted to ameliorate, on his behalf, the Allies'action in respect to his country. Reza Shah, although he had had his military education andtraining under Russian officers, was of pure Iranian descent, from the north of the country, aregion whose peoples have not mingled their blood with the tribes of the south, nor with theTurkish tribes that settled in Persia in the epoch of the great migrations. The family namewhich he took, Pahlevi, indicates that he fully realized that his origin was pure Aryan Iranian.I myself, as I have said, am closely related on both sides of my family to the preceding Kajardynasty, whose beginnings were Turkish but whose blood, through the generations, had ofcourse mingled extensively with that of the Iranians whom members of the dynasty married.Reza Shah Pahlevi was a man of great stature, whose strength in his prime was moral as wellas physical. A cavalry man by training, he rose rapidly -- like Nadir Shah before him -- bysheer ability, strength of character and superior intelligence, and became at length Minister ofWar under Ahmed Shah, the last Kajar emperor. With Ahmed Shah's encouragement hebecame Prime Minister and virtual dictator of Iran. His ambition was to make Iran a trulyindependent country, free of all de facto if not de jure suzerainty imposed from without, andfree of constant Russian and British pressure and the clash of interests of these two countries.From all that I know of him I have long been convinced that he would have had no desire toseize the throne had Ahmed Shah shown even an ordinary interest in his country and in hisduties as its sovereign.Ahmed Shah's story was sad and not unfamiliar. He was an extremely intelligent young man,highly educated, with a wide knowledge of both Eastern and Western culture, and well readin history, politics and economic theory. But his intellect and his talents were corroded by aprofound and pervasive pessimism. He did not believe that by effort, by intelligence andapplication -- all qualities which he possessed -- he could make his throne and his dynastyprosperous and stable. An indication of his strange indifference to the normal impulses of lifewas that, although he had children, he allowed his brother to remain heir apparent to histhrone. I knew him well, both as a near relative and as a friend. We were on excellent termsand we met often. It was obvious, however, that he did not care about his crown, or rather helacked any belief that he could achieve anything constructive with his destiny or do anythingto improve conditions in his own country. He concentrated on providing for his children andhis mother, and to a certain extent for his brother; he made shrewd investments in the UnitedStates, and carefully and steadily built up his private fortune. Adroit as he was inadministering his personal affairs, he was equally despondent about his duties as Shah.His end was untimely. He was enormously fat, and he determined to reduce his weight. Hewent to extremes, cut his weight down by half, and did his health irreparable harm. He wasstill quite a young man when he died in the American Hospital in Paris. But before that hehad lost his throne. Again and again he was urged to go back to Persia; he disregarded everysummons from his government and ignored the anxious advice of friends such as myself, andflatly refused to resume his duties. In these circumstances Reza Shah Pahlevi was fullyjustified, historically and constitutionally, in assuming the crown and the responsibilitieswhich had been abandoned by the man in whose charge they had been set. And I thereforewas one of the first to send him my homage and my prayers for a felicitous and prosperousreign.Reza Shah was an able ruler, a patriot who suffered real torture to see his country perhaps themost backward of all the world's independent and sovereign nations. He was a shrewd andcourageous modernizer. First, he set out to free Islam, as it was practiced in Iran, from themany superstitions and from the many semiidolatrous ideas and practices which -- contrary tothe true tenets of our faith -- had been fostered in Iran by the ecclesiastical lawyers, who thuskept the people ignorant, their own interests secure, and their power supreme. The Kajardynasty, in order to conserve its own position, had allied itself with this bigotedsemipriesthood, and together they had discouraged the younger generation in Persia fromgoing to Europe and America in order to equip themselves intellectually and technically in allthat the industrial and scientific revolution had brought about. Reza Shah broke away fromthis, opened the doors of his country to the study of modern science and sent large numbersof Persian students to universities in Europe and America. He encouraged the education andemancipation of women and ended the horrible custom of purdah. He strove to foster nationalindustries, especially carpet making which he restored to a high standard equal to the besttraditions of the Saffevi period. In fact he was Iran's equivalent of Kemal Ataturk. But thelong, deliberate obscuration, which had been the work of the Kajar dynasty and of their allies,made his task far more difficult than Ataturk's.He passionately resented any attempt at interference in the internal affairs of his country byany foreign Power. No doubt in his dealings with both Britain and Russia he was helped by anumber of factors: that the First World War had gravely weakened them both; that Britain'simperialist and expansionist ambitions and policies had dwindled almost to the vanishingpoint; and that Russia, absorbed in the consolidation of the new regime, in the Five Year Planand the vast tasks of reconstruction allied to it, had no desire, for the moment, to resume theCzarist policy of expansion in Western Asia.Therefore when the Second World War broke out, Reza Shah sought to keep Persia out of theconflict to the end, as did the rulers of other countries absorbed in their own internalproblems. However, man proposes, but God disposes.Until Germany attacked Russia in the summer of 1941, neutrality was not impossible forPersia. Thereafter however her position became increasingly vulnerable as its strategicimportance grew. Even before the outbreak of war in the Far East and America's fullscaleparticipation in the conflict, United States aid to the Allies was constantly growing in volume,and Lend-Lease untapped a vast source of vital military and other supplies, a proportion ofwhich it was agreed to divert as soon as possible to Russia.Access to Russia by any European route was, however, impossible. The Germans straddledevery sea and land route. A certain number of ocean convoys were sent by the Arctic route, atan enormous sacrifice of British and American lives, and the cargo they gave so much tobring was received by the Russians grudgingly and without a word of thanks. The Chiefs ofStaff were therefore determined to open up a less menaced and less costly road throughPersia.Reza Shah, proudly jealous of his country's hard-held independence, misled by the hithertoplacatory attitude which he had encountered in both British and Russians and by the apparentdepth and magnitude of Germany's military success, was totally uncooperative about offeringto the Allies the facilities which they asked. In his view they implied the abandonment ofIranian neutrality.The Allies at this juncture in the war were extremely hardpressed. They could and didhowever assemble a sufficient show of military strength to overpower any Persian chance ofeffective re sistance to their demands. A small force, sent from India, entered Persia; and I,far away in Switzerland, at once appreciated how gravely Reza Shah had jeopardized his ownposition. Through His Majesty's Consul General in Geneva, I therefore sought the ForeignOffice's permission to communicate with him. I had some hope that, since our relations hadalways been very friendly not only at the time of his accession but consistently thereafter, hemight listen to my advice. In a long telegram I implored him to realize that his throne was indanger and that if he persisted in this attitude of non-co-operation his own abdication wouldbe compelled and Iran, instead of entering the war as an honored ally, would be forced in as asatellite. Alas, I do not know whether my telegram reached him soon enough to give him anytime to reflect. I had had to wait for Foreign Office permission to send it. The pace of eventsin this crisis was rapid, and I fear that in all probability my telegram reached him too late, andhis abdication had by then become inevitable. However, there is some consolation in the factthat -- as I have subsequently been told by the man who was then his Court Minister,wielding great power -- the second part of my cable, in which I begged him to come into thewar on the side of the Allies, did have some effect. With the departure of the Shah, the peopleof Iran themselves could speak, the dynasty was saved and the present Emperor, Reza Shah'sson, acceded peacefully. Reza Shah was sent into exile, first to Mauritius and thence toJohannesburg, where very soon afterward he died -- doubtless of a broken heart.The war years passed. Facilities for communication between Switzerland and the outsideworld were extremely restricted for a long time. I was able to send a rare telegram bycourtesy of the Ambassador on great occasions, such as the substitute Derby, for example.Private telegrams to England took a fortnight or longer, and were often never received at all. Imanaged to hear that two of my horses had finished second and third in the Derby; and I alsogot the news that Tehran, which my son Aly had leased to me, was second in the 1944 Derby.Later in 1944, with the liberation of the greater part of France, news came through muchmore easily, and I heard at once of Tehran's victory in the St. Leger. Throughout the warthese interests of mine had been in efficient hands; the father of my present agent, Mr. NesbitWaddington, looked after my stud, and all my racing interests were supervised by Mr. FrankButters in Newmarket. Gradually after the war I resumed my own day-to-day control of mystud and my race horses in training, and by 1947 the administration of them all was back inmy hands.Early in 1945 my long seclusion ended. The British Ambassador in Paris, now Lord Norwich,secured special French police protection for me; and my wife and I -- in spite of the fact thata large part of the countryside was still fairly lawless, with German soldiers at large andarmed bands marauding -- got through to Marseilles without mishap. In Marseilles we werefor a time the guests of the U.S. Army and of the commanding officer, General John B.Ratayo. From Marseilles we made our way in a British military aircraft to Cairo.Although British G.H.Q. had been established in Cairo for all the Middle East campaignsfrom 1940 on and although a vast assemblage of British troops was in and around the city, ithad been scarcely scarred by the war. Its social life as always was diverse, polyglot andmany-sided. At the British Embassy there presided the last of the proconsuls, Lord Killearn,formerly Sir Miles Lampson, the man who earlier in his career had been primarilyresponsible for the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936. In and around the big houses, the hotels,the great new blocks of apartments in Gezira and the Garden City, a busy and exuberantsocial life ebbed and flowed. Anglo-Egyptian relations were in a phase of superficialcorrectness and amiability, overlying an increasing tension.In Egyptian Court and political circles I had countless friends and acquaintances, includingmany members of the Royal Family. Three at least deserve, in my view, more than passingmention: KingFarouk, whom I now met for the first time as a grown man; his Prime Minister,Nahas Pasha, and his Heir Apparent, Prince Mohammed Ali.Prince Mohammed Ali and I have been friends for fifty-five years. When I first went toLondon in 1898, he and I stayed at the same hotel, the old Albemarle in Piccadilly. He dinedat Windsor Castle as Queen Victoria's guest either shortly before or after I had the samehonor. By a curious and delightful coincidence, fifty-five years later, in Queen Elizabeth II'sCoronation Year, he and I, who had been Queen Victoria's guests at dinner, in the samesummer were her young great-great-granddaughter's guests at tea. Across this great stretch oftime Prince Mohammed Ali and I have been firm and fast friends.His is a fascinating and many-sided personality. A younger brother of the Khedive, heexerted for long a quiet, soothing but very powerful influence, largely behind the scenes, inEgyptian life and politics. He never married, since his view is (it has always been said) thathis health has not been robust enough for him to feel justified in founding a family. Yet hisenergy and vivacity are as great as his spirit is sensitive and his intellect powerful. All his lifehe has been a devout Muslim; he has made the pilgrimage to Mecca; he is steeped in Islamicculture. Not long ago he wrote a series of pamphlets on Islam, its meaning and its spiritualmessage for mankind, many copies of which he asked me to circulate in Europe. He speaksseveral languages, ranging from Arabic and Turkish, through English, French and Germanand one or two more. His detailed historical knowledge of Egypt, whether in the time of theMamelukes or in the era of his own great-grandfather, the conqueror Mohammed Ali, is trulyphenomenal. His friends and admirers are legion, not only among his fellow countrymen andco-religionists but in Egypt's numerous foreign colonies and minority communities -- British,French, Jews and Greeks and Copts. Outside Egypt he has earned respect throughout theMuslim East, in Europe and in the United States. All his life he has been a great admirer ofBritain and of the British character and way of life, and a staunch supporter of AngloEgyptianfriendship and understanding through many vicissitudes and disappointments. With the endof the monarchy and the establishment of the new regime in Egypt, he went into voluntaryexile, without bitterness or resentment, wishing Egypt and her people un der their new rulerscontinued and increasing prosperity, but feeling that he himself -- being far advanced in years- lacked the strength to contribute his share. His palace, his famed and beautiful botanicalgardens and his princely collection of objets d'art he has left in trust, to become after hisdeath a national museum. Now in a green and tranquil old age he spends his summers inSwitzerland and his winters on the French or the Italian Riviera. Long may he enjoy apeaceful retirement.Nahas Pasha I first met when Egypt entered the League of Nations; he came to Geneva and I,as India's representative, entertained him. Much of his long-established success as a politicianwas due to his powers of oratory, to the spell of authority which he could exert over themasses of his fellow countrymen; these qualities however are scarcely visible when you firstencounter him. By an odd irony, while he is likely to be remembered in history as a statesmanwho came into serious conflict with the sovereign whom he served, he is in fact an out-and-out monarchist. Madame Nahas has told me of the depth of the devotion which her husbandfelt for King Farouk, and with that devotion a strong conviction that the King would be bestserved by being constantly reminded of the limitations which hedged his power as aconstitutional monarch. Now this is without doubt one of the legitimate duties of a Minister;but even in Britain -- as Mr. Gladstone found in his long but severely formal association withQueen Victoria -- an adviser who is forever telling a monarch what he or she must not do isnot likely to be as popular with his sovereign as those who do not take quite so rigid orcomfortless a view of their responsibilities. In Nahas Pasha this was not merely a superficialtrait, but a fundamental principle on which he acted resolutely and without deviation. I myselfhave heard him say more than once: "Le roi regne, mais il ne gouverne pas."Doubtless to a young and energetic sovereign like King Farouk it must have been irksome tohave to accept advice so frequently. The King extended to his Prime Minister all theaccustomed courtesies -I have often, for example, seen the two of them sitting side by side inthe Royal box at the opera -- but always one felt that behind the polite formalities there was agulf which could not be bridged, with the King on his side nourishing a deep but unspokenresentment, and Nahas Pasha on his, a regret that his loyalty and his devotion were notappreciated.And King Farouk himself? To me as to many others there will always, I think, be somethingenigmatic in this sad yet remarkable man's character. There are many baffling contradictionsabout him; yet back of them all there is great charm and a genuine and compelling simplicity.His father died when he was still a boy. His mother went abroad almost immediately and theyoung Farouk was deprived of the influence and the love of both parents. He was sent toEngland to be educated; yet he lived to all intents and purposes a prisoner in a vast countryhouse, forbidden to go out and about and mingle freely with the people among whom helived, under orders given by his father in the jealous fear that the boy might not grow upalong the lines which he had laid down. He had no proper schooling, never went to auniversity, and spent only a few months attending the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich.There can, however, be no doubt as to his natural abilities. Like his uncle, Prince MohammedAli, he is an excellent and versatile linguist. But he has, I think, always felt hampered by thelack of the education which both his station and his talents merited. This developed in him aninferiority complex when he constantly found himself, as he was bound to do, in the companyof highly educated as well as accomplished men of all nationalities; in compensationtherefore he turned to a small coterie of inferior and ill-educated flatterers. Loveless inchildhood and solitary, he grew almost morbidly afraid to be alone or in the dark or with timeon his hands.In this unfortunate background, I believe, lie the real reasons for the habits which have earnedhim criticism at home and notoriety abroad, for the gambling that has been so harshlyreprobated and for the long, aimless hours wasted in seeking distraction in cabarets and nightclubs. That they were wasted it is, alas, impossible to deny. Their sad and purposeless vacuitycan be explained, if not excused, by his lack of discipline in childhood, and by the fact thatnobody bothered to teach him that a man's chief capital is time, and that if he wastes time, hewastes his greatest asset which can never be recouped.Against his defects I prefer to set his good qualities: his piety; as a good Muslim his aversionto alcohol (and this in spite of all that hostile critics have said of him); his courtesy andkindness especially to the poor, to humble fellahin and servants; and his patriotism and hispride in his country. This last I know to be a major trait in his personality. He is an Egyptianfrom the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, resenting hotly any suggestion, from anysource, that Egypt and the Egyptians are or ever have been inferior to any country or peoplein the world; longing to recapture his nation's greatness at the time of Mohammed Ali andIbrahim Pasha; and intensely proud of the farsighted ideals and achievements of hisgrandfather, the Khedive Ismail.Each of us, it is said, is composed of many diverse and conflicting elements; seldom in onehuman being has the mingling been more complex and more contradictory than in this ill-starred yet amiable and talented King. Until late in his reign, when the worst of the damagehad already been done, the uncertainties about the possibilities of the succession created inand around his Court an unhealthy atmosphere of stealthiness, intrigue and suspicion. Hisfather occupied a throne left vacant because his cousin, the Khedive Abbas Hilmi, had beenbarred from it and because the other obvious claimant, the Sultan Hosein's eldest son, was notconsidered suitable by the Protecting Powers. He himself was an only son; until his secondmarriage, he had no son. There was a guarded uneasiness about the safety of his person,which in its way was just as insidious as direct and open fear of assassination.His contests with his Ministers were protracted and stubborn. He himself believed, as hisfather had done before him, that Egypt's prime need was for firm and authoritative rule andguidance from the King. The Wafd, by far the biggest and most influential political party,strongly nationalist in sentiment but representative of big vested capitalist and industrialistinterests, wanted to make him a rubber-stamp sovereign. They came into conflict again andagain on numerous issues. There grew up as the King's instrument, or instruments, a group ofpoliticians who looked to the King for their power and their promotion. At the times when theKing and the Wafd could not get along together, it was one or another from this group, theKing's Free Political party -- as it was known -- who would be called in to form a governmentwhich would last until the next major crises. In the Army too, it was said, the King used thesame tactics, giving his favorites promotion, and thus incurring the unforgiving resentment ofthe officer class.The Wafd's last sweeping electoral victory brought Nahas and his friends back into office,when the last possible permutation of politicians had been shuffled together against them andhad failed. The King was deeply discouraged and took refuge in a sad and shoulder-shrugging pessimism. I met him on his last visit to Europe before his abdication, and I wasimmediately aware of a great change in him. He was enveloped in a mood of depressedfatalism, an atmosphere of "I cannot do what I wish -- very well, let them do what theywant," which in the long run was bound to contribute to his defeat and downfall. He had triedin his own way to help his people and improve their lot, and now he felt that he had failed. Iwas strongly reminded of Ahmed Shah, the last of the Kajar dynasty in Iran. King Farouk,like Ahmed Shah, had embraced a profound and defeatist resignation and had lost faith in hispower to fulfill his duties and serve his people. Like the House of Kajar, the dynastyestablished by Mohammed Ali fell; and in both countries the power passed, not to thepoliticians, but to the military.There is a forlorn and pitiable sadness about King Farouk now. Unlike his uncle and formerheir, Prince Mohammed Ali, he must in the course of nature face a long life. What are to behis occupations? Where and how will he be able to build for himself a new existence inwhich he can find some self-respect and some usefulness to his fellow men? At present it ismost distressing to see him on his course from European city to European city, rootless andwithout purpose; and the distress is sharpened by the knowledge that he had it in him -- if hehad had a proper education and proper guidance in his youth -- to be a good and patriotic,perhaps a great, King of Egypt.The sixtieth anniversary of my inheriting my Imamat and ascending the gadi fell in 1945. Butin the troubled conditions at the end of the Second World War it was neither possible norsuitable to arrange any elaborate celebrations of my Diamond Jubilee. We decided to havetwo ceremonies: one, including the weighing against diamonds, in Bombay in March, 1946,and another five months later, in Dar-es-Salaam, using the same diamonds.When the time came, world conditions were only just beginning to improve and travelbecoming a little less difficult than it had been in the last months of the war. However, amagnificently representative assemblage of my followers gathered for a wonderful and -- tome at least -- quite unforgettable occasion. There were Ismailis present from all over the Nearand Middle East; from Central Asia and China; from Syria and Egypt; and from Burma andMalaya, as well as thousands of my Indian followers. Many of the Ruling Princes of Indiahonored me with their presence, as did senior British officials in this stormy twilight of theRaj. Telegrams and letters of congratulation showered in on me from all over the Islamicworld, from the heads of all the independent Muslim nations, and from the Viceroy. I was aproud and happy man to be thus reunited with those for whom across the years my affectionand my responsibility have been so deep and so constant.I hope and believe that this ceremony, in its timing and setting, was in itself a completelyeffective refutation of a mischievous and trouble-making but minor story which a handful ofevil people have recently put in circulation. Some busybodies have ferreted out the fact thatin the 1930's I approached the Government of India and suggested that I might be given aterritorial state and join the company of Ruling Princes. From the refusal of this request theyhave drawn the quite erroneous and absurd conclusion that I was offended, and that inresentment I abandoned all the principles and ideals which I had cherished throughout mylife. Nothing could be further from the truth. This is what really happened: it had long beenfelt among the Ismaili community that it would be desirable to possess a national home -- nota big, powerful state, but something on the lines of Tangier or the Vatican -- a scrap of earthof their own which all Ismailis, all over the world, could call theirs in perpetuity where theycould practice all their customs, establish their own laws, and (on the material side) build uptheir own financial center, with its own banks, investment trusts, insurance schemes andwelfare and provident arrangements. The idea of a territorial state made no particular appealto me, but in view of the strength of Ismaili sentiment on the matter I made my approach tothe Government of India. For reasons which I am sure were perfectly just and fair, theGovernment of India could not see their way to granting our request. The idea that theydisapproved of me for having made it, or that I was hurt and disappointed by their refusal, isfantastic.So far as I was concerned, the practical proof surely lay in the support, financial as well as inevery other way open to me, that I gave to Britain's war effort from 1939 on; every penny thatI could save or raise in London was invested in various war loans; and I know that neither theBank of England nor the Treasury was unaware of the extent of such help as I was able togive.So far as Britain and the British authorities in India were concerned, their help, their kindnessand their consideration at the time of my Diamond Jubilee were unstinted. I am certain thatwe could never have held the celebrations at all if it had not been for the assistance andinterest of Sir Stafford Cripps, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. All the authorities from theChancellor down gave us every possible facility for the transport of the diamonds --accompanied as it had to be with vigilant security precautions -- first to India and then fromIndia to Africa. The Viceroy's personal message of congratulation was notable among thehundreds that I received, and it was exactly the same story a few months later in East Africa.There the weighing ceremony was honored by the presence of the Resident of Zanzibar, theGovernors of Tanganyika, Kenya and Uganda, and no less important a person than theSecretary of State for the Colonies, Mr. Creech-Jones himself; and the whole time that I wasin Africa I was most hospitably and graciously received and entertained by the Governors andby all senior British officials with whom I came in contact. I trust that this disposes of a falsecanard.To the celebrations in India there was an extremely serious side. An amount equal to thevalue of the diamonds -- more than half a million pounds -- had been collected and wasoffered to me as an unconditional gift. I wanted this enormous amount to be used for thewelfare of the Ismaili community throughout what was then undivided India. The specificscheme which I had in mind was a trust, along the lines which Ismailis have built up inAfrica, of which I have already given some account, which is in essence not unlike theFriendly Societies that have made so valuable a contribution to British life. I hold that for atrading and agricultural community such as the great majority of Ismailis are an organizationof this character, combining welfare with prudent financial advice, assistance, loans,mortgages and so forth, is much more important and much more suitable than an ordinarycharity fund.However, other opinions prevailed in India. Having handed back the money, with my adviceas to its disposal, to the representatives of those who had subscribed it, I did not like to usemy authority as Imam to make my advice mandatory. It was decided to set up a conventionalcharitable trust -- a decision, I must emphasize, in which I had no share and no responsibility- and there was the outcome which I had feared and foreseen, for it is not unfamiliar in theEast. Before the trust could get into its stride there was protracted and disastrously costlylitigation between various parties among the Ismallis in Bombay. I still hope, however, thatwhen the suits are settled, at least half the original sum subscribed will not have been spenton costs and will be available for charity among the Ismailis.I myself have sometimes been criticized for not supporting and encouraging ordinarycharities on a large scale -- hospitals and dispensaries, schools and scholarships, and the usualrun of charitable institutions and organizations. I am convinced that the Ismaili communitiescompose a special case. Many Ismailis are traders and middlemen; others are yeomenfarmers, of the order of society known in Russian history as kulaks. Theirs is an intenselyindividualist outlook, acquired and fostered over many centuries. Welfare imposed fromwithout is not in the pattern of their society. I am convinced that their first need is to learn toco-operate in their thrift and self-help, to extend what they practice in their families and asindividuals to the community as a whole. This will not be achieved by the ordinary so-calledcharitable and welfare systems that are part of the fabric of existence in many Europeancountries. Co-operation in banking and commerce, in the raising and lending of money, inbuilding and in farming is, I sincerely believe, their path toward economic, social and culturaluplift, toward that better life for themselves and for their children which their talents and theirvirtues can secure.The foundations have been well and truly laid in British East Africa and in Madagascar, andit is my earnest hope that by 1900 at least we shall have reached fruition in what I may callmy worldly and material effort on behalf of my followers. In Egypt and Syria, in Pakistan, inIndia, Malaya and Portuguese East Africa the task will be more difficult. I am still at ithowever, and my Platinum Jubilee -- to be celebrated in 1954-1955-offers, in my opinion, asuperb opportunity to repeat in these areas the efforts which we have so successfullyinaugurated in British East Africa.India in 1946 demonstrated every symptom -- in a critical and advanced stage -- of thatmalady whose course it had been possible to foresee from the day of the promulgation of theMontaguChelmsford reforms almost thirty years earlier.That sense of spiritual unity and of continuity, which in my youth and long before hadsustained British rule in India and had given it its moral fiber and backbone as well as itsoutward manifestations of efficiency and thoroughness, was now finally sapped. That almostschizophrenic contradiction, which from 1917 on had eaten into the solidity and firmness ofBritain's moral and practical position in India, was now exacting its inevitable and final toll."Quit India," those two words so often chalked on walls in Calcutta, in Delhi and Bombayand every other big city, were no longer an agitator's scrawl; they now expressed a desire andintention. The British were going from India. Now the chief problem was the rate ofdeparture -- fast or slow. The only questions were when and how. Only a handful ofEnglishmen -- well under two thousand in all -were now left in the Indian Civil Service; butpower was still concentrated in their hands; and so long as they were responsible, not to thepeople of India, but to the Parliament and people of the United Kingdom, India was not freeand self-governing.The Second World War affected India far more closely and far more profoundly than itspredecessor. The whole of Southeast Asia, including Burma, fell to Japanese conquest in thefirst six months of 1942; the tide of invasion lapped at India's borders; and Japanese bombersappeared -- with remarkably little effect -- over Calcutta. India raised and sent into battle, onthe Allied side, forces numbering some two million, the largest volunteer army in history.The curious and false British theory about the martial and nonmartial races of India brokedown utterly, and men from many regions in Bengal and the South served gallantly incombatant units. In the Middle East, in East Africa and in Italy, Indian Divisions were foryears an integral part of the fighting forces of Britain and the Commonwealth. The enormousvalue of their contribution to ultimate victory, from the Battle of Keren to MarshalKesselring's final withdrawal in northern Italy four years later, is written imperishably intothe military history of the war. Indian officers, holding the King's commission, haddemonstrated again and again their gallantry, their sagacity, their leadership, and theircapacity to exercise high command. In the later phases of the war India was the essential basefor the Southeast Asian campaigns of 1944-1945, under Lord Mountbatten's supremecommand, which drove the Japanese in disastrous retreat down the length of Burma andwhich were a major contributory factor in Japan's ultimate defeat.Yet in the whole conduct and strategy of the war India, as India, had no say at all. Many ofher most distinguished political leaders languished long years in political detention. At theheight of the war, in the spring of 1942, Sir Stafford Cripps headed a British mission to Indiato try to work out -- against the background of the titanic problems of the time -- a feasiblescheme for realizing India's aspirations. The Cripps Mission failed, breaking itself against theharshest rock of all -- the fact that although British and Hindu representatives alike hoped topreserve the unity of the subcontinent (not least so far as the British were concerned, in theconditions of 1942, the unity of the Indian Defense Forces), the price of achieving that unitywas one which no Muslim could accept, and Muslim opinion by now had consolidated itselfformidably under the leadership of Mr. M. A. Jinnah, the Quaid-i-Azam. He made it perfectlyclear to Cripps that no constitution for a united India which did not satisfy nearly one hundredmillion Muslims would be accepted, and that their opposition to it would be broken only bykilling them; when they said "Death or Freedom," that was what they meant.After the failure of the Cripps Mission there followed more than three years of politicalstalemate. The Bengal famine of 1943 revealed how slender and how fragile were the basesof India's economy. Lord Linlithgow was succeeded as Viceroy by Field Marshal LordWavell. With the end of the war the political temperature soared swiftly all over India.Throughout the whole of Asia there was a surging tide of nationalist sentiment, an eager andinsistent desire to throw off the shackles of colonialism. Japan's conquests, howeverdetestable many of their military and social effects, had achieved one momentous result: theyhad demonstrated, to millions all over Southeast Asia, that their European masters were farfrom invincible. Millions had seen an Asiatic nation challenge and hold at bay for more thanthree years -- in a huge area extending from Korea to New Guinea and from the Assamborder to the Central Pacific -- the combined might of the United States, Britain and theCommonwealth, France and Holland. The lesson was too glaring and too emphatic to bemissed.In India there was no talk now of a five -- or ten -- year period of transition. The strugglewould be real, immediate and bloody unless self-government were granted, not in the futureand on terms laid down by Britain, but at once and on conditions largely imposed by thepeople of India themselves. The most obvious symptom of the depth and magnitude of thisfeeling, visible to someone like myself returning after years abroad, was the hostility that haddeveloped, not simply to Britain's political suzerainty, but to everything British -- to theEnglish language, to English habits and customs, to pipes and whisky-and-soda, to Europeansuits and collars and ties, so that even Indians who had adopted these habits were in someareas in real danger. As the saying goes, this brought the situation home to one.Britain for her part had no longer either the desire or the capacity to hold India against herwill. Vastly weakened by the long strain of the war, her overseas investments expended,Britain, once the creditor nation of the world, seemed now to be in almost everyone's debt.Victory had been secured, but at the price of world leadership. At home her people faced along period of economic stringency, of shortages, austerity and rationing; and even before theend of the Far Eastern conflict the Coalition Government, which had led the nation to victory,had broken up, and the Labor party had -- for the first time in its history -- attained power,with a big Parliamentary majority as well as office. Mr. Attlee, the new Prime Minister, hadtaken a close interest in India's problems since his membership of the Simon Commissionfifteen or sixteen years earlier. In addition to its program of social and economic reform athome, the Labor party had pledged itself to end British imperialism overseas wherever it wasable to do so. Independence for India had been one of the main planks in its platform foryears. Where the wartime Coalition Government had failed, its successor, in the flush ofvigorous optimism of its earlier years of office was determined to succeed. A CabinetMission, headed by Lord Pethick-Lawrence, the Secretary of State for India, and Mr. A. V.Alexander, * the Minister of Defense, set out for Delhi to consult with the Viceroy, theCommander in Chief and the Indian political leaders on the way in which power should betransferred.Now Lord Alexander of Hillsborough.The political leaders, with whom ultimately decision and authority rested, were four innumber: on the Congress-Hindu side, Mahatma Gandhi, Mr. Nehru and Sardar Patel; on theMuslim side, Mr. Jinnah -- the Quaid-i-Azam. On their agreement or disagreement, translatedinto economic and political facts, depended the future of the subcontinent.The Quaid-i-Azam's brilliant and epoch-making career, so untimely ended, reached itssummit in these momentous years of 1946 and 1947. Now he belongs to history; and hismemory, I am certain, is imperishable. Of all the statesmen that I have known in my life --Clemenceau, Lloyd George, Churchill, Curzon, Mussolini, Mahatma Gandhi -- Jinnah is themost remarkable. None of these men in my view outshone him in strength of character, and inthat almost uncanny combination of prescience and resolution which is statecraft. It may beargued that he was luckier than some -- far luckier for example, than Mussolini, who perishedmiserably in utter failure and disgrace. But was Jinnah's success all good luck, and wasMussolini's failure all bad luck? What about the factors of good and bad judgment?I knew Jinnah for years, from the time he came back from England to Bombay to build up hislegal practice until his death. Mussolini, I met once only; and a memorable occasion it was --an afternoon in his box at the racecourse in Rome, when he harangued me for the best part ofthree hours, in very good English and curiously, for one who was such a "loudspeaker" inpublic, in a soft and gentle voice, but never once looking at the races or the people in thestands or on the course and never allowing me either to watch a race or open my mouth toargue with him. Yet between these two I detect one important similarity.Each of them between his youth and his prime traveled from one pole of political opinion tothe other. Mussolini made his pilgrimage from a socialism that was near-communism to thecreation of fascism, from Marx to Nietzsche and Sorel. Jinnah in his earlier phases was thestrongest supporter, among all Muslim political leaders, of Indian nationalism along Congresslines, with a unified Indian state as its goal; yet, in the final analysis, he was the manprimarily responsible for the partition of the Indian Empire into the separate states of Pakistanand Bharat. He who had so long cham pioned Indian unity was the man who, in fullaccordance with international law, cut every possible link between India's two halves and --in the teeth of bitter British opposition -- divided the Indian Army.Different in many superficial characteristics, different (above all) in the success whichattended the one and the failure, the other, these two, Mussolini and Jinnah, both apparentlyinconsistent in many things, shared one impressive, lifelong quality of consistency. Each hadone guiding light; whatever the policy, whatever the political philosophy underlying it, itwould be successful and it would be morally justified so long as he was at the head of it anddirecting it. In neither of them can this be dismissed as mere ambition; each had a profoundand unshakable conviction that he was superior to other men and that if the conduct of affairswas in his hands, and the last word on all matters his, everything would be all right,regardless of any abstract theory (or lack of it) behind political action.This belief was not pretentious conceit; it was not self-glorification or shallow vanity. In eachman its root was an absolute certainty of his own merit, an absolute certainty that, beingendowed with greater wisdom than others, he owed it to his people, indeed to all mankind, tobe free to do what he thought best on others' behalf. Was this not the same sort of supremelyconfident faith which guided and upheld the prophets of Israel and reformers like Luther andCalvin? In our own epoch we have seen at least two other men who were animated by thesame dynamic faith which shakes the nations, and each -- one for good and one for terribleevil -- was conscious of a cause outside himself: Hitler who dreamed of a German-imposedNew Order that was to last a thousand years; and Mahatma Gandhi whose vision was of anIndia whose society, economy and whole life would be based on certain pacifist, moralprinciples, the objective existence of which meant much more to the Mahatma than anythingin himself. Britain's two leaders in the two world wars were also men sustained by anirresistible and buoyant self-confidence, but both Lloyd George and Churchill were incapableof transgressing the limitations on the exercise of execu tive authority which are set byBritish life and by British civic, parliamentary, ethical and religious traditions and beliefs.In the view of both Mussolini and Jinnah, opposition was not an opinion to be conciliated bycompromise or negotiation; it was a challenge to be obliterated by their superior strength andsagacity. Each seemed opportunist, because his self-confidence and his inflexible will madehim believe, at every new turn he took, that he alone was right and supremely right. Neitherbothered to confide in others or to be explicit.Mussolini traveled the long road from Marxism, not because of doctrinal doubts anddisagreements, but because, in the world of Socialist politicians and theorists in which hespent his stormy youth as an exile in Lausanne, doctrines and theories were constantobstacles across the only path of practical achievement which mattered to him -- practicalachievement in which Benito Mussolini was the leader. When fascism first emerged as apolitical force in Italy, nobody knew what it was, nobody could define its principles or itsprogram, for it had none. Mussolini simply said: "Let us have a party, let us call it fascist" --which meant anything or nothing. The party's only principle, its sole duty, was to do what itsleader told it to do. And its leader believed implicitly -- and went on believing for a long time- that everything the party did would be excellent, because everything was conceived andexecuted by Mussolini.Throughout his career Jinnah displayed a similar characteristic. He would admit no superiorto himself in intellect, authority or moral stature. He knew no limitations of theory ordoctrine. The determined and able young barrister, who -- against all the omens, withoutinfluence and without inherited wealth -- triumphed within a few years despite entrenchedopposition, became an Indian nationalist when he turned to politics. He joined Congressbecause he, like the Congress politicians, wanted to liberate India from British colonial andimperialist domination and because he believed that he himself could do it if he had a freehand. Yet in association with Congress he was a fish out of water. He worked to be thechampion of Indian liberty, but his ideas of championship differed sharply from those ofCongress' other leaders. He came back and rejoined those to whom he was linked by ties ofrace and religion. Nominally in the Muslim League of those days he was one leader amongothers, but he was unable to impose his beliefs and his policy, for the general tenor of Muslimthought ran strongly contrary to the convictions which he had held when he was in theCongress camp. He had worked hard and energetically for Congress; but, from his point ofview, he was dogged by failure after failure. There was too deep a gulf between his conceptof the duties and responsibilities of a political leader in a free society and those of the peoplewith whom he worked. The instruments which he took up broke every time in his handsbecause it was impossible to reconcile policy as he conceived it with policy hammered out bycompromise and negotiation in the committees and the councils of which he found himself amember. He met barrier after barrier and his frustration and his dissatisfaction deepened. His"point of no return" was, of course, the critical Congress meeting in Calcutta in December,1928, dominated by the Nehrus, father and son. His disillusionment and disappointment thereled him to the conviction that Muslims had no chance of fair and equitable treatment in aunited India.I here reaffirm that at the Round Table Conferences Jinnah played a loyal and honorable partas a member of the Muslim delegation. His work there, however, had not shaken his faith inhis own means to his own end. The Muslims' sense of their own political needs andaspirations had been fortified and developed by years of discussion and negotiation withBritish officials and Congress representatives, and the Muslims very rightly followed andgave their full confidence to Jinnah.In an era in which "no compromise" was coming to be the mood of something like a hundredmillion Muslims, Jinnah, the man who did not know the meaning of the word "compromise,"was there to seize -- not only on his own behalf but on behalf of those whom he was destinedto lead -- the chance of a lifetime, the chance perhaps of centuries. He embodied, as no oneelse could do, the beliefs and sentiments of the overwhelming majority of Muslims all overIndia.Boldly therefore he came out and said: "We want a Muslim party. We want a unified Muslimorganization, every member of which is ready to lay down his life for the survival of his race,his faith and his civilization."But what program this organization should have, what specific and detailed proposals itshould lay before its supporters, how its campaign should be timed and what form it shouldtake, he would never say. What he intended, though he never said so publicly, was that allthese matters be reserved for his own decision when the time came -- or rather, when hethought the time came.The Muslim League, as it emerged under Jinnah's leadership, was an organization whosemembers were pledged to instant resistance -- to the point of death -- if Indian independencecame about without full and proper safeguards for Muslim individuality or unity, or withoutdue regard for all the differences between Islamic culture, society, faith and civilization andtheir Hindu counterparts.Jinnah gave always the same order to his Muslim followers: "Organize yourselves on thelines I have laid down. Follow me, be ready -- if need be -- to die at the supreme moment.And I will tell you when the time comes."A few intellectuals who could not sustain this unwavering faith in Jinnah fell away, and theircriticisms of him were a reiteration of the cry, "What, how, where and when?"I myself am convinced that even as late as 1946 Jinnah had no clear and final idea of his goal,no awareness that he would, within a twelvemonth, be the founder of a new nation, a MuslimGreat Power such as the world had not seen for centuries. Neither he nor anyone else couldhave imagined that fate was to put so magnificent, so incredible an opportunity into his handsas that which occurred in the crucial phases of the negotiations with the British CabinetMission, and gave him the initiative when Lord Mountbatten arrived. Pakistan was born: anew nation, with the fifth largest population in the world, of whom ninety per cent areMuslims. And it was the creation of an organization which had only one guiding principle:"Follow the leader."Jinnah, as I shall shortly relate, made the right choice at the right moment. How differentmight Mussolini's end have been, had he, when the supreme moment came, chosen rightinstead of wrong. For him there waited a criminal's end, humiliation and ignominy. Jinnah,on the other hand, attained immortal fame as the man who, without an army, navy or airforce, created, by a lifetime's faith in himself crystallized into a single bold decision, a greatempire of upwards of a hundred million people.When I reached India in 1946 these mighty events were in train. Although the principle ofconceding to India immediate and total independence had now won universal acceptance inBritain, there still remained the great questions: was it to be a united India, with a singlearmy, navy and air force, or was the subcontinent to be divided, and how complete was thedivision to be? There was still a faint hope too that some sort of understanding might yet bepossible between the Muslim League and Congress, or -- in terms of personalities -- betweenthe Quaid-i-Azam and the Mahatma. In such an understanding lay, of course, the answers tothe questions which I have just enumerated.The Chancellor of the Chamber of Princes, my old and dear friend, the Nawab of Bhopal,went with me to see Mahatma Gandhi, to explore the possibilities of reaching anunderstanding. There were also one or two other outstanding problems to discuss: for theNawab, the future of the Ruling Princes and their states in a free India; for myself, thequestion of the Indian community in South Africa. In our two long conversations with him(the second of which terminated with the Mahatma's remarks on communism which I havequoted elsewhere) we came to the conclusion that there was no hope of a settlement betweenhim and Jinnah. The Mahatma still firmly believed in a uninational India; Jinnah even morefirmly held that there were two nations. I pointed out to the Mahatma that, having acceptedthe principle of the separation of Burma from India, he ought really to see that there was noreason why the Muslim lands of the Northwest and the Northeast should not be similarlyseparated, since they -- like Burma -- had only be come part of a united India as a result ofBritish conquest, and therefore the idea of their union with the rest of India was artificial andtransient. However, I made no impression on the Mahatma; and I went away, leaving Bhopalto tackle the problem of the princes.From Poona I went to New Delhi. I had conversations both with the Viceroy, Lord Wavell,and the Commander in Chief, Sir Claude Auchinleck. Both were fully convinced of thejustice, as well as the necessity, of conceding Indian independence at once. Both, however,held firmly to the idea of Indian unity, doubtless because in the end the military facts meantmore to them than the political facts. And the major military fact of 1946, in the vast regionextending from the Persian Gulf to Java and Sumatra, was the existence of the Indian defenseforces, above all of the Indian Army. It happened that both Lord Wavell and GeneralAuchinleck * had had a great part, as Commanders in Chief in succession to -- indeed inalteration with -- each other, in building up the Indian Army, the Royal Indian Navy and theIndian Air Force to their magnificent and powerful condition at the end of the Second WorldWar. They were especially aware of the value to Britain and the Commonwealth, to theWestern Allies and to the United Nations, of the continued and unified existence of thesesuperbly disciplined and well-equipped forces. They appreciated too the dangers that wouldloom if the Indian Army were divided. Not merely might the two armies of the successor-states watch each other across the frontier with jealousy and suspicion, but a perilousstrategic vacuum would be created in a huge and important part of the world's surface. Theyendeavored therefore to find some solution which would preserve unimpaired the unity of theIndian Army. That they failed, and that all who strove with the same end in view failed, is ameasure of the magnitude and resolution of the Muslims' determination, against everyargument however powerful, every obstacle however stubborn, to achieve their just rights andfull political, religious and cultural independence and sovereignty.Now Field Marshal.My Diamond Jubilee celebrations accomplished, I returned to Europe. Physically, however, Iwas now in poor shape; my health broke down badly and put me out of action for manymonths. The successful operation carried out in Paris by Professor Francois de Gaudardd'Allaines relieved me of at least one cause of great anxiety; but it was many months before Iwas even partially able to resume my ordinary activities.Meanwhile 1947 was India's year of destiny. The British Cabinet Mission made what turnedout to be Britain's final offer and final proposal for a unified India. It was ingenious and --had unity on any terms been possible -- it was constructive. It was a three-tiered constitution,combining the highest possible degree of sovereignty in the three great regions into whichBritish India would have been divided -- the Northwest and Northeastern areas predominantlyHindu -- with an extremely limited concentration of essential power at the center, coveringforeign affairs, defense and major communications.Now Jinnah saw his chance and took it resolutely and unerringly. He announced hisunconditional acceptance of the British scheme. In that one decision, combining as it didsagacity, shrewdness and unequaled political flair, he justified -- I am convinced -- my claimthat he was the most remarkable of all the great statesmen that I have known. It put him on alevel with Bismarck.At this critical juncture when Jinnah stood rocklike, the Congress leaders wavered. Withincredible folly they rejected the British proposals; or rather they put forward dubious andequivocal alternative suggestions, which so watered down the scheme that it would have lostits meaning and effectiveness.However in Britain, as more than once at high moments in her history, there was foundstatesmanship of the highest quality to respond to Jinnah's statesmanship. Mr. Attlee hadfrom the outset closely interested himself in the efforts to achieve a solution of India'sproblems. Now with a boldness almost equaling Jinnah's he accepted the basic principles forwhich we Muslims had striven so long. The long-ignored yet fundamental difference betweenthe two Indias was recognized, and the recognition acted upon, quickly and resolutely. It wasdecided that India should be partitioned. One swift stroke of the pen, and two different butgreat nations were born. Lord Wavell, who had borne the heat of the day with modesty andmagnanimity, resigned. The brilliant, still youthful, energetic and supremely self-confidentLord Mountbatten of Burma was appointed to succeed him, with a clear directive toaccomplish, within a strictly limited period of time, the end of British rule and responsibilityin India and the handing over of authority to the two successor states of Pakistan and Bharat.Lord Mountbatten himself shortened the period of demission and devolution. August 15,1947, was set as the date for the final and total transference of power. On every seniorofficial's desk in New Delhi and Simla the calendars stood, in those last months, with thefateful day warningly marked. And on that day power was transferred; the two new nationstook over the functions of government, and stood forth as independent, sovereign members ofthe Commonwealth.The birth pangs which accompanied this tremendous process were, some of them, grim andpainful. On these it is not my desire nor my purpose to dwell, nor on some of the consequentinevitable problems. About one great and far-reaching effect of the British withdrawal I musthowever make some comment. Rapid and virtually unconditional as the transference ofpower was, it left one major problem, one bad debt for Britain, for Bharat and, in a smallerdegree, for Pakistan. Although the whole subcontinent of India, from the Northwest Frontierto Cape Comorin, used to be colored red in any ordinary little atlas, by no means was thewhole of this vast area in fact British. Dotted about it were scores and scores of independentand individual states, governed by hereditary Ruling Princes, ranging in size from bigcountries like Kashmir, Hyderabad or Travancore to a few square miles and a township. Withthe consolidation of the British Raj their relations with it had been settled by treaty, underwhich Britain, as the Paramount Power, guaranteed their independent and autonomous status.An elaborate and carefully constructed protocol had been worked out between the Princesand the Raj. In the long and splendid reign of Queen Victoria and in its aftermath in theopening years of this century, these complex and delicate arrangements had their ownfittingness. In Britain and in India alike, a century ago, society was hierarchic. In the view ofgenerations of able British administrators in India, the Princely Order corresponded notinexactly with the higher nobility in Britain. If in Britain the landowning and titledaristocracy had learned that their privileges and their possessions conferred on them specialduties and responsibilities, a similar lesson and the practice that flowed from it were notimpossible in India. Democracy on a basis of universal suffrage was only beginning todevelop in Britain in those days; in India it was hardly the glimmer of a distant dream. In thevigorous moral climate of Victorian opinion, who could seem better suited to bearresponsibility than those who were by inheritance endowed with privilege and power? In thehigh noon of Victorian liberalism therefore the relations between British officials andadministrators and the Princely Order stood on a comprehensible and healthy foundation, andhad about them much that was good and valuable.Now that the whole remarkable phenomenon -- illogical and anachronistic as it appeared inits later years -- has vanished and is a part of history, it is both agreeable and salutary to recallsome of its best facets, and some of its greater personalities. In my youth I was inevitablybrought into contact with many Ruling Princes, and several of them -- over and above thosewhose names have occurred from time to time in this narrative -- became my lifelong friends.The most eminent by far was the Maharajah Gaekwar of Baroda. I first met him in myearliest childhood, when my father was still alive; and during my adolescence I saw himwhenever he came to Bombay. When I reached manhood we formed a friendship whichlasted until his death, and was extended to his remarkable and talented Maharani, who,happily, is still alive. *Vivid portraits of them both, thinly disguised as fiction, are to be found in LouisBromfield's novel The Rains Came, of which there was a cinema version some years ago.He possessed a sturdy independence of character, and the awareness that the honor and thedignity which he had inherited were not only his own personal right but attributesindissociable from the race and nation to which he belonged. For him India always came first.Neither family nor class nor creed mattered more than this simple, spontaneous and all-embracing loyalty.A little over forty-five years ago, in the summer of 1908, he and I were the guests of the thenGovernor of Bombay, Sir George Clark, in Poona. One night, when everyone else had goneto bed, the Maharajah and I sat up talking to a very late hour. I have the clearest recollectionof all that he said."British rule in India," he said, "will never be ended merely by the struggle of the Indianpeople. But world conditions are bound to change so fundamentally that nothing will then beable to prevent its total disappearance."Then he added something very striking: "The first thing you'll have to do when the Englishare gone is to get rid of all these rubbishy states. I tell you, there'll never be an Indian nationuntil this so-called Princely Order disappears. Its disappearance will be the best thing that canhappen to India -- the best possible thing. There'll never be an Indian nation so long as there'sa Princely Order. If Lord Dalhousie hadn't taken over half of India, abolishing or diminishingthe sovereignty or territorial authority of scores of principalities, then perhaps somethingcould have evolved along the lines of the German Empire, with considerable decentralizationand local courts and capitals. But Dalhousie destroyed the possibility of the principalities everbecoming useful, federal, constitutional monarchies."In view of what subsequently happened, was my old friend not as farsighted as he waseloquent?Another of my good friends among the Princes was the great Maharajah of Kapurthala. Hisoutstanding quality was his magnanimity. During his minority an uncle of his had been anactive rival claimant to his titles and estates. When he came of age and was fully confirmed inhis inheritance, the Maharajah was reconciled with this formidable opponent, not merelysuperficially or formally but with the utmost warmth and sincerity, inviting him frequently tohis capital and entertaining him with as much affection as deference. I recall one cheerfullittle anecdote which he told me about himself. In 1893 when he was quite a young man firstvisiting Europe, he stayed for a time in Rome. One day King Umberto of Italy called on him,unannounced. The King's manners were bluff, abrupt and soldierly. As they entered theMaharajah's sitting room, the King saw a number of photographs of beautiful womendisplayed about the room.The King barked gruffly, "Who are these women?""They, sir, are my wives."The King swung round at him. "Well, I too have got as many women as you. But there's thisdifference between us. I don't keep 'em together. I keep 'em in different houses. You keep allyours in your palace."Take him all in all, his culture, his impeccable taste, his sane and balanced judgment, hisvigorous and colourful personality, I believe that the Maharajah of Kapurthala was, next tothe Maharajah of Baroda, the outstanding Ruling Prince of my generation. They both, I think,possessed the political vision to have appreciated the historical reasons for the disappearanceof the Princely Order and to have accepted it without bitterness or rancor. I do not think thatthis would have been so easy for two other friends of mine, both in their way admirable,talented and distinguished men: Ranjitsinhji, the Maharajah of Jamnagar, that magnificentand lovable sportsman, one of the greatest cricketers of all time, a superb and generous host,but a man very conscious of his inherited rights and duties; and the Maharajah of Bikaner, aRajput of the Rajputs, with a high and burning pride in his ancestry, for whom the passing ofthe Princely Order would have been very hard to bear.But pass it did, in a series of swift and comprehensive decisions. Pakistan -- in the immediateattainment of independence faced with countless momentous decisions -- solved thisparticular problem swiftly and well. Again it was the Quaid-i-Azam's achievement. He whohad had himself instantly proclaimed Governor General of his new Dominion, was able, withhis almost incredible clarity of vision, his statecraft, and his practical, Bismarckian sense of"the best possible," to effect on his own initiative an arrangement which was notunsatisfactory to the Princes and made them a source of strength to Pakistan.India found the task more complicated and more difficult. Paramountcy was at an end. Thetreaties which the Princes had negotiated, first with the East India Company, then with theCrown, lapsed with the withdrawal of the Paramount Power. Legally the states reverted atonce to being sovereign, independent countries. But they were islands in the surrounding seaof the enormous new nation of India. Lord Mountbatten, who at the invitation of India'sprovisional Government remained as first Governor General during a brief transitionalperiod, wrestled to bring about a solution, deploying all his tact and persuasiveness. AsMinister of the State Department, Sardar Patel was massively determined that that solutionshould be satisfactory to the new India.The situation which faced the Princes was not without its sadness, but it was inevitable. Fewhad governed badly or tyrannously; taxation was usually lighter within their domains than inneighboring British India; yet their subjects secured, at this lower cost, many of the benefitsfor which the taxpayers of British India supplied the revenue. By far the greater majority ofthe Princes were amiable, honest, well-intentioned and gentle; but few of them had beeneducated on modern lines to face the harsh and complex problems of the contemporaryworld. Feudal in their outlook -- often in the best sense -- but mentally and spirituallyunadapted to the swift transition from the bullock cart to the jet aircraft which is our age, theywere doomed by their estimable qualities as much as by their limitations. Above all, the longyears of paramountcy had rendered them politically irresponsible. They were no moredependent on their own good behavior and good administration in order to maintain their ruleand their dynasties. In the background stood always the Paramount Power. Extravagant andwasteful administration at the worst meant a few years of supervision by an official sentdown from Delhi; even scandalous misbehavior entailed only the delinquent Prince'sabdication, on pension, and the immediate succession of his heir. Secure in their privileges,yet without proper outlets for their abilities and ambitions, they tended to lose the self-confidence and the capacity required for leadership, and their prestige dwindled in the eyes oftheir subjects.When the moment of crisis came, when they found themselves without the Paramount Power,without its guarantees and without its limitations, they had -- the vast majority of them -- noalternative but to accept the terms which the Indian Union offered them. These on the wholewere not ungenerous, provided each Prince took two important steps: first, authorized theimmediate accession of his State to the Indian Union; and second, handed over politicalpower. These done, they were assured of a great deal -- large, taxfree emoluments; theretention of their private fortunes, their lands and their palaces, their honors and dignities.Almost all the Princes accepted with good grace; their States became part of the new India,and many, big and small alike, were merged to form great new provinces.The exceptions were few but troublesome. Kashmir is an outstanding special case, in which aHindu Prince, the vast proportion of whose subjects were Muslim, made a precipitate act ofaccession to India against the very first principles agreed at the time of partition. InTravancore the Maharajah and his Ministers made a brief stand on their legal andconstitutional rights, but surrendered to pressure by the people of the State themselves. TheHyderabad issue was far less happily settled. The Nizam had the great good fortune to haveas his adviser a man of the quality of Sir Walter Monckton. However, a fatal combination ofweakness and obstinacy prompted him to refuse the settlement which was proposed by LordMountbatten on terms negotiated by Sir Walter, which would have ensured Hyderabad thelast ounce of advantage in a helpless position. The results of this stubborn folly weredisastrous. India took swift, stern police action, and disaster enveloped all Hyderabad's hopesand chances.As the years pass, the immense effects of Britain's withdrawal from India -- moral andspiritual hardly less than directly political -- become more and more apparent. The decisionand the act together constitute one of the most remarkable events in modern history. BesideBritain's voluntary and total transference of sovereignty to the successor states of Pakistanand Bharat, even Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's generous action in respect of SouthAfrica pales into insignificance. Nothing on this scale has ever happened before, yet it is theculmination and the fulfillment of years of growth and struggle.Much more remains to be accomplished, especially in the field of relations between Pakistanand Bharat. In the years since partition relations have inevitably often been strained anddifficult; yet even the severest tension has been kept within bounds, and neither nation --however much sentiments may have become inflamed -- has proceeded to extremes.Forbearance and reconciliation are not transient moods; they are qualities which have to beexercised, developed and strengthened.When partition was imminent the veteran Madrassi statesman, Mr. C. R. Rajagopalachari,"Rajaji," who was later Governor General of India, made this wise and timelypronouncement: "If the Muslims really want to go, well, let them go and take all that belongsto them." There is the temper which ought to inform relations between the two peoples.It proved impossible to sustain by compulsion an artificial unity. In separation there is achance for understanding and magnanimity to grow. They are at first delicate plants; but ifthey are fostered carefully and wisely, and if their roots are deep, they will flourish.Membership of the Commonwealth supplies one intangible but important link between thepeoples of Bharat and Pakistan. It is profoundly to be hoped that there will develop aneighborly understanding which may in time grow into an alliance. Peace, a sharedprosperity, a shared and steady improvement in the standard of living for millions, areentirely in the interest of both. In the long run, as I firmly believe, the workings of fate on theIndian subcontinent will prove to have been beneficial, not evil. A relationship of mutualrespect and good will between the two countries can -and let us hope and pray that it will --secure many years of happy and peaceful development and progress for millions in a vast andimportant region. Then the strivings of so many of us, Muslim, Hindu and British, throughyears of arduous toil, through periods of misunderstanding and bitterness, through difficultiesnow forgotten and crises long resolved, will in the end have had their abundant justification.XIVPostwar Years with Friends and FamilyNEVER in my long life -- I may say with complete honesty -- have I for an instant beenbored. Every day has been so short, every hour so fleeting, every minute so filled with the lifeI love that time for me has fled on far too swift a wing. A mind that is occupied, in health orin sickness, with things outside itself and its own concerns is, I believe, a perpetual source oftrue happiness. In ordinary prayer, as we in Islam conceive it, adoration of the beloved fillsup every nook and cranny of the human consciousness; and in the rare, supreme moments ofspiritual ecstasy, the light of Heaven blinds mind and spirit to all other lights and blots outevery other sense and perception.In recent years, since the end of the Second World War, I have had a great deal of illness --enough, I suppose, in its content as in its prolongation in time to have depressed me. I haveundergone three major internal operations, two of them with what is ordinarily considered afifty-fifty chance of survival. I have been laid low for months with severe heart trouble. Yet Ihave never been depressed. I can honestly say that my mind has constantly been occupiedwith things outside myself. There has been, for example, a great increase in Ismaili activitiesthroughout the Islamic world with a swirl of new ideas and new schemes, with which I havebeen closely and actively associated. I have read a great deal; I have voyaged in my readingeagerly into the exciting new realms opened up by scientific discovery. The moment that Iwas well enough I went back to my old love -- golf; and golf has brought me a renewal andan extension of the friendships and acquaintances that have meant much to me over theyears. I think in this connection of the golfers whom I have known: the genial, warmhearted,openhanded Castlerosse, for example, with whom I played often in the years before the war -an able journalist, a witty and intensely entertaining conversationalist, at all times and on alloccasions a boon companion; or my good and wise old friend, J. H. Taylor, who usedsometimes to travel with me, who was often my guest at my home, whose pupil I was overmany weeks and months -- what a wonderful personality his is, with a mind ever open todelight in life and to curiosity about it -- it is good to know that he is in excellent health andenjoying his well-earned retirement in his home at his native Westward Ho! I shall,incidentally, always be glad that among the game's professionals I came to know many menlike J. H. Taylor, who were of sterling worth and in every way examples to all who met them.Travel is another pursuit which, since the end of the Second World War, my wife and I haveresumed with especial zest and joy -- all the keener perhaps because it was denied to us inthose dark years. We have returned to familiar places, discovering fresh charm and freshbeauties in them; and we have found delights hitherto unexplored. In Egypt we have tastedagain the pleasure of Cairo that united, under its bright and limpid sky, so many civilizations,so many worlds; Luxor with its monuments; Aswan with its especial beauties of air and light;and Alexandria, the ancient and seductive, where memories of Greek and of Ptolemaiccivilizations mingle in and alongside a big bustling modern Eypto-Levantine city and port. InIndia we have rediscovered the infinite beauty and wonder of that immense land -- the highhill station of Darjeeling, for example, with its incredible sunsets and sunrises of rose andpink over the immense snowclad peaks of the Himalayas. And there is Lahore, whosemosques and other buildings are often so curiously ignored in favor of Delhi and Agra, evenby those who know a great deal about Moghul and Indo-Saracenic history and art. In Europe,Rome the majestic and Venice the elegant and sophisticated, though they are both cities that Ihave long known and loved, have of late revealed to me new secrets and new enchantmentsin light, color and architecture.All my life I have been a constant theatergoer, and, as I remarked in an earlier chapter, adevoted lover of the opera. Whenever I can, wherever I am, I go to every good opera withinreach. One ray of light illumined for me the long, dark years of the war when I was confinedin Switzerland and deprived of almost all contact with the outside world: the MunicipalTheater in Zurich had a series of wonderful operatic seasons. Every year Kirsten Flagstad --the supreme singer among women as Caruso, to my mind, was the supreme singer amongmen -- came to give her magnificent renderings of her great Wagnerian roles. Some of thebest Italian singers too -- Gigli and others -- came each year to Zurich. There was an almostunique pleasure about these memorable seasons: the concentration of talent and genius in onecity, the sensation of this beauty's enduring and surviving in the midst of so much that wasbarbarous and horrible, and the contrast of this intellectual and sensuous feast with ourdeprivations.There are friends of mine, old and new, with whom I share this zest for life, this completefreedom from boredom. There is Elsa Maxwell, the mention of whose name brings abubbling sense of happiness. Hers is a friendship, hers is a kindness, which I profoundlyappreciate, for which I am ever grateful. She possesses a true exuberance, a boundless joy inliving; to others she gives perpetual pleasure, and she is happy because she makes themhappy. Elsa Maxwell, the best of friends and the most forgiving to her enemies -- if suchthere be -- stands out as an example and an encouragement to all who believe that socialintercourse should be accepted and appreciated as one of God's good gifts to mankind, andnot as a dreary obligation to be shuffled through when necessity arises.A couple of friends whom I cannot forbear to mention here -since they have come so muchcloser to us since the war -- have been my old racing trainer, Frank Butters, and hisdelightful, courageous wife. Their annual visit to us in the south of France was something towhich, every autumn, we grew to look forward as one of the chief pleasures of next year'sspring. Now alas, his health has so completely broken down that, though we go on repeatingour annual invitations, Mrs. Butters has to refuse them. Greatly do we miss them both, butthis sadness has not impaired our affection for two of the best human beings we have everknown.A new good, kind friend made in the years since the war is Mr. Charles Grey, a member ofthe staff of the United States Embassy in Paris, a man of sweet and sunny temperament, gay,gentle and ever helpful. He is the embodiment of the French saying "tout comprendre, c'esttout pardonner." No one could be a better companion in joy or sorrow than Charles Grey, forhe is another who realizes that friendship and social life are God-given, and that we ought tobe thankful for them and accept them with joy and gusto and not with resignation orboredom. Elsa Maxwell, Charles Grey and I share one quality which I sincerely believe to beenviable: we don't know what boredom is.During the 1953 Cannes Film Festival I met Miss Olivia de Havilland, the distinguishedactress, a woman of subtle and interesting personality who seems to me to be in her own way,if I may say so, a seeker after truth. I believe that she is one of those fortunately gifted peoplewho have an artistic and personal life of their own, full, busy and successful, and who are yet- in and through this active day-to-day life -- sharply and constantly aware of thefundamental issue and problem of our world today, the enormous power that man hasattained over physical nature contrasted with the still somewhat primitive limitations of hisemotional and spiritual existence.Another new friend -- one of the few truly great individual and creative artists of our time --who is in his fashion a similar seeker after truth and a pilgrim in search of a reconcilingwisdom amid the contradictions of today is Mr. Charles Chaplin, whom I first came to knowin 1953. He and I have talked long and far into the night -- of the dreams that lie near ourhearts, of the puzzles that afflict and sadden us. That Chaplin is a rebel goes without saying --a rebel against the folly of modern society's impotence in the midst of such overwhelmingmaterial aggregations of power.I will cite an example of the sort of thing which drives a mind like Chaplin's to distraction. Arecent report of the World Food and Agriculture Organization stated, without equivocation,that the vast majority of human beings still live far below the hunger line, with consequencesin waste, suffering, reduced productive capacity and shortened expectation of life tooenormous to measure; and, as the report pointed out, at the same time the world's presentratio of food production (let alone the results of any improvements that would follow bettermethods of soil conservation, fertilization and farming) is sufficient to ensure a perfectlyadequate diet for every human being alive if it were properly distributed.Now if only some of the enormous capital investment all over the world which every yeargoes into totally unproductive and potentially violently destructive armaments could beexpended in a single major productive project -- let us say water conservation, in buildingdams and artificial lakes and providing irrigation schemes for the huge empty and desertareas of the world -- the over-all agricultural output would be vastly and rapidly increasedand the ordinary standard of living be raised thereby. This, which is a topic about which Ihave thought a great deal, I drew to Mr. Chaplin's attention, to discover that his views on itwere just the same as mine.His detractors have in the most unmeasured terms accused Mr. Chaplin of being sympatheticto communism. I discovered one aspect of communism which horrified him. Communistpropaganda, as we all know, proclaims loudly from time to time Moscow's view that our twoworlds, our two economic and social systems, can live peaceably side by side and maintain asystem of exchange, not only economic but intellectual and cultural. Yet, as Chaplin arguedfiercely, the communists have established the Iron Curtain, which prevents any real freeexchange of ideas between the two worlds, banning utterly as it does a free interchange inwriting and the other arts, unimpeded free and uncontrolled travel by students and tourists,and all the ordinary ways by which the people of one country or civilization get to know andcomprehend the people of another. The only method, said Chaplin, by which the co-existenceof our two systems would be possible, or could offer a natural and healthy solution ofhumanity's troubles and problems, would be to open all frontiers to travelers, with theminimum of passports, currency control and restrictions and with a free and full interchangeof literature -- academic, journalistic and popular as well as technical and scientific -- fromone end of the world to another, such as existed in the far-off, happy days before 1914.Mr. Chaplin is interested in certain psychical and nonphysical phenomena, such as telepathyand its various derivatives. He quoted to me Einstein's demand that ten scientists shouldwitness at the same time, and under precisely similar conditions, every case of this kindsubmitted before he would consider these manifestations proved. He and I agreed that theimposition of this kind of test would make all psychical research and experiment impossible,for these phenomena -- and the laws under which they occur -- are simply not at the beck andcall of human beings.I consider it a real privilege and pleasure to have met Mr. Chaplin and his beautiful andaccomplished young wife. She comprehends and fully sympathizes with his ideals, with hismental and spiritual aspirations and satisfactions, and with the real suffering that thecontradictions of our time cause him. I, who by the grace of God's greatest gift, am myselfblessed with a wife who fully understands the joys and the sorrows of my mind and my spirit,can well appreciate the happiness which he finds in a domestic life very similar to my own.For a time a famous and beautiful young star of the screen was my daughter-in-law -- MissRita Hayworth, my son Aly's second wife. She is the mother of my granddaughter -- whom Ihave seen only when she was a new-born baby.Aly's first marriage -- to Mrs. Loel Guinness, a young Englishwoman of beauty, charm, witand breeding, born Joan Yarde-Buller, the daughter of Lord Churston -- had had my full andaffectionate approval. They were married in 1936, when Aly was twenty-five; I took mydaughter-in-law, Joan, to my heart; and I had, and still have, a great affection for her. Shebore Aly two fine sons, my grandchildren; these boys are now at school and in due coursethey will go to universities in America -- the elder, Karim, who shows promise inmathematics, to M.I.T., we hope, and Amyn, probably to the Harvard Law School.Their marriage remained perfectly happy until the end of the war. They were both in theMiddle East, first in Egypt and then in Syria; Aly was in the Army and Joan was one of themany officers' wives who, at that time, were grass widows in Cairo. After the war theyreturned to Europe and Joan spent a year or two in East Africa with the children. However --and to my real sorrow -- they drifted apart. Differences developed between them and theyseparated.Not long after this, Aly went to the United States on business and there met Miss Hayworth.They were seen about a good deal together -- and a blaze of sensational publicity envelopedthem, with endless gossip and speculation. They came to see me at Cannes, and I asked themif they were really devoted to each other; they both said that they were, so I advised them toget married as soon as possible.As soon as their respective divorce formalities were completed, they were married -- but incircumstances of clamorous publicity such as we had never before experienced in our family.My own first wedding in India had been elaborate, yet its festivities were simple andunostentatious, but this was a very different matter. This was a fantastic, semiroyal, semi-Hollywood affair; my wife and I played our part in the ceremony, much as we disapproved ofthe atmosphere with which it was surrounded.I thought Miss Hayworth charming and beautiful, but it was not long before I saw, I amafraid, that they were not a well-assorted couple. My son Aly is an extremely warmheartedperson who loves entertaining, who loves to be surrounded by friends to whom he giveshospitality with both hands. Miss Hayworth was obviously someone who was emotionallyexhausted with the strain of her work, which had absorbed her almost from childhood, andshe therefore looked upon her marriage as a haven of peace and rest. Certainly for two peoplewhose ways of life were thus dramatically opposed the collapse of their marriage wasinevitable.However, I must say that instead of tackling the matter frankly and openly, Miss Hayworthsomehow got it into her head that either Aly or I myself might try to take her daughter awayfrom her, indeed kidnap the child. Therefore taking the child with her, she ran away from myson in rather extraordinary circumstances.Had Miss Hayworth taken a little care and trouble, she could have found out what in fact arethe Ismaili religious laws and the code which governs all my followers and my family inthese matters. Under this code the custody of young children of either sex rests absolutelywith their mother, no matter what the circumstances of the divorce. Unless we werecriminals, therefore, we could not even have contemplated taking the baby, Yasmin, from hermother. When they are seven, boys pass into their father's custody, girls into their mother'suntil puberty when they are free to choose. This code surely offered Miss Hayworth ampleprotection.I was in India and Pakistan when the final crisis in my son's domestic life was developing.The moment I got back to Cannes -that very same night -- Miss Hayworth, without having letme even see the baby, took her and ran away to Paris and then from Paris back to the UnitedStates. She has since, I understand, come back to Europe; but she has not brought the child toshow her to her father's family.The day that she was leaving with the child, a busybody in my employ telephoned to tell mewhat was happening and to ask what she should do about it. I answered at once that it was noaffair of ours and that Miss Hayworth was fully entitled to take the child wherever shewished. She could surely have delayed her departure for Paris from Cannes and have let mesee the baby.Friends of mine and my lawyers have always maintained that I might have made a trustsettlement or taken out an insurance for my small granddaughter's future. Their arguments,though wellintentioned, are mistaken. They have not realized that under Islamic law thecustody of a female child, until puberty, rests absolutely with her mother. They have alsoforgotten that there is no way under Islamic law by which a child can possibly be disinheritedby his or her father. Were my son Aly to die, he is not allowed to will away from his legalheirs more than one third of his property; two-thirds must go to his heirs, of whom hisdaughter Yasmin is one, and he cannot interfere with this provision in any way. Nor doesMuslim law allow a testator to benefit one legal heir at the expense of another. Therefore,whatever happens to my son Aly, the child Yasmin is bound to get her proper share of anyestate which he leaves. So long as capitalism and any system of private property survive, it isunlikely that Aly will die penniless; consequently, there is no particular urgency aboutmaking financial provision for his daughter.A system of dowries and of marriage settlements is, I understand, developing in the UnitedStates, and doubtless when the child is of an age to contemplate marriage, either my son or Iwill arrange a reasonable dowry for her, in relation to the circumstances of the man shemarries.In conclusion, I can only hope that when next Miss Hayworth comes to Europe, she willbring her small daughter with her so that her father's family can see her and have the pleasureof making her acquaintance.XVPeople I Have KnownTHE PEOPLE whom I have met and known throughout my life stand out in my recollectionmore vividly and sharply than the dogmas that I have heard preached, the theories that I haveheard argued, the policies that I have known to be propounded and abandoned. I haveenjoyed the friendship of beautiful and accomplished women, of brilliant and famous men,who throng the corridors of my memory.The most beautiful woman whom I ever knew was without doubt Lady D'Abernon --formerly Lady Helen Vincent -- the wife of Britain's great Ambassador in Berlin. Thebrilliance of her beauty was marvelous to behold: the radiance of her coloring, the perfectionof her figure, the exquisite modeling of her limbs, the classic quality of her features, and thevivacity and charm of her expression. I knew her for more than forty years; and when she wasseventy the moment she came into a room, however many attractive or lovely young womenmight be assembled there, every eye was for her alone. Nor was her beauty merely physical;she was utterly unspoiled, simple, selfless, gay, brave and kind.If Lady D'Abernon was pre-eminent, there were many, many others whose loveliness it is ajoy to recall: Lady Curzon, now Countess Howe; Mme. Letelier, Swedish by origin, andalmost from childhood a leading social figure; Princess Kutusov; the American, Mrs.Spottiswoode, who took London by storm during the Edwardian era, who married BaronEugene de Rothschild, and -- alas -died young, still in the pride of her beauty and her charm.The most brilliant conversationalist of my acquaintance was Augustine Birrell, now -- I amtold -- an almost legendary figure in an epoch which has largely forgotten the art ofconversation. Oscar Wilde I never met, for his tragic downfall had overwhelmed him before Ifirst came to Europe. Strangely enough I had one chance of making his acquaintance after hecame out of prison. My friend Lady Ripon was one of those who stood loyally by him afterhis disgrace. One day in 1899 I encountered her in the hall of the Ritz in Paris, and sheinvited me to dine with her and one or two others in a private room at the Café Voisins tomeet Wilde; but unluckily an important previous engagement prevented me from acceptingher invitation.I have referred to my friend Walter Berry. He was one who could more than hold his own inany society however brilliant or accomplished. Another of a different epoch and from aprofoundly different background was Dr. Hjalmar Schacht, the German financial wizard, whoevery time that I met him held a whole table enthralled.I have known many women who allied great social and conversational talent to their beauty;notable among them were Mrs. Edwin Montagu and Lady Diana Duff Cooper (now LadyNorwich). My friend, Lady Cunard, was unique -- the most complete personality that I haveever encountered. Another figure of legend whom I knew well was the Comtesse deChevigny who was, as is well known, the original -- or shall I say the chief original? -- ofProust's Duchesse de Guermont. One of the most striking and memorable of the novelist'sdescriptions of her is at a great party in, I think, 1900. She looked worried and preoccupied,and when asked what was the matter, replied, "La Chine m'inquiete." And I reflect that morethan once, in those far-off, seemingly carefree days before the First World War, I met theComtesse de Chevigny and saw, across the dinner table, amidst all that brilliance and gaiety,that same sad and haunted expression. Had I asked her, would she have answered, I wonder,"L'Allemagne m'inquiete" or "Agadir m'inquiete..."?Only recently, in the summer of 1953, I made the acquaintance of one of the most remarkablemen of our time, an agreeable, shrewd and courtly old gentleman, the Sheikh of Kuweit, whois the personal embodiment of a truly astonishing romance -- the romance of a sudden,dazzling rise to almost incalculable wealth. Kuweit's oil resources have only lately beentapped, but they are of tremendous richness. The royalties which the Sheikh derives fromthem suffice, at present, to enrich him and his little principality something like fifty millionpounds a year. This sudden flood of wealth has come to what, until recently, was a small,frugal Arab state (though nominally under British protection it has always preserved itsindependence, and therefore its ruler ought to be designated as Sultan, not as Sheikh), whosepopulation, through many centuries, had pursued their changeless callings as fishermen,tillers of the soil or nomad shepherds. Suddenly industrial need, with its accompanyingexploitation and expansion, has enveloped them, bringing a swift and total revolution in theirway of life and outlook.It is particularly fortunate therefore that the Sheikh himself is a man of great wisdom, whoallies an incredibly clear-sighted understanding of what this industrial and technicalrevolution means to a profound awareness of his own responsibilities. I especially delightedin his company because I found a kindred spirit, one whose mind had its full store of Araband Islamic history and culture, and a steadfast appreciation of the spiritual unity of the Arabworld which underlies its present divisions and miseries.There is, I have often thought, a curious resemblance between the Arabia of today and theGermany of 1830: the many political divisions and subdivisions, minorities far dispersed andunder foreign rule, the jumble of monarchies and republics, and withal the drive of a commonlanguage, a common culture and a common faith -- and that common faith being Islam issufficiently tolerant to embrace the Christian minority in its midst and admit them to a fullshare in Arab traditions, culture and aspirations. How will the Arab world evolve? Who cantell? But who, at the time of the Congress of Vienna, could have foretold the astonishingcourse of German history over the subsequent century?The core of the Arab world is the high, central plateau of the Arabian Peninsula itself. HereIslam was born. Hence its vast tide of expansion poured out in the centuries after the death ofthe Prophet, that tide which carried Arab and Muslim culture across enormous area of theworld -- to India and China and Southeast Asia, to Byzantium, down the length of Africa, anddeep into Europe, being stemmed only at Roncesvalles. Hence in succeeding centuries hascome every great wave of Arab resurgence. Is the whole drive ended now? Few would daresay so with confidence. But given the conditions of today, and the domination of the world byscience and technology, the Arab's future greatness must be spiritual and cultural. This is farmore in keeping with Islam whose very meaning is "Peace."For in Arabia vast and portentous processes of change are at work. After a series of violentand vigorous campaigns, during the years of the final decline and the Ottoman Empire'ssuzerainty over these regions, Ibn Saud consolidated his authority over a large part of thepeninsula. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is his creation, and there can be no doubt that HisMajesty King Abdul Aziz was one of the outstanding Arab personalities of recent centuries.The veteran Ibn Saud has sired a splendid brood of sons, numbering nearly forty, all tall,handsome, virile men -- the modern counterparts of those bearded gallants who swaggerthrough the pages of the Arabian Nights, causing strong men to tremble and maidens toswoon. Yet they cannot be dismissed as simple storybook characters; many of Ibn Saud'ssons possess his redoubtable characteristics -- whether in glamorous Arab dress or inEuropean clothes -for they are as much at home in committee rooms, conference halls and thesaloons of luxury hotels in London or in Washington as they are in their father's tents at Nejd.For to Saudi Arabia the West has lately come, with the same allembracing compulsive vigoras to Kuweit; the oil resources of the former are believed to be among the richest in theworld. American enterprise is revolutionizing its economic existence. But the enormouspower that this development brings is being used in a most enlightened and skillful manner,and it makes nonsense of the shallow propagandist allegations about the crushing effects of"economic imperialism." The United States is creating, in its dealings with Saudi Arabia, anew and profoundly significant pattern of relationships between so-called "backward" and"advanced" countries. There is the maximum of economic assistance and support, andexploitation of natural resources, with a complete absence of political interference. Thisoutlook expresses itself in personal relations as well; it is a firm rule that if any Americanworking in Saudi Arabia is discovered to have failed in courtesy toward the poorest Arab, heis at once sent home and forbidden to come back. There is thus being built up a sense ofconfidence, of good will and of mutual respect between the two peoples -- and betweenindividuals -- which is of immense value both in itself and as an example to other nationswho, whether under Point Four schemes or the Colombo Plan or any other of these world-wide arrangements, come into similar contact.Whenever the state of my health has permitted, I have traveled widely since the end of thewar. I have visited the two new independent nations that have succeeded the Indian Empirewhich I knew from my childhood; I have been to Egypt and East Africa, to Iran and toBurma.Before the end of British rule in India one of the curious and erroneous opinions widelycanvassed was that Indians lacked the capacity to govern themselves, manage their ownaffairs and play their full part in the councils of the world. Recent years have demonstratedthe glaring falsity of this idea. Both countries have been particularly well served by theirstatesmen, high officials and diplomats; and their contributions to the work of theCommonwealth and of the United Nations have been many and valuable.Bharat -- though an assassin's hand struck down Mahatma Gandhi at a time when his countrystill badly needed him -- has been devotedly served by many brilliant and patriotic men andwomen, notably Sardar Patel, Mr. Nehru and his talented sister, Mrs. Pandit. My owncontacts with the new regime in Delhi are close and cordial, and I have been received therewith great kindness and hospitality. We are all constantly aware of the immensely importantpart India plays, with increasing sureness and felicity of touch, in international affairs,seeking to provide a bridge of understanding between the West and a resurgent Asia in afashion that is both courageous and sensible.Pakistan faced at the outset a far harder task than her neighbor. In Delhi, Calcutta, Bombayand other cities there existed both the traditions of a strong and stable administration and thefacilities -the staff, the buildings and the equipment -- to maintain it. In Pakistan, however,everything, literally everything, had to be built from the very beginning. Typewriters, pensand paper and file covers hardly existed. Hundreds of miles separated East and WestPakistan. Neither had, in the ordinary sense, a capital city. Karachi and Dacca doubled andredoubled their size overnight; everything had to be built from the foundations up, and everyordinary facility of administration and government had to be established anew.This vast task was undertaken with extraordinary skill and pertinacity. Pakistan was a goingconcern from the outset. Part of the genius of the Quaid-i-Azam was that, like the Prophethimself, he attracted into his orbit able and devoted people, and Pakistan has been served,throughout her brief existence, by men and women of the highest moral and intellectualcaliber. They came from the ranks, not only of his previous followers, but of those who hadbeen severely critical of his policy in earlier days. Their achievements have given the lie toall the croaking prophets who could foresee nothing but disaster for the young state.First and foremost, of course, was the Quaid-i-Azam's sister, Miss Fatima Jinnah, who hadbeen his companion, friend and helper for many years, who presided over his homes inLondon and Bombay, and later in his palace in Karachi and his summer home at the hillstation of Ziarat. Miss Jinnah has much of the strength of character of her famous brother,much of his manner, voice, resolute bearing and appearance. Now, after his death, she is stillprominent in public life, with a large and faithful following; and she acts as a zealous andvigilant guardian of the moral and political independence of her brother's God-given realm.Ghulam Mohammed, the present Governor General, universally admired and respected, is aformer industrialist and a learned and devoted student of the history of Islam, its magnificentrise, its gradual decline and its present hope and chance of rising, phoenixlike, from the ashesof the past. A former distinguished colleague of mine at the Round Table Conference and thecommittees which followed, Zafrullah Khan, is at present Foreign Minister; and he brings tohis herculean responsibilities sagacity, forensic ability and great experience in the field ofinternational affairs.There was too the Quaid-i-Azam's faithful and skilled henchman, Liaquat Ali Khan, who wasanother tragic victim of the wave of violence and assassination which for some years sweptthe East. He is survived by his wife, in her own field of work and interests hardly less ableand certainly no less devoted than her staunch and beloved husband. But Liaquat will long bemissed; for surely if the Quaid had asked for an Abu Bakr, for a Peter, he could not have beengranted a better one than Liaquat Ali Khan, whose qualities were not bright or showy butwhose strength of character was solid, durable and of the utmost fidelity. He proved his worthin Pakistan's second stern testing. The Quaid's death, so soon after the foundation of Pakistan,strikingly resembled that of the Prophet himself who was received into the "Companionship-on-High" very soon after the triumph and consolidation of his temporal conquests. Similarlythe Quaid did not live to preside long over the growth of the mighty child that he hadfathered.But Liaquat was in every way a worthy successor. Yet he who had been so near to the Quaidwas himself soon to be struck down. Truly it may be said that he gave his soul to God. As lifeebbed from him, his last words were: "No God but God, and Mohammed his messenger."That is the stamp of a man whose achievement is the Pakistan of today. I think gladly ofothers: of Habib Rabimtoola, the brilliant son of a brilliant father, who had, as HighCommissioner in London immediately after the formation of the State, a post of especialresponsibility; of Mr. Isphani who, at the same critical period, represented his young countryin Washington; of the present Prime Minister, formerly a very successful High Commissioner in Ottawa, who is the grandson of Nawab Ali Chowdry, a colleague of mine in theearly days of the Muslim League; of Amjid Ali, for many years my honorary secretary whohas rendered great service in the most onerous of charges; and of the other Mohammed Ali, abrilliant expert on economics and finance.Most of these men are comparatively young in years, and they come from families withindustrial and commercial rather than political or official traditions. Their zeal, theirefficiency and their success in their new tasks have all been notable. Is not the explanationthat they have been sustained by their patriotism, by their devotion to a great cause, and,above all, by their Muslim faith and their consciousness of immediate and permanentresponsibility to the Divine?My most recent, postwar visit to Burma was a particularly happy experience. As I havepointed out earlier, I took the step of advising my followers in Burma, a good many yearsago, to identify themselves in every possible way with the outlook, customs, aspirations, andway of life of the people among whom they dwelt -to give up their Indo-Saracenic names, forexample, and to take Burman names; to adopt Burman dress, habits and clothing, and apartfrom their religion and its accompanying practices, to assimilate themselves as much aspossible in the country of their adoption. Now that the people of Burma have regained theirindependence, this advice of mine, and the full and faithful way in which my followers havecarried it out, have borne fruit. My wife and I were received in Burma by the President andthe Prime Minister and many other leading and notable personalities with the utmost kindnessand friendliness. Burma is a beautiful country; her people unite a deep piety (in few othercountries does the Prime Minister have to be begged not to retire from office and -- as helongs to do -- assume the saffron robe and the begging bowl of the mendicant monk) togaiety, gentleness and intensely hospitable generosity.They were especially happy days that we spent in Rangoon. The climax of the hospitalitywhich we received was reached, perhaps, on the night that we were bidden to dine, in ourown apartments, on Burman food specially prepared for us in the President's palace. At eighto'clock sharp two aides de camp and several servants arrived with an array which marshaledin all something like thirty courses. The Burmans are by no means vegetarians nor are theyparticularly ascetic in their diet. Most of the dishes were very, very rich and very, verynourishing. When they were laid out, we asked the aides de camp to join us. After a fewcourses we announced that we had finished."Oh, no," said the aides de camp, smiling in the friendliest fashion. "We have been speciallysent to see that you try every dish."Such hospitality was irresistible. On we battled as bravely as we could, on and on to thepuddings, the bonbons and the sugared fruit. After all, I had lived in Victorian London andhad attended the long, rich and stately banquets of that era, but never in all my life have Iknown a meal which in variety and subtlety of taste and flavor could rival that dinner sokindly given to us by the President of Burma.Iran, the home of my ancestors for many centuries, I first visited in February, 1951, to bepresent at the wedding of His Imperial Majesty the Shah. Although the circumstances and theduties of an active and busy life had, by chance, prevented me from going to Iran until I waswell past seventy, I have always taken great pride in my Iranian origin. Both my father andmy mother, it will be recalled, were grandchildren of Fateh Ali Shah, who was a pure Kajarof Turkish descent, and the outlook and way of life of the home in which I was brought upwas almost entirely Iranian.Therefore to go to Iran was in a real sense a homecoming. It was made especially precious bythe graciousness and the kindness we received as personal guests of the Emperor, and in thebeautiful palace which Her Imperial Highness, Princess Shams, most graciously put at ourdisposal.In Mahalat, which was long my ancestors' home, I was received by thousands of Ismailisfrom all over Persia. It was good to see that their womenfolk had all given up the chaddur, thePersian equivalent of the Indian purdah. Isfahan, which we also visited, is more old-fashioned. There we saw the chaddur frequently worn, and we encountered a good number ofmen wearing the long, high-buttoned coat that was customary under the rule of the Kajardynasty. In Tehran the effects of Reza Shah's policy of modernization are numerous andvisible. Iranians in general do not resemble any neighboring Asiatic people; in ordinaryappearance many of them might be mistaken for southern Caucasians. And nowadays in thecities their adaptation of European -- or allegedly European -dress and a somewhat forlornappearance of poverty give them the down-at-heel look that one has seen in moving picturesabout Russia.Some of these appearances are, I think, misleading -- especially the appearance of poverty.Weight for weight, man for man, the masses of Iran are certainly better off than the masses ofIndia or China; and although their standard of living is obviously not comparable with that ofWestern European countries or America, they are in matters particularly of diet better offthan the people of many Asiatic nations, living distinctly above, not below, the margin ofsubsistence.One fact is clear above the welter of Iran's problems and difficulties: if the present Emperornow has, after all the stirring vicissitudes through which he has lately passed, a free hand andis able to choose his own ministers and advisers and is not hampered by conservatism on theone hand and individualism on the other, Iran will be able greatly to raise her economic andsocial standards and to support in far better conditions a considerably increased population.I must not close this brief record of my recent doings and experiences without some referenceto an incident a good deal less agreeable than most that have lately come my way. Onemorning in August, 1949, my wife and I left our villa near Cannes to drive to the Nice airportto catch a plane to Deauville. Our heavy town luggage had gone on by road in our own twocars with our servants. My wife and I and her personal maid, Mlle. Frieda Meyer, weretherefore in a car hired from a local garage. I was beside the driver, my wife and her maid inback. About two hundred yards from the gate of our villa the mountain road takes a sharpturn and another small road comes in at the side.As we reached the intersection we saw another car drawn up across it, so that we couldneither pass nor take the by-road. Three men, masked and hooded and extremely heavilyarmed -- they had no fewer than ten guns among the three of them -- jumped out and closedin on us. One of them slashed one of our back tires. The muzzles of their guns thrust into thecar, one a few inches from my wife, another close to my chest. Fear, as one ordinarilyunderstands it, did not bother any of us. I remember that I saw the hands of the man who wascovering me trembling violently, and I thought with complete detachment: "That gun is quitelikely to go off." My wife's maid, as she has often told me since, thought -again quite withoutagitation -- "When is he going to kill the Prince?" And my wife at her side had no sensationof alarm or fear at all.I said, in my normal tone of voice, "We won't resist; we'll give you what you want."One of them snatched my wife's jewel box which she held in her lap. As they backed awaytoward their car he said, "Please be kind. Let us get away."Then when they were just about to jump back into their car, I found my voice and my senseof humor."Hi, come back!" I shouted. "You've forgotten your pourboire!"One of them ran back and I gave him the handful of francs which I had in my pocket."Voilà le pourboire," said I."Merci, merci," he said again and again, as he ran back to the other car.We went home and telephoned the police at Lloyd's. Lloyd's dealt with our claim completelyand generously. After almost four years had passed, six men were brought to trial in 1953,and three were convicted and sentenced. And that, I think, is all that need be said about anepisode as unpleasant as, in my long experience, it was unprecedented.XVIToward the FutureALL MY LIFE I have looked forward. Large-scale prophecy, however, is as dangerous as itis easy, and true prophetic vision is rare indeed. It is a rarity more than ever marked in anepoch such as ours, in which science has placed in our reach material and natural powersundreamed of fifty short years ago. But since the human mind and the human imagination areas yet by no means fully equipped to master the immense forces which human ingenuity hasdiscovered and unleashed, it is not too difficult to foresee at least some of the political andsocial reactions of nations as well as individuals to this enormous scientific and technicalrevolution and all its accompanying phenomena.India, the country of my birth and upbringing, has been for centuries a land of extremepoverty, misery and want, where millions are born, live and work and die at a level far belowthe margin of subsistence. A tropical climate, aeons of soil erosion, and primitive andunskilled methods of agriculture have all taken their toll of suffering, patient, gentle butignorant mankind. The Indian peasant has survived and multiplied but in face of the mostferocious and formidable handicaps. Many years ago, in my first book, India in Transition, Igave this account of the day-to-day life of the ordinary Indian peasant under British rule.A typical rural scene on an average day in an average year is essentially the same now as itwas half a century ago. A breeze, alternately warm and chilly, sweeps over the monotonouslandscape as it is lightened by a rapid dawn, to be followed quickly by a heavy molten sunappearing on the horizon. The ill-clad villagers, men, women, and children, thin and weak,and made old beyond their years by a life of underfeeding and overwork, have been astirbefore daybreak, and have partaken of a scanty meal, consisting of some kind or other of coldporridge, of course without sugar or milk. With bare and hardened feet they reach the fieldsand immediately begin to furrow the soil with their lean cattle, of a poor and hybrid breed,usually sterile and milkless. A short rest at midday, and a handful of dried corn or beans forfood, is followed by a continuance till dusk of the same laborious scratching of the soil. Thenthe weary way homeward in the chilly evening, every member of the family shaking withmalaria or fatigue. A drink of water, probably contaminated, the munching of a piece of hardblack or green chaupati, a little gossip round the peepul tree, and then the day ends withheavy, unrefreshing sleep in dwellings so insanitary that no decent European farmer wouldhouse his cattle in them.The Raj has gone, but in essentials the life and lot of the humble villager of rural India havescarcely changed since I wrote these words. Education, hygiene, welfare schemes, plans forvillage "uplift" have but scratched the surface of the problem, hardly more deeply or moreefficiently than the peasant's own wooden plough scratches the sunbaked soil of India. Nor isthe lot of his urban kinsman, working in one of the great and ever-growing industrial citieslike Bombay or Calcutta, much better. At his factory, in his home, the Indian industrialworker endures, and takes for granted, utterly appalling conditions. From steamy,overcrowded mill or factory he trudges to the shanty or tenement, equally overcrowded,equally unhealthy, which serves him as his home. His diet, though more varied than that ofhis cousin in the country, is pitifully meager by any Western standard. Around him are theincreasing distractions of a great city, but they have little meaning for him. His amenities arefew, his luxuries nonexistent.During the years of British rule it was relatively easy to shrug off responsibility for theeconomic malaise of India, to put all the blame on imperialist exploitation, and to say, "Whenwe get our independence, then we shall put economic conditions right." The imperialists havegone; the period of alien exploitation is over. But can economic injustice be so easily righted?India's population is stead ily and rapidly increasing, yet at the present rate -- and in spite ofall manner of schemes for soil conservation, irrigation, better use of land, intensive andplanned industrialization -- it is unlikely that more than half the natural increase in populationcan be economically absorbed. India's problem, like China's, is one of economic absorptivecapacity. Pakistan's problem, since she has the empty but potentially rich acres of Baluchistanto fill with her surplus population, is less pressing. Doubtless in India, as in China, theextension of education and growing familiarity with the use of the vote and the processes ofdemocracy will give rise to eager and energetic efforts to find political solutions to thegravest economic problems. Hundreds upon hundreds of millions of human beings in Indiaand in China live out their lives in conditions of extreme misery. How long will these vastmasses of humanity accept such conditions? May they not -- as realization dawns of theirown political power -- insist on an extreme form of socialism, indeed on communism, thoughnot on Soviet Russian lines and not under Soviet leadership? And may not that insistence berevolutionary in its expression and in its manifestations?Yet in India, as well as in China, if every "have" in the population were stripped of wealthand reduced to the level of the lowest "have not," of the poorest sweeper or coolie, the effecton the general standard of living -- the general ill-being -- would be negligible. There are fartoo few "haves," far too many "have nots," in both countries for even the most wholesaleredistribution of wealth as it now stands. Reform, to be real and effective, must strike muchdeeper. These are thoughts grim enough to depress anyone who possesses more than the mostsuperficial knowledge of Asia's problems and difficulties.There is one major political step forward which should be taken by the Governments of Indiaand Pakistan, which would have a significant and beneficial effect on the life and welfare oftheir peoples. This is the establishment of a genuine and lasting entente cordiale between thetwo countries, such as subsisted between Britain and France from 1905 to 1914. Even morepertinent analogies are offered by Belgium and Holland, and Sweden and Norway. Here aretwo pairs of neighboring sovereign states, once joined and now separated. The separation ofthe Low Countries offers the nearest parallel since this was effected on the specific groundsof religious difference. I have earlier likened the Hindu and Muslim communities of the oldIndian Empire to Siamese twins; as such they were, before they were parted, hardly able tomove; now separate, surely they ought to be able to go along together as companions andfriends, to their mutual benefit and support.Here however it is for India with its far greater population, resources, and developedindustries to show the same political judgment as Sweden showed toward Norway after theirseparation -- that is to say -- a final and sincere acceptance of the partition as desirable and initself as at last opening the door to a real understanding between the two culturally differentpeoples of the subcontinent.Even a small minority can make great mischief if it keeps up and repeats the political slogansof unity which may have had a sense at one time but which today can only prevent that goodneighborly relation on which future co-operation in international politics depends.In problems such as water, both east and west between the two republics of India andPakistan, refugee property and other financial claims and counterclaims should be settlednow in a way that the weaker country of the two shall not feel that it has been browbeatenand unjustly treated by its vast and powerful neighbor.The problem of Kashmir should also be faced as an honest attempt to bring about byplebiscite, under international auspices, a final settlement on the basis of the triumph of thepopular will. Were India to adopt consistently toward Pakistan the policy adopted by Swedentoward Norway, by Holland toward Belgium, not only for years but for decades, not onlypeace in Southern Asia but the full weight for international peace and good will willnecessarily increase to an extent of which we at present can have little idea. The great role tobe played as bridge between West and East beyond the frontiers of Pakistan and India canonly be accomplished if and when these two neighbors are themselves capable of co-operation and such fair dealing toward each other as will con vince the rest of the world thatthey have a claim to be listened to and seriously considered.The alternative to an Indian policy of understanding and the encouragement of water andother economic needs of Pakistan, not only justly, but with free comprehension, can be thatthe neighbor will turn in other directions for alliances and friendships -- the result of whichmust lead to these two neighborly powers, instead of looking outward and working for worldpeace, watching each other, ever on the look-out for danger and discord rather than forpeaceful and economic independence and development.I do not think that the countries of the Near East, with the possible exception of Egypt, faceany population problems which, granted courage, resolution and ingenuity, should proveinsuperable.All that the people of countries like Iran, Iraq, Syria, the Lebanon, Yemen and even SaudiArabia, need is knowledge -- knowledge of new techniques, knowledge of engineering,knowledge of agriculture. They have room and resources enough. Science properly appliedcan repopulate their empty lands and make their barren spaces flourish; can plant cities,fertilize crops; can set up industries and develop their immensely rich mineral and rawmaterial potentialities. Here there was once the Garden of Eden; historians and archaeologistshave shown that this region was at one time fertile, rich and populous. So it can be again, ifthe powers and the resources available to mankind now are properly employed. The Arablands have been devastated by centuries of folly, by waste and extravagance due toignorance; the pitiful condition of their peoples today is a condemnation of their past. Thereis no need to look further than Israel to realize what courage and determination, allied to skilland urgent need, can achieve. The Arabs are no whit inferior to any race in the world inintelligence and potential capacity. A single generation's concentrated and devoted attentionto the real needs of education for all, of scientific and technical as well as academic teaching,training and discipline, could revolutionize the Arab world. Self-help is better by far thangrants in aid, and better than perpetual outpouring by the United States of its surplus production. The Arabs' only danger lies in continued apathy and ignorance in a swiftly changingworld, and in a social and economic outlook and practices unadapted to the challengingrealities of our time.I have little fear about the impact of the future of the British Crown Colonies in Africa. Wehave seen the noble work of Great Britain in West Africa. In East and Central Africa theproblem is at present complicated by the presence of a European settler population. I believethat there can be a healthy and satisfactory adjustment, provided all sections in thesemultiracial communities -- indigenous Africans and immigrant Europeans and Asians -- facethe simple, fundamental fact that they are all dependent upon each other. No one section candismiss any other from its calculations, either about contributions to past development orabout plans for the future. The immigrant, be he European or Asian, has no hope ofprosperity without the Africans; the African cannot do without the European farmer or theAsian trader, unless he wants to see his standard of living fall steeply, and with it all hope ofexploiting and enhancing the natural wealth of the land in which all three have their homesand must earn their bread.To a Muslim there is one quietly but forcibly encouraging element in this situation. Whereverthe indigenous population is Muslim, there is remarkably little racial antagonism or sense ofbitterness against the European, in spite of the European's obvious economic superiority.Islam, after all, is a soil in which sentiments of this sort do not take root or flourish easily.This is not a shallow and fatalistic resignation; it is something much more profound in theessence of the teaching of Islam -- a basic conviction that in the eyes of God all men,regardless of color or class or economic condition, are equal. From this belief there springs anunshakable self-respect, whose deepest effects are in the subconscious, preventing the growthof bitterness or any sense of inferiority or jealousy by one man of another's economicadvantage.Islam in all these countries has within it, I earnestly believe, the capacity to be a moral andspiritual force of enormous significance, both stabilizing and energizing the communitiesamong whom it is preached and practiced. To ignore Islam's potential influence for good,Islam's healing and creative power for societies as for individuals, is to ignore one of the mostgenuinely hopeful factors that exist in the world today.But what of the recurrent, intractable issue of peace or war? Few epochs in recent historyhave been more devastating and disastrous than (to quote a phrase of Sir Winston Churchill's)"this tormented half-century." Is the long torment at last over?I can only hope fervently, with all my being, that this is so; that the nations and their leadersare sincerely and actively convinced not only of the negative proposition that a Third WorldWar would effect the destruction of civilization, perhaps indeed of humanity, but of itspositive corollary that it now lies within men's power enormously and rapidly to enhance andincrease civilization and to promote the material well-being of millions who now rank as"have nots." The only chance of nations and individuals alike among the "have nots" lies inthe preservation of peace. Europe needs a century or more of recuperation after the agony andhavoc that its peoples have endured, and recuperation means peace. The industrial andproductive capacity of North America -- the United States and Canada -- already vaster thananything the world has ever seen, is increasing fast; North America needs markets; andmarkets mean peace. The underdeveloped countries, in Africa, Asia and South America, needover the years a vast and steady inflow of capital investment -- to build and develop theircommunications, to exploit their resources, to raise their standard of living -- and investmenton this scale and to this end calls for peace. War, in face of such circumstances and sonumerous and so imperative a series of needs, would be madness. But I must admit that if welook back at the history of the past fifty years, this has not been a consideration that hasdeflected the nations and their leaders from catastrophic courses. All the hardly wonprosperity and security, all the splendid and beckoning hopes of the last quarter of thenineteenth century counted for nothing when the crucial test came. Pride and folly swayedmen's hearts. The world's state today is the result of pride and folly.As Germany did for so long, Russia now supplies the civilized world's great enigma, theriddle to which there seems no sensible or satisfactory answer. One factor in Russia'sperplexing equation is obvious and known -- the factor whose results can only be happy,peaceful and prosperous. The other -- the perpetual "x" -- is grim and incalculable. Long agoLord Palmerston said that Russian history taught this lesson: the Russians must expand, andthey will go on expanding until they encounter some force -- a nation or a combination ofnations -- powerful enough to stop them. From its beginnings in the Grand Duchy of MoscowRussia has expanded steadily and remorselessly. Is expansion still the dominant motive inRussian policy? There are some somber indications that this is one of the manycharacteristics which Communist Russia possesses in common with Czarist Russia and thather appetite for expansion is still not glutted.Yet why should this be so? Are there not other more peaceful factors at work? Russia's emptylands, within her own borders, are greater by far than those that opened up, decade afterdecade, in front of the pioneers who extended the United States from small, precariousbeginnings along the Atlantic seaboard. Russia has no need of overseas colonies, no need,now that aerial communications have developed so swiftly and so powerfully, for those"windows on warm seas" which once mattered so much. Inside her own frontiers, if herleaders can be genuinely convinced that no one menaces the Soviet Union, that no oneharbors aggressive, imperialist designs against her, her people may live at peace for centuries.Will these realistic and wholesome considerations carry the day, or will suspicion, blindhatred, pride and folly wreak new and more terrible havoc? As in the German people beforethe Second World War there was the dreadful, Wagnerian death-wish, driving a great andsuperbly talented nation to self-immolation, so is there in the heart of all men some dark,satanic evil still lusting for destruction? These are the stern riddles of our time, and each of usseeks his own answers to them.But these issues and questions concern men in the aggregate, great bodies of men in nationaland racial groups. The biggest group, however, is only composed of the number ofindividuals in it. If it is possible to bring happiness to one individual, in him at least the darkand evil impulses may be conquered. And in the end may not the power of good in theindividual prevail against the power of evil in the many?I can only say to everyone who reads this book that it is my profound conviction that manmust never ignore and leave untended and undeveloped that spark of the Divine which is inhim. The way to personal fulfillment, to individual reconciliation with the Universe that isabout us, is comparatively easy for anyone who firmly and sincerely believes, as I do, thatDivine Grace has given man in his own heart the possibilities of illumination and of unionwith Reality. It is, however, far more important to attempt to offer some hope of spiritualsustenance to those many who, in this age in which the capacity of faith is nonexistent in themajority, long for something beyond themselves, even if it seems second-best. For them thereis the possibility of finding strength of the spirit, comfort and happiness in contemplation ofthe infinite variety and beauty of the Universe.Life in the ultimate analysis has taught me one enduring lesson. The subject should alwaysdisappear in the object. In our ordinary affections one for another, in our daily work withhand or brain, most of us discover soon enough that any lasting satisfaction, any contentmentthat we can achieve, is the result of forgetting self, of merging subject with object in aharmony that is of body, mind and spirit. And in the highest realms of consciousness all whobelieve in a Higher Being are liberated from all the clogging and hampering bonds of thesubjective self in prayer, in rapt meditation upon and in the face of the glorious radiance ofeternity, in which all temporal and earthly consciousness is swallowed up and itself becomes the eternal.