

We continued the march through the valley to Warrenton, 
where General McClellan was relieved of the command of 
the army and General Burnside succeeded him. Nearly all 
the men were sad at the loss of McClellan. He was our first 
love, and the men were loyal and devoted to him. I did 
not share in this sorrow. My faith had become shaken 
when we retreated from before Richmond, and when he 
allowed Lee's army to get away from Antietam I was dis- 
gusted, and glad to see a change. Sad as the army felt at 
the loss of McClellan, they were loyal to the cause for wliich 
they had enlisted, and followed their new commander as 
faithfully as they had the old. 

We arrived at Falmouth about the middle of November, 
and went into camp two miles from the town ; here we 
spent our second Thanksgiving. No dance for the oflicers 
this year. We had a dinner of hard tack and salt pork, and 
should have passed a miserable day had not the commissary 
arrived with a supply of "Poland water," and the officers 
were given a canteen each. The men had the pleasure of 
hearing our sAveet voices in songs of praise from the " home 
of the fallen," as our tent was called. 

We remained undisturbed until the morning of December 
1 1 , when we were ordered to the banks of the Rappahannock 
River, opposite Fredericksburg. Here we found a pontoon 


bridge partially laid, and the engineers doing their best to 
complete it. Our batteries were posted on the hills in rear 
of our line, and were vigorously shelling the city, but the 
rebel sharpshooters were posted in cellars and rifle pits on the 
other side, and would pick ofi" the engineers as fast as they 
showed themselves at work. At last volunteers were called 
for by Colonel Hall, commanding the brigade, and the 19th 
Massachusetts and 7th Michigan volunteered. We took the 
pontoon boats from the wagons, carried them to the river, 
and as soon as they touched the water filled them with men. 
Two or three boats started at the same time, and the sharp- 
shooters opened a terrible fire. Men fell in the water and 
in the boats. Lieutenant-Colonel Baxter of the 7th Mich- 
igan was shot when half-way across. Henry E. Palmer of 
Company C was shot in the foot as he was stepping into the 
boat, yet we pressed on, and at last landed on the other 
side. 

As soon as the boats touched the shore we formed l)y com- 
panies, and, without waiting for regimental formation, 
charged up the street. On reaching the main street we 
found that the fire came from houses in front and rear. 
Company B lost ten men out of thirty in less than five min- 
utes. Other companies suffered nearly the same. We were 
forced to fall back to the river, deploy as skirmishers, and 
reached the main street through the yards and houses. As 
we fell back we left one of our men wounded in the street ; 
his name was Redding, of Company D, and when we again 
reached the street we found him dead, — the rebels having 
l)ayoneted him in seven places. 

The regiment was commanded hj Capt. H. G. O. Wey- 
mouth, Colonel Devereaux being very sick in camp. Captain 



Weymouth went from right to left of the line, giving instruc- 
tions and urging the men forward. My squad was com- 
posed of men from companies I and A. We had reached a 
gate, and were doing our best to cross the street. I had 
lost three men when Captain Weymouth came up. " Can't 
you go forward, Lieutenant Adams ? " he said. My reply 
was, "It is mighty hot, captain." He said, " I guess you 
can," and started to go through the gate, when as much as a 
barrel of bullets came at him. He turned and said, " It is 
quite warm, lieutenant; go up through the house." We 
then entered the l^ack door and passed upstairs to the front. 
Oilman Nichols of Company A was in advance. He found 
the door locked and burst it open with the butt of his mus- 
ket. The moment it opened he fell dead, shot from a house 
on the other side of the street. Several others were 
wounded, but we held the house until dark, firing at a head 
whenever Ave saw one on the other side. 

As night came on we advanced across the street and the 
rebels retired. We posted our pickets and went into the 
houses for rest and observation. The house my company 
now owned was formerly occupied by a namesake of mine, 
a music teacher. I left the men down stairs while I retired. 
The room I selected was the chamber belonging to a young 
lady. Her garments were in the press, and the little finery 
she possessed was scattered about the room. Fearing she 
might return I did not undress, but went to bed with my 
boots on. I was soon lost in peaceful slumber, when a 
sergeant came and said I was wanted l)elow. Going to the 
Idtchen I found the boys had a banquet spread for me. 
There was roast duck, biscuit, all kinds of preserves, spread 
upon a table set with the best china. We were company, 


and the best was none too good for us. After supper we 
went up stairs, and the men were assigned, or assigned 
themselves, to rooms. 

In our investigation we had found a barrel filled with 
molasses. Every one must fill his canteen, and as he filled 
it from the faucet it ran over, and the house was molasses 
from cellar to attic. I opened a trunk in my room and 
found packages of paper. Thinking they might be bonds 
or stock I put them in my haversack. The next day I found 
they were unpaid bills of the music teacher. Going out on 
the street we found it quite lively. One of the boys would 
come along with a lady on his arm, but upon inspection it 
proved to be another soldier with borrowed clothes. 

Since we left Rockville I have not mentioned Ben Falls, 
He had been on every march and in every battle, and had 
his musket shot from his shoulder at Glendale, but picked 
up another and went in again. While at Falmouth Captain 
Boyd, who was now in command of Company A, made Ben 
a cook, because, as he informed me, he wanted him to live 
to go home. While we were in Fredericksburg Ben and 
another man came over bringing two kettles of coffee on 
poles. Halting before Captain Boyd he said, "Captain, if 
you have no use for Ben Falls, send me home. How nice it 
will look when I write to my wife in Lynn that the regi- 
ment fought nobly, and I carried the kettles. I either want 
a musket or a discharge, — and prefer the musket." Cap- 
tain Boyd granted his request ; and it was the last of Ben as 
a pot-slewer. 

The next day we remained in the city, awaiting orders. 
We buried our dead, sent the wounded back to the hospital, 
and made ready for the battle which we knew must come. 


On the morning of the 13th we received orders to advance, 
and marched up the street towards Marye's Heights by the 
flank. Shot and shell ploughed through our ranks, but we 
filed into a field and were ordered forward to storm the 
heights. It was necessary to move up an embankment, 
then charge over an open field. A rebel battery on our 
right had a raking fire on us, but we must go forward. Led 
by our gallant Captain Weymouth we moved up the bank. 
The two color bearers. Sergeant Creasey and Sergeant 
Rappell, were the first to fall, but the colors did not touch 
the ground before they were up and going forward. Cap- 
tain Weymouth fell, shot in the leg, which was afterwards 
amputated. Captain Malioney took command of the regi- 
ment, and he was also seen to fall, shot in the arm and 
side. Down went the color bearers again. Lieutenant 
Newcomb grasped one, a color corporal another. Newcomb 
fell, shot through both legs, and as he went down he handed 
the color to me. Next fell the color corporal, and the flag 
he held was grasped by Sergeant Merrill, who was soon 
wounded. Another seized the color, but he was shot 
immediately, and as it fell from his hands the ofiicer who 
already had one caught it. 

By obliquing to the left, followed by the regiment, we 
got out of the line of fire for a time, and lay down. I do 
not mention this fact to show that I was braver than other 
men, for every man of the old regiment on the field would 
have done the same had opportunity oflfered, but my services 
were recognized by promotion to first lieutenant, and I was 
afterwards given a Medal of Honor by Congress for the act. 

Looking back over the field we saw the ground covered 
with our dead and wounded. Captain Plympton was now 



in command of the regiment, and we waited for darkness to 
bring in our wounded. 

Late in the evening we withdrew to the city, where we 
remained the next day. At night we were ordered to the 
front. No man was allowed to speak. Dippers must not 
rattle against bayonets, but all must be as still as the dead 
who slept near us. We remained until nearly daylight, 
found the army was being withdrawn to the other side of 
the river, and as usual we were to cover the retreat. We 
recrossed in safety, and waited on the other side until the 
pontoons were withdrawn. About half of those who went 
over never marched back. In the battle of the 13th, out of 
less than three hundred men we lost, in killed and wounded, 
one hundred and four. Of the eleven men who carried the 
colors that day eight were killed. I do not believe we 
killed five of the enemy, if we did one. We found them 
strongly intrenched, charged upon them, and they mowed 
us down. Here the rebels lost an opportunity. Had they 
attacked us wliile we were recrossing the river they could 
have captured a large part of the army ; but they did not 
see the chance, and we escaped. 

Sad and weary we marched back to our old camp. We 
had become accustomed to defeat ; we knew that no braver 
army stood upon the earth than the Army of the Potomac, 
but fate had been against us from the start. We saw our 
numbers growing less, and no real victory to reward us 
for the sacrifice. 

It only required a few days after returning to camp to 
reorganize the regiment ; promotions were made to fill 
the vacant places, and active drill was resumed. We took 
up skirmish drill and bayonet exercise in earnest, and what 




spare time we had stockaded our tents, expecting to remain 
until spring ; but in army life there is no assurance that you 
will find yourself in the morning where you lay down at 
night, and in a few days the army was ordered to pack up. 
As soon as the order was given it began to rain, and con- 
tinued several days. We wallowed around in the mud, 
trying to march, but it was impossible, and all were ordered 
back to camp, after suffering untold misery for two days. 
Our next move was to break camp, and locate nearer the 
town. Here we stockaded our tents, and were comfortable. 
Were it not for the sadness felt by reason of the vacant 
places in our ranks, it would have been the happiest winter 
I had ever passed. Every night the officers would gather 
in the adjutant's tent, — which was a Sibley, stockaded some 
six feet from the ground, — and there hold regular camp- 
fires. Stories would be told, songs sung and recitations 
given. We had our orators and our poets. I remember 
one night, when seated around the camp-fire, the quarter- 
master, Tom Winthrop, who had enlisted as a private with 
me in old Company A, read the following tribute to the boys 
who had gone on : — 


I. 

Not in the quiet churchyard, where their fathers' bones repose, 
With loving hands to mark the spot with willow and with rose ; 
Not in the quiet nooks and dells of the old homestead place, 
'Mid scenes of boyhood days time never can efface ; 
But in strange lands we laid them down, in roiigh dug soldiers' 

graves, 
And far from home and kindred ones they sleep, our fallen braves. 





II. 

No mother's wail of sorrow o'er the new sod, fresh and green, 
Where sleeps the boy she nursed and loved, and fondled when a 

ween; 
No blue-eyed maiden, golden haired, to drop the bitter tear. 
Or mark the spot with loving hands, where sleeps the form so dear; 
But comrades knew their honest worth, the sacrifice they made. 
And they have marked with thoughtful care where sleep our fallen 

braves. 

III. 

We left our heroes at Fair Oakes, we dug their honored graves 

Beside the Chickahominy, with its dull, dreary waves. 

Not alone they fell in battle, not alone by steel and lead, 

The fell malaria swept them oif, as fruits fall, ripe and red. 

And where the southern laurels bloom, and oleanders wave, 

In the swamp lands, drear and deadly, they sleep, our fallen braves. 



IV. 

And oh, it was a fearful lot we buried at Glendale. 

Our ranks were thinned like standing corn before the sweeping gale. 

And thick their honored graves were strewn, through cornfields, one 

by one. 
They mark the spot where Antietam was bravely fought and won. 
And where the fight raged fiercest, by the Rappahannock's waves. 
There is many a yellow mound to tell where sleep our fallen braves. 



V. 

Oh, brave hearts that know no shrinking, oh, strong hands tried and 

true. 
You paled to see your country's stars turn from their azured blue ; 
And burned your hearts with patriot fire, nerved your arm to right, 
Ye were foremost when the call came, ye were foremost in the fight. 
And well ye fought and brave ye died, ye were no hireling slaves. 
May earth its richest tribute bring to all our fallen braves. 






VI. 

What though no marble monument, no towering shaft of stone, 
Is reared above the sacred soil where rest their honored bones ; 
What though no graven tablet shall, through all the coming time, 
Tell to the world heroic deeds of sacrifice sublime. 
But we who know how willingly their noble lives they gave, 
Will treasure in our hearts the worth of all our fallen braves. 



I do not believe there was a regiment in either army 
where the love was so strong between officers and men as in 
the old 19th. "VVe had no little jealousies ; the men obeyed 
the officers because they knew that no unreasonable orders 
would be given All was peace and harmony. Officers and 
men were given furloughs, and boxes were received from 
home. Some of the boxes had been a long time on the 
road, and when they arrived the contents were in an uncer- 
tain condition. It was hard to tell the tobacco from the 
mince pie. William A. Hill, adjutant of the regiment, had 
expected a box for some time, and the officers knew that 
when it came "Billy" would see that all had a share. At 
last it arrived, and we gathered at headquarters to see it 
opened. The cover was removed and the smell was not 
quite equal to the arbutus, but we hoped it was only the top. 
Another box was found inside containing what was once a 
turkey, but was now a large lump of blue mould. Notliing 
in the box was eatable. We held a council and concluded 
that a turkey that had l)een dead so long should have a 
decent burial. The next day the remains lay in state while 
we prepared for the last sad services. We waked the 
corpse until midnight, then the sad procession was formed. 
First came the largest negro, selected from the many ser- 




vants, as drum-major ; then the comb band ; next the 
quartermaster, with the carbine reversed, as a firing party ; 
then the corpse borne on a stretcher l)y four negroes, two 
small and two large ; then the mourners (officers who had 
expected to eat the turkey, and were left) ; all so disguised 
that none could recognize them. We marched down the 
main street of the camp, the comb band playing the dead 
march. Men half dressed came out of their tents to see 
what was the trouble, but we passed beyond the camp lines, 
where a grave had l^een prepared. Here the body was 
lowered, remarks were made by the chaplain (pro tem.), a 
poem was read by the quartermaster, and we returned to 
camp and mourned for the spirits that had departed. 

Another jolly time I recall. One day a light snow had 
fallen, and the men began to snow-ball. Soon companies 
were engaged and then the rio^ht and left wind's of the re&lt;:::i- 
ment were pitted against each other. I was with the left 
w^ing and we were holding our own when the drum corps 
re-enforced the right. Up to this time headquarters had 
been spectators, but they became excited, and joined the 
right wing. With such re-enforcements, the battle would 
soon be lost to us, but I remembered that some twenty of 
our negro servants were in rear of the hospital tent, and I 
went to them and offered bounty if they would enlist. They 
hesitated, but I assured them that I would stand the blame 
if they joined our forces. Having loaded every one with an 
armful of snow balls, I charged over the hill and attacked 
headquarters by the flank. If any one doubts the bravery 
of colored troops he should have seen my army that day. 
They rushed upon the foe, regardless of who it was. Their 
ammunition exhaused, they started on the charge with heads 




down, and butted all before them. Headquarters vanished. 
The right wing gave way, and the left held the field. It 
was the first battle won by colored troops in the war, and 
proved that they could fight if well officered. 

Many of the soldiers quartered near us, and some of our 
own men, had an eye to business, and were going about 
the camp selling pies, cookies and other articles of food. 
The 19th Maine had many men engaged in this business. 
One day a tall, honest-looking fellow w^as going through our 
camp when he passed Sergeant McGinnis. "What do you 
ask for your pies?" said McGinnis. "Twenty-five cents," 
replied the soldier. " I won't give it," said McGinnis. 
"Your colonel was just through here selling them for twenty 
cents." 

While at this camp Colonel Devereaux was called home, 
and we were without a field officer. Captain Mahoney hear- 
ing of this felt it his duty to return. Although on leave of 
absence fi'om the severe wound received at Fredericksburg 
he reported for duty. As I have before said. Captain 
Mahoney was a true son of Erin, brave and patriotic, yet a 
little peculiar. He brought with him two dozen bottles of 
ginger ale (?) and at night the officers in full uniform called 
to pay their respects. We were royally received. Corks 
were drawn and sociability began. We informed the captain 
that the regiment was delighted to have him return, that we 
had not had a battalion drill for several weeks, and were very 
rusty. He asked what in our opinion we were the most 
deficient in, and we said the charge. He said he had expected 
as much, and that the next day we should have a drill. The 
next day drill call was sounded, and we fell in . All the offi- 
cers' horses were away except an old one that was called 




"Palmer's wood-box." Mounted on this Captain Mahoney 
took command, and we marched to the parade ground near 
the town. As the drill was a new thing, the negro women 
and children assembled to witness it. We started forward in 
line; the order "Double-quick" was given, then "Charge." 
On we went ; the old horse began to wheel and kick and the 
centre of the regiment could not pass. Lieut. Eph. Hall 
was in command of the left company and I the right. Cap- 
tain Mahoney cried " Halt ! halt ! " but we did not hear him, 
and kept on driving the negroes into the town. After we 
had cleared the field we came marching back ; the captain 
had dismounted and was walking up and down the line mad 
way through. " Why didn't you halt, Lieutenant Adams ? " 
"Didn't hear you, sir." "Why didn't you halt. Lieutenant 
Hall? " " Didn't hear you, sir." " D — d lie ! consider your- 
self in arrest. Adjutant, take Lieutenant Hall's sword." 
Eph. was a lieutenant in Captain Mahoney's company, and 
while I got off without a reprimand he must be punished. 
We marched back to quarters and at night called on the cap- 
tain with a petition for Lieutenant Hall's release. We were 
well received. The ginger ale was opened, and after much 
discussion it was thought best to send for Lieutenant Hall 
and have matters explained. Captain Mahoney forgave him 
although I am not quite sure Eph. asked him to do so, but 
the noble old captain's heart was so large that he never treas- 
ured up anything against us. 

While in camp at Falmouth the base ball fever broke out. 
It was the old-fashioned game, where a man running the bases 
must be hit by the ball to be declared out. It started with 
the men, then the officers began to play, and finally the 19th 
challenged the 7th Michigan to play for sixty dollars a side. 



Captain Hume and myself were the committee of our regiment 
with two officers from the 7th Michigan, the four to select 
two from some other regiment in the brio-ade. The Ecame 
was played and witnessed by nearly all of our division, and 
the 19th won. The one hundred and twenty dollars was 
spent for a supper, both clubs being present with our com- 
mittee as guests. It was a grand time, and all agreed that it 
was nicer to play 6«.9e than minie ball. 

What were the rebels doing all tliis time ? Just the same 
as we were. While each army posted a picket along the 
river they never fired a shot. We would sit on the bank 
and watch their games, and the distance was so short we 
could understand every movement and would applaud good 
plays. Our men and theirs met in the river and exchanged 
papers, tobacco and coffee and were on the best of terms. 
As the spring months came they fished the river for shad, 
and as they drew their seines Avould come so near our shore 
that they could and often did throw fish to our boys. This 
truce lasted from January to May, 1863, and to both armies 
was one long, happy holiday. 

In April I received ten days leave of absence, and visited 
my old home. I had been promoted first lieutenant after the 
battle of Fredericksburg, and wore my new uniform for the 
first time. After two days spent on the road I arrived in 
Groveland. As in the field, I found death had been busy. 
My father had been called home, and many others had passed 
away. The second night after my arrival a delegation of cit- 
izens waited upon me and escorted me to the vestry used as 
a town hall, where I was given a public reception. I do not 
know what the feelings of General Grant were when he 
landed at California and was given the grand recej^tion after 



his trip around the world, Ijut if he felt better than I did he 
must have been very happy. I remained at home six days, 
and at the expiration of my leave reported back to the camp. 
I was as pleased to meet the dear old ])oys as I had been to 
meet friends at home. 

How I love to linger, living over in memory those happy 
days. I could fill pages with reminiscences of that winter ; 
the horse show February 22, the grand inaug-uration of Lieu- 
tenant Shackley when he received his commission, the black- 
berry jam at the sutler's tent, the courts-martial in the Sibley 
tent on the hill, and last but not least, the grand joke which 
was enjoyed by all ; but it would be of interest only to the 
comrades of the old 19th and I will pass on to the stern reali- 
ties of war. 




