
Frank and I had escape on the brain. We thought of 
nothing else, and were constantly watching our chances. 
One day I passed the guard and went out to the hospital, 
but my feet were bare, and I was advised by a sick man 
who had been out not to try it. I had kept my old boots, 
although they were worn out, so Captain McHugh cut oft' the 
tops, sewed them to the bottoms, making a kind of mocca- 
sins, and I was ready for the road. 

Our old mess of three were to go together. On the after- 
noon of November 23 Frank and I were walking around the 
camp. Directly in front of our hut we saw three prisoners, 
with their guards, come to the guard line and throw over the 
wood they had brought in. The sentinels on the beats had 
been talking together, and, having finished, marched directly 
from each other, leaving a space between them uncovered. 
The prisoners with their guards started to return to the 
woods. "Now is our chance, John," said Frank, and with- 
out waiting for McHugh, with our hearts beating like trip 
hammers, we passed over the dead line, and were outside 
following the others before the sentries faced about. We 
kept with the other prisoners until we reached the woods, 
then pretending that we saw our party over a little hill 
started to join them, and entering a place where the bushes 
were thick, dropped and waited. There were several details 



out for wood, and that was no doubt the reason why the 
guard did not stop us when we went to join our imaginary 
squad. They soon marched in and passed very near us, but 
we were not noticed, and waited for darkness before we 
moved. 

We had a small map of the country and knew the route 
we wanted to take, but how to strike it was the question, as 
the night was dark and we did not have the stars to guide 
us. We struck out at random and soon came to a road ; 
this we followed until we arrived at a plantation. Frank 
stood guard while I went forward to reconnoitre. I crept 
up to the house and was looking around the corner when a 
negro girl came out, and, in a way peculiar to the race, called, 
" Joe ! Oh, Joe ! " I spoke to her ; she turned her head, 
screamed, and started on the run, but I followed. For about 
five minutes we had as pretty a " go as you please " race as 
one could wish to see. She was soon reinforced by a man 
with a club. I halted and he came to me. He said, " I know 
you ; you are a Yankee, and have escaped from the camp." 
I informed him that he was right, and that I wanted to be 
directed to the main road. " All right," he said, " I will help 
you, but the first thing you want is something to eat," and, 
joining the girl, went into the house and brought out meat, 
bread and a dish of butter-milk. Frank came up, and we 
ate the first square meal we had seen for months. We then 
formed in single file, the negro in the advance, and had gone 
but a short distance when we heard voices, so we went into 
the w^oods while he kept the road. It proved to be some of 
our old guard. They asked the negro who went into the 
woods. He answered, "Only some of the boys." They 
called us to come out, but we did not come, so they came in 



after us. We ran into the woods, but turned and came out 
again into the road. 

We had lost our guide before we had found our road, but 
continued on until we came to a broad avenue, and taking 
that walked as fast as possible for several hours, finally 
coming to a steep bank at the end. We afterwards learned 
that this was an abandoned railroad. We struck across the 
country and near daylight came upon a plantation. The negro 
quarters were some distance from the mansion, were about 
twenty in number and located in a square. We flanked the 
mansion and made our way cautiously to the negro quarters. 
Seeing a light in one of the cabins we crawled up, and look- 
ing through the cracks between the logs saw an old colored 
woman cooking. We rapped on the door and called, 
" Auntie ! " She started, asldng, " Who's thar ? " We answered 
that we were Yankees escaped from the prison. She opened 
the door, looked at us, then to the right and left, and said, 
" Come in." Going back to the fire she gave a bundle of rags 
that was lying before it a kick and out rolled a negro boy. 
She ordered him to tell her brother that two Yankees were at 
the house, and that he must come and take care of them. As 
soon as the boy had gone she invited us to eat. A hot corn 
dodger was on the hearth and she fried us a slice of bacon. 
We were tired and hungry, and appreciated her kindness. 
We must have walked thirty miles since leaving the prison, 
but found we were only five miles away and in the wrong 
direction. 

Very soon the boy returned with the brother. He was 
pleased to see us, shook hands and requested us to follow 
liim. He took us to his house, which was outside the square 
and better than the rest, but we remained at a safe distance 


until he went in and sent the children away, " because," said 
he, " children got heap of mouths, and would tell that you 
were here." We entered the house, and retired with our 
clothes on, in the bed just vacated by the man and wife. 

The plantation was owned by A. R. Taylor, and our good 
friend was the driver. He was very intelligent, having 
travelled all over the country with his master. He fully 
understood the danger he was in, and that if we were found 
in his house he would hang to the nearest tree, but he laughed 
at it and said, "Negroes were cheap now, and one would not 
be missed." We remained in bed all day, locked in our 
room, the man and his wife going away to work. We had a 
cold lunch, and before starting at night they made us a nice 
soup. 

We began our journey soon after sunset. The night was 
clear, the moon shining brightly. Our friend went with us 
to the Lexington turnpike, and giving us directions left us 
with many good wishes for our success. We tramped along 
without speaking, and made very good time. Our road lay 
through the town of Lexington, and we intended to go 
around it, but, like all other southern towns, it has no out- 
skirts, and before we knew it we were in its centre. Lights 
were burning in several houses, and we could hear talking, 
but pushed on and were safely through. On the other side 
we met a negro, who gave us valuable information. We 
walked all night. The country was so open that when day- 
light came we could find no place to hide, and as a last resort 
went into a barn, and covering ourselves with hay, were soon 
fast asleep ; but our slumbers were disturbed by an old man 
who came in to feed the cattle, and for their fodder took our 
covering. He had two dogs that jumped upon us. 


It looked as though our march to freedom was ended, but 
we drove away the dogs and Ijegan to talk with the old man. 
One of the many resolutions we had made at the beginning 
of our journey was that we would not ])e recaptured by any 
one man. We had seen two persons brought back by one 
man and did not think it appropriate. We had provided 
ourselves with stout clubs, and it looked as though we should 
have a chance to use them. Our friend said, " I can't hear a 
word," and thinking that he meant he would hear no expla- 
nation, we got in position to use our clubs. 

Frank said, "I guess he is deaf." Then we asked him by 
signs if he was; he answered, "Yes." We then told him 
that we were conscripts going to join General Bragg's army 
at Augusta, and had lost our way. Frank wore an old rebel 
jacket, and it would have been hard to tell by our clothing 
what we were. He appeared satisfied, however, and put us 
on the road. We had gone but a short distance when we 
heard the barking of dogs, and knowing if the bloodhounds 
were on our track it was good-by liberty, we entered a brook 
and travelled up stream several miles to throw them off the 
scent, then came out and lay in the woods until night. 

When it came time to resume our journey we could not 
move, as we were exhausted with our long tramp of the night 
before. We had eaten nothing since we left our colored 
friend at Taylor's plantation. We crawled out of the woods, 
and seeing a house, dragged ourselves to it. After waiting 
a while a negro came out, and we attracted his attention. 
He saw our helpless condition, and taking us to an old shed, 
made a bed on some husks and brought a quilt fi'om his house 
to cover us. He then went for our supper, but returned in 
haste with a piece of corn-])read and the information that 


we must leave at once, as the rebel patrol was at the house 
looking for us, having learned from the old man that we were 
in the woods. Tired and sore, we returned to the woods 
and remained until morning. 

Our plan was not to travel by day, but hunger drove us. 
We moved along cautiously, and suddenly came upon the 
cabins of "white trash." Dogs of all shapes and sizes wel- 
comed us, and a white woman came out with several children 
clinging to her dress. It was hard to tell which was the most 
afraid, the woman or we poor wanderers. We asked her if 
she could direct us to Boatride's plantation, one of the places 
Ben, the colored man whom we had met near Lexington, had 
mentioned. She "reckoned not," but we reckoned that we 
could find it and moved along. 

This danger proved to us that it was not safe to be seen 
by dajdight, and we returned to the shelter of the woods. 
While there a negro boy came along a path, and when oppo- 
site to us we spoke to him. At first he was frightened, but 
as we stood up he came to us and said, "You are Yankees." 
We asked him how he knew. He said, " I can tell hj the 
blue pants ; " some rebel soldiers had told him that Yankees 
wore blue clothes. We soon became well acquainted, and he 
promised to bring us food. He kept his word, and said 
at night he would come and take us to his mother's house. 
Just after dark he came with another Ijoy, and we were 
soon made welcome at his home. They were expecting 
us, and the table was set. Roast pork, sweet potatoes, hot 
biscuits, butter and plenty of new milk were on the bill of 
fare. What a feast I To sit in a chair at a table, and eat 
with a knife and fork like a human being ; we could hardly 
believe it was real. 


The family consisted of the mother, two daughters and this 
boy, besides a baby. The daughters were delighted with us 
and the mother named the baby for me, so (if he is alive) 
there is to-day in South Carolina a young man thirty-five 
years old bearing the name of John Gregory Bishop Adams, 
besides several others belonging to the boy's family. They 
also said we were the handsomest men they ever saw. Well, 
we must have been. I had on the clothes described in a 
previous chapter, was twenty-three years old, and, having 
never shaved, my face was covered with white hairs an inch 
long. Frank looked better, but did not wear his party 
clothes on this occasion. The old lady said master told 
them not to go out after dark because the Yankees would 
catch them, but wondered what he would say to see them 
now. They were owned by a Dr. Vose, and I should judge 
he was a kind master. We were not anxious to leave our 
good friends, but felt that we must be on our way, so we 
bade them good-by, and, guided by the boy, began our 
night's march. He went with us about two miles and gave 
us in charge of a man who travelled with us until nearly 
morning, then hid us in a barn on the plantation of a Mr. 
Williams. 

The next day was Sunday, and we were on exhibition from 
morning until night. We were stowed away in the loft, 
and our first visitor was a man with our breakfast. After 
that a constant line of white eyes could be seen in the dark- 
ness as the procession filed past. The usual salutation was, 
" Hello, boss ! how has you been ? " Then followed all sorts 
of questions. One asked if we toted ambitions (meaning 
arms) . We told him that we had some ambitions left. He 
said that was good, because we might have to use it. They 


asked if we belonged to Mr. Grant's or Mr. Sherman's com- 
pany ; but while they were ignorant of many things, they 
were all loyal and ready to do anything for us. 

We left the barn at night and ate supper in the field. A 
negro guided us several miles, then gave us in charge of two 
others, who promised to remain with us until morning. 
With the negroes as guides we seldom travelled in the road, 
for they knew all the short cuts. Our new acquaintances 
were not very sharp, as they had had a hard master, but 
they rejoiced that the Yankees had killed him. The face of 
one looked like a skimmer, for his master had fired a charo;e 
of shot into it. They were very superstitious. Coming to 
a fence, Frank and I were getting over in diflerent places, 
when they pulled us down, and said all must get over in one 
place, because there was luck in it. Here we saw a man 
crossing a field with a lantern. Calling their attention to it 
they said it was not a man, but a Jack-o-lantern going to the 
graveyard. When we arrived at the main road our guides 
left us, as they had never been so far from home before. We 
were glad to part with them, yet they did the best they could. 

Following the Pike road until daybreak, we came to a 
plantation that answered the description Ben had given us of 
Boatride's. He said that his brother Dick lived there and 
would help us. We made our way to a cabin, called up a 
colored man, and asked him if his name was Dick. He didn't 
know, didn't know Ben, didn't know anything that he pro- 
posed to tell, but at last light broke through the clouds. We 
found he knew enough, only feared to trust us. He said that 
colored people had to be very careful, as all kinds of ways 
were used to trap them. He hid us in the barn. The col- 
ored women came in, and although they did not speak to us, 

left food in abundance where we could get it. The old mas- 
ter came in twice, but not having been introduced we held 
our peace. 

At night Dick came for us and took us to his house. He 
had invited his friends, and the house was full. They sang to 
us, and, besides giving us a nice supper, they packed a hav- 
ersack with bread and meat for us to take. Beino; on the 
main road, we thought it best not to take a guide, but found 
travelling quite difficult, as the road was lined with refugees 
fleeing from Augusta, and we often had to flank them, which 
made our progress slow. 

Morning found us about fifteen miles from Augusta. We 
hunted up a negro, and using Dick's name for reference, he 
put us into the second story of a barn. We climbed up on 
a plank which he removed so no one could get at us, neither 
could we get out. Through the cracks of the barn we could 
see men, single and in companies, going to join General 
Bragg's army at Augusta. The negro said that Sherman was 
expected there, and our plan was to get as near as possible, . 
wait until the city was taken, then enter. One night more 
and we would be within a few miles of our destination. 

When it became dark our man put up the plank and we 
came down. We made about ten miles that night. The set- 
tlements were growing thicker and the roads and woods were 
full of refugees. We halted at a cabin where they were hav- 
ing a first-class minstrel show. The negroes were seated in 
a circle around the fireplace and the old banjo was a-ringing. 
We walked into the room. The music ceased, and they 
thought the d — 1 had come. We explained our position 
and asked them to care for us. While they were anxious to 
do so, they could not make up their minds where would be a 


safe place. It was suggested that they hide us in the cabin. 
This had two rooms, but the master had locked the door of 
one and taken the key. The partitions did not run to the 
roof. One of the boys climbed up and pulled up a board so 
that we could drop down into the other room. Making a lad- 
der out of stools and negroes, we ascended, then dropped. 
We found a bed in the room, and a hole in the bottom of the 
door, made for cats to pass in and out ; this was used as a 
dinner hole, the negroes passing rations through it. We 
awoke in the morning much refreshed, but when I looked at 
Frank I was startled. He was as black as a negro, and he 
broke out laughing when he saw me. In reaching our room 
we had passed through several years' collection of soo't and 
had taken some with us, and, not having a key to the bath- 
room, were forced to keep darh all day. 

The negro came at night and unlocked the door, having 
obtained the key through the house servant. They said, 
"We are going to take you to see a white man." We 
answered, "Oh, no ! we take no stock in white men." But 
they replied, "He is one of you'ns. We talked with him 
to-day, asked him if he w^ould like to see a Yankee, and he 
said he reckoned he would. Then we told him we had two 
hid, and he asked us to bring you to his house." We had 
the most perfect confidence in the negroes, and followed them 
to a house where we found a true Union man. His name was 
L. H. Packard, from Kent's Hill, Maine. He prepared sup- 
per and made us feel at home. Mr. Packard had lived in 
the south eight years, had been married, but his wife was 
dead, leaving two little girls, one five, the other seven years 
of age. His life had not been a happy one since the war, as 
he was resolved not to enter the rebel army. He had worked 


in a flour-mill and in several other industries, and was now 
making shoes for the rebels. He gave me the address of his 
sister in Maine, and I promised to write to her if I lived to 
return home. 

He could give us no information in regard to Sherman's 
army. Like ourselves, he had expected they would come to 
Augusta, but they had not, and he feared they had gone 
toward the sea. We remained with him several hours, and 
made his heart glad by the news we brought from God's 
country. When we parted he gave us forty dollars in con- 
federate money, and I gave him a little badge of the 2d corps. 
He took us to the trundle-bed where his little girls were sleep- 
ing. They awoke and kissed us good-by. The name of the 
sister in Maine was Mrs. H. H. Bulen. As soon as I reached 
home I wrote to her, sending my photograph. 

In the month of October, 1889, two ladies called on me at 
the State House ; one was Mrs. Bulen, the other her brother's 
child, the younger of the two whom I saw twenty-five years 
before in a trundle-bed in South Carolina. My good friend 
Packard died a few years ago in this State, having returned 
north soon after the war. His daughter remembered seeing 
us that night, and also remembered the corps badge which 
her sister, who resides in Philadelphia, had. 

Our friend Packard sent one of the negroes with us as 
guide, armed with an old-fashioned horse pistol. He was 
apparently very brave, would march in advance of us, and 
say, " I'd like to see anybody take you'ns now ; " but hearing 
the least noise, would forget that he was our protector and 
fall back in our rear. He was the only armed guide we had 
on our journey, and our experience with him was such that 
we did not care for more. 


We were in doubt what to do, as Sherman, not coming to 
Augusta, had forced us to change our plans, but conckided 
we had better cross the Savannah River and try to strike 
him in Georgia. Our guide turned us over to another, who 
advised us to remain with him until the next night, which 
we did. 

After supper, in company with the negro, we started for 
the river. He knew all the short cuts through the swamps, 
also the location of creeks, and coming to one he would 
cross on a log, but we, not knowing in the darkness where 
to step next, would walk in. Then he would turn around 
and say "Creek thar, boss," a fact we had already learned. 
In the distance we heard a strange noise, which grew louder 
as we walked along. We asked what it was, and were 
informed that it was the shouters ; that they were having a 
shouting meeting on the plantation where we were going. 
Arriving at the plantation, we found it a singular village. 
The houses were set on posts some eight feet from the 
ground, as the river overflows in some seasons of the year. 
No white people were there, as it was owned by the man 
who owned and lived at the place where we found Mr. 
Packard, and this swamp plantation was in charge of the 
driver named Isaac. Our friend called him out, told him 
who we were, and what we wanted ; he said, " Come right 
in," and turning to the meeting, of which he was in charge, 
said, "Meeting dismissed without prayer." All gathered 
around us. We sat up until morning, talking of the north 
and of freedom, — subjects they were anxious to hear about, 
— and they asked many intelligent questions. 

The past few days my feet had been bare, — my old boots 
not being able to stand the rough service required of them. 

An old colored woman kept her eyes on my feet, and Ijegan 
to untie her shoes ; taking them oft', she came to me and 
said, "Honey, take these shoes." "Oh, no," I replied, 
" you will not get another pair, and a cold winter is coming." 
"No matter if I don't," she said, "ain't you suff*ering all this 
for me, and hadn't I ought to go without shoes if they will 
help you get home ? " and she forced me to take them. They 
were rudely made, the uppers being untanned and sewed 
with rawhide, while the bottoms were pegged on with home- 
made pegs, but they did me good service, and I wore them 
inside the Union lines three months later. Another gave me 
a pair of socks, and, washing my bleeding feet, I was once 
more comfortable. 

We could find no trace of Sherman's army, and remained 
with Isaac two days. We slept in the barn, and were well 
supplied with food ; we also had plenty of peanuts, as they 
grew on this plantation, and were called "ground peas." At 
night the negroes held another meeting, and at their request I 
read the Bible to them. My scripture lesson was the third 
chapter of John. They asked me to pray, but I excused 
myself. I never attended a meeting where all were so ear- 
nest. The singing was grand. They sang one song where 
all shake hands, and the words were, "My brother, ain't you 
mighty glad you're going to leave this sinful army," etc. They 
kept time with their feet and hands, closed their eyes, and 
swayed from side to side as they sang. 

The next day we decided that it was ]:»est to cross the 
river. The rebels had cut holes in all the boats, and sunk 
them ; but the negroes were sharp, and had taken them up, 
repaired them and sunk them again, so all they had to do was 
turn the water out and they were as good as new. 


"VYe enibarked just as night was closing in, a negro taking 
the paddle. The entire inhabitants followed us to the shore 
and knelt in prayer for our success ; no cheers were given, 
]:)ut with hats, aprons and bandannas, they waved their fare- 
wells. They remained until they saw us safely landed on the 
Georgia shore, and we felt that we had parted with dear 
friends. Our boatman secreted his boat and guided us to the 
turnpike. 

We travelled without interruption for about two hours. 
The moon was very bright, and all was quiet save the sound 
of our own footsteps. We had just crossed a bridge when 
we heard horsemen approaching, so dropped by the roadside, 
under the shadow of a tree. We did not dare breathe as the 
five rebel cavalrymen rode past. Eenewing our journey, we 
soon saw a fire by the roadside, and creeping up to it saw a 
rebel picket on duty, his three comrades sleeping by the fire. 

Thinking it dangerous to go on, we turned up a lane and 
found a negro, who secreted us. From him we learned that 
the roads were all picketed, and that the mounted patrols 
were constantly riding up and down. Danger was on every 
hand, but we still had faith. We remained with the neg-ro 
through the day, and at night started again ; we could not 
travel in the road, as the pickets were very thick, but made 
our way slowly through the w^oods. Arriving at a planta- 
tion, we found the negroes much excited. One of the girls 
started for the mansion, saying she was going to tell master. 
We caught her and told her she must take care of us, but she 
would not talk, and turned back to the house, where all the 
colored people were gathered. We followed and walked in. 
I was the spokesman and told our story. They asked if we 
came through the yard. We said we did ; they could not 

see how we got through, as ten rebel cavahymen were sleep- 
ing on the piazza. l\^ile we were talking a white woman 
appeared. She was quite good-looking, had long, curly hair, 
and her dress was clean and becoming. She said, "I will 
take care of you ; " we thanked her, but said we didn't care 
to trust a white woman. This pleased the negroes, as she 
was a slave and a field-hand besides. 

The story she told us the next day was a sad one. The 
overseer of the plantation was a brute, but had charge of all 
the slaves. She was employed in the house and he desired 
to make her his mistress, but she repelled his advances and 
was severely whipped ; again he urged her, with no better 
results. He then drove her to the swamps to work, and she 
was employed carrying heavy logs on her shoulders. This 
was one of the damnable features of slavery. Her brother, 
named Pat, was the driver. (I have several times used the 
word driver^ and some may not understand its meaning. The 
driver is an intelligent, faithful slave, selected by the over- 
seer as foreman. He turns out the slaves in the morning by 
blowing a horn, gives them their tasks, and has charge of 
them in the field.) She took us to his house, which was 
better than the rest, and we slept in the room with Pat and 
his wife. 

We were awakened in the morning by the firing of cannon, 
and the negroes came rushing in with the news that Sherman 
was coming. The firing grew nearer and nearer, musketry 
could be plainly heard, and through the cracks in the logs of 
the house we could see smoke where barns were burning. 
The negroes grew more and more excited and reported often. 
" They are coming, boss, they are coming. Massa Sherman's 
company will soon be here ! They done burn old Sam Jones's 


barn, and they are fighting down by the creek ; fo' night you 
will be with them." 

Our hearts beat hard and fast. Wheeler's rebel cavalry 
were forming, and after advancing, fell back. We were sure 
that night would find us safe under the old flag. We con- 
gratulated ourselves on our good judgment, talked of the 
foolishness of those who had tried to escape through the 
mountains, when our plan was so much easier, and concluded 
that of all the men who had escaped we were a little the 
smartest. 

Night came on. The negroes said they would not cross 
the creek until after dark, and we waited. All night these 
faithful negroes kept watch for us, and in the morning, with 
long, sad faces, reported that "Massa Sherman had done 
gone down the river." We could not follow by day, but 
started quite early in the evening. We had gone but a short 
distance when we struck a company of cavalry camped on 
the roadside. We entered the swamp to flank them, but it 
was so dark that we lost our way, and after travelling all 
night, tearing our clothes and scratching our faces and hands, 
we came out where we entered, and again passed the day at 
Pat's house. We were rather discouraged, and the colored 
people felt about as badly as we did, yet did all they could 
to cheer us up. Our friend, the white slave, made us gin- 
gerbread and biscuit to take with us, and said many com- 
forting words. 

With a firm resolution to get through the lines we began 
our journey. It was a dark, rainy night, and we had to 
guess our route. We came to a place where the road 
forked. Frank was sure he knew the road we ought to take, 
and I was just as confident that he was wrong. We scolded 


each other for an hour, not daring to speak above a whisper. 
These cat-fights occurred nearly every night, and we made 
up in the daytime. One not in our place might think it 
strange that we should lose our temper, but we were strained 
up to the highest point, and were nervous and irritable. It 
was the same with nearly all who escajoed. I have known 
two men who were fast friends who were never the same 
after they were recaptured. Not so with Frank and I. He 
was such a dear, good fellow that he gave in to me nearly 
every time. 

Finding we were on the wrong road we struck across the 
country and came upon a nice cabin near a large house. 
"We were listening under the window, and could hear the 
hum of a spinning-wheel. As we stood there a woman 
opened the shutter and, as the day was just breaking, she 
saw us. We entered the house and found a yellow man in 
bed. He said, "Go away from here." We told him who 
we were, but he would do nothing for us. We had our 
clubs, were in good fighting condition and holding them 
over him made him swear that he would not tell he had seen 
us. The woman was friendly and gave us directions how to 
reach the creek, but we dare not take the road, fearing the 
yellow fellow would forget his promise. This was the first 
instance where a man with a drop of negro blood in his 
veins had refused to help us. We turned into the woods, 
but they were so thin that we were forced to cut down small 
pine trees and stick them in the ground where we lay down. 
It was so cold we could not sleep, and as we dare not travel 
through this open country, we kept alive by rolling over and 
over on the oround. Besides beino; cold we suflered for 
food, as we had eaten nothing since the previous day. We 


could endure it no longer, and late in the afternoon resumed 
our tramp. Calling at a cabin, a negro baked the last morsel 
of meal he had in the house for us, and after we had eaten it, 
directed us to the creek. Here we found a new trouble. 
Kilpatrick's cavalry had burned the bridge, and we had " one 
wide river to cross." 

We made a raft out of pieces of plank, and went over all 
right. Frank was on the forward end of the raft ; as we 
reached the opposite bank he caught a grape-vine and swung 
himself on shore. He left the raft and so did I, the only 
difference being that he was safe on land while I went into 
the water and came up under the raft. He fished me out, 
and with my clothes nearly frozen on me we continued our 
journey. Arriving at an old mill we called up the miUer. 
He let us in, but was afraid to keep us, as the rebel pickets 
were very near, and liable to come there at any time, so we 
must keep in the woods. I was too wet to lie down, so we 
ran along in the edge of the woods. We saw places where 
Sherman's army had camped only the day before, and the 
fires were still smokino;. 

As we were running along we saw a negro coming towards 
us on horseback. Driven by hunger, we hailed him and 
asked for food. He said he was going to mill, but would 
return in aljout an hour and would take us to a place where 
he could feed us. 

We waited until he returned, when he told us to keep him 
in sight and follow along in the woods ; we had gone only a 
short distance when he ])egan to whoop and put his horse into 
a gallop. What was up we could not make out until, look- 
ing towards a shanty, we saw a rebel soldier walking towards 
us on crutches. He came near and said, "Come out, boys. 


and have a talk." We looked at each other, then at the 
Johnnie Reb. There were two of us with two clubs, and, so 
far as we could see, only one rebel, and he a cripple ; so we 
came out. The negro came riding back, and we asked Mm 
what it meant. He looked frightened, but said, " I know this 
man ; his father raised me. He fought, but he never wanted 
to fought." The rebel said it was not safe to stay there, but 
designated a place where he could meet us ; he mounted the 
horse behind the negro, and we went through the woods. 

Arriving at the place designated, we saw our Johnnie 
jumping and coming all sorts of gymnastic performances. 
We demanded an explanation ; he said, " I am as sound a 
man as there is in the Confederacy. I was slightly wounded 
at Atlanta, and was sent to guard your boys at Anderson- 
ville. I saw them starved to death and swore that if ever 
I could help one get away I would. Now is my chance, 
and I'll be dog-goned if I don't do it." He was a typical 
rebel in every respect, a regular Georgia cracker ; hair long, 
high cheek bones, tall and slim, but he talked well and 
appeared earnest. After the negro had turned out the horse 
he came to us and he and the rebel talked over the situation. 
The trouble was what to do with us now we were with them. 
Johnnie suggested taking us home ; the negro said it would 
not do, as his wife's sister would betray us ; but Enos (his 
name was Enos Sapp) said the Yankees had her husband a 
prisoner and he reckoned she would be mighty glad if some 
one would help him. They talked over all the chances of 
the rebels finding us. We listened with much interest. 

At last Enos said, " Gentlemen, I am going to take you to 
my house ; it may make a row, but I am boss of my own 
ranch." Being in his hands, we could do nothing but go 


with liirn. The house was only a short distance off. Enos 
walked on his crutches. He said if the war lasted thirtj^ 
years he should use them until the end. When we arrived 
we found two log houses ; in one were two women and five 
children ; the other was the servants' quarters. Poor as our 
friend was he owned slaves ; one, the man we had seen in 
the woods; the other, the man's mother, a poor broken- 
down old woman. He introduced us to the women as two 
friends of his. They sat in the corner of the fire-place smok- 
ing corn-cob pipes, and said very little to us, not because 
they were displeased \mi because it would require an effort 
to talk. We made ourselves at home. One of the women 
asked me if I would have a smoke. As I had little chance 
to indulge in my favorite habit I gladly accepted her offer. 
She took the pipe out of her mouth and handed it to me. 
That broke the ice ; we talked upon various subjects, mostly 
of war. Enos's \diQ said the Yanks used them better than 
their own men, as the rebels took her best horse and the 
Yanks left the old one. They didn't seem to know or care 
what army we belonged to. Supper was announced and we 
went outside to the other house. I suppose this was the 
dining hall. The table was set, but there was not a whole 
plate on it or two pieces alike. The old colored woman 
waited on the table, poured the tea and passed the food. 

Our host was a religious man and asked a blessing at the 
table, but he had a hard time carving the pork and remarked 
that it was tough as h— . After the vesper meal we returned 
to the mansion. The pipes were the first thing, and as they 
all wanted to smoke, they fixed up a new one for me. Enos 
then told them who we were, and we saw indications of fear 
on their faces. The sister, whose husband was in a Yankee 

prison, asked if we knew Sam. We could not recall him, 
but without doubt had met him, and assured her that wher- 
ever Sam was, if in a Union prison he had enough to eat, a 
good bed and all the comforts of life, more than he would 
have at home. They questioned us about our Yankee 
women. They said they had heard that they wore good 
clothes and had jewelry ; we told them they had been rightly 
informed, and they said, "Why, you all have no slaves ; where 
do they get them ? " Our answer was that our women 
worked. We told them of the mills in Lowell and Law- 
rence, of the shoe shops in Lynn, and other places where 
women were employed. "Well," they said, "we would like 
nice dresses and jewelry, but we could not work ; no woman 
could be a lady and work." So those poor deluded creatures 
were happy in thinking they were ladies, while they wore 
dirty homespun dresses, ate hog and corn-bread, and smoked 
pipes in the chimney corner. 

When it came Ijedtime Frank and I were puzzled what 
to do. The rain came down in torrents and we had been so 
wet and cold, besides being very tired, we thought it best 
to remain over night, but there were only two beds in 
the room and eight people for them ; where did we come 
in? One of the women got up and from under one of 
the beds brought out an old quilt and a blanket ; she said 
we could make a " shake-down " before the fire. We were 
glad of that, for we had had no chance to skirmish since 
we started, and there 7vere too many of us for a bed. The 
women went behind a curtain that was let down in front 
of the beds, undressed the children, tucked two in one 
bed and three in the other ; the man and ^vdfe slept with 
two, the sister with three. 


Both of us could not sleep at once, so we divided the watch ; 
neither slept much. After they thought we were asleep the 
wife said to Enos, "I don't like this ; I feels sort of jubus. 
If my uncle knew these men were here they would hang you 
before morning." "Don't care a d — n," said Enos ; "I said 
that I would help them and I shall do it ; what did they all 
do for you when I was fighting? Not a thing; I tell you 
this is a rich man's war and a poor man's fight. I have got 
my eyes open." After that we felt safe and went to sleep. 
We turned out the next morning feeling much refreshed, 
but the rain continued to fall and we could not travel, 
although every hour was precious to us. 

Frank made the women happy. They had some old shoes 
that were ripped, and being a good cobbler, he repaired 
them. We said if we had some stock we would make them 
new ones, and they wanted us to wait until they got the 
stock. It rained hard when night came, but we must be on 
the road, and the negro was sent with us. We clasped the 
hand of Enos, gave him our address, and told him if we could 
ever be of service to him not to fail to call. I have never 
heard from him since, but remember him kindly as one of 
the few rebels who gave me a kind word and treated me like 
a human being. 

We travelled all night. Everything indicated that the 
army had just passed over the ground, — fences were gone, 
barns had been burned, there was no crowing of the cock in 
the morning and the grunting hog was a thing of the past. 
At daylight, wet to the skin, we halted at a negro cabin. He 
welcomed us, but, like everything else, had been "cleaned 
out." He was old and the only one left on the plantation, 
all the rest having gone with "Massa Sherman." Our army 


had passed the day before, and he was delighted with them ; 
said they had bands just like the circuses and guns that they 
loaded in the morning and fired all day. 

After drying our clothes l^efore the fire and cooking an 
ash-cake he took us to a Imrn across the road and covered us 
with husks. Sherman was but ten miles away, and we felt 
confident that this was our last day in the rebel lines. We 
planned to leave the road and travel through the fields. If 
the pickets halted us, we were to run and let them fire. We 
believed that they could not hit us in the darkness, and that 
the firing would alarm our pickets, who would protect us. 





