
 

We had now quite a respectable regiment, numbering two 
field, ten line officers, and about three hundred and fifty men. 
We broke camp the 2d of May, were ordered to move, and 
soon found ourselves crossing the river to engage in the Bat- 
tle of the Wilderness, before W'C realized it being in line of 
battle moving forward. Our first order was to deploy as skir- 
mishers and let the line which was being hotly pressed pass 
in rear to receive a fresh supply of ammunition, while we 
held the line. 

I had al)out twenty men in my command. We advanced 
as ordered, but soon received a fire from our flank and rear, 
and found that the reljels had broken our lines. I gave the 
order "By the right flank, double quick," and we went 
quicker than that. We dodged behind trees as we ran, and 
the rebels were so near that in looking back I saw them cap- 
ture Thompson of Company B ; with the exception of one 
other, wounded, all escaped ; and the boys thought me a 
safe man to follow. We rejoined the regiment, and were 
ordered in again. We fought all day. Sometimes the reb- 
els drove us, sometimes we drove them. The woods were so 
thick it was hard to tell friend from foe. The dead and 
wounded of both armies were strewn all through the woods, 
which caught fire. It was a terril)le sight. We knew M^here 



88  

the poor fellows were, but could not reach them, and the air 
was suffocating with the smell of burning human flesh. 

None knew the result of the battle. We changed front the 
next day, and continued the light. Night came on ; it was 
so dark you could not see a rod before you, but we were 
ordered to hold our position in the advanced line until 
recalled. We remained until midnight, then as it grew a lit- 
tle lighter, the moon having broken through the clouds, 
Colonel Kice went to the right and found we were not con- 
nected with any other regiment. At the left he found the 
same. The officers held a consultation ; all agreed that we 
should obey orders, but should we allow the regiment to be 
captured because some one had made a mistake? We con- 
cluded to fall back until we connected with something, and 
after a while struck a German brigade. The Dutch com- 
mander undertook to drive us back, but w^e knew our busi- 
ness, and when Colonel Rice found our brigade commander, 
he was informed that an aid had been sent to recall us sev- 
eral hours before, and in the darkness must have passed our 
regiment without seeino; us. The conversation was on the 
result of the battle. Most of us thought it was another 
Chancellorsville, and that the next day we should recross the 
river ; but when the order came, " By the left flank, march ! " 
we found that Grant was not made that way, and we must 
continue the fight. 

Our loss was not very heavy in the Wilderness. We had 
several wounded and captured, but only three killed. Among 
the wounded the first day was Color-Sergeant Ben Falls, 
struck in the leg, and being in command of the color com- 
pany I sent him to the rear. The following day he reported 
back, and I asked why he did not stay. "Oh," he said. 



" some fool will get hold of the color and lose it. I guess I 
had better stand by." 

We marched to Williams's Tavern, where we went into 
line of battle and threw up works. From this time on we 
were engaged every day. The 8th, we had a lively brush 
at Todd's Tavern, and drove the rebels a mile ; the 9th, 
crossed Po River ; the 10th, recrossed and engaged the 
enemy at Laurel Hill. We found them strongly intrenched 
and a charge was ordered. The opinion of every officer and 
man was that we could not dislodge them, as we must charge 
a long distance over an open field. General Barlow was to 
lead and the 19th was to be the directino; battalion. The 
order to our division was, "Follow the colors of the 19th." 
With cheers for General Barlow we advanced over the crest 
of the hill, the rebels opening on us with a terrible fire. 
Grape and cannister ploughed through our ranks. Both 
color-bearers were shot down, and for a moment our line 
melted away ; but other hands grasped the colors, and we 
renewed the charge, only to be again repulsed. No army on 
earth could capture the works with such odds against it, but 
we charged once more, then gave it up. 

Among the first to go down was Color-Sergeant Ben Falls. 
He was in advance of me, and as he fell he said, "John, your 
old uncle has got his quietus this time." I could not stop to 
reply then, but in the lull of the battle went to him, and 
found that he was shot through the body ; he was carried to 
the rear, and died the next day. No man in the ranks of 
the Union army rendered better service than Benj. F. Falls. 
Always ready for duty, ever cheerful, his influence for good 
extended through the regiment. Another to fall that day 
was Sergt. William H. Ross. Until this campaign he had 



90  

been detailed at the headquarters of the division quartermas- 
ter, and one would think he was making up for lost time. 
From the day we entered the Wilderness until he gave up 
his life he was conspicuous for his bravery. Corp. George 
E. Breed of Company C, a brave little fellow, not much 
larger than his knapsack, was serving his second enlistment, 
and was not twenty years old when killed. Several others 
were killed, besides many wounded. 

We remained here until the night of the 11th, when men 
were detailed to keep up the skirmish firing while the brigade 
was withdrawn. It was a dark, dreary night, and we fell 
over stumps and fallen trees as we moved to the left. At 
four o'clock on the morning of the 12th we formed in line. 
Our orders were to give commands in whispers, have dippers 
so hung that they would not rattle against bayonets, and 
move forward. We were soon in front of the rebel works, 
which were protected by al)atis. We tore these aside and 
passed on. One regiment, forgetting the orders, gave a 
cheer, and the re])els were aroused, yet over the works we 
went, and the fiercest hand-to-hand fight of the war ensued. 
We captured Gen. Bushrod Johnson and his entire division, 
including twenty-two pieces of artillery and seventeen stands 
of colors. 

The woods were so thick that in advancing our lines 
became broken. When we reached a clearing the only offi- 
cers in sight were Colonel Rice, Lieutenant Thompson and 
myself. "Where are the colors?" said Colonel Rice. We 
could not answer the question. At that moment we saw sev- 
eral hundred rebels running back to their lines. Colonel 
Rice said, " I see a Massachusetts color and will go after it. 
You and Lieutenant Thompson try to capture those rebels." 




Hastily gathering men from nearly every regiment in the 
corps we threw forward a skirmish line and captured nearly 
four hundred prisoners. After turning them over to the 
provost guard we returned to the line, found the colors, but 
the colonel was not there, and the rest of the day we fought 
where we could get a chance. As I was standing behind the 
works, waiting for something to do, Capt. Harry Hale, who 
was serving on General Webb's staff, rode up and said, " We 
want to get two guns that the rebels have abandoned, which 
unless we bring them in, will be retaken. Can't you get 
them ? " Calling to the mob (there was no organization of 
regiments at that moment), " Come on, boys," we rushed out 
and brought them in. Turning them on the rebels, we loaded 
them with everything we could find, — ammunition that did 
not fit, old musket barrels, etc., — ])ut not knowing how to 
work the guns we were in about as much danger as the 
rebels. 

While engaged here the rebels had recaptured a small part 
of their works on our right, and we were ordered to move to 
that point. Collecting as many men of the regiment as we 
could find, we marched by the flank to what has since been 
known as the " Bloody Angle ; " here we found hot work. 
While we were firing the rebels ran up a white flag, and we 
advanced to receive their surrender, but as soon as we were 
over the brow of the little hill that had protected us, they 
fired a volley, killing several of our men. From that time 
until dark the cry was "No quarter." Part of the time we 
were on one side of the works and they on the other, each 
trying to fire over. I saw Ed. Fletcher of Company C shoot 
a man who was trying to get a shot at one of our boys, and 
was so near that Fletcher's musket was covered with l)lood. 



92  

We continued to iire until our ammunition was exhausted, 
then were relieved by men of the 6th corps. Just as long as 
we could see a man the firing continued. We slept on the 
field, ready to renew the battle in the morning, and at day- 
light waited for the rebels to open. Not a shot was fired and 
we advanced. What a sight met our eyes as we went over 
the works ! Rebels lay four and five deep in the trenches. 
Many were alive but unable to move, as the dead were piled 
on top of them. Our better natures were aroused. We laid 
out the dead for burial, cared for the wounded, then with- 
drew to the rear to reorganize our regiments. 

While resting in the rear a man from the 6th corps came 
to me and said, " Is this the 19th Massachusetts ? " I answered, 
" Yes." "Have you a Lieutenant Adams in your regiment?" 
I again made the same reply. " Well, he is dead. He lies 
just over the little hill. Here is his revolver case that I took 
from him." I then understood what he meant. A few days 
before, finding that it was impossible to carry my revolver 
on account of my wounds, I had given it to Lieut. Johnnie 
Ferris, and he must have been the one whom the man had 
found. We had been fighting so hard that we had no time 
to think of each other, and I then remembered that I had not 
seen Ferris since we charged on the morning of the previous 
day. I went with the man and found Johnnie, shot through 
the head, in front of the rebel Avorks. He had fallen over a 
tree that the rebels had cut down, and must have been killed 
as we rushed through the abatis. His death was a se^^ere loss 
to the regiment. He had been promoted from the ranks for 
good conduct ; was loved by the ofiicers and worshipped by 
the men. With sad hearts Ave laid him to rest near where he 
fell. We could not find Colonel Rice and feared he must be 




dead on the field, but after searching and not finding his 
body, concluded he must have been captured with some of 
our men when the rebels made the dash on our right flank. 
This was true. Colonel Rice was captured, but escaped, and 
rejoined the regiment in August. 

One little incident occurring in the fight at the "Bloody 
Angle," although not connected with the regiment, is worthy 
of mention. When we were relieved by the 6tli corps the 
6th Wisconsin was in our front. One of their men was an 
Indian. He would crawl up near the rebel line, wait until 
they fired, then fire and drag himself back. He could hardly 
be seen above the ground. I became much interested in his 
mode of fighting, and his face was impressed upon my mind. 
One day in 1867, while working in a shoe factory at Lynn, 
an Indian came into the place selling l)askets. The moment 
I saw him I thought his countenance was familiar and won- 
dered where I had seen him before. It came to me that he 
was the Spottsylvania Indian. I asked if he was in the 
army, and he replied, "Yes, 6th Wisconsin." Then I was 
sure he was the man. We talked over the battle and became 
good fi'iends. He was a very bright fellow, a member of 
the Masonic brotherhood, but he said, " East no place for 
Indian," and I assisted him to return west. 

We were under fire nearly all the time, marching from 
right to left, and on the 17th occupied the works taken on 
the 12th. While here we learned that Lieut. Moses Shack- 
ley, who was a first sergeant in the 59th Massachusetts, 
had Ijeen killed the day Ijefore. The 18th we fought all 
day, charged twice on the enemies" works, and lost several 
men. On the 21st occurred one of the sad events of the 
year. 



John D. Starbird of Company K was one of the three 
deserters who returned with the regiment. The charges 
against him had been placed on file on condition that he 
serve ftiithfully to the end of the war. While he had prom- 
ised to do tliis, he did not intend to, and was only kept in 
battle at the Wilderness by fear of death from the oflicers. 
On the 18th he deserted while under fire, was captured the 
19th, tried by drum-head court-martial the 20th, and ordered 
to be shot at 7 a.m. on the 21st. Early in the morning of 
that day Adjutant Curtis came to me and said, " Jack, you 
are detailed to take charge of the shooting of Starbird." I 
was not pleased with the order, and Captain Mumford, who 
was ever ready to do a kind act for a friend, exchanged duty 
with me, I going on picket for him. The detail consisted 
of eight men from our regiment. Their muskets were loaded 
by Captain Mumford, seven with ball cartridges, one with a 
blank. Starbird was seated on his coffin, blindfolded. The 
order was given to fire. Six shots struck him near the 
heart ; the other musket hung fire, and the ball entered his 
leg. He died at once. 

Those who read this, and do not understand the situation 
at the time, may think the killing of Starbird unjust and 
cruel, but it was not. At that time there were in the ranks 
of every regiment, men who had no interest in the cause. 
They had enlisted for the bounty, and did not intend to 
render any service. They not only shirked duty, but their 
acts and conversation were demoralizing good men. The 
shooting of Starbird changed all this. Men who had strag- 
gled and kept out of battle now were in the ranks, and the 
result to our corps alone was as good as if we had been 
re-enforced by a full regiment. 





CELiPTER XI. 


From the 21st to the 24th of May we were engaged in 
skirmishing, picket fighting, with now and then a charge. 
On the morning of the 24th we crossed the North Anna 
River, and about noon advanced in line, our regiment being 
on the left of Smith's division. Finding the rebels strongly 
intrenched on the edge of the woods, we charged across an 
open field and drove them out. It was one of the bravest 
acts of the war, but it counted for nothing. As soon as we 
captured the works we sent word back that we must be rein- 
forced or we could not hold them ; but no one in the rear 
seemed to be in a hurry. We could hear the rebels reorgan- 
izing their men, and knew that we should be unable to resist 
the charge, as we were only a skirmish line. I lay on the 
works by the side of Captain Hincks. Both of us had mus- 
kets, and resolved to make the best fight possible. The 
rebels came in over the works at our left, at the same time 
advancing in front. We waited until the skirmish line came 
so near that we could get a good shot. Captain Hincks said, 
"What is it. Jack; Richmond or legs?" I said, "Legs." 
We covered our man, fired and fell back. The rebels came 
on in force ; we retreated until we came to a brook, and 
standing in the water used the bank for a breast-work, and 
held them until re-enforcements came up. A more angry 
set of men than we were never wore Union blue. We had 



96  

done a ])rilliant thing, had captured and held a line of works 
for two hours against heavy odds, and could have been sup- 
ported in fifteen minutes as well as not. 

As we were falling back after our relief had advanced, and 
were safe in the rear, a staff officer rode up and swinging his 
sword said, "Go back, you cowards, go back." We requested 
him to go where he would require the constant use of a fan, 
— and kept on. We reorganized our companies and were 
ordered on picket for the night. We were so disgusted that 
we paid little attention to duty, but came to our senses the 
next morning upon finding we were all there was between 
our army and the rebels. About day-break I heard the 
picket cry, " Halt ! who comes there ? " and going to his post 
found he had a negro in waiting. The darkey had a letter 
from the rebel commander ; it read : " Send Cora to Richey." 
I did not understand it and sent it to headquarters. 

The boy was very intelligent, l)ut he was a strange-look- 
ing mortal ; had not as much clothing on as the prodigal son 
wore home from his excursion, but he could sing and dance, 
besides knowing all al)out the rebel army. Orders came to 
send him to headquarters of the division, and I reluctantly 
parted with G..AVashington, whom I had intended to keep 
as a servant. I saw him several times in the next few 
weeks, then he went out of my mind. One day soon after 
the close of the war I was standing on the street in Lynn, 
when a negro boy went past whistling. It struck me I had 
heard that whistle before, and I called to him. I asked him 
if he were from the South, and he said he was. "How came 
you here? " was my next question. " Oh, I was captured by 
Lieutenant Adams of the 19th on the North Anna, and came 
home with Colonel Palmer of Salem." "What became of 





Lieutenant Adams?" I asked. "Guess he is dead. The 
rebels done caught him, and we never heard from him 
again." "Look up here," I said. "Did you ever see me 
before?" "Golly, you are Lieutenant Adams," and he 
rushed for me. George Washington remained in Lynn 
several years. When the war ended he could not read or 
write, but he passed through all grades to the high school, 
and after two years there went South ; was a member of the 
Virginia Legislature two terms ; and the last I heard of him, 
he was with an Uncle Tom's Cabin Company whistling in 
the plantation scene, being the best whistler in the country. 
We were constantly moving by the left flank, marching 
every night, fighting every day. On the 30th we were on 
the Washington Jones plantation, near Totopotomoy Creek, 
the rebels advancing at night, but being repulsed. Captain 
Mumford and myself, with our companies G and I, were on 
the outpost all night ; we were very near the rebel lines and 
picket firing was constant. In the morning we advanced 
and they returned to their works. Captain Hume, com- 
manding Company K, was on our right, a swamp being 
between us. Captain Mumford and I had muskets, as it 
was poor fun being fired at with no chance to reply. We 
made up our minds to charge the works, so arranged with 
Captain Hume that he should go to the right around the 
swamp and we would advance and connect with liim on the 
other side. With a yell we started and the rebels retired 
before us, some of them to an old church. When we 
arrived at the crest of the hill we opened on them. Mum- 
ford was behind a tree, and had just fired his piece when he 
fell at my feet, shot through the head. All the fire of the 
rebels was concentrated on this spot. No man could live a 



98  

moment unless he lay close to the ground. Assisted by one 
of my sergeants I placed a rubber blanket under the captain 
and dragged him to the rear. He was nearly gone. The 
surgeon came but could do nothing, and in a short time he 
passed away. As the firing ceased for a time, we made a 
rude coffin and laid him to rest. We nailed a wooden slab 
on the tree, enclosing the grave with a little fence. Then I 
must perform the saddest duty of all, — write to his loved 
ones at home. 

Captain Mumford and I had been warm friends for more 
than two years, had shared the same blanket on the march, 
and while at home had been constantly together. He joined 
the regiment at Lynnfield, a young boy just out of school ; 
had been promoted from second lieutenant to captain, and 
had shared every march and battle in which the regiment had 
been engaged. Kind-hearted, generous and brave, I loved 
him as a brother. In December, 1865, I went to the place 
where we laid him and brought the body to Providence, R. I., 
where it now rests. 

"By the left flank" we marched on, arriving at Cold 
Harbor on the morning of June 2. We were deployed as 
skirmishers and lay in line until three a.m. the 3d, then were 
ordered to advance in three lines of battle, charging the 
enemy, who were intrenched. We stood in line three 
hours, waiting for the order to advance, and when it came 
the rebels were ready and waiting for us, yet over the field 
we went. Men were mowed down by hundreds. Major 
Dunn, who now commanded the regiment, was struck by a 
bullet and fell, but rallied again. The colors of the regi- 
ment were shot down, but Mike Scannell picked them up 
and carried them forward. Mike always had an eye to 




business. When we halted Major Dunn said, " Mike, keep 
the colors." "Not as a corporal," said Mike; "too many 
corporals have been killed already carrying colors." "I 
make you a sergeant on the spot," said the major. "That is 
business," replied Mike ; "I'll carry the colors." 

We changed brigade conmianders several times that fore- 
noon ; first one colonel would fall, then another, until at 
last a lieutenant-colonel commanded. We reached a ravine 
within a few yards of the rebel works and lay down. By 
forming line to the rear, the men lying flat on the ground, 
we were able during the night to get a few rails and before 
morning had quite a good breastwork. Lieutenant Thomp- 
son and many men were killed on the charge. After the 
death of Captain Mumford I had slept with Lieutenant 
Thompson ; only three days and another must share my 
blanket. Like other officers we had lost, Thompson was 
remarkable for his bravery, had been promoted from the 
ranks for good conduct, and had distinguished himself in 
every battle of the campaign. 

We were in a peculiar position, — so near the rebel works 
that we could throw a stone over, and no man on either side 
could show his head without getting a shot. Eations could 
not be brought to us until we dug a trench over the hill to 
the rear, which we did the second night. The second day 
we were in this place we saw a pile of dirt in our front, on a 
little knoll, and once in a while a shot would be fired, fol- 
lowed by a yell. Mark Kimball, Gus Bridges, Frank 
Osborne and Milt Ellsworth dug out and found Alonzo W. 
Bartlett of Andrews, Mass., sharpshooter. Bart, had come 
out after the body of the colonel of the 8th New York, who 
fell at the foot of the rebel works. He had managed to get 



100  

a rope around the body, but the rebels made it so hot that he 
was forced to intrench, which he did with his dipper, and 
was fighting the war on his own hook. His face was cut and 
bleeding from gravel stones which had struck him, l)ut he 
had held his own, and having a good rifle with plenty of 
ammunition thought he could hold out as long as they. 

For four days the little fort kept up a constant musketry 
fire. Every man was a dead shot, and the result must have 
been fearful. The rebels were also doing much damage to 
our side. No man could stand erect without being shot, and 
we lost several as they crossed to the spring for water. 
Among the killed was the boy William Fee, who had followed 
the regiment from Massachusetts. He was a brave little fel- 
low and had done the full duty of a soldier. 

On the 7th a truce was held. A white flag was raised on 
the rel)el works and firing ceased on both sides. General 
officers met between the lines, and it was agreed to suspend 
fiofhtino; until the dead who had lain between the lines for the 
past four days were l)uried. This was welcome news, as the 
stench was terrible. The men of ])oth armies were soon over 
the works and mingled together freely. Had they the power 
to settle the war, not another shot would have been fired. 
By mutual agreement not a shot was fired by either side for 
the next two days. On the morning of the 9tli a rebel stood 
upon the works and in a loud voice said, "Keep down, 
Yanks, we uns are going away ; " and the firing was soon 
resumed as before. 

While bringing in the dead we found one man wounded 
many times, but yet alive. He was first shot in the leg, and 
being unable to move had taken shots from })oth sides ; had 
been without food or water four days, yet he revived in a few 





hours and was able to talk. He had lost all trace of time, 
but said that he had suffered little, being unconscious most 
of the time. During the day Bartlett took the body of the 
colonel to the rear, and was returning to his old place when a 
sharpshooter fired, hitting him over the eye, which placed him 
on the retired list for a time. 

From the 9th to the 12th the firing was constant day and 
night; men were killed every hour in the day. Captain 
Hincks was severely wounded while lying in rear of the 
works. The duty was very hard. One-half the men must 
be on guard during the night, and all in line at three a.m. 
The officer in charge was obliged to go from right to left, as 
the men would drop to sleep as soon as they were posted, 
being exhausted from long hours of duty. The mental strain 
was unspeakable. 

While at Cold Harbor about one hundred recruits joined 
the regiment. They were not brought to the front, but 
placed in the rear line, with Lieutenant McGinnis in charge. 
At nine p.m. on the 12th we quietly moved out of the works 
and marched towards the Chickahominy. This was old 
ground to us. We had been here with McClellan in 1862. 
Lieutenant McGinnis had quite a time with his recruits ; not 
half of them could speak or understand the English language, 
and Bill tauaht them by the kinderofarten method. Stan dins: 
in front he would say, "Look at me. Put on your bayonets, 
put 'em on." He would go through the motions, they fol- 
lowing. After a few days liis " army of all nations '' was 
disbanded, the men being assigned to companies. 

Arriving at the James River we crossed on a steamer and 
halted for rations, but before they could be served were 
ordered forward, and marched twenty-five miles without a 



102  

hard tack. We reached the first line of works before Peters- 
burg, and relieved a division of colored troops commanded 
by our old colonel, now General Hincks, who had been fight- 
ing all day. This was a great day for some of us. It had 
been said that the negro would not fight, but here we found 
them dead on the field side by side with the rebels they had 
killed. The stock of the negro as a soldier was high in the 
market. With no time for rations we went into line and 
waited until nearly morning, when the detail brought us oUr 
hard tack and pork. 

Hard fighting every day since the Battle of the Wilder- 
ness had reduced our officers to major, adjutant and four 
line officers, with the addition of First Sergeant Osborne of 
Company B, who had been promoted on the march. Our 
men had been reduced to one hundred and forty, including 
the recruits who had joined us at Cold Harbor. The morn- 
ing: of June 22 we were ordered to advance through a thicket 
to the edge of an open field. We found the enemy in force, 
several batteries being so posted that they could protect the 
field, while the infantry was well cared for behind works. 
We threw up slight works and both sides were active all 
day. Our regiment was so small that we were in single 
rank and the formation was tw^o companies instead of ten, 
Captain Hume commanding the right and I the left wing. 

At noon the officers withdrew a little to the rear for din- 
ner, and in conversation Major Dunn said, "I fell asleep a 
little while ago, and had a queer dream. We were lying 
just as we are here, and the rebels came in our rear and cap- 
tured the entire regiment." We laughed at his story, said 
we guessed we should not go to Richmond that way, and 
returned to our places in line. The firing in our front 




increased, the batteries doing good service for the rebels. 
About four P.M. we heard loud talking and cheering on our 
left and the firing ceased. The woods were so thick we 
could not see through them, but knowing something was up, 
I went to the right of the line and reported to Major Dunn. 
Returning to my place, I met Billy Smith of Company F, 
who said, " Come with me ; if you go farther you are sure to 
be captured." While I was talking with Smith, Colonel 
Hooper passed us, on the way to the rear. The colonel had 
been there and escaped through the tunnel at Libby. He 
did not propose to go again. I told Smith to go on, but I 
must return to the company. I soon met two rebels who 
ordered me to surrender, but I declined. I saw my men 
standing up and the rebels as thick as mosquitoes. A major 
of a Georgia regiment demanding my sword, I presented it 
to him, omitting the presentation speech. With the rebels 
I went to the right. Captain Hume was standing on the 
works looking to the left. I called to him, '' They have us, 
Hume." Quick as a flash he stamped his sword into the 
dirt, broke the scabbard against a tree, saying, "There is 
the second one the cusses haven't got." In less time than it 
takes to tell the story we were driven to the rebel rear, and 
my story for a time will be my experiences in rebel prisons. 






