

My position had changed during the past year from 
corporal in Company A to second lieutenant in Company I, 
and it took me some time to get accustomed to the new 
office. Up to the time I left Company A no man had been 
punished ; but the morning that I reported for duty in Com- 
pany I Captain Plympton had one man on a barrel and 
another on knapsack drill, and I thought I had made a mis- 
take in not taking sparring lessons before being promoted. 

I found the men of Company I as good-hearted a lot as 
there was in the regiment, only a little wild. The leader 
of the company was a young boy ; he was aljout seventeen 
years old, and a private soldier, yet he was the one who 
settled all disputes. He was well informed in regard to the 
movements of the army, and had ideas respecting future 
campaigns that he was ready to discuss with officers or men. 
Soon after I joined the company he called on me and made 
a little speech of welcome, saying that the l)oys were glad I 
had been assigned to the company, and assured me they 
would make it pleasant for me. Such a reception was very 
gratifying. I was but twenty years of age and doubted my 
ability to control these men, but I commanded the company 
for nearly two years, and punished but one man during the 



time. That boy has since become known and honored by 
every comrade in Massachusetts. The friendship formed 
that day for George H. Patch continued until his death, and 
the memory of that light-hearted, true soldier will be pre- 
cious to me while life shall last. 

Leaving the transports at Alexandria, we first marched to 
Chain Bridga, then to Tenallytown, Md. No one seemed 
to know where they wanted us. We went into camp and 
waited for orders, which, when received, were to march at 
once for Centre ville, to reinforce General Pope. At day- 
break, August 30, we crossed the bridge at Georgetown, 
and reached Fairfax Court House the next morning, having 
marched sixty- three miles in sixty-four successive hours. 
It was the hardest march we had made, — twenty-four hours 
of the time it rained in torrents. The shoes of the men 
were in bad condition ; many marched bare-footed, and it 
was impossible for them to keep in the ranks. We did 
not have a hundred men in the ranks when we reached the 
line of battle. 

At Fairfax Court House we found everything in confu- 
sion. Pope's army had been defeated at the second Bull 
Run and were in full retreat. Without time to make coffee 
we were ordered in, and deployed as skirmishers to the 
right of the town, as it was expected the rebel cavalry would 
attack the flank. We remained in this position until the 
army had passed, when, with the 1st Minnesota, we were 
selected to cover the retreat. The rebel cavalry came down 
on us, and we had some sharp fighting as we fell back. At 
Flint Hill we made a stand. Night had come on and we 
did not care to be bothered with the rebels any longer. 
The 1st Minnesota formed a V with two sections of Tomp- 


kins's Rhode Island battery at this point, the 19th support- 
ing the battery. On came the rebels, right into the trap we 
had set. The Minnesota boys opened fire, followed by the 
battery. The 19th charged with a yell ; the rout was com- 
plete, as all not killed or wounded turned and fled. We 
had no time to follow them, as we were quite a distance 
from the main army. When we rejoined the column our 
two regiments were mistaken for the enemy, and fired upon 
by our own ranks. Assistant-Surgeon Hill was killed, 
Captain Russell disabled by his horse being shot, and several 
men wounded. 

The next day we again crossed the Potomac to Maryland 
soil. The prospects were not pleasant to contemplate. We 
had done little but march in retreat the past six months. A 
line officer has little chance to see what is going on outside 
his regiment, and his opinion is of little importance, but I 
believed then, and time has only strengthened my belief, 
that the leading officers of the Army of the Potomac were 
perfectly willing General Pope should be whipped. He had 
taken command of the Army of Virginia with a swell order : 
" Headquarters in the saddle, spades to the rear, muskets to 
the front," and they were glad to see the conceit taken out 
of him. There is a great deal of human nature shown in 
the world, — even in army commanders. 

We now took up our line of march through Maryland. 
We were not the only ones who had crossed the Potomac, 
as the rebels had already crossed and were marching north, 
and we must head them off" if possible. It began to look as 
though they would capture Washington before we captured 
Richmond. We marched through Rockville, where we had 
spent our winters so pleasantly, and met many old acquaint- 



44  

ances, but missed several of our gentlemen friends who, we 
learned, had joined the rebel army. 

Some of the ladies, who loved the stars and bars, joked 
us on our " On to Richmond " movement, and were confi- 
dent the war would soon end with the south victorious. 
The events of the past few months had been such that we 
had slio^ht s^round for an aro^ument : l)ut we assured them we 
were satisfied, and all we wanted was to get General Lee on 
this side of the river. Our march through Maryland was 
delightful ; the farther we got into the interior the more 
loyal the people l)ecame, and our welcome was cordial. 

We arrived at South Mountain while the battle was lieing 
fought, but took no part in it. The 16th of September we 
reached Antietam, and formed in line of l^attle. On the 
morning of the 17th, with our brigade in the centre, we 
advanced in three lines of battle, over walls and fences, 
through fields, under a terrible fire of artillery. The 
regiment was growing nervous but did not break. Colonel 
Hincks halted us, put us through the manual of arms, end- 
ing with parade rest. Having become steady, we moved 
forward to a strip of woods, and came upon the enemy 
strongly posted. Grape and canister, shot and shell, vol- 
leys of musketry greeted us, — and our men fell as grain 
before the scythe. 

One-half of our ofiicers and men were either killed or 
wounded. Colonel Hincks was the first to fiill, again ter- 
ribly wounded. Capt. George W. Batchelder was killed, 
and the command of the regiment and companies changed 
fast, as one after another officer went down. At the time 
we were so hotly engaged in the front we began to receive 
a fire from our left and rear, and discovered that we were 



being flanked, and must change front to rear. This was 
done by the 19th Massachusetts and 1st Minnesota. We 
were now under command of Colonel Devereaux, and were 
ordered to take a position near a stone wall. We fired as 
we fell back, holding the enemy until we had reformed our 
lines, when we again went in and continued fighting until 
dark, when we were ordered to support a battery. . We 
then had time to count the cost of the battle. Colonel 
Hincks was reported dying, and we mourned the loss of our 
brave leader. Captain Batchelder was dead. He had been 
my tent-mate since I had been an oflicer, and had rendered 
me valuable assistance. Every one loved him ; he was an 
ideal volunteer soldier. Having graduated at Harvard, he 
entered the army as an enlisted man in the Salem Zouaves 
at the first call for men, and had worked hard to bring the 
regiment to the state of efiiciency which it had reached. 

I had not seen my brother since we had advanced in line. 
He was left general guide of the regiment, and his place was 
on the left. As soon as we halted I went to the company, 
but he was not there. The following day I searched the 
hospitals, but could not find him, and on the morning of the 
lUth, the rebels having left our front, I went where their 
lines had been and found him, with Jacob Hazen of Com- 
pany C and George Carleton of Company B, near an old 
haystack. He had been shot in the right side of the neck, 
the ball passing out of the left shoulder ; it had cut the 
spinal nerve, and he could not move hand or foot. I saw 
at once that he could not live and had him placed in an 
ambulance and carried to our field hospital. It was the 
saddest duty of my life. We had left home together, and 
had often talked of a happy reunion around the old fireside 



when the war should end. Now I must wrfte to my old 
mother that one of the three who had bade her good-by in 
'61 would never return. 

This was war, terrilble war ! As I was kneeling by his 
side, hearing his last words, a woman's voice said, "Is he 
your brother ? " I explained to her the fact that I was in 
command of my company and could not stay with him, but 
could not bear to have him die alone. With tears streaming- 
down her motherly face she promised me she would not 
leave him, but would see him buried and would send me 
word w^here he w^as laid, — which promise she faithfully kept. 
The name of this good w^oman was Mrs. Mary Lee of Phila- 
delphia, Pa. She had a son in Baxter's Fire Zouaves, who 
was with her that day. Several years ago, when Post 2, 
G. A. E., of Philadelphia, was in Boston, I saw that one of 
the old battle-flags Avas the Fire Zouaves, and was carried 
by Sergeant Lee. He proved to be the son I had met that 
sad day at Antietam ; a few months later I visited his 
mother in Philadelphia, who was working just the same for 
the soldiers as she had done during the war. 

While my brother lay wounded on the field inside the 
rebel lines an officer of the 8th South Carolina came along, 
and seeing 19 on his cap asked to what regiment he l^elonged. 
Being informed that it was the 19th Massachusetts, he said 
he had a brother in that regiment named Daniel W. Spof- 
ford. My brother told him that his brother was wounded 
in the battle, and might be on the field. He searched for 
him but did not find him, as he was able to go to the rear 
before we changed front. Eeturning, he had my brother 
carried to the haystack wdiere I found him, and rendered 
all the assistance possible. The name of the South Carolina 




officer was Phineas Spoflbrd. Both brothers survived the 
war. The Union soldier resides in Georgetown, Mass., 
the rebel in South Carolina, but he often visits his native 
State. 

I also missed my boy Patch. He was last seen helping a 
sergeant from the field. He turned up in Libljy Prison a 
few days later. My old company had met with other losses 
than death. Four men had deserted on the eve of battle. 
They had taken the canteens of the company to go in search 
of water. No doubt they are searching yet, as they did not 
return. Two were non-commissioned officers, and all were 
intelligent men. 

The regiment was now commanded by Capt. H. G. O. 
Weymouth. Again we crossed the Potomac, and went to 
camp on Boliver Heights, near Harper's Ferry. We did 
not lose the battle of Antietam because we held the ground, 
but made the mistake of remaining inactive while the rebels 
withdrew to the other side of the river, so we gained 
nothing. 

Soon after the battle we received a large numl)er of 
recruits, — the best class of men that had joined the regi- 
ment. Many of them had waited, hoping that the war 
would be over, and their services would not be required, 
but seeing the disasters that had come to the army, resolved 
to come and help us. Several of them were discharged 
as commissioned officers, and all rendered very valuable 
service. 

We remained at Harper's Ferry until October 30, when 
we received marching orders, and the army marched up 
Loudon valley. The nights were cold, and we suffered 
severely. While in bivouac near Paris or New Baltimore 


two feet of snow fell, covering us as we slept. Orders 
against foraging were very strict. We were not allowed to 
take hay from tlie stacks for bedding, or in any way molest 
private property. The idea of General McClellan seemed 
to be to carry on the war without hurting any one's feehngs, 
but once in a while we broke over. One night Corjooral 
Phelau and Jack Robinson discovered hens at a neighbor- 
ing farm-house, and finding the house not guarded took 
their muskets and went on duty. The people were much 
pleased to be so well protected. While Phelan entertained 
the family Jack went on duty outside to protect the hens. 
Soon a squawking was heard, and Corporal Phelan grasped 
his musket and rushed to reinforce Jack. They secured three 
good hens, and forgot to go back to the house, but reported 
to camp. When they arrived I discovered that they had 
plunder, and called them before me. With downcast eyes 
they told the story of their shame and begged for mercy. 
As an oflScer I must do my duty, and they must be jiunished. 
I ordered them to cook one of the three hens and deliver it 
to me. With sad hearts they obeyed the order. 




