

We left Columbia, but no one knew where we were going. 
After a slow run of three hours the engine struck a cow ; as 
the cow would not get otf the track the engine did, and we 
were delayed several hours, but we did not mind that. 
Having no destination, we might as well be in one place as 
another. After being two days on the cars we arrived at 
Charlotte, N. C. 

It was quite evident that the rebels were near the last 
ditch. Our South Carolina guard would not go into North 
Carolina, and we had a new guard from the latter State. We 
left the cars and marched to camp, where an order was read, 
sio-ned by Adjutant-General Cooper, that a general exchange 
of prisoners would begin at once. Many took no stock in 
the order and escaped, but the guard did little or nothing to 
prevent them, and the next day the officers commanding in 
the city requested us to remain in camp, as they had a strong 
police guard in the city and we might get into trouble. 

We had had some fun mixed with our misery. Our band 
had retained their instruments, and while they had not played 
at Camp Sorghum for want of strings, with the money we 
received they bought new ones, and our glee club was as 
o-ood as ever. The citizens often came from the city to hear 
them sins;. 




CAPTAIN "JACK" ADAMS. 
July, 1865. 


One day we had a rich treat. The adjutant of an Ohio 
regiment T\Tote a song called " Sherman's March to the Sea," 
Major Isitt and Lieutenant Rockwell arranged the music, 
and one night the glee club sang it from the steps of the 
hospital. The boys went wild over it, and even the rebels 
could not fail to appreciate it. We also organized the I. O. 
of M. E. (Independent Order of Mush Eaters), and met in 
house No. 9. It was not a charitable organization, as we 
had no charity for any one. Our meetings were opened by 
the prisoners forming a circle, one man in the centre with a 
stick. He must do something for the entertainment of the 
brothers, then give the stick to another, who must do the 
same, and so on, until all had done their part. 

We brought out some fine talent, and were the liveliest 
crowd in prison. Often we would go out and catch some 
fellow, who was despondent and nearly dead with the blues, 
bring him before the Grand Mogul and try him for some 
offence by court-martial. While he would get mad, kick 
and swear, it revived him, gave us lots of fun, and as we 
elected him a Mush Eater, it gave him a chance to enjoy the 
meetings. I rememl^er one lieutenant of an Illinois regi- 
ment who had dug a hole in the ground and declared that he 
would not come out, but would die there. One night he 
came out, was tried and sentenced to be marched around the 
eamp. The sentence was duly executed, the comb band 
playing the "Rogue's March." He began to improve after 
that, attended the meetings regularly, and, I believe, was 
elected to the ofl3ce of Deputy High Grand M. E. We 
undertook to capture a captain of a Tennessee regiment, 
called "Puddinghead Hayes," but, as he could whip any two 
of us, we let him alone. 



176  

One afternoon at three o'clock the order was given to "fall 
in." It was an uncommon call at this hour, and "exchange" 
thoughts came to all. Soon the adjutant introduced us to a 
new commander, a Dutchman who had just come from the 
north, having been captured at Gettysburg. Said he : 
" Ghentlemens, I comes to take command of you. I have 
been in Fort Delaware fifteen months. You peoples teach 
me how to behave myself. I does for you all I can. You 
treats me like ghentleman, I treats you like ghentlemen. 
This place not fit for hogs. I sends in one hundred load of 
straw, right away, quick. Break ranks, march ! " He went 
through our quarters and swore worse than we could at our 
treatment. He then went to the hospital, had a row with 
the surgeon because he had done nothing to make us comfort- 
able, and kicked up a row generally in our behalf. We felt 
that "the morning light was breaking" for us, and that we 
should now be made comfortable. The major came in the 
next day with more suggestions, but in a day or two we saw 
him no more. He was not the man the rebels wanted, as 
they were not anxious for our comfort, and his ofiicial head 
was removed as soon as he made requisition for the straw. 

On the 20th, two hundred of us left to be exchanged. 
We had quite a pleasant ride to Salisbury. Here I saw some 
of my men, the first I had seen since we left them at Macon, 
in July. I remember two, my first sergeant, James Smith, 
and Private Jerry Kelly. I dare not undertake to describe 
their condition ; they were nearly starved to death and could 
only walk by the aid of sticks. They told me of the other 
boys captured, — that Lubin, a young recruit, had died three 
days after entering Andersonville ; that Sergt. Geo. E. 
Morse and Levi Wooffindale of Company G, and many 


others, had died at Andersonville, Florence and other pris- 
ons ; for, like us, they had been carted from one place to 
another, but their faces brightened as they said, " Not one of 
the boys went back on the old flag." I had been proud of the 
19th regiment from the first day I joined it, but never did I 
see the time when I loved and respected those boys more 
than that day. 

More than thirty thousand were crowded into the pen at 
Andersonville. They had seen their comrades die at the rate 
of two hundred a day ; they had been ofiered plenty of food 
and clothing, and no fighting, if they would renounce their 
allegiance to the old flag and join the southern Confederacy, 
but they said, "JVof JSTof Death before dishonor!" and 
waited to join their comrades beneath the starry flag if they 
lived to be free, if not to join those who had been loyal and 
true in the camp on the other shore. 

We went from Charlotte to Goldsboro, where we arrived 
the next morning. Here we saw the worst sight that the 
eyes of mortal ever gazed upon. Two long trains of plat- 
form cars, loaded with our men, came in. They had been 
three days on the road, expecting to be exchanged at Wil- 
mington, but as the city was being bombarded, were turned 
back. As they were unloaded not one in fifty was able to 
stand. Many were left dead on the cars, the guards rolling 
them oft' as they would logs of wood ; most of them were 
nearly naked, and their feet and hands were frozen ; they had 
lost their reason ; could not tell the State they came from, 
their regiment or company. We threw them what rations 
we had, and they would fight for them like dogs, rolling 
over each other in their eagerness to get the least morsel. I 
remember one poor fellow who had lost his teeth by scurvy ; 


he would pick raw corn out of the dirt by the railroad track 
and try to eat it. We gave them everything we had. I took 
my only shirt from my back and threw it to them ; others 
did the same. The rebels allowed us to mingle with them, 
and with tears streaming down our cheeks we did what we 
could. 

Lieutenant McGinnis and I were looking for our men, 
when we found one named Thompson, of his company. He 
was a noble fellow, one of the largest men in the regiment ; 
the only clothing he had on was part of a shirt and that was 
covered with vermin ; he had lost his sight and was almost 
gone ; he died while we were with him. I took a little fel- 
low in my arms and carried him across the street ; he could 
not have been over sixteen years old, and did not weigh 
more than fifty pounds ; he died just as I laid liim down. 

The men were marched to a camp, and the route was strewn 
with dead and dying. The citizens gathered around, but I 
saw or heard no expressions of sympathy. One of our offi- 
cers said, " My time is out, but all I ask is a chance to once 
more take the field; I would try and get square." A rebel 
officer heard him, and replied, "You are just the man I would 
like to meet." Our officer stepped out and said, "Here I 
am, I have been more than a year in prison, but I will whip 
you or any other rebel you can furnish." The rebel sneaked 
away, and said he would not disgrace himself by fighting a 
Yankee except in battle. We wished he had given our man 
a chance. 

We were again ordered on board the cars, and it was reported 
that we were going to Richmond for exchange. We went as 
far as Raleigh, where we halted, left the train and marched 
to an old camp. There were a few houses standing, but not 



enough to hold one-fourth of our number. The rain came 
down in torrents and we stood all night under the trees. I 
never passed a more uncomfortable night, for besides being 
wet and cold, I suffered with hunger. 

On the 23d they loaded us on the cars again, and had just 
started, when the engine ran off the track. This time the 
cause was an open switch. We believed that the switch was 
intentionally left open, but the train ran so slowly that we 
were off the cars as soon as the engine left the track, and no 
one was hurt. We were then taken to Camp Holmes, some 
three miles out of the city, and paroles were made out and 
signed. This settled the question of escape and we began 
to feel happy. We remained here until the 26th, and began 
to think that the parole was another trap to keep us with a 
small guard. All were excited, and had they not moved 
three hundred at noon I don't believe a man able to travel 
would have remained in camp that night. 

On the morning of the 27th we found ourselves in Golds- 
boro again, and were marched to camp. Here we had to 
sign another parole, as the first was not made out properly. 
All these delays were terrible ; our nervous condition was 
such that we could not sleep, and days were as long as weeks. 
We received very little food, and here I sold the last thing 
that would bring a dollar, — the buttons on my jacket. These 
brought me eio:hteen dollars, — two dollars each. It would 
buy just food enough to sustain life. At night the rebels 
gave us some rations, but, hungry as we were, we sent all to 
the enlisted men. 

The 28th, at five p.m., we again went on board the train, 
and at daylight, March 1, were at Rocky Point, three miles 
from our lines. Here we left the cars, the rebel guard formed 



in line and we were counted through. As soon as we passed 
the rebel lines we ran down the road, cheering and singing. 
About a quarter of a mile further on the guard stopped us 
and formed us in some kind of order. Although we were 
with the boys in blue we did not fully realize that we were 
free, and clung to all our prison outfit. We marched about 
a mile to the northeast bridge on the Cape Fear River, and on 
the other side saw an arch covered with the stars and stripes. 
In the centre of the arch, surrounded by a wreath of ever- 
green, were the words, "Welcome, Brothers ! " I have no 
idea what the joy will be when I pass through the pearly 
gates and march up the golden streets of the New Jerusalem, 
but if it is half as great as it was the morning of March 1, 
1865, when for the first time for nearly nine months I saw 
the old flag, I shall be satisfied. 

One who did not understand the situation would have 
thought that an insane asylum had been turned loose. We 
hugged each other, laughed, cried, prayed, rolled over in the 
dirt, and expressed our joy, each in his own way. Those 
who had clung to their meal threw it high in air, and for 
once meal was plenty. 

The 6th Connecticut were encamped near, and their band 
played national airs as we marched over the bridge. We 
also found our true friend, the colored man, not as a slave, 
but as a man and a comrade, clothed in loyal blue and fight- 
ing for a flag that never, until President Lincoln signed the 
Emancipation Proclamation, had protected him. As soon 
as we were over the bridge they began to provide for our 
wants. Hard-tack boxes were burst open, coff*ee and meat 
were furnished in abundance ; but we had been starving so 
Ions: that we did not think it would last, and I remember 


that I packed my old jacket — now fastened together with 
wooden pins — full, and as it settled down crowded in more. 
We drank so much coffee that we were nearly intoxicated. 

We cheered the boys who had provided so well for us, 
and started for Wilmington. We did not march, but hob- 
bled along as best we could, anxious to get as far as possible 
from the rebels. We clung to our instruments, and carried 
the big base viol by turns. It was my turn to carry it, and 
McGinnis and I started down the railroad. We had gone 
but a short distance when we met an officer, who asked me 
where I got the big fiddle. I told him I had played it in 
church before I enlisted ; that I carried it with me when I 
left home and had it on picket ; was in the middle of a tune 
when the rebels came on me, and as I could not stop playing 
was captured. The man looked at me and said, " I believe 
that's a d — d lie." "Well," I said, "you have a right to 
think so," and we moved along. I do not remember what 
became of the instrument. 

Arriving at Wilmington, we were collected together and 
rations were served. Here we were placed under guard to 
prevent our eating too much, but we would capture the 
rations each side of us and fill our pockets. As soon as we 
had eaten all we could, we would pass out, and in half an 
hour try to flank in again. The sanitary commission were 
on hand with barrels of weak milk punch and gave us all we 
wanted ; as we wanted everything to eat or drink that we 
saw we destroyed large quantities of it. While standing 
on the street an officer rode up whom I recognized as Col. 
Henry A. Hale, formerly a captain in my regiment. He 
was serving on the staff" of the general commanding the 
department. He took me to a gunboat in the river and 



bought me a suit of sailor's clothes. After a good bath I 
was transformed from a dirty prisoner into a respectable 
Jack Tar. I threw my old clothes overboard, and they 
floated down the stream freighted with a crew which had 
clung to me closer than a brother for the past nine months, 
and whose united voices I thought I heard singing " A life 
on the ocean wave " as they passed out to sea. 

I returned to the city and walked about, often meeting 
some of the men of my regiment, among them Michael 
O'Leary of Company F, who looked as though he had just 
come off dress parade, having a new uniform and his shoes 
nicely polished. He was delighted to see me, said that the 
rebels had urged him to take the oath of allegiance, but he 
had told them he could never look Mary Ann in the face if 
he went back on the old flag. He told me of a number of 
the men who had died, among them my old friend Mike 
Scannell. That night I stood in front of the theatre, my 
hands in my empty pockets, wondering if I should ever have 
money enough to purchase a ticket. 

March 3, Ave went on board the transport "General Sedg- 
wick," bound for Annapolis. We pulled out near Fort 
Fisher and lay over night. Some of us went on shore at 
Smithfield and had a nice time. On the 4th we got under 
way. It was the second inauguration of President Lincoln, 
and all the ships were gaily decked with flags. We passed 
out over the bar. The ship was crowded ; my berth was on 
the floor between decks. I find the last entry in my diary 
is, " Oh, how sick I am ! " I did not come on deck for four 
days, and suffered more than I can tell. The sea broke over 
the ship, and the water came down the hatchway. A west- 
ern officer, suflering near, aroused me by exclaiming, " My 



 183 

God ! Jack, there is a board off somewhere ; don't you see 
the water coming in ? " I didn't care if they were all off. 

We arrived at Annapolis and quartered in the several 
hotels. The following day we received two months' pay. I 
bought a good uniform of a Jew for seventy-five dollars. It 
was a nice blue when I first put it on, but before I arrived 
home it was as brown as a butternut. We ate from six to ten 
meals a day for a week, then received thirty days' furlough 
and came home to friends who had almost given us up for 
dead. 

I never looked better than when I arrived home. I had 
bloated so that I was the picture of health, and no matter 
what account I gave of prison life my face contradicted it, so 
I said little. After thirty days at home I did not feel able 
to return, and received an extension. The war was nearly 
over, Richmond had fallen, and I was miles away, a paroled 
prisoner, not allowed to bear arms until exchanged. 

While at home I had the pleasure of meeting my old com- 
rade, Isaac H. Boyd. He had started as a private in Com- 
pany A, and was now major of the regiment. I left him 
one Saturday at the Providence depot in Boston, he return- 
ing to the front. In two weeks I received his body at the 
same depot. He was killed in the last battle of the war, the 
day before Lee surrendered, — one of the bravest officers 
who ever drew a sword. 

Early in May I returned to Annapolis, and was pleasantly 
quartered in the house of a Mr. Harper, the only man in the 
city who voted for President Lincoln in 1860. While stand- 
ing on the street one day a small squad of prisoners passed. 
This was an unusual sight, as all had come through the lines 
weeks before. I heard a voice say, " How are you, captain ? " 



184  

and looking up saw a white head sticking out of a bundle of 
rags, and recognized Sergt. Mike Scannell. I said, "Mike, 
you are dead." " Not yet," was the reply ; " but I have been 
mighty near it. I was sent out to die at Andersonville, from 
there was taken to Blackshire, Fla., kept until the war was 
over, then taken within several miles of our lines and turned 
loose." With him was Mike O'Brien of my company, — hard 
looking, but full of courage. 

On the 15th of May I was discharged ])y general order, 
went to Washington, received my full pay, with transportation 
to West Newbury, Mass. I waited to see the grand review 
of the armies before returning home. The first day the 
Army of the Potomac passed. As the 2d corps drew near I 
became anxious, and walked towards the Capitol. The white 
trefoil came in sight, and at the head of the dear old regiment 
rode Colonel Rice. He saw me and turned out of the line 
to shake hands. Next came Captain Hume, — the only line 
officer commissioned when we were captured. He stopped, 
and the boys came from every company ; for a few moments 
I held a reception. Colonel Rice urged me to come to the 
regiment, saying he had found a place for me. I informed 
him that I was discharged, and was going home, but he said, 
"Come and see me day after to-morrow." In compliance 
with his request I went out to Munson's Hill to visit the regi- 
ment, and before night was mustered as captain, and assigned 
to the command of Company B. 

The duty was very pleasant. I was in command of the 
regiment a few days during the absence of Colonel Rice and 
Captain Hume, and was two weeks on courts-martial detail. 
June 30 the regiment was mustered out of service, and left 
for Massachusetts, arriving at Readville July 3. We were 


invited to take part in the parade in Boston July 4, and 
Colonel Rice was quite anxious that we should. After we 
went to our quarters for dinner Colonel Rice was called to 
Boston. Nearly all the officers had business there, and when 
we boarded the train found the men taken the same way. 
The colonel did not blame them, and said it was all right if 
we would report at 9 a.m. the next day at the Providence 
depot. All promised. I did not expect they would come 
but went to the station at the hour named. I found Colonel 
Rice and one private. We waited a while, but no more 
reported, and as we three would not make much of a show, 
concluded to give it up. 

July 20 we assembled at Readville for final pay. The men 
returned to their homes and took up the duties of citizens 
which they had laid down to become soldiers, — and the 19th 
Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers became a thing of the 
past. 

The regiment had been frequently complimented by its 
superior officers for soldierly conduct, and the following 
General Orders will show the opinion in which we were 
held : — 

Headquarters 2d Army Corps, July 23, 1862. 
General Order No. 21. 

The general commanding would hereby announce to this corps d'armee 
the fjne appearance on the review to-day of the 19th Massachusetts and 
1st Minnesota regiments. The condition of these regiments is an honor 
to their States, and reflects great credit upon their commanders. 

By command of 

Major-General Sumner, 
Official. L, Kip, A. D. C. and A. A. O. 

W. D. Sedgwick, A. A O. 



186  



Headquarters 2d Division, 2d Corps, 

Edward's Ferry, Va., June 26, 1863. 
General Order No. 105. 

The 15th and 19th Massachusetts Volunteers, for marching to-day in 
the best and most compact order, and with the least straggling from 
their ranks, are excused from all picket duty and outside details for four 
days. 

By command of 

Brigadier General Gibbons. 

Of the thirty-seven commissioned officers who left Massa- 
chusetts with the regiment in 1861 only one returned, — 
Col. Edmund Rice, who went out as captain and came home 
colonel commanding the regiment. 

Fourteen officers and two hundred fifty men were either 
killed or died of wounds received in action, and four hun- 
dred forty-nine were discharged for disability, occasioned by 
wounds or disease contracted in the service. 

In no better way can I close my story than by quoting 
from the 1865 report of Adjutant-General Schouler : — 

" No regiment has had a more eventful history, or has fought more, 
fought better, or performed its duties with more promptitude and alacrity. 
During its existence the regiment has been engaged in forty-five battles 
and skirmishes, in six of which it has lost from one-third to five-sixths 
of its men. It has captured and turned over to the War Department 
seven stands of colors (1st Texas, 14th, 19th, 53d, and 57th Virginia, 
12th South Carolina and 47th North Carolina) and six pieces of artillery. 
When it is said that the regiment has been characterized by the most 
kindly and brotherly feeling, the best discipline and alacrious obedience 
in all ranks, that it has been frequently commended and never censured 
by its superior commanders — the story is done." 
