

In December I resolved to return to the regiment. My 
wound was not healed and my surgeon protested, but I was 
anxious to see the boys. Upon my arrival at Washington 
what was my surprise to find that I had been discharged by 
order of the War Department November 5, as being una- 
ble to perform military duty. With Col. Gardiner Tufts, the 
Massachusetts State agent, I visited the War Department 
and was informed that I should receive my discharge through 
my regimental headquarters. If ever a man had the blues I 
had. My sickness had cost me several hundred dollars, I 
was unable to perform any kind of labor, was out of money, 
and could not settle with the government until my papers 
were received ; but Colonel Tufts could always make the 
path of a soldier smooth and he was able to secure me two 
months' pay. From Washington I went to the regiment, 
which was camped near Stevensburg, Va. I waited until 
after January 1 for my discharge, but it did not come, and 
my wound was so bad that the surgeon ordered me home. 
Colonel Rice was in command of the regiment. Colonel Dev- 
ereaux being in command of the Philadelphia brigade. I 
called on Colonel Devereaux, who was very indignant to 
learn that I had been discharged ; he said he would see about 
it, and I knew that meant something. 



One clay the colonel sent for me and said, " Jack, I have 
a letter from Governor Andrew asking that the regiment 
re-enlist for three years more or until the end of the war ; 
do you think they will do it?" My answer was, "I don't 
know; there are not many left to re-enlist." He said, "I 
wish you would go to your old company. A, and talk with 
them," and I consented. The regiment was encamped on a 
side hill in shelter tents, and the weather was cold and rainy. 
I went to Company A ; the mud in the company street was 
ankle deep and everything was as disagreeable as possible. 
Giles Johnson was first sergeant. I talked with him and 
asked him to "fall in" the men. Thirteen responded to the 
call, — all who were on duty of the grand company which 
had left Massachusetts in 1861. I repeated the story the 
colonel had told me, then asked for a response from them; 
for a moment all were silent, then Ben Falls said, " Well, if 
new men won't finish this job, old men must, and as long as 
Uncle Sam wants a man, here is Ben Falls." Then spoke 
Mike Scannell : " It is three years, as you know, since I 
have seen my wife and children. I had expected to go home 
when my time was out and stay there, but we must never 
give up this fight until we win, and I am with you to the 
end." Others expressed themselves in the same way, and 
when I said, "All who will re-enlist step one pace to the 
front," every man in line advanced. 

I then saw men of other companies. Ed. Fletcher of 
Company C said, "They use a man here just the same as 
they do a turkey at a shooting match, fire at it all day, and 
if they don't kill it rafile it off in the evening ; so with us, 
if they can't kill you in three years they want you for three 
more, but I will stay." I next saw Michael O'Leary of 


Company F and asked him if he would re-enlist. Mike threw 
his cap on the ground, struck an attitude and said, " By the 
gods above, by the worth of that cap, I never will re-enlist 
until I can be with Mary Ann without the stars and stripes 
waving over me." But I said, "Mike, they are all going to 
do it." "They are? Then Michael O'Leary must stay." 
A large majority signed the re-enlistment role, and Decem- 
ber 20 they were mustered in for three years more, or until 
the end of the war. In this instance, as in nearly every 
other where the soldiers and the government were concerned, 
the government did not do as they agreed. The conditions 
of the re-enlistment were, that the soldier should at once 
have thirty-five days' furlough and transportation to his 
home. Our men did not receive theirs until Feb. 8, 1864, 
nearly seven weeks after they had re-enlisted. The weather 
was very severe, many were sick and all were unhappy. 

To my mind the re-enlisting of the three years' men in the 
field was the most patriotic event of the war. They knew 
what war was, had seen their regiments and companies swept 
away until only a little remnant remained. They did not 
have the excitement of the war meetings to urge them on, but 
with a full knowledge of the duties required and the prob- 
ability that many would fall before their term expired, with 
uncovered heads and uplifted hands they swore to stand by 
the flao; until the last armed foe surrendered. 

I could not wait until the regiment received orders to come 
home, so came alone, took oft" my uniform, put on citizen's 
clothes, and began to look for employment. About the 12th 
of February I saw by the newspapers that the regiment had 
arrived in Boston. I could not keep away, and went to 
Beach Street Imrracks, where they were quartered. Almost 



the first man I met was Colonel Devereaux, who said, "What 
are you here for?" My answer was, "I wanted to see the 
boys." Drawing a paper from his pocket he said, "Get a 
uniform and equipments, and report for duty in half an hour." 
"But my uniform and equipments are at home," I replied. 
" Can't help it," said Colonel Devereaux, "I propose that you 
command your company in the parade to-day." So I went 
out, bought a cheap uniform, hired a set of equipments and 
reported for duty. I found that the paper read : " So much 
of General Order No. 492 as discharged First Lieut. John 
G. B. Adams, 19th Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers, is 
hereby revoked, and he is restored to duty without loss of pay, 
provided the vacancy has not lieen filled, evidence of which 
lie must furnish from the governor of his State." We were 
given a reception and dinner in Faneuil Hall; Governor 
Andrew, not being able to attend, was represented by our 
old commander, General Hincks. 

From Boston we went to Salem, where we were royally 
entertained, and then broke ranks with orders to report at 
Wenham in thirty-five days. While our receptions were 
grand, and showed that our hard services were appreciated, 
our joys were mingled with sadness. Everywhere Ave met 
friends of the boys who did not march back with us, and our 
eyes were often filled with tears as we clasped the hand of 
father, mother, sister or wife of some brave boy who had 
marched by our side, but now slept his last sleep in the rude 
gTave where we had tenderly laid him. 

The next day I went to the State House to see Governor 
Andrew. I had never met a live governor before, and as my 
feet reached the executive chamber my heart beat faster than 
It did when advancing at Gettysburg. Meeting the messen- 



ger at the door I was explaining my errand when the door 
opened, and the governor seeing me said, "Come in." On 
entering he said, "Well, my boy, what can I do for you?" 
I began to tell my story, when he interrupted me with, " I 
know all about it, and it is all right." Pointing to a roster 
of our regiment my name was in the list of first lieutenants, 
but it was at the bottom. "There, you see that is all right," 
said the governor. I replied, " Not quite ; I was the third 
in rank when discharged, now I am the tenth." "Oh, we 
will fix that," said he, and taking my name out moved them 
down one and put me in my proper place. All the time 
he was doing this he was talking and laughing, making me 
feel perfectly at home. I was so pleased with the inter- 
view that I would have signed an enlistment roll for thirty 
years if he would have promised to be governor during the 
time. 

The orders to the officers were to do all in our power to 
obtain recruits while we were at home, but although we 
worked hard we made little or no progress. Men were enlist- 
ing for coast defence regiments quite fast, but the 19th had 
no attractions, and I only recruited one man while at home. 
The thirty days were like one long holiday ; the towns gave 
receptions to the men, Company A being received by the 
town of West Newbury. The time soon came when we must 
march away, and at the end of thirty days every man reported 
at Wenham. We mustered five more than we brought home, 
— three deserters whom we had captured and two recruits. 
Two boys, Kogers and Fee, who were not old enough, stole 
away with us and were mustered in the field. I carried a new 
sword, presented by the citizens of Groveland, and several 
other officers were remembered in like manner. 



Great injustice was done to fighting regiments in allowing 
them to return without being filled to the maximum. While 
the State was filling its quota it was, as far as active service 
went, nearly all on paper. Every old regiment had many 
brave and well-qualified non-commissioned officers who could 
not be promoted because only two officers were allowed each 
company, and, besides, we were placed in line to do the duty 
of a regiment, when we were no larger than a company of 
heavy artillery. Yet our men did not complain ; with brave 
hearts, but with eyes filled with tears, they again bade good- 
by to loved ones, and marched away to face dangers that 
three years' experience had demonstrated would make vacant 
places in their thinned ranks. 

Colonel Devereaux did not return with us, and the regi- 
ment was in command of Lieutenant-Colonel Rice. We had 
a nice passage to New York, spent St. Patrick's day and 
Eph. Hall's birthday in Philadelphia, and in due time arrived 
in Washington. I was detailed officer of the day. Lieutenant 
Thompson officer of the guard. A little incident occurred 
here which I think is not known to the officers, but it shows 
the honor of the men of the 19th. After I was detailed 
Colonel Eice sent for me and said, "We leave here at six 
o'clock to-morrow morning. The officers vrill stay up in the 
city. I want you to keep every man here to be ready to 
move at the time stated." After the officers had gone I fell 
in the men and informed them that we were to move at six 
A.M. ; that as they were tired I should post no guard, and 
as Lieutenant Thompson and myself had business in the city 
we should not be able to stay with them, but would see them 
all at half-past five the next morning. Thompson and I 
returned about three o'clock, and when the colonel came at 



six every man was in line ready to march. The next night 
we spent at Alexandria. The officer of the day put on a 
strong guard, and half the men got out in some way and 
made things lively. Thompson and I were complimented 
by the colonel for faithful performance of duty when we 
should have been court-martialed. 

In a few days we arrived at our old camp and began anew 
our army life. The first night it snowed quite hard, and 
we who had been sleeping in nice, warm ])eds enjoyed the 
damp, cold ground, with snow for our covering. Active 
drilling began, reviews were frequent, and it was apparent 
we were soon to enter on an active campaign. Lieutenant- 
General Grant took command of the army, and we all felt 
that at last the boss had arrived. Unlike most of his pred- 
ecessors, he came with no flourish of trumpets, but in a 
quiet, business-like way. After a grand review by him we 
were ordered to division headquarters with the 20th Massa- 
chusetts for an exliibition drill. The 19tli drilled in the 
manual of arms, the 20th in ])attalion movements. Both 
regiments were highly complimented for their excellent 
work. 

The discipline of the army at this time was very strict. 
So many substitutes were l^eing received that the death 
penalty for desertions was often executed. We were called 
out to witness the first and, so far as I know, the only execu- 
tion by hanging. Thomas R. Dawson had been a member 
of Company A, 19th, 1)ut was transferred to the 20th Massa- 
chusetts when our men re-enlisted. He had been a soldier 
in the English army, and wore medals for l)ravery. One 
night while on picket he left his post, and, l)eing under the 
influence of liquor, went outside the lines and committed an 



assault upon an old lady. Dawson protested his innocence 
of the terrible crime, but acknowledged that he was drunk 
and had left his post. The woman swore against him, and 
the sentence of the court-martial was that he be hanared. 
The officers and men of the 19th did all in their power to 
save him ; we signed a petition to President Lincoln asking 
for his reprieve, and sent it by a Catholic chaplain, Dawson 
])eing a Catholic. The President would have been pleased 
to grant our prayer, but he said the complaint from army 
officers was that he was destrojdng the discipline of the army 
by so often setting aside the findings and sentences of courts- 
martial, and he dare not do it. 

April 14 was the day assigned for the execution. The 2d 
division of the 2d corps was formed in a hollow square, ranks 
opened, facing inward. Dawson was placed in an open 
wagon, seated on his coffin. With him rode the provost 
marshal and his spiritual advisor. The band was in advance, 
playing the dead march. Files of soldiers, with arms re- 
versed, marched on each flank, and in front and rear. As 
they passed our lines Dawson smiled and bowed to those he 
recognized. When he arrived at the scaffold, which had 
been erected in the centre of the square, he ran up the steps, 
and before the black cap was pulled down said, " Good-by, 
comrades, officers and men of the 19th. I thank you for 
what you have done for me. May you live long and die a 
happy death; I die an innocent man." The cap was then 
drawn down, the drop cut, and poor Dawson was launched 
into eternity, but not so soon as was intended ; the rope was 
new and stretched so much that his feet touched the gi'ound, 
and the provost marshal was obliged to take a turn in the 
rope. It was a horrible sight, and set me forever against 



execution by hanging. After he was pronounced dead by 
the surgeon he was taken down, placed in liis coffin, and 
lowered in a gi'ave that had been prepared. The troops 
marched past and looked into the grave. 

I presume that the impressions desired were produced 
upon the minds of the men, ])ut the remarks were that it was 
too bad to hang men when they were so hard to get, and if 
they had let him alone a few weeks Johnnie Reb would have 
saved them the trouble. 

The monotony of camp life was relieved by details for 
three days' picket duty. Our ranks were being increased 
by the return of detailed men and the arrival of recruits. 
Many were ordered to the ranks who had not carried a 
musket since the day they enlisted. The transportation 
beino- reduced to one wagon to a brigade, several who were 
ordered back were drivers of the festive mule. Among this 
number was Will Curtis of Company A. One day in pass- 
ing the wagon train a mule set up one of those unearthly 
snorts. Will looked at him, and said, "You need not laugh 
at me ; you may be in the ranks yourself l^efore Grant 
gets through with the army." 





