

About the middle of March we broke camp and took up 
our line of march for our first campaign. We bade good-by 
to our tents, which had sheltered us since we left Massachu- 
setts, and sent them to Washington with our extra personal 
baggage, where I expect they are to-day, as we never received 
them again. We marched to the river, then up the tow- 
path of the canal to Harper's Ferry, forded the Potomac at 
Point of Rocks, and for the first time our feet pressed the 
sacred soil of Virginia. We saw here the devastations of 
war, — the ruins of the old arsenal that had been burned by 
the reliels, the dilapidated and vacant houses, — but most 
interesting to us was the old engine-house, where John 
Brown made his gallant fight. This we found filled with 
rel)el prisoners. "Truly," we said, "his soul is marching 
on." As soon as arms were stacked we rushed to the arsenal 
ruins for relics. I found an old gun-lock and several other 
parts of muskets. These I packed in my knapsack, — and 
the next day threw them away. With other regiments 
we marched up the valley to join Banks's division, and 
liivouacked at Charlestown in the field where John Brown 
was hanged. 

The next morning Company A was ordered back to Har- 
per's Ferry for provost duty. The rest of the regiment 



marched on, but in a few days returned and took position 
on Bolivar Heights, occupying deserted houses. Captain 
Merritt was appointed provost marshal at the ferry and 
everything was soon in military order, the company quar- 
tered in houses, the officers boarding in the town. One day 
Captain Merritt, with a detail from the company, made a 
seizure of several barrels of whiskey and a keg of gin, which 
were taken to a vacant store and a guard placed over them. 
Somehow the keg of gin disappeared ; where it had gone 
no one knew. The next day was our last in town, having 
been ordered to join the regiment quite early in the morning.. 
I noticed some of the men were very happy, but as we 
had been called by the other companies '' Merritt's Sabbath 
school children," I thought it possible they were rehearsing 
for a Sabbath school concert. The increase of the spiritual 
manifestations told me that the cause of the inspiration must 
be the gin, and that it was not far away. After searching 
awhile I found the missing keg in the cellar. Unlike many 
of the men, it was nearly empty. In the midst of the seance 
Captain Merritt arrived. He came to order me to have the 
company in line ready to move at once. When he saw the 
condition of some of the men I guess he thought we had 
better move in ambulances. As we were going the rounds 
of the rooms we met Ben Falls, perfectly sober, having just 
been relieved from guard. Captain Merritt (referring to the 
condition of the company) said, "Ben, I am astonished." 
"Well," said Ben, "it is not my fault; I have been on 
guard, but I will get just as full as the rest as soon as I 
find the stuff." When the time came to march all were in 
fair condition, and before we reached Bolivar Heights, as 
good as ever. As it was the first ofience the men were let 



off with a lecture from the captain, and as the opportunity 
was never again presented, the offence was not repeated. 

With Captain Devereaux, who joined us at Muddy Branch, 
came more recruits, and the regiment was now full. Com- 
pany A having had for a few days one hundred and two 
enlisted men, several of the old men were discharged, bring- 
ing us down to the required number. A fine band was 
attached to the regiment, and ha\ang become very well 
drilled in the manual, our dress parades were ahnost perfect, 
and were witnessed by nearly all the soldiers and citizens in 
the town. 

March 24 we received marching orders. Crossing the 
river we took cars at Point of Rocks for Washington, where 
we arrived the next day. We remained in Washington two 
days, then marched to the navy yard and took the old trans- 
port "North America" for Fortress Monroe. 

In no place is the life of a soldier so hard as on a trans- 
port. Crowded between decks like cattle, unable to cook 
or even make coflee, they must subsist on what rations are 
issued and drink the water from the casks. The crews are 
always liberally supplied with miserable whiskey, which 
they sell at a high price to those who will buy, and a few 
men are always found in every regiment who will get drunk 
if they have a chance. On shore the guard-house can be 
resorted to, but on board ship there is no relief from this 
unbearable nuisance. I do not want it understood that 
drunkenness was general in the army, for many men went 
through the war without touching liquor, and in my four 
years' experience I never saw an oflicer or enlisted man 
intoxicated when going into battle. I believe that what was 
true during the war has been true since, and that in no 



26  

organization — not temperance — can be found so many 
total abstainers to the number of men as can be found in the 
ranks of the Grand Army of the Republic. 

Our trip down the Potomac was pleasant, but soon after 
leaving the river a sudden storm struck us ; our old craft 
leaked badly and we feared we should })e swamped. The 
captain dared not continue, and put back to Point Lookout. 
Here we found a deserted hotel and several cottages. We 
did not stop to register, but took possession of the rooms 
and passed a comfortable night. Next morning we re- 
embarked, and reached Fortress Monroe during the night. 
The following day we landed and marched to Hampton, 
where we found the Army of the Potomac awaiting the 
arrival of our division. We encamped here about two 
weeks, quartered in Sibley tents. We were not required 
to drill often, and the time was pleasantly passed in visiting 
the several Massachusetts regiments in the army. 

Early in April the grand Army of the Potomac moved 
towards Yorktown. It ivas a grand army, every regiment 
having its full quota. The experience of the previous 
months had made them reliable as soldiers. Incompetent 
officers and disabled men had been discharged, and those 
now on duty were filled with patriotic enthusiasm. They 
only desired a chance to fight, clear up the war and go 
home. Every man had confidence in General McClellan, 
and almost l^elieved that he was sent l)y the Lord to lead us 
to victory. Whenever he appeared every head was uncov- 
ered and every voice raised in loud hurrahs. 

We marched two days and encamped about two miles 
from the enemy's works before Yorktown. We pitched our 
shelter tents for the first time, and began army life in 



earnest. Our rations were served to us uncooked, and 
company cooks ordered to the ranks. A company cook is 
a peculiar being ; he generally knows less about cooking 
than any man in the company. Not being able to learn the 
drill, and too dirty to appear on inspection, he is sent to 
the cook house to get him out of the ranks. We were not 
sorry when the cook house was abolished. 

The first day after our arrival the 19th and 20th Massa- 
chusetts regiments, under command of General Dana, were 
ordered to reconnoitre the enemy's works. We discovered 
a fortification near Winn's Mill, and the 19th was ordered 
to march through a piece of woods, then along the front, 
and discern its extent. We did this under a sharp fire of 
musketry. It was not our intention to attack, but as Com- 
pany E, commanded by the brave but impulsive Captain 
Mahoney, was fired upon, he ordered the men to charge the 
works, and would have done so had not Colonel Hincks 
recalled him. Like a true Irishman that he was, he did not 
propose to be fired upon and not fight. The regiment 
behaved splendidly under fire ; when the musketry was 
the hottest the clear voice of Colonel Hincks was heard. 
'' Change front, forward on first company ! " was the order, 
and it was executed as correctly as on drill. We lost the 
first man killed in this skirmish. Andrew Fountain of 
Company D, Captain Wass, and several of Company K 
were wounded. 

We went into camp and began to erect fortifications ; for 
nearly a month we were engaged in that work, besides 
building corduroy roads and doing picket duty. While on 
picket Wm. Morgan was badly wounded by a piece of shell. 
He was the first man wounded in Company A. 



28  

Our camp was located in a swamp ; the rain was almost 
constant, and the ground like a sponge. Sickness prevailed 
to an alarming extent; it was not an uncommon thing to 
march half of the company to sick call, but not all who went 
were sick. Active service had tired some who, when we 
were in camp in Maryland, were anxious to fight, and were 
constantly grumbling because we were not ordered in. 
Picket duty under fire had given these few the " shell 
fever." Loss of voice was the trouble with many, caused 
by severe colds. One day I marched my squad of invalids 
to the hospital tent ; with them was one of the loudest 
talking men in the company, but that morning he could 
only whisper. After the doctor had examined them all he 
gave me the list of excused, and my voiceless comrade was 
not down. "Hasn't he excused me?" said B. "No," was 
my reply, in a voice that could be heard a quarter of a mile. 
"D — n him, I am the sickest man in the company," was his 
indignant answer ; but he went on duty just the same, and 
never again answered sick call until wounded. Such cases 
were the exception, however, and every day the number 
grew less, as our men were ordered back to general hospital. 

The works we were erecting were of the strongest kind, 
as it was intended to besiege Yorktown, and the heaviest 
guns were mounted for that purpdse. Sunday morning, 
May 4, found the regiment on picket duty. It had been a 
lively night, as the shelling had been constant. Lieutenant 
Hume, in charge of an outpost, believed that the rebels had 
left the works in his front ; sending his opinion back to the 
commanding officer, he started to cross the field. No gun 
was fired and he continued on. The regiment was then 
ordered forward double quick, as others had seen Lieutenant 



Hume and were anxious to be first in the works, ])ut the 
19th could run either to the front or rear and our flags were 
the first to float from the fortifications. We found the port- 
holes filled with Quaker guns (logs of wood). Men of 
straw were stationed as gunners. Every indication of a 
hasty retreat was shown, as in the camps in the rear of the 
works we found fires and breakfast smoking hot, which we 
eagerly disposed of. We also found letters ready for mail- 
ing, which went by northern mail instead of southern, as we 
sent them home. 

We marched back to our old camp, packed up, and Mon- 
day morning, in a drenching rain, marched from Winn's 
Mill to Yorktown. We were on the road all night and only 
made three miles. The mud was knee deep ; we could not 
go out of line as the ground was full of torpedoes, yet, in 
all our misery. Company A started one of our old camp 
songs, which was taken up by other companies in the regi- 
ment, then by other regiments in the brigade, and soon the 
entire army was singing. This continued nearly all night. 
The next day we took steamers, and at night arrived at 
West Point. We remained on Ijoard until morning, then 
landed, and finding our forces engaged we were ordered 
to support Captain Porter, 1st Massachusetts battery. At 
West Point we saw a feature that we never saw before, or at 
any other time during the war. It was a human telegraph. 
A line of men was deployed some twenty feet apart, and 
extended from the line of battle to headquarters. The men 
at the front would start the message, and it would be 
repeated by each turning the head to the rear as he spoke. 
One message I remember, — " Send a man to take Daniel 
Webster's place." We supposed Daniel had been shot, but 



30  

if a man was wanted to fill the place of our lamented Daniel 
Webster, we did not think Company A could spare the man. 
After a sharp fight the rebels fell back and we began the 
march up the peninsula. The condition of the roads was 
such that we halted more than we marched, but at last we 
reached the banks of the Chickahominy River, and were 
ordered on picket between Bottom and Grape Vine bridges. 

Saturday, May 31, the battle of Fair Oaks began. We 
were not relieved from picket until Sunday morning, when 
we were ordered to the front ; here we were marched from 
right to left and left to right, constantly under fire but not 
really engaged. We were at times passing over portions of 
the field that had been held by the rebels, and the ground 
was strewn with the dead and wounded. When the battle 
ended we were ordered on picket, where we remained ten 
days, having a brush with the rebel pickets every day. We 
were then given a few days' rest and ordered to the front, 
where we threw up a line of works and remained there while 
the army held the advance position. 

On the 25th of June General Hooker asked for one regi- 
ment from Sumner's corps to assist in the attack on the 
rebel lines in our front. The 19th was selected. We 
advanced in front of our intrenchments and were soon hotly 
engaged. Led on by our gallant colonel, we soon had the 
rebels in full retreat, and had the army advanced at that 
time I am confident we could have marched into Richmond 
in five hours, as we were only a few miles from the city. 
Just as we were ready to make the final charge an aid came 
to Colonel Hincks and said, " You are ordered to fall back." 
"What for?" said the colonel. "Don't you see we have got 
them on the run ? " But the order was peremptory and 



back we went. Our loss was very heavy for the short time 
engaged. Lieutenant Warner of Company H and several 
men were killed ; Lieut. J. H. Rice, Sergt. Samuel H. 
Smith, William R. Meldon, Benjamin Jellison and others, 
in all about sixty, badly wounded. 

While we had been under fire nearly all the time since 
arriving at Yorktown, this w^as the first square fight in 
which we had been engaged. We had no chance for the use 
of tactics as the woods were thick and we could see little of 
the enemy ; but the oflScers and men behaved splendidly, 
and our only regret was to lose so many and accomplish 
nothing, an experience that the Army of the Potomac often 
had in the battles that followed. 





