

Company A had in its ranks men of every trade and pro- 
fession, not excepting the clergy. Our minister might have 
been a good soldier in the army of the Lord, but was not a 
success in the Army of the Potomac. At the lirst fire he 
scattered and could not be rallied. I said to him, "You 
have been telling the Ijoys to get ready to die, but you 
are not in good marching order for the other shore your- 
self." " That is not it," replied Levi; "I should not have 
enlisted ; it always made me nervous to hear a gun fired and 
I don't believe I can get used to it." As will be shown later 
he never did. 

Returning to our works we were ordered to throw up 
traverses between companies. At night cheering began on 
our right. An aid rode down the line and gave orders to 
Colonel Hincks to have the regiment cheer. "What for?" 
said the colonel. "I do not know," was the reply; "it 
is orders from General McClellan to General Dana." " Give 
my compliments to General Dana and say that we did our 
cheering in front of the line yesterday." Soon we were or- 
dered to pack up and leave everything not absolutely nec- 
essary to carry. We were ordered into line and remained 
under arms all night. The next morning we found the 



retreat had begun, and, before we had recovered from our 
surprise, were ordered in to support Tompkins's Rhode 
Island battery, and the enemy was soon upon us. 

At the headquarters of the commissary department all 
was confusion. A pile of hard-tack as large as Faneuil 
Hall was set on fire. Heads of commissary whiskey barrels 
were knocked in and the whiskey ran in streams. This was 
also set on fire and men were burned as they tried to drink 
it. Blankets, clothing, stores of all kinds were destroyed, 
and one would think as an army we were going out of busi- 
ness, but such was not the case, as we had enough on our 
hands to last us the next seven days. 

We made a stand at Peach Orchard and found that our 
corps was to cover the retreat of the army. We were 
slowly driven back to Savage Station, where a battery went 
into position and we lay in the rear as its support. One 
who has never supported a battery can form no idea of this 
duty, which is to lie just as snug to the ground as you can 
and take those shells coming from the enemy that the battery 
does not want. Our position at Savage was a dangerous 
one. Shells were constantly bursting in our ranks and our 
l)attery was being severely tested. It did not seem that 
our lines could be held much longer, yet we knew that our 
wagon train was crossing the bridge and we must stand our 
ground until they were safely over. We heard a cheer, and 
looking to the left saw Meagher's Irish brigade moving for- 
ward on the run. The entire corps, forgetful of danger, 
sprang to their feet and cheered them wildly. On they 
went ; grape and cannister ploughed through their ranks, 
but they closed up the gaps and moved on up to the mouth 
of the rebel batteries, whose guns were captured, and the 



34  

firing that had been so disastrous ceased. The Irish brigade 
held the line until night, when our army was withdrawn. 

It was the hottest day of the year. As we changed front 
many fell from sunstroke. Captain Wass was so badly 
affected that he lost his reason and never fully recovered. 
Lieutenant Hume was left by the roadside and was soon 
captured by the enemy. At night we were stationed at the 
bridge until the last regiment was over, when we crossed 
and destroyed the bridge. 

After we had rested a few hours we were ordered back, 
and sunrise found us engaged with the enemy. In the after- 
noon the terrible battle of Glendale was fought. This was 
June 30. About two o'clock p.m. we were ordered to 
charge the enemy, who were in a belt of woods. To do 
this we must charge over an open field. Faces turned pale 
as we looked over the ground. We grasped our muskets 
firmer and waited for the order. We had kept our knap- 
sacks until this time, — they had become priceless treasures, 
filled as they were with little articles for our comfort made 
by loving hands, and with letters from dear ones at home, — 
but we threw them into a pile, and the voice of Colonel 
Hincks was heard: "Forward, double-quick," and we 
moved across the field and entered the woods. Here we 
met a line clothed in Union ])lue, and thinking it was the 
7th Michigan, of our brigade, — a regiment loved by every 
ofiicer and man of the 19th, — we reserved our fire, and 
cried, "Don't fire, boys, we are the 19th Massachusetts." 
A galling fire in our faces drove us back, but we promptly 
moved forward again, still thinking it was the 7th Michigan 
and that they would see their mistake. Again we were 
repulsed, and l)elieving we were mistaken, and that the line 



was composed of rebels in our uniforms, we charged with a 
will. As they rose to receive us we saw that this time we 
were not mistaken, as they were rebels clothed in part in our 
uniforms. We had a hand-to-hand tight for a few moments, 
when we discovered that we were being flanked and with- 
drew to the edo-e of the woods. 

Under a terrible iire we changed front. Our brave Major 
How fell, never to rise again ; Colonel Hincks was supposed 
to be mortally wounded and was carried from the field ; 
Lieut. David Lee was killed, and the ground was strewn 
with our dead and wounded comrades. For a moment the 
regiment was in confusion, but Captain Weymouth, assisted 
by Sergeant-Major Newcomb and others, rallied the men on 
the colors and the line was at once reformed and our posi- 
tion held. Capt. Edmund Rice was in command of the 
regiment. He was noted for his coolness and bravery, and 
the men had confidence in him. As I looked down the line 
of Company A many places were vacant. Ed. Hale, Volney 
P. Chase, Charles Boynton and several others were killed, 
while the list of wounded could not be ascertained at that 
time. Company A had lost men by death, but this was the 
first time any of our number had been killed in action. 

Charles Boynton was one of my townsmen. He was an 
eccentric man and had troubled Captain Merritt by his 
peculiar ideas of drill, but he was as brave and patriotic 
a man as ever shouldered a musket. He had no patience 
with the slow movements of the army, and I have often 
heard him say that he wanted to fight every day and close 
up the job. When advancing in line he would constantly 
rush ahead of the company, his only desire being to get a 
shot at the rebels. I do not think it would be showinsj dis- 



36  

respect to his memory should I relate one or two of the little 
dialogues between Captain Merritt and Boynton. Our regi- 
ment had a peculiar drill in the manual. It was formulated 
by Colonel Devereaux, and is nearly what is used by the 
army to-day. After loading we stood with our little finger 
on the head of the rammer until the order was given to 
shoulder arms. One day on drill Captain Merritt looked 
down the line and saw Boynton with his hand by his side. 
"Put your little finger on the head of the rammer, Boyn- 
ton," sang out Captain Merritt. "I won't do it," replied 
Boynton. " Won't do it ! AVhy not? " " Because it is all 
nonsense ; my gun is loaded, and do you suppose I would 
stand up in battle like a darned fool with my little finger on 
the head of my rammer? No, sir, I propose to drill just as 
I intend to fight." 

Another day the order was, "Eight shoulder, shift arms." 
The proper way was to make three motions, but Boynton 
did it in one. "Make three motions, Boynton," said Cap- 
tain Merritt. "Didn't I get my gun on my shoulder as 
quick as any man in the company ? " was the reply. Cap- 
tain Merritt was discouraged and ordered me to punish 
Boynton, but I explained his peculiarities, and assured the 
captain that he would earn his thirteen dollars a month when 
fighting began. He let the matter drop. Had the Union 
army been composed entirely of men like Charles Boynton 
the war would have ended long before it did. 

We held our position until midnight. It was the saddest 
night I ever spent. The dead and wounded of l)oth armies 
lay between the lines. The wounded were constantly call- 
ing on their comrades for water, and we could hear calls for 
Mississippi, Georgia and Virginia, mingled with those for 


Michigan, New York and Massachusetts. Brave men from 
our regiment crawled over the field, giving water to friend 
and foe alike. About midnight the order was whispered 
down the line to move. I had l)een from rio;ht to left of the 
company keeping the men awake, as we expected the order. 
As still as possible we crawled over the field. We had gone 
but a short distance when, looking back, I saw one member 
of the company had not started. Thinking he had fallen 
asleep I returned, and shaking him said, " Come, come ! " 
As I drew close to him my eyes rested on the face of Jona- 
than Hudson, cold in death. He had been killed in the early 
evening as we lay in line and his death was not known to 
his comrades near him. It was the saddest sensation I ever 
experienced. When we arrived at the road we found many 
of our wounded. Colonel Hincks was on a stretcher, and 
as the ambulances were full he was carried a long distance 
before one could be found. Captain Devereaux was also 
liadly wounded and had to ])e carried. We started with the 
body of Major How in a blanket as we had no stretchers, 
])ut being so very heavy we were forced to leave him. 

Without any regimental formation we began our weary 
march to Malvern Hill, where we arrived at daylight, were 
at once ordered to support a battery, and witnessed one of 
the most terril^le artillery l^attles of the war. In the after- 
noon our })rigade was ordered to the woods and held the 
right of the army. The next morning, in a drenching rain, 
we started for Harrison's Landing. We marched in three 
lines, but it was not an army, it was a mob. Artillery was 
stuck in the mud, wagons were abandoned and ])urned by 
the roadside. The only thought of every one was to get to 
Harrison's Landing as soon as possible. Some did not stop 



38  

at the landing but took boats for Washington. Among 
these was our minister, Levi. He had managed to keep out 
of every battle, and now deserted, joining the advance 
guard in Canada. 

Harrison's Landing when dry was a sandy plain ; when 
we arrived it was a sea of mud. Without shelter, overcoats 
or blankets we dropped in the mud, and being so exhausted, 
having been mthout sleep, except the little naps caught in 
line of battle, for seven days, we soon forgot our misery. 
It was two days before we could reorganize our companies. 
Men were coming in who we expected were killed or 
captured, but July 4 upon calling the roll, we found that 
more than half of the men who had left Massachusetts with 
us less than a year before had either been killed in battle, 
died of disease or were sick or wounded in general hospital. 
The death-rate at Harrison's Landing was fearful. Men 
who had stood the retreat now broke down and soon died. 
Every hour in the day we could hear the dead march, as 
comrade after comrade was laid at rest. The subject for 
discussion around the camp-fire was the disaster to the 
Union army. Newspapers called it "an important change 
of base." We knew that some one had been outgeneralled, 
and although the men had confidence in General McClellan, 
we believed that while we had been digging and dying before 
Yorktown we should have been advancing and fighting. 

Looking at the campaign in the most charitable light pos- 
sible, the fact remained that on April 4 the finest army ever 
mustered began the advance on Eichmond ; that we had 
been within five miles of that city, and that July 4 found the 
army on the banks of the James River, with less than half 
of the number it had three months before. We were not 



disheartened. Many had expected that 1862 would see the 
end of the war, but it now looked as though those who were 
spared would see the end of their three years' enlistment. 
The losses in officers had been such that many promotions 
were made. Four enlisted men were promoted second 
lieutenants, and I was one of the number. I was assigned 
to Company I, Capt. J. F. PlymjDton. By a misunder- 
standing between Colonel Hincks and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Devereaux, First Sergeant Driver and myself did not receive 
our commissions until August, although we continued as 
acting second lieutenants, the two commissioned by recom- 
mendation of Colonel Hincks not being assigned to duty. 

It was impossible to obtain officers' uniforms, so I bought 
a pair of brass shoulder-straps, sewed them on my well-worn 
blouse, borrowed a sword of Lieutenant Mumford and went 
on duty, as verdant an officer as could be found in the army 
of the Potomac. 

About the middle of August I was ordered to report to 
First Lieut. John P. Eeynolds for special duty. We were 
to take charge of the oruard of the division wao;on train that 
was ordered to Fortress Monroe. Our duty was an impor- 
tant one. We knew we were liable to attack at any time 
by guerillas, and constant vigilance was required. We 
often met small parties of mounted citizens who rode past 
our train. We believed they were "taking us in," but we 
had not arrived at the time when men were arrested on sus- 
picion, so we let them pass but kept our train well covered. 
We arrived at Fortress Monroe in due time, turned over 
the train and reported to the regiment at Newport News, 
they having marched a few days after we were ordered 
away. 



40  

While our duty as the advance guard had been arduous, 
we had not suffered as much as those who marched with the 
regiment. They had marched rapidly over dusty roads, 
under a broiling sun, and many had been sunstruck. Among 
the number was Capt. William A. Hill. He was not able to 
speak above a whisper for several days, and his condition was 
serious ; but his courage was good and he remained on duty 
with the regiment. The men having rested a day, and being 
now veteran soldiers, had forgotten their hardships, and 
when we arrived were nearly all in the James River hunting 
for oysters. 

On August 24, the Ijrigade embarked on the steamship 
"Atlantic" for Washington, arriving at Alexandria the 
28th, — just one year from the day we left Massachusetts. 





