
We were hurried to the rear, the rebels relieving us of 
our hats, belts and other personal property as we went. 
Captain Hume had been a prisoner before and thought he 
understood the rules of civilized warfare. A rebel officer 
demanded my belt. Captain Hume said, " Don't give it to 
him, Jack. Private property is to be respected, and all he 
has a right to claim is your sword." But the rebel was not 
so far advanced as this in his study of the articles of war, and 
turning on Hume, with his revolver and a volley of oaths, 
made him give up his belt. I gave him mine without 
more argument. Sergt. J. E. Hodgkins of Company K 
had received a nice little ounce hat from home. A big 
rebel standing near the battery on the hill saw it and, like a 
hawk after its prey, sailed for it, snatching it from his head and 
throwing him his old one, which would weigh five pounds. 

This treatment was a surprise to us. Few regiments in the 
Army of the Potomac had captured more prisoners than the 
19th, yet I never saw private property of any kind taken 
from a rebel or heard an ungentlemanly word spoken ; on the 
contrary, had often seen the boys share their rations with 
them and in every way make them comfortable. 

When well beyond the lines we were halted and took 
account of stock. We found that we numbered sixteen hun- 
dred men and sixty-seven commissioned ofiicers. 



As we had placed our colors in the rear of the line, — hav- 
ing dug a pit for Mike Scannell and the other sergeant, — we 
trusted they were safe, but soon a rebel horseman rode by with 
them, and trotting in his rear we saw Mike. " How came you 
to lose the colors, Mike? " I asked. "I'll tell you," said he. 
" We lay in the pit dug for us, and the first we knew the rebels 
came rushing over and said, 'You damned Yankee, give me 
that flag.' 'Well,' I said, 'it is twenty years since I came to 
this country, and you are the first man who ever called me 
a Yankee. You can take the flag for the compliment.' " 

We could not understand how the rebels got in our rear, 
but from the l)est information we could obtain, learned that 
the 2d and 5th corps were ordered to advance their lines. 
The 2d did as ordered. By some mistake the 5th did not, 
and there was a large gap between the two corps. The reb- 
els had seen this, and keeping us hotly engaged in the front, 
had sent a division around our left flank, and the result was 
we were "gobbled." 

The officer who had charge of my squad was Lieut. Wm. 
D. McDonald, Company C, 8th Alabama, Wilcox's old 
brigade, Anderson's division, A. N. V. He was disposed to 
be kind to us, as he had formerly resided in New York and 
knew Yankees were human, but he was soon relieved and 
ordered back to the front. The provost guard took charge, 
and we were marched to a field just outside the city of Peters- 
burg and camped for the night. We were visited by squads 
of thieves, each reducing our baggage, which was none too 
large at first. Some of our men had a few hard tack. The 
officers had no rations. 

The next morning we were ordered to a small island in the 
Appomattox River. As we marched over a little bridge 



106  

guards were stationed to take our haversacks, canteens and 
other property yet remaining, but we soon saw the game and 
sent over a few empty lianded, who, coming down the shore, 
took charge of the traps we threw to them. By this flank 
movement we saved our property. We remained on the island 
that day. No rations were issued and we began to realize 
our position. We were among a new race of people and saw 
the beauties of an inflated currency. On our side of the line 
the '' New York Herald " (doul&gt;le sheet) sold for five cents ; 
on this side the "Richmond Examiner," a little, dirty paper, 
was one dollar, — everything in the same proportion. Every 
few minutes a large, lank, lantern-jawed rebel would come 
up, look us over, and ask about the only question they had 
on hand : " What did you uns come down here to fight we uns 
for?" It mattered little what the answer was, he would pass 
on if he did not find any plunder and ask the same question 
of the next group. The captain of our guard was a spruce 
little chap and wanted his boots shined ; but the so-called 
Confederacy was out of boot-blacking, so he sent one of his 
men to us for that article. After asking several and receiv- 
ing various answers he called to his officer, "Captain, they 
all don't tote it." 

About three o'clock on the morning of the 24th we were 
ordered to fall in and were marched through the city to the 
depot, packed in the cars, and were "on to Richmond," 
where we arrived about noon. We were given a rousing 
reception. Men, women and children thronged the streets 
and were sure they had captured the entire Union army. 
They said, "Right smart lot of you all this time, I reckon." 
The men swore, the women spit at us, the children joined in 
the general cry. Just before we turned down Carey Street 



EXPEBIENCES IN BEBEL PBISONS. 107 

to go to Libby we halted. I was standing a little aside from 
the rest, thinking over the situation and whistling to keep 
together what little courage I had left, when a rebel officer 
rode up and said, " We will take that whistle out of you in a 
little while. Corn bread is gitting pretty mouldy down in 
Libby." I said I guessed not. It was my intention to 
whistle as loud the last day as I did the first. " Oh, I have 
heard lots of you fellows talk, but Dick Turner soon fixes 
them," was his reply. This was the first promise of starvation. 

We moved forward and soon stood in front of Libby prison. 
I could almost read over the door, " He who enters here leaves 
hope behind." We marched in and passed to the rear of the 
room. As I looked out of the window I saw them carry out 
four of our dead boys in blankets, all of them naked, having 
been stripped of their clothing. We hardly knew what was 
to come next but had not long to wait, for Dick Turner, who 
had charge, ordered part of us to fall in. Lieutenant Chub- 
buck had kept a small revolver in his pocket until this time, 
but now threw it out of the window into the canal in rear of 
the prison. We were ordered to stand in line, unbutton 
our clothing, and, as Turner passed down, were made to 
open our mouths that he might see if we had any greenbacks 
in them. He said those who gave up their money should 
have it again, but those who did not would lose it. I had 
sixty-two dollars and had just time to put ten between the 
soles of my shoe. The rest I gave to Turner. After he had 
picked a squad he ordered them to the front of the room, 
away from the rest. 

The front door was guarded by a thing I supposed they 
called a soldier, dressed in a black, swallow-tailed coat, his 
head crowned with a stove-pipe hat and armed with a sport- 



108 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT. 

ing rifle. He was so thin that he could never be hit by a 
bullet, as he could hide behind his ramrod in time of danger. 
I called to the boys, " See what they call a soldier," but as 
he brought up his musket to fire I found it was alive and I 
retired in good order. 

Lieut. Thomas J. Hastings of the 15th tore a piece oflF his 
shelter tent to use as a towel and was made to mark time 
while the rest were being searched. After our names, rank, 
regiment, place and date of capture were recorded we were 
marched to a room in the third story. The one next to ours 
was filled with our men. A brick partition wall divided us, 
but some of them made a hole through, and, as they had not 
been searched, passed a few things to us. Mark Kimball 
gave me ten dollars, Mike O'Leary a razor, another gave me 
a spoon. The razor and spoon I carried all through my 
prison life, and have them yet. The money I returned to 
Mark some two weeks later. We were not allowed to rest 
long, as I suppose they thought we required exercise, and 
were marched to another room over the office. The rooms 
were perfectly bare. We had no blankets or dishes, as 
everything had been taken from us. We sat down on the 
floor, about as blue a collection of humanity as was ever 
assembled. 

In a short time Turner came in to look us over. I asked 
him if it was not about time for dinner, as no rations had 
l)een issued since we had been captured, two days before. 
He did not like my question and swore at me for several 
minutes, winding up by saying that no rations would be 

issued until the next day, and I should be lucky if I got 

any then. I replied that as I was not acquainted with the 
other hotels in the city I guessed I would wait. He swore 



EXPERIENCES IN REBEL PRISONS. 109 

some more, said he reckoned I would, — and I did. At 
night we lay down on the hard floor and tried to sleep, but 
were so hungry we could not. Besides our hunger we had 
many other things to contend with. When we entered the 
room we thought it was vacant but were mistaken, for we 
discovered that it was inhabited by "very many curious 
things that crawl about and fly on wings." 

Morning came at last. We got up, washed in an old tank 
in one corner of the room, wiped our faces on our shirts, 
and waited for breakfast. While waiting; I went to the win- 
dow to look out. In a second I found myself on the floor 
and heard the report of a musket. The guard in front had 
iired at me, l)ut a comrade had seen him as he brought up his 
piece and had pulled me down. Had he not done so some 
other fellow would have written this stor3\ 

About ten o'clock rations came in and we eagerly fell in to 
receive them. They consisted of a piece of corn bread as 
large as a quarter of a brick and twice as hard, bean soup, 
and a very small piece of rotten bacon. How to draw the 
bean soup was the question, as we had nothing to draw it in. 
Lieutenant McGinnis was in rear of me. He said he must 
have some soup, and, taking a broken pane of glass, he fell 
in and the line moved on. When it came my turn the negro 
who issued the rations dipped in his gill dipper and I held 
out my hands. He turned it in. The soup ran through my 
fingers, but I secured a few beans. McGinnis held out his 
pane of glass and drew four rations, one on each corner. We 
did not touch the bacon. Hungry as we were the smell sat- 
isfied us. We went upstairs and sat down to dinner. I ate 
half my bread, and thinking it unwise to make a pig of myself 
at my first banquet in Richmond, placed the rest on the win- 



110  

dow sill, sat down and looked at it, then ate a little more and 
a little more, until all was gone, and I was as hungry as 
before. 

The next day some negroes came in to swab the floor, and 
among them we of the 19th recognized little Johnnie, Colonel 
Devereaux's servant. We had left him at White House 
Landing, sick with fever, when we started on the retreat 
down the Peninsula in the spring of 1862, and supposed he 
died in the hospital, but he must have been captured, as here 
he was. I was near enough to whisper "Johnnie." He 
recognized me and also saw Lieutenant McGinnis, but said 
nothing. The next day when he came in he dropped some 
soap near where I stood. He looked as though he was hav- 
ing a hard time of it. 

Our enlisted men were not confined in Libby but in an old 
tobacco warehouse across the street. Three days later we 
saw them march past on their way to Belle Isle. We watched 
our chances and exchanged greetings with them. The lines 
between officers and men in the 19th were not closely drawn. 
Most of the officers had come from the ranks and the only 
difference was in the pay. We would have been glad to 
have remained with them, but the rebels ordered otherwise. 

We remained in Libby about a week, receiving re-enforce- 
ments nearly every day, until our squad of officers numbered 
over a hundred. One morning we were ordered to fall in. 
The same old blankets were given us, dirty and torn, but 
better than none. We were told that we were going south. 
A very small loaf of white bread was given each man, but 
having no way to carry it and being very hungry, we ate it 
before we left the prison. We filed out and marched past 
Castle Thunder. This place was used for the confinement of 





political prisoners. We saw several women and one of them 
had a palm-leaf fan. On one side was the stars and stripes. 
As we looked up she turned that side to us and some one 
said, "Boys, see the old flag." Major Turner rode back and 
said, "Break the head of the next man who says 'old flag,'" 
so we did not cheer, but the sight gladdened our hearts. 
We crossed the river to Manchester. A large crowd were 
at the station. They told us that our men were dying fast 
down south and that "you all will get your little piece of 
land down in Georgia," a prophecy which proved true in very 
many instances. 

The train backed into the depot and we were ordered to 
"get aboard the coach." A passenger car was in front, and 
we marched in, thinking that we were to be transported in 
good shape ; but when every seat was taken, they continued 
to come in, and our entire party, numbering more than a 
hundred, packed into this one car. 

We rode all day without food or water, and found our- 
selves the next morning at Lynchburg. We were confined 
in the cars until noon, and it is impossible to express in 
words what we suffered. We could not walk about, the 
car was so crowded ; we would get down on the floor, stand 
up, look out of the window, but nothing could drive away 
the terril^le hunger. Outside the cars were hucksters sellino- 
bread, pies and fruit, and the sight made us wild. Men 
opened the windows, took rings from their fingers, and sold 
them for loaves of bread. I had no rings or anything val- 
uable to sell. I had my ten dollar greenback in my sHoe, 
but the orders were very strict in regard to the people tak- 
ing greenbacks, and I dare not try to pass it for fear the 
guard would see me and confiscate it. 



112  

At noon we were ordered out of the car, and after some 
delay rations were issued, consisting of twenty small hard 
tack and a small piece of bacon not properly cured and cov- 
ered with maggots. This was to last us four days, as we 
were to march from Lyncli])urg to Danville, our cavalry 
having destroyed the railroad between the two places. As I 
had eaten nothing for thirty-six hours I ate twelve of my 
hard tack, leaving eight for the next three days. I did not 
care much for the bacon, but tied it up in an old rag, and, 
finding a stick, carried it over my shoulder. 

They marched us five miles, and camped for the night. 
The sun was so hot that most of my bacon melted and ran 
down my back, but the maggots still lived. We were com- 
manded by a major who had lost an arm in the service, and 
had also l)een a prisoner. He was a first-class man and 
understood how to march men ; would turn us out at day- 
light, march until nine or ten o'clock, then rest until three. 
He always selected our camp near a stream of good water, 
and did everything possible for our comfort. I am sorry I 
cannot recall his name, as he was about the only man I met 
in the south who considered our comfort in any way. 

Our enlisted men joined us here. We were not allowed 
to visit them, but, passing them on the road, had a chance 
to chat a little. 

Our o'uard was not thought sufiicient to take care of us, 
and it was constantly receiving reinforcements from the 
cradle and the grave. At every cross-road we were joined 
by old men on horseback and in carriages, and boys from 
ten to sixteen years of age, armed with shot-guns and pistols. 
We could get along very well with the men, l)ut the boys 
were anxious to shoot a Yankee, and we had to keep our eyes 




open. Lieutenant McGinnis was much interested in the 
boys, and would ask them if their fathers allowed them to 
play with a gun, and if they were not afraid to lie out doors 
evenino-s. 

Our march was through a splendid country and the days 
were fine. We had many good singers among the officers, 
and as we marched through a village they would strike up 
a song. It would pass down the line and be taken up by 
the men. Passing through Pittsylvania they were singing 
"Home Again." I saw several women who were watching 
us wipe away tears. Whether the tears were of sympathy 
for us, or because the scene recalled loved ones in the rebel 
army, we did not know, but it was the only manifestation 
of anything but hate I ever saw from a rebel woman. 

Just before we went into camp one night a citizen walked 
beside us for a short distance and I saw him exchange glances 
with Captain Hume. After he passed on Captain Hume 
said, " We will have something to eat to-night. That man 
is a mason ; he says we are going into camp soon and he 
will come down and bring me some food." We soon after 
filed out of the road and into a field. The captain's brother- 
mason came and walked around until he saw Hume, then 
passed near and dropped a package containing bread and 
meat. Although not a mason at that time I shared the 
refreshments furnished by the craftsman. 

We continued the march until July 4, when we arrived 
at Danville. Here we were turned over to the provost 
guard and placed in an old warehouse. Our humane com- 
mander left us, and our best wishes followed him. We 
were brought back to the realization that we were prisoners 
by the brute in command. We were very hungiy, but that 






did not trouble them, and we waited until afternoon for 
rations. At night we were taken out and marched to the 
depot. Although it was the anniversary of our nation's birth 
we saw no demonstrations of any kind, and I do not believe 
that a citizen of the town knew it was a national holiday ; 
but we remembered it, and while waiting for the train to be 
made up sung " Star Spangled Banner " and other patriotic 
songs. We collected quite a crowd, but they manifested no 
interest, only stood and looked at us. 

The train ready, we were ordered on l)oard and packed in 
close box cars, — fifty-six in a car. Only one door was 
allowed to be opened, and that was filled with rebel guards. 
We had no room to lie down, ])ut were forced to stand or sit 
cramped up on the floor. We lay our heads on each other's 
shoulders and tried to sleep, but it was too hot. We had 
no water, but one of the oflicers had an old two-quart pail, 
and by coaxing, the guard filled it twice out of the tank of the 
locomotive. I never passed a more uncomfortal)le night, and 
when we arrived at Greensborough, N. C, in the morning, 
and were allowed to get out of the cars, we were happy. 
Here we were re-inforced by some of Wilson's cavalry ofli- 
cers, captured on the raid. They had been shamefully 
treated, — some were bleeding from wounds received from 
the guard. When they loaded us again some were allowed 
on top of the car, and I was one. Our guards were a lot of 
home guards, and, like all such, were making a war record 
by abusing us. 

On our car was a loud-mouthed fellow who was constantly 
insulting us. After a while he became quiet and was nearly 
asleep. One of the oflicers near touched me, and motioning 
to keep still, drew up his feet, straightened out, and the fel- 




low went flying off the top of the car. Turning to me he 
said, "Jack, didn't something drop?" I said I thought so, 
but guessed it wasn't best to stop the train to find out, and 
we never learned whether he landed or not. 

We arrived at Augusta, Ga. , on Sunday, and were marched 
to the park. Here citizens visited us and we had a chance to 
talk with them. The questions were about the same as at 
Petersburg. "What do you uns come down to fight we uns 
for?" etc. Talk about Yankees being anxious to trade! 
There was not a man, woman or child but wanted to barter 
with us. I sold a hat cord to a woman for twenty dollars, 
bought a dozen Qgga for ten dollars, and invested the rest in 
a blackberry pie. I shall never forget that pie. The crust 
was ironclad, and I had to bombard it before I could get at 
the berries. I ate the inside, but left the crust for the woman 
to fill again. 

We took the cars at night, and next morning arrived at 
Macon, where we left the train, and our men went on to 
Andersonville. 





