

Upon our arrival in Philadelphia we heard a signal gun 
and learned that it was to inform the people connected with 
the cooper's shop that we were coming. We marched to 
that place and found a nice breakfast served by the first ladies 
of the city. This was the only home-like meal we had re- 
ceived since leaving Massachusetts, and our hearts went out 
to the loyal people, and our thanks were expressed in three 
rousing cheers for them. But we hastened on, and soon 
took the cars for Washington. At Baltimore we left the cars 
and marched across the city. We passed through Pitt Street, 
where the sixth Massachusetts, a few months before, had 
marked the route with their blood. Every throat was 
opened as we sang "John Brown," but our knees were a 
little weak, for we expected a stone would strike us at any 
moment. We found the roof of the depot on the Washing- 
ton side of the city filled with bullet holes, the result of the 
riot of April 19. 

From Baltimore to Washington we passed soldiers doing 
guard duty on the railroad, and for the first time saw men 
being punished at the guard-house. We saw one man with 
his head through a barrel, another carrying a heavy log of 
wood. At night we arrived in Washington and were landed 
at the Soldiers' Rest. A Pennsylvania regiment was ahead 
of us, so we were obliged to wait until they had been to sup- 



8  

per. We marched into the Ijarracks before the tables were 
reset. The waiters removed the tin dishes, then jumped 
on to the tables and with dirty brooms began to sweep as 
they walked along. Tliis was too much for Massachusetts. 
On the tables not cleared were remnants of the meal left by 
the Pennsylvanians. Soon the air was filled with bread, 
pork and tin dippers. The waiters were unable to stand 
the attack and retreated in good order. After quiet was 
restored our men cleared the tables and the rations were 
brought in, consisting of mouldy soft bread, boiled salt pork 
and very poor coffee. Colonel Hincks being informed of 
our treatment found the officer in charge and gave him relig- 
ious instructions. We received nothing better that night, 
but the next morning when the 19th marched in to breakfast 
our colonel's " draft had been honored " and we had a square 
meal. 

The Pennsylvania regiment occupying the barracks, we 
had to sleep on the ground. The night was warm, and being 
very tired we were soon fast asleep. About four o'clock we 
were awakened by something grunting around us, and found 
that we were in the midst of a drove of hogs. We had never 
seen hogs running at large at home, and believing some 
one's swine had escaped from the pen, we concluded to do a 
neighborly act and catch them. The race began, liut with 
poor success for us, as they could run a mile in 2.40 or less. 

After our sport we found an old pump, where we made 
our morning toilet. We boys did not mind this new mode 
of living much ; we sang, said " it was all in the three 
years," and was nothing after you got used to it. Xot so 
with the older men. I rememl)er one instance : returnino: 
from the pump I saw one of the men leaning against the 




barracks, the tears streaming down Ms cheeks. I said, 
"What is the matter, Peter?" He replied, "I didn't think 
I was coming out here to be rooted over hj d — d hogs." 
"Oh," I said, "if we get nothing worse than this I won't 
complain." "Well," said he, "if we do I won't stay." He 
was discharged soon after. 

After breakfast we slung knapsacks and marched down 
Pennsylvania Avenue to our camp ground on Meridian Hill. 
We had brought our tents from Massachusetts and all our 
camp equipage, including bed sacks, but we could find 
nothing to fill them with, so we spread them on the ground 
empty. The ground was filled with gravel stones and was 
not as " soft as downy pillows are," but so hard that I 
believe the imprints of those stones are on me yet. At 
Meridian Hill we l)eo;an active drillinof. The duties of the 
field officers were divided. Colonel Hincks taking charge 
of the battalion drills, Lieutenant-Colonel Devereaux the 
manual, while Major How had the instruction of the guard. 
We were encamped on the side of the hill, and marching 
in Ijattalion drill was very hard, 3'et "from early morn 
till dewy eve " we were executing company or battalion 
movements. 

Since our arrival in Washino^on all had a fear of beius; 
poisoned ; we hesitated to buy camp pies of any but old 
negro aunties, and a guard was constantlj' posted with loaded 
musket over the spring which supplied us with water. One 
night a nervous comrade was on duty, and thinking that, in 
the darkness, he saw some one approacliing to poison the 
spring, discharged his piece. Immediately the camp was 
alarmed. Without waiting to fall in line the cry went up 
" Row ! Row ! " and without muskets all rushed for the 



10  

spring. The officers cried " Halt ! Halt ! Fall in ! " but you 
might as well have undertaken to stop a Dakota blizzard, 
and not till the men had been to the spring and investigated 
was order restored. The next day a square was formed and 
a short but impressive address was delivered by Colonel 
Hincks which had the desired effect. 

On Sundays at this camp we were marched out by com- 
panies, seated in the shade and the Articles of War were 
read to us by our officers. As I remember them whatever 
you did you were to be shot, " or such other punishment as 
may be inflicted by courts-martial." 

At Meridian Hill we had our first Sunday morning inspec- 
tion ; the order was for all men to be in line. Tliis included 
cooks, teamsters, clerks and all other detailed men. To the 
regular members of the company it was a grand sight to see 
these extra duty men in line. Fowler, the wagoner, had 
not seen his musket since it was given him at Lynnfield and 
knew nothing of the manual, neither did Uncle Burrill, who 
was regimental mail carrier. Lieutenant-Colonel Devereaux 
came down the line and the men threw up their guns for 
inspection. Fowler had watched the men on his right, and 
when his turn came threw his gun up in fair shape. The 
colonel took it, looked at the musket, then at Fowler. 
" What do you mean by bringing such a musket for inspec- 
tion?" "It ought to be all right," said Fowler, "it is bran 
new and I have never used it since it was given to me." 
With a reprimand the colonel, passing on, soon came to 
Uncle Burrill, who was not quite as sharp as Fowler, and 
had not watched the men on his right. When the colonel 
stood before him uncle remained quiet and modestly blushed. 
The colonel surveyed him from head to foot. "Why don't 



you bring up your musket ? " Uncle took it in his right 
hand and pushed it towards him. "Don't you know any 
better than that? " asked the lieutenant-colonel. "No," said 
Uncle B. ; "I wish that I hadn't come out here, I was sure 
that I should get into trouble if I did." With a smile the 
lieutenant-colonel passed on, and after that, extra duty men 
were excused from Sunday morning inspections. 



