

At the breaking out of the war I was a resident of the 
quiet but patriotic town of Groveland. Sumter had l)een 
fired upon and all was excitement. I could not work, and 
on the 18th of April, 1861, walked to Haverhill with my 
elder brother and Mark Kimball. • We went to the armory 
of the Hale Guards, who were making active preparations to 
march, and I returned home that night resolved to go with 
them if possible. The next day we walked to Haverhill 
again, and I at once interviewed Captain Messer, but was 
informed that the company was more than full, so I could 
not go with it. 

I had said nothing to my brother or Mark of my intention, 
but as we were walking home I found that we all had the 
same desire, — to enlist at once. "We talked the matter over 
and concluded that as Company A of the 1st Battalion of 
Eifles, an old militia company located in West Newbury, and 
then under arms, would soon be ordered away, we would 
join it. That night we walked to West Newbury (five 
miles), found the company at the armory in the town hall 
and enrolled our names. Company A was one of three 
that composed the 1st Battalion of Rifles, commanded by 
Maj. Ben. Perley Poore. They had been organized several 



2 

years and were known as "Poore's Savages." They were 
armed with Winsor rifles and sabre bayonets, the rifle and 
bayonet weighing about fifteen pounds. The uniform was 
dark green, trimmed with light green, and as I donned it for 
the first time it was hard to tell which was the greener, the 
soldier or the uniform. We had a peculiar drill. Most of 
it, as I can remember, consisted of running around the town 
hall in single file, giving an Indian war-whoop and firing into 
the corner of the hall as we ran. 

I was a soldier now. I did not walk the streets as I had 
done, but marched, always turning "a square corner." 
People grasped me by the hand and congratulated me on 
my courage. (I did not see where the courage came in.) 
The Sons of TemperancQ, of which my brother Isaac and 
myself were members, presented us at a public meeting with 
two suits of underclothes and havelocks, housewives, testa- 
ments, etc., so that before we received our army outfit we 
had enough to load a mule. 

We waited for orders to march, but none came, and from 
being heroes we began to be looked upon with disgust, and 
we were the most disgusted of all. As we would meet 
friends on the street they would say, " Is it not a]:)out time 
to have another public meeting to bid you fellows good- by ? " 
or, "You will want some more shirts before you leave." So 
mortified did we become that, instead of marcliing down 
through the village to drill, we sneaked away through a back 
street. 

The company began to get demoralized. Men were leav- 
ing every day, going to other States or to regiments that had 
been ordered to the front. At last we rebelled, and sent our 
ofiiccrs to the Governor with a vote passed by the company, 




PRIVATE "JOHNNIE" ADAMS. 
April, 1861. 







that unless we were ordered into camp at once we would 
disband. After a few days we were furnished with a large 
tent for the men, a wall tent for the officers and a supply of 
rations. Our camp was located on the land of one of our 
members, Private Sylvester, and was named " Camp Sylves- 
ter." We were without arms except three guns for guard 
duty, as our old Winsors had l)een turned in. Company A 
was officered as follows : Captain, Moses P. Stan wood ; First 
Lieutenant, J. Warren Brown ; Second Lieutenant, Ben- 
jamin Wilson ; Third Lieutenant, Isaac H. Boyd ; Fourth 
Lieutenant, Jones Frankle. The third and fourth lieuten- 
ants were soon discharged, as army regulations only provided 
for two. Lieutenant Boyd went into the ranks. Lieutenant 
Frankle was made major of the 17th Massachusetts. 

Our discipline in Camp Sylvester was not as strict as it 
was later in the war. We mounted one guard. After we 
had been once around we concluded that the lieutenants 
ought to stand their share, so we put them on. One night 
we caught a calf and after the officers were asleep we turned 
him into their tent. We did many things that later would 
have sent us to the guard-house. 

About the second week in July we were ordered to Lynn- 
field to join the 19th regiment. We were the second com- 
pany in camp. Company C of Rowley arriving about two 
hours before us. Our tents were a peculiar pattern, neither 
wall nor A, but between the two, having accommodations 
for ten men, and each tent had three windows or ventilators. 
For a time we were under the command of Col. Lyman 
Dyke, who also commanded the 17th regiment, located near us. 

At Lynnfield I was promoted to sixth corporal, and my 
troubles began. I was one day detailed for guard, the 17th 



4 

and 19th regiments doing guard duty together. When I 
posted my relief I had one more man than posts, so I made 
a new post. The officer of the day asked me what I did 
with the supernumerary. I said that I put him on in rear 
of the ice-house. He desired to know who gave me author- 
ity to create new posts, and I replied that I supposed I was 
to use up my men. As soon as the guards were posted 
they began to call "Corporal of the Guard." When I went 
to them they wanted a drink of water. I asked the officer 
of the day if it was my duty to carry water to them. He 
said it was. So I toted the water pail the two hours my 
relief was on. At night the men went to their quarters. I 
found where they slept, and made arrangements to call them. 
I would put my head into a tent and call, " Third relief ! " 
and instead of the men coming out, a boot with an oath came 
at me. As I could not get enough for a relief I turned out 
the drummer and had him beat the long roll. This brought 
out the officer of the day l)ut very few of the men, as they 
did not know what it meant any more than I did. Collect- 
ing what I could we started to relieve the guard, but I soon 
found that I had more than men enough, as at nearly every 
post we found the musket stuck into the ground and the man 
missing. When relieved in the morning I was disgusted 
with being an officer, and longed for the freedom of a private. 
Recruits were fast arriving. Company A went into camp 
with about sixty men, and every day some new man was 
voted in, as we had not given up the old militia method of 
electing our members. Skeleton companies were arriving, 
consisting of an officer and a few men, who were given 
a letter and assigned a place in line. Among the first to 
arrive was Captain Mahoney. His company was given the 







letter E. Captain Mahoney was an energetic officer and 
anxious to drill his men. Long before dayljreak, with his 
first sergeant, McNamara, he would turn out the recruits, 
and as we lay in our tents we could hear him calling, " Left ! 
Left ! McNamara, tread on that man's heels ! " 

It was not very long Ijefore we had the required number 
of companies, the last to arrive being the Boston Tiger Fire 
Zouaves, and my story from this point will include the regi- 
ment as well as Company A. 

One day in August we saw a military man looking over 
the camp. We soon learned that it was Colonel Hincks, 
who had just returned from three months' service with the 
Sth Massachusetts. Li a few days he was assigned to the 
command of the 19th and from that moment what had been a 
uniformed mob became a regiment of soldiers. With him 
came Lieutenant-Colonel Devereaux, who had l)een captain 
of the Salem Zouaves, and soon after Maj. Henry J. How. 
One of the Salem Zouaves was assigned to each company as 
a drill-master, and we soon saw that our three months' drill- 
ing had lieen worse than useless, as we had to l)egin over 
again, and it "was hard to teach old dogs new tricks;" but 
the Zouaves won our respect and every man was anxious to 
do his best. Very soon a change took place in the line 
officers, — a Zouave was commissioned in nearly every com- 
pany. Company A retained Captain Stanwood, ])ut lost 
both lieutenants, C. M. Merritt, who had been an officer in 
the 8th, being made first lieutenant, and Isaac H. Boyd, who 
had enlisted as a private, second lieutenant. 

On August 27 we were ordered to strike tents and prepare 
to march. That night, for the first time, we slept on the 
ground, with only the blue sky for shelter. The next day 



we took cars for Boston. Our knapsacks were slung for the 
first time and loaded with everything that it was possible to 
stow away. 

Being anxious that my " best girl " should see me in the 
full garb of a warrior, I arrayed myself in heavy marching 
order and went to an ambrotype saloon to have my picture 
taken. I have seen that picture since the war. In an am- 
brotype everything is reversed, so my musket is at my left 
shoulder, haversack and canteen on the wrong side, — in fact, 
I was wrong end to in every respect. 

Our wagon train was larger than that of an army corps in 
active service. Each company had a four-horse wagon, head- 
quarters two, quartermaster four ; I think there were twenty 
besides the ambulances. We arrived in Boston in the after- 
noon. It was the second time I had been in the city, and as 
we halted on the Common, and no friend came to bid me 
good-by, the first feeling of homesickness came over me, 
and I began to realize that at last we were real soldiers and 
that the enjoyments of camp life at home were fast falling to 
the rear. We went to New York by the Fall River line. I 
had never been on a steamboat before and was very sick. 
Landing in New York, we marched up Broadway. My 
knapsack weighed a ton and I was so sick that I could not 
hold up my head, yet dared not fall out for fear I should get 
lost. We were marched to a barrack and given some tliin 
soup and a testament. I had already two testaments in my 
knapsack, but I took this, although I wished they had put a 
little more money in the soup and passed the testament. I 
do not remember what route we took from New York, Imt 
we went part of the way by Ijoat and arrived in Philadelphia 
the next morning. 




