

In a few weeks we broke camp and took up our line of 
march to the front. Our destination was the Potomac, near 
Poolsville. It was our first march and to us "tender feets " 
a hard one. The older men of the company laughed at us 
boys, said we would never ])e alile to march that distance, 
but before night we left those who had laughed l)y the road- 
side. (I think our experience, that the boys fresh from 
school or from indoor life were able to endure more than 
men of mature years, was general.) Just before we arrived 
at Rockville, Md., we received ten rounds of ball cartridges 
and the command was given, "Load at will! Load!" I 
shall never forget the sensation I experienced as my ramrod 
forced home the first Ijall. We were told that at Rockville 
a strong secession sentiment existed, and I expected to 
kill a rebel or be a dead Yankee before night. We marched 
through the town and found it as quiet as a New England 
village. The second night of our march we arrived at 
Poolsville. Here we met the 15th Massachusetts, and 
Company A of the 19th was entertained l)y Company A 
of the 15th. Next morning we marched to Camp Benton, 
which was to be our home for several months. 

We were brigaded with the 20th Massachusetts, 7th 
Michigan, 42d New York (Tammany regiment), Captain 




Saunders's company of sharpshooters and Captain Vaughn's 
Rhode Island battery. Our brigade was commanded by 
Gen. F. W. Lander; the headquarters of the division were 
at Pools ville, called "corps of observation," commanded by 
Gen. Chas. P. Stone. At Camp Benton the discipline was 
brought to the regular army standard ; drills were almost 
constant ; each afternoon we were drilled in battalion move- 
ments, in heavy marching order, and in every possible way 
fitted for active service. Dress coats with brass shoulder 
scales and leather neck stocks were issued, and when not in 
line or on guard our spare moments were spent in cleaning 
brasses. If any men ever earned thirteen dollars a month 
we did. Besides the camp guard we mounted what was 
called grand guard, consisting of a detail from each regiment 
in the brigade posted on the outskirts of the camp, the tour 
of duty being twenty-four hours. Often the long roll would 
beat after we had retired for the night ; we would turn out 
and double quick to Edward's Ferry, march up the tow path 
of the canal, lay on our arms the rest of the night, and the 
next morning march back to camp. At first we expected the 
rebels were crossing the river, but as we saw no movement 
in that direction we looked upon these excursions as a part 
of the drill, the days not being long enough to give us the 
desired instructions. The enlisted men were not the only 
ones who had to work, as the line officers came in for their 
share. Well do I remember day after day marcliing to ex- 
ecute the movement "To the rear by the right flank pass 
the defile." At last Colonel Hincks became discouraged, 
and throwing down his sword said, " Let every officer o-q to 
his tent, take his tactics and study them, and to-morrow if 
any one fails to understand this movement there will be a 



vacancy in this regiment." We came out next day and in 
fair shape executed the movement. 

Many incidents occurred at Camp Benton that are pleasant 
to recall. We were in a country where there were many 
slaves, all anxious to serve our officers, and nearly every 
day some citizen would come into camp hunting for his run- 
away negro. One day a man came to the colonel and was 
sure one of his negroes Avas in our camp. Colonel Hincks 
sent for Sergeant McGinnis of Company K and ordered him 
to assist in the search. By the look the colonel gave 
McGinnis it was understood that the slave was not to be 
found. McGinnis went into the woods with the man. As 
soon as they were out of sight he halted and cut a switch. 
"Look here!" said McGinnis, "do you suppose we left 
Massachusetts and came out here to hunt negroes ? " and 
to add force to his argument he touched the old fellow up 
with the switch. The man was indignant and said he would 
report McGinnis to the colonel. " Go ahead and I will go 
with you." Both went to the colonel, and the citizen told 
his story with tears in his eyes. Colonel Hincks turned to 
McGinnis and said, "Sergeant McGinnis, is this true?" 
" Colonel, do you think I would he seen doing such a thing ? " 
was the reply. "No," said the colonel; "Sergeant McGin- 
nis is a man of truth and I must take his word. You have 
deceived me, sir; leave this camp and never enter it again." 
The man, fearing McGinnis might get another chance at him, 
left as quickly as possible. 

Here is another instance of the ready wit of a soldier. 
We had in Company A an Irishman, who was one day 
detailed for headquarters guard. The night was dark and 
rainy and the morning found Mike, pacing his beat in front 



of the colonel's tent, wet to his skin. Colonel Hincks came 
out and Mike said, " Colonel, will you allow me to speak 
a word with you ? " " What is it ? " said the colonel. 
"Well, colonel, I wish you believed as you did before the 
war. Then you Ijelieved in putting none 1)ut Americans on 
guard and here I am, an Irishman, wet to the skin, having 
been on guard all nio-ht." The colonel lauo-hed and retired. 
(Colonel Hincks had edited a Know-Nothing paper whose 
motto was, "Put none but Americans on guard.") 

Early in October we were ordered to the river and 
picketed it from Edward's Ferry to a point above Harrison's 
Island. By visits of general and field officers we could see 
that a movement against the enemy was intended. On the 
20th, ten of the best shots of the regiment were selected for 
some important service. With our officers they crossed to 
Harrison's Island to reconnoitre. Early the next morning 
the regiments began to arrive. Two small scows were 
brought to a jDoint opposite the island and Company A was 
detailed to ferry the troops across. At first we pushed the 
boats over with long poles, l)ut the current being very 
strong they drifted down the river and it was hard to land. 
After one or two trips a rope was obtained from a passing 
canal l)oat and stretched across the river, making transporta- 
tion much easier. 

In a short time we heard musketry on the other side and 
knew that the ])attle had begun. The 19th regiment was 
the last to cross. As we landed on the island the sound of 
the minie balls greeted us for the first time. We met four 
men bearing a stretcher, on which was the lifeless form of 
Colonel Baker of the 1st California. He was the first man 
we had seen killed in battle. We were marched across the 


island, meeting wounded and half-naked men who swam the 
river. On arriving at the other side we found there was 
work for us to do. The only transportation from the 
island to the Virginia shore was one scow. By this a load 
could be sent over, then marched up a steep bank called 
Ball's Bluff. The rebels, being strongly intrenched at the 
top, could kill or capture our men before another load could 
land. At last a retreat was ordered as our men were stam- 
peded. They rushed down the hill and into the boat. The 
little craft being overloaded was soon swamped, men were 
swimming the river to escape, and many a poor fellow, not 
able to swim, went down before our eyes ; others were shot 
by the rebels when almost within our lines. At night those 
not required at the landing were deployed to the right and 
left. A drenching rain set in and without overcoats or 
blankets we remained shivering until morning. Lieutenant 
Dodge and twelve men, under a flag of truce, were sent over 
to bury the dead. Alex. Short was the volunteer from Com- 
pany A, and he received injuries from which he never fully 
recovered. While the flag of truce was out a rebel horse- 
man was seen pursuing a Union soldier who was running to 
the river. A man in Company H on the island fired and the 
horseman fell. Immediately the rebels closed in on the burial 
party and held them as prisoners. It required all the energy 
and courage that Colonel Hincks possessed to have them re- 
leased. The next day we picketed the island, cared for the 
men we had rescued, and on the morning of the 23d recrossed 
to the Maryland side, wet, cold and disheartened. A few 
shots from our batteries told that Ball's Blufl' battle was over. 
For the number of men engaged this was the most disas- 
trous battle of the war. No man in his right mind would have 




sent out such an expedition. There was no way to retreat 
and no chance to send reinforcements, except a scow load at 
a time. The movement was condemned by every one. It 
was said that General Stone was a traitor, that signal lights 
would be placed at a house on the Virginia side and that he 
would go down to the river and meet men from the rebel 
army. The truth we never knew, but General Stone was 
relieved, and it was late in the war before he was given 
another command. 

While we were engaged at the 1)luff Company K crossed 
at Edward's Ferry with General Lander. They had a sharp 
skirmish with the rebels and our brave brigade commander 
received the wound which resulted in his death soon after. 
We returned to our old camp and were soon busy gettino- 
ready for winter. 

About this time we were called upon to bear our first loss, 
not by death but by the resignation of Captain Stanwood, 
Lieutenant Merritt was promoted to the vacant position. 
Second Lieutenant Boyd to first lieutenant and Quarter- 
master Sergeant O. F. Briggs to second lieutenant. 

We were about to undergo our first winter in camp and 
had not learned to stockade our tents ; we pinned them close 
to the ground, dug a flue for a fireplace, building a chimney 
outside topped with a barrel, and had plenty of smoke but 
little fire. Neither had we yet learned the art of sleeping in 
tents ; we would put on all our clothes, including overcoats, 
bring the capes up over our heads, lie down and shiver. 
Experience soon taught us that to undress and throw our 
clothing over us was much the better way. 

On Thanksgiving the ofiicers of the regiment gave a ball ; 
men were detailed to build a ball-room, and quite a nice 



18  

building was the result of their labors. Ladies came from 
Washington and Baltimore and a good time was enjoyed. 
We enlisted men looked on from a distance and thought of 
the pleasures we had surrendered for a chance to serve our 
country. 

After getting snugly fixed for winter an order came to 
move, and soon we were on the march for Muddy Branch, 
to take the place of General Banks's division, which had 
been ordered to Harper's Ferry. Here the regiment was 
assigned various duties. A part of Company A was sent to 
Kockville. First Sergeant Cook, myself as corporal, and 
ten men were ordered to Darnestown. Our quarters at 
Darnestown were in an old barn on the main street, and 
at Rockville in buildings on the fair ground. Our duty 
at Darnestown was to prevent men coming to town from 
camp and to allow none to pass towards Washington, below 
the rank of a brigadier-general, without proper papers. We 
had three posts, each at a store. The citizens of the town 
were in sympathy with the South, but as we behaved like 
gentlemen they were very kind, often sending us biscuits 
for breakfast and at Christmas furnishing a liberal supply of 
egg-nog. We were welcomed at any house, and often when 
off duty spent a pleasant hour by their firesides. Soon 
after we began duty Sergeant Cook received a furlough of 
thirty days and I was commander-in-chief of the Darnes- 
town army. 

I had no trouble with the enlisted men, but the officers 
"kicked" when I asked them to show their leave of absence. 
My duty was to inspect the coach when it arrived on its 
way to Washington, and if any officer or soldier was on 
board to ask him to show his pass. I will relate one 




instance. I opened the coach door one morning and said, 
"I will see your leave of absence, if you please," to an 
officer who wore the strap of a major. He growled out, 
" Call your officer ; I don't show my leave of absence to any 
enlisted man." I replied, "I am the only officer here; I 
have my orders in writing fi-om headquarters and know my 
duty." He put his head out of the coach window and said, 
"Driver, go on." I called to the sentry on duty, "If that 
driver starts, shoot him off the box." The driver did not 
start, and after swearing awhile the major gave in, but 
declared he would report me, — and he did. In a few days 
Major How rode up. I turned out the guard, and after pre- 
senting arms stood at attention. " Corporal, dismiss your 
guard, I want to see you a moment." Taking me one side 
he said, "You have been reported to the headquarters of 
the regiment." I explained the case to him. He patted me 
on the shoulder and said, " Corporal, you are right ; you 
are in command of this post, and if the Apostle Paul under- 
takes to go through this town, unless he wears the uniform 
of a brigadier-general, don't you let him go without showing 
his pass, and if he refuses bring him to camp." No corporal 
in the Union army felt better than I did that day, and I was 
glad that the major had reported me. 

In February we were relieved by another detail from the 
regiment and ordered to Rockville. The night before we 
left, Mrs. Hayes, of one of the first families of the town, 
gave us an oyster supper, and her daughter, who was a 
pleasant young lady but a red-hot "reb," presented me with a 
rebel flag. Thirty-eight years have passed since those days, 
but I shall never forget the kindness of those Darnestown 
people, and trust that to-day they are prosperous and happy. 



After a time we reported to the company at Rockville and 
found the three field officers examining the non-commis- 
sioned officers. Althougli we had been acting as " non-coms " 
since we left Massachusetts, none had received warrants ft'om 
the colonel. First Sergeant Cook and I joined the proces- 
sion. I was never more ft-ightened in my life, as I had never 
spoken to the colonel or lieutenant-colonel, and the examina- 
tion was unexpected. The marks were from one to five. 
In a few days, at dress parade. Captain Merritt read the list. 
He called First Sergeant Adams. I thought he meant my 
brother Isaac, who had been examined as a sergeant, and I 
was pleased with his good fortune, when the captain called 
"First Sergeant J. G. B. Adams," and explained to the 
company that I had passed the best examination and was 
promoted to that position. I did not want the place. First 
Sergeant Cook was a good man and was my friend. I went 
to the captain, told him I would prefer to be second sergeant 
and let First Sergeant Cook remain. This arrangement was 
made and I was happy. 

Our duty at Rockville was very light. The boys had 
made the acquaintance of many agreeal)le people there ; I 
was introduced, and the time passed pleasantly. 

The colored people were holding revival meetings. As 
we had never witnessed anything of the Idnd before we 
all attended, without regard to religious convictions. The 
singing was of that wild, melodious nature that only colored 
people can render. The clapping of hands and stamping of 
feet, all in time, cause a thrill of excitement to run through 
the coldest veins. With the colored people the effect is 
such that they are lost to all else but the emotions of the 
hour. When striving with the spirit it is a strife in reality. 



One night they held a meeting of unusual interest, and Com- 
pany A was represented by a large delegation. Among the 
number was Uncle Ben Falls. Ben had joined the company 
just before we left Lynnfield. He had been a sailor and 
his kind heart and ready wit made him a favorite Avith all. 
That night Ben was deeply interested. He joined in the 
hjonn, and although his voice might not accord with the 
rest there was no doubt but what he sang with the same 
spirit. Soon the excitement reached its height; sobs and 
groans were heard in all parts of the room, shouts of 
" Glory ! " went up from every heart. The spirit took pos- 
session of a girl named Malinda, who was owned at the hotel 
where our officers boarded, and was acquainted with our 
boys. She shrieked and groaned and in her striving fell to 
the floor. The people shouted, " Hold Malinda I Oh, Lord, 
hold Malinda ! The spirit has got jNIalinda ! Oh, Lord, 
hold her ! " but none went near her. This was too much for 
Ben. He rushed to the front, sat on her and held her down. 
This brought Malinda and the rest to their senses and the 
meeting soon closed. 

We enjoyed the pleasures of Rockville but a short time 
after our detail joined the company, as we were ordered back 
to camp. A new company, recruited in Salem and com- 
manded by Capt. Chas. U. Devereaux, a brother of our 
lieutenant-colonel, had joined the regiment. They were 
given the letter H and nicknamed the " Lapstone Light 
Infantry," old Company H being disbanded and the men 
transferred to other companies. 

March 1, by order of Colonel Hincks, I assumed the duties 
of first sergeant, and of all the trying positions I have ever 
filled this was the most so. If any one thinks that the life 



22  

of an orderly sergeant in active service is an amiable one let 
him try it. When the men are not growling about you the 
captain is growling at you, and you are constantly betAveen 
two fires. About one-third of the men in Company A had 
been members of the "Old Battalion," and the town meet- 
ing tactics that prevailed in the militia had not quite died out. 
I was a recruit, and my promotion was not hailed with joy 
by the old men. It was said by them that they were detailed 
for guard rainy days, and that in other ways I favored the 
new men. They drew up a petition asking for a change, 
and some twenty men signed it and, through a committee, 
presented it to Captain Merritt. " What is this ? " said the 
captain. "A petition for a change in first sergeant," was the 
reply. " Petition ! This is mutiny. Go to your quarters, 
and if I hear more of this I will have every man court- 
marshalled and sent to ' Dry Tortugus ! ' " That settled the 
youngsters, and I was ever after obeyed and respected. 





