XIII. 

MACON CONTINUED ; CHARLESTON. UNDER FIRE OF OUR 

BATTERIES ON MORRIS ISLAND. 

A stockade had been erected on the fair ground, and four- 
teen hundred oflScers were confined there. This was the first 
stockade we had seen, and while our names were being taken 
and we were being searched I had a chance to examine it. 
It was made of large trees driven in the ground, the inside 
covered with boards, and was about fifteen feet high. A walk 
was built around it for the guard, and at each corner was 
placed a piece of artillery, which commanded the inside of 
the prison. 

The door swung open and we were marched in. Had we 
entered the lower regions we could not have been more hor- 
rified. Nearly all the ofiicers had assembled at the gate, and 
such a looking set, — half naked, unshaven and unshorn, 
some dragging themselves along by the aid of sticks, others 
lying down in the dirt. For the first time my courage failed 
me, and my heart grew faint as I thought that I must pass 
through what they had already seen of prison life. They did 
not look like human beings, and appeared less so as every 
mouth opened and the cry of " Fresh fish " was heard on all 
sides. 

It is an old saying that misery loves company, and since I 
entered Macon stockade I have never doubted it. They 
would crowd around us, and the gang would howl, "Give 



EXPEBIENCES IN BE BEL PBISONS. 117 

them air ! Don't steal his blanket. Oh ! don't put that louse 
on them," etc. We made our way through them as best we 
could, and as the place was crowded lay down in the dirt, the 
first vacant spot we found. As soon as we were located, and 
the excitement attending our reception had subsided, we 
])egan to walk about. Our newness was apparent, and we 
would soon be joined by some honest looking prisoners who 
would begin to inquire how we were captured, would ask all 
sorts of questions, and before we were aware of it we would 
be drawing a line of battle in the dirt with a stick and explain- 
ing that " we lay here ; the regiment on our left broke ; the 
rel^els came in there," etc. A little group would gather 
around us, all interest and asking questions. After we had 
satisfied this party they would move on, and soon another 
would come up and we would go over the same ground. 
After we had gone through this performance four or five 
times we began to "catch on," and would show when ques- 
tioned that we were not so very fresh. 

I thought our reception was a little unkind, and resolved 
that I would never be engaged in anything of the kind, but 
when the next batch of prisoners arrived I was in the front 
rank, and howled " Fresh fish " as loudly as the best of them. 

The oflicers of our regiment became divided here. Major 
Dunn was in one part of the stockade, Captain Hume and 
Adjutant Curtis with some of the 71st and 7 2d Pennsylvania 
in another. Lieutenant Chubbuck found a friend from 
Quincy, Mass., and went with him ; Lieutenant Osborne and 
I joined Captain McHugh of the 69th Pennsylvania. 

Inside the stockade were two old buildings, each filled 
with prisoners. Many had dug holes under them, and were 
sheltered in that way, but the last two or three hundred had 



118 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT. 

no shelter. Around the place was a low fence, twenty feet 
from the stockade, called the dead line, and it meant all that 
its name implies, for to touch or step over it brought a shot 
from the guard, which was the only warning. Our rations 
were corn-meal, issued uncooked, and as no extra cooking 
utensils were provided for the additional men, we often had 
to wait until midnight for a chance to cook our dinner. If 
we could borrow a kettle we made mush, if a skillet, made 
bread, and if neither, made a cake by making a dough and 
throwing it into the hot ashes ; this was called an ash cake. 
We drew very little salt, so I exchanged my ten dollar green- 
back, receiving five for one. Confederate money, and paid two 
dollars a pound for salt and fifteen for soda. The price of 
everything was so high that my fifty dollars soon vanished. 

The only time I heard music of any kind inside the rebel 
lines was at Macon. Outside the stockade, where the guards 
were quartered, were two negroes who played the fife and 
drum. They could play but one tune, "Bonnie Blue Flag." 
At reveille, guard mounting, dinner call, retreat and tattoo 
the fifer shrieked and the drummer pounded out this same 
old tune. I do not think that the southerners are a musical 
people, for I never heard their soldiers sing around the 
camp-fires, and believe they left this, like everything else, 
to the negroes. There was a chaplain confined with us who 
was a very earnest Christian. Every night he held services 
on the steps of the main buildings, and, with a voice that 
could be heard throughout the prison, would pray for our 
country and flag, and for damnation and disaster to all rebels. 
The commanding officer came in one day and ordered him 
to stop, but he said they put Paul in prison, yet he prayed, 
and while he had a voice he should pray to his God, and use 



EXPERIENCES IN BEBEL FBI SONS. 119 

language best suited to the occasion. Courage always tells, 
and when they found that they could not frighten him they 
let him pray unmolested. 

We had been at Macon about a week when one of the 
officers came to me and asked me if I would like to escape. 
I answered "Yes." We talked awhile on various subjects, 
and on leaving he said he would call for me that nisfht. At 
midnight he came, and I went with him to one corner of the 
stockade, where we were joined by three more. We formed 
a circle with our hands on each other's shoulders, and I took 
the most solemn obligation ever taken by man. I swore to 
obey in every particular the orders of my superior officers, 
to take life if necessary in order to escape, and to kill any 
one who should betray us. Our organization was called the 
Council of Ten, as it was governed by ten officers selected 
by the captains of the companies. We were divided into 
companies of thirty-two, each commanded by a captain, and 
subdivided into squads of eight, commanded by a sergeant ; 
the privates only knew the sergeants, the sergeant knew his 
captain and the captain the Council of Ten. We had signs, 
passwords, grips and signals, and a grand rallying cry. We 
were ordered to provide ourselves with clubs if they could 
be obtained, or in place of them have a stone located where 
we could easily get it. 

It was strange to me why this organization was required, 
but I was informed that traitors were in the camp, that sev- 
eral tunnels had been started, and when ready to open, 
the rebels would come in, go directly to them, and driving 
down a crowbar would find them the first trial. It was hard 
to believe that any Union officer would betray his comrades, 
and we concluded that the rebels must have some of their 



120 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT. 

men in with us, at any rate our leaders thought that a secret 
organization was necessary for our protection. 

A good part of the time was taken by the rebels in find- 
ing out if any had escaped. Every day the commanding 
officers with the guard would come in and drive us to one 
side of the prison, then back in single file ])etween two 
guards, counting us as we passed through. It was not often 
that the first count was right, and we would be driven back 
again. It usually took from one to three hours before they 
were satisfied that "we all were thar." 

The last of July it was rumored that six hundred were to 
leave the prison to be exchanged. The "old fish" took little 
stock in it. The order of the council was for all of our mem- 
l)ers to go who could. The next day all was excitement. 
The rel)el officer in charge came in, said that exchange had 
been agreed upon and that all would soon go, but only six 
hundred would go that day. They liegan to check out the 
first five squads and Captain McHugh, Lieutenant Osborne 
(who joined the council the night after I did) and myself 
flanked out when other names were called. We believed 
that "the last shall be first." As all who went out were not 
members of our own order we were directed to tie a string 
in our button-holes so that we could ])e recognized. "VVe 
were marched to the station and placed in l)ox cars. Our 
sergeant posted two men over each guard in the car, with 
orders to seize and tie them when the signal was given. 
This was to be a red light shown from the forward car. Our 
leaders had maps of the country and had concluded to cap- 
ture the train at Pocotaligo bridge, seven miles from the sea- 
coast, take the muskets from the guard, put the guard in the 
cars, set the train in motion, then make our way to the coast. 



EXFERIENCES IN BE BEL FBI SONS. 121 

signal our gun-boats, and be saved. Thus far everything had 
worked well. The guards in our car had not a cartridge left 
in their boxes, as we had taken them all out and had been 
able to take some of the caps oif their muskets. We were 
as determined a body of men as ever lived, and it would 
have been liberty or death with most of us. Some in our car 
had been over the road and knew where we were expected to 
begin work. We waited for the signal, but it was not shown, 
and we began to get uneasy as it was evident that we had passed 
the point. Some jumped from the cars, but we were so near 
Charleston they were recaptured and arrived in the city as 
soon as we did. Some one had blundered or we were 
betrayed. We never found out who was responsible, but 
always thought we were betrayed by a regular army officer, 
who was exchanged soon after we arrived in Charleston. I 
do not think he entered the jail with us. 

Disheartened, hungry and tired we arrived in Charleston. 
We did not know why we had ])een sent there but in every 
heart was a hope that it might be an exchange. They marched 
us through the city down into the burned district. As we 
halted on one of the streets a woman on the sidewalk said to 
me, "I don't think they will put you way down under the 
fire." This was the first intimation I had received of what 
they intended to do with us, but it soon became known that 
we were to be placed under the fire of our batteries on Mor- 
ris Island. The noble qualities of the southern chivalry were 
being shown to us every day, yet this was the most cowardly 
act of all, — to place unarmed men under the fire of their own 
guns. 

We continued the march to the jail and were turned into 
the yard. I was more wealthy than when we left Macon. 



122 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT. 

There were several naval officers in our squad and the rebels 
had allowed them to retain their personal property. While 
at Macon they had bought most of their food and saved their 
meal. On the march to Charleston one was directly in front 
of me. He had a heavy load to carry, and not being used to 
marching had a hard time. Among his effects was a bag 
containing about a peck of meal. He would change it from 
one hand to another, and at last set it down, as he could 
carry it no farther. I was in light marching order and as 
soon as it touched the ground I picked it up and carried it 
into our new prison. I also had a broken water pitcher that 
the guard had allowed me to take out of the gutter, so I had 
meal and a dish to mix it in. 

We found the jail yard a filthy place. In the centre was 
an old privy that had not been cleaned for a long time, and 
near it was a garbage pile, where all the garbage of the jail 
was deposited. A gallows occupied a place in the rear of 
the yard. The wall surrounding the yard was twenty feet 
high, so that no air could reach us and the hot sun came 
down on our unprotected heads. 

The only cooking utensils we had were those brought 
fi'om Macon, and were not half enough to supply our wants. 
The jail was filled with all classes of criminals, male and 
female, and, with the exception of the women, all were 
allowed in the yard during some portion of the day. There 
were also several soldiers of the " Maryland line " who had 
refused to do duty longer for the Confederacy, and several 
negroes belonging to the 54th Massachusetts, captured at 
the siege of Fort Wagner. The negroes were not held as 
prisoners of war but rather as slaves. Their captors did not 
know exactly what to do with them. They were brave fel- 



EXPERIENCES IX REBEL PRISONS. 123- 

lows, and at night we could hear them singing in their cells. 
I remember a part of one song. It was a parody on " When 
this cruel war is over," and ran as follows : — 

" Weeping, sad and lonely, 
O, how bad I feel, 
Down in Charleston, South Carolina, 
Praying for a good square meal " 

We could hear our batteries on Morris Island, and often 
shells would pass over us. The second night we were there 
two rockets were sent up near the jail, and after that the 
line of fire was changed. The rebels could not account for 
the rockets and all concluded that they were discharged by 
our spies, or Union men in the city. 

Our home was under a window of the jail. Sometimes it 
would rain all nio-ht and we would have to sit crouched 
against the walls. Our rations were mostly rice, and we 
had not half wood enough to cook it properly. Each day a 
four-foot stick of wood was issued to twenty-five men ; we 
would cut it up into twenty-five little piles, one man would 
turn his back and another would call the names of the mess, 
at the same time pointing to a pile of wood. If by a chance 
he or one of his friends received a sliver more than another 
some one would declare that there was an understanding 
between the two. 

We were visited by the rebel generals Johnson and 
Thompson, who had returned from our lines, and after that 
our rations were less than before. One day the rice was so 
poor and so full of bugs that we refused to accept it and held 
an indignation meeting. We drew up a petition to General 
Jones, the rebel officer commanding the department, asking, 



124 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REQIMENT. 

if the rebels could not or would not issue rations enough to 
keep us alive, that our government might l3e allowed to do so. 
The next day they sent in the same rice, and as the petition 
did not satisfy our hunger we ate it, bugs and all, to keep 
from starving. Another day they issued nothing but lard. 
What they thought we could do with that I never learned, 
but I drew two spoonfuls on a chip and let it melt in the 
sun. 

We had no change of underclothing, no soap to wash 
with and were covered with vermin. We hunted them three 
times each day but could not get the best of them. They 
are very prolific and great-grand-children would be born 
in twenty-four hours after they struck us. We made the 
acquaintance of a new kind here, — those that live in the 
head. We had no comics, and before we knew it our heads 
had more inha1)itants than a New York tenement-house. 
After a hard scratch we obtained an old pair of shears and 
cut each other's hair close to our heads. 

We were growing weaker day by day ; were disposed to 
lie down most of the time, but knew that would not do, so 
resolved to walk as much as possible. We craved vege- 
tables, and scurvy began to appear, sores breaking out on 
our limbs. One day a naval ofiicer bought a watermelon. 
As he devoured it I sat and watched him, the water running 
out of my mouth ; when he had finished he threw the rind 
on the garbage pile, and I was there. I ate it so snug that 
there was not much left for the next. 

Lieutenant Osborne and myself were the only officers of 
the 19th in the jail yard ; the rest we left at Macon. One 
day a detachment came into the workhouse, the next build- 
ing to ours, and I received a note, which was thrown over 



EXFEBIENCE8 IN REBEL PRISONS. 125 

the wall, informing me tliat Captain Hume and Adjutant 
Curtis were with them. Exchange stock was unsteady ; 
several officers were exchanged by special order, some of 
them through the assistance of friends south, others by the 
influence of friends in Wasliington. Often the report would 
come in that a general exchange had been arranged, and the 
cry would go through the yard "Pack up, pack up, all 
exchanged." While it was an old story, and some of our 
comrades had heard it many times, the faintest hearts grew 
stronger and visions of home would come, only to be swept 
away by the fact that the morrow found them starving in 
prison as before. 

The life in the jail yard began to tell on us. At Macon 
groups would get together, sing old army songs, and merry 
laughter would be heard as some wit told his story, but now 
we heard no songs ; the men walked about sullen and silent ; 
it required little provocation to bring on a fight, as all were 
nervous and irritable. Our quarters grew worse each day, 
as nothing was done to change the sanitary condition of the 
yard, and six hundred men, each doing his best, could not 
keep it clean unless assisted from the outside. 

About the middle of August we were told by the rebel 
officer in charge that if we would give our parole not to 
escape they would provide better quarters for us. At first 
the feeling was general that we would not do it ; but after a 
while they began to go out, those who had talked the loudest 
being the first to go. Our little mess reasoned together; 
we feared that we should die here, as we sufiered as much for 
want of shelter as food ; we saw that the chances for escape 
were very poor, and, as all the field officers had signed, con- 
cluded we would. This parole was an agreement that they 



126 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT . 

should furnish us good quarters in the old United States 
Marine Hospital and we should have the liberty of the house 
and yard, in consideration of which we were not to escape. 
We were the last squad to leave the yard and as we went 
took an old " A " tent that the rebels had brought in a few 
days before for some sick men. Although we had been in 
prison but eight weeks we had learned the ropes and took 
anything we could lift. 

We found on arriving at the Marine that we had made a 
mistake in not being first ; then we might have had a parlor, 
now we must sleep on the upper balcony, but it was such a 
nice place, dry and clean, that we would have been contented 
to have slept on the roof. We arranged our captured tent 
to sleep on and proposed to cut it up for clothing at some 
future time. We slept soundly that night and were awak- 
ened the next morning by a rebel officer and two guards, 
who were searching for the tent. They took our names, 
saying we had violated our parole and must go back to jail. 
We did not spend a real happy day ; every hour we expected 
the guard would come in and march us out, but night found 
us unmolested and we never heard from it again. 

From our balcony we could look out over a part of the 
city. In our rear were only blackened ruins ; nearly every 
house had been riddled with shot and shell and our own had 
not escaped ; but in front the houses looked clean and each 
was surrounded with flowering trees and shrubs. It must 
have been a fine city before the ravages of war came. Our 
rations were about the same as in the jail yard, but were 
issued more regularly, and we had a better chance to cook. 
When we entered the Marine Hospital I saw an old two- 
gallon can and captured it. It had been used for spirits of 



EXPEBIENCE8 IN REBEL PRISONS. 127 

turpentine. I unsoldered the top, cleaned it by boiling 
ashes, and made a bale out of an old piece of hoop. I now 
had quite an outfit, — my kettle, pitcher, spoon and a rail- 
road spike to split my wood. I was a bloated capitalist. 

In a few days a change could be seen in the appearance of 
the prisoners ; those who had ])een blue and careless of their 
personal appearance began to brace up. We organized by 
electing Captain Belger of the Ehode Island Artillery as 
commander of the prison ; he appointed a good staif and 
issued orders in regard to the cleanliness of the house and 
yard. A daily detail was made for fatigue duty, and any 
violation of the rules promptly reported. Glee clubs began 
to be formed, and we had a fine quartet besides an orchestra 
of four pieces. Lieutenant Rockwell was the owner of a 
flute, and in some way two violins and a double bass were 
procured, which proved of great assistance to all, as it helped 
to keep us from thinking of our condition. 

Lieut. Frank Osborne and I had passed a unanimous vote 
that we would live through our confinement, and in order to 
carry it out must take extra care of ourselves. In the yard 
was a pump and every night we took a ])ath, one of us getting 
under the nose while the other worked the handle. 

The shelling of the city by our batteries was constant. At 
night we could see the flash as the old " swamp angel " on 
Morris Island was discharged, then by the light of the fuse 
we could see the shells sailing through the air ; when over 
the city they would explode and balls of fire would descend on 
the houses. At times four or five houses would be in flames 
at once, then our batteries would pass in the shells at the 
rate of twenty an hour. We could hear the rebels rallyins^ 
their fire department, which was composed of negroes, and 



128 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT. 

the engines would go rushing past iho. prison. These events 
were very pleasant to us and the more frequent the shells 
came the louder we would cheer. At times they would 
burst over us and pieces would fall in the yard. The guards 
were nearly frightened to death, as they were "new issue" 
and had never been under fire before ; we would have felt a 
little easier if they had gone farther up town, but acted as 
though we liked it. 

While at the Marine I had a streak of good luck. "We 
were American citizens and believed in the right of petitions. 
One day those who had their money taken from them at Rich- 
mond drew up a petition and forwarded it to the rebel com- 
mander, setting forth the fact that the money had been taken, 
and the promise that it should be returned, and praying him 
to interest himself in our behalf. We expected that we 
should never hear from it again, but in about a week fifteen 
received their money and I was one of the number. The 
rest they said would soon come, but it never did. I exchanged 
twenty dollars, receiving seven and a half confederate for one. 
My first purchase was a fine-tooth comb, — an article that 
could be used to advantage, — which cost me ten dollars, a 
quart of sweet potatoes for two dollars, and ten small onions 
for fifty cents each. We tried hard to be prudent and not 
forget that we had once been poor, but our wants were so 
many that in three days the one hundred and fifty dollars 
were all gone, and all we had to show was our comb and a 
darning needle. But our health was improved ; we had eaten 
some of the potatoes raw, and those with the onions had 
helped our scurvy. 

Prisoners were constantly coming into Charleston from 
various places, and exchange stock was often high. One 



EXPEBIENCES IN BEBEL FBI SONS. 129 

day a squad of officers who had been in Savannah were 
marched into the jail yard. From our quarters on the upper 
balcony we could see them but were not allowed to talk. I 
recognized Lieutenant McGinnis, also Capt. C. W. Hastings 
of the 12th Massachusetts, Capt. G. W. Creasey of the 35th, 
Lieutenants Cross, Moody and Shute of the 59th, besides 
several others who had been comrades at Macon. They 
remained a few days, then were sent to other prisons. I 
wrote a note to McGinnis, tied it to a stone and threw it 
over the wall. This was in violation of my parole, but I 
could not help that. 

One day about a thousand of our men came into the jail 
yard from Anderson ville. It is impossible to describe their 
condition ; they were nearly naked, their skins were as dark 
as Indians and dried to their bones. Serof. Daniel Corrieian 
of Company E was with them. It was a long time before I 
could recognize him ; he had no shirt and I could see that 
he was much emaciated, but he walked about, and I was sure 
that if any one got a ration Corrigan would, as he was the 
best forager in the regiment. I did not close my eyes to 
sleep that night, the coughing of the men in the yard pre- 
venting it. They remained but one day, then were taken to 
the fair ground. 

Negroes passed the prison nearly every day on the way to 
Fort Sumter to restore the works which were being knocked 
to pieces by our batteries and gun-boats. They were col- 
lected from the plantations in the country and were a fright- 
ened looking set. They knew that their chances for life were 
small, and they sang mournful songs as they marched along. 

The greatest trouble I had was cooking. I had no special 
qualification for that work, and could not boil dish-water with- 



130 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS REGIMENT. 

out l)urning it on ; but according to our rule, I must cook for 
our mess once in tliree days. My feet were bare, and the 
rice or mush would boil over on them, and as I jumped ])ack 
I was sure to land in some other fellow's fire. Frank was 
one of the best friends a man ever had and would often take 
my place, but McHugh was bound that I should learn the 
business. 

October 1 the yellow fever broke out. Our guards were 
the first taken down, the captain and some of his men dying ; 
then it struck the officers in the prison, and it was not 
thought safe to remain longer in Charleston, so Octo])er 5 
we were ordered to pack up and informed that we were to 
be removed to Columbia. Our squad did not go until the 
6th, but they started us so early that we had no time to cook 
our rice. As we left the prison I bought an apple dumpling 
of an old colored woman, and am ashamed to say that in my 
haste I forgot to return the spoon she loaned me to eat it 
with. If she will send me her address I will send her a 
dozen as good as the one she lost. 

We were sorry to leave Charleston. While it was called 
the "hot-bed of secession," we had received the best treat- 
ment there of any place in the south. Our guards were 
kind, and we were seldom taunted by the citizens. We 
marched through the city, taking our baggage, and, as no 
two were dressed alike, were a queer-looking procession. 
There were many Germans in the city, and as we had sev- 
eral officers in our party from that land, they were anxious 
to do them favors. One had a bottle of whiskey and gave 
it to one of his countrpnen when the guard was not looking. 
Our comrade had on a rebel jacket, and as he indulged quite 
freely in the whiskey soon got returns and was fairly full. 



EXPEBIENCES IN BEBEL FBI SONS. 131 

but the guard, thinking that he was a citizen, said, ''You get 
out of the ranks," and he got. Assisted by his friends he 
was soon passed through the lines, and we afterwards heard 
from him with Sheridan in the Shenandoah valley. 

Arriving at the depot, we were placed in box cars, and, as 
usual on the southern railroads, the train ran off the track 
in a half-hour after we started, which delayed us several 
hours. The night was dark and rainy, and several escaped, 
among them Lieutenant Parker of the 1st Vermont heavy 
artillery. He was pursued by bloodhounds, and when we 
arrived at Columbia was brought in so terribly torn and bit- 
ten by them that he died before night. 



132 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT. 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

COLUMBIA. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION. 

We arrived at Columbia in a drenching rain, were taken 
out of the cars, and remained in a field near the depot until 
the next morning. We had no chance to make a fire, and 
were wet, cold and hungry. Along the tracks were cars 
filled with families who had fled from Charleston and Atlanta. 
We saw several very beautiful ladies among them, dressed 
well, and wearing jewelry, but they were silent and sullen. 

We were guarded by the Columbia Cadets, a fine body of 
young men from the military school. The command was 
ffiven to fall in, and we were informed that we must march 
about a mile to a camp ground, and should be made very 
comfortable. On the way we passed the Confederate money 
factory. As the girls employed there came to the windows 
we called to them to throw us out a bushel or two, as they 
could make plenty more. They laughed, threw kisses at us, 
and for a moment we forgot that we were prisoners, and felt 
that we were going out on a picnic. We marched about two 
miles, and arrived at our camp ground. This consisted of 
several acres, covered with a second growth of wood. A 
guard line was made around it, and sentries were posted. 
Twenty feet from the guard line was the dead line. This 
time it was a furrow ploughed around the camp. Our cadet 
guards were relieved by the militia, and we were turned in 
like so many hogs. 



COLUMBIA. 133 



These were the comfortable quarters promised. The wood 
and water were outside the lines, and we had to wait our 
turn to go out. No sinks were provided, and only twelve 
men were allowed out at a time. It was terrible. Nearly 
every man in prison suftered from diarrhoea. It was no 
uncommon sight to see one hundred men standing in line ; 
many were obliged to remain there nearly all the time. 

We were in this condition for more than a week, then eight 
axes and ten shovels were given the fifteen hundred prisoners, 
and the guard line was extended an hour a day, to give us a 
chance to cut wood and gather brush for shelter. Our little 
mess located under a tree, and our rule was that one should 
always be at home ; but for some cause one day all were 
absent for a few moments, and when we returned could not 
find where we lived, as our tree had been cut down. 

We had heard much of the sunny south, and did not 
expect cold weather, but the night of October 9 was so cold 
that we could not sleep, and a white frost covered the ground 
in the morning. Our rations were in keeping with the 
place. A pint of corn-meal, bitter and half bran, a day, 
and a pint of sorghum molasses for five days. We named 
the prison Camp Sorghum. Many could not draw the 
molasses, having nothing to put it in, but my old pitcher 
worked in handy for that purpose. 

As soon as possible we began to build huts. We increased 
our mess to five, one having a blanket. We dug a hole in 
the gTound two feet deep, covered it with poles set up on 
ends, then with brush, and outside a coating of dirt. Tliis 
was first rate when it did not rain, but as soon as the dirt 
])ecame wet it would soak through the brush and drop on us 
as we tried to sleep. At night four would lie down, then 



134 NIKETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQIMENT. 

the fifth would squeeze in, covering us with our only blanket. 
When we wanted to turn over some one would say, " About." 
The odd man would get up, all turn over, then he would jam 
in again. So we lay, packed like sardines in a box, keeping 
alive from the warmth we received from each other. 

After a while sinks were dug, and the lines extended so 
as to take in the brook that ran in the rear of the camp. 
Nearly all the men were barefoot, and it was laughable to 
see us wash. We stood in the water, which was very cold^ 
and danced while we washed our faces and hands. 

Besides our other troubles Ave were in constant fear of 
being shot by the guard. One evening, as we were gathered 
in little groups around the fires, we heard a shot and saw 
Lieutenant Young of the 4th Pennsylvania cavalry throw 
up his hands and fall dead. Upon investigation we learned 
that one of the guards had asked another if he supposed he 
could hit a man at that distance. A doubt being expressed 
he drew up his piece and fired, with the result as stated. 
Another time an officer was waiting with his axe on his 
shoulder to go out for wood. He was standing several feet 
from the dead line when the guard fired, — killing him 
instantly. We made every possible effort to have the rebel 
officers take some action that would prevent our comrades- 
from being murdered. The guard who did the shooting was 
relieved one day, and the next appeared on duty on the front 
line of the camp. As far as we could learn he was never 
reprimanded. 

The presidential election was drawing near, and was the 
subject for discussion in the prison. The rel)els were much 
interested in it, and their papers were filled with compli- 
mentary words for General McClellan, the Democratic nom- 



PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION. 135 

inee. They were sure that his election would bring peace, 
and that the south would gain its independence. They tried 
to impress us with the idea that the election of McClellan 
meant liberty for us, but as much as we desired release from 
captivity, we had learned that what the rebels desired was 
just what they ought not to have. 

The election was held October 17. Why that day was 
selected I do not remember, but it is possible because we 
could not wait longer. We were to vote by States, the 
senior officers of each having charge of the poll. It was an 
exciting day. General McClellan had many warm friends, 
who had followed him in l)attle and loved him as their first 
commander, but it was evident by the debates that " honest 
Abe Lincoln " was the favorite with the majority. The polls 
opened at nine a.m. ; the ticket distributors were on hand as 
at home. I think the polls closed at twelve m. Then all 
rushed to the l)ulletin board, where the returns were posted, 
to learn the result. Lincoln received one thousand twenty- 
three, McClellan, one hundred forty-three, and two hundred 
four did not take interest enough to vote. We Republicans 
were delighted, and expressed our joy by giving three hearty 
cheers. It told us that a large majority believed in the wise 
administration of Abraham Lincoln, and although many of 
them had been in prison sixteen months their faith had not 
been shaken. The excitement did us all good. The vote 
of Massachusetts was Lincoln, forty-three ; McClellan, five. 
The only States that went for McClellan were Kentucky and 
Tennessee. Kentucky gave McClellan fifteen, Lincoln, thir- 
teen ; Tennessee, McClellan, thirty-one ; Lincoln, twenty-six. 

We had another pleasant event. One day some boxes 
came in, sent by our sanitary commission. They contained 



136 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEQ-IMENT. 

drawers, shirts, handkerchiefs and a few dressing gowns. 
There was enough for one article to each officer, and we 
drew them by lots. McGinnis was lucky, as he drew a 
dressing gown, and his clothing l)eing worn out he used it 
for a full suit. He had l)een sick, and his hair had fallen 
from his head ; he looked like the " priest all shaven and 
shorn " as he walked about the prison. I was not so fortu- 
nate, as I drew only a handkerchief. 

The wardrobes of all required replenishing. I wore the 
same shirt I had on when captured, and although it had not 
been washed oftener than was necessary it was too thin for 
comfort. My light blue pants were worn at the knees and 
fringed at the bottoms, so I cut off the skirts of my dark 
blue coat to repair them. My hat was open at the top and 
the rim was nearly separated from the crown. I found an 
old piece of tent and made a new crown, and with the thread 
raveled out of the canvas sewed on the rim. My boots were 
worn out, and my feet were bare. 

No meat of any kind was issued to us at Columbia, but 
we drew some one day quite unexpectedly. A wild boar 
rushed out of the woods. It passed the guard and came into 
camp. Every one was after it, and Captain Brown of a 
Pennsylvania regiment threw liimself on the back of the hog 
and with his knife cut its throat. Without waiting to dress 
it, he began cutting off pieces and throwing them to the 
crowd. The smell of fried pork soon pervaded the camp, 
and in fifteen minutes after the boar passed the guard every 
particle was devoured. 

Once in a while an officer would trade for a little meat, and 
while they did not entertain company frequently they some- 
times gave banquets. Captains Hastings and Creasey and 



PBESIDENTIAL ELECTION. 137 

Lieutenants Cross, Moody and Chute messed together. One 
day they obtained a shin bone with a little meat on it, and 
were going to have a grand dinner. I was invited as their 
special guest. They had some rice and made dumplings out 
of their corn -meal ration. Captain Hastings was cook, but 
we sat around to rake the fire and make suggestions. We 
would taste of it as it boiled, and could hardl}^ wait for the 
captain to pronounce it cooked. The kettle rested on two 
sticks, and just as we were getting ready to take it from 
the fire the ])ack stick burned in two and overwent the soup. 
We looked at each other for five minutes without speaking, 
then I arose, said I guessed I would not stop to dinner, and 
went back to my quarters a hungry, broken-hearted man. 

The officers were constantly escaping. Every night the 
guard would fire, and while no one was wounded we knew 
some one had passed out. The rebels called the roll or 
counted us every day. This was done by driving all to the 
dead line and counting from right to left. After the right 
had been counted we would skip down through the camp 
and fall in on the left. In that way we made our number 
good, but so many were recaptured and l^rought l)ack that 
they mistrusted what we were doing, and made us stand in 
line until all were counted. 



138 NINETEENTH MASSACHUSETTS BEGIMENT. 



