

About four in the afternoon we sat up in the husks, ate 
the last of the cornbread the negro had given us, then cov- 
ered ourselves over to wait for darkness. While we were 
hidden from view we did not entirely cover our haversack. 
In a short time we heard voices, and a man said, " There is a 
haversack : I am going to get it." As he walked over the 
husks he stepped on me, but I did not squeal. As he picked 
up the haversack, he saw Frank's arm and cried, " The barn 
is full of d — d Yankees." We heard the click as they 
cocked their pieces, and thinking it about time to stop further 
proceedings, we lifted up our heads. "Throw down your 
arms," was the next order. We explained that we had per- 
formed that sad duty several months before. 

After much talk they let us come out. Our captors were 
Texas rangers, the hardest looking set of men I ever met ; 
dressed more like cowboys than soldiers, armed with sabres, 
two revolvers each, carbines, besides a lariat hung to the 
saddle. There were but three of them, and we resolved to 
make an appeal for one more chance. In the most earnest 
manner possible we told the story of our long service in the 
field, our starvation in prison, our long tramp for liberty 
and our near approach to our lines, and begged them to let 
us go. I think we made an impression on them, but after 



162  

conferring they said, " You are loyal to your side and we 
must be to ours, but we will use you well while we have you 
in charge." 

The rest of the company came up while we were talking. 
They had thirty-six prisoners, captured from Sherman's 
army. These were known as "Sherman's bummers." My 
experience with the Army of the Potomac had been such 
that I looked with little fiivor on the bummers. Had they 
been with their comrades they would not have been capt- 
ured, but they were, like a large part of that army, scattered 
over the country, not foraging for the army but for them- 
selves, and the loyal negro was "cleaned out" the same as 
the "reb." It was demoralizing, and had the re]jels been in 
force on this flank or rear, disasters instead of success would 
have overtaken that grand army before it reached the sea. 
With the bummers we were turned into the corn and slept 
in the husks that night. 

Bright and early the next morning we were turned out 
and were soon on our way back to Augusta. The old negro 
came to see us oif ; as his eyes fell on Frank and me a look 
of sadness came over his face. Our guards were well 
mounted and they made us "hiper." We marched several 
miles without a halt, when we came to a brook, where all 
were given a chance to quench our thirst. As we had no 
cups we lay down and drank. One l)y one the l)oys got up 
and started on, I alone remaining. I was sure that the 
guards were gone and was ready to run for the woods, 
when, looking over my shoulder, I saw one with his revol- 
ver pointed at my head. "Thought you had got away, 
didn't you?" "Oh, no!" I replied. "I was very thirsty 
and it took me a long time to drink." "Well, I am looking 


after you," and he made me "double quick" until I caught 
up with the rest. 

We halted at night in a grove near a large mansion. We 
were hungry and footsore, having eaten nothing that day, and 
having marched thirty miles. The lieutenant commanding 
tlie guard went to the house and demanded supper for sev- 
enty men. The old man said he had nothing, that Sher- 
man's army had stripped liim of all he had. " Never mind 
the story," said tlie guard, "bring out the grub." After 
declaring over and over again that he had nothing, the officer 
said, "we will see," and sent a sergeant and some men into 
tlie house. The old man changed his tune a little, said he 
would try to find something, and after a short time brought 
out a bag of meal, some sweet potatoes and a side of bacon. 
All shared alike, the prisoners receiving the same as the 
guard. The night was as cold as any December night in the 
north, and the guard drew on the old man for a good supply 
of wood. Unlike our army, they did not go after it but 
ordered it brought to them. They built several large fires, 
and then posted guards for the night. 

We were in a small space and there were only seven men 
on posts. I believed there was a chance to make a break if 
we could only make the men understand it. Frank and I 
formed our plans and began to work them. I had lain down 
by the side of two prisoners and got them interested, then 
stood up, warmed myself, and was sauntering over to the 
third, when one of the guards cocked his piece, and said, 
" Yank, you get up on that stump ; I don't like to see you 
moving about so much." I tried to explain that I was so 
cold that I could not sleep and must move to keep warm, but 
he replied, "I think I shall feel better to see you on that 



164  

stump." So I took the stump and held it until daylight. 
Another draft was made upon the old man for breakfast, and 
we continued the march. 

The citizens along the route were very bitter, and at times 
the guards had hard work to protect us. Women came out 
with revolvers, looking for the Yanks who had broken open 
their trunks. Although our guards were very kind to us 
they did not take so kindly to Sherman's men. While in a 
ravine they halted us, and proposed to strip us. Frank and 
I protested. They said, " These men have robbed our people 
and ought to be punished." We told them they would get 
enough when they arrived at the prison, and that it was too 
cheap business for gentlemen, as they had proved themselves 
to be. This aroused their pride, and they let the boys 
march on. 

At Waynesboro the citizens were determined to kill us. 
One old man struck a boy over the head with a hickory cane, 
breaking the cane in two. It looked as though we should 
have a hard time, but the guards stood by us, and declared 
they would shoot the next one who struck us. The women 
were worse than the men, and could hardly keep from 
scratching our eyes out. All were going to die in the last 
ditch, live in the mountains, walk to Europe, or do any tiling 
except live in the same country with Yankees. We were 
called every name that was bad. One woman said the 
Yankees were so mean that when they went through the 
town they stole a woman's false teeth. It was suggested that 
if she had kept her mouth shut they would not have known 
she had false teeth. The guards laughed, and the woman 
jumped up and down, mad way through. She was about as 
angry with the guards as with us. 




We took cars here for Augusta ; the Texans said Georgi- 
ans were mighty mean people, and they reckoned we had 
better 2:et to Augusta Ijefore we had trouble. We arrived 
at Augusta late in the afternoon. The people expected us 
and were in line on each side of the street to welcome us. 
Old men called us " Yankee-doodles ; " boys called us " Blue 
bellies;" the women yelled all sorts of vile words. We 
marched up the main street into an old stock yard ; an officer, 
dressed in the uniform of a captain of our army, stood at the 
gate, and the first words we heard were, "Halt, d — n you, 
halt ! Would you go to h — 11 in a moment ? " Our Texas 
guards left us here ; they shook hands with Frank and me, 
wished us good luck, but reckoned we would have a right 
hard time with tliis fellow. The " imp of darkness " who 
commanded the place was a Tennesseean, named Moore. 
He was surrounded by a gang of cut-throats, mostly desert- 
ers from our army, who, having jumped all the Ijounties pos- 
sible, had joined his gang ; nearly all were dressed in uniforms 
of blue. 

We were turned into a mule pen, and while resting there 
a boy about seventeen years old, dressed in rebel gray, came 
to me and said, " They are going to search you ; if you have 
anything you want to save, give it to me." "But you are a 
rebel," I said, "and I can't trust you." He answered that he 
was not, only galvanized (had taken the oath) ; that he had 
been a prisoner at Andersonville and had not courage to hold 
out, so he had gone over to the other side, but assured me 
that if I would trust him he would be time. While I hated 
the sight of him for his treason, he was better than the rest. 
All I had was my diary ; it was very imperfect and of no real 
value ; but in it I had noted the places where we had stopped 



16G  

while out, and I felt if Moore got it the negroes who had 
assisted us would suffer, so I gave it to him. 

Soon after Moore came in. He swore at us collectively, 
by detachments and individually. Looking at me he said, 
"I swear you look like the breaking up of a hard winter." 
He drew us into line and the picking began. Frank had 
a corps badge that he had made while at Charleston ; it wa&amp; 
cut out of bone, and was the work of days, but it had to go. 
As the Tennesseean came to me he said, "That cuss isn't 
worth picking," and passed me by. From the men they took 
everything ; pictures of friends at home, and when it was a 
picture of a lady, coarse remarks would be made. After all 
the articles had been taken from their pockets, the order 
was given to take off pants, blouses and shoes, and when we 
were turned back into the pen they were nearly naked. 

The pen was very filthy ; the mules had recently vacated, 
and it had not been cleaned. Moore said, " Make yourselves 
as miserable as possible, and I hope to God not one of you 
will be alive in the morning." Gangs of the roughs came 
in and tried to trade. One of the boys came to me, saying, 
" I have a watch that they did not find ; one of these men 
says he will give four blankets for a watch, and I think I 
had better let him have it, as we shall freeze to death here." 
I assured him that he would lose his watch and get no 
blankets, but he was so cold he could not resist the tempta- 
tion, and gave the fellow the watch. When he came in again 
he asked for the blankets. The wretch knocked him down 
and kicked him ; that was all he received for the watch. 

My galvanized friend turned up again and said they were 
coming after my jacket, — that they wanted the buttons. 
I took it off and laid it under another man. Soon they came 




in and asked for the officer with the jacket, a friend outside 
wanted to talk with him. They shook me and asked where 
he was. I repHed, "He lay down over the other side." 
They carried pitch-pine torches and looked at every man, 
but failed to find the jacket. We managed to live through 
the night, and in the morning my boy returned the diary, 
and Frank, two other officers who had been recaptured, and 
myself were taken out to be sent to Columbia. As we 
passed out I heard one of the gang say, " There is the cuss 
with the jacket," but he did not take it, and we marched to 
the depot. 

The rebels must have entertained an idea that Yankees 
could live without food, for they issued no rations to us either 
at night or in the morning, and we were hungry enough to 
eat a raw dog. Our train was one of those southern tri- 
weeklies which went from Augusta to Columbia one week 
and tried to get back the next, and stopped at every cross- 
road. At one place an old negro woman was selling sweet 
potato pies. I had a Byam's match paper and bought one 
with it. She asked, " Is it good, boss ? " I replied that it 
was worth five dollars in Confederate, and she was satisfied. 
I think she got the best of it, for the thing she sold me for 
a pie was a worse imitation of that article than the match 
paper was of Confederate money. At another place I bought 
a two-quart pail two-thirds full of ham fat, paying for it with 
one of the five dollar bills Packard gave us. 

We spent the entire day on the road, arriving at Colum- 
bia at seven o'clock in the evening, and were put in jail. 
We were not confined in a cell, but in a small room with a 
fireplace ; we found a fire burning on the hearth, and went 
to work. As we had had no opportunity to examine our 

clothes since we escaped, their condition can be imagined. 
We took bricks out of the hearth and spent an hour reduc- 
ing the inhabitants. It sounded like the discharge of mus- 
ketry, and the list of Idlled was larger than in any battle of 
the war. 

In the morning we were ordered out and marched through 
the city. We learned that Camp Sorghum had been broken 
up and our officers moved to the lunatic asylum. The gate 
of the new prison swung open, the crowd gathered, expect- 
ing to see "fresh fish," but instead saw four ragged, dirty, old 
tramps. We were received with a grand hurrah, and they 
gathered around to hear our story. We had been out just 
four weeks, and had travelled more than three hundred miles. 
While we were much disappointed we were not discouraged. 
Our trip had done us good ; we had gained in flesh, had 
thrown oft' the stagnation of prison life and were ready to try 
again. We found many changes inside. Major Dunn and 
Captain Hume had received special exchange ; others had 
escaped, and the squads were broken. We were assigned to 
squad fifteen, composed of men who had escaped, and we 
were a fine collection of innocents. 

Before we escaped fror^ Camp Sorghum an order had been 
issued by the rebel commander that if any more escaped they 
would put us in a pen, and the removal to Asylum Prison 
was the result. 

There were about two acres enclosed. On three sides were 
brick walks ; on the fourth a high board fence which sepa- 
rated us from the insane. Sentry boxes were built around 
the place and two pieces of artillery were pointed at us 
through the fence. Inside was a wooden building used for a 
hospital. The frames of alwut thirty small buildings were 



up and eleven were covered. The work had been done by 
our officers, and the rebels promised to send in lumber to 
cover the rest, but it never came. The eleven would accom- 
modate about three hundred, the rest l^eing quartered in a few 
old tents. Our squad had neither buildings nor tents, and 
we huddled together on the bare ground. It was so cold that 
we walked most of the night to keep from freezing. 

I received eight letters upon my return. They had lieen 
written at various times, but all came in one mail. My 
friends had heard from me but once, and that was a letter 
written and sent out hj an officer who was exchanged at 
Charleston. I had written several letters, but suppose they 
were never sent north. 

Frank was taken sick and sent to the hospital. I visited 
him every day. The only advantages he received from being 
in the hospital were a roof to shelter him and his mush made 
thinner, called gruel. He only remained a week, as he 
chose to be with us. 

Christmas day came and we were anxious to celebrate in 
some way. I had held on to ten dollars that Packard gave 
me, as I feared we should require it for salt, but concluded 
to have a nice dinner, so I bought a squash and we feasted 
on boiled squash and salt. 

Soon after January 1 a chance was opened to get a little 
money. A man named Potter, claiming to belong to Rhode 
Island and to be a Union man, made arrangements with the 
rebel officers to let us have six for one in gold or two for one 
in greenbacks. At that time outside the walls gold was fifty 
for one confederate, and greenbacks, twenty-five. We gave 
this noble-hearted (?) man bills of exchange on friends at 
home, and were obliged to endorse them as follows : '' This 



money was loaned me while a prisoner of war, and I desire 
it paid." 

The arrangements were made through a rebel officer and 
done on the sly. We did not get the money, but an order 
on the rebel sutlers, who put up a tent inside and did a 
thriving business. The bills of exchange were sent north — 
how, we never knew — and in nearly every instance paid by 
our friends, who believed they were repaying a friend for 
kindness to us. We were obliged to obtain the money to keep 
from starving, and our necessities were such that we would 
have given twice the amount charged, l)ut it was a grand 
swindle nevertheless, and persons both north and south were 
engaged in it. I managed to get into the ring and gave a 
draft of fifty dollars, receiving three hundred dollars in Con- 
federate money. One not acquainted with the prices and 
value of the money would think that I was quite well off, 
but in two weeks it was all gone, and yet we were as prudent 
as possible. We first purchased some coarse cloth, paying 
fifteen dollars per yard. Then bought some cotton and made 
a quilt ; we paid at the rate of a dollar and a half per pound 
for the thread to make it with. Pork was seven dollars per 
pound, tea one hundred and twenty dollars per pound, shoes 
one hundred dollars per pair, lead pencils three dollars each, 
fools-cap paper two hundred and twenty-five dollars per ream, 
envelopes twenty-five cents each, other things in the same 
proportion ; but the money put new life into the prisoners, 
and many a man came home who would have died without it. 

I was always blessed with friends, and am indebted to many 
old comrades for favors. Frank and I had slept (or tried to) 
on the ground, without shelter, for two weeks. One day 
Capt. Louis R. Fortescue of the signal corps said, " Jack, I 



believe we can make room for you and Frank in our shebang.' 
He was with a party of officers of the 18th Pennsylvania 
cavalry, and they said by packing snugly we could come in. 
It was snug quarters, but neither they nor we growled. My 
ham fat was a fortune ; our new mess owned a piece of iron 
— I think it was the side of an old stove — and it was used 
to cook cornmeal cakes on. If any one outside the mess 
wanted to cook on it they paid one cake in ten for the privi- 
lege, but it was a hard job unless it was well greased, as the 
cakes would stick. It was soon known that I had the fat, 
because when we cooked we greased the griddle with a rag- 
soaked in ham fat. Outsiders would say, "Jack, lend me 
your grease," but I had an eye to business, and would ask, 
" How many cakes will you give me ? " We fixed the tarifi* 
at one cake in ten, so that when we had plenty of business 
for the griddle and o-reaser our mess fared well. 

We were very discontented and were bound to escape the 
first possible chance ; many tunnels were planned and one 
nearly completed when the rebels came in and, driving the 
prisoners out of the tent where the shaft was sunk, with lit- 
tle trouble discovered it. We were confident we had been 
betrayed, and suspicion fell on a lieutenant who was quite 
intimate with the rebel officers. A committee was appointed 
to investigate. Before night a notice was posted on the bul- 
letin board that " General Winder has ordered that unless 
tunnelling is stopped all buildings, tents, lumber and shelter 
of any kind will be removed from the yard, and that he will 
use force for force if any attempt is made to punish prison- 
ers who report tunnelling to these headquarters," signed by 
Major Griswold, commanding prison. I will not give the 
name of the lieutenant, because I may do him injustice, but, 



172  

while our committee could not obtain information enough to 
try him, all believed that he was the man, and we did not 
see him after we left Columbia. 

February 8 was a day of thanksgiving. News was received 
that General Winder was dead. He was commander of all the 
prisoners and largely responsible for our treatment. Before 
the war he was a citizen of Baltimore, and was selected for 
the position he held by Jeff. Davis because no suffering could 
touch his heart. 

The information was given us in this way. The i)rison 
was calm and still, when the voice of Lieut. David Garbett 
was heard : " Hell has received reinforcements ; Winder is 
dead." A cheer went up from every man in the prison. If 
the guards knew the cause of our joy they made no effort to 
stop it. 

Feljruary 13 a meeting was held to organize the National 
Legion. It was proposed to have it take the form that was 
afterward adopted by the Grand Army of the Republic, and 
I have always believed that the men who organized the Grand 
Army were some of them members of our prison association, 
for when I joined the order in 1867 the grip was the same as 
our old Council of Ten. 

Tunnelling ])egan in earnest, and several tunnels were well 
under way. The plan of operation was to sink a shaft from 
four to five feet deep, then dig from that. The digging was 
done with a knife, spoon or half of a canteen. Our squad 
began one from house No. 1. We were more fortunate than 
some, for we had secured a shovel, cut it down with a rail- 
road spike and sawed off" the handle. With this we could 
lie on our bellies and work with both hands. The diffsrer 
had a bag, — usually made out of an old coat sleeve — and 


when he had filled it he pulled a string and it was withdrawn 
by comrades at the opening. They would empty it into 
their coat sleeves, and with their coats thrown over their 
shoulders would walk about the prison, dropping the dirt 
wherever they could. Usually when digging a tunnel we 
made holes in various places during the day, so that new dirt 
would not attract attention. The man inside had to be 
relieved often, as the air was so bad one could not remain 
over fifteen minutes. 

We were obliged to dig fifty-six feet before Ave were out- 
side of the wall. As work could only be done at night, our 
progress was very slow. Fifty feet had been excavated, and it 
began to look as though we should be free again, but on Feb- 
ruary 14 the order came to move, and half the ofiicers were 
taken out, marched to the depot, fooled around nearly all 
night in a drenching rain, then marched back to prison again, 
as they had no cars to take us out of the city. We renewed 
our work in the tunnel, continuing all night and the next day, 
but before we could get it beyond the wall they moved us. 
We covered up three of the officers in the dirt at the mouth 
of the tunnel, but when the rebels were making their last 
round through the prison to see if all were out they were 
discovered. 






