

At midnight, May 2, we were ordered to fall iu, and 
marched to the banks of the Rappahannock, where a pontoon 
was again being thrown across. It looked like the 11th of 
December over again. The officers were called together and 
ordered to select twenty-five men from the regiment, who 
would volunteer for whatever duty they might be called upon 
to perform. One officer was to go with them, and before the 
words had fully dropped from the lips of Colonel Devereaux 
Lieut. Johnnie Ferris said, "Please let me be that officer, 
colonel," and he was accepted. We found it hard to get 
twenty-five men because all wanted to go, and while the call 
was for volunteers we had to select them. 

At daylight it was found that the enemy had left the city. 
Our volunteers crossed, and were on the other side to wel- 
come us when we came over. We were the first in the city, 
but soon met General Sedgwick's division marching in from 
the left, having crossed below us. We found that Sedgwick 
was to storm the heights and we were to support him. Gen- 
eral Hooker, with the rest of the Army of the Potomac, had 
marched up the river and engaged the enemy at Chancellors- 
ville, and we were to hold this city. In column by regiments 
General Sedgwick advanced up the hill. We saw the white 




flag of Massachusetts as the 7th, 10th, and, I think, the 37th 
advanced. A rebel battery opened upon them but the line 
did not waver, and on, on, even to the cannon's mouth they 
went. 

The battery was silenced, captured, and its support fled. 
We followed close in the rear, and when some two miles from 
the city were ordered back for provost duty. We expected 
a "soft snap." Coats were brushed, brasses brightened, and 
in every respect we " braced up." We turned in early for a 
good night's rest, but at nine p.m. were turned out and double- 
quicked to the left of the city, as our pickets at that point 
had been fired upon. At daylight "Johnnie [reb] came 
marching home again," and filled the earthworks on the left 
and front of the city. Where they came from we could not 
tell, but they were there, and had a battery which was used 
to stir us up with good results. 

From provost soldiers we changed to sappers and miners. 
Dirt flew fast as we dug trenches for our own protection, and 
to obstruct the passage of artillery. We had several men 
slightly wounded but none killed. 

On the morning of the 5th we fell back to our rifle pits in 
the city, recrossed the river, remaining on duty until the 
pontoons were taken up, and then marched back to our old 
camp. We had not slept an hour since May 2, and were 
completely tired out. I slept all night and awoke thinking 
it was time for breakfast and found it was three p.m. 

We moved our camp to a delightful spot on the top of the 
hill, resumed our daily drills, and were once more under 
strict discipline. It was very hard to get leave of absence, 
but Lieutenant Shackley made application, giving as a reason 
that he required an officer's uniform, having just been pro- 




moted, and it was granted. Mose was absent ten days, and 
then returned, having purchased two pairs of stockings, a 
linen duster and a Ijrush ])room, but he had enjoyed his vaca- 
tion, and had two cents left of his two months' pay. 

June 16, marching orders came ; we waited until all had 
moved, then with two pieces of the 1st Rhode Island artillery 
took our place in the rear. Two companies were ordered to 
march half a mile in the rear of the column, and Major Rice 
was placed in conmiand of this detachment. We marched 
over ground which we had travelled before. The roads were 
very dusty and the sun scorching. At times the woods on 
each side were on fire, and our men suffered badly. June 20 
we arrived at Thoroughfare Gap, where we remained three 
days, to repel an advance through the gap. On the 26th we 
reached Edward's Ferry, crossed the Potomac, and at noon 
halted at old Camp Benton, where we had camped in 1861. 
What changes had taken place since we were there before ! 
Then we were light-hearted, happy ))oys, expecting to be at 
home in a year at least. Now those who remained were 
bronzed and war-worn veterans marching back to meet the 
enemy on northern soil. 

Our old camp was a fine wheat field and nearly all traces 
of our former occupancy were removed. We passed through 
Frederick City to Uniontown, Md., where we arrived the 
30th, and were ordered on provost duty. We expected to 
remain here for some time, and on the morning of July 1 
Captain Palmer and myself were ordered to dress in our best 
and make the acquaintance of the families in town, so we 
could understand where the officers would be the most wel- 
come. We had just started on this pleasant duty when the 
-assembly sounded. We returned and found we must march 



at once, and ive did march thirty-five miles, not halting until 
nine o'clock at night, when we bivouacked on the field of 
Gettysburg, two miles from the battle-ground. All day we 
had heard heavy firing and knew that a battle was being 
fought. At daylight on the 2d we were ordered into line 
of battle on the left of Cemetery Hill, where we remained 
under a severe artillery fire until about five p.m. 

We had seen the advance of the 3d corps and the warm 
reception they met ; we saw them falling back and the enemy 
advancing. Lieut. Sherman Robinson and I were lying side 
by side watching the battle. " Some one must go and help 
them, Jack," said Robinson. At that moment a staff* officer 
rode up to Colonel Devereaux, and then we heard the familiar 
command, " Attention, 19th !" " We are in for it," said Rob- 
inson, and with the 42d New York, we double-quicked to a 
point where the line had broken and the rebels were advanc- 
ing on our flank. I was in command of the color company, 
had just removed the covering from the colors when a regi- 
ment on our left broke ; with other officers I rushed to rally 
them, and was returning to my place in line when I went 
down. I heard an officer say, " Jack is down," before I really 
knew that I was shot. I could not rise, and Sergeant Smith 
and Private Collopee came to me. "Put him on my back. 
Smith," said the latter, and under a terrible fire he carried 
me from the field. Our lines fell back as fast as we could 
go, and I expected that Collopee would be obliged to drop 
me, and I should fall into the hands of the rel;)els, but he 
kept on and landed me in the field hospital of the 3d corps. 
Everything indicated that we were again defeated, but when 
our men arrived at the stone wall, by unanimous consent 
they turned about, and with that wild hurrah that only Yankee 



soldiers can give, drove the rebels beyond our former 
lines. 

I found myself surrounded by men wounded and dying. 
An assistant surgeon was in charge and I asked him to look 
at my wound. He did, and said that I could not live twenty- 
four hours. I suggested that he stop the blood, as he might 
be mistaken, but he had no time to waste on me and went 
along. Upon examination I found that I was wounded in 
three places, and all were bleeding badly, but I could not 
tell where the bullets had entered or come out. 

The battle was yet raging ; men were coming in thick and 
fast, the last arrivals being mostly rebels. Collopee had 
waited until the surgeon said that I should die, when he 
rushed back to the regiment with the information. In a 
short time Lieut. Mose Shackley appeared before me with 
one of his company named Younger. "Jack, old boy, 
they say you are going to die, and I thought you would 
like a canteen of coffee before you passed up your check," 
said Mose. " What are you lying on ? " he asked, as it 
was quite dark. I replied, " Only the ground ; " and going 
to a rebel who was slightly wounded but was comfortable, 
having a rubber blanket under and a woollen blanket over 
him, he said, " There is a darned sight better man than you 
are, with no blanket under or over him," and captured one 
for me. Making me as comfortable as possible, urging me 
to keep a stiff upper lip, he said he would like to remain 
with me, but there was lots of fun at the front, and he must 
return. 

I remained in this place until late at night, when a sur- 
geon came with an ambulance, and said I must be moved to 
the 2d corps hospital, as this was too near the line of battle. 


Having no stretchers they placed me on a board, and loaded 
me in. This movement started my wounds bleeding again, 
and I thought that the words of the assistant surgeon would 
prove true, but they drove me a mile I should judge, and 
dumped me by the road side with other wounded. I re- 
mained here until the next noon. The day was fine, only 
very warm. All was still except an occasional picket shot. 
The silence was broken by one heavy gun, and the shell 
went whistling over us, followed by another. Then opened 
the heaviest cannonading ever heard on earth. Shells })urst 
over me, and on all sides. Solid shot ploughed up the 
ground and I expected my time had come. Many of the 
wounded could crawl away, but I could not, and must 
stand it. 

When the shelling opened nearly all of the non-comba- 
tants were at the front, and they now made the best time 
possible to get out of danger. I lay near a gate way, where 
they passed. Down would come a pack mule loaded with 
cooking utensils sufficient to start a stove and tin-ware store ; 
then a lot of colored servants, or a runaway horse. I would 
shout and kick ; was sure that I should be either killed by 
shell or trampled to death. Would beg some skedaddler to 
get another, and take me away. He would stop, look on 
me with pity and say he would, but before he could capture 
another, a shell would come along, and his place be vacant. 
At last I saw a staff officer whom I knew riding to the front, 
and called to him. He heard me, drew his sword, and drove 
a couple of men to me, who, finding a stretcher, had me 
carried to the rear of the barn, where an ambulance was 
found and I was placed in it. My first sergeant, Damon, 
had been lying near, and I urged that he ])e taken with me, 


and my request was granted. Damon was wounded in the 
leg, the bone was shattered, and it was necessary that the 
leg should be amputated as soon as possible. 

We started for the rear. The driver was anxious for our 
safety, and it is possible he might have thought of himself; 
at any rate he drove over a corn-field on the jump. Part of 
the time I was in the top of the ambulance, part on the floor. 
Damon and I would come together hard enough to drive the 
breath out of each other ; but we were only passengers hav- 
ing a free ride, so we could not complain. When at last we 
reached our destination I expected we were both jelly, and 
would have to be taken out in a spoon, but we had held 
together, that is, I had, but Damon's leg was all broken up, 
and was soon amputated. 

They laid us on the ground on the side of the hill, near a 
stream called Cub Run. This was the field hospital of the 
2d corps, Dr. Dyer, my regimental surgeon, in charge. He 
soon visited me, and found that one bullet had entered my 
groin and had not come out, the other had passed through 
my right hip. I asked him what he thought of it and he 
said, "It is a bad wound, John, a very bad wound." Ofiicers 
of the regiment began to come in, and soon there were seven 
of us lying side by side. They told the story of the battle. 
Lieutenants Robinson and Donath had been killed, also many 
of our bravest and best men. My company the day before 
had numbered fifteen, ofiicers and men. Only Lieutenant 
Rice and five men remained. They also told me how well 
our boys had fought ; that at last we had met the rebels 
in an open field and had won a substantial victory. They 
described to me Pickett's charge. How they had come across 
the field in three lines of battle, expecting to sweep every- 


thing before them, but when they arrived at our lines they 
found our boys ready and waiting ; that the result was more 
prisoners than we had men in our line, and our boys had 
captured four rebel flags besides. It was glorious news ; it 
revived me, and my wounds pained me less than before. 

No matter how serious the battle, there is always a humor- 
ous side to it which an old soldier never loses. So it was 
at Gettysburg. When the fire was the hottest on the centre 
the battery that the 19th was supporting lost nearly all its 
men. The captain came to our regiment for volunteers to 
man the guns. Captain Mahoney was the first to hear the 
call. Going to Company E, he said, " Volunteers are wanted 
to man the battery. Every man is to go of his own free will 
and accord. Come out here, John Dougherty, McGiveran 
and you Corrigan, and work those guns." Lieutenant 
Shackley jumped to his feet and said, " Come on, boys, we 
must keep her a-humming," and they stood by the guns until 
the fight was over. 

Ben Falls, who was now a sergeant, had captured a rebel 
color. Coming in with it over his shoulder an officer said, 
" You will have to turn that flag in, sergeant. We must send 
it to the war department at Washington." "Well," said 
Ben, "there are lots of them over behind the wall. Go and 
get one ; I did." (I told this story several years ago at a 
camp-fire. Since then I have heard it told by others, and it 
is located and dressed up in other ways, but it is my story, 
and true, at that. ) 

We lay side by side until the morning of July 4, when the 
ambulance came to take us to the station. One after another 
was loaded in. I said, "Save a good place for me," but was 
informed that the orders of the surofeon were not to take me. 



With flags of I9fh Massachusetts carried at battle of Gettysburg. 





I sent for the surgeon, who came and said that I must not be 
moved for two weeks. I saw the ambulance drive away, 
then buried my face in the ground and cried like a baby. 

Other wounded were brought to fill the vacant places. 
Duncan Sherwood of Company A was one, so I had com- 
pany. Mike Scannell had also remained, being wounded in 
the arm, and rendered valuable service to Sherwood and 
myself. Directly in front of us were two amputating tables 
which were always busy. We saw several men whom we 
knew placed on them and removed, minus a leg or an arm. 
The groans of the wounded were constant, and the dead were 
being carried past us nearly all the time. On my left lay a 
young boy. He suffered much, but did not complain. One 
night, when it was time to go to sleep, he wliispered, " Good 
night, lieutenant, I think that I shall go up before morning." 
I urged him to keep up his courage, but he said it was no use, 
he should die. In the morning I looked and saw that the poor 
boy had answered the last roll-call. He lay by my side until 
afternoon, before they could find time to take him away. I 
had forgotten to ask his name, and no one knew him. His 
grave no doulrt bears the mark "unknown," and the records 
of his regiment say, "missing in action." 

I remained here six days, and my wounds received no 
attention only such as my comrades gave. They kept my 
canteen filled with water, which I used freely, to prevent 
inflammation. Do not think that I blame the surgeons. No 
nobler men ever lived than composed the medical staff" of 
the Army of the Potomac ; but there were twenty thousand 
wounded men. Union and rebel, on the field of Gettysburg, 
and the cases requiring amputation must receive attention 
first. 



One day I was made happy. Lieutenant Shackley and 
Adjutant Hill came to see me. They had ridden back fif- 
teen miles. Some of the boys had found a chicken, and 
they had made a broth and brought it to me in an old coffee 
pot. It was the first thing that had tasted good, and I shared 
it with Sherwood. Some think soldiers are hard-hearted. 
No hearts more tender can be found than in the breasts of 
brave men. When those officers parted from me that day 
not one of us could speak, and tears ran down our cheeks as 
we pressed each other's hands. 

My mind had been quite active, and I had come to the 
conclusion that I would move my lodging as soon as possible. 
One surgeon had said that I would not live twenty-four hours, 
another that I must remain where I was two weeks. It 
struck me that to die in twenty-four hours or stay where I 
was two weeks would neither be pleasant for myself nor 
those near me. 

I talked the matter over with Sherwood. We counted our 
cash and found we had five dollars each, and we formed a 
syndicate. We made Mike Scannell our agent, with instruc- 
tions to bring some kind of conveyance to take us off the 
field. The next morning he reported with a citizen, a horse 
and side-spring wagon. The whole lot was not worth ten 
dollars, but we paid our money and were loaded and on our 
way to Littletown, where we arrived in due time, and were 
driven to a church which had been converted into a tempo- 
rary hospital. We found it nearly full, but they made room 
for us. I had a nice place on top of the pews in the broad 
aisle. 

There was no organization of the hospital. Two of the 
town doctors were doing all they could, being assisted by 



the women. No doubt our Massachusetts women would do 
the same kind of work should the emergency arise, but I can- 
not speak in too high praise of the women of Littletown. 
They would dress the shattered arm of some poor boy, wash 
the blood from the wounds of another, thinking only of what 
they could do to relieve suffering. It was like getting home. 
My wounds were in a frightful condition. They had not 
been dressed, and the maggots were crawlinej into them. As 
soon as we were settled the ladies came to see what they 
could do. They were anxious to dress our wounds, but it 
required more hospital accommodations than the church 
afforded, so they washed our hands and faces, and made us 
as comfortable as possible. A real motherly woman asked 
what I wanted to eat. I had eaten little except the chicken 
Billy and Mose brought me, and when she said she had 
chicken broth, I said, "Bring me two or three." As soon as 
possible she came with a large pan full of broth, but the 
trouble was I could not sit up to eat it. At my suggestion 
she brought the prettiest girl in the room, who put her left 
arm around me and let me lean my head on her shoulder, 
while she fed me with the broth. Oh, it was nice ! Either 
the broth or the young lady's presence revived me. My new 
friend's name was Lucy. She said, "Don't take breakfast 
until I come, because I will bring yours from home." Bright 
and early Lucy was on hand with a pan of milk toast. She 
had seen me eat the night before and had broui^ht enouo;h for 
six. As she was called away for a few moments, I spoke to 
the boys who were near, and they soon reduced the surplus. 
We remained here two days. While I had the best care 
they could give I was growing worse. I had a high fever, 
and my wounds were getting inflamed. At times I would lie 



in a stupor for hours. One day I rallied and found the 
church deserted except Lucy and myself. Soon two men 
came in. " Are you going?" they asked. Lucy said, "No. 
Mother told me if any were not able to be moved to bring 
them home, and we would care for them ; he is not able, and 
must not go." The temptation was strong to stay, but a 
moment's reflection told me that I required hospital treat- 
ment, and I explained the danger to her. The men then 
carried me to the train and placed me on the floor of a bag- 
gage car. Lucy came with us, fixed my head all right, and, 
as a good sister should, kissed me good-by, and we were off 
for Baltimore. I was so weak that the i^ear name of Lucy 
passed out of my mind, and I have never seen her since, but 
have ever prayed that the blessings of Heaven be showered 
upon her, for her constant care the last day in the old church 
saved me from fever. 

The ride to Baltimore was terrible. The air was bad. 
Groans of the wounded were constant, and could be heard 
above the rattle of the car. I did not believe it was possible 
for me to live to reach the station, but I survived, although 
many of our number did not. 

We arrived in Baltimore about three o'clock in the morn- 
ing, were placed in ambulances and driven over the rough 
pavements to the Newton University Hospital. The next 
day, for the first time, my wounds were dressed ; the sur- 
geon placed a large syringe where the ball had entered and 
forced water through the opening ; maggots, pieces of cloth- 
ing and bone came out ; then they probed for the ball which 
had entered the groin, found it had struck the bone and 
glanced downward, lodging in the leg, where it yet remains. 
We received the best possible care from the surgeons and 



attendants. Ladies ^dsited the hospital every day loaded 
with delicacies for our comfort. 

I did a foolish thing while in the hospital which came near 
ending my earthly experience. One day an officer, slightly 
wounded, came in and said the paymaster was at the Custom 
House and if we could get there we would receive two months' 
pay. On the bed next mine lay Lieut. "Bob" Stewart of 
the 7 2d Pennsylvania, wounded in the leg ; neither of us 
had a dollar, and the thought of two months' pay in our 
pockets was pleasant. We talked it over that night ; Bob 
was sure he could stand it, l)ut thought I had better not try ; 
still I was anxious to go, so we bribed the nurse, and the 
next morning, after the surgeon made his rounds, we took a 
carriage and with the nurse started for the Custom House. 
I fainted before we had gone a block, but kept on and was 
able to sign the roll which a clerk brought to the carriage, 
and received the money. We returned to the hospital and I 
suffered from fever all day, and when the surgeon made his 
rounds the next morning he was alarmed at my condition. 
I dared not tell him what we had done, for the nurse would 
be discharged if I did. In front of me was a man who suf- 
fered from a shell-wound in the back ; he was forced to lie 
on his face and was very restless. I told the surgeon that 
this man suffered so much that it made me nervous, and he 
ordered him changed to another ward. It was several days 
before I regained what I had lost by my foolishness. 

I had been here a little more than a week when one day 
Mr. Robinson, the Massachusetts agent stationed there, came 
in and asked me if I had a brother named Asa Adams ; inform- 
ing him that I had, he asked if I would like to see him. My 
answer can be imagined, and in a short time he came in with 



my brother, who had left home when the news reached him 
that I was wounded. He had been to Gettysburg, searched 
the field hospitals, found where I had been, but no one could 
inform him where I was, as I did not leave my address ; he 
was returning home and stopped in Baltimore, and calling on 
the Massachusetts agent, found where I was located. As 
soon as I saw him my mind was made up to go home ; the 
surgeon said it was impossible, but I begged so hard that he 
consented, and in due time I was placed on my stretcher and 
carried to a hospital car. The cars were so arranged that 
the wounded were hung up by the stretchers, being placed 
on rubber springs. I was hung up in mine, but the motion 
of the car was such that I could not bear it so was taken 
down and placed on the floor. More dead than alive we 
arrived at Jersey City. We found that the mob had posses- 
sion of New York and we could not cross the ferry. After 
being carried from place to place, we were placed on a steamer 
and taken to Bedloe's Island, where we remained several days, 
then to the Fall River boat. We found great excitement at 
the boat ; several negroes were on board who had been driven 
from the city. Others jumped from the wharf and swam out 
to us after we were underway. They reported that the mob 
intended to fire the city that night. 

I received every attention on the boat, was placed in the 
ladies' cabin, and the lady passengers were constant in attend- 
ance, anxious to do something to relieve my sufferings. 
Handkerchiefs were wet with cologne and given me, and 
when the boat reached Fall River I had a large stock, marked 
with nearly every letter in the alphabet. Every few moments 
some good woman would bend over me and say, " Shall I 
turn your pillow?" and wishing to please them I would say, 



"If you please," although it had been turned two minutes 
before. 

We arrived at Fall River in the morning. I was placed 
on my stretcher, carried to the train and taken to Brockton, 
where I was loaded into an express wagon and driven to the 
hotel. Here I was placed under the care of Dr. E. E. Dean, 
and in the afternoon was driven to Sharon, the home of my 
brother, where I remained three months, attended by Dr. 
Dean and nursed by my dear mother and sister. 

From Sharon I was taken home to Groveland, where I 
remained until December, reporting to the department at 
Washington and my regiment, by surgeon's certificate, every 
twenty days. I enjoyed the convalescent period much. 
Colonel Devereaux, Captain Boyd and Adjutant Hill, with 
Mark Kimball and several others, had been ordered to Long 
Island on recruiting service, and I visited them often. I also 
sat on the platform, with my crutches, at war meetings and 
was quite a hero. I found quite a change since 1861 ; then 
men were very anxious to get to the front, now they were 
just as anxious to keep away. We had all learned that war 
was no picnic. 




