ALLEN COUNTY PUBLIC LIBRARY.11 •833 01877 8461£ ..mGC929.2SH4270GENERAL JO SHELBYUNDEFEATED REBEL.,Major General Joseph Orville ShelbyCommanding Cavalry Division of the Confederate Arniy of the Trans-MississippiCONFEDERATE MUSEUM, RICHMOND, VA.GENERALJO SHELBY^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ -J«i ^ ^ ^ «^« ^ ^ ^ »J» ^ *J* <^» ^ ^ ^ ^Undefeated RebelBY DANIEL O’FLAHERTYCHAPEL HILL * The University of North Carolina PressCopyright, 1954, byThe University of North Carolina PressCMTManufactured in the United States of AmericaVan Rees Press • New YorkForNell and Walter Drew“/ saw, or imagined l saw, a great empirebeyond the Rio. This river they call thegreat river T—Joseph Orville ShelbyForeword^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ -^» ^ ^ ^ "^» *J« ^ ^ ^1 ^ ^ »^ *^-» ^ ^ «^» ^ j| ^ ^ ^ r^* ^ ^Major General Alfred Pleasanton, the creator of the CavalryCorps of the Army of the Potomac, who fought Stuart inVirginia and led the pursuit of Price’s raiders in Missouri in1864, said of Major General Joseph Orville Shelby, C.S.A., “Shelbywas the best cavalry general of the South. Under other conditions, hewould have been one of the best in the world.” The brilliant Unioncavalry leader was himself on his death bed in a Washington, D. C.,hotel when the news was brought to him of the passing of Shelby atAdrian, Missouri, in February, 1897, and his generous tribute to thememory of an old foe was almost Pleasanton’s last conscious utterance.Yet today the dust of Joseph Shelby, the only ranking Confederatecommander on active duty in 1865 never to surrender, and the greatestcavalry chieftain of them all, in the opinion of those who should haveknown best, his enemies, lies almost forgotten beneath a modestmarker at the foot of the Confederate Monument in Forest Hill Ceme¬tery, Kansas City, on the Battlefield of Westport, where he savedthe last Confederate army of the West from destruction, withPleasanton in vain pursuit. Not another stone has been raised to hismemory either in Kentucky, his birthplace, or in his adopted state ofMissouri, where in the closing years of the last century he was elevatedalmost to the status of a folk god by the people of the state. In all theglittering constellation of the South’s cavalry leaders, Shelby aloneremains a dim and almost invisible star, for reasons which will appear;no single reason alone is responsible for the obscurity which his fameviiVlllForewordhas suffered. It has been a fortuitous combination of circumstancessuch as the chronicler seldom confronts; and it is the story that hasnever been told, in all of the millions of words written on the CivilWar, despite the fact that the story of Shelby’s life, over five tumul¬tuous decades, is one of the great American epics. During thosedecades he lived more lives than half a dozen other notables of historyput together, and even without his whirlwind passage through theCivil War, in which he marched and raided more miles than anyother Confederate cavalryman, his life was one of high adventurenever matched by any of his countrymen before or since. It was aWagnerian opera of the West, in which there are thunderous over¬tones of Missouri River steamboats loaded with hemp, the crack ofJohn Brown’s well-oiled rifles, the drumfire of Confederate cavalryhoofs, the Marseillaise played by French bands in the plazas ofMaximilian’s Mexico, the hammer of railway track being laid to theGolden Gate, and the “Stars and Stripes Forever” played by a Mis¬souri brass band at a Fourth of July courthouse celebration.Shelby was as American as Jeb Stuart, Mark Twain, or P. T. Bar-num, but in his many-faceted character there was more of the Cheva¬lier Bayard than of the Showman or the Soldier of Fortune. He wasthe archetype and idol in Missouri of those who called themselvesthe Chivalry; he was, as George Creel has called him, the Last of theCavaliers.No attempt has been made in this book to cover the whole opera¬tion of the War in the West, except insofar as Shelby played a partin it, and there has not been space for detailed attention to the func¬tioning of the Confederate Department of the Trans-Mississippi, inwhich the Missourians chiefly fought; those are fields still awaitingthe historian. The writer is neither a military expert nor a scholar,and has been content simply to trace the thread of Shelby’s lifethrough the kaleidoscopic pattern of American history between the1840’s and the 1890’s. A word is necessary, however, on the author’ssource of material on Shelby’s expedition into Mexico. There is onlyone source, the works of Shelby’s adjutant, Major John NewmanEdwards. Edwards had a gift for exaggeration, and no ear for con¬temporary conversation; his characters spoke a language never heardon land or sea outside the pages of Sir Walter Scott, his literarymodel. Though it would be pleasant to be able to make the claim thatall quotations are actual transcripts from an indubitable record, itForewordixhas been necessary to recast these conversations along more probablelines; but as George Creel says, in a letter to the writer, “MajorEdwards never failed to gild the lily, but from what Colonel Elliott(Shelby’s Marshal Ney) and others told me ... he usually had a basisof fact.”Mr. Creel can speak with more than usual authority, for he was ayoung reporter covering the Federal Building in Kansas City whenShelby was United States Marshal for the Western District ofMissouri. In his autobiography, A Rebel at Large, Mr. Creel says:“The Federal Building was on my beat, and when I dropped into see the General, it was usually an hour before I could get away.As a rule, members of his old command sat with him, and when dis¬pute occurred as to a date or incident, they turned to their Bible,Major John N. Edwards’ chronicle of the expedition.”This testimony that the men who went to Mexico with Shelbyregarded Edwards as Holy Writ, coming as it does from one ofAmerica’s most distinguished writers and Woodrow Wilson’s chiefof information during World War I, would seem sufficient reply tothose historians who have felt, quite pardonably, that some of MajorEdwards’ “gilding of the lily” almost passes the boundaries of cre¬dence; but Edwards wrote in the extravagant style of the day, withthe Southern historian’s proverbial tendency to exaggerate the casual¬ties, and the villainy, of the enemy; and a grain of salt, plus a littleintelligent discrimination, are all that is needed to separate the wheatfrom the chaff in the boisterous works of Major John NewmanEdwards. It is a matter of sober fact that Shelby’s whole career wasone long sequence of highly improbable, but well authenticated,historical events; and it is equally probable that Major Edwardsstrayed no further from the truth than was considered permissible inhis time for a Southern officer and gentleman.Because of the scarcity of primary data on Shelby’s private life,the author is more than usually indebted to a large number of personswho have assisted in the search for material. He is especially in thedebt of Mr. C. Frank Dunn and Mr. Charles R. Staples, of Lexington,Kentucky, and Miss Ludie J. Kinkead, of the Filson Club, Louisville,for their devoted interest to the cause of unearthing data on the Lex¬ington of Shelby’s boyhood; to Mrs. H. H. Gratz, of Lexington,widow of Shelby’s partner, for her recollection of Betty Shelby; toMr. J. W. Motte of Waverly, Missouri, for his vivid reconstruction,XForewordfor the author, of the town of Waverly in the fifties; and to Mr. A. L.Maxwell of Lexington, Missouri, who knows more history of theMissouri River Valley than has been, or ever will be, written. Ac¬knowledgment is made elsewhere of the author’s heavy obligation toMessrs. Cass K. Shelby of Hollidaysburg, Pennsylvania, and EdwardF. Shelby, of Uniontown, for genealogical data on the Shelby family;and at the top of the list belongs an expression of heartfelt apprecia¬tion for the day-by-day assistance, for a year and a half, renderedby Mr. Milton C. Russell, of the Virginia State Library, and Mrs.Bertie Craig Smith, Mrs. Margaret Causby, Mrs. Susan Seaboyer andMiss Eudora Elizabeth Thomas, members of the staff, assistance whichincluded not only research within the library but a continuing cor¬respondence with other libraries throughout the country. In addition,the Virginia State Library provided the author with a private office,with the compliments of the Commonwealth, into which no noiselouder than the distant hum of an elevator could penetrate—a boonthe enjoyment of which has to be experienced to be appreciated, butthe nature of which any writer will understand.In addition, equal thanks are due to all of the following, in thesearch for Shelby material, which led from Pennsylvania to MexicoCity, vertically, and from Vera Cruz to California, horizontally:Donald G. Patterson, Acting Chief of the General Reference andBibliography Division, Library of Congress; David C. Mearns, Chiefof Manuscript Division, Library of Congress; Emerson Greenaway,Librarian, Free Library of Philadelphia; Paul North Rice, Chief ofReference Department, New York Public Library; M. E. Kekker,Book Editor of Armor, formerly the United States Cavalry Journal,U. S. Armor Association, Washington, D. C.; John R. Wallace, presi¬dent of the Public Library and Historical Association, Lexington, Mis¬souri; Miss Sarah Guitar, Reference Librarian of the State HistoricalSociety of Missouri, Columbia, Mo.; Miss Roemol Henry, Librarian,Transylvania College, Lexington, Kentucky; W. B. McDaniel II,Librarian, The College of Physicians of Philadelphia; Dr. Harry E.Pratt, Historian of the State of Illinois; Ralph H. Parker, Librarian,University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo.; R. N. Williams 2nd, Directorof the Historical Society of Pennsylvania; Gilbert Knipmeyer, Archi¬vist of the State of Missouri, Jefferson City, Mo.; Mrs. Frances Biese,Archivist of the Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis; Miss BarbaraKell, Reference Librarian of the Society; Joseph H. Thom, Chief ofForewordxithe Reference Department, Washington University Libraries, St.Louis; Miss Helen M. McFarland, Librarian, Kansas State HistoricalSociety, Topeka; Dr. Floyd C. Shoemaker, Secretary of the State His¬torical Society of Missouri at Columbia; Dr. James N. Primm,Assistant Director of the Western Historical Manuscripts Collection,University of Missouri, Columbia; Miss Norma Cass, ReferenceLibrarian, University of Kentucky, Lexington; Thomas C. Morelock,Director of Public Information, University of Missouri; Mrs. ViolaA. Perrotti, Curator, Snyder Memorial Library, University of KansasCity; William Ainsworth Parker, Secretary for Fellowships of theAmerican Council of Learned Societies, Washington, D. C.; WarrenC. Stewart, American Consul, Vera Cruz, Mexico; Edward F. Lane,Assistant to the Vice President of the University of Pennsylvania;George A. Harris, Alumni Secretary, Villanova College; Thomas F.Shannon, Alumni Secretary, St. Joseph’s College, Philadelphia; Ben¬nett S. Cooper, Alumni Secretary, Haverford College, Haverford, Pa.;John E. Kramer, Registrar of the Philadelphia College of Pharmacyand Science; Miss Henrietta Lynch, Secretary of the Troost AvenueCemetery Corporation, Kansas City; Miss Minnie B. Cameron, Libra¬rian, San Antonio Public Library; Robert E. Hickman, of Benton,Ill.; Mrs. Shelby Grove Steger, Van Buren, Mo.; John F. Shelby,Butler, Mo.; Henry A. Bundschu, Referee in Bankruptcy, U. S.District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Kansas City;Mrs. Lee Redd Nally, Bronxville, N. Y.; Drury T. Boyd, Joplin, Mo.;Bryan Lacy, Postmaster, Adrian, Mo.; John Bakeless, Seymour, Conn.,Historian of the Missouri Pacific Railroad; Rev. Wade Salford,Washington, D. C.; Mrs. Irwin Donovan (Mrs. Laura EdwardsDonovan) of Muskogee, Okla.; Maurice J. Schwab, Recorder ofDeeds, Lexington, Mo.; Miss Elizabeth Corder, Marshall, Mo.;Dr. James Welch Patton, Director of the Southern Historical Collec¬tion, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Mrs. Lutie GordonJordan of Waverly, Mrs. Louise Davis Brown of Waverly, Mrs.L. N. Morgan of Norman, Okla., and Mrs. Adrianna Kuyk Ludwig,in whose home the first half of this book was written, and who as amusician is more of an artist than any biographer.Daniel O’FlahertyRichmond, VirginiaSeptember, 1953Contents^ ^ <^« ^ i-^» ^ ^ »^» ^ >^» ^ >^i ^ «^» ^ ^ ^ ^ »J» ^ ^ ^ »!^Foreword viiPART ONEThe Sign of the Centaur1 Lincoln’s Confederate General i2 Boyhood in Kentucky 93 Waverly: The Golden Years 214 The Border Wars 305 Steamboat Wedding 466 Missouri and the Union 52PART TWOThe Campaign of the Missouri State Guards7 Boonville and Carthage 638 Wilson’s Creek: The Face of War 729 A Star Added, A State Lost 88PART THREEShelby the Raider10 A Colonel of the Cavalry 10311 The Iron Brigade: First Newtonia 11912 The Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross Hollows 127xiiixiv Contents13 The Iron Brigade: Cane Hill 13414 The Iron Brigade: Prairie Grove 14615 The Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 16216 Helena: Disaster in the West 17617 Shelby’s Great Raid 18918 The End of the War in the West 207PART FOURMexico19 Revolt Against Surrender 22620 From Texas to Mexico 23521 Across the Sabinas 25322 Jeanningros 26423 Parras and Encarnacion 27024 Mexico City at Last 28225 The Colonization Scheme 29126 “The Mexican Times” 313PART FIVEThe Blue grass and Missouri Again27 Home from the Wars 32728 “The Bloody Bonds”: The Gunn City Massacre 33329 Coal Mining: Boom and Bust 34230 Shelby in Reconstruction 34631 The Trial of Frank James 36032 A Friend Is Gone 37833 The Great Pullman Strike 38334 Missouri’s Farewell 394Notes 403Index 42 3GENERAL JO SHELBYUNDEFEATED REBEL— —Route of GreatRald“ R»tu.rn Routs^»/2ai IroAdC*OF^ CONITEOtt^afifto'/ijjr. i<niwic* «n ShtUy tuvCHit JVU*l*PART ONEThe Sign of the Centaur^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ »J* ^ ^ ^ »^» ^ «^ ^ ^ <^» »^» ^ *^»1. Lincoln's Confederate GeneralAFTER the American Civil War, when the heavy hand of mili¬tary defeat lay upon the South, thousands of ex-ConfederatesL looked longingly across the border into Mexico, which wasstill a white man’s country under the reign of the Emperor FerdinandMaximilian. The opera bouffe empire of the blond-bearded, thirty-two-year-old Austrian Hapsburg, supported by French occupationtroops, still had two years to go, and the broad vistas of an ancient andromantic land beckoned invitingly to all those Southerners footlooseenough to follow the sun.True, the Mexicans had a civil war of their own, and there was aJuarista behind every boulder in the north, but hundreds of disbandedConfederates, seeing it as the promised land, slipped across the bordereither to join Juarez or to seek service with the Emperor. The pick¬ings were good from the beginning, but it was not until June 2, 1865,that there was any concerted movement southward.On that day Major General Joseph Orville Shelby,1 late commanderof the Missouri Cavalry Division of the Confederate Army of theTrans-Mississippi, marched south from Corsicana, Texas, with a bandof a few hundred men, soon swelled to a thousand, and began atriumphal march to Mexico City which was one of the strangestmilitary excursions in history.2It was not an invasion, nor a raid, though all were armed to theteeth and angry as only men can be who have lost a war. It was atrespass, pure and simple; but in the unsettled state of the countrythere was none to forbid them entry. When General Jeanningros,the French commander at Monterrey, heard about it he promised2The Sign of the Centaurto hang them all, for it was the conviction of Jeanningros and his masterin Mexico City, Marshal Bazaine, that Shelby’s expedition was butthe spearhead of another gringo invasion such as Mexico had sufferedin the 1840’s. In this they guessed better than they knew. Althougheven his soldiers did not know it, General Shelby had the unofficialblessing of Abraham Lincoln in this venture; and if Lincoln had beenalive this June day Shelby could have said to his men, “Boys, I have theword of the President of the United States that if you join Juarez andoust the French, thus saving Washington the trouble, you may haveanything you like in Mexico.” 3 With Lincoln dead, he kept silent, forno one any longer knew what Washington would do; the South-haterswere in the saddle; they might even demand the return of the exilesas traitors. And yet—and yet, old Abe had picked him for the mission.It was another in the long list of distinctions which Jo Shelby couldwear and no other man could—he was Abraham Lincoln’s ConfederateGeneral.At Piedras Negras, opposite Eagle Pass, Shelby and his men receiveda magnificent offer to join the Republicans under Juarez, which wouldhave made them military masters of the Mexican states of Tamaulipas,Coahuila, and Nuevo Leon. The fame of the Missouri Cavalry Divi¬sion had preceded them. Perhaps a message from Lincoln, throughJuarez, now in the United States, had also preceded them. GovernorBiesca, Juarez’ right-hand man in the north, proposed to abdicate allbut his civil authority in Coahuila in favor of Shelby, making himmilitary commandant of the district in return for the services of hisbrigade and his ten Napoleon howitzers. Shelby was to be commis¬sioned a major general, with absolute authority from Juarez to recruitfifty thousand Americans.4A vote was taken, since Shelby’s was a democratic organization, andthe men voted unanimously to reject Biesca’s offer. After all, Juarezcommanded only greasers, in their view, and the gray coats of theJuaristas, coupled with their obvious economic distress, reminded theConfederates unfavorably of the war they had lost at home. Further¬more, the glittering braid of Empire had an irresistible attraction forthem and they plumped for the Emperor, although it should havebeen obvious to rational men that Maximilian’s days were numberedand that they were allying themselves with another Lost Cause.Rational men, however, would have had no place in an expeditionsuch as Shelby’s. He and his vagabonds were possessed by a dream,Lincoln’s Confederate General3and the dream confused reality, as it always does on such elysianargosies; it was the dream of a truant race. Their dream was to becomean elite guard of cuirassiers in the service of an Emperor, with brilliantuniforms, flying scarves, silver spurs, and jeweled pistols, with goldfor gaming and sloe-eyed senoritas for dalliance in the tropic dusk.This was to be their compensation for their rags of butternut andthe victory so often snatched from their grasp—for their poverty andtheir exile.They had been too long on Confederate army rations and quarteredtoo long in hellfire Baptist towns in Texas, where the townspeoplesniffed at them and the girls sang psalms on Mondays and it was Sun¬day every day of the week. They were headed now for a warrior’sheaven in the “land of garlic, stilettos, and straw hats.” They hadcharted their course for Hi-Brazil, for Fiddler’s Green, and the Gatesof El Dorado, with Jo Shelby up in front. Their goal was simple: loot,liquor, and women in the sinful cities of Cortez, with good horses toride, bright lances to flash, and fine feathers to preen. The Emperorwould not want them as a bodyguard—fearing the wrath of the UnitedStates—and would offer them only lands to homestead, but at PiedrasNegras they could not know that.In Jo Shelby they had the right leader. Descendant of a familywhich had fought at King’s Mountain and produced the first gov¬ernor of Kentucky, for four years he had been to the ConfederateArmy of the Trans-Mississippi what Jeb Stuart was to the Army ofNorthern Virginia—its cavalry arm. And lest the Army of the Trans-Mississippi be thought of as only a few small brigades in unimportantterritory, let it be remembered that it stood at sixty thousand menat its peak—more than Lee had after Gettysburg—and its tragedy wasthat it had never been used to assist the eastern armies.Like Stuart, Shelby was young, a brigadier general at thirty-threeand a major general at thirty-five. Unlike Stuart, he was handsome.Both had the quality of inspiring adoration in men and women alike.But here the comparison with Stuart ends—save in the matter ofcavalry genius—although Shelby was the Stuart of the West, forStuart was a bluenose in his private life, while Shelby could drink,fight, and court with the best of them.We have no fine paintings and murals of Shelby on horseback, aswe have of Stuart and Mosby, gallant with plumes in the moonlight.Nor is there a single equestrian monument honoring him in all the4The Sign of the CentaurSouth. He avoided having pictures taken as he avoided writing officialreports when he could—to the distraction of the historian. A friend hadto drag him into a picture gallery in Kansas City for one of the twopostwar photographs we have of him. The earlier picture shows himwith a beard like the waved mane of a circus horse, fine gray eyeswith deep wrinkles of intelligence about them in a square and massiveface, and hair combed as flat as a New Orleans bartender’s.This last, too-slick touch is obviously the result of an effort to tamehis locks for the ambrotype man, and he was forty years old when itwas taken. In battle, with the shock of brown hair matted beneath thebrim of his dark slouch hat, and his black plume flying, he must haveresembled a curly wolf in butternut. In addition, he had the fine figureof the Confederate cavalryman, a resounding voice capable of the mostdulcet and persuasive oratory, and he was a ladies’ man of distinctionin a country full of ladies’ men.Though pictures of him are hard to find, the men of the MissouriCavalry Division, those who survived, carried with them a picture intheir minds that never dimmed with the passage of three score yearsand more. It was the picture of Shelby as a scourge in the saddle, acavalry leader who never made a mistake; who could hold off fifteenthousand men with only one thousand throughout one bloody, live¬long day; who harnessed his men to the guns of the artillery when thehorses gave out—and the men were glad to take their places; whosmote the enemy hip and thigh, and won the last battle west of theMississippi for the Confederacy; and whose flag, in the end, was notlowered in the presence of the enemy.Before the war Shelby had been a leader of the Missouri borderruffians in Kansas and had killed his share of abolitionists in the borderwarfare. Far from being a bushwhacker, however, he was one of therichest and most elegant young planters in Missouri at the time, own¬ing land, slaves, steamboats, and a hemp factory in the romantic oldriver town of Waverly. During the war itself, he carried the conflictto the enemy so fiercely that his name was either a talisman to conjurewith, or a hissing and a byword, depending upon which side you wereon in that fight. In the very first reports in which his name appears inthe Official Records, he is already being referred to by the Federalsas “the notorious Shelby.”There is never a hint, however, that he is not an honorable soldier.His notoriety with the Federals derived from his slashing prairie styleLincoln’s Confederate General5of attack, which he had learned in Kansas. Shelby was, by tempera¬ment, a freebooter first of all. An understanding of this fact is essentialin forming an estimate of his character. It was Shelby’s fate that hiscavalry genius was used over and over again merely to save Confeder¬ate armies from the destruction invited by the military incompetenceof his superiors; he failed not once to smash the will of the enemy tofollow up an advantage, but to a man like Shelby, whose most modestplans would have called for an invasion of the United States clear upto Canada, this was frustration of the most punishing kind.The Missouri Cavalry Division, which he commanded throughoutits life, was composed first to last of volunteers, mostly boys. TheConfederacy sent Shelby not a squad during the four years of the war,nor did he want any of their “conscript trash.” He foraged for goodmen the way some generals foraged for the good beef cattle and thegiant sweet potatoes of the region, and he kept his division at fullstrength throughout the war despite the fact that its casualties ran sohigh in such slaughters as Westport, Independence, and Newtonia,that in any other division they would have discouraged enlistments.He was fond of his men, but he did not spare them—or himself.He was not above annexing whole regiments by invitation, whichflattered them into fighting with a ferocity and an elan equaled inthis war only by the Louisiana Tigers under Stuart in Virginia, andhe maintained an “underground” into Union-held territory throughwhich streamed thousands of volunteers—bushwhackers, some wouldcall them—to the Missouri Cavalry Division. Most of them were boyswith memories of enemy outrages seared in their brains, who wantedto join Jo Shelby and carry the war back to their own firesides.“Boys for war” was Shelby’s motto. He knew that a boy of eighteenwho volunteers is worth a whole company of conscripts. The reasonthat old soldiers never die is that they have sense enough to lie downwhen they are hit. Young volunteers never lie down except for good.Shelby once dallied with the idea of a regiment composed wholly ofboys, with boys as officers, but inasmuch as the outfit would have in¬cluded nearly every man in his division at the time, he never put theidea into effect. The average age at which he preferred to recruit hisspur-jingling cavalrymen was not much above twenty, and in theterrain over which they fought in Missouri and Arkansas they werepractically an amphibious breed, “half alligator and half horse.”Mounted, they swept over the plains like a plague of locusts; dis-6The Sign of the Centaurmounted, dragoonwise, they could fall upon a campfire as silently asIndians, or fight with bowie knives waist-deep in a swamp. As Shelby’sbiographer and fellow soldier, Major John Newman Edwards, says,in their long and bloody career the Missouri Cavalry Division fought“Yankees, Dutch, Indians, Negroes, ironclads, alligators, fever, small¬pox, starvation, and wintry blasts, and never once retired from anyof these without defiance on their battered crest, and ranks closed upand serried.”If Shelby had been nearer the seat of war and government inRichmond, he would have demanded for his division all the accoutre¬ments and panoply of war with which the plush-collared cavalry wassurrounded in Virginia; as it was, he was in continual short supply ofuniforms and equipment, and to dress up appearances he had to becontent with issuing a few John Brown pikes to serve as lances. Therest was butternut, or homespun Confederate gray. Or calico.Because of the volunteer nature of his organization, Shelby permitteda laxity of behavior and discipline which would have demoralized alesser command. A Kentuckian by birth and a Missourian by adoption,he knew that he commanded Southerners with Western ideas ofchivalry. He respected their code, which was based upon a sense ofpersonal honor exaggerated to an extreme degree. Dueling was recog¬nized, without regard to rank, and many an officer who “insulted” aprivate found that he had either to fight or resign. On the other hand,Shelby’s brand of discipline, though unorthodox, was strict, and noman of his division would have faced his wrath willingly.As a result of this shrewd estimate of the character of his men,Shelby was rewarded with a devotion not exceeded anywhere in thearmy. He could, and did, take liberties with the lives and persons ofhis men which would have raised a mutiny anywhere else, and hecould fraternize with both officers and men more freely, without losingdignity, than any other general in the Confederacy. No one presumedupon his affability. A thing was right if Jo Shelby did it. That was all.Following this pattern to its logical conclusion, Shelby sometimesconducted himself with his superiors in a manner which would havegot him courtmartialed in the eastern armies. His insubordinate habitswere tolerated, however, by his superiors, who were under no mis¬apprehension as to his genius, though they regarded him as a “boy”and persistently refused to give him the rank to which he was entitledby virtue of the number of men he commanded.Lincoln’s Confederate General7In such a free and easy fraternity it was natural that Shelby did notdeplore too much the activities of bushwhackers such as Quantrill aslong as they were on the Southern side. (Quantrill and the James Boys,Frank and Jesse, were attached to his command as an independentcompany of partisan rangers.) It was Shelby’s theory of the war,which he regarded as a struggle between the Puritan and the Cavalier,to “dig the gulf between the two sections so deep that it could not bebridged except by the bodies of the conquered.” 5 He was to changehis views after the war, and he did as much as any man to restore theUnion, but in the heat of the conflict he was as bitter as Jeb Stuart,who wrote his wife never to permit his children to go north of theMason and Dixon line after the war.6Quantrill he at first regarded as a good man driven to desperationby the unceasing persecutions of the Federals, who had murdered hisbrother before the war—so Quantrill said—and had hunted Quantrillhimself like a rabid animal. Shelby used Quantrill’s scouts and guer¬rillas wherever they could be of use to the army and it was largelythrough such partisan organizations, after 1862, that he maintained hisservice for recruiting volunteers in Union-held territory.7As a result of the nature of his cavalry operations—over thousandsof miles of territory—Shelby was frequently criticized in bitter fashionby the natives of the regions through which he passed, the complaintsreaching even to the ear of Jefferson Davis in Richmond. Nothingcame of them, however, and Shelby ignored the critics, as did hissuperiors in the Trans-Mississippi Department. It is hardly necessaryto point out that the Confederate cavalryman, throughout the war,was hungry and necessitous, and from the Potomac to the Gulf therewere the same continual complaints from loyal Secessionists that theywould rather see the Yankees any day than their own horsemen.Actually Shelby was very jealous of his men’s reputation and didall he could to restrain looting, though he admitted unofficially that itwas a hopeless task sometimes. Furthermore Shelby knew that mostof those who complained the loudest, in the territory in which heoperated in Missouri and Arkansas, were doing a brisk trade with theenemy and objected only to the interruption of their business, thoughthey cheered mightily for the Confederacy when Shelby was in theneighborhood.To Shelby these weather vane patriots seemed as useless as prairiedogs, which are said to have a strange preference for living in the8The Sign of the Centaursame burrow with owls and rattlesnakes. He drove them from hiscamp in Texas after Appomattox when “committees” called on him,suggesting that he surrender. The thought of surrender was anathemato him, and he would have hanged cheerfully all those who didsurrender.He himself never surrendered. He marched to Mexico instead-restoring order in Texas as he went. Bushwhackers were as numerousas coyotes in the eastern part of the state after the breakup of theConfederate armies, and no one’s life or property was safe.At Austin Shelby’s column surprised a band of renegades in the actof looting the sub-treasury of the last gold and silver of the Con¬federacy. He gave them no chance to surrender or plead for mercy.He shot them down to the last man, and turned the money over toGovernor Murrah of Texas, refusing to touch a penny of it for him¬self or his men, though none of them had been paid for years.At other places he scattered bands of outlaws as he caught up withthem, and as the news of his coming preceded him, the bushwhackersand borderers lit out for other parts of the country. Mayors and townofficials sent messengers to Shelby begging him to pitch camp near theircommunities and insure tranquillity merely by his presence. For a fewweeks, until General Philip H. Sheridan took over in Texas with50,000 men, Shelby’s was the only force for law and order in theeastern counties of the state. He also recruited as he went, and somevery bad eggs joined up, as later events proved. Major Edwards, theBoswell of the expedition, says in his memoirs, “Some he hung andsome he recruited, the last not always the best.” 8Their progress through Texas lasted for twenty-nine days, endingon the American side of the border, across from Piedras Negras, onJuly first. On the Fourth of July, the men of the former MissouriCavalry Division lowered their colors reverently for the last time.They sank their flag into the Rio Grande, weighted with stones tillthe Judgment Day, and then they marched south into Mexico as amounted regiment in full battle dress—iron, defiant, and unrecon-structible, clanking with artillery, carbines, bowie knives, and fourColt dragoon pistols apiece.9At the bottom of the Rio Grande also rested Shelby’s famous blackplume, wrapped in the folds of the flag forever.Boyhood in Kentucky92. Boyhood in KentuckyOnly the Lees of Virginia can match the record of the Shelbys ofKentucky in giving great men to the South from the time of theFrench and Indian War down to the Civil War. The Shelbys, like theLees, were large landowners, wealthy and aristocratic; also like theLees they were linked closely by ties of blood and marriage to themost distinguished families of their respective states.A list of the Shelby family connections in Kentucky reads like aWho’s Who of the Golden Age of the Bluegrass State before the war:the Gists, the Gratzes, the Boswells, the Browns, the Harts, theBentons, the Bledsoes, the Henry Clays, and the Francis Preston Blairs.Most of these families, except the Gratzes, boasted Virginian ancestry,and the Gratzes had been merchant princes in Philadelphia for twogenerations before Benjamin Gratz, who became the stepfather ofJoseph Orville Shelby, settled in Lexington, Kentucky, in 1818.For a hundred years or more there were Shelby fighting men every¬where in American history, from the Kanawha in Virginia to theThames in Canada, and from the Missouri to the Rio Grande. Therewere at least three Shelbys at the Battle of King’s Mountain, and oneof them, Colonel Isaac Shelby, who proposed the expedition, becamefirst governor of Kentucky and a distinguished soldier in the War of1812, commanding twelve Kentucky regiments at the Battle of theThames. It is for Isaac Shelby that cities and counties all over theUnited States are named—wherever his fellow Kentuckians pushed onto build new homes and found new communities.1Some genealogists assert with confidence that David Shelby, cousinof Isaac and grandfather of Joseph Orville Shelby, also was present.If so, he was one of the youngest soldiers in the battle—only seventeenyears old.2 Altogether the number of Shelbys taking part, accordingto the conflicting records, may have been an even half dozen; and thisseems not unlikely since whole families responded to the clarion callthat rang through the hills as the Tories and the British regulars underFerguson marched up through South Carolina to the battle that hasbeen called the turning point of the American Revolution.The Shelby clan in America had a common ancestor, Evan Shelby,10The Sign of the Centaurwho emigrated to Pennsylvania from Wales in 1735, bringing withhim his wife Catherine and four small sons. All of Evan’s sons set outeventually to seek their fortune in the wilderness. They were a hillpeople, the Shelbys, with an inborn memory of the steep, comfortinghorizons of Wales; and they were drawn as by a magnet to themountain wall of the Appalachians, where the frontier promisedwealth for those who could endure the hardships and fight off theIndians. The Shelbys could. They left their indelible stamp, as wellas their numerous progeny, in all of the country through which theypassed, and they were not only fighters and landseekers, but builders,educators, and canny business men, as an examination of the recordattests.3The line of Joseph Orville Shelby comes down through John, one ofthe sons of the original Evan.4 This John was the great-grandfatherof Joseph Orville Shelby, and father of the David who was reputedlyone of the youngest soldiers at King’s Mountain. Of David Shelbylittle is known except that he owned broad acres, as did all theShelbys, that he represented his county in the Tennessee ConstitutionalConvention at Knoxville in 1796, and that he was clerk of the SumnerCounty Court for thirty-five years until his death in 1822. Davidmarried Sarah Bledsoe, of a Tennessee Virginian family, and by herhad eleven children, of whom Orville Shelby, father of Joseph OrvilleShelby, was the ninth. Orville Shelby was born on January 21, 1803,at “Spencer’s Choice,” the family home in Sumner County. He wasmarried twice, lived in Adississippi, Tennessee, and Kentucky, and diedyoung.Orville’s first wife was Caroline Winchester, daughter of GeneralJames Winchester, a Tennessee general of the Revolution and of theWar of 1812. He is described in Robert B. McAfee’s History of theLate War in the Western Country, as “a wealthy citizen of Tennessee,where he lived for many years in a degree of elegant luxury andease.” 5 Caroline Shelby died several years after her marriage to Orville,leaving him with two small children, Caroline and Isaac, and also witha large fortune inherited from her father.On July 27, 1829, Orville remarried. His second wife was AnnaMaria Boswell, of Lexington, Kentucky, daughter of a well knownphysician of the community. Orville took his new bride back toMississippi, but aside from the fact that they lived in Vicksburg,nothing is known of their life there. Fifteen months after their mar-Boyhood in Kentuckyi iriage they were back in Lexington for a visit, and it was during theirstay that little Jo was born.Appropriately enough, Joseph Orville Shelby was born on Decem¬ber 12, 1830, under the sign of Sagittarius, the Centaur. The greatevent took place at the home of his grandfather, Dr. Joseph Boswell,on Short Street, and he was named Joseph for his grandfather andOrville for his father.Jupiter rules in the constellation of Sagittarius, and the ancients saidthat Jupiter is the Greater Fortune, the patron god of wealth andpower. Whether the stars rule in human affairs or not, certain it isthat the good fairy who stood by the cradle of little Jo Shelby gavehim every good thing. She gave him wealth, good looks, buoyanthealth, boundless optimism, and the golden quality which, for lack ofa better word, is called magnetism. All his life he would have thepower of making men and women fall in love with him on whom hebestowed no more than a passing glance. And finally, as if to emptyher bag of treasures, the same good fairy gave him intuition, the price¬less power which is worth all the logic in the books. It is the greenace, the ace of hippogriffs, which outranks all other cards in the deckand takes everything in sight: and it is another word for cavalrygenius.Like his boyhood friend, John Hunt Morgan,6 who was also destinedto become a great Confederate raider, Shelby was born to the traditionof the Kentucky Bluegrass, with all its extravagance of living and allits graciousness, as well as all its faults. As Shelby’s biographer, MajorEdwards, says, “Shelby’s renown belongs to Missouri, but Lexingtonshould feel honored that from her good old shades were launched forthupon the military firmament two comets of such intense brilliancy.” 7None of this could be known to the parents of the rather chunky,friendly baby as he was admired in his crib on that December day in1830, and it may be imagined that the good physician of Lexington,Dr. Boswell, had to shoo the proud Orville Shelby out of the room;Orville then sat down to write a will in which he created a trust fundfor his son to be paid to him in fee simple on his twenty-first birthday.Orville Shelby remains a shadowy character at the distance of acentury and a quarter, for he died at thirty-two and the newspapersof the time did not even carry a notice of his death. That he was a manof substance, however, is clear, for the trust fund he created amountedto $80,000 when Joseph Orville Shelby came of age in 1851.8 We12The Sign of the Centauralso know that Orville Shelby owned blooded horses; in the LexingtonReporter in February, 1826, T. Watson announced for Orville Shelbythat “the celebrated horse Stockholder will stand the ensuing seasonat my stable one mile south of Gallatin, in Tennessee... mares sentfrom Kentucky will be returned to Shelbyville, Ky. or the neighbor¬hood by Lewis Sherley, who will keep the horse during the season.” 9Like many well-to-do Kentuckians of the time, Orville Shelby wasalso attracted by the possibilities of hemp farming. It is little remem¬bered now, but the hemp industry was Big Business in the South inthe decades preceding the Civil War, and as a money crop hempranked not far below cotton. In the 1830’s Kentucky produced three-fourths of the hemp used in the United States,10 and as long as Cottonwas King, the demand for baling rope was inexhaustible. The UnitedStates Navy, too, in the days of sailing ships, used an astronomicalamount of Kentucky hemp, for the rich limestone soil produced atough, silky fibre which was unexcelled as cordage for canvas in allsorts of weather and all sorts of climates. Kentucky hemp was superiornot only for rope, but for bagging,11 and the market for that, too, wasworld-wide. A planter with even a modest investment in Kentuckyhemp could easily lay the foundations of a fortune.The records of the time show that in November, 1833, when littleJo was a month less than three years old, Orville Shelby bought fromJohn C. Richardson, Jr., 257 acres of farmland on North ElkhornCreek in Fayette County. The price paid was $8,594.55, and the deedstates that the farm was bounded “by nine poles on the WinchesterTurnpike.” 12 At this time Fayette County, of which Lexington is thecounty seat, was the leading cordage-making county in Kentucky, andboasted twenty-one ropewalks, as the hemp factories were called,nine of them in the town of Lexington.The Orville Shelbys lived for less than a year on the Elkhornplantation, however. In September, 1834, perhaps because of OrvilleShelby’s health, they sold it to Dr. Nicholas Warfield of BourbonCounty for $8,279.33, three hundred dollars less than they had paidfor it. The deed, dated September 23, discloses that Ann and OrvilleShelby had moved back to Tennessee, and were residing in TiptonCounty. The following year Orville Shelby died, and Ann Shelbyreturned eventually with little Jo to the Boswell home in Lexington.It is not likely that Jo Shelby had any but the vaguest recollectionof his father or any of his early homes other than that of his grand-Boyhood in Kentucky13father on Short Street. Dr. Boswell was a popular and busy physician,who owned a farm outside of Lexington, and his practice took himfrequently into the country, sometimes on horseback, as was oftennecessary to negotiate the back-country roads. It was on one of thesetrips, during the great cholera epidemic in Lexington,13 that he wasstricken and died, so that little Jo early in life was deprived of bothfather and grandfather. The circumstances under which the cholerastruck Dr. Boswell down—as it did fifteen hundred of Lexington’sforty-two hundred inhabitants during the plague—were tragic.As Dr. Boswell was returning from his farm on June 13, 1833, hebecame violently ill. In great pain, and able to diagnose his own con¬dition, he tied his horse to a fence rail, walked up onto the porch of afarmhouse, and knocked. The farmer’s wife answered the door.“I am going to die,” Dr. Boswell told the startled woman. “Here ismy wallet. Please notify my family.” Having spoken these words, hecollapsed on the porch.The farmer’s wife called her husband, but the two of them, realizingthat their visitor was dead, and fearing contagion, dragged the bodysome distance from the house and buried it. The spot was markedwith a stake, but a search for the body was not made until some monthslater—Lexington being in a state of turmoil—and by that time pigs orother domestic animals had displaced the marker, so that the im¬promptu grave dug for Dr. Boswell was never found.14Ann Shelby was a beautiful and vivacious young woman who hadbeen a reigning belle of Lexington before her marriage, and as awealthy young widow she did not lack suitors, but she turned themall away steadfastly until July 6, 1843, when she married BenjaminGratz, whose first wife had been her aunt, one of the celebrated Gistbeauties.15 Thus little Jo’s new father was no stranger to him. He was,in fact, “Uncle Benjamin,” and between the two there was already astrong bond of affection which was to survive many years and vicis¬situdes, for Benjamin Gratz lived to be ninety and was blind in his oldage. Because of this close relationship, which was that of father andson rather than of stepfather and stepson, Benjamin Gratz must berated foremost among those who by precept and example shaped thecharacter of the youthful Jo Shelby.Gratz ranked easily among the most distinguished citizens of Lex¬ington—a friend of Henry Clay and heir to one of the first great4The Sign of the CentaurAmerican fortunes, that of the Gratz family of Philadelphia. Hisportrait by Sully shows him to have been as handsome as Sir WalterScott, with whom his family name is associated in an immortal literarylegend.16 He was the son of Adichael Gratz, who, with his brotherBarnard, had migrated to America in 1755 from Langensdorf, inUpper Silesia, Germany. Michael and Barnard Gratz became richbeyond the wildest dreams of immigrant boys. Michael married MiriamSimon, daughter of Joseph Simon, a wealthy landowner of Lancaster,Pennsylvania, and with the financial assistance of Michael’s father-in-law the Gratz brothers soon loomed large in the commercial life ofPhiladelphia. In the latter half of the eighteenth century they andother “merchant venturers” opened up vast tracts of land in the wilder¬ness to trade and exploration. From the forks of the Ohio River theirkeel boats penetrated into the Indian country, bringing back furs fromthe territory which is now West Virginia, Ohio, and Kentucky. Latertheir holdings were extended to the Great Lakes and as far west asVincennes, Indiana. The land on which the Mammoth Cave of Ken¬tucky was discovered was part of the Gratz empire.17During the quarrel with England, the brothers, along with othermerchants of Philadelphia, were signers of the Non-Importation Actpassed in 1765 as a protest against the Stamp Act.18 The Gratzes, likeHaym Salomon and other wealthy Jews of Philadelphia, contributedheavily to the war chest of the Continental Congress, and BarnardGratz, who remained in Philadelphia while Michael moved to Lan¬caster, is mentioned in a letter of Benjamin Franklin to the Governorof New Jersey as a man important in the Revolutionary cause.Benjamin Gratz, Jo Shelby’s stepfather, graduated in law from theUniversity of Pennsylvania in 18n. In 1818 he was commissioned byhis older brothers to go west and look after the landed possessions ofthe family. Traveling by stage and horseback to Vincennes, Indiana,he spent a year on the western frontier. Returning eastward, he stoppedat Lexington, then as now one of the most charming cities of theSouth, to visit Maria Cecil Gist, a Lexington belle whom he had metin Philadelphia and member of a distinguished colonial family. WhenMaria Gist consented to marry him, Benjamin Gratz gave up plansto return to Philadelphia and the law. He was a man of cultivatedinterests and in Lexington he found a combination of breeding andwealth which was irresistible. Upon his marriage to the lovely Maria,he settled down in a brick Georgian mansion opposite the park,19 aBoyhood in Kentuckyi5block from Transylvania University, and devoted his time, not prin¬cipally to the law, but to the business of manufacturing hemp. Forthe rest of his life, until his death in 1884, he was one of the leadingcitizens of Kentucky and an exponent of the aristocratic way of life.20This was the man, worldly-wise, wealthy, and cultured, underwhose influence Jo Shelby was placed at the most impressionable ageof his life, as he was entering adolescence.The dark and patrician Maria Gist Gratz, whose portrait still hangsover the mantel in the parlor of the mansion on Mill Street, died in1841, leaving her husband and four sons a lonely family of males in thebig house with the Negro servants. The boys were Michael BarnardGratz, now going on twenty-one; Henry Howard Gratz, nineteen;Hyman Cecil Gratz, sixteen; and Cary Gist Gratz, fourteen, one yearolder than Jo Shelby.Although Cary Gratz was nearest his own age, it was HowardGratz, an enviable nineteen, whom Jo found the most congenial ofthe brothers, and it was Howard Gratz with whom he went intobusiness when he became of age, and for whom he named one of hissons. Of Howard and his coterie of friends he became a devotedfollower. And among Howard’s friends were three young men, vastlydifferent in outlook, who had one thing in common. All were to writetheir names in American history to a greater or less degree. Theywere John Hunt Morgan, who, like Shelby, was to become a greatConfederate raider; Benjamin Gratz Brown, a cousin, who was tobecome a political power in Missouri and a postwar governor of thestate; and Francis Preston Blair, Jr., another cousin, who, next toShelby, wrote his name largest in history of all the Gist descendants.He became a member of Congress, a brigadier general for the Unionduring the Civil War, the friend and confidant of Lincoln, and theman whose energetic action in 1861 kept Missouri from falling into thehands of the Secessionists.John Morgan was a strapping six-footer, with the striking blue eyes,high cheekbones, and wide forehead of his Welsh ancestry, a dashingand handsome figure, a reckless horseman and a town beau. At presenthe was at liberty, having recently had the distinction of being sus¬pended from Transylvania University for an undergraduate prank.21He lived with his mother just down the street from the Gratzes, at“Hopemont,” another magnificent Southern mansion on the corner ofMill and Short streets.2216The Sign of the CentaurGratz Brown, as he was always known, was the son of MasonBrown of Frankfort, a close friend of Benjamin Gratz, for whomMason Brown named the first son of his second marriage.23 YoungGratz Brown was studying law and aiming for a political career, andalthough he lived in Frankfort he spent much time at the Gratz homein Lexington.Frank Blair was a son of the famous Jacksonian editor of the Wash¬ington Globe and Eliza Violet Gist. At this time he was a student atPrinceton, having completed an earlier course at Transylvania. LikeGratz Brown he was a frequent visitor at the Gratz home. Jo hadknown him ever since he could remember, for Frank had lived withUncle Benjamin and Aunt Maria while attending Transylvania. Frankwas dark, intense, and handsome. He had the same quick temper andquick resolution which were the outstanding characteristics of hiscousin Jo, of whom he was passionately fond. It is on record that hehelped young Jo over the rough spots in his lessons, for at this timethe younger cousin was “struggling,” so we are told, for an educa¬tion.24 The friendship of Jo Shelby and Frank Blair survived the testof the Civil War, and continued until Frank’s death in 1875.As the Lexington Morning Herald said many years later, “It wasa remarkable trio of cousins, the three young fellows who lived underthe hospitable roof of that noted gentleman, Benjamin Gratz, andstarted life in Missouri. It was a rich gift from mother to daughterwhen Kentucky sent Frank Blair, Gratz Brown, and Jo Shelby toMissouri.” 25The influence of such young men as Morgan, Blair, Gratz Brown,and Howard Gratz over the youthful Jo Shelby is inestimable. Mor¬gan set him the example of the beau sabreur, the knight errant of Lex¬ington and the darling of the fair sex. Blair was the diplomatic andpolished man of the world, reared among statesmen and politiciansin Washington who were deferential to his father as the powerfuleditor of the Globe. Gratz Brown was the typical young Southernerwho had picked the law and politics for his profession. (He is remem¬bered chiefly today for the fact that as a Liberal governor of Missourihe led the state out of the chaos of Reconstruction.) And HowardGratz was Jo’s favorite brother and mentor.In this company, despite his junior years, Jo Shelby conducted him¬self with aplomb. He had led a pampered existence, with private tutor¬ing instead of public schooling, and at fourteen he was growing intoBoyhood in Kentuckyl7a romantic-looking lad with chestnut hair and deep gray eyes. In afteryears he was described frequently as tall and dark, but he was neither.In fact he was well under average height and his gray eyes flashedbrown only when his temper was aroused; but his bearing, even as ayouth, was remembered by all who saw him. The same LexingtonMorning Herald said of him affectionately in 1897, “He was a manlyboy in our streets and he went out into the conflicts of life from thisdear old town.” 26In the streets he was accompanied by his faithful shadow, a Negroboy of his own age named Billy Hunter, who belonged to him andwas his personal servant. Shelby’s adoring mother had bought BillyHunter for her only son when both were eleven years old, paying theunheard-of price of $2,000 for him in the Lexington slave market.27Thus, when the aristocratic Jo fared forth upon the streets of thetown, with Billy Hunter in attendance, his progress was somethingin the nature of a triumphal procession, and as the Morning Heraldnoted, was long remembered by the oldest inhabitants.As Jo grew older, he frequently took part, with Billy Hunter dis¬creetly in the background, in the many amusements, sports, anddiversions which Lexington afforded for those not handicapped byfemale companions. Lexington was a rough-and-tumble town behindthe fa£ade of elegance and culture which it had erected for itself as“the Athens of the West,” and F. Garvin Davenport in his Ante-Bellum Kentucky describes it thus:“Pistol galleries and gaming tables were popular and ten-pin alleyswere supported by steady patronage. Billiard rooms were wellpatronized and the suburban cockpit was approved by the sports-loving poor man as well as by his rich neighbor. A type of football,usually played in the streets, was popular with the more rugged ele¬ment. In Lexington, the game became a nuisance, especially on Sun¬days and holidays, so that the City Council passed an ordinancedeclaring that ‘no person shall roll or kick a football in any of thestreets or alleys of the city.’ ” 28When sidewalk adventure palled, there were the rolling fields ofthe Bluegrass country, the winding creeks and the broad rivers, callingto a young man who could ride, hunt, shoot, and had a Negro boyto help him do it. By the time he was of college age, Shelby could sita horse as well as John Morgan, and long before that the girls werecasting sidelong glances at him. In summer there were picnics and18The Sign of the Centaurbarbecues, and in the fall and winter months life in Lexington wasone round of parties and dances. On the occasions when the windsnorth of the Ohio River bore in a blanket of snow for the Bluegrass,there were sleighing parties and a hot drink on the hearth at homeafterward.The Gratz household was as hospitable as any in all the Bluegrass,but with a difference. At home the young men listened respectfullyto some of the most significant conversations of nineteenth-centuryAmerica, for around the Gratz fireside assembled such men as HenryClay, John J. Crittenden, and Frank Blair, Sr. The elder Blair, at thetime of Shelby’s young manhood, was passing from control of theadministration organ at Washington and spent much time in the Gratzhousehold. In the same parlor where they gathered, the older genera¬tion and the younger, the Marquis de Lafayette twenty years beforehad dandled young Howard Gratz on his knee.29 Outside of Virginia,seldom have so many great men been at home in a private residenceas in the home of Benjamin Gratz at Lexington.Most Kentuckians were men of action, however, rather than schol¬ars or philosophers, and it is not surprising to find that even in thisatmosphere of culture and learning there could be found those who,like Morgan and Jo Shelby, cared nothing for books and did not liketo study. Young Jo was precocious in a worldly sort of way, but hehad no academic leanings. He would much rather be riding acrossthe fields after rabbits with Billy Hunter than studying Latin, orstanding with Morgan and the other young bucks on the street cor¬ners near Transylvania, making sarcastic remarks on the appearanceof passers-by.30From the time that Shelby came to live with him, Benjamin Gratzassumed personal charge of his education, and from his stepfatheryoung Jo learned much besides the fundamentals of language andmathematics. Gratz was a cosmopolite, a citizen of the world, andlike Montaigne he considered urbanity the most essential of all quali¬ties for success. He drilled into Shelby the fundamental truth that theman who sits on top of the world is there because he will not let theworld sit on top of him; in short, because he is master of every situa¬tion. “I have lived long enough to discover,” Gratz said in a letterto his son Howard, “that those who get along best in the world arethose who conduct themselves with amiability, urbane in their man-Boyhood in Kentucky19ners, and perfectly honorable in all their transactions. With theserequisites, one can make his way anywhere.” 31Though not an enthusiastic student, Jo Shelby was what the actorscall “a quick study,” when he wanted to be, which was seldom, andunder the tutelage of his stepfather he was kept at his books; butsoon the time came for him to go to school “in the East,” as wasfashionable at the time, and prepare for Transylvania. In 1846 hewas packed off to the effete East, probably to Mr. Wilson’s School atHartsville, Pennsylvania, where Howard Gratz had finished in 1840.32The letters of Rebecca Gratz, whom he visited, would throw morelight on this period, except that they have been edited before publica¬tion to delete “such portions as are of too intimate a family nature tobe paraded before the public eye,” 33 but one of them, written onMarch 24, 1846, shows that Jo had been at school in Pennsylvania andwas going home for a spring visit.The letter, written to her sister-in-law Anna Gratz, shows the warmand deep affection which had sprung up between the two women,and also the affectionate esteem in which young Jo was held in theGratz home on Walnut Street in Philadelphia. Rebecca, who was thehomemaker for her unmarried brothers and the orphaned children ofher sister Rachel Moses (she never married) had welcomed Jo intothe family circle as one of her own. To Anna Gratz she wrote:“Your heart will rejoice in the presence of your son, and I thinkyou will find him greatly improved in health as well as in his studies—the Boys have been here only a few days & I should be glad tokeep them a week longer if I did not find they were yearning to behome. I shall give this to Jo with a charge that he does not deliver ituntil two days after his arrival, that you may enjoy his companyfirst without the intrusion of even a letter. Jo seems to have the spiritof mirth inborn in him, for he is as merry as a bird, or rather as aboy let loose from School, which he illustrated in a way to justifythe adage.” 34That Jo was a bird, and a merry one at that, the neighbors in Lex¬ington would have agreed, although in them he did not always arousea spirit of mirth, as sometimes his pranks tended toward the smart-alecky. For example, a reigning Kentucky belle whose name has notcome down to us through the coyness of a contemporary chronicler,was often a visitor at the Morgan home, probably being a relative,20The Sign of the Centaurand on her visits to Lexington she was the subject of much admiringattention by a very important personage, a General of the U. S. Reg¬ular Army, whose name also is unrecorded. Little Jo, then about ten,regarded this dignitary as a stuffed shirt, and the frequency of thevisits caused him to improvise a sign and hang it on the doorknob ofthe Morgan home. The sign, in bold lettering, read, “Headquartersof General-, U.S.A.” 35In the retelling, the legend had it that this anonymous Generallater commanded Federal occupation troops in Lexington during thewar, and that “when the owner of the house offered him a room foran office, he positively refused, saying instead (recalling the practicaljoke), ‘I will send a guard to protect you as long as you stay here.’ ”According to the narrator, Mrs. T. J. Henry, who recalls the incidentin Five Famous Missourians, “the lady of the house often told thisstory and said little Jo’s daring piece of fun—showing the gushingfountain at ten years, saved her home from destruction, for she wasthe mother of the great Southern raider John Morgan.” 36Someone has tried to make a good story better here, for the Morganhome was never in danger of destruction by the Federals, and the onlyprivate home commandeered by the occupying forces during the warwas the Bodley home, across the park, whose chief charm was its finefurnace and central heating system.37 All of the commanders of theFederal forces in Lexington during the war—they were not alwaysgenerals, sometimes merely colonels—had their headquarters at thePhoenix Hotel. Furthermore, Lexington was such a redhot Confed¬erate center that Mrs. Morgan would have needed no Federal guardsto protect her. If they were there, it was for a different reason.38Nevertheless, Jo Shelby’s reputation in Lexington as a kind of aristo¬cratic Tom Sawyer seems fully justified, and the pastiches which thelocal storytellers have added to the edifice of the legend are, if some¬what embellished, at least wholly in character.With the Pennsylvania schooling under his belt, Jo Shelby enteredTransylvania, probably in the fall of 1847. The qualifying adverb isnecessary here, for the records of the institution are incomplete, andJo Shelby’s name is among the missing.39 He is not listed at the uni¬versity as having attended Transylvania, but according to members ofthe family and all the biographical sketches of him which exist, hespent several years at that institution.One of the family legends concerns Jo’s college days at Transyl-Waverly: The Golden Years21vania. Apparently he was following gaily in the footsteps of his idol,John Morgan, and taking part in any undergraduate pranks that mightbe going. The medical department of Transylvania, in common withother medical schools of the era, had to obtain cadavers surreptitiously.It was against the law to buy bodies for dissection, and the commonpractice was to obtain them from professional grave robbers who keptan eye on new graves in the paupers’ sections of the cemeteries. Onemorning early, before classes, young Jo and several others dispossessedone of these bootleg cadavers from a pine box in the dissecting room,and one of the students took its place. When Negro attendants cameto remove the body, the “corpse” remarked, “Lift me gently, boys.”The ensuing panic, of course, came to the attention of the authorities.Whether the “corpse” was Jo Shelby and whether he suffered pun¬ishment, like Morgan, for this practical joke, we shall never know.The record does not exist. Like nearly all other records of Jo Shelbyin Lexington, except those of the most fragmentary nature, it hasfound its way into a limbo of its own. The record has been spongedas clean by the hand of time as if it had been written in chalk upona blackboard at Transylvania University. Even when Shelby engagedin a lawsuit in later years in Lexington, the testimony somehow man¬ages to absent itself from the records of the Fayette County Court;the newspapers of the period have little to say about him; and exceptfor the letters of Rebecca Gratz, which were published in part andthus preserved, there are no other Shelby letters or documents avail¬able of any period of his life in Lexington. Except for a few old-timers, Lexington has forgotten him.3. Waverly: The Golden YearsThe year i 849, the year of the great westward migration to Cali¬fornia, found two future Confederate cavalry chieftains in Lex¬ington in the prosaic business of making ropes and bagging out of hemp.John Morgan, having returned from a brief and uneventful career as avolunteer in the Mexican War in 1846,1 had been employed since 1847in his family’s ropewalk2 and was now factory manager. Jo Shelby atthat time was still at Transylvania, but as soon as he could make good22The Sign of the Centaurhis escape from the ivied halls, he turned with enthusiasm to his step¬father’s business—the natural and almost inevitable thing for him todo. Although he had not graduated, his school days were over when heleft Transylvania.3The ropewalk of Gratz and Bruce was one of the most imposingestablishments of its kind in Lexington. The main factory was twostories high, 195 feet long, and 25 feet deep, with a hacking house,a weaving house, and a “calender and hemp house” adjoining.4 Thesedivisions had storage space for 260 tons of hemp, and on each of thetwo stories of the main factory were rows of spindles and looms. Theropewalks were so called because the spinners, usually slaves or freedNegroes, tied the hemp about their waists, hooked one end to a spin¬ning wheel, and walked back and forth, thus spinning out the strandsof hemp like a spider making a web. The yams thus made weretwisted into strands, three or more strands making a rope.5 One ofJo Shelby’s duties as a supervisor was to see that the spinners walkedwith more or less regularity.Benjamin Gratz advised his stepson to learn the business thoroughly,since he would soon be coming into a sizable fortune and would beable, if that were his inclination, to set up his own ropewalk. Thiswas precisely what Jo Shelby had in mind, but in the fall of 1849 hewas not sure that he wanted to settle permanently in the small townatmosphere of Lexington. Frank Blair and Gratz Brown had alreadygone to St. Louis, and in Philadelphia he had had a taste of big citylife. It would be exciting to move to St. Louis, the biggest steamboattown north of New Orleans, with all of its cosmopolitan gayety.Young Jo was eager to go to St. Louis for a visit, at least, and heseems to have been talking glibly at home of the greater opportuni¬ties there, for on November 18, 1849, Rebecca Gratz was writing tohis mother in Lexington:“You must have difficulty in consenting to Jo Shelby’s departurefor St. Louis, he is so amiable affectionate & clever that his societyto you was of great consequence, but it was entirely right, it is sucha thriving place and he has so many friends. You must give my loveto Jo when you write him and tell him to go unceremoniously toGratz Moses’,6 and make himself at home in the family. When theyknow each other it will be mutually agreeable, and there are so manyconnections there that there may be quite a family gathering.” 7In St. Louis Shelby found Gratz Brown and Frank Blair hip-deepWaverly: The Golden Years23in Missouri politics. With the assistance of backers, they had boughtthe Morning Signal, changed its name to the Missouri Democrat, andwith Frank Blair as editor-in-chief were advocating a policy of FreeSoilism which was earning them the undying enmity of the old-lineSouthern politicians.8At this stage of the game young Jo probably did no more thandisagree goodnaturedly with Frank Blair on his radical ideas, overtheir punches at the Planter’s House in St. Louis. In the uncomplicatedlexicon of Jo Shelby abolitionists were cranks, foreigners, or NewEnglanders—which came to the same thing—and he could not imaginethe patrician Frank Blair seriously allying himself with such riffraff.As far as he was concerned, none of the nonsense being talked bythe “emancipationists” had anything to do with the South, of whosebeautiful earth he would soon be one of the inheritors. The South’srepresentatives in Washington would see to that, for the Slave Powerran the government. Furthermore, it was difficult for a youth of nine¬teen, who would soon inherit a fortune, to be seriously alarmed aboutanything. Visiting Frank Blair had no discernible influence over Shel¬by’s future, since Blair talked only politics, and the wrong kind ofpolitics at that. Jo enjoyed himself in St. Louis without coming to adefinite decision as to his plans, and in a short time returned toLexington.There was considerable local excitement in Lexington just then,for two of the largest ropewalks in town, those of L. C. Randall andCo. and John McCauley, had been burned down, probably by Negroslaves, and the Columbia Rail Road had imported a 6,ooo-foot towrope to be used on the Incline Plane outside of Lexington to haullocomotives to the station. The immense cable was nine inches thickand required fourteen tons of Italian hemp. It had been manufacturedin Philadelphia, apparently because there was no ropewalk in Ken¬tucky capable of turning out such a giant piece of cordage.9 YoungJo and the rest of the town went out to see this new civic improve¬ment in action.In the end, it was Howard Gratz who nipped in the bud any plansJo may have had for moving to St. Louis and cutting a wide swathin the life of the river capital of the mid-South. Howard, who wascourting Minerva Campbell Anderson of Lexington, had a scintillat¬ing scheme of his own. He and his prospective father-in-law, OliverAnderson, saw great possibilities in the cultivation and processing of24The Sign of the Centaurhemp in western Missouri. Out there, land was fertile and cheap, anda man could grow rich in no time. Howard pointed out enthusiasti¬cally that this very year Missouri’s hemp production had come closeto the record set by Kentucky—within 20,000 tons of it, in fact10—and in such a thinly settled territory as Missouri this was only a be¬ginning. He and his father-in-law had already picked as a likely spotthe up-and-coming town of Waverly on the Missouri River, 346river-miles west of St. Louis in the heart of the rolling prairie. Assoon as he and Minerva were married, young Jo could come in withhim, when he was twenty-one, and the firm would be Gratz andShelby.It is likely that the two young Kentuckians made a trip to Waverlyand that Jo was fired with enthusiasm for the venture. He put asidehis plans for moving to St. Louis and buckled down in Lexington forthe next two years to learn all there was to be known about theprocessing and merchandising of hemp. Shelby was never lazy; heliked meeting people, and in the world of the hemp industry in Lex¬ington he met his own kind. When he was not clerking behind thecounter, or acting as floor manager for the ropewalk, he rode out tothe plantations of Fayette County to look over the crops and passthe time of day with the planters, an occupation which he enjoyed.On the social side he continued to attend the numerous balls andparties which had become an almost daily feature of Lexington lifeever since the town had gone overboard with its grand dinner andball for Lafayette twenty-five years before.As to the ladies, he was completely heart-whole and fancy-free.To one who loved a pretty face as much as Jo Shelby, the thoughtof confining his attention to a single charmer was too much like starv¬ing in the midst of plenty. He was a ladies’ man, and he squired theLexington belles to social functions impartially, with nothing moreserious than a few stolen kisses in the moonlight.11 Soon he was thedespair of the Lexington mamas, as a young man of obviously nomatrimonial intentions. “Just think of it! The most eligible boy intown, with all that money, and talking about going off alone to someoutlandish place in Missouri to farm!” Efforts to provide him with awife for the journey, however, were met with bland, courtly inat¬tention.Early in 1852, then, having come into his inheritance,12 Shelbywas off to join Howard Gratz in Waverly, with the blessings of theWaverly: The Golden Years25family. He was now one of the wealthiest young men in the state,and it is conclusive evidence of the soundness of his character thathe did not stay at home to devote himself to women, foxhunting, andwhiskey, as many another young Kentucky blueblood would havedone. Instead, he set out to increase his fortune. Unlike John Morgan,he did not have an overwhelming interest in military matters,13 andten years before the war the thought of organizing a cavalry companywas the farthest thing from his mind. That mind was set on creatingfor himself an industrial empire in hemp, and with cash money hecould do it. As his steamer nosed into the shallow Missouri west ofSt. Louis, his head was spinning with plans.The town of Waverly, on the south bank of the river where thedeep water is, was as new as the shiny boots Jo Shelby was wearingwhen he stepped down the gangplank of the steamboat at St. Thomas’sWharf. From the wharf by the cottonwoods he could see an ironfoundry, a flouring mill, several large warehouses, a ropewalk—hisand Howard Gratz’s—a blacksmith shop, several stores, and clustersof sturdy dwellings. There was about the town the air of bustle andprogress which characterized all of the river towns of the West, andas Jo Shelby looked about him, he was more than ever convincedthat he had come to the right place. As J. M. Motte says in his mono¬graph on the history of Waverly, ‘The Waverly of the Fifties, whenhemp was king—before Mr. Lincoln had issued his proclamation—when there was no convenient rail road, when boats used the onlysteam whistle that was heard in the land, Waverly, then, was a townof real importance.” 14There had been a settlement of sorts on the site of Waverly since1818. In that year, when James Monroe was president, a man namedNotley Thomas had built a house on one of the bluffs overlookingthe river, where he could see the keelboats of the fur traders throughthe interlacing branches of a primeval forest, and had cleared enoughland to raise a hemp crop which he had sold for seven dollars a hun¬dred at Old Franklin.15 That was the beginning of the hemp industryat Waverly.Soon the keelboats had given way to the steamboats—the first ofthese, Major Long’s Western Engineer, having a prow carved toresemble a gigantic serpent with smoke pouring from its nostrils tofrighten Indians 16—and when the steamboats came they were mostlycarrying restless people to the settlements of Independence and Lex-2 6The Sign of the Centaurington, Missouri, farther west. Two distinct villages had grown uparound the hilltop house of Notley Thomas, however. One, laid outby Washington Shroyer, was known as Middletown because it washalfway between Lexington and Marshall. The other, St. Thomas,had been founded by Colonel John Dennis Thomas of Virginia, aveteran of the War of 1812. In a few years the two communitieswere practically one, and in 1845 Middletown and St. Thomas be¬came Waverly, named for Waverly, Illinois, whence some of the newcitizens of the town had come.17The Missouri River at this point was three quarters of a mile wide—a broad, if treacherous highway leading to the Mississippi. Therewas a wooded island offshore, as pretty as a picture, and as Jo Shelbylooked up at the bluffs in back of the town, his fancy was caught byone hilltop, covered with maples, which stood out above the others.This eminence was known as Mount Rucker, named for an early phy¬sician of the place, and here, Jo Shelby knew, he would build his house,a great mansion with dormer windows, overlooking the ropewalkand the flatlands below. The establishment he envisioned was one inwhich a capable Negro woman would keep house, abetted by half adozen blackamoors of various ages, and in which he and Billy Hunterwould live in the Missouri equivalent of Oriental splendor. No fianceeback in Lexington was awaiting the call to join him; no scenes ofdomestic bliss were more enchanting than the ones he conjured upthat morning, as he stepped off the steamboat.Within a few months after the formation of the firm of Gratzand Shelby, the bachelor mansion was a reality. It was a white framehouse, halfway up Mount Rucker and facing the northeast. The earlymorning sun caught its dormer windows in blazing squares of orangelight which flashed like a heliograph as far away as the bend in theriver; it dominated the town by day, and at night, when the lampswere lit, it served as a friendly, twinkling beacon for the steamboats.From his porch Jo Shelby could see a solid line of green forest onthe banks across the river, extending for miles to a point where thesky and the Carroll County bluffs merged, so that you could not tellwhere one began and the other ended; and a quarter of a mile off¬shore, the usually monotonous and muddy expanse of the Missouriwas broken by a five-hundred-acre island, known as Willow Bar,covered with giant trees.18On the east lay the timber-covered bluffs of Lafayette County,Waverly: The Golden Years27dropping into wide lowlands where the Missouri takes a bend andtravels due north for a few miles, and where, from Mount Rucker,the settlers’ homes resembled pygmy dwellings. On the west wasanother bluff, also timber-covered and known as Mount Ennis, brokenby a ravine of flatland, onto which the business district of Waverlywas edging. Down this bluff from the prairie wound two roads where,in good weather, one could see teams of oxen hauling hemp, corn,and other farmland products into town. At the steamboat wharfdownriver, likely as not, there would be a steamboat tied up, a greatfloating hotel with double smokestacks. Nowhere in the river countryof the rural South could the young hemp baron have picked a finerview.The firm of Gratz and Shelby, too, was a going concern in everydepartment. Besides the ropewalk, the two young men owned 700acres in Lafayette County, a farm which was one of the showplacesof the countryside. Here they raised wheat, hemp, cattle, corn, hogs,and blooded horses. Since the land hereabouts was heavily wooded tothe prairie’s edge, they soon built a giant sawmill at Dover, five anda half miles east of Waverly, to reap a harvest of dollars from thefelled timber of the region. At Dover they also had plans for a bignew town to be called Berlin. In 1853, a year in which Missourihemp was selling for $120 a ton, and Gratz and Shelby were deliv¬ering it in lots up to 400 tons, they laid out the town, holding a galaauction at which fifty-nine lots were sold for $98.50 each.19The interests of Gratz and Shelby, in fact, extended in every direc¬tion in Lafayette County. The extent of their prosperity can begauged partly by the number of lawsuits on record at the countycourthouse in Lexington in which they were either suing or beingsued over damage to goods in transit, and as a result of which, nat¬urally, Gratz and Shelby soon bought a steamboat of their own.20Jo Shelby had a passion for steamboats and would never allow one tobe damaged, even during the war when he captured them with cav¬alry; but on the treacherous Missouri, with its snags, shifting sandbars, caving banks, and rapid currents, steamboats had a difficult time,especially in the hands of reckless pilots who were more concernedwith making time than with safeguarding their cargoes. Also, in thepiratical, unregulated manner in which they were operated, the steam¬ers frequently blew up.But this was the golden age of steamboats on the Missouri—an aver-28The Sign of the Centaur' age of 355 a year reached St. Louis on its shallow, muddy waters 21—and the great cotton export centers of New Orleans and Mobilewere crying for baling rope. In his broadcloth coat and broad-brimmed hat, with fawn-colored trousers, fancy waistcoat, starchedshirt front, and hips of a cavalryman, young Jo Shelby, now filledout with the manhood of his early twenties, cut a fine figure as hedirected the hands in the loading of hemp at St. Thomas’s Wharf.Every account we have of him—as a youth growing up in Kentucky,as a beau of the countryside in Waverly, as a cavalry leader duringthe war, and as a soldier among soldiers at the court of Maximilian—stresses the fact that Jo Shelby made an electrifying impression onall who saw him. An Arkansas sergeant who served in the infantrywhen Shelby’s cavalrymen were the heroes of the whole army summedit up when he said, “He was the finest looking man I ever saw, blackhair and handsome features. He looked like sovtebody. He lookedlike someone who had something to him, like he was a fine strongman, which no doubt he was.” 22 The Arkansas footsoldier saw be¬neath the handsome facade the indomitable character and the ironwill; it was obvious to all that there was “something to” Jo Shelby.He was by now a leading citizen of the town and one of its chiefprides, though the local belles, like the Lexington beauties, found hisgay bachelorhood downright provoking.As soon as Jo discovered that his father’s first cousin, WilliamShelby, was living on a large plantation only six miles from Waverly,he saddled a horse and rode out to see him. William Shelby was anold settler hereabouts, having come from Marion County, Kentucky,in 1836. He greeted his young kinsman cordially, and said to a littledark-haired girl who was walking on top of a fence rail, “Betty, comehere and meet your cousin.” 23 It was Jo’s first meeting with his futurewife. What Betty thought of the romantic-looking Jo is not known,and to him she was just another pretty little girl; but ElizabethShelby was to be the only woman who was ever to excite in himanything more than a passing interest. It may have been that herdelicate, doll-like beauty at seventeen, when he married her, foreveraroused his protective and chivalrous instincts, but, whatever thecause, all his life Betty was the only one who could influence him,or “do anything with him,” as they used to say, when he was on arampage, and theirs was to be a lifelong romance.While Betsy, as she was often called, was still in pigtails, however,Waverly: The Golden Years29her husband-to-be continued to live the busy life of a wealthy bach¬elor planter and manufacturer in the Missouri River Valley of theearly fifties. As a man of substance and the owner of slaves he wassoon acquiring the friendship of such powerful proslavery leaders asClaiborne Jackson and General David R. Atchison, who, some said,had once been President of the United States for a day;24 and onhis front porch, over Billy Hunter’s mint juleps, he sat with his neigh¬bors and discussed the inflammatory proposal to create a new Terri¬tory over in Kansas which would be overrun by the damned aboli¬tionists.Social life in Waverly was far different from that of Kentucky,where stuffy dowagers ruled, and Jo Shelby found it vastly more tohis liking. His neighbors, transplanted Virginians and Kentuckians forthe most part, foxhunted and visited, when they were not talkingpolitics, just as their families did back home,25 but their relaxationwas more exuberant and informal, heavily influenced by that broadhighway of commerce, the Missouri River, at their front door.The steamboats, with their luxurious appointments, their good foodand wines, and the splendor of their salons, were ideal for “riverparties,” and the young people flocked aboard them at every landing.Whenever a steamboat tied up at Lexington or Dover, the youngergeneration would invade and take over. As soon as the evening mealhad been served, chairs and tables would be cleared away, the musi¬cians tipped—every steamboat had its fiddlers—and the young couplesfrom the town would organize a dance which lasted until the nextstop was reached. In their eighteen-foot hoopskirts the girls werebewitching, and if the night was moonless, perhaps the captain—Cap¬tain Woolford, say, of the Sioux City—could be persuaded to tie upat Waverly, “and the gay young people were in for an all nightdance.” 26Jo Shelby was much in evidence at these festivities. He frequentlydanced all night and worked all day, just as he later rode all nightand fought all day, and fresh as a daisy with it all. His name has sur¬vived as a participant in some of these river parties long after theother guests have been forgotten, for Charles P. Deatherage in hisSteamboating on the Missouri River in the Sixties says, “GeneralShelby and many others who were hemp raisers in Missouri beforethe war, being of that extreme hospitality characteristic of the earlysettlers, joining with the others up the river kept that boat in a quiver30The Sign of the Centauruntil the approaching dawn compelled the captain to call a halt, andthe young people took the stage back to their homes or caught thenext boat going up the river.” 27One wonders if he ever drove the sleepy Betsy home from one ofthese parties in a rig in the Missouri dawn, with her head on hisshoulder; likely he did, though she was only sixteen when he startedcourting her; and when he married her, they had a steamboat all tothemselves and their party for the wedding trip to St. Louis. Jo Shelbynever did anything by halves.It was a gay town, Waverly in the fifties. And to the young peopleat least, war’s alarms seemed far away.4. The Border WarsIn the spring of 1854 Congress passed the Act to Organize the Ter¬ritory of Kansas, and Jo Shelby found himself becoming one of thewealthiest hemp processers and planters in Missouri. These two facts,seemingly unconnected, actually bore an intimate relationship toeach other.The opening up of Kansas to colonization would bring a flood ofimmigration from the North and East, and such immigration wouldconstitute a long-range, deadly threat to the prosperity of the slave¬holding South, in which Jo Shelby was a blue-chip stockholder. Thesteps he would take to defend that prosperity were to shape the courseof his life for thirteen years, through the Border Wars, the Civil War,and the junket to Mexico, from which he was to return in 1867 apenniless wanderer.The prosperous condition of Missouri in the spring of 1854 wasdue in part to the bad luck that had plagued farmers east of the Mis¬sissippi. A great drought during the previous season had ruined thecrops in Kentucky; and the demand for Missouri hemp, which hadbeen rising steadily with one or two setbacks since 1849, was at apeak. The boom which was to last until the Civil War was in fullswing. Corn was also selling at five dollars a bushel, and Jo Shelbyremarked to Howard Gratz that they’d be better off to butcher theirhogs and sell their corn, rather than keep the hogs and let them eatThe Border Wars31the corn. He and his step-brother had 5,000 hogs on the farm nearBerlin, and 1,000 head of cattle.1 Four years of solid prosperity layahead for the Waverly Steam Rope Company, as their ropewalk wasnow called, and it was a period of boom prosperity such as Aiissourihad not dreamed of back in the i84o’s.Across the river and plains in Kansas, however, that other boomwas going on which was to menace, and ultimately to overthrow, allof the slave-supported industries of the South. Antislavery men, withtheir families, were pouring into Kansas from the New Englandstates and from their sister states of New York, Ohio, and Illinois.Although Missourians had rushed across the border and staked theirclaims to the best lands as soon as the Territory was opened, therewas no possibility of matching the emigration from the North, familyfor family; Missourians were doomed to remain a minority in Kansas,and under these circumstances a clash with the Free State Yankeeswas as inevitable as sunup.Before the opening up of the Territory, the greater part of theeastern border of Kansas was an Indian reservation from which theIndians had all but disappeared. There were only a few white settlers,of an impermanent character, in any part of the vast and rollingprairie. Until the discovery of gold in California, the area had beenbelieved to be a barren waste which might as well be left to theitinerant “squatters” and the remnants of the Indian tribes. In fact theIndians had been resettled here on the promise that they would neverbe disturbed.2 The Gold Rush changed all that. Travelers returningfrom the West saw that the fertile lands of Kansas and Nebraskaheld greater riches than all the gold in the creek-beds of the West,and they spread the news all up and down the eastern seaboard.Under its mat of buffalo grass, they reported, the Kansas soil wasdeep and black, a virgin loam lying on a bed of porous clay andlimestone; whether farmed for wheat or corn, or stocked with cattle,it could make a man rich; and the climate was said to be peculiarlyinvigorating, as favorable for pulmonary diseases as the tablelands ofMexico. Furthermore, on the banks of the rivers, the Missouri andthe Osage, the Arkansas and the Kaw, were heavy stands of timber,and along the banks of the streams settlers had discovered coal, thefodder of the iron horse. One enthusiastic traveler called Kansas “TheItaly of America,” and the name fired the imagination of the adven¬turous back East.32The Sign of the CentaurWhen the Indian title expired in 1854, Missourians considered thatthe region, being but an extension of their own prairie, belonged tothem. And indeed there was some justifiable basis for their claim. TheMissouri River is the natural boundary in this part of the country.As it wanders from its headwaters, up Montana way, it cuts diagonallyacross Missouri, and physically the prairies of Missouri and of Kansasare the same. There was by now enough population in Missouri tocolonize Kansas gradually, as settlers from Kentucky had colonizedMissouri: it was the logical place for Southern expansion, and Mis¬sourians had always taken it for granted that they would move in,bag and baggage, when the time came, and take over, carrying theirslaves, their customs, and their institutions with them.Back East in New England, however, were men with an entirelydifferent set of ideas. In New England, Kansas had long since replacedCalifornia as a topic of conversation. From their rockbound farms theNew Englanders looked longingly at the plains of Kansas, and assoon as the Territory was opened they headed westward by steam¬boat, down the Ohio and up the Missouri, past Jo Shelby’s ropewalkunder the bluff at Waverly, bringing their families and their NewEngland ideas with them. They were an evangelical, hardbitten lot,these descendants of the Puritans, and they regarded slavery as anabomination and the loose-living South as a Scarlet Woman. Aboli¬tionists to the core—most of them—they were as strongly committedto destroy “the peculiar institution” as to slay a Beast of the Apoca¬lypse.3The Emigrant Aid Society of New England had been set up toassist these people to settle in Kansas, and no act of the abolitionistsin years had so infuriated the South. First of all, under the Kansas-Nebraska Act, which was now in effect, the people of a Territorycould decide, through their elected representatives, when the timecame, whether they wished to apply for admission to the Union asa slave state or a free state; and there was no doubt which way Kansaswould go if the Emigrant Aid settlers had their way. Second, theMassachusetts legislature had granted a charter to the Society in thatstate authorizing a capital of $5,000,000. With this staggering sumevery pauper in New England could be transplanted to Kansas tovote, or so the Southerners believed, and thunderous protests beganto go up south of the Mason and Dixon line.It was by now well understood, both North and South, that theThe Border Wars33fate of slavery in the nation was to be decided in Kansas. It was nomere local issue. The debates in Congress, the editorials in the press,and the pronouncements of leaders on both sides, all trumpeted thefact that from here on, under the right of self-determination as guar¬anteed by the Kansas-Nebraska Act, it was to be a neck-and-neckrace between the two factions to control each new state as it cameinto the Union. If the abolitionists won in Kansas, the West wouldbe flooded with Free State settlers from the North, and the hold ofthe Slave Power on the government at Washington, which it haddominated for so long, would be at an end.A storm of anger swept the Missouri border, and Jo Shelby andhis friends took direct, characteristic action. The rich slaveholdersof the Missouri River Valley realized that they could do nothing tohalt the Free State immigration, nor could they match it; their ownpeople were not anxious to take their slaves into a territory whichmight become a free state. Furthermore, such an academic solutionhad little appeal for the violent-tempered Missourians. There was butone thing to do: control the elections in Kansas, at pistol point ifnecessary, and they were fully resolved to do it.This cool proposal to rob the Kansas settlers of the right to electtheir own representatives may sound today like the harebrainedscheme of irresponsible roughnecks: it was nothing of the sort. Itwas the product of the brains and scheming of men in whose veinsran the best blood in Missouri, men like Jo Shelby, David Atchison,General Benjamin F. Stringfellow, and Claiborne Jackson, and it wascarried into effect with all the ruthless efficiency of which they werecapable.Being Missourians, they had a natural aptitude both for politics andfor military organization, and they set to work at once to forge aweapon with which to take over in Kansas. Almost overnight a kan¬garoo organization—the Blue Lodge—sprang up, which was modeledalong Masonic lines. The Blue Lodge, which had for its sole purposethe domination of the Kansas elections, was also known as “The Sonsof the South,” “The Social Band,” “The Friendly Society,” and byother names; but these did not stick. The Blue Lodge was the titlewhich captured the fancy of most Missourians.4It was natural and inevitable that Jo Shelby should be in the fore¬front of this movement. No man in Missouri had a greater stake inthe future of Kansas: he was young, he was rich, he owned slaves34The Sign of the Centaurwho were the backbone of his hemp business, and he was a Kentuckyblueblood. Furthermore, he had a hair-trigger temper, and no manamong the slaveholding autocrats would more greatly enjoy rough¬ing up the abolitionists. From the day that Congress passed the Actto Organize the Territory of Kansas, he was deep in conferenceswith Atchison, Jackson, General Stringfellow, Colonel Sam Young,and all of the other proslavery leaders; and he organized the BlueLodge at Waverly. No records of its meetings have come to light,but it is possible, from other records, to trace Shelby’s part in theearly Border Wars minutely.The first election in Kansas took place in December, 1854, for aTerritorial delegate to Congress, but there is no evidence that Shelbytook any hand in it. The Missouri “ringers” triumphed in their firstvisit to the Kansas polls: a proslavery delegate, General Whitfield,was elected. When the news came that Congress had set March 30,1855, as the date for the election of the all-important Territorial leg¬islature, Jo Shelby was at Waverly, and he rode over at once to seeClaiborne Jackson.Over the mint juleps they discussed plans for March 30. Jacksonestimated that about a thousand voters would be needed for the FirstDistrict, headquarters of which were at Lawrence, the abolitionistcapital and the target for all the Southern wrath. Jo Shelby was surehe could recruit about fifty men among his friends and neighbors.A call for the rest would go out in the Missouri counties of Ray,Howard, Carroll, Boone, Lafayette, Macon, Clay, Jackson, Saline,and Cass. Their expenses would be paid out of the Blue Lodge treas¬ury and those who could not come would be asked to contributeprovisions, wagons, and other equipment. The volunteers were to bepaid a dollar a day and whiskey furnished.Violence was not contemplated, Jackson pointed out, unless itshould be necessary to secure the Missourians their “right” to vote.Nor was the right of Free State men to vote to be interfered with;the election must have the color of legality, even though the pro¬slavery men would thrust aside the lawful judges at the muzzle ofthe revolver, would “vote” illegally, certify to the accuracy and legal¬ity of the poll books, and pack them up and carry them away. Ifeither Jackson or Shelby foresaw what the consequences of such apolicy would be, they did not care; but it is likely that they believed,as the proslavery press had been saying, that the Free State settlers,The Border Wars35if discouraged sufficiently at the polls, would give up the coloniza¬tion of Kansas and go elsewhere. Both Shelby and Jackson undoubt¬edly were in agreement with the sentiments expressed a few weeksbefore by General Stringfellow at a meeting at St. Joseph, whereStringfellow had delivered himself of this remarkable diatribe:“I tell you to mark every scoundrel among you that is the leasttainted with free-soilism, or abolitionism, and exterminate him. Neithergive nor take quarter from the damned rascals. I propose to markthem in this house, and on the present occasion, so you may crushthem out. To those having qualms of conscience, as to violating laws,state or national, the time has come when such impositions must bedisregarded, as your lives and your property are in danger, and Iadvise you one and all to enter into every election district in Kansas,in defiance of Reeder and his myrmidons [A. H. Reeder was thegovernor appointed by President Pierce] and vote at the point ofthe bowie knife and the revolver. Neither give nor take quarter, asour cause demands it. It is enough that the slaveholding interest willsit, from which there is no appeal. What right has Governor Reederto rule Missourians in Kansas? His proclamation and prescribed oathmust be disregarded; it is to your interest to do so. Mind that slaveryis established where it is not prohibited.” 5Truly, as Eli Thayer says in The Kansas Crusade, slavery was agreater curse to the white man than to the Negro, for it made of theslaveholders tyrants “who had no correct idea of themselves or any¬body else.” 6How well Stringfellow’s admonition was heeded, the bloody annalsrecord. Kansas was to bleed at every vein, and Americans were tocommit atrocities on their fellow countrymen which make incrediblereading today; but on March 29, 1854, the day before the election,it all started off gaily enough, with the Missourians in a boisterousholiday mood as they assembled at the state line with their wagons,their horses, their flags, their tents, their fiddles, their whiskey jugs,and their bowie knives sticking out of their boot tops into their jeans.Captain Claiborne Jackson was in command, and riding with him atthe head of the expedition, on the horse which Billy Hunter hadsaddled for him, was Jo Shelby. He was traveling light, but some¬where about him there was tucked away a brace of the ornamentedpistols he was fond of.The self-enfranchised voters buckarooed their way noisily across36The Sign of the Centaurthe border and pitched camp late that afternoon in a ravine six milesfrom Lawrence. On their first bivouac the border ruffians had proofthat the Free State settlers were neither paupers nor yellowbellies,and if they had been given to reflection they might have realizedthat there was even some doubt as to whether one Southerner wouldbe enough to whip ten Yankees.Several Free State men, unarmed, came boldly out to meet them.Among them were Samuel N. Wood, an Ohioan who was to playa prominent part in the Free State movement, and N. B. Blanton, anelection judge. Wood seems to have been impelled to the scene solelyby curiosity and a stubborn Yankee determination not to be intim¬idated; Blanton was there on what he conceived to be his duty, andhe informed the Missourians that if they attempted to vote he woulddemand from them an oath as to their place of residence.When Blanton made his speech, according to the testimony whichWood gave later before a congressional committee, the border ruf¬fians first “attempted to bribe him and then threatened him withhanging, in order to induce him to dispense with that oath.” OneBlue Lodge worthy announced that he intended to vote eight timeswithout reloading, and the ninth time with a bowie knife. In conse¬quence of their threats, Blanton did not appear at the polls nextmorning and another judge had to be selected in his place.Sam Wood’s imperturbability in the face of the crowd, many ofwhom had been having a pull at the jug, and some of his sarcasticcomments, enchanted Shelby. He always had a weakness for bravemen. He went up to Wood and engaged him in conversation, andas a result Wood invited Shelby home to dinner, an invitation whichwas accepted. It was the same everywhere with Shelby: people werefrequently against what he was doing, but they were never againstJo Shelby.A discussion of the pros and cons of the Missourians’ “right” tovote took place at the dinner table. Shelby advanced all of the argu¬ments of the proslavery men: that if the Missourians were “foreign¬ers,” so were the Boston Aid Emigrants; that they had as much rightto “settle” here as anybody else; that by so doing they would losetheir right to vote in Missouri for twelve months; and that it wasno worse for Missourians to overwhelm the polls with proslaveryvotes than for the abolitionists to seek to impose the will of NewEngland on what, after all, was Southern territory. Shelby added,The Border Wars37however, that he himself would not vote if he had to swear he wasa resident of Kansas, as his residence was in Waverly. He also toldWood that there were 10,000 Missourians in the territory, ready tovote, although the figure was, to say the least, exaggerated.7The discussion was amiable, though the host’s replies are not onrecord, and Shelby formed a friendship with Wood which survivedthe Civil War. After a good supper Shelby mounted his horse androde back to the camp by the ravine, where matters of policy wereunder discussion.Since it was obvious that there were going to be more voters atLawrence than needed, Jackson and Colonel Sam Young madespeeches calling for volunteers to go to near-by districts. Shelbyelected to remain at Lawrence, where the chief excitement promisedto be, but between 100 and 150 of the others volunteered and set offnext day for Tecumseh, Hickory Point, Bloomington, Switzer’s Creek,and other places. At Switzer’s Creek, where the poll books listed but53 voters, it being a remote hamlet seventy-five miles from the Mis¬souri line, 607 votes were cast the next day.Someone in camp raised the question as to whether there would beenough “tickets”—ballot forms—to go around. Since a shortage of thisitem would defeat the purpose for which they had come, a committeewas formed which rode into Lawrence and routed out the editor ofthe Lawrence Free State and compelled him to print an extra 300blanks. All business now having been attended to, the jugs went roundagain and the fiddles were tuned up. The sound of revelry echoedafar; one settler in the neighborhood testified at the congressionalinvestigation that the Missourians could be heard “hallooing and keep¬ing up a noise all night.” 8In the morning, Missourians in groups of a hundred “marched withmusic to the polls.” 9 Those who were not carrying drums, fiddles, orflags fired their guns. They had white ribbons in their buttonholesto distinguish them from the settlers, a precaution which seems hardlyto have been necessary.The polling place was the Lawrence postoffice, a three-room build¬ing which served not only as postoffice but as living quarters forWilliam Lykins, the deputy postmaster. Lykins was a Missourian, theson of a doctor in Kansas City, and a Southern sympathizer. For aweek he had permitted one room of the postoffice to be used as astorage space for bacon, flour, cornmeal, and other provisions, for38The Sign of the Centauruse of such Missourians as might need them. Lykins, however, wasnot one of the election judges, and the voting was somewhat delayedwhen N. B. Blanton failed to show up. Blanton was soon replaced,however, with a more courageous election official, one Robert Cum¬mins, and the voting began.The first Missourian to present himself was a man named Page, andCummins challenged him, demanding proof of his residence. BeforePage could protest, Colonel Sam Young, a burly, impressive Missouriplanter with a boisterous sense of humor, stepped up to the counterand said that he would settle the matter.Deferentially, he stated that he wished to vote. The election judgeasked him if he were a resident of Kansas, and informed him that hewould have to take the oath prescribed by Governor Reeder. Youngreplied that he would not take the oath and that if he intended to makeKansas his future home that was his own damned business.The election official looked doubtful, but after some consideration,said, “Well, if you’re a resident that’s all I’ll ask.”The Colonel then went to a window, which was open, and shoutedto the crowd outside:“It’s all right, boys! Everybody vote!” 10From then on, the polls were so crowded that those who had votedcould not leave by the same door through which they had entered;to speed the balloting they were hoisted through a rear window torejoin their companions. Many of them exchanged coats and cameback to vote again. Later a passageway through the crowd was ef¬fected and two lines formed instead of one. Colonel Young asked theelection judges to permit the old men to vote first as they were tiredfrom traveling and anxious to get back to camp.No concerted attempt was made to keep the Free State men fromvoting, although the presence of the ruffians outside the polls un¬doubtedly kept some of them away. A few known abolitionists werepointed out by Southern sympathizers, and several of them were madevictims of Missouri horseplay. The editor of the Lawrence Tribune,writing about it years later, says that Shelby took part in this rough¬housing.“Shelby,” he wrote, “[had] remained at Lawrence, and thoughthen a young man, was recognized as leader. We were then boardingwith Colonel Sam Wood, and he brought Shelby home with him todinner, and thus we dined with the to-be Great Raider of the Rebel-The Border Wars39lion. During the day, Cyrus Bond was pointed out as an abolitionfighting man, and was assaulted and shot at and driven over the riverbank, making a jump of about thirty feet almost perpendicular. Itwas said that Shelby fired the shots at Bond, but this we do not know,though we saw the shots fired and saw Bond, a very fat man, runninglike a quarter horse and wheezing like an old locomotive....11As Bond was being put to rout, four or five Missourians saw CharlesStearns, a vehement abolitionist and a correspondent for the NewYork Tribune, writing in a notebook. They made a lunge for Stearnsand seized him. He was a man of slight build, weighing only 125pounds, and no match for the border ruffians. He was a member ofWilliam Lloyd Garrison’s fanatic antislavery party, which had de¬nounced the Constitution as a “covenant with death and a league withhell” and demanded that New England secede from the Union, andhe was well known to many Missourians present.When Stearns was seized, Colonel Sam Young’s sense of fair playwas outraged, and he strode into the fray with arms swinging. Awitness later testified that Young “took him [Stearns] up in his armsand asked if they intended to injure such a little man as that, balancinghim in his arms at the same time.” Then, the witness added, “ColonelYoung took Mr. Stearns away, off the ground.” 12Samuel Wood, Shelby’s host of the night before, was also present.He had a greater interest in the election than anyone present, being acandidate for the Territorial legislature. As Stearns was rescued, Woodturned to George Thompson, a Missouri bully who had threatenedhim the night before at the camp by the ravine, and said, “Is it myturn now?” Thompson merely mumbled something about intendingno harm to Wood if the latter “had not meant to insult them lastnight.”Wood did not reply, apparently feeling that to deny having “in¬sulted” Thompson would concede to him a gentlemanly status whichhe did not possess. After Thompson backed down, Wood got in lineto vote, although the crush was such, he testified later, that he did notget an opportunity to vote until afternoon, “towards night, when Ivoted.”The Free State men, appalled at the situation in Lawrence, made alast-ditch effort to get some “ringers” to the polls too,13 even Indians,but the attempt was not successful. However, some outsiders werebrought in. As Wood awaited his turn to vote, he says, he saw a40The Sign of the Centaurcontingent of 60 or 75 men approaching, under the command of a“General” Pomeroy who was an agent of the Emigrant Aid Society.This group had not been in town at nine o’clock that morning.14 AsWood saw them, he called out significantly, “There are some arrivalsas well as Missouri arrivals.” There were not enough, however, toelect him to the legislature.Another observer, Lyman Allen, a Free Stater who had just comeup from Kansas City on the steamer Sam Cloon that morning, was alsoa witness to the fact that no attempt was made to restrain Free Statemen from voting. About four o’clock, Allen said, the ground beganto be cleared somewhat “and the old men began to leave and theybegan to decamp. Some of the boys had got considerably intoxicatedand [we] could have kept a guard about here during the night. Abouthalf of those persons left before midnight, I think, and early in themorning, and the rest drove off in the direction from which theycame. There were several persons in the crowd when I tried to vote—not very rugged persons—who became faint and were taken away.It was very laborious getting up to the polls.”Jo Shelby was among the first to leave, and he rode off to Waverlyin the company of his neighbors. He was in high spirits and reportedto his brother and sister-in-law that there would be no trouble inholding the line for slavery in Kansas, as the Free State men wouldnot fight. In this he could not have been more mistaken.Though the Lawrence affair had passed off with no more casualtiesthan a Saturday night “shivaree,” there were repercussions throughoutKansas and the nation. The Northern press clamored for the suppres¬sion of the border ruffians, and the New York Times thundered that“it is madness to suppose that any community of American citizenswill submit to such tyranny as this.” 15 But the South was jubilant.The Charleston Mercury, the spokesman of the Slave Power in SouthCarolina, declared that “the safety of the institution of slavery inSouth Carolina is dependent upon its establishment in Kansas,” 16 andrejoiced that “Kansas is safe! Fanaticism has met its master and beenmade to crouch.” 17But far more important than the furor in the press was the effectof the election fraud upon the Free State settlers. They saw now thattheir existence and homes were at stake, and they prepared to fight.The St. Louis Intelligencer threw down the challenge: “It has beenthe common opinion of thoughtless persons and thickheaded bulliesThe Border Wars4iof the West that the Northern and Eastern men will not fight. Neverwas a greater mistake. The sons of New England and the MiddleStates do not like to fight. They would rather work, plough, buildtowns, railroads, make money and raise families, than fight. But fightthey will, if need be.... The Free State men in Kansas will fightbefore they will be disfranchised and trampled on. Mark the word.” 18Among the Free State men who would fight was a bearded, agate¬eyed old patriarch named John Brown. He was already in Kansas, atOsawatomie, with his five sons, and now he set to work oiling his gunsand writing letters to the newspapers. He was to end on the gallowsin Virginia, but his work in Kansas was to go marching on, throughfour bloody years of Civil War. Others, less fanatic but equallydetermined, banded themselves together all over the state into the“Free State Volunteers,” under the command of Dr. Charles Robinson,and the Southern press was soon screaming about the shipment fromNew England of Sharpe’s rifles and other arms to the abolitionists inKansas.Into the Territory also came evil men like Quantrill, Anderson, andTodd, the bloodthirsty guerrillas who fought on neither side, butsimply for loot and from the lust to kill. The Border War soondeveloped into a blood bath the like of which had not been seenbefore in the history of the Republic, not even in the days of theIndian massacres—one which the United States Army itself seemedpowerless to prevent.From 1855 to 1857, Kansas was laid waste. When Governor JohnW. Geary journeyed to the Territory to take his post he found“desolation and ruin on every hand; homes and firesides deserted; thesmoke of burning dwellings darkening the atmosphere; women andchildren wandering over the prairies and among the woodlands orseeking refuge and protection even among the Indian bands.” Hetraveled upon highways “infested with numerous predatory bands”through towns “fortified and garrisoned by armies of conflictingpartisans, each excited almost to frenzy and determined upon mutualextermination. Such, without exaggeration, was the condition of theTerritory at the period of my arrival.” 19The first violence touched off by the election of March 30, 1855,came in Missouri itself. For daring to condemn the people of Missourifor going to Kansas to vote, the Luminary, a weekly published at42The Sign of the CentaurParkville, was destroyed and the type and presses thrown into theMissouri River. The mob which carried out the destruction of thenewspaper office held a mass meeting afterward and adopted a resolu¬tion declaring that “if we find G. S. Parks or W. J. Patterson [theproprietors of the paper] in this town after three weeks, or any sub¬sequent time, we will throw them into the Missouri River, and if theygo to Kansas to reside, we pledge our honor as men to follow andhang them wherever we can take them.” 20Jo Shelby did not remain idle in Waverly as other, and grimmer,forays into Kansas were made. The next great invasion occurred atFranklin, Kansas, four miles from Lawrence, in October, 1855. Fifteenhundred Missourians gathered for the avowed purpose of crossinginto Kansas and wiping Lawrence off the map. Shelby probably wasin this group. The abolitionist capital was saved for the time being bya “peace treaty” engineered by Governor Wilson Shannon betweenthe opposing forces, but on the way home the mob plundered thehomes of Free State settlers, and one man, Thomas W. Barber, wasshot down in cold blood by George W. Clarke, one of the Southernmob and a former Indian agent in Kansas. The killing of Barber rousedthe Free Staters to a war of retaliation; they began raiding across theborder into Missouri and from then on both sides of the line becamea battleground.That was in October; in December, the beautiful new sawmillwhich Shelby and Howard Gratz had built at Berlin, Missouri, wasdestroyed by fire, and the evidence pointed to the work of an in¬cendiary.21 The roving Free State bands had marked Shelby as oneof their chief enemies, and they would stop at nothing. The loss fromthe fire was $9,000, a sizable fortune; and to make matters worse, thesawmill was not insured. Shelby’s rage knew no bounds. From that dayon he declared relentless war on Kansas.In May, 1856, occurred the sack of Lawrence, led by border ruffiansunder the personal command of General Atchison. The excuse, whichthe Missourians had long wanted, was that two abolitionist newspapers,the Herald of Freedom and the Kansas Free State, had been declareda nuisance by a Federal Grand Jury (packed with Missourians) andthat they were going to abate them. The newspaper offices and thetown’s leading hotel, a fine 7 5-room structure with new and expensivefurnishings,22 were wrecked and the entire population driven fromtheir homes. Stores and dwellings were looted and burned, includingThe Border Wars43the house of Dr. Robinson, and altogether property was stolen ordestroyed to the amount of $150,000.In a savage, exultant speech before the looting began, Atchisonroared at his men: “Boys, this day I am a Kickapoo Ranger, by God!This day we have entered Lawrence, ‘Southern rights’ inscribed onour banners, and not one damned abolitionist has dared to fire a gun.No, by God, not one! This, boys, is the happiest day of my wholelife. We have entered the damned city, and tonight the abolitionistswill learn a Southern lesson that they will remember to the day oftheir death. And now, boys, we will go in... and test the strength ofthat Free State Hotel, and learn the Emigrant Aid Society that Kansasshall be ours. Boys, ladies should be, and I trust will be, respected byall gentlemen; but by God, when a woman takes on herself the garbof a soldier by carrying a Sharpe’s rifle, then she is no longer a woman,and by God, treat her for what you find her, and trample her under¬foot as you would a snake. By God, come on, boys! Now do yourduties to yourselves and your Southern friends. Your duty I knowyou will do; and if a man or woman dares to stand before you, blowthem to hell with a chunk of cold lead.” 23The sack of Lawrence marked the real turning point in the BorderWars, as Governor Robinson points out in his history of Kansas,although John Brown and his atrocities were to come after; for theLawrence outrage was a boomerang. The North was so thoroughlyaroused that even President Pierce, who had condoned every act ofthe Southerners in Kansas, was forced to do something. He appointeda new governor, John W. Geary, to replace the indecisive WilsonShannon, and although Geary failed in his efforts to pacify Kansasaltogether, there was never again to be another large-scale “war.” AsGovernor Robinson says, “Never again was the Governor’s militia orthe marshal’s posse called upon, and United States soldiers [would be]perfectly harmless in their attempt to foist upon the people the ter¬ritorial usurpation.” 24Unaware that the verdict of history had been rendered, as is oftentrue of the leading participants, the Missouri leaders were planninganother large-scale invasion. Twenty-eight hundred Missourians, thelargest force of border ruffians ever to assemble, set up a camp in thelate summer of 1856 at the junction of the Kaw and Wakarusa rivers.This was known as the Clarke-Reid-Atchison Expedition, and wasunder the immediate command of General John W. Reid, a member44The Sign of the Centaurof the Missouri legislature. The names of the other members of thetriumvirate, of course, require no identification.On September 14 Governor Geary decided that he would visit theSouthern encampment and put a stop to the warlike preparations.Accordingly he walked boldly into a council of the Missouri leaders.He had Federal troops behind him in Lawrence; and he ordered thatthe proslavery men be disbanded and dispersed. There was a lengthyparley, and speeches were made by the Missourians, including JoShelby,25 but the Missourians were licked and they knew it; theywould not fight the United States Army—not yet. Governor Gearyhad the meeting in his pocket; and he chided General Atchison byreminding him that the last time he had seen him, Atchison was presid¬ing officer of the Senate.26 The Clarke-Reid-Atchison Expedition wasa fizzle, and Jo Shelby went home to Waverly.In his last years Shelby was not proud of his part in the Border Wars.A few weeks before his death, he told William Elsey Connelley, theKansas historian, as they were discussing the sack of Lawrence, “Iwas in Kansas at the head of an armed force about that time. I wentthere to kill Free State men. I did kill them. I am now ashamed of my¬self for having done so, but then times were different from what theyare now, and that is what I went there for. We Missourians all wentthere for that purpose if it should be found necessary to carry outour designs. I had no business there. No Missourian had any businessthere with arms in his hands. The policy that sent us there was damna¬ble and the trouble we started on the border bore fruit for ten years.I ought to have been shot there and John Brown was the only man whoknew it and would have done it. I say John Brown was right. He didin his country what I would have done in mine in like circumstances.Those were the days when slavery was in the balance and the violenceengendered made men irresponsible. I now see I was so myself.” 27As Historian Connelley says, “These were brave words from oneof the bravest and truest soldiers that ever shouldered a musket inAmerica. Only a brave man, and a great man, can bring himself tomake such a confession.”The key to the behavior of such men as Jo Shelby, David Atchison,and Claiborne Jackson is to be found in an observation made byThomas H. Gladstone, a correspondent for the London Times, whovisited Kansas in 1856. In a dispatch to his paper Gladstone said:“Having once been taught that robbery and outrage, if committedThe Border Wars45in the service of the South, were to be regarded as deeds of loyalty andobedience, these ministers of a self-styled ‘law and order’ were slowto unlearn a doctrine so acceptable.” 28 Indeed they were; and thoughthere is nowhere in all the long record a single instance in which JoShelby ever did a mean or unchivalrous thing, it was undoubtedly true,as he himself said, that the violence engendered by Southern passionsmade him irresponsible.We have his own word that Free State men died at his hands, butthey had guns in their hands when they did so, and it was his life ortheirs; by the time of the Lawrence raid Missourians and Kansanswere shooting one another on sight, and the man who went on anarmed expedition into Kansas that year, as Shelby did, knew that hewas going into a civil war. The American Civil War began in Kansas,and not, as many people think, at Fort Sumter; and Jo Shelby was asoldier in that war from the beginning.For whatever may have been on his conscience, he made his con¬fession, and his penance, like a man; and he did his best, after Appomat¬tox, to undo the harm that he had done. He was a man of savagetemper, and it was not always under control. One who understoodhim as well as loved him, Judge John F. Philips of Kansas City, aUnion veteran, summed up Shelby’s character best when he said, in afuneral oration over Shelby’s body at Kansas City in 1897:“He was not what might be termed a round man, uniform andregular in his mental and moral composition. On the contrary, he wasangular to acuteness. It was the sharp angles, the abrupt curvatures inhis character that created the constant surprises in his career and lentto his life its singular attractiveness and picturesqueness. There wereno dead planes, no monotonous levels in his journey through life, andit ran along rugged mountains, cataracts and varying scenery, muchof it exciting, and much of it beautiful.” 2946The Sign of the Centaur5. Steamboat WeddingHoward Gratz, in 1856, had had enough. The Missouri RiverValley plantations had become the target of retaliatory raids bythe Kansas jay hawkers, and he and Shelby were marked men. Theburning of the sawmill in December of the previous year had been thelast straw. He chose to return to the civilized atmosphere of Lexingtonto become editor of the Kentucky Gazette, the paper with which hisname was long associated, and Jo Shelby was left with the sole manage¬ment of the Waverly Steam Rope Factory. The courthouse recordsshow that Shelby continued to own only a half interest in the business,and there is no record that he ever had another partner in Waverly; sothe conclusion may be drawn that the firm of Gratz and Shelby wasnot dissolved. Howard Gratz simply stepped down from activeparticipation in the business to assume the more congenial role of aKentucky editor,1 and Shelby was alone at the helm in Missouri.He was to prosper mightily for a least three more years, even thoughthe Gratz Papers indicate that the business of Gratz and Shelby hadsuffered. This remarkable family history, an extremely rare item, statesthat Howard Gratz “might have succeeded as a manufacturer ofhemp and in other notable business undertakings (planned probablyon suggestion from Benjamin Gratz) if the Border Wars with Kansasand the Civil War had not disorganized Missouri business as com¬pletely as business was disorganized by Cresap’s war when, in 1774,B. and M. Gratz were ready to take their places as permanent foundersof Illinois.” 2Howard Gratz did succeed as a manufacturer of hemp. It was JoShelby’s participation in the Border Wars which created a chaoticcondition in the affairs of Gratz and Shelby, and it was the headlongcourse which Jo pursued which brought the business to the auctionblock in February, i860, a full seventeen months before he rode off tohis first battle of the war as a captain in the Missouri State Guards.In 1856, after his return from the sack of Lawrence, the Lexington(Missouri) American Citizen carried this item on June 17: “Upon thereturn of Capt. Jos. O. Shelby’s company from Kansas Territory,having been driven out by troops of the United States, notwithstandingour intentions avowed upon all occasions, of forming a peaceful settle-Steamboat Wedding47ment, and organized alone for the purpose of mutual protection, ameeting being held ... a committee [was appointed] to draft resolu¬tions expressive of the sentiments of the said meeting. Whereupon thefollowing resolutions were reported and unanimously adopted:“Resolved, that Capt. Shelby has merited our highest admirationfor the courage, coolness and dignity of his deportment under the try¬ing circumstances in which we were placed, and for his kind, carefuland impartial conduct towards all under his command, he has wonfor himself our warmest gratitude and esteem.“Resolved, that as a testimonial thereof, that as a company, wepresent him a fine Sharpe’s rifle.“Resolved, that still being desirous of forming a settlement inKansas Territory, we appoint Capt. Jos. O. Shelby and Jno. S. PercivalEsq., to visit Gov. Shannon, and ascertain under what circumstanceswe will be permitted to make permanent settlement therein.“Resolved, that all papers friendly to equal rights in the said Ter¬ritory, be requested to publish the foregoing resolutions.”While Jo Shelby was waging an unequal struggle with the UnitedStates government in Kansas, Frank Blair was preparing in St. Louisto make a successful campaign for Congress in the fall. The events ofthe year 1856 bring the characteristics of the three cousins fromKentucky sharply into focus: the peace-loving Howard Gratz wasretiring to an editorial sanctum in Kentucky from which he wouldemerge only to attend scholarly dinners or make speeches to women’sgroups;3 Jo Shelby was being presented with a Sharpe’s rifle byadmiring border ruffians; and Frank Blair was running for Congresson a platform calling for the gradual abolition of slavery.From now on Jo Shelby would have enough to occupy any man’stime even without his activities in the Blue Lodge. There was themanagement of the thousand-acre farm, which he still owned withHoward Gratz; there was the lucrative hemp business; there were thesteamboats; and there were the continual lawsuits over the shipment ofmerchandise which seemed to be the inevitable concomitant of thebaling business. And he was in love. Betty Shelby was sixteen, in1857, and a beauty. Soon she was surrounded with beaux, and soonthe smitten Jo was submerged in a torment of jealousy which almostsuffocated him. The William Shelbys may have thought their daughterrather young to marry at barely seventeen, but Jo’s impetuosity couldnot tolerate the thought of waiting—some other man might get her.48The Sign of the CentaurLike many an old bachelor, when he fell, he fell hard. As for theWilliam Shelbys, he simply charmed them down where they stood;no great feat for the twenty-seven-year-old Jo, who had been theirfavorite for years. The William Shelbys now had a house in town,just east of Jo’s house on Mount Rucker, in addition to their farm sixmiles out in the country. From his porch the jealous Jo could seeBetty’s admirers coming and going, and it was too much. The weddingdate was set for July 22, 1858, at the William Shelby’s home inWaverly.From the first there was never anybody for Betsy but Jo. Althoughlike all the belles of the great plantations around Waverly and Black¬burn she had her share of suitors, she was not a coquette, and she didnothing to fan the flames of Jo’s jealousy. On the contrary, knowingits explosive qualities, she would go to any lengths not to arouse it.On one occasion she was wearing a ring given her by an admirer—aninexpensive trinket, perhaps a birthday gift—when she saw Jo ap¬proaching down by the wharf. In a panic she threw the ring into theMissouri River, a symbol of final decision.4Great plans were made for the wedding. Shelby’s steamboat, theA. B. Chambers, commandeered as a private yacht for this occasion,would take the entire wedding party on a honeymoon trip to St.Louis. It was entirely in character for Jo Shelby that he did not minda large entourage of companions on his honeymoon. Nothing suitedhim better, in fact, no matter what a bride might think. There was agreat deal of commotion around the Waverly Steam Rope Companyas Shelby penned orders for the finest of everything for the trip, andhe kept Billy Hunter running.Assisting Shelby in his wedding plans was one of his boon huntingand fishing companions, a young Virginian by the name of JohnNewman Edwards, who had just come out from Front Royal in theShenandoah to edit the Lexington (Missouri) Expositor, a weeklynewspaper owned by Colonel Oliver Anderson, Howard Gratz’sfather-in-law, and one of the most influential papers in the MissouriRiver Valley.Edwards was a mild-mannered man whose startling opinions andflamboyant newspaper prose were to earn him the sobriquet of “theHorace Greeley of the West,” after his return from the war and hisjunket to Mexico with Shelby. Under his editorship the Expositorwas one of the most colorfully written newspapers in Missouri, aSteamboat Wedding49land of colorful editors. Old-timers in Lexington still recall hearingfrom their parents of the flaming social history with which JohnNewman Edwards filled the columns of the Expositor, and particularlythe vivid account he wrote of Jo and Betty Shelby’s wedding partyembarking for St. Louis on their private steamboat, in the cool ofthe evening, with lights ablaze in the salon, music floating out over theriver to serenade the sleepy birds in the cottonwoods on the bank,and the laughter of the young people gayer than any music evermade by Zeiler’s Band.5Unfortunately the story he wrote is lost forever. When the KansasRedlegs (so called from their red morocco leggings) raided Waverlyand Lexington in 1862, they burned the Expositor building andflumped its files and presses into the Missouri River, for the editor ofthe Expositor had been loud, denunciatory, and pointedly insultingwhenever he mentioned Kansas or Kansans in his columns. If theRedlegs had been able to find the editor in, when they called in1862, they would have thrown him into the Missouri along with hispresses or hanged him to the nearest tree; but at that time he wasriding with Shelby far away. John Newman Edwards did not fightthe war with his pen.Though the Expositor files have long since vanished, and its typefonts lie pied at the bottom of the Missouri, it is possible to piece to¬gether most of the details of Shelby’s wedding. The story has beenpassed down to succeeding generations by those who remembered it.Indeed, the town never forgot it.6The marriage ceremony was performed by the Reverend B. M.Hobson, of the Lexington Presbyterian Church, on July 22/ beforea crowd of wedding guests, among whom were the elite of the Mis¬souri River Valley.8 Aldridge Corder, a leading merchant and later abanker of the town, was best man. He was Shelby’s age, still a bachelorand one of Shelby’s closest friends in Missouri; together they hadbeen two elusive beaux of the countryside. Among the guests, we maybe sure, were the members of the family from Lexington, Kentucky,including Shelby’s mother (who had made a trip to Waverly the yearbefore to meet Betty); Gratz Brown and Frank Blair from St. Louis;such Missouri notables as David Atchison and Claiborne Jackson;young Tom Crittenden, who had just moved from Kentucky toMissouri;9 and others whose names, if they were recorded, would beequally well known. Miss Elizabeth Corder, daughter of Aldridge50The Sign of the CentaurCorder, still living today at Marshall, Missouri, recalls hearing that herfather and all the other young men present were reduced to a state ofabjection by the stunning beauty of Betsy’s bridesmaids, and especiallyone whose name was Pauline. The name of the beauteous Pauline, alas,has been forgotten, as well as whether she caught the bride’s bouquet.But quite evidently she did not need it. There was also the usualcontingent in the background, as at any Souihern wedding, of Negroservants “dressed to kill,” and at least one solemn darky who saw anera ended when Betty said “I do.” That would be Billy Hunter, whofrom now on would have charge of a family of white folks.It would have been inconceivable of course that Shelby and Edwardswould have forgotten the red velvet carpet leading from the frontporch of the William Shelby home, which was only a few feet fromthe dock, and they did not. In a letter to the author dated February 9,1953, Mrs. Louise Davis Brown of Waverly recalls hearing from oldermembers of the family that “the path leading to the river was carpetedin red velvet. At the bend of the river a brilliantly lighted boat gaywith music and the luxuries of Southern hospitality awaited thearrival of the wedding party and close friends, the guests of Gen.Shelby for an excursion to St. Louis.”At the slow speed of a Missouri River steamboat the trip to St.Louis required the better part of a week, so that the wedding trip ofBetty and Jo Shelby was one of the longest “river parties” in thehistory of that historic stream. At St. Louis the newlyweds and theirfriends spent several days seeing the sights,10 and Betty and Jo visitedmembers of the family. Surfeited with champagne and steamboat fare,the party may have made the return trip by train.It would be pleasant to record that the steamboat wedding trip wasthe beginning of an uninterrupted idyl of married life, but the grimfact is that the next two years were downhill years for the WaverlySteam Rope Company. Apparently 1858 was a good year, for in anexuberant moment Jo Shelby caused to be inscribed a silver pitcherwhich he presented “To Col. David O. Henton, from Jos. O. Shelby,for the best crop of hemp delivered at St. Thomas in 1858,” 11 butthe fiery Jo had a multitude of enemies as well as friends and as a lonebusiness man he was not a success. Without the mature judgment andrestraining hand of Howard Gratz, he over-extended himself, and thelavish scale on which he lived soon depleted his capital.Details of Shelby’s business transactions during these two years areSteamboat Wedding51largely missing, but it is known that he was involved in ventures ofsome kind with Frank Blair, who also came to financial grief on a bigscale, according to the Blair Papers in the Library of Congress.12 Ini860 a newspaper account says that Frank Blair was in Lexington toenter satisfaction of a mortgage made by him to Gratz and Shelby, andthat he left town hastily, for at the time the citizens of Lexington were“much incensed” with him and if they had known he was in townwould have handled him roughly.13 “Gen. Blair,” says the account,“returned to his boat by the way he came [evidently he avoided themain thoroughfare] and not until his boat was gone was it generallyknown that he was in Lexington.”Whatever the cause, or combination of causes, by February, i860,the crash had come. The Lafayette County records show that JohnP. Bowman (Sheriff) as trustee sold Shelby’s half-interest in theWaverly Steam Rope Factory, for $4,425.00 to Camillas Barnett, E. S.Fishback, and Thomas Shelby.14 The sale did not satisfy all of Shelby’sindebtedness, for the records also show that in May of the same yearCamillas Barnett was suing Henry H. Gratz and Joseph O. Shelby for$3,000. The disposition in this suit does not appear.Thus the critical winter before the war, that of 1860-61, found JoShelby in what were, for him, straitened circumstances. As a land-owner he could keep up some semblance of the lordly life of a planter,but he was through with the hemp business forever. As a matter offact, the war killed the hemp business in both Kentucky and Missouriso effectively that it was never revived as a money crop in either state.Jo Shelby was now a gentleman farmer; nothing more. He and Betsyhad one child, Orville, born in August, 1859.The state of Shelby’s personal fortunes, of course, was over¬shadowed by the threat of war which was now hanging over thewhole country. Missouri had been at war since 1855, but it was notuntil the election of i860 that the crisis came in the other Southernstates. Shelby had long since made up his mind that he would soonbe fighting in Southern uniform, and during the long winter hewatched events from Waverly. In May, 1861, he received a telegramfrom Frank Blair asking him to come to St. Louis and “talk” about thesituation. He knew what that meant. Blair was going to offer him aFederal commission. It was a preposterous idea, but he decided to goto St. Louis anyway, as he had some other business to attend to. Overin Lexington, Kentucky, his friend John Morgan had just written him52The Sign of the Centaurasking him if he knew a gun dealer who could supply 100,000 musketcaps for Morgan’s rifles, to be used against the United States Armyif it should attempt to overrun Kentucky. Shelby knew a gun dealerin St. Louis. He would take the next boat to St. Louis, to see if thedealer had 100,000 musket caps.6. Missouri and the UnionOnly one man in Missouri in the higher councils of either politicalparty had a full understanding of the course that events werebound to take, and that man was Shelby’s cousin, Frank Blair.Again a member of Congress following the election of i860, Blairhad a direct line into the White House and enjoyed the confidenceand friendship of Abraham Lincoln. His brother Montgomery waspostmaster general in Lincoln’s cabinet and Lincoln had fixed onFrank Blair as the one man who could secure Missouri to the Union,and as the one man who would not hesitate to use any means whateverto do it. Lincoln soon gave him unofficial powers greater than thoseenjoyed by the Federal commander in St. Louis, General Harney, in¬cluding the power to remove the General; and until Captain NathanielLyon appeared on the scene, Blair was dictator of the Union party inMissouri and the personification of the Union cause in the state.Blair’s early contacts with Lincoln left him in no doubt that Lincolnmeant to maintain the Union by force of arms if necessary. Blair, theSouthern aristocrat, knew that this meant war and nothing else. Manyin Missouri would later come reluctantly to that conclusion; butbecause Frank Blair understood it from the first he was prepared toact, when the time came, while others were still debating legal defini¬tions. His accurate estimate of the situation in Missouri enabled himto plot and carry out a master strategy which outwitted the Seces¬sionists and the compromisers from the beginning.Blair was an unconditional Union man himself, although, true tohis Kentucky blood, he viewed the freeing of the slaves as a calamity,albeit a necessary one. He proposed to meet the calamity by shippingthem all to Central America as soon as they were freed.1Missouri and the Union53Blair knew that although an overwhelming majority of his fellowMissourians were loyal to the Union, an appalling number of themcould be swayed in that loyalty. They were “conditional Union”men. The conditional Unionists fell into two categories. First, therewere the rich slaveholders of the Missouri River Valley, most of whomwanted to remain in the Union and keep their slaves. (Many of themagreed privately with old Sam Houston down in Texas that Secessionwould be a stupendous failure and would result in the subjugation ofthe South.)2 They would, however, join the Confederacy overnight,when they found that slavery was threatened, unless they were sepa¬rated physically from the opportunity to do so.Second, there were the independent farmers and the “poor whites”of the southeastern counties who were too far down in the economicscale to own many slaves, but whose forebears had come from Ken¬tucky, North Carolina, or Tennessee. If called upon to fight againsttheir blood kindred of the South, they would refuse, and if pushedtoo far they would take up arms for the South. That was the hair-trigger situation in two sections of the state; as for the western counties,they were lost beyond redemption. The inhabitants of that romanticregion, where the passions of the Border Wars had not subsided, werefiercely Secessionist, not because they had any quarrel with the Unionbut simply because they hated Yankees and would welcome theopportunity to kill them. Only in St. Louis, with its large “foreign”population of Germans, Irish, French, and Canadians, could absolute,unconditional loyalty to the Union be counted on.3Jo Shelby did not know it, but on the day he arrived in St. Louis tobuy musket caps for John Morgan, the stage was set for a coup d’etat,European style, in which Frank Blair and the Unionists would putthe city of St. Louis in their pocket and thereby secure control of theMissouri River and hence of the state. The first blood of the CivilWar in Missouri was to be shed at Camp Jackson, where GovernorClaiborne Jackson had concentrated 700 of his state militia in whatwas ostensibly a routine encampment for training, but actually wasthe first step in the mobilization of the Secessionist forces in the state.By a coincidence, Shelby was to be present at the seizure of CampJackson by the Unionists, and forced to stand by while “foreign”troops took prisoner the sons of the best families of St. Louis. If hehad not already been a convinced Secessionist, the sights he saw at54 The Sign of the CentaurCamp Jackson that day would have turned him finally and completelyagainst the Union.In the armed camp which St. Louis had become, Shelby did notfind it difficult to buy 100,000 musket caps, especially from a gundealer of Southern sympathies. But the size of the consignment wassomething of a problem, for arms were contraband, but it was solvedby placing the shiny new caps in red clay flower pots, which were thencovered with earth and topped with roses, dahlias, and lilacs.4 Thecaps were delivered safely to Morgan a few days later in Lexington,perhaps the largest floral tribute ever received by a live ConfederateAs Jo Shelby walked the streets of St. Louis, he could not fail tonote the warlike preparations, nor the fact that most of the soldiersunder arms were Germans, members of the Black Republican HomeGuards. He was scandalized and alarmed; it did not seem possible thatGovernor Claiborne Jackson, who had been in office for five months,should have permitted this organization to exist.As a matter of fact, Governor Jackson and his dominantly pro-Southern legislature had played into the hands of Frank Blair by afatal policy of delay. Instead of simply authorizing a convention tovote on secession, as other states had done, the Missouri legislature, atGovernor Jackson’s request, had authorized an election for a conven¬tion which would consider Missouri’s relation to the Union and thensubmit the issue to the people in a general election. The bill callingfor the election of delegates to the convention contained a provisothat “no act, ordinance or resolution of said convention shall bedeemed valid to change or dissolve the political relations of this stateto the Government of the United States or to any other state until aqualified majority of voters of this state voting upon the questionshall have ratified the same.” 5 To show their confidence that Missouriwould secede in a general election, the legislators appended a resolu¬tion declaring that “so abhorrent is the doctrine of coercion that anysuch attempt would result in the people of Missouri rallying to theside of their Southern brethren in their last extremity” 6This was a mistake of the first magnitude and reflected Jackson’scomplete misconception of the popular state of mind in Missouri. MostMissourians did not want war and they agreed with the outgoingGovernor Robert Stewart, Jackson’s predecessor, that the state’s posi¬tion in the crisis should be one of “high neutrality.” When the conven-Missouri and the Union55tion met, it failed to call an election and adopted instead the positionthat “there was no adequate cause to impel Missouri to dissolve herconnections with the Federal Union but on the contrary she will laborfor an adjustment of existing troubles as will gain the peace, as well asthe rights and equality of all the states.” 7All this had taken months, and during those months Frank Blairhad been equally busy, but not in weighing legal procedure or tryingto influence sentiment with speeches. He had been working night andday to create a personal military organization, composed of the Ger¬mans of St. Louis, known as the “Turners” or Home Guards. TheHome Guards had been drilling nightly all winter, under the sterneye of Prussian drillmasters, in breweries, foundries, and turnvereinhalls in which sawdust had been spread thick to deaden the soundof marching feet. The first company of Home Guards thus to assemblehad elected Blair captain, for he was the idol of the German popula¬tion of St. Louis and it had been largely through the German votethat he had been elected to Congress. He was now colonel of the HomeGuard organization, and when he spoke it would move as one man.Blair’s haughty, aristocratic bearing, plus his emancipationist politi¬cal philosophy, made him the natural leader of these people, and, infact, of all the so-called “foreign” element of St. Louis. Many of them,especially the Germans, were refugees from tyranny in Europe, andthey had brought with them to America the philosophy of the liberalrevolution which swept the Continent in 1848. They had no love forslavery or slaveholders. They feared the competition of slave laboras much as they hated the arrogant slaveholders, and their feelingswere reciprocated heartily by the Missourians of Southern birth, whodetested all outsiders as “foreigners.”From the standpoint of the Southern Missourians, the Germans,though a minority (the Irish far outnumbered them in St. Louis) wereeasily the most obnoxious of the foreigners. Not only were they BlackRepublicans; they rubbed the natives the wrong way on a score ofother counts. Their harsh rendering of the English language, theirbeer-drinking habits, their free-and-easy attitude toward the Sabbath(St. Louis enjoyed a Continental Sunday while the rest of Missourilistened to sermons on hellfire and damnation), their heel-clickingreverence for authority, and, above all, their Teutonic industry, earnedfor them, outside of St. Louis, the appellation of “the damned Dutch”or “the lop-eared Dutch.” And when the blue merino flag of civil56The Sign of the Centaurwar was raised in Missouri, the Stars and Stripes came to be known,to the Southern troops, as “the Dutch flag.”Finding himself in such uncongenial surroundings on this brightMay morning (it was May 10, 1861) it was natural that Jo Shelby,while waiting for his musket caps to be packed, should seek an atmos¬phere in which he would feel more at home. The Missouri StateGuards were in encampment at Lindell’s Grove, just outside the city,under the command of General D. M. Frost, and thither he drove tolook up some of his friends among the militia and admire the spotlessmilitary order of Camp Jackson, as the encampment was called.The militiamen had been at Camp Jackson since May third, thedate which the legislature had set for their annual training period. Atleast that was the pretense; the real reason was that Fort Sumter hadfallen in April and President Lincoln had made a requisition uponMissouri for four regiments with which to coerce the Southern States.A furious Claiborne Jackson had penned a reply to Lincoln in whichhe declared that “the requisition is in my judgment illegal, uncon¬stitutional and revolutionary in its object, and cannot be compliedwith. Not one man will the state of Missouri furnish for such an un¬holy crusade.” 8 The Missouri State Guards had then been summonedto Camp Jackson.General Frost, the New York born commander of the MissouriState Guards, had made elaborate preparations to avoid any appearanceof assembling an offensive force, although the Confederate govern¬ment had already sent siege guns into the city at Governor Jackson’srequest. The site of the encampment was selected deliberately, or soit seemed, for its exposed position; it was surrounded on all sides byhills and was vulnerable either to bombardment or to cavalry attack.Frost was at great pains to make it appear that he neither feared anattack nor contemplated one.Furthermore, the camp was open to the public at all times, and theonly flags in sight were those of the State of Missouri and the UnitedStates. Officers and men had taken the usual oath to uphold the Con¬stitution, and as further evidence of his peaceful intentions, GeneralFrost had offered previously, in writing, the services of his militia toprotect, if necessary, U. S. Government property—meaning thearsenal, with its 60,000 rifles, 1,500,000 ball cartridges, 90,000 poundsof powder, and several pieces of artillery.Despite the mighty impression of innocence which Frost sought toMissouri and the Union57create, Frank Blair and Captain Nathaniel Lyon—a regular army offi¬cer who had been sent in from Fort Riley, Kansas, with eighty regu¬lars to guard the arsenal—believed that Jackson had summoned themilitia for the purpose of seizing the arsenal, and they made plansaccordingly. Lyon put on a black bombazine dress belonging to FrankBlair’s mother, and with a heavy veil to conceal his red beard, rodethrough Camp Jackson in a carriage. No one suspected that he wasnot a bona fide old lady, and he noted, as his red beard bristled, thatthe streets in the camp bore such names as “Beauregard” and “Davis.”He returned posthaste to Colonel Blair and reported that there wasnot a doubt that Camp Jackson was a hotbed of rebellion. Further¬more, word came in about this time that the cannon and powder forthe state encampment had arrived from New Orleans on the steamer/. C. Swan, disguised as marble and ale.Lyon, who was by now a colonel, through the influence of Blairat the White House, and soon would be a brigadier general, proposedto move on Camp Jackson at once, and Blair agreed. As a result ofhis ceaseless activities, Federal troops had been pouring into St. Louisdaily, and the Union forces now stood at 7,000, outnumbering theMissouri State Guards ten to one.General Frost learned of the plans of Lyon and Blair and wroteto Lyon asking if the information were true and if so by what au¬thority the United States Army planned to attack the Missouri militia.He also mentioned the arms which had come in aboard the /. C. Swan.He said that he knew nothing of their origin and that he would turnthem over to the Federal troops if they would come and get them.Frost’s conciliatory attitude failed. Lyon by now had determined uponthe seizure of the arsenal himself (in all this he was flouting the author¬ity of General Harney, the top Federal commander in St. Louis, whowas no party to the plan and would have scotched it if he could).Lyon also refused to receive the letter Frost had written.9Seven thousand troops, including regiments from Iowa, Kansas, andIllinois, as well as Frank Blair’s “Dutch,” converged on Camp Jack-son, and Lyon demanded an unconditional surrender. Outnumbered ashe was, there was nothing for Frost to do but obey. The entire militiawere made prisoners of war and marched off to jail, through crowdedcity streets.A lady of pro-Southern sentiment wrote in her diary: “Think ofit! The German rabble, composed of soldiers of the lower element58The Sign of the Centaurof the city, recruited from the saloons and dives... taking as prisonerthe sons and husbands of the leading families of St. Louis!” 10While the militia were marched out as prisoners, a furious mob ofSecessionists gathered. Stones were hurled at the blue-coated troops.Someone fired a pistol. Whether by order of Lyon or not, the Uniontroops answered with rifle volleys fired directly into the crowd. Bythe time Lyon issued a cease-fire, twenty-six men lay dead, and onewoman had a babe killed in her arms. A twenty-eighth casualty wasthe Union captain whose men had fired the first volley. He died ofhis wounds the next day.The massacre dispersed the mob, but bands of Secessionists roamedthe streets of St. Louis until nightfall, looking for trouble. They didnot find it, for Blair and Lyon kept their men under cover. Secession¬ist speakers delivered fiery orations before the Planter’s House andin front of street-corner saloons, hurling invective at the “Dutch” anddemanding a rope for Blair and Lyon. The saloons, restaurants, andother public places closed their doors hastily as the Southern elementworked off its spleen.Things were quiet again the next day, and the militiamen who hadbeen taken prisoner at Camp Jackson were freed on their parole notto bear arms against the United States. Most of them turned up laterin the rebel army under General Bowen on the other side of the Mis¬sissippi; the parole was regarded as given under duress and was violatedwith alacrity when the bluebloods were given an opportunity forrevenge.Among the spectators at Camp Jackson, besides Jo Shelby, had beena heavy-set, bearded fellow who was engaged currently in clerkingin his father’s harness shop at Galena, Illinois. His sympathies werenot with the militia, although he wrote later that he did not under¬stand why they did not seize the arsenal. His name was Ulysses Simp¬son Grant.11 Not far away was another St. Louisan with whom Grantwas to become better acquainted later on, a fellow in a plug hat wholooked always as if he would soon be needing a shave: WilliamTecumseh Sherman, president of the Fifth Street Railroad.When Shelby saw Frank Blair, in all probability he denouncedhim. He would have nothing to do with anyone, family or not, whowould use powder and shot on Southern men and women. The volu¬minous Blair Papers in the Library of Congress make no reference atall to this conversation between these two remarkable cousins; BlairMissouri and the Union59did history a disservice when he did not set down the exact wordsof Jo Shelby on this occasion. But from other sources we know thatBlair sought to quiet him and spoke eloquently of the duty to keepMissouri in the Union; and he ended, as Shelby had suspected hewould, by trying to persuade Shelby to accept a commission in theFederal army. Shelby replied that he had fought the damned aboli¬tionists in Kansas and would fight them again, on Missouri soil oranywhere else, and that his border veterans were already at Inde¬pendence for the purpose of protecting the town from the enemy.Oddly enough, Shelby was refusing a Federal commission from theson of the man who had just offered Robert E. Lee command ofthe Federal armies;12 Frank Blair, Sr., was still very much alive andbusy running errands in Washington for Abraham Lincoln, as Frank,Jr., was running them in Missouri. But actually Shelby was refusingmuch more than a commission. Frank Blair, in effect, was showinghim from a mountain top all the kingdoms of the world. As a Fed¬eral officer under Blair and Lyon, at this stage of affairs, there wasno promotion or preferment to which Jo Shelby could not have lookedforward with confidence. In all probability, he could have had,before he was thirty-two, the rank of colonel or brigadier generalwhich was withheld from him in such a niggardly manner by hissuperior officers in the Confederate army. He could have retained hisproperty at Waverly and perhaps regained his heavy financial losses.But he tossed it all aside as contemptuously as if it had been an un-smokable two-cent cigar, and took the steamboat back to Waverlyto fight for a country which could not furnish him a uniform to wear,a gun to shoot, or a horse to ride. He would not see Frank Blair againuntil after the war, although he would be in frequent correspondencewith him on matters of importance, both to their family and to thenation.13At Jefferson City, when news of the Camp Jackson affair was an¬nounced to the legislature, pandemonium broke out. The legislatorswere convoked in special session to debate the passage of GovernorJackson’s Militia Bill, which would not only call every able-bodiedMissourian into the service of the state but give dictatorial powersto the Governor. George Graham Vest, a friend of Shelby’s whosename is remembered as the author of the classic “Tribute to the Dog,”leaped onto a chair and waved a dispatch before the assembly, shout-6oThe Sign of the Centauring apoplectically, “Frank Blair, Captain Lyon, and the Dutch haveseized Camp Jackson!”The legislators, most of whom were Secessionists, paused only longenough to pass the Militia Bill and vote $10,000 for an alliance withthe border Indians. Then they bolted from the assembly hall in searchof weapons. McElroy in his Struggle for Missouri says that “muskets,shotguns, rifles, pistols and pikes were brought out, cleaned up, bulletsmolded and cartridges made, and the Governor ordered members ofthe staff to seize a locomotive and press on as far as possible to St.Louis and reconnoitre the advance of the enemy and if necessarydestroy the bridges over the Gasconade and Osage rivers to obstructthe march.” 14The locomotive screamed out of Jefferson City with legislatorsclinging to its sides. The expedition burned part of a bridge over theOsage, but, no enemy being in sight, returned to Jefferson City andresumed its sessions. In the next few days, measures were passed ap¬propriating two million dollars to defend Missouri against the Union,and the legislators gritted their teeth as they recalled that they couldnot pass an ordinance of secession, having delegated that power to aconvention, which would not meet again until December.Governor Jackson did the next best thing. He used his emergencypowers under the Militia Bill to order all members of the MissouriState Guards into service, and he commissioned Sterling Price itsmajor general. Price, a former governor and veteran of the MexicanWar, was one of the most popular men in Missouri. He accepted theassignment, although he had always been a Union man,15 and wentat once to Lexington to begin recruiting. His acceptance of GovernorJackson’s commission undoubtedly did much to sway conditionalUnion men to enlist in the Missouri State Guards.General Harney, the Federal commander of the Department ofthe West, who had never been in accord with the direct policies ofBlair and Lyon, nevertheless was forced to take notice of the war¬like preparations of Governor Jackson. He issued a proclamation inwhich he termed the recent action of the legislature “an indirect ordi¬nance of secession” and warned everyone that he “intended to main¬tain the authority of the Constitution of the United States withinthe scope of his command.”He was not anxious, however, for an open conflict with SterlingPrice and he asked Price to come to St. Louis for a conference. PriceMissouri and the Union61came, and Harney reminded him that President Lincoln had issueda proclamation calling for the dispersal of all bands hostile to theUnited States within the borders of Missouri. He added that theMissouri State Guards now came under that heading. Price assuredHarney that his activities as a major general of militia would be con¬fined to protecting the lives and property of the citizens of Missouri.Satisfied, Harney reported his agreement to the War Department.16At first Frank Blair expressed himself as “in hopes that we can getalong with it [the Price-Harney agreement] and think that Harneywill insist on its execution to the fullest extent, in which case it willbe satisfactory,” 17 but several days later he changed his mind, andon May 30 he dismissed Harney from command, as he had authorityfrom Abraham Lincoln to do.18As a result of the St. Louis coup, Lincoln appointed Lyon a briga¬dier general. Blair’s commission in the same rank would come later.The two men now had St. Louis, and they had the arsenal. Soonthey would control the entire Missouri River Valley and two thirdsof the state. Although the rebels were6 to win victories, they wouldnever again be in undisputed control of any substantial part of Mis¬souri soil; and historians are agreed that chief credit for this outcomecan be assigned to Frank Blair and Nathaniel Lyon. The two menhad never met until the fortunes of war threw them together in St.Louis, but no two men were ever better suited by temperament tofight together and work together, unless it were Jo Shelby and JohnNewman Edwards.Governor Jackson of course regarded Blair and Lyon as out-and-out rebels against the state authority, and he would have dealt withthem summarily if he had had the power to do so. But since the heavybattalions were on the side of Blair and Lyon, he allowed himself tobe persuaded to make one last effort for peace.Through an intermediary a meeting was arranged at the Planter’sHouse in St. Louis. Lyon opened the discussion by remarking thathe would leave the conduct of the meeting to Blair, since he enjoyedthe confidence of Washington to a higher degree than any other manpresent; then Lyon proceeded to take over the meeting himself. Hebecame so vehement that Blair virtually was silenced. Lyon would notlisten to Governor Jackson, who suggested that the troops on bothsides be disbanded; and he listened to Sterling Price only impatientlyas the old Roman defended his course.62The Sign of the CentaurThomas L. Snead, Price’s aide, who was present at the meeting,says in his Fight For Missouri that the conference obviously was use¬less from the start. “It was to no purpose,” he wrote, “that they allsought, or pretended to seek, the basis of a new agreement for main¬taining the peace in Missouri. If they really sought to find one, theydid not. Finally, when the conference had lasted for four or fivehours, Lyon closed it as he had opened it.“ ‘Rather,’ he said, ‘than concede to the State of Missouri for oneinstant the right to dictate to my Government in any matter, how¬ever unimportant, I would (rising as he said this and pointing toeveryone in the room) see you, and you, and you, and every man,woman and child in the state of Missouri dead and buried!’ Then,turning to the Governor, he said, ‘This means war. In an hour oneof my officers will call and conduct you out of my lines.’ And then,without another word, without an inclination of the head, withoutanother look, he turned upon his heel and strode out of the room,rattling his spurs and clanking his sabre, while we, whom he left,and who had known each oth£r for years, bade farewell to each othercourteously, and kindly, and separated, Blair and Conant19 to fightfor the Union, we for the land of our birth.” 20Jackson and General Price returned at once to Jefferson City, andthe executive machinery ground once more as Jackson penned an¬other proclamation calling for 50,000 militia “for the purpose of re¬pelling invasion and for the protection of the lives, liberty andproperty of the citizens of this state.” The proclamation adjured allMissourians to “obey all Constitutional requirements of the FederalGovernment,” but advised them that “your first allegiance is due yourown state, and you are under no obligation whatsoever to obey theunconstitutional edicts of the military despotism which has enthroneditself at Washington or to submit to the infamous and degrading swayof its minions in this state.”By this time such a proclamation was little more than sound andfury. The solid Union men, Blair and Lyon, were in the saddle, withall the armies of the United States at their back. Of the 50,000 rebelvolunteers called for, only 5,000 were to respond—and they over aperiod of six months.It is too late now, Governor Jackson.PART TWOThe Campaignof the Missouri State Guards^ ^ ^1 1^1 1^1 ^4 ^<1 *^4 *^4 ^1 »^*> *^4 *^4 *£4 *^l *^4 ^4 ^4 *^4 *^4 ^4 4^4 1*^4 ^4 1^4 4^4 *J« »^4 4^4 »^4 ^ ^4 4^4 4^ 4^4 4^47. Boonville and CarthageBLAIR’S right-hand man, Brigadier General Nathaniel Lyon,had declared war on Governor Jackson’s state government ofMissouri,1 and he telegraphed the War Department for 5,000additional stands of arms and authority to enlist more troops. TheSecretary of War replied that the arms would be furnished andgranted Lyon’s request for permission to increase his forces. Lyonat once set in motion all the troops he could spare from St. Louisfor an offensive against the Missouri State Guards. His object wasthree-fold: to cut off the retreat of Jackson, Price, and the otherswho had retired to Jefferson City to organize an army of militia; tooccupy all of the Missouri River Valley; and to prevent Confederatearmies in Arkansas from entering the state and effecting a junctionwith the Missouri militia.Arkansas had become a Confederate state on May 6, and the Rich¬mond government had directed General Ben McCulloch, the oldTexas ranger, who commanded three regiments in the Indian Terri¬tory, to give Sterling Price all the support he could without invadingMissouri.2 As long as Missouri was still a Southern state which hadnot seceded from the Union, the non-aggression policy of the Con¬federate States was dead set against an invasion of Missouri or anyother Union territory. Nathaniel Lyon did not know of McCulloch’sorders, but it would have made no difference if he had. Sooner orlater the Confederates would invade. If he could prevent them frommaking a junction with the “barefoot militia,” and either scatter the6364 Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsMissouri state troops or drive them into the remote regions of thesouthwest, the war against the Union would be over, as far as Missouriwas concerned.The indispensable first condition for the execution of Lyon’s planwas to occupy Jefferson City, and this he was prepared to do imme¬diately, and in full force. When word reached Governor Jacksonthat Lyon intended to march on the state capital, he realized that hecould not defend the city with the 400 or 500 militia stationed thereunder the command of Colonel John S. Marmaduke, a West Pointer.(General Price had been taken suddenly and severely ill.)3 Marma-duke’s men were poorly armed, many of them only with derringers,family fowling pieces, squirrel rifles, old flintlocks, or long knivesmade of files which had been beaten into shape by blacksmiths. Mar¬maduke had for artillery only two six-pounders and he strongly ad¬vised Jackson to abandon any thought of making a stand in thevicinity of Jefferson City.Jackson, however, was determined not to let the whole state fallinto Lyon’s hands by default, as St. Louis had done. He disregardedMarmaduke’s protests and ordered him to Boonville on the MissouriRiver, with instructions to defend it, promising meanwhile that hewould order other state troops under General M. M. Parsons at Tip-ton to his aid. Parsons had 700 or 800 men, but before he could joinMarmaduke, Lyon had occupied Jefferson City and swiftly dispatched1,700 men by steamboat to Boonville. There he debarked at onceand began to beat the woods for the enemy. He had not advancedtwo miles before he found them. The contest was sharp and brief.Two men were killed and nine wounded, on either side; the Federalscaptured sixty prisoners and Marmaduke’s two six-pounders; and therest of Marmaduke’s men fled. Most of them followed GovernorJackson to the southwest, where a junction of all Missouri forceseventually took place, but Lyon had achieved, at least temporarily,one of his two objectives: he had thrown the state forces back intothe southwest or “poor white” section of Missouri.This trifling engagement at Boonville has an historical importanceout of all proportion to the numbers involved. As Governor Jacksonhad known that it would, defeat in this section of the state openedthe Missouri River to the Federals all the way from St. Louis to Lex¬ington. Price was in Lexington, but he could not stay there; the riverBoonville and Carthage 65at his door was a broad military highway over which Lyon couldmove 10,000 men by steamboat without the slightest interference.News of the defeat reached Price the day after his arrival at Lex¬ington, and realizing that he had no time to equip and organize aforce of State Guards, he broke camp and marched toward the Arkan¬sas border with 1,700 volunteers who had come in from the rivercounties. Overnight he evolved a new plan for the defense of Missouri.First, he would pick a location in southwestern Missouri at whichvolunteers from the four corners of the state could rendezvous, andthere organize his army; second, he would go posthaste to GeneralMcCulloch and appeal for the immediate aid of Confederate troops.With 10,000 or 15,000 men he would fight his way back to St. Louis,via Lexington and the Missouri River Valley.For the rendezvous of the state troops he picked Lamar, in BartonCounty, and it was to Lamar that Governor Jackson and his militiawere soon marching, joined by thousands of others en route.If Lyon had been in a position to follow up his victory after Boon¬ville, he might have caught up with Jackson, Parsons, and the rest. ButLyon was suffering from a condition which frequently afflicts thewinners of too sudden, too easy victories. He was disorganized by theheadlong rush of events which had placed him in undisputed masteryof the situation. Caution was indicated, although Lyon was not a cau¬tious man. If he followed the enemy at once, he would endangercommunications with his rear, in a country full of Southern sympa¬thizers; to secure these communications (with St. Louis via JeffersonCity and the Missouri River) he would have to leave a substantialportion of his force behind him to keep the lines open, and whenhe caught up with the enemy, he might find him concentrated instrong force, probably augmented by a Confederate army from Ar¬kansas. He was also being plagued by lack of transportation and bycontinued heavy rains. As a stopgap, he ordered Captain Samuel D.Sturgis and his Kansas Dragoons, over in Jackson County, to pursueGovernor Jackson, and added, “I will follow with all the speed Ican.” 4 He also ordered Colonels Sigel, Salomon, and Benjamin GratzBrown toward Springfield with their regiments.Jo Shelby missed the first battle of the war in Missouri at Boon¬ville, although his State Guards cavalry company had been organizedfor some weeks. That company, composed of forty-three veterans of66 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsthe border forays, was known as the Lafayette County Cavalry (pro¬nounced La-firy-ette in Missouri) and it was mounted and equippedat Shelby’s expense. But in May, when the Camp Jackson affair oc¬curred, Betty Shelby was pregnant with her second baby. So fragileand delicate she was that it seemed hardly possible that she had alreadybeen a mother at nineteen, and an anxious Jo was guarding her everyfootstep.5 For the time being, the cavalry company and the war inMissouri could wait.In June Betsy Shelby gave birth to a fine, healthy boy baby, whomthey named Joseph Boswell Shelby for the good physician of Lex¬ington. As soon as Shelby had assured himself that all was well withboth of them, he rode off with Billy Hunter to join the LafayetteCounty Cavalry at Independence. Dick Collins and the others hadpreceded him, for there had been a rumor that Sturgis was about toattack the town with his Kansas Dragoons.The anticipated attack on Independence failed to materialize, be¬cause Sturgis had been ordered south. At Independence Shelby foundhis own marching orders from Major General Sterling Price, andthe Lafayette County Cavalry trotted off toward Lamar. It was thefirst of many a hundred such jaunts in the saddle for Shelby and hismen.At Lamar Shelby was attached to the Second Division of the Mis¬souri State Guards under the command of Brigadier General JamesS. Rains. Two other militia units also marched in at Lamar, those ofJohn B. Clark and William Y. Slack, to join the veterans of Boon-ville under General Parsons and Governor Claiborne Jackson. Inthe absence of Price, who was at McCulloch’s camp, Jackson as chiefexecutive of the state assumed command of the new army.At the moment, the Federal commander nearest to Jackson wasSturgis. By a series of forced marches Jackson managed to eludeSturgis and slip across the Osage, building rafts to do so, withoutthe loss of a horse or a man. To have outwitted the detested Kan¬sans raised the spirits of Jackson’s men considerably, and they marchedin fine fettle, ready for a fight, especially since they expected to bejoined soon by Confederate troops.United at Lamar, the Patriot Army of Missouri, as it was called,numbered 3,600 men, 500 of whom, however, were totally withoutweapons. R. S. Bevier in his History of the First and Second MissouriConfederate Brigades says that the Patriot Army was “a heterogeneousBoonville and Carthage67mixture of all human compounds, and represented every condition ofWestern life. There were the old and the young, the rich and thepoor, the high and the low, the grave and the gay, the planter andlaborer, the farmer and clerk, the hunter and boatman, the merchantand woodsman. At least five hundred of these were entirely unarmed.Many had only the common rifle and shotgun. None were providedwith cartridges or canteens (as a result of which they were sufferingbadly from thirst when they went into the battle of Carthage). Theyhad eight pieces of cannon, but no shells, and very few solid shotor rounds of grape and canister. Rude and almost incredible deviceswere made to supply these wants: trace chains, iron rods, hard peb¬bles and smooth stones were substituted for shot; and the evidence ofthe effect of such rough missiles was to be given in the next encounterwith the enemy.” 6 One of their eight cannon, a brass relic of theMexican War known as “Old Sacramento,” was drawn by a team ofoxen for want of horses.At nightfall on the Fourth of July, about fifteen miles from Car¬thage, the Missourians made camp, and Governor Jackson and hiscommanders, knowing that the enemy could not be far off, went intoa conference over their maps which lasted until one o’clock in themorning. At that ghostly hour Rains, under whom Shelby was serving,was ordered to awaken his men at daybreak and lead the march ofthe troops in the direction of Carthage, where Sigel was expected.Parsons was to lead the extreme left, with Slack and Clark in thecenter and on the right. Thus the Missouri Patriot Army moved inthe shape of a phalanx rather than a column.When the march began, in the clear dawn of a summer day, Shelbywas sent ahead to scout the road, and about seven o’clock, after thearmy had advanced five miles, he caught sight of blue troopers ahead—some of Franz Sigel’s “Dutch.” Sigel was later to become a famouscorps commander for the Union, and a statue would be raised to himin New York, but on this July day he had not yet learned the im¬portant lesson which every Federal general sooner or later had tolearn, and which Shelby was to teach him at Carthage: namely, thatthe rebel cavalry, even when they looked like unsoldierly backwoods¬men, were slippery fellows and not to be trusted.Sigel’s main camp was three miles in the rear of the timbered slopeon which Shelby could now see the uniforms of the Federals as thickas blueberries in summer. The slope led down to a stream which68Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsflowed in a miniature canyon between the two ridges of the plain.To the right, and on the near side of the creek—known as Dry ForkCreek—the timber had been cleared, and a waving cornfield had takenits place.As soon as his scouts reported the enemy, Jackson halted to drawup his line of battle on a high plateau on the north side of the creek,on which his artillery would command the approaches. Here at Car¬thage the normal position of contending Civil War forces was re¬versed, for the Missouri state militia was headed south, in the directionof Arkansas and McCulloch, while Sigel had advanced through Car¬thage and was facing north.Sigel’s men could see Shelby as well as he could see them, and inno time Sigel’s spyglass was sweeping Governor Jackson’s battalions,which resembled a worm fence as they struggled into line. Sigel saysin his report, “After crossing Dry Fork Creek six miles beyond Car¬thage, and advancing three miles farther, we found the enemy in lineof battle on an elevated ground, gradually rising from the creek, andabout one and a half miles distant. Their first line was formed in threeregiments, deployed in line, and with proper intervals between them.Two regiments forming the wings consisted of cavalry, the centerof infantry, cavalry and two pieces of artillery. The other pieces wereposted on the right and one on the left wing. The whole force withinour sight must have numbered 3,500 men, with a strong reserve in therear.” 7 The strong reserve in the rear of course was the 500 unarmedvolunteers who were waiting to pick up the muskets of the woundedand slain.While Jackson’s commanders were forming their line, Rains wentforward to reconnoitre. At a distance of a quarter of a mile fromthe plateau, he says in his report, he “perceived that the enemy weredescending a slope towards a creek skirted on both sides with tim¬ber.” Whereupon, he says, “I sent orders to Captain Shelby, who wasin the advance, to halt and detain the whole command out of view,hoping the enemy would cross the creek when I could oblige them totake a position in the bottom, while I drew up my force on the heightscommanding it. My expectations were realized, and after the enemyhad crossed the creek I ordered Captain Shelby forward to checktheir advance.” 8Thus Jo Shelby received his baptism of fire in the Civil War at halfpast seven o’clock of a humid summer morning on the fifth of July,Boonville and Carthage691861, at the hands of the “hired Hessians” of Sigel’s artillery. We donot know the name of the sergeant who is supposed to have shot downJeb Stuart at Yellow Tavern, but we know the name of the captainwho missed his opportunity to shoot down Jo Shelby at Carthage ashe and his Lafayette County neighbors galloped recklessly in a feintagainst Sigel’s guns that morning. He was Captain Christian Essig,commanding a three-gun battery in support of the Third U. S. In¬fantry Regiment, Missouri Volunteers, and he is mentioned only thisonce in all the hundred and twenty-eight volumes of the OfficialRecords of the War of the Rebellion.When he saw the rebel horsemen, Essig’s guns opened up furiouslyand briefly, throwing spherical case shot in their direction which hitnobody; but Shelby’s sortie had the immediate effect of diverting theFederal fire while the Southerners unlimbered their batteries on thehill.Shelby having accomplished his mission on the left—the Southernleft, of course—Rains ordered him back to the main line, and the move¬ment, Rains says in his report, “conducted in the face of both armies,was executed with the precision of the parade ground.” 9 It was thekind of bold and heroic gesture that Shelby loved, and he made themost of it.Rains had called Shelby back, however, only to give him anotherassignment on the right flank, “to reconnoitre the timber and examinefor a crossing.” For this task more men were required, and Rains nowgave him a cavalry force three times greater than his rank entitledhim to 10 and sent him thundering off in the direction of a cornfieldto the right. The roar of the guns on both sides rang in Shelby’s earsas he rode.Sigel, meanwhile, had thrown his line forward, at the same timefiring on the Missouri State Guards with all seven of his field pieces;but the State Guards’ artillery, from its advantageous position on theplateau, swept, with a murderous mixture of grape, canister, scrapiron, and rocks, the slope on which Sigel’s skirmishers advanced.Parson’s guns, on the left, got into action first, but the greatest dam¬age was done by Captain Hiram Bledsoe and “Old Sacramento” inthe center. Bledsoe, with this museum piece, under the direction ofColonel Richard H. Weightman, “opened a steady and well directedfire into the densest of the enemy’s masses, forcing them to take refugein the depression of prairie and finally to retire some 200 yards.” 1170 Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsWith the enemy falling back, Weightman’s brigade now surgedforward toward Dry Fork Creek—artillery, oxen, riflemen, camp fol¬lowers, and all. The vanguard reached a point 400 yards from Sigel’stroops on the near side of the creek (he had held a force in reserveon the other side to protect his wagons), waited for the artillery toline up, and then attacked. At close quarters the Missourians’ lackof professional combat weapons told on them heavily, and twice theywere driven back, “amidst,” says Sigel, “the triumphant shouts ofthe United States volunteers.”Shelby’s cavalry, however, had snatched the victory at Carthagefrom Sigel’s grasp. Running the gauntlet of Federal guns on his right,Shelby had drawn such a heavy fire that their commander, a CaptainWilkins, had exhausted all of his amunition in a vain effort to halthim; with no case shot singing in his ears, Shelby and his 150 riflemenhad plunged through the cornfield, kicked over a fence rail whichseparated it from uncultivated land in the bottom, and breached anopening big enough for all of Rains’s cavalry to pour through. Sigelnow had rebel horsemen on his flanks and in his rear, between hisguns and his ammunition train, and he was encircled by a numericallylarger force. Through the cornfield and across the creek he couldsee Rains and his entire brigade streaming, and far to his own right,he could see other rebel horsemen advancing on the opposite flank.There seemed no end to them. Sigel no longer cared what his advancewas doing. He gave the order to retreat everywhere, and he admitsin his official report that he did so to avert irretrievable disaster. “Toadvance without the assistance of the artillery seemed to me a move¬ment which could easily turn into a deroutehe says. “No time couldbe lost. One part of our troops on the extreme right and left werealready engaged with the mounted troops.... The moral effect ofthe enemy’s regiments behind our lines, although the real danger wasnot great, could not be denied. To lose our whole baggage was an¬other consideration of importance. It was, therefore, with great morti¬fication that I ordered one part of the troops behind Dry Fork Creek.... Meanwhile the two large bodies of cavalry had completely sur¬rounded us and had formed into line against our rear.”Fighting now for an escape route rather than victory, Sigel’s troopsfell back from Dry Fork Creek as fast as they could in the directionof Carthage. As long as they were moving in the right direction, theMissourians permitted them to do so, and Sigel’s force gained theBoonville and Carthage7iheights crowning the north side of Carthage, before Spring River,without molestation. At Carthage, Sigel says, “our rear guard tookpossession of the town,” which is an euphemism for retreating intothe town; but he soon found that he could not stop and rest in frontof Carthage.“The enemy,” he says, “taking advantage of their cavalry, fordedSpring River at different points, spread through the woods, and partlydismounted, harassed our troops from all sides.” This was one ofShelby’s favorite stratagems during the war, dismounting light cav¬alry and using them as dragoons whenever he thought they couldserve better on foot.Fearing that the encircling movement of the rebels might cut offhis communications with Springfield, Sigel made no attempt to fightat Carthage, but ordered the retreat to continue to Sarcoxie, fromwhich he had set out two days before—a distance, in all, of twenty-five miles. Shelby and the cavalry followed him two and a half mileson the Sarcoxie road, and then desisted, as night came on, well con¬tent. Raw, inexperienced amateurs of war, they had met the enemy,a highly trained, superbly equipped enemy, in force equal to theirown, and they had chased him twenty-five miles between daylightand dusk. Enough work for one day, surely, and enough glory.To Brigadier General James S. Rains must go the credit for beingthe first officer in the war to realize that Jo Shelby, although henever had an hour’s military instruction in his life, was a born cavalrycommander, who could use the whiplash of the mounted arm to con¬fuse, rout, and defeat a well-armed body of trained professional sol¬diers whose numerical strength was greater than his own. There were1,500 cavalry in the Missouri Patriot Army, commanded by officerswho outranked Shelby; yet Rains picked Captain Shelby from themall. In doing so he was undoubtedly acting on the advice of Gover¬nor Jackson, who well knew what manner of man Jo Shelby was.As a cavalry action, Carthage ranks with some of the importantengagements of the war. It was a decisive engagement in that it per¬mitted Price and McCulloch to join forces and go on to victory atWilson’s Creek, which, in turn, enabled Price to stay in Missouri foranother full year. Thus Carthage, like Boonville, had a significanceout of proportion to the number of troops engaged. There were onlyforty-four killed on the Southern side and thirteen on the Federal;72Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsit was not much more than a skirmish on a grand scale, but brilliantlyconceived and executed for all that. It was a baptism of fire for JoShelby as a cavalry commander, and he acquitted himself as brilliantlyon his first day of battle as he would on his last. Shelby’s genius wasnot of the kind that needs maturity to ripen. It was born full blownon the field of Carthage.Eventually, when the facts of Carthage became known, and thesubsequent facts of Wilson’s Creek, Sigel suffered much humiliationat the hands of his superiors in the Department of the West;12 butfor the immediate present, he was commended for “brilliant service”by Lyon, who accepted at face value Sigel’s report that he had escapedfrom a trap set for him by a vastly superior force and had conducteda masterly retreat.138. Wilson's Creek: The Face of WarThe day after their first battle at Carthage, the dusty ranks of theMissouri State Guards were drawn up on the prairie outside thetown to receive a party of welcome visitors: General Sterling Price,“Old Pap” to his Missourians; Generals Ben McCulloch and N. B.Pearce of Arkansas,1 with their gaily dressed staffs; 3,000 cavalry ofthe Confederate States Provisional Army, smartly attired in handsomenew gray uniforms, and 1,200 Arkansas militia. The troops of Mc¬Culloch and Pearce, every whit as military and as well armed as theFederal troops under Lyon and Sigel at Springfield, marched undera flag never seen before on a Missouri battlefield, the Stars and Barsof the new Southern Confederacy.As Price, McCulloch, Pearce, and Governor Jackson rode down theranks in review, the Missourians cheered mightily. Thomas L. Snead,Price’s aide-de-camp and acting adjutant general of the Missouri StateGuards, wrote in his Fight for Missouri, “We were all young then,and full of hope, and we looked with delighted eyes on the first Con¬federate soldiers that we had ever seen, the men all dressed in sobergray, and their officers resplendent with gilded buttons, and goldenbraid and stars of gold. To look like these gallant soldiers, to be ofthem, to fight beside them for their homes and our own, was the oneWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 73desire of all Missourians who, on that summer day, stood on one oftheir own verdant prairies, gazing southward.” 2The Confederate troops were in high spirits, too. The day before,outside of Neosho, within the sound of the guns at Carthage, McCul¬loch’s Arkansas Rangers under Colonel Churchill and Major Mc¬Intosh had fallen on a rifle company of U. S. Missouri Volunteers,under the command of a Captain Conrad, and had captured 137 pris¬oners, 150 stands of arms, and seven wagons laden with supplies.The Confederates were splendidly armed and equipped, but Price’sPatriot Army of Missouri was in an even worse condition than ithad been when it started out. General McCulloch, in fact, was ap¬palled at the thought of facing the trained troops of Lyon and Sigelwith such a mob, and he made no bones about it to Sterling Price.He was also in favor of sending home those who did not have arms,because they were simply extra mouths to feed in a country wherethere was nothing to forage except green corn. Volunteers, too, werestreaming in from all directions, as news of the rebel victory at Car¬thage spread, and these but added to the problem, since most ofthem brought with them nothing but their enthusiasm.Price told McCulloch that if he could have a few days to gathersupplies and set up an armory and forge for manufacturing ammuni¬tion, he believed that adequate weapons could be placed in the handsof the men. McCulloch assented and let the Missourians have 615fine new rifles, although Price could have used three times as many.Then Price marched away to Cowskin Prairie, a bivouac he hadselected for its proximity to the lead mines at Granby. The Confed¬erate States Provisional troops quartered themselves at Maysville,where their uniforms were admired by the young girls even moreextravagantly than they had been by the Missouri troops.Price’s task at Cowskin Prairie was made the more difficult by thefact that he had no military stores of any kind and no money withwhich to procure them, even if they had been procurable. He sentquartermaster officers to Little Rock and Fort Smith, the nearest Con¬federate supply centers, but these officers, traveling as far as Mem¬phis in their search for supplies, did not get back until after the Battleof Wilson’s Creek had been fought.Nevertheless, Price was fortunate in having as ordnance officerMajor Thomas H. Price (apparently no relation to him) who was74Campaign of the Missouri State Guardssuited admirably for the job. Major Price was surrounded by menwho had been handling rifles and shotguns since boyhood and whowere adept at improvising ammunition. Lead, thanks to the near-bymines, was plentiful. There was also an abundant supply of powder,the one commodity which Governor Jackson had been able to acquirein quantity, and in the forests on the edge of Cowskin Prairie stoodtall trees whose wood could be used to make buckshot and bulletmolds. Of such homely materials were fashioned the rifle balls whichwon the Battle of Wilson’s Creek. The arsenal hummed with activityday and night. When it was too dark to see, says an officer of Guibor’sbattery, “a bayonet made a good candlestick, and at night the menwent to work making cartridges, strapping shots to the sabots, andfilling the bags from a barrel of powder placed at some distance fromthe candle.... We soon learned the trick and at the close range atwhich our next battle was fought, our home-made ammunition provedas effective as the best.” 3 Major Price’s artillery ammunition wasmolded on the pattern of round shot taken from Sigel’s capturedwagons.By the end of July the effective strength of the State Guards hadtripled, with volunteers flocking to Cowskin Prairie, and when thePatriot Army was ready to take the field again, Price had 5,000 menunder arms and 2,000 camp followers ready to rush into battle andpick up the muskets of the fallen. Morale continued high, too,for now the word flew about that other Confederate armies besidesMcCulloch’s would soon be on the march into Missouri. GovernorJackson had gone to Memphis on July 12 to persuade General Leon¬idas Polk, who had authority over Confederate troops west of theriver, to send an “Army of Liberation” into the state. Polk neededno persuasion that Missouri was the key to control of the MississippiValley and the whole vast region of the Confederate Southwest. Inthis he displayed a vision lacking completely in the commanders whosucceeded him. He did not offer niggardly help. He ordered GeneralPillow to take 6,000 men from various divisions of the Western Dis¬trict of Tennessee and move into Missouri by way of New Madrid;there he would be reinforced by Arkansas troops under General JeffThompson, bringing the expedition to a calculated force of 11,000men. These men would march at once to Pocahontas, Arkansas, whereGeneral Hardee, he of “Hardee’s Tactics,” would meet them withanother 7,000 Provisional Army troops. This Army of LiberationWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 75would then sweep through the whole of Missouri and recapture St.Louis. It was a magnificent plan—on paper.The plan died aborning. Pillow did actually occupy New Madrid,but Hardee just plainly refused to move. He insisted that his menwere “badly organized, badly equipped, and wanting in disciplineand instruction. One of my batteries has no harness and no horses,and not one of the regiments has transportation enough for activefield service.” 4 This description would have applied to any Confed¬erate army in the field at any time, but Hardee announced that hewould not move “with less than 5,000 men, well appointed, with afull complement of artillery.” As Adjutant General Snead says sourly,Hardee “had not yet emancipated himself from the tyranny of axiomswhich did not apply in the circumstances wherein he was called toact.”5 Yet the Arkansas government was at this very moment—thefirst week in August—pressing troops on Hardee for the Army ofLiberation, which he refused on the ground that he did not havethe authority to accept state troops into the Confederate army! Theoffer was for seven regiments,6 which would have given him the 5,000he said he needed. Thompson had 1,400 men, which were neverordered to join McCulloch, and Pillow simply sat idle in NewMadrid.7None of this was foreseen at Cowskin Prairie, however, and Pricewas jubilant over the Army of Liberation. He issued a boastful procla¬mation announcing that he would not only retake Missouri, but in¬vade Illinois as well; and the anvils rang with a new fury at CowskinPrairie.This form of activity had no appeal for Captain Shelby. He wasnever content to remain in camp for even a day, and now he per¬suaded Sterling Price that he should be sent on a recruiting missionto the Missouri River Valley, and to Lafayette County in particular.A state convention had met on July 22 at Jefferson City and had setup a Union government of xMissouri, with Hamilton R. Gamble asgovernor. That government would wield the power of the state, in¬sofar as it could, against the South. The time was ripe, Shelby argued,to give to the cut-off Southern sympathizers in the Missouri RiverValley an opportunity to flock to the Banner of the Bars, now thatthe issue of civil war was clearly drawn.Price gave his assent despite the fact that Shelby’s proposed jaunthad all the aspects of a suicide mission. His little company of Lafayettey6 Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsCounty Cavalry, now brought up to full strength of ioo men, wouldhave to by-pass the Federal army at Springfield—5,000 strong, at least—penetrate 120 miles into the Federal rear, in order to reach the Mis¬souri River Valley, and recruit for the rebels in a countryside in whichthe Union Home Guards, with their beer steins and their lieder, werepresent in force at every crossroads village and tavern. He would besix counties north of Price’s army, with the enemy between, and fouror five days’ march in the rear of Sigel and Lyon. Furthermore, Lafay¬ette County, whither he was going, was a garrison center of Federaltroops in the area: Lieutenant Colonel White, at Lexington, alonehad a force several times the size of Shelby’s. Nevertheless, in lateJuly Shelby rode off from Cowskin Prairie with his company andgalloped home to Waverly through the Federal lines as nonchalantlyas if there were not a blue coat in all Missouri. It was the first of theraids deep into enemy territory which were to make him famous.As a recruiting mission, Shelby’s first dash into Lafayette Countywas not a success. Major Edwards, in his history of the Confederatecampaigns in the West, says, “There was but little rest to the soldiersand small opportunity for recruiting.” But he did see Betty Shelby,and having a hundred well armed men with him, he was able to keepthe country in “a turmoil and a commotion.” By the time he reachedWaverly, his hundred horsemen had been magnified in rumor, saysEdwards, to two thousand, three thousand men. The cottonwoods atSt. Thomas’s Wharf at Waverly also got credit for masking “vast andwonderful batteries,” overlooking the Missouri, and at least onevicious-looking siege gun could be seen poking its nose along thetop of the brush like a water moccasin lying in a creek bed.This was a wooden gun, painted black,8 but it was formidableenough in appearance to halt a Missouri River steamboat, the Sunshine,sailing along as gaily and brightly as her name. The Sunshine was thefirst of many steamboats which Shelby captured during the war,9 andhe had the pleasure of confiscating a hundred army wagons and fifteenhundred sacks of flour destined for the Federals at Leavenworth, Kan¬sas. The wagons had to be abandoned, but there was plenty of freeflour in Waverly that afternoon—for white and colored—and whenthe day’s work was done Shelby tied his horse to his own hitchingpost and had supper with his family.The terror had not yet struck in Waverly. The Kansas Redlegs,the cutthroats and bushwhackers from over the border would comeWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 77later, and they would burn Shelby’s mansion, his ropewalk, and otherproperty suspected of being his—eventually; but just now, with sum¬mer golden on the river and over the peaceful prairie, neither Jo norBetty was seriously alarmed over the fact that he had to be awayfrom home with the army for a while. He would even take BillyHunter with him; there were a lot of other stalwart and loyal ShelbyNegroes on the place, and Waverly and Lafayette County were trueblue to the Southern cause. In a matter of weeks, the Army of Libera¬tion would reoccupy the Missouri River Valley. The war, in fact,seemed about over, back east in Virginia; the entire Union army hadbeen demolished in front of Washington at Manassas Junction and itremained only for the Southern armies to occupy the Lincoln capitaland enforce the independence of the Southern Confederacy. Missouriwould soon be another star in the new flag, and real peace would cometo the Missouri River Valley, for the first time since the settlement ofKansas.For another week after the capture of the Sunshine, Shelby gal¬loped about Lafayette County, making recruiting speeches and ex¬asperating Lieutenant Colonel White. On August 5 Governor Jacksonissued a manifesto declaring Missouri an independent Republic. ByAugust 8 Shelby and his men were back with Brigadier General Rains’sdivision of Price’s army, marching with the advance toward Spring-field in the neighborhood of Wilson’s Creek. It is hilly country, scrub-timbered, with cleared patches for corn and a postoffice in the littletown of Ozark. Here one of the bloodiest engagements of the warwas to be fought—almost as bloody as Bull Run.10 Many who haveheard of the Bloody Lane at Antietam have never heard of BloodyHill at Wilson’s Creek—but it was saturated with the blood of twenty-five hundred Americans before the sun went down. Rains’s men borethe brunt of it, and Shelby’s Lafayette Cavalry, dismounted at thelast and fighting savagely in the brush, wrote their names in the recordwith all the rest.They had been living the life of holiday soldiers with little realexperience of combat. At Carthage the Yankees had run, as the South¬erners had confidently predicted they would, scattered by the gallantmounts of the chivalry. In Lafayette County the amateur cavalrygentlemen had amused themselves by confounding the slow-wittedDutch with wooden cannon and clouds of dust; it was campaigningafter their own hearts, and the lordly young planters of Shelby’s com-78 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardspany had enjoyed it thoroughly. At Wilson’s Creek they had a rudeawakening to reality. At Wilson’s Creek, for the first time, they sawthe face of war—close up, in all its hideousness. Wilson’s Creek wasthe Bull Run of the West, and its analogy to the first great battle inVirginia is remarkable.In both cases the battle was the first conflict on a vast scale in itsparticular theatre of war; in both cases the Southern troops werepanicked into flight in the opening phases of the battle; in both casesthey rallied to smash the enemy and hurl him back into the tightring of defenses of his capital; and in both cases they were so ex¬hausted by the victory that they could not follow it up. In Virginiathe Confederates lost the opportunity to march on Washington afterBull Run and perhaps end the war by dictating peace terms from thecapital; in Missouri they failed to pursue the defeated enemy afterWilson’s Creek and retake the Missouri River Valley, which wouldhave brought Missouri into the orbit of the Confederacy, gained con¬trol of the vital upper Mississippi, and perhaps saved the heartland ofthe South from invasion.Both Bull Run and Wilson’s Creek demonstrated the fatal militaryweakness of the new Southern nation: its inability to make its vic¬tories count.Before sunrise on the morning of August 10, 1861—the day wascoming on bright and clear despite the rain of the night before—threeyoung children were riding horses out to pasture near their home onWilson’s Creek, near Ozark, when a mounted stranger rode up to themrapidly and shouted, “Children, get out of here! They’ll be fightinglike hell in ten minutes.” 11 The three children, a little girl of sixnamed Lavonia Ray, and her two older brothers, whose father waspostmaster of Ozark, raced back to their homes and told their parentswhat the man on horseback had said.Mrs. Ray rounded up all the children on the place, both white andblack, and herded them with the grownups into the cellar, but shecould not persuade her husband to retreat. He was sitting on the frontporch, holding the baby.“Roxanna, don’t be alarmed,” he said. “Some fellows told the chil¬dren that story to frighten them.” Mrs. Ray did not argue, but rescuedthe baby from his lap and joined the rest of the family in the cellar.Hardly had Postmaster Ray finished speaking when he saw a blackWilson’s Creek: The Face of War79line moving in the distance, and he recognized it as an army of march¬ing men. Still Postmaster Ray remained where he was. He had afront seat at the Battle of Wilson’s Creek, and he did not intend togive it up.The column of marching men was the vanguard of BrigadierGeneral Nathaniel Lyon’s army from Springfield, up early in themorning to take the Confederates by surprise at Wilson’s Creek. Inthe forefront of the line were the First Missouri Volunteers, St. Louistroops, in which Captain Cary Gratz was commander of Company E,Second Infantry, Steele’s Battalion.12As Captain Gratz marched with Lyon down the Cassville Road atthe head of his men, Captain Jo Shelby was pulling on his boots out¬side his tent in the camp of General Rains, which was situated in arocky hollow in the forks of Wilson’s Creek and Skaggs’s Branch.Somewhere about was Billy Hunter, roasting green corn and fryingfresh-killed beef for breakfast. The militiamen of the Second Division,Missouri State Guards, those that were not still asleep, were washingin the branch or preparing their own morning meal, unaware that therewas an enemy closer than Springfield. Near by, the twelve hundredhorses of Rains’s “huckleberry cavalry” chuffed and snorted andshook their heads. There was not half a mile’s distance betweenCaptain Cary Gratz and Captain Jo Shelby when Lyon struck at Wil¬son’s Creek. It is possible that Shelby saw the face of his stepbrotherand cousin amid the smoke that rolled across the field that morning,without recognizing it. Whether he did or not will never be known;but undoubtedly he saw it afterward on the battlefield, stilled indeath.13The Ray children had far more notice of the beginning of theBattle of Wilson’s Creek that the Missourians and Confederates underPrice and McCulloch, according to bitter complaints which McCullochmade later in an official report.14 For reasons which he was not able todiscover, McCulloch says, Rains, though in the advance and chargedwith the duty of reconnaissance, withdrew his pickets about nineo’clock the night before, so that he was without intelligence as to themovements of the enemy on the Springfield road ahead of him untilthe blue uniforms were actually in sight the next morning.McCulloch had intended to march on Springfield the night beforeand attack at daybreak, but he canceled the order at nine o’clock when8oCampaign of the Missouri State Guardsa light rain began to fall. Most of the men were carrying their cartridgesin cotton bags, and McCulloch could not risk their being ruined bydamp weather on the march. He gave orders for the men to remain intheir tents at Wilson’s Creek on the night of the tenth and keep theirpowder dry. It was his plan to march early next day, if the weathercleared, and attack Springfield at once, in broad daylight.15When the troops heard this, the Missourians became so jubilant thatthey staged a celebration around their campfires, Missouri style, withfiddles, jugs, songs, and dancing. To Shelby and his young dandies,just back from Lafayette County, it was reminiscent of the old dayson the Kansas border. The militiamen were in high spirits becausenow they would have a chance to show the Louisiana, Texas, andArkansas troops what they would do to Lyon, Sigel, and the Dutch.For days now they had been smarting under the jibes of their alliesat their unmilitary appearance. Even though they did not fall in tothe notes of a bugle, at company formation, merely answering a hailfrom their officers, whom they frequently addressed as “Jedge,” andeven though they had no regulation uniforms or Maynard rifles, likethe troops from the bayou country, they had been fired by the storiesof Bull Run, where undisciplined troops had made the Yankeesscamper, and they proposed to do the same thing in the morning.At Springfield Nathaniel Lyon had been as worried about his owninferior numerical strength and his supply situation as McCullochwas over the inexperience, want of equipment, and mule-headednessof his Missouri allies. Lyon knew that Price and McCulloch out¬numbered him two to one; he had never heard of Captain Shelby, ofcourse, but he knew that Sigel had been belted dizzy at Carthage bythese same forces in front of him, in spite of Sigel’s superiority introops, guns, and ammunition; and he fully expected McCulloch to bereinforced by Hardee and Pillow, at any time, thus tipping the scalesagainst him with a vengeance. He wrote to Fremont: “He [the enemy]has taken a strong position, and is recruiting his supply of horses,mules, and provisions by forays into the surrounding country, his largeforce of mounted men enabling him to do this without any annoyancefrom me. I find my position extremely embarrassing and at presentam unable to determine whether I shall be able to maintain my groundor be forced to retire.” 16But Lyon was one of the ablest soldiers ever to wear an Americanuniform, and one of the most fearless. In the circumstances, he hadWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 8idetermined to fight, on the theory that an offense was the best defense;just as McCulloch was deciding to fight for much the same reason.Thus, with trepidation, both Federal and Confederate commandersapproached the battle of Wilson’s Creek.Having decided to attack, Lyon had summoned Sigel and told himof his decision.17 The movement outlined was to be an encircling one.The Federal forces would be divided into two columns. Lyon himselfwith 4,200 men and ten pieces of artillery, would attack on the Con¬federate left, at Gibson’s Mill, below which General Rains and theadvance guard of the Southern army were known to be encamped.Sigel, with 1,250 men, would move to the east, sweep around the mainConfederate encampment, and attack on the right and in the rear. Itwould be a risky venture, and would depend upon the element ofsurprise for success. But if all went well, they would squeeze Priceand McCulloch like an accordion.Lyon left Springfield the next afternoon at five o’clock, Sigel athalf past six. Marching slowly, and averaging no more than a mile anhour, Lyon arrived at one o’clock in the morning within sight of theguard fires of Rains’s outposts at Gibson’s Mill. Waiting for daybreak,his troops slept on their arms on the wet ground.Sigel, meanwhile, carried out his part of the advance according toplan. His column reached the eastern flank of the Southern encamp¬ment at daybreak, just as some of McBride’s Missourians were goingdown to the creek for water. He captured forty prisoners, but did itso quietly that he did not disturb the rest of the camp,18 and in plainsight of the militia tents he planted four pieces of artillery on a hill,just north of the point where the Fayetteville Road crosses Wilson’sCreek. He had turned the Confederate right as completely as Lyonhad turned the Confederate left. It was now long past daybreak, anduntil the first shots were fired neither Price nor McCulloch, who wasat Price’s headquarters in the center, had any cause to suspect thatLyon had even left Springfield.19At the other end of the pincers movement, the redbearded Lyon,on the iron-gray horse which had been a familiar sight in the streetsof Springfield, rode through the thickets on the other side of a ridgefrom Rains’s camp, making his dispositions. This was the ridge ofBloody Hill, and he ordered Captain James Totten, his battery com¬mander, to place his guns atop the ridge, to cover the advance of theinfantry. Dubois’s battery he held in the rear, to cover a possible82 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsflank attack by McCulloch’s and Hebert’s Confederates, who wereon the other side of the creek. The outposts at Gibson’s Mill, half amile behind Lyon, had already been driven in; but the sound of theshots had not aroused Rains’s camp. In these hills and ravines, sounddid not travel far.But first, as a shield against McCulloch, Lyon sent the First U. S.Infantry, regular troops under Captain Plummer, across the creek,along with a battalion of German Home Guards. He instructedPlummer to prevent, at all costs, the Confederates on the other sideof the creek—Hebert’s Louisianans, together with some Texas andArkansas troops—from recrossing the creek and coming to the aidof Rains. Lyon had Rains in a pocket, and he hoped to keep him there.For the direct assault on Rains’s camp he picked the First MissouriVolunteers (holding back two companies, including that of CaryGratz, to support Dubois) and the First Kansas. The First Kansastoday would suffer a heavier loss than any other regiment in the CivilWar in a single engagement, with the exception of the First Maine andthe Eighth New York Artillery at Cold Harbor—losing 284 men of600. The Second Kansas Lyon also held in reserve, along with theFirst Iowa, state militia wearing resplendent gray uniforms whichwere to cause a great deal of misunderstanding during the battle. Theassault troops were to pick their way through the scrub oak thicket,down the slope of the hill leading to Rains’s camp, and on either sideof a deep ravine.Lyon gave the signal, the hands of the farm lads from Missouri andKansas tightened on their rifles, and they plunged silently into thebrush, slipping and sliding on the rocky shale of the hillside as theywent. Over their heads and across the ravine which separated them,Totten sent a shell screaming, followed by several more in quicksuccession. That burst of artillery was the opening gun of the Battleof Wilson’s Creek.The pandemonium in Rains’s camp as the shells whistled in isdescribed by Colonel James A. Pritchard, who led the first rally ofRains’s men, in these words: “We were surprised and aroused fromour tents by a discharge of grape and cannon ball from the enemy’sbatteries, planted on the hills around us. Our situation was in the forksand upon both sides of two creeks with high points all around us. Infact, if the enemy had picked the ground for us, they could not haveWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 83suited themselves better. We were almost completely surroundedbefore we knew it... while we were yet sleeping.” 20Although they were caught out of reach of their weapons, Pritchardwas able to assemble part of his battalion (which contradicts his state¬ment that all were sleeping) and he had the honor of attempting thefirst counterattack at Bloody Hill. It was a gallant but feeble effort; thepanic in Rains’s camp was complete. Colonel Snead, coming up withPrice’s forces as soon as the alarm had been given, says, “Looking up,we could see a great crowd on horseback, some armed, others un¬armed, mixed in with wagons and teams and led horses, all in dread¬ful confusion, scampering over the hill and rushing down toward us—a panic-stricken drove. In another instant, we saw the flash and heardthe report of Totten’s guns... not more than one thousand yardsaway, throwing shot into the flying crowd. And then, in quickresponse, came the sound of Sigel’s guns, as they opened uponChurchill, Greer, Major and Brown (in McBride’s sector) and drovethem in confusion out of the valley in which they were encampedand into the thick woods that fringed the banks of Skaggs’ Branch andcovered the hills that rose on either side of that little stream.” 21It was the last time Sigel’s guns were heard that day.Price, McCulloch, and the rest were fast moving their forces intobattle, despite the rout in Rains’s camp. McCulloch hurried to his owntroops east of the creek (Wilson’s Creek runs north and south) andthere he found himself in the most unpleasant situation in which acommander can find himself: he had the enemy both in his front andin his rear, Plummer on the north and Sigel on the south. He wascompletely in the dark as to how the situation with Sigel was develop¬ing; but seeing McBride’s men fleeing to the rear, he feared the worst.The truly remarkable speed with which Price whipped his Mis¬sourians into line at Wilson’s Creek undoubtedly saved the day atBloody Hill. Private Joseph A. Mudd, of Company B of the JacksonGuards, of Clark’s Division, says that “it could not have been morethan twenty minutes after Totten’s first cannon shot that we weremoving at quick step into the line of battle.... The infantry of Rainswas first on the field, and occupied the right of the Missouri forces.Considering our want of drill and real discipline, we got to the firingline in good shape and certainly lost not a minute in getting there.Some considerable time after the firing began McBride’s men came upand completed our line on the left.” 2284 Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsWhen McBride’s men fell into line, Clark’s men laughed at theiroutlandish appearance. Even by the elastic standards of the PatriotArmy of Missouri they were a tatterdemalion crew; but PrivateMudd’s own commander, General Clark, was wearing a civilian blackslouch hat and overcoat over his uniform, and General Price himself,sitting his horse like a statue and watching the battle, presented anastonishing spectacle. He was wearing a linen duster and a high-crowned wool hat over his major general’s uniform of gray jacket andstriped, light blue pants.There has never been, perhaps, a battle which looked exactly likethe Battle of Wilson’s Creek.Price and Rains, once their men were in line, determined upon adouble strategy: since their men would do their best work at shortrange, with the shotguns and single loaders, they would wait for theFederal infantry attack, throw it back if possible, and turn the enemy’sflank on their left, with 800 of the cavalry. Captain Jo Shelby hadridden up now, along with the rest, and with as many of his LafayetteCounty Cavalry as he could find. Rains gave the horsemen their orders.As soon as the enemy’s infantry opened fire, they were to attack on theleft and in the rear of Totten, dashing up the crest of the hill to do so.The Federal attack came soon enough, and with it began the fightingfor Bloody Hill. Colonel Snead says it was so quiet along the linethat “in a few minutes the word Forward! was plainly heard, and wasquickly followed by the tramp of men, and by the crackling of thebrush through which they were coming. When Lyon’s Missouriansand their allies had come within easy reach of Price’s Missourians,out of the ranks of the latter there rang upon the air the sharp clickof a thousand rifles, the report of a thousand shotguns, and the roar ofGuibor’s guns; the battle of Wilson’s Creek had begun in earnest.” 23As the shotguns roared, the cavalry made a futile dash against BloodyHill. In his report Captain Totten describes the debacle: “The enemytried to overwhelm us by an attack of some 800 cavalry, which had,unobserved, formed below the crests of the hills to our right andrear. Fortunately, some of our infantry companies and a few pieces ofartillery from my battery were in a position to meet this demonstra¬tion, and drove off their cavalry with ease. This was the only demon¬stration made by their cavalry, and it was so effete and ineffectual asto deserve only the appellation of child’s play. Their cavalry is utterlyworthless on the battlefield.” 24 It was, on such a battlefield as this.Wilson’s Creek: The Face of War 85The Battle of Wilson’s Creek, fought as it was throughout, in ahilly jungle with shotguns, bayonets, bowie knives, horse pistols,squirrel rifles, derringers, and the like, was one of the great infantrybattles of all time. In a war in which the cavalry mostly got the glory,Wilson’s Creek stands as an imperishable memorial to the valor of thefootsoldier. Let the cavalry dismount now, and go forward with theshotguns and the rifles, the homemade bayonets, into the brush. Noroom here for gallant sorties executed with the precision of the paradeground. The Missouri hemp grower, the Arkansas traveler, theLouisiana swamp trotter, and the “huckleberry cavalry” alike mustwin their spurs on foot today.Jo Shelby, whose gallant horse had struggled forward with the rest,was learning his trade in a rough, sure school. At Carthage he had seenwhat cavalry could be made to do, and at Wilson’s Creek he sawwhat it could not be made to do. He was also learning that a farmeron horseback is not a cavalryman, and that having cavalry withoutartillery is like having fingers without thumbs. From the day that hestepped into a cavalry command, he was never without his artillery,or far from it.The repulse of the cavalry at Bloody Hill passed almost unnoticed.Drifting clouds of smoke added to the concealment of the participants,and the August sun scarcely penetrated the gloom. The line writhedback and forth like a wounded snake. The rebel yell was not heard atWilson’s Creek; both sides went about their work in deadly silence.“The lines would approach again and again within fifty yards of eachother, and then, after delivering a deadly fire, each would fall back afew paces to re-form and reload only to advance again, and again, inthis strange battle of the woods. Peculiar in all its aspects, strange inall its surroundings, unique in every way, the most remarkable wasthe deep silence which now and then rested upon the smoking field-fell upon it, and rested there undisturbed for many minutes, while thetwo armies, unseen of each other, lay but a few yards apart, gatheringstrength to grapple again in the death struggle for Missouri.” 25 Buck¬shot is fearful at close range, and a cannon ball, when it makes a directhit, can cut a man in two. Homemade bullets sometimes flatten outharmlessly, even against a Dutchman’s shirt, but a jagged bayonetmakes a terrible wound, and the jack oaks in the underbrush are redas sumac with the blood of boys from Iowa and Kansas, from the86Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsMissouri River Valley and the Ozarks. There are shrieks from thedying, and the moans of the wounded, but those who are whole fighton, careful to make no sound. Survival is at stake today. On both sidesmen hunt one another like deer, and fall upon one another like dogson a grounded possum. It is anybody’s battle so far.It is now mid-morning, and still no word from Sigel. Lyon, who iseverywhere in the fight, feels a sting on the side of his face; he has beenstruck by flying canister, and blood streams down his cheeks. But hescorns the brandy which Totten offers him, and orders him to take hisbattery forward to the support of the First Missouri Volunteers, whoare faltering. The First Missouri has sweated today, and there is nofault to find with them, but they must hold.The rebels have seen the First Missouri’s sign of weakness too, andsomebody hoists a Secession flag, perhaps with the idea of leading acharge; but a man on horseback has a better idea. Somewhere he hasgot a Federal flag, and he holds it aloft as his comrades renew theirbutchery upon the First Missouri. For a moment, Totten is deceived(Sigel’s troops are expected from that direction), but only for a mo¬ment. At the same moment Captain Cary Gratz has spotted the rebelcarrying the Stars and Stripes, and a red choler of indignation rises inhis handsome face. Benjamin Gratz’s son breaks through the line, pistolin hand, rushes up to the enemy, and shoots down the Missourian whois carrying the flag. Before he can rescue it, he himself has fallen,caught in a crossfire of bullets. Five of them enter his body and he isdead on the instant.26Something bad has happened to Sigel, Lyon knows. It is now twoor three hours since his guns have been heard. That brisk cannonadinga few minutes ago was McCulloch, on the other side of the creek,fighting like a demon.Where is Sigel! It is not longer a question, but an oath.As a matter of fact, Sigel has been routed by McCulloch and is outof the battle. Fie has been guilty, once again, of the incredibly badjudgment which he displayed at Carthage. A European, he knows nomore of how to fight Missourians than Braddock knew of fightingIndians; but even that does not excuse him, because he has done noth¬ing since he broke up McBride’s camp at daybreak; and he hasallowed McCulloch to capture his artillery and put his men to flightWilson’s Creek: The Face of War 87without firing a round of ammunition. Through his failure to supportLyon, and with his dummkopf conclusions, he has lost the Battle ofWilson’s Creek.The fantastic sequence of events was this: when Sigel scatteredMcBride, he simply sat down and waited for Lyon to drive theSoutherners into his arms.27 This gave McCulloch a chance to smashPlummer’s Home Guards, unmolested, on his side of the creek, al¬though Sigel’s guns were in his rear and Sigel could have blown himinto the water at any time. The enemy in front of him routed, Mc¬Culloch turned his attention to Sigel. But Sigel’s Teutons, seeing theConfederate uniforms, mistook them for the First Iowa, and waved aFederal flag in welcome. As they did so, McCulloch opened on themwith two batteries. “It is impossible for me,” Sigel says, “to describethe consternation and frightful confusion caused by this unfortunateevent.”The artillerymen could not be brought forward to serve their pieces;a galling infantry fire poured into them, and every one of their artilleryhorses was killed. They fled in panic, “followed and attacked inces¬santly by large bodies of Texas and Arkansas cavalry.” Every one ofSigel’s guns was captured, and all of his stores. The rout was complete,and none of his troops were seen on the battlefield again that day.McCulloch wheeled about and marched to join Price.Back at Bloody Hill the wounded Lyon dashed once more on hisiron-gray horse to the support of a faltering regiment. It was the FirstIowa this time, which had already caused so much trouble today. AsLyon galloped toward the enemy, a bullet struck him squarely inthe breast and just beside the heart. Like Jeb Stuart at Yellow Tavern,he toppled from his horse into the arms of an orderly, but unlikeStuart he was dead when he fell. The enemy’s wave swept over them,and the orderly fled. The Southerners had not realized the identity ofthe pocket-sized redhead on the gray horse; his body was identifiedafterward only by papers in his pockets.With Sigel out of it, Lyon dead, and all of the Missouri and Con¬federate forces massed against Sturgis, who had succeeded Lyon,there could be but one outcome. About half past midday, after thefight had raged for more than seven hours, Sturgis gave the order fora general retreat, so that the sun went down with victory for theSoutherners on the battlefield of Wilson’s Creek. They did not call it88Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsby that name. They called it the Battle of Oak Hills, just as BullRun, in the South, was known as First Manassas.Postmaster Ray, still sitting on his porch, was impressed into serviceby the Confederates to help guard prisoners, when the last of theenemy had vanished. As soon as the body of Lyon was identified, itwas taken to the Ray home, where the family had emerged from thecellar. There it was placed upon a bed and covered with a counterpane.General Rains, his surgeon, Dr. Melchior, and other high-rankingofficers came into the room for a look at the dead Federal commander.Rains lifted the counterpane from the white face, so pale against thered beard. As he did so, Mrs. Roxanna Ray burst into sobs.General Rains’s nerves were battle-taut, tingling with the exhilara¬tion of victory, and perhaps with something else, for he liked hisdram and the day had been a trying one. As he dropped the counter¬pane, he turned to his officers and said, in a tone of astonishment,“She weeps because the roaring Lyon is dead!” 289. A Star Added, a State LostSo far all the fighting had been in favor of the Southerners.Sterling Price knew that nothing succeeds like success, and al¬though he could not persuade McCulloch to join him,1 he determinedto occupy the Missouri River Valley and raise the 50,000 men thatGovernor Jackson had called for. As he moved his wagon trains,loaded with Federal rifles and Sigel’s captured artillery, into Springfield,he ordered Captain Shelby back to the Missouri River with instructionsto “recruit, and annoy the enemy in every possible manner, and keepalive the spirit of resistance by constant and unceasing efforts.” 2Glad to be back in the saddle, Shelby and his men rode off to Lafay¬ette County again, while McCulloch’s Confederates, their brand-newuniforms grimy and bloodstained, moved out toward the CherokeeNation to defend the territory of a few red men who knew nothingabout the white man’s war except that they disliked all white menimpartially.After a hundred and twenty miles of hard riding, Shelby and hisA Star Added, a State Lost 89men fought victorious skirmishes with the Home Guards at Dover,six miles from Lexington, at Tabo Creek and at Salt Fork, in a seriesof whirlwind assaults which brought Federal Lieutenant ColonelWhite riding out again from Lexington in a belated attempt to assem¬ble a single force with which to waylay him. But better men thanColonel White were to try that with Shelby, and Major Edwardssays, “Baffling all operations inaugurated for his destruction, CaptainShelby thus early gave assurances of those wonderful attributes ofgenius, intrepidity and activity which were so eminently displayedduring a later period of the struggle. Constantly in the saddle, attack¬ing at strange and sudden hours, now cutting off the pickets and againcapturing unwary foragers, his movements defied calculation and en¬gendered the greatest fear and hatred, for then the virtues of a manlyfoe were scarcely appreciated.” 3 Shelby was being called every¬thing from a brigand to a guerrilla by Union officers and sym¬pathizers, though he was at some pains to let Colonel White knowdifferently.4When his activities of the day in harassing the Federals had notcarried him too far afield, Shelby slept in his own bed at Waverlyand visited his neighbors freely while carrying on his recruiting activ¬ities. Waverly, the redhot rebel town, was getting ready to honorGeneral Price with banners hung from the windows of the news¬paper office 5 and the front porches of the citizens’ homes.Price, after a few weeks of drilling, recruiting, and furloughing hisveterans at Springfield, moved on Lexington. The town by now wasgarrisoned by a force of Chicago Irish under Colonel James A. Mul¬ligan, known inevitably as the Irish Brigade, and two regiments ofIllinois and Missouri volunteers. Mulligan’s total force numbered 2,780men, and he stood very little chance alone against Price, who had4,500. There were 50,000 Federal soldiers in the Department of theWest at the time, and a week should have been enough to gatheran army at Lexington, via steamboat to its wharves, which wouldhave annihilated Price; but in the confusion created by John CharlesFremont’s conduct of his affairs in St. Louis, it was not done.Enforcements for Price, on the other hand, were arriving fromevery direction, some of them scattering enemy forces en route.Shelby was already at Lexington when his superior, General Rains,arrived and occupied a position east and northeast of the town. Withhim was Hiram Bledsoe, promoted since Carthage to the rank of90Campaign of the Missouri State Guardscolonel, and Old Sacramento, now known as “the ogs gannon” eversince a blue-coated Dutch artillerist at Wilson’s Creek, seeking therange of Bledsoe’s masked battery in the underbrush, had shouted,“Vare iss der man mit der ogs gannon?” In addition, Bledsoe’s bat¬tery now had several pieces of captured Federal field pieces withammunition to fit.Mulligan, wondering why he had been deserted, sent out twocouriers in an effort to break through to the Federal commander atSedalia—he bore the unlikely name of Colonel Jeff C. Davis—butShelby’s scouts picked them up, and from them learned somethingof conditions inside Mulligan’s lines. Mulligan intended to fight, andhe expected to be reinforced, but if he were not, he would be forcedto surrender when he ran out of food and water.After five days of preparation, during which he occupied the fair¬grounds of Lexington, Price was ready. Mulligan had also been busy,constructing around the Masonic College in Lexington “a redan ofgreat strength, with embrasures, parapets and a banquette for barbetteguns.” Just inside the Federal entrenchments, near the wharf, stoodthe residence of Colonel Oliver Anderson, Howard Gratz’s father-in-law. A hospital flag waved above the familiar red brick house.Down at the dock was a Federal gunboat.On all sides of the town was Price’s Missouri army. Its appearancehad not improved during its stay at Springfield. Typical of its bush¬rangers was the Ozarkian described by a newspaper correspondentas wearing a bright green silk shirt—a shining target on any battlefield—and having bowie knives in his boots. But if the Southerners’ ap¬pearance had not improved, their weapons had. From Wilson’s Creekon, the U. S. Army was their quartermaster department. At Lexingtonthey were ready to hurl Fremont’s ammunition back at him, or ratherat his neglected aide, Colonel Mulligan.On Wednesday morning, September 18, 1861, Price ordered anassault of artillery and infantry on all quarters of the town. As hismen fought their way into the streets from the fairgrounds, shots werefired at them from the direction of the Anderson house, over whichthe hospital flag still waved. They charged, and took possession ofthe mansion, but were driven out again in a few minutes. All Lex¬ington shook with the roar and thunder of the guns, and the firstday’s fighting ended in a stalemate.Mulligan’s Irish fought bravely that day, and again on the follow-A Star Added, a State Lost9iing day when the attack was renewed. It went on for three days, theFederals ringed in what soon became a little inferno within the wallsof their fortifications. An unidentified newspaper writer who wit¬nessed the siege says: “So accurate was the aim of the [Southern]sharpshooters that a man, a head or a cap shown for a single instantabove the works was sure to be saluted with fifty balls that neverwent many inches from the mark.” 6Receiving news that General Sturgis had disembarked troops fromthe Hannibal & St. Joseph Railway at Utica, forty miles away, forthe relief of Lexington, Price transported 2,000 men to the northside of the Missouri River to intercept him, using the lone Federalgunboat which had been tied up at the dock, and which his men hadcaptured on the first day of the siege. With Price’s men on bothsides of the river, Lexington was now encircled like a pioneer’s wagonin an Indian attack. As Major Edwards says, “No brilliant fightingwas necessary, and none, therefore, was attempted.”Mulligan’s situation was desperate. His men were nearly out offood and water, and the hospital, with its wounded and dying, hadbecome a house of horrors. In their assault on the Anderson house,during which they had held it briefly, Price’s men had captured Mul¬ligan’s only surgeon, and attempts to get him back, through an ex^change, had proved futile. As a result, badly wounded men died forlack of surgical attention. Mulligan said in a newspaper interviewlater, “It was terrible... to see those brave fellows mangled andwounded, without skilfull hands to bind their ghastly wounds. Cap¬tain Moriarty of the Irish Brigade, who had been in civil life a phy¬sician, was ordered to lay aside his sword and go into the hospital.He went, and through all the siege worked among the wounded withno instrument other than a razor. The suffering in the hospital washorrible—the wounded and mangled men dying for thirst, frenziedlywrestling for the water in which the bleeding stumps of mangledlimbs had been washed, and drinking it with horrible avidity.” 7A hospital nurse volunteered to go with a bucket to the spring onwhich the Federals’ water supply depended. This meant running thegauntlet of the rebel fire, but Mulligan, knowing that the sight of agirl would make a silent appeal to the chivalry of the Missourians,let her go. Not a shot was fired at her. The rebels waved their hatsand cheered the nameless heroine.8 When she was safely back, theyresumed their methodical, murderous fire.992 Campaign of the Missouri State GuardsOn the third day, Price hit upon a device for ending the siegewithout further heavy loss of life. There were a large number ofhemp bales lying on the wharf, some of them no doubt from theropewalk of Colonel Oliver Anderson, and on the morning of Sep¬tember 20, Price ordered them to be thoroughly soaked in the muddywaters of the river, to prevent their catching fire, and rolled themup the hill to the plain surrounding Mulligan’s fortifications. He thenorder a direct assault upon the town.State Guardsmen with hooks rolled the bales forward, while theriflemen in the rear advanced under their protection. Mulligan’s Celts,red-eyed, dry-throated, but still defiant, gazed in amazement as theysaw in front of them, on the morning of the 20th, an undulating,advancing wall of hemp bales, looking for all the world like a MissouriRiver wharf being shaken by an earthquake. First came the startledfire of the riflemen inside their parapets, ineffective against the hempbales; then the crackling of the Southerners’ small arms as they ad¬vanced safely within close range; and quickly Price’s men swarmedover the parapets, driving in the Federals with the bayonet, andbreaching a gap in the fortifications for their comrades in the rearto pour through.The battering-down siege of Lexington thus resolved itself againinto street fighting for the town, but this time the weakened defenders,greatly outnumbered, could not halt their foe. Major Becker of Mul¬ligan’s command—he was not an Irishman but one of the St. LouisDutch—ran up a white flag, without asking permission of Mulligan,and this momentarily halted the firing. General Price, who was inthe line, sent over a note to Mulligan under a flag of truce, asking,“Why has the firing ceased?” The reply came back, “General, Ihardly know, unless you have surrendered.” 10Although he ordered the white flag hauled down and the firingresumed, the jaunty Mulligan was whistling in the dark. His menran out of cartridges shortly afterward, and at three o’clock in theafternoon, as a sudden silence fell upon the Federal lines, Mulligansurrendered. But he was not able to surrender his beautiful new sword,a recent gift, when he met General Price. One of his men had stolenit for a souvenir.11Price was again master in Lexington, but again he could not staythere. He invited Colonel Mulligan, who would not accept parole,to drive with him about Lexington in his carriage; the LexingtonA Star Added, a State Lost93Brass Band played “Dixie,” and “Listen to the Mockingbird,” twobrand-new songs; but it was soon evident that although Missouri’sheart might be with the South, her interests, in the Missouri RiverValley at least, were still involved with those of the North. As soonas it became known that the Union garrison of 2,600 men had sur¬rendered, there was a rush of the chivalry to volunteer; but they wereconditional volunteers, just as they had been conditional Union men.“They were with us,” says Colonel J. F. Snyder, one of Price’s sur¬geons, “but first they must return home to arrange their businessaffairs, and set their house in order.” 12 There was also such a rushof chronic office seekers that Price set extra guards over the stairwayleading to his headquarters, which were over a photography shop, tokeep them out.13As McCulloch had pointed out, occupation of the Missouri RiverValley meant a supply line hundreds of miles long for the Secessionforces and the certainty of attack by Federal forces several timesthe size of their own. Pope was in Price’s rear, reportedly with 10,000troops; Sigel at Sedalia was said to have 10,000; General DavidHunter at Versailles, another 10,000; and Generals Sturgis and Lanein Kansas each a third of that number.Price’s activities in the invasion corridor leading from the Ozarksto Lexington and the Missouri River Valley had served to arouseLincoln to the necessity of concentrating an overwhelming forceagainst the rebels. If Jefferson Davis and his government had noplans for Missouri, the lean, gaunt man in the White House had. Thecampaign which Blair and Lyon had begun so splendidly had boggeddown under the showy and incompetent Fremont, and Lincoln or¬dered him to repair the delay at once.14Acknowledging the realities of the situation, Price gave the orderto fall back upon Springfield. Shelby’s company, as usual, was inthe van of the cavalry which escorted the 8,000 men and their wagontrains southward, through country swarming with Federals. At theOsage River Price halted long enough to build flatboats to cross theriver, and then moved into Neosho.There the legislature had assembled in response to Governor Jack¬son’s call—one hundred per cent Secessionist of course—to ratify hisdeclaration of August 5 and put an Ordinance of Secession on thebooks. On October 28, after Price had passed through, the legisla¬ture passed the ordinance and set in motion the machinery for apply-94 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsing for statehood in the Southern Confederacy. This must wait onthe action of the Confederate Congress; hence E. C. Cabell andColonel Thomas Snead were dispatched to Richmond to concludean interim alliance with the Confederate government. This they did,with all the formalities of treaty-making, and thus between October28 and November 28, when the Confederate Congress acted, Missouriwas a military ally of the Southern Confederacy and the only sover¬eign nation (except the Indian nations) ever to become one.Whether the rump session at Neosho had any authority to act isbeside the point. The importance of the Neosho legislature’s actionwas that it added to the armed forces of the Confederacy 40,000 menwho fought on both sides of the Mississippi until 1865.By the time that Price reached Springfield, Fremont’s columnswere so close on his heels that he continued on into the country—intothe neighborhood of Pineville and Cassville, whence the Patriot Armyhad started out for Wilson’s Creek last August. There was indecisivefighting on the battlefield of Wilson’s Creek itself, and Fremont’stroops finally entered Springfield in a manner concerning which thereare conflicting accounts.15 But a letter from Lincoln caught up withhim, and he was relieved of command. Lincoln was thoroughly dis¬gusted with this general who never fought a battle,16 and in his placeappointed General David Hunter, who never fought one either.It had been Price’s intention to lure Fremont, whose measure hebelieved he had taken, back into the Ozarks and there fight in thebushwhacker style in which the Missourians excelled. Hunter, how¬ever, had no intention of allowing Price to pick either the time orthe place of a fight; furthermore, on assuming command, he foundhis army in such a state of demoralization that he determined to fallback on Rolla once more and reorganize. The cause of this demorali¬zation lay deep in the office politics with which Fremont had con¬ducted his department, and which does not concern us here, but theGermans were mutinous over the dismissal of Fremont,17 and theGermans formed a majority of Hunter’s army. Added to that, winterwas coming on, in bleak, hostile country, and Hunter had no stomachfor any of it. Back he went to Rolla, where Generals Curtis and Sigelwould take over in the spring. An indication of the power of theGermans in the Union army was that, no matter what he did, no¬body could get rid of Sigel.A Star Added, a State Lost95Thus the military seesaw in Missouri teetered back and forth, andat the end of the year 1861 the situation was exactly where it hadbeen at midsummer, except that the Southern forces, instead of beinga few miles south of Springfield, were now in occupation of it. Pricemoved his campsite to near-by Osceola for a month. He now had anew task, that of separating the sheep from the goats in his army:those who were willing to be mustered into the Confederate service,now that Missouri was a Confederate state, and those who were goinghome when their terms of enlistment expired.It is a tribute to the popularity of Price and the persuasive powerof his recruiting officers, such as Jo Shelby, that most of the Mis¬sourians enlisted under the banner of the C.S.A., although grum-blingly. They would have preferred to fight under the blue merinoflag and the Two Bears of Missouri, and they were suspicious ofservice outside the state. They also felt that they had been misjudgedand treated coldly by the Confederacy, chiefly in the person ofMcCulloch. Barefoot and in rags, as they saw it, they had wonvictory after victory only to see the fruits of those victories lostthrough failure of Confederate cooperation; but now that “Old Pap”Price told them to enlist, they did so, although some of them re¬marked pointedly that they were not going to serve under anybodyelse except Old Pap.As soon as he settled down at Osceola, Price sent Shelby again tothe Missouri River Valley. That grueling hundred-and-twenty-mileride into the heart of enemy country was becoming as familiar tohis company as the parson’s path to church on Sunday morning. Thesewere no pleasure jaunts. As Major Joseph Mills Hanson, the cavalryauthority, says in the United States Cavalry Journal, “In the inter¬vals between battles Shelby and his company returned three timesto Lafayette County in the hope of recruiting a regiment-Fewmen were gathered, but every one of these expeditions to the MissouriRiver was a nightmare of danger and exertion which none but thehardiest could endure. For days and nights the raiders marched, al¬most without rest, hunted on every side by hostile columns; snatch¬ing a few brief moments with kindred and friends when the homecountry was reached, and fighting there to wrest from the enemythe arms, equipment and ammunition to replenish exhausted stocksand supply recruits. Then by similar nerve-straining marches theymade their way back over rough and obscure roads, beset by foes96 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsstill more thoroughly aroused, to arrive in Arkansas on their last ounceof strength.” 18Back in the Waverly countryside, Shelby returned to the enjoy¬able occupation of persecuting the Federals in their garrisons, althoughas one chronicler says of his activities throughout this period, includ¬ing the battle of Lexington, “a great deal of powder... was wastedwith no effect other than the effect of keeping the excitement atfever heat on both sides.” 19 Not until he donned the uniform of aConfederate colonel and assumed command of his own regiment andbrigade, did Shelby emerge as a figure of consequence in the War inthe West.Recruits multiplied through the winter of 1861-62, that grim sea¬son when the North, aroused at last to the fact that a large-scale warwas inevitable, made ready to attack the South in earnest. Shelby re¬mained secure at Waverly during the months when the Missouri ispractically un-navigable, but by February he was again headed southon the exhausting march he had made six times, and with him, thistime, rode Betsy and the two little boys, in a Confederate armyambulance.20Through roads rutted with winter, filled with snow, and bitter withthe cold of the western mountains, Shelby pushed his little company.Others, such as Jake Stonestreet, his boyhood friend from Kentucky,also had brought their families along, jostled in Confederate armyambulances.21 For the tenderly reared Betty it must have been anordeal, with two small children and no small apprehension for thefuture. She was leaving behind her every worldly possession, a finehome, a magnificent farm, a life of ease, forever. Ahead lay the roughlife of a rebel army camp, and at the end of the road, perhaps thewidowhood of the battlefield. It was an exile into hardships such asnot even her pioneer Shelby ancestors had faced; and it was madedoubly bitter by her husband’s estrangement from his family inKentucky.But like many Southern women of delicate, flower-like beauty,Betty Shelby had the stamina of a plainswoman and the iron will ofthe Shelbys in her tiny person. It was not for nothing that the bloodof the Vikings flowed in her veins.22 Where her husband was, therewould she be. From the day she wore his ring, she followed himalways, and her faith in him was indestructible. Nevertheless, as theambulance creaked and jolted along the road in the gray, icy, formlessA Star Added, a State Lost97world which enveloped her in the foothills of the Ozarks, that faithmust have received a severe testing. When the babies cried and therations were inedible, when the wind whistled through the flappingcanvas of the ambulance, the bright hearth at Waverly must haveseemed a dim dream of heaven, and the Adissouri on a summer’s dayas distant as the river Jordan.Billy Hunter was there, too,23 riding with upturned collar in thecold and keeping a watchful eye on the ambulance, when he was notriding at his master’s side. When the boys whimpered too much, hecould comfort the younger one or shame the older out of his tears,and he waited on his master and mistress hand and foot; but for thestaunch black boy this was a comedown, too. No more a warm bedin clean quarters in the rear of a mansion house; no more starchedshirts to lay out, no boots to shine, no fine horses to curry; poor food,poor country, and poor white trash for company. But like the boss’slady, where the boss was, there was Billy Hunter also. He followedhis master through most of the war, and when the years had bowedhim down, he led his master’s horse to a soldier’s grave in KansasCity. Like all those whom Jo Shelby bound to himself with hoopsof steel, the bond slave followed him to the end, long after he wasno longer bond, but free.They reached Price at Springfield, and the greetings must havebeen warm. Shelby had done yeoman work in Lafayette County;Price had recommended him for a colonelcy. But there were moreurgent matters afoot. Abraham Lincoln had placed Adajor GeneralH. W. Halleck, a tough and irritable old warhorse, in command ofthe Department of the West, and General George B. McClellan,before going east to assume command of the Army of the Potomac,had sent peremptory orders into every corner of the Northwest forregiments to take Missouri.24 Three columns of a formidable armyunder General Curtis, who had replaced the timorous Hunter, wereon the way to Springfield, which was an untenable military position,and the sun of March would soon dry up the roads. Price would fallback upon Cross Hollows, Arkansas, and there join AdcCulloch.Scouts had already brought in news of Curtis. This Federal com¬mander, approaching from Bolivar, had 8,000 men, 51 pieces of artil¬lery, and a wagon train big enough for an army four times as large.25That army was expected soon to join him as the regiments poured98 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsin from Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, andeven a few renegades from Arkansas.The First Missouri Confederate Brigade, which literally fought it¬self out of existence before the end of the war, on both sides of theMississippi, was given the task of covering Price’s retreat. It wasknown that General James H. Lane headed one of Curtis’s columns,and was aiming to prevent Price’s movement to Arkansas. This wasthe hated Jim Lane, the Kansas Redleg, jayhawker chieftain, andveteran of the Border Wars. At Dug Springs, just off the old battle¬field of Wilson’s Creek, his cavalry became obtrusive and Shelbyand the rest of Rains’s mounted riflemen struck them with fury, sothat their horses bolted away as if they had been lashed with a cat-o’-nine-tails. At Crane Creek a general engagement seemed imminent,for Lane’s forced march had brought up the main body of his troops.Price’s skirmishers were able to delay the enemy at nightfall, sothat Price had a full day to reach Cassville, where he would have aclear escape route into Arkansas. An icy sleet pelted him all daylong, and the wind, which never stopped as it blew from the moun¬tains into the foothills, was biting cold; but on the night of February15, he crossed Flat Creek for the last time—he had crossed and re¬crossed it seventeen times in one day in his tortuous twistings to avoidLane—and fell back upon Cassville.There was still a little skirmishing left in Lane’s system, but onceagain the wily Pap had escaped, and Lane’s skirmishers knew it; soperhaps their hearts were not much in it. But they tried a few shotsat Sugar Creek, received a withering response from the First MissouriConfederates, and retired in confusion.On the 17th Captain Shelby led Rains’s advance into McCulloch’scamp at Cross Hollows. The clothing of the Missouri Confederateswas frozen stiff as so many boards; the hands that gripped theirmuskets were blue, and there was not a crust of bread in the entirearmy of 8,000. Yet Price’s achievement had been remarkable. Withno government to direct him, no superior to whom to report, noweapons except those which he provided for himself, and no com¬missary to send him supplies, he had maintained a Missouri army intactfor six months, with no help, and delivered it to the Southern Confed¬eracy single-handed. And although his men were out of food whenthey reached Cross PIollows, it was no beggarly army of camp fol¬lowers that he joined to McCulloch’s regiments. He had 8,000 bayonetA Star Added, a State Lost99guns, one for each man, 50 pieces of artillery, 400 tents, and a wagontrain full of useful equipment from the prodigal stores of the Federals.For the Shelby children McCulloch’s camp was a wonderland ofstrange sights. It was not unlike a county fair on a grand scale, withflags, drums, music, Indians, soldiers, and horses. The Indians weresoldiers, too, of Colonel Stand Watie’s Choctaw regiment, but noone would have known it from the clothes they were wearing. Al¬though General Albert Pike had ordered 13,000 new uniforms forthe Confederacy’s Indian allies, and some of them had already arrived,not a single Indian was to receive one. Shortly after Price’s armyarrived, the former Missouri Patriot Army was clad in splendid newConfederate uniforms, while the Indians, for whom they had beenordered, were still wearing blankets, moccasins, odd shirts and pants,and hats with a feather sticking out of them. General Pike, who hadbeen at the greatest pains to obtain regulation uniforms for his Chero-kees, realizing their psychological value in cementing the alliance be¬tween the Indian Nation and the Confederacy, was fighting mad overthis amiable brigandage; he complained loudly to Adjutant GeneralCooper in Richmond, but by the time Richmond officialdom gotaround to reviewing the charges, Price’s men were across the Mis¬sissippi, fighting at Corinth, wearing Pike’s uniforms.26 There was nodoubt about the need of uniforms for Price’s men, and the Missourianswere all agreed that there was no use wasting good new ones onignorant savages.The fortunes of war had brought Price and McCulloch togetheragain as co-equal commanders, but the hostility between the two wasnow so deep that there was no hope of their acting in concert. Pricerealized this as soon as he talked with McCulloch at Cross Hollows;he remained one day in McCulloch’s camp and then moved a littlesouth to establish his own, at Cove Creek, where some cabins couldbe had and others could be built.From Cove Creek Price wrote to Major General Earl Van Dorn,the commander of the entire Trans-Mississippi Department of theConfederacy, and laid the case before him. He had stepped downonce before for McCulloch, but he would not do so again, and ratherthan ask preferment for himself he suggested that General Van Dornassume personal command of the two armies, with a view to retakingMissouri from the Federals. It was on this rock, of course, that heioo Campaign of the Missouri State Guardsand McCulloch had always split. McCulloch did not believe it couldbe done.Van Dorn, who knew something of the Price-McCulloch feud andof course was aware of the disasters which it had already caused,thought Price’s suggestion a good one, and he came up from Poca¬hontas, Arkansas, to weld the two armies into one and attack theenemy. This he did, on March 6, at Pea Ridge, or Elkhorn Tavern.But the plague of incompetent commanders in the Confederate De¬partment of the Trans-Mississippi had begun. Van Dorn was the first.With the splendid army now at his command,27 he whipped Curtisso thoroughly that he was sitting in Curtis’s headquarters at ElkhornTavern the next night; but with the psychopathic fear which afflictedevery man who ever commanded in his department, except Magruder,he ordered his troops to retreat from a field on which they had beenvictorious.The Battle of Pea Ridge was fought along lines similar to those ofWilson’s Creek, with the positions reversed. The main body of theFederals was divided into three separate camps. Curtis was comfort¬ably ensconced around Elkhorn Tavern, where he set up his head¬quarters; Sigel was at Fayetteville, not far from the scene of hisdebacle at Wilson’s Creek. Van Dorn’s original idea was to drive awedge between Sigel and Curtis, but Sigel was too fast for him. Hehad already occupied a strong position at Bentonville when he wasattacked, and his infantry and artillery drove off a thrust by the Con¬federate cavalry under McIntosh. By nightfall the Federal forceswere joined at Elkhorn Tavern.28There was a rough country road, eight miles long, leading to theFederal rear, and Price, after making an abortive attack similar toMcIntosh’s, decided to march by darkness into the rear of the enemy.Curtis had blockaded the road, and apparently was not worried aboutit; but when the sun had been up a few hours he realized that OldPap and the veterans of Bloody Hill were in his rear, on the onlyroad leading northward. Although the forces of Curtis and Sigel out¬numbered the Southern troops, they were nevertheless menaced onall sides by the smaller force, precisely as the Confederates had beenat Wilson’s Creek.With forty or more pieces of artillery, and an army flushed withrecent victory, Price was able first to lay down a barrage whichlasted for hours, and then drive his Missourians in a smashing chargeA Star Added, a State LostIOIinto the enemy’s center—Curtis’s. Curtis’s men gave way, his flank¬ing movements were mowed down, and the triumphant, yelling Mis¬sourians drove in everything in sight for two and a half miles. Rainsand Shelby were in this swarming mass as it careened across corn¬fields and into heavy timber; Shelby fought on horseback when hecould and dismounted his men, as at Wilson’s Creek, when he couldnot. Rains singled him out for special mention once again at PeaRidge. In his report, he said, ‘‘Captain Shelby acted with his welldrilled company during the day with Colonel Gates, on the extremeleft, where he was much exposed and did efficient service. In theevening his men were dismounted and served under Lieutenant Colo¬nel Bowman in the gallant charge across the field.” 29The gallant charge across the field had won the battle in Curtis’ssector; but disaster had overtaken the Confederate and Indian regi¬ments under McCulloch. McCulloch was dead, and the confusionresulting from his death had lost the battle for the Southerners, inspite of all that Price and his Missourians had done. McCulloch, likePrice, had delivered a smashing attack on Sigel, dislodged him fromhis position, and captured three guns; but in the elation of victoryhe had ridden too far ahead of his own lines to reconnoitre. Duringthe battle he had doubled in the role of general and sharpshooter, aMaynard rifle slung over his shoulder. Now one of the enemy’s sharp¬shooters sighted him. One clean shot through the breast snuffed outhis life, and he toppled from his horse as Lyon had done at Wilson’sCreek. The victory that had been within the Confederates’ graspslipped away with the reins that fell from the dead hands of McCul¬loch. General Albert Pike, his second in command, was unequal tothe task of rallying the men and continuing the fight, as the sun wentdown, and his Indians proved worthless. They were good at scalp¬ing dead men, but the white man’s style of fighting did not appeal tothem. The dead McCulloch’s command was in such a state of de¬moralization that Van Dorn did not know what to do at first; butwhen it was pointed out to him that Sigel was now between him andone of his ammunition trains at Bentonville, he became panicky andordered the whole army to retreat from the field. The Afissouriansat first did not realize the nature of the movement they were beingordered to make; they had just defeated the enemy and they thoughtthey were being ordered to support McCulloch. Colonel John C.Moore says, “When they found the battle was ended and lost, they102 Campaign of the Missouri State Guardswere in the savagest of moods and almost mutinous in their criticismof their commanders.” General Rains says the same thing in dif¬ferent words: “The movement was reluctantly obeyed by the wholeof my command, as the enemy were then in sight and almost withinreach. On arriving at the old field and reporting to Major GeneralVan Dorn I was ordered by him to march on the road towards Hunts¬ville. For the first time I realized the fact—the fight was over; thevictory within our grasp was lost.” 30Confederate historians maintain that Curtis was considering sur¬render when Price and McCulloch surrounded him at Pea Ridge;it is impossible to say, but his first report, written just before he wasattacked, on the sixth of March, shows that he was jumpy and nervous.He had received intelligence that “20,000 to 30,000 fighting men”were converging on him, and he was separated from Sigel. “He [Sigel]was to march at 2 this morning... he must be nearby.” The weatherwas very cold, and it was snowing, but “We will give them the bestshow we can.” 31In the race for the most inept commanders, the Federals in Missouriwere not far behind the Confederates; but the Confederates wouldsoon so outclass them in this league that there would be no comparison.Van Dorn’s was a fair sample of Confederate generalship in the De¬partment of the Trans-Mississippi from the beginning. But it ismerciful to ring down the curtain on the scene at Pea Ridge. TheConfederates retreated, through the blood-stained snow, into the Bos¬ton Mountains of Arkansas, to Van Buren. There would be raids intoMissouri territory by Shelby, Marmaduke, and Price, raids that, inShelby’s case at least, would be feats of superhuman endurance, butnever again would Missouri soil form a base for Confederate opera¬tions, throughout the war. A star had been added to the Confederateflag, but a state had been lost.PART THREEShelby the Raider^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ JJU l^ ^ ^ i^ r^ ^ ^ ^ rl^< «-l^-» ^ i^ >J* <-^« ^ ^ ^ ^ ^10. A Colonel of the CavalryMISSOURI was gone, and the Confederacy, for all practicalpurposes, was now an island, or rather a great subcontinentbounded by the Atlantic and the Mississippi, the Potomacand the Gulf. As the snows melted in the Boston Mountains at VanBuren, Price was ordered with his 5,000 Confederates—all those whowere willing to go—across the Mississippi to meet a new threat, thatof the triumphant Grant marching down the Mississippi Valley intothe heartland of the Confederacy, after Shiloh. At Shiloh there hadbeen a blood-letting like that of Wilson’s Creek. Albert S. Johnstonhad been killed, and the Napoleonic Beauregard had fallen back intothe vicinity of Corinth and needed help.At Van Buren Jo Shelby and Betsy made plans. He must go withthe army, though it was disheartening to think that the LafayetteCounty Cavalry would be dismounted now and reduced to the statusof footsoldiers. Price made a spirited address to his troops urgingthem to follow him across the Mississippi. “I go,” he said, “but tomake a pathway to your homes.” 1 There was little alternative forShelby. The only fighting now was on the other side of the river,and he agreed to take his company to Corinth, but with the provisothat they be allowed to return to Missouri whenever they saw fit.2Already plans were forming in his mind for the rescue of Missouri.He had had eight months of service under every kind of conditionin the state, and he knew what must be done. In the vast distancesof the Trans-Mississippi, cavalry must accomplish whatever was tobe accomplished; but now his duty plainly was with the footsoldiers.Major Edwards says, “The cavalry were all dismounted, and Captain103104Shelby the RaiderShelby giving up his horses with alacrity, commenced the same daythe infantry drill, and when the hour of embarkation came, led hiscompany to a man upon the boat.” 3 He probably did not give uphis horses with alacrity, but he did give them up.Service east of the Mississippi meant an indefinite separation fromhis family. Betsy and the children would go back to Lafayette County,to the farm of their good friend Mrs. Rebecca Redd, whose four sonswere in the army. The Redd farm was near Dover, and Shelby wouldfight his way back to it, but for the rest of the war he never sawhis family more than fleetingly. The letters which he wrote his be¬loved Betsy, if any of them survive, are not available. The wholeworld has read the letters which the gallant Stuart wrote his wife,almost daily, from the Army of Northern Virginia; but only Betsyever read what Jo Shelby wrote from Memphis, “where the pleasantgolden days passed like a dream,” from the swamps upon the Tus-cumbia River around Corinth, “filled with enormous reptiles, whichfattened and grew upon the deadly miasma arising from ten thousanddank lagoons and stagnant bayous.” 4 We do not even know whetherhe accompanied her back to the friendly western country near Dover,but probably he did, for he was entitled to a furlough. At the Reddfarm they were welcomed by Mrs. Redd, “the matronly mother inIsrael” and friend of the Gratzes. Betsy and the children had founda safe haven until their departure for Kentucky in September, 1863.East of the Mississippi Shelby saw little service except when hisLafayette County neighbors spied some of General John Pope’s peopleand banged away at them. The fever struck Beauregard’s army andhe retreated from Corinth into the healthful woods around Tupelo,Mississippi. It must have been a fretful task for Shelby, who wasnever willing to spend a day in camp, to be assigned to guard abridge across the Tuscumbia River in a yellow fever bottom. Hebided his time impatiently. His commission as a captain in the Mis¬souri State Guards expired on June 10, 1862, and his commission asa Confederate colonel was lying on a desk in the War Departmentat Richmond; but there was a string attached. He must march athousand miles back into Missouri to recruit his own command, orhe would have none. That, however, was precisely what Shelbywanted: to return to Missouri and recruit. He knew where there were10,000 lean, hard fellows in the bush of central Missouri, and it wasinfinitely his preference to be given the opportunity which the Rich-A Colonel of the Cavalryio 5mond government was now giving him. That he should have had acolonelcy a year earlier there is not the slightest doubt; but it wasone of the failings of “Old Pap” Price from the beginning that heregarded Shelby as a “boy,” just as it was one of the failings of Jef¬ferson Davis that he could not see the military competence of com¬manders who were not West Point graduates. Davis would give theMissourians commissions, but not until they showed up at the headof regiments and brigades already formed. It was with the greatestreluctance that he had just been persuaded to give Price a commis¬sion as major general.5With the stars of a Confederate colonel not upon his collar butin front of his eyes, Shelby bade farewell to the eastern theatre ofthe war as soon as he received his authority from the War Depart¬ment to return to Missouri and recruit a regiment. When he left,there were 5,000 Missourians of the First and Second Missouri Con¬federate Brigades at Tupelo. They fought on every battlefield southof Virginia and east of the Mississippi, and there were only 800 ofthem when they surrendered at Fort Blakely on April 9, 1865—theday of Appomattox. As General Dabney H. Maury said of them afterthe Battle of Corinth, “it is no disparagement to any troops of theSouthern Confederacy... [to say] that the Missouri troops of theArmy of the West were not surpassed by any troops in the world.” 6Shelby and his men began their careers as raiders seated on thehard cushions of the railway “cars” leaving Tupelo. The little wood-burning engine of the train hauled them as far as Meridian, Missis¬sippi. From there, in the midst of country infested by the enemy,they must find their own way across the river. Edwards says, “Themarch to the Mississippi River was rapid and fatiguing. Fort Pillow,Memphis, and every town except Vicksburg and Port Hudson werein possession of the enemy, and the gauntlet had to be run by innu¬merable bodies of cavalry and a gigantic fleet of gunboats.” 7They reached the river exactly opposite Helena, a Federal bastionof the Mississippi north of Vicksburg on the west side of the river.Helena was the home of General Tom Hindman, who had succeededVan Dorn as commander-in-chief of the Confederate forces of theTrans-Mississippi, a tough, able soldier. But they could not call onGeneral Hindman. The town was occupied by the Federals. Theyhad converted the sleepy river port into a wicked-looking fortress ofio6 Shelby the Raidersharpened staves, and abattis of wooden spikes as sharp as bayonets,with artillery emplacements everywhere.As Shelby’s men approached the river they moved as noiselessly asIndian warriors on the trail—as noiselessly as the Cherokees and Choc¬taws whose fine gray uniforms they had been wearing ever since PeaRidge. When they reached the river they saw the trademark of theFederal occupation of the Mississippi, two grim-looking ironclads, onelying at Helena wharf and another a half mile upriver. Shelby andhis men camped in a grove of cypress trees, hung with Spanish moss,which afforded a natural cover. As long as the gunboats were there,crossing the river was out of the question.At sunset they were treated to a brilliant and heartening spectacle.As the waters turned to reddish gold, the gunboat at the wharf slidfrom its mooring and floated silently downriver. The sun faded, thewaters turned a deeper, dancing blue, and the gunboat half a mileaway sent up two brilliant rockets, fired a gun to leeward, and glidedtoward them. The lookout was not twenty rods away from the campin the cypress grove as the gunboat nosed toward the shore, sendingout a sheet of ripples across the placid surface of the Mississippi. Thelookout saw nothing suspicious, and the gunboat moved on, out ofsight.Not knowing what the situation might be on the Arkansas shore,Shelby would not risk a crossing, but called for six volunteers to takea skiff across, reconnoitre the opposite bank, enter the town if pos¬sible, and report back before daylight. Stalwart and bronzed, the menshed their jackets with the telltale buttons and in a few moments,says Edwards, “their oar blades threw up diamond sparks in the moon¬light, and their swift bark gradually grew dimmer and less distinct.”It was an enchanted night, filled with moonlight, and the yellowlagoons glistened through the darkness of the cypress trees. Owlshooted hungrily, and the notes of the whippoorwills came faintly. Noone slept. The Missourians were going home. “Home,” says the biog¬rapher of these wanderers, “and a thousand sweet, familiar fanciesfilled every heart. The night was delicious, and the gigantic cotton¬woods threw far out upon the river great shadows that lay so quietand still it seemed a sin to vex the silence with a whispered word.” 8But the Afissourians were not of the sort given to reverie, and theywere in the mood for song. As always in such a situation, they calledon Jake Connor.A Colonel of the Cavalry107Jake Connor was to Shelby and his men what Sweeny and hisbanjo were to Stuart and the cavalry corps of the Army of NorthernVirginia. There is one in every army. “The inimitable Irish delin¬eator,” as Jake Connor was called, “the chief of all serenading parties,”was moved to poignant melancholy by the scene around him, and heobliged, in a clear, pleasing tenor, with a half dozen verses of “TheFallen Dragoon,” which begins,Riflemen, shoot me a fancy shot,Straight at the heart of yon prowling vidette;Ring me a ball on the glittering spotThat shines on his breast like an amulet.9The fallen dragoon in the song is the brother of the man who gavethe order; perhaps Jo Shelby was thinking of the'Gratzes as Jake’skeening lament rang clear above the dark waters of the Mississippi.Before dawn the volunteers were back with news—and a flatboat.The town was not heavily guarded, except within the fortifications;the coast was clear, and this was friendly country. Under cover ofthe false dawn, the Missourians shoved off across the river on theflatboat, and Shelby marched them to a plantation where pretty girlsserved them breakfast, under the very noses of the Federal garrisonof Helena.That breakfast would be long remembered by the bronzed boyswhen their hair had turned grayer than the splendid uniforms theywere wearing. Along with the ham, the biscuits, the fried fish, andscrambled eggs the color of a five-dollar gold piece, there were gob¬lets of champagne instead of coffee,10 served by Arkansas beautieswho themselves looked good enough to eat.Champagne as a breakfast beverage probably had never been servedbefore in Helena, and Shelby’s company of voyageurs that morning,who were to form the hard core of the Iron Brigade, could see thatthe war was going to have its compensations. Men would go insaneunder the hardships which Shelby imposed on them, and they wouldknow the agony of wounds, disease, and hunger, but Jake Stonestreetmay have been thinking of that breakfast at Helena when he told areporter for the Kansas City Star, many years later, “No man couldride with Shelby for four years and be worth his salt at anythingafterward. I did it and I know.” 11io8Shelby the RaiderShelby’s destination was Fort Smith, the nerve center and quarter¬master depot of the Confederate Army in Arkansas. The road thitherlay in bayou country and along roads strongly guarded by Federalcavalry, even in the interior, but at Fort Smith they could get horses.The next six days were spent in marching toward Clarendon, thefirst way station, and hot, heavy marching it was. The swamp countryof eastern Arkansas was a fit habitation only for alligators and snakes,and in July its native population was increased by some billions ofinsect pests.Shelby’s Missourians had been accustomed to dashing about thecountry in comfortable deshabille, on cooperative mounts; their onlyexperience as footsoldiers had been in battle. Now they found outwhat the life of the infantry is really like most of the time: nine-tenths sore feet. But their impatience to find mounts did not causeany of them to complain. If they had to slip through fence rails andacross bayou trails to avoid the Federals, their route brought them tosome interesting back doors. In Confederate country, their smart ap¬pearance brought them a cordial welcome from people who wouldhave set their dogs on the homespun soldiers of the Missouri StateGuards, for as Major Edwards says, “The appearance of a soldier isthe best passport through any country, and better meals and bettertreatment have been received by men whose guns were polished orwhose gray jackets were tidy and clean, than if they held a paperendorsed by Adjutant General Cooper.” 12Shelby was also a spit-and-polish officer, when he could enforcesuch a regime, and now that he was in command of his own men, hisinfluence was beginning to be felt in a way it had never been as amilitia officer. From the first he saw that his men were well mounted,well armed, and well uniformed, and even under Old Pap they hadbeen recognized as the most efficient separate organization in thearmy. From now on he would insist on the most soldierly behavior;even on the march to Mexico his men would find themselves spendingthe siesta hour in afternoon drill. For a man who was not a WestPointer, Shelby had a surprising love for “the precision of the paradeground.”As he marched toward Clarendon, he was a smart-looking officerhimself. He was wearing a black felt hat over the chestnut hair, itsfront brim pinned back, cavalry style, with a gold buckle; the collarof his uniform was solid gold with the bars of a captain, and buttonedA Colonel of the Cavalry 109tight. It gleamed beneath the russet beard he was wearing these days,a luxuriant affair which was not triangular like Jeb Stuart’s, butapronlike, wavy and curled at the ends. His mustachios were notfierce, but their tendril-like tips seemed ambitious of extending even¬tually to the point where they could be tied behind his ears. It wasa young man’s beard, a bushy beauty; and Jo Shelby was a youngman, thirty-one years old now and tough as the hickory wood herecommended to his troopers as a gridiron for broiling meat.13Near Clarendon the Lafayette County Cavalry rested its feet atthe plantation of a Colonel and Mrs. Lightfoot, below De Vail’sBluff on the White River. Here again a table for company had beenset. Heliotrope and roses smothered the dining room in scent, thetable gleamed with linen and smoked with good food. Mrs. Light-foot informed Shelby that she had made a Confederate battle flag ofhandstitched silk, and that she wished to present it to his company.The gallant Shelby glowed with pleasure. Luncheon eaten, he drewup his men on the lawn, and they stood at attention as the goodSouthern lady made her little speech and laid the flag in Shelby’sarms. Shelby received it with all the appropriate amenities; he wastouched. Thereafter, it was his flag. He carried it in battle.Colonel Lightfoot had some heartening news for Shelby. Theirmarching days were over. In one of the many bayous near by wasa little river steamer, attractively named the Charm, whose captainplied the White River without regard for either Federals or Con¬federates, on business of his own. Captain Shelby might make a dealwith him to take them past the Confederate works and into the campon the river at De Vail’s Bluff. Captain Shelby did, and within threehours his company of a hundred rifles had its first experience ofbayou navigation, which, as Admiral David Porter said, is like “skim¬ming along summer seas under the shade of stalwart oaks.” The stream,though crooked, was deep, and soon the Charm was scudding rapidlythrough trees whose boughs overhead almost interlaced. CaptainShelby questioned the skipper of the Charm concerning the riverfortifications which both the Federals and Confederates were re¬ported to have placed along the river; the captain assured him thatColonel Nelson with some of McCulloch’s old Texans were at DeVail’s Bluff and that he was well known to them.Colonel Nelson, however, did not know that he was receivingvisitors, and when darkness fell all river craft looked pretty muchI IOShelby the Raideralike to him. Shelby’s men, stretched out on deck in the summernight, were aroused by the familiar round of the long roll, on shore,as they approached De Vail’s Bluff, and in the clear night ahead theycould see an earthwork among the pines, mounted with three guns.Long lines of infantry were moving on the crest of the hill behindthe fort, and two field batteries were being rolled up. Just as everymatch was raised for destruction, and two thousand rifles turned onthe innocent little Charm, her furnace doors flew open, light pouredalong her deck, and the rebel captain on the shore saw that she wasnot a gunboat.The captain—his name was Dunnington, if that is important—yelledto his men to hold their fire, and reported to Colonel Nelson. Thecolonel was only half convinced; it might be a Yankee trick. Appar¬ently the skipper of the Charm was not as well known as he hadsaid he was. Colonel Nelson sent a guard on board and no communi¬cation with anyone was permitted until morning, when everythingwas straightened out. What the captain of the Charm had in mindwill never be known, although the curiosity of Shelby and his menwas re-aroused some weeks later when it was heard that he had beenspying for both sides, and had been hanged at Little Rock for treasonto the Confederacy.14Colonel Nelson informed Captain Shelby that he was expecting anattack by the Federals momentarily. They had a great fleet of gun¬boats in the river, having free ingress from the Mississippi at Helena,and Shelby volunteered to remain and help him meet it. At the endof a week, however, no enemy had attacked, and Shelby told ColonelNelson that he felt it was time for him to proceed. Nelson told Shelbyhe could not think of allowing him to do so because of “the state ofaffairs on the river,” and a somewhat edgily polite argument ensued.The matter was referred by courier to General Hindman at LittleRock. Hindman sent back a message of congratulation to Shelby,complimenting him on his courage, but ordering him to remain wherehe was.This Shelby had no intention of doing, and he left Nelson’s campat once, alone, to retrace his steps to General Beauregard’s head¬quarters in Mississippi. Beauregard was the ranking officer west ofthe Mississippi and Shelby informed him that he had a commissionto raise a regiment in Missouri, that he intended to do it, and thatneither the whole Confederate army nor the Federal army couldA Colonel of the Cavalryi 11stop him. He had had enough of the insane vacillation which hadalready lost Missouri to the Southern cause, at least temporarily, andto Missouri he was going. If Richmond didn’t like it, Richmond couldkeep its commission.Further fireworks were headed off by the news, received at Beau¬regard’s headquarters, that De Vail’s Bluff had been evacuated andthe army had fallen back to the Little Rock area. There was nothingto prevent Captain Shelby from proceeding to carry out his assign¬ment. His impetuosity having gained him nothing this time, exceptan opportunity to expatiate on his plans to Beauregard, Shelby rodeback over the road he had just come and rejoined his command atVan Buren.Here he was pleased to find his old commander, General Rains,wearing a new brigadier’s uniform. There would be no more delay.Rains was sending Colonel Vard Cockrell into Missouri to recruit,and Shelby could join him as soon as his men were equipped prop¬erly. The recruiting business was picking up, for with the abandon¬ment of the state to the Federals and guerrillas, one as bad as theother,15 thousands who had hesitated before were now more thanready to “go South.” Hindman’s recruiting camps would give themthe opportunity. These camps would also draw into central andsouthern Missouri large bodies of Federal cavalry intent on breakingthem up. These were the forces which Shelby would scatter and ter¬rorize on his innumerable raids between 1862 and 1864, althoughthe Federals always outnumbered him and the disparity in arms andequipment was often ludicrous. No army in Europe had any finerweapons than the United States Army in the Civil War, or bettermounts; their clothing was the best procurable and of their foodAdmiral David Porter of the Union said that “our commissary de¬partment was the best in the world, and the waste of provisions wouldhave supplied a European army.” 16Shelby did not have a wide range of choice as he looked over thequartermaster stores in the camp of Colonel Cockrell on the FrogBayou, just below Van Buren. The colonel was delighted to see himand told him that he could make his selection of the meagre stock;but what he got for his men was not much. “Horses and mules ofevery size, variety and condition were picked up,” Edwards says,“saddles, sheep-skins, and blankets were all used for seats; and barkbridles and ropes completed the heterogeneous equipments. Yet theI I 2Shelby the Raidermen had their Mississippi rifles and one hundred forty rounds of am¬munition each, and they knew they were going to their own countryto rend from the spoiler whatever of costly accoutrements wereneeded.” 17Before they set out Shelby made a speech to his men in which hesaid that he wanted no man who had not enlisted for the duration.His men would swear to fight for the South until she was free—fortwenty years if necessary—or step down now. None did. The com¬pany was then mustered into the Confederate service, “and the ab¬surdly mounted soldiers rode away northward.” 18 Although Shelbymay have resembled a young Quijote with a hundred Sancho Panzas,it would have been a mistake to laugh. What did he need? Just onehundred new guns and one hundred respectable horses. He wouldrequisition that number from the Federals in a single battle. Nobodyin the world of officialdom ever gave Shelby anything, and as MajorHanson points out, “In a country of great distances and such primi¬tive conditions as existed in the Trans-Mississippi region of that day,campaigning was always rigorous and a commander of Shelby’s ex¬haustless resource and driving power was of incalculable value....There was always plenty of food in the southwestern states for thosewho knew how to get it, and Shelby did. His Iron Brigade and hislater division fought the war on pork, corn and beef, plenty of each,while he also managed, either by requisitions or captures from theenemy, to keep his men fairly well clothed and very well mountedand armed.” 19It took five days to traverse the Boston Mountains, but once inMissouri the southwestern communities vied with Cane Hill, “whichopened it hospitable granaries and her rebel daughters vied with eachother in helping the tired, hungry soldiers.” At Newtonia—scene ofbloody fighting later but a sleepy, peaceful little town now—he foughta skirmish with Federal pickets, whose commander, Major Hubbardof the First Missouri, did not seem to have much stomach for a fight,feeling safe in his superiority of numbers. Even when three of hismen were killed in an exchange of shots, he did not pursue the bush¬whackers, as he assumed them to be, and Shelby and his men crossedfirst into Bates and then into Johnson County. Both counties lookedas if they had been burnt to the ground by a prairie fire. Here theBrothers’ W ar, or at least the Neighbors’ War, had been carried toits insane, inevitable conclusion. Wrath piling upon wrath, vengeanceA Colonel of the Cavalryi 13topping vengeance, had reduced the country to a desolate ruin. Foryears after the war this region would be known as the Burnt District.20As Shelby’s column rode past the blackened chimneys which rearedtheir lonely shafts from the charred rubble, a rumor reached him thatColonel John T. Coffee, Hindman’s recruiting officer in southernMissouri, was hard pressed on the Osage River. He countermarchedrapidly across Johnson County, reached Coffee’s command, butfound him safe enough. Coffee had outridden a large Federal force.After resting, the combined columns marched north again. At GrandRiver, Coffee turned west to Independence and Lone Jack, and animpatient Shelby spurred his horsemen toward Lafayette County.Scouts brought back the news that a regiment of infantry was en¬camped on his old real estate development at Berlin, or Dover;21 butthis force did not lie between him and the Redd Farm.A metamorphosis had taken place in the appearance of Shelby’scavalry during the long ride up from the Boston Mountains, so thathe was not ashamed of his company in front of Betsy. Edwards saysthat “the rich prairies had furnished their best six year olds for theseheavy riders,” and he had acquired—Edwards does not say where—“asfine McClellan saddles and bridles as ever gleamed upon the Potomac,or went down in the battle’s van before Jeb Stewart’s [sic] recklessraiders.” 22 Since he had not fought a major engagement since leavingthe Boston Mountains, Shelby may have obtained these from Coffee,who had been in Missouri for several weeks ahead of him. And ifsome of his men’s outfits were now partly Federal government issue,that made no difference. Autumn was coming on in another monthand the jackets bought by the Richmond government for the use ofthe Indians in Arkansas in June would be scant protection against thefreezing weather to come.The Federals at Dover obligingly moved out, and Shelby moved in.A perusal of the records in Missouri at the time discloses that theUnion commanders did not wear themselves out galloping after bush¬whackers, and Shelby moved about freely. He was by no meanstraveling incognito. But this time he did not find it necessary to dashabout Lafayette County to find recruits. He set up his headquarters atWaverly, and from every section of the surrounding country troopspoured in for enlistment. Governor Gamble, the Union Governor,had assisted him by ordering every able-bodied man in Missouri intothe Federal militia. That meant that Southern sympathizers would114Shelby the Raiderhave to fight against their kinsmen of the South. “They resolved thatif they must take part in the war, they would choose upon which sidethey were to fight.” 23 These were grim young men whom Shelbytook into service of the Confederate States and ideal recruits. Theywere the enlisted men of whom a recruiting sergeant dreams: fit, intel¬ligent, and mad as hell at the enemy instead of at a government seekingto draft them.At Waverly Shelby issued his famous proclamation (obviously notwritten by him), the “Document That Brought the Boys Out of theBrush in Missouri.” The proclamation read:“Freemen of Missouri: You stand face to face with one of thoseterrible issues which comes but once in a lifetime. Hamilton R. Gamble[Union Governor of Missouri], false to his birthright, his country andhis God, in obedience to orders from Washington, has resolved todraft you into service and force you to fight against blood, kindred,home, friends, neighbors, brothers. Will you do it? Can you turn yourback on this your country in this her dark hour of peril and grief andsee the mad waves of anarchy and despotism sweep away all vestigesof family ties, sacred firesides, and everything that makes life worth?“Missouri, her young brow dark with silent agony, appeals to youby all her ruined hearthstones, all her murdered sons, all her insulteddaughters, all the bloody past—heavy with the victims of hired Hes¬sians and pitiless jay hawkers—to rise now, fly to arms, gird on thesword, to swell the grand, eternal chorus,“ ‘Wave Missouri, all thy banners waveAnd charge with all thy chivalry.’“Through the providence of an Almighty and all-seeing God, Ihave reached here to alleviate in some measure your great distress. Iam duly commissioned by the Confederate Government to recruita cavalry regiment for the war and to make all arrangements neces¬sary in connection with my government as one of its officials. Toolong you have bowed your heads in quiet submission. Too longyou have remained silently watching the red wing of revolutionsweeping over your state. Too long have you waited for somethingto turn up, for the war to cease, for foreign intervention. Those whowould be free must strike the first blow. We missed you at Carthage,we missed you at Springfield, we missed you at Elkhorn, when death’sA Colonel of the Cavalryi 15gathering gloom was spreading its dark wings, and the blood of yourblood and flesh of your flesh went down on the sod, their backs to thefield, their feet to the foe. We missed you in Mississippi after Shiloh’sbloody sunset embers had faded from the Southern sky and otherregiments and other generals rushing on again for another carnival ofdeath. But come now! Come in twos, fours, tens, twenties. Come insquads, in companies and singly, bring horses if you have them, guns,swords, pistols, blankets, but above all bring the firm unalterablepurpose in your hearts that come what may you will light again yourpatriotism at the altar of your bleeding country, and swear in thebroad, grand sunlight of your prairies, Missouri must and shall be free!“Delay is death, ruin dire and dreadful. By all you hold dear in life,by wife, by mother, by smiling babe, by your hopes of heaven, helpus now to drive back the invader! Our banner is on the breeze, ourfeet are on our native soil. Close up, comrades! Close up, Missourians!Land is ahead; day is breaking. One more effort, one long pull, onestrong pull, one pull altogether, and the day is ours. Already I hearyour response. Already I see the gathering in. Soon, very soon, willcome our battle cry:“ ‘Now gallants, for your lady’s sake,Upon them with the lance!’“One great aim with me will be to give quietude and repose to theneighborhood around my headquarters. To do so, all Negroes andsuspicious persons caught after sunset within my lines will be dealtwith in the severest manner.“Union men too old for service in the ranks, who make their age apretext for spying and newsbearing, must cease all communicationswith the Federal commanders or suffer the just punishment of anoutraged and violated country.”This proclamation is undoubtedly the work of John N. Edwards, thefiery editor of the Expositor. Soon after he became Shelby’s adjutant,about the time of the Battle of Lone Jack, Edwards took over theonerous (to Shelby) job of writing Shelby’s battle reports, and theresult is still somewhat startling. From the fall of 1862, when Edwardsbecame his amanuensis, the usually dull pages of the Official Records,when they relate to Shelby, are ablaze with rhetoric and enlivenedwith quotations from the romantic poets. Edwards was a devotee ofthe Sir Walter Scott school of literature, and to him every Missourii 16Shelby the Raiderswale and hill crest was a Field of the Cloth of Gold, and “everyloping, gray-clad farmer boy a knight in armor.” 24Edwards himself was one of the most modest and lovable of men, astudent, a poet, and a gallant soldier. (He had more horses shot fromunder him than any other man in Shelby’s brigade.) He had a round,childlike face, with a high forehead, a drooping mustache, andinnocent blue eyes that forever beheld a world of wonders. As awriter Major Edwards was a Bombastes Furioso in an age whenfloridity of style and extravagance of expression were considered thehallmarks of good writing. He could scarcely think, much less write,except in hyperbole; nevertheless he was touched with the divine fire.There was a streak of genius which showed, hard and fine, in thetrashiest of his outpourings, so that his pictures come alive. To readhis works, which sometimes requires patience, is to have the rewardingexperience of coming suddenly upon a masterpiece among the garishcolors of the circus posters. Chivalry was his religion and Beauty hispassion (of flowers he said that they were the noblest work of God,saving only Woman), and for Shelby he had an attachment thatamounted to idolatry. The two were inseparable in battle or barroom,and although they disagreed after the war on the important issues ofReconstruction, they remained closer than brothers to the end of theirdays. At Waverly Shelby learned that Edwards was fond of writingproclamations and battle reports, which Shelby was not. By commonconsent, Edwards henceforth wrote all the reports—a fact which mustbe borne in mind in reading the Official Records.25Shelby enlisted one thousand men in four days at Waverly,26 enoughfor ten cavalry companies, and he had well earned a commission ascolonel. But he had marched a thousand miles from Mississippi to doit, and as Major Hanson says in The Cavalry Journal, “Thus a manwho on his merits ought to have had his colonelcy a year earlierfinally got it by finding every man for his regiment.” 27Shelby had no time to ponder over the merit system of promotion,however, for Colonel Vard Cockrell had really engaged the enemythis time, at the Battle of Lone Jack, over in Jackson County, andalthough he had driven the Federals from the town, it was the oldstory of a Confederate force’s not being able to hold the victory it hadgained, and the Federals were gathering a preponderantly large forceto run the recruiters out. Just as Price had irritated Lincoln into swiftaction at Lexington, so Cockrell stirred up a hornet’s nest at LoneA Colonel of the Cavalryi i7Jack. Edwards says, “The bloody battle of Lone Jack startled the con¬fident Federals like an earthquake, for their choice regiments lay ingory heaps among the burnt and smouldering timbers of the town andas one man they rushed after Cockrell with shouts and cries ofvengeance.” 28For once Major Edwards was not overstating the case. The Battleof Lone Jack had been a battle to the death. The Federals, taken bysurprise at four o’clock in the morning, thought they were surroundedby Quantrill and his men, whose war cry was extermination, and theyfought like trapped animals. The Confederates, many of them, werefighting in sight of their burned and ruined homes. They gave noquarter, and when they fought their way into the town and foundthe hotel filled with Federal sharpshooters, they did not attack, butset fire to the hotel and roasted the entire garrison alive.Purposeful men in overwhelming numbers would now be in pursuitof Cockrell and Shelby and their new recruits. They must get theirmen back to Arkansas. Cockrell moved first, and he did not need tobid Shelby to follow. As at Carthage, he rose to the occasion with anintensity that showed his men what it meant to ride under Shelby.Major Edwards has given an unequaled description of the ordeal towhich he now subjected his cavalry.“While the pursuit was fiercest, Captain Shelby gathered up hisraw recruits and followed after Cockrell, on a parallel and lower line,with speed as great and anxiety as heavy. The cohesive power ofdanger is probably stronger than any other, and in all that long lineof undisciplined horsemen—fresh from the balmy breezes and downybeds—not one faltered, not one missed answer in the constant rollcalls. Rest and refuge were almost gained. Crazy and blinded fromeight days and nights of uninterrupted marching, the command stag¬gered into camp on the little stream of Coon Creek, in Jasper County,to snatch a few hours sleep before nightfall and before the march wasresumed, for Captain Shelby had wisely determined to leave nothingto chance that might be accomplished by energy. To those unac¬quainted with the effects produced by loss of sleep, the sensationswould be novel and almost incredible. About the third night an in¬describable feeling settles down upon the brain. Every sound is distinctand painfully acute. The air seems filled with exquisite music; citiesand towns rise up on every hand, crowned with spires and radiantwith ten thousand beacons. Long lines of armed men are on every118Shelby the Raiderside, while the sound of bugles and harsh words of command areincessantly repeated. Often, upon almost boundless prairies, destituteof tree or bush, the tormented dozer turns suddenly from some fanciedoak, or mechanically lowers his head to avoid the sweeping andpendent branches. Beyond the third night stolid stupor generallyprevails, and an almost total insensibility to pain. Soldiers in Shelby’sdivision have been known to go incurably mad 29 and not a few casesof hopeless idiocy have resulted from his terrible raids. On the marchmen have dropped from the saddle unawakened by the fall, while onmore than a dozen occasions his rear guard has pricked the laggingsleepers with sabres until the blood spouted, without changing a muscleon their blotched, bloated faces.” 30There was to be no rest at once for the men who survived the march.At Coon Creek, near the old battlefield of Carthage, Shelby’s menwere attacked by a detachment of the Sixth Kansas Cavalry while theyslept. Awakened by the shots and shouts of the enemy, they struggledto their feet as some of them had done at Wilson’s Creek and foughtIndian style from behind trees until Shelby could rally them. For fiveminutes the conflict raged evenly. Then the Kansans seemed to havespent themselves, and they retired, hovering in the neighborhood forquite a while, awaiting their chance to make a flank attack. When theydid, they were met by a rear guard of Shelby’s men under a LieutenantBlackwell, the men swimming the creek to defend their camp, and theenemy cavalry finally was driven off, after having harassed the sleepyConfederates for three hours. This was “the Battle of Coon Creek.”The Federals lost eleven men, Shelby none; but some of his valuablehorses were disabled and had to be destroyed. Thus when he reacheda point of safety, Elm Spring, for another halt, a number of his menwere again on foot.Many accounts, including Edwards’, say that Shelby received hiscommission and his command of the Iron Brigade at Newtonia, or justnorth of Newtonia. This is an error. Shelby himself sets forth thecircumstances in correspondence with General John S. Marmadukedated October 27, 1862.31 Speaking of the encounter at Coon Creek,Shelby says: “After three hours fighting, we succeeded in driving themback. We then continued our march south into Arkansas unmolested,but during the whole march we traveled night and day. After we hadreached a point of safety, we halted and shod a portion of our horses,but soon received an order from General Rains to report, which weThe Iron Brigade: First Newtonia119did, at Elm Spring. We were then ordered to McKissick Springs.During that time we had no transportation except a few two-horsewagons that we had purchased after entering the state. At McKissickSprings we were ordered to report to General Hindman, at Pineville.On our arrival at that place, we found that the general had not reachedthere, and we were then ordered some fifteen miles north of there, ata point on Elkhorn Creek, where Colonel Hays and Colonel Coffeewere encamped. That was on or about the 9th of September, and atsaid encampment we were met by General Hindman, who caused thethree regiments, consisting of Hays’ and Coffee’s and the undersigned,to be thrown together, which constitutes this brigade, and commandof same being given me by the general himself. We were then orderedto Camp Kearny, 6 miles south of Newtonia.”He signed that report JO. O. SHELBY, Colonel, CommandingCavalry Brigade.At Camp Kearny, something else new was added. The gold bucklewhich Shelby wore on his black felt hat was no longer used merelyto pin back the slouch brim. Its clasp now anchored firmly a great,curling plume of midnight hue to match the hat. Shelby’s BlackPlume was soon as familiar to the Missouri troops as the gay ostrichplume of Stuart was to the Virginia troops; and if he modeled hisheadgear after the great Virginian he had every right to do so, forShelby was the Stuart of the West.11. The Iron Brigade: First NewtoniaIn the autumn of 1862, the Federals in Missouri badly neededanother Nathaniel Lyon. General Henry Wagner Halleck, for allhis asperity and soldier-like noises, could not make up his mind what todo, as general-in-chief of the armies of the west. “Old Brains,” as hewas proud to be known,1 never deigned to lead an army in the field. Inthe final analysis, he left the problem in 1862 to his field commanders,with the result that each divided his forces, or remained where he was,in pursuance of his own theories of the war.The new battleground of the Trans-Mississippi Department of theConfederate States 2 resembled an isosceles triangle. The lower left-120Shelby the Raiderhand tip was the Indian Territory west of the Confederate head¬quarters at Fort Smith, where the rebels had an arsenal and machineryfor making munitions—and a stranglehold on the state of Arkansas.The right-hand tip was Helena on the Mississippi River, an importantport now held by Curtis and his victorious army of Pea Ridge. Thebase of the triangle was an imaginary line extending past LittleRock on the west to Helena on the east. The apex of the triangle wasthe St. Louis-Jefferson City area of northeast Missouri.General John S. Phelps was Union military governor of Arkansas,a somewhat honorary post, and he argued, with good reason, that allof the Confederates were now in Arkansas, or about to be, and thatthey were in a better position than ever to dart with the rapidity of asnake’s tongue in the direction of the Missouri River Valley, unlessblocked by an overpowering army. He did not see any point in keepingan army idle at Helena and he repeatedly urged an all-out attack onArkansas.General Curtis, on the other hand, did not wish to abandon Helena.He was willing to spare some troops—in fact, he had sent GeneralSteele to Pilot Knob to secure southern Missouri while General Scho¬field advanced on Arkansas in the southwest—but he wanted to remainin Helena in sufficient force to secure the town. Helena lies on theMississippi River just above Vicksburg. For the Confederates tocapture such an important troop transfer base would mean that theycould send perhaps 30,000 or 40,000 troops to the aid of the Con¬federate eastern armies at any time, just as Price had crossed with his5,000 to Corinth. Curtis regarded the threat to Helena as much morereal, being closer, than a threat to either Jefferson City or St. Louis;and for Phelps’s opinion he had no regard at all. “Phelps has his heartset on Little Rock, which at this time seems to be only an encum¬brance,” Curtis wrote to Halleck on October 2, 1862.3General Schofield was the man about whom the controversy reallycentered, for it was he who was at Springfield; it was he who wouldbe reinforced, or not, for a march on Little Rock; and if he did notmake such a march ultimately, or in fact do something, a revitalizedConfederate army would surge back into the scrub oak country aroundSpringfield for the third time.Schofield had 10,000 men, a wholly inadequate number for anArkansas campaign. But Schofield was in need of reinforcements onlybecause he insisted on leaving heavy garrisons behind him everywhereThe Iron Brigade: First Newtonia 12 ihe went—at places such as Springfield and Rolla, which were in nodanger. In common with the other Federal commanders in Missourihe was jittery about the interior of the state and felt that it was muchtoo rebellious to be left ungarrisoned. The necessity of operating likean army of occupation hampered the Federals in Missouri from thefirst.Halleck ordered Curtis to cooperate with Schofield, but whenCurtis took the suggestion at face value and dispatched General Steeleto Pilot Knob, Halleck was alarmed. His order evidently had been ona par with that given McCulloch by the Richmond government whenit had ordered him to “support” Price without invading Missouri. “Ifear,” Halleck telegraphed Curtis, “that you will regret dividing hisarmy [Governor Phelps’s Arkansas army] and that the part left atHelena will be useless or lost. Unless you find it absolutely necessaryto withdraw General Steele he ought to operate from Helena. Themoment Cincinnati and Louisville are relieved I can give you moretroops from Illinois and Ohio.” But Halleck, the general-in-chief,gave Curtis no orders to follow in the dilemma. “You know your owncondition better than I do,” he said, “and must decide about this. Atso great a distance I can only advise.” 4Curtis was not perturbed; he was due for promotion soon andwould be leaving anyway. He simply wired back, “I had to divide theHelena force to do anything,” which was certainly a correct statement.However, he soon found that he was displeasing Schofield as well asPhelps, besides alarming Halleck. Schofield wrote Halleck, “I had nothought of asking for a part of General Steele’s force simply to assistme in holding Pilot Knob and Rolla, but to place him in condition tomove immediately and effectively on Little Rock if he was not alreadyprepared to do so.” 5 General Curtis retorted, in this indirect exchange,“General Schofield has most of the forces in the Southwest and dailyasks for more.” 6 The situation was somewhat eased, the last week inSeptember, by the arrival of General Blunt from Kansas with hisbrigade to report to General Schofield. With Blunt’s brigade, he had6,500 men for duty, besides those he had left behind as garrisons, andtwo inactive regiments, which he says were “without organization orequipment.”Thus it will be seen that the entire effective force of the Federalarmies facing the Confederates in Arkansas was now only 9,500 men,counting Curtis’s 3,000 at Helena. The time was ripe for another122Shelby the Raidermarch to the Mississippi to cut Federal control of the river by seizingHelena. A Nathaniel Lyon would have done it for the Union; a JoShelby would have done it for the Confederacy if he had had therequisite wreath and stars on his collar.No authorization of the Richmond government would have beenrequired, for Richmond had learned its lesson in the Price-McCullochfiasco; the discretionary powers of the commander in the Trans-Mis¬sissippi Department were now being broadened to such an extent inthe fall of 1862 that it would be only a few months until JeffersonDavis would say that the commander west of the Mississippi “has thepower to execute the laws, and that is all I have.” 7 The great distancebetween the Confederate capital and the vast empire of the Trans-Mississippi, of course, made such an arrangement the only practicalone.But at this crucial moment in the history of the new nation, theTrans-Mississippi was no longer under the control of an able andenergetic commander-in-chief. General Tom Hindman had beendemoted for enforcing the conscript law too ruthlessly,8 and in hisplace had been named General Theophilus H. Holmes, who had as¬sumed command on July 16, 1862. The order of the Adjutant General’soffice, appointing him, indicates the latitude which he enjoyed. Theorder read: “Major General Holmes is assigned to the command ofthe Trans-Mississippi Department. He will repair without delay toLittle Rock, Ark., and establish his headquarters at such place as in hisjudgment the interests of the service demand.”Holmes was deaf and superannuated; the suspicion was strong thathe had been let go in the eastern armies for his blunders at MalvernHill,9 where he had had an important assignment.10 But he was afriend of Jefferson Davis,11 and one of those “men of military educa¬tion and experience in war” whom Davis esteemed so highly.12 AtMalvern Hill the battle had been under way for some time beforeHolmes remarked, “I believe I heard the sound of firing,” 13 and hewas no better equipped to deal with the complex problems of theTrans-Mississippi Department than he had been to command a divisionat Malvern Hill.“Old Granny Holmes,” the troops called him, and although it wasobvious even to him that Helena should be the objective of the nextcampaign, he did not march on Helena for twelve months. That hecould have marched to the Mississippi at any time is demonstrated byThe Iron Brigade: First NewtoniaI23the fact that he did march to the Mississippi, when it was too late; andwas able to do so when his own military situation had deteriorated. Heattacked Helena on the day that Vicksburg fell; yet the OfficialRecords show that on September 28, 1862, while Shelby was still inthe vicinity of Newtonia, Holmes had in his department an armywhich outnumbered the Federals in Missouri nearly three to one.14Furthermore, that Davis expected big things of his fifty-seven-year-old protege is indicated by the fact that the new Secretary of War,George W. Randolph, promised him that “unless prevented by un¬foreseen contingencies, one fourth of all the arms purchased andmanufactured will be forwarded to you with suitable supplies ofammunition.” 15Thus the ineptitude of the Federal commanders of the Departmentof the West was of little benefit to the Confederacy; the Richmondgovernment could always go Washington one better in sending out tothe Trans-Mississippi Department officers who were resolutely un¬qualified to command. As Major Hanson says, “To the authoritiesboth at Washington and Richmond, the vast region west of theMississippi was a sort of precursor of Blois in the A.E.F., a salvageyard into which officers might be shunted who could not be usedanywhere else.16 Throughout the war its destinies were guided mainlyby local favorite sons and ‘lame ducks’ from the main theatre of opera¬tions who had either failed or passed out of favor, though still tooprominent as personages to be summarily dismissed. Jo Shelby, ridingand fighting endlessly, was too busy to curry favor in such quarters,while many greybeards among his superiors looked upon his youthwith distrust.” 17Shelby was not to get along with Holmes, for self-evident reasons,but right now, in the last week of September, 1862, his attention wasoccupied elsewhere. He was still at Camp Kearny, six miles south ofNewtonia, Missouri, trying to scrounge enough equipment for 3,000men and place his brigade on a war footing. In the next five days fol¬lowed two swift, savage engagements at Newtonia which are of noimportance historically except that at Newtonia Shelby’s brigadefought as a unit for the first time.For many of his men, however, it was not the first fighting they haddone since they had joined the brigade. As always in this prairie typeof warfare, the main battle at Newtonia had been preceded by a seriesof clashes. In one of these, shortly after the brigade reached Camp124Shelby the RaiderKearny, Colonel Upton Hays had been killed. He was a popularofficer and his death cast a gloom over the camp. On September 14,Shelby heard that a gang of bushwhackers, composed of Pin Indiansand runaway Negroes, was encamped in the timber near Carthage.This band was reported to have killed and scalped inhabitants of theneighborhood. Shelby summoned Captain Ben Elliott with CompanyI, of his own regiment, and gave orders to show the desperadoes nomercy. Elliott surprised them in their camp, and “everywhere amidthe heavy brushwood a silent scene of killing was enacted, none pray¬ing for mercy, well knowing that their own previous atrocities hadforfeited it, and often, with the stoical hardihood of their race, un¬covering their breasts to the unerring revolvers.” In the camp a dozenscalps were discovered, and one, a woman’s, “was particularly noticed.The long, soft hair had still its silken gloss, though tangled all amidthe curls were clotted drops of blood.” 18On the 23rd Shelby also sent Major David Shanks with five com¬panies of his regiment into Granby to drive out a force of 500 Federalswho were occupying the town and supervising the working of thelead mines. The lead mines at Granby, it will be remembered, werethose which had furnished Price at Cowskin Prairie with the bulletshis men had used at Wilson’s Creek. The Federals were surprisedand retreated in disorder, leaving a quantity of lead which they hadaccumulated. Shelby’s men loaded it into wagons and sent it back intocamp.These were but forays, however, and Shelby’s biographer says thatup to now the men had been “lying in front of Newtonia in the warmSeptember sunshine... delightfully pleasant, and the cavalry drill,which was new to the soldiers, went merrily on.” 19On September 29 Brigadier General Salomon, the nearest Federalcommander, who had been with Sigel at Carthage, sent a scoutingparty of 150 men under a Colonel Lynde to see what move theConfederates might be making to occupy Granby on a permanentbasis. They found no Confederates at Granby, but they made contactwith some of Shelby’s men, killed two pickets, and captured a prisoner.That touched off the battle of Newtonia.On the morning of the 30th Salomon moved against the town, whichthe Confederates now occupied, “with five thousand as pretty Dutchas ever bolted a bologna or swallowed the foaming lager,” 20 plus theSixth Kansas Cavalry and some Indian troops.The Iron Brigade: First NewtoniaI25The Confederates had a numerically superior force, but one whichwas superior in no other way. Three or four thousand of them wereCherokees, Choctaws, and half-breeds from the Indian Nations; forthe rest, there was only Shelby’s brigade, 2,300 strong,21 and 200Texans under the command of a Colonel Hawpe.Colonel Douglas Cooper, who commanded the Indians, rankedShelby by virtue of seniority, and he assumed command of the entireforce at Newtonia. Cooper ordered Shelby to remain in the rear of thetown until it should be known whether or not Newtonia could be held;he ordered Hawpe’s Texans into the town, perhaps remembering theAlamo, and he planted his artillery ahead of the town. Among theguns was probably Old Sacramento, although the reports do not sayso; but at any rate Colonel Hiram Bledsoe was in command.Salomon attacked at once, and with Teutonic efficiency. He hadtwo six-gun batteries, and he dueled Bledsoe and the Confederategunners until their ammunition gave out. Poor Bledsoe was left byCooper standing beside his empty guns on the bare prairie whileSalomon sent some of his German troops—the Ninth Wisconsin—ina wide, circling movement to flank Newtonia. These skirmisherspoured such an enfilading fire into the Texans that they were forcedto withdraw. At this juncture Cooper called on Shelby to send aregiment to the rescue. He sent Lieutenant Colonel Gordon, whosesabres began to ride down the Wisconsin footsoldiers with suchavidity that Salomon ordered the entire Ninth Wisconsin back outof town and onto a ridge, where they could mass for a stand. This wasa mistake; Gordon’s men rode straight ahead, and despite their empty¬ing saddles, put the Ninth Wisconsin to flight. At their heels nowwere all of Cooper’s yelling Indians, ready to murder prisoners andtake scalps unless prevented by the white troops.Salomon’s European army training stood him in better stead atNewtonia than Sigel’s had at Carthage. Although his forces had beenthrown into confusion as the cavalry and Indians swarmed throughthem, he managed to pull his entire force together, in retreat, andrally at the timber line which skirts the prairie just outside Newtonia.Here he massed his regiments in a phalanx, with batteries at the ends;and Colonel Cooper drew off his Confederates to prepare for an all-out attack.This took perhaps an hour or two; but when he and Shelby wereready, they threw everything they had into the assault, head-on, which126Shelby the Raiderwas Shelby’s style of fighting, and at Newtonia for the first time themen of the brigade saw his black plume streaming in battle.Salomon’s line could not withstand the murderous weight of thatassault; Salomon had lost heavily in the fighting for the town; and nowhis entire line gave way. There was no question of falling back to re¬form it; the line was smashed and splintered by the yelling Indians andthe no less demoniac white horsemen from Missouri and Texas. Shelbyand his regiments drove Salomon’s army furiously for twelve miles,just as he had driven Sigel for twenty-five at Carthage.Long after midnight the Confederates and their Indian allies weresorting out the guns, blankets, and provisions which the Federals hadleft behind with their wagons. They had not been able to turn theirattention to the plunder until a late hour. The burial parties had keptthem too busy. Of the enemy alone, a thousand dead had been counted.Scanning the Official Records at this point makes it obvious thatif Shelby had written his own battle reports throughout the war, theywould have added up to a very slim volume indeed. Of the battle ofNewtonia he wrote: “On the 30th, we fought General Salomon atNewtonia, defeating him very badly.” 22 That is all.The morning of October 4 found Shelby’s flag, the one Mrs. Light-foot had given him, floating from the top of the tallest building inNewtonia. It also found General Schofield’s army, about ten thousandstrong, on the march. When scouts brought in the news, ColonelCooper decided not to risk a battle. He sent Shelby northward toengage Schofield’s advance and delay it as much as possible; and hebegan packing.Shelby fought and fell back; fought and fell back. It was to becomean old story with him: covering the retreat of a Confederate army.The man who should have been given ten thousand cavalry andordered to occupy St. Louis—-which he could have done, with a suffi¬cient force, at any time in the next two years—was engaged in protect¬ing the skins of a few worthless Indian troops who even now weregoing nowhere but home. When Shelby fell back into the vicinity ofCamp Kearny again, he found that the army he was protecting was aphantom.General Rains, who was in chief command in this area, although hewas not present at Newtonia, ordered the white troops back to LittleRock; and as for the Indians under Cooper, they had taken the nearestshort cut back to the Indian Nations.The Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross HollowsI27Schofield was not pursuing, either, and Shelby found himself alonewith his brigade on the green and peaceful prairie—with nothing toeat for the next five days. In a letter to General John S. Marmaduke,Shelby said, “We were then ordered back to Mudtown [by GeneralRains] which retreat required about five days. Said time the com¬mand being without any breadstuff, and as for salt, we had beenwithout that ever since we left the Missouri River.” 23The Confederate soldier was salt-hungry throughout the war. Itwas bad enough to be without food; to be without salt was worse.12. The Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross HollowsShelby’s report to Marmaduke, in which he dismissed the battle atNewtonia in a single line, was contained in fuller form in a longletter, dated October 27, 1862. It was one of the few reports Shelbyever wrote himself and shows that he had a concise and literate, butcolorless style, with a tendency to use such adjectives as “said” forshorthand effect. There was no nonsense about it. The letter waswritten to Marmaduke because he was now Shelby’s superior in adrastic shake-up of command.Only the exigencies of the situation and the absence of his adjutantcould have commanded such concentration on Shelby’s part. Hisbrigade was in a bad way. He does not complain of their weapons (hehad supplied these himself out of his own stockpile, captured from theFederals), but one fifth of his men were sick, all of them were in rags,he did not have enough wagons for transportation, his horses wereunshod and half of them were disabled.Pointing out that when he arrived “my men were well mounted,being on as good horses as the country could afford,” Shelby says:“During all that time [since August 18, when he ended his nightmaremarch at Elm Spring] we were some forty miles in advance of GeneralRains, and were required to scout all of the country in his front fromCassville west to Scott’s Mill, 18 miles west, which required, on anaverage from 700 to 1,000 men daily. We were joined, about the 27thof September, by Colonel Cooper, who assumed command. On the30th, we fought General Salomon at Newtonia, defeating him badly.128Shelby the RaiderOn the 3d of October they [the enemy] were heavily reinforced bytheir forces from Springfield, and then moved on us in such force asto drive us from Newtonia. We were then ordered back to Mudtown,which retreat required about five days. Said time the command beingwithout any breadstuff, and as for salt, we have been without thatever since we left the Missouri River, as none has ever been issued tous.“From Mudtown we were ordered to Black’s Mill; from there toHuntsville, and thence to the Camp Ground Meeting House, northof this; from thence here, 4 miles east of Maguire’s, on Richland Creek.“In the engagements above mentioned, we have had a good manyhorses killed and wounded, and we have had frequently to do thirtyto forty hours without forage. Our horses have been under the saddleever since General Hindman organized the brigade. Our men, frombeing so poorly clad, and owing to the excessive duties they have beencompelled to perform, are rapidly becoming unfit for service. Ourbrigade reports now some 500 sick. We have a great many men with¬out a blanket, overcoat, shoes or socks. There are not more (as regi¬mental report shows) than one half our horses fit for duty. We havehad no iron or time to shoe our horses. Our horses are beginning todie pretty fast, owing to the heavy labor they have been compelledto do. As for transportation, we were furnished some five wagons bythe division quartermaster; all the balance on hand we have collectedourselves. We have never drawn any clothing, shoes, salt, or anythingelse. All we have in the way of transportation is one wagon to thecompany, and they mostly two horse wagons. We have but a fewcooking utensils, which we likewise have purchased with privatemeans. We have a great many horses unserviceable for the want ofshoeing. The strength of our brigade when first organized was 2,319,all of which were reported for duty until within the last few days.Since this cold spell of weather set in, our reports show but 1,068 menfor duty. The increase of sickness in Jeans’ and Gordon’s regiments is100 per day.”It is characteristic of Shelby that he merely states the case toMarmaduke without complaint and without suggestion. He alsodoes not mention the fact that despite the condition of the brigade,there had been almost daily skirmishes since Newtonia. From the 17thto the 28th the weather had been sufficiently moderate for the Federalsto keep thrusting at the outer fringe of Confederate territory in uselessThe Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross Hollows 129cavalry raids. On the 22nd, they appeared in some force at Hunts¬ville,1 and Shelby took to the saddle with his thousand effectives andchased them through the town in a snowstorm. On the 28th, a largerforce of Federals under General Herron menaced the hospital whichHindman had built at Fayetteville, but after an hour’s skirmishingother Confederate cavalry, under Colonel Jesse L. Cravens, drove themback.2 By this time Hindman’s entire force, consisting of 2,500 whiteinfantry, 3,600 white cavalry, and 3,000 Indians, was pretty wellestablished behind the barrier of the mountains around Cross Hollowsand Van Buren, and it was at Cross Hollows that Shelby sat down towrite his letter to Marmaduke setting forth his necessities.A review of the circumstances leading up to the appointment ofMarmaduke to the command of the Confederate cavalry has to beginon April 16, 1862, when the Confederate Congress passed its firstConscription Act. General Beauregard, by virtue of his rank, was thecommander of the Trans-Mississippi District, as it was still called, andhe sent General Hindman, an Arkansan, into the district to raise anarmy. There was considerable discontent in Arkansas, because theinhabitants felt that the transfer of Confederate troops east of theMississippi River, after Pea Ridge, meant that they had been abandonedby the Richmond government. Their resentment was heightened bythe fact that Arkansas had ranked high on the list of Southernstates in supplying troops to the Confederate army, since May of ’61.Governor Rector issued a proclamation intimating that if the south¬western states were to be abandoned, they would “seek their ownsafety,” 3 that is, withdraw their troops to their own borders fordefense. Hindman was to straighten out the matter by assuming chargeof conscription in Arkansas and raising an army to secure the state.Hindman was not only a first-class soldier but a good administrator,and he moved into the control of affairs in the Trans-Mississippi withall the vigor of a Jo Shelby. He commandeered arms and ammunition,medicine, all sorts of supplies, and a million dollars in Confederatemoney at Helena, Memphis, and Napoleon.4 He also sequestered twosteamboats and brought them up the Arkansas River for use in trans¬porting troops and supplies from Little Rock. He burned thousandsof bales of cotton to keep them out of the hands of the enemy, allow¬ing families to retain ten pounds each for their personal use,5 and heinformed Governor Rector that if Arkansas did not continue toi 30Shelby the Raidersupply troops to the regiments already raised,6 he, Hindman, wouldgather them with his conscription officers. Desertion, as already noted,he shot from the army with firing squads, and he gave authority “tovarious persons to raise companies and regiments and operate as guer¬rillas.” 7 Among these was Quantrill, and it may be that Quantrill’snod from Tom Hindman was all the Confederate commission Quan¬trill ever had.8 Hindman also realized the importance of supplies toan army. At Arkadelphia and elsewhere, “military posts were estab¬lished. ... Measures were adopted for manufacturing many importantarticles for army use_Machinery was made for manufacturing per¬cussion caps and small arms_Lead mines were opened and worked;a chemical laboratory was established and successfully operated... inthe manufacture of calomel, castor oil, spirits of nitre, various tinc¬tures of iron and other valuable medicines.” 9 In the field, he con¬structed river fortifications with the utmost energy and drove Curtisfrom the west bank of the White River in a swamp-and-bayou cam¬paign with which a Shelby narrative is not concerned except thatDe Vail’s Bluff, where his company joined the Confederates of ColonelNelson, was part of Hindman’s chain of defenses.In short, Hindman understood the magnitude of the struggle. Healso understood the importance to the Confederacy of the resourcesof the Trans-Mississippi, with its broad prairies, its endless supply offood, its cattle and its horses, its ocean ports on the Gulf of Mexico,and its border with Old Mexico through which the goods of Europecould flow into the South for the sustenance of its armies and itspeople. To preserve this great reservoir of national strength, he wasplanning to clear the Federals out of Missouri with an expedition of30,000 to 35,000 men, as soon as he could collect them from all overthe four states of his district. At Little Rock he beat the drum ofpreparedness for this expedition so loudly that on September 18 Gen¬eral Schofield was deceived into believing that it was already takingplace.10 He also completely fooled General Schofield as to the num¬ber of his troops. Schofield said he was reliably informed that Hind¬man had 30,000 men11 although, as we have seen, the number wasactually around 10,000 in Shelby’s area, 3,000 of them Indians.This useful officer, who had been about to weld his economy andhis army together and create a Third Front for the Confederacy—an idea which the Richmond government did not endorse until 1864when it was too late—was removed from supreme command in theThe Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross Hollows i 3 isummer of 1862, as mentioned earlier, when “the good old grannylimped over from Richmond, possessory orders in his pocket, and alieutenant general’s stars upon his collar” 12—General Theophilus H.Holmes.General Holmes, being deaf, probably did not hear all of the com¬plaints addressed to him—though he heard one against Shelby—but heknew enough of the situation to know that the inhabitants of the statewere roiled at the Confederate government, and he set about sooth¬ing them. His policy was to protect Arkansas, keep the peace, andsend as many men as he could east to General Pemberton, who washard pressed on the other side of the Mississippi. He vetoed Hind¬man’s plan for operations against Missouri and ordered him to reportto Little Rock. This was soon seen to be a mistake, however, andHindman was ordered back to take charge of the army in northwest¬ern Arkansas, but with strict orders not to use it for aggression.In McCulloch’s old post as field commander, Hindman used theopportunity to get rid of deadwood in his command and also to settleold scores. Like McCulloch, he had an aversion to Brigadier GeneralJames S. Rains, and as his superior he soon forced Rains’s resignation.13Colonel Coffee, who with Shelby and Upton Hays had organized thebrigade, was also dismissed summarily. In the reshuffle, General JohnS. Marmaduke was appointed cavalry commander.Marmaduke was a man who spoke Jo Shelby’s language. LikeShelby he was a Southern aristocrat from the Missouri River Valley,born in Saline County, of Virginia-descended parents who had bothwealth and social position. His father had been governor of the state.Marmaduke had served in Albert Sidney Johnston’s Utah expedition.After commanding the Missouri troops at Boonville, he had resignedto follow Johnston in the Confederate service across the river, andhad fought at Shiloh. Hindman knew him for a good soldier, andafter Corinth he asked the Confederate government to send him Mar¬maduke to command the western cavalry. When he arrived to takecommand on October 22, 1862, he found his division about 7,000strong, including Shelby’s Missouri Brigade, and he also found thatSchofield was preparing to attack him with his newly organized Armyof the Frontier. This was to be six weeks later, on November 28,when Jo Shelby was to demonstrate for the first time that he deservesto rank among the cavalry immortals.During those six weeks, however, Shelby’s brigade at Cross Hoi-32Shelby the Raiderlows “came as near not doing anything as any time during its ex¬istence,” says Historian John C. Moore, who was a member of it.14Colonel Moore undoubtedly is speaking in the military sense, for intheir necessitous condition Shelby’s men were busy foraging for any¬thing in the way of supplies they could lay their hands on. Theywere also getting acquainted with their colonel, which they had nothad time to do before, on the march from Waverly or in the seriesof bloody skirmishes which had followed one after another since ElmSpring.He was a hard man to know. The angularity of his character wasnever so pronounced as when he was made restless by the inanitionof camp life. “The square, massive lower face, hidden by its thickbrown beard”—says his biographer—“was sometimes hard and pitiless,and sometimes softened by genial smiles breaking over his features andmelting away all anger suddenly. Extremes met in his disposition,and conflicting natures warred within his breast. He was all hilarity,or all dignity and discipline. Lenient today, the men sported with hismood; tomorrow his orders were harsh as sullen drums, and his mentrembled and obeyed. In the languor of camp life he might be list¬less and contemplative, or nervous, energetic and rapacious for airand exercise as a Comanche brave. He would discuss by the hourpolitics, war, famine, crops, and field sports with the good old citizenfarmers crowding around his quarters, when a change would comeover his desires rapidly and the auditors were dismissed by a waveof the hand as he galloped off to where his troops were drilling andmaneuvering.”Around his own campfire, however, when the day’s hard work wasdone, his social qualities would stand out best, says Edwards. “Acces¬sible, kind, and bluff, and free spoken, he sympathized with the trou¬bles of his soldiers, made their cause his own, and promised them thatall differences would be smoothed away and adjusted.” His officerssoon learned that he would not tolerate the jealousies and rivalriesarising out of ambition and vanity; and if the brigade was not freeof them, at least they were hidden from Old Jo. For self-seekingofficers he had nothing but contempt, and he wore his colonel’s starsfor a solid year after he assumed command of a brigade, in much thesame manner that Lieutenant General Jackson wore a forage cap andprivate’s blouse: they would do for the business at hand. Gold lacewas pretty in drawing rooms, but it fooled nobody on the battlefield.The Iron Brigade: Camp at Cross Hollows 133For his men, however, he demanded the best the country couldafford, and some of them found to their dismay that when they hadcached away something special on their own, Old Jo, if he couldfind it, regarded it as community property of the brigade. “I remem¬ber,’’ Major Stonestreet told a reporter after the war, “that once Ihad not owned an extra shirt for a long time. I captured some calicofrom a Yankee settler, and Confederate women made me half a dozenbeauties. I put them in my tent and resolved that I would never haveanother grayback on me as long as I lived. I was called away for acouple of days and when I got back my shirts were gone. Shelbyhad given them to a lot of young dudes who hung about the tentas staff officers because they considered themselves too good to gointo the line. I was hot, but it didn’t do any good. ‘There is plentymore where that came from, Jake,’ was all I could get out of him.” 15Major Stonestreet’s indignation may be judged from the fact that hereferred to his brother officers as dudes. There were all sorts in thearmy of the Trans-Mississippi, but it is not likely that any of Shelby’sstaff officers fell into that class.On November 5 Shelby’s brigade was joined by a band of 150gimlet-eyed foragers who could have given any of his Missouri farmboys cards and spades in the business of looting settlers in remotespots—and killing them afterward. They were guerrillas under com¬mand of a Lieutenant William H. Gregg, and their company wasbeginning to be well known by the name of Quantrill’s Band, for theircaptain, William Clarke Quantrill. Captain Quantrill, who had beenoperating under the loosely granted authority of General Hindman,had gone to Richmond to see if he could persuade the Secretary ofWar to give him a commission under the Partisan Ranger Act. Thushe was not present when his bushwhackers were assigned to Shelby’sMissouri Cavalry Brigade, on the 5th, but some of his most fair-hairedboys were. Among them were Dick Yager, Cole Younger, and twoMissouri brothers, Frank and Jesse James, who were to make a namein the world for themselves after the war.The boys were tired when they arrived at Shelby’s camp in Arkan¬sas. They had ridden a long way, by the old Fort Scott and FortGibson Road, and they had paused for an exhausting two-hour fightwith Federals at the town of Lamar, in Barton County. When theyhad not been able to take Lamar from the Federals, they had set fireto it.16134Shelby the Raider13. The Iron Brigade: Cane HillShelby’s exploit at Cane Hill first marked him as a Confederatecavalry commander who, as Governor Fletcher said, was one ofthe most dangerous men the Federals had to deal with during the war.At Cane Hill Marmaduke’s two brigades of cavalry—two thirds ofHindman’s mounted forces—would have been routed and most ofthem captured if Colonel Shelby had not hit upon the idea, at thepeak of the emergency, that a force of thirty companies, attackingin all directions, can cover a retreat much better than a single brigadewhich is badly outnumbered.Because Cane Hill is scarcely a pinpoint on the battle maps of theCivil War, Shelby’s brilliant improvisation has been passed over andforgotten except by students of the cavalry and by Missouri historians,such as Moore and Edwards, who wrote in gasping admiration butwith no meticulous regard for the historical facts which form thebackground of heroic deeds. The facts of the Battle of Cane Hill,however, are indisputable. The disgruntled report of the Federal com¬mander, General James G. Blunt, whom Shelby whipsawed as hismen rushed forward to claim the victory they had won, is evidencethat Shelby is entitled to all the encomiums and eulogies heaped uponhim by the Missouri historians. And if they scramble some of thecollateral facts in so doing, it must be remembered that they werethere; and that the man in the Civil War equivalent of a foxhole,or riding a terrified horse in a cavalry melee, was not in the best posi¬tion to describe an entire battlefield accurately.The expedition to Cane Hill was Hindman’s idea. Relegated toactive command in the field, he gave General Holmes no peace untilhe had gained permission to enter Missouri and attempt to clear theborder of the enemy. He knew that General Blunt, with his Kansans,was somewhere around Fayetteville, and he knew that another Fed¬eral general, a new one, Francis J. Herron, was in the vicinity ofYellville, where he was menacing a Confederate arsenal and saltpetreworks. Blunt was reported to have 8,000 men and actually had 5,000;Herron was in command of the First Iowa, Tenth Illinois, and Sec¬ond Wisconsin regiments, all crack troops, in addition to MissouriThe Iron Brigade: Cane Hilli35and Arkansas Union troops. Hindman was alarmed by their presenceand determined to get them out.Holmes knew that Hindman was bent upon a Missouri campaign,but the Richmond government was importuning him for Arkansastroops to reinforce the Confederate armies east of the Mississippi. Infairness to General Holmes it must be said that he did not have enoughtroops to reinforce Vicksburg and reconquer Missouri too; but hewas not planning to do either. He simply played off one demandagainst the other; when Richmond wanted troops east of the Missis¬sippi, he spoke of the need in Arkansas and Missouri; when Hind¬man wanted troops he complained that the Richmond governmentwas always after him for soldiers. Nevertheless, he yielded to Hind¬man to this extent: Hindman could use his troops of the northwesternArkansas forces to drive the enemy from the Arkansas River Valley,if possible, and end the threat of invasion; but after that he mustreturn with his forces to Little Rock.Hindman agreed, and sent off Marmaduke with two brigades ofcavalry through the Boston Mountains on November 17, 1862, forthe purpose of drawing off Blunt and preventing him from makinga junction with Herron. Blunt was even closer than Hindman thought.He was fifteen miles south of Maysville, at a place called Lindsey’sPrairie. Infiltration of Arkansas by Federal troops was going aheadwithout interruption, and Hindman was fully justified in his appre¬hension that an attack on Van Buren and Little Rock was in themaking.Shelby’s brigade moved at the head of Marmaduke’s columnsthrough Van Buren on the night of the 17th, camped for a fewhours, and then swung into the saddles again—“on and on over therugged road, the swollen and rocky streams, through the eternal soli¬tude of the Boston Mountains, whose gigantic peaks, pine-crownedand majestic, rose up into the cold, gray clouds, winter on their hoaryheads, but not upon their feet; and down again to the lovely valleyof Cane Hill, nestled in among the great blue hills as cosily as adomestic housewife.” 1They arrived at Cane Hill, four days ahead of the battle, by theTelegraph Road....That term has a familiar ring in Confederate history, and a clatterof terrible urgency... blue troopers in the moonlight on the Tele-136Shelby the Raidergraph Road in Virginia, as Sheridan rides for Richmond ... with Yel¬low Tavern and a dying Stuart at the end, in ’64.... But on theTelegraph Road to Cane Hill, there had been no sergeant in dustyblue to empty his pistol at the rebel colonel on the horse... the onein the plumed hat, as he breathed the frosty air of the mountains.The Telegraph Road through the Boston Mountains, for Shelby, wasa beginning, as the Telegraph Road in Virginia, for Stuart, was theend.There had been Federals in the neighborhood a few days before,under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Lewis R. Jewell of theSixth Kansas—mark the name, for he figures in a curious way in theBattle of Cane Hill—but except for a few scouts whom Colonel Jewellhad left in his rear, the Federals had trotted on back across the moun¬tain to General Blunt. As a result of the report made by Jewell toBlunt, the latter sent word to General Schofield that if given a smallreinforcement he could take both Van Buren and Fort Smith—pro¬vided Schofield sent General Frederick Steele to occupy the attentionof Holmes so that he could not reinforce Hindman. It will be seenthat Hindman and Blunt both had the same plan, a leaf straight outof the pages of Caesar and Napoleon... divide and conquer.The second day at Cane Hill, Shelby sent out scouting parties. Oneof them sabred a party of Pin Indians while they were sleeping, andanother made contact with the scouts Jewell had left behind, butcame off badly in the encounter.2On the third day of camp the soldiers were pleasantly awakened.“Even before the most industrious soldier would have risen in allprobability from his frosty blankets,” says Edwards, “a young andbeautiful girl, Miss Susan McClellan, a fair rebel living four miles tothe west of Cane Hill, came tripping into camp, bareheaded and endeshabille, to inform Colonel Shelby that six hundred Federal cavalry,from the direction of Fort Smith, had just passed her father’s houseto surprise him. The roses on her cheeks deepened beneath the admir¬ing gaze of her auditors, but her fine eyes never quailed, nor did herpatriotic earnestness waver. Giving her a guard of honor, ten stalwartcavaliers, Colonel Shelby said to her that the enemy’s movementswere known, and that his men were concealed behind a large fencebordering a level cornfield through which the Federals must advance.... Sure enough, Miss McClellan had not preceded their arrival morethan thirty minutes, and her preparations to see the fight had scarcelyThe Iron Brigade: Cane Hill137been completed before the Federals entered the cornfield in fine styleand advanced in line of battle upon the crouching Confederates.”The fight which Miss McClellan tidied up to enjoy now ensued,but there are two versions as to how it ended—Federal and Confed¬erate. Major Edwards says that three thousand muskets poured hotshot into the enemy from behind the snaky fence, and that “the welldressed line melted away like snow in a thaw, and shivering to thepitiless shock every living man turned and fled in one rushing, frenziedmass ... the yelling Confederates following on foot until distanced inthe race.”General Blunt makes a one-line report of this affair: “A detach¬ment sent from my command attacked a large reconnoitering partyof the enemy and scattered them.” This sounds like a report of theaffair of the day before, when Major Edwards says that a small scout¬ing party was driven in; but it is not, for it is a report of activities onNovember 25, the third day in camp, and the day on which MajorEdwards insists that a victory was won for the edification of “thefair rebel” who had entered the camp en deshabille. Edwards saysthat afterward they cheered Miss McClellan, Marmaduke thankedShelby for his “watchfulness,” and made known the fact that “theladies of Little Rock had presented him with two beautiful bannersto be given to the company and regiment which most distinguishedthemselves in the next battle.” It was a great day, the twenty-fifth ofNovember, the first on which the homespun knights actually had aGuinevere present, and Major Edwards made the most of it.Blunt was in no mood for either jousting or jesting. He had hiseye on Van Buren, and his spies had informed him of Marmaduke’sadvance and disposition of his forces, which were just south ofCane Hill. Blunt had no great opinion of the enemy in front of him.“Shall strike him at daylight, unless he runs,” 3 he wrote to Schofield,and late in the evening of November 26 began his march to Cane Hill.Cane Hill is at the beginning of the Boston Mountain chain, andBlunt arrived there two days later, having covered a distance of thirtymiles. Tersely he describes the beginning of the battle:“I marched at 5 a.m. on the 28th, leaving the (main) road andmaking a detour to the left, by a blind track; struck one that wasobscure and unfrequented and entered Cane Hill directly from thenorth. As I had anticipated, they had no pickets on this road, and Imet no resistance until within half a mile of their camp.”138Shelby the RaiderThe Confederates were expecting Blunt; he could not have moved5,000 men, 30 guns, cavalry and wagons across the prairie and amountain just a few miles distant without their knowing it, but theywere not expecting him to make a detour, and if his infantry hadnot unexpectedly lagged behind his cavalry, he would have caughtthem napping.Shelby’s report says, “Having had due notice (eighteen hours previ¬ous) by the general commanding that the enemy were advancing, weendeavored to be on the alert, but I must confess (though it mayreflect somewhat upon myself) that the enemy, by skilfull manage¬ment, fell upon me sooner than I desired, considering that a portionof our division was encamped some distance in my rear and I hadbut little time to give them the notice required; yet I had sufficienttime to place my men in their proper positions and await the comingof the hated foe.” 4The style is not Shelby’s; plainly Captain Edwards has rejoinedhim and taken over the duty of writing reports. The report saysthat “we had expected [the enemy] to advance either on the Cincin¬nati or Fayetteville Road, our position covering both.” Shelby hadonly two guns with which to cover the two approaches. (There wereonly six in Marmaduke’s entire command.) Two little six-pounders,turned in opposite directions, awaiting the coming of 5,000 men and30 pieces of artillery. And only 2,000 men in the rear to meet thehurricane of fire which 5,000 men and 30 pieces of artillery can loose.(Carroll’s brigade had only 389 out of 1,700 present; the rest wereShelby’s 5 but he had only about two thirds of his normal muster rollof 2,500.)Blunt, however, was one of the Federal commanders who alwaysbelieved the reports of Confederate strength which Hindman’s spiesbrought him, and as he marched through the town of Cane Hill, ona cloudy November morning, he believed that Marmaduke had 8,000men, probably with artillery to match. He would not have marchedthrough Cane Hill at all if he had known that the 200 Kansas cavalrytrotting in his rear, hauling two light mountain howitzers and fourheavy guns under a Captain Rabb, were his only effective force atthe moment. The other 4,800 of his men were still struggling over amountain road seven miles in his rear, but Blunt says that “Of thisI was not apprised until my advance was engaged.” 6With the enemy in sight, Shelby trained both guns on the Fayette-The Iron Brigade: Cane Hill139ville road, into which Blunt and his cavalry escort had channeled, andhurled a few shells in their direction. At the same time Marmaduke’svidettes, lurking in the brush in a gorge between two hills, openedfire on the blue-capped horsemen of the Third Kansas. Sabres swing¬ing, the Kansans rode into the defile, and the videttes, whom Blunthad mistaken for “the grand guard” 7 of the enemy, fell back. Bythis time the Federal gunners had set up their six guns and wereblasting away at Shelby’s position on the summit of the hill. Thesound of cannon brought Marmaduke apace from the main camp,but knowing the strength of the enemy—and not knowing that thatstrength was divided—he adopted an immediate policy of watchfulwaiting. For the next hour Shelby’s gunners exchanged broadsideswith the Federals, who strangely made no move, and Marmadukeformed two lines of defense on the ridges in back of him.When he halted just south of Cane Hill, Blunt was in the positionof a stagecoach driver, hurtling along a mountain road, who looksaround at a turn to discover that his perch and two wheels is allthat is left of his vehicle. He was at the head of an army, but it wasnowhere in sight, and the enemy was in front of him. He sent a staffofficer—Major V. P. Van Antwerp—at a gallop to see where his lag¬gard columns were, with orders to “bring them on the double-quick”for a flanking movement to dislodge the rebel gunners on the hill“and perhaps capture their artillery.” 8 Van Antwerp took a longtime, for he had to ride a great distance—this was the delay whichpuzzled Marmaduke—and when he returned he had only four com¬panies of the Eleventh Kansas and a four-gun battery. The others,he reported, “were too far in the rear and the men much too fatiguedby the march to reach me in time.” 9With ten guns, however, Blunt could sweep the field, and with sixcompanies at hand he decided to risk battle despite what he believedto be the superiority of the enemy’s forces. Sending four companiesahead under Major Van Antwerp, to attack, and retaining the twocompanies of the Third Kansas in reserve, he ordered the reinforcedbatteries to begin a work of destruction on the ridge which shelteredMarmaduke’s main line and Shelby’s guns.Thus, after a false start or two, began the engagement at CaneHill, Blunt, the well-named soldier, dismisses the opening clash withone line in his report. Van Antwerp, he says, “after the artillery hadbeen very destructive to the enemy, compelled them to abandon their140Shelby the Raiderposition.” 10 Major Edwards, who was a participant as well as aneyewitness of the battle, says the same thing in different words:“In sooth, it was a glorious sight. A strong northwest wind toredown the yellow leaves in great gusts of broken pinions, and flaredthe rival flags in broad defiance above the rival armies. Every move¬ment of Blunt could be plainly seen in the valley below, and his longlines came gleaming on“ ‘Ere the life-blood warm and wetHad dimmed a glistening bayonet.’“Collins opened first and shot a great gap in the leading regimentwhile the stars and stripes went down dimmed in the battle’s van. Ahundred eager hands grasped the fallen banner, but a fresh dischargescattered the regiment like chaff to the shelter of the woods beyond.There went up a fierce yell from the Confederates, and their skir¬mishers ran swarming down the hill to engage at closer range. Batteryafter battery rolled up to the front and poured a terrible fire uponShelby’s devoted brigade, waiting for the onset—a fire rarely if eversurpassed for terrible accuracy and precision. Ahead of all [the Fed¬eral guns] plied their bloody trade, and shredded life and limb awaylike stubble in the lava tide.... When Blunt threw forward a largeforce of infantry for the assault... three times they came to the deathgrapple and three times Shelby’s lone brigade hurled them back inconfusion. Suddenly, two heavy [Federal] columns broke away tothe right and left, and General Marmaduke knew further resistancewould be useless. The bugles sounded retreat, and Shelby moved offin magnificent style, bringing with him his dead and wounded.” 11It will be seen that to Edwards, the incurable adventurer and ro¬manticist, any battle was a “glorious” sight, whether it was beingwon or lost; but Shelby had no time for heroics and from the momenthe had seen Blunt’s overwhelming forces advancing up the valleyturnpike at nine o’clock that morning, he had realized that GeneralMarmaduke was in a trap. As Edwards says—this time without exag¬geration—Shelby’s outstanding trait was “an almost infallible divina¬tion of the enemy’s designs and a rare analysis which enabled him,step by step, to fathom movements and unravel demonstrations as ifhe held the printed programme in his hand.” 12The outstanding factor in the present situation was that, in theThe Iron Brigade: Cane HillI4Irugged country to their rear, retreat would be difficult. By the sametoken, so would pursuit. In an intuitive flash, Shelby had the answer.To make retreat easy, it would be necessary to make pursuit difficult.A lone brigade against five brigades would stand no chance in cov¬ering such a retreat. But a brigade is thirty companies. Suppose youplaced thirty companies at distances an eighth of a mile apart alongthe route ... properly concealed... that would be thirty firing posi¬tions. The positions could not be held, of course, but that would notbe necessary. The company next the enemy would only have to fireat point-blank range, break rapidly into column, gallop immediatelybehind the other twenty-nine still formed, and take position again forthe same maneuver. Thus, advancing forces would meet continuallya solid, deadly tempest of lead driving into their very faces, and thecompanies delivering their fire in rotation would have ample time toreload carefully and select the most excellent positions.It is one thing to dream up such academic solutions while seatedin a comfortable chair at the War College or before a fire with brotherofficers in a club. It is another to improvise such a plan and put itinto execution with the enemy swirling about you and one of yourtwo guns suddenly smashed by the direct hit of an enemy shell, whichwas what was happening now ... but Shelby did it. He not only savedMarmaduke’s command at Cane Hill, he evolved on the spur of themoment a plan which he used to bloody perfection over and overagain when he was on his great raids into Missouri.Somehow, in all that confusion, he got word to his regimental com¬manders, Gordon, Jeans, and Thompson, and to Elliott’s and Quan-trill’s scouts (still commanded by Gregg), as to what they must do.And somehow, in that six weeks at Cross Hollows, he had built anorganization which could receive such orders, under such circum¬stances, and carry them out.Shelby’s brigade—it would earn the title of Iron Brigade—was alonein the fight now. Colonel Carroll’s Arkansans had cut and run in thevery first breath of the hurricane, “and thundered away to Van Buren,carrying tidings of defeat and disaster.” 13 Collins and Bledsoe werestaring at their disabled gun, so badly smashed that it could not bemoved by horses. But they and their cannoneers did more than stare.They gathered up the entire gun carriage, “crippled but trium¬phant,” 14 and staggered under its weight down the incline of theridge. It was not the first time that day—the fight lasted all day, thanks142Shelby the Raiderto Shelby, until the last man got clean away on the other side of themountain—that the men of the brigade took the place of the horsesof the artillery when the horses could no longer move the guns.From ridge to ridge, Colonel Carroll observes, they bore their guns,“unwilling to leave any trophy in the hands of their country’s en¬emy.” 15 His admiration is all the more touching in view of the factthat his own men had fled somewhere back of the landscape.Marmaduke fell back first to his reserve line on the second ridge,then to another, then to still another, and finally to a large moundor pillar, completely nude of vegetation, at the base of the BostonMountains, where he was able to plant his artillery firmly and gatherall of Shelby’s men about him for a breathing space. He had beenable to accomplish this because Blunt’s progress had been painfullyslow. There was nothing in the copybooks about what to do whenthe enemy retreats by means of a series of offensives, and the slow-witted Blunt apparently never realized exactly the nature of the opera¬tion Shelby was conducting.“I felt assured,” he said, “that they had resolved on a desperateresistance, and made my arrangements accordingly; but after gettingmy force across a deep and rugged ravine, and deploying them inposition, ready to advance upon their long and well formed line, Idiscovered, to my disappointment, that they had again retired, andwere in full retreat to the mountains.” This happened four times inthree miles, according to his own statement.16After three miles of retreating, Shelby style (“Let the enemy'sadvance pass before firing/”)17 the men, the horses, and the artilleryof the brigade were firmly ensconced on their pinnacle, and Shelby’sgunners were able again to direct their fire at the enemy’s infantry.Apparently the ease with which they had escaped to a formidableposition now made both Marmaduke and Shelby reluctant to proceedat once with the retreat. Men and horses would welcome a rest; butmorale was high. In fact, the brigade was jubilant as Shelby’s mengazed down at the blue-gray haze of the valley below. They had asteeplejack’s view of the Federals, and their situation was pleasing.Just then the sun, which had been behind the November clouds allday, burst through with a fiery, winter-glazed radiance which almostreached the tips of the Boston Mountains in the southwestern sky.A wild shout went up at the happy omen, and Shelby, pointing tothe blazing sky with his plume, said, “It is the sun of Austerlitz!”The Iron Brigade: Cane Hilli43Recently he was becoming acquainted with military history underthe tutelage of Edwards. But it was not the sun of Austerlitz forMarmaduke; the swarming Federals in the valley still outnumberedhim five to two.Blunt reconnoitred the ground in front of Marmaduke’s new posi¬tion and decided that the terrain was not suitable for an artillery bom¬bardment;18 and he had had enough of flank attacks. He ordered hismen to take the hill by storm.This they did, and not all the picaresque prose of the Southernhistorians can conceal the fact that the men of the Second Kansas,the Eleventh Kansas, and the Third Cherokee Indian Regiment madea charge at sunset that day as brave as any in American history. Bluntsays his Kansans were bloodthirstily eager to come to grips with theMissourians, and he was doubtless right, for there was bad bloodbetween them to start, and at Cane Hill Shelby had been thwartingand tormenting them all day.“The resistance of the rebels was stubborn and determined,” Bluntsays in his report. “The storm of lead and iron hail that came downthe side of the mountain, both from their small arms and their artil¬lery, was terrific; yet most of it went over our heads without doingus much damage. The regiments named, with a wild shout, rushedup the steep declivity, contesting every inch of ground, and steadilypushing the enemy before them, until the crest was reached, whenthe rebels fled again in wild disorder.” 19The rebels retreated, but not in wild disorder, for Shelby againcovered the retreat in precisely the same manner as from Cane Hill,down three miles of winding mountain road, toward the valley inwhich Van Buren stands. Blunt paused on the mountain top longenough to bring up the rest of his artillery, then sent his Indians(whom Edwards says he had “stimulated with drink”) and the Elev¬enth Kansas after the Confederates, but once again he was confrontedwith the mystery of an enemy who was supposed to be running,but actually was fighting. “About every half mile,” he says, “theenemy made a stand [thus contradicting his own description of “wilddisorder”] and as often the howitzers of the Eleventh Kansas andThird Indian would put them to flight, leaving more or less of theirdead and wounded behind them. Thus the fight continued for threemiles.”Three times during the three-mile retreat, Shelby’s horse was shot44Shelby the Raiderand killed beneath him—a horse for every mile. All three were sorrels—one of them cut down by eleven bullets at once—and during therest of the war Shelby would ride only a sorrel, believing that hebore a charmed life as long as he rode one. A pistol ball carried awayhis black plume, his uniform was soaked with the blood of the horses,and the blood of one of his officers spurted into his face as the enemy’sshrapnel swept them—but he remained with the rear company untilthe last of Marmaduke’s regiments had streamed to the base of themountain in the oncoming dark.At the intersection of the Cove Creek road with the Fayettevilleroad, leading to Van Buren, Shelby again brought his guns into posi¬tion. (One of the two wrecked guns had been patched up sufficientlyto go into action again, so that he now had five.) With darknessupon them, he expected Blunt to try one last charge before givingup the pursuit.His surmise was correct. Blunt hurled the three companies of theSixth Kansas under Lieutenant Colonel Jewell straight into the rearof the Confederates, with sabres and carbines, for a distance of halfa mile; his men were again deceived into thinking that everythingon two feet ahead of them was running. The order of the day waspassed to Shelby’s gunners once more: “Let the enemy's advance passbefore firing!”Blunt admits that he was ambushed. “As soon as the party we werepursuing had passed through the defile,” he says, “they opened uponus a most destructive fire, which, for the moment, caused my mento recoil and give back, in spite of my own efforts and those of theofficers to rally them; whereas, if they had, after receiving the enemy’sfire, passed on 200 or 300 yards, we could have secured, in a momentmore, what we so much coveted—the enemy’s artillery.”Jewell went down, mortally wounded, and Shelby ordered a charge.“Emboldened by their success in defending the defile and checkingour advance,” says Blunt, “they raised a wild yell and advanced to¬ward us.... I succeeded in rallying the companies of the Sixth Kan¬sas, who had suffered severely, and formed them across the valley.”The stand made here was necessary for salvation, as Major Ed¬wards says. His own horse had been killed, and Edwards’ eyewitnessdescription of the savage scene on the wild mountain side, as darkcame down swiftly, is one of his best: “Blunt’s troops took no prison¬ers, and had broken through the rear by one long bloody, tenaciousThe Iron Brigade: Cane Hill 145charge. The narrow road, rough and filled with huge stones, wascrowded by a rushing, thundering, panic stricken mass, riding forlife, as imagined, down a huge hill and over a deep stream at thebottom. It was a fearful moment. The ground shook and sounded asif undergoing some terrible convulsion. Sabres were whirling, pistolscracking incessantly, the peculiar Indian yell—a wailing, mournfulsound, loud above all—and thus the human avalanche rushed down.It was swallowing up Shelby’s lines as it came. He could erect nobarrier strong enough to check it. In a moment then he ordered hisregiment to open its ranks for the tide to sweep through, which itdid with the rush of a hurricane, knocking men right and left overprecipices and into deep pools. Hall Shindler, attached to the staffof Colonel Shelby, while bravely attempting to bring some order outof the confusion, was literally ridden over, and finally knocked by ablundering horse down a steep place into the water below.” 20Shelby’s horse was shot from under him for the fourth time thatday, and as he rolled away from its kicking, shrilly neighing form,he heard the thunder of the guns die down. Night and a flag of trucehad ended the battle, and only the terrible sounds of the woundedmen and the mangled horses, mingled with the noise of the rushingstream, were heard. Shelby got to his feet, called to Edwards in thedark, and the two of them fumbled for the bridles of a pair of rider¬less mounts. General Marmaduke was somewhere back there, at thehead of the line. Shelby’s presence of mind, and the devotion of someof his officers, had saved the cavalry brigade of the Army of North¬western Arkansas that day.What happened next has been made the subject of much historicalembroidery. A number of Southern historians 21 say that Blunt sentover the flag of truce, asking a suspension of hostilities to gather upthe wounded and bury the dead, and asking for the body of ColonelJewell. A highly imaginary conversation is recorded in which Bluntis supposed to have told Marmaduke and Shelby, “Your men foughtlike devils.... Two hundred and fifty of my best men fallen, andmore heroic young officers than I can hope to get again.” Shelby isquoted as having asked, “How many men did you fight us withtoday?” and Blunt is quoted as having replied, “I am ashamed to tellyou, but more than you had to meet me.”In all probability, Shelby asked some such question, and got noanswer from Blunt as to his strength; the rest is purest moonshine.146Shelby the RaiderIn the first place, Colonel Jewell was not dead. He was wounded,although mortally. (He died later in the Federal camp.) Secondly,Blunt did not send over an officer with a flag of truce. Marmadukesent one to him. That was the lull in the firing when Shelby’s horsewas killed. Having seen Marmaduke’s officer galloping up with awhite flag, Blunt directed that “not a gun should be fired until Igive the word.” 22 He granted the truce, he says, “out of considera¬tion for Colonel Jewell and others who had fallen upon the groundthey then occupied, and whom I feared they might brutally murder... convinced though I was at the time that it [the flag of truce]was a cowardly trick, resorted to to enable them to make good theirretreat and save their guns.” 23So far from admitting 250 casualties, Blunt reports that he hadfour men killed and thirty-six wounded, four of them mortally and“since dead.” As for the calibre of the troops opposing them, remem¬bering the flight of the Arkansas troops, he said later, “I am preparedto meet and with my little army whip 25,000 of such chivalry.” 24And he added that “an officer who came inside our lines [under theflag of truce] that night acknowledged that they were badly whippedand worse chased.”Such conflicting reports are the rule rather than the exception inthe official accounts given by participants in the war west of the Mis¬sissippi, and they are not unknown in other theatres. General Bluntwas a most sarcastic man,25 and as a result of the Battle of Cane Hillthe District of Western Arkansas was added to his command. Butthe plain fact is that, thanks to Jo Shelby and his adaptation of Indianwarfare to the cavalry, Blunt had been unable between 9 a.m. andsunset to capture an enemy whom he outnumbered five to two andwho was never more than a few yards away at any time.14. The Iron Brigade: Prairie GroveThe battle of cane hill had been a feeling-out fight. Marma¬duke, halted with his division at Dripping Springs at the foot ofthe mountain down which he had been driven, sent a courier to Hind¬man for orders. Hindman sent back word for Marmaduke to stayThe Iron Brigade: Prairie Grover47where he was; he himself would be coming up with 9,000 men ad¬ditional and twenty-two guns to strike Blunt at Cane Hill. Hindmanknew that his force vastly outnumbered that of Blunt, and althoughhis equipment was in poor condition and his rations meagre, he hadHolmes’s permission to fight1 and nothing on earth could have kepthim from marching on Cane Hill.Blunt had retired into Newburg, one of several little towns in thevicinity of Cane Hill which, though it appears to be in a valley, isactually one of the low-lying ridges north of the Boston Mountainchain. There he was separated from Hindman by some forty milesof rugged and sterile mountain range, through which the roads, ifthey could be called that, were excessively bad. At his own back,however, there was an excellent road, the main highway runningnorth to Fayetteville and Springfield, along which General Herroncould march to his reinforcement at the drop of a telegraphic dispatch.Blunt was in much the better spot, militarily speaking, of the two,and the morale of his men, Pin Indians and all, was high. They hadmade the enemy run, in their first invasion of Arkansas; they hadseen their superior artillery scatter great bodies of rebel horsemenwhose rags fluttered like pennons in the hot hurricane. Confident andcocky, as they swilled down great quantities of the peach and applebrandy for which Washington County is famous, they were readyto enjoy another such uneven contest any day.General Blunt, however, still believed that Hindman had 25,000 or30,000 men2 (Hindman had a positive genius for mystifying theenemy as to his strength), and on December 3, when spies broughthim word that Hindman was on the move, he telegraphed GeneralHerron, in something like alarm, suggesting an immediate consolida¬tion of forces.Herron was not as close by as he had been; he had fallen backfrom the Huntsville-Yellville neighborhood to the peace and quiet ofSpringfield, and was camped on the old battlefield of Wilson’s Creek,but he responded immediately to Blunt’s call. He telegraphed thesame day: “Will move both divisions entire at noon today and willmake good time to your position.... The distance is so great it maybe necessary for you to fall back a short distance, but I will do mybest to make that unnecessary.” 3Hindman’s plan of campaign was perfectly shaped and adapted tothe country in which he would wage it. This whole area between Van148Shelby the RaiderBuren and Fayetteville, a distance of fifty or sixty-five miles depend¬ing on the route traveled, is crisscrossed with country roads as thickas blood vessels. There are four principal roads leading through themountains, but Hindman was concerned with only one: the CoveCreek Road, which branches off the Telegraph Road nineteen milesabove Van Buren, and strikes for Fayetteville through defiles, valleys,and eventually over prairies. This Cove Creek Road, however, hasa little offshoot of a road at a place called Morrow’s, which runs di¬rectly into Cane Hill—and the distance is only seven miles. That wasHindman’s route: Telegraph Road, Cove Creek Road, turn off atMorrow’s, march seven miles to Cane Hill. And while he did so, theplan was to send Marmaduke and Shelby straight ahead on CoveCreek Road until they came to another back trail—the Maysvillebranch—where they would gallop to the left and rear of Blunt andattack him on the flank.If this plan is objected to on the ground that it leaves GeneralHerron out of the picture, the objection is valid. Hindman had askedHolmes to take care of Herron by using some of the troops at LittleRock to make a feint in his direction and thus distract his attentionwhile the main force of the expedition surrounded Blunt. Holmes hadagreed to do this, Edwards says,4 but he did not do it. Perhaps be¬cause Herron seemed to be retreating toward Springfield, or perhapsbecause he feared an attack on Little Rock from the direction ofHelena—where no danger threatened—the General-in-chief of theTrans-Mississippi Department simply drew his troops about him likean old man drawing on an overcoat against the cold, and did nothing.On the morning of December 3, then, as Blunt became duly in¬formed, Hindman assembled his troops at Van Buren and marchedup the Telegraph Road to join Marmaduke. There was never anydoubt about Flindman’s plan, as the author of Confederate MilitaryHistory at this point seems to think.5 Blunt was Hindman’s quarry;Herron did not enter into his calculations at all. The only thing thatwas in Hindman’s mind as he joined Marmaduke was this: Bluntcould use these back-country roads too. While he was turning offthe Telegraph Road, marching north and turning right to Cane Hill,what was to prevent Blunt from slipping across the mountain by thesame road along which he had driven Marmaduke and Shelby threedays before? To permit Blunt on that road would be to put him onThe Iron Brigade: Prairie Grove 149the road to Van Buren and Little Rock. Hindman could easily out¬smart himself here.To seal off this route, and to confuse Blunt as to his real plans,Hindman now sent Colonel J. C. Monroe with the Arkansas Brigade(they were back again, minus Colonel Carroll) on foot up the boulder-strewn road over which Shelby had fought, with instructions to fireon Blunt’s pickets from the crest of the mountain and kick up enoughcommotion to make Blunt believe that they constituted the advanceguard of the main force.Shelby’s brigade (now designated the Fourth Missouri Cavalry)was reserved for the real work of drawing the enemy into a battlein which he could be whipped. It must be done quickly, for Hind¬man had barely enough ammunition for one battle “and not suffi¬cient subsistence and forage for seven days at half rations.” 6 Thesemeagre supplies had been accumulated with extreme difficulty. TheArkansas countryside was exhausted, and even if supplies had beenavailable, the river at Van Buren was so low that they could nothave been transported by water. In Hindman’s own words, “Thesefacts made it certain that I must soon retire the greater part of my forcetoward Little Rock, hence it seemed important... that Blunt be drivenfrom his position.” Hindman was relying on his superiority of num¬bers to encompass Blunt. With 11,000 men, he outnumbered theKansan better than two to one.As Monroe’s Arkansas riflemen—dismounted—moved cautiouslyalong either side of the road against the mountain which loomedahead of them at Dripping Springs,7 the rest of Hindman’s armymoved in a northerly direction on the Cove Creek Road. It was atypical mountain creek road, difficult of passage for poorly shodhorses, wagons with wheels loosened by much jolting, and frayedharness which frequently snapped as the caissons strained and strug¬gled over the outcroppings of rock—but Hindman pushed his com¬mand eight miles the first day. Although this was good progress,considering the obstacles, he was, on the fifth of December, onlyhalf the distance to Morrow’s crossroads—a full day behind schedulein a movement in which time was vital.On the fifth, while the infantry was making its eight-mile march,Shelby’s scouts, ranging ahead, encountered a peacefully trotting com¬pany of bluecaps of the First Kansas, with a captain in the lead. “AfterI5°Shelby the Raidera sharp little fight,” says Shelby’s report, “my advance ... drove himback in great confusion.” 8That brush, of course, advertised their position to Blunt: as soonas the men of the First Kansas reported back to Cane Hill, the Fed¬eral general sent a “much larger scout” over the mountain to lookinto matters on the Cove Creek Road. Under fire from Shelby’s men,they retreated, having seen enough: Shelby had unlimbered his bat¬teries and dismounted the entire First Regiment of his command incase they should try a charge. Major Edwards’ disappointment thatthey did not do so is keen in his report: “During this engagement,”he says, “the First Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel B. F. Gordon, andthe Third, Colonel G. W. Thompson, [were] dismounted and formedas support to Bledsoe’s battery, now in position, with lighted port¬fires and eager gunners, keen for the fray that grew fainter and fainteras Colonel Jeans’ [cavalry] pushed them hard and heavily, until thegrand old mountains gave no murmur back, and all was silent, cold,and still.”As the Federals escaped in the direction of Cane Hill, Hindmansuggested to Shelby that he send Major Ben Elliott by another moun¬tain trail to try to head them off, and interrupt Blunt’s flow of infor¬mation: Elliott departed on this assignment at nightfall with a battalionof scouts, “but owing to the darkness of the night, the rugged andimpassable road, and the ignorance of the guide,” Elliott, that trainedV. M. I. graduate, got lost in the mountains, and “the expeditionfailed in its essential points.” 9Long before the winter dawn of the sixth, Shelby had every manin his brigade awakened, armed, and in the saddle for a pell-melldash to Morrow’s crossroads, to take possession of the approachesto the road which leads direct to Cane Hill. At Morrow’s, they foundthe neighborhood swarming with Federals. Shelby attacked, for heknew that Hindman was in motion behind him, and should be almostwithin hailing distance. Shelby was a cavalryman, but he knew whento dismount. The time was now. He waved his men from the saddlewith his plumed hat, and every man who had a gun capable of firingat even shotgun range advanced on the wooded mountain. Blunt’spickets, too, knew that this was it. They stood and fought, when theycould, but they were up against hill fighters, these bluecoated boysfrom the plains of Kansas, and Shelby’s men smashed them threetimes as they attempted to form a line below the crest of the ridge.The Iron Brigade: Prairie GroveI5IShelby’s report says that the three companies which he had orderedinto the advance “drove in the enemy’s pickets with great rapidityand execution, although he made three different stands and foughtme three times.” The men, he says, “were this morning keen for afight, and went furiously up the steep and rugged mountain at thedouble quick for miles.”Actually it was five miles, five miles of fighting through treacher¬ous gullies and over rock slabs which would have slowed down thehardiest infantry that tried to cross them on the double-quick; butShelby’s men were mountain goats, in addition to being “half alli¬gator and half horse.” When they finally gained the heights andsaw no more enemy in sight, they were staggering from exhaustion,and the reaction from battle tension. Their legs buckled, and theythrew themselves panting on the ground, careless of where theirweapons fell.The infantry was not far behind, and when Hindman rode up, hesaw that Shelby and his men had fought themselves into the stateof collapse from which soldiers cannot be aroused, unless they arerelieved; he ordered them back to camp. The infantry—these wereParsons’ brigade—was directed to hold the ground which Shelby hadgained. Colonel Monroe, who had carried out his assignment on themountaintop the previous day and had rejoined Parsons, was orderedforward with skirmishers of the Arkansas brigade. For the rest ofthe day, Monroe harried the enemy on the downward slopes, “charg¬ing a superior force of the enemy’s cavalry with great boldness andvigor, breaking his ranks, and only ceasing to pursue when recalled.” 10Shelby’s men were permitted “some little sleep,” but not until theyhad cooked three days’ rations and made preparations to move north¬ward again: they must bivouac tonight on the Maysville Road, alongwhich Hindman would push one prong of his two-pronged attack inthe morning. The attack by the Maysville Road, with Marmadukeand Shelby leading the way, was to be the important one. Theywould describe a wide circle, crossing the Fayetteville and Cane HillRoad as they did so, assail Blunt on his left and in his rear, dislodgehim from Cane Hill, and drive him into the waiting arms of Parsons—the old man of the mountain, who would blast him as he fell backinto the already bloodstained ridges.It was a good plan, though it was to miscarry. In fact, if it hadl52Shelby the Raidernot been for Herron, Blunt on the morning of the seventh wouldhave faced a choice of being destroyed or leaving the country alto¬gether—providing he could find an escape route across the plains.General Schofield, the supreme Federal commander in the West, sawit all later when he exclaimed angrily that Blunt and Herron werebunglers who had been outwitted “in detail,” 11 thus unintentionallyconferring a compliment on Hindman, who had thought of every¬thing.Shelby’s men, however, on this Saturday afternoon—the sixth wasa Saturday—were thinking of nothing but food and sleep, and theyrolled into their blankets as soon as they had eaten their rations inthe camp on the Maysville Branch. No jugs and fiddles this Satur¬day, or dances before the campfire, as on the warm and starry fieldat Wilson’s Creek. “After encamping,” Shelby reports, “I doubledmy guards, threw out infantry skirmishers in every direction, underthe charge of trusty officers, and lay down with the conscious satis¬faction that neither Federal, Kansas jayhawker nor Pin Indian couldsurprise us, and if they came they would meet with a bloody andhospitable welcome, for I had ordered my entire brigade upon theslightest alarm to form rapidly as infantry and sleep upon loadedarms.”On the night of the sixth, Hindman held a last-minute conferencewith his infantry division commanders, General Francis A. Shoup(like Marmaduke a West Pointer), G. S. Shaver, M. M. Parsons, J. F.Fagan, and D. M. Frost, who had commanded the militia at CampJackson. While the plan for the next day was being worked out indetail, a courier from Shelby brought news that Federal forces, pre¬sumably Herron’s—were encamped to the west and north, a few milesup the Fayetteville Road. Shelby had not made the mistake that Rainsmade at Wilson’s Creek. His scouts knew the whereabouts of all thevarmints in the countryside, including Herron’s. The presence ofHerron was very bad news; Hindman’s whole plan was predicatedon the supposition that the Fayetteville Road would be enemy-free;but it was too late to change, and he gave his final orders. Shelbywas to find Herron in the morning and attack him. The whole armywould follow, rout him if possible, and countermarch to fight Blunt.It was a large order, but Hindman was a fighter, and as he explainsin his report, “to withdraw without fighting at all would discouragemy own troops and so embolden the enemy as to insure his follow-The Iron Brigade: Prairie Grovei5 3ing me up. His sudden concentration of troops justified the opinionthat a movement against me was intended in any event.” 12At three o’clock in the morning, Hindman was up and about, andso were the troops, but his artillery and wagon trains were hardly inshape to move at all, much less advance into battle. It took a full hourto set everything right that had gone wrong at the last moment, andin his report he says, “The command was not set in motion untilnearly four o’clock, and then the route proved so excessively bad,and the detentions so frequent from the breaking of artillery harnessand debility of the battery animals that the infantry failed to marchabove two miles an hour.” 13 For the animals dying of starvationthere was no forage; for the men there were half a day’s rationsleft. In such condition, and worse, the troops of the Southern Con¬federacy fought for four years. For the sublime insanity of theirsacrifice, their war is remembered, when all the other foolish warsare forgotten.Shelby’s brigade moved much faster. His horses were in bettershape—he kept them fed no matter how shrill the cries from theplundered commissaries or the requisitioned settlers. At three o’clockhis men, refreshed from their long sleep, rolled out of their blankets,munched their rations, and rode off, a little stiff-legged, in the direc¬tion of the Telegraph Road from Fayetteville. There, a little beforesunrise, they made contact with the enemy, a company of the SeventhU. S. Missouri Cavalry Volunteers, followed at a short distance byrenegade Arkansas cavalry of the First U. S. Arkansas.Jo Shelby, out of the mountains, with room to turn the cavalry,could wield it like a whip, and the crash of the carbines against theblue troopers was like a flash fire on the Telegraph Road.The Federals, sleepy-eyed with cold, were startled awake by theexplosion, and for some these few instants of wakefulness were thelast. First Lieutenant Lafayette Bunner’s men—they belonged to Com¬pany M—were piled up like a railroad wreck. The next instant,Shelby’s borderers, slouch-hatted, Federal-overcoated, and scraggly-bearded (not many of them were old enough to own a set of whisk¬ers), were riding into their fellow Missourians with sabres swinging,like farmhands cutting brush.Lieutenant Bunner was a very young lieutenant, and he tried tomake a brave show in his report: he says he engaged the enemy, butthat is not true.14 Those of his men not unhorsed, taken prisoner, ori54Shelby the Raiderdead, took headlong flight to the rear, Bunner among them. A captaintried to stop him, but could not; the commanding officer of the ad¬vance, Major James M. Hubbard, impatiently ordered the strickencompany to take cover behind the main column, and he himself fellaway into a wheatfield to receive the shock of the enemy’s headlongcharge.Said General Hindman, in brief but unstinted praise, Shelby, “mak¬ing his dispositions rapidly and with excellent judgment, attackedthem front and flank, routed them completely, killed and woundedmany, captured over 200, with the train of a regiment, and pursued thefugitives five miles in the direction of Fayetteville in the line of battleformed by Herron’s infantry. My infantry was yet in the rear, movingas rapidly as possible.” 15 But Hindman’s report covers the ground tooquickly. This was a day of events in the life of Colonel Shelby—eventswhich transcended in importance any effects of his cavalry operationson the success or failure of an obscure battle in a forgotten campaign.The three companies which always formed his advance were com¬manded by Major David Shanks, one of the iron officers of the IronBrigade, and in their rear were three more of the First Regiment underthe command of Lieutenant Colonel Charles A. Gilkey. FindingHerron’s men formed in a battle line, Shanks ordered a charge, led byJeans, Ben Elliott and the guerrillas of Quantrill’s company under thecommand of Lieutenant Gregg. The enemy broke and fled pre¬cipitately at the first impact, scattering into the woods which lined theroad. The six companies of the advance plunged after them with grimdetermination, for prisoners meant overcoats, boots, and weapons. Asalways, the United States Army was Shelby’s quartermaster corps.Shelby went up and down the line, spurring it on, but the headlongplunge carried him into danger. The boys of the forward company,bent on the chase, had disappeared as if the earth had swallowed themup. Shelby found himself riding amid a teeming rabble of the enemy,with only half a dozen men around him, and, right in front, a wholeregiment of Federal cavalry, under the same Major Hubbard who hadsought vainly to form a line in the wheatfield.Shelby looked about him with a fierce and exasperated glare. Wherethe devil were Shanks and Elliott? He had a thousand men a momentago. Now he had only two light guns and half a dozen members ofhis staff. Gordon’s men were dismounted, out of sight in his rear inThe Iron Brigade: Prairie Grovei55the dry bed of a creek, where he had left them to cover the Fayette¬ville Road, and Shanks and his guerrillas were off chasing Federalslike rabbits through the woods. Even his two guns were useless; theycould not be unlimbered, and Hubbard’s men had ridden them downand were sabring the gunners. Hubbard had a hundred men betweenhim and the artillery. The Federal major recognized Shelby by hisplume, and advanced upon him, brandishing an exultant pistol.“You are surrounded and overpowered, sir,” Hubbard said. “Sur¬render your men immediately, sir!”Shelby’s gunners, gashed and bleeding, tried desperately to emptytheir pistols at the careering horsemen, but it was all over with themin a moment.“Surrender, sir, do you hear!” shouted Hubbard. “Surrender, or Ifire! You are surrounded.”This was true, but not for long. Shanks had heard the sound offiring, and had sent his cavalry thundering along Telegraph Road tothe rescue. His shaggy borderers, hundreds of them, were betweenHubbard and Herron, and now rode head-on for Hubbard withsabres uplifted. They were close enough for Shelby to recognize thefaces of individuals in the van. One of them was a lean, craggy Mis¬souri boy from Clay County, riding with reckless disregard of his ownsafety. He was Alexander Franklin James, better known in Americanfolk history as Frank James, brother of Jesse; and Shelby would neverforget the sight of his face as he rode with the rescue party that dayon the Fayetteville Road.Shelby smiled with pleasure, and he was a courtly sight as he sweptthe plumed hat from his chestnut hair, white teeth sparkling in thechestnut beard, and turned to Major Hubbard.“You are mistaken, Major,” he said. “It is you who are my prisoner.Look around you.” And he halted the advancing column with a waveof the plume.Hubbard did not need the admonition. He restored the pistol to itsholster, and tugged at his sword belt. Contemporary accounts quotehim as saying, “I am caught, nicely caught.” He loosened the buckleof his belt. “Here is my sword. I only ask quarter for my men.” Thiswith a look in the direction of the guerrillas, whose reputation waswell known.“Take back your sword, Major,” said Shelby. “It was never stained,156Shelby the Raideras I have learned, with the blood of the helpless around Newtonia. Ialways respect an honorable foe.” 16They really talked like that, in those days.Hindman was now on the Fayetteville Road with 10,000 men. Onethousand had been left with his wagons at Hogeye, just south of thehighway. Shelby fell back, with his prisoners and his plunder, for hedeemed it “not only imprudent but highly dangerous” to pursue theenemy farther.17 On any other occasion Hindman’s heart would havebeen gladdened by the sight of the substantial fruits of victory whichShelby’s men were dragging with them—12 standards, 32 wagons,400 to 500 stands of arms, 200 prisoners, “besides quantities of clothing,commissary stores, quartermaster’s supplies, negroes, horses, mules,and every variety and description of articles a corrupt Governmentcan furnish to hired freebooters and cutthroats and thieves.” 18 Butthe “hired freebooters” were on Hindman’s flanks, and he had to makea decision quickly.In his own account of his movements of the morning, Hindmansays, “I remained with Parsons’ brigade, hoping to get some intel¬ligence from the enemy at Newburg. Receiving none, at 11 a.m. Iwent forward about two miles and overtook the marching column.It was painful to observe the exhaustion of the men. They had marchedabout fifteen miles. The rations of all had been insufficient for thirtydays. Many, overcome with fatigue, had been left by the roadside.Brigadier General Shoup met me and stated that Marmaduke hadfallen back before the enemy’s infantry... and that therefore he hadput his men in a position to resist attack.” 19This was at Prairie Grove, from which the bloody battle of theday takes its name. Shoup has been criticized for turning his face toHerron, at Prairie Grove, instead of forming one main body withFrost, for the purpose of making a concentrated attack on eitherHerron or Blunt; but at the time Hindman approved his action, what¬ever he may have thought of it long afterward.The truth is that at this juncture there was no decision which Hind¬man could make that would have changed the course of events.Herron was speeding south on the Fayetteville Road, recovered fromthe shock of his surprise; and over toward Cane Hill dense columnsof smoke at Rhea’s Mill indicated that Blunt was moving north,destroying his depots as he went, to unite with Herron. Hindman wasThe Iron Brigade: Prairie Grove157astraddle the road between them, his men facing in two directions,Shoup, with Marmaduke and Shelby, looking north, Frost, withMonroe and the rest of the infantry, looking south. At Prairie GroveShoup had occupied the only possible position in the vicinity; Hind¬man says so. “I found,” he says, “the position taken by General Shoupan exceedingly strong one.” 20 If he had had sufficient ammunition, hecould have held it.The smoke indicating Blunt’s activity decided Hindman on hiscourse. “The interval of time in which I might have attacked Herronwas past,” he says. “Circumstances did not permit me to avail myselfof it for the manifest reason that at the favorable moment the rear ofmy column could not be where the head was. Evidently the combinedforces of Herron and Blunt would speedily attack me. I made sucharrangements as seemed best to meet that contingency.” 21The line of battle determined upon was in the shape of a horseshoe,conforming to the shape of the hill with the church on the summit.Around the spire of that peaceful country church, within a few hours,were enacted scenes of horror seldom equaled on a battlefield on theAmerican continent, and not even exceeded by the most revolting ofthe suppressed details of the Death March of Bataan. That men losttheir minds on the battlefields of Missouri is not to be wondered at;that the survivors were ever sane and well-balanced again is a greatercause for wonder, and may even be doubted.Shoup’s division and Shelby’s brigade of Marmaduke’s division con¬stituted the front line in the periphery of battle at Prairie Grove.Shelby’s dragoons were dismounted once more, filling the center andright opposite the line taken by Herron upon the far side of Craw¬ford’s Prairie, on a bluff that rose up steeply behind a stream flowingtoward the Illinois River. Frost’s division, to which had been addedthe brigade of Texans, the veterans of Newtonia, and Clark’s MissouriRegiment, commanded by Brigadier General Roane, was held in re¬serve to await the coming of Blunt. MacDonald’s regiment of Missouricavalry—Colonel Emmett MacDonald, who vowed never to cut hishair until the Confederacy was established—was held in readiness tomeet any attack upon the flanks.At noon sharp, the Federals opened up with artillery; the Con¬federate gunners answered with a roar, but Hindman gave quickorders to stop the firing. There must be no waste of ammunition inpointless artillery duels. Marmaduke and Shelby awaited the infantry158 Shelby the Raiderattack. An hour later, at one o’clock exactly, it came—wave afterwave of the bluecoats, supported by a tremendous artillery fire. Theywere permitted to come within sixty yards of the Confederate lines,where, says Hindman’s report, “making gallantly past one of ourbatteries, and having it a moment in its possession, Fagan’s Arkansasbrigade, part of McRae’s brigade, and the Missourians under Shelbydelivered a terrific fire from their shotguns, rifles, and muskets, andcharged the enemy furiously.” 22Hawthorne’s regiment of Arkansas troops recaptured the battery,and under the onslaught of the countercharge, the Federals retiredto the prairie. Once again Herron threw a charge against Shoup’s posi¬tion, and once again was repulsed.On the other side of the hill at Prairie Grove, Blunt was comingup. To the front and left of Shoup he formed a line of battle twothousand yards long, and began advancing to the thick undergrowthon that flank. Hindman threw Frost in that direction, although hismen were somewhat impeded by the undergrowth, and once again aFederal assault failed. Says Hindman, “One of Marmaduke’s regi¬ments (Shelby’s) shared the honor of this brilliant achievement. Theenemy now brought up his artillery, many pieces of which wererifled, and endeavored to shake our troops by playing upon the entireline for nearly an hour. Then he attacked with all his infantry, atthe same time threatening the extreme left with a heavy cavalry forceand attempting to turn the right. MacDonald’s Missouri cavalry de¬feated him in the last maneuver. Lane’s Texas cavalry and Roane’sbrigade deterred him from seriously assailing the left, and Shoup’sdivision, Shelby’s brigade, of Marmaduke’s division, and Parsons’sand Shaver’s brigades of Frost’s division, gloriously repulsed him inhis desperate attacks upon their lines. He again fled beyond theprairie, leaving his dead and his wounded, and the colors of severalof his regiments, in our hands, besides a number (275) of prisoners.Some of these were ascertained to be of Totten’s division, which hadarrived upon the field, still further increasing the disparity of ourforces.”As Blunt fell back, his men stumbled through a live chamber ofhorrors in the peach and apple orchard which masked his artilleryline of thirty guns. Let Major Edwards describe it. “In this orchardwere five gigantic ricks of straw, dry and combustible almost as gun-The Iron Brigade: Prairie Grove159powder. Hither some two hundred wounded Federals had crawled,to burrow in the warm covering and find shelter against the bittercold. Shells from their own lines fired the frail protection, and beforeany effort could be made at rescue their heart-rending cries told allthe dreadful agony of the conflagration. The sight was sickening andappalling. Two hundred human bodies lay half consumed in onevast sepulchre, and in every position of mutilated and horrible con¬tortion, while a large drove of hogs, attracted doubtless by the scentof roasting flesh, came greedily from the apple trees and gorged them¬selves upon the unholy banquet. Intestines, heads, arms, feet, and evenhearts were dragged over the ground and devoured at leisure.” 23It was worse at Prairie Grove than it had been on any other battle¬field for the Missourians. Writing in 1867 Major Edwards said, “Fewof Shelby’s soldiers will forget the horrors of their night bivouac onthe gory field at Prairie Grove. Around them in every direction laythe dead and dying, the full glare of a cold battle moon shining whiteupon the upturned faces, and the chilling wind singing freezing dirgesamong the naked and melancholy trees. Soon upon the night air rosegreat heart-sobs wrung from strong men in their agony, while thewhite hoar frost hardened the fever drops into ice that oozed fromclammy brows. Death stalked in silently among the sufferers and pliedhis busy sickle.... The night waned, the trees shivered, and the cold,hard sky was rough with spirit wings fleeing away from the blood anddust of the trampled earth. Through all the long, long watches, theburial parties from both armies flitted over the field with lights thatgleamed like phantoms, and mingled friendly in a common work ofmercy. Daylight came slowly and solemnly, yet the dead were notburied, and many wounded were dying slowly and lingeringly in thedark and lonesome places. Fires were strictly forbidden all along thelines and sleep was necessarily an utter impossibility. During the nightthe rumbling of laden wagons and the clatter of horses’ feet on thefrozen ground could plainly be heard in the direction of Fayetteville,and scouts brought constant word that Blunt was being reinforced.” 24Their own wagons were on the move too, though no sound camefrom the turning wheels, muffled in blankets as they rolled west andsouth to the Boston Mountains.Thus ended the Battle of Prairie Grove, almost upon the altar of aquiet country church. Do not look for it in the ordinary history text-160 Shelby the Raiderbook; it is not there. An unimportant battle, in which only a few hun¬dred died.This time Blunt sent the flag of truce, and the two commanders,Blunt and Hindman, met. Case-hardened soldiers though they were,both were sobered by the ghastly sufferings inflicted in the campaign,and agreement was reached whereby “certain terms for conductingthe war in the future” were to be observed, “to mitigate, if possible,some of its unnecessary rigors,” and to encourage speedy exchanges.It was stipulated that hospitals and hospital stores were not to becaptured, and that better facilities for communication between op¬posing commanders should be set up. This conference was conductedwith the greatest courtesy on both sides, and some of the terms agreedupon were lived up to, although Blunt later accused Hindman of usingthis cartel arrangement as an opportunity for espionage.From a military standpoint, the battle was certainly a draw; butHindman’s men had scarcely twenty rounds of ammunition apiece atthe end, and their food had long since been eaten; their battery animalshad dropped from exhaustion, and some of the Arkansas troops—twohundred of them—had deserted to the enemy. Hindman could not staywhere he was, nor could he fight another day. He “determined toretire, and gave the necessary orders for that purpose.”The sad, gaunt army of northwestern Arkansas retired towardLittle Rock by three routes, Shelby and Marmaduke by way ofDripping Springs, the way they had come. At Dripping Springsanother horror was piled onto the horror which the men had suffered.Hindman, enraged at the desertion of the Arkansas troops, sent overto Shelby a deserter, named Phelps, for execution. “In sight of thewhole brigade,” says Edwards, “drawn up in hollow square, thedoomed man came out to death, a curious, wondering expression onhis face, as if he did not understand the solemn preparations. Thefiring party tied a white handkerchief over his eyes, and the poorcriminal knelt a few moments in silent prayer, the cold breezesblowing his straggling locks about a brow very pale and rigid. It endedat last, and his freed spirit went shrieking down the wind to the oceanof eternity.” 25Weary, barefoot, starving, Hindman’s army struggled on back intothe Arkansas River Valley. Marmaduke went into winter quartersat Lewisburg, on the north side, and Shelby’s brigade rested. TheyThe Iron Brigade: Prairie Grove i 6 iwould not break camp again until the last day of the old year. Bluntand Herron, unopposed, started south on December 27 in a forcedmarch and drove Hindman, who had only 4,000 men, from VanBuren, chiefly by artillery bombardment. Six steamers at the dockwere lost (two of them burned by the retreating Hindman), andBlunt destroyed all of the food stores in Van Buren which he couldnot use, amounting to 13,500 bushels of corn, among others. Havingdealt this disheartening blow to the hungry Confederates, the Federalcommanders withdrew across the Missouri line to their own com¬fortable headquarters at Springfield.Thus ended the year 1862, on a note of savage despair and frustra¬tion for the Confederacy in the west. General Joseph E. Johnston,commanding on the east side of the river, had written to GeneralHolmes asking about the possibility of reinforcements in his sector.Holmes replied unconcernedly, “My information from Helena is tothe effect that a heavy force of the enemy has passed down theMississippi on transports, doubtless for the demonstration [sic] uponVicksburg. Thus it seems certain that any force I can send now fromhere would not be able to reach Vicksburg.” 26It was not necessary, of course, for him to reach Vicksburg; hecould have sent Hindman or Shelby to Helena with 10,000 men androoted out Curtis, who had not half that number. Those transportshe had mentioned would be streaming past Helena down the Missis¬sippi to Vicksburg for the next nine months because of Holmes’sfailure to deal with Helena. But he resolutely refused to do anything,even make a recommendation to the Richmond government; themost that he would do would be to ask General Hindman what hethought about the possibility of taking Helena and seizing control ofthe navigation of the Mississippi.27 In the same breath, however, hewas declaring, “I have written to the Secretary [of War] that I shallbe satisfied if I can hold Arkansas and the Indian country.” And hewas gratified to think that he was in no danger. “I have made everyinquiry possible,” he told Hindman, “and do not believe that we arein any danger of an invasion from Helena.”But what Hindman thought made no difference now. As a resultof Prairie Grove, Hindman was to be blamed for Holmes’s failures;he was to be sent east of the Mississippi to an obscure post, and theonly other man in the Department of the Trans-Mississippi capable ofcommand at this critical juncture, Jo Shelby, was only a colonel. He\6iShelby the Raidercommanded a brigade and his responsibilities were those of a general,but they were not to make him a brigadier until he demonstrated thathe could march to the gates of Jefferson City, on his Great Raid—andeven then they would not give him the men to seize Missouri’scapital.The Trans-Mississippi was an empire as big as all Europe, andpotentially as rich. But the Confederate government, entrusting itscontrol to such men as Theophilus H. Holmes, was trying to winwithout it.15. The Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and ShelbyOn the day that Blunt burned the stores at Van Buren, Hindmandetermined to try to accomplish in Missouri by means of a raidwhat he had not been able to accomplish in a campaign. He orderedMarmaduke and Shelby, reinforced by Monroe and MacDonald, tostrike at the Federal line of communication between Springfield andRolla, the terminus of the St. Louis railway line which was the jugularvein of the Federals in Missouri. He meant to remove the threat toArkansas by destroying the enemy’s base at Springfield, and openagain that 120-mile route to the Missouri River Valley along whichShelby had so often galloped, and on which Price with his PatriotArmy had marched from Wilson’s Creek.It was the first of two raids by Marmaduke and Shelby into Mis¬souri; the second was attempted in the spring of 1863, to the vicinityof Cape Girardeau, six weeks before Holmes finally made up his mindthat an attack on Helena was possible. The first expedition, set inmotion on New Year’s Eve, may be rated a success, so far as the ac¬complishment of its lesser objective is concerned: it drew the Federalsaway from Arkansas, but how much of an accomplishment that wasis open to question, for as Thomas points out in his Arkansas in Warand Reconstruction Blunt and Herron could not subsist their armyat Van Buren.1 By the same token, neither could the Confederates.The second thrust, generally known as the Cape Girardeau expedi¬tion, represented a useless expenditure of effort, and weakened theConfederates at a time when they should have been mustering everyThe Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 163ounce of strength for their drive to the Mississippi at Helena in July.Both expeditions were marked with the endless incidents of aShelby raid: the dreadful marches, the bloody hand-to-hand fighting,the banter with the country girls, the ruthless punishment, by firingsquad or simple massacre, of Union bushwhackers and guerrillas, andthe gala pursuit of prisoners when a scattered enemy was no longerin position to fight. In winter, the overcoat-bearing Federal wasesteemed especially for his pelt, and Shelby permitted his men to takehundreds of prisoners in fights where only hundreds were involved.There was no feeding problem, for prisoners were “paroled” instantly,foodless and sometimes pantsless as well, and left to see how they couldmake out on the charity of their Union sympathizer friends. Thebrigade ate well, too; there is talk of sweet sorghum molasses servedby handsome country girls, with great rashers of ham and eggs forbreakfast, and savory steaks broiled over hickory sticks at night—except on the occasions when they were starving. It was either a feastor a famine for Shelby’s men.After Newtonia, Cane Hill, and Prairie Grove the brigade wasbeginning to take on an identity. Shelby had men now who werewilling to follow him anywhere, into anything. This was partly dueto the solicitude which he showed for them, but only partly. Thebasic reason for their devotion was that they had become inordinatelyproud of Old Jo, and were becoming proud to be known as Shelby’sMen. That pride, which was the thing called esprit de corps, wascomposed of many ingredients. First of all, as the Arkansas privatesaid, Jo Shelby looked like somebody. He looked like Jeb Stuart, withthe plume, and in an army whose standards were none too high, hiscommand was no unworthy miniature of the Cavalry Corps of theArmy of Northern Virginia.2 Furthermore, he was somebody, asyou’d find out quick enough if you got gay with him. He was alsosmarter than the entire high command of the enemy in the Depart¬ment of the West; and as for fighting—well, they had seen him fight,on the plains and in the mountains. He fought like the man whoinvented fighting, and the men of the Missouri Cavalry Brigadelooked on him as the perfect commanding officer: colorful and dash¬ing, but with a recklessness so shrewd that it amounted almost tocaution. This combination made an irresistible appeal to the Missouricharacter, for it was the quality they most admired. From trusting and164Shelby the Raiderrespecting Old Jo, they had come to idolize him, by the end of 1863,and they knew that as soon as the higher-ups got smart and made hima general, he was going to lead the entire army back to the PromisedLand of Missouri, and that when the roll was called up yonder they’dbe there.With such thoughts in their minds, though hardly articulated, andtheir stomachs comfortably full, Shelby’s men rode off from Lewis-burg on the morning of December 31, 1862. Their destination wasYellville, where they would be joined by other cavalry under Mac¬Donald and Monroe, but they moved in a westerly direction, throughthe mountains, on account of the scarcity of forage. En route toYellville, Shelby surprised a band of about a hundred jay hawkers(“tories and deserters”) killed a large number, and captured twenty-seven.3 “The vigor with which his troops attacked and pursued thosescoundrels,” says Marmaduke, “terrified them, and broke up, for thetime at least, the lawless bands in this part of the mountains.”The settlers in this territory, even those engaged in peaceful pur¬suits, were one hundred per cent Unionist, and foraging could there¬fore be carried out with the greater enthusiasm; but Shelby insisted,as always, on paying for supplies requisitioned, especially if they con¬sisted of stock which the farmer would have to replace.Major Jake Stonestreet recalls that on this march they came to oneespecially well-stocked farm. “We had captured some supplies,” hesays, “and every man of us had on a new federal overcoat. The planterwas a Union man and welcomed us joyfully. ‘There’s my hogs,’ hesaid, ‘and there’s my sheep and here’s my mule lot. Boys, help your¬selves.’“Then Shelby undeceived him. His people had been killing ourswhenever they could catch them, and he made ready for death. Shelby,however, paid him in good money for everything we consumed andhired him as a guide through the mountains, afterward giving him asafe conduct back home. A year afterward, that fellow rode nearlya hundred miles to shake Shelby’s hand.”Shelby and MacDonald reached Yellville simultaneously, on thefourth of January, and on the sixth MacDonald stormed an isolatedFederal outpost on Beaver Creek, scattering the garrison of 300 andtaking 20 prisoners. Here MacDonald made a bonfire of the enemy’ssupplies: Marmaduke’s orders were to carry nothing that could not betransported easily on a forced march.The Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby i 65Shelby, with Elliott’s scouts in his van, did the same thing at Ozark,which had a slightly larger Federal garrison. By now General E. B.Brown, at Springfield, was alerted. Indeed, the entire Department ofthe West was alarmed. The Federals had thought that Marmaduke’scavalry was wintering on the Arkansas River in a state of demoraliza¬tion and defeat. Now they were reliably reported to be moving on theFederal bastion of the southwest with 5,000 picked men and two piecesof rifled field artillery drawn by ten horses each, and moving fiftymiles a day. General Brown had only 2,000 men—2,099, to be exact—and though he had four guns, two of them were small brass cannonand the other two, old twelve pounders, more fit for the ornamenta¬tion of a city park than for the defense of a town. The Federals hadnot only denuded western Missouri of forage, they had denuded it ofdefenses, and General Curtis, who had succeeded Schofield at St.Louis, conceived Brown to be in a desperate situation. Actually hewas not, for Marmaduke had only 2,300 men, Brown was shelteredbehind heavy fortifications at Springfield, and even though his gunswere not first-rate, they outnumbered Marmaduke’s two to one.Nevertheless Curtis was almost in tears when he heard of Marma¬duke’s march. He telegraphed Brown: “You and your troops areheroes. I hope God will spare you strength for tomorrow. I expecta desperate effort early in the morning. All the troops, especially thecavalry, should be ready. Herron started with two divisions eastwardfrom Fayetteville on the 6th. He will soon be behind or near the foe.Don’t weary in well doing. The eyes of the country are on you. Yourgeneral feels for you deeply. God grant you success.” 4If anyone needed sympathy under these circumstances, it wouldseem to be Marmaduke. He was in the midst of a situation which couldeasily shape up into another Prairie Grove, operating far from hishome base, with no supplies, and soon to be confronted with twolarge bodies of the enemy, each the equal of his own, converging tomeet him. But the fact that they were actually on Missouri soil, andequal to the enemy in front of them, was enough for Shelby’s men:it was more advantage than they usually had, and when they struckSpringfield, they struck it with fury. They were dismounted at Spring-field, as were MacDonald’s men, and fought as infantry; a cavalrycharge against the rifle pits and fortifications would have been suicide.Under cover of artillery fire, MacDonald led the attack.All day long, until darkness put an end to the fight, Marmaduke’s166Shelby the Raider2,300 fought the enemy in a house-to-house battle for Springfield,amid the crash of falling and burning timbers as the Federals set fireto their stores. Their attack had been swift; Brown says in his reportthat Marmaduke “moved right up and commenced the fight by can¬nonading the town” before dismounting his infantry and moving tothe attack across the prairie.Brown was a brave soldier as well as a good one, and he won therespect of the Confederate troops that day. Edwards says that “he didwhat no other Federal brigadier general ever did in front of Shelby’sbrigade... rode its entire length under a severe fire, clad in boldregimentals, elegantly mounted and ahead of all so that the fire mightbe concentrated on him. It was reckless bravado, and General Browngained by one bold dash the admiration and respect of Shelby’ssoldiers. They fought him often and often after Springfield, and hadthe fortunes of war placed him in their hands I am positively certainthat he would have been paroled and sent to his own lines with marksof soldierly esteem.” 5As Brown appeared in front of their lines, Shelby’s men held theirfire momentarily, and someone yelled, “Don’t shoot that man! Let himgo!” The cry, “Let him go!” was echoed all along the ranks, but un¬fortunately their admiration for Brown’s heroism was not shared by arebel sympathizer in Springfield. Brown’s adjutant says that theGeneral “was treacherously shot from a secesh residence while leadinga charge of his bodyguard when the day seemed to be lost.” 6 Heattempted to remount his horse, but could not, and was carried fromthe field.At this point, when pressure on the Federals seemed greatest,“Shelby, seizing the opportune moment... rushed to the terriblecharge at the doublequick, driving before him the frightened foe,who fled, abandoning all stores, stockade, fort, and a piece of artillery.”The gun, a field piece captured in the town’s graveyard, was added toCollins’ battery. One of their own officers admits that Shelby’s attackhad been so fierce as to throw them into “a panic-stricken rout.” 7At five o’clock of that winter day, Marmaduke had a tenuous gripon the gutted town—the Federals had not fallen back one step withoutapplying the torch—but Springfield was still swarming with Federals,and they were heavily barricaded behind whatever cover they hadnot abandoned—houses, stockades, and fences. They had not givenup yet.The Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 167Marmaduke decided to withdraw his men for the night, out of thetown and onto the prairie. As soon as he did so, he received word thatreinforcements for Brown were on the way to Springfield. That wasenough for Marmaduke. His first objective had been accomplished.Springfield was a wreck, the great Federal depot destroyed. Ratherthan risk his next objective, which was to cut the Rolla communicationline, he decided to move off in the direction of Hartville, where heexpected to be joined by a Confederate force coming up from Poca¬hontas, Arkansas, under Colonel J. C. Porter. Porter’s brigade, number¬ing 825 men, was a reinforcement reluctantly wrung from GeneralHolmes, and represented all he was willing to contribute out of hiswhole department to bolster Marmaduke in his operations in theinterior of Missouri.Federal garrisons at Sand Spring and Marshfield fled at the Con¬federate approach, leaving only their burning stores as beacons on themarch to Hartville. At Marshfield Marmaduke was met by Porter,who also brought news that fresh Federal troops, 2,500 of them, hadmoved into Hartville. Marmaduke determined to give battle at once.He hurried on, Shelby’s brigade leading the advance.At Hartville the pattern of Springfield was virtually repeated,except that it was a triumphant victory for the Confederates. Afterthree hours, the enemy, under Brigadier General Fitz Henry Warren,retreated, leaving Marmaduke in possession of the town. But Marma¬duke sustained a sore loss: Colonel Emmett MacDonald was killed.Major Edwards was also captured, though later exchanged. FederalGeneral Warren in his report lays claim to having escaped fromHartville “without the loss of a musket or cartridge box,” but actually,says Marmaduke, “his men retreated rapidly and in disorder, leavingthe dead and wounded, many arms, ammunition and clothing on thefield and in my possession.”Marmaduke’s troops were now in no position to go farther. Theyhad no baggage whatsoever, and they were attempting to live off thecountry, an impossible feat. Two hundred of his horses, succumbing tothe rigors of winter, had been left to die by the roadside; his men werethinly clad, many without shoes, and the stores they had hoped tocapture had been burned. Furthermore, there were two large Federalarmies in the neighborhood, with reinforcements arriving hourly.Marmaduke “deemed it best not to put myself in battle between twoforces” and marched for Batesville, Arkansas, as rapidly as the condi-168Shelby the Raidertion of his command would permit. At Batesville he would await thecoming of spring, for another foray into Missouri.Marmaduke is justified in saying, as he does, that “the object of theexpedition was fully accomplished, and more.” He had marched 300miles “on miserable, unshod horses,” forced the enemy to gut its supplydepot for the entire southwest, at Springfield, destroyed all of themilitia stores as far as Hartville, and thrown a scare into the enemy asfar away as St. Louis.The march to Batesville was one of intense suffering, and by the timeShelby’s men reached the White River Valley, they were so desperatefor food that they no longer cared whether the settlers were loyalConfederates or not—if there was any food left on the farms of thisdesolated region, they took it, despite Shelby’s stern orders againstlooting. Major Jake Stonestreet, who rode at Shelby’s side on thatnightmare march, recalled years later an incident in which Shelbyhimself was involved.“On that raid,” said Stonestreet, “we were half-starving, and Shelbyand I rode down to the White River to water our horses. A detach¬ment of the troops was doing the same thing just below us. Amongthem was Dick Gentry [who later went to Mexico with Shelby]. Hewas a gallant private and a good fellow. Slung across his saddle wasa sack, carefully tied and bleeding at one end. Shelby demanded whathe had got there.“ ‘Been having my clothes washed,’ said Gentry.“ ‘You’d better get back to camp,’ said Shelby, ‘or your clothes willbleed to death.’“Gentry was lodged in the guardhouse at Shelby’s order. Thatnight a quarter of fresh pork found its way to Shelby’s headquarters.Shelby looked at it and said, ‘I haven’t an idea where this comes from,but go round to the guardhouse, orderly, and tell ’em to turn Gentryloose. No use keeping a man shut up all his life for a little laundry.’ ”The arrival at Batesville, in the deep freeze of late January, was notauspicious. The supply train which had been ordered from Lewisburgto meet them was marooned by snowstorms in the mountains whichhad flooded creeks and banked the snow high upon the winding roads.Shelby’s men were forced to bivouac in the open, destitute of tents,cooking utensils, and even a change of clothing; but the good citizensof Batesville came to their rescue, and they had food. Shelby’s biog¬rapher says that the townspeople welcomed them as their own,The Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 169“lavish of their food and raiment.’’ The sick were taken into theirhouses, “nursed, cured, and sent back comfortably clad.” The oldbrigade, he says, “even kept the memory of these generous peoplegreen, and struck many a gallant blow for them upon dark and bloodyfields.”Best of all, of course, were the pretty girls. In Batesville werecharmers as beautiful as any in all Arkansas, which is to say as in allthe world. Those of Shelby’s soldiers who were not sick were soonlovesick. His camp, pitched among giant oaks on the south side of theriver, was named Camp Nannie Wilson “in honor of one of Batesville’smost lovely daughters,” and as soon as the huts and barracks had beenbuilt, the men found a gay social life in the town, for the next twomonths.“Balls, promenades, flirting, coqueting and matchmaking followedin rapid succession,” says Major Edwards. “The young, dashing officersput away all battle visions, and lived as if life were one long gala-dayof vows, and sighs, and tresses of hair.... ’Twere long to tell whattroths were plighted, and what dainty, jeweled hands rested lovinglyin great brown ones down by the garden gates, as twilight lingered inthe lily beds, and the breath of ‘low, mysterious roses’ came up fromthe dim parterresThat was when spring was well under way, and it was a spring thatwould live in the memory of the Iron Brigade forever. Who couldforget the sight of beautiful girls watching the cavalry drill—drillwhich the gallant Shelby turned into “tournaments” 8 for their benefit—or the Great Sham Battle which they staged for the ladies ofBatesville?The Southern cavalrymen were getting the reward for which theychiefly fought, next to food: the adulation of the fair.After the sham battle Shelby made a great occasion of presenting tohis men the two silken banners made by the ladies of Little Rock.Captain Yandell Blackwell’s company got one. But the men of Jeans’sregiment, in Shelby’s opinion, had so covered themselves with glorythat he would make no invidious comparisons: he gave the second flagto the entire regiment.Another attraction of Camp Nannie Wilson was Captain DickCollins’ black bear, a cub recently found by hunters in the BostonMountains. This lumbering infant, bought by Captain Wave Ander¬son, Shelby’s ordnance officer, and presented to Collins’ battery, was170Shelby the Raider“a veritable, good-natured, intelligent bear.” 9 It bore the euphonioussobriquet of “Postlethwaite.” The men fed, petted, and boxed him;ladies “came from a distance to stroke his black coat and surfeit himon sweetmeats and delicacies.” Unchained and thoroughly domesti¬cated, Postlethwaite roamed at will among the regiments, “thrustinghis ugly face into saucepans and stew kettles.” Minor engagements ofthe future would find him at his post, amid the spraying shrapnel; inmajor engagements he was removed to a place of safety with thehorses. But he was no hero, Postlethwaite, for he “dodged and shirkedlike a veritable coward whenever the shells and grapeshot rattled abouthis gun.” Of his subsequent history nothing is known, except that,riding on a caisson to the various Armageddons of Shelby and hismen, he was the most traveled bear in Missouri outside of a circus.As the green lace of April on the trees gave way to deeper foliage,Marmaduke and Shelby were seen more often in earnest conversa¬tion, and two electric words ran down the ranks of the brigade, nowat its full strength of three thousand:“St. Louis!” 10These words would have brought on a convulsion, uttered in thepresence of General Theophilus H. Holmes, but Holmes was nolonger in command of the Trans-Mississippi Department of the Con¬federate States. Jefferson Davis had been persuaded to replace him atlast, although he did so with reluctance and then only demoted himto command of the District of Arkansas; but the four states of theDepartment were now governed by Lieutenant General EdmundKirby Smith, who had made a record pleasing to the Richmondgovernment in Kentucky, and Holmes could no longer interfere withHindman’s “darling project” of invading Missouri. Hindman wasgone—transferred at his own request “—and Marmaduke and Shelbywere the inheritors of his mission.Kirby Smith, as he was generally known, had been sent to theTrans-Mississippi chiefly because of Holmes’s failure to use hisLouisiana troops to support Pemberton, hard-pressed on the Vicks¬burg side of the river,12 and Smith, with orders to remedy the situationin Louisiana, established his headquarters first at Alexandria and thenat Shreveport. He was not a fortunate choice as a commander in theTrans-Mississippi, which needed a Napoleon or a Stonewall Jackson—or a Jo Shelby—but at least he was not suffering from prematureThe Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 17 isenility, as was Holmes, and Marmaduke and Shelby found him easierto get along with.Marmaduke was cautious in his first dealings with Smith, for thenew general-in-chief was an unknown quantity. He feared that Smithmight take alarm if he announced that he intended to make a demon¬stration upon St. Louis, and he used the scarcity of food for his menin Arkansas as justification for another expedition into Missouri. Noother explanation will suffice for the curious endorsement which Smithplaced upon Marmaduke’s report when it was received. As if apologiz¬ing for the temerity of the two cavalry leaders in attacking theFederals in Missouri, he wrote: “The expedition under GeneralMarmaduke into Missouri was made more particularly on accountof the scarcity of forage in Arkansas, it being deemed probable thathe would be able to sustain himself, and thereby relieve Arkansas ingreat degree of the large amount of forage it was supplying the armyin that section.” 13 He need not have feared that Jefferson Daviswould think Marmaduke had gone on a fool’s errand, for in one ofDavis’s last letters to Holmes he had said, “I look forward... to theday when, Arkansas secure, you may advance into Missouri andcompel the enemy to look to the defense of the Upper Mississippiinstead of conquest of the lower portion of its valley.” 14On April 18, 1863, Marmaduke set out on his second Missouri raidwith the most formidable force of cavalry the Confederates had everassembled on the soil of that state. He had shifted his theatre ofoperations from the western border of the state; indeed it was hisplan to make such a demonstration in central Missouri that all Federalforces would be drawn as by a magnet to the Iron Mountain region, ahundred miles from St. Louis, and “away from Northern Arkansasand extreme Southwest Missouri.” 15 The task of drawing them away,by a series of feints, he assigned to Shelby. While this was being done,it was Marmaduke’s plan to put himself between Ironton and St.Louis, as a jumping off place for a “demonstration” in the direction ofeither St. Louis or Jefferson City. If the Federals rose to the bait, itwould have the effect of de-garrisoning the state, and would siphon allof their troops into northeastern Missouri, where they had been inthe beginning. Under such circumstances, both Marmaduke andShelby were convinced, a Missouri Confederate army, 50,000 strong,would spring from the freed soil and overrun the state. Shelby andMarmaduke spoke each other’s language, and they worked together172Shelby the Raiderlike forefinger and thumb. There was nothing whatever the matterwith Marmaduke’s plan, except that he allowed himself to be divertedfrom it.The original intention was to strike a crippling blow at Rolla, thenerve center of the Federal supply line in Missouri, but when Marma-duke reached the Eleven Points River with his cavalary and his eightguns, he found that the country had long since been swept clean offorage, and that the hundred-mile march to Rolla would have to beconducted through a wasteland. Much nearer at hand was the oppor¬tunity to attack General John McNeil, who was stationed at Bloom¬field, with an outpost at Patterson, in Wayne County. Marmadukeestimated that McNeil had 2,000 men. He himself had 5,000 men,not all of them armed; but with this number he estimated that, aftercapturing the outpost at Patterson, he could surround McNeil. “Ifsuccessful in capturing McNeil,” he says in his report, “I anticipatedthat my whole command could be well armed and finely mountedfor vigorous action.”On the Eleven Points River Marmaduke divided his army into twocolumns. One, under Shelby, consisting of Shelby’s and Burbridge’sbrigades, would move by a circuitous route to Patterson, throwingout scouts in a northwesterly direction to create the impression ofa force marching in that direction. At Patterson he was to join theother column, composed of Carter’s and Greene’s brigade, who wouldhave marched via Doniphan. Marmaduke would march with Carter’scolumn.Shelby galloped to within thirty miles of Patterson on the 19th,covering that distance overnight, and sent ahead 450 men undercommand of Lieutenant Colonel Giddings, with one battery andorders to kidnap the Federal picket line in front of Patterson so thatthey could not give an alarm. Then he was to advance on the townand take it by surprise. Giddings carried out the first part of hisassignment handsomely, scooping up a lieutenant and twenty-fourmen, about twelve miles from Patterson, at daylight; but he under¬estimated the distance to the town from that point, and opened upan artillery cannonade at a distance of two miles, to cover his entry.The sound of firing alarmed the Federal commander, Colonel EdwinSmart, a man almost as notorious as McNeil and as anxious to eludecapture. Smart lost no time in evacuating Patterson before Giddings’mounted column had covered the distance of two miles, and he setThe Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 173fire to the town as he went. When Marmaduke arrived at Pattersonon the 20th, he found Shelby in possession of the burned-out town,and the enemy flown. Smart had retreated to Pilot Knob.On the 21 st, Marmaduke sent Carter east to Bloomfield and Shelbynorth to Fredericktown, to cut off McNeil’s escape route at thatpoint, which was assumed to be in the direction of Ironton. “Ifhe remained in Bloomfield, Carter would whip him,” says Marma¬duke, “and if he attempted to get to Ironton, Shelby would capturehim.”McNeil, had in fact, been ordered to Ironton, as Shelby learnedfrom captured dispatches, but hearing that he was about to be caughtin the pincers of two columns of rebel cavalry, he turned west andran like a hunted animal for the strong fortifications of Cape Girar¬deau on the Mississippi River.In exasperation at McNeil’s having given him the slip, Marmadukenow threw strategy to the winds and concentrated on the chase ofthe Palmyra butcher. He ordered Carter’s column to Cape Girardeau,but the brigade was hampered by high water, marshes, and bad roads—this is swampy country—and their horses, worn down by heavymarching and lack of forage, were no match for the fleet steeds ofMcNeil. By the time they came within sight of the heavily fortifiedriver port, McNeil was safe in his headquarters at Cape Girardeau.Marmaduke now ordered Shelby to join him, preparatory to anattack on Girardeau. Shelby made another of his notable nightmarches—thirty miles over bad roads—and joined Marmaduke fourmiles from the bristling guns of the Federal forts which ringed thetown. A day’s scouting of the vicinity, however, convinced Marma¬duke that an assault on the town would result in nothing but heavyConfederate losses. There was an abundance of evidence that the tele¬graph wires had been busy, and that Cape Girardeau was now beingreinforced from every direction, by land and water. Most formidableof the reinforcements was Vandever’s force of 3,500 cavalry andartillery, marching toward him on the Jackson and Fredericktownroad.There was nothing to do but retreat, and Marmaduke made the onlydecision possible. He could not go back the way he had come, how¬ever; the only escape route to Arkansas in this God-forsaken swamplay across the St. Francis River, a bayou stream now out of its banksin flood. To get across he would have to build a bridge for the foot-i74Shelby the Raidersoldiers, swim his horses over, and float his artillery on improvisedrafts. Meanwhile the dogs of war were snapping at his heels, in theshape of Vandever’s column, and McNeil would soon march out tojoin him. Marmaduke ordered Shelby to make a “demonstration” onthe road leading from Jackson to Cape Girardeau, to distract theirattention.It was beginning to be a familiar story—Shelby’s covering the re¬treat of a Confederate army whose commander had walked into a trap.In a few hours, however, Shelby had so embroiled himself at CapeGirardeau that Marmaduke was afraid a full-scale battle would ensue.“Shelby’s demonstration,” he says, “amounted almost to an attack.”Actually, it was an attack. Shelby rolled his artillery up to the un¬suspecting battlements of the river town, kicked up a mighty can¬nonade with his twelve-pounders, and hurled Shanks’s entire regimentagainst the First Nebraska Infantry, which came out to meet them.Shanks drove the Nebraskans back upon the stockade; but again theFederals emerged in force, and for a time it seemed that there wouldbe a battle that no one wanted. Marmaduke, seeing Shelby so heavilyengaged, could not begin his retreat. “I deemed it necessary,” he says,“to bring Carter’s column up to his [Shelby’s] support. On arriving[I found] that Shelby had driven the enemy’s pickets and advancedforces into their works.” But “the enemy were admirably posted,”and he ordered Shelby from the field on which he seemed disposed tolinger.“My retreat,” says Marmaduke, “was orderly and slow. Vandeverand McNeil did not seem anxious for a fight. Light rear-guard fightingwas of daily occurrence. Shelby’s or Carter’s brigades were habituallyin the rear and always did their duty. On several occasions I offeredbattle when the advantages in position were greatly in my favor. Myobject was to give ample time to the bridge party.”The bridge, a flimsy, swinging affair, was erected by Marmaduke’sengineers while Shelby brought into play his old game of confusingthe enemy by appearing on all sides of him at once, hurling a concen¬trated fire first from one point and then another, as if his little six-pounders were the signal guns for a thirty-gun barrage; by this razzle-dazzle he so perplexed McNeil’s bluecoats that they forgot to use aparallel road across the swamp which would have led them straightto the St. Francis River and the axe-swinging engineers of Marma¬duke’s “bridge party.” Their failure even to cling to the coattails ofThe Iron Brigade: Marmaduke and Shelby 175such a disorganized retreat, into a swamp which should have provedan effective barrier against escape, was going to look bad in McNeil’sreport, and he knew it. Taking refuge in the excuse that “the natureof the country was such that a strong rear guard could retard a heavycolumn with ease and almost with impunity,” he wrote to his superiorsin St. Louis: “I deeply regret that despite the excellent quality of theforce in pursuit, and the splendid and effective artillery placed at ourdisposition, Marmaduke was allowed to make a successful retreat intoArkansas, saving his guns and his baggage, but trust that an examina¬tion of the reports made by the various brigade and regimental com¬manders will exonerate me from blame in the premises.”Colonel Shelby was the last man to cross the bridge on that retreat,and with his sabre he cut adrift the logs on which the dismountedcavalry had escaped.Once across the St. Francis, they were molested no more byFederals, and once across the St. Francis they understood why. The“road” was a slightly elevated quagmire from which there was noturning off, surrounded by swirling, slushy flood waters of unknowndepth, which turned the rank vegetation of the swamp into a fetidvegetable soup. Men and horses sank to their kneecaps in the soughing,tundra-like humus of the “road”; artillery wheels would not turn, andthe guns were half carried by the men across one sucking mudholeafter another, until their strength gave out. The horses, as always, hadgiven out first; the poor beasts keeled over and were left to die as themarch lengthened to an interminable ninety-six hours. This was JohnHenry country, where the sun don’t ever shine; the roof of branchesoverhead shut out the light by day, and closed in like a coffin lid atnight. Cottonmouths and alligators shared their bivouac; men wentinsane in the midnight watches from hunger, fever, and exhaustion.Somehow, after four days, the division staggered “home” at last, intothe streets of Jacksonport. Behind them they had left thirty dead, sixtywounded, and one hundred and twenty missing.1617 6Shelby the Raider16. Helena: Disaster in the WestThe failure of the Confederacy to win the war through a success¬ful defense of its own territory—the only way it could win—hasbeen ascribed to many chief causes, from the effectiveness of theUnion blockade to the failure of the army’s supply system to Long-street’s dilatory tactics at Gettysburg, but the plain truth is that thesewere but incidental and unavoidable results of an over-all plan thatwas defective from the beginning.The inability of the Richmond government to realize that theMississippi River Valley and the Trans-Mississippi Department of theConfederate States—not the Atlantic seaboard—constituted the heart¬land of the Confederacy, doomed the Southern cause from the start.The conclusion is inescapable that the government never had anymaster plan to prevent this vast region from falling into the hands ofthe enemy, and as a result of this aimless drifting—the consequencesof which we have already seen in Missouri—the Confederacy was re¬duced, for all practical purposes, within two years to an area which en¬compassed only Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. The defenseof the west was neglected in favor of a grandiose plan to win sweep¬ing, spectacular victories in the east which would bring the Army ofthe Potomac to its knees and secure European recognition and possiblyintervention.This was folly, both military and diplomatic. There was never achance of direct European intervention, and the Confederate armiesin Virginia were never able seriously to menace Washington, althoughit is only a hundred miles from Richmond as the crow flies. Yet thedelusion that the war could be won in Virginia was persisted in stub¬bornly for four years. As Major General J. F. C. Fuller, Britishmilitary authority, says:“As the defensive was by force of policy and circumstances thrustupon the South, Jefferson Davis should have recognized at once thatthe strategic frontier of the Confederacy did not coincide with thepolitical. While the latter ran from the Potomac to the Ohio, andthence to Columbus on the Mississippi and westwards along the Mis¬souri, the former ran from the Potomac along the Alleghany mountainsto Chattanooga, thence along the Tennessee River to about Savannah,Helena: Disaster in the Westijlacross to the Mississippi at Fulton, (Arkansas) and from there toLittle Rock on the Arkansas River.” General Fuller might have addedthat if the Confederates had controlled Missouri in 1861, this linecould have ended not at Little Rock but at St. Louis. General Granthimself said, as we have already noted, that the Confederates couldhave had St. Louis and all Missouri, if they had acted.Abraham Lincoln, who was in many respects the military genius thatJefferson Davis imagined himself to be, knew all this better thananyone, even Grant, and in homelier language he said the same thing.Conferring with Admiral David Porter and General McClellan atMcClellan’s headquarters in Washington, at the beginning of the war,Lincoln pointed to a map of the Mississippi, and exclaimed to Porter:“What a lot of land these fellows hold, of which Vicksburg is thekey! Here is the Red River, which will supply the Confederates withcattle and corn to feed their armies. There are the Arkansas and WhiteRivers, which can supply cattle and hogs by the thousand. FromVicksburg these supplies can be distributed by rail all over the Con¬federacy. Then there is that great depot of supplies on the Yazoo. Letus get Vicksburg and all that country is ours. The war can never bebrought to a close until that key is in our pocket. I am acquainted withthat region and know what I am talking about, and as valuable as NewOrleans will be to us, Vicksburg will be more so. We may take all thenorthern ports of the Confederacy, and they can still defy us fromVicksburg. It means hog and hominy without limit, fresh troops fromall the States of the Far South, and a cotton country where they canraise the staple without interference.” 1Abraham Lincoln said it: the Trans-Mississippi Department of theConfederate States had not only the food, but the men and the money(in the form of cotton) that the Confederacy needed to win; theNorth could not win as long as the South had access to the land of theArkansas River, the White River, and the Red River; and Vicksburgwas the key to that vast and rich empire.If Vicksburg was the key to Confederate victory, Helena, Arkansas,on the west bank of the Mississippi, was the key to Vicksburg. Justbelow Memphis and above Vicksburg, possession of Helena at anytime in 1862 or early 1863 (when Holmes obdurately refused to act)would have snapped Federal control of the Mississippi River like anover-age rubber band and anchored the Potomac line of the Con¬federacy upon Little Rock.178Shelby the RaiderHelena hard to invest, perhaps you say, and hard to hold? At notime did General Samuel R. Curtis, or Benjamin M. Prentiss, whosucceeded him, have more than 5,000 men at Helena and there weresix times as many men on active duty in the Confederate Army of theTrans-Mississippi, including a full brigade stationed at all times in theIndian Territory to protect the Indians against only Holmes knewwhat.True, an assault on Helena would have brought the Federals down¬river in force, but it would have prevented or at least crippled Grant’smovement on Vicksburg and would also have brought about thatconsummation devoutly to be wished: an opening of a third front forthe Confederacy and the consolidation of that line down the Appala¬chians from Virginia to Arkansas which, as Major General Fullerpoints out, was indispensable to Confederate victory. With the Fed¬erals rushing their armies downstream to retake Helena, they wouldhave had to leave the back door open for an invasion of Missouri.Either way, they were vulnerable unless they were willing to bringan overwhelming army into the area to guard all their flanks. That, atthe risk of being repetitious, would have relieved pressure on Lee andJohnston, and on Pemberton at Vicksburg; it would have shifted theentire center of gravity of the war and brought the full strength of theTrans-Mississippi army into the contest at the time it was most needed.But to turn his department into a battlefield was the last thing onearth that General Holmes wanted.In June, 1863, however, so many Federal troops had been siphonedout of Missouri to reinforce the Union armies east of the Mississippithat General Holmes felt safe in telegraphing to Kirby Smith atShreveport: “I believe we can take Helena. Please let me try it.” 2Smith replied the same day: “Adost certainly do it.”On June 16, therefore, Holmes journeyed to Jacksonport to conferwith Marmaduke and Shelby and with General Sterling Price, whohad been reassigned to Arkansas after a long absence across the river.At Jacksonport, Holmes outlined his plan. Three Confederate divi¬sions, rendezvousing at Clarendon on June 26, would move by diver¬gent roads and attack Helena at daylight on the Fourth of July. Pricewould attack from the west, Brigadier General James F. Fagan fromthe south, and the brigades of Marmaduke and Shelby, together withthat of General L. Ad. Walker, from the north. The Confederates out¬numbered the Federals nearly two to one, but even so the task of tak-Helena: Disaster in the West179ing the city would be a formidable one, for Helena was literally a ringof concentric defenses, with the Mississippi River, now in full flood,at its back.General Holmes had a plan of the fortifications of Helena, not avery good one, as it turned out. On the map the town was a perfectsquare, right on the edge of the Mississippi River.Looking west on this map, one sees that the river runs straight acrossthe bottom of the page. There are six roads leading into Helena (notcounting the Levee Road along the river, which is no more than a citystreet and is not a point of access for the Confederates). Two of theseroads, the Sterling Road on the north, and the Lower Little RockRoad on the south, meet in the town and are physically the same road.Like the Levee Road, they parallel the river, though curving awayfrom it gently at both ends of the town. In fact, the ellipse formed bythese two roads—the Sterling Road and the Lower Little Rock Road-sits there very much in the shape of a hat above the square face of thetown. The other four roads, all of which enter Helena from a westerlydirection, are like feathers sticking out from the hat.Reading left to right, these roads are: the Upper Little Rock Road;a road running directly from the center of the town which has noname on the map but passes Graveyard Hill, the Upper St. FrancisRiver Road, and the Old St. Francis River Road. Their names indicatetheir points of origin, and their directions. The first two lead off intocentral and southern Arkansas, in the direction of Little Rock, theother two toward the Missouri border and the swamps from whichthe Iron Brigade has but lately emerged.Across these roads, in the shape of an inverted bowl, the Federalshave dug rifle pits which are manned by such troops as the Forty-third Indiana, the Thirty-third Iowa, the Twenty-eighth Wisconsin,and the Thirty-third Missouri. In back of their rifle pits, at a distanceof about half a mile, stand four Federal forts, designated by them asA, B, C, and D, or rather as D, C, B, and A; they are lettered fromright to left on the map, as if the map had been drawn by a lefthandedman. It makes no difference, because to the Confederates the threeavenues of approach are known as Rightor Hill (covered by forts Aand B) on the Sterling road, or north side, of Helena; Graveyard Hill,on the road running out from the center of town; and Hindman Hill,on the south, so called because here stands the home of General TomHindman. Graveyard Hill and Hindman Hill are guarded by only onei8oShelby the Raiderfort each, but the construction of the rifle pits and the gun emplace¬ments are such that the Federals can send an enfilading fire in all direc¬tions—unless they are attacked on all sides at once, and hence kepttoo busy to do so.The success of the attack on Helena depends absolutely on perfectcoordination. Every Confederate unit must strike simultaneously atdaylight, every rifle pit of the enemy must be carried, every gunsilenced, and the defenders driven back into the town upon their mainfortification, Fort Curtis. This is a square citadel or redoubt in thecenter of town, bristling with crossed spikes and manned by no fewerthan twenty siege guns, pointing in all directions. Fort Curtis, too,must be taken from all sides at once, or there is no hope of taking itat all.Seldom has a Confederate army been given a rougher assignmentthan the assault on Helena.Holmes’s General Orders outline the plan clearly:“The attack on Helena will be made tomorrow morning (JulyFourth) at daylight, and as follows:“ist. Major General Price, in command of McRae’s and Parson’sbrigades, will proceed by the best route, assume position, assault andtake Graveyard Hill at daylight.“2d. Brigadier General Walker, with his cavalry brigade, will, inlike manner, proceed to the Sterling Road, where he will hold himselfin position to resist any troops that may approach Rightor Hill; andwhen that position is captured, he will enter the town and act againstthe enemy as circumstances may justify.“3d. Brigadier General Fagan will proceed by the best route, assumeposition, and take the battery on Hindman Hill at daylight.“4th. Brigadier General Marmaduke will proceed with his com¬mand by the best route, assume position, and take Rightor Hill atdaylight.”Mark the day. It is the Fourth of July, 1863—the second most im¬portant Fourth in American history, if not the most important. For onthat day, defeat settled permanently on the banners of the SouthernConfederacy, and not all the heart-bursting rides of men like Shelbyand Stuart could any longer save the armies and the government. TheFourth of July, 1863: Lee’s beaten army is falling back from Gettys¬burg. The three-day battle for Pennsylvania ended yesterday. Pember¬ton, at Vicksburg, was ready to quit yesterday, but he has waited untilHelena: Disaster in the West i 8 itoday, hoping to get better terms for his troops if he surrenders themon the Fourth of July. And at Helena, three Confederate forces areconverging upon General Prentiss’s works for a bloody and uselessattack whose failure will mean the loss of Arkansas in six weeks andthe bottling up of the Trans-Mississippi army for the rest of the war.The attack is set for daylight; the Federals have been up and at theirposts since 2:30 a.m., waiting for it. There is a good deal of argumentin the official reports as to whether the Confederates started the Battleof Helena on time. Holmes says that they did not, and blames Price,chiefly, and Walker, secondarily. Holmes charges that Price laggedfor a full hour after sunrise in his attack on Graveyard Hill, and that asa result the enemy was able to throw the combined weight of itsartillery and rifle fire at Fagan, when he attacked; Price says that hemade only “a brief halt” to rest his troops before commencing theattack at daylight, and that his two brigades, under Parsons and McRae,attacked simultaneously and according to plan. Holmes says thatMcRae was derelict in his duty because he did not obey Holmes’sorder, given hastily at the last minute, to reinforce Fagan after Faganwas repulsed; McRae says it would have been madness to attempt it;Marmaduke admits his attack from the north was “a failure” butblames General L. M. Walker for not supporting him on his frontand left. Walker says that he did what he was supposed to do; andthe record would seem to bear him out. Marmaduke shot Walker deadin a duel afterward as a result of their quarrel as to who was at faultat Helena.It was a mess, a bloody, unholy mess, but the Confederate soldierin the ranks, as always, covered himself with glory. For twelve solidhours in the tanglefoot of the felled logs, the deep ravines, the impas¬sable gullies, the rifle pits, the blazing artillery, the thunder of theheavy guns from Fort Curtis, and the barricaded streets of Helenaitself, the boys from Missouri, Texas, and Arkansas fought like theswamp tigers they had become. They were driven back in the endbecause the attack was not coordinated and because the Federals couldconcentrate their fire always on the Confederate weak points. Never¬theless, since the Confederates outnumbered the enemy 7,646 to 4,129,with artillery support, their attack should have been overwhelming.All of the Confederate reports are acrimonious and contradictory.The best account of what happened to the Federals comes from theirside. General Prentiss says that the attack began on his front and rightI 82Shelby the Raiderat daylight. His front was Graveyard Hill. That was Price. His rightwas Rightor Hill. That was Marmaduke, Shelby, and Walker. Prentissthus exonerates Price from the charge that Holmes made—that Pricelost the battle through delay. The Federal commander says that Priceattacked first, or so nearly first that it was practically simultaneouswith the others, and that four hours later, Price was still attacking asfuriously as ever. In fact, if we are to believe General Prentiss, andthere seems no reason not to, Sterling Price and his Missourians werethe heroes of Helena. Prentiss, in writing of Price’s division, soundsmore like a general praising his own men than an enemy commanderdescribing an attack upon himself. Few generals have had this sort oftribute from an enemy:“For four hours,” Prentiss wrote, “the battle raged furiously, theenemy gaining little, if any advantage. Now however, the attack infront became more furious; the enemy covered every hilltop, swarmedin every ravine, but seemed to be massing his force most particularlyagainst Battery C [at Graveyard Hill]. I now signaled the gunboatTyler, the only one at hand, to open fire in that direction. The enemy,Parsons’s and McRae’s brigades, nothing daunted by the concentratedfire from Fort Curtis, Batteries, B, C, D, the Tyler and all the infantryI could bring to their support, and led, as I since learn, by LieutenantGeneral Holmes and Major General Price in person, charged uponBattery C. Twice they were repulsed, but the third time, exhibiting acourage and desperation rarely equaled, they succeeded in driving mysmall force at the point of the bayonet and capturing the battery.Dividing his forces, and sending a part, as a feint, to menace FortCurtis, the enemy then assaulted Battery D, to reach which they mustpass through a deep ravine and encounter a heavy cross fire.”Here Price’s advance faltered, under that murderous fire, and gettingno support from either flank, was surrounded and made prisoner bytroops whom they outnumbered three to one!The failure on the flanks had been complete—Price’s victory in thecenter was a useless effusion of blood. He and a weeping LieutenantGeneral Holmes gave the order to retreat at about 10:30 a.m., al¬though it was not until about 3:00 p.m. that the day was seen to beirretrievably lost and all brigades set in motion away from Helena.What had happened, on the flanks?Nothing good, from the very start.Fagan’s attack failed and Marmaduke never attacked at all.Helena: Disaster in the West 183The failure of Fagan’s attack is soon accounted for. He had left hisartillery behind! (out of necessity, he says), and his men had practicallyto crawl on all fours to the Battle of Helena through the barriers whichthe enemy had set up. He says that “the road was completely filledwith felled timber, the largest forest growth intermingling and over¬lapping its whole length, while on either side precipitous and impas¬sable ravines were found running up even to the very entrenchmentsof the enemy. It was utterly impossible to move my artillery or ammu¬nition train along this road. The obstacles were so great, indeed, thatI was under the necessity of directing every officer of my commandto dismount and proceed on foot—a dire necessity which subsequentevents gave occasion seriously to deplore. After crawling through theinterstices of the closely jutting limbs and boughs, and climbing overthe thickly matted timber for a mile, my line of skirmishers, who hadbeen ordered by me not to fire, came within sight of the enemy. Iwent to the front, and could plainly see that the enemy was on thealert, and evidently waiting and expecting an attack. Not having beenapprised of the obstructions in the road, I had made no arrangementsto remove them. The limited time to daylight would not allow evenof an attempt to take my artillery along. To conform to orders, it wasnecessary for me to move with the utmost celerity. Freeing myselfof everything except my column of infantry, I pushed along withall the haste in my power. At daylight I reached and attacked theenemy in his works.”Despite his lack of artillery and the exhaustion of his men from hav¬ing to cover an obstacle course before reaching the scene of action,Fagan carries four lines of Federal rifle pits by assault, and follows upwith an attack on Fort Hindman, which is bloodily repulsed. Pricehas taken Graveyard Hill (also without artillery, for, like Fagan, hehas been forced to leave his behind, and for the same reason!), but inthe center the Confederate flag is planted squarely on the enemy’sfortifications; it is the crucial moment of the battle and despite Fagan’sreverses, there may still be time to take Helena—if the Confederateforces on the north have been attacking successfully.They have not attacked at all. Marmaduke and Walker have takenup positions on either side of Rightor Hill at daylight, but somehow orother, large Federal forces are on every side of them. There are massedbatteries and infantry between Walker and the river; the enemy is inMarmaduke’s rear at Rightor Hill, also with batteries and infantry, in184Shelby the Raidersuch force that he is afraid to move forward. Twice he sends a courierto Walker demanding that Walker attack the forces in his (Marma¬duke’s) rear so that he, Marmaduke, can carry out his assignment oftaking Rightor Hill. Walker, after looking over the situation, con¬cludes that if he moves from where he is, Marmaduke will be sur¬rounded on four sides instead of just on three; he also makes it clearin his report that he considers he has done his duty when he protectsGeneral Marmaduke’s flank by holding his position on the SterlingRoad.Marmaduke wrote angrily: “The attack upon Fort Rightor by mycommand was a failure. I have every reason to believe that my troopswould have carried it had it not been for the force on my left and rear,which occupied that position after daylight, and which could andshould have been prevented from taking that position, and afterthey had gained that position, could have been driven from it byGeneral Walker’s brigade, which did not come to the support of myleft until 7 a.m.; and during the whole engagement his force wasmore than half a mile to my left and rear. I could see the force whichengaged Walker’s brigade, and at no time did it exceed 500. I think300 a big estimate.”Jo Shelby played a much more active part in the Battle of Helenathan Marmaduke’s inaction would indicate, but he was severelywounded at Helena and turned in no report on the battle, being underthe care of a physician at Batesville for several weeks afterward. Hisassignment to Marmaduke’s command at Helena was another piece ofbad luck on the part of the Confederates (the Iron Brigade had beenpart of Price’s division and was detached from it by Holmes at the lastmoment), for Shelby was the only Confederate commander who wasable to bring up his artillery at Helena. Shelby had marched throughcountry fully as rough as that which Fagan and Price had encountered,but they had left their guns behind, 'whereas Shelby had his with him—for once again the men of the Iron Brigade had substituted for thehorses when the horses could no longer move the artillery, and soonafter daylight were blazing away at everything Federal in sight, in¬cluding a troopship in the river! Never, on any battlefield of the CivilWar, did Shelby leave his artillery behind, and never, on any battle¬field, did he ever lose a battery.Let Marmaduke tell the story of his troubles of the early morning,before Shelby’s activities of the next eight hours are traced:Helena: Disaster in the West 185“When three miles from the fort (on Rightor Hill) I dismountedmy whole force, except one company under Major Benjamin Elliott.I then moved forward. When within two miles of the fort, I found theroad and country thoroughly obstructed, the enemy having choppeddown the trees and rendered almost impassable that approach to thefort and the town. The country was exceedingly rough. I was delayedsome half hour or more by my guides, who lost their way and reportedthat they were completely lost and unable to guide me farther, inconsequence of which I did not get into position until a little afterdaylight, but before sunup. The enemy’s pickets and skirmishers wereencountered some three quarters of a mile from the fort, and drivento within 150 yards of the fort. In this the enemy lost several killedand wounded, and five prisoners. Shelby’s brigade was in the advance,and so narrow was the road, and so rough and rugged were the hills,that the troops could only march by the flank, and the artillery withgreat difficulty was brought up piece by piece, and by hand. By thetime that the advance had reached within 200 yards of the fort, andthose in rear brought up and deployed along the ridges, the enemy hadbrought to my left and rear a body of infantry and several pieces ofartillery which, during the whole day’s fight, poured upon me a deadlyfire. I now had a heavy force in my front, infantry in rifle pits andartillery in position, which it would have been difficult with my wholeforce to have carried. In addition, I had the force on my left (ofinfantry and artillery) thoroughly protected by the levee, which en¬gaged a large part of my force and, on every attempt to advance,enfiladed my line. It was from the sharpshooters and artillery on myleft and rear that I suffered my greatest loss, and not until they weredislodged could I have advanced. I twice dispatched to BrigadierGeneral Walker to advance and assist me in dislodging them. It wasnot done.”The enfilading fire which Marmaduke speaks of was being receivedin part by Shelby, who was chafing, fretting, and fuming becauseMarmaduke would not permit him to attack Fort Salomon on RightorHill.Says Major Edwards, in the only account extant of Shelby’s partici¬pation in the battle:“In plain view, the Mississippi river lay wrapped in an impenetrableveil of fog, that whirled and twisted in vast formless clouds upon thesleeping town (at daybreak; but Helena was not sleeping) and on thei 86Shelby the Raidergiant trees upon its banks. At sunrise it lifted sufficiently to see glim¬mering through the gloom the dark sides and the inevitable black,pitchy smoke of an ironclad escorting a large steamer, whose roof anddecks were blue with uniforms. Shelby opened directly upon thecrowded boat; the ironsides answered immediately and from all thebastioned walls the grim redoubts of Helena there went up on thisIndependence Day a crash and thunder of artillery more discordantthan a war of elements. From the town a splendid six-gun battery ranout and took position in the plain below to silence Collins’s guns; theironclad shelled him all day, and Fort Salomon plied its busy Parrottsalmost beyond endurance. Under this heavy and enfilading fire Shelbyformed his brigade for the charge... [after] waiting impatiently fororders to advance, asked permission to assault Fort Salomon, but wasrefused.... General Prentiss concentrated a fearful fire upon Shelbyfrom artillery and infantry.” The Federals had been reinforced follow¬ing the defeat of the Confederates on the other two sides of the Helenatriangle, and it was in this storm of shot and shell that Shelby waswounded. A minie ball struck him at the elbow, coursed through hisarm and came out at the wrist. All of Shelby’s men agreed that in theexcitement of battle Shelby was impervious to pain: Major JakeStonestreet, who was standing next to him by Collins’s battery, says,“I was near him and he did not even draw in his breath.” 3In addition to being wounded, Shelby has had two horses shot frombeneath him at Helena; although faint from loss of blood, he returnsto the little inferno of Rightor Hill as soon as the arm is bandaged;he is worried, as always, about his artillery. Price’s infantry can be seenretreating through the streets of Helena, past houses “vomiting flamesof death,” and the great grim citadel playing its siege guns like a hoseof fire in every direction; it is pretty obvious now that the attack onHelena has failed, and the messenger from Holmes is not long in com¬ing. At 11 a.m., a little less than eight hours since Shelby’s battery washauled to the foot of the declivity at Rightor Hill, Marmaduke getsthe order to retire.“Volunteers to save the battery!” shouts Shelby, pale against thechestnut beard as he sits his horse weakly. “Fifty volunteers to savethe battery, boys! Shelby’s Brigade never lost a battery, and withGod’s help, never will. What do you say, Colonel Gilkey?”Gilkey and hundreds of others have a good deal to say in the smokeand confusion; and Major Edwards says that Shelby could have hadHelena: Disaster in the West 187a thousand volunteers; but fifty is enough, and these Colonel Gilkeytakes forward into the pit of death at the foot of the hill to cut thedead battery animals from their traces, drag the bullet-rent and riddledwheels by the severed harness from the path of the Federal advance,and flee with the rest. New horses are found for the guns; “everyoneworked for dear life and dear honor.” When Marmaduke’s retreatfinally was begun, with the Iron Brigade in the rear, Federal pursuerswere not three hundred yards away—“pressing on furiously, infantry,cavalry and artillery, and shouting and killing as they came.” Fifteenof Gilkey’s men died to save the battery.General Prentiss was satisfied to save Helena; the pursuit did notextend beyond the fortifications. If you care to read his report all theway through, you will find that after Price’s retreat, he was expectinganother attack on his left flank, where Fagan had been inactive eversince his first, headlong rush, but Prentiss says that afterward, whenhe counted the Confederate dead and wounded, he understood whythey did not come back to the attack. These pages make painful read¬ing, for at the end of the reports come the official figures of thestrength of the Confederate Army of the Trans-Mississippi afterHelena: 31,933 in the District of Arkansas; 23,597 m the District ofWestern Louisiana; 11,717 in the District of Texas.Sixty-seven thousand men, and half of them were on furlough orsick leave on July 4, 1863!This was the army which was never used.The great storms which rumbled over the dying Confederacy in thesummer of 1863 were accompanied by lesser gusts and squalls whichblew ill fortune like a disease borne upon air currents into every cornerof the decaying mansion which was the “proud imperial South.”The history of Confederate operations in Arkansas in 1863, afterHelena, requires no time in the telling. Although there were marchesand countermarches, with the wounded Shelby leaving his sick bedto lead a charge on the road to Little Rock, the upshot of it all wasthat by September 10, General Frederick Steele of the Union armywas comfortably settled in General Holmes’s old headquarters at LittleRock, Price and Holmes had retreated to Arkadelphia, whither theirstores had been transported, and Jo Shelby, his arm still suppurating,was pondering bitterly the news from Missouri.Quantrill, who seems to have detached himself at will from whatever188Shelby the Raidercommand he was assigned to, now rode a thousand miles to Lawrence,Kansas, where he sacked and burned the town and murdered sixtyunoffending civilians. The Federals, under a General Ewing in thatdistrict, issued their famous Order No. n, which ordered that rebelsympathizers and their families in the whole western Missouri RiverValley be dispossessed and driven out of the area. The order includedJackson, Howard, Lafayette, and Johnson counties. The family ofMrs. Rebecca Redd and Jo Shelby’s family, who were still stayingwith the Redds, were included.Word of this came to Shelby at Batesville. He got in touch withFrank Blair and Benjamin Gratz, no matter how (the records hereagain are lost), but General Blair made arrangements for Betty andthe children to go through the lines to Lexington, Kentucky, and theold home on Mill Street. That great and gallant gentleman, BenjaminGratz, came to Waverly in person to get them, and he also escortedMrs. Redd back to Kentucky. On this trip he went out to look at the1,000-acre farm which Shelby and Howard Gratz had owned, andwhich Howard now owned by himself, and bought it from his son.(Shelby had thoughtfully deeded his share in the farm to HowardGratz, so that it was not confiscated in 1861 along with his home onMount Rucker.)It was also about this time that Shelby got permission to go on hisGreat Raid Into Missouri, the longest and most daring raid of the CivilWar, which was a war of raids. He would not have got permissionfrom such fellows as Price and Holmes, or even Kirby Smith; butthere was a new factor in the situation in the person of Thomas C.Reynolds, the new Confederate governor of Missouri. ClaiborneJackson had died of cancer the previous December; his successor wasa man as energetic as himself. When Shelby asked permission to invadeMissouri, Reynolds overruled the military and said, “Go.” And headded as he shook hands with Shelby—it had to be the left one—“Thebuff sash of a brigadier awaits the issue.”Shelby’s Great Raid18917. Shelby's Great Raid“Ho Boys! Make a Noise!The Yankees are afraid!The river’s up, hell’s to pay—Shelby’s on a Raid! ”“Shelby’s Mule” 1The old men dreamed in the sun on the porch of the ConfederateHome at Higginsville....Fifteen hundred miles to the Missouri River and back again_with 800 men in thirty-four days... through a state filled with yo,ooqof the enemy ... and 600 of them dead in sixteen days, 600 sabred andshot and six-poundered in a dozen fair fights... and some not so fair.We know because we got their rifles, every one of them... from theIllinois Yankees and the Black Republicans and the Lop-Eared Dutch... with 300 wagons to carry them in. Jo Shelby never had so manywagons... and forty stands of colors. Old Jo said that we destroyed ahundred thousand dollars worth of enemy property ... but that's notcounting the million dollars in supplies of the best fed, best equippedarmy the sun ever shone on... in the Federal Department of Missouri. ..yes sir, boy .. .there were 10,000 troops out of the 50,000 inthe Department of the West who couldn't catch us... though theytried... 10,000 blue coats who stayed home from Chattanooga be¬cause of Shelby's Raid... .You've heard of Shelby's Raid? Jeb Stuart'sRide around McClellan? Hell, brother, Jo Shelby rode aroundMISSO URI! ...Fifteen hundred miles to the Missouri River and back again... with800 men in thirty-four days.. .to the gates of Jefferson City!What if they had given us 10,000 men? ...The Civil War was a war of raids, and Shelby’s raid into Missouriin September and October was one of the most daring of them all.It was accomplished with fewer men against greater numbers thanany other raid of the war, and it may be quite possible to prove thatbecause of Shelby’s ceaseless activity on horseback he covered moremiles as a Confederate raider than any of the other great Southerncavalry leaders. It was this daring foray into Missouri in 1863, coupled190Shelby the Raiderwith his smashing defeat of Pleasanton the following year at Newtonia—the last battle fought west of the Mississippi—which caused Pleason-ton to say that Shelby was the greatest cavalry leader the South had,bar none—and that from a man who had fought Jeb Stuart for threeyears.The compliments were not being passed freely in Shelby’s direc¬tion on September 22, 1863, however. The older heads were waggingdubiously; it was felt that Shelby was a show-off and a fool, andheaded for certain destruction. The only men in high spirits, asidefrom Shelby and Governor Reynolds, were Shelby’s Missourians.With Old Jo in sole command, they did not doubt that they wouldget where they were going. As Major Edwards says, “Preparations forraids to Missouri were never long in the making, and this one grewas swiftly as a young man’s love.” 2 The preparations, in fact, had beena little too enthusiastic, as far as General Holmes was concerned, andhe summoned Shelby to Arkadelphia for the purpose of giving him alecture.Holmes had been in a state of acute depression ever since the failureof the attack on Helena. The old man’s heart was broken; during theretreat he had remarked tearfully to Marmaduke that the Army ofthe Trans-Mississippi was now “an army of prisoners, and self-sup¬porting at that.” 3 His terrific disappointment had not caused him tosink into apathy, however; he was more morose and excitable, andharder to get along with, than ever. When Shelby entered his presence,he blurted out, without preliminaries,“Sir, your men are nothing but a set of thieves, and their thievingmust be stopped.”Shelby stiffened. “Sir,” he said, “whoever told you that, lies.”“I believe it is true,” said Holmes.“Why?” asked Shelby.“Because everybody says so.”“Do you believe a thing when everybody says it?” inquired Shelby.“I certainly do,” said Holmes.“Do you know what everybody says about you?” inquired Shelby.Holmes fell neatly into the trap. “No, sir, I do not!” he snapped.“They say that you are a damned old fool,” said Shelby, and walkedout.Major Edwards gives a watered-down version of this conversation,but Major Jake Stonestreet, who was present, says it took just aboutShelby’s Great Raid191this form; it is also quoted thus in Hollister and Norman’s Five FamousMissourians.4 With the backing of his commander-in-chief, GovernorReynolds, and liberated from the tyranny of superior officers whosechief characteristic was timidity, Shelby was in no mood to takefurther orders from the bunglers under whom he had served since ’61.He knew of course that with 800 men he could not secure a foot¬hold anywhere in Missouri, but on the day that he set out, Rosecrans,driven back from Chickamauga, was vociferously demanding thatmost of the Federals in Missouri be sent to reinforce him at Chat¬tanooga; it was a critical time for the Confederates east of the Missis¬sippi and the threat of a new Confederate invasion of Missouri wouldhold a substantial number of Federal troops west of the river. On theother hand, if the Federals were foolish enough to strip the state oftroops, believing the Confederates too weak to invade, Jo Shelbycould drive to Jefferson City as easily as he had once raided toWaverly, and raise the Stars and Bars above the capital. The consterna¬tion which this would cause would produce startling changes in thecourse of the war; it might even make the Richmond government dosomething.The situation in Missouri as Shelby rode north to Caddo Gap onSeptember 22 was one of terror and bedlam which not all the 50,000troops of Major General Schofield could control. Kansas Redlegsroamed the Missouri River Valley settling old scores from the BorderWars and murdering those suspected of being rebel sympathizers, andtheir families. Bushwackers on both sides, and many who were inreality on neither side, operated freely throughout the state, lootingand killing. The German newspapers protested bitterly that anyonewho had “a German face” was in constant danger of having a daggerplunged into his heart. Fraud and corruption in connection with U. S.government supplies were so rife that Schofield had reprimanded Gen¬eral Blunt—a good soldier—for having allowed frauds of monstroussize to be perpetrated under his very nose.5The whole of Missouri was a Donnybrook fair, with civiliansmurdering one another wholesale, while the officers of the army sup¬posed to protect them robbed the government blind. Shelby was soenraged at the state of affairs in Missouri that he who had made themost sparing use of firing squads now kept them busy day in and dayout.Bands of guerrillas were so numerous that Shelby had been in192Shelby the RaiderMissouri about a week before the Federals realized that a Confederateexpedition was among them. In fact, on October 1, 1863, eight daysafter he had left Arkadelphia, President Lincoln wrote to Schofield:“There is no organized military force in avowed opposition to theGeneral Government now in Missouri, and if any such should re¬appear, your duty in regard to it will be too plain to require anyspecial instructions.”Abraham Lincoln was so convinced that the Confederates in theWest had been liquidated by the success of the Vicksburg campaignthat he was chiding Schofield for his failure to keep order in a statewhere there was no enemy to fear. Wrote Lincoln in the same missive:“Your immediate duty in regard to Missouri now is to advance theefficiency of [your] establishment, and to use it, so as far is practicable,to compel the excited people there to leave one another alone.” 6As this was being written in the White House, Shelby and his 800men were cutting a swath of destruction in the state which would costthe Federal government a million dollars in destroyed supplies. AsColonel John C. Moore said of him after the war, Shelby could doanything with the cavalry, wield it like a whip or drive it like a wedge.He also seemed to have the power of making it invisible when hewished, and the Irishmen in his command, at least, like Jake Connorand Jimmy Grady, would have sworn that he could ride between theraindrops when he wished to keep dry.All such praise, boiled down, merely means, of course, that Shelbywas one of those rare individuals who seem to have no limit to theirphysical endurance, and he had the good fortune to have native intel¬ligence to match his physical strength. That such praise is not toohigh, under the conditions that existed, is indicated by the cracklingtelegraphic dispatches which fill up no fewer then one hundred pagesof the Official Records.7 From the top commanders of the Depart¬ment of the West down to mere lieutenant colonels and majors, noone ever knew where Shelby was until after he had been there, ex¬cept at Marshall, Missouri; and at Marshall, where he was surroundedby a vastly superior force, he drove his command through a solid wallof the enemy and escaped, though encumbered by artillery and heav¬ily loaded wagons.First blood of the Great Raid was spilled just north of Caddo Gapin the Arkansas mountains. Shelby had just been joined by ColonelDavid Hunter with fifty men. Major Ben Elliott, who was always inShelby’s Great Raidi93the vanguard of the Iron Brigade, discovered a camp of Confederatedeserters and Union jayhawkers just beyond the gap. They were at¬tacked, and seventy-nine of them killed and thirty-four captured. Allbut three of the prisoners were condemned to death by a militarycommission and shot the next morning. The last to die was a notoriousCaptain McGinnis, leader of the band and a New England Puritandespite his Irish name. He was given time to pray, and he prayed forhis enemies.“Oh God,” he began, “bless the Union and all its loyal defenders;bless the poor ignorant rebels who persist in hardening their hearts andstiffening their necks; bless Mrs. McGinnis and her children; bless theConstitution, which has been wrongly interpreted; and eradicate slav¬ery from the earth.”“Come, come, old man,” said the captain of the firing squad, “thecommand has already gone and I will get far behind.”“I am ready, young man,” said McGinnis, “and may God havemercy on your soul.” He bared his breast and six Confederate rifle¬men shot him dead. The Confederates believed that his jayhawkershad murdered twenty Southern sympathizers in the neighborhood.At Roseville was the First Federal Arkansas Infantry, composed ofjust the kind of fellows the Missourians liked to catch up with—deserters from Hindman’s Arkansas army, Union Negro soldiers, andwhite men who, though Southerners, were Union sympathizers. Theselatter belonged to Illinois and Missouri regiments. Shelby let Quantrill(now back from Richmond) and Gregg do a little preliminary workon these people, knowing that they would enjoy the assignment.Taken by surprise, most of the Federals—between 300 and 400—were captured. Those who could be identified as Arkansas deserterswere shot instantly. The Negroes were not treated as soldiers. Theywere stripped of their uniforms, each given a sound thrashing, andordered back to their masters; they were told if they showed up inthe enemy’s ranks again, and captured, they would be hanged. Thebonafied Union soldiers were treated in gentlemanly fashion, givenprovisions, paroled, and dismissed.One of the Union prisoners had been wounded in the initial attack.He was brought within Shelby’s lines and placed on a bed of leaves.He was a farmer of the neighborhood, and among those whom Quan¬trill and Jim Thorp had rounded up were members of his family, twowomen and three little girls. One of the women was the man’s wife,194Shelby the Raiderthe other his sister. The prisoner seemed to be wounded badly. Shelbydid not know quite what to do with him, and the five females had setup such a wailing that Major Edwards says it was “distressing to be¬hold.”Shelby explained to them that he could not linger, but that he wouldnot leave them in distress. He ordered a blanket, overcoat, and someprovisions set down for the family; he then asked his boys if theywould contribute something in the way of cash. Edwards says that Con¬federate money—and the Missourians had precious little even of that—was “showered” upon the family—and that even a few greenbacksappeared. Shelby himself contributed several greenbacks, and presseda purse of coins upon the wife. “What it contained,” Edward says,“even he himself could scarcely have told. But be sure the Recorderof his many actions knew, and reckoned it to the uttermost farthing.”Shelby’s curious blend of caution and recklessness is nowhere betterdemonstrated than in the fact that throughout the war, as far as anyrecords show, he never carried anything but United States moneyupon his person.Whenever he was called upon to produce money, which was seldom,he could always manage to find a few greenbacks of large denomi¬nation in one pocket or another. It was not that he did not trust hisgovernment; it was just that some other people did not. When GeneralLee surrendered at Appomattox, he had two brand-new Confederatetwenty dollar bills upon his person. You may see them today in theConfederate Museum at Richmond, together with the handsome uni¬form in which he surrendered. Lee and Shelby were both dead brokeat the end of the war; their vast estates confiscated, but Lee was alwaysamong friends, or at least surrounded by a large army; Shelby wasalways followed, like a criminal, by overwhelming forces of the law,and he felt that it was the better part of wisdom to carry a couple ofbucks in his shoe, so to speak.It was not until October 4, when Shelby had marched 250 miles toNeosho in southwest Missouri that the Federal commanders in thearea were fully aware of what the Shelby expedition meant; but eventhen they misjudged his ultimate destination. On his previous threeraids into Missouri, he had headed by one devious route or anotherfor Waverly, and they began concentrating forces of larger or smallersize between Neosho and Waverly—see the endless dispatches in theOfficial Records. Even Major General Schofield thought that ShelbyShelby’s Great Raidi95was merely on a raid into southern Missouri and that he would wheelaround and head home for Arkansas in a short time. Nobody thoughthe was heading for Jefferson City.8Furthermore, the savagery of his destruction and the amount ofsupplies he had captured made Schofield and the others in the top ranksof the Department of the West believe that Shelby’s main object wasto gather up as much booty as he could before returning to Arkansas.True, Schofield said, let’s get behind him and prevent him from re¬turning to Arkansas, so that he will be trapped in Missouri, but notmany Federal commanders wanted to tangle with Shelby unless theywere part of an overwhelming force sent against him.From Roseville, which is in Logan County, Arkansas, the commandpassed on to Neosho via Huntsville, Mudtown, and Bentonville. AtBentonville Shelby sent a Colonel Horace Brand with a small detach¬ment to recruit in northeast Arkansas and make a demonstrationagainst the Federal railway terminus at Rolla. En route to Neosho,which had been the only capital of the Republic of Missouri when thestate was for two months an ally of the Confederacy, Shelby’s raidersdestroyed mile after mile of telegraph lines. At Bentonville it was dis¬covered that Sigel and the Dutch had been there recently and burnedthe town. There Shelby was joined by Colonel Coffee and 100 men.Sitting their horses and looking at the charred ruins of Bentonville,neither Shelby’s nor Coffee’s men needed any exhortation for the workahead of them.Neosho proved a prize indeed. It was occupied by a garrison of400 Federal cavalry, and there were about 500 splendid horses in thecommand. The garrison was concentrated in a large brick courthouse,which Shelby surrounded and began to blow apart with shells fromhis Parrott guns. The beleaguered Federals ran up a white flag in shortorder, and Shelby’s men where soon taking inventory of one of thefinest Federal supply depots in Missouri. Besides the horses there were400 Sharpe’s rifles, 400 new navy revolvers, and four splendid cavalryovercoats, together with pantaloons, boots, spurs, hats, undercloth¬ing, medicines, blankets, socks, and commissary supplies, as well as“now and then some rare demijohns of glorious Bourbons.” As theIron Brigade rode off from Neosho, there was not a gray jacket insight, except Shelby’s. It was a curious sight: bluecoated cavalry trot¬ting along beneath the Confederate flags with the red sumac in theirhats which had become the insigne of Shelby’s men.196Shelby the RaiderBower’s Mill, the next town on the line of march, was notoriousas a rendezvous of thieves, cutthroats, and prostitutes. At Bower’sMill Shelby simply exiled the population and set fire to every housein town at once. There is a Bower’s Mill in Missouri today, as re¬spectable a community as any; it should be, for no spot on earth hasbeen more thoroughly purified by fire.Southwest Missouri was one vast depot of the finest supplies an armycould wish for, and Shelby was destroying methodically everythinghe could not carry safely—at Greenfield, at Stockton, at Humans-ville, and Warsaw, after leaving Bower’s Mill—but it was not hispurpose simply to turn Missouri into a desert for the Federals. Hisdestination was Jefferson City, where he meant to strike a swift,savage blow that would jolt the Confederate nation into a realizationof the vulnerability of Missouri. To get there fastest, and before theFederals could assemble a large force to intercept him, he had sentout three scouting parties in the direction of Springfield, with ordersto cut every wire between there and St. Louis. Nobody knew betterthen Shelby what would happen to him if the telegraph circuits wereleft open. Every Yankee in the Department of the West would turnout to meet him. As he approached Cole Camp from Warsaw, inBenton County, he had not heard from the detachment commanders—Lieutenants Williams, Wills, and Captain Lea—but he could feel con¬fident that they had carried out their mission, for he encountered noenemy force of any size.Cole Camp was a rural, agricultural district which had been turnedinto an Eden by its industrious German settlers. Shelby sent aheadscouts into Cole Camp. Being clad in blue uniforms, of course, theywere welcomed by the inhabitants and entertained hospitably. In fact,those whom Shelby sent ahead found the work much to their liking.In his account Major Edwards says, “Dan Ingram reveled in the de¬licious cider; Peter Trone made love to innumerable moon-facedgirls; Dave Shanks devoured their sauerkraut and patted the matronlyfraus under their double chins; Hooper chatted about crops and bo¬logna sausage, swearing his forefathers came from Amsterdam, or Rot¬terdam; Langhorne traded saddles twenty times and got one at lastto suit him; Yandell Blackwell sang “Villikins and His Dinah” overrousing bumpers of sparkling Catawba; Lieutenant Selby Plattenburgbegged books, magazines, or newspapers; McCoy talked Irish to theDutch and Dutch to the Irish; Toney wrote letters to his innumer-Shelby’s Great Raid97able sweethearts in Missouri and made every house a postoffice; Gor¬don went in heavily for cheese and Gentian apples; Judge Shindler[Sam Shindler, for whom Shelby named one of his sons. Ed.] discussedpolitics and the Emancipation Proclamation; Newt Hart and EdStonehill sought news from St. Louis, and inquired about the girlsthere; Coffee electioneered for Congress and explained his position;Maury Boswell bought wooden shoes to feed his horse in; Elliottstood aloof, a grim Saul among the prophets, listening only for bugleblasts and rattling musketry. Being clad in Federal uniforms, the im¬positions were easily kept up.” 9Even after the main body of the rebels rode in, the truth was notat first revealed. Shelby was wearing a blue uniform on this occasion,not wishing to undeceive the Cole Camp population until he hadmade a survey himself of the situation.A man described as “a tall, lank, kill-dee sort of fellow” darted outof the brush with a Mississippi rifle in his hand, and greeted Shelby.“Well, boys, I’m glad to see you sartin,” he said. “I heerd Jo Shelbywas coming this way and I sorter made up to have a pop at him withthis here weapon.“Ah!” said Shelby. “What command do you belong to?”“Well—ginral—I suppose you are a ginral from the feather in yourhat and your big crowd behind, I don’t exactly belong to any regi¬ment but I’m as good a Union man as anybody, and me and the boysjust formed a kind of gurilla company for home service, you know,drawing our arms and ammunition from Warsaw.”“Whom do you fight?” asked Shelby. “There are no rebels here,I reckon.”“Bless yer soul,” said the good Union man, “plenty of ’em here¬abouts and damn bad ones too, but we have been workin’ on ’emlately and only day before yesterday we killed old man Beasly, TomMays, and two of Price’s men just home from the army.”“Did these men make resistance,” asked Shelby, “and had theybeen lying out in the brush?”“No, not exactly, but they were rebels, you know.”“So are we rebels,” said Jo Shelby. He turned to Major Elliott.“Take this mem to the rear and shoot himrIt was done, and Shelby’s biographer says that the man was soterror-stricken as he was dragged away that he could not speak.At Florence the raiders beheld a curious sight. Every man, woman,198Shelby the Raiderand child had fled from the place. Everything had been left behind.Doors were left open, furniture in place, stores were left stocked.“One peculiarity of the place struck everyone with surprise, and itwas the vast quantities of eggs in every house, store, barn and tene¬ment. Hogsheads were filled with them, boxes, barrels, buckets, pansand baskets contained countless thousands, and yet the numbers wereonly half enumerated.” The raiders feasted on hundreds of omeletsfor supper.At Tipton, the railway center in Moniteau County, there was asmall Federal garrison, which made a token resistance but soon fledbefore the rebel onslaught. Their flight was so precipitate that theydid not even carry their flag with them. Some of Shelby’s men, re¬membering the burned homes and the murdered settlers in the areathrough which they had passed, tore it down and trampled it in themud.They wreaked other destruction at Tipton of a kind more calcu¬lated to cripple the enemy. They tore up the Missouri Pacific Rail¬road track for miles, burned the depot, and set fire to a large numberof freight and passenger cars. Before entering Tipton, however,Shelby sent Captains Warner Lewis and Bill Edwards to reconnoitrethe town. As they galloped about, a locomotive and one passengercar came hurtling across the prairie from Sedalia, at twenty-five milesan hour, and Captain Lewis undertook to do battle with it. He firedseveral times at the engineer’s cab, but the train merely passed on.When Shelby heard of it, he told Lewis that he could see that hewas a new hand at capturing locomotives. The proper way, saidShelby, was either to displace one of the rails slightly (which mightbe possible with one of the home-made Missouri bayonets formedout of blacksmith files) or else place an obstruction on the trackwhich would cause the locomotive to slow down. Shelby would havebeen disappointed if he had known that the lone passenger on thattrain was Lieutenant Colonel Thomas T. Crittenden,10 the futureGovernor of Missouri, who had been a guest at Shelby’s wedding.Shelby was particularly anxious to cross swords with him becauseCrittenden was a Kentuckian and Shelby viewed his present affilia¬tions as a disgrace to their native state.This was October 10, and Shelby had been on the road sinceSeptember 22. He had stolen or destroyed hundreds of thousandsof dollars of enemy property, and terrorized a good part of westernShelby’s Great Raid199Missouri; and the Federals had not even concentrated a force in hisneighborhood. The reason for this seeming paralysis of action maybe found in the Official Records. The colonel commanding at Spring-field—headquarters of the District of Southwestern Missouri—was aColonel John Edwards. The frequency with which his name appearsin the accounts of Shelby’s raid is confusing at first glance becausethe Confederate John Edwards is also mentioned frequently.On the morning of October 6, 1863, Union Colonel Edwardssent this dispatch to the Federal commander at Neosho (who was nolonger there): “The enemy, if he does not divide, will be 2,000 strong;now at Carthage, and trying to go into Jackson County but will bedriven back, and will try to get out again into Arkansas. That wemust prevent. Follow up rapidly in his rear and give him battle wher¬ever you can. I will leave today, via Greenfield, with three piecesof artillery and a column. Colonel Campbell is at Cassville, and hasCaptain Stark’s ammunition. I shall order him... to go to Newtonia.I will go from Greenfield in the direction of Lamar and hope toform a junction with you.” 11General Schofield accepted this mistaken diagnosis as gospel andmade arrangements accordingly. The telegraph wires were warm—those that had not been cut. Schofield wired General Ewing, ofOrder No. 11 fame, to “meet and destroy” Shelby in the JacksonCounty area—which is up near Lexington and far from Shelby’sactual route. Ewing replied that he would concentrate all of his menat Butler in Bates County. He might as well have concentrated themin Montana. Schofield then wired Brigadier General Holland atSpringfield to “call out all of the militia of your district which youcan make available in the pursuit of Shelby. Prevent his escape intoArkansas if possible.”Thus Shelby was afforded quite a head start in his march towardsnortheastern Missouri. By the time he reached Tipton, however, hiswhereabouts was known, and the telegraphic dispatches which werecircling the wires now reported not only Shelby’s daily, but hishourly movements. Brigadier General Totten—the Captain Totten ofthe Federal batteries at Wilson’s Creek—reported to Schofield thatShelby left Cole Camp at exactly twelve noon on October 9.12 Allof Missouri was now swarming with Federals on all sides of Shelby;it did not make much difference which way he went. He was out¬numbered ten to one on every side, and now that the Federals knew200Shelby the Raiderhe was moving on Jefferson City, his chances of a spectacular raidon the capital had gone glimmering.Shelby now knew that Brown’s was not the only large Federalforce in the neighborhood which would soon be concentrating itsattention on his raiders; northeastern Missouri held tens of thousandsof the enemy, and all of these would soon be enclosing him. Never¬theless, his little army (now numbering 1,200) was a colorful sight,with its fine horses, its 300 wagons, and 40 stands of colors. No lum¬bering draft animals drew these wagons; Shelby had captured somany fine cavalry horses that he could move his wagons at top speed,especially since many of them were empty. Boonville was soon insight, and a delegation, including the Mayor, came out to greet himand assure him of their Southern loyalties.Camped outside Boonville, Shelby received word that GeneralE. B. Brown, the Union commander who had been cheered by theConfederates at Springfield for his reckless bravery in the line, wasmarching in his direction with 4,000 men. Bennett H. Young, authorof Confederate Wizards of the Saddle, says: “Brown ... was not afraidof Shelby. In this respect he was better off than some of his asso¬ciates.” 13 Brown knew that the man who bagged Shelby would wina renown in the western armies which would secure him undyingfame. Although he was unknown even in the South, Shelby was al¬ready a legend among the Federals, who had to fight him.Brown was so afraid that Shelby would not attack and let himselfbe captured at Jefferson City that on October 11 he marched to meethim at Boonville, hoping to lure him toward the capital, where hecould be engulfed from all sides. Brown’s advance had reached thecity limits when some shaggy-looking fellows of almost inhumanaspect rose up out of the ground and fought so fiercely that histrained German troops fell back. Brown’s bluecoats rallied and foughta skirmish with Hooper’s men which lasted, off and on, until teno’clock that night. In camp, Shelby was busy repairing the axle ofhis rifled gun, which had been broken, and his biographer says thathe was in extreme pain from his wounded arm, which again had begunto suppurate. Nevertheless he was cheered by the news, brought inby Captain Jim Wood and a detachment of 100 picked men, thatthe new $400,000 bridge over the Lamine River near Boonville hadbeen blown up, burned and destroyed by Wood’s men. There hadShelby’s Great Raid201been 40 Federals in a blockhouse at the bridge, and Wood’s men hadeither captured or killed all of them.From this point, the official report of operations turned in by Shelbyon his Great Raid is an account of his escape from the trap whichall northeast Missouri had become.14 “At daylight of the 12th,” hesays, “my pickets were again driven in and the camp aroused. Forminga line of battle immediately and choosing a good position, I waited anhour for General E. B. Brown, intending to give him battle then,but he not accepting the proffered wager, I moved out slowly on themain Marshall and Boonville Road. I captured in Boonville one iron-fourpounder, which, not having any ammunition of sufficient size,was destroyed, with many stands of arms and colors. After travelingperhaps for two hours uninterruptedly, General Brown again chargedmy rear furiously, and I saw that he must be checked then and there.At the crossing of the Lamine the banks are rugged and precipitous,so stationing Major G. P. Gordon with his regiment on the westernside I had him to dismount and ambush them, leaving two companieson the eastern side to fire and then retreat in apparent confusion.The bait took completely, and the yelling, shouting Federals dashedinto the stream and up the farther side of the Confederates in ambush.A hot, close, deadly fire from rifles and revolvers left 50 dead onthe spot, many wounded, and the rest routed and demoralized. [Edi¬tor’s Note: Shelby used this trick in nearly every battle of the war,yet it never failed to deceive the enemy. Its success apparently de¬pended upon the fact that every Federal commander who outnumberedShelby usually outnumbered him so greatly that he could not believethat Shelby was not in full retreat, and that all a pursuer had to dowas to catch up with him.] This modified General Brown’s desirefor a more vigorous pursuit, but toward night he came on again witha heavy force of cavalry and artillery. Near Jonesborough, at thecrossing of the Blackwater, I took up my position and waited fordevelopments. Very soon the enemy made a furious attack. In twentyminutes I silenced their batteries, charged and drove them three miles,then leaving the ground covered with their killed and wounded. Afterthis my rear was left unmolested, and I halted for the night aboutsix miles from Marshall, sending a scout to Arrow Rock, which re¬turned about ten o’clock, reporting all quiet there. On the morningof October 13th, I broke camp early and started for Marshall.”202Shelby the RaiderIt was at Marshall that Shelby, commanding 1,200 men, was sur¬rounded by 8,000 or more. The Federal commanders must have beenjubilant. Whichever way the weary Confederate cavalryman turns hishorse, there are six armed men in his path. The old fox is bagged atlast; what a triumph to lead Jo Shelby a prisoner to Governor Gambleat Jefferson City!Since Shelby’s official report differs in no particular important in¬stance from that turned in by General Brown, it may be acceptedas correct. “When within a mile of the town [Marshall],” the reportcontinues, “my advance sent word that a heavy body of Federals wereformed in my front too, too strong to be attacked by them. I imme¬diately galloped to the advance and found, sure enough, GeneralEwing drawn up with 4,000 Federals, of all arms, ready to receiveme. The force in the rear would be on me in an hour, I knew; so Idetermined, if possible to defeat Ewing before Brown came up. Dis¬mounting Major Shank’s regiment, and forming it at the bridge overwhich we had just crossed, I ordered him to destroy it and hold Brownin check to the last extremity. In the attack upon Ewing, Hooperheld the left, Hunter and Coffee the right, the artillery, and battalion,with Gordon in the center, the cavalry all dismounted. Ewing hadadmirably chosen his position, which was a high ridge, with a deepravine in his front between his lines and mine. The men were eagerfor the fight, and when the order was given to advance, went to theFederals right gallantly. For two hours the fight raged evenly alongthe entire line.... On the left Hooper held his ground against over¬whelming numbers, and Gordon and the rest fought manfully. Iordered a charge along the whole line. Hunter and Coffee doubledEwing’s left wing back upon his right, gained the town of Marshall,my artillery sweeping the crowded streets [of pursuers] with fearfulslaughter. Just as their rout was inevitable, the roar of artillery in therear warned me that Brown was hurling his columns upon the heroicand devoted Shanks, and must bear him back. For two mortal hours,Shanks, with his 200 men, held Brown’s 4,000 in check, although hebrought to bear upon him the weight of his artillery.... In the mean¬time General Brown, unable to drive Shanks from his position, hadcrossed the creek above and below him, and was coming up on eitherflank rapidly. Shanks ... fell back a short distance, and formed again.... Brown soon formed a junction with Ewing, however, and theircombined forces, outnumbering us eight to one, looked absolutelyShelby’s Great Raid203fearful-1 determined to retreat, knowing it was madness to con¬tinue the unequal contest.“My rifled gun had again become useless. The trail, which wasshivered by a cannon shot at Helena, broke off short, and left it un¬manageable. I determined to save it, if possible, and had it fixed up,under a hot fire, with poles; but in crossing a deep ravine it hope¬lessly gave way, in which condition it was well spiked and left.“Withdrawing my forces by regiments, and forming them as if tocharge, got my entire command mounted in splended order, with theordnance wagons in the center, at the same time keeping up a fireof grape and canister with the remaining piece of my artillery. Theenemy’s twelve pieces of artillery were playing upon my ranks, butthe men withstood their fire without flinching.“As soon as my command were mounted and straightened out, Isaw the Federals were almost entirely around me, and only on theright was there a way open for escape, and this every minute gettingnarrower and narrower. The undergrowth here was thick and mat¬ted, almost impassable for cavalry; besides, directly in my way wasa deep ravine, or ditch. This, however, I had bridged two hours be¬fore. Now gathering my command well in hand, I dashed at theenemy’s left, knowing that this was his weakest point, and besides,if I succeeded in forcing this line before he swung his right around,I could change my front and have the entire force behind me. Hardblows were given and received, the Federals gave way before themomentary shock, and Gordon, Coffee, and the battalion passedsafely through, but the head of [David] Hunter’s regiment, beingentangled in the thick brush, did not keep well closed up, and theFederals, rallying, dashed in between him and the rear of Gordon,thus dividing them. Hunter, seeing it impossible to join me withouta great sacrifice, turned squarely to the right, and by a quick gallopplaced the whole enemy’s force in the rear. My object was thus jarsafely attained.”It certainly was. Novelist Paul Wellman, a Kansan who is a studentof the Shelby legend, wrote in a feature story on October 2, 1938,when he was a member of the staff of the Kansas City Star: “TheUnion volleys rolled up a typhoon of sound. The first horsemen inthe charging force went down but the leader’s black plume stillfloated. The raiders plunged squarely into the gray powder cloudahead of the fire. There was a shock, the rapid tattoo of revolvers,204Shelby the Raiderand the glitter of sabres. Then the Confederates were through—mirac¬ulously, unbelievably through. How they did it will always remaina mystery but they actually sheered through Ewing’s line as if ithad been made of cheese instead of men and found themselves freeon the other side.”There ought to be equal praise for Hunter—he was not with Shelbyat the time, because of the terrain, but he got away too.Shelby took another chance here. Although he was still menacedby the forces from which he had escaped, he waited for an hour“for the separated forces to come together.” Shelby was determinedto go to Waverly; there was nothing there for him any more exceptnostalgia; and it was not on the way back to Arkansas. Nevertheless,he went home. Home, for Jo and Betty Shelby, was never anywherebut the little steamboat town on the Missouri where they had beenmarried. “I continued my retreat to Waverly,” says Shelby, “andthey (the combined forces of Brown, Ewing) pressed me sorely foreight miles. By forming a two squadron front, and taking advantageof every natural position, I drove the enemy back. [All these “I’s”that dot the report, remember, are not Shelby’s; they were sprinkledthrough the report as from a salt shaker by his adjutant.] At German¬town they made a desperate onslaught, but meeting them with prompt¬ness and firmness, they fell back in confusion.”The truth here seems to be that Ewing and Brown were merelyprodding Shelby’s retreat with large bodies of scouts to find whichway he was going. It was necessarily a large operation, even forscouts, because Shelby had dozens of routes by which he could travel,all of them equally dangerous.Herein lies the real demonstration of what a cavalryman Jo Shelbywas. It might be argued that he raided 750 miles to Boonville andthe neighborhood of Jefferson City safely because the Federals weremisinformed as to his movements and were looking for him some¬where else; but that argument now falls on its face, because everyone of Major General Schofield’s 50,000 troops in Missouri knewexactly where Shelby was: he was in the Missouri River Valley and750 miles from the nearest Confederate reinforcements. To go home,to Arkansas, he had to run the gauntlet of the entire Federal Armyof the West, and they were tough troops—Germans and Kansansmostly.Shelby’s Great Raid205Yet—Shelby went home just as fast as he had come. What theenemy was doing never bothered Shelby when he knew he had togo somewhere.Excerpts from his report tell the rest: “At three o’clock in themorning I passed through Waverly, and then turned directly south¬ward. At Hawkins’s Mill, finding my wagons troublesome, and havingno ammunition except what the men could carry, I sunk them in theMissouri River, where they were safe from capture. The 14th, 15thand 16th were spent in constant travel, halting long enough only forfeed and a few hours rest. At Johnson County, 2,000 Federals at¬tacked us; but were repulsed; on the evening of the 16th, I encampedwithin eight miles of the Osage River, making through from riverto river in two days. On the 17th, 18th, and 19th, I traveled hard,fighting once at Carthage; crossed the Springfield road three mileseast of Keytesville, all the time followed by a large force, and onthe 20th was rejoined on the banks of the Little Osage, in Arkansas,by Hunter, Hooper, and Shanks, with their entire commands in finespirits.” *Hunter, Hooper, and Shanks had had a much rougher time goingsouth than Shelby. They had traveled almost as rapidly as he andencountered more Federals. They had fought and defeated Federalsat Florence, Humansville, and Greenfield; at Humansville they hadrun into an advance of 2,000 of McNeil’s men, and while they couldnot claim a victory, had held it in check until the three columnspassed safely through. But McNeil was fast after them, says Shelby,and when the eight large horses carrying their last heavy gun wereunable to follow “the devious and zigzag march of the cavalry,” andfell out, the harness traces were cut, “the gun was left, after beingthoroughly spiked, and the wheels and axles chopped into kindlingwood.”Shelby lost only two guns to the enemy during the war, and leftthem both so thoroughly spiked as to be useless.“After uniting my command,” continues the report, “and seeingthe jaded and forlorn condition of my horses, I determined to marchby easy stages to the Arkansas River. For three days I was unmolested... but Colonel William F. Cloud, hearing of my escape from Mis¬souri, came hard after me with 3,000 men. I retired slowly beforethem, and they as slowly followed, never urgent in their pressureuntil we arrived at the foot of the Buffalo Mountains. They made a20 6Shelby the Raiderweak charge, easily repulsed. They followed us to Clarksville, whereI crossed the Arkansas River.”This was on October 26, and most chroniclers, including those ofthe Official Records of the War of the Rebellion, choose this dateas the end of Shelby’s Raid. It took him until November 3 to get toWashington, Arkansas, where he halted finally; and hence in hisreport says the raid lasted forty-one days. From beginning to end, itdid.Shelby’s report, which has never been seriously challenged as tothe facts set forth, concludes:“I have traveled 1,500 miles, and found the people of Missouri, asa mass, true to the South and her institutions, yet needing the strongpresence of a Confederate army to make them volunteers. The south¬ern, southwestern, and some of the middle counties of Missouri arecompletely desolated. In many places for forty miles not a singlehabitation is to be found, for on the road we met delicate femalesfleeing southward, driving ox teams, barefooted, ragged, and sufferingeven for bread.”Here the report ends abruptly, except for some figures given byShelby. He had a stubborn contempt and a stubborn dislike for stupidsuperiors, and he never asked anybody for anything, not even in hisreport to Marmaduke after First Newtonia, and he liked Marmaduke.Edwards wrote this report, no doubt about it; but it must have beenone of the few that Shelby ever read because it has a minimum ofrhetoric and a multitude of facts. Shelby evidently turned editor foronce. This is what he reported:Number of Federals killed and wounded. 600Number of Federals captured and paroled. 500Number of forts captured and destroyed. .10, at an aggre¬gate cost of $ 120,000.Amount of property destroyed, consisting of rails, ties,tanks, cattle-stops, telegraph wires, bridges and piers.. . $800,000Number of guns captured . 600Number of stands of colors taken. 40Number of revolvers... 600Number of wagons captured and destroyed. 300Number of horses and mules captured. 6,000Amount of supplies (U. S.) used and destroyed.$1,000,000The End of the War in the West 207Pieces of artillery taken (1)Number of recruits gained. 800Amount of ordnance captured and destroyed (reduced tocost) . $50,000Wearily, almost sarcastically, Shelby signed the report, which wasaddressed to Sterling Price’s adjutant thus: “Hoping this report mayprove satisfactory, I remain, major, very respectfully, your obedientservant.”He had shown them. But he must have felt a strong sense of per¬sonal frustration. His arm was bothering him, too, the one that hadbeen suppurating for weeks. It was clean and healed now, but stiff.For the rest of his life it was all the fingers of his right hand coulddo to perform ordinary tasks like signing his name; he could still man¬age to fire a revolver, shooting at a peacetime target; but he couldnever again wield a cavalry sabre.On the occasion he mentions in his report that “ammunition waslow” he drove his men one hundred and six miles in eighteen hours.As Major Edwards rightly says, “Search the annals of the Confed¬erate war for another such feat and the inquirer will surely go un¬rewarded.”18. The End of the War in the WestIn the spring of 1864 occurred the Red River campaign of theFederals, which, though it added no glory to the Federal arms,posed the only serious threat to the Confederate Department of theTrans-Mississippi ever made during the war.It was the pet project of General Nathaniel P. Banks, who hadgained no fame opposing Stonewall Jackson in the Shenandoah Val¬ley in Virginia, and had been shunted into an obscure post at NewOrleans. There were those who were unkind enough to say thatBanks was more interested in taking over Kirby Smith’s cotton em¬pire—a gold mine for speculators—than he was in clearing the west ofrebels. Nevertheless he obtained General Grant’s reluctant permissionto ready an expeditionary force against Shreveport in late March,1to be supported by a large force of gunboats under the command of208Shelby the RaiderAdmiral Porter. At the same time, Sherman, who was ranking officerin the Tennessee-Arkansas area, was notified to order General Fred¬erick Steele, at Little Rock, to march southward, advancing uponShreveport from the other direction, and assist Banks.The threat to the Trans-Mississippi Department was a major one,for Banks had 30,000 men (including 10,000 under the command ofA. J. Smith, detached temporarily from Sherman’s command) as wellas Porter’s naval flotilla, while Steele had 15,000 all told, scatteredthrough Arkansas. To match such a force, Smith would have had toassemble every effective under his command in the Army of theTrans-Mississippi, from the four corners of the vast department; animpossible task, and he had no navy.Price, who had succeeded Holmes in the Arkansas command, hur¬ried to Louisiana with his infantry brigade to meet Banks, leavingFagan, Marmaduke, and Shelby—his top cavalry commanders—in theOuachita River country with instructions to prevent Steele frommarching south to join Banks.The combined Confederate cavalry force was less than half thatof Steele; but the mission which Price gave his cavalry commanderswas accomplished in record time, almost wholly through the doggeddetermination of Jo Shelby and his Missourians. Although Steele out¬numbered his small brigade twelve to one, Shelby fought him almostdaily for two weeks, smashed his transportation, reduced him to astate of siege at Camden, and forced him to retreat to Little Rockonce more without ever getting closer to the Red River in Louisianathan the Little Missouri in Arkansas. The Camden expedition was oneof Shelby’s most brilliant cavalry exploits, and the one that has re¬ceived the least attention.At Little Rock, General Steele, whom Edwards admired as “a fin¬ished and elegant gentlemen,” grumbled a little on the short noticehe was given to assemble his forces (he got the order on March 27,only three days before Banks started out with his impressive Army-Navy coalition), but wired Sherman, “I am confident of being ableto do my share of the work before me.” 2 On April 2 he left LittleRock with 12,000 men and a large wagon train, mostly empty, mov¬ing on the road to Camden via Arkadelphia and Washington. Shelbywas at Princeton, whither he had been ordered the week before tohold the line of the Saline, cover all roads to Camden, “and annoythe enemy in every disagreeable manner his known ingenuity mightThe End of the War in the West 209invent.” When Shelby learned that Steele was on the march andwould cross the Ouachita River at Arkadelphia, he gave orders forhis troops to move that night at moonrise—twelve o’clock preciselyby the almanac.While the troops were cooking five days’ rations, a message camefrom Colonel Colton Greene, one of Price’s commanders, informingShelby that the Confederate Congress had confirmed his appointmentas a brigadier general. Just before sunset the soldiers were drawn upon the prairie and their orders read to them. It was their first inklingthat their commander had been promoted.“Soldiers of Shelby’s Brigade!” the orders read. “You march infour hours to attack the enemy. He is strong, well equipped, and notdeficient in courage, but I intend that you shall ride down his in¬fantry and scatter his battalions by the splendor of your charge. Youhave just four hours to say your prayers, make your needful prepara¬tions, and nerve your hearts for the onset. It will be desperate, be¬cause you are brave; bloody, because you are reckless; and becausetoday, I am a brigadier general. I have told you often about our homes,our country, and our glorious cause—today, I simply appeal to yourambition, your fame, your spotless reputation and your eternalrenown!”No more was needed. A shout went up; their hopes were realized.Old Jo was a brigadier. Next day, April 2, they fought with a newpride in themselves and with a savage joy, as they struck the rearof Steele’s column on the Arkadelphia Road, killing forty-four andcapturing fifteen in a series of sporadic attacks. A veteran of Steele’scommand is quoted in Five Famous Missourians as saying, “Shelbymade them attack the rear of Steele’s army of 15,000 men (Figuresvary. Ed.) only a few thousand of them, yet they charged like theyhad been the vanguard of an army of thirty thousand. We drovethem back, it is true; but they charged again; we drove them backand they charged again; and thus they charged until night put anend to the remarkable contest.” 3From then until April 21, when he was ordered back to Fagan’scommand, Shelby gave Steele no rest on the road to Camden. OnApril 3 he fought the enemy’s cavalry rearguard in a blinding springstorm in which snow, hailstones, thunder and lightning mingled, fall¬ing back only when Steele ordered two full brigades under GeneralCarr—Shelby had 1,200—and going into bivouac at Prairie d’Anne on2 10Shelby the Raiderthe fifth, joining Marmaduke, who had 3,000. Marmaduke had alsomade a desperate stab at Steele the day before, and had failed to halthim. Steele was in high spirits at having beaten off the largest forceof the enemy. He wired Sherman: “Marmaduke, with his whole force,including Shelby... are in the Prairie d’Anne but will run as soon aswe move.” 4At Prairie d’Anne the Confederates did not run, but fought a six-hour battle, or skirmish, if you will5—as long as they had fought atWilson’s Creek—three hours of which were devoted to a duel betweenSteele’s and Shelby’s artillery. At nightfall Marmaduke’s army fellback in good order, across “a naked prairie,” “smooth as a sea of glass,”with Shelby covering the withdrawal. He fought one more engage¬ment with Steele’s men—at Poison Spring on the 15th, in which therewere heavy casualties on both sides—before Steele finally shook offthe Confederates and occupied Camden. At Camden Steele was vir¬tually a prisoner. But he was so relieved to have gained the safetyof a fortified town that he wrote jovially, “This is a strong place.The Confederates have fortified it for us.” 6 By the same mail hesent word to Halleck that he would move to the Red River as soonas he brought up his supplies from Pine Bluff. In his haste to movefrom Little Rock, he had carried only a minimum of rations (theywere unprocurable anyway in the hostile countryside), but he wasnot worried, for he had a tremendous wagon train and expected it tobe provisioned at Pine Bluff, where there was a Federal commissaryand quartermaster depot. Once in Camden he sent most of his wagons,with an escort, to Pine Bluff, under the command of a Colonel PowellClayton. His scouts had assured him that there were no rebels in thatdirection.At Marks’ Mill, Fagan and Cabell attacked this procession on oneside, while Shelby, who had galloped ten miles over parallel and con¬necting roads to encircle the train, attacked from the other. Theattack was a rout and the surprise was so complete that Shelby lostonly one man killed in action. His report says: “I had advancedscarcely a mile in the direction of Marks’ Mill when I met the Fed¬eral advance coming rapidly in the direction of Mount Elba. I deter¬mined to charge them first, last and all the time....” These are MajorEdwards’ words of course, but there is no doubt that Shelby’s bor¬derers fell upon Colonel Clayton’s wagon train with an abandon un¬surpassed during the war. Here was Steele’s whole baggage, theThe End of the War in the West 21 iplunder of an army. Colonel Clayton’s men, caught in a hurricaneof fire and steel on all sides, fought furiously; it took the Confederatesthree hours to kill or capture two thirds of them before “the sobershades of evening came down upon one of the most final and crush¬ing victories of the war.” Again that is the report of Shelby’s uncon¬servative adjutant, but it is confirmed by Colonel Clayton’s report.The Federal commander offered no excuses, made no attempt tomitigate the disaster. He wrote: “The attack upon our train at Marks’Mill resulted in its entire capture. We have lost 240 wagons, fivepieces of artillery, and without doubt the whole escort. The fightwas very severe, and lasted about three hours. The escort consistedof Colonel McLean’s brigade, and between 300 and 400 cavalry, alto¬gether about 1,500 men; they were crushed by overwhelming num¬bers of the enemy. A portion of the cavalry and a few mounted offi¬cers succeeded in cutting their way through after everything waslost.”Everything was lost so far as reinforcing Banks on the Red Riverwas concerned. As Major Hanson, the U. S. cavalry writer, says,“Not much was ever said about the debacle at Marks’ Mill [yet] itwas one of the most substantial successes gained by the western Con¬federates during the war. It forced General Steele to abandon Camdenand retreat to Little Rock.” 7 Its effects were even more far-reachingthan that. If Steele had been able to join Banks, the Red River ex¬pedition might not have ended in ignominious failure, as it did,8 andthe Confederate Department of the Trans-Mississippi would have hadan abrupt termination in the spring of 1864. Furthermore, the sup¬plies captured at Marks’ Mill formed no small part of the supplieswhich were used by Price and Shelby on Price’s invasion of Missouriin the autumn of that year.Steele’s retreat to Little Rock was accomplished in an even moreuncomfortable manner than had been his advance to Camden. He washampered by rain, bad roads, lack of wagons, and incessant attacksby the Confederates—at Princeton, at the Ouachita River, in theSaline Bottoms, and in a skirmish at Whitmore’s Mill. His numericalsuperiority was still so great, however, that there was not the slightestchance of defeating him in an all-out battle, although the attempt wasmade at Jenkins’ Ferry, where four thousand of Steele’s men foughta bloody battle to cover his escape. The Confederates suffered 443casualties, and Steele an uncomputed number,9 probably as great;2 I 2Shelby the RaiderConfederate historians have claimed that he lost nearly a thousandmen. Steele got away, but to do so he had to destroy nearly all thatwas left of his baggage and trains, according to his own statement.Rain had turned the region into rivers of mud before the battle. Thatthe Confederates did not follow Steele into Little Rock is probablyattributable to the condition of the roads.On May 27, 1864, Shelby was appointed Confederate commandernorth of the Arkansas River and given the assignment of organizingthe vast number of Confederate conscripts there into serviceable com¬mands, as well as recruiting for a new campaign in Missouri in thefall. Arkansas was a paradise for deserters and evaders of the Con¬scription Act, and many of those who professed to be in the Confed¬erate service had turned bushwhacker. Major Edwards describes thesituation:“Ten thousand men within the conscript ages—Texans, Missouriansand Arkansans—were scattered along the valley of the White River,three or four to a house, drinking, gambling, smuggling, trading cot¬ton for Memphis whiskey, and swapping sweet potatoes with theFederals for flat tobacco and pocket knives.... A sort of freemasonryexisted between the quasi-Southerners and Federals.... Horses weretaken from their plows and negroes from the furrows whenever itsuited the convenience or pleased the fancy of these professed Con¬federates spending their time in rioting while the country bled atevery pore.”A proclamation from Shelby sounded like a bugle blast in the WhiteRiver Valley. Until June 10, he announced, every able-bodied mancould ponder what he wanted to do, but after that: “You shall fightfor the North or South. I will enlist you in the Confederate army;or I will drive you into the Federal ranks. You shall not remain idlespectators of a drama enacted before your eyes.... There is no timeto argue_I command you at once to rush to arms. Every officerwith recruiting papers will report at once to my headquarters andcolonels or generals professing to have regiments or brigades willcome immediately to receive instructions for future operations.... Ido not bully; but I strike.... Come up like men, or go to GeneralSteele like men, but whatever you do, remember the tenth of June.”In the same document, he promised “to hang all who failed to rally totheir country’s flag.”“They knew the man, they knew his soldiers,” says Edwards, andThe End of the War in the West213the countryside was quiet in a week. Throughout the summer,Shelby rode through northern Arkansas, superintending this opera¬tion and fighting Federals wherever he found them. One of the bestknown incidents of his career occurred in June, the capture by cavalryand artillery of the Federal ironclad Queen City at Clarendon on thelower White River. The Queen City was as formidable an ironcladas any in the fleet; she carried nine guns.At midnight, Shelby’s favorite hour for beginning operations, thelight dragoons of the Iron Brigade got quietly off their horses on theriver bank while Dick Collins’ cannoneers rolled their guns by handacross a bridge muffled with weeds for a distance of a mile, and gotthem into battery on shore, close to the moonlit superstructure of theQueen City.Major Edwards’ report of the capture of the queenly vessel isone of the best examples of the prose with which he startles readersof the staid Official Records of the War of the Rebellion:“It was a beautiful moonlit night. White fleecy clouds hovered overthe sleeping river, over the doomed craft with all her gala lights inbloom, and over the crouching lines of infantry and the yawningcannon. The silence was broken only by the measured tread of thesentinels and the deep striking of the time bell. Just as the white handof morning put away the sable clouds of night four pieces of artillerysent their terrible messengers crashing through the boat. Then theinfantry opened with terrible effect, and in ten minutes the QueenCity was a helpless wreck upon the water, her captain surrenderingunconditionally.’ ’Three other Union gunboats raced to the rescue of the Queen City—but she blew up before they could reach her. Battery CommanderCollins and his men had run a terrible risk, however, just before theQueen City's magazines went skyward. They had rushed aboard anddragged off two 12-pounder boat howitzers. The other Union gun¬boats, one of them the Tyler, which had taken part in the battle atHelena, manning a total of twenty-six guns, began to fire in the direc¬tion of Collins’ guns. In a final nose-thumbing gesture, Collins stoodhis ground for a short time and fired a few six-pounders in the direc¬tion of the Tyler.If Shelby had been in the habit, as Jeb Stuart was, of writing lettersalmost daily from the field, they would make an interesting diaryindeed for the summer of 1864. He was undoubtedly in high spirits,214Shelby the Raiderdoing the kind of work he liked, punishing bushwhackers with thefiring squad and gallows when crimes had been committed, and drivingthe less guilty into the army.10 He was wearing the buff sash andthe wreathed three stars of a brigadier at last, although rank neverseems to have mattered to him;11 and he was governing all NorthArkansas boldly from his favorite headquarters, at Batesville, wherehis soldiers had wintered so gloriously in ’63 at Camp Nannie Wilson.General Steele knew what Shelby was doing and begged reinforce¬ments from General Cadwallader Washburn and A. J. Smith at Mem¬phis to stop him. The reinforcements were refused and warfare inArkansas was reduced to a few minor clashes between mounted menin remote districts, and raids on steamboats, which were almost ascommon as cows in the bayou country. Nevertheless, prisoners occa¬sionally were captured on both sides, and Steele treated his Confed¬erate prisoners with courtesy and consideration. Shelby developed awarm regard for Steele as a result, and characteristically desired tosend him a present. It must be a grand one, naturally, and worthy ofthe recipient, but Shelby had just such an article. Someone had senthim a magnificent Mexican sombrero, embroidered with flowers andworked with decorations of gold, including gold coins sewed intothe brim and a wide gold band. This Shelby put aside, intending tosend it to General Steele under the next flag of truce. Unfortunatelythe sombrero was blown out of Shelby’s tent and into a campfire,ruining it beyond the possibility of sending it to anyone as a gift.Shelby swore in exasperation,12 and in 1867, when Edwards waswriting an account of the war, he asked his biographer to set forththe circumstances and ask General Steele, who was still living, toaccept the will for the deed.Two months to the day from the time Shelby assumed the role ofmilitary dictator in North Arkansas, he wrote an enthusiastic letterto Price’s adjutant, on July 27, saying that he had 5,000 men underhis personal command and that he was ready to invade Missouriagain as he had done last year, “without its costing the Governmenta dollar,” and predicting that he could raise 10,000 additional menin Missouri to seize the state. He also pointed out that the Federals,with their grand offensive taking place east of the Mississippi, hadstripped Missouri of defense forces, which was true. (Even Shelbycould not have known, however, how true it was; General Rosecrans,The End of the War in the West 215who now commanded the Department of the West, admitted later,after Price’s Missouri campaign, that even the militia had been re¬duced to “skeleton” organizations in St. Louis and other importantcities.13 It was the time to strike, and swiftly, in the Shelby manner—but in full force.Shelby’s letter had hardly reached his superiors before the wordcame from Kirby Smith, the top commander of the Trans-MississippiDepartment and the virtual president of that autonomous region,that the invasion would take place, and that Major General SterlingPrice had been appointed to lead it. Smith’s official order, dated August4, gave Price instructions “to make immediate arrangements for amovement into Missouri, with the entire cavalry force of yourdistrict.”The promptness with which Kirby Smith acted was not owing toShelby’s insistence—Shelby seldom talked about anything else exceptan invasion of Missouri—nor to the obvious fact that Missouri wasvulnerable, which Shelby had demonstrated so brilliantly on his raidof a year ago.Smith’s decision was the result of pressure from the governmentat Richmond, now beleaguered as never before and seeking, in itsextremity, at last, to make use of its troops west of the MississippiRiver. The call from Richmond was, in fact, a Macedonian cry; Jef¬ferson Davis, who had agreed cautiously with Holmes that troopscould not be sent east of the Mississippi in 1863, when with a littleenergy it could have been done, was now demanding that Smith sendhis entire force, when it could not be done. Smith said so bluntly;to attempt it, he informed Davis, would be to invite “another Vicks¬burg or Port Hudson.” 14The alternative selected was the invasion of Missouri, which wasdictated by political as well as military considerations. The presiden¬tial election of 1864 in the United States was approaching. Grant’scasualty lists were horrifying the North, and General Lee at ColdHarbor was fighting with the same tenacity of purpose which haddriven a Union army from the very same spot, at the gates of Rich¬mond, in 1862—McClellan’s army, down the Peninsula and back tothe Chesapeake. Sherman in Georgia had not yet convinced the Souththat he meant business;15 some optimists, including Jefferson Davis,were comparing his position to that of Napoleon in Russia,10 andmeantime, if Missouri could be recaptured before November, the216Shelby the Raidervoters of the North might repudiate Lincoln at the polls. So at leastran the reasoning in the high councils of the South.In all this chimerical thinking, the plan to invade Missouri wasalone not visionary; the state was open, as Shelby said, and a blowstruck in that quarter with all the troops at Kirby Smith’s disposalwould, if successful, open a third front in the war, relieve the pres¬sure on Lee and Hood—and the Army of the Trans-Mississippi mightstrike into Illinois or even across Kentucky into Virginia.Smith, however, bobbled the expedition from the start, and al¬though much blame attaches to Price for the manner in which he con¬ducted his “Great Raid,” it is fair to examine the nature of the ordershe was given. Smith permitted him to take only the three divisionsof Fagan, Marmaduke, and Shelby, and a brigade of Louisiana troopsattached to Marmaduke’s command. (Shelby was now signing his re¬ports “Brigadier Commanding Division,” and he was as fully entitledto the rank of major general as Marmaduke, to whom it had beengiven; furthermore, he had furnished five of the nine brigades for theexpedition, out of his own command and the “camps of instruction”in Arkansas, where his “reformation” program, as he called it, hadbeen converting bushwhackers into soldiers.) Smith’s order advisedPrice that “these skeleton organizations [the three divisions] are bestadapted for an expedition in which a large addition to your force isexpected. These weak brigades should be filled by the regimentsraised in Missouri, and you should scrupulously avoid the organiza¬tion of any new brigades_Rally the loyal men of Missouri, and re¬member that our great want is men...(He had 40,000 or moretroops on which to draw if he had been willing to spare the timefrom administering the Cotton Bureau to bring them in from all overthe three other states of his department.)Nevertheless, Missouri was invaded on September 19, and “Price’sGreat Raid” cut a swath twenty-five miles wide across the state, fromBloomfield in the southeast, north toward St. Louis, and then west¬ward across to the Kansas line at Westport Landing, before he fellback to Arkansas and the Canadian River country for the last time.Of the more than 400 battles and skirmishes fought in Missouri duringthe war, sixty-five took place in the campaign of 1864; it is possiblehere only to record the major developments and Shelby’s part inthem.Price assumed command at Camden (Arkansas) on August 29,The End of the War in the West217which gave the Federals ample notice—twenty-one days—of his plans,and as early as September 3, two weeks and two days before hemarched, Federal General Cadwallader Washburn at Memphis“sounded the tocsin” of a new rebel invasion of Missouri.17On September 13 Price and his commanders reached Powhatan, innortheast Arkansas, where they found that the impatient Shelby hadalready moved part of his division ahead to Pocahontas “on theselected route to Missouri.” At Pocahontas next day, a concentrationof all forces of the expedition took place. From the 14th to the 19th,Price organized his army and assembled a huge wagon train. Shelbyand his lean, swift travelers of the Iron Brigade, stood open-eyed andclose-mouthed as they watched the assembly of that baggage train,which Major Edwards says was “as long as the tail of Plantamour’scomet.”All of this did not look like preparations for an invasion to Shelby’smen, whose lightning mobility was largely due to the fact that theywere seldom encumbered with anything heavier than a Yankee over¬coat in cold weather. (Most of Shelby’s men were wearing Unionuniforms now; and many of them were shot by the enemy whenthey were captured in Missouri in these uniforms.18)Sterling Price had not learned a single thing since Wilson’s Creek.When he marched on the 19th, he had 12,000 men, of whom only8,000 were armed, and only 14 pieces of artillery—all he had col¬lected in a month and a half. And he had encouraged the army ofcamp followers to come along, eating their heads off in country whichhad long since been stripped of forage. He was also taking into Mis¬souri almost as many food and draft animals as he was to take out.Shelby, who should have commanded the expedition, and Marmaduke,who had been given the commission which Shelby deserved, bothnoted with dissatisfaction that the Sterling Price who had sat hishorse like a statue in the hail of lead at Wilson’s Creek now liked tocampaign in an ambulance because of his great girth, and take fre¬quent naps. Price was suffering the physical deterioration which goeswith obesity, and encased as he was in uncomfortable folds of flesh,he no longer had the bulldog quality which had held Missouri single-handed for a year in 1861-62.At Fredericktown Price received information that the strength ofthe enemy at Ironton was only about 1,500 and that General A. J.Smith’s force in the vicinity of St. Louis constituted the only major218Shelby the Raiderthreat in his path. Price ordered Shelby to proceed at once with hisdivision by way of Farmington to a point on the St. Louis and IronMountain Railroad and destroy all bridges in the vicinity. This Shelbydid, but traveling thirty miles a day, while the speed of the mainarmy was twelve, he was soon so out of touch with his commander-in-chief that Price had suffered a bloody repulse at Pilot Knob, aheavily fortified place which he made a blundering attempt to cap¬ture, before a courier caught up with Shelby at Potosi notifying himto rejoin the main force. An indication of the savagery with which theConfederates attacked at Pilot Knob is the fact that out of 94 menlost by Marmaduke in the assault, 14 were officers. Such a high per¬centage of officers lost, in comparison with men in the ranks, meansthat the charge was all-out and desperate indeed. General Ewing paidhigh tribute to the Confederates in his report, especially to GeneralCabell, who, he says, “led the assault, swept upon the plain in hand¬some style, yelling and on the double quick.” 19When Ewing heard that Shelby was on the way, and was told byprisoners that Price had 12,000 men against his 1,100, he evacuatedPilot Knob during the night, blowing up the fort, magazine, and ironfoundry as he went, although the forces of A. J. Smith were onlytwenty-four miles away at Mineral Point and could have reinforcedhim. Both Ewing and McNeil had good reason to fear a firing squad,or the gallows, for crimes against civilians, if captured.When Shelby arrived next day from Potosi he found the delightedsoldiers of Old Pap, Marmaduke, and the rest picking among the ruinsof Pilot Knob, which were glowing like a landscape of hell even indaylight, because an immense pile of charcoal next to the iron workshad been fired and was still red hot and luminous. Among the loot,besides food and blankets, were sixteen pieces of artillery; these Priceordered destroyed, although a lieutenant of Shelby’s command, SelbyPlattenburg, had captured thirty-nine artillery horses, complete withequipment including harness and two caissons, on the Potosi raid andhad brought them along.Price was now within striking distance of both St. Louis and Jef¬ferson City; he chose the latter, although St. Louis was undefendedexcept by a small force of raw militia. Its inhabitants were in a stateof panic. They had been “supping on fear and horror” ever since itwas learned that Price and the army of bushwhackers was approach¬ing.20The End of the War in the West 219Price was relying heavily on the Southern “underground” or Cop¬perhead organization in Missouri, known by various names but chieflyas “The Knights of the Golden Circle,” to supply him with informa¬tion, and he had sent a spy into the St. Louis area, an inexperiencedmember of Shelby’s command who was selected because of his ex¬tremely youthful appearance, which would enable him to move with¬out suspicion within the enemy’s lines. This spy was filled with mis¬information when he returned; he brought word to Price that at St.Louis the Federals could muster a force twice that of his own. MajorEdwards says that the spy, whose name was Jim Ward, had remark¬able success in obtaining an audience with General Rosecrans himself,and received the information straight from the Federal commanderin the West. If so, General Rosecrans must have been delighted atthe opportunity to talk with one of Price’s agents and give him anearful; Rosecrans had a good counterespionage system himself, whenit came to the Knights of the Golden Circle. At any rate, Price aban¬doned any idea of attacking St. Louis and moved on Jefferson City,where he attacked and defeated the Union defenders on October 7.Around the events of October 7 and 8 centers all the controversyconcerning Price’s actions in Missouri. The question is: Could he haveoccupied Jefferson City on the 8th, after his victory on the 7th, andraised the Confederate flag over the State Capitol of Missouri? Theundisputed fact is that he did not make the attempt. His consolidatedarmy had been in front of Jefferson City on the 7th, a large bodyof Federals had moved out to meet them, and Major General Fagan’sdivision drove them back, after bloody fighting, into the fortificationsof the city. Having won the day, the Confederates expected to con¬tinue the assault on the next day. Price decided that it would be fruit¬less. He had received more “information.”In his report he says, “I had received positive information that theenemy were 12,000 strong in the city, and that 3,000 more had ar¬rived by the North Missouri Railroad before I withdrew my troopsto the encampment selected, whereupon I gave immediate instructionsfor General Shelby to send a sufficient force to burn the bridge anddestroy the railroad west of Jefferson City in the direction of Cali¬fornia, the county seat of Moniteau County.” Price added that hehoped to capture a sufficient number of arms at Boonville, Sedalia,Lexington, and Independence to “arm my unarmed men.” He alsomakes the puzzling statement on the same page of his report (p. 631)220Shelby the Raiderthat he was “acting as instructed in my original orders.” 21 (His orderswere to move into Kansas “if compelled to leave Missouri.”) Never¬theless, at Jefferson City, he desisted from the attack, and movedwest. It is not too much to say that if he had killed and capturedevery Federal on the Kansas border, the outcome of the war wouldhave been affected not one whit.On the morning of the 8th, as Price moved toward Boonville,Major General Alfred Pleasanton, former cavalry chief of the Armyof the Potomac, arrived at Jefferson City to take charge of the Fed¬eral forces, which actually numbered 5,000, or not much more thanhalf of Price’s strength. Seeing the rebels in retreat, Pleasanton sent4,100 cavalry under General John B. Sanborn after them.Price was now bound down that lonesome road, leading fromBoonville to somewhere in the southwest, which had been traveledby every hard-fighting Missouri army of the South since NathanielLyon had seized St. Louis in that long-gone spring of 1861. The Mis¬souri Expedition had ended in failure, so far as offensive operationswere concerned, but yet to come were some of the bloodiest battlesin the War in the West: the actions on the Little Blue on October21 st, the fight at Independence the following day, and the smashingdefeats of the Confederates at Westport and the Marais des Cygnesin Kansas, on the 23rd and 25th respectively. Westport has beencalled, inaccurately, the “Gettysburg of the West,” but only be¬cause of the large numbers involved. At Gettysburg the course ofthe war was determined by the outcome; at Westport there was nodoubt of the issue, for Rosecrans and Pleasanton had assembled amighty arm to crush Price from all sides, and had him in a trap. AtMarais des Cygnes, the coup de grace was administered; and the sequelto Marais des Cygnes, the second battle of Newtonia, is important be¬cause it saved Price’s army from capture and wound up Shelby’sCivil War career in a blaze of glory. At Second Newtonia, he notonly saved the army, he won for the Confederacy the last battle ofthe war west of the Mississippi.From Boonville on the 12th Shelby moved in obedience to Price’sorder. From then until the 22nd, he and his division lived the night¬mare existence of the Missouri cavalry in action, retreating, but fight¬ing every few miles of the way. Shelby says his men were tired tothe point of exhaustion when they reached Independence two daysbefore the great holocaust of Westport. He had passed through hisThe End of the War in the West 221old home at Waverly, “where the rude hands of war had strippedfrom the quiet little town much of her wealth and beauty”; manybuildings had been destroyed, among which were his factory, hisdwelling house and every other habitation supposed to be his;22 andthe fatigue which Shelby was suffering when his men reached theLittle Blue, where they fought a skirmish, was intensified, no doubt,by the sight of his burned home and a longing for his family far awayin Kentucky. Shelby never suffered melancholy long, however; andfighting was a daily occurrence and an urgent business. As Edwardssays, “Danger gathered fast. Rosecrans had assembled a large armyand was advancing from Sedalia; additional cavalry forces were com¬ing from Boonville, while Kansas was ablaze and her cruel militiaswarming to the front from the far west.” The “cruel militia” werecommanded by Blunt, old foe of Shelby and Marmaduke, and byCurtis. The Kansans under Blunt fell back before Price’s column,attempting to burn a bridge over the Little Blue, but Marmadukehalted this operation and later burned the bridge himself, once he wassafely over. At the Little Blue, the Kansas Redlegs were commandedby Colonel Jennison of border-struggle fame—or infamy, dependingon how you looked at it; he was soon joined by General Curtis fromKansas City, and the Battle of Independence was fought. Adarmadukesent to Shelby for aid. Fagan’s troops actually were nearer to Marma¬duke, but Shelby’s were mainly Missouri River Valley men who couldbe counted on to fight the Kansans to the last ditch. They did, andwith Marmaduke’s and Price’s men, drove Curtis out of Independence.Price was so elated by the victory at Independence, and by Blunt’sretreating, pursued on foot by Shelby’s dismounted men, that heissued a proclamation announcing that he would dash at the enemy onthe morrow and take Sunday dinner at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.It was one of his failings, never cured in four years of war and dis¬appointments, that he always proclaimed on the eve of battle thathe would annihilate the enemy in the forthcoming struggle. WhatPrice did not know was that at this very moment Federal armies wereconverging on him from all sides; Rosecrans was not a Halleck or aSchofield, and being already under the displeasure of Grant for hisbungling at Chickamauga, he had gathered every available man in thewest and was about to lead an army of some 20,000.Except for the victory of Marmaduke and Shelby, Rosecrans would222Shelby the Raiderhave surrounded Price and annihilated him. Rosecrans says in hisreport that he never believed that the Confederates could crack Gen¬eral Curtis’s line on the Big Blue; hence instead of sending A. J. Smithto Independence, which would have hemmed them in, he allowed himto fan out southward from Lexington in the direction of Chapel Hill.He believed that Price, balked at the Big Blue, would have to turn inthat direction. But once the Kansas line was breached, Price wentwestward, and Rosecrans had to revise his plans. Orders were sentto Smith to change his direction and march westward to Hickman’sMills, but by the time he got there, Price had retreated from West-port. The bird had flown.Big Blue and Westport were fought the same day—October 25.Actually they were two faces of the same coin. Shelby’s divisionfought at both—at Big Blue from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and at West-port until the Confederates were driven from the field. At WestportShelby made the acquaintance, for the first time in real battle, ofMajor General Pleasanton, the only Union cavalry commander who,like Shelby, could march 200 miles a week and fight continuouslywhile doing it.23The trap was sprung on the pleasant Sunday morning of October23, 1864. There is a high and spacious plain between the Blue andWestport; the great battle was fought on an enchanting prairie land¬scape. No scrub oaks and gullies, as at Wilson’s Creek; no sunken roadsand thorny abattis, as at Helena; no rugged mountains, as in Arkansas.Some 30,000 troops could be seen with the sweep of a field glass. Itwas like a European battlefield, in the Napoleonic style; or like animmense parade ground. Marmaduke caught the first impact of theattack by Pleasanton, on one side; Shelby was soon in a death grapplewith Curtis on the other.Shelby’s report gives this account of the participation of his division:“The 23rd of October dawned upon us clear, cold, and full of promise.My division moved squarely against the enemy about 8 o’clock in the di¬rection of Westport, and very soon became fiercely engaged. The ene¬my had regained all the strong positions taken from them the day beforeby General Thompson, and it became imperatively necessary to forcethat flank of the enemy back. Inch by inch and foot by foot they gaveway before my steady onset. Regiment met regiment and opposingbatteries draped the scene in clouds of dense smoke. While the engage¬ment was at its height Collins burst one of his Parrotts, but fought onThe End of the War in the West 223with his three guns.... Again were the Federals driven within sightof Westport and here I halted to reform my lines, intending to makedirect attack upon the town. About 12 o’clock I sent Jackman’sbrigade back to the road taken by the train, for it was reported thatGeneral Marmaduke had fallen back before the enemy—although henever notified me of the fact and I never saw his couriers which Ilearned afterward were sent—and thus my whole right flank and rearwere exposed. Jackman had scarcely reached the point indicated whenhe met an order from General Fagan to hasten to his help at a gallop,for the entire prairie in his front was dark with Federals. Jackman dis¬mounted his men in the broad and open plain and formed them in onelong, thin line before the huge wave that threatened to engulf them.Collins with one gun hurried forward to help Jackman, and openedup on the advancing enemy.... Fresh lines of Federals forced Jackmanto mount his horses, and he fell back after the train, fighting hard.Now, my entire rear was in possession of the enemy, and the newswas brought that Thompson was fighting for dear life at Westport.Withdrawing him as soon as possible, and with much difficulty, forhe was hard pressed, I fell back as rapidly as I could... the force Ihad been fighting at Westport coming up just behind, when, reachingthe road, the prairie in my rear was covered almost by a long line oftroops which at first I had supposed to be our own men. This illusionwas soon dispelled, and the two great waves uniting, came down uponone little brigade and Colonel Slayback’s regiment. The prospect wasdark and desperate. Not a bush or tree was to be seen for weary milesand miles, and no helping army could be seen anywhere. I knew theonly salvation was to charge the nearest line, break it if possible, andretreat rapidly.”As at Marshall on his Great Raid, Shelby at Westport accomplishedthe seemingly impossible feat. With his instinct for picking the weakestpoint in the enemy’s line, he cut his way through. “My command wassaved, and we moved off after the army, travelling all night.”Similar disaster had befallen the rest of the army, which Shelbyrejoined the next day; and an even greater disaster was to befall Price.Pleasanton caught up with him on the Marais des Cygnes and dealthim such a smashing blow that the Confederates ran, some of themthrowing away their arms. They were human, and in the last twenty-four hours they had had all they could stand. Shelby was not presentwhen Pleasanton struck; he was twelve miles away on the prairie. A224Shelby the Raidertearful Price sent him a courier with this despairing message: “TellGeneral Shelby that he alone can save the army.”Shelby did it. He galloped back and joined Fagan on the prairiestretching away from the river. With sufficient cavalry on hand,Fagan was able to interpose his division between Price’s infantry andthe enemy, until Price could reform his columns, and march off in thedirection of Carthage. What memories for the Missourians along thisroad! General Pleasanton, who had already seen Sanborn’s division“very much shaken” by Shelby at Westport, when he cut his waythrough, was beginning to appreciate that in Shelby he had a cavalryfoe such as he had not seen since he left Virginia.Marais des Cygnes had been a disaster in another respect—BrigadierGenerals Marmaduke and Cabell had been captured. Price had onlytwo brigadiers left—Shelby and Clark. Clark was appointed to com¬mand Marmaduke’s division, and on the 28th the command reachedNewtonia. Shelby had a brush with some Federal cavalry, killed abushwhacker captain, and chased them off. But it was no more than agnat sting. He camped on the edge of the prairie and his men lay downto a sleep of exhaustion. The other divisions of the army passed onbeyond him and encamped on the prairie. The condition of horses andmen made a halt for rest absolutely necessary, and Shelby took up aposition in the rear to fend off an attack by pursuers. It was knownthat the Federals were on Price’s trail in large numbers in triumphanthope of destroying his army before he could escape into Arkansas.The organized pursuit was not long in making its appearance. Atthree o’clock in the afternoon of the 28th, “while resting comfortablya few miles south of Newtonia,” according to Shelby’s report, a largeforce under General Blunt appeared and “drove in our pickets quitebriskly, and came charging on with their usual vitality. Dismountingevery man of my division, I formed my line of battle just in time tomeet the onset. Jackman held the right and protected Collins’s twopieces of artillery, which opened with good effect. Thompson andSlayback were on the left, and I sent a good detachment under MajorGordon to watch well my extreme left flank, and then moved steadilyforward with a loud and ringing cheer. The men never hesitated fromthe first, but drove the enemy all the time before them and advancedtwo miles into the prairie, exposed to a heavy artillery fire from thefirst, and if I had had a mounted regiment of my own command lcould have charged and taken their splendid batteryThe End of the War in the West 225The contest lasted two hours, before Blunt finally retreated. He didnot abandon pursuit, but Shelby once again had covered the retreatof a Confederate army and saved it from destruction.24 Long beforeShelby gave the order to his men to remount, Price and his remnant ofan army were far away, in slow and painful progress to the Arkansasborder and the Canadian River country.Such was the battle of Second Newtonia, last battle of the CivilWar west of the Mississippi. Jo Shelby won it.In Price’s report of the Missouri expedition, he had this to say ofShelby (and it must be remembered that the two were never particu¬larly fond of each other): “Brig. Gen. Shelby, commanding division,added new luster to his past fame as a brilliant and heroic officer, andwithout disparagement to the other officers I must be permitted tosay that I consider him the best cavalry officer I ever saw.”PART FOURMexico4^4 ^ ^ ^ «^4 4^4 ^4 4* ^ *^4 4^4 »s£« 4* *|* "^4 4^41 «^» 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 ^ 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 1^4 *J» *^4 4^4 4^4 4^4 4y4 4^4 4^« 4^4 4^419. Revolt Against SurrenderTHE RETREAT SOUTH from Newtonia was a famine anda pestilence. Most of the wagon trains had been left behind,with all of the food, and smallpox broke out on the third dayafter they crossed the Arkansas River. Men died by the wayside in anagony of delirium, but as long as life remained in any of the victims,none was abandoned. There was no shrinking from contagion.1 Eachdetachment in detail mounted guard over the wagons bearing theirburden of horror, taking their chances with the rest. At last the ghastlyexpedition limped home into Louisiana and Texas.For the rest of that winter the Missouri Cavalry Division wasstationed at Pittsburg, Texas. While the Army of the Trans-Missis¬sippi stood idle (it was never to fire another shot) a court of inquiryin Shreveport was investigating charges of dereliction of duty againstGeneral Price.2 This struck Shelby as about as useful a procedure asperforming an emergency operation on a corpse. Price had procrasti¬nated and napped, literally, during the disgraceful Missouri venture,but it would do no good to cashier him now. Eventually the investiga¬tion came to nothing, and it was announced that General Price hadgone home for a long visit. It was a visit from which he was never toreturn.The winter of 1864-65 must have been truly “a winter of discontent”for Shelby. Even under normal conditions he was the most rest¬less of men. Activity of some sort, preferably on a grand scale, wasas necessary to him as breathing. Now, brooding under the pines ofPittsburg, where his men watered their cattle by the lazy streams, hesaw that the prediction made by General Holmes to General Marma-226Revolt against Surrender227duke at Helena had come true at last. The Army of the Trans-Mis¬sissippi was an “army of prisoners, and self-supporting at that.” Theenemy could simply ignore them, and this was the crowning insultof all.Shelby also knew that the news from the North was taking all theheart out of the army’s idle divisions, and that most of the men weresimply anxious to have done with the war and go home. He saw thedisintegration writ in letters so large and so plain that he decided totake action independent of Kirby Smith and of the Confederategovernment itself.Shelby had a high personal regard for the old commander of theTrans-Mississippi Department, but he had no faith in Kirby Smith’senthusiasm for fighting against odds. He became convinced that achange in commanders was the only solution, a change inaugurated bythe generals themselves. He knew from experience that he could nothope for the command himself, because of his “youth” and reputationfor recklessness. Of those who might be available, and acceptable tothe other commanders, Shelby preferred Simon Bolivar Buckner. Hedetermined to lead a coup which would oust Smith, place Buckner incommand, consolidate the Army of the Trans-Mississippi on the barrierof the Brazos River, and continue the war—preferably in alliance withone of the two regimes in Mexico. It was a bold plan, and a typicalShelby plan.Shelby reasoned that many Confederates from Lee’s and Johnston’sarmies would join them rather than live under the heel of the Yankeeconqueror, and that eventually he and Buckner ought to be able tooffer to Maximilian or to Juarez an army of 75,000 or 100,000 veter¬ans,3 enough to give the Yankee government pause, especially sinceMexican forces in an equal or greater number could be joined to theConfederates. The North would be faced with indefinite prolongationof the war, and it was well known in the South that the North wasweary unto death of the struggle. The New York papers had been fullof it for a year.A negotiated peace, Shelby believed, would ensue. Then a vast newempire in the Southwest and in Mexico could be opened up for emi¬grants from the South—all those who refused to live under the oppres¬sor’s yoke, and their families. It would be a resurrection of “the proudImperial South,” as Major Edwards called it, on a new and greaterfrontier. Let the Yankees have their Black Republic; Buckner, Shelby,228 Mexicoand their men would create a new and larger Confederacy in theSouthwest.This was the Grand Design.One may imagine that Major Edwards had a great hand in it, oreven that it was substantially his idea. Like Shelby, he thought inheroic terms, and his imagination was always riotous. He was theperfect companion-in-arms for Shelby, who was his ideal of a manand a soldier; and they were complementary in the sense that Edwardscould arouse Southern patriotism to fever pitch with his prose asShelby could with his oratorical eloquence.By the time the spring flowers had come to full bloom on the prairie,Shelby and Edwards had perfected their plan on paper.Two events enabled them to carry out the first step—the unseatingof Kirby Smith. One was an order from Smith to Shelby to move hisdivision to Fulton, Arkansas, preparatory to a new thrust into thatstate; the other was the news of Lee’s surrender. Shelby was at Fultonwhen the paralyzing news came. And paralyzing it was. Public morale,which had been at low ebb, collapsed. General Cooper’s Choctawsand Comanches, who had been fighting under the Confederate flag,were the first to act. They announced that they were going home tothe reservation, and went. Delegations of white citizens visited Shelbyand inquired the army’s plans. He pistol-drove them out of camp fortheir trouble.News of the lenient terms granted to the Army of NorthernVirginia also had had a profound effect. Even the officers of the Armyof the Trans-Mississippi, who would have embraced Shelby’s planeagerly a year ago, were now disaffected and eager only to get it overwith. Furthermore, the army was widely scattered throughout threestates, Texas, Louisiana and Arkansas. The difficulty of consolidatingand supplying its divisions would have been enormous.Kirby Smith decided to ask the governors of the three states toassemble for a final meeting at Marshall, Texas, in May, to decide acourse of future action. Under the loosely knit Confederacy, gover¬nors of states were commanders-in-chief of state forces in the fieldand had final authority.4The generals of the Trans-Mississippi Department were also sum¬moned to Marshall, and they all came except “Prince John” Magruder,who remained in Galveston, where he watched with savage eyes aFederal fleet, beating in from the Gulf, filled with Negro troops toRevolt against Surrender229occupy the Department of Texas. He had already had as many livesas a cat, had Magruder, and he was to have many more, as an imperialland commissioner under Maximilian and as a darling of the lectureplatform back in the States, to mention only two.Magruder remained in Galveston because he had got wind of thepalace revolution which was about to take place and he did not wantto fall in with any plan advanced by Shelby. There was a submergedjealousy between them which was to come to the surface later inMexico in an argument over rank. Perhaps they were too much aliketo be downright fond of one another.The Marshall conference convened. Shelby came down from Fulton;Smith from Shreveport; Hawthorne, Buckner, Preston, and Walkerfrom the bayou country, along with a lot of lesser lights. The gover¬nors went into an executive session.5 Shelby invited all of the militaryto a separate meeting. Kirby Smith, however, did not attend. Heknew that the younger generals were ready to depose him, and heremained at the home of a friend in Marshall, awaiting their decision.Shelby took the floor. “Gentlemen,” he said, “the army no longerhas any confidence in General Smith. We must concentrate everythingwe have on the Brazos River at once, and the men must have a leaderwhom they trust. Fugitives from Lee and Johnston will join us by thethousands, and we shall be able, at the very least, to interpose an armyof a hundred thousand men between them and disaster. Mr. Davis ison his way here, and he alone has the right to treat of surrender. Ourintercourse with the French is perfect. Count de Polignac 6 is ouremissary to Louis Napoleon, and General Preston should go at onceto Mexico to learn from Marshal Bazaine whether it is to be peace orwar between us. Every step to the Rio Grande must be fought over;we will march into Mexico and reinstate Juarez or espouse the causeof Maximilian. It makes no difference which.”He paused, then added, “Surrender is a word which neither my divi¬sion nor myself understand.”Shelby’s gift for infecting others with his own enthusiasm did notfail him here, as it had not failed him when he persuaded Price andMarmaduke, much against their will, to permit him to strike at theenemy after Helena.The suggestion that Louis Napoleon would ally himself with a non¬existent Confederacy was madness; yet none of the commanderspresent pointed it out. They acceded to the plan with enthusiasm.230MexicoShelby grew more eloquent, picturing the flood tide of emigrationwhich would create a new Southern empire in Texas and Mexico; andhe climaxed his peroration by nominating Simon Bolivar Buckner tocommand the new army.“General Buckner has reputation, he has the confidence of the army,and he is a soldier of fortune like ourselves,” said Shelby. “Who butBuckner should command us?”In the absence of Magruder, Buckner ranked next to Smith, so thatthe nomination was a logical one. The description of Buckner as asoldier of fortune, however, could not have been more wide of themark. He was a business man at heart, with a secret ambition to writeverse. His record as a commanding general had been, to say the least,an indifferent one. Caution, which is hardly a characteristic of soldiersof fortune, was his fundamental trait, and of all those in the room hewas the least likely to succeed as commander of an expedition such asShelby proposed. Nevertheless, he was so deeply flattered by Shelby’soratory that his judgment was swayed; he accepted the nominationwhen it was offered to him, although later he was to repudiate it.7It was a stirring scene, as Shelby concluded, and every officer in theroom stood up to cheer the new leader. In a splendid new uniform, andwith his magnificent physique, Buckner at least looked the part.Major Edwards says that he was as handsome as Murat and that thegold lace on his uniform shone “as if it had been washed by the dewand wiped in sunshine.”Buckner made a gracious speech of acceptance and assured all ofthose present that he would entertain no proposal of surrender.Shelby again took the floor.“Since there is some embarrassment about this, gentlemen,” he said,“and since the business must be done boldly, I will ask the honor ofpresenting this ultimatum to General Smith. We must make haste, forit is some good leagues to the Brazos, and I shall march to the nearestenemy tomorrow and attack him. If I do not overthrow him I shallat least keep him at bay in the movement southward.” It was amaneuver at which Shelby had grown expert from constant repetition.Kirby Smith was waiting for him in the living room of his friend’shome. There were tears in his eyes as they rested on Shelby’s sinewyframe.“General Smith,” said Shelby, being intentionally cruel to cover hisdeep embarrassment, “the army has lost confidence in you.”Revolt against Surrender 231“I know,” said Kirby Smith.“They do not wish to surrender.”“Nor do I,” said Smith, wearily. “What would the army have?”“Your withdrawal as its direct commander,” said Shelby, “in favorof General Buckner. Then, concentration of the forces of the Trans-Mississippi upon the Brazos River—and war to the hilt.”A shadow like an eagle’s wing passed over Kirby Smith’s face. Hearose slowly and faced the younger man who was deposing him.“What is your advice, General Shelby?”“Instant compliance, sir.”“Very well,” said Smith, and walked to a writing desk.The order was signed, and Edmund Kirby Smith resigned in favorof Simon Bolivar Buckner as commander-in-chief of the Army of theTrans-Mississippi. Smith remained only as chief executive of thecivilian government of the Department—a post in which he had keptthe paddles of the blockade runners turning for four years.Shelby rode off under the stars to his division, now camped atStone Point near Kaufman, Texas. The thoughts that were in hismind were far away on some dusty road leading into the sunlight.Whatever Buckner intended to do with his new-found rank, he wasnever to do it. On Smith’s return to Shreveport, bewildered and heart¬broken, the Old Man found two communications: one from the gover¬nors of every State in the Department except Reynolds of Missouri, di¬recting him to give up the struggle; the other from Colonel JohnSprague, U. S. A., demanding the surrender of the Army of the Trans-Mississippi to General John Pope.Smith hemmed and hawed and corresponded with Colonel Sprague.He refused at first to meet the terms demanded by Pope, asserting thatthey were too harsh, but when Pope modified them, he gave in. Heordered Buckner to surrender, just as if he had not resigned his com¬mand in favor of Buckner, and Buckner obeyed. He went down toShreveport and signed the articles, ending the existence of the Armyof the Trans-Mississippi forever.It was several days before the news reached Shelby. By the samecourier came an order from Kirby Smith directing him to march atonce to Shreveport with his division, there to lay down his arms andgive his parole to General Pope not to bear arms again against theUnited States. From Shreveport the men of the Missouri Cavalry232 MexicoDivision would take such transportation home as the Federal authoritiesmight think fit to provide.Shelby was in a towering rage. He did not blame Smith, whom heregarded as a superannuated fool. The full torrent of his wrath wasturned on Buckner, who, he now recalled savagely, had surrenderedthe first army of the Confederacy at Fort Donelson, as well as thelast now at Sheveport.Consigning Buckner to a pit of hell which even the devil wouldshun, Shelby compared him to Benedict Arnold, the gatekeepers ofTroy, and all the turncoats of history. The profanity which he loosedwould have been sufficient to take all of the curl out of his beard if theatmosphere had not been heavy with an impending Texas storm.Shelby did more than give way to verbal explosions, however.Buckner had surrendered, but not the soldiers. They would not havehad time to reach Shreveport yet. Very well. A blow struck in thatdirection might turn the “surrender” into a Donnybrook Fair, andprevent its taking place at all. Shelby gave the order to hitch up hishowitzers—but first he sat down and penned a furious proclamation“To the Men of Shelby’s Division.”“Soldiers!” he wrote. “You have been betrayed! The generals whomyou trusted have refused to lead you. Let us begin the battle again bya Revolution. Lift up the flag that has been cast down and dishonored.Unsheath the sword that it may remain unsullied and victorious! Ifyou desire it, I will lead; if you demand it, I will follow. We are theArmy and the Cause. To talk of surrender is to be a traitor. Let usseize the traitors and attack the enemy. Forward, for the South andLiberty!”There was no printing shop in Stone Point and no paper worthy ofa proclamation. Wallpaper was ripped from the wall of a store, overthe storekeeper’s protests, and the proclamation, when posted, was asgaudy as anything of its kind during the French Revolution. It wasdone in bold letters of red, black, and blue like those of a circusadvertisement. Shelby’s brown-faced boys read it slowly, those ofthem that could read, and scratched their sunbleached hair. For awhile there was silence. Then someone gave a shout.“On to Shreveport!”The rebel yell went up, and the townspeople of Stone Point shud¬dered.At dawn the division was on the march again, in full battle array.Revolt against Surrender233The impedimenta which soldiers gather during months of idlenesswas left behind, and they traveled stripped for action.But man proposes, and God disposes. The storm which had beengathering since the day before broke, and a cloudburst came out of thesky which was a gullywasher even for Texas. The deluge swept awayall the bridges between Stone Point and Shreveport, and water roseto the saddle girths in streams which had been dry land the day before.The roads disappeared in the torrent along with the bridges, and theMissouri Cavalry Division bivouacked the second night in a shallowlake which had been prairie up to yesterday.The third day they toiled on through the muddy wreckage of thecountryside, their horses straining and the wheels of their artillerybarely turning.Now a new tide was rolling out to meet them, a wave of armystragglers bearing the news that it was all over. The surrender atShreveport was already taking place, in the public square of the town.Division after division of the Army of the Trans-Mississippi wasmarching in, stacking arms, giving their paroles, and taking the roadthat was outward bound. There had not been for them even themournful glory of an Appomattox, where a cease-fire was needed tosilence the guns forever. The Army of the Trans-Mississippi had sur¬rendered—or been surrendered—without firing a shot.Only one small grain of comfort in the debacle remained for Shelby.From paroled officers he learned that Kirby Smith had not surrendereduntil it was clear that the governors of the states would no longerpermit their divisions to fight, and that he had held out for the verybest terms he could get. Thus the Old Man’s conscience was clear andhis honor bright. Shelby was glad of that, for he admired Kirby Smith.But, unreasonably enough, he still blamed Buckner.The end had come, but the men of the Missouri Cavalry Divisionwould not march in and surrender with the rest. They turned asidefrom Shreveport, and at Corsicana, Texas, on a green and undulatingplain with the sun shining again on their ragged butternut, they biv¬ouacked together as a Confederate army division for the last time.There was great argument in the camp that night. For months everyman of them had known of Shelby’s plan to take refuge in Mexico if theConfederacy should go down; the great question was, to go or not togo. For those with families and sweethearts back home, of course, thematter was already settled.234MexicoThere is no record anywhere of Shelby’s farewell address to hismen when they fell in for the last time. One of them, Thomas West-lake, who went to Mexico and wrote a history of the expedition onthree scratch pads which may be examined in the Western HistoricalManuscripts Collection of the University of Missouri, reports thescene in his laconic fashion: “In the Morning General Shelby Formedhis men around him on the open Pearie and made a Speach to themRecounting many of the hardships and Struggels of the Four Yearspast. He said he was not going to surrender but was going to Mexicoand Requested all that would to go with him.” 8Major Edwards says that Shelby did not make a speech for thehistory books. He was impatient, as usual, to be on his way. From theevidence, what he did say was, in effect, “Boys, the war is over andyou can go home. I for one will not go home. Across the Rio Grandelies Mexico. Who will follow me there?”Several hundred men stepped forward. Estimates of the exactnumber vary. Major Edwards says five hundred; Thomas Westlakethinks there were only about a hundred fifty. There is no way of tell¬ing, for sure; from now on the size of the expedition would vary, notfrom day to day but from hour to hour.A sergeant bore forward the old barred banner of the division anddrove its staff into the ground before Shelby, who stood with baredhead, tears in his eyes, as the volunteers surged around him. Bucknerhad been the poet of the outfit, Shelby recalled; the thought occurredto him now that if Buckner had stayed, he would have seen thatthough the banner’s red was faded and torn, its bars of blue still shonewith"the white stars of hope.The partings were said that night. They were the partings of com¬rades in arms, and they have been the same, no doubt, since the Landof Nod; and after the last goodbye, Shelby and His Men—no longerthe Missouri Cavalry Division—camped on the prairie over beyondCorsicana.Tomorrow, they must make their preparations, elect their officers,and gather up their arms; but tonight, in the cool grass, they slept,and their dreams were not of home but of the golden mines of Sinaloa.From Texas to Mexico23520. From Texas to MexicoThe organization formed next day was that of a regiment, withShelby as colonel.1 By the time the Rio Grande was crossed, itwould be a brigade. In the election of officers Shelby received everyvote but his own, so that he was commander-in-chief by acclamation.When it came to balloting for the lesser ranks, however, not all ofhis officers fared so well. Never before had soldiers had such a goldenopportunity to express a candid opinion of their superiors without fearof retaliation, and never was better use made of it. Unpopular officerswere demoted right and left; others were rewarded in outbursts ofgenerosity which added yards of mythical gold lace to the tatteredsleeves of their uniforms.One major found himself a corporal; several lieutenants were newlybreveted captains and majors. The election results were announcedamid exuberant and raucous laughter. Those who were demotedstepped down sheepishly, without apparent rancor, and Shelby lethis rangers enjoy themselves. But any of those who may have regardedthe new organization as a military jest were to find that Shelby inhis new role would take his responsibilities more seriously than ever,and that he could still, when need arose, jerk the reins of discipline ina manner to make the eyeballs pop.Officers elected, the brigade set about arming and provisioning itselffor the march ahead. This presented no problem. Texas was one vastartillery park of fine French and Austrian cannon run through theblockade to Galveston and Matamoras. These stood idle on theprairie, where their late gunners had left them. Quartermaster andcommissary stores were plentiful and there were stands of importedmuskets in all the towns. Corsicana was no exception.Shelby dragged into his camp ten brand-new Napoleon howitzers,2,000 Enfield rifles, 40,000 rounds of small ammunition, bushels ofgun caps, pistols, and cartridges, and 500 dragoon sabres. Each manalready had a Sharpe’s carbine and 120 rounds of ammunition apiece.On the road to Waco they found an abandoned wagon train whichhad been bound from Brownsville to Shreveport. It had been aban¬doned with all of its provisions intact—salt pork, lard, bacon, rice,dried fruit, molasses, wines, whiskeys, pickles, preserves, jellies, cakes,236Mexicoand tins of sweet English biscuits with which the ‘‘gold laced tape¬worms” of the Confederate Cotton Bureau had been wont to regalethemselves.Gorged with food, and amid exclamations of profane wonder atthe pampered life of the bureaucrat, they took up their march in thedirection of Houston, armed as cavalrymen have never been armedbefore or since.At Houston there was the largest depot in the state, filled with allkinds of supplies, and into these Shelby meant to have a look, sincethey were the property of the Confederacy and he and his men had along and uncertain journey ahead of them. Word reached him as headvanced that the countryside was alive with bandits and cutthroatsof every description. The breakup of the Confederate armies hadremoved the last stabilizing influence in East Texas, and the Federalsunder General Sheridan had not yet assumed full control. Murder,looting, and raping were the order of the day. It was Bloody Kansasall over again.Shelby swore that he would protect government property and hanglooters wherever he found them, and he lectured his men on the jobahead, which must be performed before crossing into Mexico; but ashis brigade speeded up its march, he found that his own men werebeing mistaken for another band of renegades, and that there was awholesale evacuation of territory in his path.It was not until he neared Houston that Shelby was able to demon¬strate what his real intentions were. Hearing that bushwhackers hadtaken over the town, he sent a light cavalry force of 100 men underCaptains James Meadow and James Wood into Houston, with ordersto seize all the stores and hold them for distribution to ex-soldiers andthe needy among the civilian population.Meadow and Wood reached Houston none too soon. Two thousandarmy stragglers and ne’er-do-wells were milling about, drinkingwhiskey and debating the best way to batter down the doors of thegovernment warehouse. All of them were armed with some of theConfederacy’s last muskets and cartridges.As Wood and Meadow drew up at the head of their butternutcavalcade, the ruffians blinked owlishly at them. Despite their youth,Shelby’s captains were bearded to the eyes and saddle-colored fromthe sun, and they had a ferocious appearance.> From Texas to Mexico237Wood’s voice was the first to be heard. It was like a pistol shot.“Disperse!” he said. “We are Jo Shelby’s men.”One of the border ruffians laughed. “The war’s over, young feller,”he said, waving an empty jug. “Every man for himself and the deviltake Tom Hindman [General Hindman was now a commander underMagruder]. Whyn’t you give yore parole and get? And Jo Shelbytoo?”“My friend,” said James Wood, “Jo Shelby is the ranking Con¬federate general in Texas right now and every shoelace of governmentproperty is under his protection. As soon as he gets here, flour, bacon,clothes, and medicines will be distributed to the women folks, andnothing at all to drunks and scalawags. Now git! My men and I haveridden thirty miles and we’re hungry, so we’ll stop to eat. If any ofyou are here at supper time, we’ll blow you into hell.”One by one the armed loafers began to fall away at the rear. Thename and fame of Shelby was known from one end of the border tothe other. As the ranks of the renegades began to thin, they fell awayby tens and twenties instead of ones and twos, shuffling their feet andsquinting at the sun as if they were going no place in particular, butwere anxious to get there. Jim Wood grinned like a skunk eatingbumblebees, and the sunburned horsemen dismounted to cook supper.After supper, and some reassuring words spoken to the townspeopleof Houston, the column remounted and rode back to Shelby’s campon the prairie.Similar scenes were enacted at the Texas crossroads communities ofTyler and Waxahachie, and by the time Shelby reached Austin, thestate capital, word of his vigilante work had preceded him, and thecitizens turned out to give him an ovation.Governor Murrah welcomed them on behalf of the State of Texas.He was a tall, stooped man with burning eyes in a wasted face, andtwo spots of crimson on his cheekbones—he was dying of consumption.He had remained to guard the gold and silver of the Confederacy,three hundred thousand dollars worth, in the sub-treasury at Austin.In the end he would ride away to Mexico with Shelby in the Con¬federate uniform that was to be his shroud.Shelby camped just beyond Austin on the banks of the ColoradoRiver and a good many of his men drifted back into town for girlsand drinks. It was a misty, ominous, cloudy night, full to the brimwith darkness and spattered with invisible rain. Though May and238MexicoJune are the dry season in Texas, the weather had been fractious eversince Shelby had left Corsicana, and tonight gave promise of beinganother howler.It was a good night for dirty work—which was not long in coming.A band of guerrillas, under the command of a notorious Captain Rabb,for whom Shelby was on the lookout, rode silently into Austin in therain-filled dark, intent on looting the three hundred thousand dollarsin the sub-treasury, whose presence was itching the palm of everybushwhacker in Texas.The silent horsemen, two score strong, sped to the State Housewhere the money was kept. Some of Shelby’s men, reveling in thetown, saw them, bolted to the saddle, and rode for the brigade. Whenthey returned the church bells of Austin were ringing furiously andthe home guard was marching out of the armory to the long roll of thedrums.Shelby dashed for the State House, and when his column reachedthe square, Rabb and his guerrillas had already battered down thedoors and were inside, sacking the vault. Every light under the Capitoldome seemed ablaze. Shelby asked no questions. He threw a tightcordon of men around the State House, and sent forty men withSharpe’s carbines to rush the doors while the rest shot out the windowsof the building.Shrill cries of agony went up as the volleys from the carbinescrashed into the treasury room where the freebooters were stuffingtheir clothing with American double eagles, British sovereigns, Frenchhundred-franc pieces, and gold ingots. In their greed to get at the goldthey had flung a king’s ransom in silver—U. S. and Mexican silverdollars—to the four corners of the room. Now the raiders fell inwrithing heaps, blood spattering gold and silver alike, as Shelby’s menfired again and again in the narrow confines of the treasury vault.Not a dollar was lost and not a man escaped. Captain Rabb’s bullet-riddled body was buried under those of his men. Only one manreached the exit, a shaggy giant of a plainsman in filthy clothes oftanned goatskin, who staggered out of the gloom, smoke, and horrorto fall dead with a ringing sound like that of a moneybag spilled. Hehad taken off his trousers, tied the bottoms together, and filled themwith gold double eagles. No silver dollars for him. Shelby’s mendragged him onto the grass of the State House Square and left himthere, a reddening bundle of gold-filled rags.From Texas to Mexico239When the wild work was done Shelby posted sentries who walkedtheir posts in blood splashing to their knees, while he conferred withGovernor Murrah as to what was to be done. Murrah suggested thatsince the money was Confederate government property, it might bewell to divide it pro rata among the men of Shelby’s brigade, none ofwhom had seen a paymaster for months before the war ended. Therewas an official precedent for such a distribution: by order of theConfederate government, the last train from Richmond, bearing thegold of the Treasury Department, had distributed the money tosoldiers straggling home from Appomattox, all along a route whichextended from Richmond to Washington, Georgia.Shelby, however, refused to touch a penny of the treasure, on theground that it might cause him and his men to be mistaken for bush¬whackers. “I came into the war with clean hands,” he said, “and withGod’s help I will go out of it with clean hands.”He made known his decision to his men on the steps of the Capitol.“We know what the world would say,” he told them. “We shallnot take the money.” He paused, then squared his shoulders.“We are the last of our race,” he said. “Let us be the best as well.”It was the old magic that touched everything he did. There was nodissent or grumbling among the ragged paupers in front of him—farfrom it. The entire brigade cheered. Old Jo was right. They couldn’ttake the money. It was the bond they would give to history. Onceagain, a thing was right if Jo Shelby did it, and that was all. Theyreformed their column and rode out through the blustery night to theircamp on the Colorado River.But their night’s work was not done. As they approached the camp,they heard the shrill sounds of horses neighing, and a great commotionamong the tents and wagons. Another band of bushwhackers wasafter their horses.Unlimbering their carbines, they fired into the mass of horses andmen—taking care not to hit the horses—and then they dismounted andcharged the renegades with bowie knives and sabres. Thirty-nine ofthe robbers were cut to pieces on the sward, out of about fifty whohad been in their number originally. The rest fled, most of them onfoot, their own horses having scattered in panic.The night of slaughter was over at last. A thunderstorm broke, andShelby decided that at daybreak he would move for San Antonio. Thedead he would leave unburied as a warning to others.240MexicoHis men fell into their bedrolls wearily, heedless of the thunder’sroll, the lightning’s flash, or the sabred bodies of the Texas horsethieves scattered in grotesque heaps throughout the camp, almostwithin reach of many a sleeper’s arm. There were so many nightmaresin the day’s work for Shelby’s men that sleep always came to themcalmly and peacefully.San Antonio had been a gold rush town and a city of gilded sin sincethe spring of ’61. Far outside the theatre of actual war, it had stoodnevertheless midstream in the swirling tide of the blockade, a portof entry not only for supplies and munitions of war, but for the finestluxuries the European markets could afford. In San Antonio anythingcould be had for a price. While the rest of the South tightened its beltduring the four years of the war, King Cotton held high carnival inthe city on the San Antonio River.It was a mardi gras of prosperity which attracted all the leastattractive human elements in any war—speculators, profiteers, con¬tractors, gamblers, prostitutes, and fugitives from the draft. With thecollapse of the armies and the hauling down of the flag, San Antoniohad become the capital of the desperadoes of Texas. As Shelby’scolumn clanked toward the city, “ruffians,” as Major Edwards says,“had taken possession of the city and were rioting in royal fashion,sitting in the laps of courtesans and drinking wines brought throughthe blockade from France.”Seven men had been killed in street fighting, in the twisted thorough¬fares which made San Antonio look as if it had been laid out on thepattern of a rattlesnake’s nest. Besides the seven murders, a dozenstores had been sacked, renegades had levied a prestamo on citizens topay for their revels, and a commissary train had been burnt.The Mayor and a committee of citizens rode out twenty miles toShelby’s camp to urge him to hasten into the city and restore order.The brigade was asleep when they reached camp, but when Shelbywas informed of the situation, he roused his men from their slumbersand they rode all night into San Antonio.Patrols were sent through the streets, rounding up the scalawags;guards were stationed at the corners; and Shelby appointed two of themost trusted men of the brigade, D. A. Williams and Alonzo Slayback,as provost marshals for each side of the river. There are no files atall of San Antonio newspapers of this date in the universities andFrom Texas to Mexico24rlibraries; we have to rely on Major Edwards, who says as usual thatmen were hanged and shot, without giving details; but we may be surethat Slayback and Williams did their duty, and that for a day or sowere exhibited the bodies of looters, so that the rest took warning andleft town.Major Edwards was enchanted with San Antonio, “the antique,half Mexican city where the Spanish death flag wound above theAlamo,” and after order had been restored, he wrote in his journal,“Peace came upon the city with the balm of a southeast trade windand women walked forth as if to a festival. The Plaza transformeditself into a parterre. Roses bloomed in the manes of the horses andafter Cannae there was Capua.”tIf San Antonio was the capital of King Cotton, the Menger Hotelwas the capital of San Antonio.2 A cool, inviting oasis in the nowstifling heat of early summer, it was (and still is) a rambling, two-storybuilding of stone and stucco with lemon and orange trees in its patio.The host, Otto Menger, whose family had been in the brewing busi¬ness in St. Louis, served the best of food and wine, combining in hiscuisine a hearty German love of good eating with the best of Frenchand Creole recipes. The bar of the Menger was of noble BritishHonduran mahogany and the range of its whiskeys unexcelled. Itwas by now the last refuge of rather paunchy patriots who declared inloud voices that the South would fight on, and that the Yankee forcesof occupation under General Philip Sheridan would find the Depart¬ment of Texas too hot to handle.These gentlemen, in their flapping linen coats and their black stringties, had been in retirement during the riots, but as soon as Shelbyrestored order, they were back in the bar, as noisy and vocal as ever.Shelby recognized the type with a faint smile. They were the samestay-at-home Southerners he had met throughout the war, whom hecompared to prairie dogs. When the coast is clear and nobody is insight, Shelby remarked, there is the most infernal barking, chattering,cavorting, and yelling ever witnessed, outside the burrow; but let astrange shadow appear on the horizon and every furious dog amongthem is popping back into his underground den.In the Missouri campaign of 1864 these same gentry, most of themmembers of the Knights of the Golden Circle, as the Copperheadscalled themselves, had come into his camp with mysterious books,innumerable signs, grips, signals, passwords and incantations, to aid242Mexicothe cause; General Sterling Price, riding about in a buggy because ofhis great bulk, had placed great reliance on them, though they hadnever enabled a Confederate soldier to take or hold a foot of ground.But there were good men at the Menger too—some of the best brainsin the country, and some of the stoutest hearts. There was “PrinceJohn” Magruder, no longer aloof now that Galveston had fallen,Governor Reynolds of Missouri, Governor Henry Watkins Allen ofLouisiana, General Lyon of Kentucky, Colonel William B. Broadwell,the genius of the Confederate Cotton Bureau under Kirby Smith,Governor Murrah of Texas—whom Magruder had asked to empty theprisons of Texas to swell the expedition—and Edmund Kirby Smith.The Old Man alighted from an ambulance in front of the Menger,as dusty as any footsoldier. He had traveled incognito all over Texas,fearing the wrath of the soldiers whom he had surrendered. Shelby,taking his ease on an upstairs balcony of the Menger, saw him andrecognized him. After the Old Man had entered the hotel, Shelbywent downstairs, careful not to be seen, and looked at the name on theregister.Smith had registered as “William Thompson.”Shelby noted the room number, which was that of an outside roomon the second story. He went into the street to look up. The blindswere drawn and the curtains down.Shelby sent for Jake Connor, the lieutenant of artillery who hadbeen the minstrel of the Missouri Cavalry Division. Jake was band¬master of the brigade.“Jake,” said Shelby, “old men need air and sunlight. They shouldnot commence hibernating in June. Get your band together for aserenade.”“To whom?” inquired Connor.“Never mind to whom,” replied Shelby. “Just get your band to¬gether. And as you go, order also that all men not on duty get underarms immediately and parade in front of the balcony.”At sunset the entire brigade was massed in the square in front ofthe Menger Hotel, to the wonderment of the townspeople, and JakeConnor’s band struck up, “Hail to the Chief.” There was no sign ofa stir behind the blinds of Kirby Smith’s room.“Play ‘Dixie,’ boys,” said Shelby. “If the Old Man were dead, that’dfetch him.”From Texas to Mexico 243The familiar stirring strains went up, but still there was silencebehind the blinds.“This is downright selfish of him,” said Major Edwards.“Wait!” said Shelby, holding up a hand to halt the music. “Boys,that old man up there is Kirby Smith. Let’s give him a cheer.”The cheer rose up in a rc*ir, and the blinds were flung open. KirbySmith came out onto the balcony, a look of eagerness and wondermenton his face. Since the surrender, he had feared these men more thanthe Yankees. Now, as they cheered him, tears streamed down his faceand he could not speak. But Shelby could, and did.“General Smith,” he said with a magnificent flourish of his hat,“you are the ranking officer of the Trans-Mississippi Department andwe are here to report to you. Command, and we obey; lead us and weshall follow. In this public manner, and before all San Antonio, withmusic and banners, we come to proclaim your arrival in the midst ofthat little band which knows neither dishonor nor surrender. Youwere seeking concealment, the night and obscurity of your self-appointed exile, and you have found guards to attend you, and thesteadfast light of patriotism to make your pathway plain. We bid yougood morning instead of good night, and await, as of old, your furtherorders.”Smith came down, amid the playing of the band, and the men of theArmy of the Trans-Mississippi mobbed him with affection; but he wastoo old for new adventures, and the greeting was also goodbye.Shelby had now set up his expatriate headquarters behind the coolshades of the Menger, while his men savored the delights of SanAntonio. The streets were safe again, patrolled by Williams and Slay-back’s guards, and the girls, both Mexican and Texan, walked armin arm with Shelby’s men in the paseos, with flowers in their hair andlaughter in their eyes. Serenades, led by Jake Connor, went on dayand night beneath the balconies of the town, while the Stars and Barsfloated hither and thither, borne aloft triumphantly by the wandererslike the Ark of the Covenant. The soldiers had money in their pockets—paid them by the merchants of San Antonio in return for theirprotection—and they spent it freely. Phil Sheridan was still far away.The days were loud with laughter, and the nights were filled withmusic.Shelby let his men frolic through the sunshiny June days, while heplotted his Mexican adventure with the band of exiles at the hotel.244MexicoAmong his “No Surrender” Confederates Shelby had his eye inparticular on John Magruder. Though there was no love lost betweenthem, Shelby was not a man to waste talent, and he knew that Mag¬ruder possessed talents of a superlative order.He had fought with distinction in Virginia, though transferred tothe Trans-Mississippi afterward, because General Lee, some said, hadfound him difficult to work with. He had had a brilliant career in theArmy of the Trans-Mississippi, capturing a Federal steamship withonly “cotton-clads” at Galveston; and he was a man of immensesoldierly bearing, standing six feet, four inches tall, who would havebeen an impressive figure at any court.He had been an officer in “the old army” before the war, a hero ofthe Mexican War, and the darling of New York and Newport society.General Winfield Scott, the wittiest man in the old army, adored himas extravagantly as the youngest society matron. At an elegant dinnerat Newport, when someone had inquired of him how much an officer’spay might be, he had turned to his butler and inquired, “James, what ismy salary?” That was John Magruder.He was penniless now. He had given up his commission in theUnited States Army to join the Confederacy and at fifty-five he couldstill fight all day and dance all night. After the capture of the HarrietLane 3 by the cotton-clads, he had danced till dawn with blood on hisuniform and a bullet wound in his body, though he had been somefifty-nine hours without sleep.Magruder was in love with all beautiful women and was belovedby them all his life long. He wrote love songs and could sing them ina clear tenor, though in ordinary speech he was somewhat embar¬rassed by a tendency to lisp. He was loved by his men, too—with adevotion equaled only by Shelby’s men for Shelby himself—and it wasas inevitable that he should be attracted to the Mexican expedition asa nightfly to the candle.Realizing that Magruder could charm the birds off the trees, Shelbyasked him to go at once to Mexico City. From Monterrey he was tosend Magruder ahead of the expedition to talk with the EmperorMaximilian.Between San Antonio and Eagle Pass the brigade got a preview ofthe kind of country it would be marching through henceforward—adreary range, full of mesquite and black chapparal. On the first nightof the march from San Antonio, bushwhackers attempted to make offFrom Texas to Mexico245with seven mules from the camp, and in the ensuing melee fourteenmen were killed, three of them Shelby’s.The next day two scouts from the rear—James Kirtley and JamesRudd—brought in news of a Federal force of 3,000 approaching, underthe command of a Colonel Johnson. Shelby penned a note to the Fed¬eral commander and sent it into his camp by another of his adjutants,Major Jim Moreland. The note read:“Colonel: My scouts inform me that you have about three thousandmen and that you are looking for me. I have only one thousand men,and yet I should like to make your acquaintance. I will probably marchfrom my present camp about ten miles farther today, halting on thehigh road between San Antonio and Eagle Pass. Should you desire topay me a visit, you will find me at home until the day after tomorrow.”Colonel Johnson received Moreland affably and said he would thinkabout it. But next day he wheeled his command northward and trottedaway. The war was over and Shelby could go to the devil or Mexico,as far as he was concerned. No doubt Johnson had his orders, too.At Eagle Pass Shelby set up camp again, and here the flag of theMissouri Cavalry Division was lowered for the last time. In a rev¬erent ceremony it was weighted with stones and sunk into the RioGrande by Elliott, Slayback, and Gordon. Inside its folds Shelby laidhis black plume, which had been his own private Confederate flag. Noman felt like making a speech. None was made.Shelby lined up his howitzers on the river bank in plain view of thegarrison of Piedras Negras, on the Mexican side of the river. Then hesent Lieutenant Colonel Frank Gordon in a skiff with a flag of truceand twenty-five armed men to parley with Governor Bieska, civil gov¬ernor of the State of Coahuila, who was in command of 2,000 Mexicantroops in the town.Biesca was a man of pomp and dash himself, and he rode into theplaza to receive Gordon, surrounded by a glittering staff. A meetingwas arranged, and Shelby came over later in the day. There is norecord of the conversation which the two men held behind closeddoors, but there is no doubt of the case put to Biesca by Shelby. Itmust have been something like this:“The war in the United States is over now and Secretary of StateSeward has given the French their marching orders, politely but firmly.If they do not withdraw from Mexico, the gates will be open for United246MexicoStates intervention. There are a million troops under arms in the GrandArmy of the Republic, and they are being held in readiness for justsuch an event. Already General Grant has ordered General Sheridanwith 50,000 troops to station themselves in Texas, awaiting a moveinto Mexico. It will be 1848 all over again, with the United States flagflying once more over Chapultepec. You can forestall this, GovernorBiesca, by recruiting the soldiers of the late Southern Confederacy intoyour armies, by marching at once to Mexico City, and reinstatingBenito Juarez as rightful president of the Republic. I have 1,000 men,and the brigade can soon be recruited up to division strength. And notonly disbanded Confederates, but discharged Federals, will join you.In this they will have the blessing of General Grant, who commandsall things in the United States now and would rather win an unde¬clared war against the French than a declared one. What is youranswer, Governor Biesca?”Biesca was enthusiastic. The fortunes of the rebels were at a lowebb, with Juarez in hiding in the United States, Porfirio Diaz cut offin the South, and the French, who treated the Mexicans like dogs,riding high in most of the towns and in a large area around the Capital.Biesca offered Shelby control of the three states of Coahuila, Tam-aulipas, and Nuevo Leon, reserving for himself only civil authorityover Coahuila, and suggested that Shelby make Piedras Negras hisheadquarters until his brigade could be recruited to division strength.With 20,000 men they would attack General Jeanningros at Monterreyand thrust for Mexico City.Shelby could have asked for nothing better. It was a dream cometrue, and far more quickly than dreams usually do. He thanked Biescawarmly, explained that the decision must be left up to his men, andpromised to return the next day with their answer.The brigade was assembled, and Shelby outlined Biesca’s offer inglowing terms. Before the vote was called for, Shelby made no secretof the fact that he wished to accept the Juaristas’ offer.“Boys,” he said, “if you are all of my mind, and will take yourchances with me, it is Juarez and the Republic from now on. Youknow Biesca’s offer. What he fails to perform for us we will performfor ourselves, and if his promises turn out to be Mexican ones, therewill be scant laughter over any American trapped or slain by treachery.We will cut his gizzard out.”A long debate followed, full of the high-flown oratory in whichFrom Texas to Mexico247the Missourians and Texans delighted. Shelby took part in it spiritedly,although it was evident that there was not much doubt about the out¬come. In Shelby’s secret heart he was of a mind with those who op¬posed him. The two natures that warred within him constantly—theromantic and the practical—had come to grips in the supreme test,like Jacob wrestling with the angel, and the practical had won out,for Shelby was clear-eyed enough to see that Biesca had offered himexactly what he wanted: unlimited authority and the certainty of vic¬tory in the end. It was a glittering prize that had been dangled beforea tramp general of an army which no longer existed. But that otherside of Shelby’s nature, the romantic one which longed for plumesand lances, had given in reluctantly. He was glad that the matter wouldbe settled by others than himself.In the end every single vote, except Shelby’s, was cast for Maxi¬milian. The eloquent Alonzo Slayback, who had recruited for Shelbyin the vast and interminable brush of Arkansas, and Ben Elliott, whonext to Shelby had been the leader of the Iron Brigade in a hundredbattles, spoke for the Empire,4 and the picture their fancy paintedwas a Mohammedan’s dream of Paradise in Imperial Mexico. Shelby’sdeep gray eyes were alight; if he was ever to regret, it was not at thismoment. His men had won his battle against himself, and his nextwords showed that he was aware of it.“If that is your answer,” he said, “it is mine too. Henceforth wewill fight under Maximilian. Tomorrow at four o’clock in the after¬noon we commence the march for Monterrey. Let no man repine.You have chosen the Empire, and perhaps it is as well, but good orbad, your fate shall be my fate and your fortune my fortune.”Biesca merely shrugged when he was informed of the decision. Hethought the gringos mad, but it made no difference. His garrison ofirregulars could not prevent Shelby from marching on; Shelby’showitzers would blow them into the Rio Grande. Being an Indian,he accepted the situation philosophically. He rolled a cigarette andpointed out to Shelby that since his peregrinos would need money,and since Juarez needed cannon, a deal might be made. He proposedto buy Shelby’s howitzers and munitions for $16,000 in silver, and$40,000 in worthless Juarez scrip.This was most generous, and at the moment Shelby and his menneeded money more then they needed howitzers. They were no longerin Texas, where everthing had been free. They were in a town of248Mexicomud huts in a land of strangers. The trail that lay ahead of them, toMonterrey and Mexico City, was no more then a narrow path througha most formidable wilderness of thorny mesquite and ugly cactus,some of it poisonous, entwined in a hedgelike growth which the na¬tives call brasada. The only inhabitants of the Great Plateau of Mexico,where the brasada flourished, were Lipan Indians, bandits, and de¬serters from the French Foreign Legion. It was emphatically no placeto be burdened with wagons, teams, and artillery. Shelby acceptedBiesca’s offer of $16,000.5Biesca did not have $ 16,000 on hand, but he raised it easily enoughby raiding the till of every merchant in town. Piedras Negras haddone a booming business with the Confederacy for four years, andits merchants were rich, by Mexican standards.The usual formula of the prestamo, or levy, was carried out. A listof contributors was made up, an adjutant with a file of soldiers calledon those whose names appeared, pointed to the figure by their names,and waited, with bayonets courteously at the fix. Given no choice,the merchants paid, and by evening $16,000 in silver had been paidover to Shelby and deposited by him in the Customs House for safety.With all these matters settled, the men scattered to the cantinas.The day was hot, white glare upon white dust, and no breath of airstirring in the streets. The mood of the brigade was festive, and therewould have been no trouble with the inhabitants of Piedras Negrasif it had not been for a pair of troublemakers who had enlisted withShelby somewhere above San Antonio, representing themselves asveterans of Lee’s army.This pair now circulated among the male portion of the population,amazingly fluent in Spanish, declaring that Shelby’s men were des¬peradoes, with a long trail of rapine and slaughter behind them inTexas, who would leave not a virgin unravished or a store unrobbedin Piedras Negras. Furthermore, they declared that their own presencein Piedras Negras was due entirely to the fact that Shelby’s men hadstolen their horses, back in Texas, and that they had trailed along onlyin the hope of recovering their mounts, which they prized above theirown lives and which were worth a fortune.The sullen Mexicans, hearing the loud voices of the gringos in thecantinas, and the pealing laughter of the girls, swore a great oath thatthe horse thieves from north of the river should deliver up everybranded horse among them. This would have been a large order, forFrom Texas to Mexico249Ike Berry and Dick Winship, who had been first into Piedras Negras,each rode a branded horse and so did scores of others.Afternoon drill, on which Shelby always insisted, was just over, andIke Berry was seated cross-legged in front of regimental headquartersenjoying the sun and a meerschaum pipe which he had picked up inhis travels. His horse was tethered near by. Ike was a low, squatHercules, with a long yellow beard and unshorn locks, a man free ofspeech and quick with a sabre.Directly across from Ike Berry, Captain James Wood was leaningagainst the door of a cafe. He had a better view of the street than IkeBerry, and he was the first to see a detail of thirty-five Mexican soldiersapproaching Shelby’s headquarters. They were trailing their rifles,Mexican style, and at their head marched a smartly uniformed, hand¬some young lieutenant.Wood went inside the cafe and spoke to Martin Kritzer, who hadhis arm around an Indian girl, beaded and beautiful.“Looks like Old Joe delivered those guns too soon,” Wood said toKritzer. “Maybe we’re going to have to take them back.”Kritzer and Wood walked back to the door of the cafe, and watched.One of the men who called himself a veteran of Lee’s army now ap¬proached Berry. Berry knew him and greeted him cheerfully. Therenegade pointed to Berry’s horse. Backed by the rifles of the Mexicancaptain’s squad, he was arrogant.“That is my horse, Berry,” he said. “He wears my brand. I’ve fol¬lowed him to Mexico and these boys aim to see that I get him back.”Ike Berry was taken by surprise. He knocked out his meerschaumpipe. Then he rose and smiled slowly, a frank, disarming smile. It wasthe kind of smile, full of wonderment and pleasure, which he had beenaccustomed to wear in battle. He pulled his sabre from its scabbardand with one swift, slicing blow laid open the man’s arm from shoulderto fingertips.At a shouted command from their captain the Mexicans closed inon Ike Berry and overpowered him. Martin Kritzer dropped his Indiangirl and ran through the crowd of Mexicans for Shelby.Shelby was sitting in another cafe, drinking cognac and discussingthe mysteries of the Catalan language with a psycopathic, scholarlyEnglishman who had joined the brigade at Austin. The Englishmaninterested Shelby more than any other man in the brigade because hecherished an overweening passion to perish in a train wreck, and had250 Mexicocome to Mexico, so he said, in the hope of finding a stray locomotiveon a siding with cars attached.“They are after the horses!” shouted Kritzer as he burst into thecafe.“What horses?” asked Shelby.“All of our horses,” said Kritzer.“We might have known it,” said Shelby. “After we have deliveredup our arms, too. Well, sound the rally.”Kritzer blew a blast that could be heard in Eagle Pass across theriver, and the laughter died in the cafes. Men swarmed out of door¬ways, flushed but sobered, and when they had taken note of the situ¬ation, opened fire on the Mexicans from every direction with theirsidearms.Jim Wood was armed with a short Enfield rifle, and as the Mexi¬cans fell upon Ike Berry he took aim at the young Mexican captain.A beautiful, tawny Mexican girl—perhaps his sweetheart—tried tostrike the Enfield from Wood’s hand, crying, “Spare him!” but toolate. Wood shot the captain dead, and when the revolver smoke hadcleared, seventeen Mexican soldiers lay dead or wounded in the plaza.The rest fled back to their barracks.And now, Major Edwards notes in his diary, “a dreadful commotionfell upon Piedras Negras.” The long roll sounded and the entireMexican garrison turned out. Shelby’s men mounted their horses andcharged them. At the same time a detachment of the brigade underthe command of a Virginian named Langhorne battered down thedoors of the Customs House, seized the sacks of silver belonging tothem, and made off with it after locking the sentries inside.Shelby waved his hat, stormed at his men, and threatened, but foronce his commands were not obeyed. Governor Biesca also dashedinto the plaza amid the milling horsemen and began a passionate speechof apology, but since it was in Spanish it was not too well understood.“I’m sorry, Governor,” said Shelby, “and I don’t know what it’s allabout, but the devil is in the boys, for all that.”He went vigorously to work, however, at the task of quieting hismen, and eventually suceeded, although what he was shouting couldnot have been heard above the crack of pistol shots, the ringing ofchurch bells, and the wailing of women.When quiet was restored, Biesca ordered all of his men confinedto barracks and implored Shelby by all the saints in the Mexican cal-From Texas to Mexico251endar to leave Piedras Negras as quickly as possible. Shelby promisedto do so, but it was a promise impossible of immediate performance.His men had seized not only the money, but all of the howitzers whichhad been sold, and it would require some persuasion to make the menpart with them again. Shelby, however, assured Biesca, whom he liked,that he would get his howitzers back, and as an earnest of good faith,again placed the $16,000 in the Customs House for safe keeping.Shelby’s men were never ones to hold a grudge, and incredible asit may seem, a short time after the massacre in the plaza they wereback in the wine shops of the bordellos, laughing, whooping, andsinging cavalry songs to the girls of those establishments.The day had been full of surprises, and it was not over yet. Stand¬ing in front of his headquarters with three of four officers, and dis¬cussing the arrangements for returning the howitzers, Shelby hearda shout like an Indian war whoop. Looking down the street, he sawthree men, two of whom he recognized. They were Joe Moreland,brother of James, and William Fell, and they had a prisoner. Thoughthe man looked like anything but a desperate character, Fell andMoreland evidently considered him a great prize, for they were guard¬ing him elaborately with drawn sabres and egging him along withthe muzzles of their revolvers.The prisoner proved to be a shifty-eyed individual, not a Mexican,with a wisp of a beard and with frightened, though intelligent, eyes.A crowd of soldiers gathered around him.“Who the hell’s that?” asked Shelby.Moreland was in a mood to make a speech. Pointing to his tremblingcharge, he delivered himself of these remarks:“Make way, Missourians, and therefore barbarians, for the onlyliving and animated specimen of the Genus Polyglot now upon theNorth American Continent. Look upon him, you heathens, and un¬cover yourselves. Draw nigh unto him, you savages, and fall uponyour knees. Touch him, you blood drinkers, and make the sign ofthe cross.”This was Southern platform eloquence, and there was no moreappreciative audience for such than the men of the former MissouriCavalry Division.“What did you call him?” a voice rang out.“A polyglot, you Feejee Islander; a living dictionary, a humanmausoleum with the bones of fifty languages; a lusus naturae, a royal252Mexicononesuch and a sine qua non; a paragon of perspicacity without apeer in prolixity; a gringo in the land of garlic and a guardian of thegreaser gold. In short, let me introduce the clerk of the CustomsHouse.”The prisoner, who by now had stopped shivering, was indeed some¬thing of a curiosity. He said that he had been born of Creole parentsin New Orleans, that his name was Dupre, and that he had beeneverywhere in the world and seen everything. His knowledge oflanguages would seem to bear out at least a part of his story: besidesbeing able to speak English, French, Spanish, German, and Italian, hesaid, he was proficient in modern Greek, ancient Arabic, and a numberof Indian dialects, both Eastern and American. His native language,he said, was Gumbo French, and his linguistic accomplishments hadearned for him the appointment of clerk of the Customs House inPiedras Negras.He charmed Shelby and his entire company from the beginning.Shelby, who was never so happy as in the company of odd fish, likethe locomotive-happy Englishman, ordered that a party be held inDupre’s honor immediately, at regimental headquarters. It lasted farinto the night, Dupre matching the stories of Shelby’s men with ex¬otic tales of adventure in many lands, of which he himself was thehero. It must have been one of the greatest lie swaps of all time, anda credit to the storyteller’s art.The newcomer also proved to have a good singing voice, and MajorEdwards says that “he remained late over his wine, singing songs inall manner of languages and boasting in all manner of tongues.”As dawn approached, Dupre was invited to stay and share a bunkwith the gringos, but he bowed himself out, in a grave and courtlymanner, expressing gratitude for their hospitality and promising toreturn on the morrow for more aguardiente. The soothing charm ofhis voice, says Edwards, fell upon the bemused Missourians like thefeeling of benediction which follows prayer.That morning he stole $2,000 of their money. As clerk of the Cus¬toms House, of course, he had the key.When the money was counted and the loss discovered, Biescaswore, and Shelby could not believe his eyes; but $2,000 was gone andthe Polyglot was the only man who had the key.Such was the spell he had woven over Shelby and his followers,however, that they did not hang him at all, but forgave him; and be-Across the Sabinas253fore they departed, Shelby gave him a beautiful ivory-handled pistol,worked in gold, as a souvenir.When the brigade left Piedras Negras, the Polyglot still had their$2,000.621. Across the SabinasThe Brigade marched south at daybreak, while Piedras Negrasslept. There is a ridge in the back of the town, and as the columntrotted onto rising ground, Shelby halted his men for one last look back¬ward across the Rio Grande. The day was clear and golden, the river alazy cattle stream, and the fields of Texas were green in the shim¬mering haze. Above the fort on the hill, back there at Eagle Pass, afaded Confederate flag hung motionless, dull red in the morning sun.The hats of the brigade came off, and Shelby’s hat, no longer deco¬rated with the plume.Bearded and brown as Mexicans, swathed in cartridge belts andloaded down with all manner of gear, the sun glinting on the handlesof their bowie knives and pistols, they gazed silently at the mirageof the flag on the Texas shore. They would not see that sight again.Then, at a command from Shelby, which the platoon leaders echoed,they replaced their hats, swung round in their saddles, and urgedtheir horses forward. They looked back no more. Ahead lay Monter¬rey and the Great Plateau of Mexico, seven thousand feet up in theinvisible distance, and beneath them the broad highway of the con-quistadores.A horseman in a sombrero came panting up to overtake them.Shelby reined in his horse and took the man’s extended hand, althoughhe could not remember having seen him before.“Amigo!” said the Mexican.“Friend, yes,” said Shelby. “Que va? You wish to join us?”The Mexican shook his head. “No, senor,” he said. “I wish to warnyou. An American saved my life once, in Texas. Perhaps I can repaythe favor to his countrymen. You are riding toward the Sabinas.Beware of ambush.”“Ambush?” asked Shelby.254 Mexico“This is evil country, senor. Beware of the Sabinas.” He wheeledhis horse and rode away.Shelby turned to Ben Elliott. “That fellow thinks he knows some¬thing,” he said, “and maybe he does, at that. Keep your eyes sharp.”The march went on, along the hard rock road. It was desolatecountry, but within a few miles the flat, square roofs of an adobevillage mushroomed in the plain. The village seemed at peace, andundefended. There was no cover as far as the eye could reach. Shelbyruled out the possibility of ambush here. The column would rest,for the day was coming hot, and he would send a few men ahead toreconnoitre.In the village street, a sight presented itself that caused the facesof the brigade to go white beneath their tan, and their horses to rearand neigh shrilly. The village was a thing of horror. Guerrillas hadbeen there—the bloodthirsty guerrillas of Mexico whose refinementsof cruelty would make a Quantrill or an Anderson blench. The en¬tire population of the village had been wiped out in an orgy ofsadistic, senseless slaughter. The broken bodies of men, women, andchildren lay everywhere, attended by dogs and vultures. Many haddied in torture. “Men hung suspended from door facings literallyflayed alive. Huge strips of skin dangled from them as tattered gar¬ments might hang. Under some a slow fire had been kindled, untilstrangulation came as a tardy mercy for relief. There were the bodiesof some children among the slain, and one beautiful woman, not yetattacked by the elements, seemed only asleep.” As the brigade rodeinto the silent street, the vultures flapped away and the carrion dogsbacked off, snarling. Hardened as they were to the sights of the Kan¬sas frontier and the rapine and slaughter of four years of war, themen of the Missouri Cavalry felt sick, some of them, and the air wasblue with profanity and revulsion as the riders jerked their horsessteady.Pity and horror swept over Shelby, but he ordered the columnthrough the village at full speed: the victims were beyond help, andto halt and give them decent burial might expose the brigade to at¬tack. As he rode beside Ben Elliott he said shortly, “If worst comesto worst, Colonel, keep one pistol ball for yourself.” Elliott, “thatgrim Saul who never smiled,” slapped his dragoon’s holster in agree¬ment. He had taken away the scalping knives of his Comanches beforesending them into battle, but his savages of the reservation wouldAcross the Sabinas255never have been guilty of the butcheries he had seen in this Mexicanvillage.The men were in a vicious and introspective mood, a new experi¬ence for them, as they rode on. They had seen nothing in this God¬forsaken country but treachery and sudden death. Plainly the Frenchdid not rule in Mexico. No one ruled in Mexico. As a civilized countryit was a nightmare; the very earth of Mexico cried out for an iron handto take over.The same thought occurred simultaneously to Jo Shelby and JohnEdwards, riding with Elliott at the head of the column. With 50,000men from over the border, this country could be had for the taking.Not for a Maximilian or a Juarez, but for the stricken South: thewhite people of the subjugated states who would welcome the chancethe flee from oppression. Once this country could be policed into asemblance of law and order, and the guerrillas hanged, the fertilelands of Mexico could create a Paradise for the Southern people. Letthe Yankees have their Black Republic. In Mexico there was land forall: not to be wrested from the wilderness, as in Kansas and the west¬ern states, but simply to be scratched with a hoe to produce everysort of agricultural wealth in abundance. That was it! Resettle Mex¬ico with the people of the South, and raise the Stars and Bars again—over the Palace of Chapultepec! Edwards’ brain reeled, and a wildlight came into his eyes as he rode.Magruder saw his expression, and mistook his emotion for horrorinspired by the sights they had left behind.“Never mind, John,” he said. “Today is the third of July. To¬morrow is the Fourth. Maybe we’ll see fireworks.”Edwards nodded. He was thinking of Maximilian, and the thronehe could not hold.Toward evening the brigade encountered two deserters from theFrench Foreign Legion at Monterrey. They were Austrians, sick ofa dog’s life in the Legion, and Texas-bound. Shelby questioned themas to the road ahead. They had crossed the Sabinas at the main ford,and they had not seen a living soul. After giving them food andbrandy, Shelby bade them good luck, and they tramped off. Thebrigade pitched camp where it was, and next morning Shelby sentD. A. Williams ahead with twenty men to reconnoitre. As Williamstrotted off with his detachment, Shelby called his officers together.256Mexico“The logical place for an ambush is beyond the Sabinas,” he said.“Williams has gone ahead to smoke them out. We shall have no peaceuntil we scatter them. According to those fellows who were takingFrench leave, there are fords in the river where the crossing is easyand where we can be shot down like dogs. I shall try none of them.When we have caught up with Williams again, we shall find our owncrossing, and when the bugle sounds, form your men in fours andfollow me. Our first object is to get across the river; after that weshall have to see.”It was simple cavalry strategy, of the kind that works well. JebStuart had used it superbly when he went on the Chambersburg raidin 1864, while all the North was watching. Stuart traveled homewith his hostages so far west of the fords of the Potomac that hewas in the Valley of Virginia before the enemy knew he had leftPennsylvania. Shelby did not know where the river might be crossed,but as always he relied on his intuition. He meant to cross at a seem¬ingly impassable point and strike the enemy in his flank, or in therear if possible. It was the oldest trick in his bag; he had used it togood advantage at Carthage, on his first day of battle, when he hadfrightened Sigel into running twenty miles to Sarcoxie with all ofhis artillery, and had almost got the famous Dutchman courtmartialed.Ten men would go ahead to draw the enemy’s fire when the riverwas reached; and Shelby called for volunteers. So many respondedthat lots were drawn, and those who drew the short straws wereMcDougall, Maurice Langhorne, James Wood, George Winship, RasWoods, James Kirtley, James Rudd, James Chiles, James Cundiff,and William Fell. Colonel Ben Elliott would command. The mainbody would follow him.The plan is set; every man understands it, and the march beginsagain. It is three o’clock of a hot Fourth of July afternoon, and thedust kicked up by the column settles in the throats of the men. Theyempty their canteens and clatter ahead toward the river.Williams has accomplished his mission when they catch up withhim again. He has spotted skirmishers in the dense underbrush onthe other side of the river. All his horsemen have to do is show them¬selves: shots from the opposite side ring out at once. Nobody ishit, but the volley has halted Williams. His orders were to uncoverthe ambush, not to attack it, and he has retreated beyond their rangeand out of sight to wait for Shelby.Across the Sabinas257But he has done more than find the enemy. He knows their num¬ber. On most of the four hundred battlefields of Missouri his earhas been trained to estimate the strength of the enemy by the volumeof his musketry; he knows that there must be eight hundred menover there as well as if he had counted their crouching forms. Theguerrilla force is nearly the equal of Shelby’s own.The column comes up through the yellow dust to the green lineof the river, and Shelby confers with Williams. Their conversationis brief.“You found them, it seems.”“Yes, General.”“How many?”“Eight hundred. Armed with muskets.”“Good. Take your place in the front ranks. Elliott goes ahead withten men. I shall lead the column.”To Elliott he gives the order to advance. “The sooner over, thesooner done,” he says. “Take the water as you find it, and ride straightforward.”Elliott’s ten plunge down the bank and into the stream, ten abreast.The Sabinas is a rushing mountain stream and its banks are slippery,uncertain shale. At this point, the current races past jagged pinnaclesof rock, upthrust through roiling white spume, and hurls itself down¬ward into a waterfall some distance to the left. It is a rough cross¬ing, full of precipices and quicksands, and a sensible man would rideon here, even without the menace of hidden rifles on the other side.The Mexicans and Indians, their eyes on the ford, do not see El¬liott’s ten at first, struggling through the deep water. By the timethe commotion has attracted the attention of skirmishers in the woods,and a few scattered shots have been fired, they have gained the otherside and scrambled onto a path leading into the brush. A solid blastof musketry now engulfs them, but the Americans ride into the brushwith sabres swinging. Not a pistol shot is fired.Shrieks from the sabred Mexicans echo through the Valley of theSabinas, to the last outpost of the guerrilla camp. There is a turbulencein the woods as the guerrillas mass to meet the attack. Shelby’s menare in the river, their horses churning wildly as they strain their headsfor shore. A new volley of musketry breaks out, sweeping the ter¬rain where Elliott’s men are at work. For a moment there is such aheavy powder pall on the bank that the men in the river cannot see258Mexicowhat is happening to Elliott, but they have no time to speculate. Thediversion has not been complete; a murderous fire is suddenly turnedon the river, and a dozen saddles are emptied before the men’s horsesgain the bank, and the bodies are carried away to the falls. Othersare wounded, but manage to gain the shore safely, and are helped bytheir comrades; but the entire brigade is over now and the guerrillasare flanked. There is a path leading into the brasada; it is the onlyescape route of the guerrillas, and it is closed now. A bugle soundsin Shelby’s ranks and the brigade swarms into battle formation oneither side of the path. Revolvers crash as the attack is mounted.Two-handed now, with sabre and pistol, they ride down the enemy.Edwards says that “the attack was a hurricane.” 1 The surprisehad been almost complete, and the result was a massacre. Two hun¬dred bandits were killed, and the rest vanished into the landscape.The Southerners found themselves suddenly alone in the guerrillacamp, except for the dead and wounded and the drifting clouds ofrevolver smoke. Remembering the villagers flayed alive and the chil¬dren dead in their mother’s arms, the Americans took no prisoners.Shelby’s casualties were thirty-seven wounded and nineteen dead.He paid a high price, but he got across the river safely and routed aforce equal to his own; he assured the safety of his march to Mon¬terrey, and did it with revolvers and sabres alone. If he had crossedthe river by the ford, his command would have been butchered.Elliott’s volunteers suffered the greatest number of casualties thoughnone were killed. He himself was badly wounded, and had to bedragged from beneath his horse. Cundiff had a flesh wound in hisleft arm, not serious; Winship and McDougall were down, uncon¬scious, and bleeding badly; Fell had a musket ball in his thigh; andJim Wood’s left wrist was shattered, but he had stayed in the fight,with his bridle between his teeth, using his right hand to fire his re¬volver until it was empty.The mad Englishman, he of the locomotives, was mortally hurt.Riding at the side of Shelby and Edwards, he had his horse killedunder him, but seized another and caught up with them again. Amusket ball struck his ankle and split his leg bone to the knee, butstill he drove ahead, firing his revolver. Fifty paces farther on, an¬other ball, striking him in the chest, knocked him from the saddle andput him out of the fight.Across the Sabinas259Now he is lying on a soft bed of blankets as Dr. Tisdale examineshim, blood welling from a great blotch across his chest. He is donefor, but he seems to care less for that than for something else. In aracked voice he asks if anyone can speak French.Governor Reynolds can. He kneels beside the dying man, whowhispers something in his ear.“Get a pencil and paper,” Reynolds says, and Major Edwards sup¬plies it. “Why is he speaking French?” asks Edwards.“He doesn’t want the others to understand him,” says Reynolds.The Englishman begins to speak, though with difficulty. It was nearlysunset when the guerrillas fled. Now it is getting dark. Reynoldswrites rapidly.The story was the usual sordid one, and straight out of a dimenovel: he was a ticket-of-leave man, cashiered from the army forkilling a brother officer in a duel, a wanderer over the face of theearth, disowned by country and kin; he did not want to die name¬less and unknown, in a no man’s land of the Mexican desert. He de¬sired the British minister at Mexico City to notify his parents thathe had died a brave man.The strange and pitiful part of the story is that it may even havebeen true. There is an old saying that you cannot burlesque life. Inthis case, the only man who would ever know whether the story wastrue or not would be Sir James Scarlett, the British minister (wonder¬ful name!). His would be the responsibility of communicating withthe dead Englishman’s parents, after duly receiving the message fromthe hands of Governor Reynolds in Mexico City.One may read the dying man’s last words, a good five hundred ofthem, on page 35 of Major Edwards’ book, but they are not amongthe best of Edwards, and he might have done better if he had hadmore original material to work with, or if he had understood French.The men of the Iron Brigade buried the Englishman tenderly, rev¬erently, and another cross was added to the forest of crosses inMexico.Most of the wounded were up and around in a few days, althoughweak and sore. Shelby decided to break camp and move on, eventhough it would be necessary to improvise horse-borne litters for thosewho could not walk or ride. It would not be practical to send themback to Piedras Negras and the border, for the countryside was still2 6o Mexicoinfested with guerrillas. Furthermore, not one of the disabled wishedto turn back.As the brigade kept on its way, the guerrillas, though disorganized,still made their presence felt by taking pot shots at the pickets, at¬tempting to stampede the horses, and firing muskets into the air atmidnight. The continual din and the unseen presence of their skulk¬ing companions began to get on the men’s nerves, especially sinceShelby would not permit them to go guerrilla-hunting in the thornycountryside at night. Prodded into a constant state of alertness, theygot no sleep, and their tempers grew short. Presently they began totalk of reprisals on the countryside.For four years Shelby had dealt ruthlessly with this sort of thing,and he was stern now. The time had come to exercise the authoritywhich had been voted him on the plains of Corsicana. He orderedthe column under arms and faced the men, the old wrath showingin his countenance. His eyes moved quickly over the line, pickingout the malcontents. To them he addressed the ultimatum.“There are some signs among you of bad discipline,” he said, “andI have called you out that you may be told of it. What have you tocomplain about? That there are those who follow on your track tokill you? Very well, complain of them if you choose, and fight themto your heart’s content, but lift not a single hand against the Mex¬icans who are at home and non-combatants. We are invaders, it istrue; but we are not murderers. Those who are shall not follow me.He who robs, who insults women, who oppresses the unarmed andaged, is an outcast to the good fellowship of this command, and uponhim a soldier’s work will be done. Fie will be driven forth out ofthis camp as an enemy to us all.”In guerrilla country, they knew what that meant.Shelby paused. Then, to show in what affection he held them, hesaid, “Hereafter, be as you have ever been, brave and true and hon¬orable.”There was no more mutiny.The marches became shorter and the bivouacs anything but agree¬able. They were in mountain country now, with altitude increasing atevery step, and the thin air had a razor edge to the lungs. Althoughthe rainy season had not set in, some chill rain fell, and both menand horses suffered. The horses, unused to the higher altitude, didAcross the Sabinas261not acclimatize themselves rapidly. They began snuffling and devel¬oping a high fever. Dr. John Tisdale,2 whose fifty years rested on himas lightly as “the night air in the mountains of San Juan Aguilar,”turned veterinarian and ordered that the animals be swathed in moun¬tains of blankets, and as the sweat poured out he poured the whiskeyin. When the fever broke, the horses were given a few days to con¬valesce and enjoy such rocky pasture as they could find, while themen sat hunched in their overcoats about the fires, and did not evenbother to hunt small game. Shelby frowned on it anyway, as theguerrillas seemed to be quiet, and he did not wish to stir them up.For the time being he did not even send out scouting parties.The guerrillas had not given up, however. The gringos had silverin their pockets, a thousand serviceable horses, each man an Enfieldor Sharpe’s rifle, shiny new Navy or dragoon pistols for which aMexican would sell his soul, and untold wealth of other descriptionin their saddle bags. To loot their camp would be second only tolooting Mexico City, and the two leaders of the bandits in this neigh¬borhood, Juan Anselmo and Antonio Flores, lay awake thinking ofit at night, and dreamed feverishly of it when they slept. Anselmowas a renegade priest and Flores a young Cuban who had sold hissister to a wealthy hacendado and turned robber when the money wasspent.Two days’ journey from Lampazos, on the other side of the Pasode Palmas, the brigade halted for the night in a palm grove in thepass. It was a chilly night, but moonlight, and through the two spursof the mountain range which flanked the pass, the men could see theplain, like a bay of shining silver, stretching away along the highroadto the town. On one side of the road, under the frosty moon, theycould see a casual cemetery of white wooden crosses, the inevitablecrosses that dotted all the roads of Mexico they had traversed. Onecould count the deeds of violence in Mexico, says Major Edwards,by the number of crosses which were everywhere.With this grim reminder of mortality in front of him, Shelby scat¬tered his sentinels a little wider than usual that night as the menbedded down. By midnight, after the fires were out and a mist hadreplaced the moonlight, a pistol shot rang out. Shelby lifted himselfup in his blankets and roused John Thrailkill, the old guerrilla, whoshared his outdoor sleeping quarters.“Who has the post at the mouth of the pass?” he asked Thrailkill.262Mexico“Joe Macey,” said ThrailkilL“Something’s up,” said Shelby. “Joe Macey never fired at a shadowin his life.”He sat upright in the blankets, and the two men listened, as min¬utes went by, but there were no more sounds.“Either hit the-or scared the-out of him,” said Thrailkill,and rolled over again.As the silence continued, Shelby soon lay down again, and sleptinstantly, as he always did. An hour later he was awakened again,this time by a blinding flash, followed by the report of a volley ofmusketry. The whole camp struggled to their feet this time, cursingand stamping their feet as they shed their blankets.The volley had been fired by a party of Mexicans who had creptdown the side of the mountain to the edge of a stream and had takenpoint-blank aim at the camp. By a miracle, no one had been hit. Thevolley had passed over the heads of the men sleeping on the ground.Unclad, barefoot, and fighting mad, the brigade now surged for¬ward with revolver and sabre. Muskets crashed as they surged upthe mountainside in the cold darkness, and many went down, but therifle flashes served as a guide to the rest. And the Mexicans weretrapped—they had tethered their horses on the other side of the moun¬tain until they should return at leisure, after wiping out the gringocamp and gathering up the loot. No match for Shelby’s borderers,they went down before the revolver and sabre—those that did notflee. Sixty-nine of them were dead when the revolver smoke clearedand the sabres were dropped. Two prizes were among them—the deadbodies of Anselmo and Flores, the guerrilla chieftains. Eleven Amer¬icans were dead, too, and seventeen wounded. But the band that hadtried to trap them on the Sabinas was wiped out.Lampazos was another Piedras Negras, a sizable village on the plainat the foot of the San Juan Range, and exactly half way to Mon¬terrey. Shelby had learned his lesson at Piedras Negras, and hemarched his brigade through the town without a halt until he reacheda camp site beyond the suburbs.Lampazos was enjoying a feast day as the bronzed strangers marchedthrough, and Shelby ordered the men confined to camp. His owneye had been caught by the swirl of skirts without petticoats, andthe low cut camisas of the laughing girls, as they marched throughAcross the Sabinas 263the celebration, and Shelby’s faithful biographer observes that he was“unwilling to trust his men to the perils of so much nakedness.”A large number of Shelby’s followers, however, were determinedto be exposed to such perils, and after guards had been posted for thenight, they managed to slip past them and back into town. The wineshops and the senoritas were waiting. Jealous lovers were waiting too,and three of the men soon wished that they had remained in camp.These three gay caballeros—Walker, Boswell, and Crockett—attendedthe fiesta and drank sizable quantities of red Catalan wine. As theywalked back through the streets in the moonlight, they saw a beauti¬ful, dark-haired Mexican girl standing in the doorway of a house.The men called out to her, and she answered with a laugh. This isnothing in a country where women look at men as boldly as menlook at women, but Crockett went up to her and laid a hand on hershoulder. He also asked for a kiss, and when it was refused, attemptedto take it. In doing so, the girl’s rebosa, the garment which serves inMexico for both shawl and brassiere, fell away, exposing her bosom.As Crockett attempted to seize her, the girl gave a high-pitchedfeminine cry of distress, which brought half a dozen Mexican gal¬lants flying. The three Americans were unarmed, or there would havebeen a repetition of the affair at Piedras Negras; as it was, they didnot make their escape until Boswell had been stabbed three times andWalker had been shot through both cheeks and the tongue. Crockett,the cause of it all, was unhurt.The Mexicans did not pursue them. Fearing reprisals at the handsof the gringos’ comrades, they vanished into the shadows of Lam-pazos. One young Mexican who had taken no part in the melee, buthad watched the affair from the sidelines, came boldly up to Crock¬ett, announced that he was the girl’s brother, and demanded satis¬faction. Crockett now was interested only in getting his woundedcompanions back to the camp, and he merely snarled at the Mexicanto make himself scarce. The Mexican followed them to the camp, hiseyes smoldering.The sound of the shots had roused Shelby and the rest of the bri¬gade, but Shelby checked a torrent of profanity when he saw howbadly two of them were wounded—Boswell slashed from throat towaist and Walker dumb from the wound in his tongue, the lowerhalf of his face smeared with blood. Shelby summoned Dr. Tisdalewith a roar. Then he saw the Mexican.264Mexico“What do you want?” he asked.The Mexican pointed to Crockett. “This man has outraged mysister,” he said. “I demand satisfaction.”Shelby turned on Crockett. “Is this true?” he asked.Crockett shook his head. “I meant no harm to the girl,” he said.“I had a few drinks, and I put my arm around her.”“What business had you to touch her at all?” demanded Shelby.“How many times must I tell you that the man who does such thingsis no follower of mine? You will give her brother satisfaction.”“Very well,” said Crockett sullenly. “Somebody give me a gun.”“No, no, senor!” said the Mexican. “Not the gun. The knife. Isthe American afraid of the knife?”“He has the choice of weapons,” said Shelby, but Crockett growledlike an animal and waved protocol aside.“Somebody give me a knife,” he said.A bowie knife was handed him, and the Mexican produced a bladeof his own.“All right,” said Shelby, “I tolerate this, but only according tothe rules. At first blood, the encounter is over.”Both men nodded, and Shelby gave the signal. The Mexican struckfirst, a wild thrust aimed at Crockett’s ribs. Crockett fended off theblow with only a scratch on his forearm. Then he struck downward,through the Mexican’s shoulder, burying the blade some inches deep.The man shuddered, choked, and fell backward into the grass, withthe knife protruding from his chest cavity like a cross.No need for Dr. Tisdale here. Cover him up, and send a litter backinto the village, and listen for a woman’s scream.22. JeanningrosIn an editorial written in 1887, Major Edwards said, “First andlast, forty thousand French soldiers were operating in Mexico atone time, to say nothing of the native forces enlisted in the cause ofMaximilian, and yet the very best they could do was hold the townswhile the Juaristas held the country. All they ever owned, or occu-Jeanningros 265pied, or controlled, or felt sa% in, was the extent of the territorywhich their cannon covered.’’1Colonel Jeanningros, soon to be General Jeanningros, held Monter¬rey with five thousand French and Mexican troops, including the fourregiments of the Foreign Legion, the Third French Zouaves, and tworegiments of the Imperial Mexican Army; he was Maximilian’s frontline of defense against Juarez and the Republicans in the northerntier of states. In the Legion, which was composed of the finest cut¬throats of four continents, he had tough, professional soldiers whocould match the Mexican guerrillas in ferocity: Germans, Austrians,Americans, English, Irish, Arabs, Turks, Negroes, Belgians, and Swiss.2In the Third Zouaves he had one of the crack regiments of the FrenchArmy, which was cut to pieces and passed away from service atGravelotte in 1870. In the Mexican Imperial regiments he had mer¬cenaries of uncertain dependability, whose loyalty was assured bythe presence of the Legion and the Zouaves.Jeanningros was a career soldier who had been in the French Armyfor thirty years and looked it. He was addicted to absinthe and hisexcesses in the name of “discipline” had kept him from promotionafter promotion, though he would soon be a brigadier; and the knowl¬edge that he had missed a marshal’s baton rankled, driving him toeven greater extremes of cruelty. The execution wall at Monterreywas stained with the life blood of French soldiers who had been shotfor guardhouse offenses; and Jeanningros had chosen, as his righthand, another sadist, Colonel Achille Dupin of the contra-guerrillas,a madman who cut off the hands of male Mexicans so that theymight not be tempted to bear arms against the Emperor, and hangedan unoffending hacendado because it was a “pity” that a tree in theman’s yard had never borne fruit. He had been cashiered once, thoughsubsequently restored to his rank, for his conduct as a looter and mur¬derer in the Peking campaign; and he had “parodied the speech ofWarren Hastings” at his trial, sneering contemptuously at the court-martial, “When I saw mountains of gold and precious stones piled uparound me, and when I think of the paltry handfuls taken away, byGod, Mr. President, I am astonished at my own moderation.”This was the pair waiting for Shelby and the Iron Brigade at Mon¬terrey. Jeanningros had been informed accurately of Shelby’s move¬ments ever since he crossed the Rio Grande. Agents had brought him266Mexicothe news of the sale of the Confederate artillery to the Juaristas, andit was on receipt of this news that he had promised to hang them all.He was not under any misapprehension as to the fighting qualities ofthe Confederate soldier, however, having watched the progress ofthe Civil War with interest from south of the border, and he coun¬seled restraint when Dupin wished to meet the brigade head-on withhis contra-guerrillas.“Wait a while,” he said to Dupin. “We must catch them beforewe hang them.”Meanwhile Shelby had marched to within a mile of Monterrey, insight of the tricolor waving over the barracks. He pitched camp, fedhis horses, and threw out a picket line. Comfortably established, heasked Major Edwards to write a communication to Jeanningros andGovernor Reynolds to put it into French; John Thrailkill and RaineyMcKinney would carry it in under a flag of truce.The message read: “General. I have the honor to report that Iam within one mile of your command. Preferring exile to surrender,I have left my own country to seek service in that held by His Im¬perial Majesty, the Emperor Maximilian. Shall it be peace or warbetween us? If the former, with your permission, I shall enter yourlines at once, claiming at your hands the courtesy due from onesoldier to another. If the latter, I propose to attack you immediately.Respectfully, Jos. O. Shelby.”As Thrailkill and McKinney rode into the square, a bugle sounded,and the garrison turned out, but the white flag was respected. Themessengers were conducted to Jeanningros, who received them notunfavorably. He read the message, as Dupin looked on. Then hesmiled. The message had had the effect which Shelby had intendedthat it should. Ele had suspected that the Frenchman would appre¬ciate a nose-thumbing gesture; Jeanningros did.“Tell your general to march in immediately,” he roared to Thrail¬kill and McKinney. “By God, he is the only soldier yet that hascome out of Yankeedom. The Emperor will bid him welcome! Tellhim he is my guest, he and the members of his staff. Tell him to comein!”A smile hovered over Thrailkill’s childlike guerrilla face, and heglanced at McKinney. Old Jo had done it again. They saluted smartlyand went back to their horses.It was an exultant Shelby, surrounded by his brilliant “cabinet ofJeanningros 267Confederates”—Magruder, Reynolds, and others—who heard the mes¬sage which Thrailkill delivered. They had come a long way to thegarrison of Monterrey, and they had fought literally for every inchof the way, but it was over now—the Emperor’s commander was theirfriend and colleague—and Shelby’s optimism knew no bounds. Theyhad done right, he pointed out, to choose the Empire. Major Edwardsproposed a toast—he never lacked the excuse—to Maximilian and Car-lota. The glasses were handed around.“To king and queen and countryNeither Edwards nor Shelby had forgotten that they were knightserrant, and that their mission was to rescue a lady fair.If it all seems ridiculous now—the speech, the posturings, and theabsurd code of honor—it must be remembered that the Southerner ofthe mid-nineteenth century is a breed as extinct as that of Quijoteand Sancho Panza; he was a curious, but by no means unadmirable,bundle of characteristics which were typical of an America that hasvanished—Mark Twain’s America. Twain poked gentle fun at it, andit vanished, but Twain himself spoke its language with a robust bel¬low when he wanted to, and no man spoke it better, for he was aMissourian. And the Missourian was the Southerner of the West. Heloved grand gestures and he loved to make a speech—if you had askedMajor Edwards the time of day he would have told you how tomake a watch—and he was sometimes hard to get along with, butbasically he was a very human fellow, a man of good will, who be¬lieved that life could be glorious; and sometimes it was. And whenthe chips were down, he proved that he was one of the best soldiersin the world, that he could live without food and almost withoutwater, and that he feared nothing in this world or the next.3 Hehimself would have been the first to admit that his strength was asthe strength of ten, because his heart was pure.Colonel Jeanningros outdid himself in the entertainment of hisguests. They were assigned officer’s quarters, and Jeanningros him¬self led them into the banquet hall for dinner, where a table hadbeen set worthy of the representative of a great monarch, LouisNapoleon, and a soon-to-be brigadier of France. He was a superbhost, and “emphatic in all his declarations.” The talk was soldier talk,and turned on the Civil War, of course, which Jeanningros discussedintelligently, and on the campaigns of Louis Napoleon in which hehad served, in the Crimea, in Italy—where Maximilian had won a268 Mexicoregency—in Algeria, and in China in i860, when the Allies had openedup the Treaty Ports.The eyes of both Jeanningros and the silver-bearded, bronzed Dupinlit up with pleasure when they spoke of the Chinese Treaty Portsand of Pekin. Pekin! Ah, messieurs, there the greatest loot in historytook place, the loot of the Imperial Summer Palace at Pekin!As Jeanningros waxed eloquent, Shelby and his company foundthemselves in imagination outside the gate of a fairyland palace, thesummer and autumn palace of the Chinese Emperor twelves milesfrom Pekin, in the splendid autumn of September, i860—with theBritish and French caissons of the Joint Allied Forces rumbling pastits undefended walls....... Figure to yourselves, messieurs, a Chinese palace fashioned afterthe Palace of Versailles, and laid out on the exact measurements ofVersailles, by Jesuit priests from France, for a Chinese Emperor whowanted nothing but the best. In i860 we were on our way, with theBritish, to the capital city of Pekin, to force the Emperor to openthe Treaty Ports, in accordance with his word; but there had beenChinese treachery before we reached Pekin, and when we reachedthe Imperial Summer Palace, where great dragons gaily switched theirthree-meter tails in the air to support the roofs of the pagodas, wedecided to have a look at the residence of the Emperor.... The Emperor had left his palace in a hurry, not bothering evento lock the doors behind him, or to carry anything away. In thispalace of his were all the art and treasures of the vast Chinese Empire,the most exquisite products of uncounted generations of artists, gemcutters, and gold and silversmiths; all of the tribute which fear oradmiration had drawn from the great and humble; all the gifts ofthe Kings and Emperors of Europe; all the bric-a-brac and curiositiespresented by merchants and ship captains wishing to do business inChina....... It was like a one-franc bazaar, messieurs, in which every item,instead of being worth nineteen cents, was worth $19,000. In theapartment of the Empress alone there was enough to dress from headto foot ten thousand princesses of the Arabian Nights, so that itwould be impossible for the Caliph of Bagdad, a judge of such mat¬ters, to find occasion for changing the position of a single pin or toalter a single arrangement. All is of silk, satin, damask, fur, with em¬broideries sometimes as delicate as spider’s webs, sometimes as heavyJeanningros 269as those on a bishop’s cope; it is a brilliant display of birds, butterflies,and flowers fresher than those in the sun, with diamond dewdrops intheir perfumed calyxes....... Our troops staggered out of the apartments of the Empress halfsmothered in the folds of brocade and pieces of silk; others stuffedrubies, sapphires, pearls, and jewelry into their pockets and their hats.Silks and fabrics worth twenty millions were trampled into the mud;engraved ivories were ground into the earth by the wheels of wagonsand caissons; soldiers lighted their pipes with priceless and beautifulvellum manuscripts.... That night was a nightmare in camp. It was like a New Year’sEve celebration in Bedlam. The French soldier, messieurs, is passion¬ately fond of clocks and mechanical toys, and each soldier had hismechanical bird, his music box, his monkey, his trumpeter, or his rab¬bit. The night was hideous with the caterwauling of rabbits playingtambourines, cuckoos screeching, mechanical musicians flutingsweetly, music boxes emitting waltzes and quadrilles, cocks crowing,clarionets blaring, horns and cornets sounding, and soldiers guffawingtheir heads off....The entranced Shelby nodded. Soldiers were the same the worldover. “What a place to loot!” he said.“So said Blucher of London,” commented Jeanningros. “The loot¬ing took three days, although some of us,” and he looked significantlyin the direction of Dupin, “were courtmartialed. However, the Em¬peror had left his palace unlocked, and the Chinese of the countrysidehad already attempted to set fire to it in order that what they hadstolen should not be discovered. It was better for the Allies to lootit. Those Chinese would have cabbaged everything.” 4As the cigars and brandy were passed, Shelby took advantage of thegenial frame of mind of his host to ask the question that was in hismind. “His Majesty the Emperor Maximilian, what kind of man ishe, Colonel Jeanningros?”“Ah, the Austrian,” said Jeanningros. “You should see him to un¬derstand him. More of a scholar than a king, good at botany, a poeton occasion, a traveler who gathers curiosities and writes books, asaint over his wine and a sinner among his cigars, in love with hiswife, believing in destiny more than in drilled battalions, good Span¬iard in all but deceit and treachery; honest, earnest, tender-hearted andsincere. His faith in the liars who surround him is too strong, and270Mexicohis soul too pure for the deeds that must be done. He cannot kill aswe Frenchmen do. He knows nothing of diplomacy. In a nation ofthieves and cutthroats he goes devoutly to mass, endows hospitals, sayshis prayers and sleeps a good man’s sleep in the Palace of Chapultepec.Bah! His days are numbered, nor can all the power of France keephis crown upon his head, if indeed it can keep that head upon hisshoulders.Jeanningros checked himself abruptly. He had said too much.“Has he the confidence of Bazaine?” asked General Clark.“The Marshal, you mean?” repeated Jeanningros. “Oh ho! TheMarshal keeps his own counsel. Besides, I have not seen the Marshalsince coming northward.” He smiled, and changed the subject. “Haveyou journeyed far, General Clark?”Clark smiled in return. He realized that the subject was closed.He said that he had journeyed from Texas, and hoped to continueas far as Mexico City.“Ah, Mexico City! It is not too unlike Paris,” said Jeanningros,“save for the great cows at court, who would never be permitted asladies-in-waiting at Versailles.”It was daybreak before the party broke up—the Americans to sleep,Jeanningros to sign a death warrant.2 3. Parras and EncarnacionShelby seldom had need for sleep when there was anything impor¬tant afoot, and as he walked about in the dazzling morning sun¬shine of Monterrey, his head clearing of the champagne and thebrandy, he thought more and more of Jeanningros’s contemptuous as¬sertion that not all the power of France could keep Maximilian on histhrone. This was precisely his own opinion. If Maximilian was to main¬tain himself, he must have an army other than French, and he, Shelby,could supply it. The answer to the problem was as simple as that. Itwas an uncomplicated solution of the kind that appealed to Shelby,and he presented himself to Jeanningros again as soon as the French¬man was available.“I don’t know what you think of things here, Colonel,” he said,Parras and Encarnacion271“or what the future has in store for the Empire, but one thing iscertain and I shall tell you the plain truth. The Federal governmenthas no love for you French or your French occupation of Mexico.If diplomacy can’t get you out, infantry divisions will. I left a largearmy concentrating on the banks of the Rio Grande and all the facesof the men were looking straight forward into Mexico. Will Francefight? I think not; if your Emperor had meant to be serious in thisthing he would have formed an alliance with Jefferson Davis longago. Now it is too late. Nevertheless, if you will give me a port as abasis of operations, I can organize an American force capable of keep¬ing Maximilian on his throne, composed of men who would be de¬lighted to fight Yankees again. If left discretionary with me, that portshall be either Guaymas or Mazatlan, on the Pacific coast. The Cali¬fornians love adventure, and many leaders among them have alreadysent me messengers with overtures. I am not informed as to the wishesof the Emperor; but the French cannot remain and he cannot ruleover Mexicans with Mexicans. The plan I propose is his only hope.You know Bazaine better than I do. What would Bazaine say to allthis?”Jeanningros was equally frank. “Bazaine would say that he is dailyexpecting orders from Louis Napoleon to reduce the size of theFrench force in Mexico, with the eventual expectation of getting outof the country entirely. That is, he would say so if he were frank.There is no love lost between Bazaine and Maximilian, but I do notthink that he would be adverse to employment of Americans as sol¬diers of the Empire.”“I have your permission, then?”“You have my full permission to march to the Pacific, to Guaymasor Mazatlan, or wherever you choose, and to take whatever stepsyou deem necessary to recruit an army for the Empire.” Jeanningrosrose and extended his hand.Shelby shook his hand, and saluted. “Thank you, Colonel Jeannin¬gros. And again, the thanks of my officers for your hospitality.”“It was for my own pleasure,” said Jeanningros. “Good luck, andau revoirTThe brigade camped that night on the field of Buena Vista, whereSoutherners and Northerners had last fought as comrades in 47. Itwas a beautiful view indeed, with a moon as big as a tent-leaf palmshining down on the field of Mars, and the sierras mist-hung in the272Mexicodistance. For Magruder it was a return to the scene of earlier glory.He had been here in ’47, and to the younger men, veterans of anotherand bloodier war, he pointed out familiar scenes.Here the left of the American Army had rested; there Bragg’s bat¬tery crouched in the mesquite ambush; here Santa Anna had sacri¬ficed the best blood of his men in a vain attempt to hold the highwayto Saltillo; here the Lancers charged in scarlet and gold; there theMexicans broke and fled into a ravine, with Hindman and ColonelJefferson Davis in hot pursuit. Shelby’s yellow-haired borderers lis¬tened respectfully, in the patient manner of youth toward age, andShelby in his tent studied a map of the road to Parras, where the nextFrench garrison lay.The clouds which had hung about the mountains of Buena Vistawere rainfilled, and as Shelby’s men clanked along the broad highwaywestward, an inundation like that of the march from Stone Pointpoured out of the sky. The rainy season had begun with a vengeance.Just beyond Saltillo Shelby pitched camp in a canyon which theheavens seemed bent on turning into a river. Watch fires went out,sleep was impossible, and the wind howled down the canyon in aprivate war of its own with the rain. Pipes would not stay lit, and theplainsmen grumbled through the night as they waited for the moun¬tain dawn.No amount of bad weather ever caused Shelby to relax his ruleof stationing a picket guard, and he sent four men to the mouth ofthe canyon, Dick Collins, James Kirtley, George Winship, and JamesMeadow—four of the toughest soldiers ever to draw a bead. They hadSharpe’s carbines which they had picked up in Monterrey and theysettled down for a night in the rain with the rifles thrust into theirgreatcoats. The Confederate soldier, when he was not lousy, was wet,and in the Missouri and Arkansas campaigns he had usually beenboth; tonight’s bivouac was nothing more nor less than what he wasused to.Collins, the old battery commander, was huddled under the lee ofa boulder, wide awake and soggy, and as the first light showed abovethe dark jaws of the canyon he saw two dark objects move. Instantlyhe was on his feet, the carbine moving like a finger.Guerrillas were moving about them in the gloom, and the four wereambushed. Musketry rang out in the half light, and all four repliedParras and Encarnacion273with their Sharpe’s, but they were shooting at phantoms and beforethey could reload, the invisible foe caught them with a volley. Col¬lins took a ragged wound in the shoulder, Kirtley was hit in the leftarm, and Meadow and Winship were grazed. The wind was still blow¬ing furiously and the rain was still pelting the camp as the sharpnotes of the bugle sounded. The men of the brigade were fully awake,although some of them were hatless and bootless as they struggledout of their blankets. They ran toward the sound of the shots, but asthey did so, rifle fire broke out in their rear. The camp was beingattacked from two sides and they could see the moving forms of theMexicans plainly.This was work for the revolver and sabre, and they threw downtheir carbines and fanned out in every direction. At such close quar¬ters their casualties were fearful. Slayback and Cundiff held the postin the rear while Shelby pressed ahead to the picket line a quarterof a mile away. He left Slayback and Cundiff fighting desperatelywith a detachment of twelve men, nine of whom were killed orwounded; Jim Chiles had a sudden thought for the horses and withhalf a dozen men pressed in that direction. Langhorne and the Kritzerbrothers, Martin and John, detailed to guard the mounts, mistookthem for guerrillas and opened fire. George Hall’s overcoat suffereda shredded collar and he let out a profane yell of self-identification,which halted the shots; Hall’s shout gave Jake Connor an idea andhe lifted his powerful voice in song, a song they had heard him leadon the march to a hundred prairie battles. “Tramp, tramp, tramp, theboys are marching/”It was the Confederate soldier’s song—next to “Dixie”—and severalguerrillas went to purgatory with the mad gringo hymn ringing intheir ears. They were driven off at last; the close, reckless fightingsaved the camp and scattered the desperadoes back to the hills. WhenShelby was able to bring reinforcements for Slayback and Cundiff,it was all over. Edwards says that the brief, sharp fight in the canyonwas “the most persistent and bloody of the expedition.” He took agallant part in it himself, but no modern reader, turning the mustyleaves of his account, would ever know it. Edwards wrote more thana thousand pages on the campaigns in which he served as Shelby’sshadow, but as far as the reader can tell, he might have been writingof the Punic wars; not once is his own name mentioned.It was a sobered brigade which marched on in the rain to theD274MexicoFrench stronghold of Parras. More than fifty of their comrades weredead, in the little more than a month since they had crossed the RioGrande, and more than twice as many had been wounded, somebadly. But neither blood nor rain could dampen the lust for life ofthe Iron Brigade. The plumes and the lances and the gilded ease werethere—they were sure of that—just over the horizon at Parras, in theservice of the Emperor. They had seen the proof at Monterrey, whereAlgerines in turbans and Zouaves in baggy trousers swaggered in thesun and preened themselves before the pretty Mexican girls. Soonit would be their turn for a season in the sun.Colonel Depreuil of the French garrison at Parras was another ofthe officers of Louis Napoleon’s army who was an unwilling exilefrom the boulevards of Paris. He commanded the Fifty-SecondFrench Regiment of the Line at Parras, and Parras was the key toSonora and Chihuahua, from which the forces of Juarez had beenscattered. Depreuil’s vice was brandy, and the monotony of this Mex¬ican outpost afforded him an added excuse to indulge it. He was inmany respects a fine soldier, but tyrannical and overbearing, and givento the easy fury of the alcoholic. He had been enraged by the newsthat the Confederates were taking refuge south of the Rio Grande,and he had sent word to Bazaine that they were robbers and plunder¬ers who would involve the French in trouble with the United Statestroops on the border.Bazaine agreed with him. Furthermore, he had heard of Shelby’smarch toward Sonora, and he sent a message which was lying onDepreuil’s desk when Shelby arrived. Bazaine ordered that their marchwas to be arrested and that if they refused to return to their owncountry they were to report to him in Mexico City at once. TheFrench commander at Parras was to give them no alternative.Depreuil was rereading this message with some degree of satisfac¬tion when Shelby and his officers entered, confident of a cordialreception. The Frenchman did not bid him be seated, but Shelbythought nothing of that; he was in too good a mood to notice trifles.He did notice, however, that it was a little early in the day for thebarroom aroma which pervaded the place.“I have called, Colonel,” Shelby began, “for permission to con¬tinue my march to Sonora.”Parras and Encarnacion275“Such permission is impossible,” snapped Depreuil. “You will turnaside to Mexico.”“May I ask the reason for this sudden resolution?” asked Shelby.“General Jeanningros had no information to this effect when I lefthim the other day in Monterrey.”The reference to Jeanningros as a general provided the match forthe fuse of Depreuil’s temper.“Colonel Jeanningros does not command in all Mexico,” he roared,“and the devil fly away with you and your information. It is thesame old game you Americans are forever trying to play—plunder¬ing, plundering, plundering!” His voice rose to a shrill pitch. “Youshall not go to Sonora and you shall not stay here. And whateveryou do, you shall obey!”Shelby replaced his hat and spoke deliberately.“It seems I am mistaken,” he said. “I thought an American visitinga French soldier would find an officer and a gentleman. Ah well, onecannot always keep his hands clean; I wash mine of you. You are aslanderer and a coward.”Depreuil’s knuckles whitened on his sword; the Confederate offi¬cers clapped their hands on their revolver holsters. The French guardsoutside the door, hearing the inflection of the voices inside, steppedacross the doorsill with rifles at attention.Depreuil pointed to Shelby’s hat. “Remove that!” he ordered.Shelby replied that he removed his hat only to beauty and to God,and that in Depreuil he saw nothing that resembled either.The officers in the room thought for a moment that Depreuil wouldstrike him, but instead Depreuil, with trembling underlip, said to theguards: “Retire instantly!” When they had done so he walked aroundhis desk and faced the Rebels.“Get out,” he said, “before I outrage all hospitality and dishonoryou in my own house. You shall pay for this; you shall apologize.But now, get out.”“Never,” said Shelby, referring to the demand for an apology. Henodded to his officers, and they walked out together. They knewwhat was coming now.Shelby sought out Governor Reynolds and sent him to Depreuilwith his compliments. As the challenged party, Depreuil had thechoice of weapons, and he was an expert swordsman; Shelby, on thecontrary, still had a stiff right arm where the minie ball had coursed27 6Mexicodownward from his elbow. He was willing to fight Depreuil withthe sword but when Governor Reynolds pointed out to DepreuilShelby’s disability, the latter agreed to pistols. The Frenchman, infact, was as agreeable to Governor Reynolds as he had been disagree¬able to Shelby. He was by no means sober but he had a code of hisown, and he and Reynolds chatted for some little time. Satisfied thatShelby would blow Depreuil to Kingdom Come, now that the wea¬pons were pistols, Reynolds was not too discouraged over Bazaine’smessage; it might be the best thing, after all, for Shelby to see theEmperor. Depreuil couldn’t say as to the Emperor. Privately, how¬ever, he could have said as to Bazaine: The old goat had made up hismind, or perhaps Louis Napoleon had made it up for him, on thesubject of dealing with Confederates.The projected duel never took place.At ten o’clock that night, amid a clattering of sabres and gallop¬ing of horses, Jeanningros rode into Parras on an inspection tour ofthe entire northern line of outposts, accompanied by four regimentsof Chasseurs d’Afrique, and he found Depreuil in a regrettable con¬dition. He also heard, in no time, that Depreuil had insulted his friendShelby and that a duel was scheduled in a few hours. Now wearingthe epaulets of a brigadier, Jeanningros placed Depreuil under arrest,a violation of which would cost him his life, and sent for Shelby. InJeanningros’s presence Depreuil, sobered now, apologized freely andfrankly; by one of those coincidences with which Shelby’s career wasfilled, he was to save Depreuil’s life at the hands of the guerrillas ayear later. But all the sweetness and light which obtained in Parrasdid not alter the fact of Bazaine’s order. They would march now toMexico City to see the Emperor Maximilian.The katydids in the bearded cactus were singing the end of sum¬mer as Jim Wood and Yandell Blackwell took their turn at picketduty beyond the camp, the first night out from Parras. The fire hadgone out, the soldiers slept, and the earth smelt sweet with grass.Yandell Blackwell’s eyes caught the sight of something like a flagwaving to and fro not fifty yards away. His carbine snapped to at¬tention as a moving figure approached, and he saw that the flag wasa blanket, held aloft on a stick like a flag of truce.“Who lives?” he shouted in Spanish.The bearer of the flag came into plain view. He was a MexicanIndian, and he took off his hat.Parras and Encarnacion277“Hold, amigoT he said. “You are the Americans?”“Yes,” said Blackwell shortly. He had developed an unneighborlydislike for Mexicans in the last month.“I come to ask you a question. Do you know the hacienda ofEncarnacion?”“No,” said Blackwell, still shortly.“What about it?” asked Jim Wood.The Mexican crossed himself, being about to speak of the devil.Encarnacion, it seemed, was a plantation with royal stables, and acresof corral, with abounding water, long rows of male and female slavecabins, with a veritable Don for an owner, who had music, singingmaidens, and pillars of silver dollars. He was Luis Enrico Rodriguez,a Spaniard born and patron saint of all the robbers who lived in theneighboring mountains. A man in league with the devil himself;otherwise his passionate life would have been a brief one at the handsof the French. Their hands had never been laid upon him. Not eventhe contra-guerrillas had penetrated his mountain fastnesses.“If you mean the hacienda is a good place to loot, muchachoWoodsaid, “you may be right, but you’re barking up the wrong tree. TheFrench cut off the hands of looters, but General Shelby cuts off theirheads and boils them in oil.”“No, senor,” said the Mexican. “I am not a robber. Rodriguez isthe robber. He has robbed me. Therefore I have come to you. Thename and fame of the Americans has spread through this country,as a terror to such as Rodriguez. What will you say that he holdscaptive an American woman, young and beautiful, against her will?”“What’s that?” said Yandell Blackwell. He looked at Jim Wood.“Say on,” said Jim Wood. “Are you sure you’re telling the truth,bub?”“As the Virgin is true, senor,” said the Mexican. He launched intohis story, which amounted to this: years ago a California prospectorhad drifted into the Sonora hills looking for gold, and married awoman of one of the local tribes. They had a daughter, who despiteher Indian mother was miy nibia, a golden-haired beauty with darkeyes. The prospector struck it rich; he sent his daughter to San Fran¬cisco to be educated. When she returned she was American, havingnothing of the mestizo about her save her coloring. Even her mother’slanguage was unknown to her. Rodriguez had looked upon her inGuaymas, and though he was a Spaniard, and rich, her father had278Mexicoforbidden him to woo her. The outcome was but natural; to a Span¬iard and a millionaire all things are possible, and Rodriguez seized thegirl and bore her away to his mountain fastness at Encarnacion. Butin order to do so, he had to shoot her father dead. To Rodriguez thiswas nothing; a bravo more or less. But his victory was an empty one.The girl was still in his power, but prayers of vengeance for hermurdered father still rose to her lips; she would have nothing to dowith Rodriguez, despite his magnificent hacienda and his ill-gottenwealth. So said the Mexican goatherd, wrapped in his blanket like amantle of truth.The Missourians looked at each other. They were thinking thesame thing. Old Jo would skin them if they meddled in anything likethis without his permission; but their duty was plain, and it seemed apleasant duty in prospect. Still, they had warning doubts; if anythingwent wrong a prison term behind stone Mexican walls would be theleast that could happen to them, and the wrath of Shelby might beeven worse. It was no time for larking around; but a beautiful Ameri¬can girl in distress, held prisoner by a fat hacendado who had murderedher father? They were Missourians, and whatever misgivings they hadwere brushed aside as unworthy.“Look here,” said Jim Wood to the goatherd. “How far is it tothis Encarnacion?”“By tomorrow night, senor, you will be there.”“All right. We’ll find out if you’re telling the truth. You’ll sleephere tonight, and tomorrow you’ll go with us and show us the way.”The Mexican muttered something in protest. Wood pointed hisrevolver at him. “Roll up in that blanket whenever you feel sleepy,”he said. “I don’t know how much English you understand, but youunderstand this, so muffle up your ears with that blanket.” The Indianshrugged, rolled out the blanket, and lit a cigarette, sitting crosslegged.When he had finished, he rolled over in the blanket.“You never know when the yellow snakes are asleep,” said Wood.“They never sleep,” said Blackwell. “What’s the girl’s name, did hesay?”“Inez Walker.”“Think we’d better speak to Old Jo?”“We’ll see how he’s feeling tomorrow.”“Pass the word for volunteers anyway.”“Think he’ll take it as calmly as he did at Lampazos?”Parras and Encarnacion279“That was a drunken brawl. This is attacking a peaceful hacienda.”“Not so peaceful with a murderer and kidnapper inside,” said JimWood. “Besides, the greaser says he’s a guerrilla.”“Maybe we’d better do it our own way,” said Yandell Blackwell.“Old Jo won’t complain after we rescue the girl. I aim to have aword with this Rodriguez and if Jo Shelby don’t like it he can lumpit.”The second night’s camp was pitched in view of the hacienda ofEncarnacion, which, if it did not come up to the goatherd’s descrip¬tion, at least was a plantation of respectable size, tucked into the sideof the mountain like an eyrie. The day had passed with no word beingspoken to Shelby of the fair Inez; he looked as if he had matters ofunusual importance on his mind, and the curt replies he made inordinary conversation were not encouraging to Blackwell or Wood.They passed the word to a dozen men who could be trusted, no more,and the Mexican marched glumly with them, somewhat to Shelby’ssurprise. Wood had promised to shoot the man like a rabbit if hestepped so much as a foot in the direction of the towering cactus.The night was starlit, and Wood and Blackwell reconnoitred theplace with a practiced eye. The hacienda was set on the side of a hill,and on the right, like an ornamental fence, stretched a row of cabins,the quarters of the peons. The corral was near the gate. Within, thehorses were saddled. Rodriguez was ready for a fight or a flight.On top of the main building a kind of tower lifted itself up. Thiswas to be expected; where there is a maiden in distress there is a tower.The hacienda seemed to be roomy and could be approached from theoutside by circular steps. Perfect, thought Wood and Blackwell; aquick rush up those steps with a battering ram and it would be over.Once aboard the lugger_They were not two shaggy borderers in butternut, standing beforea farmhouse in Mexico; they were Galahads about to rescue a ladyfair, with all the splendid dash of mediaeval chivalry. Her prison towerloomed before them. They went back to camp and waited for thestars to go in. At midnight the light faded, and the volunteers slippedout of the camp leaving no hole in the dark behind them. They werearmed with revolvers, and carried a huge piece of timber which theyhad wrenched from the upright fastenings of a large irrigation basin.Wood made a brief speech. The time to turn back was now, if anyhad misgivings. “We must have the American woman safe out of their280Mexicohands,” he said, “or we must burn the buildings. If the hazard is toogreat for any of you, step out of ranks. Old Jo will hear the noisesoon.” No one moved, and a one-armed soldier named Sweeny whohad served with Walker in Nicaragua cut short the forensics. “Savethe speech, Jim,” he said. “We’re with you.” The names of others havecome down to posterity too. Among them were McDougall, Boswell,Armistead, Winship, Ras Woods, Macey, Vines, Kirtley, Blackwell,Tom Rudd, Crockett, Collins, Jack Williams, OAvens, Timberlake,Darnall, Johnson, and the two Berrys, Richard and Isaac. Jim Woodstood forward by the right as leader.Twenty-two men lifted the beam as easily as if it were a log ofpaperwood and sent it crashing into the gate, ripping its hinges fromthe adobe wall which enclosed the hacienda. The horses in the corral,masterless and riderless, began milling about and giving shrill neighsof alarm.As Jim Wood’s men poured through the breach in the wall, swarm¬ing across the flattened gate like the drawbridge of a moat, therancheros of Encarnacion took alarm too, and a dozen or twenty ofthem sprang up out of the flagstones of the patio. Shots crisscrossed.There was no light anywhere except in the tower; the men foughtnow in the dark. Young Tom Rudd was killed, Crockett, the victorof the Lampazos duel, Rogers, Provines the Louisianian, and a Ger¬man named Matterhorn. He was one of the damned Dutch of St.Louis but he had not fought under the Dutch flag. He was riddledwith bullets.The survivors drove their battering ram against a great door lead¬ing into the main hall, and it gave way, like the gate. No lamps lit thehall, but Rodriguez himself was there with half a dozen men, and inthe brief flashes of revolver fire Wood’s men took aim. In the darkyou could not tell who killed Rodriguez, but he fell dead, and Wood’smen groped past each other uncertainly in the dark. From within theyhad no tower light to guide them, and from without came the soundof Shelby’s bugle; but the hall was clear now. The whole brigade wasadvancing on Encarnacion and drawing the scattered fire of rancherosfrom the windows and the top of the wall. They withheld the fire oftheir carbines, knowing that their comrades were inside, but theMexicans, seeing the awesome sight of the yellow-haired Neanderthalmen approaching, stripped to the waist and nearly nude, abandonedtheir posts and the fire died down. All was quiet in Encarnacion.Parras and Encarnacion281Shelby’s face was quivering as he faced Wood. This went beyondanger, and beyond punishment. It was gross betrayal of the expeditionand a death blow to all their hopes, worse than any insubordination orpersonal disloyalty to himself. It meant that his men were hooliganswho would kill for loot, jailbirds and gallows bait; he could not offersuch men to the Emperor Maximilian as an elite guard.“Who among you has done this thing?” he asked in a terrible voice.There was no answer. The men put up their weapons.“Speak up!” said Shelby. “Let me not find you cowards before Ifinish the job on you that the Mexicans have done so badly.”Jim Wood, covered with blood and powder stains, came forwardand told the story. He told it as the goatherd had given it to him andYandell Blackwell.It was, of course, as Yandell Blackwell had said. Shelby could notblame them too much when he knew their motive. But they did notunderstand how badly they had interfered with his plans for a peacefulmarch to Mexico City. The Empire would be ringing with condemna¬tion of the invaders for the sack of Encarnacion. And four good menof the brigade lay dead for no other reason than the irresponsibilityof Wood and Blackwell.“Why did you not tell me?” he asked harshly. Again there was noanswer; Wood could not tell him that during the last few days Shelbyhad been in such a mood that no man dared approach him.“Very well,” said Shelby, characteristically. No man accepted afait accompli with fewer reservations when it was necessary; and therewas still the woman.“Where is she?” asked Shelby.Inez Walker was brought. Edwards writes, “Grief-stricken, pre¬maturely old, Inez Walker came into the presence of Shelby, a queen.Some strands of gray were in her glossy, golden hair. The liquid lightof her dark eyes had long ago been quenched in tears. The form thathad once been so full and perfect was now bent and fragile; but therewas such a look of mournful tenderness in her eager, questioning facethat the men drew back from her presence instinctively and left heralone with their General. He received her commands as if she werebestowing a favor upon him, listening as a brother might until herwishes were all made known. These he promised to carry out to theletter, and well he did so. For the rest of that night she was left alonewith her dead. Recovered somewhat from the terrors of the wild282Mexicoattack, her women came back to her, weeping over the slain andpraying piteously for their souls as well.”When the dead had been buried and Dr. Tisdale had seen to thewounded, and Jim Wood had received a warning “which he wouldremember to his dying day” 1 a guard of honor was detailed to aconveyance which was new to the men. It was a carriage with theblinds drawn, and it moved southward with the soldiers in the morn¬ing. No one needed to ask its occupant.224. Mexico City at LastThe men of the former Missouri Cavalry Division went intobattle as a unit for the last time at Matehuala, Mexico, in August of1865. Matehuala is north of San Luis Potosi and was a city of 20,000at that time. It was being held precariously by 500 French of the 82ndRegiment of the Line under a Major Pierron. “A weak detachmentfor such an exposed outpost,” Major Edwards comments.As the Iron Brigade approached, the sound of cannon could beheard, and as they came down the slope they saw what the situationwas. The Juaristas—whom the historian of the expedition persists incalling guerrillas—had got hold of half a dozen cannon (perhapsShelby’s) and with 2,000 men were laying siege to Matehuala.Shelby sent two scouts into the city—Cundiff and Hodge—andadvised Major Pierron that he had a thousand men who would attackthe rebels from the rear if Pierron felt that he could attack in frontat the same time. The delighted Pierron agreed, and at the signalagreed upon Shelby attacked from the rear—mainly with the revolver—while the French made an unexpected sally against the Juaristas.Probably the element of surprise prevailed, for they scattered, althoughthey outnumbered their foes; still, Shelby’s men were bad men tohave at your back.Major Pierron, says Edwards, made Matehuala a Paradise for afew days. Undoubtedly it seemed like Paradise to men who had beensleeping in the rain in cold canyons and fighting in their sleep. Whatinterested Shelby most was that he could get shoes for the men, whichthey badly needed, and other supplies from the well-equipped FrenchMexico City at Last283Army. After three days they marched on to San Luis Potosi, wherethe commander, Colonel Douay, informed Shelby that he would liketo send him on an expedition against guerrillas at once, but thatMarshal Bazaine’s orders were inflexible: Shelby must march at onceto Mexico City, with no more diversions. Bazaine had heard of theparticipation of the Americans in the affair at Matehuala and was dis¬pleased by it. Major Edwards says that he believes the Matehualabattle finally made up Bazaine’s mind that he would have no Con¬federate units in the Imperial Army because of the excuse it wouldgive for United States intervention. It had been his plan, thinksEdwards, to recruit them individually into different units of theFrench Army and the Mexican Imperial Army, but he now fearedthat when news of Confederate participation in the battle of Matehualareached General Sheridan, it would be misconstrued, and so hence¬forth Bazaine determined to have nothing to do with the Confederatesas soldiers.Whether Major Edwards’ reasoning is correct or not—and it wouldseem to be—his conclusion was eminently correct. From now on themen of the former Missouri Cavalry Division would be nothing buttraders and farmers in the Mexican Empire.There was nothing of this, of course, in their minds as the IronBrigade approached Mexico City. They were met by a full battalionof Chasseurs d’Afrique sent out by Marshal Bazaine, to guide theminto the stone barracks which temporarily would be the home of themen. There is no record that they were asked to lay down their arms;it is highly probable, however, that the French asked every man toregister his name and the number of his belongings, including arms.If that register existed today, what a find it would be! It wouldinclude some of the finest names in the South.Although Major Edwards had gone ahead with Magruder andGovernor Reynolds, reaching the city two days ahead of the IronBrigade, he wrote of the feelings of all of them, as the Chasseursd’Afrique led them in:“The city of all men’s hopes and fears and aspirations—the city ofthe swart cavaliers of Cortez and the naked warriors of Montezuma,who rushed with bare bosom on lance and sword blade—... the citywhich had seen the cold glitter of Northern steel flash along the brokenway of Contreras and wind itself up, striped thick with blood, intothe heart of Chapultepec—the city filled now with Austrians and284MexicoBelgians and Frenchmen, and an Emperor newly crowned with man¬hood and valor, and an Empress royal with imperial youth and beauty—the city of Mexico was reached at last.” 1In her book, Ten Years of My Life, Agnes Salm-Salm, wife of aGerman nobleman and soldier of fortune, Prince Felix Salm-Salm,who had been attached to the Union army under Sherman and wasnow an adviser of Marshal Bazaine, describes it thus: “It [the city] issix leagues in circumference, has four hundred and eighty-two streetswhich are mostly straight, paved, and provided with sidewalks. Thereare sixty large and smaller squares, fifteen monasteries, twenty-twonunneries, seventy-eight churches and chapels, three great theatres,two arenas for bull fights, three principal promenades, and tenhospitals.” 2The houses were never more than two stories, and Princess Agnesfound them rather monotonous, but the Alameda she found finer thanthe Tiergarten in Berlin and the great Cathedral of Mexico enchantedher. Situated in the midst of the Plaza de Armas, it inspired her toremark that the capital of Mexico was a large parallelogram with acandelabra in the center; and the College of Mines, built entirely ofgreen porphyry, left her somewhat speechless, as well it might. Shealso remarked upon a fact which is remarkable: the city of Mexicowas entirely paved “and kept tolerably clean” in a horse-drawn erawhen even the streets of great cities like Washington and Londonwere not paved.It was into this wonder city that the men of the Iron Brigademarched, and for many a country boy from Missouri it must have beenlike marching in a dream. They were given quarters in the stone bar¬racks of the French Army while Shelby went to the Hotel San Carlosto join Edwards and Henry Watkins Allen, the former Governor ofLouisiana who had been a brigadier general and badly wounded atShiloh. Allen, Edwards, Magruder, Reynolds, and several others hadbeen first in conference with Matthew Fontaine Maury and then witha Monsieur Loysel, who was confidential secretary to the Emperor.M. Loysel had arranged a conference between Shelby and the Emperorfor the following Thursday afternoon at two o’clock. Magruder hadalready spoken to the Emperor and seemed somewhat to have gainedhis confidence. In fact, Alexander Watkins Terrell relates this anecdoteabout Magruder and the Emperor. Magruder, always a meticulousdresser, wore a dove-colored top hat and a salt-and-pepper cutawayMexico City at Last285for an afternoon meeting with the Emperor; the next time Terrellsaw the Emperor, the latter was wearing a dove-colored top hat anda salt-and-pepper cutaway.3The historic meeting between the Emperor and Shelby took placeas scheduled in an informal reception room at the Palacio Nacional.Perhaps no single room in history has ever held a more varied array ofpersonalities. Besides the Emperor Ferdinand Joseph Maximilian,descendant of Emperor Charles the Fifth and a long line of Hapsburgkings, there was Marshal Bazaine, the Marshal Ney of Napoleon theThird; Commodore Matthew Fontaine Maury, the first man to chartthe currents of the oceans; General John B. Magruder, one of the mostcolorful generals in an army in which colorful generals abounded; JoShelby, who as a cavalry immortal ranked with Jeb Stuart; Countde Noue, the son-in-law of old General Harney back in Missouri,who was to act as interpreter; and Major John Newman Edwards,who although only an obscure aide to Shelby was to become one ofthe great American editors of the nineteenth century and the HoraceGreeley of the West.This was the first meeting of Edwards with the Emperor and hewas impressed, as were alb who saw him, by the magnificent appearanceof the Austrian Pretender. “In height,” recalls Edwards, “Maximilianwas six feet two inches. His eyes were blue and penetrating, a littlesad at times and often introspective. Perhaps never in all his life hadthere come to them a look of craft or cruelty. His forehead was broadand high, prominent where ideality should abound, wanting a littlein firmness, if phrenology is true, yet compact enough and wellenough proportioned to indicate resources in reserve and abilitieslatent and easily aroused. To a large mouth was given the Hapsburglip, that thick, protruding, semi-cleft underlip, too heavy for beauty,too immobile for features that, under the iron destiny that ruled thehour, should have suggested Caesar or Napoleon. A great yellowbeard fell in a wave to his waist. At times this was parted to the chin,and descended in two separate streams, as it were, silkier, glossier,heavier than any yellow beard or any yellow-haired Hun or Hungarianthat had followed him from the Rhine and the Danube.” 4Maximilian met the Confederates without ceremony and with greatfriendliness. Although he understood English, he felt more at home inFrench, and it was in that language that the interview was conducted.Shelby had rehearsed this moment from the day the vote of his286Mexicosoldiers was taken at Piedras Negras, and he made the most of it now.In a confident voice, he laid his plan before the Emperor and beforeBazaine, who in the final analysis must approve it. His plan, saidShelby, was to take immediate service in the Empire, recruit a corpsof 40,000 Americans, supersede as far as possible the native troops inthe Mexican Imperial Army, consolidate the government against thetime of the withdrawal of the French soldiers, encourage immigrationin every possible manner, develop the resources of the country, andhold it, until the people became reconciled to the change, with a strongand well organized force.He was proposing to do neither more nor less than Cortez haddone, and every man in the room knew it. He was also proposing towipe out the four years leading up to Appomattox, so far as theSouthern people were concerned, and reestablish their Confederacy.That was Joseph Orville Shelby. Throughout his life, from the boy¬hood days when he rode with Billy Hunter and Johnny Morgan acrossthe fields at Lexington, he made no little plans.Major Edwards records that “every proposition was faithfullyrendered to the Emperor, who merely bowed and inclined his headforward as if he would hear more.”“Shelby,” says Edwards, “continued in his straightforward, soldierlymanner:“ ‘It is only a question of time, Your Majesty, before the Frenchsoldiers are withdrawn.’“Marshal Bazaine smiled a little sarcastically, it seemed, but saidnothing.“ ‘Why do you think so?’ inquired the Emperor.“ ‘Because the War Between the States is at an end, and Mr. Sewardwill insist on the rigorous enforcement of the Monroe Doctrine.France does not desire a conflict with the United States. It would beneither popular nor profitable. I left behind me one million men inarms, not one of whom has yet been discharged from service. Thenation is sore over this occupation, and the presence of France is aperpetual menace. I hope Your Majesty will pardon me, but in orderto speak the truth it is necessary to speak plainly.”“ ‘Go on’,” said the Emperor, greatly interested.“ ‘The matter whereof I have spoken to you is perfectly feasible.I have authority for saying to you that the American governmentwould not be averse to the enlistment of as many soldiers in yourMexico City at Last 287army as might wish to take service, and the number need only belimited by the exigencies of the Empire. Thrown upon your ownresources, you would find no difficulty, I think, in establishing morefriendly relations with the United States. In order to put yourself ina position to do this, and in order to sustain yourself sufficiently longto consolidate your occupation of Mexico and make your Governmenta strong one, I think it absolutely necessary that you should havea corps of foreign soldiers devoted to you personally, and reliable inany emergency.’ ”“On being appealed to, Commodore Maury and General Magrudersustained his view of the case and Shelby continued:“ ‘I have under my command at present about one thousand triedand experienced troops. All of them have seen much severe and actualservice, and all of them are anxious to enlist in support of the Empire.With your permission, and authorized in your name to increase myforces, in a few months all the promises given here today could bemade good.’ ”“The Emperor still remained silent. It appeared as if Shelby was anenigma he was trying to make out—one which interested him but atthe same time puzzled him. In the habit of having full and free con¬versations with Commodore Maury, and of reposing in him the mostunlimited confidence, he would look first at Shelby and then at Maury,as if appealing from the blunt frankness of the one to the polishedsincerity and known sound judgment of the other. Perhaps MarshalBazaine knew better than any man at the interview how keenlyincisive had been Shelby’s analysis of the situation; and how absolutelycertain were events neither he nor his master could control, to pushthe last of his soldiers beyond the ocean. At intervals, the calm, im¬mobile face would flush a little, and once or twice he folded and un¬folded a printed dispatch held in his hands. Beyond these evidencesof attention, it was not known that Bazaine was even listening. His ownjudgment was strongly in favor of the employment of the Americans,and had the bargain been left to him, the bargain would have beenmade before the end of the interview. He was a soldier, and reasonedfrom a soldier’s viewpoint.”In the end, Maximilian did not reply directly to Shelby. He arose,beckoned De Noue to one side, and spoke to him earnestly and quietlyfor several minutes. Then he dismissed his visitors pleasantly and with¬drew, in the company of Marshal Bazaine.288MexicoDe Noue gave Shelby the verdict. The Emperor had refusedabsolutely to consider the plan. His Majesty, said De Noue, was notwilling to trust the Americans in an organization so large and socomplete—an organization composed of forty thousand skilled andveteran soldiers, commanded by top-ranking officers of the Con¬federate Army. Maximilian was a man of immense good will andmuch woolly thinking—but even he found the thought of such anarmy in his midst disturbing.Furthermore, said De Noue, the Emperor had other plans. Hewished to establish peace and friendship with the United Statesthrough diplomacy, rather than by trying to maintain himself by forceof arms. He believed that Secretary of State Seward and the dominantparty in the United States would not be adverse to his experiment intrying to bring good government to Mexico—a thing unknown up tonow—once it was understood in Washington that that was his soleaim. De Noue shook his head as he repeated this statement. “Hereasons with his heart instead of his head, and is furthermore exceed¬ingly stubborn,” said the Frenchman. “It is no use, General: theEmperor will not give you employment.”“I knew it,” said Shelby.“How?” asked De Noue.“Not once could I bring the blood to his face,” said Shelby. “Hehas faith but no enthusiasm, and what a man in his position needs isnot only enthusiasm but audacity. You have spoken to me frankly. Ishall speak to you frankly. Maximilian will fail at any sort ofdiplomacy.”“Why do you say that?” asked De Noue.“Because he will not have time to work the problem out,” saidShelby. “I have traveled slowly and in my own fashion from PiedrasNegras to the city of Mexico. You have not one foot of Mexicanterritory in sympathy with you. As surely as the snow is on the browof Popocatepetl Juarez lives in the hearts of this people and before ananswer can come from Seward to the Emperor’s Minister of State,the Emperor will have no Minister of State. That’s all. Thank you foryour kind offices today, Count. 1 must go back to my men now. Theyexpect me early.”The men of the Iron Brigade had made their own observations onthe march from Piedras Negras, and they knew by now that theFrench did not want them, would not have them under any circum-Mexico City at Last289stances, and so perhaps it is not surprising that Major Edwards recordsthe fact that when Shelby informed them of the Emperor’s decisionthey received it with something like apathy or indifference. Theyhad dreamed of a new home, a new flag, a new country—and a fullportion of the richness of a tropical land—and while dreaming the use¬less and unprofitable dream they had gone hungry for bread of late.Money was a commodity they scarcely remembered. Again to quoteEdwards, “if all the purses of the men had been emptied into the lapof a woman, the dollars that might have been gathered up wouldscarcely have paid for a bridal veil.”But if they were indifferent, they were still cheerful, and theylaughed—the tension broken—when Shelby, instead of bemoaningtheir fate, said, “How many of you know enough Spanish to get youa Spanish wife with an acre of breadfruit, twenty-five tobacco plants,and a patch of corn? We cannot starve, boys.”Innumerable plans were discussed, but it was obvious now thatevery man was thinking of himself as an individual rather than as amember of the brigade. The cohesive agent that had held themtogether as a unit was gone: the Iron Brigade ceased to exist from themoment that Shelby announced that the Emperor would not havethem. They would go their separate ways now, and a majority ofthem were merely anxious to get out of Mexico. They had not comehere to scratch the soil for a living and raise half-Mexican brats.To do anything at all, however, it would be necessary to raise somemoney, and the courtly and elegant Governor Reynolds solved thatproblem for them handsomely. He went at once to Marshal Bazaineand pointed out that at Parras the expedition had turned aside toMexico City by his inviolable command; that the movement neces¬sarily cut off the brigade from all communication with friends at home;that if they had marched to Guaymas or Mazatlan on the PacificCoast, return to California would have been easy; and that, in thecircumstances, he felt that Bazaine should deal with them as onesoldier with another.Bazaine responded not only generously but extravagantly. Althoughhe headed an army in which men were paid a few cents a day, he drewfrom his war chest fifty dollars in gold for each of Shelby’s men,“and this amount came to each as a rain to a field that the sun isparching.” Officers and men got the same amount, and with this sumin their hands they were again masters of their own destiny. Edwards290 Mexicosays a little sadly, “Thereafter every man went the way that suitedhim best.”The few who were willing to remain as colonists prepared to followShelby wherever he might settle. “Shelby,” says Edwards, “told themall he knew about [the proposed colonization project of] Carlota andadvised them briefly to pre-empt the legal quantity of land and giveup at once any further idea of service in the ranks of Maximilian’sarmy. Many accepted his advice and entered at once and heartilyupon the duties of this new life. Others, unwilling to remain in theEmpire as colonists, received permission from Bazaine to march to thePacific. On the long and dangerous road some died, some were killed,and some took shipping for California, for China, for Japan, and forthe Sandwich Islands. A few, hearing wonderful stories of thetreasures Kidd, the pirate, had buried on an island in the Pacific Ocean,got aboard a schooner at Mazatlan and sailed away in quest of gold.Those that survived the adventure returned starving, and for breadjoined the Imperial Army in Sonora. Perhaps fifty took service in theThird Zouaves.“A singular incident determined the regiment of their choice,” saysEdwards. “After authority had been received from the Marshal forthe enrollment, a dozen or more strolled into the Alameda where, ofevenings, the bands played and soldiers of all arms promenaded. Ineach corps a certain standard of height had to be complied with. Thegrenadiers had need to be six feet, the artillerymen six feet and aninch, the cuirassiers six feet, and the hussars six feet. Not being all ofthe same stature, and not wishing to be separated, the choice of theAmericans was reduced to the infantry regiments. It is further obliga¬tory in the French service that when soldiers are on duty, the privatein addressing an officer shall remove his cap and remain with it in hishand until the conversation is finished. This was a species of disciplinethe Americans had never learned, and they stood watching thevarious groups as they passed to and fro, complying scrupulously withthe regulations of the service.“At last, a squad of Zouaves sauntered nonchalantly by—great,bearded, medalled fellows, bronzed by African suns and swarthy ofbrow and cheek as any Arab of the desert. The picturesque uniformattracted all eyes. It was war dramatized—it was campaigning expressedin poetry. An officer called to one of the Zouaves, and he went for¬ward saluting. This was done by bringing the right hand up againstThe Colonization Scheme291the turban, with the palm extended in token of respect, but the turbanitself was not removed. The subordinate did not uncover to hissuperior, and therefore would the Americans put on turbans and makeZouaves of themselves. Major Pierron (he of Matehuala) mote of anAmerican than a Frenchman, supervised the metamorphosis, and whenthe toilette was complete even Shelby himself, with his accuratecavalry eyes, scarcely recognized his old Confederates of the fouryears’ war. At daylight next morning they were marching on thedouble-quick to Monterrey.”25. The Colonization SchemeShelby was now as poor as the poorest of his peregrinos, but he hadfriends in high places, and even before his rejection as a soldier bythe Emperor he had had an alternative plan of campaign mapped out: ifhe could not serve in the army he would go into the coffee raising busi¬ness and make another fortune such as he had made in hemp in Missouribefore the war. If the country had been at peace, there is not theslightest doubt that he would have done so, for a profit of $16,000could be realized in a year on an investment of 60 acres,1 and landcould be bought from the government at a price ranging fromtwenty-five cents to a dollar an acre, under the generous terms whichthe Empire was now granting to foreigners to encourage immigration.General Sterling Price was in Mexico City, looking more thanever like a Roman Senator, bringing with him 460 pounds of officialdocuments of the Army of the Trans-Mississippi. He planned toestablish an agricultural colony for Southerners somewhere in north¬east Mexico, not too far from Vera Cruz and the sea-lanes. SoonShelby was deep in conference with him and with such top-rankingConfederates as former Governor Isham Harris of Tennessee, JudgeJohn Perkins of Louisiana, Brigadier General Richard H. Maury, andLieutenant General Dick Ewell, who had succeeded to StonewallJackson’s command in the Shenandoah Valley. (It was beginning tolook as if every surviving Confederate general in the army was eitherin Mexico or planning to go there soon.) All of them had one objec-292Mexicotive: to make a fortune in coffee and revive the old South’s aristocraticway of living.In this scheme they had the complete backing of Maximilian. TheEmperor had grandiose plans for the colonization of Mexico by bothEuropeans and Americans in order to stabilize his Empire and hewas willing to finance the project to the limit of his treasury. Hehad uncounted and unsurveyed acres of fertile lands, dotted withhaciendas, which he had expropriated from the Catholic Church, andthese he was anxious to make available to immigrants, particularlyConfederate immigrants.By imperial decree of September 5, 1865, three classes of lands wereoffered for colonization. They were—first, “those of the public domainthat have never been reduced to cultivation”; second, “those that havebeen more or less improved as haciendas, the right to dispose of whichthe Government has acquired by purchase or otherwise”; and third,“private lands and haciendas, the owners of which are disposed tooffer them to immigrants on liberal terms for colonization. Manyhaciendas that are or have been under cultivation may be bought oneasy terms and for less than one dollar per acre.”The terms were the most attractive imaginable. Immigrants “whoby misfortune have lost all their substance” were offered a free passageby sea to Mexico, with a traveling allowance of ten cents a league totheir new homes, for each member of the family;2 a single man mightacquire 160 acres, and the head of a family up to 640 acres, gratis, ofuncultivated lands in the public domain. Each settler was to receive“a duly executed title, incommutable, of his landed estate, and acertificate that it is free of mortgage.” The land was to be tax-freefor the first five years, after which a ground rent of ten per cent wouldbe imposed, based, however, only on the value of the land and not onimprovements which might have been added. Those immigrants whohad personal effects would be permitted to bring them into thecountry duty-free, including “work and brood animals, seeds, agricul¬tural implements, machines and working tools.”Slavery was forbidden in the Mexican Empire, persons of colorbecoming free by the mere act of touching Mexican soil, but the ex-Confederates could bring their former slaves with them to serve aspeons, if the Negroes could be induced to come, and such laborerswould be subject to “special protective regulations.” Under theMexican peonage system the employer provided food, lodging, cloth-The Colonization Scheme293ing, and medical attention for his employees, in addition to a stipulatedwage, of which one fourth was held back until the end of the contractperiod; the peon in return became an indentured servant for five yearsand was prohibited by law from leaving the service of his master.The Imperial Decree also exempted new settlers from militaryservice for five years—an attractive inducement for war-weary Con¬federates—guaranteed toleration of Protestant churches and schools,and even promised endowments of land for the support of schoolsand colleges.The first to receive the benefit of the lavish outpouring from Maxi¬milian’s treasury was Henry Watkins Allen, Confederate brigadierwho had been nearly shot to pieces at Shiloh, and governor ofLouisiana during the last year of the war. Allen arrived in MexicoCity independently of Shelby, Price, and the rest, with $500 which hehad borrowed from friends in Louisiana. As soon as the ImperialDecree was promulgated in September, Allen was granted a subsidyof $10,000 and a salary of $150 a month to establish an Englishlanguage weekly in Mexico City, The Mexican Times, as an organ ofthe Imperial Government. In this enterprise he was soon joined byMajor Edwards as editorial assistant.In October the Emperor appointed Matthew Fontaine Mauryhonorary counsellor of state and Imperial Commissioner of Coloniza¬tion. At the same time, John B. Magruder was appointed chief of theOffice of Land Colonization. Another ostensible plum went to Gover¬nor Reynolds as head of the American and Mexican Emigrant Com¬pany, chartered by Maximilian, which was to establish emigrantassistance offices in the United States.3The emoluments attached to these officers were substantial. Thesalary paid to Reynolds is not on record, but Maury was paid $3,000annually, with additional authorizations of $150 for office furniture,$500 annually for expenses, $100 a month for office rent, one clerk atan annual salary of $1,200, and $300 yearly for a private messenger.Magruder received the same except that no provision was made inhis office for a clerk.The Emperor authorized Maury to appoint agents of colonizationfor certain districts of the Southern United States; Virginia, NorthCarolina, South Carolina, Texas, Mississippi, California, Louisiana, andAlabama. Officers for the last two were to be established at NewOrleans and Mobile. These agents were to receive $100 a month as294 Mexicocompensation and the further sum of $300 a year for generalexpenses.4Secretary of State Seward in Washington crippled this venture fromthe start by forbidding the agents to enter the country; neverthelessliterature was distributed throughout the South telling of the activitiesof the American settlers in their adopted country and urging othersto start life anew by joining them in the Mexican project. Those whomay have had any idea of doing so, however, were prevented, in themain, by another Federal decree. General Philip Sheridan, command¬ing the Departments of Texas and Louisiana, ordered that no one wasto leave for Mexico from any Gulf port without special permission.5Despite the seeds of its own destruction which the colonizationproject carried within itself—the hostility of the United States, thehostility of the Mexicans themselves to any project of Maximilian’s,and the hostility of the press of the Southern United States, whichobjected to the best blood of the South being drained off to a foreigncountry G—there was vast enthusiasm in Mexico for the colonizationscheme all through the fall and winter of 1865 and 1866, and a reporterfor the New York Herald who went there to report on the develop¬ment wrote a series of articles for his paper which were mostlyecstatic. The Herald was unique among American newspapers ingiving friendly coverage to the Confederate settlement in Mexico.There was considerable justification for optimism at this point.First, the land was there, hundreds of thousands of acres of the finestfarming country on the entire globe, which Maximilian was eitherwilling to give away or sell so cheaply that it amounted to a gift.Second, Juarez was in hiding in the United States and the Confederatesbelieved that Maximilian was in Mexico to stay. Sterling Price voicedthe sentiments of all when he told the Herald reporter that “theNapoleon family is not in the habit of backing down in the accom¬plishment of its schemes.” Besides, he added, France was bound toMaximilian by treaties which it could not give up without compro¬mising its prestige and its national honor: before Napoleon would backdown he would seek the cooperation of other nations, as he had donein ’61, to control the affairs of Mexico; and finally, if the UnitedStates intervened in Mexico it would arouse Mexican nationalism andunite the two factions, Imperialist and Juarista.“Every friend of the Empire,” said General Price, “trusts in theseThe Colonization Scheme295considerations, which are, in their estimation, sufficient to discountany appearance of danger on the part of the United States.” 7General Price selected a colonization site of 500,000 acres of aban¬doned land in the beautiful Cordoba Valley sixty-five miles from VeraCruz and a three-day journey by stage from Adexico City. With himwent Shelby, Perkins, and Harris, Shelby being accompanied by aboutfifty members of the Iron Brigade. The prominence of the Confederateleaders associated with the Cordoba Colony gave it the greatest pres¬tige of all the Confederate colonies in Mexico. Lawrence F. Hill, in his“Confederate Exodus to Latin America,” says that “the fact that suchmen proceeded with arrangements to establish themselves and theirdearest friends in the community made a powerful appeal. The appealcaptured the imagination of all classes: every rank known to the Con¬federate Army was represented; every sort of politician listed in adictionary of political science was included; every type of artisanand planter known in the Old South was there; every social positionfrom big planter to lowly slave was included. The total number ofpersons included varied with the season, with the months, with themoons, even with the suns. One settler said that at one time five hun¬dred emigrants found themselves in the valley about Carlota, the namegiven a town [built] in honor of the Empress of Mexico.” 8Carlota was a brand-new settlement. The old Mexican town ofCordoba, which was the focal point for the Confederate colonists,was the capital from which the development fanned out. It lies in thestate of Vera Cruz about ninety-two miles from the City of the TrueCross. The settlers who came by way of the Gulf of Mexico, andmost of them did, in spite of General Sheridan’s order, had to makepart of their journey by rail and partly by diligencia, or Mexican stage¬coach. From Vera Cruz, the Imperial Mexican Railway ran sixty-fourmiles to a terminus at Paso del Macho. From there on, Cordoba hadto be reached by twenty-eight miles of winding mountain road. TheCordoba Valley ranges from 800 to 2,000 feet above sea level; andwhen the yellow jack was not raging, or guerrillas raiding from themountain passes, it was another Garden of Eden, with equable climate,moderate rainfall, and soil capable of producing four crops a year. AsMajor Edwards put it, “So impatient is life in that tropic land thatthere is no death.” Orange trees, he found were white with bloom andgolden with fruit at the same time.Experienced farmer that he was, Shelby did not need a second296Mexicolook to know that here in the Cordoba Valley was the earthly paradisewhich he had been seeking for Betsy and the children. He arrangedto buy a magnificent stone residencia, surrounded by twelve acres ofland suitable for coffee cultivation, the Hacienda of Santa Ana,9 twomiles from Cordoba in the purple heart of the tropics, and he sent aletter posthaste to the Gratz mansion on Mill Street in Lexington,Kentucky, bidding Betsy Shelby leave at once with the children forVera Cruz. As always whenever the Shelby saga touches Lexington,the record fades; but it requires no vivid imagination to realize thatShelby’s letter, full of a glowing account of the rich coffee plantationsof the Cordoba Valley, must have brought great joy not only to BetsyShelby, but to the entire Gratz household, and especially to AnnaGratz: the wandering Confederate black sheep has found a home atlast, and of the kind that is suited to him. He has given up the perilouslife of a soldier of fortune and gone back to an occupation in whichhe can, as he has demonstrated before, make not only a living but afortune. There are tears at parting in Lexington, but they are tearsof joy, as Betsy and the two little boys take the steamer for St. Louisand New Orleans. In a money belt around Betsy’s waist there is fivehundred dollars in gold which Anna and Benjamin Gratz have placedthere.10 We know from The Mexican Times that they arrived at theHacienda Santa Ana in October.11The colony was already growing apace when Betsy Shelby andlittle Joe and Orville arrived. As early as September 20th, there hadbeen ninety-eight Confederate families seeking homesteads in the re¬gion, so that the jump to 500 by the first of the year is probably noexaggeration. In fact, Henry Watkins Allen visited Cordoba justbefore his death in the spring of 1866 and was astonished by what hesaw—and not only astonished, but alarmed, for Allen never had anyfaith in the colonization project. He alone of the Confederates seemsto have had a realistic view of the intentions of the United Statestoward the colony. Furthermore, he had felt from the beginning thatthe extravagant inducements would attract an undesirable element-loafers and ne’er-do-wells who expected to live without working—andthat they would be a millstone around the necks of their more ener¬getic neighbors. In this he was partly right, although only partly. Fol¬lowing his visit to Cordoba he wrote to a friend, Mrs. Sarah Dorseyof Crockett, Texas, on March 16, 1866: “Immigration is setting in fastin Mexico, in earnest. Every vessel brings many passengers as emi-The Colonization Scheme297grants, from Tennessee, Georgia, Mississippi, Louisiana, South Caro¬lina and Missouri. There is enough land here -for all the South, butthey are slow in surveying it; and all those who come here should bringsome money. I fear there will be much misery among the colonistswho come here without money. They had better stay at homeT 12The sentiment was echoed by the New York Herald on April 19,1866. The friendly reporter of that newspaper (he remains uniden¬tified, although he made several trips to Cordoba and Carlota) warned:“This is no country for drones. A man without money, industryand energy had better go hang himself before he starts for Mexico—he will be glad of it afterwards. Mechanics and farmers are neededhere. Such, if willing to work, cannot go amiss. Wages are low, com¬pared to what are paid in the States, laborers receiving seventy-fivecents and one dollar a day and board; but with this a man can soonsecure a fortune. Clerks and professional men should by all means avoidMexico.... There are no opportunities for clerks, ministers and law¬yers; and happily for the community a doctor’s services are rarelyneeded in this climate. Forty acres in coffee is a fortune to any man,and there are a dozen other articles that can be raised with little labor,and which will pay 200 per cent more than the best crops that canbe raised in the States. But hardships are to be endured that few col¬onists are prepared to encounter; therefore, unless they have a littlemoney or a trade and are willing to work, they had better remainwhere they have friends to help them in case assistance is needed.”The drones in the colony of Cordoba appear to have been com¬paratively few, however, for as the same reporter says, “little morethan half of the Southerners who went to Mexico (in the first rush ofimmigration) remained, and many of them caught the first returningsteamer they could reach.” Confronted with the necessity of workingfor a living, even in Mexico, those with a distaste for it left in a hurry.The attitude of the responsible, hardworking settlers towards thesepeople (and towards the land from which they had exiled themselves)is well expressed in a letter written February 9, 1866, by an unrecon¬structed rebel, Benjamin Crowther, to his friend J. Calvin Littrel ofSt. Louis:“I was sorry to see and witness so many Confederates come toMexico with wrong and improper motives; some imagined that theywould be installed forthwith in some fat office, like CommodoreMaury, and because they were not, and not being disposed to adapt298Mexicothemselves to temporary inconveniences, would not labor, and totheir shame went back to the dis-United States, like a dog returningto his vomit; whereas had they been patient, and not tried to forcethings whether or no, they would, by settling colonies of twenty-fiveand fifty families, as is now the case at Cordoba, Rio Verde and otherplaces—they would have all done well and been of mutual assistanceto one another. The only temptation that I or any of my familycould have to return to the United States would be on the occasionof a war with any other power on earth and that of the federal gov¬ernment, in which event you may expect to see me in the service ofthat army, whatever army it may be.” 13Those who prospered, however, prospered exceedingly. The ubiq¬uitous Herald reporter commented: “Of all these [prominent Con¬federates in Mexico] General Shelby is the most energetic and enter¬prising, and consequently his prospects are more flattering than anyAmerican’s in the country. Besides working in his hacienda, he runslarge wagon trains from the railroad terminus at Paso del Macho tothe City [of Mexico]. His wagons are all of Yankee manufacture, aredrawn by ten mules each, and every wagon carries a load of six toseven thousands pounds, the freight of which is 300 to 350 dollars.” 14From Cordoba the Herald reporter went to Carlota, in a wagondriven by a one-legged Confederate veteran who pointed out thesights as they went. The village, which was now firmly establishedwith a population of thirty families, was laid out systematically arounda large square “which is covered with a natural growth of trees, amongwhich is a grove of mangoes, the most beautiful shade trees, whoseinterlacing boughs and thick, glossy foliage exclude completely thesun’s rays, affording a delightful retreat during the heat of the day. Ina few years, Carlota, will be the most pleasant town in Mexico. It willbe built after the American style, with a degree of beauty and comfortelsewhere unknown in the Empire and the society there will beformed from the best educated families of the South and West.” 15At Carlota, the newsman called on Sterling Price and found theportly general seated on the porch of his bamboo house, the finest intown. It was set “amid a grove of mango trees near the casa whichafford a cool and inviting retreat for the old soldier, and here he maybe found at all hours, seated upon a chair of his own manufacture,cracking jokes with old companions in arms, or giving orders respect¬ing the cultivation of his plantation. Everything is of the most prim-The Colonization Scheme299itive description, the tables and chairs being the General’s own handi¬work. General Price is not a little of a Yank, and is about as ingeniousand handy as any New Englander. Governor Isham Harris and theGeneral are inseparable companions, living together until the Gover¬nor’s house shall be completed.” 16The reporter sat with General Price for five hours on the porch ofhis bamboo house while the General discoursed at length on the subjectof the war, Reconstruction, and colonization in Mexico. As far asprosperity went, the reporter found that Price was doing as well asShelby. He boasted that during the winter he had exported coffee tothe value of $25,000, in addition to tobacco, beans, cattle, horses, sweetpotatoes, and fruits,17 nearly everyone in Carlota was doing the samething on a smaller scale. Said Price, “I have six hundred and forty acreshere which I would not exchange for twelve hundred anywhere in theUnited States,” and he advised the Herald reporter to abandon jour¬nalism, “settle down in this magnificent country, and turn farmer.” 18This was in April, when there were in the lush Cordoba Valleypossibly 5,000 inhabitants, including colonists, Indians, Mexicans, andregiments of French and Austrian soldiers. It was the high noon of thecolony’s existence, and General Price was right in saying that Mexicohad everything to offer the industrious settler—everything, that is, ex¬cept the one indispensable condition of successful colonization: a sta¬ble government. Even while Maximilian was dreaming his Utopiandreams and giving away lands that did not belong to him, it was a factwell known even to those around him that the Liberals, the Republicanfollowers of Juarez, would soon be in power; and it was well knownto the Liberals themselves. Juarez was in the United States, in contactwith top political and military leaders of the administration, and theyhad given him their assurance that the French would be compelled towithdraw, although given the opportunity to do so gradually. As soonas that happened, the scattered Juarista armies would unite and con¬verge on Mexico City. They would be unopposed except for a handfulof troops of the “Imperial Mexican Army” commanded by a be¬wildered Maximilian—himself no general even if he had had an ade¬quate army.In the spring of 1866, however, all was peace and prosperity on thesurface. The French still held a tight cordon of the toughest troopsin Europe—veterans of Algeria and Pekin—across Mexico from VeraCruz in the east to Mazatlan on the Pacific. The market value of col-3 ooMexicoonization lands cultivated by settlers had quadrupled.19 Henry WatkinsAllen, dubious as he was about the success of the scheme, was able towrite: “In a recent trip to Cordoba we were much delighted by thisinteresting city. It is now the center of much attraction and has beenalmost Americanized. In fact more Americans are seen on the streets,in the hotels, and public places than any other class of person. Theymingle freely with the Mexican population and are universally treatedvery kindly and hospitably by them.” 20 The best of the three hotelsin Cordoba was the Confederate, run by W. G. Johnson of Texas, aregular advertiser in The Mexican Times who boasted that the Con¬federate Hotel was the largest two-story building in Cordoba.Jo Shelby’s freight line was doing a thriving business, as alreadyreported, carrying supplies from Vera Cruz to Mexico City and fromMexico City to the French army outposts, in addition to the freightwhich he hauled for the colonists; he had twelve acres in coffee; hewas a vigorous thirty-five years old, reunited with his family for thefirst time since 1861, and Betsy Shelby was awaiting her third baby,the only one of the eight Shelby children to be born in Mexico;21 JoShelby was as happy as he had ever been in his life, and as busy. Hehad taken into partnership in the freight line a Major McMurty ofwhom no other mention survives, and he and McMurty had a mo¬nopoly of whatever goods were hauled for the French army otherthan by rail.If all of Shelby’s neighbors had been as tactful in dealing with theirMexican neighbors as he,22 the fate of the colony might have beendifferent; but they were not. As a result of one highhanded action bya family of ex-Confederates, disaster befell the Cordoba colony. Thisfamily selected some land to homestead, and ordered an Indian familyoccupying it to clear out forthwith. The Indians left, but laid theircase before the leader of the nearest Juarista command, one ColonelFigueroa, who already had an evil record as the murderer in coldblood of a party of prominent Confederates.23 Figueroa welcomed theopportunity to make a surprise attack on the Cordoba plantations,galloping through a mountain pass which the French had left unpro¬tected, with i,ooo guerrillas. He smashed farming implements, burnedcabins, destroyed stock, and carried off thirty settlers as hostages,seizing many of them in the fields, and eventually demanding $10,000for their release. There are various estimates as to the number of thesehostages, but most accounts place the number at thirty. They wereiThe Colonization Scheme301kept for a month “in barbarous captivity,” stripped, robbed, and beaten,but the ransom was not paid and in the end they were released whenit became known that French troops were on their way into the hillsto rescue them. Half naked, and half dead from hunger and exhaustion,with “passports” signed by Figueroa, they made their way back totheir homes eventually. There they found that their work of ninemonths had been wiped out. And the village of Carlota had beenburned to the ground.As a result of the attack on the colony, General Price went toMexico City to see Bazaine. The Marshal sent Dupin and his contra-guerrillas to Omealco and Toloquillo, two of the plundered haciendas,with orders to remain there indefinitely; and Dupin at once went towork scouring the hills for Figueroa and his men, with considerablesuccess.On July 2, 1866, Price wrote to his son Edwin, back in Missouri(a delayed account), “I visited Mexico at the request of our Colony...and to make such arrangments as would prevent such things fromoccurring again I have succeeded in having done. These robbers,failing to get pay, have released their prisoners, who have returned,and an Imperial military outpost has been established in their midst.The Imperial troops went in search of the robbers a few days since,came upon them in camp and scourged them terribly, killing theircommander and about twenty others; six thousand dollars were foundupon the person of the commander.” 24The affair had interesting repercussions over beyond the Frenchlines in the camp of the supreme Juarista commander, General Ale¬jandro Garcia, whom The Mexican Times had at first erroneouslyaccused of attacking the colony.25 Garcia publicly deplored Figueroa’sdeed and declared that he would have hanged Figueroa as a commonrobber had he not perished at the hands of the French; and he shrewdlyseized the opportunity to let loose with a blast of anti-imperial prop¬aganda. The colonists, he said, had “brought all their trouble on them¬selves. In the first place, they had no title to the lands upon which theysquatted [the Juaristas of course denied the right of Maximilian todispose of Mexican territory] and refused to enter into any arrange¬ment for their purchase. Secondly, they had neglected the advice ofMaximilian not to be violent imperialists;26 and thirdly the conductof the party [of settlers] was such that the Liberals were obliged tobreak up the colony, some of the men attempting to dispossess old302Mexicosettlers of their homes and two being guilty of worse crimes in con¬nection with native women. Their indiscretions have effectually brokenup the settlement for the present and put a stop to American colon¬ization. This is more to be regretted as parties are now engaged insurveying and plotting out land for colonization purposes in the stateof San Luis Potosi, and the [Liberal] Government offer to settlersof 21,000 acres on the Hacienda of Michopa near Cuernavaca”27—about seventy miles west of Mexico City.Garcia did not exaggerate. The Figueroa raid ended the settlementof Carlota—the town with the ill-fated name. Those settlers who, likethe Shelbys, occupied haciendas on the edge of Cordoba itself, andhad escaped molestation, remained. General Sterling Price, however,had lost his home and his investment in Mexico and after his returnfrom the visit to Bazaine he became ill, chiefly from anxiety, so muchso that he was unable to bring himself to write the account of theraid to his son until two months after it happened.Fate was dealing unkindly with the old warrior, and some of hisfriends back in Missouri proposed to raise $50,000 to reimburse himfor his losses in Mexico; when Jo Shelby heard of it, he wrote to afriend in Mexico that instead of raising $50,000 for Price, they oughtto raise that amount for the “widows and orphans that were madeby his darn’d blunders.” 28 Such bitterness was not often characteristicof Shelby; one can only conclude that the pompous Price, in his roleas patriarch of the colony, had been getting on Shelby’s nerves withhis pretensions and the pontifical blasts which he was constantly loosingin the press back in the United States. The papers back home feltsomewhat the same way about Price, at least outside of Missouri, wherehe was still revered; the Charleston Daily Courier for June 1, 1867,had this to say about him:“The General is by no means a favorite with the Liberals, who ifthe opportunity offers will give the old Missourian short shrift andthe benefit of a stout rope. This fact Price fully appreciates, and whenhe heard the Liberals intended to raid the Carlotta [sic] colony mountedhis horse and hied him in haste to Cordoba, where he begged theAmericans there to arm themselves and go to Carlotta, excusing him¬self from going on the ground that if the Liberals caught him theywould send him to hell or the United States, and he would as soongo one place as the other.” 29The Colonization Scheme 303As long as the French army garrisoned the frontier, which it didthrough most of the summer, Shelby’s freight business held up, butthe French were pulling in their lines now, harried as they went bythe slowly but relentlessly advancing armies of Juarez and PorfirioDiaz. North of San Luis Potosi the Liberals were commanded by thenotorious Escobedo, who was to be the executioner of Maximilian,and who hated all foreigners with a hatred that amounted to loathing,30and the Liberals took no prisoners. Remembering the hands and feet ofMexicans cut off by the French contra-guerrillas, he visited unspeak¬able tortures on any of them who fell into his hands.Appropriately enough, Shelby’s last pitched battle in any war wasfought with Escobedo’s men from behind the barricade of a wagontrain which was carrying supplies to the French garrison at Cesnola,above San Luis Potosi. Ironically, the commander at Cesnola wasColonel Depreuil, his old antagonist of Parras, and Shelby was to havethe unique opportunity of rescuing Depreuil from the Juaristas, thusheaping coals of fire upon his head. Revenge, as Major Edwards says,is sweet, especially the revenge of returning good for evil.Shelby’s last fight resembled Custer’s in many respects except that,through the use of bold strategy, Shelby emerged from it alive, andthe rescue party arrived on time. The engagement was fought Indianstyle, by twenty dismounted cavalrymen of the Iron Brigade, nowserving Shelby as waggoners, and the finish was in the best traditionof the Wild West, with three squadrons of cavalry and a section offlying artillery, led by three civilian scouts, dashing to the rescue atthe last moment. Nevertheless it was a desperate fight in which menwere killed just as dead as at Shiloh, and but for Shelby’s delayingaction the garrison at Cesnola would have been cut off and massacred.Shelby had come up to San Luis Potosi from Mexico City witheighty wagons of supplies for the garrison of Colonel Douay, and afterreporting to Douay he was sent forward with twenty men and tenwagons toward Cesnola. As he advanced into open country, his ad¬vance was led by James Kirtley, Thomas Boswell, and George Hall,as it had been a thousand times, from Missouri to the Gulf. The ad¬vance was fired upon, and two soldiers, James Ward and Sandy Jones,were wounded. Shelby countermarched quickly to an abandonedhacienda, encamped his wagons within the walls, formed them intoa circle, and awaited an attack. It was impossible to tell how large a3°4Mexicoforce was between them and Cesnola, but it was death to be taken,and Shelby sent Kirtley, Boswell, and Hall back to San Luis Potosffor aid. Their mounts were not of the best, and it was thirty milesto the encampment of Douay. Shelby and his seventeen teamsters wereoutnumbered ten or twenty or even thirty to one, and the situationwould have been hopeless except for one fortunate circumstance:the Juaristas had no artillery. Shelby was able to throw up a formid¬able breastwork under the wheels of the wagons: sandbags and sev¬eral hundred sacks of corn intended for Depreuil. A musket ball couldnot penetrate them, and as long as the Missourians kept their headsdown the Juaristas would be wasting ammunition.The Juarista leader, a Colonel Gutierrez, realized that this was thesituation and sent a soldier across the plain waving a flag of truce.The Liberals had 500 soldiers, explained the de sc amis ado who wasfighting under the banner of Tierra y Libertad, and the Americanswere trapped. Colonel Gutierrez advised surrender.Shelby had heard of Gutierrez, a renegade priest with a savagereputation for torturing prisoners. There would be no surrender, buton the other hand no relief could come until tomorrow, even if Kirt¬ley got through. Shelby decided to parley.As an American soldier, he told the messenger, he could not dis¬honor himself by surrendering until he was convinced that resistancewas hopeless. He would not even discuss surrender until he had seena show of overwhelming force. The messenger could go back and tellhis commander that.On receiving this message, Gutierrez surveyed the situation at Shel¬by’s improvised fort. He could see at least fifteen gleaming rifles, withhairy faces above them, thrust across the sandbags and sacks of corn.There might be more, but not many; a show of force would certainlyconvince the commander of the Americans that they would be slaugh¬tered if they did not surrender.Gutierrez therefore wasted some valuable time, until the sun wentdown, in parading his 500 poorly armed rancheros in front of Shelby.When he concluded that the display had had the required effect, hesent another messenger, demanding Shelby’s surrender once more.Shelby replied that the review had not been impressive; Gutierrezwould have come and get him. Gutierrez decided to do so at aboutdusk.Then, says Major Edwards, “with a shrill, short yell, the MexicansThe Colonization Scheme305dashed forward to the attack. Had the wave held on its course itwould have inundated the earthwork. It broke, however, before itreached halfway across the open space behind which it had gatheredfor the onset. Those in front began to fire too soon, and those in therear, not seeing from the smoke what was really in front, fired too,and without aim and object. With unloaded guns they dared not goon—the fire of the Americans was distressing beyond endurance—thewave broke itself into fragments—and the sun sank lower and lower.” 31As the Mexicans fell back, the full, ringing notes of French bugleswere heard, and the siege was lifted. Three squadrons of Chasseursd’Afrique, led by Scouts Kirtley, Boswell, and Hall, and followed bya battery of horse artillery, rode into the mass of retreating Juaristasand laid about them with the sabre. There was no organized resistance.Gutierrez’ command broke and fled into the cactus.At Cesnola Shelby found that Depreuil had been unaware of thefact that a large body of the enemy was interposed between him andSan Luis Potosi; but he was made aware of it speedily, for CaptainMessillon, the commander of the Chasseurs, brought word fromDouay that the Juaristas about Cesnola were believed to number sev¬eral thousand while Depreuil had only several hundred in his com¬mand. Messillon brought orders for Depreuil to fall back to San LuisPotosi and join the main French force at once; evacuation of theMexican state of that name was to begin immediately.Depreuil was in a state of almost tearful Gallic abjection as he apol¬ogized to Shelby “for the rude things said and done at Parras.” Therewas no need, said Shelby, to apologize; Depreuil had been justifiedin suspecting at first that the Americans were bushwhackers, and bush¬whackers should be dealt with sternly. He rode back to San LuisPotosi with the column, paid his respects to Douay, and prepared toleave. Douay wished to reward him, but Shelby would not have it.“Nevertheless,” said Douay, “you are poor, you are an exile, youcan have no more refuge in this country when it is learned that youhave rescued a French garrison, and I demand the privilege of pay¬ing you for whatever losses you may have incurred.”“Very well, Colonel,” said Shelby, “you can settle the bill nexttime we meet in Mexico City.”He knew that for him and Douay there would never be anothermeeting in Mexico City. The garrison at San Luis Potosi was among30 6 Mexicothe first to be evacuated, and the French troop ships were already onthe tide.Shelby realized that his days as a freighter were over, not becausehe had rescued a French garrison, but because with the departure ofthe red-trousered veterans he would have no more customers. Con¬centrated principally in the large cities now, awaiting their ordersof embarkation, the French no longer patroled the roads or attemptedto give protection to those who lived away from the garrisonedtowns. The highways of Mexico were a bandits’ paradise. He mustfind some other means of making a living. Furthermore, the colonyof Cordoba was expiring from the blow dealt it by Figueroa the pre¬vious spring. Immigration was at an end. This year’s crops had beenruined, and not replanted. There would be no more coffee, bananas,and sugar to haul to the railhead at Paso del Macho, and even if therehad been, there would be no chance of getting through the guerrillalines. He and his partner, McMurty, sold off their stock, and at theend of the rainy season, Shelby took Betsy and the three children toMexico City.A farmer at heart, Shelby had not yet given up the idea of estab¬lishing his own plantation on the rich soil of Mexico; it was a dreamthat died hard with him, and furthermore he had no intention of re¬turning to the United States. The war was only fifteen months ended,and the brutalizing effects of four years of war had made conditionsfrightful in the former Confederacy. From Virginia to Texas, theSouth had been converted from a garden into a desert. Wreck andruin covered the land, and with them despair. Such proud cities asRichmond, Atlanta, and Columbia stood in blackened ruins. Railroadshad been destroyed and not rebuilt; hordes of idle Negroes lordedit over their former masters while the fields went unplanted for lackof help to work the great plantations; cash money was so scarce as tobe nonexistent; a vindictive peace of disfranchisement and humiliationhad been imposed upon the whites; and the proud, imperial South,which had been served by proud men like Joseph Orville Shelby andJohn Newman Edwards, lay prostrate in the dust. In Missouri con¬ditions were perhaps worst of all, for there it had been brother againstbrother, and neighbor against neighbor; and Jo Shelby, on Octoberfirst, 1866, could not imagine any conditions under which he wouldreturn to the state of his adoption. No matter how bad things wereThe Colonization Scheme307in Mexico, they were worse at home; and besides, on this day theEmperor Maximilian had sent for him.With the Emperor was a Baron Sauvage, a French financier whohad acquired a grant of land from Maximilian as big as the state ofDelaware. It was on the Tuxpan River, which empties into the At¬lantic between Tampico and Vera Cruz, and dense with rubber andmahogany trees. (The first are described, in the records of this pre¬automotive age, as “india rubber trees,” the product of which wasused mainly for elastic and buggy tires, and they stood on the pres¬ent site of the great oil wells of the Tampico area.) The climate wastropical, the grant being in the lowlands, and none too healthy. Theinhabitants were Toluca Indians, an ignorant and primitive race, butbelieved to be friendly. Baron Sauvage was dreaming of great wealthfrom his Tuxpan project, but he had no intention of taking up thelife of a pioneer; he wanted a manager and partner who was used toperil and privation and who would be willing to found a colony insuch a steaming jungle outpost. The Emperor had recommendedShelby enthusiastically as just such a man.Shelby was willing, and when the interview was over a scheme ofcolonization had been formed similar to that which had failed in theCordoba Valley; but the promoters believed that their chances ofsuccess at Tuxpan lay in the remoteness of the colony. Cordoba hadfailed only, Shelby believed, because of its exposed position; evenwith Sheridan’s ban on emigration, he argued, success at Cordobawould have caused thousands to defy it and flock to Carlota as toanother California. At Tuxpan, the colony would have the impene¬trable jungle at its back. Its commerce would flow unmolested to theseaport of Tampico for shipment to all the world, and all that wasneeded was to clear the jungle for a settlement.Maximilian lost no time in signing the necessary permissive docu¬ments. On October 8 The Mexican Times announced a decree of theEmperor permitting Baron Sauvage to transfer his rights and privi¬leges of colonization to Jo Shelby in return for stock in the company.Two hundred shares were issued at $500 a share, and these were tobe placed in the market at once to raise money for immediate necessi¬ties. The price of the land, to colonists, was fixed at $1 an acre upto 320 acres; and two schooners were ordered to be placed on theline between New Orleans and Tuxpan.“Every emigrant,” said the Times, “will be landed free of cost308Mexicowithin two days march of his settlement; agents of known energyand discretion are to be sent through North America, and the stockof the company will be offered at once in the New York market. Thelands are government, without being obtained by confiscation, andare among the richest in Mexico. It is impossible to overestimate thegrave political difficulties about to transpire in the United States, andthe great advantages of a colony located near Tuxpan will be to thegovernment and the friends of improvement and agricultural wealth,and the great necessity for the immediate pacification of this depart¬ment is most evident. The destiny of the Government is in its ownhands now. Colonization, unfortunately mismanaged at first, comesback again to the vision on the horizon of Mexico, and when Shelbyand Laurence Keith Boyle and others of similar energy and intelli¬gence put their shoulders to the wheel success is easy and colonizationalready commenced.”The Laurence Keith Boyle mentioned was an American entrepre¬neur in Mexico City, a promoter of a variety of business enterprises,and his part in the venture was to leave at once for New York andobtain Wall Street backing for the company.On November 19, 1866, Major Edwards reported to his readers,“We have gratifying intelligence that General Shelby has gone towork with his accustomed hardihood in this really important enter¬prise. He intends leaving in a very short time [for the Tuxpan colony]with some twenty or more families, for the scene of his labors, andhe is so happily constituted that he brings to his energy—which is nat¬ural and inherent—a faith that is limitless... an enthusiasm born ofthe army, a diplomacy uncultivated, but pliant as wax and sharp ascaustic, and a courage when all else fails, that would dare everythingand grapple everything.“We conscientiously believe that had the management of affairs atCordoba been entrusted to his keeping today a great and growingcolony would have been stretching browned hands southward fromthe Gulf and westward to the gates of Mexico, holding up the whitebeacon of cotton bales and beckoning from the world commerce,enterprise and capital. With him there is no such word as fail,and the man who went up from captain to major general along apath illuminated only by the light of his sword and the blaze of hisgenius, will find it easier to destroy the obstacles of nature alone thanto overcome the barriers of man and nature combined, as he alwaysThe Colonization Scheme309did. When all arrangements have been perfected we will have otherand more extended information to offer our readers.”A survey of the Tuxpan lands was undertaken under the directionof a former Confederate engineer, Major R. J. Lawrence of KansasCity, and Maximilian pledged $20,000 as a subsidy to build a railroadfrom Tampico to Vera Cruz. Shelby hired 200 Mexicans as laborers,acquired a house for Betsy and the children, and went by passengership to Havana to buy supplies. There he bought “a seaworthy sailboat” and loaded it with American plows, harrows, railroad tools ofall kinds, enough provisions for a summer’s campaign, and sailed backto Vera Cruz with a hired crew.At Vera Cruz Shelby purchased another schooner from the FrenchCoast Guard, and hearing that Marshal Bazaine was in the city, wentup to visit him. The marshal of Louis Napoleon greeted him cordially,as always, and Shelby came directly to the point.“Marshal,” he said, “we have taken upon our hands much work.We have plenty of farming implements but no guns. I understand thatyour army of occupation has been supplied recently with the newcbassepot rifles, and I am wondering if you couldn’t spare us some ofyour old muskets. With 500 muskets and enough ammunition to pro¬tect the colony at Tuxpan for six months, I promise you that we canbuild a colony as prosperous as the colony of the Emperor Napoleonin North Africa.”Bazaine smiled a rare smile, but he did not hesitate; he signed theorder for the 500 muskets just as he had given Shelby’s men fiftydollars apiece in gold. It was always said of Magruder that he couldcharm the birds out of the trees, but Shelby could charm thousandsof dollars out of a Frenchman without even promising to pay it back.Bazaine wished him luck, and Shelby sailed out of the harbor of VeraCruz that night, past the dark battlements of the Castle of San Juande Ulloa, the possessor of 500 elegant rifles, great stores of ammuni¬tion, and a boundless faith in the future. The colony at Tuxpan, likePlato’s Atlantis, was to be wiped out “in one dreadful day and night,”but as the tropic breezes blew across the Bay of Campeche, and thegentle waves slapped at the sides of the schooner, he turned in on deckand slept serenely in the winking dark, confident that success was athand.Back in Tuxpan Shelby put his 200 hands to work, and construc¬tion of the Tampico-Vera Cruz railway was actually begun. Mean-310Mexicowhile, Laurence Keith Boyle had been flooding Texas and Arkansaswith circulars from his headquarters in New York, and a trickle ofimmigration began, twenty families at first. No records exist of theTuxpan colony except the references in The Mexican Times and theRailway Era, and the account given by Major Edwards in his historyof the Mexican expedition. Edwards says, “Through no fault of anyAmericans there, the colony did not live. Shelby did the work of agiant. He was alcalde, magistrate, patriarch, contractor, surveyor,physician, interpreter, soldier, lawgiver, mediator, benefactor, auto¬crat, everything. All things that were possible were accomplished.Settlers came in and lands were given to them. The schooners wereloaded with tropical fruit and sent to New Orleans. When they re¬turned they were filled with emigrants. The railroad took unto itselflength and breadth and crept slowly through morass and jungle to¬ward Vera Cruz. Disease also decimated. The rank forests, the trop¬ical sun, the hardships and exposures of the new and laborious lifetold heavily against the men, and many whom the bullet spared, thefever flushed. The living, however, took the place of the dead, andthe work went on.”The blow fell at Tuxpan just as it had fallen at Carlota. The Frenchgarrison at Correzetla, the only troops between Shelby’s settlers andthe ragtag Indian armies of Porfirio Diaz, was ordered to MexicoCity, one of the last French units to go; and word came to Shelbythat 2,000 Mexicans were marching to the colony, shouting “Deathto the Gringo!” He was forced to give the order to evacuate Tux¬pan, although it came too late to save settlers in the outlying districts,who were massacred. Arming all those capable of bearing arms, heset out on a toilsome march for Cordoba, through the mahoganyforests. At Tampico he learned that his two vessels had been scuttled,the crews murdered, and their bodies thrown into the sea. Behind himlay the great wreck of the plantation of Tuxpan, soon to return tothe jungle, the farming implements buried forever in the stranglingvines. He was through with Mexico now.It was March, 1867, when the disheartened survivors of the Tux¬pan expedition returned to Cordoba. The Hacienda Santa Ana stillstood, intact, but Shelby’s title to it, derived from the Emperor Maxi¬milian, was bogus now. He and Betsy had a choice; they could gohome, or they could migrate to Brazil, where Confederates now livedin peace. But Shelby was not disposed to risk any more hardships forThe Colonization Scheme 31 ihis family; he was heartsick at the thought of what his tiny, adorablewife had already been through for his sake. They would go home,no matter what. General Grant was running for President of theUnited States, and his election was a foregone conclusion; that wasgood news. The old soldier who had been generous to a fallen foewould not continue to humiliate the South. Jefferson Davis was free,and Horace Greeley had gone on his bail bond. Perhaps the nation’swounds would be bound up, after all. And the Shelby’s were home¬sick for Kentucky and Missouri.John Edwards was at Cordoba, ready to go home, and Betsy andthe three boys could make the trip to New Orleans and St. Louisunder his protection.32 Shelby would remain a few weeks to see whatcould be salvaged from the wreck, then join them in Kentucky.33Home!Betsy Shelby divided her jewelry among those of Shelby’s men whowere still with him, reserving only enough for herself and the chil¬dren to take passage to the United States.34 Of cash reserves theyhad none. When they boarded the ship at Vera Cruz, all that theytook with them from Mexico was a little dog which ArchbishopLabastida, the Cardinal Archbishop of Mexico, had given the Shelbychildren.35In New Orleans Major Edwards gave an interview to the Associ¬ated Press in which he summed up the situation in Mexico:“There is no love for the people of the United States, and the onlysympathy for them at all is because they are presumed to representopposition to the French and to have expressed dislike for them.“The settlement at Cordoba is among the things of the past. Thedeparture of General Price, which has been duly chronicled, will befollowed by almost all who associated with him at Cordoba. JudgePerkins has gone to Paris, France. Governor Harris left two weeksago for Havana. General Shelby still remains in Cordoba, and prob¬ably will remain for several months to come.“Condition of the country is worse than has been known for twentyyears. The main thoroughfare between the city of Mexico and VeraCruz is interrupted about every fifteen miles and everything the un¬lucky passengers possess is taken with a quiet shrug of the shouldersand the polite declaration: no me importa, which means that it makesno matter to me....312Mexico“Governor T. C. Reynolds of Missouri will remain in the city ofMexico, and see the issue of affairs there. General T. G. Hindmanwill leave in two weeks for the United States where it is his intentionto practise law in Memphis or merchandise in New York.“With the evacuation of Mexico by the French, the rest of theforeigners think it best to leave the country; and those of all nationali¬ties are leaving as fast as steamers will bear them from Vera Cruz.The great idea in the Mexican mind is to get rid of foreigners, nolensvolens; and whether it is the French this year or the people of theUnited States the next, it makes but little difference to them.” 36As the news of reverse after reverse came to Maximilian in thePalace of Chapultepec, he turned despairing eyes toward the Amer¬icans once more, and sent for Shelby. Although he was exposinghimself to great danger in traveling alone in Mexico, Shelby allowedhimself to be joggled for three days in a mule-drawn diligencia toreach the capital. Then for the last time the blunt and faithful exilestood before his Emperor.“How many Americans are there in the country?” inquired Maxi¬milian.Shelby shook his head sadly.“Not enough for a corporal’s guard,” he said.“I need twenty thousand men,” said Maximilian.“I beg pardon,” said Shelby, “but you need forty thousand. Nota single regiment in your service is dependable. You cannot now relyupon numbers; only upon devotion. I am but one man, but I am atyour service.”Maximilian spoke slowly. “It is refreshing to hear the truth,” hesaid. “I feel that you tell it as one who neither fears nor flatters.” Heunclasped the Golden Cross of the Order of Guadelupe from hisbreast, and fastened it upon Shelby’s.“This is all I have to give,” he said. “Take this in parting, and re¬member that circumstances never render impossible the right to diefor a principle.”The two men shook hands, and Shelby walked away into the nightof Mexico. They were not to meet again, but Shelby watched at adistance as Maximilian evacuated his capital forever, moving north¬ward with a token army—the Imperial Mexican Army—to meet themassed forces of Benito Juarez. Hemmed in and beseiged at Queretaro,he was betrayed by one of his own officers, captured by General“The Mexican Times” 313Escobedo, and shot, “the final victim of imperialistic European plotsin America.”Shelby returned home to Kentucky during the second week ofJune, 1867, a few days before Maximilian met his death.Lexington, which had been a staunch Confederate center duringthe war, despite the Union sympathies of such leading citizens as theGratzes, acclaimed him a hero.26. “The Mexican Times”No history of Shelby’s expedition to Mexico would be completewithout a day-by-day reading of The Mexican Times, theweekly English language newspaper of the exiles established in MexicoCity under the patronage of Maximilian by Henry Watkins Allen andJohn Newman Edwards. Seldom has a livelier and more sparklingrecord of a Continental capital been left between the covers of boundvolumes of newsprint.Mexico City under the Empire was another Paris, as Jeanningroshad said, although with the advent of Shelby’s borderers the paseosand boulevards began to take on some of the overtones of the WildWest, the American Civil War, and Election Day in Missouri. Theeffect was pictorial rather than audible, however, for the brigade wasunder heavy discipline, and virtually in custody of the French army.While not confined to barracks, the ex-Confederates, having not onesilver peso to rub against another, found little temptation to rangeabroad in search of excitement. The people of Mexico City wenttheir way unmolested. They were either very rich or very poor, intheir Parisian finery or their Indian blankets, and if the ImperialCourt was not a second Versailles, it was no fault of the French. TheEmperor and the Empress drove out every evening in the plaza, themilitary bands played French and Mexican airs, and Juarez seemedfar away.Allen and Edwards, both enthusiastic newspapermen, though onlyEdwards had professional training, plunged into the colorful life ofthe capital with avidity, and their newspaper contains a completerecord of what they saw and felt. The Times was financed by Maxi-3HMexicomilian himself, and the Empress Carlota smiled on it. She had a warmspot in her heart for the sans-culottes of the South, had the regalCarlota, and they returned her friendship with adoration.1The Times was printed on good stock, which has withstood wellthe ravages of time, and was published every Saturday. Its mastheadwas set in the same type as that of the New York Times, in “OldEnglish” lettering, and the paper consisted of a four-page folderwell buttressed with advertisements. The price was two reales percopy or a dollar a month by subscription. The first issue appearedon September 16, 1865, under the chief editorship of Henry WatkinsAllen. At the death of Allen, Edwards succeeded him as editor andheld that post as long as the Times remained an official organ of theEmpire; after the subsidy was withdrawn and Edwards resigned, itwas owned and edited by one C. B. Barksdale, an American business¬man who urged the Emperor to abdicate and was jailed for a monthfor his pains.Under the editorship of Allen, however, with Edwards as assistant,the Times got off to a handsome start with $10,000 in the bank. BothAllen and Edwards had the ear and confidence of Maximilian, andtheir devotion to the imperial cause was not wholly self-serving, al¬though the subsidy and the weekly paper were a newspaperman’sdream come true—and in a paradise of the tropics at that. Both ro¬mantic Southerners would have worked willingly for nothing, if thathad been possible, for both had succumbed, instantly and irrevocably,to the charm of the Emperor and Empress; and Edwards mourned theEmpress all his days, writing, in the Kansas City Times, upon herconfinement in a European madhouse, the famous editorial, “PoorCarlota,” 2 which was reprinted all over the English-speaking world.It was such an editorial as Galahad might have written of Guinevere.The Mexican Times opened its offices the second week in Septem¬ber at No. 17, Hotel de San Carlos, on the corner of Coliseo andSan Francisco streets. One of Allen’s first acts as editor was to setup a register on which newly arrived Southerners could record theirnames and addresses for the benefit of their friends. Edwards signedthe register as having arrived on August 29th, Jo Shelby on September3rd, and Commodore Maury and Editor Allen each noted the factthat they had been in the city since June 1st and July 29th respec¬tively. The register was reprinted in the first edition of the paper.The Times informed the public that copies were available at the“The Mexican Times”315San Carlos, and at the two swankier hotels, the Iturbide and the Na-cional, and that it could also be bought at the newsstand of H. C.Covert on the corner of Second Plateros and San Juan streets. Thenewsdealer’s address caused Editor Allen to complain of the Mexicancustom of naming a street more than once; it was confusing, hepointed out, to have a First Plateros Street and a Second PlaterosStreet.In the first issue Allen announced that the foreign policy of theTimes would be the same as that which Marshal Bazaine had an¬nounced for Mexico: “indemnity for the past and security for thefuture.” There was also an editorial on the weather: “The Rain—ItRaineth Every Day.”Like the editors of many weekly papers, Allen was hard up forfront-page material. On the front page of the first issue were twolengthy features, “The Death of Montezuma,” dealing with a newsevent three hundred years old, and a history of the song, “AnnieLaurie.” There was more than a hint of nostalgia in the second selec¬tion. Henry Watkins Allen was never a willing exile, although hewrote in a letter home, “I receive much kindness here; I ought tobe grateful. I am. My sanctum in Mexico is the headquarters of allAmericans. I do not expect to be permitted to return, but 1 shall liveand die an American citizen.” 3In the issue of the 23rd, the Times announced, “It is our pleasureto state that the following gentlemen have been appointed agents ofcolonization by the Imperial Government: Sterling Price, Isham Har¬ris of Tennessee, John W. Perkins of Louisiana and W. T. Hardimanof Texas. Also Senor Roberts of Texas.” On the 19th, Price, Per¬kins, and Harris had left for Cordoba, Hardiman and Roberts forTepic. “In a few weeks,” says the Times, the reports of the agentsof colonization will be received, and good lands, in healthy districts,will be apportioned to everyone who wishes to become a citizen ofMexico.”Meanwhile Allen’s editorial assistant had been roaming the streetsof Mexico City like a delighted child, savoring the Utopian sights,sounds, and smells, enjoying the mild weather and exulting in theheady altitude. John Edwards was a bachelor and there were no tiestugging at his heartstrings, as there were at Henry Allen’s. And heloved Mexico City. As the Reverend George Plattenburg, of Dover,Missouri, said of' him after his death, “What a strangely romantic316Mexicoperiod these two years must have been to the dreamy, poetic soldierof the North. The rich, tropical foliage, the skies luminously blue,the warm airs and the voluptuous climate, the romantic people inher¬iting the glorious traditions of old Spain, memories of the Cid, thesongs of Calderon and Lope de Vega, chanted in the sweet Castiliantongue must have been things of ceaseless charm to the imaginativetemperament so strongly marked in Major Edwards.” 4Edwards, in fact, was thinking of exactly all those things, for hewas a student of heroic literature of all ages, but he was also a news¬paperman and he missed nothing in the current scene. One fact espe¬cially enchanted him and he noted it for the paper: “Ice fromPopocatepetl is sold on the backs of burros (asses) at one and a halfcents in the streets.” Editorials were unsigned, but the suspicion isstrong that he also wrote the one entitled, “Oh, the Beautiful Flow¬ers!” It read:“On the corners of the Calles Calisco and Espiritu Santo wherethey join the San Francisco, the Broadway of Mexico City, are tobe seen every morning long rows of Indian boys and girls offeringfor sale the most beautiful flowers made into the most exquisite bou¬quets. These flowers grow in the valley around the city and arebrought to market by means of the canals, which are still much usedby natives. In passing these marts of Flora we always stop and feastour eyes on nature’s loveliest work—always excepting woman. Here¬tofore, seen side by side are all the rare and beautiful flowers knownto the tropics. The passion flower and the superb cloth-of-gold, themost delicate cactus and the flor del paraiso are also here in greatprofusion....”Mexico’s Independence Day is September 16th, and on that dayTheir Majesties attended the opera. It was “Belisario,” one of Doni¬zetti’s best. The Italian Opera Troupe sang the national hymn on thestage after the performance in honor of the Emperor and Empress.That was a Sunday afternoon. In the morning the editors of theTunes had attended a military mass at the Cathedral and been greatlyimpressed by the uniforms.The influx of ex-Confederates into Mexico City was having aplainly discernible effect on life in the capital, as reflected in theadvertisements. Dr. B. M. Rodgers (from California) announced tothe public that he kept always on hand not only the best cigars,Havana and Mexican, but the BEST Virginia chewing tobacco, at“The Mexican Times’’3i7wholesale or retail. F. Dufere, formerly of the Hotel St. Louis inNew Orleans, had opened the National Bar for Americans at theHotel Nacional, but Ed Daily, new proprietor of the St. CharlesSaloon at the San Carlos, warned that his establishment was “the onlysaloon in the place where London and New York drinks are served.”The San Carlos, host of The Mexican Times, advertised “well fur¬nished and arranged and ventilated apartments” and Editor Allen inappreciation gave it a free plug, declaring, “We recommend the SanCarlos to the traveling public. This elegant, newly furnished andwell kept Hotel is decidedly one of the best in the city. It is thefavorite resort of Americans.” Shelby was staying there too, although“Prince John” Magruder was at the more fashionable Iturbide in hisdove-colored top hat and his pepper-and-salt cutaway.There was also the National Shaving, Hairdressing and Dyeing,Curling and Shampooing Salon, at the corner of Santa Clara andThird San Francisco streets. For those interested in reading matter,the English Circulating Library, No. 4 Calle San Francisco, offereda collection of 2,000 volumes, “the only one in Spanish America.”The issue of September 23, 1865, also announced that MatthewFontaine Maury had become a citizen of Mexico, and featured anarticle on the cultivation of the cacao plant, “of interest to all whoare going into the chocolate business.” It was to be the first of aseries of articles on money crops which could be raised in Mexico.For the benefit of the exiles, two exchanges were headed “Destitutionin Georgia” and “The Kentucky Elections a Mockery,” designedperhaps to make them more contented with their lot in a foreignland. The following week, the Times carried the text of Maximilian’sproclamation declaring that since Juarez had left Mexican soil, andwas a refugee in Texas, his followers were now bandits and outsidethe law. This was the famous “Black Decree,” which made manda¬tory the execution of prisoners and cost Maximilian his own lifewhen he himself was made a prisoner.By October 14 Maury had become Chief of Colonization and Ma¬gruder Chief of the Office of Land Colonization. Their friends in theUnited States will be pleased etc. At the Concert Room in the Pal¬ace, the Italian Opera Troupe gave a special performance for theirMajesties; “the beauty and the fashion of the city were there”; like¬wise Major John Newman Edwards.The American Steamship Mail Company of New York, says the3i8MexicoTimes, is now running two modern steamers to Vera Cruz, the Man¬hattan and the Vera Cruz; the captain of the Manhattan, CaptainTurner, a fine upstanding fellow and a credit to the American Mer¬chant Marine, has visited the Times office. The Empire is riding high,the rebels are scattered in the north and Porfirio Diaz is cut off inthe south; Editor Allen cries, “Give us immigration! Give us theskill and energy of Americans, French, English, German and Irish!”There is some other important ship news also in the same issue.Mrs. Shelby, wife of the General, and her two small sons, have ar¬rived in Mexico from New Orleans, and the Times reports that Mrs.Shelby wrote in a letter that General Sheridan told her, “Your hus¬band outlawed himself in going to Mexico.” 5 Editor Allen has beento Cordoba to see the Shelbys, and he comments on the bad roads,especially in the region of the Paso del Macho, which would “liter¬ally swallow up stages, passengers, mules and all. The Ministro deFomento is at work on it.”But Allen found things humming in Cordoba: “There is no limitto the land the company can buy,” and the crops that will growthere, at the mere scratch of a hoe, are tobacco, coffee, sugar cane,rice, indigo, cochineal, and all the cereals in great perfection. Alsofruits and vegetables. Generals Price and Shelby are doing well andthere is still plenty of land left at the twenty-five-cents to a dollar-an-acre figure, with five years to pay. “Cordoba is in fact a paradise... not like the West which has to be reclaimed from the wilderness.Here the settler has only “to redeem from the ravages of war.”The Times wishes “Success to these noble pioneers! Success to theVillage of Carlota!”But it is Christmas time, and not all the cheers for the Emperornor the good wishes for the village of Carlota can take the place ofbeing home at Christmas. Henry Watkins Allen, he who had beenonce of that company whom O. Henry called the angels of theearth, could not forget. On Christmas Day he wrote:“On Last Christmas we were seated in our executive chair, chiefmagistrate of the great State of Louisiana, the Governor of a nobleconstituency of lovely women and brave men. The Christmas beforethat we were a brigadier in the field. On the next Christmas we wereconfined to our bed, given up to die and suffering all the agonies ofterrible wounds. Today we are in this great city, editing this humblepaper and coining our brain into our daily bread, but thank God, in“The Mexican Times”3*9good health—as it were rejuvenated—and now enjoying the hospitalityof the good people of Mexico. God bless the exiles wherever theymay be in this wide world of sorrow and may they on ChristmasDay with grateful hearts thank all who have been kind to them inthe land of the stranger. That heaven may bless our native land, andbind up the bruised and broken hearts and dry every mourner’s tear,is our sincere, fervent prayer.”If I forget thee, O Jerusalem!On New Year’s Day, 1866, the Times devotes its whole front pageto the message of Andrew Johnson to Congress on the restoration ofthe Union. The Empress Carlota has returned from a trip to Yucatan,and Major Edwards composes a long poem in honor of the event.On January 16th Editor Allen welcomed the Deutsche Presse,published in German in the city. “It is a highly respectable sheet,”he said, “and we hope it will be well and liberally patronized by thepublic. The German population including the officers and soldiers ofGerman extraction form a large and highly respectable portion ofthis empire. They should have a newspaper. We welcome Dr. Fred-erico A. Ludert to the corps editorial.”In the same issue the Times said: “We have received letters fromSenores Price, Shelby, Perkins and Harris at Cordoba. They are alldoing well and delighted with Mexico. We have also heard fromCol. Terry of Guadalajara and Col. O’Bannon of San Luis Potosi.” 6The Times also quotes with approval an editorial in the New YorkDaily News which reports that many disaffected Southerners are inMexico, “all of them in high spirits and expect to make a fortuneraising coffee.” The same paper carries, too, the letter of GeneralSterling Price to a friend in New York pointing out that “we arepractically as near the markets of New Orleans and New York asare the people of Central Missouri, and the climate is the best in theworld.” There is also mention of the fact that the Imperial MexicanRailway will be extended soon from Vera Cruz into the highlands,and that the ex-Confederate colony soon will be linked by rail tothe sea.Major Edwards’ preoccupation with natural phenomena is seen intwo items published about this time. One is an editorial on an earth¬quake, the other on a sea serpent reportedly seen in Virginia. Evenin 1865, the sea serpent was a newspaper standby.320MexicoAn earth tremor had shaken up the Times office. (The editorialrooms had been moved from No. 17 to more commodious quartersin No. 37, Hotel de San Carlos.)“The cool weather of the last few days,” says the editorial, “doubt¬less has been caused by the earthquake. Why and how we leave tothe weatherwise philosophers to tell. What is the primary cause ofearthquakes? An intelligent article on this all-absorbing topic is solic¬ited.” As any newspaperman can see, Major Edwards was having avery fine time at his job of assistant. An indefatigable reader of ex¬changes, he also published the report that “the Richmond (Va.) Timesamuses itself with refreshing stories of the old newspaper canard ofthe sea serpent. The fabulous monster has reappeared on the coastof Nahant and Willis Creek, Virginia. At the latter place when seenit was reported to be 150 feet long.”In December, 1865, the first of the exiles to return to the UnitedStates has gone. The ageing Kirby Smith has left Mexico, and is re¬ported to be in Lynchburg, Virginia. But Jubal Early, “a nobleSouthern Tacitus,” is in town. He and General Sheridan are rumoredto be on the verge of a duel because of snide remarks made by theYankee general in an interview.The paper was having trouble with one of its advertisers. Underan editorial banner entitled “HOLLOWAY’S PILLS,” it complained:“We have published his pills for several months and now he refusesto pay the draft of his agent. Out upon such a swindling, thievingconcern! Stephens [a representative of Holloway’s Pills] has his pricefor his pills and we have our price for the paper. Benjamin HollowayStephens should be condemned to sit in the pillory and swallow hisown pills until he has purged himself to death.”In March Editor Allen took a trip to the seaside at Vera Cruz,visiting the colony of Carlota en route, and on St. Patrick’s Day,1866, bathed in the ocean, writing to Edwards in Mexico City, “Ihave bathed in the briny waters of Old Ocean and laid my handsupon his mane and played familiar with his hoary locks.” Allen wasone, like Edwards, who scorned to use the copper coin of languagewhere there was so much gold lying about. “When the Imperial Rail¬way to Vera Cruz is finished, what a rush there will be for freshoysters and fish and sea bathing!”The gallant Allen was feeling much better than he had in years,and seemed on his way to a full recovery from the ill health that had“The Mexican Times”321plagued him since Shiloh; but the hand of death was laid on him atVera Cruz. That graveyard of Europeans and Americans in the mos¬quito-infested lowlands, was full of the yellow fever at this season,and Allen came down with it. He died of it in Mexico City on April22, 1866, in spite of all that Marshal Bazaine’s personal physician coulddo, and Edwards succeeded to full control of the paper.March was a fateful month. It was during March that the UnitedStates inaugurated the moves which were to hasten Maximilian tohis doom; and in Allen’s last editorial he had written, concerning therumors that the French troops were to be evacuated from Mexico,“The United States are spoiled children whose pranks old Europeoften smiles at; but the statesmen of America should avoid abusingthe patience of France and England beyond their endurance. Theevacuation of Mexico by French troops will commence the momentthat the Government of the United States shall have recognized theEmperor Maximilian.”The French, in fact, had already got their marching orders fromSecretary of State Seward. Politely, but firmly, he had told them thatthey must go. They could take eighteen months to do so, and with¬draw gradually, thus saving face; but go they must, for, as GeneralGrant said, the French invasion of Mexico was so closely related tothe Rebellion as to be a part of it.7 Louis Napoleon and Bazaine hadalready acquiesced, and even though Maximilian was to occupy thethrone of Montezuma for a full year longer, preparations were goingforward for the withdrawal of the French troops.To Edwards, withdrawal of the French troops was as unthinkableas it had been to Allen. On May 19, 1866, he wrote: “We do notbelieve, in the first place, that the French troops will be withdrawn.Eighteen months is a long time and North American insolence andaggression may become insufferable. Mr. Seward’s menace of Aus¬tria, and the rest of the world, General Sheridan’s hatred of emigra¬tion, and General Weitzel’s conduct on the Rio Grande and othermarkedly unfriendly acts show that the chronic bullying of that partyhas not yet exhausted itself, and the only question is how far it canbe carried unless it is speedily checked.”When it became obvious, as it soon did, that nothing was goingto check the policy of the United States with regard to Mexico,Edwards wrote petulantly: “Since the Emperor [Napoleon] has an¬nounced openly his intention to withdraw his forces, why, the sooner322Mexicothey go, the better, that’s all. The Emperor Maximilian has posses¬sion, which is the nine points involved, and the tenth may be foundin the determination with which he intends to strive for his honorand his cause.”None should have known better than Major Edwards that it wouldtake more than mere determination to set at naught the purposes ofmen like Grant and Seward.Shortly thereafter the attack on the Cordoba Colony occurred andthe Times reprinted an account of it from the columns of the RailwayEra, an English language publication which had been established atOrizaba by George W. Clarke:8“A well mounted column under Col. Figueroa swept down on theunprotected outpost, swallowed up men, stock, implements and pro¬visions, and threw their advance to the gates of Carlota, where theywere beaten off. In a night the hard-bought improvements of ninemonths were swept away, were destroyed totally. Homes were plun¬dered, trunks forced open, mules taken, clandestinely approved bysympathetic neighbors. If they had been Yankee railroad contractorsor owners of model coffee haciendas there would not have been ahorse stolen or a firkin of lard run into tortillas. They were mostlyex-Confederates, which only means, as we have ever contended, thatSouthern men are naturally and instinctively supporters of the Em-pire.>>Edwards pointed to the Cordoba raid as an example of the Em¬peror’s need to follow Shelby’s suggestion and recruit 50,000 soldiersof the Southern Army to bolster his sagging Empire. Under formerC. S. A. commissioned officers, Edwards said, such an army still couldreplace the troops of Louis Napoleon and secure Maximilian on histhrone.9He was having troubles of his own, too. The $10,000 subsidy hadbeen spent, and in August, 1866, the paper suspended publication fora week. “Owing to changes necessary to be made in the paper,” Ed¬wards advised his readers, “its publication for one week will be sus¬pended, at the expiration of which time we hope to offer renewedinducements to our subscribers.” Business was bad for the Empire,too; the subsidy would not be renewed although Edwards’ salarywould continue. Juarez was back in the country with a large if ill-trained army and General Sheridan had been in contact with his emis¬saries in the North, “taking care not to do so in the dark.” 10 The“The Mexican Times”323Juaristas were equal at least in numbers to the French and they werein possession of the whole line of the Rio Grande and all Mexico asfar down as San Luis Potosi.Edwards managed to resume publication of the Times on August27, 1866. Throughout the fall and winter his paper reflected the un¬easy mood of the capital, although nothing could altogether extinguishhis natural optimism. In June he had written: “Life is very brief andcommonplace, but crest it with a crown, deck it with the glory andgrandeur of royalty illumined by great and heroic deeds, and it floatsaway in an eternal sea of history and renown.” In that sentence wassummed up the whole creed of John Newman Edwards, the votaryof Sir Walter Scott; but as winter came on, no amount of optimismor imperial tinsel could stay the course of history.Shortly after Sheridan extended the hand of friendship to the Juaris¬tas, the New York Times reported that an agreement had been reachedunder which the United States was to give military support to Juarezin return for the cession of the rich mining states of Chihuahua andSonora. Edwards dismissed the report as the foolish rumor that itwas, in an editorial entitled “All That Glitters Is Not Gold,” but heturned both journalistic barrels on the correspondent of the NewYork Times who had originated the rumor. The mountain, he said,had attracted the attention of a mouse. The mountain was “thisgoodly city of ours” and the mouse the “Washington penny-a-liner”;but the real RAT was the New York Times, “which has gnawed itsway into every party and then gnawed out again.” Edwards did notlike the New York Times.He had good reason not to. The Times had been an implacable foeof the Confederates in Mexico. In this case he was perhaps thinkingof a particularly infuriating article written by a Times correspondenton January 19, 1866, entitled “Interview With Seedy Southern Exiles—Failure of the Southern Emigration Scheme.” Since the colony hadbeen barely established at that time, announcement of its failure wascertainly premature; yet the New York reporter had written con¬descendingly: “We had a look at some of those great and mightySoutherners who have sold four thousand Southern families to theEmpire. The Emperor, however, begins to smell a rat, and begins tosee that Maury, Price and Magruder have humbugged him. The fourthousand families have not been delivered according to bargain—noteven one thousand, not even one hundred, not even fifty. The poor3MMexicofellows looked seedy enough ... they had one horse between four. In¬deed the ways of a sinner are hard.”As Major Edwards said, if anyone smelled a rat, he could identifythe rat.The Mexican Times was in serious financial difficulties by Novem¬ber; Edwards tried valiantly, after the subsidy was spent, to pay ex¬penses through job printing and advertisements; but he was no businessman and after three months the paper’s affairs were in such a snarlthat there was nothing to do but put it on the auction block. B. C.Barksdale, who had a sewing machine agency in Mexico City, andhad made a fortune selling the maquinas de coser, bought it for anundisclosed price. Major Edwards laid down his pen and for the nexttwo months visited friends at Cordoba and elsewhere before return¬ing to the United States. He arrived home in Missouri in April, 1867.The last editorial that Edwards wrote for The Mexican Times con¬cerned Carlota. He had received shocking news; the Empress hadsuffered a nervous breakdown in Rome, whither she had gone to askthe aid of the Pope in keeping her husband on the throne of Afexico.The Pope had been a last, desperate resort; Louis Napoleon had al¬ready refused to have anything further to do with Maximilian, andwhen the full realization of what this meant came to the highly strung,ambitious woman, her mind gave way.Edwards wrote, “Very weak and pale today at Miramar, sur¬rounded by the unseen wings of angels, lies the proudest, queenliest,noblest woman of the age. Pure and stainless as a heaven-guardedchild, she has hazarded life for humanity and sacrificed health forher kindred and her cause. Within the hushed and silent chamberrises up a shrine bright with glorious teachings of nobility—so holythat womanhood all over the earth can bow down and worship thereas the Persian bends in wild idolatry to the shining God of his countryand his faith.“Beautiful in the pride and purity of her kingly race; filled inex¬pressibly with the great longings of heroic ambition; brave unto deathand clothed with a mantle of living hope and desire—she vanquishedthe terrors of pestilence, scorned the dangers of the sea, endured thefatigues of a dreary voyage and entered the palace of the Tuileries asa saint might enter heaven—because she had a right to be there and“The Mexican Times”325because she was the equal of any prince or emperor, pope or potentatefrom the confines of one continent to the confines of another.“Amid the vastness and age and memories of the Eternal City shewas stricken down as a flower when the hoar frosts fall and the northwind comes heavy with the wings of the snow. It is only left tothose now who have received from her unbounded charity, help andsympathy; those who have drawn from her immortal example, cour¬age and devotion; those who feel pride in their sex because it hasbeen crowned, and enabled to pray to that God who tempers thewind to the shorn lamb that he will cool her fevered brow with thegentle streams of his everlasting mercy and bless her returning healthwith wishes gratified and hopes fulfilled and realized.”The same issue also recorded the fact that General Shelby had leftfor Tuxpan with twenty families. Edwards assailed the immigrationauthorities, but he lauded Shelby to the sky, saying that if the manage¬ment of Cordoba had been entrusted to him a great and growingcolony would extend southward from the Gulf and to the gates ofMexico City. “With him there is no such word as fail.”With Edwards, however, there was such a word now, and he lefthis office at the San Carlos for good on December 5th. There wouldbe other newspapers, in Missouri, and an editorial fame that wouldspread beyond the borders of the state; but there would never beanother such venture, for him, as The Mexican Times.Under Barksdale, the paper prospered at once. He was a capableeditor and a courageous one and he had in ample measure the businessinstincts which Edwards lacked. Within a short time the paper wasa bi-weekly instead of a weekly and the front page was covered withads instead of features copied out of the encyclopedia. Henry Allenand John Edwards had used the New York Times as a typographicalmodel; under Barksdale the paper resembled the London Times, whichhas published ads on the front page for a hundred years.From the first, Barksdale was impatient with Maximilian for notpacking his valise and going home to Europe where he certainly be¬longed. When Maximilian went out to the field to look over troopsof his “Imperial Mexican Army,” Barksdale wrote: “It is our inflex¬ible idea that the Emperor will not return to this capital.” The Em¬peror did return, in brief triumph; but Barksdale quoted MarshalBazaine as saying, “The Republic has entered into the manners andideas of a majority of the people.” Barksdale remarked: “This is the326Mexicoconfession of one who has been for some two years in Mexico, fight¬ing and working to make it his empire. With 40,000 French and20,000 Mexicans under his command, the marshal confesses the failureof the attempt.”As another not so gentle hint to the Emperor to get out, Barksdaleran this item: “A Significant Notice: The Last Convoy. Col. NapoleonBoyer, Marshal Bazaine’s chief of staff, announces through the col¬umns of the Ere Nouvelle that the very last convoy will depart fromthis city on Friday the 1st proximo. He warns all persons who intendto improve the opportunity that there will be no postponement. Thedate mentioned is farther off than was intended, but on account ofthe large number of families that are anxious to go to Vera Cruzwith the convoy, a postponement has been made from the 27 th to the1 st proximo.”All of this was extremely annoying to the Imperial officials in Mex¬ico City, but it was not until Barksdale reported that Maximilianwas seeking to make a deal with Porfirio Diaz that they acted. Barks¬dale was in jail for a month before he was able to make his peacewith General Marquez, whom Maximilian had named his lugartenientein the capital.The suspension of The Mexican Times for eight issues seems but tohave whetted the appetite of its readers for later issues; the paperpicked up right where it had left off and on June 17, 1867, Barks¬dale announced that “the rapid increases in circulation of the Timessince the change of management in December 1866 has clearly provedthat a newspaper published in the English language in Mexico Cityis not only a necessity, but that it can be a power in the country.”The next day, the troops of Porfirio Diaz entered the city, andall foreign language newspapers were suppressed.PART FIVEThe Bluegrass and Missouri Again27. Home jrom the WarsIT WAS a changed Lexington to which Shelby and his familyreturned in June, 1867. His old boyhood friend, John HuntMorgan, was dead in the war, as were so many of the gildedyouth of Kentucky who had been his boon companions in the long-gone days at Transylvania University. The war had killed the hempindustry in the state, and in fact in the entire South.1 His stepfather,Benjamin Gratz, had been retired since 1861. The ropewalk in therear of the mansion on Mill Street was idle now, and practically theonly business interest in which Gratz was active was the cultivationof the big $40,000 farm outside of Waverly which he had acquiredduring the war.The political atmosphere of Kentucky, however, delighted Shelby.In Mexico he had heard grim stories of Reconstruction, but as hewalked the streets of Lexington he found Southerners holding theirheads up, for the pro-Confederate element had succeeded in doingat the polls in 1866 what they had not been able to do in ’61: theyhad gained control of the state. The Democratic Convention at Louis¬ville in May had adopted a belligerent platform condemning the Fed¬eral government for its “usurpations,” extending sympathy to theSouthern states in their troubles, and demanding the right to regulatethe political status of the freed Negroes. The platform praised Presi¬dent Andrew Johnson for his stand on the Freedmen’s Bureau andthe Civil Rights Bill, and pledged support of efforts to restore theConstitution and the powers of the states.When the election was held, the candidates of the simon pureDemocrats, running on this platform to repeal the Civil War, were327328 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againelected by an overwhelming majority. The Cincinnati Gazette, a Rad¬ical Republican newspaper and self-appointed monitor of Kentuckypolitics, admitted: “It was a straight-cut rebel victory. There is notthe least necessity in trying to dodge or evade the issue.... The rebelgray has whipped the union blue at the polls.” 2The reason for this revulsion of feeling in Kentucky undoubtedlywas that the Federal occupation authorities, with their harsh rule andtheir indiscriminate use of firing squads, had alienated even that sectionof the population which had been staunchly Unionist throughout thewar.3 The emancipation of the slaves, now set over their masters inthe Southern states, was a sore point, too. In fact, Kentuckians foundthe political philosophy of the Radical Republicans altogether tooproletarian and exotic, and they flocked back to the banner of whatthe New York Herald called “Bourbon Democracy” with a vengeance.Jo Shelby found the air of Kentucky sweet to breathe again.The first reference to Shelby in Lexington after he reached St.Louis aboard the Great Republic is to be found in the KentuckyGazette for June 22, 1867, which observes: “General Jo. O. Shelbypaid our city a visit on Thursday last and spent the day receiving thecongratulations of his friends and the hearty good wishes of those whohave differed with him politically. He has no enemies, and it is grati¬fying to observe that his intercourse with our people was both friendlyand cordial. This is right; for there is no sort of propriety in allowingold questions to disturb the equanimity of the present, or add anobstacle to the heartiest reestablishment of those kindly relations thatshould subsist between the people whose political destiny is so inti¬mately and inseparably conjoined.“Gen. Shelby did not merely receive a cordial welcome from politi¬cian friends, but the greeting extended to those of opposite sentiment,who had known him in brighter and better days, all giving him theright hand of friendship and wishing for him prosperity and happiness.This cordial reception in the capital of his own county must have beengratifying, if not indeed flattering to him. And this is just as it shouldbe. We should not allow prejudice to so far overcome our judgmentof propriety and right as to either forget or neglect the genial andpleasant gentleman and brave and intelligent soldier—the hero of ahundred hard-fought battles in the open field against a legitimateenemy, each contending for what they thought right.”Home from the Wars329The account further records that “in the evening, Gen. Shelby didthe ladies present at Arcana Hall the honor of his presence for a shorttime, where the welcome to him was marked with all the cordialityand respect due to a gentleman and a soldier. We again welcome Gen.Shelby to his old county, and hope that he will find it to his advantageto make Fayette County his home. But should he not do so, ourbest wishes follow him wherever he may elect to reside.”It was Lafayette County, Missouri, however, not Fayette County,Kentucky, which was home to Jo and Betsy Shelby, and he madeplans to return to Missouri immediately, to a farm near Aullville in thehemp country. The hemp industry was in a bad way; in fact it wasjust as dead in Missouri as it was in Kentucky, but Jo Shelby couldnot foresee that, and since Missouri had been the nation’s greatesthemp-growing state in the late 1850’s, it was logical to suppose thatthe future of the hemp industry still lay in Missouri.Furthermore, the state had been laid waste by war, and its economywould have to rebuild. In that fact lay the seeds of a mighty prosperity,for in addition to the agricultural wealth of Missouri, there were thickbeds of coal under the western ridges, and mountains of iron ore. Withthe railroads pushing west (the Union Pacific was being driven toCalifornia that very year by the swinging picks of the Irish) and withMissouri standing at the crossroads of the nation, a boom was inevitablewhen political conditions should return to normal. Shelby could notwait to begin spreading hemp again. And of course, as always, hewould go into a little of everything to bolster his hemp crop; farming,buying livestock, and turning prairie lands into wheat fields.Betsy Shelby too was homesick for Missouri and the beautifulcountryside from which she had been so rudely banished six yearsago. She wanted to go home with the children, and so did her husband.Thus, with the financial backing of the family, Shelby returned tothe Missouri River Valley in the summer of 1867, only a few milesfrom the spot where he had ridden away as a captain in the StateGuard in 1861. Their home was a plain farmhouse, twelve miles fromLexington and the broad Missouri River, situated in a triangle of richprairie formed by the towns of Aullville, Page City, and Higginsville.Higginsville, six miles away, was the post office. Nathan Parker, awriter from the North who published a book that year, Missouri asIt Is in 1867, now a gold mine of information on postwar Missouri,says of the neighborhood of Higginsville that “the traveler sees as33°The Bluegrass and Missouri Againfine country as there is in Adissouri. The landscape is beautiful andimposing. In summer the prairies resemble a vast carpet of greenspread out before him, dotted here and there with herds of cattle thatcrop the luxuriant native grasses, and flowers of every hue and everycolor of the rainbow, which perfume the atmosphere while theydazzle the eye of the beholder, and he can hardly dismiss the idea thatthe cattle are trespassers on his artificial parterre, which seems to havebeen cultivated and carefully dressed, and set in groves skirted alongthe streams with beautiful parks.” 4But the beauty of the countryside belied the harsh reality of life forthose Missourians who had fought against the Union or supported theConfederacy behind the Federal lines. Hostility against the Southernminority was deeper and more vindictive in Missouri than in any otherstate, for Missouri had been not only a battleground, but a housedivided against itself. Her body politic had been clubbed into a sense¬less, bloody pulp by the internecine warfare, and by the atrocitiescommitted, on the one side, by Quantrill, Anderson, and Todd, andby Lane, Jennison, Ewing, and McNeil, on the other. The wholecommunity was seething with hate, hating as only neighbors andkinsmen can hate.The Union had won, and dire and bitter measures were being takenagainst the ex-Confederates. The Drake Constitution of 1865, whileit could hardly be called a carpetbag Constitution since it was drawnup by Missourians, was nevertheless an instrument of vengeanceagainst the ex-rebels which was not surpassed in any of the “recon¬structed” states, not even under Governor Brownlow in Tennessee.Former Confederates were not only disfranchised in Missouri, theywere forbidden to teach, preach, practice law, perform the marriageceremony, or engage in corporate business. To make sure that no statecourt would interfere with its provisions, the Constitution providedfor the removal of judges and other officers of government at theinstance of the governor, who could replace them with RadicalRepublicans at will.The fanaticism of the Radicals was to prove their own undoing inthe end, as it had in Kentucky, and the pendulum was to swing in theother direction by 1870, when Gratz Brown was to be electedgovernor; but at this time the only occupation open to Shelby wasthat of farmer. He could not engage in business as he had done in the1850’s, or in any other occupation save that of the soil. In this he wasHome from the Wars 331not so fortunate as General Lee, who had become a college presidentin 1867.5But Jo Shelby was a farmer at heart, and the next two years werehappy ones for the Shelbys, after the turmoil of Mexico. In 1868 thedisabilities of ex-Confederates were removed, and their fourth child,Webb Shelby, was born. With four small boys Betsy Shelby had herhands full. (It was beginning to look as if there would be no girls inthe family.) She was not too busy, however, to keep the open housethat Shelby loved. During these years the farmhouse was visited byhundreds of old Confederates, many of whom were homeless uponthe roads of Missouri, and for them the latchstring was always out,as well as a good dinner cooked and a clean bed waiting. The Shelbylatchstring was out not merely for old Confederates. In his homeShelby entertained almost daily former officers and men of the BlueArmies, especially those who had fought against him and who wereimpelled either by admiration or curiosity to see the Great Raider ofthe Rebellion in person. Between old soldiers, naturally, there was noanimosity, for as Grant said, if it had been left up to the soldiers, peacewould have been restored in a year.6The fame of the Shelby hospitality soon became such that in ashort time anybody who needed a meal, or an encouraging word, orhelp of any kind—such as eloping sweethearts—wound up at theShelby homestead whether they knew the Shelbys or not. On at leasttwo occasions the romantic Jo and his no less romantic Betsy assistedrunaways to get married. One of these was John Newman Edwardsand his fiancee, Virginia Plattenburg, who was also his cousin. Theywere married at the Shelby farm on March 28, 1871. The gallantmajor was forced to elope with his bride from her home at near-byDover, for Jennie’s parents objected to the union on the ground of thenear family relationship of the parties. But it was a love match andhighly successful, much more so than might have been expected froma bachelor of the age and disposition of John Edwards. The romanticsoldier, now a newspaper editor in Kansas City,7 made a devotedhusband.Among the visitors to the Shelby homestead in the late sixties andearly seventies were Jesse James, Frank James, Cole Younger, andsome of their friends. Their business seemed to carry them about thecountry a good deal, and Jesse always tried to pay for their meals,though Shelby wouldn’t hear of it. They were as welcome as the332 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againflowers in May, Frank especially, for they were his old boys, and inJo Shelby’s eyes his old boys could do no wrong. There were plenty ofstories going around to the effect that they were road agents, but ifso, it was up to the law to catch them. And the law in Missouri, atleast in the first few years after the war, would get little aid or comfortfrom Jo Shelby. It was that same law which disfranchised Southernwhite men and dragged them down to the level of Negroes before thewar; if the boys got a little desperate under these circumstances, noone was going to criticize them for it—or interfere with them—inShelby’s presence.Many of Shelby’s admirers have made much of the supposed factthat Shelby always absented himself from home if he knew that theJames Boys were coming, but the plain truth of the matter is that hedidn’t. If he was at home, he stayed and greeted them; if he had goneto town, he had gone to town, and Jesse’s and Frank’s schedule had noinfluence on it one way or the other.As the St. Louis Republican said, “ It made no difference whetherGeneral Shelby was home or not. The latchstring was out just thesame; and if it was winter, the big, open fireplace was made to blazewith logs and the table groaned with the bounteous fare which theShelby family always kept. There were more dainties when guestscame and somehow the fire seemed brighter and bigger. But JesseJames was safe and he knew it. Shelby had announced that anyonewho surrounded the house would have to take the consequences. Itwould have been a reckless daredevil of a detective indeed who wouldhave dared intrude upon the Shelby homestead, for with him his homewas his castle. A hungry detective might have pulled the latchstring,found food and shelter, but the minute he sought to intrude his mis¬sion it would have been a sorry day for him. None were brave enoughto try it, although they must have known where the game could befound. Constables and sheriffs knew where Jesse came and went.They knew him by a great fleet-footed gray horse, a pet that he alwaysrode, and yet none of them called at the Shelby homestead for severaldays thereafter, and then not on business. Jesse made no effort toconceal his identity. He rode along the country highways and throughthe village streets....” 8That was written much later, when the James Gang had attainedits national notoriety as robbers of both trains and banks, but it wouldhave made no difference at any time, as events showed. Aside from“The Bloody Bonds”333his unswerving loyalty to the men of his old command, Shelby con¬sidered that he owed Frank James a debt that he could never repay,for saving him from capture at Prairie Grove, and that Jesse sharedin the debt which he owed to Frank.Shelby was to repay this debt to Frank James twice over, duringthe next fifteen years or so, and it was to cost him dear, but wherethere was a question of loyalty involved, with Jo Shelby there couldbe but one answer. Frank and Jesse and their companions were wel¬come at the house between Aullville and Page City. Such loyalty isnot unknown in Missouri in our time, around Independence, not farfrom the Shelbys’ neighborhood.One day in 1872, Frank James rode up to the Shelby farmhouse.Visits from the James Boys were not unusual (Jesse especially hadalways put himself out to be nice to Betsy Shelby and on one occasionhad saved a Negro boy on the place from violence at the hands ofwhite ruffians), but this time Frank was alone. Furthermore, he was ina desperate condition. Shelby said afterward that he was bleeding atthe lungs. Whether this was from a bullet wound is not clear. RobertusLove, in his Rise and Fall of Jesse James, says that Frank was rumoredto have tuberculosis,9 but at any rate, Frank was as pale as death andunable to ride or walk another step. The Shelbys took him in, and forthe next two and a half months nursed him until he was able to be upand about again. As Shelby testified later at Frank’s trial, everyoneknew he was there, but he was not molested by the officers of the lawduring all that time. When he recovered, he rode away to Tennessee.That was the last time Shelby saw Frank James until he saw him inthe prisoner’s dock, on trial for his life, twelve years later.28. “The Bloody Bonds": The Gunn City MassacreWhen the disabilities of the ex-Confederates were removed in1868, Jo Shelby cast around for some business to go into, asidefrom farming. The farm prospered, but not sufficiently to support thelavish hospitality which he and Betsy extended to all who chanced theirway; and railroads, which were enjoying a postwar building boom,seemed the most promising opportunity for big money.334The Bluegrass and Missouri Again“Boom” is a mild word for the turbulent revival of railroad spendingwhich was taking place in Missouri. A race was on—a race to be thefirst county in a given section to have a railroad, and whole com¬munities, stirred by promotion literature and editorials in their localpapers,1 felt that here was the philosopher’s stone—transportation.Land values would rise at least five dollars an acre within five miles ofany railroad; farmers’ market prices would increase fifty per cent; anda flood of immigration, with prosperity in its wake, would followwherever the magic tracks were laid. Half the counties in the state weremortgaging themselves up to the hilt, and beyond, to build short linesor “feeders” to connect with big railroads, such as the Missouri Pacific,which ran from St. Louis to Kansas City, and thence with main linesin Kansas and Nebraska.No fewer than eighteen of these short lines were built,2 and someof them, like the Missouri, Kansas & Texas (the “Katy”) grew intomajor railroads. In some cases, however, where the counties partedwith the bonds before the work was done, they found themselveswith a large bonded indebtedness and no railroad;3 but the bondscould not be repudiated if they had come into the hands of “holdersin due course”—as the promoters saw that they had—and their grand¬children would still be paying the bill as late at 1934.4 Most of thetrouble arose not from fraud and collusion—although there was plentyof that—but simply from the fact that the counties overestimated theirability to pay.5Enthusiasm for railroads in Missouri was not new. The fever forrailway expansion which had gripped the entire nation during theprewar years had been at the top of the thermometer in Missouri inthe 1850’s, but little had been done. The war had put a halt to all con¬struction except 108 miles of track which represented the efforts ofthe Missouri Pacific to reach the western boundary of the state.6 Nowthat the war was over, and the general tone of business improved, therosy dream appeared a possibility, and the St. Louis Republican foundthat “never before was the railroad mania in a more intensified condi¬tion than at present” 7—1868.Shelby had superintended railroad construction in Mexico, and theromance of railroad building had a strong appeal for him. The fabulousprofits envisioned by the promoters had an even stronger appeal, nodoubt; to a man of Jo Shelby’s extravagant needs railroads seemed likean immediate answer to prayer, and the year 1869 found him deep in“The Bloody Bonds”335the affairs of not one, but two, rail transportation schemes. The firstwas the Lexington and St. Louis, already being built, of which he waselected a director, and the second was the famous, or infamous, St.Louis and Santa Fe, whose bond scandals caused a bloody massacre,and for whom Shelby and a business partner, James Lillis, contractedto lay $75,000 worth of track.The Lexington and St. Louis, a strictly legitimate enterprise, was aproject for which the people of Lafayette and Pettis counties hadvoted $800,000 in bonds in two elections. Its charter dated from1859, but war had halted two attempts at construction, in i860 and1861. After the war the project was revived, and on April 1, 1869, thedirectors let a contract to Daniel R. Garrison for the construction ofthe roadbed. On May 12, 1869, the first spike was driven at Sedalia.It was a gala occasion. A large body of prominent citizens of bothcounties assembled and marched on foot to the proposed site of thenew terminus, about a mile west of town. President George H.Ambrose led the ground-breaking ceremony and there were speechesby the directors. Unfortunately there is no record of Shelby’s speechon this occasion, but he undoubtedly made one, just as he undoubtedlyattended the big banquet for 150 guests which followed at the IvesHouse at Sedalia, “where toasts to the new venture and funmakingensued.”Shelby’s connection with the new road was reported in the KansasCity Tinies with a flourish which leaves no question as to the writer’sidentity. The style is pure Edwards. Shelby’s fidus Achates outdideven himself in the bouquet of superlatives which he tossed in thedirection of his old commander:“Gen. J. O. Shelby has been appointed General Superintendent andFinancier of the Lexington and Sedalia [sic] Railroad. The enterprisewill be finished. From a raid to a railroad, Jo Shelby is invincible. Heworks like he fought—that is to say, 24 hours out of the 24. He is acountry farmer, having the power of a king; the leader of 10,000 men,driving oxen; the sower of wheat today, tomorrow sees him upon themarket negotiating a hundred thousand dollars worth of countybonds; living in the saddle, ubiquitous at Sedalia and Lexington. It issafe to say that the railroad will be finished by January.”The road was not finished by January, although a creditable amountof work had been done (thirty-six miles of track laid out of fifty-five)33 6 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againand the company reported that its aggregate capital, invested in “roll¬ing stock and appurtenances,” amounted to $870,000.The progress being made on the Lexington and St. Louis, however,did not satisfy at least one resident of Pettis County, who complainedabout the slowness of construction and the manner in which thefinances of the railroad were being administered.8 Shelby was deeplyoffended by the criticism and offered to resign if the board wouldappoint the critic in his place. But the other directors refused to hearof Shelby’s resignation, and President George Ambrose of the Lexing¬ton and St. Louis called the critic “a vicious man.” 9The St. Louis and Santa Fe was an iron horse of an entirely differentcolor. Its officials were involved in one of the most celebrated swindlesin the history of American railroading, and the manipulation of itssecurities led to a massacre at Gunn City, Missouri, on April 23, 1872,in which outraged citizens brutally shot to death a judge of the countycourt, a city councilman, and an attorney for the railroad.Shelby’s connection with the St. Louis and Santa Fe was entirelyinnocent. He was not a member of the board of directors nor associatedwith the railroad in any way save as a contractor—a paid employee.He and his new business partner, James Lillis, were hired to constructthe roadbed; Lillis was an estimable citizen of Cass County and hisson, Thomas F. Lillis, later attained eminence as a bishop in KansasCity. Shelby and Lillis were losers on the Santa Fe deal; of the $75,000worth of track contracted for, only $17,000 was laid, and the roadwas never completed. The names of Shelby and Lillis, however, willalways be associated with the “Gunn City massacre,” for by a strokeof pure coincidence, they happened to be passengers on the train onwhich the Santa Fe conspirators were murdered. But that is gettingthree years ahead of the story. In midsummer, 1869, Shelby and Lillishad formed a new partnership, and they were after big game—thecontract to build the proposed new road of the St. Louis and Santa Fe,of which R. S. Stevens was president.Stevens was dangling a big railroad project in front of the rusticsof the western Missouri counties. He proposed to build a road fromHolden, in Johnson County, westward through Harrisonville, thecounty seat of Cass, to Paola, Ottawa, and the Cottonwood Valley,and thence to New Mexico. Such a railroad, linked with the east,would mean virtually a transcontinental line through southwesternMissouri, and there was great excitement over the project. Large meet-“The Bloody Bonds”337ings were held along the proposed route, and the enthusiastic countieswent overboard, some of them subscribing one amount and then, onthinking it over, petitioning to be allowed to increase their subscrip¬tion. Two hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars’ worth of bondswere voted at elections held at Coldwater, Dolan, Camp Branch,Grand River, and Index.The company was organized, the contract let to Shelby and Lillis,and the first section, from Holden to Harrisonville, was scheduled forcompletion by September i, 1870. The contract called for completionof construction to the Kansas City line by July 1, 1871. The capitalstock of the company was listed at $700,000, of which $225,000 hadbeen taken by the counties, and bonds to the extent of $20,000 permile were to be issued to contractors for building the road.So far, so good. Now came the chicanery, in which Shelby had nopart. R. S. Stevens, president of the St. Louis and Santa Fe, knewthat, before the war, the Missouri Pacific Railroad had been planningto build a road through Cass County, and that $100,000 in bonds hadbeen voted for the purpose. He also knew that the bonds were longoverdue, the war having prevented the building of the railroad, andthat, since they represented a transaction which had never been ful¬filled on either side, they were worthless unless revalidated by courtorder, and their terms brought up to date.10The bonds were still in existence, in the vaults of the MissouriPacific up in St. Louis, and Stevens had a bold plan for getting hold ofthem, having them revalidated by court order, and transferred to theSt. Louis and Santa Fe, without consulting the people of Cass County.Such a highhanded procedure would be possible, under the law,only with bonds issued before the war, and that is why Stevens singledout the Missouri Pacific issue. The Drake Constitution of 1865 forbadecounty authorities to subscribe to railroad stock without submittingthe question to a vote of the people, but in the case of bonds issuedbefore the war, the old railway charters empowered a county court tosubscribe to such stock at its discretion, without holding an election.Here Stevens saw his chance, so he thought, to acquire $100,000worth of negotiable securities by a simple piece of sleight-of-hand.To do this, of course, he had to have the connivance of the CassCounty Court, but this, he felt sure, he could obtain, and, as eventsproved, he was right. What neither he nor the court reckoned on was338 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againthe fury of an aroused populace in Cass County when its citizensfound that they had been loaded down with an overwhelming bondedindebtedness without their consent.The year 1869 had started out as a year of great promise, withShelby director of one railroad and contractor for another, but 1870was to be a year of double misfortune. Although he and Lillis werenegotiating for other contracts,11 their big customer, the Santa Fe,had bogged down hopelessly in the prolonged litigation over the bonds;and in late March the Shelby farmhouse at Aullville burned to theground.Shelby was absent in Lexington that day, and the barns and out¬buildings were saved by the neighbors and the hired hands, but thefarmhouse in which the family had been so happy was a charred ruin,collapsed upon its foundation, with only curling smoke where thesecond story had been.Confident that no defeat could ever be inscribed permanently onthe Shelby banner, John Edwards wrote in the Kansas City Times onMay 1, 1870; “Little he cares about the strokes of fortune. He takesfate as he finds it, and loves to prop a falling house or back a losinghorse. About his character is that admirable trait which all thoroughsoldiers have, and misfortune no more deters the man than would thewind blowing over the billowy wheat from the South. The house helost was a good house, but in a month he will have a better one, andwhen it is finished, the welcoming lamps will be hung again in thewindow, and the guest chambers will be arrayed as of old.”Benjamin Gratz’s farm near Lexington now afforded sanctuary forthe Shelbys,12 although it is probable that Betsy took the children backto Kentucky about this time for a visit, while Jo Shelby supervised therebuilding of the house. Betsy was a prime favorite with the familyin Kentucky, and remained so all her life.13 As Major Edwards hadpredicted the house was rebuilt in record time—in less than twomonths—and the Shelbys lived in it for the next fifteen years, until1885, when they moved to Adrian in Bates County.There were four boys in the family now, and no girls. (TheShelbys’ only daughter, Anna, was not born until September, 1875.)Orville, the oldest, was twelve; Joe, born the first year of the war,was nine; Ben was four, and Webb, the baby, was two. When thefamily moved into the new house at Aullville, Betsy was expecting“The Bloody Bonds” 339her fifth child, who was born in 1871 and named Sam ShindlerShelby for one of Shelby’s comrades of the war.Shelby himself, forty and acquiring a waistline, was leading thebusy life of a railroad executive, roadbed contractor, country gentle¬man, and prosperous farmer, roles which suited him immensely. Hehad not yet turned his attention to politics, in which he was to figureso prominently in Missouri during Reconstruction, for Reconstruc¬tion can hardly be said to have begun at this period. Not until sometime after the election of his cousin Gratz Brown as governor in1870 would political issues become sharp. Up to now Southernerswere second-class citizens in Missouri, under the Drake Constitutionand Governor Fletcher. It would be left to Gratz Brown to inauguratethe “Liberal Republican” revolution which would bring back therough-and-tumble days of politics in Missouri, with “mossbacks andBourbon Democrats”—unreconstructed Southerners—slugging it outwith the Progressives, like Jo Shelby, for control of the Democraticparty.In 1871 and 1872 the railroads were the burning issue in Missouri—along with the James Boys and their gang, who robbed the railroadswhile the railroads robbed the people—and it was during these twoyears that the final acts in the drama of the St. Louis and Santa Fewere performed. The climax of the melodrama had been long delayedby the tedious progress of litigation through the courts, but when itcame, its blood and thunder were real.On March 1, 1871, the infamous order making the bonds negotiablewas issued. The conspirators were tired of waiting, and the swag,with accumulated interest, now amounted to $229,000. March 1 wason a Saturday, and the bonds were made out the night before in theoffice of Cline and Hines, attorneys. J. R. Cline was the legal repre¬sentative of the St. Louis and Santa Fe, and J. D. Hines was the countyattorney. Judge Jehiel Stevenson acted for the court, normally com¬posed of three judges, and by his order, the bonds were funded andbecame as good as cash when packed into a suitcase and taken to St.Louis or Kansas City.Stevenson sent his son, John, in a fast buggy to East Lynne, withthe bonds and another conspirator, named Higgins, who committedsuicide later. This pair went on to St. Louis with the bonds in a suit¬case. They were joined en route by agents of President Stevens of theSt. Louis and Santa Fe, and at six o’clock on Sunday morning in the340 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainSouthern Hotel in St. Louis, the swagholders divided the spoils. JudgeStevenson was charged with having received $12,000 for his part in thetransaction (he had arrived in St. Louis in time for the meeting) andCline $55,000. The remainder of the bonds were placed in the hands ofStevens’ agents.Attorney Cline and Judge Stevenson were arrested the followingweek, a great hue and cry, as well as an offer of a $1,000 reward,having followed their flight to the big city. Stevenson had to post abail of $15,000, and Cline $10,000, to keep out of jail pending trial.Cline posted his bond in cash, but Stevenson had to get several friendsto put up the $15,000 bond required of him. One of these was a citycouncilman, T. E. Dutroe, whose act was to cost him his life.Back in Cass County, Stevenson and Cline, though facing longprison terms if convicted, showed no evidence of concern, and boastedopenly that they would be freed in court. By this arrogant behaviorthey signed their own death warrants.On the morning of April 24 they were advised by friends thatpublic indignation was at such a pitch that they had better get out ofthe county that day. Accordingly, they decided to go over to thedepot and take the train to Kansas City. The news of their intendeddeparture soon spread, and a mob began to gather up the line.T. E. Dutroe, the city councilman who had gone on Judge Steven¬son’s bond, decided that in the interest of his own safety he had betteraccompany them. At five o’clock that afternoon the three of them,muffled in overcoats, boarded the train at East Lynne. They wererecognized by some of the passengers, who behaved in a menacingmanner, and they soon went forward and hid in the baggage car.At Gunn City the trap had been laid. All afternoon armed menhad been drifting into town, and when about fifty had arrived, theydonned masks and took control of the entire community. Pickets wereestablished, and no one was allowed to leave or enter Gunn City.Those who had come into town to trade were locked up in Zook’sstore. Then the masked men began piling rails, logs, boulders and oldplowshares across the railroad tracks. When a barricade had beenerected, they entered the brush on either side and waited for the train.When the engineer approached Gunn City he was forced to halt.As he did so, he heard the warning sound of pistol shots fired into theair, and fifty masked men emerged from the brush. They found“The Bloody Bonds” 341Stevenson, Cline, and Dutroe huddled in the baggage car, and withouta word, opened fire.Stevenson fell first, a bullet piercing his jugular vein. At the sametime, someone struck him a blow with a sharp instrument which splithis forehead to the eyebrow. He was thrown from the coach and leftto bleed to death beside the tracks. Cline had time to draw a gun, andescaped momentarily from the baggage car, but was brought down,stone dead, by a fusillade of bullets, three of which passed throughhis brain. Dutroe was shot in the back of the head, the ball lodgingover his left eye.On this train also were Jo Shelby and Jim Lillis, who were goingto Kansas City on business. They had not been in conversation withStevenson, Cline, or Dutroe, although in all probability they knewthey were on the train, since the other passengers knew it. Apparentlythey had no intimation of the violence which was to take place atGunn City, or Shelby certainly would have gone forward to thebaggage car and confronted the mob; as it was, he remained seated ina rear coach, and the mob confronted him.The word had spread that Jo Shelby was on the train, and since hewas a contractor for the St. Louis and Santa Fe, somebody yelled,“Where’s Jo Shelby? Get Jo Shelby!”Shelby heard the cry. He did not move from his seat as the maskedMissourians, thirsting for more blood, stood over him. The beardedlips curled, and in a voice that carried distinctly through the coach, hesaid, “Well, here I am. Come and get me.”Confronted with those icy gray eyes and that lion glare, the men’spistols wavered, and finally somebody mumbled something apologetic.“Get out before I recognize some of you,” said Shelby, and suitingthe action to the word himself, got up, and with Jim Lillis, stalked fromthe coach.As a result of the Gunn City Massacre, as it came to be known inMissouri, forty-one men were arrested and brought to trial for thedeaths of Stevenson, Cline, and Dutroe. None of them was convicted.“The Bloody Bonds,” as they were called, were recovered by courtorder and burned, all but two, Nos. 1 and 229, the first and the last inthe series, which were turned over to the city fathers of Harrisonvilleand Gunn City respectively. There they were framed and hung inthe courthouse, “that the public servants of old Cass may remember,342The Bluegrass and Missouri Againwhen they trample upon the rights of the people and refuse to heartheir prayers, that they will appeal to a higher power and serve aninjunction that will stick.” 14Truly, as the Kansas City Star said many years later in a headlineover a feature story on the Gunn City massacre, “General Shelby’sTurbulent Days Did Not End in Mexico.”29. Coal Mining: Boom and BustThe turbulent days of Shelby’s postwar career in Missouri hadjust begun. The first six months of 1872 had seen the collapse ofa business venture, a narrow escape from death at the hands of alynching party, and a wounded bandit, sought by detectives in sixstates, as a guest for two months in his home. At forty-three he hadlived enough lives for a dozen men, and one would think that hewould welcome a chance to devote himself to the farm and theprosperity which he now enjoyed.But Shelby’s temperament was such that he could not enjoy lifeexcept in the atmosphere of headquarters in the midst of a big cam¬paign, and in 1872 his restless mind was turning to a new business witheven more enchanting prospects than railroading. That business wascoal mining. The railroads, pushing into every corner of the state, atleast on paper, had brought on a boom in the coal and iron industries.In March, 1871, the legislature had limited the amount of aid any city,county, town, or township might subscribe in railroad bonds,1 andhad specified that the bonds must be paid up in two years. It was feltthat thereby the railroad industry of Missouri was stabilized and takenout of the realm of speculation; and that henceforth the railroads,sound as a dollar financially, would be good paying customers for thethriving coal and iron industry. Actually, regulation had come toolate. The panic of 1873 was )ust around the corner, and in the GreatCrash of that year, a dismal replica of all the Great Crashes before andsince, prosperity was to disappear from all Missouri industries alike;but Jo Shelby could not foresee that.On the face of it, optimism was justified. The coal and iron werethere. Central and southern Missouri were popping at the seams withCoal Mining: Boom and Bust343coal, and, if anything, Missouri had more iron than she had coal-mountains of it. Yet Missouri industry was paying fifty dollars a tonfor British ore! It was not only good business, it was the patriotic dutyof Missourians to develop their mineral resources and resist this im¬perialist economic aggression. As a Scottish traveler in Missouri wrote,about this time, it was “certainly aggravating to the Americans andespecially to the people of that state [Missouri] to have to buy Britishiron when they have literally mountains of iron ore beside them.” 2The people of Missouri, as Dr. Lopata says, still “breathed and aterailroads” and the boom showed no signs of diminishing; Jo Shelbywas soon in the coal mining business. Exact dates are not available forthis period, but sometime in 1872 he leased a “coal bank,” or coal mine,at Clarksburg in Moniteau County and moved the family thither. Hedid not, of course, give up the farm.Clarksburg was a roaring frontier town in the seventies. Situated onone of the deepest veins of coal in Missouri, it had attracted the usualfly-by-night population of a boom town of the West, except that inplace of cowhands there were sooty-faced miners who drank them¬selves stiff on Saturday nights. The house to which Shelby broughthis family stands today in the middle of town, but in those days it wasa little to the north of it. The Shelbys drove up in a fine carriage, drawnby a beautiful team of matched bays,3 and the boys were delightedwith the woods near by, which were much thicker than the woods athome.Shelby’s mine was located on a coal bank of “the old Isaac Williamsfarm” a mile south of Clarksburg and just to the east of a countryroad which connected with the state highway. Here he sank a miningshaft several hundred feet deep, and a good deal of his available cash.He employed fifty men, miners by vocation, and for them he built alarge two-story frame boarding house near the mine, as well as anumber of separate dwellings for those with families, so that the settle¬ment at the coal bank had all the appearance of a crossroads town.Shelby also built himself a private office near the shaft, within a fewfeet of the spot where the Clarksburg railway station now stands, andhere he could be found at all hours, ready for a social chat or a businessconference.At first the coal was moved into Clarksburg by large wagons, drawnby the biggest mules Shelby could find, “much larger and better bredthan the average mule in that section of the country at the time, but344 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againas the work progressed and the mine gave evidence of a large supplyof coal, a narrow-gauge track was built on the east side of the publicroad from Clarksburg. This spur line was elevated at the mine to apoint where coal could be dumped directly into the cars for shipment,after it had been brought out of the mine in wagons pulled by smaller-sized mules than those Shelby used for outside transportation.The output of coal was so heavy that Shelby inaugurated a nightshift. According to the Tipton Times, he had no trouble finding help,for “to drive a small mule or horse attached to a small coal car was anovelty and provided a thrill, to those thus engaged, heretofore un¬known in that day, and naturally there were more applicants for theposition, either day or night, than could be accommodated.”The professional miners, however, for whom the thrill and noveltyof coal mining had long since worn off, were accustomed to spendtheir leisure hours in the saloons of the near-by town of California,where they could relax with liquor purchased either by the drink orby the gallon. On Saturdays, according to contemporary accounts,they left for California by local freight early in the morning andreturned, if able, in the evening. The Tipton Times says that evenamong those that did return “many of them would be unable to travelon foot without a guide.”To make sure that all of his wayfaring employees should return totheir boarding house at the coal bank in safety, if not in good order,on Saturday night, Shelby had one of his large coal wagons, with abig team of mules, wait at the railway station for the freights to pullin. Those who had been able to get into the boxcars at California, butwere unable to get out at Clarksburg, because of more nightcaps enroute, were hauled home to their boarding house or to their wives.Thanks to this system of Shelby’s, says the Times, “they were alwaysready and willing to report for duty on the following Mondaymorning.”Visitors were brought to the coal mine office in the fine carriagedrawn by the matched bays, after they had been given an expense-freetour of Clarksburg and vicinity—possibly that they might contrastthe splendor of Shelby’s coal mining operation with the dingy andsqualid establishments of his competitors. The driver on this free tourwas a redheaded youth named George Gay, whom Shelby employedfor his conversational talents as well as for his ability to drive a spank¬ing team of bays. George drove the visitors around for an hour or so,Coal Mining: Boom and Bust345haranguing them on the sterling quality of the coal mined hereabouts,and then—and only then—says the Missouri Historical Review, werethey introduced to the bluff and genial manager, who took them onanother tour, this time of the mine.3Young Orville and Joe were growing up to be fine horsemen liketheir father, and with an older friend, Jerry Warren, they wouldtraverse the country on horseback for miles, in search of small game,both timber and game being plentiful in Moniteau County. There wereno hedge and wire fences in the neighborhood in those days, only thekind known as “stake and rider fences,” which a horse could negotiateafter the top rails were removed. This necessitated crossing privateproperty, but the young Shelbys had been brought up to have goodmanners, and they always, says the Tipton Times, asked the farmer’spermission, which was always granted “for the reason that they nevermolested anything.” It was also said of them that they never fired ashot at any game “except while on the run or on the wing.” Theirfather would have tanned them properly if he had heard of their doingotherwise.During the summer, a blighting middle-western drought settleddown on central southwestern Missouri, and all of the wells at Clarks¬burg, except that at the Shelby home, went dry. The shortage ofdrinking water was so serious in the fall that school children drankfrom an old mill pond near the schoolhouse, the water of which wasin a stagnant condition. As a result, typhoid broke out. Shelby sentword to the teacher at the school to send the children thereafter to hishome for drinking water, and added that if his well should go dry hehad plenty of money with which to replace it.This solvent condition was to be of short duration. The new coalbaron was to find his well of money running dry, before long, for,partly because of the extravagant manner in which he had conductedhis enterprise, Shelby’s mine was unable to weather the financialstorms of the year 1873, and his investment was wiped out. This timethere were no fraudulent bonds, no absconding officials; but thederoute, as the old-fashioned military term had it, was complete. Whenthe customers stopped buying coal, as they did, he sadly closed hismine and drove off in the carriage with the matched bays.But there was always the farm in Lafayette County, with its acres ofwaving wheatfields, and back to it the Shelbys now went.34 6The Bluegrass and Missouri Again30. Shelby in Reconstruction^he era of big business was ended for Jo Shelby. He engaged inother commercial ventures, as a commission merchant for a St.Louis firm and as part owner of a store in Lexington,1 in addition tofarming, but his capital was depleted, and there was no more venturemoney to be had during the depression. For the next eighteen years wefind him farming, “politicking,” and slipping easily into the role whichhe played so well in his later years, that of The Grand Old Man ofMissouri. During those years he was to suffer new financial reverseswhich overwhelmed him, so that in his latter years he was to know theharassment of debt, and at the end he did not even own the farm onwhich he was living; but to measure the postwar years entirely by theyardstick of financial success would be to miss the point entirely.The Shelby of Reconstruction was to emerge as a much morepowerful, much more human and beloved figure than even the hard-riding cavalry chieftain of the war days. Whereas at the end of theCivil War he had been a living legend, by the time of his death he hadbecome a folk god in Missouri. Although rocked by blows, some ofthem to his pride, which would have embittered a lesser man, he didnot, like many old Confederates, become cantankerous in his old age;on the contrary, he grew more courtly and popular. The paradox ofhis character was that he who in his youth had been at times cantan¬kerous and imperious, grew mellow and tolerant with the years,though he was as good-humoredly tactless as ever. His peculiaritieswere endearing rather than otherwise, and he remained a publicIn the early seventies Shelby’s connection with the railroads causedsome people to mutter; the scars left by the cruel frauds of the railroadswindlers would not be erased in Missouri in a generation, but whenit became cameo-clear that Shelby had had nothing whatever to dowith the financial manipulations, the criticism ceased as abruptly as ithad begun. It was also known that he had worked for better conditionsfor workers in the railroad camps, and that he had built what amountedto palatial quarters for his coal miners at Moniteau; but none of thiswould have sufficed to wipe out the stigma of association with the rail¬roads if it had been anybody but Jo Shelby.Shelby in Reconstruction347He was not within a thousand miles of being a good business man.His open-handedness and his flair for doing everything on a grandscale far outweighed the element of shrewdness which had been oneof his great assets on the battlefield. If it was a choice between what isknown as “good business” and doing a favor for a friend, the friendwon out. Major Jake Stonestreet, now living in Kansas City, made theapt observation that “it took as much to run him as to run a steamshipline.” 2For the first few years after the return from Moniteau, all wentswimmingly. The thousand-acre farm at Aullville was well stocked,and the Shelbys lived high, raising wheat, “spreading hemp,” andtrading in livestock. (The store was a latter day venture, in 1889.)There are newspaper references to Shelby’s raising blooded horses,certainly no occupation for a poor man, and an admiring reporterwrites particularly of “Columbus the roan and Niagara the upstandingblack,” both of a fine Canadian strain.For a man who had lived as many lives as Shelby, farming, even inthe grand manner, was not sufficient outlet for his energies. He wasas restless and unruly as his blooded horses, shackled to the routine ofthe farm. In such a case, it was inevitable that he should turn to localpolitics, and just as inevitable that, with Shelby mixed up in them,fireworks should result.Politics in Missouri was always a rough-and-tumble affair, andespecially during Reconstruction. Quentin Reynolds once remarkedin an article on the Irish that in Ireland every man considers himselfan expert on politics, and is. The same thing was true in Missouri.Politics was the poor man’s entertainment. It was the one free showwhich all could attend, the wool hats in the same seat as the aristocrats,with the privilege of hurling ripe fruit at the actors.Among the boiling political issues in Missouri in the seventies andeighties were railroad regulation, the greenback or cheap moneyquestion, the exploitation of natural resources by out-of-state interests,and the war records of the various candidates. The situation was com¬plicated, of course, by the fact that Missouri had just passed throughthe distressing period of Boom and Bust. As an anonymous writer inthe Missouri Historical Review points out, “The period up to 1873 inMissouri was a period of boom times and prosperity. Characteristic ofthe period were rise of prices, great apparent prosperity, large profits,high wages, large importations, a railway mania, expanded credit,348 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againover-trading, overbuilding and a tendency to run into debt. There wasa willingness to borrow on any terms and confidence that the processwould never stop.” 3When the process did stop, “the farmer found that he was notaccumulating but that his interest charges and his debt were increasing.Saddled with debt, he lost his holdings or became a renter. Thequickest way to fortune was to be found in combinations or units ofindustry and fortunes made in this way did not appeal to the massesas being the reward of productive enterprise and were viewed withalarm. Prices were low in depression, money was hard to borrow, andin effect a contraction of the currency was in progress.” This broughtabout a demand for greenback inflation, and the birth of the Green¬back party. “The opinion was general that the decline in prices,particularly grain prices, was due to legislation on the currency. Itwas the commercial east against the agricultural west. If more cur¬rency were printed the occupation of the money lender would begone.” It was also a continuation of the old quarrel between the Northand the South.To Shelby’s credit be it said that he did not fall for the lure of print¬ing press money, or the proposal to pay gold bonds in greenbacks.That was cheating, in his code. He clung to what he lovingly called“the old Democratic Party” until 1896, when the party embracedFree Silver and William Jennings Bryan. That year he voted forMcKinley. He had learned the value of sound money, the hard way.His first appearance in connection with anything political was hisendorsement, in 1869, of a bill introduced into Congress by ColonelRobert T. Van Horn for the relief of John M. Fleming of Lexington.Fleming had owned a beautiful home in Lexington which the Federalshad burned during the siege to prevent the State Guards from usingit as protection for one of their batteries, although Fleming was knownas a staunch Union man. After the destruction of his house, he rentedanother in which he cared for four wounded Confederate officers aswell as Federal wounded. Now an old man, and penniless, he waspetitioning Congress, through Congressman Van Horn, for compensa¬tion.Shelby wrote to the Kansas City Journal on December 1st, “I seethat Colonel Robert T. Van Horn has introduced a bill in Congressfor the relief of John M. Fleming of Lexington. I hope it will be passedat once, for it has as much merit as any measure ever presented forShelby in Reconstruction349consideration of the house. There can be no valid reason why theGovernment should not pay the amount specified, and there is noreason why any member should hesitate to support that measure. Itis the compensation due an honorable man and a noble citizen who hadnoble qualities that rose above the heat and strife of war days, andmade him beloved by both Federals and Confederates.”Although he voted Republican in the last year of his life, the thoughtof doing so in the 1870’s would have been unthinkable. In the files ofthe Lexington Intelligencer, which kept minute tabs on the doings ofthe great man who lived twelve miles away, we find that such a sug¬gestion has angered him. The Intelligencer quotes the St. Louis Globeas saying on September n, 1872, that “Grant was good enough forhim [Shelby]—he believed the true friends of the South were the Re¬publicans of the nation. In the Republican Party a Confederate soldierknew where he stood.”“All a lie, was Shelby’s reply,” says the Intelligencer lyrically.General Shelby’s admiration for Grant was well known, but it didnot extend that far. “The thing for Democrats to do,” he advised hisconstituents through the Intelligencer, “is to support the Democraticticket.”Shelby steadfastly refused to run for public office himself, thoughhe might have had the nomination for any office within the gift ofthe Democrats. His refusal to make political capital of his war recordwas rooted firmly in his admiration for the Grand Old Gentleman whohad just died in 1870 in his college president’s chair over in Virginia,Robert E. Lee, who not only took no part in politics but said that asoldier had no business doing so, even in peacetime.If he had wished to run for office, as his friends urged him to do,Shelby would have had a powerful ally within the party in the personof his cousin Frank Blair. Nauseated by the excesses of his Republicanfriends under Reconstruction in Missouri, Blair had become a Demo¬crat. In makeup he was very like Shelby. He had been an abolitionistand a Republican when such an affiliation brought down the anathemaof his own class upon his head; now that he could have enjoyed thefruits of power with the Republicans he threw in his lot with theshirtless ones of the Democratic party. That his perverse honesty costhim heavily did not matter to his future, for he had little of that left.He died in 1875, in his early fifties, burned out by years of intenseliving.350The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainAt first, Shelby’s political activities seem to have amounted to nomore than an outlet for his social nature, a means of escaping theroutine of farm life, and a natural desire to help his friends, for before1876 there is only one account of his presence at a political rallv. OnAugust 19, 1875, the Intelligencer recorded, “At a picnic at ThreeGroves, north of Corder, Elisha M. Edwards of Waverly, candidatefor State Senator from the 17th District, and Jos. O. Shelby madespeeches.” Other speakers were A. A. Leseur, who became Secretaryof State for Missouri, and Captain Dick Collins. In 1875 Collins wasstill a bachelor. He was the last of those famous uncatchable beaux ofthe Waverly countryside to hold out against the blessed estate—evenAldridge Corder had recently succumbed to matrimony, at the ageof forty-three.4 Collins was not to escape forever. He married in 1888,inspiring John Edwards to write an editorial on love.5 Edwards at thetime of the political picnic was finishing his second book at the homeof his wife’s parents at Dover, and may have been present to hearCollins and Shelby speak.The spotlight of national political news was turned on Jo Shelbyin 1876. It was after the Hayes-Tilden presidential contest, whenRutherford B. Hayes was seated, although Samuel J. Tilden, a Demo¬crat, received the majority of popular votes. There was much resent¬ment in the South, especially in Kentucky and Missouri. Henry Wat-terson, the fierce, Mark-Twain-like editor of the Louisville CourierJournal, announced that there would be 100,000 Kentuckians in Wash¬ington on Inauguration Day to see that “the right man was inaugu¬rated.” Even more serious, though idle, threats of a new Civil Warwere made. In this crisis Jo Shelby, in St. Louis at the time, gave aninterview to the Globe Democrat in which he announced his intention“to stand by President Grant in whatever course he may take regard¬ing the contest.” The electoral college was sitting but there wasapprehension that the Senate and House, one Republican and theother Democratic, might refuse to abide by the decision and the Pres¬ident would have to step in. Shelby deplored talk of violence anddeclared that “in the event there is a failure to decide the election ina lawful and constitutional manner, and President Grant is determinedto exercise the power of the Chief Executive in favor of the one heregards as duly elected, I propose to support the President in his actionwhether that action be favorable to Tilden or Hayes.” 6It was the right note, coming from one of the most famous livingShelby in Reconstruction351Confederates, and both Republicans and Democrats soon came tolook on Shelby as a balance wheel for sanity in Missouri politics. Theday after the interview appeared, Colonel Alonzo Slayback and ColonelClay King, another ex-rebel of note, came out in indorsement ofShelby’s position, and there was some reason to believe that the CivilWar, in Missouri at least, was over.Slayback especially let the Northern Democrats have it with bothbarrels:“They [the Northern Democrats]” he said, “encouraged the Con¬federate war. They led the Southern people to believe that Lincoln’scall for volunteers and his armed invasion of the South would beresisted by them. They not only falsified these pledges, but wore theblue, and came on to the work of that ravage and bloodshed with thatrash zeal which is ever the mark of new converts, trying to provetheir fidelity to their adopted loyalty by acts more cruel and militaryorders more brutal than any that emanated from the lifelong aboli¬tionists. All through the wrar they fed the South on these vain hopesthat either by riots in New York or by release of prisoners in theNorthwest or by assassination of leaders in Washington City or bya general uprising of Southern sympathizers all over the Northernstates the Government would be forced to suspend hostilities.... Theseflatteries were all delusions. They left the South to starve and bleedand die and sent as the flower of the Yankee Army young Democratswho had been promised as recruits for the Southern army. Theytalked all the time of what they would do but when the time camethey were afraid to commit any act of overt treason, as they gliblylearned to call it, and were desperately anxious to commit some actof loyalty when there was no occasion for it. The men who are talkingloudest about fight right now won’t fight if there should be a war andtheir braggadocio might as well stop and let honest people attend totheir business.” 7It will be seen that Colonel Slayback would have been quite willingto start another war if he thought he could win it, but was convincedthat he could not and that the South should accept the situation grace¬fully. This was the attitude, in fact, of Shelby and most ex-Confeder-ates at the time. Real loyalty to the Union would come later; in theseventies it was still too soon for that, but the pronouncements of suchmen as Shelby and Slayback were powerful medicine at the time andthere was no more talk of seating d ilden by force.352 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainMissouri was in an irritable frame of mind, nonetheless, and Mis¬sourians were looking around for a scapegoat. Since it could not beYankees, it might as well be Mexicans. Mexicans were making cattleraids on the border. Remembering that six thousand Missourians hadvolunteered in the Mexican War, a lot of people began talking aboutanother expedition to Mexico. Jo Shelby was on hand; perhaps hecould be persuaded to lead it. The rumors flew thick and fast, and soona first-class tempest in a teapot was brewing in the newspapers. TheCentennial History of Missouri says that “as the talk of invasion grew,in 1877 [in retaliation for raids and stealing on the Texas frontier],the seeming inability of the Mexican Government to maintain peaceseemed to offer an excuse. Shelby’s name was mentioned freely as themost eligible leader of it. Rumor was that he knew of the movement;that there was already a secret organization; that Missouri ex-Con-federates were actively planning.” 8It even reached the point where the St. Louis Times sent JohnEdwards to ask Shelby about it. The Times knew, and Edwards knew,that the talk was pure foolishness, but it was a good chance to doanother colorful feature around Shelby. Shelby denied any furtherdesigns on the Mexican Republic but in this interview he disclosed forthe first time that, according to Frank Blair, his expedition had theunofficial blessing of Abraham Lincoln.9In 1879 Shelby appears to have had a brief illness, for the Intelli¬gencer reports on November 29 that General Jos. O. Shelby “is walkingaround” again at his farm at Page City; on March 13, 1880, he andhis family have returned from a visit to Kentucky; he has also had astud horse named for him, and in April, 1880, he has just returnedfrom Bates County, where he has bought a new farm near Adrian.“General Jos. O. Shelby,” says the newspaper, “who has been in BatesCounty, returned Monday. The General was overseeing the laborerson HIS NEWLY PURCHASED FARM.” He was not movingfrom Aullville, however, the paper was glad to note, and in July aone-line item makes mention of “General Jos. O. Shelby threshinghis wheat crop (Page City Farm) and will ship at once.” At the sametime the paper reported that J. O. S. is “still a Democrat, but don’t likea Democrat he’s a-feudin’ with.”A year later, “General Shelby and son Orville talk of going to BatesCounty. John Morgan Shelby has moved his cattle to Barton County.”In the fall of 1882 Shelby supported the candidacy of AlexanderShelby in Reconstruction353Graves, a Democrat, for Congress. Graves’s opponent was one ofShelby’s own men of the Iron Brigade, Lieutenant Colonel John T.Crisp, who had the endorsement of the Republicans of the FifthDistrict, composed of Jackson, Johnson and Lafayette counties. Theeditor of the Lexington Register, a Republican paper and consequentlya supporter of Crisp, sought to counteract Shelby’s endorsement ofGraves by charging that Shelby was “anti-foreign”—meaning anti-German, in that town of large Teutonic population—and “anti-Negro.”Shelby let loose with a blast in which he said, “I was a Democratwhen there were only about three hundred here [in Lafayette County]in 1852 to 1854, and there were twenty-seven hundred of the ‘KnowNothing’ party.” He praised Colonel Crisp, saying that he “was partof my command and an important part,” but added, in his reply inthe Intelligencer, “that to lay the blame of everything on the Demo¬crats and Confederates was unjust and untrue.”As for “foreigners,” Shelby said, “The issue of slavery was all thatever separated the foreigner from the Democratic party. That is goneand gone forever and we of the South are glad that slavery is deadfor all time.” This was an unusual instance of soft words from Shelbyturning away wrath. He still harbored some of the bitterness of theex-Confederate on this subject, although he was not being untruthfulwhen he said that he was glad that slavery was no more. His entirefeelings on the subject he set forth in a letter to George Lankford,another of his old boys, some time later:“My dear Lankford,“Your kind favor of July 27th has been received—The expressionstherein contained are well calculated to cause ones thoughts to revertto the good old days when we were battling against the World for ourindependence—We failed but we (the South) have the satisfaction ofKnowing that no people on Earth endured or fought more from patri¬otic desires-We were overcome by the hirelings of the World, whowere avaricious, Mercenary, ignorant of our people, devoid of honorand patriotic duty. It is over, and as we all surrendered it behooves us allto abide by the terms imposed. As to the institution of slavery, nobodycares that it is obliterated. All the World is opposed to it, and in duetime the South would have abolished it—So it was not the loss of it weso much objected to, but the manner in which it was taken from us.The War has demonstrated that so far as the Constitution is Concerned,it amounts to Naught—It is force that frames Constitutions and fa-354The Bluegrass and Missouri Againnatics When they can exercise the power over the Masses will by forcebreak Constitutions. After all, it is the greatest number of bayonets.As to being with you at Higginsville [Lankford had invited him toattend ceremonies at the Confederate Home] I fear I will be debarredof the pleasure—I am not well, besides circumstances that are of nointerest to anyone are of such a nature that will prevent my going onthe day designated. As for my presence, you flatter me, a few likeyourself would be glad to meet me, but to the greatest number itwould be of no moment. Renewing my thanks for your Kind words,I remain your friend, Jo. O. Shelby.” 10The blue note in this letter was due only to the temporary indis¬position; Jo Shelby was not used to being sick, and obviously didn’tlike it. In the Graves campaign he stumped for his man with all theold-time energy. The Kansas City Times reports his activities duringthis period in the following breathless paragraph:“It is the same Shelby, whether in the lobby or on the long march.He never sleeps. When other men tire, when other men faint and dropby the wayside, he has just begun to fight. He never forgets a faceor loses a man. He knows everybody. About the man there is a personalmagnetism impossible to resist. Whether it is a fort or a vote that hewants, he goes straight at it. Baffled, he retreats a little, re-forms hisline and returns to the attack with a redoubled effort. He does notunderstand the word defeat and refuses to learn it. In one week he wasat six meetings in Lafayette, he was in Kansas City, St. Louis, Har-risonville, in Jefferson City, in Sedalia, in Chicago, and made elevenspeeches, wrote fifty-two letters, sent forty-eight separate telegraphicdispatches, held nine caucuses and slept just thirty-five hours.”Graves won. His opponent was snowed under, and in Shelby’s homecounty of Lafayette his majority was 1,777; a phenomenal record,considering that Frank Blair had been elected to Congress the lasttime by a majority of only 1,500 in the teeming city of St. Louis.11 Itwas a personal tribute to Shelby, of course, and demonstrated that anysuspicion which may have attached to his earlier connection with therailroads had long since been forgotten. He was a power in Missouripolitics. At this juncture—just before the trial of Frank James in 1883—he might have had anything he wanted, within the power of theelectorate. But he declared that he wanted no public office, despitethe urgings of his friends to run, and he even pretended, during thewhirlwind campaign for Graves, that he was just an obscure worker inShelby in Reconstruction355the political vineyard. When posters flamed with the announcementthat General Shelby would speak, he told a reporter for the Times,“O, I never make speeches and the committee should not have adver¬tised me. I expect to do all in my power in other ways, however, toelect Mr. Alexander Graves, having advocated him even before theprimaries.” Graves carried every ward in Kansas City and rural Jack-son County.Before the election Jo Shelby had made a trip to Washington, todiscuss Missouri politics with the state’s leaders, and being somethingof a national figure by now, found himself at a dinner for the bon tonin the nation’s capital, which was plentifully sprinkled with glitteringnames in blue uniforms. His companion at dinner was a once wiry,redheaded little man of considerably less than Shelby’s own shortstature, and like Shelby, inclining to plumpness in his middle years.This personage, to whom Shelby was introduced for the first time,was Lieutenant General Philip Henry Sheridan, sometime scourge ofthe Shenandoah, and Reconstruction commander in both Texas andMissouri. Soon he would be general-in-chief of the armies and the topranking general in the United States.(“Little Phil Sheridan ... through the Shenandoah/”)What the thoughts of the two great warriors were, as they were intro¬duced, is open to speculation. Sheridan knew Shelby well, thoughhe had never seen him before; Shelby had caused him plenty of troublein Texas, and even before that, from reports received, he had knownhim as the only great Confederate commander west of the Mississippi.As for Shelby, though he had never fought against Sheridan, he mighthave taken some pardonable pride in having given him the slip in1865, when Sheridan had a force fifty times as great as his own.Yes, although they had never met, the two had a lot to talk about,and they greeted each other cordially. Eventually, at dinner, as thewine bottles clinked on the thin-stemmed glasses, the talk turned onMexico.“I was very anxious to go over into Mexico after you,” said Sheridan(according to the New York Herald, which had a reporter at thedinner).12 “In fact,” continued the hero of Winchester, “if my requesthad been granted you would not have gone to Mexico. While I waswaiting for orders, you slipped in. The orders to go after you nevercame, and it was one of my bitterest disappointments.”Shelby might have enlightened him as to why those orders never3 56 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againcame, but instead he said gallantly, as he lifted his glass, “I wish youhad got them, for we found it mighty lonesome over there for twoyears.”“Shelby,” said Sheridan with characteristic graciousness, “I believethat every man who went through our war felt lonesome for two orthree years after it was over.”The conversation turned, too, on politics and Reconstruction, menand books. Sheridan was writing his memoirs; so was Grant. Bothmen would die within a short time of publication. Both were con¬cerned with the future of the country, and a South not yet recon¬structed. Undoubtedly Sheridan congratulated Shelby on his standduring the Hayes-Tilden dispute; undoubtedly he spoke of the diffi¬culties of rebuilding the country, and especially Missouri, whereSheridan had most recently served; and undoubtedly he expressedsome such wish as that the Confederates would come back into theUnion.Just what Sheridan’s exact words were, makes no difference. Suchan appeal could hardly fail to go straight to Shelby’s heart. From thetime of his visit to Washington, there was discernible plainly in hispublic utterances a new attitude; from having been an advocate ofdocile acceptance of the status quo as something that could not behelped, he became a crusader for a genuinely reunited country.He would have come to it anyway, in the mellowness of time, butthe conversation with Sheridan had touched a vital chord. Somethingthat the great Union cavalryman said opened his eyes to the gloryof the nation, not as it was, but as it should be; the grandeur of thepast, and the promise of the future, of “the best government the sunever shone on.” Confederates had been accustomed to quote that phrasein sarcastic contempt. Shelby saw now how blind they were. Sheridanwas right; disunion meant, first of all, chaos and ruin and, eventually,loss of national identity. He, of all people, who had seen the fate ofa nation divided in Mexico, twenty years before, should know thatbetter than anyone else.But for the fortuitous circumstance of its geographical position nextto the United States, a disunited Mexico would have lost its inde¬pendence forever to the conquering armies of a European power. Adivided union of the American states would fare no better. The theoryof states’ rights, carried to its logical conclusion, would result in theShelby in Reconstruction357formation of three or four weak nations, like Mexico, each an easyprey for the Louis Napoleons of the future.Up to now, Jo Shelby had been a citizen of the South, under what¬ever flag might be waving overhead. From now on, he became anAmerican citizen. With the zeal of a convert, he returned to Missouri,determined to show his unreconstructed associates the error of theirways.In this he had set himself quite a task. Since most of his old friendswere of the ex-Confederate persuasion, his stand was not going to beimmediately popular. Shelby’s own term for the enemies of progress,as he now viewed them, was “mossbacks,” but he soon adopted theapt description of the New York Herald: “Bourbon Democrats”—meaning those who never learn anything and never forget anything,and his tactlessness, which was characteristically his own, did not im¬prove his approach. He gave out some newspaper interviews in whichhe advocated the encouragement of more immigration into Missouri-more lop-eared Dutch!—to develop the state’s natural resources, andhe advised Missourians that it was time to forget the war and theirnarrow provincialism, in preparation for the New Day that was aboutto dawn.These utterances were welcomed by the Republican press, whichmistakenly interpreted them to mean a conversion to Republicanism.Over in Lawrence, Kansas, the editor of the Tribune, the same whohad had dinner with Shelby at the home of Colonel Sam Wood inLawrence the night before the election of March 30, 1855, wrote:“The recent position taken by Jo Shelby against ‘mossbackism’ andhis declaration that ‘Bourbonism’ hung like a pall over the state,impeded her progress and turned immigration from her borders,reminds us of two interviews we had with the distinguished Confed¬erate leader—one in 1855 and one in 1875.” After discussing Shelby’sactivities at Lawrence on that long-gone day, the editor went on tosay, “Our second interview was at the Kansas City fair in 1875. Aswe saw him walking alone across the grounds, we approached himwith extended hand, and remarked, ‘This is General Shelby, I believe,’giving our own name. ‘I do not know whether you will rememberme, but I took dinner with you at Sam Wood’s house in Lawrencewhen you came to help us in the little matter of voting.’ He wasvery cordial, shook us heartily by the hand, saying: ‘We have allmade damned fools of ourselves since those days.’ We said: ‘General,358 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againsince Kansas City has extended its hospitalities to Jefferson Davis, Ithought I would call on you and extend to you the hospitalities ofLawrence.’ He laughed, and said he would really like to visit Law¬rence, inquired all about the place, what it had grown up to, and aboutvarious persons, including Col. Wood and wife.... There are fewmore genial, gentlemanly men than Jo Shelby, and if he really wants tojoin the Republican Party, we cannot see why the liberality of theMethodist hymn may not apply to him:“ ‘While the lamp holds out to burn,The vilest sinner may return.’ ” 13There were howls of surprised anguish from the Bourbon Demo¬crats. Among these was John Newman Edwards, now conceded tobe the most brilliant and popular editor in Missouri. Edwards was notonly a Bourbon Democrat, but a mossback and unreconstructed rebelof the most unalloyed sort. The dye in his Southern wool was sodeep that he refused even to believe that Quantrill was a bad man,14and as for Republicans—with whom Jo Shelby was now hobnobbing—it was Major Edwards’ unshakeable conviction that every Southernboy who lay in a soldier’s grave had been shot by a Republican, andhe wanted no truck with any of them. After reading Shelby’s pro¬nouncements, he wrote one of his most famous editorials, “On Bour¬bon Democracy,” which is a hymn to the ante-bellum South.Although he would never have criticized his old commander byname, out of the love he bore him, he plainly had Shelby in mindwhen he wrote:“One hears much of this term [Bourbon Democracy] lately. It isas glib in the mouth of certain Republican men and newspapers asthe forked tongue in the mouth of the snake. And just as glibly doesit dart in and out, by its rapidity something like a nerve that jumpsand throbs under galvanism, and something like a cutthroat in am¬bush where the hedge is thickest, or the road the most lonely andGod-forsaken.“In their estimation Bourbon Democracy means pull down; burnschool houses; retrograde; have here and there a touch of the thumb¬screw; the rack also upon occasions; proscription always; guerrillasout in the underbrush; all the better if a few train robbers ride andraid; breaking into the strong place where the public money is kept;Shelby in Reconstruction359chaos; no more law and order; no more jails; the Rebels in the saddle;and no pitch hot in any available direction.“The truth about Bourbonism in Missouri is just this. It got itsname from the fact that it would not steal in the old days, nor dis¬franchise, nor break into meeting houses to deprive other denomina¬tions of their property, nor confiscate railroads, nor run away withcounty funds, nor be generally unclean, despicable and dishonest.“True, a Bourbon Democrat delighted in the past. He believed inthe old fashioned way of doing things. He lived in peace with hisneighbors. He burnt neither their hay, their wheat, nor their strawstacks. Nor was one ever known to break into a smokehouse. Hebelieved in the family and taught his children to rely upon it as thebasis of all society, the foundation upon which the state rested, thebulwark against which all the Cossacks in the world could not pre¬vail when they came to attack civil and religious liberty. He likedhis dram and got the best that was going. No Puritanical processesinvaded his sanctuary, preaching free love on the one hand and Pro¬hibition on the other. Virtue was a shrine at which all Missouriansworshiped....“The Bourbon Democrat was also a pastoral American. He hunted,fished, plowed, loved the woods, laughed and sang at his work, in¬dulged in much reverie, which is the parent of sadness, did not knowhow to lie, never knew the road to Canada with his stolen goods andchattels, would have put his wife and daughter to death before per¬mitting either to work or to vote at the polls,...”15There was much more, but Major Edwards concluded that “theman who would not take the oath to foreswear his people was aBourbon Democrat.”None of this indicated a break in the firm friendship of the twocronies. Readers understood that such editorial pyrotechnics fromMajor Edwards meant merely that he did not agree with the senti¬ments expressed. They were accustomed to Edwards’ style, and wouldhave been disappointed with anything less colorful and vehement.Through long exposure to it, they knew that the Major s bark wasmuch worse than his bite, and that he was congenitally unable toexpress himself, when aroused, except in the most explosive terms.It was well understood, for example, that when Major Edwards wrotethat he hoped to see the day when there would be a jug of freewhiskey, with tin cup attached, on every stump in Missouri, he was360 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againmerely indicating that the editorial policy of his paper was opposedto prohibition. He and Jo Shelby would soon be working hand inglove to secure the acquittal of Frank James, who, as the campaignof 1882 ended, was wanted by the State of Missouri to stand trial formurder.31. The Trial of Frank JamesIf you drive west on the main street of Lexington, Kentucky, youcome to a gray stone pile in the middle of town which is the FayetteCounty Courthouse. In one corner of the courthouse green, as youapproach, is a bronze statue of General John Hunt Morgan, theConfederate raider, seated on a horse, although he never rode any¬thing but a mare in his life. Several blocks behind you, and to theright, is the Morgan home, with a Commonwealth of Kentuckymarker advising the passerby that this was the birthplace of JohnH. Morgan, “The Thunderbolt of the Confederacy.”At the opposite end of the courthouse green from the Morganstatue there is a vacant space which would be a splendid locationfor another statue, but there is no statue there to Joseph OrvilleShelby, although this was his home town and he lived two doorsaway from the Morgan home, where the “Thunderbolt” marker is.Inquiry into the history of the family in Lexington discloses thatthere may be a reason for this which is not altogether the fact thatShelby commanded Missouri troops and is generally thought of asa Missourian. The feeling persists that if Robert E. Lee or J. E. B.Stuart had been born in Lexington there would be monumentserected to them there even though they commanded troops in Vir¬ginia. The reason in Shelby’s case seems to go much deeper thanthat. One lady of impeccable connections (including the Shelby one)snapped, when asked about the General, “I heard he had a war careerbut don’t believe it. He was intimate with the James Boys, you know.”There you have it. Lexington, Kentucky, is not Lexington, Mis¬souri.Now, as to Shelby’s having been intimate with the James Boys,that has an ominous ring; but when one considers that he had anThe Trial of Frank James 361opportunity to loot an entire government sub-treasury at Austin andturned it down, it seems safe to say that Jo Shelby would not haverobbed a bank if his life had depended upon it. His old boyhoodchum, John Morgan, thought nothing of rifling a bank (Yankee) inMt. Sterling, Kentucky, according to reports; but that is anotherstory and a good one.1The damning fact remains, however, so far as Lexington, Ken¬tucky, is concerned, that the James Brothers and other members ofthe gang visited the Shelby farmhouse in Missouri; that Frank James,when wounded, had been given asylum in the Shelby home; thatthe wife of Frank James had once appealed to Shelby to intercedewith the Governor for a pardon for her husband; that Jo Shelbygave an interview to the press in which he credited Frank with havinghelped to save him from capture by the Yankees; that he appearedas a character witness at the trial of Frank for murder, at Gallatin,Missouri, in 1883; and that largely as a result of his support, Frankwas acquitted with something like acclamation. As Paul I. Wellmansaid many years later in a signed article in the Kansas City Star,“When Jo Shelby was a witness, and the Lost Cause an issue, therecould be but one answer. Frank James was acquitted.” It was, ofcourse, so far as a Missouri jury was concerned, as if General Leehimself had appeared; for Jo Shelby was the General Lee of Mis¬souri and, as one account has it, half the old Confederates in the statewould have lifted their hats at the mere mention of his name.The story of Frank and Jesse James is too well known to needrecounting in detail, but a brief resume of the events leading up toFrank’s trial is necessary. After the war, Frank and Jesse, findingordinary labor unrewarding, took up robbing banks and railroads.They had learned a good deal in the army, and they displayed muchof the tactical genius of the Confederate cavalryman; for sixteen in¬credible years they headed a group of mounted holdup men whowere known to newspaper readers throughout the country as “TheJames Gang” or “The Border Bandits.” As a result, Missouri be¬came known as “The Robber State,” or “The Outlaw State.” TheJames Boys were heroes to all Missouri, principally for this reason:they seldom robbed anybody but banks and railroads, and both ofthese institutions were fair game from the Missouri point of view. Thebanks foreclosed mortgages with villainous elation and the railroadsstole hundreds of thousands of dollars from the counties through the362 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againsale of worthless bonds. The railroads, as far as most Missourianswere concerned, were greater bandits than the James Boys; and someMissouri farmers claimed that the railroad locomotives set fire tohaystacks, for which the railroads refused to pay. If it be protestedthat the James Boys robbed passengers, who were certainly not re¬sponsible for the thievery of the railroads, the Missourians had ananswer for that, too: the James Boys never robbed Southerners, andespecially old Confederates.2 The James Boys, therefore, were merelygetting back some of what the Missourians regarded as their own.They were chastising the capitalists of the railroads and the banksas the border ruffians had chastised the abolitionists in Kansas; in theirway they were champions of the oppressed and downtrodden South.Jesse James, as leader of the gang, became the Robin Hood of Mis¬souri.It seems to be an established fact—at least there is no evidence tothe contrary—that Jesse James was in his own way honest. He alwayspaid for food or lodging whenever he stopped, and he stopped atcountless farmhouses in Missouri, including Shelby’s, during the six¬teen years he was on the road. At towns like Waverly the JamesBoys were never at a loss to find someone to help them “get acrossthe river.” Jesse in particular was well liked because of his personality.Frank, being older and more serious, was less popular. But Jesse wasearnest, honest, and religious (a well-thumbed Bible always in hispocket); he sang in church choirs, and his blue-eyed good looks wereappealing. The people of Missouri knew that he would never haverobbed either a bank or a railroad unless he needed the money. Forsixteen delicious years they followed his exploits like a modern serialon television.The fact that they had the people of Missouri behind them—a sup¬port which had extended back into the days when they were guer¬rillas during the war 3—is the reason that the James Boys were ableto continue their career for sixteen years, despite Pinkerton detec¬tives and rewards offered by the state of Missouri and the railroadsthemselves. But the inevitable occurred at last, and Jesse James wasdone in, in 1882, by Bob Ford, a traitorous pal, who hoped to collectall or part of the $10,000 reward which Governor Thomas Crittendenhad offered for him.The story has been told often, of how Governor Crittenden metBob Ford in the St. James Hotel in Kansas City, after Bob had gotThe Trial of Frank James 363himself appointed a detective; how the strangely assorted politicalpair planned to trap Jesse James in his home; and how Crittendenpromised Bob, in addition to the reward, a pardon for his brother-in-law, Dick Liddil; and how Bob Ford then rode off to the homeof Jesse James, where his brother Charlie Ford, another member ofthe gang, also was staying. The next afternoon, as Jesse was wander¬ing about the house coatless—it was a hot afternoon—with a featherduster in his hand, Bob Ford shot him dead just as he was about tomount a chair and dust the picture of a racehorse called “Skyrocket.”Charlie Ford had his pistol cocked too, but he testified at the inquestthat he did not shoot, as he saw that his brother’s shot already haddone for Jesse.4A great hue and cry went up in Missouri. Governor Crittenden wasaccused of having plotted the official murder of Jesse James, for hisown political ends, rather than have him captured and tried. Writerson Jesse James disagree; many, including Homer Croy, insist thatCrittenden did commission Bob Ford to execute Jesse James. In aninterview with a reporter of the St. Louis Republican on April 17,1882, Governor Crittenden denied emphatically that he had everdone any such thing and pointed to the language of his proclamationoffering a reward for Frank and Jesse. The offer was for $5,000 forthe apprehension of each outlaw and $5,000 additional for the con¬viction of either in court.Nevertheless, a large section of the press believed that Jesse Jameshad been the victim of an official murder, and feeling ran high asthe Ford brothers were brought to trial for murder. No man in Mis¬souri was more wrathful over the “official murder” than Major Ed¬wards. He was at this time editor of the Sedalia Missouri Democrat,and he let loose with an editorial blast which has become a Missouriepic. Of Jesse James he wrote:“We called him outlaw, and he was, but Fate made him so-Pro¬scribed, hunted, shot at, driven away from among his own people, aprice put upon his head, what else could a man do, with such a na¬ture, except what he did do? He had to live. It was his country. Thegraves of his kindred were there. He refused to be banished fromhis birthright and when he was hunted he turned savagely about andhunted his hunters. Would to God he were alive today to make arighteous butchery of a few more of them.“There never was a more cowardly or unnecessary murder in all364 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainAmerica than this murder of Jesse James. It was done for money. Itwas done that a few might get all the money. He had been living inSt. Joseph for months. The Fords were with him. He was in the toils,for they meant to betray him. He was in the heart of a large city.One word would have summoned 500 armed men for his capture orextermination. Not a single one of the attacking party need to havebeen hurt. If, when his house had been surrounded, he had refusedto surrender, he could have been killed on the inside of it and at longrange. The chances for him to escape were as one to 10,000 and noteven that; but it was never intended that he should be captured. Itwas his blood the wretches were after—blood that would bring moneyin the official market of Missouri. And this great Commonwealthleagued with a lot of self-confessed robbers, highwaymen and prosti¬tutes to have one of its citizens assassinated, before it was positivelyknown that he had ever committed a single crime worthy of death.”As Major Edwards contemplated this unholy liaison, it was toomuch for him, and he wrote with flaming pen:“Tear the two bears from the flag of Missouri! Put thereon, inplace of them, as more appropriate, a thief blowing out the brainsof an unarmed victim, and a brazen harlot, naked to the waist andsplashed to the brows in blood!” 5Edwards’ estimate of Jesse James was just about the estimate ofthe people of Missouri, and Governor Crittenden found himself inconsiderable hot water. The Cincinnati Times Star, which was somedistance from the redhot Jesse James country, reflected the opinionof much of the press when it commented: “If Governor Crittendenof Missouri reads the newspapers extensively, he has discovered thatpublic opinion severely condemns assassination by law, even in thecase of a notorious desperado and outlaw. Not a single reputablepaper in the land justifies the part he plays in the conspiracy tomurder James.”The unalterable fact remained, as Edwards pointed out, that Jessecould have been captured easily; but the point that seems to escapeeven latter-day writers on the subject is that a man like Bob Fordwould not have missed for all the world the chance to go down inhistory as the man who shot Jesse James.When the Ford brothers were brought to trial, largely on accountof popular opinion, they were sentenced to be hanged. Two hourslater Governor Crittenden gave them an unconditional pardon andThe Trial of Frank James 3 65they walked forth from the penitentiary at Jefferson City as freemen. By this act Crittenden committed political suicide. He was neveragain even nominated for an office in Missouri.The killing of Jesse James and the fact that his killers went scot-free had a profound effect on Frank James. The old guerrilla andretired bank robber was living a sequestered life in Baltimore at thetime, and he read about Jesse’s death in the newspapers. Jesse hadbeen reported killed a number of times; but this time Frank believedit.6“I think this time it’s true,” he told his wife. “I think they’ve gotJesse.” It was something for a man to think about; Jesse shot downwhile peaceably dusting a picture in his own home. It could happenjust as well to Frank James in Baltimore reading a newspaper. Fur¬thermore, the fact that the newspapers were mourning Jesse as agreat man made Frank wonder whether he might not be wise tostand trial, and get an acquittal from a Missouri jury. The JamesBoys had plenty of friends in Missouri and, with the right lawyer,twelve of them would be sitting on the jury.Governor Crittenden received a letter asking whether, if FrankJames surrendered, he would be given a fair trial. Frank O’Neil, areporter on the St. Louis Republican, acted as go-between. Critten¬den assured O’Neil that Frank would get a fair trial but that if con¬victed he would have to pay the penalty. Frank James would risk that.He took a train from Baltimore to Jefferson City, and at Sedalia hewas joined by the redoubtable Major Edwards, who accompanied himto the capital.At one o’clock in the morning the sleepy night clerk of the McCartyHotel in Jefferson City was aroused by two guests who wished tosign the register. One of them he knew. Everybody in Missouri knewMajor Edwards. The other was a stranger who signed the registeras B. F. Winfrey. The two slept in the same bed at the McCartythat night, the two veterans of diverse and bloody campaigns, thefriend of the Emperor and Empress and the common bank robber.They ate breakfast together and spent the day greeting people onthe street in Jefferson City. Not until five o’clock in the afternoondid Edwards escort Frank James into the office of Governor Crit¬tenden at the Capitol and introduce his companion. Frank reachedunder his coat and laid a six-shooter on the table.“I want to hand over something that nobody but myself has touched3 66 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againin twenty-five years,” said Frank James. uI’ve taken out the car¬tridges.” He showed Governor Crittenden the cartridge belt; it wasold United States army issue and the brass buckle was stamped withthe letters “U. S.”“I got it off a dead Federal soldier in Centralia, Missouri,” saidFrank James. “We had killed him.”That was one killing for which he would not be tried.Great excitement spread through Missouri when it was announcedthat Frank James was surrendering; it reached an even greater pitchwhen it was learned that Jo Shelby would appear as a character wit¬ness for Frank. It was a fact known to all Missouri that the Jamesbrothers had stopped frequently at the Shelby farm, and it was alsoknown that Old Jo had befriended Mrs. Frank James when she hadcome to the Shelby home with her baby, seeking shelter; and allMissouri applauded that. These facts were, as a matter of fact, sowell known that a short time before the killing of Jesse, when Shelbywas stopping at the St. James Hotel in Kansas City, the Journal senta reporter to interview him on the subject of the James Boys.With characteristic forthrightness Shelby said that he believed Gov¬ernor Crittenden would pardon them both if they surrendered. Theentire interview is worth quoting, as it gives not only Shelby’s reasonfor going to the assistance of Frank James later, but also throws agood deal of light as to what he was doing in Missouri in the springof 1883.GENERAL JOE SHELBYInterview With This Celebrated Confederate Cavalry LeaderYesterday AfternoonWhat He Knows About Jesse, and the Remainder of the OutlawGang. Why He Is Their FriendThey Have Visited HimSome New Incidents and Adventures in the Career of Jesse JamesThe Trial of Frank James367“The famous Confederate cavalry leader, General Joe Shelby, wasin the city yesterday, stopping at the St. James, where he was foundby a Kansas City Journal representative engaged, in his bluff jovialway, in a running conversation with a group of friends. Gen. Shelbywas on his way to Bates County, where he has large farming inter¬ests, having a farm of 320 acres sown in wheat alone. He also ownsa tract of 640 acres of land in the same county under the surface ofwhich large coal beds have been discovered of a compact and excel¬lent quality. His visit to Bates County is for the purpose of puttingin force plans for the development of these coal beds to the fullestextent, and attending to other important business interests. The gen¬eral is one of the largest wheat raisers in the state, having a farm of1,000 acres in Lafayette County, where he resides, devoted exclusivelyto the production of this valuable staple.“ ‘To change the subject, general, is there any truth in the rumorscirculating around to the effect that you are a friend of the JamesBoys? ’“ ‘I can answer that question by relating an incident,’ GeneralShelby then said. ‘A cavalry company under command of Dave Pool,among the most prominent members of which were Jesse and FrankJames, were ordered to report to me at Prairie Grove in 1863, whenGenerals Herron and Blunt were in command of the federal forcesand General Hindman the confederate commander. My forces beingin the advance, I was ordered to attack Herron at daylight. I chargedhis lines at the foot of the ridge, drove his outposts back on the in¬fantry lines, and carried 700 prisoners to the rear. The federal linerallied, counter-charged, and I was captured by a troop of cavalry.Captain Pool, under Quantrill, was on the left of our line, and seeingthe situation, with the Jameses and the rest of the company, dashedto my relief, driving the enemy back and rescuing me. For this andthe [other] past associations of the war I do not feel it incumbenton me to betray a set or class of men who offered to sacrifice theirlives in defense of mine. Therefore I haven’t volunteered any infor¬mation to officers in hunting these now notorious outlaws.’“ ‘Under what circumstances would you aid the authorities in theircapture?’“ ‘When indictments are found and responsible witnesses are foundwho will attest to the guilt of these persons, I’ll not hesitate to be ofthe number to place them in the hands and the fangs of the law.’368 The Bluegrass and Missouri Again“ ‘Is it true that you have seen them lately?’“ ‘No. I haven’t seen them in a year.’“ ‘It is intimated that certain officers have harbored these men.’“ ‘Why, certainly. These men being with me during the war, Imight say belonged to my command. It is not my purpose, wheneverybody is turned against them, to betray or give evidence againstthem. Before the robbery on the Chicago and Alton Road I notifiedPresident T. B. Blackman and General Manager J. C. McMullin ofthat road that I had seen the James Boys in this section of the countryand that they could take action accordingly. I did not consider thatmy duty extended farther.’“ ‘Have the Jameses ever given you any evidence of friendshipsince the Battle of Prairie Grove?’“ ‘Well, yes. I think it was about eight years ago that Jesse Jamesrode to Lafayette county to see Robert Cox on business for his step¬father in regard to breeding stock, and stopped at my house, althoughI was away at the time. There was a negro boy in my employ atthat time named Joe Miller. My wife sent this lad over to Aullvilleon an errand and he got into a fight with a white boy about his ownage, fifteen years, by the name of Catron. This boy fired at the negrothree times and followed him on horseback to my front gate whenhe got behind the gate post just in time to save himself from a loadof buckshot. Before Catron had time to reload, Joe rushed out, pulledhim from his horse, and had nearly overcome him when a crowd ofwhite men came down the road for the purpose of mobbing the negro,who, seeing his danger, ran into the house and told my wife the menwere going to kill him. This so alarmed her that she knew not whatto do, and while thus agitated Jesse James stepped up and told hernot to be uneasy, he would stop that mob. Mounting his horse, Jesserode to the Davis Creek bridge between my house and the town, andthere stationing himself with a revolver in each hand, he told theadvancing crowd that if they harmed the negro there would beenough business around there to amuse the county undertaker forseveral days. They waited not upon the order of their going, butwent....’‘‘During the few hours Gen. Shelby remained in the city he meta number of old comrades in arms. Among those who greeted him atthe St. James Hotel was Major J. F. Stonestreet, who rather prideshimself on being a moss-backed Bourbon of the straightest type. HeThe Trial of Frank James 369listened to his old commander’s fierce denunciations of Bourbonismwith amazement, and, unable to control himself, said, ‘General, Ihave known you since you were a boy. I followed you all throughthe war, and never had a more gallant leader. You made us fightevery day in the month and every month in the year, until we werealmost worn out with fatigue, but when you rode along in front ofour lines and with flashing eyes commanded us to follow you inthe charge, we never faltered. We will follow you anywhere nowexcept into the Republican party, where you are certainly headedfor, and going with that speed and dash with which you always wentfor the foe on the field of battle. We can’t desert the old Democraticparty. As a soldier, none was ever braver or more chivalrous; as aman none was ever more honorable; as a friend, none was ever truer;but politically you are the damndest humbug I ever knew. You couldhave thousands at your back, who would give you any position youwant, if you would only stand by the Democratic Party.’“This aroused the General to a still more fierce denunciation ofBourbonism, which he declared hung like a pall over the state ofMissouri, blighted her progress and turned immigration from her bor¬ders. He wanted people to come from the North and East and fromEurope to settle among us, and he didn’t want them ostracised sociallyand politically. Missouri, he said, could only be great and powerfulwhen universal toleration of opinion prevailed—when men could voteas they pleased, and have their votes represent their will. About thistime Major Stonestreet’s indignation cooled down, and he entered acarriage to accompany his old commander to the depot. As a part¬ing word, Gen. Shelby said he meant to return from Bates Countyon Tuesday (Election Day) to put in a word for Lew Eveland, theonly man on the Democratic ticket whose election he could favor.Eveland he said was a federal soldier and the cleverest conductor whoever ran a train. He had ‘passed’ hundreds of poor Confederates aswell as Union soldiers, and he desired to help him.”From the last sentence in the interview it is evident that Shelby’sattitude toward the railroads was, in its own way, identical with thatof the James Boys and about ninety per cent of the rural populationof Missouri.Frank James, however, was accused of something far more seriousthan train robbing. He was accused of murder, and not only that—he was accused of shooting an unarmed railroad worker, one Frank370 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainMacMillan, in the back, during the course of a train robbery. Themurder of MacMillan had taken place aboard a train of the RockIsland Railroad near Gallatin, and it was at Gallatin that he wouldbe tried. Appropriately enough, the trial was to be held at the operahouse, that being the only auditorium in town large enough to ac¬commodate the crowds expecting to attend.The trial took place during the last week of August, 1883, somethree months after the interview which Shelby had given to the Kan¬sas City Journal, and it need scarcely be remarked that the membersof his aristocratic family back in Lexington, Kentucky, must havethought that he had taken leave of his senses. What passed betweenthem in the way of communications is not known, and never will be,but there can be little doubt as to their attitude. The newspapers,meantime, had been keeping up a great foofooraw about Shelby andthe Jameses, and by the time he arrived in Gallatin, he was in a foulhumor about the whole thing. To make matters worse, an officioustown marshal arrested him on a charge of carrying weapons. He wasfined, but promptly appealed, and the matter was not settled for along time, Shelby fighting it out to the bitter end.The next day, his disposition no whit improved, Shelby met Ed¬wards for lunch and Shelby, at least, lunched rather too well.In the afternoon of August 30 General Jo, smelling strongly ofBourbon, took the witness stand. His entry and conduct are describedin the St. Louis Republican:“The afternoon session opened with the testimony of Gen. Jo.O. Shelby, who came into court with the stride of a dragoon, andwith a savage glare in his eyes which promised trouble. He was shownto the witness chair, which is located a couple of feet below the ele¬vated stage on which the judge sits, surrounded by gaily dressedladies and less gaudy correspondents. When asked by Col. Philips(the defense attorney) to state his residence the general maintaineda silence, turned his fierce glare to the various attorneys’ tables, andto the jury box, in evident search of something. Finally he announcedthat he desired to see and know the court before he answered anyquestions. It was suggested that if he would look back over his headhe would see the gentleman he was looking for, and following thedirections he discovered Judge Goodman; smiled blandly on him andassured his honor that while he had not had the pleasure of meetinghim, he was glad to know him now, and entertained the most kindlyThe Trial of Frank James37ifeeling toward him. All this was in a loud, bluff, genial voice, and itwas apparent that the general was disposed to shake hands with thecourt if he could just get at him. Judge Goodman fidgeted ratherperceptibly as a titter ran through the court, and then with a quiz¬zical expression of countenance intimated the witness to defer formali¬ties and answer the question. General Shelby next inquired, fromanother survey of the opera house, where the jury were, and whenthat body was pointed out he bestowed upon them a friendly bowand settled himself to answer the question of his residence.”The prosecuting attorney, William Wallace, was himself a Con¬federate veteran, and for this reason Shelby felt a personal antag¬onism toward him; no ex-Confederate should be assisting at theprosecution of one of the James Boys. Ironically enough, Judge JohnF. Philips of Kansas City, the attorney for the defense, was a Unionveteran who had fought against Shelby and later, as a Federal judge,was to become Shelby’s boss when Shelby was appointed UnitedStates marshal for the Western District of Missouri.In response to Wallace’s opening question on cross-examination,as to his place of residence, Shelby replied that he had lived forthirty-four years in Lafayette County. “Live nine miles from Lex¬ington and nearer Page City. Remember Jesse James, Dick Liddil,Bill Ryan and Jim Cummings coming to my place in November,1880.” In response to another question he added, “Was spreadinghemp at the time, working some twelve or fifteen men, and when Ireturned home that evening found four men with horses in my yard.Jesse James was there. Young Cummings (Jim Cummings) I knewbefore, and this man Liddil passed as Mr. Black that time.” 7Asked by the prosecutor what they were doing there and whatconversation, if any, he had with them, Shelby said, “In the morn¬ing had a conversation with Jesse James in the presence of Dick Liddil,in which I said that a couple of young men had been arrested forsupposed complicity with the alleged bank robbery at Concordia, andthat I didn’t think they had anything to do with it; and asked JesseJames if he knew anything about that affair to tell me, and he said,pointing to Dick Liddil, ‘There is the man that hit the Dutch cashierover the head.’ Remember, in November, 1881, meeting Liddil andJesse James in my lane, and when I asked Jesse who was ahead ofthem he replied, Jim Cummings and Hite.8 Remember meeting JesseJames and Liddil again in the fall of 1881, and of asking Jesse372 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againwhere Frank was, and of his announcement that Frank’s health wassuch that he had been south for years, and that when I asked thesame question of Liddil he announced that he had not seen him fortwo years. Reckon I know Cummings better than any man exceptFord’s and his own people. He was at my house a dozen times. Hewas with me in the Confederate army. Have not seen Frank Jamessince 1872. Believe he sits there right now. With the permission ofthe court, can I be tolerated to shake hands with an old soldier?”The Court. No, sir, not now.Shelby. Did not see him in jail. Have not seen him since about 1872.Am correct about it, sir, when I say that the four parties I have al¬luded to by name did not include Frank James, who was not withthem. Mrs. Frank James came to Page City in the spring of 1881.She sent for me and said, I am in distress. This man Liddil and othersare committing depredations in the south, and they are holding myhusband amenable for it, as he has been charged with being connectedwith them. I have come over on purpose to ask you to intercedewith the Governor. I told her there was no necessity for that, andno hope of success. I told her further that Governor Woodson hadtalked with me at the Planter’s House. For Hardin I had no respectat all. She wanted me to intervene in her husband’s behalf with theGovernor. I told her it would be folly to do so, and advised her togo home to her father. She didn’t stop at my house. She could havestopped there if she had desired.As to the sewing machine, don’t know what time the sewing ma¬chine arrived there. She simply gave it to Mr. Birch, the agent atthe depot, directions for shipping it, and I don’t know where shedirected it to be shipped at all. Was only assisting a woman in dis¬tress, and would have done the same if she had been Jennison’s wife,the most obnoxious man in the country. Mrs. James left orders withthe agent for the movement of the sewing machine. She was a lonewoman, with a little child, and crying, and any man who wouldhave faltered in giving suggestions or aid ought to be ashamed of him¬self. Have known Frank James since 1862. Got acquainted with him inour army.Wallace. This sewing machine you didn’t see at all?Shelby. Nobody knows better than yourself that I didn’t see it.The Court. Answer the question in a straightforward manner.Shelby. I did not.The Trial of Frank James373Wallace. You didn’t have anything to do with it at all?Shelby. Nothing in the world.Wallace. You are just as sure of that as you are of anything else?(The transcript of the testimony evidently is not complete at thispoint, for newspaper accounts say that this remark by Wallace causedShelby to demand fiercely whether the prosecutor was insinuatingthat he was lying; and whether he would like to make a “personalmatter of it.” The newspaper account was undoubtedly correct, forthe judge alluded to Shelby’s challenge when he rebuked him lateron. At this point, however, the record merely quotes Shelby as say¬ing to the Court: “I should like to know if the Judge is going topermit a lawyer to insult an unarmed man, who is a witness in thiscase?” The Court responded that “Every witness comes in here un¬armed, sir!” and Prosecutor Wallace resumed his questioning)Wallace. What are your initials?Shelby. If you are desirous of knowing go to the bank here and findout. Jo O. Shelby is my name.Wallace. Then your initials would be J. O. S.?Shelby. Go to the banks in this town and you will find it to beJ. O. S.Wallace. Look at the way-bill and see if that has J. O. S. as theconsignor of that sewing machine! There may be a great manyJ. O. S.’s who in that section have those initials beside you.Shelby. You had better go and inquire.The Court. I won’t have any more nonsense of that kind. You willhave to answer the questions as they are put.Shelby. You are not protecting me at all.Judge Philips. I suggest to the court that under the circumstancesthis examination perhaps had better be deferred.Shelby. Not at all. Better let it go on. Now is the time for it to go on.The Court. General Shelby, you are a man that I respect and a manwith a state-wide reputation as a gentleman. We did not expect suchdemeanor in this court room. I must admonish you that I can notpermit this to go on any further.Shelby. Very good, Judge. He has forced it on me. If I am guiltyof a misdemeanor, correct me or punish me for it.The Court. I shall do it.Wallace. You saw Liddil down at Captain Ballinger’s house after¬ward, didn’t you?374The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainShelby. You don’t propose to invade the household of Captain Bal¬linger, a soldier of the Federal Army? It is very wrong for a rebelsoldier to make remarks about what occurred in a Federal soldier’shome.Wallace. The war is over, General Shelby.Shelby. I don’t like to allude to a visit to a gentleman’s home. Thatis indelicate and improper.Wallace. Did you see Liddil there?Shelby. I did sir. I saw him like a viper, curled up in a rocking chair.Wallace. You saw him again at the hotel the other night, or wasthat a drummer that you took for him?Shelby. No sir; by no means.Wallace. Were you not about to kill the drummer, thinking he wasDick Liddil?Shelby. I have lived thirty-four years in this state and never killedanybody yet.Wallace. Answer the question.Shelby. I was not. This gentleman was seated at the table oppositeto me, and he dropped his knife and fork and looked at me. Have hiscard in my pocket. He is a Michigan man, not one of your peopleat all, but a better man than yourself for instance. He was staring atme. Am not in the habit of staring at men on the street, especiallyladies anyway, and I must have made some casual remark about it.Wallace. Did you get your pistol out?Shelby. No sir.Wallace. Didn’t the marshal of Lexington see you draw your pistol?Shelby. No sir; he is a liar, or anybody else, if he says so.The Court. I want no more such remarks as that, General Shelby,or I will fine you $50.Shelby. Dick Liddil had partaken of my meals and I had fed my cornto Liddil’s horses. That was in 1880, and Jesse James was with himand Cummings and Ryan. Did not know that Jesse James was wantedby the officers. Knew it was asserted that he had been guilty of mis¬demeanors. Never told any other officer where they could find him,but did once notify the Chicago and Alton and Missouri Pacific peo¬ple that if they were under the apprehension that George Shepardhad killed him they were being misled, and that he was not dead.The last time I saw Jesse was at my house in Page City, in the fallof 1881, where I saw Frank James in 1872, which is the last time IThe Trial of Frank James375saw him. He was bleeding at the lungs, and Dr. Orear was attendinghim. Didn’t know that he was an outlaw then or that he is one today.Don’t know that he was fleeing from the officers. He was at myhouse some sixty or eighty days that time and everybody knew it.When the four men came to my house, as I have already stated, Itold them I could accommodate only two of them for the night. BillRyan and Jesse James stayed all night with me. The others stoppedwith a man from Illinois named Graham, who had been in the FederalArmy. Am certain that Ryan was not pointed out to me as the manwho hit the Dutch cashier over the head.This concluded Shelby’s testimony, although the record at thispoint adds: “As the witness started to leave the courtroom he askedpermission to go over and shake hands with the defendant. This theCourt refused, saying, ‘You can call on him some other time’. Where¬upon General Shelby spoke to the accused as he walked out, andsaid, ‘God Bless you, old fellow.’ ”Shelby’s brush with Prosecutor Wallace and with the Court didnot end that day, however, although he was not again called to thewitness stand. The next day, Defense Attorney Philips arose at thebeginning of the session and said, “Your Honor, General Shelby is atthe door and desires the privilege of making a statement to the court.”Judge Goodman said that it would be permitted.Shelby entered, and without preliminaries, said, “If anything I saidduring my examination yesterday offended the dignity of the courtI regret it exceedingly, your Honor. As to what I said in regard toothers, I have no regrets to express.”The rest of the conversation between Shelby and Judge Goodmanis also upon the record:Judge Goodman: The court has been both surprised and mortifiedthat a gentleman who was so highly respected as General Shelby,and who had a national reputation—for there was scarcely a man inthe West who had not heard favorably of General Shelby-should beguilty of such conduct. Nothing of this kind has ever been attributedto him before. He should have reflected that to enter a court ofjustice in such a condition as he was in on Thursday was not onlyan insult to the court, but was an act of the greatest injustice towardthe man who was on trial for his life, and in whose behalf he hadbeen summoned, for the reason that it prejudiced his interests beforethe jury. He (the Court) asked no apology from any man so far as376 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againhe himself was concerned, but this assault on the rights of the de¬fendant had been so flagrant that the court would not overlook it,and the clerk would be instructed to enter up a fine of ten dollars.The general’s conduct had been reprehensible in more than one par¬ticular, as the testimony showed that he had drawn a revolver almostat the verge of the court room in one of the hotels of the city.“General Shelby said he had listened attentively to the court andwas very glad His Honor had spoken so fully as it gave him an op¬portunity to refute a slander. I am charged with drawing a revolver;it is false and the man who said so said what was false.”The Court. The information came from the Marshal of Lexington,who had given it under oath.General Shelby. He has lied if he said so.Judge Goodman. While on the stand you threatened to call the at¬torneys of the state to account for what was said by them in yourexamination. The attorneys are officers of the court and must be al¬lowed to conduct the case in the interest of the state, in their ownway. Any intimidation or threat was in the nature of an obstructionof justice.General Shelby. You use the plural, Your Honor. It is not theattorneys, but the attorney (pointing to Mr. Wallace).Judge Goodman. Had General Shelby been an unsophisticated back¬woodsman and had persisted in disobeying the directions of the courthe would simply have administered a rebuke and committed him tojail. Such a course, however, would seem to be hardly necessary inthe case of a man with the refined sensibilities which characterizedGeneral Shelby and the court disliked to resort to harsh measures withhim. So far as the Court was concerned the General’s apology wasample, but he felt he had no right to condone the offense of whichthe General had been guilty in prejudicing the interests of a manwho was on trial for his life, and in whose behalf he had been sum¬moned.General Shelby. So far as the term backwoodsman is concerned, Ihave been a Missouri farmer for thirty-four years.Judge Goodman. Yes, but you do not claim immunity on that ac¬count.General Shelby. No, sir; I never sail under that flag.Judge Goodman. That is sufficient.Shelby paid the fine of ten dollars and left the courtroom. TheThe Trial of Frank James377next day Judge Philips made a masterly address to the jury. In dis¬cussing Shelby’s relations with the James Boys and “the fugitive, pant¬ing, little wife of Frank James,” he said: “Shelby’s testimony isworthy of all credit. It is but frank in me to admit that the General’sdeportment on the witness stand was improper, as a matter of pro¬priety. It hurt no one so much as himself and I know he regrets it.But he spoke truth. His high character needs no defense and no eulogyby me. His name is a household word in Missouri. As splendid incourage as he is big in heart, his home is a model of hospitality. Noman, however poor and outcast, was ever turned from it hungry.Truth and chivalry are to him as modesty to the true woman, azureto the sky.“He has been denounced in public and private as a friend of FrankJames. Smirking Puritans and lugubrious Pharisees have shrugged theirshoulders at the fact that Shelby gave a bed and a glass of water anda pinch of salt to the defendant when he chanced to pass his door;and for extending the hand of assistance and a word of sympathy toFrank James’s wandering heartsick wife. In the midst of so muchmoral cowardice and starveling charity in this age, I rather admirethe quality of heart which prompted Shelby.”So did the jury, and Frank James walked forth from the opera housea free man. But there was still one more act to be played out in thedrama at Gallatin which had been attended by “gaily dressed ladiesand less gaudy correspondents,” as well as by all of the wool hatsin Missouri who could manage to be present.During the afternoon, someone handed a note to Prosecutor Wal¬lace in which, Wallace revealed later, a “friend” warned him thatGeneral Shelby had threatened to shoot him on sight as soon as heleft the courtroom. In view of the fact that Shelby had just askedhim, from the witness stand, whether he desired to make a personalmatter of their differences during the cross-examination, and had beenbalked in this challenge, Wallace may be excused for being some¬what apprehensive as he left the courtroom. He was unarmed, ofcourse, and he was carrying an armful of law books which he in¬tended to study that night at his hotel.It had rained, and the streets of Gallatin were muddy. Across onemudhole, directly in front of the opera house, a plank had been laidfor pedestrians to cross to dry land. As Wallace stepped on one endof the plank, someone else stepped on the opposite end, and the prose-378 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againcutor looked up from the plank-covered mudhole straight into theeyes of Jo Shelby. Shelby was wearing a long black coat, over thesleeves of which his white cuffs were turned back in the old-fashionedmanner.Wallace did not flinch, for he was a brave man and had servedhonorably in the same army with Shelby, but the thoughts that flashedthrough his mind at this moment could not have been pleasurable. Itis quite likely that he expected to die on the spot, for directly infront of him was one of the most dangerous men, when angered, inMissouri; and he had seen a fine display of the Shelby temper onthe witness stand not an hour before.General Shelby removed his broad-brimmed black hat and steppedback with a courtly bow. “You pass first, Mr. Wallace,” he said, witha Southern gentleman’s courtesy.The gaily dressed ladies and the open-mouthed wool hats who hadbeen watching this scene with exquisite expectation breathed a sighof relief. They knew now that Jo Shelby had never threatened toshoot Prosecutor Wallace. If he had done so, he would have shothim then and there, for all Missouri knew that Old Jo was a man ofhis word.32. A Friend Is GoneIn the spring of 1889, the Shelby household was saddened by thenews of the death of John Edwards. The legislature was in sessionat Jefferson City and the Major had gone, as had been his wont foreighteen years, to cover the proceedings in person. He was stayingat the McCarty House, where he always stayed in Jefferson City,and with him were Mrs. Edwards, a Negro servant, and his littledaughter Laura, now eight years old.1Edwards had been suffering from a heart condition, but his deathwas sudden and unexpected. A few minutes before he was stricken,he had been teaching Laura to blow soap bubbles from a pipe, andas if he had a premonition of his death, he said to her, “Laura, alwaysremember that your papa bought you that pipe.” 2 He was alone whenthe end came. Mrs. Edwards entered the room, bringing a friend,A Friend Is Gone379Major J. L. Bittinger, and they found him slumped in his chair, be¬yond medical aid. The gallant heart had given up quietly.The news soon spread throughout Jefferson City and there wereexpressions of profound sorrow. No man in Missouri was betterknown, or better liked, than Major Edwards. At the time of hisdeath he was at the height of his fame as editor of the Kansas CityTimes, which he had left in 1874 and to which he returned in 1887.The thirteen years between had been a whirlwind career on the St.Louis Times, the Sedalia Democrat, the Sedalia Dispatch, and theSt. Joseph Gazette. In every case his burning pen had lifted the paperout of the humdrum routine of newspapering and kept his readersat a high pitch of enthusiasm or indignation on a variety of publictopics.Always a partisan in politics, and always a die-hard Southerner, henevertheless had friends in all camps, and when news of his passingreached the State Capitol, half the members of the Senate and theHouse left their seats and gathered in the lobby and the adjoiningrooms. When the afternoon sessions were resumed, both houses ad¬journed out of respect to his memory.3Officials of the Missouri Pacific Railroad came forward with anoffer of a special train to carry his body to Dover, where he wouldbe buried. From the moment of his death until his body was takento the train at noon the following day, a Sunday, there was a con¬stant stream of visitors passing in and out of the hotel corridor toextend sympathy to Jennie Edwards and to look for the last time uponhis features. At 12:30 Sunday afternoon the funeral procession formedat the hotel to go to the depot, where the train was waiting. Secre¬tary of State A. A. Leseur, who was one of the pallbearers, recordsthat “first came a long line of gentlemen on foot, led by GovernorFrancis, and composed of senators, members of the house of Repre¬sentatives, and many others. By the side of the hearse were the pall¬bearers—Dr. Morrison Munford [owner of the Kansas City Timesand a devoted friend of twenty years], Col. W. D. Marmaduke,J. Frank Merriman, Major John L. Bittinger, Capt. T. P. Hoy andA. A. Leseur; after them came the family and other friends in specialcarriages.” 4 The train arrived at Dover Sunday evening and burialtook place the following morning from the home of Mrs. L. C. Plat-tenburg, Jennie’s mother.As soon as the news of Edwards’ death had been telegraphed to380 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainKansas City, a reporter for the Tivies went to Adrian and informedJo Shelby. The reporter quoted Shelby as saying, ‘The news of MajorEdwards’ death is a great shock to me. I have known and loved himsince he was a boy. It is hardly within the power of language toportray or describe Major Edwards as his noble character merits. Godnever created a more noble, magnanimous and truer man than John N.Edwards.” 5Among the old Confederates who filed beside his casket when itwas opened for the last time at Dover, Shelby, as he turned away withtears in his eyes, said to a friend, “He was the bravest man inwar and the gentlest man in peace I ever saw.” That summed upthe character of John Edwards. He was a man, as Robertus Love says,of “violent convictions and gentle habits.” 6Simple services were conducted at the grave, as Edwards had re¬quested. He is buried in the old cemetery in the outskirts of Dover.A reporter for Edwards’ paper wrote, “It is a quiet, secluded spot,where the rumble of the wagon wheels in the road nearby are theonly sounds, save the singing of the birds, heard from one year’send to the other—just the place where Major Edwards’ love of natureand the beautiful would desire to lie in his last long sleep. And itwas his wish, frequently expressed, that he should be buried there.It is within easy view of the old Plattenburg homestead, where hiswife spent her girlhood and he wooed and won her, and from whichhis body was carried to its last resting place this morning.”The entire press of Missouri mourned the passing of its most color¬ful and beloved editor. No fewer than 128 editorials in Missouri andKansas newspapers appeared after his death.7 They totaled more thana hundred thousand words. Robert M. Yost, writing in Edwards’ oldpaper, summed it up best in a sentence. “There will be tears in everyhousehold in Missouri over the death of John Edwards.” And headded, as a fitting epitaph, “After life’s fitful fever, he sleeps well.”A quarter of a century had passed, and the lines of the Iron Brigadewere beginning to thin, but at the Confederate reunions you wouldnot have known it, for most of Shelby’s men whom he recruited asstriplings were now in their vigorous fifties (Edwards had been fifty-one), and when, once a year, a bugle blew throughout the South,they still responded with firm tread and undimmed eye, to live againfor a few brief days their lost years.A Friend Is Gone381But Shelby was older. He would be sixty years old his next birth¬day, and the chestnut beard, which had resembled the waved maneof a circus horse, was gray now and the shoulders not quite so straightas of old. Those of his men who saw him at reunions in the ninetiesalso saw for the first time that Shelby was not seven feet tall, asmany had supposed. He was, in fact, just a courtly little old gentle¬man with a gray beard.The family was living in Bates County, at Adrian, not far fromButler, and Shelby had given up all occupations except that of farmer.His sons were able to help him run the farm, and Anna had grownout of pigtails and into lovely teenhood. The scarcity of family rec¬ords makes it impossible to throw much light on Shelby’s financesat the period, but that they were at low ebb for a time there is nodoubt. He did not even own the farm in Bates County. The will ofShelby’s mother, Anna Boswell Gratz, written in 1886 and filed forprobate on August 26, 1892,8 indicates that Shelby’s business reversesof the seventies and eighties had used up all of his fortune and lefthim in debt, for Mrs. Gratz acquired the Bates County" farm, pre¬sumably to save him from losing it, and gave the deed, not to herson Jo, but to Betty Shelby.The terms of the will left no doubt as to the low esteem into whichhe had fallen with the Gratzes, as the result of his flamboyant post¬war career in Missouri. In the second clause of her will, Anna Gratzwrote:“I devise to my daughter-in-law Betty N. Shelby, the wife of myson J. O. Shelby, the farm in Bates County, Missouri, whereon shenow resides, containing about 400 acres to have and to hold to hersole and separate use and estate free from the control or debts ofher husband, during her natural life. At her death, if her husbandthe said J. O. Shelby shall survive her, I wish him during his life touse and control said farm for the support and maintenance of him¬self and those of his children who shall live with him; but he shallhave no interest or estate therein which shall be subject to his debtseither past or future; and if any creditor of his should attempt tosubject any supposed estate or interest of his in said property to'payment of his debts and the courts should deem the same liable,then all such interest shall at once cease ... and become vested in thosewho would take the property in case of his death. After the death ofboth my said son and his said wife, the said land shall pass in fee382 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againsimple to the descendants of my said son and his said wife or to suchof them as the said Mrs. Betty N. Shelby shall by last will appoint;or in default of such appointment to all their children; and if anyof their children be then dead leaving issue the descendants of suchdeceased child shall take the share the parent would have taken ifliving.” To other members of the family Mrs. Gratz made substantialbequests.The disinherited Shelby brought suit in the Fayette County Courtto upset this will, and spent some time in Lexington at the PhoenixHotel during its trial in the latter part of 1893.The testimony at this trial is missing from the files of the FayetteCounty Courthouse. The explanation may be that Shelby’s attorneytook the record from the courthouse to have it copied for an appeal,and never brought it back. In law, as distinct from chancery, attor¬neys are permitted to take papers out of the courtroom for such apurpose. However, the testimony is not on file in Lexington, nor donewspaper files of the period yield any reference to it.Apparently Shelby based his suit on the allegation that undue in¬fluence had been exercised over his mother, and against him. (Theappeal papers contain a sample copy of depositions sent to a mem¬ber of the family then in Kansas City in which the questions indi¬cate that this was the basis of the suit.)Defeated in the lower court, Shelby noted an appeal on February16, 1894, m which he alleged “irregularities in the proceedings ofthe court, by adjournment from time to time, and by the adjourn¬ment of the Court for one week which was over the protest of thecontestant and an abuse of the discretion of the court by which thecontestant was prevented from having a fair and impartial trial.” Healso claimed that there was misconduct on the part of the jury inthat “one of the jurors proclaimed to the jury that he didn’t intendto set the precedent of breaking wills by breaking this will,” andthat another told his fellow jurors that he “didn’t believe in break¬ing wills.” Shelby further charged that one of the jurors had beeninfluenced by the promise of a job.The appeal never reached the higher court, though first papers werefiled with the Fayette County Court and the courthouse books showthat Shelby paid $150 to have the record copied. The reasons for hisfailure to pursue the contest into the Court of Appeals are not clear,although a guess may be hazarded that he was not very confidentThe Great Pullman Strike383of success on the grounds set forth. Even a layman can recognizethe fact that proving bias on the part of the court, or the bribingof the jury, would be extremely difficult, no matter how excellentsuch grounds might be for a reversal of the decision.3 3. The Great Pullman StrikeIn the fall of 1892, just after the probation of his mother’s will,Jo Shelby allowed his name to be put up for political office. Heneeded a job. The man who could have been governor or UnitedStates senator, and who had refused to trade on his war reputation,as hundreds of lesser men had done, now allowed his friends to nom¬inate him for the office of United States marshal for Western Mis¬souri, which was vacant. Grover Cleveland was President, and JoShelby had been one of his most active supporters.Ex-Governor Fletcher, who had fought against Shelby in the UnionArmy, made a special trip to Washington to urge Cleveland to ap¬point him. Fletcher told the President that appointing Shelby wouldbe the most popular thing he could do in Missouri. A recommenda¬tion from Fletcher carried weight, for Fletcher had had the thanklesstask of being governor from 1865 to 1869 and knew better than anyother man how hard it had been to bring peace to Missouri. He alsoknew better than any other man how great had been the contributionof Jo Shelby in finally achieving it.“Although he was the most dangerous man we had to deal withduring the war,” Fletcher told Cleveland, “no man was so widelyinstrumental in helping us bring order out of chaos when the war wasover. His influence with the people of Missouri was inestimable andhe worked night and day to restore peace by appealing to them toaccept the new order of things in a spirit of resignation.Cleveland nominated Shelby as marshal, a nomination which had tobe approved by the Senate as a matter of routine. As always in thecareer of Jo Shelby, however, what was ordinarily a routine matterturned out to be an occasion for fireworks of one sort or another.The opposition press indulged in delicious shudders at the thoughtof the old rebel as United States marshal, and soon found a handy club384 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againwith which to beat him. An enterprising reporter went to the OfficialRecords of the War of the Rebellion, which were then in process ofbeing assembled, and dragged out Shelby’s battle reports, written, ofcourse, after 1862, by John Edwards. All of the florid prose of MajorEdwards was paraded before the public as Shelby’s, in an effort tomake him look ridiculous, to discredit him as a soldier, and to picturehim as a posturer infatuated with delusions of his own greatness.Among the dispatches quoted from the Official Records were thosein which Edwards had described Shelby’s men as turning like lionsat bay, and the enemy as “mongrel soldiers, Negroes and Yankeeschoolmasters imported to teach the young idea how to shoot.” Hewas quoted as saying that his own victories were “a beacon light ofhope and help reared in the dark night of despotism and oppression,”and cited such Edwards masterpieces as the report of the capture ofthe Queen City, which begins, “It was a beautiful moonlit night.White fleecy clouds hovered over the sleeping river, over the doomedcraft with all her gala lights in bloom, and over the crouching lines ofinfantry and the yawning cannon_Just as the white hand of morn¬ing put away the sable clouds of night four pieces of artillery senttheir terrible messengers crashing through the boat.” The newspaperaccounts hurled at Shelby the charge of quoting poetry in his dis¬patches; and the charge was true, except that Shelby had not writtenthem.Not only had Shelby not written them, he had not read them. Thetask of writing reports was one that he had been glad to leave to hisadjutant. Nevertheless, he could not say so, and as the guffaws arose inthe Republican newspapers, the graying Shelby was acutely embar¬rassed.The attack boomeranged, as it deserved to. Letters and telegramsbegan to pour in to the United States Senate denouncing the news¬papers for their buffoonery. These came not mainly from old Con¬federates, but from soldiers of the Blue Armies who had been outriddenand outfought by General Shelby during the war, and who knewwhat manner of man he was. The substance of the messages was thatif there was a better man in all Missouri for the post of United Statesmarshal than Jo Shelby, they would like to know about it.Shelby’s nomination was confirmed. He took up the duties of hisoffice in the old Federal Building in Kansas City in January, 1893.He was still able and energetic at sixty, as his handling of the PullmanThe Great Pullman Strike385strike in Kansas City the following year was to show, and the Shelbyflair for doing everything with a gracious gesture soon made itselfmanifest in the conduct of the marshal’s office.On the first day that he reported, naturally, there was a stream ofvisitors in and out of his office—all sorts of prominent people, butchiefly old soldiers of both armies who came to congratulate him. Socongenial did they find the atmosphere that many of them began tomake the visit to Shelby’s office a daily ritual. The United States’marshal’s office became a clubhouse for veterans wearing the Con¬federate gray of the Old Soldiers Home or the bronze button of theGrand Army of the Republic, who otherwise might have been spend¬ing their time sunning themselves on a park bench. There was goodtalk at all times, and hospitality in the afternoons. George Creel, thena young reporter covering the Federal Building for the Kansas CityWorld (a Yankee paper, for working on which Shelby chided him)dubbed them “the Colonels,” and he says in his autobiography, “TheFederal Building was on my beat and when I dropped in to see theGeneral, it was usually an hour before I could get away. As a rule,members of his old command sat with him, and when dispute occurredas to date or incident, they turned to their Bible, John N. Edwards’chronicle of the expedition.” 2The eastern press, as well as the press of Kansas City, had been insomething of a stir when Shelby was appointed marshal, and therewas more of a commotion when he appointed a Negro as one of hisdeputies. This deputy, named Bob, was of the aristocratic Negromanservant type, a representative of the vanishing race of majordomoswho had ruled autocratically in the plantation “big houses” before thewar. He carried out his duties with the bearing of a Senegambianprince. The New England press, says Creel, cheered that “at last...the ‘man and brother’ had been given recognition, and by a formerslaveholder and great Confederate leader. It was a good thing theNew England editors never visited the General’s office, for whileOl’ Bob did have the title of United States deputy marshal his real jobwas to wait on Mars’ Jo and see to it that the mint juleps were properlyfrosted.” 3About this time Shelby got word that Billy Hunter was working asa bricklayer in Indianapolis, and he sent one of his deputy marshals,C. C. Colt, to bring him back, if he would come, to the Shelby house¬hold at Adrian. Billy was glad to come back to the home that had38 6 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againalways been his, and he spent the rest of his life with the Shelbys. Hewas with his old master when Shelby died.Shelby’s notorious tenderheartedness, which had made him a softtouch for every old soldier, now made him a soft touch for everybody.For the first time, he came in contact with human misery as it is seenonly in a courtroom. As Judge Philips said in his last tribute to hisfriend, “The angels alone have recorded the sums of money he hasgiven for bread and raiment to the wives and little ones of convicts incourt. He gave so often that recently one foolish woman came to thenotion that the government furnished the money and wanted me torequire him to do more.” 4One day, hardboiled attorneys were moved as Shelby stood andlistened while the judge pronounced sentence upon a young man con¬victed of a petty postoffice theft. Having spoken the fateful words,the judge directed Marshal Shelby to remove the convicted youth.Thereupon Shelby stepped to the side of the prisoner, but instead ofcatching him roughly by the arm, he laid his own over the youngman’s shoulders and spoke to him in a low voice, full of understand¬ing. The boy looked up at the sympathetic touch, buried his face inthe marshal’s shoulder, and burst into tears. Thus they left the court¬room, while spectators gazed in astonished silence.5When two thinly clad newsboys came into the office on a bitterlycold day in Kansas City, Shelby gave them jobs on the inside wherethey would be warm. He could not quite get away with appointingthem his deputies, but he surmounted the difficulty. Thereafter, saysthe Kansas City Star, “visitors to the courtroom could not fail toobserve what could not be found elsewhere in the land: two smallboys filling the important posts of bailiffs. They were so small that, atthe opening day of term, when they approached the clerk’s desk totake the constitutional oath of office, they barely reached over it.Shelby admitted to the judge that they hardly came up to ‘the mostancient standards for bailiffs,’ but explained that they were two news¬boys whose aged mother was dependent upon them for support andhe would like to give them a better job.” 6Advancing years had not lessened Shelby’s gallantry toward thefair sex, and down the corridor in the Federal Building worked a prettyyoung woman of whom he was extremely fond. Two or three timesa day, reporters at the Federal Building recall, he entered her officeand talked to her in “his knightly and courtly fashion.” If he foundThe Great Pullman Strike 387any man there wearing a hat, he would instantly pluck it off. “Sir,” hewould say, “do you know no better, sir, than to remain covered inthe presence of a lady, sir?” 7 Shelby had become a character, and ofcourse he knew it; no man could be the object of as much publicadoration as he had been in Missouri for thirty years without acquiringa few royal mannerisms, but to Shelby’s eternal credit it must be saidthat the pampering had not spoiled him. Only the petty becomespoiled, and Shelby, whose eyes were always on horizons which othermen could not see, had no time for pettiness.In July, 1894, occurred the great Pullman boycott and strike of therailroads, one of the bloodiest labor wars in American industrialhistory. Hundreds of thousands of dollars’ worth of railroad propertywas destroyed, dozens of persons were killed and wounded, the militiawas called in twenty states, and the Federal government finally inter¬vened with troops and injunctions to bring an end to the chaos. InMissouri there was little violence, as compared with such areas asChicago, the storm center of the strike. That the trains ran and themails were delivered in Missouri was due in large part to the swiftnesswith which United States Marshal Shelby acted when the Federalgovernment stepped in.The basic cause of the strike, which originated in the little Chicagosuburb of Pullman, a “company town” of the Pullman Palace CarCompany, was the panic of 1893. The economic disruptions of thatyear launched one of the bitterest depressions of the nineteenthcentury. More than 16,000 business firms had gone bankrupt, includ¬ing fifty companies with a capital of more than half a million dollarseach. The bottom dropped out of wholesale prices, making it difficultto produce goods at more than the barest minimum of profit, andcompanies repeatedly slashed the pay of their workers. Especially hardhit was the village of Pullman, Illinois, which the company had builtfor its workers, and in which it was the only employer and landlord.Even in prosperous years the wage standards of Pullman had beenlower than union wages for similar work in Chicago, but the rents forthe company cottages were 20 to 25 per cent higher. Labor being adrug on the market in 1894, there were no other jobs to which thePullman workers could go; it was work for Pullman or not work.Although the company had on its books an undivided surplus of$2,320,000 at the end of the fiscal year in July, an amount which388 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againexceeded its total wage outlay for six months, the wage cuts and lay¬offs continued, but rents were not lowered. One skilled mechanicworked ten hours a day for twelve days and received a pay check ofseven cents. His wages were $9.07, but he owed the company I9.00rent.8On May 7, 1894, the employees presented their grievances to Pull¬man executives, but were not satisfied with the result. On May 11,9,000 workers left their jobs and the remaining 300 were quicklylaid off by the Pullman Company. The walkout was orderly, andEugene V. Debs, president of the American Railway Union, withwhich some of the strikers were affiliated, undertook to arbitrate, al¬though the ARU had neither caused nor authorized the walkout.The Pullman Company refused to arbitrate, and on June 22 anultimatum was issued by the American Railway Union: unless thecompany agreed to enter into negotiations within four days, the Pull¬man shops at Ludlow, Kentucky, and at St. Louis would be struck,and the ARU would refuse to handle Pullman cars. Again the com¬pany was adamant, and the boycott was voted to begin on June 26unless the company changed its mind in the meanwhile. It did not. Atnoon on the date set, the ARU ordered all Pullman cars cut from theirtrains and sidetracked.The railroads now stepped in. The General Managers Association,representing twenty-four railroads having their terminus in Chicago,which operated 41,000 miles of track and had 221,000 employees, an¬nounced that they could not move trains without Pullman cars becauseof their contracts with the Pullman Company. To move them withPullman Palace Cars attached meant hiring strikebreakers. Thattouched off the fuse which exploded in twenty states.There had been strikes aplenty in the United States since the CivilWar, but never one like this. More than 100,000 men had gone off theirjobs, and between Chicago and the Golden Gate only the GreatNorthern Railway was maintaining a semblance of its regular schedule.The Federal government was now involved whether it liked it ornot, for the delivery of the mails was affected. On July 2 a Federalcourt in Chicago issued an omnibus injunction prohibiting officials ofthe American Railway Union from aiding the boycott in any way. Itwas a sweeping injunction, and it cut the ground from under the feetof the strikers. Debs and his fellow ARU leaders were eventuallyindicted for conspiracy, refused bail, and imprisoned. On July 2The Great Pullman Strike389President Cleveland ordered Federal troops to Chicago. Riots, blood¬shed, arson followed. In Chicago alone $300,000 worth of propertywas destroyed on July 6, and the soldiers fired into the mob. (A dis¬patch in the Kansas City Star said on July 12 that ten lives had beenlost in Chicago and forty-one persons injured.) Losses to the PullmanPalace Car Company throughout the country were estimated afterthe strike at twice the value of the Pullman holdings.Shelby swore in 700 deputies in Missouri at the beginning of thestrike, which began at noon on July 2. The Kansas City Star reportedon that day that “at the Union Depot a force of deputies of MarshalShelby is guarding Santa Fe Trains and everything sent out yesterdayhad deputies on the coach platform as far as Argentine [Shelby had61 men on duty at Argentine]. Even the backups, local trains that stophere, are backed into the Union station and are guarded by deputies.”The Chicago and St. Louis Limited Express was held up at Slater,Missouri, and Shelby sent Chief Deputy Marshal C. C. Colt to Slaterwith a force of deputies to see to it that trains moved unmolested. Atthis point he found himself involved in a controversy with GovernorWilliam J. Stone. Stone, along with Governor Altgeld of Illinois,viewed with alarm the use of Federal troops as police, holding that itwas a usurpation of the power of local and state authorities and aninvasion of states’ rights. Fie addressed a letter to Shelby in which heset forth this view. Shelby did not make the letter public, but theStar reported on July 3, 1894, that “Governor Stone wants to knowby what right the United States court and marshal presume to interferewith the free action of the people of Missouri at Slater and other pointswhere trains are stopped by strikers. The letter,” continued the Star,is “full of suggestions that the United States has gone beyond itsauthority when deputy marshals were placed at stations within thestate of Missouri to protect trains.”Shelby took only the curtest notice of this communication from theGovernor. He replied that “in protecting trains he was carrying outthe orders of the United States courts for the protection of propertyin their hands,” 9 and he suggested that Governor Stone apply toWashington for further information.Stone wrote a letter to his brother, John B. Stone, in Kansas City, inwhich he complained that the newspapers were trying to involve himfirst in a quarrel with General Shelby, which he said did not exist, andsecondly with President Cleveland. Nevertheless, he said, he opposed390 The Bluegrass and Missouri Again“the dangerous policy of making the protection of the mails or inter¬state commerce a mere pretext for supplanting state authority.” “Evenin recent decisions of the Supreme Court,” he said, “the line betweenthe state and federal government has been well drawn by the constitu¬tion and by repeated and even recent decisions of the United StatesSupreme Court.”The Governor’s brother showed this letter to Shelby, as he doubtlesswas intended to do, and Shelby replied, as quoted in the Star on July12, “If the Governor had been through what we have he would haveknown that the question he thinks is still open was long ago settled inblood.” 10But Shelby, now incensed with the Governor for interrupting himon a busy day, did not let the matter rest there. In the same letterto his brother, Governor Stone had said that he had received com¬plaints from the local authorities at Slater that Shelby’s deputies wereroughnecks who were making themselves obnoxious to the public atSlater. Shelby was as quick to defend his deputies against this chargeas he had been to defend his men against the charge of looting duringthe war. He sent a telegram to Mayor R. T. Brightwell of Slater askingwhat the conduct of his deputies had been at that place, and receivedthis reply, signed by Brightwell and three other city officials: “THECONDUCT OF THE UNITED STATES DEPUTY MARSHALSAT THIS PLACE WAS DIGNIFIED, POLITE AND GENTLE¬MANLY THEY ATTENDED TO THEIR DUTIES ANDTHEIR OWN BUSINESS.” Shelby did not fail to send this down tothe city room of the Star which published it, and also commentededitorially:“General Jo Shelby has very decidedly the best of the correspond¬ence in which Governor Stone attempts to call Shelby down forordering United States deputy marshals to Slater to preserve thepublic peace. The Governor looks upon this as an impertinent inter¬ference with the authority of the state and enforces this opinion in aletter which shows a plentiful lack of courtesy for General Shelbyand of respect for the General Government. There is a tone aboutthe communication which suggests that if Mr. Stone could have hisway he would pitch the United States Marshal of Missouri and all ofhis deputies into the river.“In reply to Governor Stone’s offensive letter General Shelby statesthat he acted on the authority and instructions of the attorney generalThe Great Pullman Strike 391of the United States and adds that if the Governor desires to obtainany further light on the question of Mr. Olney’s (the United StatesAttorney General) right to maintain the dignity of the Governmentagainst violent and unlawful interference with the mails he (Stone)should apply to Washington.“General Shelby writes like an old soldier—Governor Stone likethe small-bore politician that he is. Shelby fought in the war on theConfederate side, but was so thoroughly reconstructed that he knowsthere is nothing left of the heresy of state sovereignty. While Shelbywas fighting for the Lost Cause and dodging bullets on many a hotlycontested field, Governor Stone, as a beardless youth, was hangingaround the Seventh Cavalry camp in Kentucky. That is as near as heever came to smelling powder. But no rebel who ever took up armsagainst the Union flag ever had a braver mouth than Governor Stone,who is always ready to rush to the front as the champion of States’rights and ‘gallant’ defender of the cause which perished without hopeof resurrection when Lee surrendered to Grant at Richmond [sic].The quiet but effective manner in which Jo Shelby has scalped Mr.Stone ought to suggest to the latter some idea of the value of modestyand patriotism in a public officer but it is almost too much to hope thatit will have that effect.” 11By an ironic twist of circumstance, Governor Stone was forced toaccept a personal favor from Shelby’s deputies at Slater just two daysafter he had protested that they were roughnecks and exceeding theirauthority. The State militia staged a sham battle at a Fourth of Julycelebration at Marshall, at which Stone was present, and when theday’s festivities were ended, it was discovered that strikers had madeoff with the engine of the special train which had brought Stone andthe militiamen from Jefferson City.In a huff, the Governor telegraphed the strikers at Slater that if theydid not return the engine he would send the militia after it, a suggestionwhich the Kansas City Star says evoked only horselaughs.“If it had not been for General Jo Shelby and his deputies,” saysthe Star, “the Governor might have been at Marshall yet. GeneralShelby didn’t say anything about it and it was not until the deputiescame home that the facts were known. The Governor had a train atMarshall, which is twelve miles from Slater, and no engine. His tele¬gram threatening to send the militia after the engine and strikers wassent to a druggist at Slater. The latter showed it to some of the strike392 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againleaders, who laughed a loud horselaugh. The thought of the militiacoming after them struck the strikers as funny and they began todebate the question as to how they should entertain the Governor ifhe should visit them. They said they would receive him as becomes hisdignity and high position, though some of the more noisy agitatorswere for capturing him.“Meanwhile Chief Deputy United States Marshal C. C. Colt, havingbeen notified by the superintendent of the Alton that the Governorwanted an engine, took four deputy marshals, one of them a fireman,summoned an engineer and went in person with the party and engineto Marshall. After seeing the Governor safely started with the militia¬man acting as fireman, he took his own fireman and deputies and wentback to Slater on a handcar. The strikers were disappointed at nothaving a chance to receive a distinguished visitor but it is not recordedthat the governor thanked the deputy marshals for their services.” 12All of Shelby’s deputies, however, were not gentlemanly and well-behaved, as the contemporary newspaper accounts show. With a forceof 700 special officers, recruited in haste, it is not surprising that thereshould be some roughnecks among them. No one knew this betterthan Shelby and every morning when the deputies reported for workhe passed in review before them in a “weeding out” process. Anydeputy on whom there was a bad conduct report was dismissed im¬mediately. On July 11 the Star reported, “His orders to men in chargeof details are to discharge any men found drinking intoxicating liquor,if only a single glass, or misbehaving.... One deputy whipped hiswife Sunday. She reported it and an order was sent to find the manand dismiss him at once. The wife was instructed to have him prose¬cuted and how to proceed. This morning City Attorney Walker hada dozen deputies who had been drinking last night.” Another itemrecorded that “Louis Page, one of Marshal Shelby’s deputies, wanderedacross the state line into Kansas City yesterday afternoon and on hisway home accumulated a considerable jag. He was arrested and fined$5 for drunkenness by Kansas City police. He could not pay the fineand was sent to the rock pile.”By July 15 the strike was over, and Shelby went back to his Colonelsand his mint juleps. There had been only one instance of seriousviolence in Kansas City during the two weeks of the strike, a fire set onJuly 6 in the yards of the Chicago and Alton which was extinguishedThe Great Pullman Strike 393before it could damage the 800 cars standing on the tracks. The Starcongratulated the community on the law-abiding behavior of itscitizens and pointed out that such rowdy centers as Chicago woulddo well to emulate the example of Kansas City.In July, 1896, the combined armies of the Confederacy marchedagain in the Great Reunion held at Richmond. It was only the sixthtime since the war that a general reunion had been held, and theoccasion would be marked by the laying of the cornerstone for amagnificent monument to Jefferson Davis in the capital of the Con¬federacy. Shelby made the journey east to Richmond, although inthat proud stronghold of the eastern armies he was a little over¬shadowed by the great figures of the Army of Northern Virginia whowere present. The silver-voiced John B. Gordon was chairman of themeeting of the Confederate Veterans Association, Longstreet wasamong those present, although he rode in a carriage instead of march¬ing, and Shelby led the Missouri Veteran Division, which assembledat the northeast corner of Eighth and Broad on the morning of July2 for the great parade which preceded the laying of the cornerstone.Among those who marched with him were Maurice Langhorne, DickCollins, and A. A. Leseur.The Richmond Times published an ink sketch of Shelby and com¬mented that “few of the veterans in Richmond are better known thanJ. O. Shelby,” but reporters did not interview him, and he made onlya brief speech at the main session of the veterans’ convention.The pen of John Edwards, which would have risen to heights onsuch an occasion, was laid aside forever, these six years, but Shelbymade a simple, heartfelt statement. “Like many from Missouri,” hesaid, “I have come here to mingle with you for the love and affectionI entertain for you. We are here, as ex-Confederates, to watch the lay¬ing of the cornerstone for a monument to the memory of JeffersonDavis, whom we all love and revere, and I stand here as a representativeof the Confederate cause west of the Mississippi, and I speak for theMissourians when I say that this for all time shall be our Mecca and weshall ever do him honor.”It was his last public appearance. While in Richmond he attended areception tendered the veterans by Governor O’Ferrall, himself aveteran, and another at the White House of the Confederacy for Mrs.394 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainJefferson Davis. Then he and his comrades took the “cars” back toMissouri.34. Missouri’s FarewellThe winter of i896 was blustery, rough and damp in Kansas City.Early in February, 1897, his fellow workers noticed that MarshalShelby had a bad cold and urged him to go home and go to bed. Hewould not hear of it, and although it got no better, he insisted onserving summonses personally, as he had always done, despite thesleety weather. On his return from one of these trips, during the firstweek in February, he was suffering from a fever, and he was orderedto bed by the family physician, Dr. F. G. Henry. Within twenty-fourhours he had pneumonia. A short time after being put to bed he hadbecome unconscious from the fever and unable to recognize any ofthe family.Dr. Henry sent for the best physicians in Kansas City, and theyhurried to Adrian by train, but when they arrived, there was littlethey could do for the patient, although for a time, during the examina¬tion, it seemed as if he were struggling back to consciousness. Whenthe doctors had concluded their visit and had gone into the next roomto give Betsy Shelby their verdict, Shelby aroused himself and saidin a lucid voice which could be heard through the doorway, “Betsy,don’t let the doctors go without their supper.”Those were his last words. They reflected better than any eulogycould the spirit of knightly hospitality of the man who, as WilliamElsey Connelley said, “was one of the bravest and truest men ever toshoulder a musket in America.” His last thoughts, which had been ofa courtesy to others, drifted back into the dark chaos, and his breathingbecame heavier and more painful as the disorder of silent deliriumclosed in. The doctors had told Betsy there was no hope, and all of thefamily, except Anna, knew it, as they watched at the bedside throughthe night. Two hours before daybreak, the spirit fled.At dawn in the newspaper offices the telegraph keys broke theirrobot silence of the night to click out the sentence from Adrianbeginning, “Gen. Jo. O. Shelby died this morning_” 1And on the copy desk of the Kansas City Star, a blase desk man wasMissouri’s Farewell395stirred to feel for, and to write, the appropriate headline. He wrotethree words, in capitals which look like handset type: “THY WAR¬FARE O’ER.”When C. C. Colt reported for work that day, he received a telegramfrom Joe Boswell Shelby: “Father died at 4 o’clock this morning.”The deputy marshal walked into the outer office, where the staffwas assembled. They saw the telegram in his hands.“He’s gone,” said Colt. The girls in the office wept; the deputymarshals gathered in Shelby’s office to discuss the matter of what theyshould do first. Judge Philips was in Colorado Springs on a vacation.Colt sent two telegrams, one to Washington and one to Judge Philips;then he went out to a drygoods store and bought some crape. Whenthe “Colonels” appeared to inquire after the General, as they had doneevery day during his illness, they saw the crape over the door of themarshal’s office, and they filed in silently.Soon the crowd had increased beyond the normal complement ofold soldiers who had been accustomed to visit the office at least onceevery day, health and weather permitting; the news had spread to thestreet, and men and women who had known the General, one way oranother, came in, ostensibly to inquire if the news were really true,but actually with some awkward idea of paying their respects. Withthe crape on the door, it was not necessary to ask.As mid-morning passed, Captain Stephen Carter Ragan came in.2He had a newspaper in his hand. He sat down in Shelby’s old chair, asone entitled to do so, and unfolded the paper, which he handed toC. C. Colt. The usually keen eyes in his rugged Celtic face were filledwith tears. His collar button showed beneath the close-cropped goateeand his chest was rising and falling with emotion as he passed thepaper over. Colt read the dispatch from Adrian aloud to the assemblyin the office.“General Joseph Orville Shelby died at his country home, eightmiles from this city, at 4:20 o’clock this morning. The end came peace¬fully. The patient had been unconscious since early Monday morningand had been slowly dying since that time. At a consultation ofphysicians last night it was given out that death must come beforemorning, and the family had been constant watchers at the bedside.Gen. Shelby was taken seriously ill ten days ago with pneumonia, andgradually grew worse. Funeral arrangements are not yet perfected.”396 The Bluegrass and Missouri AgainCaptain Ragan spoke up. He was a member of the committee of theEx-Confederate Association in charge of the plot of ground set asidein Forest Hill Cemetery, near the site of the battle of Westport.“He wanted to be buried with his men,” said Ragan.Major Stonestreet was present, and he nodded. “He told me threeweeks ago he wished to be buried in the Confederate Cemetery,” hesaid.“It was about three weeks ago he told me the same thing,” saidRagan. “I came in here and asked where the General was, and theytold me he was in there—” pointing to the closed door of a side room.“I went in and the General was talking with Colonel Hunt. As soonas I opened the door he looked up and said, ‘Captain, have you roomin that burying ground at Forest Hill for me?’ I thought he was joking,and I said there was room for all us old fellows. ‘Well, when I die Iwant to be buried there among my old soldiers,’ the General said tome, and I said, ‘General, I want to be buried there too, and I want thehonor of being buried near you.’ That is all that we said, but I amsure that the General meant it, and I am sure that he wished to beburied there.”W. H. Draffen, assistant United States Attorney, said that he hadbeen at Shelby’s home the day before and that Sam Shelby had toldhim that when his father died he would probably be buried at Butler.Someone else remarked that the people of Lexington, Missouri, wouldprobably want him to be buried there.“It’s up to us,” said Stonestreet. “I think that Captain Ragan, here,should go to Adrian and tell the family of General Shelby’s wishes.”There was general assent, and a telegram was written out and signedby Captain Ragan: Do not decide on place of burial until you see me.It was found that Ragan could catch a train in a few minutes. Aletter to Betsy Shelby was composed for him to take with him. It read:“We beg to assure you of our condolence in the great grief which hascome upon you and also of our keen regret and grief over the death ofGeneral Shelby. Without wishing to intrude upon your opinion as tothe proper place of burial for him, we yet feel that he should be buriedat Forest Hill Cemetery in this city. This is in consonance with hisexpressed desire, and it seems to us fitting that he should rest amongthose who fell about him in the brilliant battles he fought during thewar. His public record has endeared him to the people of the state,Missouri’s Farewell397and in burying him at this place an opportunity would be offered tothe people at large to visit his grave from time to time that wouldnot be if he should be buried at Butler.”The letter was signed by John R. Walker, United States DistrictAttorney; W. M. Draffen, the Assistant District Attorney; C. B.Anderson, United States Pension Agent; C. C. Colt, Chief DeputyUnited States Marshal; Milton Welsh, Surveyor of the Port; Dr. F. G.Henry, Surgeon to United States prisoners; Webster Withers, InternalRevenue Collector; Major Jacob Stonestreet, and Major CharlesCarples.3When Ragan had gone, Major Carples said, “I’m glad I’ve got hispicture. One day I took him by the arm and forced him into a galleryand had his picture taken, and it’s framed and on the wall at my home.I wouldn’t take a million dollars for it.” Carples was a Union veteran.He had been one of the Union troops under Pleasanton who hadchased Price and Shelby on the last great raid into Missouri in 1864.His eyes were red-rimmed from weeping.“He was heart; all heart,” said Dr. Henry, who was seated now atthe dead General’s desk, the newspaper clutched in his hand, his felthat pulled down low over his eyes. He pushed back the hat and laidthe newspaper on the desk. “Gentlemen,” he said, “he was theChevalier Bayard of America.”In the doorway, a footstep sounded, and those present in the mar¬shal’s office looked up. Framed in the doorway was a silent man in afaded white hat, a Confederate campaign hat. He had gray hair and agray mustache, with a sharp thin face; but he stood straight and hewas every inch a relic of the Missouri Confederate cause. His handswere deep in his overcoat pockets as he gazed at the rosette andstreamers of crape. For a moment he stood with his underlip beneathhis teeth. Then out came his red bandanna and he pressed it to hiseyes, as he leaned his elbow on a high desk near the door and weptsilently. For several minutes he stood, and then without a word turnedand went down the stairway. The crape on the door had confirmedthe news he had heard on the street.When Ragan arrived in Adrian, another telegram had precededhim—this one from Major Will Warner, Jo Shelby’s close friend.Warner, now a resident of Kansas City, stood in the same relation tothe Union Veterans’ Association of Kansas City as Ragan to the Ex-Confederate Association. Major Warner wanted to know the family’s398 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againplans for the funeral, so that the men of the Blue Armies could makepreparations to pay their last respects.Under these circumstances Betsy Shelby and the children could notrefuse to hold the funeral in Kansas City, although they would havewished him closer home in his last sleep. A mass meeting of Adriancitizens was held, and it was decided after consultation with the familythat the body should rest in state for an hour at the Methodist Church,before being placed on the train, so that his friends and neighborsmight say goodbye.The bleak prairies about Adrian were mantled with snow, and thealmost impassable condition of the roads made it necessary for thefuneral party to leave the Shelby home early in the morning for theslow ten-mile drive to Adrian, with time enough at the church beforethe train left for Kansas City. The hearse was followed by a carriage,in which were Captain Ragan, Ben Shelby and Joe Shelby. A singlehorseman, with frayed overcoat turned up against the cold, completedthe cortege of the man who had led ten thousand cavalry in battle.The lone rider beside the hearse, as it crawled across the prairie nofaster than a man could walk, was Billy Hunter.The train left Adrian at twenty minutes past one in the afternoonand arrived at Kansas City at four. This was on February 15. At thestation an honor guard of ten old Confederates and ten members of theMissouri National Guard met the train. The procession wound throughMain Street to Eleventh, thence eastward to Walnut and northwardto the Federal Building. There the casket was placed in the courtroom,to lie in state for thirty-six hours.All day long on the 16th, mourners filed past the coffin, and at theUnion station the trains were bringing in people from all over the state,and from across the border in Kansas.The funeral was held at 10 o’clock on Wednesday morning, Febru¬ary 17, in the auditorium of the Armory, the largest in town, but notlarge enough by half to accommodate those who attended. Therewere two thousand people seated inside, and as many more outside, asthe Reverend Dr. Neel, pastor of the Second Presbyterian Church,preached the sermon.Of Shelby’s family, only his sons were present. Both Betsy andAnna Shelby were prostrated by grief, and the ordeal of attending theservices in Kansas City was out of the question. The seven stalwartMissouri’s Farewell399sons of the dead general sat together, an impressive sight, in the frontrow of the auditorium.The armory was decorated with long festoons of evergreen, hungfrom the center of the high ceilings and reaching out to the cornersand sides. Walls were trimmed with sprigs of evergreen and holly. Onthe south side of the auditorium a platform had been erected, on eitherside of which stood a field piece that had been used in actual combat.A stand of arms was stacked on either side, and behind it was draped abright new flag, the Stars and Stripes. The front of the platform was asolid bank of floral offerings, among them a broken column and sabrethat stood six feet high, and a wreath of artificial flowers sent by theUnited Confederate Camp in St. Louis. The column with the sabrewas the gift of U. S. Government officials. One of the handsomest ofthe wreaths was of hyacinths, roses, carnations and lilies, a remem¬brance from the Daughters of the Confederacy of St. Joseph, Missouri.At either end of the platform stood tall palms. The coffin rested on asmall stand in front of the platform, covered with roses, lilies, and asmall silk Confederate flag.At 9:30 Shelby’s sons, and other relatives, took a last look at the faceof their dead. It was a touching farewell. There had never before beena death in the family—in twenty-nine long and crowded years—andtheirs was a grief for which no words came. They had been close toone another, the Shelbys. They would be closer now.Dr. Neel took as his text: “War the Good Warfare.” One news¬paper account says that his “burning words swept the audience likemagic and despite the fact that it was a funeral three times the audiencebroke into applause.”Judge Philips spoke next, and everyone in the audience knew thathe had fought for the Union and against Shelby. Referring to Shelby’spostwar battle to help restore the Union, he recalled that “this mani¬festation of patriotic zeal for the Republic in his later life has beengreatly misconceived and unjustly criticized by some well-meaningpeople, some good-meaning people, as well as by some exceedinglynarrow persons of provincial tendencies. May I be indulged, in thepresence of his speechless tongue, to vindicate him?And without hyperbole, or flattery, “which would be an offense,”he proceeded to do so. It was a moving speech, portions of which havebeen quoted in previous chapters, but the conclusion is worth quoting400 The Bluegrass and Missouri Againagain, for it is the best estimate of the character of Joseph OrvilleShelby ever put into words:“He was not what might be termed a round man, uniform andregular in his mental and moral composition. On the contrary, he wasangular to acuteness. It was the sharp angles, the abrupt curvatures inhis character that created the constant surprises in his career and lentto his life its singular attractiveness and picturesqueness. There wereno dead planes, no monotonous levels in his journey through life, andit ran along rugged mountains, cataracts and varying scenery, much ofit exciting, and much of it beautiful.” At the end of the service, thecongregation sang “My Country ’Tis of Thee.”Four hundred members of the United Confederate Veterans andthe Grand Army of the Republic stood bareheaded as the casket waslifted into the hearse in front of the Armory. Among them was a thin,rugged-faced man named Frank James. The procession, which movedthrough streets filled with snow and ice, was led by the band ofCompany A of the Third Regiment of the Missouri National Guard.Next came the Third Regiment itself, in full-dress uniform, next theveterans of the Confederate and Union armies, next a group ofhonorary pallbearers, all members of the Iron Brigade, and then thehearse. In the rear of the hearse, Uncle Billy Hunter, his black facemournful, led a horse belonging to Shelby. It was a wiry, nervous bay(Shelby had a fondness for bays as well as sorrels) bearing Shelby’scavalry saddle, boots, and spurs, the traditional memorial of the deadcavalryman. Following the ex-slave were members of the Shelbyfamily, in carriages, the Kansas City High School Cadets in uniform,United States officials in carriages, county officers, and hundreds ofplain citizens on foot, who walked all the way to the gates of ForestHill Cemetery at 69th and Troost—a distance of fifty blocks.At Forest Hill the casket was placed in a receiving vault, and thevault filled with flowers. A squad from Company A fired a salute, abugler sounded “Taps,” and the honors to General Shelby had beendone. His funeral was the largest Confederate funeral in the postwarSouth, with the exception of the funeral of Jefferson Davis inRichmond.Thus they buried Joseph Orville Shelby, the Last of the Cavaliers,and the greatest cavalryman of them all, according to those who shouldknow best—his enemies. But the South, which he served, has forgottenhim.Missouri’s Farewell 401A simple stone ammunition box marks his grave. The letteringreads only:“Gen’l. Jo. O. Shelby. Dec. 12, 1830. Feb. 13, 1897.”But his real epitaph is to be found in the injunction which he gavehis men in the flare of the torches on the steps of the Confederate sub¬treasury in Austin, when he refused to touch a dollar of the govern¬ment’s hoard of gold and silver:“We are the last of our race. Let us be the best as well.”Notes1. LINCOLN S CONFEDERATE GENERAL1. In 1864 Shelby commanded a division; thus his responsibilities were those of amajor general. But it was May 16, 1865 (retroactive to May 10) before Gen. KirbySmith, commander of the Trans-Mississippi Department, gave him the long-delayedcommission.—IT^r of the Rebellion, Official Records of the Union and ConfederateArmies (Washington, D.C., Gov’t Printing Office, 1881), Ser. I, Vol. XLVIII, pt. ii,p. 1307. Hereafter cited as Official Records or O.R.2. Unless otherwise noted, all facts of Shelby’s Mexican sojourn are from the worksof Maj. John Newman Edwards of Lexington, Mo., Shelby’s adjutant during the warand in Mexico. His Shelby's Expedition to Mexico, An Unwritten Leaf of the War(Kansas City, Mo., Kansas City Times Publishing Co., 1872) is the only day-by-daychronicle of the expedition ever published. Hereafter cited as Expedition to Mexico.3. Shelby disclosed, in a newspaper interview in 1877, that his cousin, Federal Gen.Francis Preston Blair, Jr., whose father was a friend and confidant of Lincoln, wrotehim just before the end of the war that Lincoln would be glad to see ex-Confederatesoldiers migrate to Mexico, join Juarez, and depose Maximilian.-Interview quoted inW.B. Stevens, Centennial History of Missouri (St. Louis and Chicago, S.J. ClarkePublishing Co., 1921), pp. 297-98:“You led an expedition in Mexico once, general.”“Yes, an expedition of a thousand men. It could have been fifty thousand just aswell.”“Tell... something about your expedition then.”“There were several things which led to that. Some have been told and some haven’t.Perhaps the time is as good as any to make them known.... There were a thousandmen in my division who did not want to surrender. If there had been but two I wouldhave felt it my soldierly duty to stand by those two and have gone with them into theunknown. Then again I had ideas, or dreams, or ambitions. I saw, or imagined I saw,a great empire beyond the Rio. This river they call the great river.“Through General Frank P. Blair I had received, long before the killing of Lincoln,some important information. It was to the effect that, in the downfall of the Con¬federacy and the overthrow of the Confederates of the East, the Confederates of theWest would be permitted to march into Mexico, drive out the French, fraternize withthe Mexicans, look around them to see what they could see, occupy and possess lands,keep their eyes steadfastly upon the future and understand from the beginning thatthe future would have to take care of itself. In addition, every disbanded soldier inthe Federal army in the Trans-Mississippi who desired the kind of service I have indi¬cated would have been permitted to cross over to the Confederates with his armsand ammunition. Fifty thousand of them were eager to enlist in such an expedition.403404Notes to Pages 2-10On my march south from San Antonio to Piedras Negras I received no less than 200communications from representative Federal officers, begging me to wait for thembeyond the Rio Grande.”“Do you mean to say that President Lincoln was in favor of the movement youhave outlined?”“I do mean to say so most emphatically. I could show nothing official for my as¬sertions, but I had such assurances as satisfied me, and other officers of either armyhad such assurances as satisfied them. There was an empire in it and a final and prac¬tical settlement of the whole Mexican question.”History offers some support to Shelby’s statement in the mission of Frank P. Blair,Sr., to Jefferson Davis in Richmond early in 1865. According to Davis, Blair seems tohave had something in mind concerning a face-saving device for the Confederatearmies whereby they could be used, in the event of the termination of the war byagreement, to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in Mexico. See Jefferson Davis, The Riseand Fall of the Confederate Government (2 vols. New York, D. Appleton Co., 1881),II, 612-18.There is still other supporting evidence. Gen. Philip Sheridan telegraphed Washing¬ton for orders to go after Shelby when it became known that Shelby was movingtoward Mexico with an unsurrendered portion of his army; the orders never came.4. Stevens, Centennial History of Missouri, p. 296.5. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, or the War in the West (Cincinnati, MiamiPublishing Co., 1867), p. 448. Hereafter cited as Edwards, Shelby and His Men.6. John W. Thomason, Jr., J.E.B. Stuart, the Portrait of a Cavalryman (New York,Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1930), p. 360.7. William Elsey Connelley, Quantrill and the Border Wars (Cedar Rapids, la..Torch Press, 1910), p. 289. Hereafter cited as Quantrill.8. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 4.9. News of Shelby’s march to Mexico soon reached Sheridan in New Orleans. OnJuly 4, 1865, he wrote the news to Grant.—O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XLVIII, pt. ii, p. 1077.2. BOYHOOD IN KENTUCKY1. Published genealogies of the Shelby family contain a number of errors. Manybiographical references assert that Joseph Orville Shelby was a lineal descendant ofIsaac Shelby, which is not correct. The author is indebted to Cass K. Shelby, ofHollidaysburg, Pa., author of The First Three Generations of the Shelby Family inAmerica (Hollidaysburg, 1941), for supplying a complete genealogical chart of thefamily. The line of descent of Joseph Orville Shelby is also settled conclusively in aletter written by his mother on May 22, 1881: “Genl. Jo. O. Shelby was the son ofMr. Orville Shelby, Sumner Cy., Tennessee, his mother (my maiden name was AnnaM. Boswell of Lexington, Ky.) eldest daughter of Dr. Joseph Boswell. The grand¬father of my son Jo on his father’s side [was] Mr. David Shelby of Sumner Cy. Tenn.His grandmother on the same side Miss Sarah Bledsoe of the same county and state....My son Jo is a descendant of John, and the Shelbys of Kentucky of Evan.”—Letterowned by the Filson Club, Kentucky Historical Association, Louisville.2. Zella Armstrong, Notable Southern Families (Chattanooga, Tenn., LookoutPublishing Co., 1922), pp. 305-6.3. Most famous members of the early Shelby family aside from Governor IsaacShelby were Isaac’s father, Brigadier Evan Shelby, Jr., and his cousin, Dr. John Shelbyof Nashville. Evan, Jr., was a noted Indian fighter in Pennsylvania before removingto Virginia and subsequently to North Carolina. He served with the British Gen.Forbes in the attack on Fort Duquesne and was well known to George Washington.He was too old to fight at King’s Mountain, as some accounts assert he did, althoughhe had seen service against the border Indians of Virginia and North Carolina. Dr.John Shelby founded the first medical college in Tennessee, Shelby Medical College atNotes to Pages 10-20 405Nashville, later merged with the University of Nashville, now a part of the PeabodyInstitute. Shelby Avenue in Nashville is named for him. He was a brother of OrvilleShelby and consequently an uncle of Joseph Orville Shelby.4. This John Shelby, great-grandfather of Joseph Orville Shelby, is not to be con¬fused with Dr. John Shelby, who was grandson of the first John Shelby.5. Robert B. McAfee, History of the Late War in the Western Country (Lexington,Ky., Worsley and Smith, 1816), p. 131.6. Morgan was born in Alabama but spent his boyhood in Kentucky.7. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 42.8. Executor of the estate was Samuel Grant Jackson, wealthy Kentuckian, father-in-law of Governor Thomas C. Crittenden of Missouri.—H.H. Crittenden, comp.,The Crittenden Memoirs (New York, G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1936), p. 478. Hereaftercited as Crittenden Memoirs.9. Dated Jan. 21, 1826; published Feb. 6.10. James Franklin Hopkins, A History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky (Lex¬ington, Ky., University of Kentucky Press, 1951), p. 97.11. The Western Farmer and Gardener, Vol. II (1841), quoted in Hopkins, His¬tory of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky, p. 102.12. Record in Fayette County Courthouse, Lexington, Ky. Orville’s acres are nowpart of the Madden Farm.13. Newspaper files (late 1820’s to mid-i83o’s) tell of cholera epidemics in Lex¬ington.14. Mr. C.R. Staples of Lexington supplied facts of Dr. Boswell’s death.15. Ann’s mother was Judith Bell Gist, daughter of Col. Nathaniel Gist of theRevolution, and granddaughter of Christopher Gist, friend of George Washington.16. The legend was that Benjamin Gratz’s sister, the beautiful Rebecca Gratz, wasthe original of Sir Walter Scott’s “Rebecca” in Ivanhoe.—Letters of Rebecca Gratz(Philadelphia, Jewish Publication Society of Philadelphia, 1929), Foreword.17. Ibid. 18. Ibid.19. Today the residence of Mrs. Anderson Gratz.20. Letters of Rebecca Gratz, Foreword.21. The nature of this misdemeanor is not known. The minutes of the board ofvisitors show that he was suspended Jan. 20, 1843. He never went back.—Cecil FletcherHolland, Morgan and His Raiders (New York, The Macmillan Co., 1942), p. 23.22. The Morgan home is still one of the showplaces of Lexington.23. This child died in infancy.24. Wilfred R. Hollister and Harry Norman, Five Fa?nous Missourians (KansasCity, Mo., Hudson-Kimberly Publishing Co., 1900), p. 339. Hereafter cited as FiveFamous Missourians.25. Issue of Feb. 15, 1897.26. Ibid.27. Kansas City Star, Feb. 16, 1897.28. F. Garvin Davenport, Ante-Bellum Kentucky (Oxford, O., Mississippi ValleyPress, 1943), p. 28.29. Told the author as a cherished tradition in the Gratz family.30. Holland, Morgan and His Raiders, p. 23.31. B. and M. Gratz, Merchants in Philadelphia, 1754-1798: Papers of Interest toTheir Posterity and the Posterity of Their Associates, edited by William VincentByars (Jefferson City, Mo., Hugh Stephens Printing Co., 1916), p. 311. Hereafter citedas Gratz Papers.32. Ibid., p. 263.33. Letters of Rebecca Gratz, p. viii.34. Ibid., pp. 327-28.35. Biographical sketch of Jo Shelby in Five Famous Missourians, pp. 328-29.36. Ibid.406Notes to Pages 20-2837. In 1864 it was occupied by the adjutant and was the printing office forThe Mailbag, Federal soldier newspaper —Lexington City Directory.38. Morgan frequently slipped into Lexington under the noses of the Federals tovisit his mother.39. In a letter to the author, July 16, 1952, Miss Roemol Henry, Librarian ofTransylvania, wrote: “We have no material on Joseph O. Shelby in our library. Ourrecords, though not complete, do not even show that he was a student here.”40. Letter to the author from the late Mrs. J.C. Bryant of Wheatridge, Colorado,niece of Shelby, who as a girl visited the Shelbys in western Missouri. Hereafter citedas Letter from Mrs. J.C. Bryant.3. WAVERLY: THE GOLDEN YEARS1. Holland, Morgan and His Raiders, p. 7.2. Howard Swiggett, The Rebel Raider (Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1934),p. 15; Holland, Morgan and His Raiders, p. 26.3. Most biographical sketches of Shelby, including that in the Dictionary ofAmerican Biography, state that he attended college in Philadelphia after leavingTransylvania. An examination of the records of all of the institutions of higher learningin the Philadelphia area in existence in the 1840’s and 1850’s has disclosed that thereis no record of his having been a student at any of them. The Historical Society ofPennsylvania also found no record of it. The original papers on which the D.A.B.sketch is based have also been examined in the Library of Congress, and these citeno authority other than the published references given, all of which contain manyerrors. The Rebecca Gratz letter of March 24, 1846, plainly fixes the date of Shelby’sPhiladelphia schooling. At this time he was fifteen years old and hardly of college age.4. See Hopkins, History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky, pp. 131-32.5. Missouri Historical Review, XXVI (Jan., 1932), 190.6. Gratz Moses was a St. Louis physician, cousin of Benjamin and Rebecca Gratz;later professor of obstetrics at the Missouri Medical College, president of the St.Louis Obstetrical Society, and doctor for the St. Louis Board of Health.—Gratz Papers,p. 279.7. Letters of Rebecca Gratz, pp. 327-28.8. William Ernest Smith, The Francis Preston Blair Family in Politics (New York,The Macmillan Co., 1933), I, 292. Hereafter cited as Blair Family in Politics.9. The Lexington Reporter, Jan. 9, 1850.10. Hopkins, History of the Hemp Industry in Kentucky, p. 109.11. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 82.12. Crittenden Memoirs, p. 479.13. Morgan founded the Lexington Rifles, a fashionable organization of youngbloods.—Swiggett, The Rebel Raider, p. 18.14. Seven-page manuscript entitled “The History of Waverly,” by J. M. Motte,in the Western Historical Manuscripts Collection of the University of Missouri.Original owned by Q.W. Brickin. Hereafter cited as Motte’s “History of Waverly.”15. Ibid.16. Fred Erving Dayton and John Wolcott Adams, Steamboat Days (New York,Frederick A. Stokes & Co., 1935), p. 356.17. Motte’s “History of Waverly.” 18. Ibid.19. Facts on the firm of Gratz and Shelby through 1835 quoted from files ofLexington newspapers.20. Shelby operated a packet line to Lexington; one of his trim little steamers isknown to have been the Winnie Belle. The other boat with which his name is as¬sociated was the A. B. Chambers, a larger craft. (Steamboat lists give names of cap¬tains rather than owners.)21. Louis C. Hunter, Steamboats on the Western Rivers (Cambridge, HarvardUniversity Press, 1949), p. 661.Notes to Pages 28 -44 40722. Quoted in letter to the author by Drury Tillman Boyd of Joplin, Mo., as havingbeen made in a letter by his father, a sergeant in 34th Arkansas Volunteers.23. Letter from Mrs. J.C. Bryant.24. Claiborne Jackson was a Kentuckian who had come to Missouri at eighteenand become a wealthy merchant and banker.-W.L. Webb, Battles and Biographies ofMissourians (Kansas City, Mo., Hudson-Kimberly Publishing Co., 1900), pp. 294-304.25. One of Shelby’s Kentucky friends, Col. William Warner of Lexington, namedhis daughter Shelby Warner, at Shelby’s suggestion, according to Col. Warner’s great-granddaughter, Mrs. Shelby Warner Steger of Bear Camp Hollow, Mo.26. Charles P. Deatharage, Steamboating on the Missouri River in the Sixties (KansasCity, Kansas City News-Press, 1924), pp. 12-13.27. Ibid.4. THE BORDER WARS1. An unidentified writer in the St. Louis Republican in 1898 recalled in an article,“Fruitful Missouri,” that the farm of Howard Gratz and Jo Shelby was one of thefinest in Lafayette County. Reprinted in the Kentucky Gazette, Lexington, Nov. 9,1898.2. The promise was not kept.—Thomas Hughes, The Struggle for Kansas. Pub¬lished as an appendix in J.M. Ludlow, A Sketch of the History of the United Statesfrom Independence to Secession (London, The Macmillan Co., 1862), p. 330. Here¬after cited as Hughes, Struggle for Kansas.3. This statement is not an exaggeration. Eli Thayer, president of the MassachusettsEmigrant Aid Society, who more than any other man was responsible for thecolonization of Kansas, says in The Kansas Crusade (New York, Harper and Brothers,1889) that it was a holy war and that the society was formed for no other purposethan “to put a cordon of free states from Minnesota to the Gulf of Mexico and stopthe forming of slave states.”4. The best description of the Blue Lodge is contained in Report No. 200 of sub¬committee of Committee on Elections of 34th Congress (Washington, D.C., Gov’tPrinting Office, 1856). Hereafter cited as Report No. 200.5. Speech quoted in Connelley, Quantrill, p. 294.6. Thayer, Ka?isas Crusade, p. 31.7. Testimony of Samuel N. Wood, Report No. 200, p. 140.8. Testimony of F.P. Vaughan, ibid., p. 130.9. Testimony of Ira W. Ackley, ibid., p. 156.10. Hughes, Struggle for Kansas, p. 325.11. Unidentified writer in Lawrence, Kan., Tribune, Apr. 12, 1882.12. Testimony of Lyman Allen, Report No. 200, p. 138.13. Hughes, Struggle for Kansas, p. 333.14. Wood said, “I never saw any of the strangers before.”15. Quoted in Charles Robinson, The Kansas Conflict (New York, Harper andBrothers, 1892). Robinson was first governor of Kansas.16. Quoted in Thayer, Kansas Crusade, p. 237.17. Quoted in Robinson, Kansas Cotiflict, p. 133.18. Ibid., p. 158. 19. Ibid., p. 329.20. Connelley, Quantrill, p. 286.21. Lexington, Ky., Observer and Reporter, Dec. 19, 1855.22. The Eldridge House was opened in March, 1856.-G. Douglas Brewerton, et al.,The War in Kansas, or a Rough Trip to the Border (New York, 1856), pp. 35I~52*23. Connelley, Quantrill, p. 287.24. Robinson, Kattsas Conflict, p. 265.25. St. Louis Republican, Sept. 15, 1856.26. D.W. Wilder, Annals of Kansas (Topeka, T. Dwight Thacher, 1886), p. 138.27. Connelley, Quantrill, p. 288.408Notes to Pages 45-6128. Ibid., p. 291.29. Kansas City Star, Feb., 1897.5. STEAMBOAT WEDDING1. Howard Gratz edited the Gazette for many years.2. Gratz Papers, p. 268.3. See his “Reminiscences of Famous Americans,” Gratz Papers, Chap. XX.4. Letter from Mrs. Louise Davis Brown of Waverly.5. Zeiler’s band (four brothers) was famous on river boats.6. Shelby kept “a steamboat tied up at the wharf all day to take his wedding partyto St. Louis.”—Motte’s “History of Waverly.”7. Marriage Record Book No. D (Lafayette County Courthouse), p. 367.8. Letter, July 6, 1857, Letters of Rebecca Gratz, p. 405.9. Crittenden Memoirs, pp. 4-5.10. Recollection of Miss Elizabeth Corder.11. Now in the possession of Mrs. H.K. Thomas, Marshall, Mo.12. The Blair Family Papers, Library of Congress, contain no mention of JoShelby, but Frank’s father wrote that Frank owed $85,000.13. Newspaper references here are from files of the Express or the Caucasian, onlyones that survive.14. Thomas Shelby not identified in Shelby genealogical record.6. MISSOURI AND THE UNION1. A correspondent in the Anzeiger, St. Louis German language newspaper, chidedBlair during the 1858 campaign for owning slaves while advocating abolition ofslavery. Blair replied in the Daily Republican, Oct. 4, 1858: “I am the proprietor ofsome slaves, of whom most were purchased to prevent separation of families, and thenumber of slaves to whom I have given freedom is greater than the number I possess.The principle I represent contemplates ... giving freedom to all the slaves in Missouri,mine as well as the others_Our free Negroes should be colonized in Central Amer¬ica under the protection of the Government and equal social and political rightsguaranteed them.”2. Tom North, Five Years in Texas (Cincinnati, Elm St. Printing Co., 1867), pp.88-89.3. The Census showed 30,000 Irish, 5,500 Germans, 5,200 French, 4,500 Swiss, 2,800Canadians, and 2,000 Scotch in St. Louis as against 56,780 of native Missouri stock.—Figures quoted in Blair Family in Politics, II, 30.4. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 42.5. Blair Family in Politics, II, 21.6. Ibid., p. 23. 7. Ibid., p. 28. 8. Ibid., p. 37.9. Edward Conrad Smith, The Borderland in the Civil War (New York, TheMacmillan Co., 1927), p. 229.10. Quoted in Blair Family in Politics, II, 46.11. Personal Memoirs of U.S. Grant (Cleveland, O., reissued by World PublishingCo., 1951), p. 119.12. Blair Family in Politics, II, 17.13. Letter from Mrs. J.C. Bryant, who heard the story from “Aunt Betty.”14. John McElroy, The Struggle for Missouri (Washington, D.C., National TribunePublishing Co., 1909), p. 90.15. Price was chairman of the convention which affirmed Missouri’s loyalty to theUnion.16. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 374.Notes to Pages 61-77 40917. Smith, The Borderland in the Civil War, p. 247.18. Ibid., p. 50.19. Major H. A. Conant of Lyon’s staff.20. Thomas L. Snead, The Fight for Missouri (New York, Charles Scribner’s Sons,188/5), pp. 199-200.7. BOONVILLE AND CARTHAGE1. Lyon asserted that it was the other way around (O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, pp. n-12).Nevertheless Lyon’s statement to Price, “This means war,” preceded the Governor’sproclamation and was the direct cause of it.2. McCulloch’s original assignment was simply to guard the Indian Territory againstinvasion from Kansas {ibid., p. 575) and to obtain the active cooperation of the Indiannations with the Confederacy. But he was to give “only such assistance to Missourias will subserve the main purpose of your command.” Secretary of War Walker atRichmond pointed out in a letter to McCulloch on July 4, 1861 (when McCulloch hadalready disregarded orders and moved to join Price), that “the position of Missouri asa Southern state still in the Union requires, as you will readily perceive, much prudenceand circumspection,” and added that only when “necessity and prudence unite” mightMcCulloch proceed into Missouri. Thus it will be seen that McCulloch acted solelyon his own initiative.3. R.S. Bevier, History of the First and Second Missouri Confederate Brigades,1861-1865 (St. Louis, Bryan Brand & Co., 1879). Hereafter cited as Bevier.4. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 14.5. Mrs. J.C. Bryant recalled that Shelby did not join his command until after theShelbys’ second child was born.6. Bevier, pp. 35-36.7. Sigel’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 17.8. Rains’s report, ibid., pp. 20-22.9. Ibid.10. Rains passed over his own cavalry commander, Col. R.L.Y. Peyton, to assignShelby to the task of flanking the enemy —O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 28.11. Rains’s report, ibid., p. 17.12. Letter from Brig. Gen. J.M. Schofield to Maj. Gen. Halleck on Feb. 13, 1862:“Sigel retreated all day long before this miserable rabble, contenting himself with re¬pelling their irregular attacks, which he did with perfect ease whenever he venturedto make them.”—Ibid., p. 94.13. Ibid., p. 19. Lyon thanked Sigel for his “brilliant service.”8. WILSON’S CREEK: THE FACE OF WAR1. Pearce commanded the Arkansas militia, McCulloch the troops of the Confeder¬ate Provincial Army.2. Snead, Fight for Missouri, p. 238.3. Ibid., p. 242. 4. Ibid., pp. 245-46. 5. Ibid., p. 245.6. Hardee to H.M. Rector, president of the Arkansas Military Board, Aug. 8, 1861:“If General McCulloch intends attacking Springfield, he has already done so.”7. For a full account of this military fiasco, the first in a long series of majorblunders in the Trans-Mississippi region, see correspondence on pp. 607-40 of theOfficial Records, Ser. I, Vol. Ill, between Pillow, Polk, Hardee, Thompson, etc.8. Shelby acquired an entire “battery” of such “guns.”—Edwards, Shelby and HisMen, p. 33.9. Shelby never permitted a captured steamboat to be destroyed.—/^.10. And far more savage, being fought Indian style.410Notes to Pages 78-9211. Recollections of Mrs. Lavonia Ray Bruton (1938), Western Historical Manu¬scripts Collection, University of Missouri. Hereafter cited as Bruton MS.12. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 76.13. Cary Gratz’s body was reinterred in the family plot in Lexington Sept. 11, 1861.14. Not, however, his routine report to Adj. Gen. Cooper in Richmond but asupplementary report quoted in the Missouri Historical Review, XXVI (July, 1932),354. The supplementary report, setting forth McCulloch’s defense of his actions beforeand after Wilson’s Creek, appeared originally in the Historical Magazine in NewYork, March, 1872, contributed by none other than Gen. Franz Sigel, who had some¬how come into possession of it.15. This decision was bom of exasperation and desperation on McCulloch’s part.He felt that he had to strike a blow with his army before it fell apart. Although hehad assumed supreme command, with the consent of Price, he found that he coulddo little or nothing with the individualistic Missourians. “There was left,” saysMcCulloch, “only the choice of a disastrous retreat, or a blind attack upon Springfield.”He chose the latter.16. Lyon to the Adjutant General’s office at St. Louis, Aug. 4, 1861.—O.R., Ser. I,Vol. Ill, p. 47.17. Although McElroy quotes Schofield as saying that Lyon gave Sigel credit forthe plan of battle at Wilson’s Creek (Struggle for Missouri, pp. 158, 161), it is notlikely that Lyon trusted blindly to Sigel’s judgment.18. Sigel’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 86.19. Snead, Fight for Missouri, p. 271.20. Bevier, p. 46.21. Snead, Fight for Missouri, p. 272.22. Joseph A. Mudd, “What I Saw at Wilson’s Creek,” Missouri Historical Review,VII, 99. Mudd was a private in Company B, Jackson Guards.23. Snead, Fight for Missouri, p. 275.24. Totten’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, p. 75.25. Snead, Fight for Missouri, p. 275.26. Report of Lieut. George L. Andrews, First Missouri Volunteers, O.R., Ser. I,Vol. Ill, p. 76.27. Sigel’s report, ibid., p. 86.28. Bruton MS.9. A STAR ADDED, A STATE LOST1. See McCulloch’s supplementary report cited in n. 14, Chap. VIII, above.2. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 41.3. Ibid.4. Letter of Shelby to Col. White, in collection of Missouri Historical Society,St. Louis.5. Waverly Morning Visitor.6. Webb, Battles and Biographies of Missourians, p. 100.7. Quoted in a souvenir booklet of Lexington, by A.L. Maxwell, Sixty Days inSixty One; the Siege and Battle of Lexington (Lexington, Mo., 1952), p. 12.8. Clement A. Evans, ed., Confederate Military History (Atlanta, Confederate Pub¬lishing Co., 1899), IX, 65. Hereafter cited as Confederate Military History.9. How methodical it was is described thus by an anonymous newspaper corre¬spondent: “An old Texan, dressed in buckskin and armed with a long rifle, wouldgo up to the works every morning about seven o’clock, carrying his dinner in a tinpail. Taking a good position, he banged away at the Federals until noon, then restedan hour, ate his dinner, after which he resumed operations until six p. m., when hereturned home to supper and a good night’s sleep.”10. Webb, Battles and Biographies of Missourians, p. 107.11. The sword was returned eventually to a G.A.R. post by a descendant.Notes to Pages 93-113 41112. Missouri Historical Review, III, 9.13. Maxwell, Sixty Days in Sixty One, p. 15.14. Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lmcoln, the War Years (New York, Harcourt, Brace& Co., 1936), I, 349.15. Maj. Charles Zagonyi, chief of Fremont’s bodyguard, describes a “rout” thatallegedly took place at Springfield (O.R., Ser. I, Vol. Ill, pp. 251-52), but Moore says,“As Zagonyi and his resplendent command came dashing in [the State Guard] fireda volley that emptied a third of the saddles and sent the remainder of the commandback pell mell upon the main body.” Nevertheless the Confederates retreated throughSpringfield.—Confederate Military History, IX, 80.16. Report of Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War (Washington, D.C.,Gov’t Printing Office, 1861), III, iff.17. See testimony of Zagonyi before committee, ibid., p. 192.18. Joseph Mills Hanson, in U.S. Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 15. Now pub¬lished as Ar?nor by the U.S. Armor Association. Hereafter cited as Cavalry Journal.19. Webb, Battles and Biographies of Missourians, p. 97.20. Recalled by Mrs. J.C. Bryant.21. Also recalled by Mrs. Bryant.22. The family tradition in the British Isles was that the first Shelbys came fromScandinavia, according to Miss Minerva Shelby of Parkersburg, W. Va.23. The Kansas City Star recalled, the day after Shelby’s funeral, that Billy Hunter“liked to tell of his experiences at the battle of Pea Ridge.”24. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. VIII, pp. 428-29.25. Confederate Military History, IX, 76.26. See correspondence of Pike with the Richmond government.—O.R., Ser. I,Vol. XIII, p. 893.27. About 17,000.—Confederate Military History, IX, 78.28. Moore (in ibid.), places the Federal strength at 18,000. For once a Confederateestimate would seem to be correct, for Halleck says that he had sent Curtis 16,000 or17,000 men (O.R., Ser. I, Vol. VIII, p. 555) and to Curtis’s forces were added thoseof Sigel.29. Ibid., p. 328. 30. Ibid., p. 191. 31. Ibid.10. A COLONEL OF THE CAVALRY1. For Price’s address see McElroy, Struggle for Missouri, p. 40.2. E. M. Violette, History of Missouri, (Ramfre Press, Cape Girardeau, Mo., 1951),P- 375*3. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 53.4. Ibid., pp. 54, 71.5. Davis was particularly irked by criticism leveled at the West Pointers whom heappointed.—McElroy, Struggle for Missouri, p. 295.6. Confederate Military History, IX, 92.7. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 57.8. Ibid. 9. Ibid., p. 58. 10. Ibid.11. Jake Stonestreet to reporter, Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897.12. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 59.13. Ibid., p. 80. 14. Ibid., p. 62.15. Violette, History of Missouri, p. 380.16. David Porter, Incidents and Anecdotes of the Civil War (New York, D.Appleton & Co., 1885), p. 180.17. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 69.18. Ibid., p. 70.19. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 14.20. Violette, History of Missouri, p. 384.412Notes to Pages i 13-12421. For operations of Home Guards against rebel bands around Shelby’s propertyin May, see O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, pp. 80-81-82.22. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 72.23. Violette, History of Missouri, p. 379.24. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 18.25. Many writers on Shelby, including Maj. Hanson, have missed the fact thatShelby did not write his own reports. Hanson says: “Had he [Shelby] done nothingelse than contribute his amazing reports to the 128 volumes of the Official Records...history in its lighter vein would owe him a perpetual debt of gratitude. They seemtoo good to be true.”—Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 12.26. Shelby’s report of the recruiting at Waverly (the style shows that he wrotethis one himself) says that he assembled 1,000 men in four days.—O.R., Ser. I, Vol.XIII, p. 97.27. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 14.28. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 73.29. Literally true. The Gold City (Mo.) Democrat, March 15, 1953, reprintedin its “News of Bygone Days” the 1890 obituary of a member of Shelby’s brigadewhose mind had become unhinged as a result of his experiences during the war, andwho never recovered.30. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 75.31. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 978.11. THE IRON BRIGADE: FIRST NEWTONIA1. McElroy, Struggle for Missouri, p. 255.2. The boundaries of the Trans-Mississippi Department embraced the states ofMissouri and Arkansas, the Indian Territory, the state of Louisiana west of theMississippi, and the state of Texas.—O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 829.3. Ibid., p. 702. 4. Ibid.5. Schofield’s report, ibid., p. 17. 6. Ibid., p. 702.7. E. Merton Coulter, The Confederate States of America (Baton Rouge, LouisianaState University Press, 1950), p. 359, says that the Trans-Mississippi Department wasset up in early 1863. This Department had an official existence before 1863 —O.R.,Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 829.8. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 108.9. Douglas Southall Freeman, Lee’s Lieutenants (New York, Charles Scribner’sSons, 1942), I, 614.10. Ibid., pp. 582-84. 11. Ibid., p. 518.12. See n. 5, Chap. X, for Davis’s views on West Pointers.13. Freeman, Lee’s Lieutenants, I, 584.14. Counting Indian troops and units scattered over three states, Holmes had athis disposal 50,000 troops or more. For list of Confederate troops in the Trans-Mississippi Department in 1862 see O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 883; but there is noindication as to which divisions and brigades were up to official strength, so that anaccurate estimate of the number cannot be made, but it was certainly 50,000 or better.Over against this force, Gen. Schofield says that he had only 17,360 troops in Missouri,counting regulars, volunteers, and militia. With Curtis’s 3,000 at Helena, the Federalstrength did not greatly exceed 20,000.15. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 883.16. On Oct. 26, 1862, Gen. Holmes wrote to Richmond: “Colonel White, C.S.Artillery, has reported to me for duty, but the painful disease with which he isafflicted disqualifies him for any trust at all commensurate with his rank. His mind,I think, is seriously impaired.”—Ibid., p. 899.17. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 14.18. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, pp. 85-86.Notes to Pages i 24-147 41319. Ibid., p. 83. 20. Ibid., p. 87.21. Report of Shelby to Marmaduke, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 978.22. Ibid. 23. Ibid.12. THE IRON BRIGADE: CAMP AT CROSS HOLLOWS1. David Y. Thomas, Arkansas in War and Reconstruction, 1861-1814 (Little Rock,Arkansas Division, U.D.C., 1926). Hereafter cited as Arkatisas.2. Ibid.3. Proclamation quoted in ibid., p. 140.4. Ibid. 5. Ibid.6. It was the policy of the Confederate government not to create new regimentsuntil those already in existence were raised to full strength.7. Thomas, Arkansas, p. 147.8. The Richmond government refused him a commission.9. Thomas, Arkansas, pp. 141-42.10. Schofield’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 22.11. Ibid., p. 16.12. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 109.13. Rains and Col. Coffee were both intoxicated on duty, Hindman said.—O.R.,Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 48.14. Confederate Military History, IX, 103.15. Interview with Jake Stonestreet, Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897.16. Connelley, Quantrill, p. 277.13. THE IRON BRIGADE: CANE HILL1. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 95.2. Ibid., p. 96.3. Blunt to Schofield, Nov. 26, 1862.—O.R., Ser. L, Vol. XXII, pt. i, p. 38.4. Shelby’s report of Battle of Cane Hill, ibid., p. 55.5. For figures of the Arkansas brigade, see Carroll’s report, ibid., pp. 53-55.6. Blunt’s report of Battle of Cane Hill, ibid., p. 43.7. Ibid. 8. Ibid., p. 44. 9. Ibid. 10. Ibid.11. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 99.12. Ibid., p. 80.13. Thomas, Arkansas, p. 160.14. Carroll’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 55.15. Ibid.16. Blunt’s report, ibid., p. 44.17. Carroll’s report, ibid., p. 54.18. Blunt, ibid., p. 45.19. Ibid.20. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 102.21. Edwards, Webb, Hollister and Norman, etc.22. Blunt, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 46.23. Ibid.24. Blunt to Curtis, Dec. 2, \%6i.—lbid., p. 43.25. Ibid., p. 82.14. THE IRON BRIGADE: PRAIRIE GROVE1. This permission was so qualified as to make it of little value.—O.R., Ser. I,Vol. XIII, p. 917.4i4Notes to Pages 147-1752. Blunt clung to this delusion even after he fought Hindman at Prairie Grove.3. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 807.4. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 111.5. Moore says Hindman took the Cove Creek Road because he had determinedto fight Herron instead of Blunt (Confederate Military History, IX, 107-8). Thisis erroneous, as Hindman’s report shows.6. Hindman’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 139.7. Monroe’s report, ibid., pp. 153-54.8. Shelby’s report, ibid., pp. 148-49.9. Ibid., p. 149.10. Hindman’s report, ibid., p. 140.11. Quoted by Thomas in Arkansas, p. 169.12. Hindman’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 141.13. Ibid., p. 140.14. Capt. Amos Burrows, of the First U.S. Missouri Cavalry, who was immediatelyin rear of Bunner’s company, says that Bunner’s were running so fast before Shelby’scavalry that they could not be halted (ibid., p. 137). This corroborates the Confed¬erate claims of the completeness of the rout.15. Hindman’s report, ibid., p. 141.16. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 118.17. Shelby’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 150.18. Ibid., p. 153.19. Hindman’s report, ibid., p. 141.20. Ibid. 2i. Ibid. 22. Ibid., p. 142.23. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 125.24. Ibid., p. 127. 25. Ibid., p. 129.26. Holmes to Joseph E. Johnston, Dec. 29, 1862, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXVII, p. 811.27. Holmes to Hindman, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XIII, p. 917.15. THE IRON BRIGADE: MARMADUKE AND SHELBY1. Thomas, Arkansas, p. 173.2. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 14.3. Marmaduke’s report of his first raid into Missouri, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. i,p. 196.4. Ibid., p. 179.5. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 139.6. Report of the adjutant general’s office at Springfield, Jan. 8, 1863, O.R., Ser. I,Vol. XXII, pt. i, p. 181.7. Report of Col. B. Crabb of the 19th Iowa to Curtis, on the battle of Springfield,ibid., p. 186.8. The “Tournament” was played with long wooden lances used at full gallop tospear a wooden ring.9. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 255.10. For Marmaduke’s own statement of intentions, see O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII,pt. i, pp. 285-88.11. After a savage letter to Braxton Bragg saying he would resign rather thanserve under Holmes (O.R., Vol. LIII, Supplement, p. 848), Hindman was transferredto Vicksburg on Jan. 30, 1863.12. See letter of Jefferson Davis to Holmes on January 28, 1863 (ibid., p. 847),13. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. i, p. 288.14. Letter of Davis to Holmes (see n. 12 above).15. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. i, p. 259.16. Marmaduke’s report of Cape Girardeau expedition, ibid., p.  288.Notes to Pages 177-2144l516. HELENA: DISASTER IN THE WEST1. Porter, Incidents and Anecdotes of the Civil War, p. 92.2. The events leading up to the Battle of Helena and the account of the battleitself are based on O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII.3. Interview in Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897.17. SHELBY’S GREAT RAID1. Henry Clay McDougal, Missouri writer, says in his Recollections, 1844-1909(Kansas City, Mo., Hudson Publishing Co., 1910), p. 205: “During the Civil War Iserved in the eastern army [Union] and came west and located at Gallatin, Mo. Thenone night soon after my arrival, I heard one of his soldiers singing ‘Shelby’s Mule.’...In my day I had done some tall marching, after Jackson, Mosby, Imboden, Jenkinsand other Confederate commanders in Virginia; had been startled by their buglecalls, alarmed by the Rebel Yell, but never heard anything like ‘Shelby’s Mule.’ ”2. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 197.3. Webb, Battles and Biographies of Missourians, p. 193.4. Five Famous Missourians, p. 365.5. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 586.6. Ibid.7. For the hundred pages of correspondence on Shelby’s raid, which do not in¬clude any of the official military reports, see ibid., pp. 585-683.8. Grant was just as mistaken as Lincoln about the condition of things in Missouri.—Ibid., pp. 673-74.9. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 200.10. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. ii, p. 627.11. Ibid., p. 609.12. Ibid., p. 622.13. Bennett H. Young, Confederate Wizards of the Saddle (Boston, ChappiePublishing Co., 1914), p. 214.14. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXII, pt. i, p. 670.18. THE END OF THE WAR IN THE WEST1. Grant had little faith in Banks, and he was more interested in assembling troopsfor Sherman’s campaign than he was in invading the Trans-Mississippi, which wasalready sealed off.—O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXXIV, pt. i, p. 203.2. Ibid., p. 659.3. Five Famous Missourians, p. 367.4. O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXXIV, pt. i, p. 660.5. The volume of Reports dealing with the Camden expedition {ibid.) lists manyactions as “skirmishes” in which a study of the casualty lists reveals that, from thestandpoint of the troops involved, at least, they were battles.6. Ibid., p. 663.7. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal, Sept.-Oct., 1933, p. 14.8. Banks got no further than Alexandria, La. Grant ordered his removal fromcommand as a result of the Red River campaign.9. See Steele’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XXXIV, pt. i, pp. 667-71.10. See Edwards, Shelby and His Men, pp. 299-319, for account of Shelby’s cleanupin northeast Arkansas.11. Though consistently passed over for promotion, there is no record that heever complained about it.416 Notes to Pages 214-22812. But not more than was usual in the Confederate army, and Shelby was usuallycareful of his language. He would never swear in the presence of a Methodist divine,Brother Mobley, whom he had appointed his aide.—Edwards, Shelby and His Men,P- 303-13. No regular troops at all were in St. Louis. Rosecrans wired frantically to Gen.Paine in Illinois, who could promise only some ioo-day volunteers whose terms wereexpiring (O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XLI, pt. i, p. 308). The slowness of Price’s movements,however, gave Rosecrans ample time to gather an army.14. Kirby Smith Papers, Southern Historical Collection, University of NorthCarolina Library.15. Rumors were flying through the Southern Confederacy (outside of Georgia,of course) that Hood had smashed Sherman at Atlanta. Shelby’s letter of July 27,1864, states it as fact.16. Jefferson Davis made the comparison in a speech at Macon.17. Rosecrans’ report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XLI, pt. i, p. 307.18. Col. John F. Philips’ report on the battle of Marais de Cygnes. The Confederateswearing Union uniforms were “executed instanter” on the battlefield {ibid., p. 352).19. Ewing’s report, ibid., p. 448.20. See account of Rev. Galusha Anderson, St. Louis pastor, in his The Story of aBorder City during the Civil War (Boston, Little, Brown and Co., 1908), pp. 328-30.21. Price’s report, O.R., Ser. I, Vol. XLI, pt. i, pp. 625-40.22. Edwards, Shelby and His Men, p. 417.23. He did it during the pursuit of Price. See Rosecrans’ report, O.R., Ser. I,Vol. XLI, pt. i, p. 314.24. Because Shelby retreated after fighting his rearguard action at Newtonia, theUnion reports call it a Union victory; but Gen. Sanborn, who came up on Blunt duringthe fight to assist him, says that Shelby had driven him back and was attacking himon his flanks. Shelby retreated while still victorious; he had smashed the pursuit.19. REVOLT AGAINST SURRENDER1. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 4. Maj. Edwards describes the retreat with¬out mentioning his own part in it. After Edwards’ death, Maj. Stonestreet said: “Whatheroism he displayed in that awful retreat from Westport! Smallpox broke out amongthe men. John Edwards feared it as little as he did the bullets of the enemy. Hewould take a soldier with smallpox in his arms, carry him to the most comfortableplace that could be secured, and nurse him with the care of a woman ... it was he whocheered and encouraged them and held them together.”—John N. Edwards, His Writ¬ings and Tributes (edited by his wife, Jennie Edwards and published by her, KansasCity, 1889), p. 15. Hereafter cited as John N. Edwards.2. The charges were brought by Gov. Reynolds of Missouri. For an account of thecontroversy see Edwards, Shelby and His Men, pp. 466-84.3. This figure was not such wishful thinking as it might seem. Smith had 36,000well fed, well armed troops. A revival of Confederate hopes through such a campaignas Shelby proposed might easily swell the Army of the Trans-Mississippi to double thatnumber. The exact strength of Kirby Smith’s forces is set forth in a hitherto un¬published letter to Jefferson Davis dated March 7, 1865, in which he declared: “Theeffective strength of this department is 19,000 enlisted men of infantry and artillery;17,000 enlisted men of cavalry, of which 17 regiments (6,000 enlisted men) are beingdismounted; in addition 4,000 enlisted men are to be sent on furlough, 10,000 absenton details; 6,000 reserve corps in Texas, 2,000 in Louisiana and 2,000 in Arkansas.”—Letter in Kirby Smith Papers, Southern Historical Collection, University of NorthCarolina Library.4. State governors in their capacity as commanders-in-chief were frequently atodds with the Richmond government over the disposition of troops.Notes to Pages 229-265 4175. Reynolds carried with him to the governors’ meeting a brief document headed“Memorandum for the Marshall Conference” and signed by himself, Shelby, andColonel L.M. Lewis of Shelby’s division. It declared that the Missourians would fightto the last ditch if such were the decision of the conference but added that “if it [thewar] is to be discontinued, we desire time, facilities and supplies to leave the countrywith our personal property.” Shelby and Reynolds, this communication makes it clear,meant to take refuge in Mexico whether they had an armed force at their back ornot.—Memorandum in Kirby Smith Papers.6. J.C. de Polignac, distinguished French soldier of fortune, had also served underStuart in Virginia.7. Western Historical Manuscripts Collection, University of Missouri.8. Arndt M. Stickles, Simon Bolivar Buckner, the Borderland Knight (Chapel Hill,The University of North Carolina Press, 1940), p. 273.9. Western Historical Manuscripts Collection, University of Missouri.20. FROM TEXAS TO MEXICO1. As stated in n. 2, Chap. I, the entire account of the march to Mexico, exceptwhere otherwise indicated, is based upon the only detailed account ever written:Shelby's Expedition to Mexico, an Unvoritten Leaf of the War, by John N. Edwards.Edwards was a participant in all of the adventures described. With the exception ofthe fragmentary Memoirs of Thomas Westlake (Manuscript in Western HistoricalManuscripts Collection, University of Missouri, Colombia, Mo.), there are no diariesfor the historian to consult.2. The Menger is still a landmark in San Antonio.3. The Harriet Lane was a Federal blockade vessel off Galveston in 1863. In Jan.,1863, Magruder captured Galveston and broke the blockade. The Harriet Lane wasboarded by Confederates from the Bayou City, on which cotton bales had been stackedto protect the engines and wheelhouse, thus earning for the Bayou City and her sistership, the Neptune, the title of “cotton-clads.”4. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 24. For an excellent account of this episodeby George Creel, who as a young newspaper man in Kansas City heard it told byBen Elliott in Shelby’s office, see A Rebel at Large (New York, G.P. Putnam’s Sons,1947), p. 27. Elliott and Thomas Westlake left the expedition at Monterrey and wentto join the Liberals.—Memoirs of Thomas Westlake, p. 136. Edwards states in anAppendix to Shelby and His Men that Shelby left Monterrey with fifty of his men,evidently referring to those remaining in Monterrey after other parties had left.5. Creel also says that when Elliott told him this story in Shelby’s presence, heexclaimed to Shelby, “But General,... when the Juaristas got your artillery, what wasto prevent them from taking back your money and annihilating you?” Shelby repliedicily, “You forget, sir, we still had our sidearms.”—A Rebel at Large, p. 28.6. According to Thomas Westlake, each man’s share was sixty silver dollars.Westlake says: “I never knew just what... our artilery sold for, but have alwaysbeen satisfied that General Shelby saw to it that all were delt fairly with.”—Memoirs of Thomas Westlake, p. 134.21. ACROSS THE SABINAS1. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 34.2. Afterward a physician in Platte, South Dakota.22. JEANNINGROS1. Kansas City Times, May 22, 1887.2. Traditionally Frenchmen may not enlist in the Foreign Legion.418 Notes to Pages 267-2983. Admiral David Porter, in his Incidents and Anecdotes of the Civil War, wrote:“Who could help admiring such men even though fighting against them? ... In pointof endurance they set us an example that would have been hard to follow.... Ourcommissary department was the best in the world and the waste of our provisionswould have supplied a European army.”—p. 180.4. Edwards says that Jeanningros talked on the French campaign in the Orient.His conversation here has been supplied by the author from “The Loot of theImperial Summer Palace in Pekin,” The Diary of an Interpreter in China, by MauriceD’lrisson, Comte d’Herisson, translated in the Annual Report of the SmithsonianInstitution for 1900 (Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Institution, 1901), pp. 601-35.23. PARRAS AND ENCARNACION\ •1. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, pp. 52-62.2. Inez Walker was placed under the protection of the Empress when Mexico Citywas reached and was seen frequently driving in a carriage with her during theEmpress’s public appearances.24. MEXICO CITY AT LAST1. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 83.2. Agnes Salm-Salm, Ten Years of My Life (Detroit, Belford Bros., 1877), p. 140.3. Alexander Watkins Terrell, From Texas to Mexico to the Court of Maximilianm 1865 (Dallas, Texas Book Club, 1933), p. 45. Hereafter cited as From Texas toMexico.4. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 85.25. THE COLONIZATION SCHEME1. Figures quoted by the New York Daily News, Dec. 9, 1865.2. It soon became necessary to abandon the proposal to pay transportation costs.See Savannah Herald, May 31, 1866.3. The American and Mexican Emigrant Company established offices in St. Louis,despite Secretary Seward’s order, but never sent a settler to Mexico.4. Figures quoted in George Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico, CircularNo. 137 of the Institute of Research, Lehigh University, Publications, XII, No. 2(1937), 460-61-62.5. Philip Sheridan, Memoirs of P.H. Sheridan (New York, Charles L. Webster& Co., 1888), II, 218. Hereafter cited as Sheridan’s Memoirs.6. Chief among the Southern newspapers which opposed the exodus were theRich?nond Enquirer, the Charleston Daily Courier, the Raleigh Standard, the NewOrleans Times, the Daily True Delta and the Crescent of New Orleans, the AlabamaState Journal, and the Daily Register of Mobile.7. Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico, p. 469.8. Lawrence F. Hill, “The Confederate Exodus to Latin America,” SouthwesternHistorical Quarterly, XXXIX, 309-26.9. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 104.10. Letter from Mrs. J.C. Bryant.11. Issue of Oct. 14, 1865.12. Quoted in Sarah A. Dorsey, Recollections of Henry Watkins Allen (NewOrleans, James A. Gresham, 1866), p. 340.13. Quoted in Harmon, Confederate Migratio?is to Mexico, p. 474.14. New York Herald, Apr. 19, 1866.Notes to Pages 298-322 41915. Ibid. 16. Ibid.17. Ibid., Supplement, Jan. 12, 1866.18. Ibid., Apr. 19, 1866.19. The Mexican Times, Apr. 29, 1866.20. Ibid., Mar. 31, 1866.21. Benjamin Gratz Shelby, born at the Hacienda Santa Ana in July, 1866, exactbirthdate unknown.22. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, pp. 104-5.23. Gen. M.M. Parsons, leader of one of the many small parties of Southern exileswho crossed the border independently of Shelby, was captured by Figueroa north ofMonterrey in the summer of 1865, and he and five companions were executed underparticularly revolting circumstances.—Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 45.24. Letter from Price to Col. Edwin Price, Western Historical Manuscripts Col¬lection, University of Missouri.25. The Mexican Times, June 16, 1866.26. Maximilian in his Imperial Decree establishing the colony had adjured thenewly naturalized immigrants not to mingle in politics.27. Harmon, Cojifederate Migrations to Mexico, p. 481.28. Letter written by Shelby, in MSS collection of the Missouri Historical Society,St. Louis.29. Quoted in Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico, p. 482.30. Ibid., p. 484.31. Edwards, Expedition to Mexico, p. 118.32. On March 30, 1867, the Kentucky Gazette, Lexington, reported: “The wifeof Gen. Joseph O. Shelby has reached New Orleans from Mexico. A letter from herto a friend in this city says Gen. Shelby will return in a few weeks to the UnitedStates, as it is impossible for an American to live in that country. He is the last of theConfederates to leave.”33. The same newspaper on June 8, 1867, quoted the St. Louis Times as saying,“Gen. Jos. O. Shelby, one of the most distinguished, gallant and popular of all bravesons of Missouri who fought in the armies of the Confederacy during the late waris now, we learn, a passenger on the steamer Great Republic and will arrive here fromNew Orleans this morning. He has been living in Mexico since the surrender of theSouthern armies.”34. Mrs. Bryant says that “Aunt Betty” told her many years later at the Shelbyhome in Bates County, Mo., that none of the recipients ever repaid her for her jewelry.35. This pet dog lived to a great age. “He was so old,” wrote Mr. Motte in a letterto the author, “that when he lay down, he just fell down.”36. Quoted in Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico from the Charleston(S.C.) Daily Courier, March 15, 1867.26. “THE MEXICAN TIMES”1. For Confederates’ appreciation of Carlota see Terrell, From Texas to Mexico,and Dorsey, Recollections of Henry Watkins Allen, p. 334.2. Kansas City Times, May 29, 1870.3. Letter from Allen to Mrs. Dorsey, from Vera Cruz, March 17, 1866.—Dorsey,Recollections of Henry Watkins Allen, p. 342.4. John N. Edwards, p. 17.5. Evidently Betsy Shelby applied to Gen. Sheridan at New Orleans for permissionto leave the country and join her husband.6. See also Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico, p. 459.7. Sheridan’s Memoirs, II, 228.8. Was this the old Indian agent who was charged with the murder of ThomasBarber at the beginning of the Kansas-Missouri border warfare? The name is a com-420Notes to Pages 322-342mon one and may be a coincidence. Nevertheless the Missouri Clarke was a die-hardSoutherner and may well have followed Shelby to Mexico.9. Harmon, Confederate Migrations to Mexico, p. 482.10. Sheridan’s Memoirs, II, 218.27. HOME FROM THE WARS1. In 1861 Kentucky farmers raised a bumper crop of hemp, but could not sell it.Federal law placed an embargo on Southern hemp (U.S. Statutes 12, 257). Most of theproducers, like Gratz, went out of business, although in his case he had reached anage of retirement. Jute largely replaced hemp by the end of the war, and the hempindustry in Kentucky never staged a recovery. Some farmers continued to grow hemp,but sent it to Newr England to be processed.2. Cincinnati Gazette, Aug. 10, 1866.3. E. Merton Coulter, The Civil War and Readjustment in Kentucky (ChapelHill, The University of North Carolina Press, 1926), pp. 232-34.4. Nathan Parker, Missouri as It Is in 1867 (Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott, 1867),pp. 293-94.5. Washington College at Lexington, Va., now Washington and Lee University.6. Stickles, Simon Bolivar Buckner, p. 327.7. Edwards was editor of the Kansas City Times from 1871 to 1874, and from 1887until his death. From 1868 to 1871 he was associate editor, with Col. John C. Mooreas editor.8. Reprinted from the St. Louis Republican in the Kentucky Gazette, Lexington,Nov. 9, 1898.9. Robertus Love, The Rise and Fall of Jesse James (New York, G. P. Putnam’sSons, 1926), p. 299.28. “THE BLOODY BONDS”: THE GUN CITY MASSACRE1. Edwin L. Lopata, Local Aid to Railroads in Missouri (New York, ParnassusPress, 1937), p. 65. Hereafter cited as Lopata.2. They are listed in Margaret Louise Fitzsimmons, “Railroad Development inMissouri, 1860-1870” (thesis, Washington University, St. Louis, 1931), p. 329.3. Laclede County found itself in this predicament.—Lopata, p. 102.4. Ibid., p. 7. 5. Ibid. 6. Ibid., p. 62.7. St. Louis Republican, May 13, 1869.8. Kansas City Star, May 24, 1942.9. Ibid.10. For details of the St. Louis and Santa Fe bond history and the Gunn Citymassacre, see A History and Directory of Cass County (Harrisonville, Mo., CassCounty Leader, 1908), pp. 177-204, and in A History of Cass and Bates Counties (St.Joseph, Mo., 1883), pp. 205-6.11. Newspaper items indicate that Shelby worked as a sub-contractor for variousrailroads.\2. It was sold shortly thereafter. The Lexington Caucasian reported on June 29,1870, under the heading, “BIG LAND SALE,” that “The farm on which Gen. Jo.O. Shelby has been residing, belonging to Benj. Gratz of Lexington, Ky., was soldthe other day to Mr. James B. Clay (Sr.) and a grandson of the great orator andstatesman, Henry Clay.”13. Mrs. H.H. Gratz, widow of Shelby’s early partner, told the author at herhome in Lexington, Ky., that Betty Shelby, whom she recalled meeting in Lexingtonin 1894, was much beloved of all the family.14. History of Cass and Bates Counties, pp. 205-6.Notes to Pages 342-36442129. COAL MINING: BOOM AND BUST1. Lopata, p. 37.2. Gordon Macrae, The Americans at Home (New York, E.P. Dutton and Co.,reprint edition 1952), p. 421.3. This and the following information is from the Missouri Historical Review,XXII, No. 1 (Oct., 1927), 135.30. SHELBY IN RECONSTRUCTION1. Unless other sources are cited, the account of events in the 1870’s and 1880’sis derived from files of the Lexington Intelligencer.2. Interview with Stonestreet in the Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897, the day afterShelby’s death.3. Missouri Historical Review, XXIV (Oct.-July, 1929-1930). p. 385.4. Data on Aldridge Corder supplied by Miss Elizabeth Corder, Marshall, Mo.5. The marriage took place in Aug., 1888.6. Quoted in Centennial History of Missouri, p. 150.7. Ibid., pp. 152-53.8. Ibid., p. 297.9. See n. 3, Chap. I, above.10. This letter to George Lankford, who was one of his aides, dated Aug. 2, 1885,is in the Western Historical Manuscripts Collection, University of Missouri.11. Telegram from Frank Blair to his brother Montgomery in Washington afterthe election, Blair Family Papers, Library of Congres.12. Quoted in Kansas City Star, May 24, 1942. Date of publication in the Heraldnot given.13. Lawrence Tribune, Apr. 12, 1882.14. In his book Noted Guerrillas (St. Louis, Bryan, Brand and Co., 1877). Edwardsaccepted the fanciful tales told by Quantrill as to his early background, citing thealleged persecution of the Federals as an excuse for his excesses.15. Quoted in John N. Edwards.31. THE TRIAL OF FRANK JAMES1. William H. Townsend, Lexington lawyer and Lincoln authority, author ofLincoln’s Wife’s Home Town (Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1929), told this story to the writerin his office in Lexington in July, 1952: When Townsend’s book was published, MissNellie Morgan, a niece of the great John Morgan, met him on the street and denouncedhim for recording the Morgan incident in his book. “Mr. Townsend,” said MissNellie, “you know that Uncle John never took any money from a bank in MountSterling, Kentucky! And you shouldn’t have said such a thing!” Townsend repliedthat he had not said so, but that the newspapers had. Miss Nellie spied an old Confed¬erate across the street, one of Morgan’s men, and hailed him. “Come here, CaptainKeller,” she commanded, “and tell Mr. Townsend that you and Uncle John nevertook any money from a bank in Mount Sterling, Kentucky.” “That’s right,” obligedCaptain Keller. “John Morgan and I blew the durn safe open, Miss Nellie, but therewan’t nothin’ in it. The Yankees had got there ahead of us.”2. Love cites an instance of this legend in The Rise and Fall of Jesse James, p. 131.3. See also Homer Croy, Jesse James Was My Neighbor (New York, Duell, Sloaneand Pearce, 1949).4. Love, The Rise and Fall of Jesse James, p. 350.5. Quoted in John N. Edwards, p. 163.422 Notes to Pages 365-3976. Croy, Jesse James Was My Neighbor, p. 202. Frank’s conversation with theGovernor is as quoted by Croy on p. 205.7. Transcript of testimony appears in American State Trials (St. Louis, ThomasLaw Book Co., 1916), II, 661 ff. Lent to author by Robert E. Hickman, attorney ofBenton, Ill. Also quoted in Crittenden Memoirs. The original testimony is on file inthe courthouse at Gallatin, Mo., but the author has not had an opportunity to ex¬amine the entire record there.8. Wood Hite, member of the James gang, to whose slaying Dick Liddil confessed.32. A FRIEND IS GONE1. The Edwardses had three children. The elder boy, John, seventeen, was a studentat St. Mary’s College. The second son, James, was fourteen.—John N. Edwards, p. 26.2. Ibid. 3. Ibid., p. 27. 4. Ibid., p. 29. 5. Ibid., p. 188.6. Love, The Rise and Fall of Jesse James, p. 293.7. John N. Edwards, pp. 196-228.8. In records of Fayette County Courthouse, Lexington, Ky.33. THE GREAT PULLMAN STRIKE1. Press dispatch sent from Adrian, Mo., on the day of Shelby’s death. Quoted herefrom the Richmond, Va., Times of Feb. 13, 1897.2. George Creel, A Rebel at Large, p. 26.3. Ibid.4. Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897.5. Hanson, in Cavalry Journal (Sept.-Oct., 1933), p. 12.6. Kansas City Star, Feb. 14, 1897.7. Ibid. «8. From history of the Pullman strike in Ray Ginger, The Bending Cross; A Biog¬raphy of Eugene V. Debs (New Brunswick, N.J., Rutgers University Press, 1949),pp. 108-52.9. Kansas City Star, July 3, 1894.10. There are many newspaper versions of this statement of Shelby’s, but the Star'squotation would seem to be the correct one since its reporter interviewed him.11. Kansas City Star, July 4, 1894.12. Ibid., July 7.34. MISSOURI’S FAREWELL1. Details of Shelby’s death and funeral are taken from contemporary newspaperaccounts.2. Capt. Ragan was a Kentuckian who had served with Texas militia during thewar at Farmington, Corinth, Chickamauga, and against Sherman on the march to thesea. At this time he was a deputy county marshal in Kansas City.—Webb, Battles andBiographies of Missourians, p. 366.3. Maj. Carples was one of the “Colonels” who was a Union veteran. He servedin the brigade of General A.J. Smith, who looted “The Bloody Bonds” at Har-risonville.Index^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ >^» ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ »^i ^ ^ ^ >^»«^> ^ »^» ^ ^ »^» ^ «-^-» ^ ^/I. B. Chambers, Missouri steamboat, 48Abolitionists, 4, 23, 29, 30-45, 59Ackley, Ira W., 407, n. 9Act to Organize Territory of Kansas, 30Adjutant General and Inspector’s Office,C.S.A. See Cooper, Gen. James S.Adrian, Mo., vii, 338, 352, 379, 380, 381,385, 394-398 passimAlabama, 293Alabama State Journal, 418, n. 6Alexandria, La., 170Alleghany Mountains, 176Allen, Henry Watkins, Brig. Gen. C.S.A.,Gov. (La.), 242, 293, 313-324 passimAllen, Lyman, 40Altgeld, Gov. J. P. (Ill.), 389Ambrose, George H., 335American and Mexican Emigrant Co.,293 .American Civil War, mentioned, viii, 1,9, 30, 45, 134, 267, 313, 345, 388American Railway Union, 388American Steamship Mail Co. of N.Y.,318 . .Ammunition, improvised, Mo. StateGuard, 67-74 passimAnderson, Bill, guerrilla under Quantrill,41, 254, 330Anderson, C. B., 397Anderson, Rev. Galusha, 416, n. 20Anderson House, Lexington, Mo., 91Anderson, Minerva Campbell (Mrs.Howard Gratz), 23, 24Anderson, Col. Oliver, 23, 48, 90, 92Anderson, Capt. Wave, 169Anselmo, Juan, 261-262Antietam, 77Anzeiger (Mo.), German language news¬paper, 407Appomattox, mentioned, 8, 4*,, 287Argentine, Mo., 389Arkadelphia, 130, 187, 190, 192, 208, 209Arkansas, becomes Confederate state,63; operations in, 5, 7, 63, 73, 75, 146,161, 169, 170, 171, 178, 181, 195, 199, 204,205, 208, 212, 213, 310; troops, C.S. andmilitia, 28, 72, 74, 87, 129, 134, 146,149, 151, 160; U.S. Western District of,146Arkansas River, mentioned, 31, 135, 160,165, 177, 205, 206, 212, 216, 226, 228Armor Magazine (formerly U.S. CavalryJournal) 411Armory, Kansas City, 398Army of Liberation of Mo. 74, 75, 77Army of Northern Va., 3, 104, 107, 228,393Army of Northwestern Ark., C.S., 145,160Army of the Potomac, vii, 97, 176Army of the Trans-Mississippi. See Con¬federate Army of the Trans-Missis¬sippiArrow Rock, Mo., 201Arsenal, St. Louis, 56, 57, 58Atchison, David R., 29, 33, 34, 42, 43,49Atlanta, 306Aullville, Mo., 330, 333, 338, 347, 352Austin, Tex., 8, 237, 238, 239423424IndexBailiffs, 385Baltimore, mentioned, 365Banks, U.S. Gen. Nathaniel P., 207, 208,211Barber, Thomas W., 42Barksdale, C. B., 314, 325, 326Barnett, Camillas, 51Bamum, P. T., mentioned, viiiBarton County, Mo., 65, 352Batesville, Ark., 167, 168, 169, 184, 187,2rT 338, 352, 367, 369, 380Bay of Campeche, 309Bazaine, Francois-Achille, Marshal ofFrance, 2, 229, 270, 271, 274, 283, 284,286, 287, 289, 302, 309, 315, 321, 325,326Beauregard, P. T. G., 103, no, 129Beaver Creek, Ark., 164Bentonville, Ark., 101, 195-196Berlin, Mo., 42, 113Berry, Ike, 249Biesca, Mexican Governor, 2, 245, 246,250, 251Big Blue River, 222Bittinger, Maj. J. L., 379Blackburn, Mo., mentioned, 48“Black Decree” of Maximilian, 317Blackman, T. B., pres. Chicago & AltonR.R., 367“Black Republicans,” 55Blackwell, Yandell, 169, 196, 277, 278,279, 281Blair, Francis Preston, Jr., 16, 18, 22,23, 47* 49* 5°> 5b 52* 6o* 6l* 62, 188,348, 352Blair, Francis P. Sr., 16, 59Blanton, N. B., 36, 38Bledsoe, Hiram, Capt. and Col., Mo.State Guard, commanding Bledsoe’sBattery, 69, 90, 125, 141, 150Blockade, 176“Bloody Bonds,” 341Bloody Hill, Wilson’s Creek, 77, 81, 83,84, 85, 87Bloomfield, Mo., 172Bloomington, Kan., 37Bluegrass, Kentucky, 17, 18Blue Lodge, border ruffians, 33, 34, 36,47Blunt, Brig. Gen. James, U.S.A., 121;134-152 passim; 157-162 passim; 191, 221,224, 225Bodley home, Lexington, Ky., 20Bolivar, Mo., 97Bond, Cyrus, 39Boone County, Mo., 34Boonville, Mo., 64, 65, 66, 71, 131, 200,204, 219, 220, 221“Border Bandits” (the James Gang), 361Border Ruffians, 3, 4, 31-46Border Wars, Missouri and Kansas, 31-46Boston Emigrant Aid Society, 36Boston Mountains, 102, 112, 113, 135,136, 142, 147, 159, 169Boswell, Anna Maria. See Gratz, AnnaMaria Boswell; Shelby, Anna MariaBoswellBoswell, Dr. Joseph, 11, 13Boswell, Maury, 197, 263Boswell, Thomas, 303, 304, 305Bourbon County, Ky., 12Bourbon Democrats, 328, 339, 358, 359,369Bowen, Gen. J. S., C.S.A., 58Bowers Mill, Mo., 196Bowman, John P., sheriff of LafayetteCounty, Mo., 51Boyle, Laurence Keith, 308, 310Boyer, Col. Napoleon, 326Braddock, Edward, British general, 86Bragg, Gen. Braxton, 272Brand, Col. Horace, 195Brasada, Mexican thicket, 258Brazil, Confederates in, 311Brazos River, Tex., 227, 229, 230Brightwell, R. T., Mayor of Slater, Mo.,39°Broadwell, Col. William B., 242Brown, Benjamin Gratz, 15, 16, 22, 65,33°» 339Brown, E. B., U.S. Brig. Gen., 165, 166,167, 200, 201, 202Brown, John, 41, 43, 44Brown, Mason, 16Brownlow, Gov. William G. (Tenn.),329Brownsville, Tex., 325Buckner, Simon Bolivar, 227, 230, 231,232Buena Vista, Mexico, battlefield of, 271Buffalo Mountains, Ark., 205Bull Run, battle of, 78, 80, 88Bunner, Lafayette, 153Burbridge, John, Col., Mo. State Guards,Brig. Gen., C.S.A., 172“Burnt District,” Mo., 112Bushwhackers, mentioned, 4, 8, 76, 163,214, 239. See also Border Ruffians; Jay-hawkersButler, Mo., 381, 397Bryan, William Jennings, 348Index425Cabell, E. C., Mo. Commissioner to C.S.Gov’t., 1861, Brig. Gen., 1863, 94, 210,218, 224; captured at Marais desCygnes, 1864, 224Caddo Gap, Ark., 192California, Mo., 219, 328, 344Camden, Ark., 208, 210, 216Camp Branch, 336Camp Jackson, St. Louis, 54, 56-60, 66, 152Camp Kearny, 119, 123, 124Camp Meeting Ground, Mo., 128Camp Nannie Wilson, Batesville, Ark.,169, 214Canadian River, 216, 225Cane Hill, battle of, 134-151, 156, 163Cape Girardeau, 162, 173, 174Carlota, Empress, 290, 295, 297, 299, 300,301, 302, 306, 310, 314, 319, 322, 323,324Carlota, village of, Mexico, 318, 320Carples, Maj. Charles, 397Carroll, Col. Charles, 142, 149Carroll County, Mo., 26, 34Carroll’s Arkansas Brigade, 138Cass County, Mo., 34, 336, 338, 340, 341Cassville, Mo., 98, 127, 199Carthage, Mo., battle of, 67-72; men¬tioned, 73, 77, 80, 85, 86, 89, 205, 224Castle of San Juan de Ulloa, Vera Cruz,309Catalan language, 249Catalan wine, 263Cathedral of Mexico, Mexico City, 284Cavalry Corps, Army of Northern Vir¬ginia, 163Cavalry Corps, Army of the Potomac, viiCentaur, sign of, 11Centralia, Mo., 366Cesnola, Mexico, 303Chapel Hill, Mo., 222Chapultepec, 246, 254, 270, 283, 312Charleston Daily Courier, 302Charleston Mercury, 40Charm, steamer, 108, 109Chassepot rifles, 309Chasseurs d’Afrique, 276, 283, 305Chattanooga, 176, 190Cherokee Indians, 106Chicago, 354, 387, 388, 389Chicago & Alton R.R., 367, 374, 392Chicago & St. Louis Limited Express, 389Chickamauga, 190, 221Chihuahua, 323Chiles, Jim, 273Choctaws, 99, 106Cholera epidemic, Lexington, Ky., 13Churchill, Col. T. J., 73Cincinnati Gazette, 327Civil Rights Bill, 327Clarendon, Ark., 108, 178Clark, Gen. John B., 66, 67, 84, 157, 224,270Clarke, George W., 42, 321Clarke-Reid-Atchison Expedition, 43, 44Clarksburg, Mo., 343, 344, 345Clarksville, Ark., 206Clay, Henry, 13, 18Clay County, Mo., 34Clayton, Col. Powell, 210, 211Cleveland, Grover, 383, 389Cline, J. R., 339, 340, 341Cloud, Col. William F., 205Coahuila, Mexico, 245, 246Coal mining, 342Cockrell, Col. Vard, hi, 116Coffee, Col. John T., 113, 119, 130, 195,336Cold Harbor, mentioned, 82, 215Cole Camp, 196, 199College of Mines, Mexico City, 284Collins, “Dick,” Capt., Maj., Artillery,Shelby’s brigade, 66, 141, 169, 213,222, 224, 272,. 350, 393“Colonels,” Civil War veterans, 385, 395Colorado River, Tex., 237, 239Colt, C. C., 385, 389, 390, 392, 395, 397Columbia, Mo., 306 •Columbia Rail Road, Lexington, Ky., 23Confederate Army of the Trans-Missis¬sippi, 1, 3, 73, 132, 190, 208, 216, 226,227, 231, 233; strength of, after Helena,187Confederate Cemetery, Kansas City, 394Confederate Congress, 94Confederate Cotton Bureau, 216, 230, 242Confederate Department of the Trans-Mississippi, 100, 102, 122, 161, 207, 211,243, 244Confederate Monument, Forest HillCemetery, Kansas City, viiConfederate Partisan Ranger Act, 132Confederate reunions, 380, 381, 393Confederate Soldiers’ Home, Higgins-ville, 189, 385Confederate States Provisional Army, 72,73Confederate Southwest, 74Confederate sub-treasury, Austin, Tex.,401Confederate Veterans Association, 393Congress, U.S., 30, 34, 55Connor, Jake, 106, 107, 192, 242426IndexContra-guerrillas, French, in Mexico,Depreuil, French colonel, 274, 275, 276,265, 303303, 304, 305Coon Creek, “battle of,” 116-118Cooper, Douglas, Col., 1862, Brig. Gen.,1863, commanding C.S. Indian troops,125, 127, 228Cooper, Brig. Gen. James S., Adj. Gen.,C.S.A., 1862, 99Copperheads, 219, 241Corder, Aldridge, 49, 350Corder, Mo., 350Cordoba, Mexico, 295-300, 302, 306, 308,310, 311, 315, 318, 319, 321, 322, 324,325Correzetla, Mexico, 310Corinth, Miss., 99, 103, 105, 120Corsicana, Texas, 1, 233, 234, 238, 260Cottonwood Valley, Mo., 336Courier Journal, Louisville, 350Court of inquiry into conduct of Gen.Sterling Price, 226Cove Creek, Cove Creek Rd., 99, 144,148, 150Cowskin Prairie, 73, 74, 75, 76, 124Crane Creek, Mo., 98Crawford’s Prairie, 157Cravens, Col. Jesse L., 129Creel, George, viii, ix, 385Cresap’s War, 1774, 46Crisp, Lieut. Col. John T., 353Crittenden, John J., 18Crittenden, Thomas, Lieut. Col. U.S.A.,Gov. (Mo.), 49, 198, 362, 363, 364, 365Cross Hollows, Ark., 98, 129, 131, 141Crowther, Benjamin, 297Cuernavaca, 302Cummings, Jim, 371, 374Cummins, Robert, 38Cundiff, Jim, 258, 273, 282Curtis, Maj. Gen. Samuel B., U.S.A.,94, 97, 100, 101, 120, 165, 178, 221,222Customs House, Piedras Negras, 252Davis, Jefferson, 7, 90, 93, 105, 122, 123,171, 176, 177, 215, 229, 311, 358, 393, 400Daughters of the Confederacy, St.Joseph, Mo., 399Death March of Bataan, referred to, 157Debs, Eugene V., 388Democratic convention, Louisville, 1866,327Democratic party in Reconstruction, 348,349’ 369De Noue, Count, 287, 288De Polignac, Count, 229Deutsche Presse, German newspaper,Mexico City, 319De Vail’s Bluff, Ark., 108, 109, no, hi,130Diaz, Porfirio, 246, 303, 310, 326Disfranchisement, Mo., 1865, 330Dolan, Mo., 336Doniphan, Mo., 172Douay, French colonel, 282, 283, 303, 304,305Dover, Mo., 27, 28, 29, 89, 104, 113, 315,331, 350, 379Draffen, W. H., 396, 397Drake Constitution of 1865, Mo., 329,33°’ 337’ 339Dripping Springs, Ark., 149, 160Dry Fork Creek, 68, 70Dubois’s battery, Wilson’s Creek, 81Dueling, among Shelby’s men, 6Dug Springs, Mo., 98“Dutch,” St. Louis, 55, 58, 67, 77“Dutch flag,” 56Dupin, Col. Achille, 265, 266Dutroe, T. E., 340, 341Eagle Pass, Tex., 2, 245East Lynne, Mo., 339Edwards, Col. John, U.S.A., 199Edwards, Major John Newman, C.S.A.,viii, ix, 6, 8, n, 48, 49, 61, 89, 91, 103,108, in, 115, 116, 118, 132, 134; 136-150 passim; 158, 159, 160, 166, 169, 186,187, 188, 190, 195, 196, 206, 212, 213, 221,227, 228, 230, 241, 250, 254, 258, 259, 261,266, 267, 273, 284, 285, 288, 289, 290,295’ 3°3’ 3°4’ 3°6; 3*°-325 passim; 331,338, 350, 352’ 358’ 359’ 363’ 3^4’ 3^5’378, 379, 380, 383, 385, 393Edwards, Virginia Plattenburg (Mrs.Jennie), wife of Maj. J. N. Edwards,.379Eighth New York Artillery, Cold Har¬bor, 82Eleventh Kansas U.S. Inf. reg., 139, 143Eleven Points River, 172Elkhorn Tavern (Pea Ridge), Ark., 100Elliott, Benjamin, Capt., Maj., Col.,Shelby’s brigade; viii, ix, 124, 150,165, 185, 192, 196, 245, 246, 254, 257,258Elm Spring, 119, 127, 132Emigrant Aid Society of New England.See Boston Emigrant Aid SocietyEncarnacion, Mexico, 277, 278, 279, 280Index427Ere Nouvelle, French newspaper, MexicoCity, 325Escobedo, Mexican general, 303, 312Essig, Capt. Christian, 69European recognition of South, 176Eveland, Lew, 369Ewing, Brig. Gen. Thomas, 199, 202,Freedmen’s Bureau, 327Free Silver, 348Free Soilism, 23Free State (Kan.) settlers, 34, 36, 40, 41,42Free State Volunteers, 41Fremont, Maj. Gen. John Charles, 80,204, 218, 291, 33089, 90, 93, 94Ex-Confederate Association, Kansas City,396Fagan, Brig. Gen. James F., C.S.A., 152,157, 178, 180, 181, 182, 183, 187, 208,210, 216, 219, 221, 223Fayette County, Ky., 12, 21, 24, 328, 360,382French in Mexico, 229, 245, 265French Coast Guard, 309French Foreign Legion, 255, 265Friendly Society. See Blue LodgeFrog Bayou, Ark., 111Front Royal, Va., 48Frost, Daniel M., Brig. Gen., C.S.A.,56, 57, 152, 156, 157, 158Fayetteville Rd., Ark., 81, 138, 144, 152,Fuller, Maj. Gen. J. F. C., British militaryi55. 156Fayetteville, Ark., 134, 147, 148, 151, 153Federal Building, Kansas City, ix, 385,386, 387Fell, William, 251Fifth Street Rail Road, St. Louis, 58Fifty-Second French Regiment of theLine, in Mexico, 274Figueroa, Mexican colonel, 300, 301, 321First Iowa, militia, U.S., 8, 87, 134First Kansas Inf. Reg., U.S., 149, 150First Manassas (Bull Run), 88First Missouri Confederate Brigade, 98,I05First Missouri Volunteers, 79, 86First Nebraska Infantry, 174First U.S. Arkansas, 153Fishback, E. S., 51Flat Creek, 98Fletcher, Gov. Thos. C. (Mo.), 134, 339,383Florence, Mo., 196, 205Flores, Antonio, 261, 262.Ford, Bob, slayer of Jesse James, 363Ford, Charlie, 363Forest Hill Cemetery, Kansas City, vii,396» 4°°Fort Blakely, 105Fort Curtis, Helena, 179, 180, 181, 182Fort Gibson, Ind. Ty., 133Fort Leavenworth, Kan., 221Fort Pillow, Tenn., 105Fort Riley, Kan., 57Fort Scott, Kan., 133Fort Smith, Ark., 73, 108, 120Forty-Third Indiana Regiment, U.S., 179Franklin, Benjamin, 14Franklin, Kan., 42Fredericktown, Mo., 173, 217expert, 176-178Fulton, Ark., 176, 177, 228, 229Galena, Ill., 58Gallatin, Mo., 361, 370, 377Gallatin, Tenn., 12Galveston, Tex., 229, 235, 244Gamble, Hamilton R., Union Gov.(Mo.), 75, 113, 202Garcia, Alejandro, Mexican general,301-302Garrison, Daniel R., 335Garrison, William Lloyd, 39Gasconade River, 60Gay, George, 344Geary, John W., Gov. (Kan.), 41, 43,44Germans, backbone of Home Guard, 54,55> 82German vote, 55Gettysburg, mentioned, 3, 176, 180Gibson’s Mill, 81, 82Gilkey, Lieut. Col. Charles A., 154, 186Gist, Eliza Violet, 16Gist, Maria Cecil (first Mrs. BenjaminGratz), 14, 15Globe Democrat, St. Louis, 350Goodwin, Judge (at trial of FrankJames), 370-376 passimGordon, Col. B. F., 125, 129, 150, 245Gordon, Maj. George P., Shelby’s bri¬gade, 141, 154, 201, 202Gordon, Gen. John B., Army of North¬ern Virginia, 393Governors’ Conference, Marshall, Tex.,May, 1865, 228Grady, Jimmy, 192Grand Army of the Republic, 246, 385,400428IndexGrand Design (of new Confederacy),228Grand River, Mo., 113, 336Grant, U. S., 58, 103, 207, 221, 246, 311,Helena, Ark., battle for, 105, 106, 107, no,120, 148, 161, 163; 176-188; mentioned,190, 213, 229Hemp Industry, Ky., 12; Mo., 24, 27, 30;322, 331, 349, 350, 356decline of, 51Graves, Alexander, 352, 354, 355Graveyard Hill, 179, 180, 181, 182Great Northern Railway, 388Great Plateau of Mexico, 248, 253Granby, Mo., 73, 124Greene, Col. Colton, 172, 209Gregg, Lieut. William H., 133, 141, 154,193Gratz, Anna Maria Boswell, mother ofJoseph Orville Shelby, 19, 295, 381. Seealso Shelby, Anna Maria BoswellGratz, Barnard, 14Gratz, Benjamin, 9, 13, 14, 16, 18, 22,23, 46, 188, 338Gratz, Cary Gist, 15, 79, 82, 86Gratz, Henry Howard, 15, 16, 18, 19,^30, 42, 46, 47, 50, 51, 90, 188Gratz, Michael, 14, 15Gratz, Rebecca, 19, 21, 22Gratz & Bruce, firm, 22Gratz mansion, 16, 19Gratz & Shelby, firm, 24, 26, 27, 50Greeley, Horace, 311Greenback, party, 348Greenfield, Mo., 196, 199Guaymas, Mexico, 271, 277, 288Guerrillas, 163, 191, 196, 254, 255, 257,260, 272, 301Guibor’s battery, 74, 84Gunn City massacre, 336-341Gutierrez, Mexican colonel, 304Henry, Dr. F. G., 394Herron, Brig. Gen. Francis J., 129, 134,148, 152, 154-162 passimHickman’s Mills, Mo., 222Higginsville, Mo., 189, 330Hindman, Gen. Thomas C., 105, no, in,119, 122, 128, 129; 130-135 passim; 146-162 passim; 170, 237, 312Hines, J. D., 339Hite, Wood, 371Hobson, Rev. B. M., 49Hodge, Jim, 282Holden, Mo., 336Holmes, Gen. Theophilus H., 122, 123,131, 135, 147, 148, 161, 162, 167; 170-190passim; 208, 226Hotel Iturbide, Mexico City, 315Hotel Nacional, Mexico City, 315Hotel San Carlos, Mexico City, 314-315Houston, Tex., 236Houston, Sam, 52Hubbard, Maj. James M., in, 154, 155,156Humansville, 196, 205Hunter, Col. David, C.S.A., 193, 202, 204,2°5Hunter, Gen. David, U.S.A., 93, 94Hunter, Billy, Shelby’s bodyservant, 17,18, 26, 29, 35, 48, 50, 66, 77, 79, 97, 385,398, 400Huntsville, Ark., 128, 129Hacienda of Santa Ana, Cordoba Valley(Shelby home in Mexico), 295, 296,310Hall, George, 273, 303, 304, 305Halleck, Maj. Gen. Henry Wager, 97,120, 121Hardee, Gen. William J., author, “Har¬dee’s Tactics,” 74, 75, 80Harney, Gen. W. S., 52, 57, 60, 61, 285Harris, Isham, C.S. Gov. (Tenn.), 291,295, 311, 315Harrisonville, Mo., 336, 354Hayes, Rutherford B., 350Hayes-Tilden dispute, 350-357Hays, Col. Upton, Shelby’s brigade, 119,124, 131Illinois River, Ark., near Prairie Grove,157 .Imperial Court of Maximilian, 313Imperial Mexican Army, 265, 299Imperial Mexican Railway, 319Imperial Summer Palace, Pekin, 268Independence, Mo., mentioned, 25;Shelby’s cavalry company at, 59; other,66, 113, 219, 220; battle of, 221Independence Day, Mexico, 316Index, Mo., 337Indianapolis, 385Indian Territory, 63-120, 124Indian troops, 125, 126Ingram, Dan, 196Irish Brigade, Battle of Lexington, Mo.,Hebert, Col. Louis, commanding La.troops, Wilson's Creek, 8289 . . .Iron, mined in Missouri, 342-343Index429Iron Brigade, Shelby’s, 107, 112, 141, 179,186, 187, 193, 195, 213, 217, 246, 259,265; 283 passim; 295, 400Ironton, Mo., 173, 217Isaac Williams farm, Shelby home inMoniteau Co., 343Kansas City Journal, 348, 367, 370Kansas City Star, 203, 342, 388, 389, 390,391, 392, 393, 394Kansas City Times, 335, 338, 354, 379Kansas Dragoons, 65, 66Kansas Free State, Lawrence, Kan., news¬Italian campaign of French, 267paper, 42Jackson, Claiborne F., Gov. (Mo.), 29,33, 54, 56, 57; 60-88 passim; 188Jackson, Stonewall, 132, 207, 291Jackson County, Mo., 34, 65, 173, 174, 199,355Jackson Guards, 83Jacksojiport, Ark., 175, 178James Boys, 332; 360-371 passim; 377James, Frank, 7, 133, 331, 333; 360-377Kansas-Nebraska Act, 32, 33Kansas Redlegs, 76. See also RedlegsKansas Territory. See Border Wars“Katy,” Missouri, Kansas & Texas R.R.,334Kaufman, Tex., 231Kaw River, 31Keelboats, 25Kentuckians, in Missouri, 29Kentucky, vii, 3, 17, 23, 24, 53, 170, 188,passim; 400; trial of, 371-3763n, 327* 328, 329, 331, 352James, Mrs. Frank, 372, 373James, Jesse, 7, 133, 331, 332, 333, 354;Kentucky Bluegrass, tradition of, 11Kentucky Gazette, Howard Gratz, edi¬361-368 passim; 371, 374tor, 46, 328Jay hawkers, 46, 152, 164Jeanningros, Pierre Jean Joseph, Frenchcolonel, July, 1865; brigadier, August,1865, 1, 246, 265; 267-271 passim; 274,313Jeans, Col. Beal F., Shelby’s brigade, 128,King, Maj. Clay, 351King Cotton, 241King’s Mountain, battle of, 3, 9, 10Kirtley, James, 245, 272, 303, 304, 305Knights of the Golden Circle, 219, 241Kritzer Brothers, Martin and John, 273;141, 150Martin, 249, 250Jefferson City, Mo., 59, 60, 63, 64, 65, 75,120, 162, 171, 189, 191, 195, 196, 200, 202,204, 218, 220, 354, 365, 391Jenkins Ferry, battle of, 211Jennison, Col. Charles, jayhawker, 221,330Jewell, Lieut. Col. Lewis R., 136, 144, 145,146Johnson, Andrew, 319, 327Johnson, W. G., hotelkeeper, Cordoba,Mexico, 300Johnson County, hi, 205, 336Johnston, Albert Sidney, 103Johnston, Joseph E., 161, 178, 229Jones, Sandy, 303Jonesboro, Mo., 201Juarez, Benito, 1, 2, 229, 246, 254, 274, 288,299i 3°3* 312* 3H* 322, 323Juarez scrip, 246Juaristas, 1, 246, 299, 300, 303, 322Kanawha River, 9Kansas, 3, 5, 31, 32, 33, 35, 38, 40, 42, 59,220, 221Kansas City, vii, ix, 4, 40, 97, 309, 331, 334,336, 339* 340, 34L 347* 354* 355* 385* 392*393* 394* 397Kansas City high school cadets, 400Labastida, Archbishop, 311Lafayette, Marquis de, 18; ball for, Lex¬ington, Ky., 24Lafayette County Cavalry, Shelby’s com¬pany, 66, 75, 77, 84, 103, 108Lafayette County, Mo., 26, 27, 34, 69, 75,76, 77* 80, 88, 95, 97, 113, 328, 345, 354,367, 368Lafayette County records, 51Lamar, Mo., 65, 66, 133, 199Lamine Bridge, 200Lampazos, Mexico, 261, 262Lane, Gen. James H., 93, 98, 330Langhorne, Maurice, 393Lankford, George, 353Lawrence, Maj. R. J., 308Lawrence, Kan., 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43,44* 357* 358Lawrence Tribune, 38, 357Lee, Robert E., 3, 59, 178, 180, 215, 229,244, 248, 331, 349, 360, 361Lees, the, of Virginia, 9Leseur, A. A., 350, 379, 393Levee Road, Helena, Ark., 179Lewis, Capt. Warner, Shelby’s brigade,198Lewisburg, Ark., 160, 164430IndexLexington, Ky., 9-27 passim; 49, 51, 54,312, 327, 360, 361, 370Lexington, Ky., Observer and Reporter,12Lexington, Ky., slave market, 17Lexington, Mo., 25, 26, 29, 48, 60, 64, 65,76, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 97, 199, 219, 329,330, 335, 338, 360, 371Lexington, Mo., Expositor, 48, 49, 115Lexington, Mo., American Citizen, 46Lexington, Mo., Intelligencer, 349, 350Lexington, Mo., Register, 353Lexington & St. Louis Railway, 334Lexington, Mo., Presbyterian Church, 49Liberal Mexican government’s offer toAmerican settlers, 302Liberal troops, Mexico, 299, 301, 302, 304.McClellan, Susan, 136McCoy, Arthur, 196McCulloch, Brig. Gen. Ben, 63-75 passim;80-88 passim; 93, 99, 100, 101MacDonald, Col. Emmett, 157, 158, 164,165, 167Macey, Joe, 262McGinnis, jayhawker capt., 193McIntosh, James, Maj. and Col., Ark.militia, 73, 100McKinley, William, 348McKinney, Rainey, 266McKissick Springs, 119MacMillan, Frank, 369, 370McMullin, J. C., 368McMurty, Maj., 300, 306McNeil, Gen. John, 172, 173, 174, 175,See also Juaristas; Republicans205, 330Liddil, Dick, 371, 372, 373, 374Lightfoot Plantation, near Helena, Ark.,108Lillis, James, 335, 341Lincoln, Abraham, 2, 15, 52, 56, 93, 97,177, 192, 216Lindell’s Grove, 56Lindsey’s Prairie, Ark., 135Lipan Indians, 248Little Blue River, Mo., 220, 221Littrel, J. Calvin, 299Little Missouri River, Ark., 208Little Osage River, 205Little Rock, Ark., 73, 120, 121, 122, 129,130, 135, 148, 149Logan County, Ark., 195London Times, 44Lone Jack, 113; battle of, 116-117Longstreet, Lieut. Gen. James, 393Louisiana Tigers, 5Lower Little Rock Road, Helena, Ark.,179Loysel, M., confidential secretary to theEmperor Maximilian, 284Ludert, Federico A., 318Ludlow, Ky., 388Luminary, Parkville, Mo., newspaper, 41Lykins, William, 37-38Lyon, Nathaniel, Capt., U.S. Army,March, 1861, Col., April, 1861, Brig.Gen., May,. 57-65 passim; 72, 76; 79-88 passim; 220, 242McBride, James H., Brig. Gen., Mo. StateGuard, 83, 84, 86McCarty House, Jefferson City, 365, 379McCauley, John, 23McClellan, George B., 97, 177, 215McRae, Brig. Gen. D., 180-181Magruder, John B., 100, 228, 230, 237, 242,244, 284, 287, 293, 309, 317, 323, 325Malvern Hill, mentioned, 122Mammoth Cave, Ky., 14Majjhattan, steamer, 318Marais des Cygnes, 220, 223, 224Marion County, Ky., 28Marks’ Mill, Ark., 210, 211Mark Twain, mentioned, viii, 267Marmaduke, Maj. Gen. John S., 64, 102,103, 118, 127, 130, 135; 138-151 passim;156, 157, 158, 164, 172, 173, 174, 178,181-187, 2°8, 210, 216, 218, 221, 222, 224,226, 227, 229, 379Marshall, Mo., 49, 192, 201, 202, 391Marshall, Tex., 228Marshfield, Mo., 167Masonic College, Lexington, Mo., 90Massachusetts legislature, 32Matamoras, Mexico, 235Matehuala, Mexico, 282Maury, Brig. Gen. D. H., 105Maury, Brig. Gen. Richard, 291Maury, Matthew Fontaine, 287, 293, 297,3H» 3i7Maximilian, Ferdinand Joseph, Archdukeof Austria, Emperor of Mexico, 1, 2,28, 229, 244, 247, 255, 267, 269, 285, 287,288, 290, 292, 299, 301, 306, 310, 312, 313,317, 325, 326Maynard rifles, 80Maysville, Ark., 73, 135, 151, 152Mazatlan, Mexico, 271, 290, 299Meadow, Capt. James, 236, 272Memphis, Tenn., 73, 79, 105, 214Menger Hotel, San Antonio, 241, 242, 243Meridian, Miss., 105Index431Mexican cattle raids (1873), 352Mexican Empire, 247, 267Mexican Imperial Army, 265, 299Mexican Times, founded, 293; history,314-326; advertisements in, 316, 317, 320Mexican War, mentioned, 21, 67, 271,Moniteau Co., Mo., 198, 219, 343, 345, 347Monroe, James, 25Monroe, Col. J. C., 149, 151, 157Monroe Doctrine, 286Montaigne, mentioned, 18Monterrey, Mexico, 1, 246, 248, 253, 262,35fMexico, Americans in (1865), 283, 284;American colonization in, 291-313; fail¬ure of scheme, 306-307. See also Car-lota (village of); Cordoba; TuxpanMexico, Shelby’s expedition to, 235-312Mexico City, description of, 284; Shelby’slast visit to, 312; French troops in, 313;customs, 315-316; evacuated by French,326; mentioned, 1, 2, 259, 261, 270, 283,288, 289, 298, 299, 300, 305, 308, 310, 311,32L 352Mill Street, Lexington, Ky., 15, 188, 295Mineral Point, Mo., 218Miramar, Palace of Maximilian on Adri¬atic, 324Mississippi River, 4, 94; service east of,103-107, 122, 123, 129, 161, 173, 177, 178,!«5Mississippi River Valley, strategic impor¬tance of, 176-178; mentioned, 74, 76,77, 86, 88Missouri, Union government of, 113Missouri Cavalry Brigade, 163Missouri Cavalry Division, 1-8 passim;226, 231, 233Missouri, Kansas & Texas R.R. (“Katy”),334Missouri legislature, calls Secession con¬vention, 54; grants dictatorial powersto Governor, 59-60; adjourns at deathof Maj. Edwards, 379Missouri militia, Camp Jackson, 53, 57-58Missouri National Guard, at Shelby’sfuneral, 400Missouri Pacific R.R., 198, 334, 336, 374Missouri River, 9, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 48,53> 64, 65, 76, 176, 189, 205, 329Missouri River Valley, 33, 42, 46, 48, 49,6l> 75’ 78’ 93’ 95’ l62, 187, 191, 204, 221,329Missouri Secessionists adopt Ordinance,94Missouri State Guards, campaign of, 63-95; inducted into Confederate service,95Missouri Veteran Division, United Con¬federate Veterans, 393Mobile, Ala., 28Mobley, Brother, 416265, 266, 270, 272, 274, 291Moore, Col. John C., 101, 132, 134Moreland, Maj. James, 245Morgan, Gen. John Hunt, n; 15-25passim; 51, 54, 327, 360, 361Morgan home, Lexington, Ky., 19Morning Herald, Lexington, Ky., 16-17Morning Signal, St. Louis, 23Morrow’s Crossroads, 149, 150Mosby, Col. John S., mentioned, 3Moses, Gratz, 22Moses, Rachel, 19“Mossbacks,” 339Mount Elba, Ark., 210Mount Ennis, Waverly, Mo., 27Mount Rucker, Waverly, Mo., 26, 27, 48,188Mount Sterling, Ky., 361Mudtown, Ark., 127, 128Mulligan, Col. James A., 89, 90, 91Musket caps, 51-52Munford, Dr. Morrison, 379Murrah, Pendleton, Gov. (Tex.), 8, 237,242Napoleon, Louis, 229, 267, 309, 324, 357Neel, Rev. Dr., pastor officiating atfuneral of Shelby, 398Negro soldiers, 193Nelson, Col., C.S.A., commanding DeVail’s Bluff, 109-110Neosho, Mo., 73, 93, 184, 195Newburg, Ark., 147, 156New England, mentioned, 32, 39New Madrid, Mo., 74, 75New Mexico, mentioned, 336New Orleans, 22, 28, 77, 207, 306, 310, 311,319Newtonia, Mo., 5, hi, 122, 123, 124; firstbattle of, 125-129, 156, 157, 163, 190,199; second battle of, 224-225New York City, mentioned, 319New York Herald, 294, 328, 355New York Times, 40, 323, 325North Elkhorn Creek, near Lexington,Ky., 12Ninth Wisconsin, U.S. Inf. Reg., firstbattle of Newtonia, 125Northern Democrats (during CivilWar), 351432Index“No Surrender” Confederates, San An¬tonio, 244Nuevo Leon, Mexican state of, 2, 246O’Ferrall, Charles T., Gov. (Va.), 393Ohio River, 14, 18, 176Old St. Francis River Road, Helena,Ark., 179Old Franldin, Mo., 25Old Mexico, 130“Old Sacramento,” brass cannot, 67, 69,90, 125Olney, U.S. Attorney General duringPullman strike, 391Omealco, American settlement in Cor¬doba Valley, 301O’Neill, Frank, 365Order No. 11, issued by Gen. ThomasEwing, 188Order of Guadelupe, Golden Cross of,312Philips, John F., Lieut. Col., Union army,federal judge, Kansas City, 45, 120, 370,375, 386, 395, 399 .Phoenix Hotel, Lexington, Ky., 382Piedras Negras, 2, 3, 8; 245-253 passim;259, 262, 263, 288Pierce, President Franklin, 43Pierron, Maj., 282, 290Pikes, John Brown, mentioned, 6, 99Pillow, Gideon, 74, 75, 80Pilot Knob, Mo., 120, 173, 218Pineville, Mo., 119Pin Indians (Indians in Federal army),I24, i47. U2Pinkerton detectives, 362Pittsburg, Tex., 226Plantamour’s comet, 217Planter’s House, St. Louis, 23, 58, 61, 372Plattenburg, Lieut. Selby, 218, 315Plattenburg, Rev. George, 315Pleasanton, Maj. Gen. Alfred, vii, 190,Ordinance of Secession, passed by Mis¬220, 222souri legislators at Neosho, 93Plume, Shelby’s, 8, 119, 126, 144, 155, 203,Orizaba, Mexico, 321Osage River, 31, 60, 66, 113, 205Ottawa, Mo., 336Osceola, Mo., 95Osawatomie, Kan., 41Ouachita (Washita) River, 209, 211“Outlaw State,” nickname for Mo., 361Ozark, Mo., 78, 165, 166Ozarks, 86, 93Pacific Coast of Mexico, 271Page City, Mo., 330, 333, 352, 371, 374Panic of 1873, 342Paola, Mo., 336Paris, compared to Mexico City, 313Parks, G. S., 42Parkville, Mo., 42Parras, Mexico, 274-276Parrott guns, 186Parsons, Gen. M. M., 64, 65, 66, 67, 151,152, 156, 158, 180Parsons’ brigade, 151Paso del Macho, 295, 298, 318Paso de Palmas, Mexico, 261Patriot Army of Missouri, 66, 73, 94, 162Patterson, J. W., 42, 172Pearce, Brig. Gen. N. B., 72Pea Ridge, Battle of, 100, 101, 102, 106,120, 129Pekin, 265Pemberton, Gen. John C., 131, 178, 180Percival, John S., 47Perkins, Judge John, 291, 295, 311, 315245Plummer, Capt., Wilson’s Creek, 82, 83Pocahontas, Ark., 74, 100, 216Poison Spring, 210Polk, Gen. Leonidas, 74“Polyglot, The,’’ 252, 253Pool, Capt. David, 367Pope, Gen. John, 93, 104, 231, 324Popocatepetl, 316Porter, Admiral David, 109, 177, 208Porter, Col. J. C., 167Port Hudson, 105Postlethwaite, pet bear, 169, 170Potosi, Mo., 218Prairie Grove, Battle of, 156, 157, 158,159, 161, 163, 165, 333, 367Prentiss, Gen. B. M., 178, 181, 186, 187Preston, Gen. William B., 229Price, Edwin, 301Price, Sterling, Gov. (Mo.), 1852-1856;president Missouri State Convention,1861; Maj. Gen. Missouri State Guards,May, 1861, commands state forces, Wil¬son’s Creek, Aug. 10, 1861, 72 If.; oc¬cupies Lexington, Mo., 89 if.; afterBattle of Lexington, Sept. 17-20, 1861,retreats to Springfield, Mo., arid CrossHollows, Ark., 93 ff.; commandsMissouri troops at Pea Ridge, March,1862, 100 ff.; transferred east of Missis¬sippi until 1863, 103 ff.; commands divi¬sion, Battle of Helena, July 4, 1863,179 ff.; leads invasion of Missouri, Sept.,Index4331864, 215 ff.; joins Shelby and Confed¬erate expatriates in Mexico, 291, 295;coffee planter at Carlota, Cordoba col¬ony, until sack of colony by Mexicantroops, 299 ff.; returns to St. Louis,1867, 311Price, Maj. Thomas H., 73, 74Princeton, Ark., 208, 211Pritchard, Col. James A., 82, 83Pullman, Ill., 387Pullman Palace Car Company, 387, 388,389Pullman strike, 387 ff.Quantrill, William Clarke, 7, 41, 130, 132,141, 154, 187, 193, 254, 330, 367Queretaro, Mexico, 312Queen City, steamer, 383Rabb, Capt., bushwhacker, 238Radical Republicans, 328, 329Ragan, Capt. Stephen Carter, 395, 396,397Railroad fever in Mo., 342Railway Era, publication, 310, 322Rains, Brig. Gen. James S., Mo. StateGuard and C.S. army, 66-89 passim;hi, 118, 127, 130, 152Randall, L. C. & Co., ropewalk, Lexing¬ton, Ky., 23Randolph, George W., Secretary ofWar, C.S.A., 123Ray, Lavonia, 78Ray, Mrs. Roxanna, 78, 88Ray County, Mo., 34Reconstruction, 346-360Rector, H. M., Confederate Gov. (Ark.),129Redd, Mrs. Rebecca, 104, 187Redlegs (Kansas jayhawkers of the CivilWar), 49, 191, 221Red River, La., 177, 208, 210Red River Campaign of 1864, 207 ff.Reeder, A. H., Territorial Gov. (Kan.),3 5-3 8Reid, Brig. Gen. John W., 43“Republic of Missouri,” 95Republican party. See ReconstructionReunion, Grand Reunion, Richmond,1896, 393Reynolds, Thomas C., Lieut. Gov., laterC.S. Gov. (Mo.), 188, 190, 231, 242, 259,266, 274, 284, 288, 289, 312Rhea’s Mill, Ark., 156Richardson, J. C., Jr., 12Richland Creek, 128Richmond government, 135, 161, 176, 306,320, 393Richmond, Va., Times, 320, 393Rightor Hill, Battle of Helena, 180 ff.Rio Grande, 8, 9, 229, 234, 235, 246, 253,265, 271, 274, 321, 323“River parties” (steamboat excursions),29“Robber State,” nickname for Mo., 361Robinson, Dr. Charles, 41, 43Rock Island R.R., 370Rodriguez, Luis Enrico, 277, 278, 279,280Rolla, Mo., 94, 121, 162, 167, 172Rome, Carlota’s visit to, 324Ropewalk, description of, 22Rosecrans, Maj. Gen., 190, 214, 219, 221,222Roseville, Ark., 193, 195Rudd, James, 245Ryan, Bill, member of James Gang, 371,374Sabinas River, Mexico, 253, 254, 255, 256Sagittarius, astrological sign of, 11St. Francis River, 173-174St. James Hotel, Kansas City, 366, 367,369St. Joseph & Hannibal R.R., 91St. Louis, mentioned, 22, 23, 24, 28, 47, 50,51, 53, 54, 55, 57, 64, 65, 75, 89, 120, 127,165, 169, 171, 177, 215, 217, 218, 297, 311,334, 339, 354, 364, 388St. Louis & Iron Mountain R.R., 218St. Louis Globe, 349St. Louis Globe Democrat, 350St. Louis Intelligencer, 40St. Louis Republican, 332, 334, 363, 365St. Louis & Santa Fe R.R., 335, 336, 337,338, 339, 340, 34iSt. Louis Times, 352St. Thomas, Mo. (St. Thomas’s Wharf),. 2.6’ 50Saline County, Mo., 34, 131Saline River, Mo., 208Salm Salm, Princess Agnes, 284Salm Salm, Prince Felix, 284Salomon, Frederick; U.S. Colonel, Brig¬adier General, 65, 124Salomon, Haym, 14Salt Fork, 89Salt, Shelby’s lack of, 127Saltillo, 272Sam Cloon, steamer, 40San Antonio, 239, 240, 241, 243, 244, 245Sanborn, Gen. John B., 220434IndexSan Juan Aguilar Range, Mexico, 261,Shelby, Dr. John, of Nashville, uncle of262Joseph O., 404San Luis Potosi, Mexico, 283, 302, 303,Shelby, Joseph Boswell, son of Joseph O.,304, 305, 323Santa Anna, 272Savannah, 176Sawmill of Gratz & Shelby burned, Ber¬lin, Mo., 46Sauvage, Baron, 306Scarlett, Sir James, 259Schofield, Maj. Gen. J. M., 120, 126, 130,136, 152, 165, 191, 195, 204Scott’s Mill, 127Scott, Sir Walter, mentioned, viii, 14Scott, Gen. Winfield, 244Sea serpent, reported in Virginia, 319Secession movement in Missouri, 52;forces, 53; Secession flag, 86Second Missouri Confederate Brigade,io5Sedalia, Mo., 90, 93, 219, 354Seventh U.S. Missouri Cavalry Volun¬teers, 153Seward, William H., U.S. Secretary ofState, 245, 288, 321Shanks, Major David, 124, 154, 202, 205Shannon, Wilson, Governor of Kansas,4*> 43, 47Sharpe’s rifle, presented to Shelby, 47;Sharpes mentioned, 43, 195, 261Shaver, Gen. G. S., C.S.A., 152, 158Shelby, Anna (Maria) Boswell, wife ofOrville Shelby, mother of Joseph O.Shelby (later Mrs. Benjamin Gratz),10, 12, 13, 381Shelby, Betty (Betsy). See Shelby, Eliza¬beth NancyShelby, David, grandfather of Joseph O.,9Shelby, Elizabeth Nancy, wife of JosephO., 28, 47, 66, 67, 103, 104, 300, 310, 318,333, 381, 382, 394Shelby, Evan, first Shelby in America,9, 10Shelby, Evan, Jr., Brigadier, French andIndian Wars, 404Shelby, Caroline Winchester, first wifeof Orville, 10Shelby, Caroline, daughter of Orville andCaroline, 10Shelby, Isaac, hero of King’s Mountainand first Gov. of Ky., 9, 10Shelby, Isaac, son of Orville and Caro¬line, 10Shelby, John, great-grandfather of JosephO., 966, 395Shelby, Joseph Orville, Major General,C.S.A., ancestry of, 9 ff., 404, n. 1, n. 2;birth of Dec. 12, 1830, Lexington, Ky.,11; boyhood of 15 ff.; education of, 19-21, 406, n. 3; removed to Waverly, Mo.,1850 or 1851, 24 ff.; hemp-grower,manufacturer, operator of MissouriRiver steamboat packet line, 27 ff.; per¬sonality and character of, 28, 132-133,163-164, 247; and Kansas Border Wars,33-42; marriage of, 46-50; organizedLafayette Co. Cavalry, Missouri StateGuards, April, 1861, 65-66; in Battle ofCarthage, 67 ff.; recruiting in MissouriRiver Valley, 75 ff., 88 ff., 95 ff.; inBattle of Wilson’s Creek, 77 ff.; takesfamily to Arkansas, 96 ff.; in Battle ofPea Ridge, 100 ff.; transferred east ofMississippi River to Corinth, spring of1862, 103 ff.; commission as capt. inMissouri State Guards expires, June 10,1862, 104; returns to Mo. to recruitregiment, 105 ff.; in Waverly issuesProclamation for recruits, 114-115;organizes Cavalry Brigade, 116; at CoveCreek, 118; commissioned col. ofMissouri Cavalry Brigade, Oct. 27,1862, at Elkhorn Creek, Ark., 119; atNewtonia (first battle), 123 ff.; at CrossHollows, 127 ff.; and Marmaduke,131 ff.; at Cane Hill, 134 ff.; at PrairieGrove, 149 ff., 156 ff.; narrowly escapescapture, 154-155; joins Marmaduke infirst raid into Mo., 162-168; in camp atBatesville, Ark. (Camp Nannie Wilson),168 ff.; joins Marmaduke’s second raidinto Mo., 171 ff.; at Helena, Ark.,July 4, 1863 (wounded), 176ff.; GreatRaid of into Mo., Sept.-Oct., 1863, 189-207; commissioned brig, gen., 209; de¬feats Federals in Ark. campaign, Apr.,1864, 209-211; commands Missouri Cav¬alry Division in Price’s raid into Mo.,1864, 216-225; at Newtonia (secondbattle), 225; commissioned maj. gen.May 16, 1865, retroactive to May 10,403, n. 1; in Texas plans Mexican ex¬pedition, 226 ff.; at Houston, 236-237;at Austin, 237-239; at San Antonio,240 ff.; at Eagle Pass, 245; leads his meninto Mexico, 245; sells artillery toJuarez forces at Piedras Negras, Mex-Index43 5ico, July 3, 1865, 247-248; marches toMexico City, 248-284; interviews Em¬peror Maximilian, 285-287; settles atHacienda Santa Ana, Cordoba Valley,Oct., 1865, 296-298, 300; fought attack¬ing Mexicans, 303 ff.; at Tuxpan Col¬ony, 307 ff.; returned to U. S., June,1867, 312; settles at Page City, Mo.,329; engages in business ventures: rail¬road construction, coal mining, store¬keeping and stock raising, 329-345; inReconstruction, 346 ff.; appointed U.S.Marshal of Western Missouri, 1893,383 ff.; death of, Feb. 13, 1897, atAdrian, Mo., 394; funeral of, 395 ff.Shelby, Orville, father of Joseph O., 10,11, 12; Orville, son of Joseph O., 51, 345Shelby, Sarah Bledsoe, grandmother ofJoseph O., 10Shelby, Thomas, 51Shelby, John Morgan, son of Joseph O.,352Shelby, Benjamin Gratz, son of JosephO., 352Slater, Mo., 389, 390, 391Slavery, Frank Blair, Jr.’s, plan for eman¬cipated slaves, 52; in Mo., 52, 53; for¬bidden in Mexico, 292; Shelby’s newson, 352Slave Power, 23, 33, 40Slayback, Alonzo, Col., 223, 240, 241, 245,247, 2731 359Smart, Edwin, Col., U.S.A., 172Smith, A. J., U.S. General, 208, 214, 217,218, 222Smith, Edmund Kirby, commanding C.S.Department of Trans-Mississippi, 1863-1865, 170, 178, 207; 215-233 passim; 242,243Snead, Col. Thomas, 62, 72, 75, 83, 84, 94Snyder, Col. J. F., 93Social Band (Blue Lodge), 33Sombrero, Shelby’s, 214Sonora, 274, 277, 290, 323Sons of the South (Blue Lodge), 33South Carolina, mentioned, 9Southern Hotel, St. Louis, 340“Spencer’s Choice,” home of DavidShelby, Sam Shindler, son of Joseph O.,Shelby in Tennessee, 10339Shelby, Webb, son of Joseph O., 331Shelby, William, 28, 48Shelby & Lillis, railroad contractors, 336Shelby’s Great Raid, 188-206Shelby’s Missouri Cavalry Brigade, 131,13 2Shelby’s official reports, 115Shelby’s plume. See PlumeShelbyville, Ky., 12Shenandoah Valley, 291Shepard, George, 374Sheridan, Gen. Philip H., 8, 236, 241, 243,246, 283, 294, 295, 321, 322, 355, 356Sherman, Gen. William Tecumseh, 58,208, 210Shiloh, 103Shindler, Hall, 145Shindler, Sam, 197Shoup, Brig. Gen. G. S., C.S.A., 152, 158Shreveport, La., 170, 207, 231, 232, 233, 235Shroyer, Washington, 26Sigel, Franz, Col., Brig. Gen., U.S.A., 65,67, 68, 72, 74, 76, 81, 83, 86, 88, 93, 94,95Simon, Joseph, 14Simon, Miriam, 14Sioux City, 29Skagg’s Branch, 79, 83“Skyrocket,” racehorse, 362Slack, William Y., 66, 67Sprague, Col. John, 231Springfield, Mo., operations at, 65, 72, 76,79’ 95’ 97’ 121, 128, i47’ 162, 165,166, 167, 168, 196, 200, 205; battle of,165-167Spring River, Mo., 71Steele, Gen. Frederick, 120, 187, 208, 210,211, 212, 214Sterling Road, Helena, Ark., 179Stearns, Charles, 39Stevens, R. S., 336, 339Stevenson, Jehiel, 339, 340, 341Stevenson, John, 339Stewart, Robert, Governor of Missouri(1856-1860), 54Stockton, Mo., 196Stone, John B., 389Stone, William J., Governor of Missouri(1894), 389, 398, 391, 392Stone, John S., 389Stone Point, Texas, 231, 232, 233Stuart, J. E. B., viii; 3, 4, 5, 7, 69, 87, 104,109, 136, 163, 180, 189, 190, 213, 360Stonestreet, Major Jacob, 132, 164, 186,i?o, 347, 369, 396, 397Stringfellow, Benjamin F., 33, 34, 35Sturgis, Brig. Gen. Samuel D., 65, 66, 87,91’ 93Sub-treasury, Austin, Tex. See Confed¬erate sub-treasurySugar Creek, Mo., 98436IndexSully, Thomas, painter, 14Sumac insignia worn by Shelby’s men,J95Sumner County, Tenn., 10Sumter, Fort, 45Sunshine, steamer, 76-77Swan, /. C., steamer, 57Switzer’s Creek, 37Tabo Creek, 89Tamaulipas, Mexican state of, 2, 246Tampico, Mexico, 306, 309, 310Telegraph Road, Ark., 135, 136, 149, 153Tennessee Constitutional Convention of1796, 10Tennessee River, 176Tennessee, Western District of, C.S.A.,74Tenth Illinois U.S. Inf. Reg., 134Territory of Kansas, 29, 30, 31, 41. Seealso KansasTerritorial legislature, Kan., 34Texas, 8, 53, 181, 226, 228, 235-253, 310,352-> 355Texas, Department of, 228, 241, 294Texas cavalry, 87Thames River, Canada, 9Thayer, Eli, 35, 37Third Cherokee Indian Reg., U.S., 143Third U.S. Inf. Reg., 69Third Kansas Inf. Reg., 139Third Zouaves, French, Mexico, 265, 290,292Thomas, Col. John Dennis, 26Thomas, Notley, 25, 26Thompson, George, 39Thompson, Col. G. W., 150Thompson, Gen. Jeff C., 74, 75, 141, 222,223Thorp, Jim, 193Thrailkill, Capt. John, 261, 266, 267Three Groves, Mo., 350Tilden, Samuel J., 350-351Tipton, Mo., 64, 198Tipton Times, 344, 345Tisdale, Dr. John, 259, 261, 263, 264, 282Todd, George, guerrilla under Quantrill,4L 330Toloquillo hacienda, Mexico, 301Toluca Indians, 306Totten, James, Capt. of artillery, Wilson’sCreek, brig, gen., 1863-1864, 81-83, 84,86, 158, 159Tournaments, 169Transylvania University, Lexington, Ky.,15-22 passimTreaty Ports, Chinese, 268Trone, Peter, 196Trust fund for Joseph O. Shelby, 11Tuileries, 324Tupelo, Miss., 104-105“Turners,” 55Turnvereins, 55Tuscumbia River, 104Tuxpan, Mexico, 306, 310Tyler, gunboat, 182, 213, 237Union Depot, Kansas City, 389Union government of Mo., 75Union Pacific R.R., 328Union Veterans Association of KansasCity, 397United Confederate Veterans, 399, 400United States Department of the West,72, 123, 165, 189, 193, 196, 215United States Supreme Court, 390United States troops in Pullman strike,389University of Pennsylvania, 14Utah Expedition of A. S. Johnston, 130-131Utica, Mo., 91Van Antwerp, Maj. V. P., 139Van Buren, Ark., 102, 103, 111, 135, 141,H3, i49Vandever, Gen. William I., U.S.A., 173-174Van Dorn, Earl, Maj. Gen., commandingTrans-Mississippi, 1862, 99, 100Van Horn, Col. Robert T., 348Vera Cruz, Mexico, 291, 295, 299, 300, 309,310, 311, 3*2> 3i8> 3j9> 320> 321Versailles, Palace of, 268Vest, George Graham, 59Vicksburg, mentioned as home of OrvilleShelbys, 10; operations around and siegeof, 105, 120, 135, 177, 178, 179, 180, 192Vincennes, Ind., 14Waco, Texas, 235Wales, Shelby family in, 10Walker, Inez, 277-281Walker, Gen. L. M., C.S.A., 178, 180, 181,183, 184, 185, 263, 280Wallace, William, prosecutor at trial ofFrank James, 371-378Wall Street backing for Mexican immi¬gration, 308, 310Walnut St., Philadelphia, 19Ward, Jim, 219, 303War Department, C.S.A., 104Index437Warfield, Dr. Nicholas, 12Warner, Maj. Will, 397Warren, Jerry, 345Warren, Brig. Gen. Fitz Henry, U.S.A.,167Warsaw, Mo., 196, 197Washburn, Gen. Cadwallader, 214, 216Washington, Ark., 206, 208Washington, D.C., visit of Shelby to,Westport, Battle of, vii, 5, 220-223White, Lieut. Col., 76, 77, 89White House of Confederacy, Richmond,393White River, Ark., 109, 130, 177, 212, 213Whitmore’s Mill, Ark., 211Williams, D. A., 34, 240, 241, 255Wilson’s Creek, Battle of, 71-88, 90, 98,100, 101, 152, 162, 2171882, 355-356Wilson’s School (Mr. Wilson’s School)Washington, Ga., 239Washington, Mo., 77Washington Co., Ark., 147Washington Globe, 10Watie, Col. Stand, 99Watterson, Col. Henry, 350Waverly, Ill., 26Waverly, Mo., 4, 24-30, 32-40, 42, 44, 49,51* 59* 76* 77* 89* 96* 97* ”3* H2* l88*191, 362Hartsville, Pa., 19Winchester, Va., Battle of, mentioned,355Winchester, Gen. James, 10Winchester, Caroline, first wife of OrvilleShelby, 10Winchester Turnpike, 12Winship, Dick, 249, 258Winship, George, 272Wood, Capt. James, 200, 201, 236, 237,Waverly Steam Rope Factory, 31, 46, 48,249, 258, 276-282 passim5°Waxahachie, Tex., 237Wayne County, Mo., 172Wedding trip, Shelbys’, 30Weightman, Col. Richard Hanson, 69, 70Weitzel, Gen., 321Wellman, Paul, 203, 360Welsh, Milton, 397Western District of Missouri, ixWestern Engineer, first steamboat onWood, Samuel N., 36, 37, 38, 39, 357, 358Yager, Dick, 133Yazoo River, 177Yellow Tavern, mentioned, 69, 87, 136Yellville, Ark., 134, 164Yost, Robert M., 380Young, Col. Sam, 34, 38, 39Younger, Cole, 133, 331Missouri, 25Westlake, Thomas, 234Zeiler’s Band, 49Zook’s Store, 340\