
The Early Years 
Lancashire and London 




Mary (Halton) Spencer 1912-1996 John Henry Halton 1906-1965 



Life for me began at about 6 am on Sunday the 9 lh of March in 1941 at a maternity 
home in the Lancastrian town of Accrington (Lancashire) in northwest England, 
the first and only child of Mary (May) and John Henry Halton. After what was in 
those war days considered an appropriate time, I was taken home to 1 3 Corona- 
tion Street in Great Harwood, a nearby cotton town then of some 8000 people. 
Coronation Street remains small and terraced, and is located close to the top left 
of the aerial photograph (above what became the Oxo Factory in 1938).' It was an 
unmade road, then paved with cobblestones and ultimately surfaced convention- 
ally in the 1950s. 

March 9 has few noted events save for the birth of Mickey Spillane (1918- 
2006), the US author who wrote the Mike Hammer detective novels, and Yuri 
Gagarin (1934-1968). Michael Dewar reported 2 solidifying liquid air to the Roy- 
al Society on this day in 1893, and the Barbie doll was launched on it in 1959 
when I was 1 8 ! 

The town of Great Harwood lies within sight of Pendle Hill and easy reach 
of the Ribble Valley, but it has always been just off the main road and, like many 

- 1 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 




Left: Outside 13 Coronation St, spring 1941. Centre: With gate in 1997. An uncle and aunt lived at 
No. 17 (satellite dish) from 1948 to 1995. Right: Gt. Harwood from the Air. 



small towns or large villages, it is quite unremarkable. Indeed, it is not on a major 
road, and one does not pass through it on the way to somewhere else. Its only 
buildings of significance are the Town Hall and Mercer Memorial Clock, and the 
Mercer Hall (now the public recreation centre). It has had many distinguished sons 
and daughters though not many who are famous. 1 




Gt. Harwood (left): Clock Tower and Town Hall; {right): Mercer Leisure Centre 
(photos kindly provided Ian Fairclough). 



The most renowned citizen was John Mercer who, in 1 844, devised a process to 
cause cotton fibres to swell upon treatment with sodium hydroxide. In the original 
version of his process the fibres swelled and caused the overall size of the fabric 
to shrink, making it stronger and easier to dye. The process became popular after 
H. A. Lowe improved it in 1890 by holding the cotton during treatment to prevent 
it from shrinking. On doing this, the fibre gains a lustrous appearance and repre- 
sents the modern form of the process. The self-taught Mercer became famous and 
wealthy; he excelled in the dye industry working in the Oakenshaw Calico Print 
Works (where he became a partner) 'dyeing cloth with certain colours and figures 
on a ground of a different hue'. The factory was located in what is now Clay- 
ton-le-Moors and close to the Hyndburn river. His development of chemistry and 
chemical processes became widely recognised and he became one of the founding 
members of the Chemical Society (1842), joined its Council in 1860, and remains 

-2- 



The Early Years 

the only 'Harroder' to be elected to the Royal Society (1852) upon nomination by 
James Thomson, Thomas Graham, Walter Cram and Lord Playfair. 

And so I was raised for my first years at No. 13 Coronation Street. My mother, 
a nurse of the mentally handicapped (the terminology of those days), remained at 
home as was the custom, while my father worked as a male nurse in Calderstones. 
This was a mental institution that had been converted into a wartime children's 
hospital, but the children were evacuated shortly before the troops came back from 
Dunkirk. It is set in lovely country near Whalley with beautifully kept grounds, and 
it lies in the Ribble Valley some three miles from what was our home. It still ex- 
ists, but is now a UK National Trust Home providing specialist services to people 
with a learning disability. I do not know when Dad became a male nurse as, during 
the 'great depression', he had been a full-time musician (saxophone and clarinets) 
touring Ireland as a member of the Elite Orchestra - a dance band comprising his 
elder brothers (Bob and Eddie) and two friends - and they still did Saturday dances 
from time to time. I recall being on-stage with the band in the Mercer Hall for a 
post-war dance, probably during the 1 945- 1 946 winter and I have always regretted 
not taking up drums, likely from the impact of that single event! 




3 Shaftesbury Ave 



My part of Gt. Harwood. My maternal grandparents lived at 3 Shaftesbury Ave., Uncle Ted and Aunt 
Mary at 17 Coronation St. (from 1948) and Uncle Bob and Aunt Alice on Park Ave. {2 nd from top 

left) until 1950. 

Apparently I was a sickly child and caused my parents much concern as medi- 
cations and food were not easy to come by with the rationing system then in place. 
My earliest memory of those war-time years is of my father arriving home from 
work at about 8 o'clock in the evening having cycled or taken a bus. Our next door 
neighbour at No. 1 1 was the local coalman, and I remember him, and the milkman 

-3- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

from the nearby farm, with their horse-drawn carts making deliveries in the street 
that was, at the time, merely an unmade road. He, with his half-leather jacket, tak- 
ing hundred weight sacks off the cart onto his back to carry them to the outdoor 
coal-hole, and the milkman transferring gill, pint and quart measures from the 
churn into the jugs and pans left for them; pasteurization was yet to come. While 
I do not have any memory of the barrage balloons that floated above the nearby 
recreation ground or the last day of the war, I do remember the celebrations that 
ensued and straddling lower Queen Street (see bottom of map) with many other 
families, presumably well intoxicated, as we returned from the festivity on that 
auspicious night. Being on the northern edge of the Lancashire cotton towns, Gt. 
Harwood escaped damage as the German bombers concentrated on Manchester 
and Liverpool; the closest they got was with an unspent payload dropped near 
Whalley to speed the return home. 

I do not know precisely when it was that my parents told me that Dad was to 
leave Calderstones and that we were moving to the fish and chip shop at 54A Park 
Road (less than a hundred yards down the next street over as can be seen from the 
map), but it was 1945. I do remember the horse and cart (from the coalman) in 
the back street (that not labelled between Park Rd. and Coronation St.) and all our 
belongings being loaded on, and then making our way down to the rear entrance of 
54A. The row of houses of which this was a part was demolished in the late 1980s 
but in those days the back street crossed Salisbury and ran down to Balfour St. 
The chip shop was located opposite the recreation ground just beyond the junction 
with Windsor Rd., and about three houses above Balfour St. We remained there 
for four years. 

Over the next few years (1946-48) I went through a phase of contracting all 
the childhood diseases (measles, German measles, whooping cough, diphtheria). 
These kept me away from St. Hubert's Primary School, where I had started when 
I was 5 years old, and then St Wulstan's to which we all transferred at age 7. The 
culmination of these events was a sizeable swelling on my left neck that, ultimate- 
ly, proved to be a result of bovine tuberculosis contracted from contaminated milk. 
At that time it was a rare condition in humans and no simple remedy was available 
in NW England. Eventually, my parents located a specialist practising at Great 
Ormond Street Children's Hospital in London who was able to excise the abscess 

from a small incision. Surgery was 
performed on the 15 lh of November 
1948, the date remembered because 
Prince Charles was born the even- 
ing before and the street outside my 
ward window was decorated and the 
Leftca. 1942; Right, with father, 1948 passing trams were decked in flags. 




-4- 



The Early Years 

Recuperation was slow and I was required to spend time in the country air. I was 
absent from school for most of 1948 and 1949 and spent the summer months of 
'49 with my father's eldest sister, my Aunt Mary and Uncle Tom (Aspey) at their 
home 'Key Hills' at Martin Top, near the small village of Rimington, some 20 km 
northeast of Gt. Harwood in glorious countryside. 




Left: Key Hills (1997) - largely unchanged from 1949. Right: Stonyhurst PO ca. 1953 (Copyright: 
The Francis Frith Collection - reproduced with permission). 



In the autumn of 1 949 we moved from Gt. Harwood to Stonyhurst whose fame 
lies in its Jesuit public school which, at the time, comprised three colleges for boys 
and young men - Hodder House, St. Mary's Hall and Stonyhurst College - located 
close to each other in the delightful countryside bordering the Hodder River in the 
Ribble Valley. My father became the Stonyhurst sub-postmaster, the office housed 
within our small local store in the hamlet of Woodfields; we stayed there until the 
summer of 1956. Having lost almost two years of schooling through illness, I did 
not take to full time school easily, but the two staff of St. Joseph's Primary School 
in the nearby Hurst Green, Miss Hall (junior) and Miss Burns (senior), sorted me 
out and I passed the all important 11 + exam in 1952. My time at Woodfields re- 
mains very special and I retain fond memories of the place and the people. 

Passage through the 11 + headed me to grammar school in September 1952. 
However, Stonyhurst was some 25 km from Preston and the nearest grammar 
school, a journey of 70 minutes involving a 10 minute walk to the bus stop, 45 
minutes on the bus and then 1 5 minutes from the bus terminal to the college, all to 
be repeated for the trip home. Instead, I entered St. Joseph's College, Blackpool, 
in early September 1952 as one of about eight new Form II boarders. It was a 
school run by the Irish Christian Brothers and attended by a good number of the 
local grammar boys. The excessive disciplinary demands, whims and fancies of 
the Brothers were hard to adapt to and life was completely regimented. Being a 
Catholic institution run by a religious order, Mass was held daily, but we only had 
to attend on five weekdays as Wednesday and Saturday were designated lie-in 
days, and Sunday Mass was held at the late hour of 8.30 am. Typical of the gram- 
mar schools of the day, classes for 11 + entrants started in Form II and involved 

-5- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

English Language, English Literature, Maths, Science, French, Geography and 
History, with Religious Studies from noon to 12.30 pm daily and Music once or 
twice per week. Wednesday afternoon was sports (the boarders had sport every day 
after school from 4-5 pm) and, to make up the teaching time, school was held from 
9-12 am on Saturdays. 

Age 14 signified entry into the Lower Fifth form and choices had to be made 
as the syllabus split into arts and sciences. I had little capacity for languages even 
though I enjoyed my year of Latin, and so the choice was easy - it had to be the 
sciences. And so my journey into Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics at a more 
serious level began. We retained French, selected between Geography and History, 
and were required to take both English Language and English Literature. This gave 
us each seven subjects, plus the mandatory Religious Knowledge, for the General 
Certificate of Education Ordinary Level programme that culminated with external 
examinations in the Upper Fifth form. The end of the 1955-1956 year marked our 
departure from the Post Office to begin a life in southeast London where my par- 
ents subsequently purchased a larger (but still 'corner') grocery store in Lee SE12 
with a separate family home at 3 1 Heather Road, some 50 metres down the street. 

I returned to Blackpool in September 1956 for the Upper Fifth year and the 
'O' levels, the essential school leaving examinations for grammar schools of that 
era. As mid-term breaks were but a Friday and Monday, there was no opportunity 
to return to London until the Christmas holidays. The prospect of spending these 
breaks at school had no appeal and I was fortunate to have my father's eldest 
brother and his wife (Uncle Bob and Aunt Alice) invite me to stay with them in 
Gt. Harwood whenever I wanted to. They owned a lady's and children's outfitters 
on Queen Street, near the Town Gate and Clock and I spent every short break with 
them until I left Blackpool. I always felt sorry for those boarders whose parents 
lived abroad and who had no choice but to stay at school through the mid-term 
recesses. 

The 'O' levels came and went and I travelled south to London for the sum- 
mer holiday, worked in the shop, and awaited the results. I still have the card on 
which I had been required to enter my name and the subjects I had taken, with 
the results added by hand by the then Headmaster (a Bro. Dolan) and mailed to 
me. I passed six of the seven subjects, missing out on English Language by a 
few percentage points. I elected to return to SJC despite my parents asking if I 
would prefer to attend a day school near home. Quite why I did this I will never 
know, but return I did and entered the Lower Sixth taking Chemistry, Physics 
and Mathematics for Advanced (A) Level GCE in the new Science Block that by 
then had been completed. The chemistry programme was taught by Bro. Cornelius 
Sreenan and I think it was his knowledge and ability to put across the great logic 
of organic chemistry that directed me into my career in the subject. The precision 

-6- 



The Early Years 

of functional groups and their ability to provide logical derivatives in a predictive 
manner was enough to convince me; Physics and Maths rounded things off, but I 
had markedly less interest in them. The demands of boarding school life and the 
continual removal of privileges from my peer group during that year persuaded me 
that there had to be a better way to gain an education and my departure from SJC 
in July 1958 was permanent, although at the time no one knew it. 

Despite the adverse publicity the Irish Brothers attracted in the late 20 lh cen- 
tury, the demise of the college was due solely to mismanagement. Bad decisions 
in construction and the wish of every headmaster to have an edifice created during 
his tenure led to a loss of funding and its closure. 3 An Old Boys Society exists and 
there is a web site containing reminiscences of former pupils. 3 

When I arrived in London for the summer holiday, my parents had arranged 
for me to attend St. Joseph's Academy in Blackheath, London SE3, subject to a 
satisfactory interview with the Headmaster, a Brother Vincent. At that time, the 
Academy was the most prestigious Catholic grammar school in South London and 
it saw a high proportion of senior pupils move on to university with good 'A' level 
qualifications. I was accepted and began an entirely new lifestyle in the autumn 
of 1958. 

What my time at SJC taught and instilled into me more than anything was the 
discipline of study and a capacity for work. This came from the routine of set study 
hours, limited free time and few distractions - the boarders did have a 12 inch (25 
cm) TV that the seniors could watch from time to time. I was never a star in the 
classroom or in the examinations for it was the day boys from the professional 
families that dominated, but nor was I a dunce. 

■PPMHHB Not only was my boarding school background ben- 

I eficial as I started life at the 'Academy' but it has served 
' '1 me well throughout life. The initial stages of Upper Sixth 
I were far from easy. Maths in the north was a single sub- 
I ject comprising mainly 'pure' components, whereas the 
; I Academy had distinct 'Pure' and 'Applied' programmes 

: I to fit the London GCE courses. There, 'A' levels com- 

1 I prised four rather than the three subjects I had taken pre- 

' ' aff-V-''' -, J viously, and catching up on a year of missed tuition with 
. : L^^^^ P ros P ects of calculating the friction generated by a 

H^^J box sliding down a slope inclined at 20° did not impress; 
Bro. Austin 2002 I had great difficulty in assimilating the missed work of 
(courtesy Tony Hyman) 'Applied'. However, to my great delight, chemistry and 
physics were taught by knowledgeable enthusiasts, Brother Austin (Casson) and 
Mr. (Pussy) Catt, respectively. 

-7- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

Although the labs were old by comparison with the new S JC facility, there was 
the real advantage in the London County Council scheme that had expensive (by 
1958-59 standards) laboratory equipment rotated through the schools on a loan 
basis. Life was a ball! We even had tickets to the Royal Institution Christmas 
Lectures. These were instigated by Sir Lawrence Bragg and seeing and hearing 
that Fullerian Professor of Chemistry, who at age 25 had received a Nobel Prize, 
remains a highlight of my life; he was a master showman as well as a brilliant 
scientist. 

The year at the Academy went well and I achieved good 'A'-level passes in all 
but 'Applied' for which I passed 'O'-level. Despite a second attempt the following 
November, I never made it to the echelons of such (to me) mysterious mathemati- 
cal manipulations. At that time, the examination periods consisted of a three-hour 
laboratory practical in each of Chemistry and Physics and two three-hour written 
papers in all subjects. Prior to the summer break and the examination period, it had 
been suggested to me that I should return for a 7 lh -form year and take the Schol- 
arship exams. This I did. Perhaps it was this extra year at school that provided a 
needed catch-up for me, for I have never regretted it. Kevin Prendergast, a local 
lad, and I were the only two taking science scholarship, both of us with chemistry 
and physics. We had lots of free periods and were encouraged to set up project 
work and write essays on all manner of topics using not simply the school facili- 
ties but also those of the neighbourhood and city. We were both prefects (there had 
been a suggestion that I be Head Boy but my tenure in the school was too short for 
the proposal to be taken seriously) and we had to make sure that we were on time 
when we were on duty, as 'late comers' were subject to detention. We attended 
plays in the West End, concerts at the Festival Hall and, of course, a second Royal 
Institution Christmas lecture was not to be missed. It was some thirty years later 
that I chaired the first ever live-via-satellite science lecture from the UK to NZ by 
Prof, (now Sir) John Cadogan, then President of the Royal Society of Chemistry, 
from that same lecture theatre late on a January evening. My audience was in the 
Massey University Marsden lecture theatre (Palmerston North) for the post-lunch 
plenary lecture of the 1987 ANZASS Congress held that January. Prof. Dick Bart 
was Congress Chairman. 4 

Once again the year passed quickly and by the time the formal examinations 
came around I had secured an unconditional offer from Southampton University. 
Initially a college of London University, it had been granted its own charter in 1 952 
and was typical of the 'red brick' universities of the time. I had by then persuaded 
my parents that to gain the full benefit of a university education I really needed to 
be an integral part of it and that this could only be done by living away from home. 
I had applied to other institutions and (to keep faith at home) London's University 
(UC), Imperial (IC), and Kings Colleges; I did not consider myself Oxbridge ma- 

-8- 



The Early Years 

terial. Southampton was the first to invite me to interview and it was conducted by 
Dr. Kenneth Webb, a delightful inorganic chemist who spent his academic career 
at Southampton, initially when it was a university college, through its formative 
years, and beyond. Before we were done he was telling me what I should and 
should not do when I came down; the formal and unconditional offer came soon 
afterwards. In the event, the outcome of the scholarship year (A-levels plus one 
additional three-hour written paper for each scholarship subject) was passes in 
both subjects and the offer of a State Scholarship to both Kevin and me (which I 
gather were limited to a total of 500 nationally): a first for the Academy. Although 
the financial reward was formally no different from the London County Council 
scholarship, there were advantages of kudos and in the parental income test being 
more lenient, with the cost of travel to and from the university also met. Several of 
the colleges that had not previously accepted me wrote offering a place based upon 
the 'State' but, given the confidence Ken Webb and Southampton showed in me, I 
stayed with them, a decision that I have never regretted. 

The summer months were spent as a laboratory assistant in the Haematology 
Department of Dulwich Hospital, a part of the King's College Hospital Group. 
This provided additional workplace and laboratory experience beyond that of the 
shop, cafe and departmental store gained during other school holidays. At the end 
of the first week of October 1 960, 1 went down to Southampton to enter university 
as a freshman. 



-9- 



University Years - Southampton 

Undergraduate Days 



October 1960 saw me depart from Lee and move to Southampton where I had 
secured lodgings with Mrs. Pritchard and her son David at 4 Bankside, Wessex 
Lane, in the suburb of Swaythling. This was a distance of some 2 km from the Uni- 
versity. I remained with them for two years. At that time, entry into a University 
Hall was not common for first-year men and only one of my schoolmates, classics 
student Rick Collett, who had been the Academy Head Boy, gained such entry. 
He too was at Southampton and a resident of Connaught Hall, a little closer than 
Bankside to campus down Wessex Lane. I spent many happy hours there as Rick 
was a competent guitarist and had a good voice; it was my own 'Hall of Choice' 
and I spent my final undergraduate year as a resident there. Kevin Prendergast, my 
friend and co-scholar from the Academy elected to attend Liverpool University 
and subsequently moved to a career with Coates Bros, (of printing inks fame) in 
St Mary's Cray, Kent. 

Southampton University had about 1500 students of whom the BSc (Hons) 
Chemistry class of 1960 was 37; one was female. Lectures were held in the only 
lecture theatre that the Department had and comprised the traditional Inorganic, 
Organic and Physical. The inorganic programme started with a course on Structure 
and Bonding given by Drs. Eddie Cartmell and Gerry Fowles and it followed their 
renowned textbook Valence and Molecular Structure initially published in 1956 
and as a 2 nd edition in 1961 I still have my copy of the latter with its 32/6 (£1- 
12-6; $NZ 3.25) price sticker inside the front cover. 5 Organic was split between 
Drs. Ishbel Campbell and Eric Parker, and covered functional group chemistry in 
all its 1960s glory. The set texts were the two volumes of Finar and Cram &amp; Ham- 
mond's Organic Chemistry book. 6 Ishbel was a delightful lady, one of the very few 
female academics in science and whose fame lay in being the first to isolate chiral 
phosphorus compounds; her research was dominantly in the organophosphorus, 
-arsenic, -antimony, and -tin areas in the era prior to most spectroscopies becoming 
commonplace. She had few research students but Martin Hocking (who completed 
his PhD in 1 963 and was one of my laboratory demonstrators) rose to the rank of 
Professor at the University of Victoria in Canada. Ishbel was a chain smoker and in 
her first lecture she advised us that, as Southampton University forbade smoking in 

- 10- 



University Years - Southampton 

all lectures, her classes would be tutorials. She then lit her next cigarette from the 
stub she was holding, put out the stub under the bench tap, and launched into the 
first lecture! Eric Parker was very much the gentleman, even changing into a suit 
in his office prior to delivering most lectures. He was an excellent communicator 
but left academia for the Registrarship of the Royal Institute of Chemistry in 1 962. 
Physical chemistry had Drs. H. M. Frey and A. C. Riddiford as the principal expo- 
nents; the latter was assigned as my tutor. 

The first term of university involved lectures, no formal study requirements 
and only one assignment (in physical chemistry); it seemed to provide an easy en- 
try into university life. The needed shock to the system came with an end-of-term 
examination that produced an average mark well below 30%. A more structured 
regime of study was needed and the SJC idiom was reinstated! In those days, 
there were no classes on Wednesday afternoons so that sporting activities could be 
followed but, like SJC, to compensate, laboratory classes were held on Saturday 
mornings, ostensibly from 9-12. Ostensibly, because the first term programme of 
Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis had the requirement of results being pre- 
sented before the end of the laboratory period. While this seemed straight forward 
enough - the time allocation was more than equitable - what was not pointed out 
to us was the level of accuracy required for the quantitative components. Volu- 
metric analyses had to have an uncertainty to ±0.5%, whilst the gravimetric com- 
ponents were somewhat more lenient with a mere ±0.75% - and with any result 
falling outside the limits it was back to the bench to start over again. The midday 
close was a mere indicator as it was closer to 1 pm before everyone was finished, 
washed-up and out, sometimes much later depending upon the whim of the dem- 
onstrator. The rigours of that programme have meant that, even now, I can use a 
balance, a pipette and a burette with a precision far greater than most of the early 
21 s1 century graduates. 

In the early 1960s the university BSc (Hons) programme comprised two parts, 
the first covering the first two years of study, and the second for year three. All 
chemists were required to take one subsidiary subject (a maths, physics, or bio- 
chemistry option) and a non-examinable non-science offering, as well as gain a 
passing grade in translating a scientific paper from one of Russian, German or 
French into English, before being able to graduate. The French option was dis- 
couraged on the basis that few chemistry papers then were written in the language. 
My choices were Physics, International Law and German, of which the law op- 
tion was magical. Subsidiary physics and I engaged happily until the electricity 
component ran to complex circuits and electronics, while the German translation 
was left until 2 nd year. The end of first year had no formal examinations as the Part 
I degree examinations applied only at the end of year two. However, this did not 
mean an easy ride for the freshmen. Departmental examinations were scheduled 

- n - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

and these decided one's fate - to remain in the Honours stream, to drop to the Or- 
dinary Degree (a BSc plain and simple), or to be 'sent down' with one's university 
days ended. Thus, in late June 1 96 1 the examinations began; for me two papers in 
physics and three in chemistry scheduled over three days with only the afternoon 
of the second day free. 

Unlike today's norm where courses are split into small components with much 
in-course assessment and feedback, the 1 960s had none of these. For us, the sum- 
mer exams were the first since the disastrous pre-Christmas exercise and there 
was some trepidation about the outcome. Again, and contrary to the mandatory 
practices of the 21 st century, the procedures did not comply with anything I have 
seen elsewhere. Two lists were posted on the first year notice board. The first, 
headed 'The following candidates may proceed to the second year of the Honours 
programme'' contained an alphabetical list of family names with given initials. 
It comprised thirteen entries - 13 of the original 37 had made it beyond 1 SI year! 
The second list was similarly annotated and gave the list of candidates who were 
allowed to proceed to the second year of the ordinary degree. This list carried 
fewer than the remaining 24 names. There were but two lists. If, after (frantically) 
searching, one had not found one's name then a visit to the tutor was necessary, 
after all, the tutor was expected to nurture the student's well being. I well remem- 
ber one such individual reiterating his experience of being told that 'as far as this 
institution is concerned you no longer exist' . For me, the news was good - I was 
through to year two of Honours. 

Year two at Southampton saw a few changes. Dr. Ian Stevens had joined the or- 
ganic staff headed by Richard Cookson ( 1 922-2008) who had taken over the Chair 
in Chemistry in 1957 from N. K. Adam and, at the time was the youngest Profes- 
sor of Chemistry in the UK at 35 years of age. Ishbel Campbell, Eric Parker and 
the 'new man' provided the organic lecture courses, while Ken Webb continued 
his discourse of systematic inorganic chemistry from the green Partington, 7 and 
Gerry Fowles continued with coordination chemistry. Thermodynamics formed 
a good part of Physical Chemistry and the entire laboratory programme moved 
to a higher plane. I successfully completed the German translation programme in 
May of that year when Eric Parker announced his impending move to London to 
become Secretary and Registrar of the Royal Institute of Chemistry. During 1 962 
Drs. John Hudec and Leslie Johnson joined the organic staff. 

The first part of the degree examinations that counted to the final outcome 
followed in June 1 962. Chemistry had three three-hour papers (one for each sub- 
discipline) and Physics just two. They began at 9.30 on Tuesday June 12 with 
Chemistry I and were completed by 12.30 on Thursday 14 lh with Physics II - five 
papers in two and a half days with a one and a half hour break between each. 
The organic and inorganic papers were regarded by us as essentially what was 

- 12 - 



University Years - Southampton 

expected, but the Physical Chemistry paper caused us problems; I gathered later 
that only three of the class of eleven actually passed it. Nonetheless, save for my 
good friend Mike Gravestock, we proceeded to the final year of Honours; Mike 
moved on to the Ordinary degree programme only to be vindicated the following 
year when he was invited to return for honours in a fourth year. This he did, subse- 
quently completing a PhD degree in Canada. Once again, the results were posted 
in the same indicative way. 

The second year at Southampton had seen the start of a new Chemistry build- 
ing to abut the existing two storey structure at its southern end creating an internal 
courtyard. The impact on us was the construction of a corridor inside the eastern 
wall of the lecture theatre reducing its size. This had minimal impact on our small 
numbers and the lecture programme continued. Richard Cookson, who had been 
involved with (Sir) Derek Barton whilst at Birkbeck College (London) on the con- 
formational analysis work that led to the latter's 1969 Nobel Prize, gave one of the 
courses and our first exposure to him. Unfortunately, lecturing was not Richard's 
strong point. I recall one lecture in which the blackboard became covered with 
jottings and a series of lines joining them together in what appeared to be a com- 
pletely haphazard fashion. Nonetheless, he impressed with his breadth of knowl- 
edge and willingness to discuss. John Hudec and Ian Stevens were joined by John 
Mellor who retired from the Department only in 2002 or thereabouts, while Leslie 
Johnston had little contact with the senior class. Physical had its first professor 
appointed and Graham Hills appeared before us for a good part of the year. By the 
Christinas break, the new edifice was almost ready for occupation and the spring 
term saw the new laboratories for 'organic' opened. The postgraduate students had 
already moved into the upper level labs of this spacious building and, with the 
expansion, came a drive to increase the postgraduate population by attracting stu- 
dents from elsewhere. I well remember Gerry Fowles more regularly stopping to 
give me a ride up the hill from the Swaything-Portswood Road to the rear entrance 
of the Department and I think that he was somewhat disappointed that organic was 
my preference to his co-ordination chemistry. 

The final examinations comprised the three-hour papers in each area of chem- 
istry followed by Paper IV that was designed to test the candidate 's breadth and 
depth of knowledge in the subject. There was no syllabus, no formal lecture pro- 
gramme and anything (within reason) was fair game. Invariably, a question would 
be based on a topic presented in one of the seminars by a visiting academic and 
the interpretation of 60 MHz proton NMR spectra (the new technique) would be 
there. Physical chemistry frequently drew upon one of the thermodynamic deriva- 
tions and Inorganic offered essay-style review topics. These examinations were 
generously spaced, being mornings only over four days from June 7. For these, 
Ishbel Campbell waited with us outside the examination hall checking that we 

- 13 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

were all there and wishing us the best. If one of a class failed to appear, she would 
promptly rush away to bring the errant being in. I cannot remember just how long 
after the exams it was before the results were announced, as it always depended on 
when the external examiner could attend. We were given a date and told to make 
ourselves available should we be required to attend for interview. As it happened, 
none of us were so invited and we all gained degrees. There were a few thirds 
awarded, a good number of lower seconds and four upper second degrees, one of 
which was mine - but no first class honours. Much to my surprise, I was awarded 
the Smith Prize in Physical Chemistry while the organic equivalent went to a peer 
who went on to do a 'physical' PhD. My clear preference for research study was 
for a PhD in organic chemistry and preferably under Cookson's guidance. 



The July graduation ceremony involved a procession through the centre of 
the city, conferment of degrees in the town hall, and an afternoon reception in 

the grounds of Stoneham House, adjacent to 
Connaught Hall on Wessex Lane (now a part 
of the Wessex Lane Halls Complex). My par- 
ents came down from London for the day and 
enjoyed the success that I gained. That final 
undergraduate year had been spent as a Con- 
naught Hall resident in a room next to John L. 
Wk \ A (Jack) Frost who also gained an upper second 

degree and proceeded to a PhD with Gerry 
Fowles. Gerry left Southampton in 1966 to 
take up a Chair at Reading, joining Monty 
Frey (physical chemistry) who had made the 
move a year earlier. Our rooms in Connaught 
faced the entrance to the quadrangle and were 
below the accommodations occupied by Dr. 
Webb (who never married and became a very longstanding member of the Con- 
naught community, even well into his retirement years I believe). I heard later 
that he and other academics resident in the Hall kept a 'book' of the degrees each 
resident was expected to gain! 



Postgraduate Study 

After the vacation, it was back to Southampton on a Science Research Council 
scholarship for PhD study. As was customary, I found I was to be supervised joint- 
ly by Cookson and Ian Stevens whose expertise lay in the chemistry 
of small rings - azirines and diazirines - at least until he destroyed N-N 
the NMR probe of the newly installed Varian A60 during the early azirine diazirine 

- 14- 



University Years - Southampton 

part of 1964. Chris Watts (who with Mike Gravestock remain the only contempo- 
raries of those days with whom I have maintained contact) was likewise assigned. 
There were also additional recruits to organic from other places. John Henstock 
joined our year while Brian Drake, who had graduated via the Royal Institution of 
Chemistry examination process, had started his postgraduate study a year earlier; 
both were with Richard and had John Hudec as co- supervisor. 

Organic chemistry was located on Level 5 of the research building with offices 
for Ishbel, Ian and John at the eastern end and research laboratories occupying the 
remainder of the floor. John Mellor and Leslie Johnson were located in the old 
building, while, as Head of Department, Cookson had his offices on Level 2. 1 was 
allocated to Room 514 which comprised four research benches, each with a writ- 
ing space at the end, and two fume cupboards. 

Brian Drake and Golapudy Subrahmanyam (an Indian postdoctoral) were the 
first to move in and had taken the end benches with a fume hood behind them. I 
had a centre aisle bench facing west and the remaining vacant space behind me 
became the coffee centre for 'organic' for the duration of my PhD. Having had to 
move out of Connaught Hall, I had secured a one bedroom apartment on Hartley 
Avenue, no more than 50 metres from the back entrance of the Chemistry Depart- 
ment, and I recall the tremendous thrill of letting myself into the building after 
hours for the first time. The closeness to 'work', however, soon became a burden 
as the sight of the building from my bedsit window was too much of a pull. I found 
that I was spending far too much time at the bench and I had to put more space 
between 'home' and 'office'; a move became essential. 

Mike Gravestock had been 'in residence' with the Eaton's at 17 Phillimore 
Road, Swaythling, for some years. This family was known as providers of one of 
the very best of home-stay accommodations for Southampton students. While I do 
not recall the details, a vacancy unexpectedly arose and I was fortunate enough 
to be accepted by them. I moved in at the end of October in 1963. Les Eaton had 
been a Midland Bank Manager in the Eastleigh Branch but was recently retired 
when I appeared on the scene. His wife Kay, formerly very active within South- 
ampton amateur dramatics, provided us with every home comfort, meals cooked 
on the Aga, freshly perked coffee with breakfast and dinner, and the ability to join 
them to watch TV in the evenings unless they were entertaining. Les was a devout 
home brew enthusiast to the extent that he would only provide us (and our visiting 
friends) with his ale if we were not driving; the potency was legion and a pint was 
the maximum intake. I remained with Kay and Les for the duration of my PhD and 
maintained contact with them until they died. Even in 1 974, when I was on leave 
in the UK with Margaret, my wife, and 2-year old son, Mark, Kay insisted that we 
come down from Reading (where I was based) to spend a weekend with them; the 
last time that I saw them was in 1985 when their health was clearly on the decline. 

- 15 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 



The Research 



Scheme 1 



-C0 2 Me 



A 



Scheme 2 



In 1963, cyclopropanones, e.g. 1, had not been isolated but their presence as 
intermediates had been demonstrated in a transformation known as the Favorskii 
reaction. So also had their allene oxide resonance isomers, both from trapping 

studies as illustrated in Scheme 
l. 8 The project that I accepted 
was designed to see if nitrogen 
analogues of allene oxides, the 
Ph isolable methyleneaziridines, e.g. 
2, behaved similarly. The known 9 
amine 2 was synthesized from 
2,3-dibromopropene by amine 
for bromide replacement using 
ethylamine with subsequent de- 
hydrobromination using amide 
ion in liquid ammonia (Scheme 
2). The second step provided the 
first exposure to the use of low 
temperature liquids. The needed liquid ammonia was dispensed alongside the 
building loading bay and a fume cupboard in an unoccupied laboratory at the west- 
ern end of Floor 5 was used for the reaction. The isolated yield of 2 was dire - 1 had 
not used an appropriate trap and the product had co-distilled with the solvent under 
vacuum, an easy mistake for the novice and a lesson well heeded. Trapping reac- 
tions with a range of dipolarophiles were largely unsuccessful as only two of nine 
such reactants gave products, viz. 3 and 4, from tetracyanoeth- 
ylene (TCNE) and dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD), 
respectively. The structure of the more interesting pyrrole tri- 
ester 4 was confirmed by comparison with an authentic sam- 
ple. The route from 2 to 3 was clearly by a [2 + 2] addition, 
but that from 2 to 4 much less obvious (there were no rules for pericyclic reactions 
then). Although a lengthy pathway was proposed, 10 1 only returned to these stud- 
ies when Victoria University honoured me with a grand retirement symposium in 
2005. One of the participants, Dr. Andrew Grimsdale, represented Klaus Mullen, 
the Organic Chemistry Director of the Max Plank Institute for Polymer Research. 
I had met Andrew there and the issue of my PhD arose, the dipolar cycloadditions 
discussed, and a few weeks later, the mechanistic explanation of Scheme 3 came 
from him. As is clear, methyl 2-butynoate should be detected. That it was not may 
simply reflect loss during purification (bp 102 °C 760 mm/Hg). Repetition of the 
sequence would seem to offer a promising honours year project. 

- 16- 



f CN 

N L-CN 

H H 



Et 

A 

w // 



E E 
E = C0 2 Me 
4 



Et 
N 




Et 

H .', 

H 2 C E 



H 



Me E 



Et 

A 

W IF 



Me E 
4 



Scheme 3 

Feist's ester 5. He showed that heating in 
the presence of furan (and cyclopentadiene) 
gave a single spirocycle, e.g. 6, from [4 + 2] 
cycloaddition rather than interception of the 
ring opened zwitterion 7; we share a com- 
mon publication from our results. 11 



University Years - Southampton 

While these studies took the 
most part of a year, they were 
never going to extend for the re- 
maining two years of the doctoral 
degree. Chris Watts, who was 
awarded a Southampton Schol- 
arship, had examined a different 
aspect of the Favorskii interme- 
diate, namely the intermediate(s) 
in the thermal rearrangement of 

CH 2 r^Vi _ C0 2 Me 



Me0 2 C* 'C0 2 Me 
5 



Me0 2 C ' 'C0 2 Me 
7 



We both needed new topics. Chris moved to study the cycloaddition chemistry 
of diethyl azodicarboxylate and Richard broached with me the subject of confor- 
mational analysis and the possibility of separating and isolating distinct conform- 
ers (now termed rotamers) of one molecule. The pioneering work of Sir Derek 
Barton and the evolution of conformational analysis had made major inroads to 
organic chemistry, but in 1 964 the isolation of more than one conformer of a mol- 
ecule was still to be achieved; the challenge was too great to resist. The molecule 
that had attracted Richard was cyclotriveratrylene (CTV, 8). It had been synthe- 
sized by Mrs. Robinson 12 in 1907 from the condensation of 1 ,2-dimethoxyben- 
zene (veratrole) with formaldehyde, although it was only in 1 963 that the correct 

ro or trimeric structure, depicted by 'crown' 8, 
appeared (Scheme 4). 13 The compound is 
easily oxidized to a monoketone, which 
has significant conjugated aryl rings (u m 
1685 cm 1 ) and, thus, cannot retain the 
non-conjugated crown arrangement. It 
had to have the 'saddle' shape 9 shown 
in Scheme 4. Lithium aluminium hydride 
reduction of 9 leads to alcohol as ex- 
pected but two conformers were detected 
- the less stable saddle 10 and the ther- 
or or modynamically more favoured crown 11. 
saddle A separation of the conformers to provide 
the independent rotamers was not easily 
- 17- 




1 1 - crown 
Scheme 4 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

found until their solubility in tetrahydrofuran (THF) was discovered to be mark- 
edly different. Saddle 10 is essentially insoluble whereas crown 11 is very soluble; 
simply stirring in THF followed by filtration gave almost pure 10, stable for sev- 
eral days at -70 °C. Crown 11 exhibits its methylene groups as a pair of doublets 
(3.48 and 4.65 ppm; J 14.0 Hz) with a singlet for the 18 methoxy protons (3.87 
ppm) in the (60 MHz) 'H NMR spectrum. In contrast, saddle 10 had an AB quartet 
centred at 3.90 ppm (J 15.5 Hz) for the CH 2 moieties and a split signal (3.85 and 
3.92 ppm) for the OMe protons. A kinetic study concluded that saddle 10 ionizes 
some 6 x 10 4 times faster that crown 11. The isolation and formal distinction of 
the a-10 and (3-11 cyclotriveratrylenols fonned my first scientific publication - a 
communication in the Journal of the American Chemical Society jointly with N.K. 
Anand who had carried out some of the preliminary studies. 14 Subsequent study of 
a range of transformations and kinetic measurements provided a foundation of my 
PhD thesis and the full paper appeared later. 15 




HF-6-31G**electron density potentials of crown (left) and saddle (right) 8, the second of each from 

rotation and turning 



Calixarenes and crown ethers are now of major importance in host-guest chem- 
istry and the cyclotriveratrylenes have played their part. Nonetheless, CTV (8) was 
not revisited until recently. Out of interest, the equilibrium geometries and density 
potentials of the crown and saddle conformers of 8 were calculated at the HF-6- 
31G** level. As often happens with calculation, the pictorial outcome can have 
artistic appearance. For me, this is especially true for the saddle, and especially 
from above as depicted in the figure at the right. 

In July 1 965 my father, John, died. Shortly after returning from holiday in the 
summer of 1964, he suffered a minor stroke. He was subsequently diagnosed with 
arterial sclerosis for which there was no simple remedy. Having been referred to 
the specialist medical staff of Guy's Hospital, he chose to undergo experimental 
surgery to clean his carotid arteries. Prior to his hospitalization, he had visited 
me in Southampton and saw my work environment, met the Eaton's and, I think, 
was happy and satisfied with what he found. The late July surgery never saw him 
regain consciousness and he died on the 3 1 st . After the funeral and attending to the 
essential matters, I spent some time with friends at a chateau near Lyons in France. 

On returning to Southampton I met with Prof. Cookson and still remember 

- 18- 



University Years - Southampton 

his offer of financial assistance - cheque 
book in hand - to help out in what he was 
certain had been difficult times. Richard's 
generosity was well known as he had lent 
money to many students, often the travel 
costs to get to an overseas postdoctoral, 
always done on a pay-me -back-when 
-you-can basis. While the Cookson fam- Richard Cookson (1922-2008) and his wife in 
ily were financially independent, having later years 

owned what became British Steel, wealth was something Richard used to assist 
others when he perceived a need; he was a delightful individual, a first-rate chem- 
ist and a generous man. 

As with my peers, the final year of study brought thoughts of the future and 
career prospects, and this second only to completing the degree successfully. In my 
pre-University days I had contemplated reading textile chemistry but my father's 
brother, Edward, dissuaded me from it. He had worked his life in the Lancashire 
mill environment rising from a weaver to become Manager of Sabden's Studdart 
Mill; by the late 1950s he was convinced that a future in textile chemistry was 
not a good idea. Nonetheless, the dyestuffs industry had appeal and I interviewed 
with ICI (Dyestuffs Division) in Blakely, Manchester, but I was not convinced the 
northern environment was what I really wanted. Indeed, even before the outcome 
became known, I had convinced myself that travel was important, and that a post- 
doctoral position would be ideal. In the mid-1960s, the US economy was strong, 
postdoctorals were abundant and salaries good. The choice of potential supervi- 
sors combined with locations to provide a list of six. Highly ranked was Prof. Nick 
Turro of Columbia University in New York City, but by February of 1 966 he had 
already committed his funds. Others were similarly placed, but Prof. Turro prof- 
fered my name and an unsolicited offer came from Milton Orchin at the University 
of Cincinnati on March 30. By then, I was more attracted to small ring chemistry 
again and the work of Merle Battiste (1933-2009) at the University of Florida held 
greatest appeal. I wrote expressing my preference to work with him rather than 
be in Cincinnati. I received a formal offer on April 12 that I accepted for a late 
August/early September start on a salary of SUS7200 pa - more than triple the 
expected UK income at that time. Without doubt the most difficult next step was to 
tell my mother of this decision, a mere nine months after my father's death. 

Chris Watts and I were allocated the same external PhD examiner but were told 
that he was to leave on a one year sabbatical in late August. The choice was to have 
the thesis written and in final draft form in six weeks or wait until he returned the 
following year! Unbound copies of our theses went to him for examination ahead 
of the formal submission. Likely this was contrary to policy, but it happened and 

- 19- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

we had our oral examinations sequentially on the same 
day in August 1966. Chris was first, and I discovered that 
our examiner was Prof. Ken Schofield of Exeter Univer- 
sity. When my time came, I was cheerfully greeted, and 
then there was a silence as he proceeded to delve into 
his briefcase. He produced a paper bag of broken Drei- 
ding Model parts and assured me that my statement on 
the inability of the Dreiding model of crown 11 to invert 
to saddle conformer 10 was correct. His attempt to dis- 
prove this had cost him a comparatively new set of com- 
ponents! Chris and I were successful and awarded PhD 
degrees conferred in abstentia at the graduation ceremony in 1967. Ken Schofield 
and I next interacted in 1 973 as he was then the Scientific Editor (Organic) for the 
Cambridge Chemistry Texts in which the Coxon and Halton book Organic Pho- 
tochemistry appeared, 16 and subsequently on his visit to New Zealand. Chris and I 
then left Southampton, me for Florida and Chris for Los Angeles where he had a 
postdoctoral with Prof. Saul Winstein. 

My departure from England for the USA was on the Queen Mary from South- 
ampton to New York on Friday September 17, 1966. My mother, her twin sister 
Anne and her daughter (my cousin Marian to whose son Nicholas I had become 
godfather the previous October) came down to Southampton to see me off. In 
those days, the fanfare of departure had bands playing on the quay, a myriad of 
streamers (provided by the Cunard Line) and the decks lined with the departing 
passengers. For my event there was room for all of us along the rails as the boat 
was far from fully booked, and the smaller number of passengers provided for a 
most pleasant journey. 




-20- 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 



My berth on the Queen Mary was in a four-man cabin in the bowels of the boat 
- the least expensive - and, together with the subsequent rail journey from New 
York to Gainesville, allowed for a further three days holiday in the city covered 
by the remains of my £500 legacy. The cabin, it transpired, was to be occupied by 
only two passengers, a British jazz musician returning to New York for work and 
me. We proceeded to make the most of the five day journey, using the first class 
golf driving range during the daytime (with 50% occupancy in steerage class and 
less in First the barriers were left open) and the bar in the evenings. 

Apart from the usual tourist sites, my few days in NYC included a visit to 
Columbia University to meet Nick Turro who, some months later wrote asking if 
I was still interested in a post at Columbia for the following academic year. The 
offer came in a letter which stated: My postdoc stipend will be of the order of$US 
5,500. From your point of view, such a drastic pay cut would demand some other 
dramatic compensation. Whether living in New York would make a difference, I 
don't know. 

The Saturday afternoon had me board the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad train 
at New York's Perm Station bound for Florida, with a train 'relocation' scheduled 
for Jacksonville the next morning. With a single berth bedsit the journey was com- 
fortable and enjoyable. My evening meal in the dining car necessitated joining an 
elderly couple as the restaurant car was full. Even after 44 years, I recall those peo- 
ple being most convivial and hospitable. It transpired that their son was studying 
at the University of Florida and dinner conversation revolved about life in Florida, 
the Gainesville campus and all the new things that I would see and experience; 
they happily befriended me and bought me dinner. 

Upon arrival in Jacksonville on the Sunday morning I was told that there was 
ample time to take a stroll and look around the station, which I did. On return to the 
track (no longer a British platform) I was horrified to see a long empty space with 
no train - the 'relocation' had occurred. Sanity was restored when I discovered that 
the train had split in half with the one for Central Florida and Tampa now at a dif- 
ferent track and the other already on its way south to Miami. The Gainesville stop 

-21 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

came up around noon with the external temperature close to 100 °F (37 °C). I was 
the only passenger to disembark. I phoned Prof. Battiste and waited what seemed 
like hours in the blistering heat for him to arrive. He had not accepted that a train 
actually stopped in Gainesville and had driven 35 minutes south to Ocala, only to 
learn that 'if he had gotten off then it had to be back in Gainesville as that was the 
only half ! We went directly to lunch, I rehydrated, and then we toured the town 
and the extensive campus, finally arriving at the Chemistry Department. Dinner 
was with Merle Battiste, wife Anita and son Mark. It was delightfully casual but, 
as the evening progressed, I became somewhat concerned about the accommoda- 
tion that Merle had said would be arranged for me; he had forgotten to mention 
that it was to be with the family for as long as it took to find an apartment. 

My first day on campus was taken with the usual signing-on paperwork, a visit 
to the Campus Police for issue of ID card and fingerprinting, and then downtown 
for issue of a Social Security Card. All of this was done with the assistance of Dr. 
Rolf Rehberg, Merle's first postdoctoral fellow who had been there some months 
and recently become married to his German fiance, with Merle and Anita acting 
in loco parentis; they had accommodated Angelika ahead of the wedding. Some 
months later it became my turn to initiate the next postdoctoral down the line. This 
was a simple enough task as the individual, one Dr. John Hill, also an Englishman, 
was a sabbatical visitor from Hobart and William Smith College of Geneva in up- 
state New York where he had a permanent post; he needed no introduction to US 
customs, just a bit of help finding places. 

Arriving in Gainesville in September (1966) meant that most of the apartments 
had already been rented to student groups and little was available. Anita was gen- 
erous in insisting that I did not rush into any agreement and regret the decision 
(typically a 12 month lease with a first and last month's rent payable up front). It 
took only a few days to realize that a car was essential and, while I had saved what 
I thought would be adequate for a US start-up, a car had not featured on my list! 
Rolf had me sorted out within an hour; we visited the Campus Staff Credit Union 
of which I became a member on payment of SUS2.00 and collected the applica- 
tion form for a loan! Being German, Rolf advocated the purchase of a VW Beetle 
for a single postdoc and, knowing little about US Chevys, Buicks or Fords, I took 
his advice, went to the local dealership and agreed to a low mileage 1964 model 
subject to loan approval. My loan was approved within 24 hours and I had a red 
VW the next afternoon. Florida law in 1966 was a little confusing. As an overseas 
visitor, I was able to drive on my British licence for about three months but, upon 
taking up residence in the State, I needed to take out a Florida one. No one would 
tell me for how long I could drive before I took the Florida test and so I decided to 
wait for some weeks until I was sufficiently settled. 

At the end of my first week in Gainesville I found a semi-furnished one bed- 

-22 - 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 

room apartment on SW 14 lh Terrace, almost at the southern edge of the town as it 
was then. The complex, Cheshire Apartments, was about a mile from the Chemis- 
try Department and set back by one block from Route 441 (13 th Street), the main 
highway through the town. It was surrounded by woods, the trees covered in Span- 
ish moss that provided an eerie sensation when driving in at night. My experience 
in gaining a Florida driver's licence was not without its own drama. With a few 
weeks of Florida driving behind me, I attended the Florida Highway Patrol Sta- 
tion. The large burly officer at the desk had me complete the paperwork, dismissed 
my UK licence recording no licence on the form and wrote needs glasses after the 
eye test. I was then asked to wait outside for the road test where I was joined by 
another man, who I assumed was also waiting for his test. Not so! He enquired as 
to how I had got myself to the testing station. I replied that I had driven my VW 
on my UK licence. 'How so, you don't have a licence' I was told. Then: 'since you 
have been driving without a licence we should lock you up'. Battiste's name was 
given as surety and only after a considerable time was I told: 'OK -if you can pass 
the practical we '11 let it go\ The one thing that no one had told me about driving 
was the difference between a UK and a US emergency stop. The former allows one 
to lock the wheels, while this is anathema in the US; my examiner ended up on the 
floor of my Beetle. I had all sorts of problems trying to convince him that this was 
normal where I came from and, eventually, he let me have another go doing it his 
way. I was given a licence and had but two other interactions with the Highway 
Patrol service, one when a prisoner had escaped jail in Georgia and I was subjected 
to visual car search, the other on my penultimate day in the country. 

With my arrival, the Battiste group comprised nine students, an MSc, 6 PhD 
and 2 postdoctorals. My first full week in the lab was spent reading and coming to 
grips with the chosen project that was to involve the rearrangements of vinylcy- 
clopropenes. It had been opened up by MSc student Bobby Grubbs who had left 
U of F for Columbia University (NY) and a PhD with Prof. Ron Breslow prior to 
my arrival. Within a few weeks the rearrangement chemistry was well underway 
and a series of physicochemical studies were subsequently completed and refined 
for publication. This provided Grubbs with his first scientific publication and me 
with my first from the US, a Chemical Communication. 17 For me this publication 
has much significance as Grubbs went on to become a 2005 Nobel Laureate in 
Chemistry (with Yves Chauvin and Richard R. Schrock). As fate would have it, 
Bob gave a lecture at Victoria University (of Wellington) at noon on October 5, 
2005, some 10 hours before he was advised that he was recipient of the Prize; I 
have an off-print of that first communication duly signed and dated that day. I had 
met Bobby and his wife on a visit to Caltech (CIT) in late 1990 and was impressed 
by his generosity, not simply personally but also in his chemistry. At VUW he took 
the trouble to introduce me as someone involved with his early work and the role 

-23 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

that it played in his subsequent (glowing) career. 

The laboratory work went well with discussions frequent, informal and espe- 
cially beneficial. The work itself involved the rearrangements of tetraarylcyclopro- 
penes and the first phase concentrated upon the thermal process whereby triarylin- 
denes are formed. Whereas tetraphenylcyclopropene gives 1,2,3-triphenylindene 
(13, Ar = Ph) only, the anisyl- and mesityltriphenyl derivatives provided products 
from ring closure on to each of the C3 substituents, e.g. 13 and 14, that are now 
easily rationalized as resulting from [1,5] H and Me shifts as shown in Scheme 

5. The studies advanced to cover the 
full gambit of rearrangement con- 
ditions. The photochemical work 
showed that 13 (Ar = Ph) is the pri- 
mary product from a singlet process 
induced by 254 nm irradiation of 12 
(Ar = Ph) and that triplet sensitiza- 
tion or irradiation at 350 nm returned 
unchanged starting material. Subse- 
quent separate irradiation of 13 (Ar = 
Ph) results in cyclodehydrogenation 
and formation of 1 3 -phenyl- 13//- 
indeno[l,2-/]phenanthrene (15). 18 In 
conjunction with Prof. Gary Griffm 
and his students at Louisiana State University, the work was extended to show that 
tetraphenylpropyne (16) is a suitable starting material for photosynthesis of 12 
(Ar = Ph). Over short irradiation periods (ca. 1 h), 12 (R = Ph) is the sole product, 
while longer times are needed to produce firstly 13 (R = Ph), and then 15. 18 

Electron impact induced fragmentation of 12 (Ar = Ph) causes loss of a phenyl 
radical with formation of the triphenylcyclopropenyl cation (18) as base peak in 
the mass spectrum (70 eV electron impact). Subsequent fragmentation is by way 
of cyclodehydrogenation with formation of the cyclopropaphenanthrenyl cation 
(19) (Scheme 6). These facts were established from the unambiguous generation 
of 18 in the mass spectrometer from volatil- 
ization of triphenylcyclopropenyl chloride, 
bromide and tetrafluoroborate (17) into the 
instrument at temperatures well below their 
melting points. The high melting bromide 
and tetrafluoroborate are ionic whereas the Scheme 6 
lower melting chloride has some covalent 

character. However, the tetrafluoroborate provides a molecular ion compatible 
with 1 -nuorotriphenylcyclopropene, which fragments to both 18 and its fluorodi- 

-24- 




Scheme 5 



Ph 
X = CI. Br 
or BF 4 
17 



j^P 




18 



19 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 

phenyl analogue. 19 This aspect of the programme demonstrated, for the first time, 
that carbonium ion salts can be excellent sources of the free cations in the mass 
spectrometer. 

In the mid-1960s, a major issue with a postdoctoral position was how long to 
stay in one place before moving on. Two years provided a great opportunity to gain 
several good publications, whereas moving after the first twelve months provided 
two independent referees. Extending postdoctoral study to a third year was unu- 
sual; indeed, employers would often wonder why you had not gained a permanent 
post within that time. I was fortunate in two ways. Firstly, I had had the offer from 
Nick Turro and, very soon after it arrived, Merle asked if I would be interested in 
an Assistant Professorship from September 1967. Florida was to change from a tri- 
mester to a quarter (10 week) system and junior academics were needed to smooth 
the transition. The opportunity to gain teaching experience without having to com- 
mit to anything more than a year had great merit and so, in short order, I applied for 
and was offered a post at a salary of $US 900 per month. I responded affirmatively, 
and then wrote to Turro to let him know what had happened. 

The first weeks in Gainesville provided numerous experiences in settling to life 
in the US South. I was ill prepared, after all, the PC and internet with their instanta- 
neous worldwide communication had yet to be invented. In ordering my first lunch 
time coffee, I was asked 'How'dya like if, I responded with the traditional English 
'white please' - and only just managed to catch the cup as it careened across the 
counter from the Negro (Afro-American) assistant; 'with cream' was immediately 
substituted! In similar manner, going to a colleague's place for supper at 8.15 did 
not auger well; the family had waited to serve dinner until I arrived! 

I spent half of each Saturday tidying up the laboratory bench, writing up the re- 
sults and planning the next week of work. In contrast, Sunday was my day off and 
for the first weeks it was spent seeing something of the local area. The east coast 
town of St. Augustine, with its Fountain of Youth and Ponce de Leon's 1513 claim 
of possession for the Spanish King, was one of the first places visited. Just south 
is Marineland of Florida and that was a must for, at that time, I had never seen a 
dolphin or a decent sized turtle. Florida's western Gulf coast has many fascinat- 
ing places, the nearest to Gainesville being Cedar Key, a sleepy little settlement 
in those days that had much scenic appeal; I made several visits there. Tarpon 
Springs and its historic sponge industry was another. Much of central Florida is 
covered in State Parks with springs bubbling fresh warm water year round. Many 
had swimming facilities but one needed to be aware of the alligators, something I 
discovered only after swimming on a winter's afternoon when I found a reasonable 
sized specimen lazing a little further down the spring! 

Merle had, at that time, just the one son, Mark, about 3 years old. His wife 

-25- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

Anita was a full time mother and the family hosted the research group from time 
to time. Nonetheless, Merle maintained long hours at the office, had lunch with 
some of the group most days and held group meetings in the evenings, following 
them with a visit to one of the local bars. The structure and formalities of England 
were forever lost. By early November, I was beginning to realize what Thanksgiv- 
ing meant and just how important it is to the average American. Most of my lab 
mates were off home and Merle suggested that it would be a good time for me to 
take a trip, so I elected to go south to Miami and the Everglades. As I recall it, I 
drove the 340 miles taking the Sunshine State Expressway toll road to ensure an 
early arrival. I had made no motel booking but drove beach side to see the big (ex- 
pensive) hotels and then went back a few blocks to find something more suitable. 
Luck was with me as the first place I pulled into was operated by a Lancastrian 
and his wife. They recognized my accent and after a short chat about 'home', I was 
given discounted accommodation and an invitation to return whenever I wanted 
at minimal cost. Having learned that Thanksgiving was a big thing, I decided to 
find a good restaurant for dinner. Many places had private functions or were open 
only for those with reservations, but eventually I found what seemed like a nice 
place, and went in. Apparently the restaurant was fully booked, but the maitre d' 
spoke to a lady who seemed to be in charge, and a small table was set up for me. 
To my surprise, the meal was from a designated menu with no choices, but it was 
out of this world. I was graciously tended, exceptionally well fed, and somewhat 
concerned about the likely cost - no matter it was a real experience! When I came 
to pay the bill, the total was a trivial $US20.00; I questioned this but was told that 
it was Thanksgiving and to enjoy my stay in Florida. After returning to Gainesville 
I found the restaurant to be the most respected Jewish establishment in Miami with 
Thanksgiving Dinner offered to their regular customers at a fraction of its real cost. 

One day in spring 1 967, Merle came into the lab very excited about an idea he had 
had of how to demonstrate the dependence of cyclopropyl ring participation in sol- 
volyses as a function of the stereoelectonic environment. Earlier, he had shown that 
tricyclo[3.2. 1 .0 24 ]octen-8-one 
(20a) underwent facile decarbon- 
ylation (Scheme 7) 20 and a report 
by Clarke and Johnson 21 had trig- 
gered his imagination. Thus, four 
of us in the group began the work 
to synthesize and then decarbon- 
ylate the series of derivatives 
20 and 22. As I had studied the 
tetraarylcyclopropene-to-indene 22b, r 1 r 2 = benzo fusion 
rearrangement kinetically using Scheme 7 

-26- 




'- 

a 


R 1 


= R 2 = H 


b 


R 1 


= R 2 = Ph 


c, 


R 1 


= Ph;R 2 =H 


d 


R 1 


= CI; R 2 = H 




= H 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 

'H NMR methods, my role was to take the materials synthesized by the others and 
detennine the first-order rate constants for decarbonylation. This was done over a 
quite short period of time. The enJo-compounds 20 lost CO very easily, with rates 
dependent upon the substituents present. In contrast, the exo-derivatives 22 were 
markedly more stable, 22b losing CO only at 400 °C. The study led to the clear 
conclusion that the orientation of the three-membered ring in endo-20 is ideal for 
the bent 'banana' bond of the bridge to overlap with the o bonds holding the car- 
bonyl moiety in place. Through this interaction, concerted ejection of CO yields 
the cycloheptatrienes 21a-d directly in their favoured conformations. The mark- 
edly more stable exo-22 provided cycloheptatriene product, but only by way of the 
norcaradiene 23 that undergoes six-electron electrocyclic ring opening. The work 
was completed in short order and subsequently published. 22 

The remainder of that 1966-67 academic year passed quickly, but with one 
notable visitor to the university. Professor Emanuel Vogel (1927-2011), who held 
the senior Organic Chemistry Chair at the University of Cologne, was a visiting 
professor during the late spring quarter. He gave some first-rate research seminars 
and a graduate course entitled New Trends in Aromatic Chemistry - The Annu- 
lenes. It soon became clear that his trademark was to draw impeccable structures 
on the blackboard, and deliver his lecture in perfect English. I was fortunate to be 
invited, with Merle, to join him and his wife Christiane for afternoon tea and that 
meeting became what was the first of many throughout my career. 

Through my next door neighbour, Bill (Eaton), I widened my circle of (non- 
chemistry) friends and also started to play cricket for the U of F team - financed by 
successful college football - and played at the MCC-affiliated Savannah (Georgia) 
Cricket Club. We enrolled a Canadian, John Hay wood-Farmer who was Merle's 
third postdoc. Some years later he left chemistry for commerce and spent several 
years at Victoria University as a faculty member in the mid-to-late 1 970s where 
our friendship was renewed. 

My summer holiday of 1967 took the form of a tour up the east coast of the 
US in early June covering Williamsburg, Washington DC and then Niagara Falls. 
Brian Odell, one of Cookson's postdoctorals and former '5 14' lab mate had moved 
to a second postdoctoral at Cornell University in Ithaca and so I stayed with him 
and wife Cathy for a few days prior to our both attending the 20 lh National Organic 
Chemistry Symposium of the American Chemical Society from June 1 8 in Burl- 
ington, Vermont. It was my first attendance at a specific organic meeting and it was 
a real thrill to hear von Schleyer, Pettit, Closs, J. D. Roberts and Orville Chapman 
presenting their work. To me it was a grand affair, made all the more memorable 
from the ease of mixing and socializing. The feature lecture was by Nobel Laure- 
ate and Harvard great, R. B. Woodward, whose orbital symmetry rules (with Hoff- 
mann) had begun to have real impact. It was the only time that I heard him; it was 

-27- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

simply magical chemistry even though he did speak for close on two hours. Back 
on vacation, I headed north for Montreal and Expo '67, and then back to Florida 
via New Hampshire, into Portland (Maine) and the delightful coast (and lobsters) 
to Boston, where I stayed with friends for a couple of days. The move south by- 
passed New York and the main centres to allow time for the Shenandoah National 
Park, the spectacular Skyline Drive, and the Blue Ridge Parkway from just south 
of Front Royal and along the high Appalachian ridges into North Carolina. From 
there to the Great Smokey Mountains National Park in Tennessee prior to tak- 
ing 1-75 back to Gainesville. Shortly after returning to Gainesville, I moved from 
Cheshire Apartments across the woods to the brand new Williamsburg Apartments 
(No. 1 14) on SW 14 th St. where Bill Eaton and I shared a place that served us well. 

I started teaching first-year chemistry (CY201) in mid-September 2007, the 
junior of a three-man team that had the 900+ candidates in almost equal sized 
groups, each with its own lecturer. Each class had to reach the same point every 
Friday so that a common quiz could be sat during the ensuing week. It was an 
excellent way to start teaching, as Dick Dresdner and Bud (E. E.) Muchlitz were 
the other lecturers and willing to help the novice as needed. I tried to communicate 
effectively in the lecture room and, like most new to lecturing, I was keen to get 
questions from the class. As time passed, my southern accent increased to the ex- 
tent that I was not understood when I arrived in New Zealand a year later. 

My formal appointment to the faculty of the university was marked by an invi- 
tation to an official reception hosted by the University President. As an interim ap- 
pointee, I had no real interest in attending, but my colleagues thought that it would 
be a good experience and pressured me into accepting. Indeed, it was a grand and 
fonnal affair held on the lawn of the Presidential Residence on West University 
Avenue. When I arrived there was already a lengthy reception line, which I passed 
along like everyone else until I met the President's wife, the last on the line. She 
introduced herself and politely asked what I would like to drink. My response was 
a simple: A scotch and water please. And that is why my colleagues had been so 
enthusiastic about my attendance! The President's wife, a staunch Southern Bap- 
tist, was teetotal and proceeded to give me a lecture on the evils of alcohol. The 
line froze for what seemed an aeon and I was ribbed about it the next day by those 
who had known exactly what would happen. 

Being the gentleman that he was, Merle had asked if I wanted to start my own 
research work or continue on with him. I had decided that the small ring chemistry 
we had underway was going too well to simply drop as at least two more publica- 
tions would come were I to continue with it; this I did. That fall quarter passed 
very quickly and all too soon the winter quarter of 1968 arrived and was notable 
in that I had a class of my own. The content was inorganic structure and bond- 
ing for a group of students who needed a one-off course to take them through the 

-28- 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 

transition to the quarter system. It was a great time as I had the freedom to do as I 
wished and it cemented my desire for a career in academia. The northern spring of 
1968 had my joint PhD supervisor, Ian Stevens (who had looked after the day-to- 
day running of the project), in the US and visit Florida to lecture. Whilst that was 
enjoyable, the visit proved unforgettable. Bill and I had invited Ian and his wife, 
Jeanine, to dinner and it was a nice occasion but turned out a night to remember. 
Just after starting the meal the phone rang. It was Merle. The date was April 4 and 
Martin Luther King had just been assassinated. Shot on the balcony of his Mem- 
phis motel at 6.01, he was pronounced dead about an hour later after emergency 
surgery. Riots erupted in many US cities, Gainesville being no exception with the 
city streets taken over. The local TV and radio station advised everyone to stay 
indoors; the dinner party lasted longer than planned - until about 1 1 .30 - by which 
time we were able to get our guests back to their hotel. 

I had started to look for a permanent post and, with the exception of an offer 
of a teaching fellowship at Bristol University (with the possibility of a permanent 
position later), my approaches to UK institutions led only to offers of further post- 
doctorals. As I was in the USA as an exchange visitor, my stay was limited and so I 
began to explore possibilities in Canada and further afield. Roger Brown, who had 
spent a sabbatical with Cookson at Southampton during the latter part of my PhD 
tenure, wrote to let me know he was moving from the Australian National Univer- 
sity to a more senior position at Monash in Melbourne. His job was to be advertised 
and he encouraged me to apply. This I did, but I also sought out other Australasian 
possibilities as a few years in the antipodes had much appeal. Of the institutions I 
wrote to, Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand, responded advising 
that a lectureship was about to be advertised and would I care to apply and have 
referee reports sent. I did, and some months later enquired of both universities 
about the status of my 
applications. Each told 
me that I was on their 
short list but ANU ad- 
vised that no decision 
would be made for 
some months. VUW 
responded with the 
news that a decision 
was imminent and, on 
April 8, 1 received a ca- 
ble offering me the lec- 
tureship in chemistry. 
Knowing that nothing 

-29- 



SlEl WESTERN UNfON / 

ILZtZZ. TELEGRAM "SST 



SY A If' 



PAOKfc ZC VIA CANADI 
iLLIHOTOH 5) 5 K}C 
fLT RP15.??GFCS =8rT 
SMIST RY DEPARTS 

I SORRY Jior N z DOLLARS 
XPECT TAK E UP DUTIES 
REGISTRAR VICTORIA 



b 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

would come from ANU for some while, the decision was simple - I accepted the 
Wellington position. Once again, fate played its role as, that day - April 9 in the 
US but the 1 0 th in NZ - the main item on the US TV news was of a terrible storm in 
Cook Strait and the sinking of a passenger ferry, the T.E.V Wahine. The storm that 
exploded upon Wellington was one of the worst ever recorded in New Zealand. Its 
ferocity was due to two fronts that by chance merged directly over Wellington at 
the same time as the overnight Lyttelton- Wellington ferry approached the harbour 
entrance. When I reached the office the next day I was greeted by: 'Is that where 
you want to go to'' and (by the less well educated): 'Just where is that - somewhere 
in the Baring Strait?'; world geography was not well studied in the US then and 
the thought that New Zealand could be located between the easternmost point of 
the Asian continent and the westernmost point of North America was considered 
likely by more than a few! 

With a permanent position secured, the opportunity to pursue research was 
greater and the work with small-ring organics took on a new pace to get as much 
completed as possible in the time remaining. The mass spectral study referred to 
already was completed 19 and, because of the belief that what happened when light 
interacted with an organic molecule was mirrored in the mass spectrometer, a pho- 
tochemical study of the arylcyclopropenes was initiated. This was my final contri- 
bution in Gainesville but it needed to be brought to a publishable state and this was 
done subsequently by Marty Kulig, one of Merle's newer PhD students. 18 The time 
in Florida had continued my excursion into non-natural (synthetic) products and 
the sheer excitement of laboratory work aimed at providing something that had not 
been done before and the exhilaration of success had me hooked. A career involv- 
ing unnatural products, compounds made because they did not otherwise exist, 
that could then be explored in all facets of chemistry and predictions confirmed or 
denied, was the direction I was determined to take. 

The Spring Quarter ran from about the end of March till early June. My teach- 
ing then was a repeat of CY201, the introductory chemistry programme, but with 
a small class that I handled alone. Outside of teaching, the research moved along 
and my thoughts were more and more occupied by the move to the antipodes. I 
had written to the New Zealand embassy in Washington DC, enquiring of require- 
ments for immigration and, as a British subject, I was advised to 'catch a plane 
or a boat and go', as British subjects had open access in those days. Victoria 
University's Registrar had written with the standard set of conditions and advised 
on travel arrangements. The University was to meet the cost of economy air travel 
from Gainesville and put me on the salary from the day I left the US. However, I 
was not bound to air travel if I had a preference for surface, although the allow- 
ance would be no more than the airfare; salary would still be paid from the day of 
departure from the US. In 1968, international air travel was not common and so I 

-30- 



Florida in the Mid-1960s 

took a berth on the Pacific and Orient (P&amp;O) liner Oriana from Port Everglades 
on Sunday, August 25 Ih to take in the Bahamas, the Panama Canal, Acapulco, Los 
Angeles, San Francisco, Vancouver, Honolulu and Suva before arriving in Auck- 
land on September 21 s1 . I advised my future employer that I was not accustomed 
to air travel and that a voyage was more appropriate. Nonetheless, I made a short 
visit (by air) to England after the teaching was over and arranged for my few pos- 
sessions to be shipped to New Zealand on the same sailing of the Oriana. 

The return to Florida was into Jacksonville on a new airline to service the 
southeast. When I reconfirmed in New York I was asked what I would like for 
dinner and given a choice of six mains. That has never happened since, despite all 
the flying I have done. I was met at Jacksonville and whisked back to Gainesville 
and the incessant humidity of Florida in the summer. The few weeks remaining 
were spent bringing the research to a suitable point for handing over and writing 
the essential reports. All too soon my final week arrived and all those myriad of 
minor details that take so long were attended to. I got the essential tax clearance for 
departure from the US that was never checked, closed my accounts at the Bank and 
Credit Union, and I rented a large Ford convertible for the drive to Port Everglades 
with my luggage. 

My ticket for the Oriana arrived only on the morning I was to leave and, after 
collecting it, it was back to the apartment for the final time, sad goodbyes, and 
then south to Fort Lauderdale and Port Everglades. The large car accommodated 
the trunk that I had bought for all the things that I now owned as well as my cabin 
baggage. After some time cruising along the expressway, I noticed a flashing light 
closing up on me through the rear view mirror. It turned out to be a Florida High- 
way Patrolman who pulled me over and asked why I was going so fast. Bearing in 
mind that the maximum speed of a VW was 72 mph, I had no idea how fast I was 
travelling. Apparently it was 85 with the limit at 65 mph. This officer was far nicer 
than the ones I had dealt with when I got my licence. Seeing the trunk on the rear 
seat, he asked where I was going. Discovering that it was New Zealand he said 
'And if I give you a ticket I suppose you '11 toss it off the rear of the boat as soon as 
you sail'. 'No officer ' I said, 7 would never dream of polluting US waters; I would 
wait until we were outside the US limit. ' I was asked to slow down but given no 
ticket! On arriving in Ft. Lauderdale, I found a motel for the night and then had 
dinner, which was a lonely affair. My two years in the US had been the best of my 
life to date. I had been successful in my job, made advances in my career that I had 
never expected, and had made some really good friends. I was financially sound 
and had I been able to stay in the US then I would have done everything I could to 
have secured a permanent post there, but that was not the case. I had to leave for 
a two year minimum period and, when I looked over the stern of the Oriana late 
the next afternoon at the disappearing Florida coastline, this is what I vowed to do. 



-31 - 



A New Life, a New Place, and an 
Emerging Career 



Voyage to the Antipodes 

The Oriana left port late on the afternoon of Sunday July 25, 1968 and, as I have 
said before, it took in the Bahamas, the Panama Canal, Acapulco, Los Angeles, 
San Francisco, Vancouver, Honolulu and Suva before arriving in Auckland on 
September 21 st . Once again, my cabin on the liner was one of the least expensive 
and on the lowest passenger deck. I had come to like this on the Queen Mary as 
the night before arrival in New York there had been a storm and there was much 
less roll than higher up. The berth was for four but I had the place to myself. The 
voyage was very pleasant, especially for the first two weeks as these involved 
traversing the Caribbean and then north up the Pacific Ocean taking in the North 
American ports. Grand Bahama was pleasant enough with its markets, restaurants 
and large sailing club, but I was in no mood for sightseeing so soon after leaving 
Gainesville. From there, it was a three-day sail to Central America and the Panama 
Canal and enough time to take stock and begin to enjoy what the next weeks could 
offer. Our evening arrival in Central America meant that we spent the night at Bal- 
boa (Panama City) before traversing the Panama Canal, a fascinating experience. 
The Oriana was one of the largest vessels to pass through the waterway with the 
clearance to the side of the locks frighteningly small in places. Progress was slow 
though constant, but it increased once we were in the upper reaches and in Gatun 
Lake. After crossing it, the 26 metre descent through more locks to sea level at 
Cristobal was easy and we moved into the Pacific Ocean. 

Our journey took us north as far as Vancouver before heading southwards. The 
first Pacific port was Acapulco (Mexico), where we moored off-shore and were 
ferried to land by a series of small tenders. I mention this stopover for the notori- 
ety that I gained from it. After viewing the La Quebrada cliff divers and looking 
around the city I made my way back towards the harbour and, having time, entered 
a cafe and settled for a Mexican beer. One of the other customers was a crew mem- 
ber that I had interacted with a few times and so we got together, chatted and had 
another beer. All at once we realised the time - somewhat beyond that of the last 
passenger tender back to the Oriana. We raced the short distance to the quay and 

-32- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

were lucky to find the shore crew still there but packing up. My new found friend 
was in trouble because his shore leave had expired much earlier and he blamed 
himself for my being late. The duty crew, far from impressed, made much messag- 
ing to the ship by walkie-talkie. By the time the shore gear was stowed, the Oriana 
had raised anchor and was underway. It proved to be a fascinating experience to 
ride the small craft to the liner, come alongside the large moving vessel and then be 
hoisted aboard. Once safely secured in the hellions, a ladder appeared at the side of 
the craft and I was asked to disembark first. What a sight! The available crew and 
most of the passengers had been gathered on deck. I was given a formal ceremo- 
nial welcome aboard, being then passed down a line of officers who increased in 
rank until I met the Captain. He then introduced me to the Commodore of the P&amp;O 
Fleet who was on an inspection tour for our voyage. After him was a solitary more 
junior individual who, quite drolly and almost in an undertone, said: We know 
you will never do that again. How right he was! Of course, the embarrassment 
remained and gave me more than an element of notoriety. 

The voyage continued via the scheduled ports with San Francisco providing 
two full days ashore as it housed the main US P&amp;O Offices and allowed time 
for the liner to be restocked at its mid-point on the Southampton-Sydney run. 
The leg from Vancouver denoted a precise repeat of the on-board activities and, 
whilst the weather was great, the vistas of continuous ocean instilled a boredom 
that only landfall would break. The Hawaiian Islands came up and everyone had 
made plans for their Honolulu stopover given the week in which to do it. Holding 
a US driver's licence made it simple to hire a car and a 'round Oahu island' tour 
was made with the car full. In the evening we visited one of the beach bars com- 
mon before Waikiki gave way to the high rise developments, drank Pina Coladas, 
then returned to the ship for a midnight departure and days of sailing south to Fiji. 
There was a full day ashore there and then a comparatively short time to Auckland 
and the start of a new life. 

The Oriana docked in Auckland mid-morning on Saturday, September 21, 
1968, and the business of clearing customs in one of the staterooms began. I left 
the collection of my research samples until that morning. On embarking in Florida, 
I had decided to have the chemicals put into safe storage to avoid possible loss 
and/or injury to a fellow passenger. No questions were asked when the box of syn- 
thesized compounds was deposited or retrieved and I can but wonder what would 
happen if the same thing was tried in 20 1 1 , given all the regulations now in force. I 
was astonished that my entry to New Zealand was complete within seconds with a 
single stamp affixed into my passport. Dockside, the trunk that had been on-loaded 
in Southampton was there as was a 'not needed on the voyage' suitcase, but there 
was no sign of the large trunk that had disappeared into the hold of the Oriana in 
Port Everglades. It had been incorrectly stowed and it took almost two months 

-33 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

before it appeared in Wellington without any apology or compensation for the 
inconvenience P&amp;O had caused. What I did have was forwarded to Wellington on 
the overnight train that I took that evening. 

By then, it was afternoon and I took a taxi to the railway station to uplift my 
sleeper ticket for the Auckland-Wellington night express. Though short, the taxi 
ride was odd; everything was from an era past - the cars, the streets and the dress 
of the people. Clearly, the US of A was well behind me and I had the impression 
that things were even years behind England. On paying the taxi fare, I tipped the 
driver as one would in the US. This provided me with my first lesson in NZ eti- 
quette, for the driver took the time and trouble to point out that such things did not 
happen in his country as everyone was paid a living wage. He recommended that 
I didn't try to do it again, and returned the additional money I had proffered. After 
dinner it was back to the station and on to the train. This was lesson two for life in 
NZ. The train was like something out of the ark and bore no resemblance to the one 
that had whisked me from New York to Gainesville two years earlier, or even the 
Blackpool-London expresses that I had taken while at boarding school. The seats 
were uncomfortable, there was no refreshment car, and the sleepers were what I 
had known as couchettes on the European expresses to and from Austria some ten 
years earlier. There were a few stops and then one, at about 10.30 (my guess is that 
it was Tauramanui), where everyone in the carriage rushed to the platform. I got a 
'come on' from my fellow passengers. This was the last stop where refreshments 
could be bought and it seemed that pies and tea were the order of the day. The pie 
was fine but the hot NZR tea, the first one non-iced in a couple of years, proved 
undrinkable. We reboarded, the train moved on and, after a fitful night, the ancient 
train pulled alongside Platform 9 at Wellington Railway station a little after 8.30 
am. 

Despite this being Sunday and early, Professor Stan Slater, the then Head of 
Chemistry was there to meet me. After the pleasantries, he took me to his car that 
had to be at least 1 5 years old (I gathered subsequently that it was a 1 952 model), 
put my cases in the boot and drove me to my hotel, the Columbia, in lower Cuba 
St., central Wellington. My room was reserved but not yet available as it was only 
a little after 9 am. My enquiry about breakfast was met with a: But it's after 9 and 
weekend service ends at 8.30. After much intercession by Slater, it was agreed that 
a pot of coffee and some buttered toast could be brought for me. At this Stan left, I 
waited for my breakfast, and really began to wonder where I was. By about 10.30 1 
was able to get to my room and clean up. After lunch at the hotel, Slater reappeared 
and showed me around the city. Although I do not remember where we went, the 
initial view of Victoria University sitting on the ridge of a hill higher than anything 
in Florida has remained with me. As we approached the steep street upwards I was 
convinced that the car would never make it, yet with much crunching of gears we 

-34- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

advanced slowly, onwards and upwards, to the Easterfield Building on Kelburn 
Parade that housed Chemistry. I was given a tour of the Department, told that there 
was no office available but that something would be worked out, and then depos- 
ited back at the hotel. 

The First Months 

On my first day at Victoria University of Wellington (VUW), I was collected by 
Prof. Slater and driven up the Dixon Street hill again, and it did not seem quite so 
bad the second time. I was taken to his office on the third floor of the Chemistry De- 
partment, and introduced to the then Secretary, Unity Jones. After the usual pleas- 
antries, we moved into the inner sanctum where we discussed 
what I was going to do. I was then taken to meet the staff. The 
first was Dr. Ted Harvey (1925-2008), externally a quite loud 
and forceful individual who, I was told will look after you. Ted 
was the senior organic chemist after Slater and he attended to 
all the chemical orders, supervised the stores, and scheduled 
training for the technical staff. He took me around the Depart- 
ment, introduced me to staff and arranged for completion of 
the necessary paperwork in the castle, the affectionate name 
then given to the central administration on the assumption that W E - ( Ted ) Harvey ca. 
what went in rarely, if ever, came out! I do not recall all that 
had to be done except that there was little by way of formality. The major concern 
was over my lack of removal expenses and how it was that I could have arrived 
without shipping household furniture and kitchenware separately. That I did not 
have any of these things by virtue of my US furnished accommodations made little 
impression. I was told that I could stay at the Columbia for a maximum of three 
weeks, but that most people were out of the place within one. I was given informa- 
tion on the various city suburbs and advised to consult the Evening Post 'To Let' 
section for available flats (not the US apartment). When asked if there was a map 
of the city that I could borrow, there was a sigh and a look of disbelief. 

Back up Kelburn Parade to Chemistry and Ted took me to lunch in the Rankin 
Brown Staff Club, arranged for membership papers to be sent to me, and intro- 
duced me to various people. Upon return, a decision was reached that the best 
place to put me was in Bob Hay's office. Bob, another organic chemist, had left on 
sabbatical leave and was to be away until mid- 1969. So I moved into his Level 1 
laboratory-cum-office with its window looking across to the Library in the Rankin 
Brown building and opposite the smaller of the first-year laboratories. The first 
days were a struggle as I had little idea what was expected of me and I became 
fully occupied doing things non-academic staff did in Florida. The Columbia Ho- 

-35- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

tel was not particularly comfortable and I needed to find a place of my own. Flat 
hunters waited outside the Evening Post Building on Willis St for the first edition 
of the evening paper to appear at about 1 pm. My problems were in working out 
where the various suburbs were and, with no car, how to get to them. I saw numer- 
ous dark, dingy and damp places that convinced me that a car was essential; a new 
Austin Mini was chosen as my funds were in US currency that gave eligibility to 
purchase a new vehicle outright. The impact of this was that the car was worth 
more when it came out of the British Motor Corporation showroom a week later 
than it was when it was inside. It also accounted for the aged (vintage!) vehicle 
fleet and the number of old bombs on the streets. 

On the Thursday of that first week I was summoned to appear at the monthly 
Science Faculty Board meeting. Prof. Slater formally introduced me to the August 
gathering (as it was in those days) and espoused the great things that I was (ap- 
parently) going to do for VUW. In those days each Department had as Head, its 
Professor or, if there was more than one the longest serving of them. Chemistry 
had three Chairs, Slater (Organic) as Professor of Chemistry, James Duncan (Inor- 
ganic and Theoretical Chemistry) and John Tomlinson (Physical Chemistry). The 
Faculty Meeting lasted for a long time with much formality and a strict code of 
practice that I needed to become familiar with. Once complete, it was to lunch in 
the staff club with new found colleagues. On the Friday I was told that there would 
be little by way of 'To Let' in the paper that afternoon as Saturday was the big day, 
and that I should get that paper as soon as possible. Indeed, the Saturday evening 
paper did carry most advertisements for flats and I made appointments to view sev- 
eral. One of these was on Sefton Street in Wadestown for which, after interview, 
I was accepted by the elderly couple who lived in the upstairs home. In 1968, set- 
ting up electricity and telephone accounts was simple. The Municipal Electricity 
Department had its showroom and office almost next door to the Columbia Hotel 
and the paperwork was straightforward with the power turned on later that day - 
no security deposit, merely a small connection fee. The telephone connection was 
just as easy and made the following day; the account was billed monthly without 
need for a deposit. 

Because I had arrived in September, I had no allocated duties in Chemistry 
other than to start my research and prepare for the 1 969 academic year. However, 
I was asked to mark some undergraduate and Honours answers to examination 
questions set by Bob Hay. This I did, subsequently to discover that an additional 
5% was added to the Honours papers by the external examiners. Inevitably, hav- 
ing not taught the courses and with no model answers or guidelines to go by, the 
standard was one that I devised and not that common to VUW at that time; to the 
present day I have never enjoyed marking what others have set. During those early 
days, I found that John Craig, another organic colleague and a Scotsman, had been 

-36- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

at VUW for some six years and researched aromatic systems. His work was not 
too far removed from my own interests in strained molecules and novel aromatics. 
He was a delightful individual and always helpful; I have fond memories of the 
years we worked together and our lunch time sojourns to the Staff Club. Ted was 
the better bench chemist, but he had few students and only rarely published his 
natural products studies; his last paper appeared in 1979, the year that he moved 
to become VUW's Registrar. He more than encouraged me to apply for a VUW 
research grant for a student assistant over the summer months. In those days, there 
was no application form. Rather, one had to spell out what one wanted and why, 
and then wait for a call to interview; the panel consisted of the Geology Professor, 
Bob Clark, his Philosophy counterpart, George Hughes and (I believe) Prof. Gor- 
don of Botany. In due course, I was called for an interview with Clark. This was 
the first of its kind for me and I was far from comfortable attempting to tell this 
senior non-chemist academic what I needed money for. Some years later I learned 
that Bob would give financial support to every new science staff member, but that 
any subsequent monies depended upon what was achieved. I got the grant and 
employed Rosemary Coveny, a married third year student, for the summer months 
as the funding then was sufficient for that. She made a range of starting materials 
and I prepared several more-specialized small-ring compounds for subsequent use, 
including the notorious skin sensitizer, diphenylcyclopropenone. As Christmas ap- 
proached, Prof. Slater advised the Department that he had accepted the position 
of Assistant Vice-Chancellor and would formally leave Chemistry on January 1 , 
but retain his chair in the subject. What I had not understood prior to this was the 
need for me as a 6 th organic chemist. His move made sense of it all and he never 
returned to the Department. 

Ted Harvey obtained $NZ 550 for me to purchase equipment of my choice. It 
was the equivalent of a modern set-up grant and it was spent on the purchase of a 
photochemical reactor as I hoped to pursue further research in that area. A Rayonet 
unit was ordered from the US, duly arrived six months later and was put to use. It 
became the longest serving piece of equipment in the Department for it was still 
emitting radiation in 2007; it blew remarkably few of its four horseshoe inter- 
changeable light tubes during the many years of service. The month of October 
also saw the Department's first nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer 
arrive. It was a 60 MHz Japanese Hitachi state-of-the-art instrument that Ted took 
charge of. Once appropriately installed and commissioned, he invited me to be- 
come an operator with one of the Technical Staff, knowing that I had operated both 
an NMR and mass spectrometer during my time in Florida. 

I began to get accustomed to VUW and it to me. I worked long hours at the 
desk preparing course notes for the following year and I spent my other time at the 
bench to get my research underway. The pay was low by US standards but I was 

-37- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 



VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF ! .ELLINGTON 



Sal ary Advice Slip 

Tnis advice covers any change in standard 
pay or any other variation in net amount 
payable for this period. 



NAUS 



PERIOD 



Ifonth 

Fortnight 

Week 



GROSS 
OVERTIME 
HOLIDAY PAY 
ARREARS 



DED UCTIONS 

P.A.Y.E. 
SUPER 
INSURANCE 
P.S.I.S. 



y 

j Ending 



■&amp;0 OC! »&lt;Vo!. 



la- 



&gt; ~l 



NET 



= Cash 



able to get by. I assumed that a 
salary of $NZ 3400 was appropri- 
ate for a staff member with a year 
of teaching experience, but sub- 
sequently found that it was only 
just sufficient, largely because 
there had been no adjustment to 
academic salaries for some time; 
the next review was due only in 
1970. My salary increased on the 
anniversary of my appointment 
and I was given an accelerated 
increment to $NZ 3900. 

I found living alone depress- 
ing and I felt isolated. As a staff 
member, there was a limit to the 
socializing that could be done 
with students and I was the only 
one single. Unlike Florida, where 
there had been a lot of social in- 
teraction, Wellington provided 
almost none with Gary Burns 
being the only colleague to in- 
vite me to his home in the first 
few months. Christmas came and 
went and I was back in the lab 
on Dec. 27 having not been told 
of VUW's two week close down 
period. I was discovered there by 
Ted Harvey who took me to his 

home (where his widow, Helen, still lives) for dinner. During the course of the 
evening, he explained what Christmas and New Year meant in terms of NZ, the 
university and academic staff holidays, and so I toured the South Island being back 
before my colleagues began to reappear. The travel gave me a good impression of 
the South Island with a return via Christchurch where I stayed with Jim and Fay 
Coxon for the second time. I had first met Jim (and Fay) when he joined Cookson's 
Southampton group as a postdoctoral for the 1965-66 year and worked on the 
bench facing me. Although a year ahead, Jim and I are the same age and had main- 
tained contact while I was in the US. It is not surprising, then, that I accepted their 
invitation to visit for a weekend shortly after arriving in Wellington. This second 

-38- 



Bank Deposit 



Checue . 

ft y~ 



Your annual salary is $ ^4-oo 

ABOVE AMENDMENT ARISES FRQi.; 

Nev; appointment 
Change of tax code 
Char.ge of salary 
Change of deductions 
Leave without pay 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

visit was more relaxed and I learned more about his work at Canterbury University 
where he held a lectureship. When I returned to the office it was as though I had 
never left - there was still no one about and few ever knew that I had had almost 
three weeks in the South Island that summer. 

Time to Settle In 

After the holiday in the South, I found a flat in a large house on Pembroke Road 
in the suburb of Northland that had a vacancy for a flatmate. I saw the place, met 
the two men already there (Warwick Jenness, a salesman in boating equipment 
and Jon Blomfield, who worked for the telecommunications industry as a major 
installation engineer) and, being accepted, moved into the shared environment a 
week later. Warwick was a delightful flatmate but often out and Jon, though less 
outgoing, was very reliable. I got on with them both and enjoyed having people 
around again. 

As the weeks and months passed, I began slowly to appreciate Wellington. Af- 
ter an initial impression that winds blew continuously, I became able to distinguish 
between a gentle Wellington breeze and a decent storm, and even walk up the hill 
from the city to Victoria. Teaching was going well (4 th -year Honours courses on 
non-benzenoid aromatics and physical organic chemistry, and more routine 3 rd - 
year undergraduate work) and the research programme began to pick up pace. The 
allocation of Honours students entering their 4 th -year in 1 969 was made at about 
the same time as the arrival of the NMR instrument the previous spring, and I was 
allocated Ang Weng Soon, a Chinese Malay. He was more than happy to be with 
the new lecturer and settled on a project involving three-membered ring nitrogen 
chemistry; I gave him reading material for the summer months. Ang started labo- 
ratory work for his MSc (Hons.) degree, with its 12 month maximum completion 
period, before formal registration early in February, and by the end of that month I 
had written my first reference. He applied to the Singapore-based Lee Foundation 
and was one of few in NZ to have success in gaining a grant. Of course, as I had 
no experience of the NZ science scene and the laboratory courses involved in the 
undergraduate programme, I did not know what I could (or should) expect of him 
and how much, if any, of the work I would need to do myself. As it happened, Ang 
was a keen learner and we got on well together. He made a foray into the hetero- 
cyclic chemistry associated with my own aziridine PhD studies. The intent was to 
see if methylenepyrroles 24 would add dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD) 
and, if so, what products would ensue (Scheme 8). At that time, methylenepyrroles 
of type 24 were unknown and so we set out to synthesize various A^-phenylphthal- 
imidines 25 and find if they would react with DMAD; Ang got no further than 
to make a series of compounds and establish the stereochemistry about the exo- 

-39- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 




Et 

Y Y 




^ // 



Scheme 8 



cyclic double bond during 
his MSc degree, for which 
he was awarded an upper 
second class. The work was 
written up during 1 970 and 
formed my first publication 
from NZ. 23 Ang returned 
home to Penang (Malaysia) 
where, for some years, he 
was employed in the rub- 
ber industry. However, he 
decided to move to a business venture and set up his own firm in Singapore. He 
married, has two children, and now works only for two hours each day - long be- 
fore me. Although he has remained in contact since those days, we have only once 
met, and that was on my first visit to Hong Kong in late 1988. Ang was there on 
business but we had a delightful afternoon together and followed it with dinner at 
one of the Floating Restaurants in Aberdeen. 

Those early times in Wellington signified a further break from my origins as 
several of my relatives died. The first was my mother's twin sister, Anne, who suf- 
fered a fatal heart attack in October 1968 aged only 56 years, and she was followed 
by John Parker, the husband of my cousin Julia, who died in a diving accident, and 
then my maternal grandmother. 

My 1969 allocation of laboratory supervision included one afternoon session a 
week with each of the second- and third-year students in the second floor organic 
laboratory, and a first-year lab on Level 1 . The academic in charge of the organic 
laboratory was Ted Harvey and I can still picture him telling the students that I 
could do everything they had to do in half the time using bench skills that were 
on a par with his own; high praise indeed from one whose skills exceeded mine 
quite considerably. The first year lab covered the General Chemistry programme 
of the day, which at that time took the full teaching year with the lab and lec- 
ture programmes integrated. I think that there were about 350 candidates enrolled. 
Most of these were medical and engineering intermediate students who spent their 
first year of tertiary education at the local university and then, if selected, moved 
to the specialist schools elsewhere in NZ. Many non-chemistry science students 
were required to have a chemistry input of first and (for some) second year study. 
Dr. Malcolm Carr was in charge of the l sl -year studies, a position designated as a 
Senior Lectureship, and his noon lecture was repeated at 4 pm. Malcolm was the 
remaining organic chemist, but did little by way of research, preferring instead to 
concentrate his efforts in the teaching environment. He was a delightful individual 
and great to work with but he moved to the new Waikato University in late 1 970. 

-40- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

There he taught the first science courses in 1 97 1 , taking charge of the introductory 
programmes and subsequently doing much for New Zealand science education. 

The introductory chemistry practical course involved analytical chemistry for 
the first twelve weeks (the first-half year) and general and organic in the second pe- 
riod. My first half-year afternoon class comprised some 70 students and I was al- 
located demonstrators at the rate of one to twelve students (a ratio that has worked 
well for more years that I care to remember), so there were five demonstrators with 
me. By the time the mid-year came, Bob Hay had returned and was none too happy 
to find his office-lab occupied. As a Senior Lecturer he got his office back and I 
moved to the second floor and took over E208, Alan Freeman's small office-lab 
as he had, in turn, gone on leave. In reality, this office was the preparation room 
for the Easterfield 206 lecture room and located at the southern end of the East- 
erfield Building, behind the E206 lecture room. Entry to the office was by way of 
the E209 research laboratory. Other than that door, there was one that led into the 
lecture theatre but access was prevented by the desk; there was also a double-sided 
fume cupboard that served both the prep room and the lecture theatre. Even now, 
after 40 years and major building renovations, the fume cupboard is still evident, 
though sealed up with some, now historic, molecular models remaining in it. The 
office itself was completely hidden from those not in the know and meant few ex- 
traneous visitors. On moving in, I made the point that although I was the last one 
to arrive, I did need a permanent home and, as this was on the organic chemistry 
floor with my colleagues, I should be left there. I remained in that office until the 
1980s when I moved to Room 210 overlooking Kelburn Parade. 

The annual NZ Institute of Chemistry (NZIC) conference was always held in 
the common university break during August and in 1 969 the venue was Dunedin. I 
needed to attend and meet colleagues from the other universities as well as present 
some of the US-based research work to show the sort of chemistry I was involved 
with. Ted Harvey was the Hon. General Secretary of the NZIC, a role that he held 
for some 20 years. He took the trouble to introduce me to all of those organic 
chemists I had not met and many of the industrialists as well. In fact, throughout 
my first years at VUW, Ted invited me to socialise with the NZIC Councillors af- 
ter their deliberations, which in those early days spanned a two-day meeting three 
times a year. Each of the annual conferences included a Student Papers Competi- 
tion with one entrant representing each university; it was taken seriously. Margaret 
Leach, a PhD student with James Duncan and a demonstrator in my first half-year 
laboratory, was selected as the VUW candidate. 

Jim Coxon had come down from Christchurch by car with a couple of his 
research students that included Dick Garland who subsequently joined NZ Phar- 
maceuticals at its inception and rose to Managing (now Executive) Director of 
the company. That vehicle, decidedly old, became the mode of transport for es- 

-41 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

capes to the local hostelries and was always well loaded with a group of us that 
included Margaret. After our return, we saw more of each other and on November 
4, we drove to Havelock North (where her parents lived in retirement) to seek their 
approval to marry; we became formally engaged on November 5 th . By then, my 
mother had set her plans to spend some six weeks in NZ over the 1 969/70 summer 
- as much time as her job would allow; she met her future daughter-in-law on arrival. 

By that time in November, the teaching year had ended and the formalities of 
settling final grades had passed. It provided me with an experience very different 
from the US scene. At VUW, there was a much greater effort to ensure that candi- 
dates close to the borderlines were fairly assessed. Answers from those on the bor- 
derlines were revisited and marks adjusted if appropriate. With that done, meetings 
to settle the 1 970 teaching duties were held and I began to appreciate how easily 
the long summer research period could vapourize, more so as Margaret and I start- 
ed to think about a future life together and where we could live after our May wed- 
ding. I had arrived in NZ with some 
significant savings and there was 
enough left for us to make a deposit 
on a house, provided we could get 
a mortgage. After much searching, 
we located a property at 52 Croydon 
Street in the suburb of Karori, some 
4 km from the university, had our of- 
fer accepted and secured the needed 
two mortgages. Settlement was set 
for late February 1 970 and Margaret moved in while I remained in the Northland 
flat until after our marriage. As Margaret's parents lived in Hawkes Bay in retire- 
ment, our wedding was held in Wellington on May 9, 1 970, at St. Teresa's Catholic 
Church in Karori with both Catholic and Anglican priests officiating. 

A Career Develops 

Once home from honeymoon, Margaret returned to her PhD research and I 
was back into teaching. Ang had completed his thesis, been examined, and left. I 
had gained no new researchers for 1 970 and had no one active in the laboratory. 
However, I was fortunate in gaining a new grant from the Faculty Research Grants 
Committee and I employed Paul Milsom as my research assistant - but more of 
that later. I began to feel the need to make known my presence as an academic. 
After some deliberation, I came to the conclusion that the best way to do this 
would be by way of a textbook. The chosen topic was Organic Photochemistry as 
there were few books on the subject suitable for senior undergraduates at that time, 

-42 - 




A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

and my interest had been kindled by 
the Florida work; it also gave me a 
job that could be done privately at my 
own convenience. However, as this 
was my first such venture, I sought 
a like-minded co-author and a con- 
tract from a publishing house. Jim 
Coxon joined me as co-author and 
Prof. Michael Grundon in Northern 
Ireland accepted our proposal for the 
book (subject to acceptability) into 
the Oldbourne Chemistry Series for 
which he was Editor. A contract was 
executed at the end of May 1970 with 
delivery of the text set for June 1971. 
Jim and I decided on content, divided 
the sections between us and scoured 
the literature reports prior to writing. 
The task of putting words on paper 
did not come easily but, eventually, I found that jotting down ideas in the evening 
and then rising early the next morning to commit pen to paper before going to the 
office, worked best for me. 

By autumn, 1971, the draft text was written, the writing checked and many 
amendments made. Nevertheless, we needed to unify the style and settle remain- 
ing discrepancies. This was done over a long weekend at a beach house in Akaroa, 
near Christchurch. Thereafter, the final manuscript was typed in Wellington by 
former chemistry secretary, Rhyl Singleton, who subsequently returned to the De- 
partment after her children attained school age; she remained with us until about 
200 1 , shortly after she was diagnosed with cancer. The completed manuscript was 
dispatched by air to Grundon, who liked what he saw, edited lightly and accepted 
the tome into his series. The manuscript was passed to Oldbourne Press where it 
sat for almost two years with no progress to print despite efforts to elicit explana- 
tions and a publication date. Excuses were plentiful and apologies prolific until, 
finally, we were told that the series was to be terminated. A breach of contract 
payment had to be made by Oldbourne and they were generous enough to pass our 
manuscript to the same Ken Schofield at Exeter who had been my external PhD 
examiner; by then he was the Organic Chemistry Editor for the newer Cambridge 
University Press series, Cambridge Chemistry Texts. In short order, Ken accepted 
the book into the series, allowed us to update the material, made a few amend- 
ments himself and the book appeared 16 in both paper- and hard back versions in 

-43 - 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

mid- 1974, and as a second edition in 1986. Surprisingly, as this is being written, 
CUP has advised it is interested in releasing the same 2 nd edition as an 'e-book' 
although it would be hopelessly out-of-date. 

The most notable event in Chemistry at VUW during 1970 was the creation 
of the first (and only) Chair in Organic Chemistry. The position was advertised 
in March and two candidates were short-listed, with interviews taking place in 
June. The first, Bill Crow from the Australian National University, was congen- 
ial but did not impress the selection committee (whose composition excluded the 
organic chemists) as much as the more austere Robin Ferrier, a Scotsman from 
London's Birkbeck College, who was appointed. He arrived some months later, in 
mid-spring, and ahead of his family, intent on settling into the university and find- 
ing a home. Margaret and I decided that he should not be left alone as I had and we 
entertained and assisted in whatever way we could. In fact, the day his wife, Caro- 
lyn and the two children arrived in December, we were taken to their temporary 
accommodation in Kelburn to meet them and have a meal. During the following 
twelve months we saw Robin and Carolyn socially at both their home and ours. 
However, a year after arriving, at an end-of-year post-Christmas barbeque at his 
home, Robin told me that he thought it no longer appropriate for a Professor to 
socialise with junior staff - and that was the last time that Margaret was invited to 
his home. He became a difficult colleague to work with, probably because he felt 
that NZ should treat professors as in the UK, and it led to several strained relation- 
ships. For my part, I got along well enough, even to the extent of agreeing to col- 
laborate in some of Robin's work with unsaturated carbohydrates. I say agreeing 
as it never actually eventuated. As best I recall, Robin had a sabbatical visitor who 
was to provide some unsaturated compounds that were to be cyclopropanated. My 
involvement ended when I was asked not to waste the visitor's time and only enter 
discussion when he got to the cyclopropanation part I was to be involved in. 

Paul Milsom had been in the laboratory since 
March 1970 as my second research assistant. He „ 

made excellent progress in the benzocyclopropene KS^ue 
field by starting what was to become my life's Me Me R = c °2Me 26 

work. The now used 'cyclopropabenzene' was un- 
defined in 1 970 and both terms appear in what fol- 
lows. My interest with such molecules came from 
my Florida studies that had required the cyclopro- 
panated phenanthrenyl cation 19 (Scheme 6) as 
a fragmentation product in the mass spectrum of 
triphenylcyclopropenyl halides. Little was known 
about the series of compounds from which such 
ions could be derived. By 1 964, Anet and Anet 24 

-44- 




H ^ fvp 




A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 



had synthesised the first benzocyclopropene 26, and Vo- Y 
gel and his group reported parent 27 a year later in 1 965 /^T/^y ^£ 
(Scheme 9). 25 As our 1968 US study was concluding, x 

28 

the Vogel group reported a simple synthesis of the gem- 
difluoro derivative 28 by way of a double dehydrohalogenation. 26 

When Paul started his study, evidence had been gleaned to suggest the interme- 
diacy of benzocyclopropenones, 27 and Diirr's group in Saarbrucken had reported 28 
a new photochemical synthesis of the ring system. Yet, despite these reports, lit- 
tle had been done to study the ring system systematically, explore the family of 
derived compounds, or seek evidence for the derived cations, anions or radicals. 
This we hoped to rectify. 

Paul's task was simple: to provide a straightforward, high yielding synthesis 
of an ionizable cyclopropabenzene in an amount that would allow for systematic 
chemical and spectroscopic study. By the NZ spring of 1970, Paul had evidence 
for the first of the Wellington cyclo- Ph » Ph 

proparenes, 29. He was competent f- ^ cl Vy cl /^X^Ty^cx 

ci 



at the bench, got results quickly ^ c / ci pk 

and returned for an MSc Honours Ph 



\ 

degree in February 1 97 1 , by which 

time he had learnt how to obtain the ^ co ^ e MeOH - ■ • C(0M ^ 





dichloro derivative 29 pure and in 
high (93%) yield (Scheme 10). His 
results were published in communi- 
cation fonn that year. 29 Paul was as enthusiastic a tramper as he was a chemist and, 
even with the stimulation of his publication, he did not get his thesis submitted 
until 1975. His preference had been to explore the mountains of South America 
and parts of the USA, but subsequently, he rued not returning for PhD training; 
the idea of a return to academic research stayed with him for more than 30 years. 

In February 19711 started my first PhD student, Tony Woolhouse, with whom 
I have a continuing friendship. Tony had completed his MSc degree with John 
Craig, gained l sl Class Honours in late 1969 and worked for the Wellington Hospi- 
tal Board in the metabolic unit laboratory for a year. However, he decided that re- 
search work was more what he wanted and returned to VUW for PhD study under 
my direction; he made the lab buzz. He was, and still is, a remarkable enthusiast, 
thoroughly enjoying the challenge of bench chemistry. Even today at Industrial 
Research Limited (formerly the DSIR that he joined in early 1976) he continues 
as a model bench chemist. Although he had a wife and two small daughters, he 
worked long hours in the lab, ran marathons at the weekend for relaxation, and had 
gained more than enough results for a PhD thesis by mid- 1973; he left for postdoc- 
toral work in Liverpool with Prof. Charles Rees in October of that year. The eight 

-45- 




Tony Woolhouse at DS1R ca. 1980 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

papers that came from his thirty months 
laboratory work cemented my position at 
VUW and internationally, and his comple- 
tion time, within the three year norm, was a 
record in the Department. 

Tony started working on the synthesis of 
aziridines, with a view to preparing tricyclic 
derivatives from bicyclo[2.2.1]octanes and 
-octadienes (Scheme 11) for thermal and 
photochemical ring-opening of the three- 
membered aziridine ring. In essence, azide 
addition to a bicycloheptene or -heptadiene 
led either to a single isomer or a mixture 
of endo/exo stereoisomeric tricycles 30, 
with the orientation a function of the CIO 
and the C8/C9 substituents. Products in the 
diene series were sequentially transformed 
into bisaziridines. Photochemically induced 
loss of dinitrogen was found best and a se- 
ries of all the possible aziridine isomers, 
e.g. 31, was characterized and subsequent 
ring opening followed. The ultimate ring 
opening reactions were soon settled and the 
study was completed, but with insufficient 
data and scope to lead to a thesis. 30 Tony 
then moved into the more profitable cyclo- 
proparene area. 

By this time, it had become apparent that 
the early historical studies laying claim to 
cycloproparene synthesis were most likely incorrect and needed to be repeated. 
Tony's initial foray was a repeat of a 1953 study reported by the Egyptian workers 
Mustafa and Kamel, 31 which we gathered had been done by Harold Shechter and his 
group earlier, but not published. After writing and gaining no reply, we proceeded 
to the laboratory and showed that the claim to gem-diphenylcycloproparenes from 
diphenyldiazomethane addition to, and dinitrogen loss from, Af-dibenzoylimines 
was incorrect. While the additions and losses of molecular nitrogen did occur, 
the products were simple cyclopropanes and not their aromatized analogues. Very 
shortly after this work was completed, a delightful letter from Shechter arrived 
telling us that my enquiry had fallen behind a filing cabinet and that should we 
have repeated the work then we should publish jointly, which we did. 32 

-46- 




A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

During that year of 1971, it became necessary to make some serious deci- 
sions regarding research in New Zealand, and specifically at Victoria University. 
Research groups were small by international standards, frequently comprising 
only one or two 4 th -year (Honours) students. Instrumentation was barely adequate 
despite laboratories that were more than appropriate. Monies, which were never 
great, were made available to each university by the (national) Universities Grants 
Committee, with funding agencies evolving only in the late 1980s. Each institu- 
tion allocated its monies, not to individuals but to Departments, based, to a point, 
on budgets submitted. In chemistry this led to separate allocations for organic, 
inorganic and physical, from which the duly appointed professor allocated teach- 
ing monies, but no individual amounts; each of us in organic chemistry had the 
ability to draw on the whole for our area on the assumption that if one individual 
had an expensive year it would not be repeated in the following one. Bob Hay, 
who returned to Scotland (Stirling University) that year, had wanted this split into 
individual accounts but it never happened. Chemicals were not easy to obtain and 
impossible to get if needed in a hurry - unless one of the researchers elsewhere had 
the compound and was willing to lend some, a regular occurrence. Despite this, 
Ted Harvey had maintained a tradition of annually adding to the range of chemi- 
cals held in the store and the list of compounds was extensive. 

But this was neither the US nor the UK. A decision had to be made whether 
to follow modern international research trends and try to keep up without being 
scooped by others overseas, or to select an area of work that one could research 
and become recognised for. The last appealed as benzocyclopropene chemistry fit- 
ted well to the philosophy. Thus, 1 97 1 saw my work move almost exclusively to 
the cycloproparenes, a field that I had never anticipated staying with for the rest of 
my career. The year was notable because Margaret completed her PhD in May and 
then, later, I was elevated from Lecturer to Senior Lecturer. I had let a select few 
know of the textbook and its acceptance into a known chemistry series, and this 
must have helped. In those days, and until the late 1980s, promotions could not be 
applied for rather than one's nomination being made by the Head (subsequently 
Chairperson) of the Department. I saw James Duncan and Robin Ferrier to offer 
my thanks for their efforts on my behalf. James was as gracious as he always was. 
However, Robin was surprised and said that he had had nothing to do with the 
promotion. A few days after the formal announcement, Stan Slater expressed his 
delight and invited Margaret and me to a musical evening at his home, his way of 
offering congratulations. We arrived to find that Alan Clark, a PhD chemist but 
lecturer in biochemistry, had also been promoted and he too had been invited. Stan 
was a classical music buff and had a room specially set up for listening with 1 970s 
state-of-the-art reproduction equipment. After being asked what we would like to 
drink, Alan and I were given bottles of spirits, mine a scotch and Alan's a brandy, 

-47- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

both with a jug of water. To this day I have never been able to decide if this was 
out and out generosity or a method of measuring intake, but I err on the side of 
generosity. 

The same year saw me invited to spend six months at the University of New 
South Wales in Sydney as a UNESCO lecturer, a title more grandiose than the job 
itself. In essence, UNESCO provided funding for a lecturer for Asian students 
enrolled at NSW, but the School of Chemistry used the money to solicit visiting 
teaching staff for six month periods. Gary Burns, my inorganic chemistry col- 
league, held the post for the second half of 1 97 1 and VUW gave me unpaid leave 
so that I was able to take over for the Jan-Jun period in 1972. This provided Mar- 
garet with postdoctoral work with the late Ray Golding (1935-2009), a New Zea- 
lander who had worked in DSIR at Petone prior to moving to Sydney. 33 1 left Tony 
and my second PhD student Alan Browne, who started up after we left, to fend 
for themselves - but with detailed reports air-mailed to Sydney every two weeks. 

The Australian Experience 

The move to Sydney for six months meant that our car had to be sold and the 
house rented to pay the mortgage. The latter took more time (and trouble) than we 
had imagined, but both were achieved before our Christmas at home with Marga- 
ret's parents and a December 28 evening flight to Sydney. We had accommoda- 
tion in a Randwick Motel for a few nights, with our initiation and settling to the 
city eased by the presence of my cousin Bob Robinson (the son of my mother's 
brother) and his wife. They had emigrated from the UK a year or so earlier, liked 
the Sydney lifestyle and were generous with their time to us. After viewing several 
apartments, we found a fully furnished, one bedroom place in a high rise block at 
56 Anzac Parade in Randwick. It was a fifteen minute walk to the university, just 
down the road from the Sydney Cricket Ground and various parks, and but a short 
bus ride into the city. The block of flats is still there as is the small garage opposite, 
though it is no longer the VW specialist repair place that it was. 

Monday January 3 signified sign-on day at UNSW. I was assigned an office 
within the l st -Year Teaching Unit where I was to be based and met its Director, 
June Griffith (1925-1978), a delightful outgoing lady who made our stay in Syd- 
ney so enjoyable. Margaret linked up with Ray Golding and we were quickly into 
work. For my part, I had lectures in General and Organic Chemistry to prepare but 
there was nothing dramatically different from my U of F and VUW work (I had 
taken over the P'-year organic course in 1971 as Malcolm Carr had moved to the 
then new science faculty at Waikato University). 

We bought a VW Beetle, older than the one I had had in Florida, but it let us see 
something of the Australian countryside and its wildlife at the weekends, as I had 

-48- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

seen nothing and Margaret little of Australia's indigenous species. We began to 
explore further afield, quickly adapting to the Australian traveller's Sunday 'sign- 
in'. This was when a bona fide traveller, who had journeyed a minimum distance 
was required to register upon entering any hotel or pub before gaining service; it 
always proved interesting to see just where those locals thought they had come 
from! We spent a weekend in the Blue Mountains at Katoomba that included the 
Scenic Railway with its steep descent into the valley near the Three Sisters Peaks, 
and we spent Easter in Canberra. Our time in the Randwick flat saw us visit the 
excellent Elizabethan Theatre, seeing Leo McKern in Mutiny on the Bounty. The 
shopping area nearest to us had a range of food establishments of which Tiffany 's 
was big in precooked foods and specialized in main meals. That and Mr. Chips, a 
fish and chip place closer to the campus that sold boxed meals more akin to the fil- 
let dinners now common, provided us with numerous evening meals at little cost. 
We absorbed our temporary environment to the full. 

My work at UNSW went well but I caused a few rumblings when I let it be 
known that I intended using my research time to write a review on the cyclopro- 
parenes, as research was not common among the 1 st -year unit staff. I had provided 
a proposal to Harold Hart, then editor of Chemical Reviews, seeking his approval 
for the first on this topic. It came in mid-January. Subsequently, I set to work, with 
a schedule for completion by the end of May, and the manuscript was submitted 
before we left. It appeared in the April 1 973 issue of the journal. 34 1 also expected 
to use some of my time to meet with colleagues in other Chemistry Departments. 
Setting up visits to the Sydney universities was simple enough and I enjoyed those. 
An overnight visit to ANU in Canberra, with Ron Warrener as host was also a part 
of the schedule. It proved to be an enjoyable and memorable visit as Ron had done 
a lot of photochemical work in an area that had much appeal, and I got along well 
with him and his then postdoctoral, Michael Paddon-Row; contact with both was 
maintained for many years and I spent two months in Ron's laboratory in Central 
Queensland in 1999. 

During the period after Easter, Margaret found that she was pregnant and the 
emergence of a soup craving came on our journey to Melbourne. I had convinced 
my colleagues that I would be able to fit the time needed into the main teaching 
break and arranged to lecture at Melbourne and Monash universities, the latter 
housing Roger Brown as a Reader. We drove down to Melbourne on the inland 
Hume Highway (a two-way road for much of its length then) and spent the rest of 
the weekend exploring the city and its environs. Monday was my day at Melbourne 
University. I was made very welcome by Prof. Don Cameron who, for whatever 
reason, became very supportive of me and my subsequent collaboration with Dr. 
David Kelly, an organic chemist who ran the NMR facilities. The instrumentation 
there far exceeded that at VUW and we soon agreed upon a collaboration that gave 

-49- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

my small group in Wellington access to facilities unavailable in NZ. Although I 
met Don on a number of occasions, it was during the period when he was Chair- 
man of the Editorial Board of The Australian Journal of Chemistry and I was a 
member ( 1 994-99) that I really got to know and respect him and the then Editor, 
Dr. John Zdysiewicz (1943-2010), who became a true friend. Tuesday was spent 
at Monash University in Clayton but, sadly, Roger Brown was away and David 
Black (whose successes since have been especially notable) hosted me. The day of 
meetings was good and I have retained contact with many of the people although 
no collaborations followed; we hold fond memories of a very pleasant dinner with 
David and some of his colleagues with his wife in their home. Wednesday morn- 
ing saw us heading back towards Sydney but via the coastal route. The remaining 
time in Sydney went well with June Griffith great to work with; sadly she died an 
untimely death from cancer in 1978. 

Our morning Sydney-Wellington flight was diverted to Auckland due to high 
winds. However, whilst still at cruising altitude, we flew over Wellington from the 
south in clear skies and with a view of the north island from its southern tip beyond 
the Wairarapa to the right and Mt. Egmont (as it then was) and New Plymouth to 
the left. It was a sight that I have never forgotten. By the time we had landed in 
Auckland, Margaret was feeling none the better for the flight and I remember get- 
ting her into a sick room as a pregnant lady. Whether this impacted or not, I do not 
know, but we got back to our Croydon Street home late in the afternoon, with mini- 
mal delay. The second half of 1 972 saw Margaret continue her research at VUW, 
with her pregnancy becoming ever more obvious, while I had to contend with a 
full year's teaching; we were both busy. Our first son, Mark was born on Dec 22. 

My new PhD man, Alan Browne (1948-2001), had settled in as Assistant Ra- 
diation Safety Officer as he had no scholarship. The minimum time for a part-time 
PhD submission was three years, but in reality it was always closer to a four-year 
year period. Both he and Tony Woolhouse coped well during my absence and with 
the little time I was in the office because of the heavy teaching load after returning. 
I had a dozen lectures each week, tutorials, labs, and meetings of the committees to 
which I had been appointed during my absence. I vowed never to get into the same 
position again. During that period, Tony 
had covered the formation of dimers from 
cycloproparene 29. These were not the 
simple ring-opened head-to-tail or head- 
to-head dimers 30 and 31 that intuitively 
one might expect but the more complex 
isomeric E/Z bicycloheptatrienylidenes 32 
and 33. The structures of these products 
were unable to be settled by simple mass 

-50- 




Ph Ph 
33 





C0 2 H 



Ph 

Scheme 12 





A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

spectrometry and 'H NMR spectroscopy, and 
so the offer of assistance from David Kelly 
was taken up. Despite the l3 C spectra, 35 it was 
some eight years before the structures were 
finally established by X-ray crystallographic 
analyses, with the mode of formation likely 
involving ionization and recombination to a 
bicyclo[4. 1 .0]hepta-l (7),2,4-triene (Scheme 
12). 36 Tony also settled issues regarding the 
generality of the double dehydrochlorination 
route of Scheme 10, the replacement of the 
gem-dihalo substituents of the cycloproparene, and the stability of the various de- 
rivatives. 

Subsequently, Tony showed that the instability of gem-dichlorocycloproparene 
29 to protic media was due to ionization to cation 34 and he devised an appropri- 
ate procedure that allowed for its isolation as a highly moisture-sensitive antimony 
salt (Scheme 12). As there was no facility to carry out low temperature NMR stud- 
ies in Wellington, the procedure was forwarded to David Kelly after Tony had left, 
and the work was repeated in Melbourne by Helmut Hiigel; the vital spectroscopic 
data that characterized the first cation in the cycloproparene series was gained. 37 
In fact, David collaborated with me for many years before becoming Dean of Sci- 
ence at La Trobe University, while Helmut is at the Royal Melbourne Institute of 
Technology and was my equivalent as editor for Chemistry in Australia until 2008. 

In comparison with Tony, the 1 972 new man, Alan Browne, began our foray 
into cyclopropenes fused to other simple aromatics. During his first year, he syn- 
thesized the first cyclopropa[&amp;]naphthalene 
35a (86%) (the benzo analogue of 29) using 
precisely the same chemistry 38 and showed that 
its properties were analogous but with a some- 
what more stable ring system. He also obtained 
dibromo 35b unexpectedly from a halogen ex- 
change. Subsequent work led to our only case 
of being scooped to publication. Ed Billups at 
Rice University in Houston had published 39 a 

straight- forward synthesis of parent cyclopropabenzene (36) in 1 97 1 and an exten- 
sion of this to the naphthalene analogue 36 (benzo fusion) seemed simple. Alan 
had this done with the compound fully characterized, but he isolated a series of 
side products whose proportions were dependent on his reaction conditions. While 
this was being sorted out, the Billups paper appeared and Alan continued on, pro- 
viding a simple semi-kinetic analysis of the reactions that led to the benzene and 

- 51 - 





From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

naphthalene derivatives before beginning our attempts to generate an angular 
naphthalene analogue, the cyclopropafa] derivative. 

Sabbatical Leave and New Colleagues 

The year of 1973 saw me hosting a sabbatical visitor, Charles Spangler with his 
wife Brenda and their children. They came from De Kalb, Illinois (Northern Illinois 
University), for some six months and we had accommodation arranged for their ar- 
rival; we entertained them and they us during a happy time. Charlie was keen to do 
bench work and he started to re-examine one of the earliest recorded syntheses of 
cycloproparenes, namely the formation of iminocyclopropa[/]phenanthrenes 37, 
as reported in 1930 by the Indian workers De and Dutt. 40 The study 
Y|N^ N was completed by Honours student, Silvana Harrison the following 
J^Y^ r year by showing that the original study could not be replicated be- 
k*^ cause entirely different products were obtained. 41 During Spangler's 

37 stay I began to think of my own sabbatical leave, which accumulated 
to a maximum eligibility of 270 days in August 1974. With a widowed mother in 
England, leave had to be in the UK and that would also give Margaret the chance 
to see my homeland for the first time. In order to avoid three generations living 
in the same house, and to fit with my chemical interests in photochemistry, leave 
at Reading University with Derek Bryce-Smith and Andrew Gilbert fitted best. 
Arrangements were made easily and VUW approved the leave in August 1 973 for 
the following year. 

Despite Margaret being hospitalized in December 1973, 1 was able to attend my 
first international conference outside NZ, namely the Royal Australian Chemical 
Institute meeting on Philip Island, near Melbourne, late in February. It provided an 
opportunity to revisit David Kelly and settle more work and, more importantly, to 
present some of our research under the heading: Developments in the Chemistry of 
Arocyclopropenes. More notable was the presence of J. E. (Jack) Baldwin, then at 
MIT, who spoke on 2,3-Sigmatropic Reactions and subsequently almost drowned 
while swimming. During the year, Alan continued as my sole PhD student and 
Silvana Harrison was joined by Teng See (later Christine) Chuah in what was to be 
the final year of Victoria offering an MSc (Hons) degree over a 12 month period. 
The move to a BSc (Hons) structure saw a gradual and continuous reduction of 
the research component, to the extent that publications from the honours projects 
diminished. In that final 12-month MSc year, both of my students were involved 
with our early approaches to the cyclopropa[/]phenanthrene ring system that were 
published. 

The British Council offered Fellowships to a limited number of NZ resident 
academics and I sought funding for the sabbatical travel scheduled for late No- 

-52- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 



vember. The outcome was not to be decided before we left NZ and I was advised 
that there were many applicants. It was in my second week in Reading that I was 
told I was to receive the grant. Our initial accommodation was with my mother in 
the same Lee SE 12 home I had lived in and we had a week there before I moved 
to Reading. Margaret rapidly warmed to nearby friends Sally and Peter Civil, who 
had been looking after my mother more and more since she was on her own. 

My time in Bryce-Smith's Reading laboratory began at the beginning of our 
second week in the UK and I stayed in Whiteknights Hall, one of the student/staff 
residences, for the weekdays. I was made very welcome there and in Chemistry, 
especially by the former Southamptoners Gerry Fowles and Monty Frey, who were 
still active. By 1974, Derek Bryce-Smith had become renowned for his environ- 
mental work on roadside lead pollution from exhaust emissions and he spent most 
of his time on that, leaving Andrew Gilbert to run the photochemical programme. 
Andrew was a delightful colleague who, in my view, never gained the recognition 
that he truly deserved, as it was he who drove the photochemical studies. I set- 
tled to photoaddition reactions of aromatic ethers, specifically the photoaddition 
of maleimide to anisole, gained much valuable experience and a publication that 
appeared in 1977 describing the isolation and characterization of 38-40 (Scheme 
13). 42 The Chemistry building was relatively o 



sor Guggenheim had not wanted students dis- 
tracted by pleasant views. Daylight was there though, thus making it very different 
from the central, totally enclosed laboratories of Utah that I experienced later. 
The first few days provided an opportunity to visit The Old Crown in Gallowstree 
Common that we had agreed to rent from Dr. Neil Isaacs after Christmas. Neil, a 
physical organic chemist, was to spend a leave in Auckland with Prof. Peter de la 
Mare and depart for NZ close to Christmas, returning shortly after our planned 
departure at the end of July 1975. The property and the rental were too good to 
turn down. The converted old pub in the small village was more than suitable as it 
had four bedrooms, three for our use, and all the modern conveniences of the day. 
In our time there, we experienced only one problem and that was with the heating 
system, and not the resident ghost who we never met. I returned to Lee on Friday 
evenings and so began some weeks of commuting until after Christmas. 

Whiteknights Hall was some 15 minutes walk from Chemistry and I recall feel- 
ing that the air in Reading never seemed to move. On one particular morning, the 
stroll across campus was much more enjoyable as there was a gentle breeze. When 



height. While this provided more wall space for 
cupboards and shelving, the reason given to me 
was that earlier, the somewhat notorious Profes- 



new, stood alone, and had the distinction of re- 
search laboratories with windows above head 2 




o 



38, R 1 = OMe, R 2 = R 3 = H 

39, R 1 = R 2 = H, R 3 = OMe 

40, R 1 = R 3 = H, R 2 = 0M9 



-53- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

I got to the office, I was greeted by complaints about the wind and asked what it 
was like in Wellington! My time in the Hall covered the pre-Christmas festivities 
of which there were several. I was invited to the formal Christmas Dinner, a quite 
grand event, and then, afterwards, to the Warden's residence for port. The port 
was excellent and it was only the next day when I learned that, traditionally, each 
warden laid down port for a Christmas function many years in the future. Christ- 
mas was spent at 3 1 Heather Road and provided a further opportunity to visit rela- 



After New Year, we moved to Gallowstree Common to find that the Isaacs had 
left their home in excellent order; all that we needed do was to turn on the heating 
and get the place warm. The ensuing months there were happy. The university was 
easily accessible by car but not by bus. There was a service but it took over an 
hour, needing a change at Reading Station. We met the neighbours, including ones 
that the Isaacs had advised of our arrival and who had small children, and Margaret 
got to know some of them well. She took Mark for walks through the neighbour- 
ing woods, enjoying the openness of the English countryside in comparison to the 
bush of NZ. Our nearest neighbours were a delightful older couple (George and 
Mary Holmes) who offered to look after Mark should we wish to have an evening 
out. Mary, especially, was very friendly and we remained in contact with her until 
2008 when she died. Our weekly shopping was done in Henley-on-Thames as it 
was no further than central Reading, yet easier to access by car and park. 

In late January, I left for a week in Switzerland and Germany. I had visited a 
couple of the London Colleges to give seminars and meet staff before Christmas. 
But a visit to continental Europe was vital because of the small-ring chemistry be- 
ing studied there. Paul Miiller at the University of Geneva had collaborated with 
us on cycloproparenyl cation issues after the publication of our landmark com- 
munication and I wanted to meet with him. In fact, he was responsible for Bryce- 
Smith offering me more respect than to many of his staff. In late 1 974, the Eng- 
lish universities were in financial difficulty, manifest in Reading by only Senior 
Lecturers (or above) having direct dial for local telephone calls while Professors 




The Old Crown, Gallowstree Common, 1975 



tives and friends from the past, no- 
tably Chris Watts, who by then was 
working for Plessey Company and 
not using his chemical background 
any longer. Margaret met several of 
my relatives and, as fate would have 
it, a cousin and her husband lived in 
Reading, he the grounds-man of the 
Gallowstree Common playing fields 
just down the road from The Old 
Crown. 



-54- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

were allowed long distance access. That I received calls from a Swiss Professor 
caused confusion as no one knew where I should speak to him except by using the 
Professor s office, which I had to do. My visit to Geneva (and other places) was 
arranged by Heinz Diirr of the University des Saarlandes and not Paul, as we had 
corresponded first on our mutual interest in the cycloproparenes. So it was that I 
flew to Geneva where I met and began a twenty year friendship with Paul Miiller. 
My lecture was well received. I also reaffirmed that souvenir collecting should 
never cause packing problems and settled on a pair of cufflinks from each overseas 
lecture tour. A set from Geneva was added to the pair from Sydney. 

From Geneva, I went by train to Freiburg in Germany to meet Horst Prinzbach, 
then a major force in small ring chemistry and photochemistry. My first evening 
was hosted by one of his junior colleagues, Dr. Gerd Kaup, who took to task the 
level of a new textbook on Organic Photochemistry that had quite recently ap- 
peared. 16 After some discussion, he looked at me then said: 'Ah, I think it was by 
someone from your country. Do you know him?' I responded that I did since I was 
one of the authors - and we got on well from that day. Prinzbach was a great host 
and the next evening, after my seminar, we went to his favourite restaurant in a 
small village on the outskirts of the Black Forest. It was there that the wine was 
lj— s served in Prinzbachian chalices - the pentagonal cup joined to a triangu- 
\y lar stand depicting the molecule named by him as calicene. That visit saw 
II the beginning of a long friendship that continues even today, cemented 
when he visited NZ just a few years later. Saturday saw me travel to Saar- 

cs I icsn© 

bracken to be collected from the railway station by Heinz Diirr. He was, 
and is, a striking individual, tall with small beard, yet he remained silent until we 
were sat in his car. He then turned and said: It is now Saturday afternoon and it is 
my custom not to talk chemistry until Monday morning. Will this be alright? It was, 
and I had a marvellous weekend with him and his wife Helga when, amongst other 
things, I was taken to the Roman Ruins at Trier. Monday saw my university visit, a 
lecture on the small-ring chemistry and much discussion. It was then a race to the 
station to get the evening train to Cologne. The train had no restaurant car and, as it 
began to pull out of the station, Heinz and his student waved to lower the window 
whereupon savouries, sandwiches and cakes were passed in. 

In Cologne, I saw Emanuel Vogel who, with Prinzbach, Hafner and Huisgen 
was among the most noted of the mainstream chemists in Europe. I had met him 
in Florida during his visiting professorship and he had corresponded since then 
on cycloproparene chemistry. As in Freiburg, it was a great visit and we remained 
friends for close on 40 years until his death on 3 1 March 2011.1 was fortunate as, 
unlike his junior German colleagues, I was an international collaborator and ben- 
efitted from gifts of chemicals from his on-campus pilot plant, mailed at no cost to 
NZ. I purchased another pair of cufflinks to mark the end of a very successful tour. 

- 55 - 




My mother, Mark and friend, Reading, 1975 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

My return to Reading was uneventful and we settled to the cold of winter with 
delightful weekend outings to the local sights and periodic visits to Lee. Once 
spring arrived, my mother and friends came more often for weekend visits. For 
Easter, we headed northwest to my relatives in Lancashire. The first stop was in 
Lytham-St. Annes where my oldest cousin, Margaret, lived; my father had stayed 
with her and husband Bernard Lancaster prior to his surgery. We were made most 
welcome but, in the short time available, we had to move on to Gt. Harwood, 
where we stayed with Cousin Julia and her two children in their home at 6 Coro- 
nation Street, across the street from 
my first home. To fit the accommo- 
dation, a typical terraced property, 
modernized, but with only three 
bedrooms the smallest of which 
was very small, her children stayed 
with their maternal grandparents at 
No. 17. Margaret was then exposed 
to the gaggle of northern relatives 
through a gathering that Julia or- 
ganized on Easter Sunday. We saw 
something of the local countryside 
including the Woodfields Village and Stonyhurst, Chatburn where Margaret Lan- 
caster's sister Teresa and her family lived, and Sabden, the small mill village at the 
foot of Pendle Hill where my Uncle Ted had been Mill Manager. We returned there 
together only in September 2009. 

Back in Reading, I continued to work and give university lectures. Robin Fer- 
rier had been more than keen for me to gain exposure in the UK and set up several 
desirable visits. In total, I must have given a dozen or more lectures and made 
some very valuable contacts, but not all were simply professional. I arranged to 
visit my Southampton friends, Brian and Cathy Odell, who by this time were in 
Leeds with Brian at the University. This was followed by Stirling University with 
Bob Hay (d. 1999) who had returned there from VUW in 1971. We thoroughly 
enjoyed our time and driving over Ilkley Moor (Bar T'at), and visiting York and 
its Minster. In Scotland, we saw Edinburgh and the Highlands near Stirling, but not 
Loch Lomond. The return journey took us through Cumbria and the Lake District, 
passing through Ambleside, where Margaret and Bernard Lancaster had run the 
Boots Chemists for many years before settling in Lytham. 

The visit to Stirling University provided the best outcome for me, in that Prof. 
Willie Parker asked if I would like to contribute to the Royal Society of Chem- 
istry (RSC) annual publication, Alicyclic Chemistry, which provided an annual 
summary of the literature published in the field. I accepted and it proved to be an 



-56- 



A New Life, a New Place and an Emerging Career 

interesting time. The retrieval of scientific material was on the brink of electronic 
searching and, thanks to Willie Parker, the RSC provided me with the latest list- 
ings of article abstracts retrieved under a trial process; they gave a huge time ad- 
vantage over the hard copy that came to Wellington dominantly by surface mail. 
Air-mail print-outs began to appear in December when I was home and they came 
with remarkable regularity. The collection of the ca. 1 000 citations and requisite 
data over the 1976 and 1977 years was manageable. Writing was done over a short 
period around Easter and the book appeared some four months or so later, with the 
1976 literature survey published in the northern autumn of 1977. It was an excel- 
lent experience and one that set me up for assessing and abstracting papers for the 
rest of my career. I had articles published in Volumes 5 and 6 of the series, the last 
after Parker's most untimely death. 

Our final months in Reading saw us enjoying the late spring and early sum- 
mertime before we dispatched surface-mail parcels home to keep our air luggage 
within the allowance. Our car was easily sold and we left Reading for a few days in 
London before our departure from Heathrow. We did not expect the welcome that 
we received in Los Angeles. Air New Zealand had begun flying from Auckland to 
London via LAX, but it was only the aircraft that made the full journey. Air NZ 
handled the Pacific sector and a British Airways crew flew the polar route to and 
from LA. We were appropriately ticketed for the single flight from LHR to AKL. 
On arrival at LAX, all passengers were required to pass through immigration and 
customs, much like the situation in the recent past. However, US officialdom des- 
ignated the flight from LHR as British Airways and that from LAX as Air NZ. We 
had no US visas and were not to be granted entry to the US, despite the tickets and 
itinerary being clear; we were barred from entry and from any transit facility. Our 
enquiries of how we could re-board our aircraft met deaf ears until two-year old 
Mark decided that he had had enough and began to cry. The solution was simple: 
we were to be placed under armed guard and taken from arrivals to departures and 
held in custody until we re-embarked. The guards, however, were more humane 
and, once out of eyesight of the immigration officials, they carried our luggage, 
smoothed our way and, once at the boarding gate, simply left us to our own devic- 
es. The Pacific leg remains a blur, but we arrived home tired, yet happy to be back. 

My return to VUW was greeted with enthusiasm and I began to prepare the 
mandatory Leave Report for the research and refresher leave committee, as it had 
become called. I was quickly into teaching and the routine cycle of research, teach- 
ing and administering began again. In September, I attended the annual meeting of 
the New Zealand Association of Scientists to receive the 1 974 Research Medal. I 
had been advised of this before we left for England and its receipt, my first award, 
came from nomination by James Duncan, then Head of Chemistry. Naturally I was 
delighted, as recognition within one's own country is usually not easy to come 

-57- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

by and it was a significant addition to my CV. The surprise of the spring was my 
promotion into the Extended Range of the Senior Lectureship. At that time, the sal- 
ary ranges for Senior Lecturers overlapped that of Readers through the extended 
section. While this was a much appreciated event, it was also a cause for concern 
for two reasons: it was unusual for a staff member to be promoted so soon after 
sabbatical and the SL Extended Range generally was regarded as difficult to move 
out from. 

When we got back from England my research students were Alan Browne, 
who was approaching the end of his four-year period, Teng See Chuah, my 1974 
Honours student who had returned for PhD, and a BSc Honours student, Garry 
Mitchell, who had had a difficult time with me absent for the bulk of the period that 
he was carrying out laboratory work. All three had maintained an excellent routine 
of reporting by air-mail and 1 wonder how the student body of today, with all his 
modern facilities, would cope if transported back to that era of pen and paper. 
Teng See found advanced study too demanding and she moved away, subsequently 
to marry our Store Manager, Peter Leighs, and to a successful career initially in 
business and then in law. As the end of the teaching year approached, 1 obtained 
a grant and took on a new research assistant, David Officer, who stayed with me 
until 1981, firstly as a paid employee and then, from 1976, for his Honours and 
PhD degrees. 



-58- 



A Young Family, a Career, and 
Momentum 



The 1975-76 summer vacation saw David Officer as my research assistant and the 
only laboratory worker I had. However, he and Martin Banwell, a more than com- 
petent undergraduate, had signed up for the new 1976 BSc (Hons.) degree, with 
research under my direction. The reduced activity gave time to complete some 
projects on our Croydon Street home, especially as we were expecting our second 
child the following spring. Paul Derek was born on September 3 and Margaret 
stayed in the maternity hospital for about a week, in line with the policy of the day. 

Both Officer and Banwell proved to be very competent individuals, as different 
as chalk and cheese, but they made the research lab hum. The pair outdid my for- 
mer students as both graduated with first class honours. 
Alan Browne submitted his thesis on cyclopropanaph- 
thalenes mid-year, in a time just a little longer than the 




four-years expected, and ended up with a tally of six r = l[ 
publications. He went to join Leo Paquette at Ohio 
State for his postdoctoral period. David was attempting 
to extend the cycloproparene family by synthesizing 

cyclopropa[/]phenanthrene (41) by use of ring contraction processes. He carried 
out some of the critical work that showed that the 1974 report by Radlick and 
Crawford 43 (Scheme 14) was impossible to reproduce; the dreadful odour of 27 
was the only evidence for its presence. Martin also took on aspects of mono- and 
dicyclopropabenzene synthesis and they both shared (with others) their first paper. 

In January 1977 I formally moved into the Readership, having been told of 
this just ahead of Paul's birth. A little later, the Higher Salaries Commission com- 
pressed the Reader's salary scale from four levels to a single rate. With a second 
child, everything helped and this proved a major boost to our income. Both Martin 
Banwell and David Officer returned for PhD study, Martin, like Tony Woolhouse, 
with a University Grants Committee Scholarship (of which NZ had -100 for all 
disciplines) and David as a Junior Lecturer akin to Alan Browne. I also started 
Neil Galloway as an Honours student and was very busy again. Martin and David 
have been the two students whose careers have been especially pleasing to see 

-59- 




Martin Banwell 2010 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

develop as both moved into academia, Martin ascending 
to the senior Organic Chemistry Chair in the Southern 
Hemisphere, that at the Australian National University 
in Canberra. This followed postdoctoral study with his 
choosing Leo Paquette at Ohio State, a research fellow- 
ship in Adelaide (Australia), and then tenured positions 
in Auckland and Melbourne before moving to ANU in 
1995. He was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science 
degree by Victoria University in May 2010. For some 
time I had assumed such honours would go to him, but 
I had neither expected VUW to be the first institution 
to make such an award nor to see it from the same side 
of the grass as Martin. By way of contrast, David had 
postdoctorals with Ron Warrener (at ANU) and then Emanuel Vogel (in Cologne) 
as a Humboldt Fellow, before accepting a lectureship in NZ at Massey University, 
Palmerston North, with promotions, ultimately to Professor. He accepted a Chair 
at the University of Wollongong in 2007, where his research is in the recently cre- 
ated 'Intelligent Polymer Research Institute' developing functional nanomaterials 
systems. Their time at VUW gave them seven and six publications each, Martin 
completing after a mere 30 months (like Tony Woolhouse) and David after 4 years 
as a Junior Lecturer, in 198 1 . 

Martin began what turned out to be a failed project - the attempted synthesis of 
the linear and angular dicyclopropabenzenes 42 and 43, which also was unsuccess- 
ful for Udo Brinker and his group in the 1980s 
when they tried to generate the naphthalene 
equivalent 44. What Martin's work did was to 
show the ease by which halotricyclooctanes 
could be transformed into homotropylidenes, 
as depicted in Scheme 15. The reaction re- 
quired addition of the substrate to the base, the 
reverse of what had been our normal procedure 
until then. The so called normal addition led 
to a series of styrenes and much of the work 
concerned the precise way in which these were 
formed. A series of papers entitled Studies in the Tricyclooctane Series appeared 
in the Australian Journal of Chemistry. 

Understandably, David's work was slower as he had to contend with the duties 
of a junior lecturer. He elected to continue attempting to extend the cycloproparene 
ring systems to the cyclopropa[/]phenanthrenes. By this time, cyclopropabenzene 
(27) and -[Z?]naphthalene (36) had been characterized and studied in some detail. 



42 



43 




--OMe substrate to 
— £ f-BuOK/THF 



X = CI; R= Hor OMe 
X = Br; R = OMe 



Scheme 15 



f-butoxystyrene 



-60- 




A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

Vogel and his students had prepared the angular -[a]naphthalene (45) from flash 
vacuum pyro lysis during 1976, a result that was taken much further by Paul Miil- 
ler and his group using more conventional chemistry over 
the ensuing years. Our interest came from the strain in the 
molecules and its impact upon stability. Thus, while 27 and n 36 
36 were stable compounds, 45 was not. This fitted with the 
expected increase in n character of the bridge bond on mov- 
ing from 27 to 41. Although our efforts to obtain 45 (or a de- 
rivative) failed, we were convinced that phenanthrene 41 had 
to have a more double bond-like bridge and would show even less stability. Thus, 
David's studies laid the foundations for the ultimate synthesis of 41, with which he 
was intimately involved in 1984 whilst in Vogel's Cologne laboratory. 

The year 1 977 also was significant for me in a different direction. I noted ear- 
lier just how much Horst Prinzbach had impressed me when I visited Freiburg in 
1975. A year after returning from England in the spring of 1976, 1 found that the 
NZ Vice-Chancellors Committee had an established fund for a visiting German 
National Fellow. The monies available provided for travel to and from NZ, with 
one week to be spent at each of the four major, and half a week at the minor (Wai- 
kato and Massey) universities. Half a week at each of Rotorua and Queenstown 
was also included for rest and recuperation. On carefully reading the conditions 
and criteria, I could find nothing to limit the individual to being a German Lan- 
guage or Literature scholar, and so I wrote to Prinzbach seeking his permission to 
nominate him, got it, and then submitted the paperwork. He was selected and came 
in the winter of 1 977 travelling via Easter Island. He gave a lecture course in each 
university, with that at VUW stunning in its clarity, vision and scope, and encom- 
passing his fulvene, fulvalene and bishomobenzene chemistry. Only Roger Brown 
had visited me previously (1974) while on sabbatical at Canterbury University, 
and Horst's time in NZ did much to enhance my reputation. Margaret and I enter- 
tained him at home, showed him the Wellington area and, on his last night, took 
him to a progressive dinner. The concept of hosting an evening meal with the three 
courses eaten at different venues had become popular. It meant that one had each 
course with a different group of people in a different home. Horst was allowed to 
join this Young Wives event and it took him into different NZ homes. In the follow- 
ing year he was, I believe, named German of the Year, became a firm friend and, 
on every visit to Freiburg since (the last being in 2009), that progressive dinner has 
been raised by him. Subsequently, I hosted some two dozen eminent chemists who 
lectured in the various NZ universities. Robin Ferrier nominated Hans Paulsen, a 
carbohydrate chemist from Hamburg, also for the German National Fellowship 
and he came in 1978, the only other before the rules were changed so that they ap- 
plied to language and literature experts only. 

-61 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

Time passed quickly as I became more involved in committee work, not least 
that of the University Safety and Civil Defence. I had taken on the duties of De- 
partmental Safety Officer shortly after we returned from Reading. In itself, this 
was straightforward enough. However, the various science departments had quite 
different expectations of their staff and students when it came to safety issues 
and directives were frequently at odds. The effect of this was that a Science Fac- 
ulty safety advisory committee was established under my chairmanship to put the 
house in order as it were. It succeeded in bringing about a much more logical ap- 
proach to safety issues and an approach was made to the then Vice-Chancellor, Dr. 
Danny Taylor, for funds to produce a Laboratory Safety Handbook. Unlike mod- 
ern management practices that require everything justified in triplicate, my one 
meeting with him was short and simple, and I emerged charged with the task of 
producing a manual for use in all laboratory areas. A group from the faculty com- 
mittee rose to the occasion and Victoria's first Laboratory Safety Handbook ap- 
peared in 1 977, by which time a University Safety and Civil Defence Committee 
had been established. In the years that followed I was involved with safety courses 
for secondary school teachers, advising the Wellington Medical School how better 
to address its issues and a range of other matters that provided a distraction from 
what I really wanted to do. 

The summer of 1977 saw Mark's 5 th birthday ahead of Christmas, and our first 
summer house sitting for Margaret's brother Ron, in Hamilton. I do not recall who 
initiated things but Ron preferred to have the house occupied when they were 
away. The idea of a quiet time relaxing in the NZ sun with a large pool and a ten- 
nis court was seriously attractive. It was the start of regular summer visits to 58 
Herbert Road that provided the essential R&amp;R after a busy year. My mother, now 
retired, visited us for the third time over the following summer (1978) but she was 
distracted by a new suitor, Victor Spencer, whom she married in March 1980. They 
visited us in 1984, and then again in 1987, the last time my mother was with us as 
she was beginning to display early signs of the dementia that took hold and forced 
her into permanent care for the last five years of her life. She died on February 
28, 1996, ten days after a serious stroke. My flight to London for the funeral had 
me in a seat adjacent to John Spencer and his wife on the Auckland-Los Angeles 
leg; John had been out to interview for the inorganic chair vacated by Neil Curtis 
on retirement, was offered the position, and subsequently joined as a Professor of 
Chemistry with responsibilities in the inorganic area - labelled chairs were out! 

For the new 1978 academic year my 1977 Honours man, Neil Galloway, re- 
turned for PhD. Neil had gained a 1 st Class Honours degree and a UGC scholar- 
ship, but with added allowances for his wife and young child. He began working 
on the oxidative decarboxylation of bicyclo[4.1.0]heptene dicarboxylates in the 
search for a new and viable synthesis of the cycloproparenes. During the course of 

-62- 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

his work he moved from Wellington city to the coastal suburban settlement of Rau- 
mati where his wife was closer to family. The subsequent daily commute did not fit 
to his responsibilities or the demands of the research laboratory and he transferred 
to an MSc degree, which he gained in early 1980. We never found a new pathway 
to the cycloproparenes but did synthesize the requisite bicycloheptene 1,6-diac- 
ids and follow their decarboxylations. 44 Neil subsequently joined Taubman's Paint 
Company (now the Peter Jackson film studios) in Wellington and had a successful 
career there until its closure. 

I had had spells serving on the Wellington Branch Committee of the New Zea- 
land Institute of Chemistry (NZIC), was elected to its Fellowship in 1977, and 
became the Branch Chairman in 1980. One David Bibby was the very compe- 
tent Branch Secretary - he is now VUW's first-rate Dean of Science - and still a 
competent secretary. During this time, I was awarded the Institute's ICI Prize for 
Excellence in Chemical Research, while also serving what transpired to be the first 
of four lengthy terms on the National Council. The last two of these buttressed a 
27 year involvement with the organization and running of the Chemical Congress 
of Pacific Basin Societies (Pacifichem). Following from the success of bringing 
Prinzbach to NZ, I nominated Derek Bryce-Smith for an NZIC sponsored lecture- 
ship of the country. He visited in 1979 and attracted significant media attention 
from his environmental stance on lead pollution. He was followed a year later by 
Emanuel Vogel, then Peter Sykes (Cambridge), and almost annually thereafter a 
distinguished chemist from the northern hemisphere. 

My third international conference (I attended an RSC meeting in York while 
at Reading) was another RACI Organic meeting in January 1979, this time the 
5 lh National in Hobart, Tasmania. David Officer and I both attended, and David 
presented our approaches to cyclopropa[/]phenanthrene at the subsequent meeting 
in Melbourne in August 1980. 1 was fortunate to meet and interact with Prof. Koji 
Nakanishi of Columbia University, fortunate not so much for his elegant chemis- 
try or his magic (we were almost ejected from the Wrest Point Casino) as for the 
help he offered when VUW's 1 1 year old 60 MHz Hitachi NMR instrument had 
problems. We were unable to get any satisfaction from the manufacturers until he 
intervened on our behalf. Even more coincidental is that I had an excellent work- 
ing relationship with Koji's brother, Atsuo, during our mutual times working on 
the Pacifichem meetings; he was the Executive Director of the Chemical Society 
of Japan during 1 989- 1 998. The problems with the Hitachi NMR instrument signi- 
fied its age and the need for a second generation machine. The organic chemists 
were, by far, the largest users of the facility and it fell to us to provide an appro- 
priate case for a new instrument that could provide carbon- 13 as well as proton 
spectra. The task was up to Ted Harvey as he was the one most familiar with the 
Hitachi and he did the job with aplomb. After considerable searching, a decision 

-63 - 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

was made to match Otago and Canterbury universities and acquire a Varian Instru- 
ments 80 MHz electromagnet instrument when funding became available. In those 
days, grants for major equipment were made by the University Grants Committee 
and our case was so well handled by Ted that we were given the grant at the time 
we needed it. The instrument was ordered, but only after some significant negotia- 
tion that had the installation done by the Varian Palo Alto expert technician and 
not an Australian counterpart who had quite limited experience. The order itself 
was placed in 1979, not by us but by the Government's Education Department. 
They provided their own (internal) insurance and refused to transfer monies to the 

US despite the almost certain probability 
that the NZ dollar would devalue before 
any account was paid. In any event, the 
instrument duly arrived and was installed 
by the Varian man in the early part of 
1980. He was superb in getting the elec- 
tromagnet up and running, and in train- 
ing our NMR technician, the NZ Varian 

man (Alan Ross) and me. Ted had already 
Brian Halton and Alan Ross -NMR 1980 , „ _ • 

moved away irom the Department to the 

Registry, the NMR acquisition his final and lasting contribution before departure. 

I well recall receiving a letter from the Education Department some months after 

installation and payment of the account seeking something approaching $NZ 1 000 

from me to meet the difference between the grant and the final payment. I think 

it unnecessary to explain my subsequent actions, save but to say that neither I nor 

VUW made any additional contribution! 

All of these things seem to have happened in a flash of time, for the next focus 
was the second sabbatical due in late 198 1 after David's departure. A decision as to 
where best to spend the time was coloured by thoughts of the US and Peter Stang's 
novel carbene chemistry, which was expected to fit nicely with new ideas for our 
cycloproparene work. Even in those days, Peter, who is my own age, was located 
in Salt Lake City and his area of expertise was simply too good to miss. We ar- 
ranged for a nine month spell at the University of Utah from late September 1981 
and VUW approved the programme, although I was encouraged to seek additional 
financial support as my VUW salary was likely to be inadequate. And so it was 
that I applied for a Fulbright Fellowship from the 1 980-8 1 allocation. Shortly after 
the application had been lodged, I was informed that the NZ programme applied 
only to NZ citizens and I was asked if I had an application under consideration. 
I did not, but application papers were completed in short order and delivered to 
the NZ immigration office. There were two difficulties, the first being proof of my 
1968 entry to NZ. As I commented earlier, there were no formal requirements and 

-64- 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

the stamp in my obsolete passport was my sole record unless a letter from VUW 
could be provided. The major problem, however, was in having my application 
considered in time for the deliberations of the Fulbright Selection Panel. Yet again, 
fate was on my side. When I entered the Department of Labour and spoke with the 
officer handling applications, I detected a clear and definite Lancastrian accent; 
he came from a village close to Gt. Harwood. Naturally, favouritism can never be 
shown by any NZ Government officials as applications are dealt with strictly in or- 
der of receipt; I was shown a large pile awaiting investigation. My NZ citizenship 
was granted shortly afterwards and it was followed by the award of a Fulbright 
Fellowship and I am now a member of the NZ selection committee. 

Sabbatical in Salt Lake City 

So it was that, in 1981, we planned the stay in Utah 
extreme with his time and help. Not only did we set 
up a research plan, but also he provided information 
on apartments, cars, schools and the ways in which we 
could get both boys into the Utah State education sys- 
tem. He had me appointed as Visiting Professor, pro- 
vided medical cover and assisted in many other ways. 
Our third foray into house renting, car sale and travel 
arrangements went smoothly, culminating in our Oc- 
tober 1 departure for Los Angeles, where we spent a 
few days taking in all of those things that the city and 
its environs are famous for. By then, Peter had rented 
an apartment for us on the Salt Lake valley floor, a two 
bedroom, semi-basement, unfurnished place at 1224 
SE 9 th St., comparatively close to campus. It proved 
ideal. 

Our arrival into Salt Lake City involved a flight path up the valley before a turn 
to the east and touchdown towards the south. The Mormon Temple and Moroni, 
the angel, glistened in the afternoon sun and the University stood out from its site 
on the foothills to the Rockies. Peter met us and whisked us to the apartment in 
short order. Much to our surprise the place was almost completely furnished from 
the University of Utah loan closet, set up some years earlier by University staff 
members' wives; all we needed do was to donate any household items we pur- 
chased or replaced. Dinner that night was with Peter, his wife Christine and their 
two daughters, similar in age to Mark and Paul. Although Christine had provided 
us with essentials (even made the beds ready for us), Margaret and the boys ven- 
tured to the grocery store next day for a few more things while I was at the univer- 

-65- 



. Peter was generous to the 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

sity. A day later Christine took Margaret to Smiths, a vast grocery store and a mind 
blowing experience for someone who had never been in the US before. Both Peter 
and Christine have remained close friends since that first encounter. 

At the U of U, I completed various forms, collected my campus ID and arranged 
for issue of the Exchange Visitor Visa needed as a Fulbright Scholar. I met mem- 
bers of the research group and academic colleagues, most notably Cheves Walling 
(1916-2007), then editor of JACS. I was given an office desk and lab bench, and 
settled to the work that I would do. The boys attended Emerson Elementary, a State 
school just around the corner a couple of blocks away from our apartment and on 
E 13 lh S. One of Peter's neighbours ran a car dealership and he let us have a later 
model Mazda GLX hatchback at cost and agreed to take it back for a fair price 
when we left. Christine arranged for Margaret to attend the Utah Women's Faculty 
Club New Comers afternoon just a few days after our arrival and she won tickets 
to the university Pioneer Theatre for Stubby Kaye in Guys and Dolls. 

Very soon after my arrival in the Chemistry Department, Prof. Manfred Regitz 
visited from Kaiserslautern in Germany, and I began to get more international con- 
tact and hear many excellent lectures. We joined the 
Regitz and Stangs for dinner and I was invited to visit 
Kaiserslautern when in Germany the following Euro- 
pean spring. We settled to a happy life and Margaret 
began to explore and enjoy her new found freedom 
with both boys in school. The weekends were spent 
doing all those things that the US had and NZ did not. 
One of the exercises during the winter months was tak- 
ing the car out of the carport safely. The apartment had 
no garage but a covered concrete pad. With the level 
of snow and ice, salting the roads was common and 
whenever one got home the car would be wet. Over- 
night, the temperature drop was such that the water 
froze the tyres to the car pad and so a revved up engine 
was needed to free the wheels and get moving. All well and good, except that the 
carport was orthogonal to the driveway, and as soon as the car started moving 
backwards, a 90° turn was vital, yet we always managed to miss the neighbour's 
fence directly behind. 

We spent time ice skating on one of the local open air swimming pools that was 
set to freeze for the winter season. Skates were provided at a small cost and the 
boys and I enjoyed making the circuits. They became more proficient as the ses- 
sions passed and, as I had always enjoyed roller skating at St. Joseph's College, I 
found this experience exhilarating, despite the bumps and falls. Margaret was less 
of an enthusiast and, sadly, had a fall that hurt. It happened shortly after New Year 

-66- 




A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

and two weeks later, on a Sunday morning, her hip began to ache. She degenerated 
rapidly from having some minor discomfort to total immobility and was admitted 
to Holy Cross Hospital (now the Salt Lake Regional Medical Center) as advised 
by Peter, underwent surgery for a recurrence of her childhood osteomyelitis, and 
remained there for almost two weeks. I contended with the boys, but as soon as 
our predicament became known, colleagues arrived with prepared meals and the 
fridge was filled, most notably with lasagne (and now I can no longer face it). The 
timing was far from the best as I had planned on visiting several universities to the 
east and, not knowing how long the recovery would take, all had to be cancelled 
save for visits to Texas and Florida in March. 

I spent three days in Houston lecturing at both Rice University, with Ed Bil- 
lups as my host, and at the University of Houston. Ed was the other chemist most 
active and successful in the cycloproparene 
area and the visit was good for both of us. At 
Houston I met Randy Thummel and gained 
much useful insight to his four-membered 
ring chemistry. Arrival in to Florida was to 
Gainesville airport on a Friday evening for 
a weekend with my former flatmate, Bill 
Eaton and his wife Cindy, before venturing 
back to the U of F. I spent from midday on 
Monday until the following Friday at the University. My visit coincided with one 
of the early Katritsky Florida Heterocyclic and Synthetic Symposia (now Flohet). 
He was most gracious, and involved me in as much of the programme as was fea- 
sible but I was there dominantly to see the developments in Merle Battiste's chem- 
istry as well as catch up with former teaching colleagues. It was time well spent. 
There were but a few days after returning to Utah before the 183 rd ACS National 
Meeting took place in Las Vegas. Peter had encouraged me to attend and present 
some VUW work. This I did, with the research going under the title Aromatization 
Routes to Cycloproparene s. The meeting was exhilarating and new contacts and 
friendships ensued, most notably with Larry Scott, then at Reno (University of 
Nevada), who I subsequently visited and with whom I have had much interaction 
involving the International Symposia on Nonbenzenoid Aromatics as it used to be 
called. The meeting was followed by a few days back in Utah and then a lecture 
tour in Germany that was generously hosted by Emanuel Vogel. 

I flew to London, gave a lecture at University College and met Peter Garratt, 
and then attended to a few family matters before moving on to Cologne. Ema- 
nuel had set up an excellent speaking tour encompassing some eight universities 
over two weeks that began in Cologne. The tour gave me better recognition in the 
country, and led to many return visits. Of course, there were returns to Geneva 

-67- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

and Saarbriicken as well as time in Freiburg with Prinzbach. I made many new 
contacts, not least Klaus Mullen (now Director of The Max Planck Institute for 
Polymer Research in Mainz), and Curt Wentrup and his wife Edeline who had 
worked with Miiller in Geneva some years earlier. I got to know Manfred Regitz 
better than simply over dinner in SLC and saw him a on a number of subsequent 
visits. Sadly, he suffered a serious stroke in Paris in the late 1 990s that essentially 
terminated his career in chemistry and forced him into early retirement. The last 
stop on the tour was at Heidelberg where my host was Richard Neidlein of the 
Pharmacy School. We got along well and have interacted both in Germany and in 
NZ many times. In fact, Richard subsequently embarked on aspects of cyclopro- 
parene chemistry and, being of the sort of individual who would never do things by 
halves, made significant quantities of the highly odoriferous cyclopropabenzene 
(27). However, there were difficulties at the University as the odour of the com- 
pound, when coupled with concerns that it advanced alopecia (baldness), led to a 
ban on its preparation and use there. After this, I became aware that molecule 27 
can be detected nasally at the level of 1 ppb, but I am unsure just where that figure 
came from - perhaps the Heidelberg University health professionals who had con- 
tacted me. It is important to note here that there have been no adverse health effects 
in Wellington, save for the occasional headache, and this from a 35 year period of 
working with the compound(s). 

The Utah project that I had been working on had developed but, in itself, never 
appeared in print save for review documents. What had been decided was to cou- 
ple Stang's expertise with unsaturated carbenes to our own in the cycloproparene 
area, with a view ultimately to deliver the first methylenecycloproparene. Our 



parent that 47 and analogues 49 would need a synthetic procedure that carried the 
aromatic ring while the exocyclic alkene was located in place. Thus, a retrosyn- 
thetic analysis (the term was beginning to be used) led us to propose deprotonation 
of the arene, capture of the anion with trimethylsilyl chloride and deprotonation of 
the monosilylated cycloproparene so formed, so that the anion could be captured 
by a carbonyl-containing compound in a silyl-Wittig sequence. This was expected 
to deliver the alkene 49 directly as shown in Scheme 17. There was insufficient 
time in SLC to initiate this work except for the synthesis of 27, which was then 




approach involved the addition of unsaturated 



Scheme 16 



47 



cMe 2 carbene, generated from 2-methylpropenyl tri- 
flate, to 1,4-dihydronaphthalene. This gave the 
exocyclic alkene 46 that was expected to doubly 
dehydrogenate to the sought after arene 47. This 

cMe 2 not j ia pp en as 0 p en i n g of the three-membered 

ring was the preferred path, giving alkene 48 
(Scheme 16). From these studies it became ap- 



-68- 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

returned to NZ in a sealed thick-walled glass ampoule ^\ h BuLi 
by conventional air mail delivery. It was my students k^^^H " 
in Wellington who brought things to fruition. The col- 27 I 

0 £ ' Me 3 SiCl| 

laboration with Peter that my sabbatical began was ' 
ongoing and lasted some twenty-one years giving ^X^siMe 3 ^ BuLi ^\siMe 3 

twenty communications, papers and reviews. %^ h 

|r 2 c=o 

Our final morning in the US started as it had be- 
gun nine months earlier - in Los Angeles and with |T JCX* 83 " Me3Si ? [T^t&gt; = K R 
breakfast at Denny's. Unlike our arrival, we were into R r 4g R 

pancakes and all things American and we made the Scheme 17 
most of it for the last time. Our Air New Zealand flight home provided time for 
reflection on what had been highly successful professionally and a truly wonderful 
time in our family life. Unlike my departure in 1968, this was to a homeland that 
I was not going to leave. 



Advances in Chemistry - At What Cost? 

With David Officer having left the lab in 1 98 1 without being replaced, the hope 
for future research assistance had rested on the two honours students that joined 
me before I left for Utah. Both Barry Dent and Cliff Randall got on well with 
their honours research and elected to return for PhD study despite my being out of 
the country. Barry had gained a 1 st class honours degree along with several other 
prestigious awards, and returned with a UGC postgraduate scholarship to take on 
the challenges left by David to synthesize a cyclopropa[/]phenanthrene. By com- 
parison, Cliff had not achieved as highly in his honours year, but his upper second 
qualification was enough for him to be awarded a teaching assistantship, which he 
took up in late February, 1982. The provision of junior lectureships in chemistry 
was terminated by VUW through its Dean of Science, but the Department had 
retained a few assistantships to continue at least some PhD sponsorship. 

Cliff had used his honours year to delineate the route to halocyclopropaben- 
zenes from tetrahalobicyclo[4.1.0]heptanes and found that the presence of a labile 
bromo or chloro substituent in the six-membered ring indeed led to triple dehydro- 
genation. Such elimination sequences had been studied earlier but the precise route 
by which the product(s) were formed remained in doubt. Our studies, initiated for 
us by Martin Banwell, showed that, by using a mixed halide, the halogen retained 
in the product arene 50 or 51 was that from the six-membered ring of the trans-2,3- 
or 3,4-dihalo starting material (Scheme 18). Moreover, the 2,3-dihalo compounds 
had the 2-halogen on the opposite face to the three-membered as shown from 
X-ray crystal structure. As will be obvious from Scheme 18, the major thrust of 
this work was to generate the two possible didehydrobenzenes, 52 and 53, by 

-69- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 




subsequent dehydrohalogenation. This Cliff did using the complex base system of 
sodium amide/sodium r-butoxide in tetrahydrofuran and, in the presence of furan, 
the two benzynes were trapped as the angular and linear Diels-Alder adducts 54 
and 55, respectively. The structures were confirmed from Ag(I)/MeOH opening 
of the three-membered rings to the same naphthalenyl methyl ether 56 that was 
independently synthesized. The results were published in 1983. 45 

During my time with Peter Stang, the competence of Yitzhak Apeloig, both 
as an experimentalist and a theoretician had come to impress me. Having neither 
computer nor software, let alone the needed expertise to carry out a computational 
study of the didehydrobenzenes 52 and 53, I approached him to see if he would 
be interested in assessing the compounds for us; this led to another on-going col- 
laboration of almost 20 years. Of course, in the early-mid 1980s the personal 
computer had not arrived and computation, as it was, was far from easy to per- 
form. Worse still, the basis sets then available did not replicate the cycloproparene 
geometry well. Yitzhak and his students persevered with parent hydrocarbon 27, 
subsequently to publish in 1986 a paper in the Journal of the American Chemi- 
cal Society entitled Cyclopropabenzene. Geometry, Electronic Structure, Strain, 
Reactivity, and the Question of Bond Fixation. A Theoretical Study. 46 This was fol- 
lowed by another on 52 and 53 that showed the pair to be the most highly strained 
benzyne derivatives yet prepared, having strain energies in excess of 700 kJ/mol. 
The angular isomer 52 is the more strained (by some 1 0 kJ/mol) as the distortions 
imposed by benzyne itself sit more comfortably upon 27 in a linear rather than 
angular manner. 47 What is interesting here is that in the mid- 1 980s the time needed 
to complete each computation was long, and the only computer that Yitzhak had 
access to capable of handling the job was that in Technion's (Israel Institute of 
Technology's) administration. This was taken over for small ring calculations dur- 
ing the summer months when staff were absent. This cannot have been all bad as 
Yitzhak rose to become President of the Technion from 2001 to 2009. In 1999, a 
book World Records in Chemistry was published by Wiley that includes benzynes 
52 and 53 as then, and even now, they remain the most highly strained benzynes 
recorded. 



-70- 



57 




SiMe 3 



SiMe 3 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

Having completed this work, Cliff moved on to the synthesis of our desired 
planarized cycloproparenes, namely those carrying an alkene at the CI position, 
the alkylidenecycloproparenes exemplified by 49 of Scheme 17. Cliff was able to 
show that in the naphthalene series, methylene derivatives could easily be synthe- 
sized, not by following the path of Scheme 1 7, but by modifying it because mono- 
silylation of the naphthalene could not be controlled easily. However, disilylation 
was readily brought about in good yield to give 57 which, in turn, underwent desi- 
lylation with f-BuOK to the ensuing oc-silyl anion that readily coupled with aryl- 
containing carbonyls. This gave the much sought after olefins as highly coloured 
crystalline compounds in good yields, as demonstrated by the yellow-orange 58 
of Scheme 19; this was obtained, ultimately, in 
almost quantitative yield. In this way, a range 
of naphthalene derivatives was soon prepared 
and the work extended to the benzene series. 
This was more problematic as the benzenoid 
oc-silyl anion has less stability and the entire 
sequence, although successful, gave rise to 
products in yields of little more than 50%. 48 
Not surprisingly, Cliff successfully completed 

his doctoral study. The work he did was demanding and its execution was due to 
his excellent 'pair of hands' that seem to have been the trademark of his career in 
mass spectrometry in the NZ Crown Research Institute environment. The gambit 
of properties of these new compounds took us in a new direction and involved us 
in many years of fascinating study. 

While Cliff was underway with benzynes and alkenes, Barry Dent was pursu- 
ing cyclopropa[/]phenanthrenes. His initial studies followed from those of David 
Officer, and honed to the delivery of the gem-dichloro derivative employing a route 

that uses a 9- or 9, 1 0-disubstituted phenanthrene 
-ci carrying an electron-donating substituent. With a 
nucleofugic substituent, subsequent elimination is 
facilitated, with the first successes coming from the 
addition of dichlorocarbene to 9-phenylselenophen- 
anthrene, oxidation of the product to selenoxide and 
then ejection of PhSeOH. Although not as simple 
as implied, methyl 9-phenanthrenecarboxylate was 
obtained via intermediate 59 (Scheme 20) by a 
scheme 20 route that mirrored the behaviour of 27. 49 In order 

to complete the study, Barry skilfully pursued the parent molecule 41 by employ- 
ing the C 1 unsubstituted methylselenide 60 successfully, as shown in Scheme 2 1 . 
The route to 60 involved monodechlorination of the dichlorocarbene adduct of 





C0 2 Me 




■ 71 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

9-trimethylsilylphenanthrene, ?-butoxide desilylation and capture of the ensuing 
cyclopropene by the anion of methylselenide as 60. Methylation of this then gave 
the dimethylselenonium tetrafluoroborate that lost dimethylselenide when treated 
with r-BuOK at ambient temperature. In the presence of furan, a mixture of the 
three Diels-Alder adducts 62-64 was isolated and then separated into the indepen- 
dent components in yields of 13, 20 and 7%, respectively. The formation of 62 and 
63 represents 83% of the isolated adducts and shows that not only is 41 formed in 
this reaction but that it is a kinetically more stable product than the angular (Cl- 
C9b) alkene 61. Work in Cologne by Vogel's group (that included David Officer) 
also led to 41 by their traditional flash vacuum pyrolytic retrodiene process, and 
this allowed for its isolation free from side products. It is a moderately stable solid 
at -78 °C but decomposes over several days. The results were published jointly in 
1985. 50 




Scheme 21 



I regard the results of Barry and Cliff as probably the most significant from 
my career. These two doctoral students made the advances recorded above from 
research that started while I was on sabbatical leave in Utah and then saw my pres- 
ence in the university dwindle from March 1983 for close to a year. I had not felt 
well for some time and my GP had been unable to offer any solution. During the 
stay of Prof. Mord Rubin (Israel Institute of Technology) I was referred to the local 
hospital for a coronary check but discharged. That was until March 25, 1 983, when 

-72- 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

I suffered a significant heart attack - though the night duty doctor did not pick it 
and gave me a significant dose of morphine that kept me more than happy for the 
day. After diagnosis, and the mandatory stay in the coronary care unit of Welling- 
ton Hospital, my cardiologist came to the conclusion that I could be well served 
by arterial grafting and approached the surgical team. At that time, coronary artery 
bypass surgery had only been introduced recently to Wellington but I was regarded 
as a suitable candidate and underwent the operation some four months later, in 
July. Anaesthesia in 1983 was markedly more invasive than in the 21 s1 century (as 
I know from experience) and it took six months before its effects finally dissipated. 
Although I was back to the office some six weeks after surgery, even doing some 
lecturing, I doubt if my presence was especially effective. During my recuperation 
Barry and Cliff visited, brought their results and provided much needed stimula- 
tion. That they achieved what they did, essentially unsupervised, says much about 
their own perseverance. Cliff married and left to take up a position with the then 
DSIR, while Barry spent a postdoctoral period in Alberta with Prof. Derek Clive 
before also joining the govern- 
ment laboratories. Both stayed 
in the service through its tran- 
sition into the Crown Research 
Institutes. Barry developed a 
speciality in the synthesis of la- 
belled reference compounds in 
1987 that extended to custom 
organic synthesis. He bought 
a business unit from his then 
employer in 1996 and began 
his own company BDG Synthe- 
sis that now employs six PhD 
chemists providing custom organic synthesis; it is a well recognised organization. 
At the time that the pair left my group, I had made several significant decisions 
and refocused my life. 

Things at Victoria University were undergoing change when I took my sab- 
batical at Utah. My second US sojourn and European visit had brought me to the 
conclusion that the time was right to seek a more senior appointment elsewhere, 
and this I had begun to do. VUW elected to place a freeze on personal chairs, 
announced it in 1982 and, effective from the following year, it stayed in place 
until 1991, and so any advance could only come with a move. The impact of my 
infarct and heart surgery put an end to any thought of move, as I was no longer 
eligible for the essential insurance covers that would be associated with reloca- 
tion within or beyond NZ; I settled to the knowledge that my career was to be 

-73- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

intimately linked with VUW for the remainder of my working life. 1981 had seen 
major restructuring of Departments with the autocratic Head being replaced by an 
elected Chairperson (limited tenn appointment) with an Executive that comprised 
the Professors and one representative of the sub-professorial staff. In Chemistry, 
the Chairperson (masculine and feminine were displaced and now the title 'Chair' 
is deemed sufficient!) was Dr. Stuart Smedley, a physical chemist. This significant 
change marked the beginning of a reorganization of the NZ universities during the 
ensuing decade, as illustrated by, e.g. each offering its own postdoctoral fellow- 
ships. As my medical advisors had given a prognosis of five years survival post- 
surgery were I lucky, I was faced with a rapid change in lifestyle that needed to be 
effective. I simply had to become more efficient and more selective in what I did 
so as to gain more quality time with the family, and this I did. 

In the summer of 1 984 1 was approached by two of my compatriots from DSIR, 
Neil Milestone and Graeme Gainsford, to see if I would be willing to accept nomi- 
nation to the NZIC 2 nd Vice-Presidential role. That year, the Wellington Branch 
had the customary right to make such a nomination, which meant a three-year 
commitment to the Institute if I was elected. Having been merely a year post- 
coronary and with serious concerns about the work level, I was not easy to per- 
suade. However, my former roles with NZIC had been more than worthwhile and, 
after some serious discussions and considerable thought, I acceded to the request 
and was elected unopposed (the tradition). I have never regretted the decision, as 
it marked the beginnings of what has now been 27 years of continuous service to 
the profession of chemistry by way of the national New Zealand organization in 
one guise or another; it has also provided much personal satisfaction. The roles 
took me through the Vice-Presidencies to President for the 1986-1987 year with a 
workload that was shared by one of the Chemistry secretaries, who attended to the 
entire (and significant) correspondence that was needed, much done on Saturdays. 
The presidential year took me to Japan for the first time. I was the NZIC observer 
at the 1987 planning meeting for the 1989 Honolulu pan-Pacific Chemical Society 
Congress that was named Pacifichem at that Tokyo meeting. It kept me involved as 
the convener of the Young Scholars Selection Panel. NZ and Australia were admit- 
ted as full partners in 1990 but more of that later. 

During 1984, Victoria advised staff that it would fund a strictly limited num- 
ber of three-year postdoctoral positions - no more than two or three across all 
disciplines. The selection of the projects for funding was to be made from rec- 
ommendations placed by Departments. This feature has remained, although there 
has been a marked tightening of the criteria and the type of work that fits to the 
accountability regimes of the 21 st century. In any event, Stuart Smedley solicited 
proposals from chemistry staff and invited those who had so done to attend for 
interview with those of the Departmental Executive not involved. I was fortunate 

-74- 



A Young Family, a Career, and Momentum 

in having my proposal referred, via the Faculty, to the VUW selection committee 
and subsequently funded. Robin Ferrier was also a contender but he disputed the 
Departmental decision and, I gathered later, took his concerns to the Faculty and 
perhaps higher. 

The fruitful times with Barry and Cliff in the laboratory saw the first of the 
jointly published papers with Peter Stang 48 of that valuable and viable 21 year 
collaboration. This work has had many successes and given much enjoyment and, 
as Peter Garratt of London's University College put it on one of my visits: The 
methylenecycloproparenes have been good to you. So it was that my proposal for 
a postdoctoral fellow was for further study of the cycloproparenes. Unlike many 
organizations, VUW itself called for applications to the areas chosen, ranked them 
and then sought the academic's approval to make an offer to the person it had 
selected. The best of the chemistry applicants was Simon Buckland, a graduating 
PhD chemist from London's City University. He had a wide range of skills that 
impressed, was offered and accepted the post, and joined me in February 1985. He 
stayed for more than two years, became engaged and married a New Zealander 
during his tenure, and left for a position with DSIR's Chemistry Division. His 
researches led to some ten publications that appeared between 1986 and 1990. 
After the mandatory report was submitted to the Scholarships Committee, its then 
convener (and subsequent University Chancellor), Prof. Tim Beaglehole, saw me 
to tell me that since this man had done so much good work I could not possibly 

need another postdoctoral and I did not get funding for another until 1993 

when Mark Cooney joined me from Larry Scott's lab. 

The time after the 1983 surgery until 1985 was spent coming to terms with 
teaching and research, and retaining good health. I did a minimum of travelling, 
supervised four Honours students and saw Cliff and Barry through to completion. 
Of the Honours students, Anna de Raadt gained a l sl -class degree and went on to 
PhD, not with me but with Robin Ferrier. During this time and until 1989, my sur- 
geon required that I see him on an annual basis for a check-up. Always the progno- 
sis remained unchanged - if lucky, I might live for another five years. From about 
1985, his daughter was taking chemistry at VUW and much of the consultation 
time was taken up discussing her progress and the prospects of subsequent gradu- 
ate study; she completed an Honours degree with my colleague, David Weath- 
erburn. I maintained the collaboration with Peter Stang and developed that with 
Yitzhak Apeloig, to the extent that our computational work continued into the 21 st 
century. Peter visited NZ for the first time in 1984 to attend the 7 lh IUPAC Physical 
Organic Chemistry meeting in Auckland, which marked the major contributions 
of retiring Professor Peter de la Mare. He travelled much of the country giving lec- 
tures and spent time in Wellington prior to our both attending and presenting work. 
By the beginning of the next year, 1985,1 was encouraged to do all the things that I 

- 75 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

wanted to do and to return to full participation in all things chemical. VUW funded 
conferences outside NZ only once every three years and, as I had not been to a 
conference since the Las Vegas ACS meeting in 1981, 1 elected to attend ISNA-5 
in St Andrews (Scotland) that summer. Yitzhak Apeloig and Mord Rubin at Israel's 
Technion were keen to meet with me and so my time was extended to allow for 
two weeks in Israel under the auspices of the Technion Vice-Presidential Fund. 

So it was that in the summer of 1 985 I travelled to to Tel Aviv (amid the delays 
imposed by El Al the day after the aircraft hijack in Beirut, Lebanon). The time 
at the Technion was very valuable and allowed me to cement the collaborative 
relationship with Yitzhak. With visits to Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and the Weizmann 
Institute, the entire time was both chemically stimulating and personally satisfy- 
ing. A bonus was the conducted tour of Jerusalem that I was given by Shalom Sarel 
(Professor of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the Hebrew University and 1 960-64 
President of the Israel Chemical Society who, incidentally, still attended Israeli 
chemistry meetings in 2009, his 92 nd year). Shalom had visited Wellington in the 
late 1 970s while on leave at ANU and, as an amateur archaeologist, he gave me a 
spectacular tour that included some of the underground excavations, with access 
and egress through a synagogue and a home! Return to London was followed by 
the ISNA meeting that was chaired by the late Charles Rees with Peter Garratt as 
secretary. Not only were many of the attendees known to me (Vogel and Prinzbach 
were featured speakers) but the meeting provided an opportunity to get to know 
other stalwarts of novel aromatic chemistry. My attendance there was followed 
by an invitation to speak at the 1989 meeting in Japan and the beginning of an as- 
sociation with the ISNA movement that lasted through ISNA- 12 also in Japan, by 
then Novel Aromatics rather than Nonbenzenoid Aromatics. 



-76- 



Chemistry and Service 

A Postdocfor Planar Strain 



Simon Buckland arrived in Wellington in February 1985 and, as much of his PhD 
study had centred on photochemical reactions, he began his programme by at- 
tempting to synthesize some heterocyclic cycloproparenes. This did not eventu- 
ate but he was able to trap the diradical intermediates that were involved in the 
3//-pyrazole photolyses. With Cliff in the throes of completing his degree, the 
time was right for Simon to move to the newly discovered exocyclic alkenes. The 
strong and highly unpleasant odour of cyclopropabenzene (27) was such that the 
only work with it in Salt Lake City had been limited to my own synthesis of the 
compound in 1982. The corresponding naphthalene 36, however, although some- 
what smelly, provided no such impediment and aspects of our programme involv- 
ing derivatives of 36 were carried out in Utah by PhD student Qiu Mei. 

A detailed study of the alkylidenecycloproparenes was of such fascination to 
us because of the strain imposed to the nucleus by the three-membered ring, with 
planarization of the molecular framework and the expectation of charge donation 
to, and withdrawal from, the aromatic core, dependent on the nature of the exocy- 
clic substituents (Scheme 22). The schematic 
summary has appeared before in various guis- 
es. Simon began his contribution by extend- 
ing Cliff's initial syntheses to the first of the 
push-pull benzocalicenes and benzotriahepta- 
fulvalenes as depicted by 65-68 in the benzene scheme 22 

series; Qiu Mei repeated the experiments in the naphthalene series and prepared 
69 as well. These compounds clearly showed that the cycloproparene could be 
annulated with both donating (cycloheptatrienylidene, cf. 66, 67) and electron 
withdrawing (cyclopentadienylidene, 65) moieties. We studied spectrochemical, 
spectroelectrochemical and photoelectron properties of these compounds using 
the facilities available not only in Salt Lake City but also, in Eugene, Oregon 
and Washington DC. The behaviour of the range of compounds towards electro- 
philes and nucleophiles, oxidizing and reducing agents and other general reagents 
followed and a short review on the area was published in Accounts of Chemical 
Research by Peter and me. 51 By this time, Simon Buckland was reaching the end 

-77- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 



R 



R' 




CM 



Ar 



Ar 




69 



Ar 



Ar (or H) 



of his time at VUW and I was 
fortunate in having the fund- 
ing for a 1987 Teaching As- 
sistant. However, there was no 
VUW student qualified and in- 
terested in the position and the 
problem became one of find- 
ing an appropriate appointee. 



By chance, a student from Fudan University in Shanghai, Qi (Chi) Lu, wrote 
to see if there was any possibility of studying for PhD in Wellington. As Fudan is 
one of the oldest and most prestigious of China's C9 League universities (China's 
Ivy League equivalent), competence seemed likely and the references bore this 
out. Chi accepted the teaching post, fully aware that he would need to communi- 
cate effectively in English, and he arrived in late 1986. He studied English hard, 
improved his ability with it and took on the teaching work, but not without trepida- 
tion. His chemical knowledge was far superior to his NZ peers in the laboratory 
and he slowly came to grips with us and we him. During the Chinese Cultural 
Revolution he and his family were moved forcibly to Tibet and he was required to 
study music. I was astonished at how quickly he gained his scientific knowledge 
after he was allowed to return to Shanghai. However, the transition from the rigid 
controls of home to the open society of NZ overwhelmed him and he was found to 
have taken clothing for his sister from one of Wellington's stores. The then Chair- 
man of Chemistry, John Tomlinson, provided outstanding support and rallied the 
Department behind Chi. I provided the Court with a statement, attended for his 
hearing, and found the Bench to be occupied by the only Wellington judge that I 
knew. Chi received a small fine, never to err again. This did not mean that the Chi- 
nese Embassy let him off. Staff members (presumably their secret service) were 
sent to the university in search of him and we responded by putting Chi in a secure 
location. I made an appointment with the Embassy's First Secretary Lin Xinglan, 
and sought to smooth matters so that Chi could continue his studies. The one vivid 
recollection of that meeting that I retain is that had the slight Mrs. Lin decided I 
was not to leave, I would never have got past her! Chi stayed, and I have kept the 
New Year card the Lin's sent at the end of 1987 to remind me of that auspicious 
meeting. To the best of my knowledge, Chi was the first Chinese national to study 
for a higher degree at VUW, certainly in chemistry and the sciences. 

One of the things that we had wanted to do in extending our exocyclic alkene 
chemistry was to make meaningful measurements of the polarities of the com- 
pounds. However, there was no suitable cell available for the small quantities of 
the compounds that we had. The original Guggenheim procedure had used the 
now impractical 100 mL of ca. 0.1 M solutions of the compounds, and conse- 



-78- 




Chemistry and Service 

quently a miniature capacitance cell had to be designed. Our then highly skilled 
glassblower, Ian Crighton, rose to the challenge, obtained the remaining supply 
of small variable capacitors from DSIR and built two cells 
(see opposite) with which readings were taken from ca. 2 
mL of 0.05 - 0.15 M benzene solutions. Impedance read- 
ings were taken with the cell open and closed (done by ro- 
tating the glass socket spanner shown protruding above the 
cap) and the necessary refractive index measurements were 
from an Abbe refractometer. The cell gave results for known 
compounds that lay within 5% of the literature values, and 
for every alkylidenecycloproparene whose dipole moment 
was determined, a standard was measured before and after- 
wards. Eventually, the dipole moments of almost 90 com- 
pounds were obtained in this way. It was Chi Lu who began expanding the series 
of compounds and he made the first dipole measurements on the known and new 
compounds. In 1987, when he started this work, we had no personal computers, 
but my good friend and physical chemistry colleague, Jim Pearce, lent us his HP 
75C programmed microprocessor to make the mathematical transformations. Our 
initial report covered the dipole moments of the then known compounds and this 
was followed by one on the ambiphilicity of the system. 52 It had been our intention 
to compare the polarities of cyclopentadienylidene and cycloheptatrienylidene 65 
and 67. Indeed, the dipole moment data on 65 (R = H; \i 2.6 D) and 67 (R = H; [i 1 .2 
D) could easily be taken as supporting cyclopentadienyl anion and cycloheptatrie- 
nyl cation (tropylium ion) character, respectively. However, further computational 
results from Apeloig were convincing in having both dipoles caused by electron 
donation from the cycloproparene core; the seven-membered ring was sustaining 
an increase in electron density. Thus, we turned our attention to 
the well recognised electron donor, ./V-dimethylaminophenyl. 
Chi made the benzo and naphtho derivatives 70 and 71 in short 
order and recorded their dipoles as 3.0 and 2.2 D, respectively. 
The ability of the cycloproparene to sustain both positive and 
negative charge was clear, especially when the effects of UV- 
vis data and nitrogen quaternization were considered. The dual 
nature of the cycloproparene was confirmed by subsequent experimental, crystal- 
lographic and computational study. I collected my first Recognition of Research 
award and a DSc degree from Victoria University that year. 

The year of 1987 was notable for several other reasons: the textbook Organic 
Photochemistry underwent revision for a second edition (published in 1 988), I was 
President of the NZIC, and we had visits from Al Padwa from Emory University, 
Atlanta (with whom Tony Woolhouse had spent a period of leave from DSIR) 

-79- 




NMe 2 



70, R = H 

71, RR = 

benzo fusion 



NMe 2 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

and Merle Battiste. Merle spent his sabbatical at Canterbury as an Erskine Fellow 
with Jim Coxon as bequest funds have always allowed Canterbury to attract more 
international visitors than Victoria. Jim had spent his first leave with Merle in 
Florida in the 1970s after discussing the U of F and Merle with me. Merle's first 
visit to NZ was all the more memorable as he met his (subsequent) second wife, 
Jan, while in Christchurch. While both of these occasions were stimulating in their 
own right, a third visitor sought permission to come and meet with me. He distin- 
guished himself with Margaret, becoming known as 'the vegetarian' - he only told 
me of his dietary needs on the way home to stay with us with a lamb-based dinner 
almost ready! He was a crystallographer, Roland Boese by name, and his visit her- 
alded not just 20 years of collaboration but a strong lifelong friendship with him 
and his family. He arrived from Essen in Germany en route to the International 
Union of Crystallography meeting in Western Australia, gave us a great lecture, 
and asked me if he might have some of our small-ring compounds as he wished to 
focus his crystallographic study towards strained molecules. Our samples requir- 
ing structural characterization were on his desk before he got back home! What his 
analyses showed us was that, while the aryl substituents of 71 were twisted out of 
plane, the extent of the distortion was much less than in comparable compounds 
- the absence of pendant hydrogen atoms adjacent to the ring fusion sites allowed 
for the aryl rings to be closer to planarity with a twist angle of ca. 28° rather than 
the ca. 45° of diarylethenes. The expectation of small twist angles had had us seek 
monoaryl derivatives and the synthesis of 72 had much in its favour. 

Chi Lu appeared in my office one morning to seek advice on how to get his 
glassware clean which, despite much washing, glowed green! This was not his 
inability, rather the exceptional fluorescence of 72 that he had just prepared. It 
triggered a further aspect of our study, namely an examina- h 

tion of the absorption/emission characteristics of the alkyli- k^JJ-^^ 5 ) 

dene compounds. In that era, VUW had no fluorescence spec- \) 

72 ^ 

trophotometers and there was nothing available to allow us NMe 2 
to study the excited states involved. However, fluorescence measurements were 
made using equipment at the Otago Medical School in Wellington's Public Hos- 
pital, and we enlisted the services of DSIR's Hugh Melluish, NZ's leader in the 
field of photophysical measurement and a member of the IUPAC Commission on 
Photochemistry. His work provided a reliable absolute quantum yield (® 72 = 96 in 
both cyclohexane and acetonitrile) and led to the conclusion that the exceptional 
fluorescence was due to a twisted internal charge transfer state. The compound 
and its potential as a laser dye were placed under provisional patent in 1 988 by the 
University at the instigation of Ted Harvey. In those days, the recognition of intel- 
lectual property rights and the facility to promote their exploitation had not been 
thought of in most academic institutions and it advanced no further. Multinationals 

-80- 



Chemistry and Service 

overseas with minimal exposure in New Zealand were interested in having access 
to the compound but no one was willing to provide financial support to an aca- 
demic institution here to advance the study. The data were published subsequently 
in the chemical literature. 53 

That same year of 1987 saw Sarah Russell begin her PhD studies as my last 

University Grants Committee postgraduate scholar. Her work was focussed on 

our continuing exploration of structural types carrying a fused cyclopropene ring. 

Specifically, she studied nonbenzenoid cycloproparenes and was able to provide 

the sole air-stable cyclopropa[10]annulene, 73, whilst c k 

exploiting much three-membered ring chemistry in poly- /T^r^j^P 

cyclic assemblies. Chlorine-containing 73 was easily v ^= J ~-^=^ H 

73 

reduced to parent cyclopropa[10]annulene, a molecule 
synthesized by Vogel using the Billups route many years earlier. An interesting 
consequence of her work was the ^-facial selectivity of the chloro-substituted tri- 
cyclic diene 74 recorded in, for example, carbene additions. Following a lecture at 
Imperial College in London late in 1991, Henry Rezpa was keen to perfonn some 
calculations and they led to a Perkin Communication that was prepared over three 
days by circulating the draft manuscript via e-mail from Wellington to London to 
Essen and back; electronic mail had certainly made its impact! 




Service in New Zealand and Beyond 

My year as President of the New Zealand Institute of Chemistry started on October 
1, 1986. At that time, the Institute was a fully professional organization requiring 
appropriate qualification in the subject to gain membership and job advertisements 
had (traditionally) carried the qualification in chemistry needed for the job in ques- 
tion. All of the various professional demands of qualification and registration were 
dealt with by long standing Registrar, Denis Hogan (1927-2006). However, soci- 
ety and professionalism were beginning to change and much of my year was spent 
holding the two factions of the organization at bay. On the one hand, there existed 
those who felt that professionalism and all its ramifications had to be retained 
to ensure that standards were maintained and the profession appropriately recog- 
nised. On the other hand, a more vocal group foresaw a decline in membership, a 
departure from professional needs, and a requirement for the organization to be- 
come more open. Membership and number predictions dominated and the debate 
was rampant. For my part, I saw the environment changing but felt that it was too 
soon for NZIC to make major change. In fact, it did not until after Denis had re- 
signed as Registrar some while later. The growth in membership that deregulation 
had predicted did not eventuate and current numbers are somewhat lower than they 
were more than 20 years ago. As 1987 President, I was required to visit all of the 

-81 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

NZIC's six Branches and lecture at their main and outlying centres, ten lectures 
in all, and I did this giving an overview of small rings in chemistry. As for most 
incumbents to the position, making these visits was the highlight of my year. I 
was shown generous hospitality and everyone went out of their way for me. I was 
given tours of the Ivan-Watkins-Dow plant at New Plymouth that had the noto- 
riety of being the last site to make 2,4-D and 2,4, 5-T, NZ's cottage acid industry 
producing hydrochloric and sulfuric acids as Scientific Services Laboratory Ltd. in 
Napier and run by Gerry Hussher, Nelson's Cawthron Institute and InvercargilPs 
aluminium smelter at Tiwai Point. In those days Institute Presidents did not stay 
on the Council for a subsequent year and the end of my tenure provided more time 
for other things. 

What I will always associate with my 1987 NZIC visit to Invercargill and Ti- 
wai Point is the fact that it was in mid-winter with a howling gale blowing from 
the west, difficult to walk against and chilling to the bone. After taking the train 
to Dunedin and meeting the main Otago Branch members, I was back in Welling- 
ton for a day or so before making my first visit to Japan. The transition from the 
cold southernmost point of NZ to Tokyo's July heat and humidity was something 
more than dramatic! As NZIC President and an academic, I was the one chosen 
to represent the organization as an observer at a Pacific Basin Societies' Planning 
Meeting for the 1989 Congress to be held in Hawaii. I had know of this meeting 
sufficiently far in advance to be able to set up a meeting with Prof. Renji Okazaki 
at Tokyo University as he, too, had become involved with cycloproparenes. In 
correspondence, he asked me to allow him to set visits to a couple of other univer- 
sities and so I also attended Waseda and Osaka. The visit with Okazaki initiated 
much correspondence and personal contact, and Renji came to Wellington in 1998. 
Waseda University provided my first experience of a Japanese private institution 
and the formalities that go with such visits. After my lecture a selected group of 
graduate students each presented a summary of the research they were involved 
with, but this was decidedly formal and in front of the Faculty Dean, the Head of 
School and several chemistry staff. As one with no experience of the country or 
its customs, it was not at all clear if I should simply thank the student or question 
him/her. I elected to put questions, found the session to take more than the allot- 
ted time, and secured a place in history! For Osaka, I was met at Tokyo Railway 
Station by Ichiro Murata and taken to Kyoto by train where I spent a Sunday at 
the end of the hurricane season - and got thoroughly drenched seeing the magnifi- 
cent sights - even the Shinkansen (bullet trains) were cancelled by the ferocious 
downpour. Osaka University was reached easily by bus on the Monday morning 
and the discussions and lecture there was the first of many years of interaction with 
Murata-san. The late Monday afternoon bullet train had me in Tokyo well ahead 
of the morning committee meeting and, as is so common with our Japanese hosts, 

-82- 



Chemistry and Service 

I was met at the station and escorted to the Hilltop Hotel in Ochanomizu, close to 
the Chemical Society of Japan building. 

The Pacific Basin Societies meeting was a significant affair. The three organ- 
izing societies were the American (ACS), Canadian (CSC) and Japanese (CSJ) 
chemical societies, with the last as the host society. Michinori Old, a Professor of 
Chemistry from Tokyo University and former CSJ President was congress chair- 
man. Both NZIC and RACI had had observers for the 1984 Pan-Pacific meeting, 
and so we were invited in the same guise for the 1989 event. The meeting was held 
in the new CSJ building and the banner entry board welcomed all the delegates by 
name; Bob Breakspear was my RACI counterpart and President of that organiza- 
tion, and we were accompanied by Sang Up Choi (Korea) and Zhand Dehe (Chi- 
na). The last two took little part in the proceedings and were not further involved. 
The morning session was dominated by the search for an appropriate, easily recog- 
nisable name for the congress and it was the Japanese hosts that proposed the name 
Pacifichem; it could not be bettered, was unanimously accepted, and is now known 
to almost every chemist the world over. The various discussions that shaped the 
nature of the 1989 meeting were wide ranging and open to all. However, at an 
early break, Guy Dutton (1923-1997), Head of the Canadian delegation, took me 
aside to remind me that I was but an observer, that I had no voting rights, and that 
it was inappropriate of me to attempt to contribute. Those who know me will rec- 
ognize that such comments would never win me over. Indeed, I took precisely the 
opposite tack, contributed to my limit and came away as Chairman of the Young 
Scholars Fund that was set to bring some 25 young chemistry professionals from 
emerging countries to the 1989 meeting. 

But the comments and the meeting itself ran deeper than that with me. To me, 
it was clear that if Pacifichem was to survive as a truly Pacific Basin meeting then 
its organization had to involve more than three northern hemisphere societies. I 
spent much of the non-meeting time in Tokyo with the American delegation, Norm 
LeBel (1931-2003) and Chris Pruitt in particular. Norm, a Chemistry Professor at 
Wayne State University for more than four decades, is regarded as the 'Father of 
Pacifichem ' as he was involved from its inception to his death; we became firm 
friends. Chris, on the other hand, was an administrator par excellence and became 
Congress Manager for the 1995 and 2000 meetings. They both recognised the need 
to expand the organizing committee and saw involvement from Australasia as the 
only way forward. Early suggestions were for one member selected from between 
the two societies, but that would have had little chance of success in any early 
involvement. I left Tokyo with the view that an increase in the organizing societies 
from three was critical and, as NZ is but a small country, the expansion needed to 
encompass both NZ and Australia. Over the next two years, having gained NZIC 
approval, I made approaches to the RACI in Melbourne and secured an agreement 

-83- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

for that organization also to be an organizing society of Pacifichem were the ACS, 
CSC and CSJ willing to accept us. Securing the support of the ACS was easy as 
Norm was all for the expansion and he persuaded the Canadians for me. The more 
difficult task was to convince the Japanese that an increase in the size of the struc- 
ture would serve them well in the future. Norm LeBel and Chris Pruitt were gen- 
erous in ensuring that my time at Pacifichem 1989 was spent meeting individuals 
who could further our cause. They ensured that I left appreciating that Pacifichem 
extended beyond chemistry and national boundaries to international collaboration, 
cooperation and a demonstration of how peoples could live and work alongside 
one another in peace. 

I mentioned earlier that I was an invited speaker at ISNA-6 in Toyonaka, Osaka 
in 1989. 1 am sure that this came about from my 1987 interactions with Renji Oka- 
zaki, his colleague Hiizu Iwamura (then at Tokyo University), and Ichiro Murata. 
Murata was Conference Chairman and Iwamura its Treasurer. Returning to Japan 
to attend that meeting provided the chance to meet with Renji again in a more re- 
laxed atmosphere than the conference - a fact that has been a feature of my career, 
initially because conference leave overseas was only available every three years. 
This I did, but I also spent time discussing the Pacifichem issues with CSJ staff in 
Tokyo and then, much more seriously, at a meeting with Michinori Oki during the 
ISNA meeting and some months ahead of 'his' Pacifichem 1989. 1 had been told 
that Michinori Oki was of Samurai warrior descent and that was entirely believ- 
able from his tall solid stature and voice. My recollections of the meeting are that 
he was not too enthusiastic in expanding the organization as Australasia had few 
chemists and would be unable to contribute at an appropriate level. Nonetheless, 
we concluded with a favourable agreement and, in late 1990, after the post-con- 
gress 'wrap-up' meeting, I was informed that the membership bid had succeeded. 
Both NZIC and RACI have been involved continuously ever since and Korea 
(2005) and China (2010) joined subsequently. NZIC needed look no further than 
me for a willing Pacifichem representative. I was elected to the role in 1990 and 
attended the 1991 meeting to sign the agreement for Pacifichem 1995. I held the 
position until after my retirement (and inability to secure medical travel insurance 

for the US) in 2004. Participation at Pa- 
cifichem climbed from 1989 through the 
1 995 and 2000 meetings for it to become 
the largest chemistry event worldwide. 
There were well in excess of 1 1 ,000 reg- 
istrants for Pacifichem 2010 and some 
1 1 ,500 presentations. Those meetings in- 
volved a lot of hard work, none less than 
that done by Chris Pruitt and Stan Israel 
-84- 




Chemistry and Service 

(1944-2004), who joined the group with me in 1991. The pair had typed reports 
and programme proposals in everyone's room by the time we woke up, having not 
completed the typing and photocopying until well after midnight. The committee 
meeting in December 200 1 , at which the 2005 agreement was signed, was a clear 
demonstration of Pacifichem unity, being just two months after the shock of 9/1 1 . 

I am left with many memories of this work, of the terms of Michinori Old, 
Norm LeBel and Shinji Murai as Congress Chairman for 1989, 2000 and 2005, 
respectively, and of friendships strengthened, especially that with Paul Walter, 
congress treasurer superieur and an ACS president during that time. Indeed, at the 
1996 signing ceremony meeting Paul Walter was President-elect of the ACS and 
Ron Breslow, of Columbia University in New York City, was the then President 
close to the end of his term of office. I was more than aware of Ron's work in the 
small ring area of organic chemistry and that Merle Battiste had been his first PhD 
student with Bob Grubbs moving to Ron from Florida for his PhD in the mid-late 
1960s; we had not met and the opportunity was more than enjoyable. The sad 
loss of Norm LeBel in 2003 was superseded only by the untimely death of Stan 
Israel in 2004; he was, by then, a very close friend. In fact, he 
had wanted me to transfer to Texas State University in San 
Marcos, where monies for research would be provided without 
applications. Such a move from the comparatively low salary 
base of NZ would have meant major mortgage commitments, 
a feature I could not take on. As for the congresses themselves, 
I gather that I hold some sort of record in asking the waiting 
staff at Sheraton Waikiki to serve me dinner so that I could 
leave within 30 minutes, and also in setting judges on the Stu- 
dent Poster Award trail with minimal criteria to follow. I was 
given the duty only the day before the competition began and, 
as judges could only be gained at the last minute, the simplest of criteria, visual 
impact of the poster had to apply; the number of young lady winners proved high! 
I lost Christmas Day 2000 as the only flight I could get from Honolulu was on 
Christmas Eve crossing the date line and arriving on Boxing Day. Peter Stang 
joined the American delegation for the 2005 meeting and had to carry Stan's load 
as well as his own for the last year. 




More Chemistry and Some Recognition 

I have described Chi Lu's discovery of the highly fluorescent cycloproparene 72 
and Victoria placing the results under patent. He continued his studies after my 
NZIC Presidential year and laid the foundation of the invited lecture to ISNA-6. 
A substantial component of his PhD thesis work covered the synthesis of a large 

-85- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

range of exocyclic methylene compounds and then recording a range of phys- 
icochemical properties including the IR and laser Raman spectra, absorption and 
emission spectra, the molecular polarities and the 'H and 13 C NMR chemical shift 
data. A range of the compounds were subjected to crystallographic study by Bo- 
ese and his students and, as was noted earlier, the twist of the diaryl substituted 
derivatives is a mere 28°, while the monoaryl-substituted compounds have the 
exocyclic bound aromatic ring essentially coplanar with the cycloproparene core; 
fluorenylidene compound 65 is almost flat. Chi Lu completed his study by synthe- 
sizing dimer 75 from the C 1 carbene derived Ph Ph 



from our first cycloproparene 29, in higher 
yield than recorded in the literature and then 
explored the chemistry of dicyclopropanaph- 
thalene 76, again prepared in better yield than 
fonnerly recorded. Comparisons and correla- 




tions of the structural parameters of the three 

hydrocarbons show the geometry of 76 to lie between those of 27 and 36. Sadly, 
we were never able to transform 76 into its corresponding anion and provide exo- 
cyclic alkenes of either one or both of the three-membered rings; dialkylidene de- 
rivatives could have provided extended push-pull systems as illustrated by, e.g. 77. 

Two of Roland's students came to our NZ labs over our summer months, fore- 
runners of the now common German exchange students that Jim Johnston has 
regularly. In the late 1980s my students from Essen brought their own monies 
with them as VUW had nothing in place, though I was able to glean some summer 
research funds to assist a little. 

During 1988 one of the most dedicated of Honours students worked with me. 
Janet Bridle set to work attempting to generate cyclopropa-fused furans, a piece 
of work that provided interesting chemistry but not the desired compounds. It was 
brought to a publication state by Dr. Eva Lovett, who was here on leave from 
Petrolite Corporation of St. Louis (Missouri) in 1989. Janet gained a Hi Honours 
degree, spent time in the UK and married and, most distressingly, developed Toxic 
Shock Syndrome from which she never recovered and has been under continuous 
medical supervision for many years. Before her debilitating illness she was always 
keen to hear of developments, even thought seriously of returning for PhD study 
and was a joy to have had as a member of the team. During her year, Richard Nei- 
dlein visited NZ under the auspices of NZIC. It was the first of several visits that he 
made and our discussions were always profitable. However, Richard distinguished 
himself in more ways than he might have wished and caused an element of notori- 
ety in Wellington, and especially at our home where he was supposed to stay; his 
unannounced travelling companion was a female PhD student. 

As it was then six years since my last sabbatical, 1988 denoted the maximum 

-86- 



Chemistry and Service 

accumulation of leave entitlement. By this time, our eldest son, Mark, was in the 
latter part of his school education and, with public examinations, it was impracti- 
cal to take leave as a family overseas. My programme involved an October return 
to Utah for a few days with Peter Stang, visits to various places in the US, and then 
on to London and another lecture tour of Germany and Switzerland. This was fol- 
lowed by a return to the Southern Hemisphere to give a plenary lecture at the Mel- 
bourne Synthesis meeting in early December and then the bulk of the summer at 
Monash University carrying out some flash vacuum pyrolysis studies with Roger 
Brown. The northern lecture tour was useful in several ways. Firstly, it provided 
more time with Peter to settle future directions of the cycloproparene work face 
to face, and that was coupled with a desire that I try to spend a longer period there 
the following year. I saw Al Padwa at Emory University as he had encouraged the 
visit when he was in Wellington the previous year, and that meeting changed the 
direction of my 'spare time' for most of my remaining career. By 1 988, Al was the 
Series Editor of the JAI Press texts on organic chemistry and he was keen for me 
to take on the editorship of a volume on strained organic molecules. The invitation 
was tantalizing, not least because he was so adept and prolific in his own chemistry 
to think me up to the task. Despite the pressure Al applied, I promised to give the 
matter serious consideration and over the following months did just that. Eventu- 
ally, I wrote and accepted, giving an undertaking to have the first volume in the 
series published in early 1 99 1 . 

In Germany, Richard Neidlein had put together a three week lecturing schedule 
but it was by no means a circular tour, rather a trekking back and forth across the 
country from Essen in the West, to Regensburg in the East, Hamburg in the North 
and then to Geneva in the south. The train travel became tedious and a stretch of 
railway line near Mannheim reminded me of Jerome K. Jerome's book Three Men 
in a Boat, but rather than repeatedly seeing a bun it was washing on a clothes line! 
Nonetheless, the travel had a bright spot. On the sector between Cologne and Es- 
sen my compartment was shared by another chemist and north country English- 
man. He was the then President of the Royal Society of Chemistry, Sir Jack Lewis 
(now Baron Lewis of Nownham). We had an exhilarating discussion, brought to a 
close all too soon by arrival in Essen. 

The meetings that Neidlein provided for me were by far the most compre- 
hensive I have ever had. Thus, I met, and subsequently came to know, Klaus 
Hafner in Darmstadt, renewed my acquaintance with Klaus Mullen, then at the 
Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz, that has evolved into a true friendship. I 
met Armin de Meijere in Hamburg, renewed my 1985 ISNA-5 acquaintance with 
Neuenschwander in Bern, and made my first visit to the Max Plank Institute for 
Coal Research in Mulheim. Visits to my well established contacts and collabo- 
rators were also included. My last visit was to Heinz Diirr in Saarbriicken and, 

-87- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

with a day and a half in hand before my flight to Australia, I returned to Mainz to 
have dinner with Klaus Mullen and discuss future interactions. As my departure 
was the next evening, I was able to meet Rolf and Angelica Rehberg at Frankfurt 
Airport when they returned from an overseas holiday. It was a happy reunion, our 
first since they left Gainesville in 1967. Rolf spent his entire career working for 
Hoechst AG (it became Aventis after its merger with Rhone-Poulenc in 1999), 
initially in Frankfurt and as a senior representative for the company in Japan for a 
period that covered my earlier visit to Germany. It was the beginning of infrequent 
but enjoyable times with them. He moved to Cologne after being relocated to the 
Knapsack plant, which I visited in 1991 to see the 500 L scale diazotizations used 
in the dyestuffs industry. 

Once in Australia, I spent a few days at the University of Melbourne staying 
with Martin and Cathy Banwell. The first couple of days provided time out after 
the long flight and then it was the RACI Victoria Section 13 th Annual Synthesis 
Symposium at Melbourne University on Friday, December 2. The meeting has be- 
come a focal point of the RACI Victorian calendar and continues to attract full 
representation from the region. The 80+ registrants were stimulated by the opening 
plenary from Prof. Bernd Giese, at the time a colleague of Hafner's in Darmstadt 
and already in Australia when I had visited there just a few weeks earlier. The last 
morning lecture was from Prof. Frank Bachelor (Calgary, Canada) and I had the 
pleasure of presenting the closing plenary Methylenecycloproparenes: Strained 
and Polar Aromatic s. There were about a dozen posters that were judged during 
the session breaks and after my lecture. The student prizes were sponsored by The 
Australian Journal of Chemistry and presented by its then editor, John Zdysiewicz 
(John Z; 1943-2010); that was the first time that I met this remarkable and humble 
man. The time at MU served me well as discussions with Martin, David Kelly and 
Don Cameron influenced some of our subsequent work. 

On my first Sunday in Melbourne, I moved south of the Yarra River to stay with 
Roger Brown and his wife Mary in their home in the suburb of Prahran. Roger had 
arranged a university apartment for when Margaret and the boys came to join me 
at the end of the NZ school year, but it was not immediately available. I had the 
pleasure of sharing the Brown home for a little over a week when we commuted 
south to Clayton and the Monash campus each day and I slowly acclimatised, 
not just to the Australian summer but to a campus that was comparable in size 
to that of the University Florida. The first task was to finalise my manuscript of 
the third review on the cycloproparenes and get it off to Josef Michl, then editor 
of Chemical Reviews, and this I did. David Black had moved from Monash to 
Sydney by this time but the summer gave me ample opportunity to interact with 
Roy Jackson (another Lancastrian who held the Organic Chair), Ian Rae, David 
Collins, Syd Middleton (who had spent a leave with Robin Ferrier in Wellington) 

-88- 



Chemistry and Service 




Scheme 23 

and, of course, Frank Eastwood. I say 'of course' as it was the pairing of Frank and 
Roger that had established Monash as the centre for pyrolysis chemistry. My time 
was to be spent assessing the behaviour of the simplest of the alkylidenecyclopro- 
parenes under flash vacuum pyrolytic conditions. The fluorenylidene 65 (Scheme 
23) and diphenyl 58 derivatives were those chosen as they were available in suf- 
ficient quantity for study. The pyrolysis work used the very simple, yet especially 
functional and well used equipment that Frank and Roger had. Both compounds 
gave a series of products, the latter converting into the former by cyclodehydro- 
genation at 750 °C prior to opening of the three-membered ring and expansion to 
a series of polycyclic aromatics (Scheme 23). As we were aware of the potential 
carcinogenicity of the products, the work was performed on small scale and it was 
not possible, at that time, to be sure which products we actually had, other than 
the known dibenz|&gt;.£]acephenanthrylene 78. As the years passed, the number of 
polycyclic aromatics with data matching our own, e.g. 79, increased, but it was not 
until 2006, some ten years after Roger had retired from Monash as professor that 
the study appeared in print. It formed a Tetrahedron Letter, for which I received 
surprisingly generous reviews from its assessors. I had asked Roger to co-author 
the paper but he declined and, in so doing, gave me my only primary publication 
as sole author. 54 

Returning to Wellington in late February 1989, I hosted Eva Lovett who had 
leave from her St. Louis job as I noted above. She was able to bring the bicy- 
clo[4.1.0]hept-l(7)-ene work to a nice conclusion that, subsequently, I was able to 
incorporate into my Pacifichem ' 89 presentation in the symposium on Strain Ef- 
fects. However, I needed to think more carefully about the invited lecture I was to 
give at the August ISNA-6 meeting in Toyonaka, Osaka, and to see if it would be 
possible to revisit Peter Stang in Salt Lake City, as he had been encouraging me to 
do. Sarah Russell and Chi Lu were, by then, sufficiently advanced with their studies 
that my absence late in the year would be non-problematic and so I sought funding 
to spend time in Utah ahead of the 1989 Pacific Basin Congress in Honolulu. 

-89- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

It was a very hectic time for us as by then Margaret had gained her essential 
Teacher Training Certificate that she was able to do while teaching part-time. This 
she had done at Karori's Samuel Marsden Collegiate School, a job to which she 
was encouraged and led into by one of New Zealand's famed chemical immigrants, 
Dr. Dora Suuring, then about to leave her role there as the temporary Chemistry 
Teacher. Dora came to NZ after WWII and, it transpires, had been actively in- 
volved in the Dutch underground movement providing falsified documents and the 
like; she is one of the longest surviving Wellington members of the NZIC as far 
as I am aware. With her registration and our boys in secondary school, Margaret 
had become a full-time teacher and accepted the role as Head of Science from the 
beginning of 1989. She rose to become Dean of Student Achievement some years 
later, retiring in 2005 as she had been worked to the bone and no longer felt that 
she should keep me in the lifestyle to which I had become accustomed! My time 
at ISNA-6 included a visit to Okazaki in Tokyo before travelling to Osaka and 
then the Post-Conference meeting in Sendai, for which I was also asked to give a 
lecture. However, not being sufficiently familiar with Japan at that time, I declined 
the invitation as, with only a small group by international standards, I did not feel 
able to deliver two highly relevant first-rate lectures and did not want to deliver the 
same one twice, as did others. 

ISNA-6 was held in August 1989 in the 
heat and humidity of the Japanese summer. 
Simply exiting the air-conditioned environ- 
ment of the meeting for lunch took me back 
to my time in Florida. The lectures were 
stimulating, none less than that by (now 
Sir) Harry Kroto on the C 60 discovery and 
subsequent study. However, the plenary 

The author and Emanuel Vogel (1927-2011) leCtUreS and subsequent interactions with 

Fritz Bickelhaupt, Fumio Toda and, to a 
lesser extent, Siegfried Hiinig led to ongoing enjoyable chemical and personal in- 
teractions. Of course, this second visit to Japan extended my appreciation for the 
culture of the country and my friendship with a number of its people. One of the 
things that the ISNA-6 organizers did was to place registrants new to Japan in 
contact with Osaka chemists who were area members of bilateral societies. Thus, I 
received a delightful invitation from one Haruyasu Shiota to meet with him at the 
end of the meeting. I did and we have maintained contact since. We exchange cards 
at New Year and have dinner whenever I visit Osaka. His son spent time in our 
home on a visit to New Zealand but, although Haruy has been to NZ as an execu- 
tive of the Osaka Japan-NZ Society, he has yet to come to Wellington. He recently 
retired from his role as a flavour chemist in Shiono Flavor and Fragrance Co. 

-90- 




Chemistry and Service 

The Osaka meeting provided an opportunity to discuss more chemistry with 
Ed Billups from Rice University, who was also an attendee. In fact, we both went 
on to Sendai to be hosted by one of Chemistry's junior staff, Tadayoshi Morita, as 
his English was better than that of Tsutomu 
Kumagai. They took us to Shiogama for 
an excursion on Matsushima Bay on the 
boat shown in the photograph. The more 
relaxed atmosphere gave a great oppor- 
tunity to get to know our Japanese hosts 
and explore our common interest. In fact, 
it was this meeting more than ISNA-6 that 
aligned me with Koichi Komatsu who has 
looked after me in Japan on many occa- 
sions - but more of that later. Morita, Billups, Halton &amp; Kumagai 

Back in NZ, I applied for a Claude McCarthy scholarship as, having gained a 
New Zealand DSc, I met the criteria, namely to enable any university staff member 
who is a graduate of a New Zealand university to take leave and travel overseas, 
other than at the time of their normal entitlement for refresher leave and addition- 
al to it, to undertake short periods of research in important recent developments 
relevant to their specialties. Why I raise this is that for the first time I was asked to 
submit a budget for the period, with costing geared to public service rates - some- 
thing that does not form any part of a university leave scheme. My application was 
successfully submitted and I spent some six weeks at the University of Utah over 
November-December of 1989. We planned what we could continue to collaborate 
on, given US funding agencies were becoming more sensitive to the nature of the 
work involved and Peter less likely to gain support for fused aromatic chemistry. In 
contrast, the NZ scene still had no funding for fundamental studies except through 
university monies. Funding though the Ministry of Science was being established 
but it emerged to be only for applied science in areas dictated by the Ministry. The 
more important task in SLC was to writeup the studies that had been completed 
and the time passed quickly with the completion of four manuscripts. These cov- 
ered the remaining work of Chi Lu in Wellington and that of Lingsheng Song in 
Utah, which had concentrated on reactions with organometallic reagents. Song's 
departure left Aileen McNichols as the last researcher in the cycloproparene area 
in Utah. My departure from SLC to Hawaii was by way of Reno and a visit with 
Larry Scott at the University of Nevada, my last before his move to Boston Col- 
lege. I had got to know Larry even better at ISNA-6. 

At Pacifichem, my oral presentation was in the Symposium on Strain Effects, 
scheduled for the first full day of the meeting. Almost all of those at the forefront 
of the field were present; my range of contacts was extended and the opportunity to 

-91 - 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

meet many of those I had not seen for some time arose. The symposium included 
a luncheon organized by Phil Eaton (Chicago) to which a good number of the 
participants were invited. I had run across Phil in passing but this gave us a good 
personal introduction. This aside, Norm LeBel went out of his way to be my host, 
introducing me to the working of the conference, and he led me to the conclusion 
that the NZ and Australia bid to become formal partners in the organization would 
be sympathetically heard and, as I have said earlier, it succeeded. The inclusion 
of the Australian and New Zealand chemical societies among those organizing 
Pacifichem has to be my most significant contribution to NZ chemistry. It has 
served to formalize internationalization, given the profession added visibility and 
strengthened ties worldwide. I received a VUW Research Recognition award that 
year as well. 

The return from the McCarthy Fellowship coincided with Christmas, the new 
decade, the expectation that Chi Lu would soon defend his PhD work, and that 
Sarah (Russell) would have her's submitted by about the middle of the year - but 
no prospects of replacements for them. NZ science was undergoing major restruc- 
turing and university funding, never great, was suffering as academics had the 
greatest difficulty in obtaining monies from the emerging contestable fund . . . and, 
on the personal front, I was advised that my mother was showing increased signs 
of dementia. 

The year was comparatively quiet but set to a good start by Chi gaining excel- 
lent reports from his PhD examiners and performing well at his oral in February 
of 1990. Had awards been offered and theses graded in that era, I am sure that he 
would have collected a distinction and an award. Without doubt, he was the most 
productive PhD student in the Department at that time, and indeed for many years, 
but that was partly the project and not just him. His demeanour changed and he 
was less than happy tying up the ends of his work while waiting for his move from 
NZ. In 1990, any return to China would have resulted in serious repercussions for 
his 1987 indiscretion and he was very keen to get to the US and work there for 
some time. Chi had made contact with Professor J. H. Boyer in the University of 
New Orleans, an expert in fluorescence, who offered to sponsor him for a 'green 
card'. This he did and the time came for Chi's all important interview at the US 
embassy in Wellington. His most prodigious hobby was the game of bridge, which 
he played at the Wellington Bridge Club (the largest and most prestigious in the 
country it is claimed). I recall his departing for the interview in trepidation, and 
his sheer elation on return - the immigration interview had been conducted by the 
only American he knew, his bridge partner! He was granted the green card, went 
to New Orleans University and then spent a second postdoctoral at Tulane before 
joining Monsanto in St. Louis (Missouri). When Chi arrived in NZ, he was ada- 
mant that chemistry was what he had always wanted to study but by the time he 

-92- 



Chemistry and Service 

left this had changed to medicine, and the early period of his time with Monsanto 
was spent seeking admission to a US medical school. As far as I am aware this 
never happened and he left Monsanto sometime after 1 996 and may well now be 
back in China, but I have lost contact with him. 

Sarah Russell had her thesis completed by the middle of the year and was 
examined by Frank Eastwood at Monash and Con Cambie in Auckland. Sarah 
experienced no difficulties through her examination process and left Wellington 
in mid-August 1990 for a postdoctoral with Prof. Jaeger in Laramie, Wyoming. 
He would have kept her on for a second year had the project not been declined 
further funding. Her approaches for a postdoctoral position had problems in that 
the reference from a colleague was, in her view, biased. It is not that she obtained 
a copy in an untoward manner rather than being given it by one of the Department 
secretaries because she, too, was concerned. The issue was a difficult one and the 
then Head of Department, the late Professor John Tomlinson, handled the matter 
with much skill and diplomacy. Sarah returned to New Zealand and secured a 
position in Forensic Science in Auckland, with what was DSIR and transformed 
into Environmental Science and Research Ltd. (ESR) with the reorganization of 
NZ government science shortly after she joined. She transferred to the Wellington 
(Porirua) facility and has had a distinguished career with them. 



-93- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

A New Direction 



The year of 1990 had my research work largely on hold as the laboratory was 
empty, save for one Honours student, and I had even less time available to devote 
to serious laboratory work myself. Thus, it was largely a time of taking stock and 
transforming the idea of Advances in Strain in Organic Chemistry that I had agreed 
to edit under Al Padwa in JAI Press series, into reality. I had selected a range of 
recognized authors -including Padwa by way of retribution - Mark Baird (who 
moved to Bangor that year), Martin Banwell, Ed Lee-Ruff (with whom I had been 
associated at Pacifichem '89) and Herbert Meier, who I had met in Mainz in 1988: 
everyone agreed to contribute. The manuscripts arrived as expected and gave me 
my first experience at personal editorship. As all academics do, I had served ap- 
prenticeship as a referee for a number of periodicals in my area, not least those 
from the US and UK. Thus, the standard for the articles was much less of an issue 
than presentation and level for the targeted senior undergraduate/graduate student 
audience. I had had a reasonable amount of experience in writing and in having 
review articles accepted with minimal amendment, so I stumbled along. Al was 
particularly supportive as the volume took shape, and proof was eventually issued 
for publication in 1991; Ed Billups provided a nice review of the volume in the 
Journal of the American Chemical Society, but that did not appear until 2003. The 
most difficult aspect of editing the first volume was in deciding just how much of 
Herbert Meier's English should be altered. It was not an easy decision to make. I 
did not wish to offend him, but I came to the conclusion that if the series was to 
succeed, then it needed internationally recognised researchers summarizing their 
own field of research, and for this to be edited, heavily if necessary, to provide a 
uniform standard with easily understandable English. This concept led me to Vol- 
ume II that carried four of the five chapters from authors in Continental Europe, 
with English as their second language. Volume III included the first of the Japanese 
contributions and the series continued to progress well. My title in the JAI series 
was initially produced out of the UK office and then moved to its US counterpart 
before the series was terminated. That happened after JAI was taken over by El- 
sevier who felt that Strain generated insufficient profit. But the experience and 
camaraderie that I got from the editorial role and the frequent communications and 

-94- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

meetings with the contributors persuaded me that this was a role that I could hap- 
pily revisit should the occasion arise. Indeed, comments from some of the authors 
served to encourage me into what has become a major part of my professional life 
in retirement. 

By the middle of 1990, my step-father had advised us that my mother's de- 
mentia was becoming more serious and that it would be best to make a visit dur- 
ing the year, if at all possible. Sadly, it was not possible for all four of us to get to 
London, but as December of that year signified Mark's eighteenth birthday, he and 
I spent Christmas in London. As it so happened, the well respected Fritz Bickel- 
haupt (Vrije University, Amsterdam) had encouraged me to spend some time in 
Holland and so a short lecture tour was set up for me in December 1990. Although 
I was ineligible for sabbatical leave from VUW, the then convener of the Leave 
and Grants committees, Librarian Vic Elliot, was always sympathetic to my lec- 
ture tours and provided some financial support to assist. However, before I left, I 
started a summer student, one Andy Kay, who worked that summer in my absence 
and then continued on for Honours in 1991 and PhD training from 1992. 

The lectures in Holland were preceded by a short visit to Essen and Roland 
Boese, as our structural work had reached an interesting stage. The bond lengths 
within the aromatic cycloproparene moieties were showing some consistency; the 
internuclear bond separation of the bridge bond was short while the electron den- 
sity path of the bent ji and o bonds matched very closely those of a normal benze- 
noid and o bond, respectively. The 1 990 visit to Essen has more than an element 
of notoriety associated with it. My flight from London was to Amsterdam (for the 
Netherlands tour) and then by direct train to Essen. Although the aircraft on which 
I was a passenger was fitted with all the modern equipment to allow it to take off 
in fog, it was held in line behind all the aircraft not so equipped until the fog lifted 
from Heathrow; arrival into Schiphol was late in the afternoon and without lunch. 
I was quickly ticketed for a train to Essen but it had no dining facilities. Being 
without food so soon after my departure from Wellington did not augur well and I 
was not in such good shape, even though Roland had me into a cafe very quickly. 
It was only the next morning that I realised I was without passport, tickets and 
money. All that I could imagine was that my documents case must have been left in 
the restaurant, but the morning staff knew nothing of it and it was only just before 
lunch that the owner made contact to say that it was safely locked away. We went 
to collect the essentials, only to have the proprietor insist on us drinking Schnapps 
to settle matters before my lecture. 

That evening I returned to Amsterdam to be met by Fritz, dined and entertained 
at his home and then settled to an apartment at the Vrije University for the duration 
of my visit to the country. The arrangements were excellent as I had the weekend 
free to see the canals, markets and, of course, the van Gogh gallery. The downside 

-95- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

was that I had to take the tram to the centre of the city and collect a worker's train 
pass for the following week. In itself, this was simple enough. However, when I 
tried to pay my fare to the tram driver as I had been instructed, I was told to board. 
There was nowhere to purchase a ticket but numerous machines in which a ticket 
could be validated - all emblazoned with the penalties for riding without one! I 
survived without challenge. The lectures went well and my hosts provided me with 
much fascinating chemistry that once again led to subsequent visitors to the NZ 
scene, most notably Binne Zwanenburg from Nijmegen, who brought his research 
group on an Australasian tour some eight years later. 

The year of 1 99 1 was significant for the Department and also me in more ways 
than one. Firstly, John Craig, my organic colleague, retired at the end of January. 
In those days, the university maintained continuity in teaching by having staff 
retire on January 31 s1 after their 65" 1 birthday, unless it fell in February when retire- 
ment was on January 3 1 beforehand. It meant that academics were employed for 
the full teaching year with a known retirement date. What was even more notable 
with John's position - formally a lectureship in chemistry - was that it was adver- 
tised in 1 990 ahead of his departure, not as a permanent tenured post but a limited 
term three year appointment; student numbers in chemistry had declined and the 
Department was under pressure to contract. By the time I left for my visit to the 
Netherlands, the shortlist had been drawn up with the leading applicant, Christina 
Chai, a Chinese Malay with Australian citizenship. She had taken her PhD under 
Athel Beckwith's supervision at the Australian National and was part way through 
a postdoctoral in Oxford. As I was to be in London in very early December, I 
was asked to interview her and report back. The interview was held in a Univer- 
sity College office, arranged for me by Peter Garratt; I was suitably impressed by 
Christina and returned my summary of the interview. I was told that she would 
be offered the position. However, by the time the offer was to be formalized, the 
University terminated the post. Robin Ferrier was adamant that the teaching of 
organic chemistry demanded a minimum of three people and he was successful in 
negotiating a joint appointment between Victoria and what had just become DSIR 
Chemistry. By the time Christina received her offer of appointment, it was not for 
the limited term position for which she had been interviewed but as a joint VUW/ 
DSIR job for three years. She accepted, joined us for the beginning of the 1991 
teaching year, and quickly established a first-rate teaching and research reputation. 
Her free radical chemistry had much emphasis directed towards the biological/me- 
dicinal environment, but we jointly supervised a Masters student, Malcolm Starr, 
who attempted to detect the cycloproparenyl radical. The work overlapped with 
some of Neidlein's in Heidelberg and was jointly published. 

Sadly, Christina's lot in Wellington was far from easy. She was given a normal 
full-time teaching allocation as the 50% VUW component of her role, with the 

-96- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

other 50% at DSIR for research where she had no student assistance; but she was 
encouraged to start students at VUW. She did her very best to keep everyone hap- 
py, but the task was too great, as it would have been for just about anyone knowing 
that full-time teaching demands more than 60% of one's time. She was discour- 
aged from conference or other leave, and from seeking promotion even by way of 
an accelerated salary increment, all because she was part-time. Such features no 
longer play a part in VUW ethos and, indeed, have been contrary to a part-time 
limited tenn position for a long time now; likely they were not the norm even then. 
The increase in part-time positions demanded that the duties be consistent from 
area to area and no one is now allowed to be given more than a 50% teaching load 
in a half-time position. By the time her three year term was coming to an end, a 
full-time permanent lectureship in organic chemistry was reinstated and Christina 
should have been appointed to it. However, with an equivalent job offered in the 
School of General Studies at ANU in Canberra, and a refusal by Victoria to give 
her advancement, she left in early 1 994. She was a great colleague and a dedicated 
teacher whose research opportunity had been limited by her Wellington joint posi- 
tion. Robin Ferrier was the Departmental Chairman when Christina was appointed 
and just how much of her lot resulted from his decisions is not known. 

Two other major events occurred in 1991. The first, that of Curt Wentrup's first 
Reactive Intermediates meeting on Heron Island, Great Barrier Reef, to which I 
was invited and this was a stunning event both chemically and scenically. Most of 
the chemists with significant research in intermediate/reactive molecule chemistry 
were there. I got to know Leo Radom better as we were billeted together, then 
Maitland Jones and Akira Oku, who I met for the first time. Friendships were 
renewed with Peter Stang, Roger Brown, Armin de Meijere and Leiv Sydnes to 
name but four. The last 1991 event at Victoria University was the removal of the 
1983 embargo on personal chairs. I was encouraged to let my name go forward 
- it was not a matter of completing forms and submitting an application as now, 
but neither was it the same as the nomination process followed by Departmental 
Heads in the 1 970s. That year Robin Ferrier had taken over as Departmental Chair- 
man and he was careful to ensure that I was nominated 
and that it received the support needed. Reports were 
sought from some outside New Zealand who knew me, 
but with no formal connection to me, and others with 
whom I had had contact for some time. Peter Stang was 
more than willing to give support and the late Profes- 
sors Charles Rees (of Imperial College, London) and 
Athel Beckwith (of ANU) were named as ones who 
could comment independently on my standing in the 

profession. The outcome of the first personal chair ex- A Chair of Chemistry 

-97- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

ercise at VUW for some eight years was two appointments, both in science — they 
were to John Lekner in Physics and me in Chemistry. We each accepted the chair 
in our respective subject, effective from September 1991. The elevations were 
treated with great aplomb by the university and there followed a series of inter- 
views and lectures, not least that of the inaugural lecture, which I entitled Battered 
Benzenes and Beautiful Bicycles. Of the interviews, one for Radio New Zealand 
was conducted by Shona Willis, one of the better New Zealand radio journalists 
and she came to my office to make the recording. Once again, fate reared its head 
as Shona's mother-in-law became our delightful next door neighbour when we 
moved to our second home. 

A further recognition came a year later as I was elected to Fellowship of the 
Royal Society of New Zealand in November 1992. My good friend Jim Coxon had 
been elected in 1 99 1 and he was awarded a personal chair in chemistry at about the 
time as my 1992 RSNZ election. As was customary in those days, newly elected 
Fellows were appointed to the selection panel for their area and I served my time 
through two terms that took me to 200 1 . The donation of accolades two years in a 
row had a clear message - 1 had to be close to my highest level of incompetence! 
And so it was. As Robin Ferrier's term as Departmental Chairman drew to a close, 
the academics were encouraged to put their names forward for election to the posi- 
tion. There was a dearth of activity and so, after some considerable thought, I saw 
John Wells (the then Dean of Science) and gave him my name. The chairperson of 
a department or school at Victoria has always been a difficult one because of the 
bureaucracy involved and the need to do a good job. I had always felt that this was 
a task for those close to retirement, as research could be reduced over the last years 
as opposed to having the role early, losing track of one's research field and falling 
behind with the chemical literature. However, the Dean released my name ahead 
of the closing date for the chairmanship role, and it proved an excellent move as 
a number of names were submitted in short order. With such keen departmental 
interest evident, I then did the unthinkable; I withdrew from the race and infuriated 
the Dean. 

During the time that I was distracted from the Wellington lab, Andy Kay made 
good progress, initially in his 1 990-9 1 summer studentship and then through his 
Honours year. Part way through that time Mrs Zha Zhi-mei arrived from Sichuan 
Normal University for a year of research experience. She settled into the exocyclic 
olefin and quinone chemistry that was then carried on by Andy, when he returned 
for PhD after his gaining a Hi Honours degree. Before coming, and while seeking 
acceptance to join us as a Visiting Fellow, Zha had communicated well in written 
English; it was only after she was here she told us that her Russian was better than 
her English, and asked if we could communicate in that language. That was not an 
option as I have never been competent with languages and so Zha struggled, but 

-98- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

improved enough to cope, although she never mastered her spoken English. None- 
theless, she proved a convivial lady to have around and she tried hard to succeed 
at the bench. The only difficulty that she presented was with help to get permis- 
sion for her husband to visit for a few days. Her visa did not allow her to leave 
NZ, while her husband, who was involved in official trade with Hong Kong, was 
not allowed to travel beyond there from China. A second session with staff in the 
Chinese embassy (the Lins had left by then) served to settle things there and they 
agreed that Mr. Zha could come provided that he was chaperoned by embassy staff 
once here. The next hurdle was Immigration NZ. Only through the good graces of 
Mr Schroff was Zha's husband allowed into the country, and then only for a few 
days - but enough for Zha to persuade him that she should go to the US after her 
time in Wellington. On our day out sightseeing, we had a Chinese embassy staffer 
in the car and his presence created a somewhat different atmosphere to the norm 
when I am host. 

Andy's actual research carved out two major areas of cycloproparene chem- 
istry and showed us the limitations in another. He completed Zha's efforts and 
synthesised 81, the first stable quinone in the cycloproparene series. Our hope 
was that this compound would lead to more extended conjugation and give rise to 
extended 'push-pull' polar molecules. In the process of pursuing this, Andy found 

cerium ammonium nitrate to be most efficacious 
for demethylation of 80 and obtained 81 in 85% 
yield. This provided sufficient compound for the 
full range of spectroscopic, crystallographic and 
chemical properties to be recorded, including 
the electrochemical reduction potentials. What 
siMe s we found totally frustrating was that, while the 
siMe 3 diether 80 could be silylated and transformed 
into alkylidene derivatives such as 82 (Scheme 
24), neither 81 nor the disilylated diether could 
be converted into quinone 83 (and hence 84). 
Moreover, olefin 82 did not lose its ether moieties 
Ph without also involving reaction of the exocyclic 
alkene; extensions into the 'push-pull' arena had 
to wait. 

The second part of Andy's study combined with Utah work in examining the 
behaviour of exocyclic olefins to cycloaddition. What was found was that the alky- 
lidene compounds add dienophiles in a Diels-Alder sense. However, the benzene 
derivatives underwent addition exclusively across the bridge bond while the naph- 
thalene analogues gave products only from addition to the exocyclic double bond 
(Scheme 25). The nature and orientation of the benzene adduct was proved by 

-99- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 




Scheme 25 




S8 



49 




Ph 



Ph 



CO 



Ph 



Ph 



Ph 



Ph 



Ph 




Ph 



Ph 



Ph 



crystal structure analysis in Essen and 
the additions were further rationalized 
by computation, also studied in Essen. 
By then one of Roland students, An- 
dreas Maulitz, had spent time with Ape- 
loig and was trained in computational 
chemistry. He put this to good use on our 
behalf. As Scheme 25 shows, there is a 
basic difference in the bridge bond char- 
acter in moving from benzo to naphtho 
fusion. The last part of Andy's study was 
to extend conjugation in the exocyclic 



olefins through functionalization at the carbon atom adjacent to the ring fusion 
(C2), but this did not eventuate. He made the passage to a PhD chemist by serving 
as a teaching assistant, not in the traditional half-time post, but by taking a frac- 
tional position that allowed four rather than three students to have some funding. 
He completed his PhD in 1996, had a postdoctoral with Hiizu Iwamura, then at 
Kyushu University, and subsequently returned to what was by then the metamor- 
phosis of DSIR Chemistry - Industrial Research Limited; he is now the Manager 
of the Energy and Materials Group. 

It was during Andy's time that the funding of science in NZ was dramatically 
altered and government science reorganized. The various parts of Scientific and In- 
dustrial Research were carved into Crown Research Institutes, each charged with 
returning a profit on the public investment. Science funding was diminishing and 
the catch phrase became 'accountability'. The universities were no exception and 
the push for a 'blue skies' research fund gained momentum, ultimately to succeed 
with the creation of the Marsden Fund largely as a result of the work of Simon Up- 
ton, then Minister of Science. He was subsequently elected to Fellowship of RSNZ 
for this. National Postgraduate Scholarships through the University Grants Com- 
mittee disappeared, to be replaced by awards offered by each institution, initially 
on a simple application basis and then by the institution selecting the project work 
that it would sponsor. The effect of this was (and is) that despite a run of good PhD 
candidates, Victoria had insufficient scholarships to retain them. Not surprisingly, 
students with very good upper second class honours degrees gained PhD scholar- 
ships from other places in NZ and left VUW. Thus, over three years from 1993, 
I saw four of my BSc (Hons) graduates leave for PhD training elsewhere, two 
in NZ, one at ANU, and one in Boston College, USA. Each had made a genuine 
contribution to my research, but the writing was being etched indelibly into the 
wall, namely, unless one's work was deemed relevant then funding was not going 
to be made available. As best I recall it, the postdoctoral fellowships were the first 



- 100- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

subjected to project selection. Much to my surprise, I was able to put forward a 
proposal directly to the faculty in 1992 for scholarship consideration, a process 
that was quickly terminated in favour of internal departmental selection. Be that as 
it may, I succeeded and gained my second and last postdoctoral. Moreover, I was 
able to solicit applications by writing to colleagues overseas and then ranking the 
applicants gained that way with those who applied directly to the university. Larry 
Scott, who was in the process of moving from Reno to Boston College, had a man 
keen to join me and, with the relevant paperwork completed, Mark Cooney arrived 
in Wellington for a two year postdoctoral at the end of August 1 993 . 

Mark was, and probably still is, a quiet individual, particularly knowledgeable 
in the art of science and exceptionally adept in the laboratory. Not only did he 
bring a range of modern techniques to the Department, but also he gave his time 
to those around him who needed assistance. He worked well, initially coming to 
terms with the area and then completing and delving into a raft of topics in our 
field. His publications numbered eight from a mere twenty-two months at VUW. 
They included the synthesis and spectral characterization of the first oxaspiropen- 
tene 85 (RR = benzo fusion) that was much more stable than we had expected, but 
it transformed into the ring expanded cyclobutarenone 86 on standing. 55 Moreover, 
the simpler starting material (85, R = H) underwent an identical series of reactions 
showing that it is only cycloaddition that involves the bridge bond. It served to 
remind us that small ring systems annelated to an aromatic core have increased sta- 
bility over their non-annelated analogues, allowing for easy characterization and 
study. A range of heterocyclic-substituted methylenecycloproparenes were made 
and the series of polar dyes 87, e.g xanthone (X = O), obtained. They were sub- 
jected to detailed crystallographic and theoretical study, again involving the Boese 
and Apeloig groups, and shown 
to be essentially planar. Initial 
work by Mark, involving the 
silyl-Wittig reaction of 57 with 
diphenylcyclopropenone (the 
dimesityl and di-f-butyl deriva- 
tives followed), ultimately led 
us to settle on a reaction se- 
quence to 1 ,4-anthraquinones 
that proceeds via bicyclopro- 
penylidene 88 (R = Ph), for- 
mally a valence bond isomer 
of benzyne (C 6 H 4 ), and the first non-annulated derivative to be spectroscopically 
characterized. Mark's other contributions involved chemistry directed to the cy- 
cloproparenyl radical and radical anion. The synthesis of a dioxacycloproparene 

- 101 - 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

provided extended conjugation and set in train subsequent work on ^-extended 
alkylidenecycloproparenes, which somehow did not get published until 2006. He 
left Wellington in mid- 1 995 to settle to life as an industrial research chemist in his 
home country. He was very much our loss and industry's gain. 

One thing that I remember after Mark's departure was the need to keep the 
administration happy with his appointment by way of a formal report - it was 
no longer appropriate to say he came, he saw and he conquered. At that point in 
time, bureaucracy was in the early stage of proliferation and corporatization, and 
a concise account that included publication off-prints was not quite what the As- 
sistant Vice-Chancellor demanded. The clear requirement, as I saw it, was for a 
substantial report, with the all-important precis attached. I decided that this was 
an ideal time to test the waters and so, rather than send double-sided copy of ar- 
ticle preprints, double spaced, single-sided copy at a minimum print width and 
page length was the order of the day. And so it was that a very substantial 'report' 
was handed in, which probably had had a few extraneous pages inserted for good 
measure. In due course, I received a glowing letter of thanks for my very detailed 
summary of Dr. Cooney's tenure and successes. As far as I am aware, that very 
heavy folder lies buried in a filing cabinet in the (corporate) archives of the uni- 
versity, most likely never opened beyond the precis. It seemed to me that this was 
fair recompense for having been classified as one with 'no overseas collaborators' 
from an earlier survey when, in fact, I had more than most. The 'zero' came from 
the fact that none of my overseas collaborators funded Victoria - only those that 
put money into the institution's coffers were counted! 

Later in that year of 1993 I took my fourth sabbatical but, unlike the earlier 
ones, the pressures meant that I could not be away for long periods and somewhat 
contrived absences became the norm. Instead of spending most of the available 
time in one place, I chose to accept invitations to lecture and to couple those with 

new experiences, and so I asked Koichi Komatsu if he 
would be able to co-ordinate a visit to Japan for me. 
This he did, and I spent almost two weeks there with 
meetings around Tokyo, Kyoto and on to Hiroshima, 
and then across the Ituski-nada Sea and into Mat- 
suyama, where I was a guest at Fumio Toda's sympo- 
sium on Solid State Organic Chemistry. I ended with 
Sho Ito (who I first met at ISNA-6) bestowing me with 
the Dean's Lecture at Tokushima Bunri University, the 
first of many meetings with him as will become ap- 
parent later. From there I flew to Germany and spent a 
little less than two months with Klaus Mullen, who by 
Fumio Toda then had formally moved from the Gutenberg Univer- 

- 102 - 




From Recognition to Retirement 

sity to the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPI-P), also on the Mainz 
campus. It was a very happy time as Klaus and I have got on well since we first 
met in 1982, and my time in his institute proved no different. On a chemical note, 
I tried to gain evidence for a cycloproparenyl radical anion from conventional 
electron transfer using the expertise of Martin Baumgarten, but all we were able 
to show was that cyclopropa[Z?]naphthalene (58) ring opens and dimerizes before 
the cycloproparenyl anion radical (or its ring-cleaved naphthalene analogue) could 
be detected; only the radical anion of pentacene was characterized. Mark Cooney 
completed the study by carrying out equivalent conventional chemistry prior to 
publication. 

New Staff, New Challenges, and a New Home 

I made comment earlier about the need to gain funding for research and how 
this was beginning to become more and more important in NZ. It seems to have 
continued unabated in this country from the early 1990s to a situation that now 
makes it almost impossible to perform any meaningful research, or gain promo- 
tion, without it. What is lacking is an adequate size of fund to meet needs beyond 
those of areas deemed of national importance. It was at the time that this was being 
advanced that Christina Chai's replacement, and permanent appointee, arrived in 
the first part of 1994. The position had been widely advertised and it attracted a 
good range of serious contenders, from which Peter Northcote was duly appointed. 
Peter, a Canadian marine natural products chemist, who had done some school 
teaching in Tonga prior to his PhD training and a postdoctoral position with the 
Blunt-Munro combination at Canterbury University, arrived from his post with a 
New York pharmaceuticals research organization. He was thrown into first-year 
teaching and had his independent research initiated by gaining an MSc student, 
Anthony Fake, who needed serious supervision. Peter settled amazingly well 
and started what has been a very decisive foray into NZ marine sponge natural 
products chemistry. He has attracted attention internationally with peloruside A, a 
serendipitous discovery from a native sponge. He gained pharmaceutical funding 
because of its potency as an anticancer treatment and is now on the board of Reata 
Pharmaceuticals Inc., who licensed the compound. What quickly became clear 
with Peter's work was that the aged 80 MHz Varian electromagnet NMR was not 
going to meet the needs of a modern natural products chemist intent on structure 
identification from tiny amounts of sample, rather than the minimum 20 mg for a 
good 13 C spectrum on our instrument. 

The aging VUW instrument had survived being deluged in a flood caused by 
failure of an elbow bend of the mains water inlet pipe on the top floor of the East- 
erfield Building early in the 1980's and then, later, smoke damage from a fire in 

- 103 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

the adjacent chemical store. It had come through these events well and continued 
to serve us despite its limitations. One of the interesting impacts of science on the 
local workforce followed the flood, in that a new mains server for Chemistry was 
installed on Kelburn Parade, outside the Department. At that time, charging for 
water used by the University was being introduced, and so the new system came 
not only with a water meter but also an ability to cut the supply to the building. 
When I asked how a permanent low flow-rate supply to the NMR could be guar- 
anteed, the city workmen responded simply: apparently they installed a bypass 
that avoided the cut-off and likely the meter. The effect was that the FT80A had 
uninterrupted water for life, presumably unknown to anyone but the workmen 
and me! The lifetime of the machine was enhanced by our acquiring the Chem- 
istry Division of DSIR's sister FT80A when the government lab upgraded to a 
superconducting instrument. This was another interesting acquisition. I resisted a 
request for payment, saying that it would be just as easy to transfer the machine to 
our truck at the Hurt Valley rubbish disposal site! In the end, DSIR transported it to 
us and even managed to damage the tray of their truck in the process, all at no cost! 

Despite all of this, Peter's presence was just the trigger needed to set in motion 
a move for a replacement instrument. It was not so much a case of the FT80A not 
operating to its specifications, as to it being a second generation instrument still 
in use in the third generation era; 'supercons' with multinuclear and 2D NMR 
facilities were in every place that serious chemistry was researched. In a short 
time, Peter and I had surveyed the range of instruments available, made a case for 
major instrument funding to the Department, the Faculty and the Vice-Chancellor, 
and utilised the opportunity to seek the best possible financial arrangements and 
instrument capability that we could get. Apart from his natural products expertise, 
Peter was (and is) an order of magnitude up the NMR ladder of knowledge than 
me, and so it was that he went to Brucker's NMR facility in Germany, while the 
Varian sales and engineering people came to us, as NZ was dominantly Varian at 
that time. The final hurdle turned out to be not so much the fund-raising as having 
to gain support from Robin Ferrier, who felt that our electromagnet instrument 
was adequate and wanted to know the cost of a straight replacement for it. Dur- 
ing our negotiations, a team of Varian's senior executives had happened to pass 
though NZ and called in to meet us. They were especially enthused when I told 
them that our electromagnet was working and they insisted on seeing the instru- 
ment. This was a new experience for them, as they were under the impression that 
the only remaining FT80 in operating condition was in interior NW China. The 
Chinese instrument could have been available to us second-hand, while the cost 
of building a new FT80 specifically for us was markedly higher than the 300 MHz 
supercon instrument we wanted. Approval for the latter became automatic, the 
monies (including a grant from the NZ Lotteries Commission) became available, 

- 104- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

and a multinuclear Varian 300 instrument duly arrived with its cryogenic probes 
manufactured by Nalorac Corp., which was subsequently taken over by Varian (it- 
self now a part of Agilent Technologies). It was installed in late 1 996, became fully 
operational early the next year and is still in excellent working order. However, it 
was not located with Chemistry in the Easterfield building but with the physicists 
in Laby. The size of the superconducting magnet and the need for access to its core 
from underneath, coupled with the external magnetic field, meant that no room in 
Chemistry was suitable. I cannot remember just what favours I was owed by the 
Works and Services Section (now the more grandiose Facilities Management) but, 
after some considerable bartering, I was offered a large room on the ground floor 
of the Laby Building alongside the physicists; it was modified and fitted out for 
the new instrument. 

Installing a superconducting magnet in New Zealand in the mid-late 1990s 
was no easy task. All the necessary equipment had (and still has) to be imported 
into the country and, depending upon the whim of NZ Customs, the port of entry 
could vary. Varian had competent technicians in Australia and their senior men did 
the installation. The large quantity of helium needed to initiate the superconduct- 
ing magnet arrived by air from Sydney (NZ does not have its own liquefaction 
plant) and the instrument came up with the minimum of effort. Peter mastered the 
instrument quickly and had superior spectra produced routinely because of the at- 
tention that he had paid to having the best probes possible as part of our package. 
Of course, routine maintenance was not easy and even having the vital supply of 
liquid helium here when needed always caused a missed heart beat or two. This 
was no more so than when the 'can of helium' sat on the tarmac of Sydney's King- 
sford Smith airport because the pilot of the daily freighter elected not to carry it 
(yes, they can make that decision!); no one took it out of the summer 30+ °C heat 
and its volume on arrival was markedly short of the needed quantity! Beyond this, 
the instrument needed a continuous supply of compressed air and this had to be 
supplied and installed by our Works and Service personnel. Sadly, they tried to 
minimize costs by ordering an inferior compressor and not allowing adequately 
for the storage of the helium and nitrogen cylinders that had to be kept outside 
the NMR room; much instrument time was lost with more still invested by Peter 
to ensure that this vital need was met. One of the matters that Victoria University 
has never come to grips with adequately is the time commitment involved by staff 
in maintaining an instrument. The responsibility for a new piece of equipment is 
always passed to a staff member and, until quite recently, it was presumed that this 
was part of the research commitment with minimal additional cost involved in run- 
ning the facility. For the life of the FT80A, I was the one with that responsibility 
and changed NMR samples most weekends and evenings until the then organic 
technician, Rhys Batchelor, was able to assist. Rhys moved over to the 300 MHz 

- 105 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

instrument and provided a good service for that. Nonetheless, problems were not 
alien to us as the supercon quenched more than once, the last time damaging the 
magnet and putting the instrument out of action for six months or so; that single 
event had major consequence for organic chemical research as we shall see. 

But to return to the time that the NMR replacement was being planned, the 
northern summer of 1995, 1 attended my fourth ISNA meeting, that time in Ger- 
many. I had been on the International Advisory Board (IAB) and had attended the 
meetings since the 1985 conference in Scotland. With the cost of travel from NZ to 
Europe, there was little point in simply attending the conference and I asked Man- 
fred Regitz (Kaiserslautern) if he could arrange a few visits for me. Once again 
I was well served, meeting Gerhard Maas in Ulm and Paul Binger at MPI-Coal 
Research. The ISNA meeting, organized by Klaus Mullen and Henning Hopf, was 
held in Braunschweig, Henning's home territory, and it was a little more intensive 
than the earlier events. Nonetheless, it was more than pleasant as I had enjoyed 
Henning's company in Victoria (Canada) in 1993 where, inadvertently, we man- 
aged to take breakfast at the same time most days. There were three particularly 
notable events at this meeting, leaving aside the meeting of colleagues from the 
past. The first was that the IAB set ISNA-9 for Hong Kong under the steward- 
ship of Henry Wong of the Chinese University. Henry wanted to have a Regional 
Organizing Committee in place for this 1998 meeting and I became its convener. 
Secondly, the subsequent meeting was proposed for Europe, with Leo Jenneskens 
of Utrecht in Holland offering to put things in place. The last, and most significant 
for me, was that after the meeting I had a free day before an evening flight to Lon- 
don to visit my mother in her hospice for what proved to be the final time. I spent 
that free day alone revisiting Gottingen, only to find that the main Japanese party 
escorting Professor Tetsuo Nozoe, the father of ISNA and in his 93 rd year but still 
active, was also sightseeing. We crossed paths several times including the same 
restaurant for lunch. At the railway station, waiting for a train to Hamburg and 
the flight to London, I found the opposite platform to be occupied by my Japanese 
friends awaiting their train south. My train arrived first and, after boarding, I found 
the entire group, Nozoe included, lined up along their platform where they courte- 
ously bowed as my train pulled away. That was the last time that I saw Nozoe as 
he died on April 4 lh in 1 996, two months after our eldest son's wedding. 

With involvement in the upcoming 1998 ISNA-9 in Hong Kong, the news of 
Nozoe's death came not just as the loss of a mentor but as the loss of the doyen of 
Japanese organic chemistry and the founder of ISNA. It meant that ISNA-9 could 
not take place without some significant recognition of the great man. Henry Wong 
and I saw a Nozoe symposium as one possibility but a commemorative Nozoe 
Lecture as the better choice. Sho Ito, an early Nozoe student who had spent his for- 
mal teaching years at Sendai University, was the next senior Japanese and he has 

- 106- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

ably filled Nozoc's shoes, though 
unable to attend all the ISNA I 
meetings. Thus, I wrote to Sho I 
suggesting that we included a I 
Nozoe Memorial Lecture to open I 
the ISNA-9 meeting, and that the I 
Nozoe students themselves select I 

the speaker. Not only was this ac- ^^^HBH^^^^BHHHBH^^^^^BHB 

cepted but it went one better. The group established a fund to commemorate Tetsuo 
Nozoe and set about raising money to secure The Nozoe Memorial Lecture and 
hold the Nozoe Memorial International Symposium on Organic Chemistry, the 
latter taking place in Sendai in August 1997. A book commemorating Nozoe's life 
was issued after the symposium and some 255 people were involved in getting 
the commemorative events started; just one American and three European names 
appear (Ron Breslow, Klaus Hafner, Brian Halton and Emanuel Vogel). Naturally, 
to establish the lectureship there needed to be a nomination process, an interna- 
tional advisory board (to select the lecturer and prevent the current ISNA organizer 
dominating), and stipulations on what the stipend would cover. 

This, in essence, comprised my contribution to ISNA-9 with the various friends 
that I had in Japan. As it happened, Fumio Toda invited me to his 1 997 November 
Mini-International Symposium in Okudogo, just outside Matsuyama on Shikoku 
Island, and this provided an ideal opportunity to meet with Sho Ito as he was still 
in Tokushima. So, after the wonderful conference at the Okudogo onsen, I again 
took the train to Tokushima, where I had the potency of the Japanese puffer fish 
(fugu) demonstrated in one of Sho's favourite sushi restaurants. The owner stirred 
the tank containing one fugu with a range of other fish, all available for eating. 
The impact of the ejected toxin on the other species was spectacular, with water 
from the tank being splashed a fair distance. Before my departure home, we both 
travelled to the new Osaka airport by boat where we met Ichiro Murata (by then 
retired from Osaka University) and transposed our ideas into the final details for 
the Nozoe Memorial Lecture. The first of the series was notified, nominations/ 
applications were sought, and the panel of Japanese Nozoe students decided that 
the inaugural lecturer should be Larry Scott of Boston College. I was privileged to 
chair that inaugural lecture as the opening event of ISNA-9. As an aside, the new 
Hong Kong airport opened just a few days before my arrival for ISNA, but I was 
assured by Roland Boese that my luggage would not be lost as his brother had 
designed the excellent facility. 

The ISNA series continued, with Klaus Mullen opening ISNA- 10 under Jay 
Siegel's stewardship in San Diego in 2001, and again I was asked to chair his 
Nozoe lecture. At that meeting, Leo Jenneskens of Utrecht University accepted 

- 107- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

the challenge of running the next novel aromatics meeting somewhere in Hol- 
land (to be the ISNA-1 1 mooted in Hong Kong in 1998) but it never eventuated. 
The Canada-based Graham Bodwell and Rik Tykwinski rose to the challenge and 
saved things by running the meeting in St. John's in 2005, and my good friend 
Koichi Komatsu of Kyoto gave the third Nozoe lecture. I had been invited to at- 
tend as Guest of Honour but it was not medically possible for me to travel at that 
time and so, unbeknown to me, Graham Bodwell had a photograph printed at life 
size and mounted (below). I was told that I chaired one session, attended the dinner 
and visited one of the local hostelries one evening. Larry Scott has told me that I 
was alive and well in Graham's Newfoundland office in late 2010! It was a great 

privilege for me to be involved with the 
series and to have three of my personal 
friends selected as Nozoe speakers. The 
funds raised by the Japanese covered 
the series including ISNA-1 2, which 
was back in Japan under the auspices 
of Yoshito Tobe at Osaka University. At 
that meeting Francois Diederich of the 
ETH in Zurich, Switzerland, was the 
Nozoe speaker. Fortunately, and sensi- 
Koichi Komatsu bly, the IAB decided that the name of 

Tetsuo Nozoe was too closely associated with the congress series, to be allowed 
to disappear and it enshrined the Nozoe Memorial Lecture in the series, with each 
conference offering some sponsorship. Europe was redeemed by Diederich as he 
organized the 2009 meeting that was held in Luxembourg, while the 201 1 meeting 
is being held in Oregon in late July. 

Not too long after my return from Okudogo and Toda's mini-conference in 
1997, Robin Ferrier retired. At that time, 65 was the mandatory retirement age 
(scrapped in NZ in 1999) and his fonnal departure was on Jan 31 of the following 
year in accord with the 'old contract'. Robin's departure was expected but he made 
no comment to Peter or me about it, his plans for the future, or when he would 
leave. He had often taken his summer holiday later than most and, when I went to 
see him a few days before he was due to depart, I found that he had already left. 
He did return a little while later to give a 'post-departure' lecture and was hosted 
to a farewell function, but there was no personal word of encouragement for the 
future to those left behind. For the entire 1998 teaching year, Peter Northcote and 
I were left to cope with all of the organic chemistry lecture, laboratory and tuto- 
rial work. In its 'all too customary' manner, the university chose not to decide on 
whether there would be a replacement until long after the incumbent had departed. 
In Robin's case, it was clear that there would be no continuation of an organic chair 

- 108 - 




From Recognition to Retirement 

and, with the advent of the Departmental Chairperson, it was not within my man- 
date to become the Organic Professor as had been the case with Neil Curtis, who 
become Professor of Inorganic Chemistry on Duncan's retirement. Eventually, a 
chemistry lectureship was advertised in mid- 1998 and among the applicants was 
one John Hoberg, an American carbohydrate chemist from the National Renew- 
able Energy Laboratory in Colorado. After telephone interview (by then accepted 
for non-senior applicants from overseas) and appropriate discussion, he was ap- 
pointed. He arrived in late 1998 but took some time to settle to the NZ way of 
things. Sometime later, the senior organic laboratory programme was reorganized 
and the communal research group meeting was replaced by area specific ones. I 
assume that Jim Johnston, then chairman of SCPS, had some part in this but it was 
only after the events that I became aware of them. It had always been my hope to 
introduce change to our syllabus but, other than for comparatively minor adjust- 
ments with new courses and the like, I never had adequate opportunity to discuss 
or evolve the sub-discipline as I might wish. 

John Hoberg rapidly gathered a sizeable research group, did some good chem- 
istry using the equipment that had been available to all the organic people prior 
to his arrival, and alienated both Peter and me. To assist his independent start in 
academia, I encouraged John to write an article on strained carbohydrates for my 
book series, which he did with one of his PhD students, Ghislane Cousins (now 
employed by NZ Pharmaceuticals). John had his first child in NZ but his wife 
never settled to life here and they left Wellington just before Christmas in 2003. 
Joanne Harvey, his replacement, arrived six months later having gained her Hon- 
ours degree at Victoria with Robin Ferrier and PhD with my own former student, 
Martin Banwell, at the ANU. 

But to return to chemistry. At the time the new NMR arrived I took on Gareth 
Dixon as an Honours student. He stayed with me until 2002 and was the last of 
my PhD students to finish. It is not that Gareth took his time rather than the cir- 
cumstances that he found himself in. He started his PhD training in 1 997 after an 
honours year that gained him a Hi from researching some new polar alkylidene- 
cycloproparenes. He continued in the same area for his PhD degree but with an 
initial foray into the precise conditions needed for the silyl-Wittig reaction. We had 
moved to an era of completing the studies we had done and determining the most 
appropriate ways of obtaining the various products. From his study, Gareth made 
a range of conjugated and cross-conjugated alkylidenes, recorded the dipole mo- 
ments of all the ones still needing measurement, and completed a significant and 
thorough survey of the polar and spectroscopic properties of these compounds; 
the work provided him with a number of publications. Most notable among these 
was confirmation that the cycloproparenyl core acts as both an electron donor and 
an electron acceptor from synthesis of various p- substituted phenyl derivatives 

- 109- 




66, 
92, 



H; (i 1.4(5) D 
OMe; n 1.8(5) D 



67, R = H; n 1 .6 D 

93, R = OMe; n 1.8(5) D 



Scheme 26 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

of, e.g. 58 (Scheme 25), and that the ability of the cycloheptatrienyl moiety to 
donate electrons is lower than that of the cycloproparene. Coupled with a theo- 
retical study, the last of the results were decisive in showing that in the unknown 
cyclopropenylidene compound 89 (Scheme 26), it is the cyclopropenyl moiety 
that is the stronger electron donor. With 
a cyclopentadienylidene attachment as in 
90, donation is to the five-membered ring 
as expected from first principles, but in- 
tuition argued that the seven-membered 
ring of 91 should be the donor. Theoreti- 
cal calculations in Haifa and Essen dif- 
fered with this and served to dispel such 
thought as did Gareth's subsequent work 
with substituted compounds. Thus, by 
preparing the previously known seven- 
membered ring-containing hydrocarbons 
66 and 67 and the new ethers 92 and 
93, the dipole moments were all telling 
(Scheme 26); the presence of the electron 
donating ether moieties in 92 and 93 results in an increase in polarity. Even more 
important was the X-ray crystal structure of 93 that has the seven-membered ring 
bent out of the plane of the cycloproparene to a greater extent than in non-ether 65; 
the cycloheptatriene resists the increase in electron density that would require it to 
become an 8n7C antiaromatic ring. 56 

As Gareth started his PhD training, Carissa Jones entered the BSc (Hons) pro- 
gramme and spent most of her time delineating the detail of our reactions with 

silylcycloproparenyl anions, which she 
continued into her PhD that started the 
following year. She had much success, 
inevitable failures, but discovered side 
products not detected by earlier workers, 
/ Me and she was able to provide a series of 
Me cross-conjugated ^-extended compounds. 
Her final contributions transformed cy- 
clopropaquinone 81 into its higher anthra- 
cene homologue 94, and facilitated the 
synthesis of the precursor to our cyclo- 
propabenzenylidenethenone 96 (Scheme 
27) that was obtained by a 'reverse electron mode' process. This used our original 
cyclopropabenzene 29, which ionized and let its cation be captured by the anion 

- 110- 




Scheme 27 



From Recognition to Retirement 

of Meldrum's acid. In work performed in conjunction with Curt Wentrup in Bris- 
bane - we did not have flash vacuum pyro lysis and low temperature IR facilities at 
VUW - the decomposition of 95 was monitored and 96 isolated at low temperature 
(Scheme 27). 57 After leaving Wellington, Carissa had postdoctoral positions in San 
Diego, with Jay Siegel, and then Oregon, with Mike Haley, both of whom I had 
come to know well. 

Gareth's PhD languished for some time, but not all of it of his making. When 
he registered for his degree, VUW was in the process of added change, this time 
directed at the postgraduate student. Accountability and a mandatory research pro- 
posal for all PhD candidates had been set. Until this point in time it was assumed 
that chemists could direct research and supervise PhD students in a responsible 
fashion merely from reputation in one's discipline, assuming that university funds 
were available. Gareth registered shortly before the 
changeover and, although the offer of a proposal and 
cost analysis/budget for his programme was made, it 
was declined; we were still under the old rules. One of c P co(co) 3 / 
the important phases set for the cycloproparene pro- octane, 48 h, 

gramme was to extend the exocyclic olefin series of ^^?™ S 
strained cyclopropabenzenes into molecules that also D J ~ *" D J&gt; 

i n i i • r.-. i ^^SnBU 3 

incorporated a rour-membered ring, e.g. 97, that we 97 
named 'rocketene'. This compound and its angular- \ 
ly substituted isomer had been known for almost 25 
years but their chemistries had not been studied. In SiMe3 
the early part of the programme we were able to ob- J 
tain a supply of hexa- 1 ,5-diyne, the essential starting i — (| 



material for the new route reported by Peter Stang and SlMe3 
Aileen McNichols in 1 992 for 97 (Scheme 28). Scheme 28 

Our difficulties began with the diyne-to-propyne cycloaddition that failed to 
give the organotin substituted benzocyclobutene in measureable quantities under 
the conditions stated; most of our diyne was used up attempting to persuade the 
reaction to behave. Eventually, we learned from Mike Haley that the reaction was 
likely best performed with external irradiation from an air cooled halogen lamp, 
and this proved to be the case; a 46% conversion was effected. The subsequent 
1,3-elimination proceeded without difficulty and gave us rocketene (97), but we 
had little starting material left and no way of synthesizing the compound ourselves 
given local safety regulations. Worse still, the financial situation had deteriorated 
and we were not allowed to renew our supply. Garth was left in limbo, active in 
other aspects of our programme but so close to the end of this appealing synthe- 
sis. With no softening of local attitudes but monies being dispensed elsewhere, 
I had little option but to beg. This I did, securing funds in the US to provide the 

- in - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

vital hexadiyne for us. The synthesis of 97 was repeated and the 
chemistry advanced to generate the derived anion, silylate it and 
provide 98, the first and only methylenecylobutacyclopropaben- 
zene. 58 Sadly, we were unable to proceed to the range of deriva- 
tives that we had hoped for, nor to pursue the ramblings of an aging chemist to- 
wards cross-conjugated trienes as illustrated by 99. 

Attempted silver(I)-mediated dimerization of various alkylidene compounds 
never led to any of the hoped for products but charge-transfer complexation did 
provide some interesting results that await others to confirm and extend. These 
complexes were generated by my final honours student, Jarrod Ward (2001), who 
subsequently worked in UK industry before undertaking his PhD at Auckland Uni- 
versity and, like Gareth Dixon, is now a thriving patent attorney. 

It was during Gareth's tenure as a student that academic members were strong- 
ly encouraged to apply for monies for research from the Marsden Fund. Like most 
of my chemistry colleagues, I had made applications from the earliest time and 
the new 'push' was easily satisfied by putting the development to tri-olefins, as 
illustrated by 99, before the selection panel. The effect of this was that my 1 999 
application passed through the preliminary round and I was required to submit the 
detailed 'round two' application. The procedure remains one of submitting a brief 
project synopsis for assessment and then, if invited, a full formal application to 
the second round, from which projects are selected for funding. As it happened, 
my application was the first from a VUW chemist to go to the second round and I 
was sent a glowing letter of appreciation from Dr. John Morrow, the then Assistant 
Vice-Chancellor (Research). Nonetheless, the project was turned down because 
one referee had questioned the predicted outcome of one particular reaction. While 
this might seem harsh to some, it needs to be noted that, even today, the success 
rate for chemists from this (nominal) blue skies research fund is a mere 5%, 1 in 
20; it is rightly regarded as a lotto more than a serious fund. This is not to criticize 
the few who rank the applications, as their task in a small country such as NZ is to 
use the slightest reason for rejection so as to reduce numbers to fit the paucity of 
funding available. 

The decade of the 1 990s had many things happening as I have discussed already. 
It also initiated me further into the role of editor, not simply from the ' Strain' series 
but from being appointed to the International Advisory Boards of (in sequence) the 
Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin 1 ( 1 993-97), Perkin 2 (1 997-2002) and the 
Australian Journal of Chemistry (1 994-99). With my involvement in Pacifichem, it 
was pleasing to find that those members of the UK RSC publication boards present 
in Honolulu for both 1995 (Perkin 1) and 2000 (Perkin 2), met with Sheila Buxton 
who was, in my view, an excellent managing editor for RSC. By comparison, AJC, 
being closer to home, meant a more 'hands-on' involvement and it proved to be 

- 112- 




From Recognition to Retirement 

a delightful time working with John Zdysiewicz and the board chairmen, initially 
Don Cameron and then co-ordination chemist Len Lindoy. John and Don I have 
referred to before, while Len, who moved from the James Cook University of 
North Queensland in Townsville to Sydney, was more than familiar with the forces 
of change that were blowing through Australia's CSIRO in the late 1990s. He 
was an astute and perceptive Board Chairman. For me, the most frequent task 
was to assess manuscripts from emerging country authors whose language ability 
was poor, and it was from this that my patience with English-as-second language 

authors evolved. I continue to offer to rewrite such 
papers in the hope that subsequent submissions are 
improved, but I do this only once for a given author. 
There was an annual face-to-face meeting that John 
Z organized, usually late in the year and always a 
I — pleasure to attend. It was not simply the generous 
hospitality that John showed, but the camaraderie 
and dedication to maintaining AJC as the flagship 
CSIRO periodical that made the time so worthwhile 
- the AJC subscribers more than doubled the number 
of its next best rival in the stable. Back in those days 
it was accepted as the pre-eminent chemistry peri- 
odical of the region and although its editors would 
John Z in his office accept material from other countries, that was domi- 

nantly by invitation. All of that has changed since John retired. AJC now strives 
to excel as an(other) international publication; the regionalism that made it so 
recognizable (and known) is gone. The moves to government agency ratings and 
staff assessments based upon publication and citation numbers have done nothing 
but exacerbate matters. 

One of the other tasks that emerged in the mid-to-late 1 990s after Peter North- 
cote's arrival was the serious need to upgrade our mass spectral facilities. My per- 
sonal involvement with mass spectrometers and mass spectrometry date to my fac- 
ulty position at Florida and those research outcomes have already been discussed. 
What, in fact, was involved in Florida was a first generation mass spectrometer 
that arrived in the Chemistry Department in the summer of 1 967. It was assembled 
by the manufacturers and a graduate student gained his PhD degree from work 
using and maintaining it; I hate to think what my own work vapourizing organic 
salts did to the instrument's interior! Nonetheless, I had a grounding in instrument 
operation and so when VUW obtained its own instrument (again brought in by Ted 
Harvey) in 1 974 from Micromass in Manchester (UK), I was an operator. The in- 
strument was housed in its own sizeable room adjacent to one of the lecture rooms 
in the McLaurin Lecture Block, now the Mail Room. The Micromass 12F was a 

- 113 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

second generation electron impact instrument with a large flight tube, huge pumps 
and was difficult to service, but it was state-of-the-art. I geared myself up to using 
the machine and spent a week with Micromass becoming familiar with its intrica- 
cies in 1975, whilst at Reading. It served us well, but advances in the art of mass 
spectrometry were fast and all too soon the 12F was outdated. By this time, John 
Craig had become interested in volatiles chemistry and after some negotiation, the 
NZ Racing Conference (the organization that oversees the country's horse rac- 
ing) placed a Hewlett-Packard 5595 desktop mass spectrometer in Chemistry. The 
old Micromass instrument was decommissioned in the mid-1980's and its various 
parts put to good use in science around Wellington - even the flight tube went to a 
good home. The Racing Conference contracted a technician to perform the neces- 
sary horse urine analyses and we had the instrument for the balance of the time. 
Eventually these analyses were transferred to Auckland and, after some protracted 
discussions, the aging desktop 5595 was left with us as our MS instrument. 

The general research of Chemistry and the Northcote marine natural products 
programme really needed a modern instrument and so one was mooted in 1997, 
especially since the biochemists were keen to have a MALDI time-of-flight instru- 
ment. Serious negotiations began late that year and ran well into 1998. After much 
discussion with VUW's senior administration, including the Dean, as well as a 
raft of manufacturers, our decision was narrowed to either one from PE Biosys- 
tems (near Boston) or Finnigan (in San Francisco). The Biosystems instrument, 
a Mariner, seemed better suited to the natural products chemists than an ion-trap 
instrument from Finnigan that was ideal for me. Someone had to inspect the in- 
struments and put them through a strenuous test process. As I had had the most 
experience (and am able to shut down most instruments and computers in minimal 
time!), I was the one to make the trip. The Mariner was in the process of final 
development and the timing for my visit was put back a few times, eventually 
taking place in a one week break from teaching. The manufacturers split the cost 
of my travel (which I had insisted to be business class as I would only return the 
day before lectures recommenced) and the Biosystems salesman accommodated 
me in a Venice Beach hotel near LAX for two nights. I flew to Boston on the 
Sunday and met him at the airport there. The time was hectic but the instrument 
performed well and handled the samples that I had brought with me with flying 
colours. On the Wednesday morning we arose before 7 am, drove back to Boston 
and I left for San Francisco, arriving late morning local time. I was whisked to my 
hotel, lunched and then taken to the Finnigan facility to 'play' with the ion-trap. 
Just as I was about to ask to be returned to the hotel (it was by then 6 pm Pacific 
time, 9 pm Eastern) I was told that I was being taken to dinner . . . and so the long 
day progressed. The time with Finnigan was well spent and although I preferred to 
have their instrument for my own needs, it was the Biosystems Mariner that won 

- 114- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

out. My return to Wellington was on the 14 hour United Airlines flight to Sydney 
and then home, arriving mid-afternoon, 18 hours before my Monday lecture. The 
Biosystems man gave me an upgrade coupon and the United flight was in l sl class; 
the food was awful but the wine superb - 1 slept for 1 1 of the 14 hours. 

With decisions made, a combined Biochemistry-Chemistry order was placed 
once the price finally had been settled for this 'first-in-NZ' purchase and the mon- 
ies confirmed available. At that time Les Holborow was in his last year as Vice- 
Chancellor and, as happened for the NMR, payment was to be met by the central 
administration. However, with Holborow's departure at the end of his term and fol- 
lowing the arrival of Michael Irving in January 1999, all of the arrangements were 
subsequently negated and the instrument costs were levied against the Science 
Faculty. There was significant impact as the funds for routine equipment replace- 
ments were swallowed up and no science department was able to get anything new 
for more than a year. As far as I was concerned, this was a reversal, not simply of 
the policy, but the reneging on an agreement. I am sure that Les Holborow would 
never have initiated it. John Hoberg took charge of the instrument after its arrival 
and attended a training course in Boston, which had been negotiated into the all up 
cost. For the first time, Victoria had accurate mass measurement facilities. It sig- 
nified the end of a long standing arrangement with Canterbury University and its 
first-rate technician, Bruce Clark, who had provided me with high resolution mass 
spectra (at least 150) for many years; they were run at a cost that was close to zero, 
a far cry from today's charging regimes that pervade every sector of academia. 

In the early days of the Mariner's short life, we had a Russian immigrant, Oleg 
Zubkov, master the instrument and have it perform to specification. However, dur- 
ing 2002, the Varian NMR instrument suffered a quench that damaged the mag- 
net and it was out of service for some six months; this impacted on the Mariner. 
Whereas an NMR instrument accepts crude samples within a sample tube, a mass 
spectrometer is only as good as the sample that is inserted into it, unless sepa- 
ration is done by way of gas chromatography. Unfortunately, research students 
were allowed to use the instrument as a 'crude sample analyzer' whilst the NMR 
was down and the inlet, source and ion-tube became clogged; costly repairs were 
needed. The manufacturers did not help matters by not maintaining a supply of 
spare parts and the quality of the mass spectra never returned to the former level. 
Ultimately, after Oleg's departure in 2006, the instrument became almost impos- 
sible to maintain (and certainly too expensive), not because it was inferior, but 
because of the maltreatment that it had been subjected to. It was decommissioned 
in 2008 and its replacement is due soon. 

The period that covered the Mariner installation was one of further change for 
the Chemistry. For many years the chemists had held the view that amalgamation 
with a larger unit was desirable, the organic staff favouring an affiliation with the 

- 115 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

biological sciences and the rest of the Department preferring Physics. A couple 
of the earlier Departmental reviews had recommended amalgamation with Phys- 
ics but the university administration rejected the calls. However, from 1997 there 
was a change of heart which, when coupled with the paucity of undergraduate 
numbers, led to amalgamation to 'The School of Chemical and Physical Sciences' 
(SCPS) during the last part of John Well's tenn as Dean. Not surprisingly, there 
was considerable concern about the name of the new unit and, recognising that it 
would never be accepted, I was to the forefront pushing "The School of Physics 
and Chemistry" as the order reads and sounds better than the reverse. Of course it 
was rejected as being insufficiently appropriate to define a new collaborative enti- 
ty. And so my preferred (but previously unannounced) SCPS, with chemistry first, 
won the day. After this, and when the facilities in Physics were being modified to 
provide teaching and research laboratories for chemistry, my time for 'research 
and refresher leave' (as it had become known) came around again. For a variety of 
reasons, it was no longer possible to spend long periods away and so this particular 
sabbatical was divided into three. The first segment was to be a two month spell 
in Ron Warrener's Centre for Molecular Architecture at Central Queensland Uni- 
versity in Rockhampton, the second a similar time at the Australian National with 
Martin Banwell and the last, another two months with Klaus Mullen in Mainz. 

The first component, with Ron and his delightful colleague Doug Butler, was 
set for the NZ winter over June- July 1999. On my way to 'Rocky', I stopped in 
Brisbane to see Curt Wentrup and then made the 8 hour drive north the next day. 
My arrival was carefully scheduled so that I could meet John Warkentin (McMas- 
ter University, Ontario) before he left. John had begun some work on the addition 
of dimethoxycarbene to ring-fused cyclobutenes as a part of the elegant Warrener- 
Butler programme that led the way to large, rigid molecules with functional units 
precisely located on the carbon framework. It is continued by others even today. 
I spent time modifying the reaction conditions and characterizing the products 
in order to bring the work to a successful conclusion; it gave rise to my second 
publication with full-time academics as its only authors. 59 Ron had rented a small 
house for me on Ocean Parade by the beach in Yeppoon, a 30-40 minute drive 



Scheme 29 




o 



o 




81 



CO 



o 



o 




100 



from the University. The location was glori- 
ous and a far cry from winter in Wellington. 
I took early morning walks along the beach 
and became familiar with the sea eagles and 
ibis, saw the brolgas in the marshlands to 
the north, and enjoyed the local old mining 
town to the interior. Margaret joined me for 
the winter holiday break that the NZ schools 
had during July. But it was not holiday for 



- 116- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

me. I had forwarded a sample of cyclopropaquinone 81 in order to use Ron's high 
temperature/pressure facilities for cycloaddition. What we found was that the 
olefmic bond of 81 did not add furan under 14 x 10 5 kPa pressure, even at 65 °C. 
By comparison, the more reactive isobenzofuran added at 40 °C and atmospheric 
pressure giving 100, but attempts to deoxygenate the furan ring to liberate the 
corresponding tetracenedione (Scheme 29) failed. Nonetheless, I was more than 
pleased to have had two publications from my last sojourn at the laboratory bench. 

The second component, at ANU, was hosted by Martin Banwell over October- 
November 1 999 at the time he was appointed to his Chair. En route to Canberra, 
I stopped over in Sydney to visit my old friends at the University of New South 
Wales, especially David Black, and the newer ones at Sydney University, particu- 
larly Len Lindoy, who was in the last period of his AJC Board chairmanship. In 
Canberra, I stayed with Martin and his wife Cathy for almost a week and got to 
know their two boys, the elder one then 1 1 , but only a baby when I had been with 
them in Melbourne in 1988. Martin had arranged an on-campus apartment for me 
but it was unavailable for the first two weeks of my stay, and so Christina Chai 
made a room in her home available for my second week. The time I spent on the 
ANU campus provided a great renewal of chemistry with international visitors 
and their seminars, and the RACI (Royal Australian Chemical Institute) evening 
meetings and the camaraderie of the organic chemists. It was especially gratifying 
to meet up again with Leo Radom and the late Athel Beckwith (1930-2010) as we 
had enjoyed our time on Heron Island some eight years earlier. 

The plan for my stay was to use the time, not in the laboratory as in Rockhamp- 
ton, but by writing a review with Martin on the use of gem-dihalocyclopropanes 
in natural products synthesis. Many hours were spent in ANU's excellent Chemis- 
try Library searching Chemical Abstracts as electronic searching with SciFinder®, 
routine today, had not yet advanced adequately at that time. In any event, the lit- 
erature was collated, the references read and the draft manuscript prepared. Not 
surprisingly, Martin had had little time to contribute and felt that were the review 
to be published, he would need to make a significant contribution. The project had 
arisen because Martin had been approached by Peter Vollhardt for a review to ap- 
pear as an Account in Synlett. When I left in late November 1 999, Martin was to 
draw most of schematics but he never found the necessary time and the text lay 
dormant until late 2004. 

During my stay in Canberra, I was advised by Jim Johnston, still Chairman of 
SCPS, that the comparatively new Dean had placed the School under review and 
that staff numbers were to be reduced with all positions under scrutiny. Asked if I 
should return to better cope with the issues, Jim's response was non-committal and 
offered little by way of hope or expectation; it was bureaucratic, but it did tell me 
that I needed to make a submission, which I did. When I got back I needed to move 

- 117 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

from my home of 3 1 years in the Easterfield Building to a new office in the School 
of Chemical and Physical Sciences located in the Laby Building, and this I did, 
leaving Gareth to clean up and vacate the Easterfield laboratory. In itself a simple 
task one would imagine, but one simple slip - omitting to 'kill' the remnants of our 
cyclopropabenzene with an alkali wash - resulted in one of the Psychology staff 
calling the fire brigade because of a chlorine leak. The psychologists evacuated but 
when Easterfield was checked no chlorine was found - only those chemists yet to 
move happily having afternoon tea. 

The revamped facilities in Laby gave the chemists about half of the space that 
they had had and teaching laboratories that were markedly smaller. The renova- 
tions were Science's major project for the new millennium and, while nice and 
new, there remains insufficient space for storage and too few fume cupboards for 
the number of students involved in synthetic work. Of course, these deficiencies 
only emerged when numbers increased significantly a couple of years later. As one 
would imagine, the design and construction of the modifications to Laby had been 
under contract and, whilst visually impressive, the reality was not. We had to have 
a light well to the central area that borders a small instrument room and student 
computing facilities on one side and a teaching lab on the other, with the remaining 
sides corridors; within days, the blinds in the computer unit were shut. Offices had 
their computer work stations set back-to-back to minimize wiring costs - but the 
effect was that one side was in the sun with its computer screen impossible to read. 
Main support columns pierce work areas making sections inaccessible and, as has 
happened throughout my lengthy time at VUW, the join of the 'add-on' to the ex- 
isting roof was anything but watertight. What NZ has never learnt is that countries 
far larger have had bigger science laboratories operating for many years with true 
and tested designs. Despite their availability, VUW seems incapable of accepting 
such designs, preferring instead to see if the wheel can be reinvented. My office is 
in a section of the revamped old structure that had its heating decommissioned for 
the renovation. Reconnection, though perhaps obvious, was not attended to and so 
heaters were supplied, supposedly to be removed when the connection was rein- 
stated over a year later. The temperature dips below 15 °C much of the time and the 
heaters remain. What was new in Laby was the provision of a separate laboratory 
for each of the organic staff to locate their students. This marked the beginnings 
of a divide into separate and independent operations. In the early stages, the major 
concern was with the few fume cupboards available and I was more than happy for 
one of those in my lab to be used by the Hoberg group, but the new environment 
led to strained relationships as much of what had been communal equipment was 
amassed into just one area. 

The final part of my sabbatical was to be a period with Klaus Mullen at the 
Polymer Institute over February-March of the new millennium. Unfortunately, it 

- 118- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

did not eventuate, not because I had had to reapply for my position as all those 
in the organic area were renewed, but because I suffered a second heart attack in 
January 2000, while on holiday. Margaret drove me back to Wellington and I was 
immediately hospitalized. By this time, the procedure of stent implantation was to 
the fore and my blockage was treated speedily and efficiently in this manner. Since 
my return from Canberra, I had not been feeling as well as usual and my then GP 
had suggested seeing my cardiologist, Ron Easthope. Unfortunately this did not 
happen, not that the NZ health system failed but because Ron had made attempts to 
reach me when we were away. In the event, he suggested that, since his retirement 
was imminent, I should accept a more recently trained and competent man - and I 
have been in the care of Phil Matsis ever since. Because of the infarct and keyhole 
surgery, I was not able to obtain international health insurance for a six-month 
period and so the visit to Mainz had to be put off and, when coupled with other 
university commitments, it could not be rescheduled until mid-2002. 

My hospitalization and convalescence period also had an impact on my leave 
allowance. Since about 1998, the NZ government had required employers to keep 
a record of the leave taken by their staff members; Victoria was no exception and, 
like every academic, I was asked how much leave, if any, I was owed. After about 
30 years in the employ of Victoria University, I came to the conclusion that the 
40 hour working week insisted upon by the government agencies (and university) 
over that length of time led to a considerable period of leave due - especially al- 
lowing for all the weekend time changing NMR samples on the FT80A. The 40 
hour week had brought me into disrepute with one government agency earlier. I 
cannot remember when, but there was a survey of academic duties, responsibili- 
ties and times taken performing the various tasks. This was no simple exercise as 
staff were randomly selected for interview and my name was on the list. I recall 
the interview being lengthy by the time all the boxes had been ticked, crossed and 
expanded, and questions answered. Finally, I was asked to say what proportion of 
my time was spent on teaching, research and administration. This was about 33% 
each but, not surprisingly, the interviewer insisted on expressing this as 33% of 40 
hours and entered these into the boxes. The truth was that it needed to read 50% 
each if 40 hours was taken as the norm; this did not fit to the survey being applied 
and its entry was refused. So I took the forms, tore them up and put the pieces in 
the wastepaper bin. I have always felt that l A teaching, l A research and l A admin- 
istration is a fair rule of thumb, but never at 13 hours 20 minutes each per week! 
Thus, my simple calculation of the time in excess of the assumed 40-hour week 
over the 30 years for which untaken holiday was to be claimed led to insufficient 
time in one calendar year for this to be taken! I suggested that my entitlement be 
recorded as 90 days and there was no argument. At the time that I was hospitalized, 
I was taking 'leave due' but this had to be cancelled and 'sick leave' inserted in its 

- 119 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

place for this and the subsequent recuperation dictated by the medics; my arrears 
did little but grow! 

The impact of this second heart attack was more significant than just prevent- 
ing leave in Germany. The six-month 'no insurance' period also covered the time 
of the major Pacifichem 2000 planning meeting scheduled for Washington, DC. 
Sadly, I missed it and a hosted tour of The White House that ACS had arranged 
for the delegates. This meeting scheduled the accepted symposia and allocated 
the various rooms to be used in Waikiki. Despite my inability to attend the DC 
meeting, I was back to normal by the time of the congress and I attended. It was at 
the final planning meeting, the day before the congress opened, when I found that 
the student poster competition had attracted far more entrants than had been pre- 
sumed. Rich Oakley of Waterloo University in Ontario asked me if I would assist 
with the event. At that time, papers were scheduled within the various symposia 
rather than being a student event at one place with a predetermined number of ses- 
sions. We both worked harder than ever before with the outcomes as I indicated 
earlier. The congress was another outstanding success and there was no dissension 
in holding another in the series in 2005. Again, I signed the agreement for the 
NZIC and was delighted to support the Korean chemists' move to join the organ- 
izing committee. These duties took place at the first of the planning meetings for 
Pacifichem 2005 that was held in Hawaii a few months after the dramatic events of 
September 1 1 , 200 1 . Stan Israel took over as Head of the ACS delegation and Peter 
Stang was the replacement for Paul Walter as treasurer. That 200 1 meeting and the 
subsequent one in Tokyo had great camaraderie. It was agreed that the congress 
must move into the modern era as its growth had almost outstripped the facilities 
we had available. Registration and abstract submission went to an on-line format 
for the 2005 meeting through the good graces of Rich Oakley and some Canadian 
software colleagues. However, someone was needed to test the Canadian-designed 
software and, of the committee members, the task fell to me. I managed to shut the 
system down rapidly and then with increasing difficulty until the software became 
idiot proof! That Tokyo planning meeting was the last time that I was with Stan 
Israel, whereas Peter Stang has visited NZ a number of times since then. 

For VUW staff, the Pacifichem meeting in 2000 was more than interesting 
because one of its former chemistry graduates, Alan MacDiarmid, had just been 
awarded the Nobel Prize (with Heeger and Shirakawa) for his work on conducting 
polymers; VUW's name was recognised more than usual. In a rare case of 'getting 
it right', VUW had awarded an honorary DSc to MacDiarmid in December 1999, a 
year ahead of the Nobel Prize. After the auspicious occasion, Alan revisited VUW 
Chemistry a number of times and had some of our staff, including John Spencer, 
the Head of School since 2005, visit him at his home-base in the University of 
Pennsylvania. Alan gave his name to a number of institutes and organizations, 

- 120- 




From Recognition to Retirement 

none less than the MacDiarmid In- 
stitute for Advanced Materials and 
Nanotechnology based on the VUW 
campus. By the time of his Nobel 
Prize, NZ science was being con- 
centrated and focussed even more, 
with government pushing for cen- 
tres of research excellence (CoREs). 

Eventually, it was decided that there 
The MacDiarmid Building, VUW should be gix of these Perhaps as a 

result of the Nobel, or perhaps from good advice, the decision was for one of these 
to encompass new materials. 'Bids' by reputed scientists in conjunction with oth- 
ers elsewhere in the country were sought for the six centres. By that time, Prof, 
(now Sir) Paul Callaghan had been appointed to a Chair in Physics and he led the 
initiative for a materials science and nanotechnology centre to be located at VUW. 
The VUW bid included Massey, Canterbury, and Otago Universities, as well as 
two Crown Research Institutes (GNS Science and IRL Ltd.), and it succeeded. 
The MacDiarmid Institute was opened in 2002 as a partnership among these or- 
ganizations. What the significant funding did for Chemistry, unintentionally, was 
to create a two tier system: those with MacDiarmid monies and those without. 
Fortunately, as time has passed, the discrepancies have become less significant, 
but the School's doors still carry signs designating the nature of the laboratory. The 
CoRE not only survived its initial six-year funding period, but retained an equally 
significant budget for its second six year period. Victoria named its newest (2010) 
science building, after Alan. 

In 2001, Carissa Jones departed for her postdoctoral with Jay Siegel in San 
Diego and I saw her there as Jay hosted ISNA- 1 0 that year. It was also the year that 
Jarrod Ward examined the charge transfer complexation of our ^-extended cyclo- 
proparenes for his Honours year. Moreover, despite the 
lack of monies for chemicals, I was allowed to purchase 
the School's only copy of the Warren Hehre Spartan 
software for ab initio molecular orbital calculations. I 
then began to use the software to compute properties of 
many of our molecules; the most notable outcome was 
a delightful illustration on the cover of No. 23 of the 
European Journal of Organic Chemistry in November 
2003. 60 The year also allowed me to reschedule the visit 
to the Max Planck Polymer Institute and Klaus Mul- 
len for the following June. Over the years Leiv Sydnes, 
initially at Tromso then Bergen in Norway, had been to 

- 121 - 




Scott and lto-ISNA-10 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

visit, always staying with us at home and always with a mutual interest in three- 
membered ring chemistry. Leiv was keen for me to go to Norway. With this in 
mind, a two month period from mid-May 2002 was set to include almost two 
weeks there and several days with Roland Boese in Essen, prior to some six weeks 
back at the MPI-P in Mainz. The time in Norway was most rewarding, not simply 
because I had over a week in Leiv's comfortable home, but because I was able 
to meet Lars Skattebol in Oslo. Many years earlier he had invited me to a NATO 
chemistry meeting but I had been unable to attend because of funding and the 

l-in-3-year overseas conference regime. 
As any small ring chemist will know, Lars 
is acclaimed for his pioneering work with 
cyclopropanes and their derived carbenes, 
and the time with him was rather special. 
Not only this, but Leiv had arranged for 
me to fly to Trondheim and lecture as 
well. However, the Norwegian custom of 
a visitor spending time only with the host 
group surprised me as remarkably few 
other staff were seen. I then returned to 
L-R: Terry, Ruth, Leiv and Kirsty Bergen on the overnight ferry, the maid- 

en voyage of the new boat MS Trollfjord. The experience of daylight well into the 
small hours of the morning was exhilarating and the time in Bergen stimulating. 
The weekend was spent with Leiv and wife Kirsty at a cabin on Hardanger fjord, 
with friends Terry and Ruth. 

From Bergen it was a short hop to Dortmund. Roland Boese met me at the air- 
port and took me back to his home as it had become the norm to stay there when 
in Essen, in the same way that he always stayed with us in Wellington. I remember 
arriving on a Saturday afternoon and being told that he and Renate were to have 
a group of chemists round for lunch the next day. This proved to be a most enjoy- 
able occasion as Frank-Garret Klarner and other organic chemists were there. I 
stayed with Roland and Renate until the middle of the following week, lecturing at 
what is now the old University of Essen (the University of Duisburg-Essen since 
the 2003 amalgamation) and spending a day at Bochum with Wolfram Sander. 
He had been a contributor to my ' Strain' series and had moved to Bochum some 
time earlier to establish what has been a spectacularly successful group studying 
matrix isolated molecules and other reactive intermediates. Then it was a longer 
than usual train journey to Mainz. The railway lines on the southern side of the 
Rhine were being renovated and a slow winding trip on the left side of the river 
was needed before crossing back upstream ahead of the Mainz station. 

As in 1993, Klaus had set up accommodation in an MPI-P guest room. Life 

- 122 - 





From Recognition to Retirement 

was easy to adapt to and the newly constructed organic lab wing well designed. 
My first lecture was in Heidelberg, but with Rolf Gleiter as Neidlein had, by then, 
retired. I had first met Rolf in Utah, and then at conferences before he came to NZ 
in 1998, but my visit to him was the same as in Norway. Of the people that I was 
keen to see again, Klaus Hafner in Darmstadt rated highly. He 
is another of the distinguished German chemists, but with a re- 
alistic and perceptive grasp of the discipline in the country and 
of the individuals involved. Indeed, I well recall him describing 
one national as a 'me too' chemist that precisely described this 
person's ability to take and use whatever had been discovered 
elsewhere. It was a delightful day, no lecture commitments and 
time to simply enjoy his company. However, after returning to 
Mainz by train and then dining at a Greek restaurant, I began to 
feel uncomfortable but, early the next morning, a Friday, I was 
up and off to Utrecht to see Leo Jenneskens and deliver a lecture. Unfortunately, 
the overnight discomfort continued and I suffered another heart attack, the third, 
somewhere en route. After Leo had collected me from the station and taken me to 
the Debye Institute, I decided that I was in no state to do anything other than call 
the NZ insurance company and get to a hospital. 

What happened has to be the worst nightmare any academic can face, namely 
that of having a visitor taken ill while host. Leo and his wife were more than gener- 
ous. Initially, Leo got me to the university hospital where an infarct was confirmed 
and hospitalization mandated. The difficulty that Leo had was that, in Holland, be- 
ing a geographically small country, the patient is located at that hospital best able 
to take him, not the closest. However, because I knew few people in the country, 
he was able (eventually) to have me admitted to the hospital in the small town of 
Zeist, not far outside Utrecht and close to his home. One of the cardiologists was 
Oxford-trained Dr. Bredero, with impeccable English, and I was assigned to him. 
I also had a nurse whose command of the language was good. This was Lilian 01- 
limans who went out of her way to be of assistance and she has become a close 
contact. I was well cared for; Leo went and bought me pyjamas and other essen- 
tials as I had arrived only with enough clothes for the weekend stay, and he was 
instrumental in having a bed provided for Margaret in my room when she arrived 
from NZ. The only other non-native to have stayed in the hospital was a Russian 
and his treatment set the precedent. The system in the Netherlands at that time was 
for angioplasty and open heart surgeries to be performed in a few centres with 
diagnostic testing done elsewhere; the patient was moved as needed. For me, the 
angiogram dictated changed medication and a probable second by-pass surgery at 
home, a journey to be taken only under medical supervision. 



As a long journey by air was designated in Zeist as 'Amsterdam to New York', 

- 123 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

the 24+ hours needed to return to NZ could only be agreed to after being symptom 
free for a week. This time was spend in a hotel in the neighbourhood as I was 
not allowed to take up the Zwannenburg's offer of accommodation, but to remain 
close to the hospital should its services subsequently be needed. The NZ insurance 
company, by this time one that covered all the Victoria University travelling em- 
ployees, was good to deal with and they, in turn, liaised with Margaret. The only 
time the service fell down was when payments were needed in Holland. 

I was visited by Klaus and Renate Mullen, who brought my belongings from 
Mainz, the Rehbergs from Cologne, and the Zwannenburgs from Nijmegen. But it 
was Roland, who drove from Essen twice each week, who kept me in good spirits. 
It was he who introduced me to Henning Mankell and the 'Kurt Wallender' series 
of crime novels (see frontispiece) saying that he thought I might like them; I have 
read every one in the series and many others by the same author. Roland went 
even further, offering to cover any expense that I could not meet; a very generous 
gesture but not needed as it happened. The hotel that Margaret and I had to stay in 
was by no means inexpensive and the account due at the time I left had to be sig- 
nificant. However, the insurers had agreed to this place and their NZ medic settled 
all the accounts before we eventually left. Margaret was unable to get flights back 
with the medic and me, and so she had a weekend in London with Mark and his 
family (who had come across to Zeist for a weekend to see me) before flying back 
to NZ via Los Angeles, arriving home some six hours ahead of me. My journey 
was by way of Singapore where we had a daytime layover. After checking in for 
the overnight flight to Auckland (and then down to Wellington), we ran into David 
Officer in the Singapore Airlines lounge! Upon return, the videotape of my Dutch 
angioplasty was left with my cardiologist and a follow-up appointment scheduled. 
This led to another angiogram and Phil Matsis' decision to open the blockage and 
insert stents number three and four. 

Unfortunately, Phil was proved wrong and the Dutch right, as the blockage 
stayed open only for a few weeks before causing infarct number four in Septem- 
ber. With this, the decision was that I should have a 'redo' by-pass and so I un- 
derwent surgery in late November of 2002; the surgeon proved to be Mr. Riordan, 
the assistant during my first such surgery. By 2002, the impact of anaesthesia was 
markedly less significant than in 1983 and the procedure itself was much faster. In 
any event, my anaesthetist's daughter was one of the chemistry students (Joanne 
Wojnar) and she brought flowers to the hospital for me. This caused all sorts of 
confusion as the hospital staff thought that they had to be for her father and not 
a patient. I recovered quickly, edited the subsequent issue of Chemistry in New 
Zealand, (for which I became the editor in 2001) as therapy, and then took a short 
break to sample some of the Hawkes Bay wines and see the Mike Ponder paint- 
ings that were being exhibited at the Silini vineyard before returning to the office. 

- 124- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

Gareth Dixon had been in the process of writing his thesis before I left for the 
ill-fated sabbatical in Europe and his examination procedure 'ticked along' dur- 
ing my northern hemisphere hospitalization. His completion happened after I had 
returned home but before the subsequent by-pass surgery. He left to undertake suc- 
cessful preliminary patent attorney training in Manchester. This was followed by 
further courses in Wellington before being appointed to Baldwin-Shelston patent 
attorneys (now ShelstonIP) in Sydney. Another notable event before the surgery 
was notification and presentation of the New Zealand Association of Scientists 
'Shorland Medal' to me. It is awarded annually in recognition of major and contin- 
ued contribution to basic or applied research that has added significantly to scien- 
tific understanding over one's career. Its importance to me stems from the fact that 
Brian Shorland (1909-1999), a doyen of NZ science, spent his 'honorary career' 
in retirement (in biochemistry) at Victoria University for 30 years from 1969. He 
always supported my endeavours and I cherish the times we had when he was a 
passenger in my car on the way from local NZIC meetings, always insisting that he 
take the bus home once we reached the Wellington tenninus at the railway station. 

A consequence of my medical misdemeanours was that I had no research stu- 
dent assigned for 2003 and so the year gave me an opportunity to take stock once 
again. My step-father had died a few weeks after I had returned from Zeist and 
the family home in Lee, London SE 12, which he had occupied since my mother's 
death, was put on the market, a task eased with the help of friend Peter Civil and 
his son Roland. In short order, the place was emptied of its contents, put up for sale 
and a settlement reached. Once the various UK taxes had been paid and the lawyer 
done with the paperwork, it was well into 2003, but the consequences were signifi- 
cant. Whereas I had assumed that I would have to stay at VUW at least until the 
'traditional' retiring age of 65 years, I now found myself in the position of being 
able to retire and not be the pauper I might have been. There seemed little virtue in 
continuing as a staff member at the university because funding was being targeted 
more and more, and staff without such monies or unable to attract students were 
going to have increasing difficulties with their research efforts. Indeed, such aca- 
demics have become less and less able to make a meaningful research contribution 
without bastardizing their work and twisting their real interest to fit to the modern 
idiom. Given my health situation, the demands of targeted research, and the pau- 
city of external funds for very fundamental studies, the direction was clear, but the 
ultimate decision to retire was most difficult. Eventually it was made, as retire I 
must, and it was in the full knowledge that my ties to the laboratory bench would 
be severed. I could never raise the monies needed to rent a bench and purchase the 
chemicals necessary to push back further the frontiers in strained molecule chem- 
istry. And so, towards the end of October 2003, it was with much sadness that I 
submitted my resignation. Jim Johnston was still Head of School and he instigated 

- 125- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

the process of my becoming an emeritus professor and retaining my office, with 
access to the associated facilities. My resignation proved to be a little ahead of that 
from John Hoberg, who returned to the US with his family just before Christmas 
in 2003 some months ahead of my own departure. 

One of the last duties that befell me in VUW's employ was the need to com- 
plete a portfolio for the newly instigated performance based research funding 
(PBRF) model. By mid-2003, New Zealand had chosen to follow world trends 
and assess the performance of academic researchers, and this seems soon to be 
extended separately to teaching. There is little doubt that having an assessment of 
a given discipline can be a good thing. However, as soon as it was announced that 
the exercise would grade each academic according to performance (output) with 
the individual results returned to the institution involved, that arrows were drawn 
and the opportunity for misuse legion. The concept was simple enough, assess 
staff research across all the institutions and then divide the government money for 
research to fit the profile. Of course, none of this has evolved as was intended and 
the universities now use the PBRF outcome at will for any purpose which suits. 
Thus, it was announced in the spring of 20 1 0 that, henceforth, no new academic 
staff member will be appointed to VUW unless the individual's PBRF rating is B 
or better, at least until after the next (2012) round - the NZ universities are moving 
to buying in staff to raise their profile for a subsequent round(s). 

But to return to the first such exercise and my involvement in it: by the time the 
need to produce a portfolio for the newly established Tertiary Education Commis- 
sion was known, I had tendered my resignation and felt that, should the institution 
require a submission from me, then it would need to make its views known in a 
polite manner. I took the various electronic communications as of little relevance 
and awaited the personal touch - my research output as measured by the number 
of published papers in the peer reviewed literature was one of the highest in Chem- 
istry. Eventually, it was the Dean who asked if I would be willing to complete a 
portfolio; it was very definitely a situation of the institution needing me far more 
than I, it. Whereas colleagues had attempted to 'fill boxes' as prescribed, I felt it 
important to know precisely what the bureaucrats meant in specifying the maxi- 
mum size of an entry by way of characters. I had seen enough nonsensical exercis- 
es to suspect that the characters would also include spaces, and thus minimize the 
opportunity to say precisely what one wanted; I was proved correct. In 2004, there 
were no good comparative data to allow for science and non-science publication 
to be matched effectively. This was rectified through a subsequent major exercise 
undertaken in Australia (which showed that almost every journal that carried my 
colleagues and my own refereed papers ranked 'A'). Thus, we were required to 
classify papers by the nature of the review process, the locality of the publication 
house, etc., etc. What I found highly amusing was the absence of a suitable box 

- 126- 



From Recognition to Retirement 

in which one could place one's peer review exercises of refereeing. I maintain 
the view that, if by my actions of scientific review, a paper is subsequently pub- 
lished and the author gains an 'A' grade for that paper in his PRBF exercise, then 
my action as referee is at least as good, if not better. I included my list of referee 
reports among the highest ranked papers. Not only did this cause a stir among the 
pencil-pushing administrators but it elicited a request for the actual reports. The 
request was vehemently refused (naturally, all hard and electronic copies had been 
destroyed) and the information that my portfolio would be altered if I did not re- 
locate the offending material was treated by a simple deletion of the entire folder 
(backed-up of course but who was to know). The point had been made, my per- 
sonally completed portfolio was duly submitted without change and the 'A' grade 
outcome, which Victoria had so desperately wanted, gained. Vindication for my 
stand followed when a separate category of output, namely, material refereed, was 
included in subsequent exercises. 

The decision to retire proved to be a wise one as the sole remaining 'original' 
by-pass faltered just after Christmas 2003, a little more than a year after surgery. It 
gave rise to infarct number five and the implantation of a new stent, also number 
five. Statistically, one in five stents block within the first six months and mine did 
just that. Shortly after my formal retirement, I awoke in the early hours one April 
morning feeling unwell but capable of recognizing the heart symptoms. Margaret 
called the ambulance service and I was (again) admitted to Wellington Hospital. 
It was later that same morning, while having an ECG taken by the coronary care 
unit (CCU) medical manager that I was told the pattern was changing as the plot 
emerged from the machine. I was having an(other) heart attack but felt nothing 
untoward. That single event had more people moving faster that I had seen previ- 
ously in the CCU, and I was in the procedures facility for an(other) angioplasty 
within fifty minutes. The blockage to stent five was opened and two more stents 
successfully located. At that point in time, an anti-platelet medication had become 
available in NZ, but only for about three weeks after an uncoated metal stent was 
implanted; Canada had their patients on the drug for about six months. The car- 
diology team were of the view that I needed to be medicated for at least a month 
but the NZ drug purchasing agency 'Pharmac', whose medical director earlier had 
been my GP for several years, declined the request even for a slightly extended 
period. The hospital staff manipulated matters so as to provide the medication for 
the longest possible time, and I purchased the remainder to cover their preferred 
time period. 

It took only a short time to recover and I was soon back to my office at Victoria 
and into teaching. Peter Northcote was the sole full-time organic staff member and, 
although assisted by recent PhD graduate Bridget Stacker (prior to her postdoctor- 
al appointment), it was a difficult time for him. My health was then stable from that 

- 127- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

time until November 2008. While pruning a small tree, my blood pressure dropped 
to the extent that I blacked out, fell from the tree, and regained semi-consciousness 
finding myself in total darkness and with no sensation. The question in my mind 
was: had I died? I tried to move a finger, could do so, and ultimately regained full 
mobility on the ground in our garden. Margaret found me with no recollection of 
what had happened. She got the ambulance, and I was off to hospital again. I then 
had a series of black-outs but all attempts to monitor an 'event' failed and, after an 
incident in which I scraped the skin off the left side of my face, I was readmitted 
to hospital and advised that a pacemaker was essential. As I was declared a danger 
not just to myself but to everyone around me, I was required to stay there until one 
was inserted. This was done but, being an active chemist, the local anaesthetic did 
not numb my sensations sufficiently and I was able to discuss just where the elec- 
trodes were during the insertions; I had several doses of anaesthetic more than the 
norm, but to little effect. Since the 2004 blockage and this 2008 're -wiring', I have 
had no further troubles with my array of expensive metalwork. 



- 128 - 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 
- What Better Role? 



When the time came for my formal retirement on March 3 1 , 2004, there was no 
replacement here for John Hoberg, although the position had been advertised and 
an appointment made; my own post was about to be advertised as a lectureship in 
chemistry (organic). On my final day, Jim Johnston organized a delightful School 
gathering in the late afternoon and marked my retirement with the presentation 
of Yearling Sale, a print by local Hutt Valley artist Mike Ponder. It has pride of 
place in our home as I have been a Ponder fan for some time. I had negotiated with 
Jim, who still retained the chairmanship, to retain my office, its facilities with the 
computer, and university services so that I could continue with writing, editing and 
student assistance. I was appointed an emeritus professor some months later. I was 
also asked if I would agree to the School holding a formal retirement symposium 
in my honour, to which I acceded, but this could not happen until 2005. It seemed 
prudent to separate my formal retirement from the new 'paper chemist' activities 
I had planned, and this was to have been by way of a month away from the uni- 
versity. The period was extended for it was during April 2004 that my fifth stent 
blocked as I have already described. 

Joanne Harvey, a Victoria graduate, was the replacement for John Hoberg, but 
she did not arrive until mid-May of 2004 as she was completing a postdoctoral 
with Richard Taylor at York in England. For the second time Peter and I covered 
much of the organic teaching, Peter as a formal employee, me as one under con- 
tract, though some of the courses were taught by Crown Research Institute staff 
and others. My vacant lectureship was subsequently filled by Brendan Burkett, 
another ANU graduate, but this time from my former colleague Christina Chai. He 
arrived in the early part of 2005 and, together with Joanne, proved to be a delight- 
ful colleague, each active in establishing their respective research groups. 

I regard my senior unpaid role as one that allows me to continue with writing, 
refereeing, editing and assisting any student who wants it - providing only that s/ 
he makes an honest effort. Additionally, it has given me a number of excursions 
into computational chemistry, some published, some not. What the status of emeri- 
tus has done for me is to provide complete freedom of choice to do what I most 

- 129- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

enjoy, in the time that I wish to devote to it, and at a pace that I find pleasing. As a 
staff member I was always in to the office well before 9 am, but now I prefer the 
corridors of knowledge to be aired before I enter at about 10 am, after a leisurely 
breakfast, the newspaper and morning crossword. 

My first tasks were to complete a review that Henning Hopf had invited me 
to write and to finish off all those papers remaining from our research work. The 
review was on the fulvalenes and it appeared in print in 2005. With that done, 
and as Joanne Harvey had been in Canberra at the time that I was on sabbatical, 
the ill-fated review from 1999 on gem-dihalocyclopropanes reared its head. The 
content encompassed much of Joanne's ANU PhD work and it seemed an ideal 
opportunity to complete the exercise with her, providing that she was willing and 
that Martin (Banwell) had no objections. Peter Vollhardt and Synlett were still in- 
terested in publishing the item while Martin was happy to leave the task to Joanne 
and me. Thus, it was in late 2004 that Joanne and I began to think about just how, 
and in what way, the manuscript should be revised and updated. The exercise itself 
showed Joanne to be adept at the task at hand, effective and efficient, and it was 
a pleasure to be involved with her in this way. The duly completed article went 
to Peter Vollhardt, received accolades from him, and subsequently appeared in 
Synlett in 2006. 61 1 recall making an enquiry of Peter's secretary, only to receive a 
rebuke that said 'with so few amendments required what more did I want'! I think 
it worth noting here that I had not wanted to complete this review for any personal 
kudos, rather than to provide Joanne with her first article as a VUW staff member. 

As the time passed, I took great pleasure in being able to explore the industrial 
uses to which so many small-ring organic compounds had been put, something 
that never quite made it past the 'wish list' whilst I was employed. What I found 
fascinated me and led to a series of articles for Chemistry in New Zealand (all 
externally refereed since I was editor!) under the title of 'From small rings to 
big things' . Not only this, but one manuscript provided the NZ readers with a 
synopsis of Alfred Nobel's life and work that encompassed the nitroglycerin com- 
mercialization and its phannacological (heart) use. What better than to dedicate 
this to the trio of cardiologists who have tended me over the past 28 years, and I 
did just that. Another in the small ring series covered the use of 1 -methylcyclopro- 
pene as a fruit/flower preservative and that fell to my surgeon, Bede Squire, who 
in his retirement is growing and grafting New Zealand native shrubs. The Nobel 
piece came from my (editorial) policy of including a synopsis each year of the 
Nobel Prize winning chemistry with someone subsequently saying just how little 
he knew about Nobel himself. 

Several of the students I had taught continued on to postgraduate study and my 
final senior teaching in 2004 was to an exceptionally competent group individuals. 
Joanne Wojnar, who I have mentioned previously, took a year away from study 

- 130- 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 

before returning for PhD training with Peter Northcote, a postdoctoral in Chicago 
and then back to NZ for a fellowship with Margaret Brimble in Auckland. Maria 
Matvenko, a Russian immigrant, impressed and it has been a pleasure to sup- 
port her through the choice of PhD supervisor, her study, and her postdoctoral as 
a Humboldt Fellow in Munich. Teck Lim, a Malaysian Chinese, completed his 
PhD with Richard Tilley (in my view, Richard is an emerging nanoparticle star), 
then went to Oxford as a postdoctoral and is now employed as a research chem- 
ist in Resene's Hutt Valley (Wellington) plant. Jonathan Singh, a local man who 
has taken time to display his true talents, is about to complete his PhD with Peter 
Northcote as this is written. Indeed, one of the joys of retirement has been to in- 
teract with those students who have sought some form of assistance and to watch 
them develop. 

The retirement symposium that the School hosted for me took place over two 
days at the end of June in 2005. The School asked me to provide a (limited) list 
of overseas chemists who could be invited and extended the invitations around 




Upper. Andy Kay &amp; Leiv Sydnes; Roger Brown, the author, Jun Nishimura and Yoshito Tobe. 
Lower: Barry Dent, Andy Kay, Tony Woolhouse, Brian Halton, Ted Harvey, David Officer, Martin 

Banwell and Jarrod Ward 

- 131 - 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

NZ itself. I was humbled by the number of colleagues who came. They included 
all the senior organic academics: Jim Coxon, Rob Smith and Margaret Brimble, 
my former students Tony Woolhouse, Martin Banwell, David Officer, Barry Dent, 
Andy Kay, and my last Honours man Jarrod Ward, then a PhD student in Auck- 
land. The visitors from overseas included Martin, Roger Brown (himself retired 
for some years), Jun Nishimura and Yoshito Tobe from Gunma and Osaka Univer- 
sities, respectively (in Japan), Andrew Grimsdale (who was in Melbourne at that 
time and represented Klaus Mullen of MPI-P), and Leiv Sydnes (then President of 
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) who travelled the furthest 
(from Norway), specifically for the event. Koichi Komatsu was unable to attend 
but he visited with his wife in 2008 and, like Leiv, stayed with us at home. Graham 
Bowmaker of Auckland University was also there as President of the NZIC. 

Immediately after the symposium opening by the Vice-Chancellor, Graham 
took the floor, ostensibly to chair the opening session with Martin Banwell as 
speaker. However, he diverted and advised the gathering that the NZ Institute 
wished to confer upon me its highest honour, namely that of Honorary Fellowship, 
and proceeded to present me with the framed certificate. This election by my peers 
is the most meaningful award I have received as it formalizes my lifetime attempts 
to foster chemistry beyond the classroom and laboratory, and my service to the 
profession in this country and beyond. At the time of writing, it is the only such 
award this century and the first since the early 1 990s. Following this, Martin pro- 
ceeded to give the opening paper and I was designated the last slot with a title Life 
in the Strain Lane. The first day was capped off by a delightful symposium dinner 

to which many of the tech- 
nicians and secretaries 
from the School came, 
as did Margaret, our son 
Mark and his wife Debra. 
What surprised me was 
the fact that Yoshito Tobe 
took the floor to represent 
the Chemical Society of 
Japan. He presented me 
with a framed citation 
marking my involvement 
in Pacifichem (Shinji Mu- 
rai was then President of 
the CSJ) and, later, the American Chemical Society did a similar thing, giving me 
a cut glass globe on a Pacifichem-inscribed stand. 




The CSJ Plaque 



Some fifteen weeks after the retirement symposium the School was visited by 

- 132 - 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 




Clockwise: Andrew Grimsdale, Peter Northcote, Jim Johnston, Yoko &amp; Koichi Komatsu, Jim Coxon, 

and John Spencer 



Bob Grubbs, Merle Battiste's most renowned student, who, as I mentioned previ- 
ously, I had met on a visit to Caltech in the early 1990s. Bobby, as he was known 
in Florida, gave an inspirational lecture to a large audience and influenced many 
of our graduate and undergraduate students. I had had the impression that Bob 
was likely to be awarded a Nobel Prize for some while and my thoughts were 
that 2005 was the right time. It was because of this that I had Bob sign an off- 
print of that original joint Chemical Communication in my office, ostensibly for 
Merle Battiste. Bob received the call from Stockholm advising of his Prize later 
that night, after returning to Christchurch where he was a visiting Erskine Fellow. 
Merle never got the offprint, but Bob took him to Stockholm for the ceremonies 
and that became the highlight of Merle's career. 

The presence of Brendan Burkett from early 2005 reintroduced some biologi- 
cally oriented heterocyclic research into the School and Brendan supervised one 
Robert O'Reilly as his first student. Robert had entered VUW in 2002, just after his 
1 7 lh birthday and before he had formal university entry requirements, as his chemi- 

- 133- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

cal knowledge was ahead of his peers. He had been brought to my attention by the 
university's occupational health nurse because he was tutoring the 7 lh -form class 
at his school although he was only a 6 ,h -former. He had a better grasp of chem- 
istry than even the teacher involved. After meeting him in 2002, Jim Pearce and 
I arranged for the Dean of Students, Shona de Sain (a former chemistry teacher), 
to interview him. He impressed and was enrolled for an introductory chemistry 
course while still completing his senior school programme and examinations. His 
VUW undergraduate degree was completed at the end of 2004 and he then taught 
in Thailand for a year before returning for Honours with Brendan in 2006. Robert's 
interests were (and are) dominantly theoretically oriented but with affiliated exper- 
imental study; he gained a 1 st class honours degree and is set to complete his PhD 
under Leo Radom's supervision at Sydney University during 2011.1 regard Robert 
as my protege student as he has continually performed well above the average with 
a chemical maturity ahead of his 25 years; likely his PhD will be completed ahead 
of his peers in this institution. 

But let me return to Brendan Burkett and the difficulties that he experienced 
from changing attitudes in the university. He was caught up in a major change in 
policy and protocol. Because Joanne took maternity leave, it was Brendan who 
had the responsibility for much of the organic chemistry outreach work, lots of 
teaching, and the expectation that his research would still nourish. Indeed, his 
proposal for a postdoctoral research fellow succeeded and Mattie Timmer was of- 
fered and accepted the job. After his arrival, Mattie worked on Brendan's project 
as expected, but the Dean of Science and the School encouraged him to follow 
his major interest that allied with the Malaghan Institute of Medical Research, 
a private research organization housed in rented space on the VUW campus and 
alongside the School of Chemical and Physical Sciences. As I saw it, what this 
did was simple - it essentially terminated Brendan's research and made it difficult 
for him to make significant progress. Worse still, Mattie was encouraged to seek 
external funding and it seemed that he spent too little time in Brendan's laboratory, 
writing research proposals instead. With but 2.7 organic staff, it was obvious to me 
that another appointment was needed, even if it was to be limited to a three-year 
term. A post was created and Mattie was duly appointed, likely with the Malaghan 
Institute meeting a part of the salary. Brendan then sought approval to apply the 
monies remaining from the postdoctoral position to employ a research assistant 
(there were neither funds nor time to seek a new postdoctoral researcher) and, even 
with the intercession of the Head of School, these were not well received. 

Current policy now regards postdoctorals as independent researchers rather 
than a recently qualified individual gaining new experiences under the guidance 
of an appropriate member of staff whose research proposal was deemed relevant 
prior to the appointment. The circle is completed with the absence of a fair and 

- 134- 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 

equitable career structure for the recent doctoral graduate, and insufficient funding 
either to provide the vital postdoctoral fellow for a research group or to provide ad- 
ditional support should limited monies be gained from some other external source. 
The postdoctoral now is encouraged to seek independent monies from the already 
overstretched research funds, such as the Marsden, whose criteria have changed 
to include them. What is so insidious here is that the postdoctoral (or other short- 
term appointee) appears to be given promises of a position beyond the length of 
any successful grant application and spends much time preparing submissions, as 
did Mattie. In comparison, the staff member whose postdoctoral may be diverted 
from the 'real' job is still expected to raise external monies for research and gain a 
high ranking in the PBRF exercises that have become a fixture in NZ academia. It 
has a major impact on the 'doing' of science, while leaving the administrators free 
to criticize and 'grow' their own area almost without limit. The University used 
to proffer its core business as teaching and research but it seems that this is now 
closer to the management of teaching and research. It is not surprising, then, that 
Brendan became disenchanted with the institution and its demands for increased 
research output: it showed little concern for his extensive teaching and outreach 
work. He tendered his resignation and is now in the Singapore Institute of Chemi- 
cal and Engineering Sciences. He has been replaced by Rob Keyzers, one of Peter 
Northcote's doctoral graduates who gained additional experience in South Africa 
and South Australia, and who, like Brendan, is being diverted into outreach and 
other duties above the norm. Mattie's limited tenn appointment became permanent 
at the same time. 

Apart from the writings that I described, the edi- 
torial work with Chemistry in New Zealand, and the 
various peer review editing that I continue with, I gain 
much pleasure from assessing the discipline of chem- 
istry locally, and supporting those chemists who ap- 
pear worthy of nomination for New Zealand prizes and 
awards. This no less so than the nomination of Martin 
Banwell for an honorary DSc degree of Victoria Uni- 
versity. With appropriate support internationally, Mar- 
tin was nominated for and subsequently awarded the 
degree in May 20 1 0. He graced us by being in Welling- 
ton for the week that included the graduation ceremony and the School made the 
occasion grand by hosting a one day symposium in his honour. I was allowed to 
entitle the event 'From Small Rings to Big Things'. Prof. Peter Steel from Canter- 
bury University was the invited external speaker as he had interacted with Martin 
in Christchurch when he was an Erskine Fellow and even earlier during Martin's 
PhD study when he was there to use the Canterbury NMR facilities. 

- 135- 




From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 




The local speakers included 
Joanne Harvey and her 'just 
graduated' PhD student, Russell 
Hewitt. I was fortunate enough to 
be able to outline Martin's early 
career and chair his closing lec- 
ture. The symposium was com- 
pleted with a dinner at which the 
day's proceedings and the degree 
award were commemorated in a 
bound book that was presented to 



L-R: Halton, Banwell, Harvey, Hewitt (18 May 2010) our guest of honour. The gradu- 
ation ceremony itself was special, not just for the award to Martin, but because 
the official seating housed four generations of 'Halton chemists': Russell Hewitt 
(PhD supervisor: Joanne Harvey), Joanne (PhD supervisor: Martin Banwell), Mar- 
tin (PhD supervisor Brian Halton), and the author. 

Finally, it is worth recording that my last invited lecture on the strained mol- 
ecule chemistry took place in 2009. Our younger son, Paul, was married to his 
German fiancee Sandra, in Winnenden, north of Stuttgart, in October of that year. 
Much to my surprise, I was able to gain international medical insurance to visit Eu- 
rope and, when Roland Boese heard of this he insisted that I revisit Essen and give 
a final lecture. This I did under the title From Cyclopropenes to Novel Molecules 
and New Ring Systems. It was a delightful occasion that provided much needed 
time to catch up with this good and generous friend before his own retirement in 
July of 20 10. 

So what about the Bread and Butter? 

This biographical account has run its course with little mention of teaching work, 
academically oriented extracurricular activities, or the way in which Victoria Uni- 
versity has evolved in its approach to its staff, and their duties and responsibilities, 
save for the occasional comment. What follows is no less a personal view than 
those which have already appeared, but I feel that comment is justified. 

As I have said, my teaching began in the University of Florida in 1967 and 
continued beyond retirement. Some of my colleagues have preferred to focus their 
teaching to the senior years, leaving others to carry the onus of the larger more 
junior classes. I have always held the view that it is the senior staff who should in- 
struct the new student at the beginning level, not on a continuing basis, but among 
the group of that particular chemical specialization, typically the organic, inorgan- 
ic and physical chemistries in NZ. Moreover, I maintain that every organic chem- 

- 136- 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 

ist ought to be able to teach any part of the curriculum save for more specialized 
course work in the final undergraduate year and beyond. From my earliest days 
in Florida, through my introduction to work at VUW by Ted Harvey, and for my 
lifetime, the protocol has been simple: teaching is the first responsibility with lec- 
tures always met unless health makes it impossible. In comparison, laboratory su- 
pervision and tutorial work can be delegated if the need to be elsewhere becomes 
an essential duty. I do not subscribe to the concept of 'smart teaching' whereby 
much of the job is handed to research students and postdoctorals as may be justi- 
fied on paper. I am convinced that it is important for the academic to be available 
for discussion in laboratory sessions, unlike the US norm. Research lines up as 
second and administration a poor third. This allies with my 1:1:1 time division 
that I provided to the witless public service interviewer. Of course, there is always 
flexibility and when research is not going well respite can be found in teaching 
and vice versa. To me, teaching has always been a pleasure, with lecturing never a 
chore but something enjoyable. This is despite one student seeing me after a par- 
ticular class to tell me that it was the best lecture he had heard me give; little did 
he know that a total lapse of memory had my attendance there at the last minute 
and without preparation! With undergraduate and graduate course work, the quest 
always has been to impart a balanced approach to organic chemistry and provide 
the essential base from which the interested student can evolve, never spoon fed. 
This requires that the courses are given over an appropriate time period that allows 

the candidate to assimilate the material, digest it, and come to grips with it 

and this is markedly different from the current 'put it in a box, test it and discard 
it' that the fractionalization and marginalization of the 2 1 st century now demand. 

Another part of my role in academia has been with extracurricular activities 
over and above service to the discipline and profession of chemistry, and these 
have gone beyond the NZIC. Regular outreach courses on laboratory safety were 
given to school teachers in a 'two man show' with my friend and colleague Jim 
Pearce, even advising the Wellington School of Medicine on it safety protocols 
many years ago. I spent three or four terms of service on the University Library 
Committee that covered periods of financial constraint, library redevelopment and 
budget reductions for the sciences accomplished by reducing text and periodical 
spending, as well as a range of (limited) activities for the Science Faculty. Further 
afield, I was involved with the Catholic Chaplaincy from the time that the Student 
Union officers ousted the chaplains from the union complex through to the An- 
glican and Catholic chaplaincies having their own properties on Kelburn Parade. 
I found one of the chaplains (a Capuchin friar) appear in the university without 
introduction or direction to the institution by the Church and I became involved 
establishing a Chaplaincy Trust Board. I was appointed the Victoria nominated 
Newman Trustee to join two illustrious 'legal eagles', supreme court judge Sir 

- 137- 



From Coronation Street to a Consummate Chemist 

Barry O'Regan and Maurice O'Brien QC, when the trust expanded from its two 
inaugural members to oversee a significant added bequest and then through it, to 
the joint Anglican-Catholic Trinity-Newman Trust Board. The Board saw the de- 
velopment of student accommodation using VUW-owned properties that it reno- 
vated using a timely government summer employment initiative. Ultimately, it 
became the largest single non-sectarian accommodation provider for university 
students as Trinity-Newman Hall. Rentals were set at no more than market rates, 
often below, and a part-time warden and support staff were employed. It became a 
25 year involvement but I never felt that I had given to it as much as I should. Ulti- 
mately, the accommodation facilities were taken back by the university authorities 
by not renewing the lease that the Trust Board held. VUW felt that the enterprise 
could be better managed and return a (good) profit if it ran things. The impact of 
this has been to decimate the work of the Anglican and Catholic trust boards that 
continue as Trinity-Newman. More importantly, there is now notably less support 
for the student interns whose rentals have added to the institutions coffers (except 
for 2010 which, through needed major maintenance, seems to have run at a sig- 
nificant loss). The entire VUW accommodation service has undergone a 'change 
review', the terminology that administrators use to reduce staff and services in the 
cause of fiscal efficiency. The outcome of this is that University Flats - the name 
given to the former Trinity Newman Hall - has lost staff and is now centralized, 
thereby removing its operating personnel from within the environment of the flats 
where they were easily accessible to the students. The long standing and dedicated 
manager of the facility, with whom I worked on Trinity-Newman for many years, 
has taken voluntary redundancy rather than be forced to lose the student contact 
that she had - another case of the administration seeing victory in change - in 
victoria mutatiol 

The institution that saw me as a formal employee for 34+ years, and to which 
I owe my career, has, like many, evolved to one in which the corporate model 
of administration rules. Curriculum and research matters have become confused 
during the evolution of a university from one with a small administration, which 
regarded its role as assisting the (all important) academic staff, to one that has its 
enclaves (and here I do mean this as dictionary defined) each insulating itself from 
the others by becoming pernicious and almost autonomous. The corporate admin- 
istration, and indeed the like-minded governmental agencies, impose a document 
requirement and paper trail so long that they take up too significant a proportion of 
the academic's time, if the now regulated 37/4 hours per week is used as measure. 
What is most destructive is the one rule for all, whereby every minor problem seen 
in one sector of the institution is solved by imposing its solution institution-wide. 
It is sad to see precious research time eroded by bureaucracy, the benefits of seri- 
ous study reduced because of statutes, regulations and rules introduced for all. Far 

- 138 - 



The Joys of Emeritus Professor 

too often, a minor problem in one area could have been solved quietly - but instead 
the largest mallet available is sought to squash the smallest ant! As I complete this, 
I find that the PhD supervisor is no longer allowed to select appropriate examiners 
for his/her student, rather having to comply with a School Committee who make 
the judgement - a principle that might work in a large organization but one that 
will be fraught with more than frustration in a small one such as VUW. What is 
wrong with the supervisor nominating those world leading experts best able to as- 
sess his student's work? After all, PhD study in science is a training in which the 
ideas of the supervisor in his or her sphere of activity are advanced: one's reputa- 
tion depends upon it. Worse still, the Chairperson for the PhD oral examination 
is now appointed by the Faculty of Graduate Studies with little recourse to the 
discipline and subject of the incumbent. As I complete this writing, an invitation 
to Readers, Associate Professors and Professors to seek appointment to the panel 
of 'PhD Oral Chairpersons' has been issued. Those who do not seek appointment 
seem doomed to be labelled 'unwilling to do their bit' for the institution, while the 
mediocre researchers will become resplendent in chairing orals in disciplines that 
they know nothing about. The institution in which I have spent my career has as its 
motto sapientia magis auro desideranda - wisdom is preferable to gold. As I said 
before, VUW's core business was teaching and research whereas now it seems to 
be the management of them, with research in the small time that the management 
allows. Given this, and the administrator not to be questioned in public, acclaim by 
its staff may now better be served by aequalitas sine discrimine or, more cynically: 
regat valgus nequissimum. 

But I am retired from the serious doing of chemistry, the production of reports 
and the keeping of paper trails, and so it falls to the next generations to fight their 
battles and serve this same discipline that has served me so well. What is important 
is that they fight adversity, treat each day as gift, and use each as though it will 
never end. They must do this in a way that best fits their time and not mine. What 
remains for me is to keep the memories and to continue serve my discipline as best 
I am able. 

In its latest motto-creating initiative, Victoria University advises its staff to 
'Get Amongst the Best' when they log on to their personal computer each morning. 
I am of the firm opinion that my life and career in chemistry has been amongst the 
best - and I could never have wished for anything more. 
