DUKEUNIVERSITYLIBRARYHENRY IIHENRY IIKing of France 1547-1559(fFrederic J. BaumgartnerDuke University PressDurham and London 1988Material from two previously published articles is included inthis volume, by permission of The Sixteenth Century Journal:“Henry II and the Conclave of 1549,” The Sixteenth CenturyJournal, 16 (1985), 48-57; “Henry Il’s Italian Bishops: A Studyin the Use and Abuse of the Concordat of Bologna,” TheSixteenth Century Journal, 11 (1980), 49-61. The illustrationon page iii is from the portrait of Henry II by Primaticcio.Photo Giraudon/Art Resource© 1988 Duke University PressAll rights reservedPrinted in the United States of Americaon acid-free paperLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataBaumgartner, Frederic J.Henry II, King of France 1547-1559.Bibliography: p.Includes index.1. Henry II, King of France, 1519-1559. 2. France—History—Henry II, 1547-1559. 3 France—Kings andrulers—Biography. I. Title. II. Title: Henry II.DC114.B38 1988 944'.028 [b] 87-19955ISBN 0-8223-0795-2Designed by Anne KeylFor Eric Michael and Nathan Robertris*/mDigitized by the Internet Archivein 2018 with funding fromDuke University Librarieshttps://archive.org/details/henryiikingoffra01baumCONTENTSPreface ix1 Second Son i2 Hostage io3 Husband and Dauphin 264 Vive Le Roi Henri 425 The First Year 646 Silver Is the Sinew of War 797 Life at Court 928 Le Roi Tres-Chretien 1149 Chef des Hommes de Guerre 13310 Protector of German Liberties 14611 War and Truce 16012 Disaster at Saint-Quentin 17913 Mars Remains Astride 19714 Pax 21815 “This Lutheran Scum” 23116 Requiescat in Pace 24717 Conclusions 256Appendixes 263Notes 279Bibliography 331Index 343PREFACEIn 1909 Henri Hauser wrote: “The reign of Henry II has beenlargely ignored, and that king is far less known than his father,Francis I.”1 Little has changed eight decades later despite theexistence of a number of works that deal with Henry II. Therestill is no scholarly biography of Henry or study of his reign, whichneed this work is intended to fill.There are several possible explanations for this lack of interest inHenry II. Perhaps the most important is that he has been badly over¬shadowed by his father, whose impetuous character, brilliant victo¬ries and disastrous defeats, and reputation as the father of the FrenchRenaissance all have claimed the attention of historians. A secondreason is the comparative brevity of Henry’s reign. The twelve yearsthat he was king made his the shortest reign, except for that of hisill-fated son, Francis II, in almost five centuries from 1328 to 1793.Third, Henry has been overlooked in the enormous attention givento his wife, Catherine de Medici, and his mistress, Diane de Poitiers.Both women have been the subject of a vastly greater number of bi¬ographies than the king. Last, the date of his accession, 1547, marksno major turning point in history. To a large extent Henry continuedthe policies of his father, and there was no dramatic break with thepast.One may ask, then, whether this biography of Henry II is needed.Certainly the lack of an adequate scholarly study of his reign pro¬vides a practical justification, but, more significantly, it can be arguedthat Henry’s reign was a pivotal period in French history. During thetwelve years that he ruled, French Protestantism became an orga¬nized, dynamic force in the realm; the eastern borders of France wereextended into Lorraine; and Calais was recovered from the English,XPrefacefinally putting an end to the five centuries of Anglo-French conflictthat had begun with William the Conqueror. Henry 's reign was aperiod of extensive changes in the system of taxation and the royalbureaucracy, creating a more modem-appearing governmental struc¬ture. One of the few works that has dealt extensively with Henry II,Henri Noell's Henri II et la naissance de la societe modeme (1944),described Henry's rule as creating "a new France, a new society wasbom.”2Noell's statement surely is an exaggeration, since much of w hatHenry did w as to complete trends begun under his father. For Noell,Henry was a capable king and an admirable person: “Une figurehautement franf aise." If Francis I was le roi chevalier, and Henry IVle roi galant, then Henry II was le roi gentilhomme. In places virtu¬ally a panegyric of the king, Noell's biography is at times too will¬ing to overlook the failures and problems of Henry's policies andpersonality.The only English-language biography of Henry II came from thepen of H. Noel Williams in 1910. The focus of Henri II: His Courtand Times is directed on the person of the king and his courtiers.3 Itwould appear from this work that Henry did little else besides engagein war and the frivolities of the court. The author paid close attentionto court gossip: and while he can hardly be called sympathetic to hissubject, he did make an effort to disprove the most calumnious of thetales of the gossipmongers. Williams was well versed in the memoirsof the era of Henry II. and his biography sen es as a useful source onthe king's personal life and the activities of his court.Quite the opposite of Williams' book is the work of NicolasDelabarre-Du Parcq, Histoire de Henri ll. 1547-1559 (1887):4 Thisauthor, a respected military historian, was primarily concerned withthe wars and foreign policy of Henry 's reign. While quite sympatheticto the king, Du Parcq accepted uncritically the statements foundin the sixteenth-century memoirs and histories, and was heavilydependent on the Memoires de Vieilleville. That work, redactedaround 1600. attributed to Marechal de Vieilleville much that wasdone or said by others or was outright fanciful. Nonetheless, DuParcq's work is informative on the French military under Henry7.The tone for many historians who have written on Henry II wasset by Jules Michelet whose talented but often \icious pen has per¬manently branded numerous figures in French history for better or,far more frequently, for worse. Michelet saw Henry as melancholy,Prefacexigloomy, uneducated, and bigoted and tagged him as having “un vis¬age de prison,”5 referring to the four years that Henry spent as ahostage for his father in a Spanish prison. His reign was a “sinistervestibule to the civil wars.”Numerous historians since Michelet have seen Henry in muchthe same light, although they usually have not used the highlycharged and evocative terms that he did. Henri Lemonnier’s volumein Lavisse’s Histoire de France, likely the most-often cited history ofthe era, depicts Henry as largely a failure, having accepted a dis¬graceful peace with Philip II in 1559 and pursuing a shameful policyof persecution of the French Protestants.6 This view of Henry wastaken up by authors like J. E. Neale, who wrote that Henry’s follyand prodigality had brought France to the edge of ruin, and it canbe found in the works of such well-informed current historians asNancy Roelker, who has described Henry as “the heavy-handed sonwho, lacking his father’s personal flair and political skills, yet pur¬sued his father’s least successful policies to the brink of bankruptcyand civil war.”7 I do not intend to argue that these authors are com¬pletely wrong, for the fact that Henry has had so negative a pressover the ages suggests that at the very least there were some trulycontroversial aspects of his reign and character. Clearly, however, amore balanced reassessment of the king and his reign is in order.In several respects the best history of Henry’s reign is LucienRomier’s two-volume work, Les origines politiques des guerres de re¬ligion.8 It is not a biography of Henry but a highly detailed study ofthe foreign relations of his reign. Romier concentrated very heavilyon the French involvement in Italy, and he made extensive use ofdocuments in Italian archives, in particular the reports of the ambas¬sador of the duke of Ferrara at the French court. Romier presentedHenry largely in terms of the bitter struggle for power between themajor factions at his court, the Montmorencys and the Guises. Buthe was ready to give credit to the king when he felt it due, such as forhis handling of affairs after the disastrous defeat of Saint-Quentin in1557. Even as a diplomatic history of Henry’s reign, however, thereare several curious lacunae in Romier’s volumes, such as almost com¬pletely ignoring relations with England.This work had already been written in first draft when IvanCloulas’s Henri ll appeared.9 Fortunately, 1 still had the opportu¬nity to incorporate his more significant points and new' information.Cloulas, as Conservateur-en-chef of the Archives Nationales in Paris,xiiPrefacehad easy access to the collection of manuscript scources from Henry’sreign. Thus, his book has detailed information on such topics as royalfinances, the composition of the royal household, the royal entries,and patronage of art and architecture. Despite his font of new detailon the king, Cloulas presents Henry in a largely traditional point ofview, little criticizing the opinions of the nineteenth-century histo¬rians who wrote about him. Furthermore, the biography is clearlyintended for a mass readership. Cloulas did not provide notes, al¬though he has a very thorough bibliography, so scholars will have adifficult time following up on his information.This work is meant to be a political biography of the king. By thatterm I mean that the book will cover Henry’s life in its entirety butwill give particular attention to the political events of his reign and tosome extent will slight his personal life. Like most biographers, whobecome sympathetic to their subjects in the course of writing theirbiographies, I have, I am sure, become more appreciative of Henry’svirtues. Certainly I have become less inclined to paint him only inblack and white, but now tend to shade in the gray as well. I do notexpect that this work will move Francis I from center stage in thegeneral histories of the French Renaissance, but I hope that I willprovide future historians with a balanced perspective from which tojudge Henry II and his reign.This work is based in large part on extensive research in themanuscript collections of the Bibliotheque Nationale and the Ar¬chives Nationales in Paris, and on the contemporary materials thathave been printed. There also are large depositories of pertinentdocuments in Moscow and several Italian cities. A Russian duke priorto 1900 bought up a vast amount of French historical materials andcarried them to Moscow. In respect to Henry II, the collection now inthe Soviet Central Archives consists largely of the correspondence ofSecretary of State Duthier and deals almost exclusively with Italianmatters under Henry. A. Lubinskaja has published the documentsfor the first fifteen months of Henry’s reign in her Documents pourservire a I’histoire des guerres d’ltalie.10 Michel Antoine made use ofthe collection, the first westerner to do so since 1900, for his “Insti¬tutions frangaises en Italie sous le regne de Henri II. gouvemeurs etintendants.”11A great number of the relevant documents in the Italian archiveshave been printed in various works, which will be cited in the ap¬propriate notes. As for those in places such as Mantua, Ferrara, andPrefacexiiiTurin, which have not been edited, Lucien Romier and Ivan Cloulashave thoroughly exploited them in their works. The reports of theambassadors of Charles V and Philip II in the Archives of Simancasare available on microfilm in the Archives Nationales. Most have alsobeen printed, especially in the Calendar of State Papers, Spanish se¬ries. The editors of the various series of the Calendar of State Paperstook a very broad view of what was pertinent to English history; thus,the Italian, English, and Spanish series all include documents moreproperly French in content and are invaluable but little exploitedsources of information for Henry II. Last, a great deal of the docu¬mentation in German archives has been used by Jean-Daniel Parisetin his Relations entre la France et I’Allemagne au milieu du seiziemesiecle.12Henry’s own letters, of which there are a considerable numberextant, are not particularly informative of either events or motives. Alltoo often a letter of that era states that the courier who was bringingthe letter would inform the recipient of the details of the royal ordersor the events that prompted the correspondence. Henry’s spelling inthose letters written in his own hand was exceptionally erratic evenfor an age that had no standards for spelling. I have made limitedand very careful use of the histories and memoirs from later in thesixteenth century because the factionalism of the religious strife andcivil wars had a profound and largely negative impact on perceptionsof Henry II within a decade of his death.I have used the English version of the names of the French kingsand of foreign rulers and princes: e.g. Henry II, not Henri II, DukeFrancis of Lorraine, not Due Francois de Lorraine. All other namesare in the proper form for their native language: e.g., Due Francoisde Guise, Ottavio Famese. French place names will be given in theFrench spelling. All dates will be new style: i.e., the year beginson January i, not at Easter. Monetary sums will be given in thesame currency found in the sources, either ecus (crowns) or livres(pounds). Until 1550 the ratio between the two units was 2.25 livresto the ecu; after that it became 2.5. When a non-French source usesthe term crown, I will express the sum in ecus if it is clear thatthe French coin was meant; if it is not clear, I will use crown. Seeappendix A for a further description of the French monetary system.Every author of a work such as this knows that there is alwaysa vast number of persons who contributed to it. Those who de¬serve special thanks include my fellow historians Delamar Jensen,XIVPrefaceM.-N. Matuszek-Baudouin, David Buisseret, Lynn Martin, Carl Hood,Patricia Thompson, Albert Hamscher, Mack Holt, and Wylie Sypher.Dr. Thomas Ollendick provided me with valuable advice on childpsychology. Rennie Givens, Patty Mills, and Debbie Rhea typed themanuscript with their usual diligence and skill. Dorothy McCombsand Interlibrary Loan librarians of the Newman Library have beenmost helpful, as always. Cathy Gorman prepared the maps. I owespecial thanks to Joanne Ferguson, editor-in-chief of Duke Univer¬sity Press, and her staff for their good advice and hard work in seeingthis book to publication. Financial support came from the AmericanPhilosophical Society. The editor of The Sixteenth Century Journalhas kindly given permission to use portions of three articles thatfirst appeared in his journal: “Henry II’s Italian Bishops: A Study inthe Use and Abuse of the Concordat of Bologna,” XI (1980), 49-58;“Henry II and the Papal Conclave of 1549," XVI (1985), 301-14; and“The Final Demise of the Medieval Knight in France,” XVIII (1987).As has been true for twenty years now, Lois, my wife, has giventhe support and encouragement needed to see my scholarship reachfruition, but I dedicate the book to my sons, in hope that they too willcome to see history as being as exciting and important as I do.1 SECOND SONOn the first Sunday of April 1519 the church bellsthroughout the kingdom of France resounded in thestreets of the cities and towns for an hour’s time. Theywere ringing by order of the king to celebrate the birthsix days earlier of a new prince, Henry, duke of Orleans. The newprince was bom into the ruling dynasty of the realm, the Valois, andwas destined to take the throne twenty-eight years later as Henry II.In many respects the kingdom that his ancestors had ruled since987 was, in the early sixteenth century, the most important andpowerful in Europe. Its territory of 450,000 square kilometers madeit the largest state west of Poland-Lithuania, although it was some20 percent smaller than the present-day Republic of France. Thevast expanses of the realm were rather loosely held together un¬der the monarch; one of the major tasks of the reigns of Francis Iand Henry II was to bring the outlying provinces more directly un¬der royal control. Linguistically, the kingdom was becoming moreuniform. French, the langue d’oil, was spoken by the educated andthe elite throughout the realm, but the ordinary people in Brittany,Gascony, and the Midi still spoke one of the regional dialects andlikely had difficulty understanding more than a few simple phrasesof French. For the king, life centered on Paris and the chateauxwithin two or three days’ journey from that city. Although the courtwas highly peripatetic, only rarely did it reach cities like Limoges orBourges, to say nothing of the cities of the south or southwest.France’s population probably had reached 18 million people in1547. While exact figures are impossible to obtain, there is no ques¬tion that it was increasing at a good rate.1 France in that era was stilloverwhelmingly rural. Perhaps as high as 90 percent of the popula-2Henry IItion lived in the small villages that served as centers of life for allof the rustic population except the great nobility. Rural society hadtwo meaningful social divisions: the nobles, who varied enormouslyin wealth and political influence, but in law stood completely equal,and the roturiers, who worked with their hands. The latter also variedfrom the poverty-stricken day laborer, so called because he was paidat the end of each day’s work, to the relatively well-off tenant holder.France was for the most part blessed with fertile soil and a favorableclimate, so its agriculture was highly productive and the envy of therest of Europe. The export of grain, despite the monarchy’s frequentattempts to prevent it, was one of the more important sources of for¬eign exchange. France was largely free of disastrous crop failuresduring Henry’s lifetime, but he did see one in 1556.2Most of the urban population lived in some 100 cities that hadpopulations between 5,000 and 10,000. For the most part, thesecities were local markets for their rural districts. A small number ofmerchants and artisans made use of the urban day laborers to carryon commerce. Most of these cities were also cathedral cities, for therewere nearly 120 bishoprics in France. The cathedral chapters, how¬ever, were often more influential than the bishops in local politicsand economies.On the next level of urban centers were the twenty-five cities withpopulations between 10,000 and 40,000. Most had important foreigntrade, like Bordeaux’s wine trade with England and Marseille’s im¬ports from the eastern Mediterranean. Several were manufacturingcenters, such as Amiens with its woolen cloth industry or Tours forsilk. Most were also administrative centers. Six of the eight major lawcourts, the parlements, fourteen of the seventeen generalities of theroyal fiscal system, and twelve of the fifteen universities were locatedin cities of that size. Lyon and Rouen were both well over 40,000 by1547 and competed for second place among French cities. By far thelargest was Paris, with its vast number of government officials, mer¬chants, and university students. Its population during Henry’s reignhas been estimated conserv atively at 220,000.Urban society was even more stratified than the rural. The wealthymerchants and government officeholders, who often came from thesame families, found themselves in fairly cordial competition forcontrol of the cities. In the cities that had parlements, the men of the“long robe,” the officeholders, clearly had the upper hand. The rest ofthe bourgeoisie, a term that carried the legal sense of a person withSecond Son3political rights in the city, were the petty merchants and the artisans.In most cities, Paris being the exception because of its great numberof officials and students, a large majority of the population were wagelaborers. Of all the major social groups, they were-most vulnerable toeconomic fluctuations, and a small downturn in economic fortunesof a region would quickly reduce many to dire poverty.For the most part, however, the French economy during Henry’slifetime was healthy and expanding. The first appearance of Ameri¬can treasure via Spain, and increased silver production from Europe’smines through better mining technology, were stimulating the econ¬omy without yet causing disruptive inflation, as happened later inthe century. France was said to have imported gold worth i ,500,000crowns in 1558 from Spain, most of which, however, quickly leftFrance for Italy. Besides the traditional production of cloth, wine,salt, and grain, the early sixteenth century saw the creation of silkand printing industries. Lyon became the French center for both andbecame as well the financial capital of the realm, rivaling Antwerp asa source of borrowed capital for northern Europe.In general the era of 1519-1559 was one of the more fortunateperiods in French history. Harvests were good; commerce and popu¬lation were expanding; no major epidemics erupted; war was the onlyserious blight. But, by the end of Henry’s life, the climatic changes,the fiscal problems, and the disruptions in the economy that madethe next hundred years so dismal were beginning to show their hand.At the moment of his birth, however, Henry was not expected torule this kingdom since he was the second son of Francis I and Claudede France. His brother. Dauphin Francis, was fourteen months olderand strong and healthy. Henry’s birth itself, on March 31, 1519,was uneventful, although his mother had been taken seriously ill onthe trip from Paris to the Chateau of Saint-Germain-en-Laye at thebeginning of March and had to remain at Neuilly for a week. The kingpreferred hunting to waiting for the arrival of his fourth child anddid not return to Saint-Germain until the second day after. The birthof a prince was an occasion for calculating the political advantagethat baptism, marriage, and similar events in the royal child’s lifecould bring. Well before his birth, it had been decided that HenryVIII of England would serve as godfather for a male child, hencethe name. Francis apparently hoped to gain more from the youngprince’s baptism by dangling the honor before the duke of Savoy inhope that he would be drawn away from the Swiss Confederation.4Henrv IIConsequently, Henry’s baptism was delayed until June 4, when theEnglish ambassador, Sir Thomas Boleyn, stood as proxy for hismaster in a late evening ceremony. The Scottish ambassador held thechild at the font, and his aunt. Marguerite d’Angouleme, served asgodmother. Francis I pronounced himself very pleased with the giftsthat Henry VIII had sent and declared that he hoped the Englishking would soon have a son so he could repay in kind.3After the flurry7 of excitement over the duke of Orleans’s birth andbaptism had passed, the sources have little to say about the youngprince for the next seven years. Shortly after his baptism he wasmoved to the Chateau of Blois, where he joined his brother and sis¬ter in the royal nursery.4 Henry had become a member of a familythoroughly dominated by his father, despite his frequent absences.Francis I was the only surviving male member of his generation ofthe House of Valois-Angouleme.5 This cadet line of the royal familybegan with Jean d’Angouleme, the second son of Louis of Orleans,who had been assassinated in 1407. Two notable female members ofthe family were Valentina Visconti, the daughter of the last Viscontiduke of Milan, who had married Jean d'Angouleme, and Francis’sowm formidable mother, Louise of Savoy, whose father Philippe wasduke of Savoy for one year before his death in 1496. Francis owedhis throne to the fortuitous circumstance that both Charles VIII andLouis XII, his cousins, died without male issue. On January 1, 1515,Francis had become king at the age of twenty years.Francis I was physically the most active and vigorous king ofFrance since his great-great-great-grandfather, John II (died 1364).He was both le roi chevalier and le pere des lettres, combining alife crammed full of war, battles, and hunting with generous andwell-informed patronage of art and learning. Furthermore, he was awomanizer of notorious reputation who, as a contemporary put it, “at¬tended to business when he had no more women.”6 In all, he cameclosest to being the ideal monarch of his era in the eyes of most con¬temporaries and historians. The reputation and place in history ofhis son and successor have suffered considerably when the inevitablecomparisons have been made.Henry’s mother, Claude de France, had many of the same an¬cestors as her husband since they were second cousins, having acommon forebear in Louis of Orleans. The daughter of Louis XII andAnne de Bretagne, her marriage in 1514 at the age of fifteen to theheir presumptive, Francis, was seen as necessary not only because itSecond Son5would facilitate an orderly succession of the crown but also becauseClaude had become duchess of Brittany early in 1514. The reversionof that large duchy to autonomous status would have been a seriousblow to the monarchy’s efforts to create a unified kingdom. Claude,all contemporary accounts agree, was not a beautiful woman; but shehad a sweet and kind nature and considerable personal charm.Royal marriages have usually had two purposes—the political ad¬vantage of the families involved and the procreation of royal-bloodedheirs for the royal succession. Queen Claude fulfilled her duty wellin both respects, in the latter regard by giving birth to seven chil¬dren before her premature death in 1524. Her first child, Louise, haddied before Henry’s birth, so he joined two older siblings in the royalnursery—Charlotte, bom in 1516 and dead by 1524, and the dauphin,Francis, fourteen months older than Henry. Seventeen months lateranother sister, Madeleine, joined the nursery; in 1522 a brother,Charles, due d’Angouleme; and in 1523, the last sister. Marguerite,the only one of Henry’s siblings to survive him, dying in 1573. Forhis early formative years Henry was surrounded by four siblings, allof them close to him in age if not necessarily in affection.In addition to his parents and siblings, two other family mem¬bers must have played a significant role in Henry’s early years—hisgrandmother, Louise of Savoy, and his aunt Marguerite, Francis’s sis¬ter. Both women were totally committed to advancing the fortunes ofFrancis, “mon Cesar,” as Louise called him, and, one can presume,of his children as well. Louise, a skillful and determined politicianin her own right, as well as a truly avaricious person, took good ad¬vantage of her position as the king’s mother and the regent duringseveral occasions that Francis was out of the kingdom to accumu¬late extensive political influence and a vast fortune. Henry almostcertainly was too young to appreciate her role in the disgrace of twopowerful royal servants, the constable Charles de Bourbon and theroyal financier Jacques de Semblanfay. Since the existing record ofLouise’s role in negotiations to release Henry and his brother fromtheir captivity in Spain from 1526 to 1530 is quite impersonal, thereis little note of affection. Louise, however, was portrayed as beingdeeply afflicted when her usher Baudin related his account of themistreatment of the two brothers in their Spanish jail. Shortly beforeLouise’s death in 1531, Marguerite d’Angouleme wrote to the kingthat their ill mother improved greatly “when she has three little doc¬tors who make her forget her pain.”7 His grandmother’s death when6Henry IIHenry was twelve precluded any extensive influence on his politicalviews.Marguerite d’Angouleme became surrogate mother for her broth¬er’s children after their mother had died; she declared to him in1530 that she loved his children more than her own.8 Her letters toFrancis and to Bishop Guillaume Brigonnet are the only sources ofinformation about the life of the royal children prior to the two olderbrothers’ imprisonment in Spain.9 In February 1526, for example,she wTote that several of the children, including Henry, had hadthe measles but had recovered.10 In general, her letters are moreinformative about her nieces than about Henry.Marguerite outlived her brother by two years and thus saw Henrywear the crown. In later life aunt and nephew had a respectful rela¬tionship, but the affection between them was harmed by the factthat they found themselves on opposite sides of the factionalism thatmarked Francis’s last years. After he became king, Henry asked her tostay at court, but she preferred to return to her own court in Navarre.Henry confirmed her pension of 25,000 livres and asked her to standas godmother for his daughter Claude. There is no evidence of anysense of loss on Henry’s part at her death in 1549.11In a royal household, with the frequent absences of the royal par¬ents, the children often turn to governors, governesses, and tutorsfor affection. The household of the royal children at Blois, its usualplace of residence, was large in size. A statement of its accounts for1523 has been preserved, and it indicates that some 240 personsearned salaries in it, including fourteen enfants d’honneur and sixdemoiselles d’honneur as playmates for the royal children at salaries of200 and 100 livres, respectively. Guillaume Gouffier, better known asAdmiral Bonnivet, was the first governor of the household, a positionhe gave up in 1523 to command the Italian campaign. His brother-in-law Rene de Cosse-Brissac succeeded him as governor; Brissac’s wifehad been governess for the dauphin since 1518. Their sons Charlesand Artus were among the enfants d’honneur,12 The presence of therespected captains-of-war Bonnivet and Brissac in the household wasto direct the training of the royal sons in rough sports, riding, andhunting. The young princes were particularly fond of their huntingdogs, despite Brissac’s efforts to inspire a taste for falconry in them.13Physically, young Henry developed rapidly; the English ambassadorreported in 1522 that Louise of Savoy had said he was one of theSecond Son7biggest children for his age (a month short of his third birthday) shehad ever seen.14In 1524 another influential figure entered the lives of the youngprinces—their tutor Benedetto Tagliacamo (Theocrenus), an Italianhumanist who had served as secretary for the republic of Genoa asa protege of the Fregosi family.15 When the Fregosi lost power inGenoa in 1522, Tagliacamo fled with them to France. He alreadyhad a reputation for his skill in Latin verse and his knowledge ofGreek. It was apparently the latter that brought him to the attentionof Francis I, through the influence of Guillaume Bude and FrancoisRobertet. Robertet had already appointed Tagliacamo as tutor for hisown sons. The choice of the Italian humanist, “beloved of the Muses”as a contemporary styled him, for royal tutor in July 1524 reflectedthe king’s great interest in and love for the culture of the ItalianRenaissance and his desire that his sons would be well versed in theclassics, the foundations of that culture.Some sense of the type of education the royal princes receivedcan be gained from a letter of Gaspard de Coligny, the future admiral,who was two months older than Henry and an enfant d’honneur atthe court in 1534. Writing to his own tutor, Coligny stated that “themajority of my time is committed to the reading of Cicero and thestudy of the tables of Ptolemy, under [Guillaume] Du Maine [Henry’ssecond tutor], who, adopting a different method from Tagliacamo,adds cosmography at the same time, especially the part relative tothe longitude and latitude of places with the addition of meridiansand parallels.”16 It would appear that Henry’s interest in maps andoverseas exploration may well have been stimulated by Du Maine.Henry’s program of study may also explain why his library had a copyof Copernicus’s De Revolutionibus.Another important source of support for a humanist educationwas Marguerite d’Angouleme, whose deep love for the classics andown knowledge of Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and Italian were celebratedby the humanists. The first mention of Henry as a student comesfrom his aunt, who wrote to the king in Spain in February 1526,that “Monsieur the Dauphin is doing wonders in his studies. . . .Monsieur d’Orleans is riveted to his books and says that he wishesto be wise; but Monsieur d’Angouleme knows more than the oth¬ers.” 17 Note that Henry was already being compared unfavorably tohis younger brother.8Henry IIWhile Henry’s younger sister Marguerite took full advantage ofthese educational opportunities to become one of the most learnedwomen of the sixteenth century, there is less evidence that Henrytook well to learning. He was a person who took much better to vigor¬ous sports and exercise. Later in life he was fluent in Latin, Italian,and, of course, Spanish; Brantome described how he loved to readSpanish literary works and spoke the language very well.18 Henry wasalso said to be able to speak Italian as if it were his mother tongue.Henry also was a patron of humanists, but there is a sharp conflictin opinion whether he himself took an active interest in learning andscholarship. One Venetian ambassador, Lorenzo Contarini, writingin 1547, described Henry as “not well lettered, and he simply knowshow to read and write.” The next ambassador, Giovanni Capello, writ¬ing seven years later, stated that for some time each morning “he de¬voted himself to the study of letters, because he knows well that theycan be more useful and honorable for princes than anything else.”19Brantome wrote that “he well loved learning and learned men.”20The royal historiographer of Louis XIV’s reign, admittedly writingover a century later, stated that Henry had a “marvelous facility ofexpression both in public and in private.” Two foreign ambassadors,writing at different times in Henry’s reign, noted his ability to readand speak Latin well.21 His program of study as a child, his later pa¬tronage of humanists, the impressive range of manuscripts and booksthat he collected 22 and the testimony of Brantome all suggest thatHenry was not the grossly ignorant and uncultured man that he isoften portrayed, but he was not a scholarly person. His poetry, writ¬ten to his mistress Diane de Poitiers, is judged to be “imaginativeand sincere but with rather little literary merit.”23 In all, however, heseems to have had an appreciation of art, theater, and learning thattranscended their use as mere decoration. He was especially fond ofmusic, “of which he has the best ideas,” and tapestries.24Until his seventh year Henry seems to have had a pleasant andprotected childhood, except for the deaths of his mother and sis¬ter, but affairs far distant from the chateau of Blois that made thelater years of Henry’s childhood a nightmare were beginning to casttheir shadows over the royal nursery. The king, having taken leaveof his children in July 1524, had gone off to Italy to make good theFrench monarchy’s claim to Milan and Naples. Six months later camethe devastating news that their father and several nobles from theirhousehold were captives, while others, including their former gov-Second Son9emor, Bonnivet, had been killed on the battlefield of Pavia. Almostexactly a year after that disastrous defeat, the dauphin and Henrywere taken from Blois on February 17, 1526, to be exchanged ashostages for their father in Spain. Henry’s lifetime of service to hiskingdom had begun.2 HOSTAGEThe long and complicated chain of events that put the youngFrench princes Francis and Henry on the road to Bayonne inFebruary 1526 must be traced back a full century earlier totwo assassinations of the early fifteenth century. Few eventsin European history have had such enduring consequences as didthe assassination of Louis of Orleans in 1407 and John of Burgundyin 1419. With the Burgundians responsible for the first and the Valoisdynasty implicated in the second, the consequence was the mostbitter and long-lasting family feud in European history.The feud was a major factor in the third phase of the HundredYears’ War, in the form of the Burgundian alliance with England; itappeared again in full vigor in the war between Louis XI and theBurgundian dukes; and it was very much a part of the rivalry be¬tween Francis I and Charles V. Francis was a great-grandson of theassassinated Louis of Orleans, and Charles was two generations fur¬ther removed from the fallen John of Burgundy. The emperor hadbeen named for his great-grandfather, Charles the Bold of Burgundy,killed at the Battle of Nancy in 1477, and he had been raised at theBurgundian court, since 1477 located at Ghent. That the feud wasstill very alive at the time the two young rulers came of age is demon¬strated by a remark in a letter of Emperor Maximilian to his grandsonCharles in 1513 calling the French “the ancient and still now naturalenemies of our House of Burgundy,” and by the demands for retri¬bution for these distant murders made by both sides during peacenegotiations in 1523. In his instructions to his son, Charles referredto Burgundy as “notre patrie.”1The bitterness engendered by the ancient hatred was exacerbatedby the conflict over the principal territories of Charles the Bold’sHostage11domain: Flanders and the duchy of Burgundy had been fiefs of theFrench monarchy throughout the Middle Ages, while the free countyof Burgundy (Franche-Comte), to the east of the Saone river, wasa unit of the Holy Roman Empire. After the death of Charles theBold, Louis XI claimed Flanders and the duchy of Burgundy, butFlanders remained in the Burgundian dynasty and passed to Charlesof Habsburg upon the death of his father, Philip, in 1506. The Frenchkings were left with only a shadowy feudal claim to Flanders, but theBurgundian dynasty had lost the duchy of Burgundy, a key part of itsdomains. Both sides were determined to use any means necessary tomake good their claims to their respective lost provinces.In itself, the heritage of the Burgundian feud was sufficient toembitter the relationship between the Habsburgs and the Valois, butlegacies of other conflicts further poisoned the atmosphere and gaveample opportunity to turn the festering hatreds into war. One of theseother points of conflict was the kingdom of Navarre. In the late Mid¬dle Ages, Navarre straddled the Pyrenees with roughly equal area oneither side of the crest of the mountains. The ruling family had beenthe de Foix from southern France, but the title passed to the Albrets,another southern French noble house, when Jean d’Albret marriedCatherine de Foix, heiress to Navarre and Beam, in 1484. Ferdinandof Aragon maintained the claim of his second wife, Germaine de Foix,from a collateral branch of the family, and used it to seize the south¬ern half of Navarre in 1512, incorporating it into Castile. The acquisi¬tion of Haute-Navarre was crucial for the Spanish monarchy becauseit closed off a dangerous invasion route into the Iberian peninsulaand facilitated communications between northern Aragon and north¬ern Castile. From the French point of view, Ferdinand’s annexationof Haute-Navarre was threatening because it involved a land consid¬ered a fief of the French crown, ruled by a French family, and it putSpanish power at the crest of several passes into the recently recov¬ered province of Gascony. After 1512 the return of Haute-Navarre tothe Albrets was an important theme of French diplomacy and mili¬tary strategy, and it received added impetus in 1527, when Francis I’ssister, Marguerite d’Angouleme, took as her second husband Henri IId’Albret and became queen of Navarre.Another cause of rivalry between the two young monarchs,Francis and Charles, was their competition for election as HolyRoman Emperor in 1519. Francis contested the imperial electionwith Charles out of a desire to deprive his rival of the authority and12Henry IIprestige that the imperial crown conveyed and to enhance his own.The election cost Francis some 300,000 gold florins, but Charlesspent 800,000 for his successful campaign. Not that the emperor hadextensive real authority in Germany, but the title did give Charlescontrol of the empire’s foreign policy and enable him to call onthe German cities and princes for support in his wars with France,aid that was given very reluctantly, if at all. Charles’s election asemperor certainly galvanized in the minds of the French the opinionthat Charles intended to make himself universal emperor of westernChristendom by incorporating France into his domains. When oneconsiders the extent of his domains and his aunt Catherine’s positionas queen of England, it is easy to understand how the French wouldbe nearly paranoid about the possibility.It was the conflict over Italy, however, that precipitated the chainof events that put the two royal sons in a prison in Spain. The Frenchmilitary involvement in Italy was more than thirty years old, havingbegun with Charles VIII’s invasion of Italy in 1494. Charles VIII waslured into Italy partly by the Valois dynasty’s claim to Naples. Thislast point dated back to the papal grant of Naples and Sicily to Charlesof Anjou in 1264. Within twenty years, the French princes had beendriven from Sicily during the Sicilian Vespers (although not fromNaples until 1435) and their place taken by members of the Houseof Aragon. Old dynastic claims were forgotten very reluctantly in thelate Middle Ages and could be resurrected at any opportune moment,as the claim to Naples was in 1494.The memory of the ease of the French army’s victorious marchdown the peninsula to Naples in 1494 veiled the recollection of thesame ease with which the French were driven out by Ferdinandof Aragon’s coalition. Thus the French returned a second time, in1499, under Louis XII, who also had a dynastic claim to the duchy ofMilan through his grandmother, Valentina Visconti. (As devoted asthe French kings were to the Salic Law that prohibited the Frenchcrown from passing to or through the female line, they were not inthe slightest inhibited from claiming foreign lands for their wivesor daughters or through their female ancestors.) The French stay inItaly after the second invasion was longer than after the first, butagain, a coalition succeeded in forcing the French army back acrossthe Alps.At the moment of the accession of Francis I, the French hadno foothold in Italy. But Francis, driven by a lust for military gloryHostagei3and conquest, a zeal to make good his family’s claim to Italian pos¬sessions, a deep curiosity about Italian culture and learning, and aneed to avenge the previous French defeats in-Italy, almost immedi¬ately embarked on what is known as the Third French Invasion ofItaly. He was further motivated by appeals from the Italian allies ofFrance, many of whom had lost power during the previous Frenchretreat from Italy, or were being threatened with such. It was at thebeginning of Francis’s reign that the Italian exiles in France, thefuorusciti, began to gain influence at the French court, an influencethat steadily increased to its height during the regency of Catherinede Medici after 1560.Francis concentrated on his dynastic claim to Milan as a great-grandson of Valentina Visconti because it was more immediate thanhis pretensions to sovereignty in Naples. Furthermore, Milan wasthought to be less likely to draw Ferdinand of Aragon into a war, and,of course, Milan was far closer to the French border. In July 1515the French army began to move across the Alps, and in September itfought and defeated the Swiss forces defending Milan in the battle ofMarignano. Francis had himself installed as duke of Milan and forceda treaty on the Swiss that permitted the French monarchy to recruitmercenary troops from among them. Perhaps most important, theFrench victory persuaded Pope Leo X of the need to meet with theFrench king. Although neither man had anticipated that the statusof the French church would become the key issue of the conference,the negotiations resulted in the framing of the Concordat of Bologna,which governed the church in France until 1790.2 It provided theking with a vast font of patronage to reward the service and loyaltyof important families and officers and created an episcopate far moreamenable to the “gifts” of decimes (tenths) that the kings annuallyrequired from the clergy after 1516. The concordat made it far lessattractive to the monarchy to contemplate breaking with Rome whenProtestantism made its appearance.The Concordat of Bologna was by far the most enduring accom¬plishment of Francis’s 1515 campaign in Italy, for his territorial con¬quest proved to be very fleeting. In 1521 the city of Milan fell to theforces of Charles V, who was involved there on the grounds that Mi¬lan was still a fief of the empire. An attempt to retake it the nextyear resulted in the French disaster at La Bicocca, and in the springof 1524 the last French stronghold in Piedmont fell. Francis’s rageat these defeats at the hands of Charles V’s forces was compounded14Henry IIby the treason of Charles de Bourbon, the constable of the Frencharmy, who, having failed to organize a revolt in France, had offeredhis services to the emperor.In July 1524 the king took leave of his children at Blois andheaded for Marseille, where Bourbon, now commander of an imperialarmy, had the city under siege. Having forced him to retreat, Francispursued Bourbon across the Alps. The imperial army in Piedmontdecided to abandon Milan and make its stand at Pavia to the southof Milan. Forced to fight because the lack of money threatened theimperial commanders with the desertion of much of their army, theyattacked the French army on February 24, 1525. The French cavalrywas repulsed by the Spanish musketmen and fled, leaving the kingand a handful of the nobles of his court to fight on alone. Havinghad his horse killed under him, Francis was obliged to surrender. Itwas reported that he refused to concede to Charles de Bourbon butwaited until the viceroy of Naples, Charles de Lannoy, arrived to giveup his sword.3Pavia was a military catastrophe for the French. The roll of greatnobles killed or captured was seemingly endless with Admiral Bon-nivet, the former governor of the royal children, and Francois de Lor¬raine among the dead, and Henri d’Albret and Anne de Montmorencyamong the captives. Francis I wrote to his mother to assure her thathe was still alive, adding the poignant phrase “nothing remains tome but my honor and my life, which are safe.”Now that the imperials had the king, they had to decide what todo with him and how best to exploit their enormous good fortune.Frightened by the almost immediate escape of Henri d’Albret, Lan¬noy decided to send Francis to Spain, where he arrived on June 19.Having been very generously treated by his captors and given whatcan best be described as a triumphant welcome to Spain, the kingwas shocked to find himself rigidly confined in the rude tower of theAlcazar. Unable to hunt or engage in rough sports, his usual pas¬times, deprived of the company of women, and faced perhaps for thefirst time with the full psychological impact of his defeat and cap¬tivity, Francis fell seriously ill, to the point that the emperor wastold that he was dying. While word of his impending demise carriedback to France by his sister Marguerite was exaggerated, his illnessprompted both sides to begin serious negotiations.Charles expected to make good all of his claims against the Frenchmonarchy, with special emphasis on gaining the duchy of Burgundy.Hostagei5Despondent over the heavy demands, Francis proposed that he abdi¬cate and the dauphin be crowned king under the regency of Louiseof Savoy.4 Whether the proposal was at least momentarily sincereor a ploy to prod the emperor to reduce his demands cannot be de¬termined; but if the latter,5 it succeeded since Charles made a lessdemanding proposal shortly after. Louise urged that Francis acceptit because, as she argued, the dauphin could not rule and she wasgetting too old to bear the regency much longer. It was better, shesaid, to lose a duchy (Burgundy) than to destroy the kingdom. Thusthe Treaty of Madrid was signed in January 1526.The peace terms called for the transfer of Burgundy to Charlesand the renunciation by Francis of any claim to sovereignty over Flan¬ders, Artois, Naples, and Milan. Bourbon was to be given amnesty andreinstated in his French lands, but without Provence. The Frenchking was to withdraw his support for Henri d’Albret’s claims toHaute-Navarre. Francis had proposed that he marry Charles’s sister,Eleanor, widow of the king of Portugal, to seal the treaty and that hebe released immediately because he alone could effect the transfer ofBurgundy. Because of this latter request, it was agreed that Francis’stwo older sons be given up as hostages until the fulfillment of thetreaty’s clauses. The treaty had, in fact, given the French the optionof providing as hostages the two princes or the dauphin and twelveof the great nobles of the realm, including Anne de Montmorency,Claude de Guise, and Louis de Breze, husband of Diane de Poitiers.Since the option involved only the second son, whose value was less¬ened by the existence of the third son, who would remain in France,Louise rejected it. She certainly foresaw the likelihood of war sinceshe had to have been informed of Francis’s secret oath of August1525, sworn in the presence of the Cardinal de Toumon and PhilippeChabot, that declared null and void any promise to surrender Bur¬gundy into which he might be coerced.6 The regent dared not permitthe principal French captains who had survived Pavia to take theplace of the duke of Orleans.Nothing is known of how or when the news that they were to taketheir father’s place in captivity was broken to the two boys, but it waslikely their aunt who did so, since she was at Blois in early Febru¬ary. On February 13 their grandmother arrived at Blois from Lyonamid some of the worst weather in years. Her journey from Blois toBayonne with the two princes is well described in the reports of JohnTaylor, the English ambassador, who accompanied them in order toi6Henry IIdiscuss an Anglo-French alliance with Francis upon his release.7 AtBlery, Taylor had an audience with the regent and the princes and re¬ported to Wolsey that “Verily they be two goodly children. The king’sgodson [Henry] is the quicker spirited and the bolder as seemth byhis behavior.”8The entourage reached Bayonne on March 15, in time for the ap¬pointed date of exchange on March 17. When word of their arrivalwas passed to the Spanish, Francis was brought to the border. Atseven in the morning, March 17, two boats left the shores of thebay formed by the Bidassoa River, which marked the border betweenFrance and Castile. The area for ten miles around the rendezvouspoint was completely deserted, as established in the exchange proto¬col.9 The two boats met at a raft moored in the middle. For a moment,the king embraced his sons, told them he would send for them soon,and made the Sign of the Cross over them. Francis then enteredthe French boat and the princes the Spanish, and they were rowedto the opposite shores. “All was done very peaceably as it had beenarranged.”10 Whether Francis looked back at his forlorn sons is notrecorded; if he did, it was not for long. The moment he touched theFrench shore, he leapt on a horse, shouted “Now I am king; I am kingonce again,” and dashed off to Bayonne where his mother, sister, anda number of courtiers had gathered.11Dauphin Francis, who had just celebrated his eighth birthday, andPrince Henry, who was six weeks shy of his seventh, were escortedto Vitoria in Castile to join Queen Eleanor and await the fulfillmentof the terms of the Treaty of Madrid, after which all would go toFrance. The princes were accompanied into Spain by their governor,Rene de Cosse-Brissac, his wife, and his youngest son. Other notablesin the entourage included their tutor, Tagliacamo, and their maitred’hotel, Louis de Ronsard, the father of the famed poet. Some seventyattendants and servants completed the French party. The Frenchwere treated cordially, and Eleanor took to the boys as the mothershe shortly expected to become. The constable of Castile, Don InigoHernandez de Velasco, was given responsibility for the princes untilhis death in October 1528, when the duty passed to his son DonPedro, the new constable.12Shortly after his sons’ arrival in Spain, Francis I received wordthat Henry was ill. The king confronted the viceroy of Naples, Lan-noy, who was at the French court for negotiations, with the report.Lannoy reported to Charles V that he answered Francis that the airHostage17and temperature of Spain clearly disagreed with the princes and forthat reason the king ought to fulfill at once the conditions of theTreaty of Madrid.13 As the weeks passed and it became increasinglyclear that the king had no intention of giving up Burgundy, the treat¬ment of the princes and their entourage became more rigorous. Fran¬cis based his refusal to concede the duchy of Burgundy on two points:that he had been coerced into signing the treaty by the harshness ofhis captivity, thus voiding it; and that the Burgundian people did notwant to be removed from French rule.14 For his part, the emperor waswilling to concede every other point in the treaty, except perhaps themarriage of his sister, to secure Burgundy.To put pressure on Francis, Charles ordered that the honorablecaptivity of the princes be ended. They were removed from the careof Queen Eleanor and taken from Vitoria to a castle farther south,near Valladolid, to prevent any attempt at rescuing the princes. Suchan attempt, or at least a plot for their escape, was reportedly uncov¬ered in February 1527. The Spanish responded by taking the princesstill further into Castile and dismissing “well nigh all of their atten¬dants.”15 Nonetheless, in March, Rene de Brissac wrote to Francisrequesting more money for his household and stated that it was ob¬vious to the eye that the king’s sons were increasing in virtue andsize.16The French monarch hoped to force Charles to give up bothhis demands for Burgundy and the two hostages by organizing theLeague of Cognac, which included the papacy, Venice, and Florence,and England as an associated state. The League’s Italian memberswere already at war with Charles, but the sack of Rome by imperialforces in May 1527 forced Francis to take a more active role in thewar. Negotiation with England resulted in an agreement in August1527, in which the duke of Orleans was pledged to marry PrincessMary. Confident of his new alliance with England and persuadedby Cardinal Wolsey that success in Italy would bring his sons homequickly, Francis sent a French army across the Alps in the samemonth.17Charles’s response was to increase greatly the rigor of the Frenchprinces’ captivity. At the end of August, the English ambassador atthe French court reported that all of the servants of the dauphinhad been sent back to France, which was in fact untrue, althoughseveral did return to France then, and the princes taken deeper intoSpain.18 On October 24, 1527, the English ambassadors in Spain wenti8Henry IIto interview them to demonstrate their kingdom’s friendship withFrance. They found the boys in a castle four leagues from Palencia.They reported:They be goodly children and promising, as we might, for so shorta time, judge. Tagliacamo could not enough praise the duke ofOrleans of wit, capacity, and great will to learn, and of a pru¬dence and gravity passing this age, besides treatable gentlenessand nobleness of mind, whereof daily he avoweth to see greatsparks, as may be seen in this tender age. He much passeth hisbrother in learning, and in manner hath overcome the rudimentsof his grammar. Tagliacamo said that one day, on their removal tothe castle where we found them, “he called nothing of them forlearning”; but the Duke, seeing him sit alone, came running tohim, and said, “Ah, master, now I have you, you shall not go fromme or ever you teach me my lesson.”The Englishmen also added the complaint that they were not permit¬ted to see the princes a second time. Their protests to the constableof Castile were of no avail.19The harshness of the two boys’ imprisonment was increased agreat deal more when Francis I declared war on Charles V. The em¬peror gave vent to his anger in his order of January 21, 1528, to re¬move every French attendant from the princes except for their tutorand a dwarf and replace them with Spaniards.20 The harshness ofthis treatment caused “a great outcry throughout Castile . . . andthe Queen [Eleanor] hearing that the French princes had been thustreated has fallen melancholy and retired to a monastery.”21 The am¬bassador of Ferdinand of Bohemia reported that “the emperor hashad the king’s sons more closely confined and watched in a spotwhere they ought to have been from the very beginning.”22The effectiveness of the closer confinement of the royal hostagesis made clear by the greatly reduced number of references to themin the diplomatic dispatches from Spain, 23 although this situationwas also a result of the confinement of the ambassadors of Franceand England. Thus, one reads only that in April 1529 Henry wasvery ill and as of June 2 had recovered. The statement of Jean DuBellay to the English court that he was “in danger of his life” wasperceived as seeking to arouse indignation against the emperor24 Itwas shortly after Henry had returned to good health that a Frenchspy was discovered in the vicinity of their place of confinement andHostage19executed. This event frightened the princes’ Spanish custodians whoin mid-June moved them to the fortress of Pedraza, high in the Sierrade Guardarrama north of Madrid.25Pedraza was a cold and isolated place where the princes’ alreadySpartan existence became even harsher. Surprisingly, however, in¬formation about their year at Pedraza is more extensive than thatavailable for the previous year of captivity. In July 1529 a French spysaw the boys twice, once while they were going to Mass and the othertime going out to play. On the way to church a Spanish prince andeighty soldiers accompanied them; when out to play, fifty horsemen.The spy commented on how big Henry had become and on his de¬fiance of the Spanish: the townspeople had told him that the princeconstantly hurled verbal abuse at the Spanish. When he was takenout to play or ride, two lackeys had to hold his donkey because healways tried to escape.26This report is valuable because it occurred shortly before and con¬trasts sharply with the much more famous and dismal account ofLouise of Savoy’s usher, Baudin, which has come to represent theentire circumstances of the princes’ ordeal. His mistress had sentBaudin to Spain to check on the condition of the princes after thesigning of the Peace of Cambrai on August 3, 1529. While the em¬peror and the French king had been busy posturing, challengingeach other to a duel at the Bidassoa River, the two most influentialwomen of the era, Louise and Margaret of Austria, Charles’s aunt andregent of the Netherlands, took matters into their own hands. Theyagreed to begin peace negotiations on July 5, 1529. A month later anagreement, la paix des dames, was hammered out. It reaffirmed theTreaty of Madrid with the very important revision that Francis wouldpay 2 million ecus for the ransom of his sons instead of conced¬ing Burgundy, with 1.2 million to be paid upon the release of thehostages. Charles never gave up his claim to Burgundy, but, as hetold his son Philip, the claim should be maintained without beingmade the cause of war.27Once the treaty had been signed, Louise requested permission tosend someone to inform her grandchildren that they would soon bereleased. So her usher was sent south several days after the agree¬ment. He was delayed twenty-three days at Narbonne waiting for asafe conduct, and he spent another three weeks on the road, reach¬ing Pedraza in mid-September. Always kept under the close guardof eight to ten soldiers, he was at last presented to the commander20Henry IIof the fortress, the marquis de Belanga, brother of the constable ofCastile, who took him in to see the princes.Baudin’s report begins by describing the room where he first sawthe princes:In a dark, disordered chamber with no adornments except strawmattresses were my lords, seated on little stone seats oppositethe windows of the chamber, which is furnished both within andwithout with large iron bars, while the wall is eight to ten feetthick. The window is so high that only with great difficulty canmy lords enjoy air and light. It is an unhealthy place and mostunhealthy for those of the young and tender age of my lords. Theywere poorly clad in a sort of black-velvet riding-costume, withblack-velvet caps, without silk ribbons or ornaments of any kind,white stockings, and black-velvet shoes. Seeing them so, it wasimpossible for me to refrain from shedding tears.”28When Baudin told the dauphin in French that his father andgrandmother had sent him to inform the princes of the treaty andexpected release, Francis turned to the Spanish captain and said inSpanish that he did not understand him and wished that the visitorwould use the language of the country. Baudin, who knew Span¬ish, incredulously asked how it was possible that he had forgottenFrench. He replied that he could not remember it since he neversaw anyone with whom to speak it. Henry then told his brother thatthe visitor was the usher, Baudin. The dauphin replied that he didin fact know him but had not wished to say so. The brothers thenproceeded to bombard Baudin with questions about their family andthe court. (There is no indication in what language this conversa¬tion was carried on.) The party moved on into another room that wasmore disorderly, equally poorly furnished, but better lit. There were,as well, two little dogs for them to play with. One of the Spanishguards who was always with the boys remarked: “You see how thesons of the king of France are treated, living among the soldiers of themountains of Spain, with no education or exercise.” Baudin repliedthat he hoped that they would find better treatment in less than threemonths, but the marquis of Belanga replied that it would be morethan three or four months before they left Spain. He then insistedthat Baudin leave, despite the Frenchman’s annoyance at the shorttime of the visit.The next day Baudin returned with the reluctant permission ofHostage21Belanga to give the princes ornate velvet caps and, having noticedthat they had grown substantially, to take their measurements fornew clothes upon their release. The Spaniards, however, refused toallow him to give the gifts or take the measurements, apparently onthe grounds that they were afraid that Baudin was a magician andwould use these means to spirit the prisoners out of Spain.Despite the poignancy and pathos of Baudin’s account, whichhas been accepted uncritically by historians, certain aspects createproblems that make it difficult to accept the account as a completelyvalid picture of the princes in captivity. It seems implausible that thetwo boys had forgotten how to speak French in the eighteen monthssince their French attendants had been taken away. The dauphin wasnearly eleven when his French companions were removed, and hehad his brother with whom to speak French. Furthennore, the em¬peror’s order of February 1528 isolating them exempted their tutorand dwarf, although it is obvious that by the time of Baudin’s visiteven that exemption had been revoked.29Nonetheless, one must accept Baudin’s statement as accuratesince he had no reason to disguise the truth. Consequently, one canexplain the incident as a fit of juvenile petulance on the part of theprinces or, more likely, a case of identification with the aggressor, touse a concept from modem psychology. In a situation where a personis under the complete control of another in an alien environment, heoften begins to take on the characteristics of his captor. That this maywell have happened to the French princes is supported by their habitof dressing in the first years of their release in a manner consideredmore Spanish than French.30Another problem in the Baudin report is the statement attributedto a Spanish officer that the princes had neither exercise nor edu¬cation. The report of the French spy of July 1529 stated clearly thatthey had been taken out for exercise. What was the purpose of theSpanish comment if in fact it was not really true? One may presumethat the Spanish captain, to whom the statement about no exerciseis attributed, knew enough of the Spanish government’s purpose inholding the princes as hostages to present their circumstances in theworst light, so as to increase the pressure on the French to fulfillquickly and exactly the terms of the Treaty of Cambrai. Baudin’s re¬ception at Pedraza seems to have been designed with that end inmind. In that regard, one must note that the Spaniards constantlystated how distasteful it was to them to treat princes in that way.22Henry IIThere is sufficient evidence available to suggest that when there wereno known French observers about, they may well have been treatedbetter.As noted, the marquis de Belanga had expressed the opinion thatthe release of the princes would not occur as quickly as the Frenchhoped. And he was correct, for the date for their repatriation as set inthe Treaty of Cambrai, March i, 1530, passed without their release,in large part because Francis I had enormous difficulty in raising the1.2 million ecus needed for their exchange. But Charles V did takesteps to ease the severity of their imprisonment.31 Rene de Brissac,who had been allowed to return to France because of ill health, butwithout his wife and son, was allowed to rejoin his charges in March1530. With him came Come Clausse, the future secretary of stateunder Henry II, who described the princes’ living condition as “ex¬tremely noisome” in a letter to Montmorency.32 He stated that hefound the dauphin and his brother in very good health and “mar¬velously happy at the coming of Sieur de Brissac.” He gave their dailyroutine, noting that their meals were served by their own squiresand attendants. In the afternoon they were taken out for exercise andhunting, although under the strict watch of twenty-five foot soldiersand ten mounted guards. Between six and seven in the evening theyhad their supper, after which all of their French attendants were putout of the fortress.33At the end of March 1530 the French princes were brought downfrom Pedraza and sent north toward the border.34 The problems ofcollecting the huge sum for their ransom had been staggering. In1527, representatives of the nobility, the clergy, the parlements andthe Hotel de ville of Paris had agreed to raise 2 million ecus, eitherfor the ransom of the royal sons or for a war with Charles V. When thePeace of Cambrai was signed, collection of the money had not pro¬ceeded very far but was quickened after August 1529. In April 1530the last French-minted gold coin in circulation in France had beencollected, and the ransom commission had to turn to foreign coins,which were melted down and reissued as ecus. In early June the im¬perial representative was called in, and he and Cardinal de Toumon,in charge of the ransom commission, proceeded to the weighing ofthe coins. They were found to be light because of debasement, andanother 41,000 ecus were added to make the necessary weight.35The dauphin and the duke of Orleans, still under the guard ofthe constable of Castile, reached Vitoria in early June, where QueenHostage23Eleanor, still waiting to be married to Francis I, rejoined them. Atthe end of the month, arrangements for the exchange, delayed bydisputes over protocol, were completed, and a train of thirty-twowell-guarded mules carrying the ransom left Bayonne for the exactplace on the Bidassoa where the first exchange had taken place in1526. The second exchange, in the evening of July 1, 1530, wasexactly the same as the first except for the complication caused bythe many heavy boxes of coins that had to be transferred. QueenEleanor, meanwhile, crossed the Bidassoa in her own boat; and oncethe princes had reached the French shore, the entire company set offfor Bayonne. A messenger was sent to inform Francis at Bordeaux ofthe successful exchange, and he and his court went immediately toBayonne. On July 3, the father and his sons were reunited, and onthe seventh, the marriage of Eleanor and Francis, already effected byproxy, was celebrated.36There is no reason to suppose that their lengthy imprisonment at akey period in their physical development stunted the princes’ growthor physical skills. Both had grown a great deal, as Baudin had noted,and they apparently were well nourished.37 All accounts agree thatHenry grew to become a fit, physically powerful, and imposing youngman, while too little is known of the cause of Dauphin Francis’s deathin 1536 to suggest any causal relationship with his captivity.Psychologically, the impact seems to have been greater, especiallyon the younger brother. The dauphin seems to have accepted therationale for his imprisonment reasonably well. When on the banksof the Bidassoa, the constable of Castile asked his forgiveness forany injury he may have caused him, he replied that he was content.Henry, for his part, reportedly broke wind.38 The constable gave eachbrother a pair of horses for which the dauphin wrote a letter of thanksand signed it “votre bon ami.”39 Nonetheless, he became somethingof a loner, preferring to wear black clothes and appearing sober andreflective in a manner looked upon as more Spanish than French.40Given the fact that observers had previously commented on theoutgoing and bright character of the younger brother, the change thathis ordeal effected in Henry appears to have been more extensiveand negative. According to Noel Williams:In the Due d’Orleans the change was even more marked. Awk¬ward, taciturn, morose, unsociable, he seemed an altogether dif¬ferent being from the bright, intelligent lad whom the English24Henry IIAmbassador had seen at Amboise [sic] on the eve of his departurefor Spain. The boy’s spirit, in fact, had been crushed by the drearyexistence which, as we have seen, had been his lot for more thanfour years—an existence in which he had not only been deprivedof the affection and sympathy so necessary for one of his age, butsubjected, it is but too probable, to constant petty humiliations atthe hands of his callous gaolers. So profound was the impressionwhich his sufferings had left upon him, that in 1542—that is tosay, twelve years after his return from Spain—Matteo Dandolo,the Venetian Ambassador in France, wrote that few people at theCourt could ever remember to have heard him laugh from theheart.41Williams’s opinion reflects the virtually unanimous consensus of con¬temporaries and historians that the Spanish captivity drastically andnegatively transformed Henry’s character.This commonsense conclusion would find support in a modemtheory of the psychology of child development that sees the period ofchildhood corresponding to the age of Henry’s imprisonment as thekey time for social development. Cut off from the guidance of adultsand interaction with his peers, Henry emerged from Spain consid¬erably retarded in social skills. Unable to adjust and leam sociallyacceptable behavior quickly, he withdrew from extensive social con¬tact and appeared taciturn and melancholic. He would take refugein the sort of physical exercise in which he excelled and found op¬portunities to act out his aggressions and relieve his frustrations inwrestling and, later, jousting. His intense loyalty to two considerablyolder persons, Anne de Montmorency and Diane de Poitiers, can beseen as reflecting a belated development in relationships with pater¬nal figures, which he could not achieve with his father, who made noeffort to improve his relationship with Henry until two years beforehis death.There is, however, another possible interpretation of the psycho¬logical impact that the Spanish captivity had on Henry, which wouldplay down the impact on him. This view' would note that the En¬glish ambassador, just before the exchange for Francis, had calledHenry' “the quicker-spirited and the bolder, ” which suggests a moreaggressive personality. His behavior in Spain clearly was more ag¬gressive than his brother’s. His captivity would have prevented himfrom learning how to socialize these aggressive tendencies inherentHostage25in him. He may have felt that the loss of the French entourage andthe ever-stricter confinement of the brothers were punishment forhis behavior and felt guilt about how it affected his brother. Hav¬ing returned to the French court, where his aggressive behavior wasfrowned on, Henry’s response was to become rigidly controlled, ex¬pending his energy and anger in rough sports and exercises andnot allowing himself displays of emotion. A person with this sort ofpersonality would have had a difficult adolescence under any cir¬cumstances; the imprisonment would have further exacerbated hisadolescent problems. Among them would be a serious conflict withthe father or a father-figure, which Francis’s attitude did nothing toalleviate. Compounding Francis’s indifference to Henry was the deepresentment that Henry felt toward his father for abandoning him tothe Spanish. Acutely aware of his father’s disapproval and used in hismarriage to Catherine de Medici as a pawn in Francis’s diplomacy,the sibling rivalry inherent in his character would have been madeeven more bitter by his father’s obvious favoritism to his youngerbrother.This approach to assessing Henry’s psychological developmentwould propose that the Spanish imprisonment would not have pro¬foundly changed his personality, but would have made it far moredifficult for him to deal with the antisocial tendencies in it. Freed atlast from his father’s disapproval upon Francis’s death, Henry couldat last relax the rigid tendencies he had used to control his emotionsand mask, without complete success, his resentments. Observersnoted a significant change in him after he became king, including theability to laugh freely. Nonetheless, the characteristics of his youthdid not disappear entirely; he displayed them in a strong stubbornstreak, an aggressive foreign policy, especially toward Charles V, andan unforgiving attitude toward those who disapproved of what heheld dear, whether his mistress or his religion.42 Blaise de Monluc,the tough Gascon captain, described Henry as never forgetting a ser¬vice nor allowing malice to change his opinion of a faithful servant,“but he never forgot a fault or an injury and could not easily conquerhis resentments.”43 As much as such a short statement can possiblysum up a person’s character and career, Monluc saw to the heart ofHenry’s domestic and foreign policy.3 HUSBAND AND DAUPHINHaving returned from Spain, the two princes settled backinto the routine of being dauphin and second son. A tri¬umphal tour of western France with their father and newstepmother took them to Amboise in September 1530,where the entire family was together for the first time in more thansix years.1 In March of the next year the brothers attended QueenEleanor at her coronation. At about the same time the king recon¬stituted the dauphin’s household, to which his two younger brotherswere attached. Its members included the scions of the greatest fami¬lies of the realm. Artus and Charles de Cosse-Brissac were also mem¬bers since their father remained as governor of the prince’s house¬hold and their mother its governess. Still another member of thehousehold appeared in 1530, when Jean d’Albon de Saint-Andre wasnamed as Henry’s personal governor. He had been involved withMontmorency in the process of freeing the princes. His son Jacques,the future marshal and confidant of Henry II, also joined the house¬hold as an enfant d’honneur.2Tagliacamo also returned as tutor, but his interests began to turnto the several clerical benefices with which the king had favored him,culminating in his nomination to the bishopric of Grasse. He gaveup his position as tutor in 1533. He was succeeded by Guillaume DuMaine, a poet and humanist of some reputation who, like Tagliacamo,had previously served as tutor for the sons of Guillaume Bude.3Life in the household of the royal sons was described in April1531 in a long letter by the tutor of one of its less prominent mem¬bers, Francois de La Tremoille, to the boy’s father.4 The activities ofthe household seem to have consisted largely of rough sports andhorseplay, in which the dauphin several times bullied the youngerHusband and Dauphin27La Tremoille to tears. Henry was noted as enjoying wrestling, tennis,and jumping. His older brother was described as often preferring tospend his pastime in solitude, but “whatever he wishes to do, good orbad, he is little contradicted.” When he was corrected, the dauphinwould reply that the king wanted him and his brother nourishedin this freedom so they would forget the terror of their captivity inSpain. Although Henry is only mentioned in passing in this letter, itsuggests that Brantome’s often-cited quotation of Francis I’s remarkthat “the mark of a Frenchman was to be always gay and lively andhe did not care for dreamy, sullen, sleepy children” applied as muchto the older brother as to Henry.5 There is no question, however, thatthe king found the personality of his third son, Charles, much moreto his liking and bestowed little parental affection on his older sons.Nonetheless, Henry was a prince of France and, as such, the sub¬ject of numerous marriage schemes to advance the foreign policyof his father. As early as 1523, there was a suggestion that he bebetrothed to the daughter of Queen Eleanor of Portugal, his futurestepmother.6 The principal subject of these schemes, however, wasPrincess Mary of England, who was three years older than Henry.The hand of Mary Tudor was used as a negotiating ploy by herfather on numerous occasions, involving Francis I himself and histwo older sons. Those proposals involving Henry were the most seri¬ously considered, especially during the negotiations between Franceand England while the princes were in Spain. The Peace of Cam-brai included a clause affirming their future marriage.7 In September1530 the negotiations on the matter were still moving forward, butin October the Milanese ambassador in London reported that thediscussions had stalled because Francis suspected that Henry VIIIwanted to bring his son to England to serve as security for the debtthat he owed the English king.Francis delayed the formal betrothal on the grounds that his sonwas not old enough to consummate the marriage, but certainly thecloud over Mary’s legitimacy created by her father’s quest for an an¬nulment of his marriage to Queen Catherine was a factor. This pointwas made clear in February 1532, when the Venetian ambassadorin England reported the delay of the marriage until Henry VIII’scase was settled, because Francis did not want it to be said that hisson had married a bastard.8 Nevertheless, discussion continued untilSeptember 1532, when all mention ceased, presumably because ofthe forthcoming conclusion of Henry VIH’s suit.928Henry IIBy that time a new candidate for the position of spouse to Henryhad come to the fore—Caterina Maria de’ Medici, daughter of Lorenzode’ Medici, duke of Urbino and grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent,and Madeleine de La Tour d’Auvergne, a member of a prominentFrench noble family.10 Catherine was the cousin twice-removed ofPope Clement VII, but was usually referred to as his niece. As theonly member of her generation in the legitimate line of the Medicifamily, she was the topic of a great deal of matrimonial diplomacy onthe part of Clement VII. She had been bom April 13, 1519, two weeksafter her future husband, and her childhood was probably even moredistressful than Henry’s. Both her parents died within a month of herbirth. Pulled back and forth in the political tug-of-war between thecommune of Florence and her family, and shunted about betweenFlorence and Rome and from one convent to another, the momentsof security in her first fourteen years must have been few and farbetween.11Like Henry, Catherine was the subject of numerous marriageproposals, such as to the duke of Richmond, Henry VIII’s illegiti¬mate son, or to the duke of Milan, Francesco Sforza, the candidate ofthe emperor. In January 1531, however, the Venetian ambassador inFrance reported that the pope was urging the marriage of his nieceto the duke of Orleans and hoped to gain the duchy of Milan forthe couple.12 Henry’s age was a stumbling block, since he was stilltwo years from the canonical age for marriage. Clement objected toFrancis’s suggestion that Catherine go to France for the betrothaland then wait several years for the marriage.13 He was mindful of themany marriage contracts broken by the European royalty, and he wasdetermined to protect his niece and family from such humiliation,as well as to avoid the loss of time and opportunity that a long buteventually broken betrothal would incur.When the French offered a marriage contract in April 1531, Clem¬ent raised several objections and delayed accepting it. A year later,however, the Venetian ambassador affirmed that the marriage wouldtake place, as would a conference between Clement and Francis.14Negotiations concerning the marriage and the conference were con¬cluded in early September 1533. Within a month a fleet of papal gal¬leys arrived at Marseille, where the French court joined Clement andCatherine two days after their arrival. On October 28 Pope Clementpresided over one of the more spectacular marriage ceremonies ofHusband and Dauphin29the century. Afterward, as the scandalmongers have taken great de¬light in detailing, the king and the pope remained in the weddingsuite to see whether Henry at age fourteen was mature enough toconsummate the marriage.15 He was.Catherine’s dowry was considerable—130,000 ecus, most ofwhich came from the city of Florence rather than the pope, althoughhe added 30,000 in exchange for her concession of her rights toUrbino. She also received several notable precious jewels, includinga famous pearl necklace that she gave eventually to her daughter-in-law, Mary Stuart, from whom Elizabeth I seized it. For his part, theFrench king provided his son with an annual income of 50,000 livresfrom the duchy of Orleans and his new daughter-in-law an incomeof 10,000 livres. Catherine also had an inheritance of French landsfrom her mother Madeleine de La Tour, with an estimated income of9,000 ecus.16The marriage had been arranged strictly for political purposes,and politics occupied the attention of Clement and Francis for thefive weeks that they were together at Marseille. Secret clauses ofthe marriage contract promised that the pope would support theFrench conquest of Milan, Pisa, Parma and Montferrat, which wouldbe given to the young couple to rule. Clement agreed to create fournew French cardinals, including Anne de Montmorency’s nephew,Odet de Chatillon, later to become an embarrassment to the Curia,and to allow Francis to collect a clerical tenth. Disappointed becauseCatherine failed to show any signs of being pregnant, Clement leftMarseille at the end of November. Nine months later he was dead,and the Franco-papal alliance that the marriage was to seal was dis¬solved as well. The new pope, Paul III, refused to recognize anyobligations involving the marriage, including the last installment ofClement’s share of Catherine’s dowry.Francis’s failure to make any permanent gains in Italy only addedto the unpopularity of the marriage. Most Frenchmen resented it asa mesalliance between a prince of royal blood and an “Italian shop¬keeper’s daughter,” ignoring her French noble ancestry. Many feltthat the king had been duped in the matter of Catherine’s dowry,believing that the Medici heiress ought to have brought a great dealmore.17 Henry himself appears to have been of much the same opin¬ion. He, of course, had had nothing to say about the choice of hismate, and he would later indicate his resentment over the fact that he30Henry IIhad been married to a spouse who brought him no significant landsor fortune, while his younger brother Charles expected to marry theemperor’s daughter.It seems fair to say that Catherine had no special sexual attractionfor Henry. Her physical appearance has been the subject of so manycontradictory statements that one can hardly reach any conclusionsabout it. Nonetheless, judging from the many portraits and descrip¬tions of her as a young woman, she was outshone by the beautifulwomen of the French court, many of whom Francis I had placedthere precisely because of their beauty. Her charm, intelligence and,perhaps most important, her interest in riding and hunting won hermore support, particularly from the one whose opinion mattered themost in the first years of her marriage—her father-in-law. It is truethat in early 1535 the Spanish ambassador in France wrote that theduchess of Orleans was being treated as usual but “some of her maidssay that they heard the king say he had not been well-advised whenhe made his son marry her.”18 Later in the same year, however, theVenetian ambassador reported that “the king, the Dauphin, her hus¬band as well as the king’s youngest son seem to love her much.”19How accurate that statement was in regard to Catherine’s husband is,however, open to some question. Although their marriage had beenconsummated on their wedding night, it appears that for some timeafterward they lived as brother and sister because Catherine had notreached puberty.20Equally a threat to Catherine’s place as wife to Henry was thedominating presence of the famous Diane de Poitiers, Henry’s mis¬tress. The subject of numerous biographies, few of which have anyvalue as history,21 Diane has been the object of as much maliciousgossip as anyone in history. Clearly the worst piece is the report that“in her youth Diane redeemed by her virginity the life of Sieur deSaint-Vallier, her father”22 who had been condemned to death in1524 for his role in the treason of Constable de Bourbon. The pre¬cise point of that charge is disproven by the fact that at that dateDiane, bom in 1499, had been married for ten years to the GrandSenechal of Normandy, Louis de Breze, and had two daughters. Thebroader charge, that she had been Francis I’s mistress before becom¬ing Henry’s, is disposed of less easily, but Georges Guiffrey, editor ofher letters, has convincingly argued that the characters of Francis,Louis de Breze and Diane made it highly implausible that such aHusband and Dauphin3irelationship occurred prior to Breze’s death in 1531, by which timeAnne de Pisseleu had a firm grip on the king’s affections.Henry and Diane met for certain for the first time at his returnfrom Spain, in 1530. Largely ignored because of the emphasis onhis older brother and the marriage of his father and Queen Eleanor,the eleven year-old boy was permanently smitten by the beautiful,mature woman of thirty who took an interest in him and gave himher scarf to wear in the tournament that celebrated the marriage.23Shortly after her husband’s death in the following year, Diane began arelationship with Henry that was seen by some as being entirely ma¬ternal as late as 1547.24 At what point the relationship ceased beingmaternal and became sexual is unknown, but it certainly occurredbefore 1547, perhaps in 1536. Whatever qualms Henry might havehad about adultery were reduced, if not eliminated, by the examplesof his father and his godfather Henry VIII. Francis’s mistress, Annede Pisseleu, openly flaunted her control over him, and a bastard sonof Henry Tudor was sent to be raised with the French princes in153 2.25Diane’s attention to the young prince must have perked up a greatdeal in 1536, when Henry suddenly became the successor to theFrench throne. The dauphin Francis, who had impressed observersat his brother’s wedding in 1533 with his poise and quiet charm,26died in August 1536, four days after he had taken ill after a vigorousgame of tennis. Any unexpected death was, in this era, cause forsuspicion of poisoning, and an Italian squire of the dauphin, who hadthe misfortune of possessing a book on toxicology, was tortured intoa confession.27 Although he subsequently retracted his confession,he was executed by being tom apart by horses. In the confessionthe Italian named Charles V as the perpetrator, but suspicious eyeswere also cast toward those who clearly would benefit the most fromthe dauphin’s death—Henry and Catherine. Since all Italians wereconsidered expert toxicologists (and Catherine certainly enhancedthat view in her later years), many Frenchmen believed that she hadplotted the death in order to rise from ignored wife of the secondson to the exalted position of dauphine. Catherine never was able toshake completely the suspicion that she had risen to power throughthe murder of her brother-in-law.Henry’s reaction to the death of his brother is unknown. Onewould like to think that the two brothers who had spent four years as32Henry IIone another’s only companion had remained close, but there is littleevidence available on the relationship after 1530. In 1534, however,Henry had asked the king to give him Brittany as an appanage, butFrancis had already decided to crown the dauphin as duke. The re¬fusal of his request is said to have strained his relationship with bothfather and brother.28 Francis I had attempted to make good Henry’sclaim to the duchy of Milan by sending an army into Italy in 1535,but it had failed to take the city. Thus Henry’s ambition to take a placeamong the important figures of Europe had remained unfulfilled. Hisunexpected elevation to successor to the throne, therefore, certainlybalanced any sadness he felt at the loss of his brother.Shortly before the dauphin’s death, the Venetian ambassadorGiustiniano wrote a description of the king’s children. Henry was saidto be eighteen years old (he must have been seventeen), melancholiclike his older brother, and like him enjoyed hunting and exercisingwith weapons. Giustiniano added: “The integrity of his judgment isalready remarkable.”29 The value of his report as an accurate assess¬ment of the French court, however, comes into question when onefinds that he had Catherine de Medici as the wife of the youngestbrother, Charles, who became the duke of Orleans upon his brother’sdeath.After his son’s death, the king decided to separate the householdsof his younger sons. Henry chose for his the bravest young gentle¬men of the court and, in particular, Jacques de Saint-Andre, Francoisde La Chataigneraie, Claude de Dampierre, Jean d’Andouins, andFrancois d’Escars. For the next ten years this group of gay youngblades was inseparable, and together they fought in war, hunted,played tennis, pulled off practical jokes, and defended their positionat court. For his part, Prince Charles, feeling insulted at the choicesleft to him, refused to name anyone until Francis intervened in thequarrel. Thus the rivalry and jealousy between the two brothers wasmanifested from the first days of Henry’s status as dauphin, althoughas late as 1542 the Venetian ambassador described Henry as ban¬tering and playing practical jokes with his brother like “an excellentcomrade.”30Once he had become dauphin, Henry was determined to take ad¬vantage of the prerogatives of the office, which included the right toserve in the field as the commander of a royal army. Eager to provehimself in battle (he had been knighted immediately before his mar¬riage), he persuaded his father to let him join Anne de MontmorencyHusband and Dauphin33in Provence, where the French and the imperial armies had beenwaging a particularly brutal war. After its failure in the previous yearto take Milan, the French army had been driven out of Piedmontand pursued by the emperor’s army into Provence. Montmorencywas conducting a scorched-earth policy of unusual thoroughness inProvence to prevent the enemy from supporting itself in the field. Hewas beginning to have some success by the time Henry arrived onthe scene.Montmorency had always been close to all of the royal children,but it was during the several months of this campaign that he andHenry forged the close ties and mutual respect that endured untilHenry’s death. As Henry wrote shortly after, “Be sure that whateverhappens, I am and shall be for my life as much your friend as any¬one in the world.” Although he was nominally in command of theFrench army, the dauphin deferred to his second-in-command in allrespects and learned a great deal about waging defensive warfare, atwhich Montmorency excelled. The successful expulsion of the im¬perial army substantially raised Montmorency’s credit with the kingand the people, and lifted Henry’s as well. The duke wrote in thefollowing spring when he and Henry were campaigning in Artoisthat Henry’s presence “gives great pleasure to this army . . . and thetroops are eager to fight well so that, if it please God, he will comeout victorious and with great honor.”31A truce, however, prevented a conclusive battle in Artois, andFrancis’s attention again turned to Milan. Henry was appointed com¬mander of the vanguard of the royal army crossing the Alps, withMontmorency as his chief of staff. The duke’s capable generalshipcleared the passes of Piedmont for the royal army, and by Novem¬ber 1537, the French were on the Po in full strength. The emperor’sforces had been thrown back in large part because of the war with theTurks in the Mediterranean and in Hungary, which was going badlyfor Charles V. The looming threat of the infidel in central Europe wascreating a major embarrassment out of the infamous alliance thatFrancis had concluded with the sultan in 1536. Pope Paul III, eagerto create a united Christendom to face the Turks, pressed Charlesand Francis to make peace. Thus in June 1538, after a conference atNice where the pope served as a go-between for Charles and Francis,a ten-year truce was signed. It maintained the status quo in Pied¬mont with the French in control of most of the region but not the keyprize—Milan.34Henry IIHenry was thus deprived of the duchy that he considered to berightfully his as well as the great battle in which he had hoped to haveproven his mettle. But the Piedmont campaign was not a completeloss for Henry; while there he fathered a daughter with a Piedmon¬tese girl.32 The child, named Diane, was taken to France and raised inthe royal household, where she occasioned gossip that she was in factthe child of Henry and Diane de Poitiers. By siring this child, Henryput the responsibility for the lack of offspring from his legitimateunion on his wife, putting greater pressure on Catherine to producean heir.Another benefit for Henry from the Provence-Piedmont cam¬paign was that his mentor and confidant, Anne de Montmorency, wasraised to the office of constable in February 1538. His investiturewith the office, left vacant since the defection of the last constable,Charles de Bourbon, took place, with intentional irony, at a chateauonce owned by Bourbon. With his close friend elevated to a positionof the highest influence, Henry could hope to see royal policy re¬flect his interests. It may have been the dashing of such expectationsthat caused Henry to become so upset at the decision of his father topursue the acquisition of Milan by means of a different tack—the pro¬posed marriage of his youngest son, Charles, to Charles V’s daughterMary. The bad blood between the two brothers, already obvious tocourt observers, was brought to a boil by this proposal.The feud had multiple causes. Henry clearly resented the factthat he had been sent off into captivity while his younger brotherremained at home to capture the deepest affection of their father.But the king’s favoritism toward Charles was motivated in large partby their close similarity in both appearance and personality. Francisclearly saw himself in the bright, vivacious, and impetuous Charlesin a way he never could in his son Francis, and certainly not inHenry. If the Memoires de Vieilleville can be trusted, Charles openlyrevealed his ambition to be more than a younger son of the king.In 1547 Henry’s companions at Francis I’s obsequies, Jacques deSaint-Andre and Francois de Vieilleville, told him how Charles hadcelebrated the false report that the two older brothers had drownedin a boating accident and had become depressed and ill when wordcame that his brothers were still alive, saying: “God’s curse on thisnews. I shall never become anything but a nonentity.”33The rivalry between the two brothers became a far more seriousmatter when it expanded to include the two most powerful women atHusband and Dauphin35the French court—Anne de Pisseleu and Diane de Poitiers. Anne, theduchesse d’Etampes, Francis’s mistress since his return from Spainin 1526, clearly enjoyed the vast gifts of jewels, property, and patron¬age her royal lover bestowed on her and quickly moved to eliminateany threat to her power and influence. Diane, as mistress to thedauphin, presented an obvious rival to Anne’s position and, of course,would displace her as the most powerful woman in France as soonas Francis died. Spurred on by a deep personal antagonism as well,the two women’s relationship grew from dislike to open hatred. Theduchesse d’ Etampes, terrified by the prospect of being displaced byher enemy, sought to build a party around herself that would enableher to retain a position of power upon the king’s death. The centerof her plans was Charles d’Orleans, who was all too willing to serveher purposes. The two became the center of a faction at court thatwas made up largely of ambitious young nobles such as Gaspard deTavannes, a future marshal of France and author of an important setof memoirs, but also included several established courtiers, such asMarguerite d’Angouleme and the Admiral Philippe Chabot.34Henry’s circle came to be centered on Constable Montmorency,who had a personal feud with Chabot dating to before 1530.35 In theimmediate aftermath of the truce of 1538, the constable, who hadbeen the leading advocate of seeking peace with the emperor, hadreached the pinnacle of influence at the court. He dominated themaking of foreign policy for the next two years; he acted largely onthe belief that Milan could be gained for France by maintaining peacewith Charles V. When, in October 1540, Charles V made clear thefallacy of that policy by investing his son Philip as duke of Milan, theconstable’s influence collapsed rapidly. After several humiliations atthe hands of the king, he left the court in June 1541, not to returnuntil Henry’s accession to the throne.36 With Montmorency gone fromthe court, the Etampes-Orleans faction had the upper hand, and itset about to win for Prince Charles a position of power that could notbe lost after the death of Francis, which, given the king’s health in1541, was seen as not far in the future.The collapse of the constable’s policy and his disgrace led to arenewal of war with the emperor in which the two brothers vied withone another for military glory.37 Charles gained the advantage in thisregard, for he was the nominal commander, with Claude de Guise ashis chief of staff, of the French army that took the excellent fortressof Luxembourg in 1542. Henry was given an army in the Midi, serv-36Henry IIing with Marsha] Claude d’Annebault, to attack the Spanish provinceof Roussillon. Having taken Luxembourg, and hearing that a greatbattle was forthcoming in the south, the duke of Orleans disbandedhis army and rushed to Perpignan to win further glory. But Henry,unable to attack Perpignan because of its extraordinarily strong for¬tifications, was forced to retreat without a major battle. Meanwhile,the imperial forces retook Luxembourg. The rivalry between the twobrothers had cost the French a major gain, although the French didrecapture Luxembourg the following year. It was near Perpignan thatan incident occurred that showed Henry to be capable of a gracefultouch. Charles de Cosse-Brissac, son of his former governor and hiscompanion in Spain, led a very courageous sally to save some Frenchguns from capture. Henry said to his officers: “If I were not Dauphin,I would wish today to be Monsieur de Brissac.”38The war continued through 1543 and into 1544. Henry was in¬volved in considerable hard fighting but with only mixed success.His request that Montmorency be recalled to serve with him wasbrusquely refused. Invading Champagne, Charles V outmaneuveredthe dauphin and for a time threatened Paris. Reduced by deser¬tion and disease, the imperial army could not push on to Paris,but the fright that the incident caused Francis, along with the nearbankruptcy of the treasury, convinced him of the need for peace.The Peace of Crepy, signed in September 1544, pledged theFrench monarch to aid the emperor against the Turks and, in a secretcodicil, against the German Protestants.39 More pertinent to the mem¬bers of the French court, the treaty called for the marriage of theduke of Orleans to the daughter of either the emperor or his brother,Ferdinand. If the former, the couple would receive the Netherlandsand Franche-Comte as a dowry; if the latter, the duchy of Milan.In either case Charles would receive from his father the duchies ofOrleans, Angouleme, Bourbon, and Chatelleraut. The emperor hadfour months to decide on which bride to give to the duke, and in theend he offered the daughter of Ferdinand.This agreement may well have been the most reckless act of Fran¬cis’s reign. It would have created a dangerous threat to the unity ofthe kingdom, for it would have made Prince Charles an enormouslypowerful man within France and provided him with a very potentpower base outside of the realm. The Burgundian situation of theprevious century would probably have been recreated. One suspectsthat Francis agreed to these provisions not only because he wishedHusband and Dauphin37to be generous to his favorite son and secure Milan for his dynasty,but also because Anne de Pisseleu encouraged him as a way to se¬cure her own future. She reportedly received a promise to be madegovernor of the Netherlands if Charles received them.Dauphin Henry was enraged when he received news of the treaty.He was motivated, of course, by envy of his brother, but equally bythe threat it posed to his future power as king. Speaking of the peacetreaty, the papal nuncio wrote that “it can only been seen as pro¬voking discontent between the duke and the dauphin.”40 Henry hadhoped for a marriage between his brother and Jeanne d’Albret, whowas about to be released from her marriage to the duke of Cleves.Henry signed the Treaty of Crepy, as he put it, out of “fear and rev¬erence for my father,” but he proceeded to write a secret protest inDecember 1544, witnessed by three prominent young noblemen—Antoine de Vendome-Bourbon, Francois d’Enghien, and Frangois deGuise.41Henry’s anger at this turn of events was less than it might havebeen because the birth of a son the previous year had reduced thelikelihood that his brother would gain the French throne. By 1542the failure of Henry’s marriage to produce a child had given riseto suggestions that it be ended. Catherine sought to quiet them byappealing first to her husband who, “because he loved her,” assuredher he had no thought of it. More important, she also went to Francisand pledged to go to a convent if that was what he wanted her to do.His reply, as reported by the Venetian ambassador: “Since God haswilled for you to be my daughter-in-law and wife to the dauphin, Ido not wish to change it and perhaps it will please Almighty God togrant to you and me the gift we greatly long for.”42 The papal nunciowrote at about the same time that “Madame la Dauphine is muchloved by the king.”43Despite these assurances, Catherine, as well as Henry, must havebeen enormously relieved when she became pregnant in 1542 andfar more so when she gave birth to a son in January 1543. The child,named Francis for his grandfather and godfather, was always ratherweak and sickly, but the fact of his existence was all that mattered.44After the first child, others came rapidly—ten in all, seven of whomsurvived infancy. The latter were Francis, Elisabeth, bom in 1545,Claude, in 1547, Charles, in 1550, Edouard (Henry III), in 1551,Marguerite, in 1553, and Hercule Frangois, in 1555.One can presume that, with the birth of his son, Henry slept moreHenry IIeasily, knowing that his brother was no longer directly behind himin the line of succession. That problem disappeared entirely twentymonths later when Charles suddenly died. Tavannes, his boon com¬panion, reports that while Charles was on campaign with the army inPicardy, he was advised that several persons had died of the plaguein a certain house. Charles arrogantly declared that no prince of royalblood had ever died of the plague and entered it. In four days hewas dead. The king was heartbroken over the death of his favoriteson, and Henry himself is said to have wept. Eight times he wasprevented from entering the sickroom of his brother for fear that hewould become ill as well.45The death of the son whom Francis probably would have pre¬ferred to see as his heir meant that in his old age he had to turn toHenry and prepare him more thoroughly to take over the governmentafter his death. Francis’s efforts at improving his relationship with hissurviving son and preparing him for rule continued, despite the em¬barrassing episode recorded by Vieilleville, in which Francis’s jesteroverheard Henry telling his friends what offices they would receiveafter he became king.46 As early as 1537 the king had associated hisheir with him in royal authority by having Henry sit at his right handin a lit de justice. Francis invited Henry to attend the conseil d’etaton a regular basis. Nonetheless, he offended his son by his statementthat he intended to be king until his death and no one was to actor speak to the contrary.47 Henry, for his part, was reluctant to iden¬tify himself too directly with the decisions of the old court so as notto be blamed for their failures, and he absented himself frequently.Furthermore, he refused to preside over the council.48The memoirs of Blaise de Monluc show that Henry was presentin the council in March 1544, when Monluc made his appeal to theking to permit the French army in Italy to give battle to the impe¬rial forces. The dauphin, he noted, stood behind the king’s chair andsaid nothing. Monluc remarked that “I believe it is not the customfor the Dauphin to speak although the king would have him presentto learn.” When Monluc began to press his point, “the Dauphin gaveme a nod with his head by which I guessed he would have me speakboldly.”49 Clearly, Henry was given the opportunity to participate inthe government in the last years before Francis’s death, althoughthe relationship between the two continued to be troubled by suchmatters as the feud between Guy de Jamac and Francois de FaHusband and Dauphin39Chataigneraie, representatives of the court’s two factions, which wasto be resolved early in the next reign.With the demise of the old king expected soon, the foreign pow¬ers began to seek to use the dauphin, known to be at odds with him,for their purposes and to gain influence over the coming reign. Hein¬rich Bullinger, among others, thought that Henry might embrace theReform. In 1546 the German Lutheran princes made contact withHenry through the city of Strasbourg and Martin Bucer and JacobSturm, in hopes of joining France to the Schmalkaldic League in itswar against Charles V.50 The dauphin, on his part, let it be knownthat he was opposed to his father’s religious policy and reportedlyeven promised to introduce the Reform into France. But he said thatat the moment he was without power and could do nothing since hewas not even assisting at the royal council. Nonetheless, Henry didattempt to formulate his own policy for Germany. He proposed a mar¬riage between Duke Joachim Frederick of Saxony and Anne d’Este,the daughter of Renee de France, Henry’s cousin. The opposition ofthe princess’s father was one reason why nothing came of it.The Germans, again through Bucer and Sturm, wrote to Henrythanking him for his efforts. They proposed electing a new emperorto replace Charles, “if not the king then the dauphin,” and offeringto him the imperial lands that used the French language, like Lor¬raine. Although the plan was rendered useless by the Lutheran defeatat Miihlberg, it would be resurrected by Henry in 1552. His motto,Donee Totum Impleat Orbum (Until It Fills the Whole World), hasan imperial connotation that suggests that he had greater ambitionsthan simply king of France.51By the end of 1546 the French court did not expect Francis Ito live much longer. A serious illness had afflicted him for much of1546, although he had recovered from it sufficiently to engage ina furious round of hunting and traveling. The court and the gov¬ernment were biding time until the new king and his new policytook over. It was at this time that Marino Cavalli, the ambassador inFrance from Venice, produced his description of Henry for the sig¬nori. He described Henry as tall and powerful in appearance, darkin complexion with black hair, dark eyes, and a short black beard,two fingers in length, and bothered by bad teeth.52 The dauphin, hewrote, has “such qualities that promise to France the most worthyking it has had in 200 years. This hope is now a great comfort for this40Henry IIpeople who console themselves on the present misfortunes by thethought of good fortune to come.” Cavalli made it clear that Franciswas not very popular in his last years. He continued by saying that theprince was skilled in the exercise of arms in which he loved to par¬ticipate. His courage in war was highly esteemed. Cavalli describedHenry as having a disposition somewhat melancholic and an intel¬ligence not the most prompt, but firm and decided in his opinions.“What he has said once, he holds with tenacity.” Cavalli suggestedthat this sort of man is the best, “like autumn fruits which ripenlatest but are for that reason better and more durable than those ofspring or summer.” The Venetian gave his opinion that Henry wouldseek to maintain a foot in Italy and to keep Piedmont. “For this pur¬pose he supports those Italians discontented with the affairs of theirhomeland.” Cavalli remarked on the relationship between Henry andDiane as that of mother and son, Diane being a counselor devoted tobringing out the best in the dauphin. In most matters “he is prudentand honorable, and in all he has corrected several little faults of hisyouth and has become wholly another man.”In many respects Henry was the most promising heir to thethrone of any European kingdom in the sixteenth century. At agetwenty-eight, he was more mature than most new kings of the era,yet had the promise of a long reign before him. He was well trainedin military command, and Blaise de Monluc declared that “he wasthe best king whom God has ever given soldiers.”53 Despite his dis¬agreements with his father, he had been given a reasonably thoroughtraining in the working of the royal government. Henry’s more soberpersonality seemed to promise a court less dominated by frivolouspursuits and less expensive. Thus, Francis’s passing would not bewidely mourned outside of the circles of Anne de Pisseleu and hissister Marguerite.54In mid-March 1547 Francis realized that he was seriously ill andhalted his travels at the chateau of Rambouillet to prepare for death.On March 31 the king had what all agreed was a very edifying death,asking the forgiveness of his enemies and those whom he had injuredand of God for his many sins. He gave Henry last words of parentaladvice, urging him not to injure his subjects by going to war on minorpretexts or to tax them too heavily and not to allow himself to beruled by others as he had been ruled by the duchesse d’Etampes.He asked that Henry take care of her, his wife, Queen Eleanor, andhis only surviving daughter, Marguerite. Francis also urged Henry toHusband and Dauphin4ipersevere in the Christian religion and to uphold it to the best of hisability. The bad blood between father and son seems to have beenforgotten in these last hours as Henry was said to have fainted onhis father’s bed in his grief, while Francis was reported to have toldhis son: “You have been a good and obedient son.”55 Two days afterhis father’s death, Henry was seen playing tennis, but his courtierswere quick to inform observers that, since he had spent four days andnights at the deathbed, his physicians had ordered him to take someexercise56Henry’s feelings for his father, pent up all those years of theirestrangement and probably given exaggerated fonn in compensationfor that, were made manifest in the grand funeral he gave Francis.Since his two brothers were only temporarily interred in churchesnear where they had died, their bodies were brought to Paris to beburied at the same time with their father in the abbey church ofSaint-Denis. Although by tradition the new king was not to take partin the obsequies of his predecessor, Henry viewed the funeral pro¬cession from a house on the route, disguised as an ordinary person.When the funeral cortege passed under his window, Henry “began tobe very troubled and grieved even to the point of tears.” His compan¬ions Saint-Andre and Vieilleville turned his grief to anger by recount¬ing the inordinate ambition and envy of his younger brother.57On May 23 the dead king and his sons were entombed in Saint-Denis. After Francis’s coffin had been placed in the vault, a heraldshouted three times: “Le roi est mort,” and the banner of France wasdipped into the vault. Then the herald shouted: “Vive le roi! ViveHenri, deuxieme du nom, par la grace de Dieu roi de France!” andthe banner was raised upright again. The first official recognition ofthe new reign had been proclaimed.584 VIVE LE ROI HENRIOn his twenty-eighth birthday, Henry, dauphin and dukeof Brittany, became king of France, the second of hisname but the first Henry since 1060. As king, Henrywas heir to the thousand years of tradition that had goneinto the creation of the French monarchy as it was found at mid¬sixteenth century. A millennium of Frankish and French kings hadseen royal power ebb and flow, but Henry was the beneficiary ofthe work of several recent predecessors, whose success at enhancingroyal authority placed the French monarchy at the pinnacle of itspower up to that time.The French concept of kingship was ambiguous since it includeda sense of both absolutism and limitation. While the royal lawyersadvocated an absolutist interpretation of the monarchy’s tradition ofauthority, it is unlikely that the kings gave the problem much thoughtas they made decisions. If the kings believed themselves to be in astrong enough position, they could break with the conventions thatlimited their authority and make an arbitrary decision in an absolutistmanner. If, on the other hand, the customs and conventions that lim¬ited their authority on the issue at hand were important enough toa sufficiently influential group, the king easily, and probably withoutmuch reflection, accepted the bonds on his arbitrary power and con¬sulted that group. It was not unheard of for a king on occasion tobreak with a tradition that enabled him to act arbitrarily and to accepta new limitation.To some extent, then, it is futile to attempt to define the natureof the French monarchy as Henry found it; it was largely what eachking was capable of making it. If he had the drive and ambition toaspire to be all-powerful and the hardheadedness to ignore the com-Vive Le Roi Henri43plaints of powerful elements in society, tradition gave him sufficientopportunity to work toward that goal with the expectation of consid¬erable success. Should the king lack those qualities, custom providedas well for a style of government that limited royal authority and re¬quired consultation without necessarily causing a permanent declinein royal power or resulting in anarchy. Henry, like most kings of theearly modem period, thought of himself as absolute but was unableto rule absolutely, nor did he make any strong effort to do so.One of the powers any king had was to settle old scores and re¬ward old friends upon gaining the throne, and Henry immediatelyset himself to those tasks as soon as his father had died. Henry’ssettling of old scores was, one must say, less harsh than the depthof hard feelings might have suggested; but old friends were indeedrewarded, likely beyond even their expectations.1The member of the old court who had the most to fear was Annede Pisseleu. She had fled from the court at the time of Francis’sdeath. Emboldened, however, by a courteous letter from Henry, sherequested permission to return to her apartments at Saint-Germain.The new king brusquely informed her that Queen Eleanor wouldhave the final say in the matter and she must make her request of her.Meanwhile Constable Montmorency had already occupied the lodg¬ing. Henry ordered Anne to return the jewels valued at 50,000 ecusgiven to her by Francis, which Henry then gave to Diane de Poitiers.2More seriously, Anne was charged with conspiring with Charles V in1544, but the only consequence was that she had to concede landsto the crown.3 Although she lost much of her property and all of herinfluence, Henry did not take everything from her. Perhaps heedinghis father’s dying request to treat Anne well, he allowed her to retireto one of her chateaux, where she died in 1580.While Anne de Pisseleu lost the most as an immediate result ofthe royal succession, numerous other members of Francis’s courtwere also turned out of their offices. The extensive change has beencalled—in an often-quoted comment from Francis Decrue, Mont¬morency’s biographer—a palace revolution, resembling somewhat theOttoman Empire in its almost complete replacement of major offi¬cials. Decrue in turn took his cue from Saint-Mauris, who wrote: “Inshort this court is a new world.”4 Among the most influential figuresdemoted from power were Cardinal de Toumon and Admiral Clauded’Annebault, who had served as the late king’s principal advisers andhad in particular directed foreign policy. D’Annebault lost all of his44Henry IIoffices except the title of admiral, and Toumon was placed “entirelyin the shade.”5 He was ordered not to come to the court after the fortydays he attended the body of the dead king at Rambouillet. Further,he was deprived of his estates. In June he did go to the court, wherehe was poorly received. “In good truth the king hates to hear hisname mentioned.”6 A well-regarded military commander, Jacques deMontgommery, who had recently put down with inordinate blood¬shed a revolt at Lagny-sur-Mame, lost his estates and was disgraced.The irony of this harsh treatment of Montgommery was the fact thatit was his son whose lance fatally injured Henry II in 1559. It mustbe noted, however, that the “palace revolution” applied only to closeadvisers of the dead monarch. The routine administration of the stateremained in the hands of largely the same men and families.With the old favorites almost entirely repudiated, the way wasclear for different, but not necessarily new, faces to fill the highestoffices. Those offices that appeared to sixteenth century observers tohave the most power were the provincial governorships and seats onthe two royal councils.The governors had first appeared as military officers for the fron¬tier provinces during the fourteenth century, and in the sixteenthcentury they still served as captains of companies of gens d’armes.Although no edict stated that they had to be military captains, onlyone governor of a major province during the reigns of Francis I andHenry II was not. The governors were also responsible for the exe¬cution of royal edicts in their provinces and the maintenance of lawand order. Their instructions usually included the order “to representour person in all the offices of the said province.”7 The governor alsohad extensive patronage, both at the local level and at the royal court.The governors’ own wealth and sources of patronage, when added tothat of their offices, clearly placed them among the most powerfulmen of the realm.Accordingly, the governors had accumulated considerable powerindependent of the monarchy. As J. H. M. Salmon has said, “Theover-mighty subject who replaced the feudal prince was more likelyto be the governor of a province than its hereditary duke.”8 The factthat the kings continued to nominate the governors ought not dis¬guise the fact that in many instances the monarch had little choicebut to appoint a member of a prominent family for a particular prov¬ince. For example, no one disputed the governorships of the south¬western provinces with the d’Albrets. Once installed, a governor oftenVive Le Roi Henri45acted at odds with royal policy, but the removal of a recalcitrant gov¬ernor was difficult for the king to achieve, as Francis I found whenhe tried to remove Anne de Montmorency from his governorship ofLanguedoc in 1541.9It is an interesting paradox of Henry I Is reign that at no othertime during the sixteenth century were the governorships more con¬trolled by the greatest nobles of the realm, yet never did the monarchyhave less trouble with the governors. The explanation for this situa¬tion lay in the type of governor of Henry’s reign: nearly all came fromthe circle of great nobles who were closest to the king. In 1547 theMontmorencys, the Saint-Andres, and the Guises already controlledsix of the eleven major governorships that constituted some three-quarters of the realm. A seventh soon went to Robert de La Marck,Diane de Poitiers’s son-in-law. The Bourbons and the d’Albrets, rela¬tives of the king, held another two. The due d’Etampes was governorof Normandy. Despite being the husband of Anne de Pisseleu, or per¬haps because of it, he was deeply beholden to Henry. Only Claudede Tende, appointed by Francis as governor of Provence, fell outsidethe intimate circle of the court, but even he had a tie to it as thebrother-in-law of the constable.It is probably because of this close relationship with Henry thatthere was no serious threat of revolt or disobedience from any of hisgovernors. He brought a measure of peace to his reign by having somany of his close friends in the governorships, but he did create amost dangerous and troublesome situation for his successors, whowere faced with the rebellious sons of Henry’s intimate friends inpower in the provinces.If the governorships tended to reduce royal authority in the majorprovinces, the royal councils were the institutions through which theking worked to increase his power. There were two councils: a smalland very secretive body of intimate advisers known as the conseiletroit or conseil des affaires, the latter tenn being used more oftenduring Henry’s reign, and a larger body of advisers for more rou¬tine decisions called the covseil prive or conseil des parties.10 Threedays after his father’s death Henry established the procedure and themembership of these councils, both of which remained largely un¬changed during his reign. The conseil des affaires met in the morningshortly after the king’s lever and before he attended Mass, and it usu¬ally lasted for about three hours. Its purpose was “to treat of mattersof state and finances.” It rarely met without the king.46Henry IIThe usual membership of this council in the first years of Henry’sreign included Montmorency and his cousin, Jean d’Humieres, thetwo Guise brothers and their uncle, Cardinal Jean de Lorraine, thetwo Saint-Andres, Henri d’Albret, Antoine de Bourbon, Robert de LaMarck, the chancellor, Francois Olivier, and Nicolas de Villeroy, asecretaire des finances, who died in 1549.11 The four secretaries ofstate attended as well, but without taking part in the deliberations.Occasionally, for the most crucial or secretive matters, only the con¬stable, the two Guises, and the younger Saint-Andre were present.The membership of the ccmseil des parties was considerablybroader and more flexible. In addition to the members of the secretcouncil, it included at the beginning of the reign (if they were at court)the cardinals Louis de Bourbon, Odet de Chatillon, Jean Du Bellay,and Ippolito d’Este, bishops Philippe de Brissac of Coutances andMathieu de Longwy of Soissons, dukes Claude de Guise (who rarelyattended), Louis de Nevers, and Jean d’Etampes; Pierre Raymon, firstpresident of the Parlement of Rouen; and Andre Blondet, the trea¬surer of the Epargne, who on occasion attended the conseil des af¬faires as well. This council met in the afternoons, and the king rarelyattended. Besides routine administrative decisions, it heard appealsfrom the Parlement of Paris because of the special significance of thepersons or the points of law involved. Under Henry II, the conseil desparties began to take a more active role in supervising royal finances,which by the end of the century had become its principal function.12Most prominent among those who held positions of power underHenry II was Constable Anne de Montmorency. On the afternoonafter Francis’s death the new king and the constable had a two-hour private talk, and Montmorency emerged as president of the newroyal council in charge of all matters of the government. He heldthe signet; with it he had the authority to sign routine administra¬tive orders. On April 12 the king received his oath as constable ofFrance and issued a declaration to all civil and military officers toobey Montmorency, who regained his charges as captain of the fortsof the Bastille, Vincennes, Saint-Malo, and Nantes, and of the com¬pany of gendarmes of the king. He also resumed the governorship ofLanguedoc he had held in 1541. He had not been stripped of these of¬fices during his disgrace, but others had exercised his authority. Norhad he received the income attached to them. Accordingly, Henrymade good the duke’s claim with a sum of 25,000 ecus a year forVive Le Roi Henri47four years, above his regular annual income of 24,800 livres from hisroyal offices.13A reason for the extraordinarily close relationship between Henryand Montmorency may have been that in appearance and charac¬ter they were more alike than Henry and his father. The constablewas bom one year earlier than Francis into a very ancient house thatclaimed to be descended from the first Frank baptized after Clovis.Despite its reputed ancestry and pretensions to the title of first baronof the realm, the family had not played a significant role in Frenchaffairs until Anne rose to high levels of public office. A boon com¬panion of Francis as a youth, he had fought in every major campaignof his reign and had become successively marshal, grand master ofthe royal household, and constable, the highest military office in therealm. He was regarded at the beginning of 1547 as the best fieldcommander in France, although his ability lay far more in effectivedefensive tactics than in taking the offensive. Montmorency was will¬ing to take the most draconian measures against those he perceivedas the enemies of the French monarchy, whether foreign or domes¬tic. Nonetheless, he was less eager for war than most of the Frenchcaptains were, and in his later years he was usually vocal in supportof peace. In 1552 he candidly stated to the papal nuncio his reasonsfor pursuing a policy of peace: “I seek peace as a Christian, as an oldman, and as one who finds himself in a good position.” The contem¬porary perception of the constable was that he, more than any othermember of the court, was dedicated to promoting the greatness ofthe king.14Among the constable’s virtues were a strong sense of loyalty, es¬pecially to Henry, which was strongly reciprocated, and an ability totake care of matters entrusted to him down to the smallest details.He was very devout and conservative in religion and gained a repu¬tation for being particularly harsh in meting out punishment if thematter disturbed him at his prayers. Montmorency was not very ap¬preciative of learning and scholarly pursuits. He was said to haveregarded learning as being conducive to heresy and to “have little es¬teemed savants and their books.”15 He was also considered arrogantand narrow-minded and was unpopular among the courtiers. In thepolitics of the court he was largely a loner, little interested in dis¬pensing patronage and aiding the rise of others outside of his family.An English ambassador wrote in 1550: “No man may have anything48Henry IIby his will save his own kinfolks and ... he feedeth every man withfair words and performeth nothing.”16 Under Henry II, however, hehardly had need of his own party.Montmorency did indeed support his kinfolk, and several roserapidly to prominence. His brother, Francois de La Rochepot, wasrestored to his governorships of the Ile-de-France and Picardy thatFrancis I had taken from him. The constable had a large family—foursons and seven daughters—and he would do well for them as theymatured. Since his eldest son was only seventeen in 1547, it was hissister’s sons, the Chatillons, who profited most from Montmorency’sposition at the beginning of Henry’s reign. The oldest nephew, Car¬dinal Odet de Chatillon, moved into the same apartment at Saint-Germain with his uncle and was noted by the imperial ambassador as“beginning to compete with the Cardinal of Ferrara [Ippolito d’Este]for precedence” among the clerics at court.17 The next brother, Gas-pard, was shortly named colonel-general of the infantry and later be¬came admiral of France, going down in history as the famous AdmiralColigny. He also became governor of the Ile-de-France and Picardyafter his uncle La Rochepot’s death. The third nephew, Francois,seigneur d’Andelot, received notice from the English ambassador asone of the chief favorites of the new court.18 Many further honors andoffices would come to these young men in the next decade until theirloyalty to Catholicism became suspect. Montmorency’s influence alsocarried his cousin, Jean de Humieres, into the conseil des affaires andthe office of governor of the household of the king’s children.The English ambassador, Nicholas Wooton, included among thechief favorites of the new king all of the sons of Claude de Guise, butthree in particular—the oldest, Francois, known as the due d’Aumaleuntil his father’s death in 1550, the second, Charles, archbishop ofReims, and the fourth, Louis, bishop of Troyes.19 No family in thesixteenth century and few throughout European history had as fas¬cinating a history as did the Guises. The family was a branch of theHouse of Lorraine, which claimed Charlemagne as an ancestor. In1503 Rene de Lorraine sent his second son, Claude, to the Frenchcourt to make his fortune and to take over the French fiefs of thefamily, in particular the county of Guise near the border with theNetherlands. Claude was naturalized as a French subject and becameacquainted with his second cousin, Francis, then the heir presump¬tive. As king, Francis gave him a number of military commands, inwhich he demonstrated that he was one of the great soldiers of hisVive Le Roi Henri49generation. In 1526 Guise was rewarded for his services in Franceduring Francis’s captivity by being made duke and peer. The countyof Guise was raised to a duchy, and several estates added to it to makeit worthy of its tenant’s new rank. As members of a foreign princelyfamily prominent at the French court, the Guises occupied an am¬biguous position that could be played to their advantage, but equallywell could be used by their enemies to foment resentment towardthem.The ten children of the due de Guise who survived infancy, amongthem six sons, were raised in easy familiarity with royalty. The oldestchild, Marie, in fact, was raised to royalty by her marriage to JamesV of Scotland in 1538. It was the second marriage for both, as Jameshad married Francis’s daughter Madeleine and Marie had weddedLouis de Longueville. Both marriages had been quickly ended bydeath, and Marie de Guise went to Scotland to become consort to itsking, despite the persistent courting of Henry VIII, who was deter¬mined to make her his fourth wife. Marie’s married life in Scotlandwas brief and filled with tragedy. Her two infant sons died a weekapart in April 1541, and her husband in December 1542, a week afterthe birth of a daughter. This daughter, the famous Mary, queen ofScots, put a throne in the Guise family and gave her uncles a muchwider sphere for their political ambitions in the future.The oldest Guise brother, Francois, bom in February 1519, fol¬lowed in his father’s footsteps as a military captain. He suffered aserious wound in 1545 outside of Boulogne, then held by the English.A lance thrusted through his right cheek left him with a jagged scarfor life that gave him the tag of le Balafre, “the scarfaced.” A casualacquaintance with Dauphin Henry, a month younger, had blossomedinto deep friendship. He was one of the three nobles who witnessedHenry’s protest against the Treaty of Crepy. Nonetheless, Francis Igave him the governorship of Dauphine in 1546. By the time Henrybecame king, Francois de Guise had become his usual opponent attennis. Guise was a very talented military captain, but he was morethan just “a man of war with a sort of naivete in the practice of non¬military affairs.”20 His sense of the importance of planning and at¬tention to detail carried over to politics as well. With only rare lapses,he also had a keen sense of how to avoid offending others, especially,of course, those whose opinions counted most.21The second brother, Charles, six years younger, may well havebeen the most complicated and controversial public figure in5°Henry IIsixteenth-century France. Friend and foe alike acknowledged hismany talents and virtues and his equally numerous faults and vices.All were in awe of him. His intelligence enabled him to move quicklyto a degree in theology at the College de Navarre, and he was anoted orator and preacher, moving Theodore Beza to say that “If Ihad the graces of the Cardinal of Lorraine, I should hope to converthalf the people in France to the religion I profess.” Morally austereat the frivolous French court, he was called un santarello, “onewithout sin,” by Cardinal Famese, yet he had at least one illegitimatechild.22 A dedicated patron of Renaissance artists and humanists, healso demonstrated the same tendency to acquisitiveness in collectingantiquities and art works as he did in collecting wealthy churchbenefices. It was his reputation earned after 1559 as one of the mostardent, articulate, and effective defenders of Catholicism that wasmost responsible for his controversial place in history.Charles was as surely a bom churchman as that species was pos¬sible. But his ascent to church power depended far more on the credithis father and his uncle, Cardinal Jean de Lorraine, had with Fran¬cis I than on the brilliance of an oration he made before the king atthe age of fifteen as a student at the University of Paris, despite whatone historian of the Guises has maintained 23 Francis did not appointmen to major sees on the latter type of consideration. Guise’s ap¬pointment to the archbishopric of Reims in 1538 gave him the mostprestigious church office in France, and one of the wealthiest. Catch¬ing the king’s ear with his eloquence, however, may well explain whyCharles was invited to the court in 1540 and in February 1547 namedas “chief of the council of the Dauphin and governor of his householdand all his affairs.”24 Henry had sought for several years to raise himto the rank of cardinal, but it was only after Henry’s coronation inJuly 1547, at which Charles presided as archbishop of Reims, thatthe pope agreed to grant the red hat. A contemporary of Charles deGuise stated that from the beginning of their friendship, Henry lovedhim as Jonathan loved David.25The two Guise brothers, likened to “the lion and the fox,” althoughthat phrase tends to denigrate Francois’s mental and administrativeabilities more than it ought, worked extraordinarily well togetherto promote the family’s prestige and position. Their four youngerbrothers dedicated themselves equally to the task, and one of thethings about the Guises that both amazed and confounded observersand rivals was how well they worked together without the usual in-Vive Le Roi Henri5itemal conflicts and jealousies that marked most families with powerand influence. In 1547 only two of the younger brothers were oldenough to be active at court: Claude, due de Mayenne, then twenty-one years old and married to the daughter of Diane de Poitiers, andwho became due d’Aumale when Francois became due de Guise in1550; and Louis, nineteen years old, who had been made bishop ofTroyes in 1545. All of the brothers, even the youngest two, who neverreceived major offices, were capable men.Every knowledgeable Frenchman and foreign diplomat expectedthat the Guises would move into the highest levels of the govern¬ment upon Henry’s accession to the throne.26 Events quickly provedthem correct. Saint-Mauris noted that in the weeks after the death ofFrancis I, the two oldest Guise brothers were lodged with the king,a clear sign of favor. They were appointed to the conseil des affairesalong with their uncle, Cardinal Jean de Lorraine. Charles was made“chief of the council as regards judicial affairs under the supervisionof the constable.” He was also named chancellor of the Order of SaintMicheal. Francois de Guise was made the chief of the royal huntand was reconfirmed in his governorship of Dauphine. In November1547, Henry informed the Chambre des comptes, which had beenslow to release the 4,000 ecus due to Guise as governor of Dauphine,that he was one of those “whom I wish to exempt from the usualscrutiny and to be treated with all grace and favor.”27 Clearly, Mont¬morency was in ascendancy in the first months of the new reign; butif the old adage that two heads are better than one has any validity,then the Guise brothers, who worked together virtually as one, werein excellent position to challenge that dominance.The two Saint-Andres also profited greatly from the change on thethrone. Both Jean, the father, Henry’s former governor, and Jacques,the son, his close companion, were seated in the conseil des af¬faires. The older was made governor of Bresse, and the younger be¬came grand chamberlain and a marshal of France. Jacques de Saint-Andre was the only one of the group of noble youths who had grownup with Henry to gain high office. Jean d’Andouins had been killedin battle in 1545; Claude de Dampierre lost favor for criticizing Dianede Poitiers; and Francois d’Escars was dead by 1547. The fifth mem¬ber, Francois de La Chataigneraie, lost his place by his death in thefamous duel with Jamac in 1547. Saint-Andre did not form a factionat the court, nor did his position benefit his relatives or friends toany significant extent. A contemporary opinion about him was that52Henry IIhe was only interested in becoming rich and could be led whereverone wished as long as there was a promise of profit for him. Hisopinions were rarely noted by the ambassadors at the French court.Saint-Andre was, however, royal chamberlain, and as such he sleptin the king’s chamber. This constant access to the king presumablygave him considerable influence, but to what end he used it besidesfor personal gain is unknown.28One prominent house that did not do well under the new regimewas that of Bourbon. As the only princes of blood except for the sonsof the king, the Bourbons ought to have been given a major role inthe government, but they had not yet fully recovered from the blowthat the treason of Charles de Bourbon had dealt to their position.While they were not completely ignored in the allocation of offices inApril 1547, they were not as well represented as befitted their status.Antoine de Vendome-Bourbon was given a place in the conseil desaffaires. His uncle, Cardinal Louis de Bourbon, kept his seat in thewider conseil des parties. In 1548 Antoine’s brother, Charles, alreadybishop of Saintes and Carcassone, would receive the cardinal’s hat.His other two brothers were still too young at that point for high of¬fice. The favor of the Bourbons would rise considerably when Antoineagreed to marry Jeanne d’Albret in 1548. His decision avoided a po¬tentially serious crisis as her parents wanted to marry her to PrincePhilip of Spain.Two individuals who were outside of the above four families andtheir circles were invited to join the privy council. Henri d’Albretclearly owed his selection to his status as the king’s uncle. FrancoisOlivier, one of the most respected royal officers of the century, re¬mained in his office as chancellor and kept his place on the councilthat had been given him in 1543. Jacques-Auguste De Thou laterwrote about him that he had “such unusual virtue that no office wasbeyond his merit.”29 The office of the chancellor had been greatlyenhanced in the previous century, and he had become the king’smost important administrative officer. The chancellor was first of allthe head of the royal chancellery, which drew up edicts and formalpapers; he was also the keeper of the three royal seals, at least oneof which was used to stamp every royal decree. He was entitled torefuse the seals for decrees that seemed to him to violate the law orto be unjust, but the king could order him to seal the decree. Thechancellor was also head of the royal judicial system and presidedover the parlement when he attended it, as he did for the presenta-Vive Le Roi Henri53tion of royal edicts and the election of its officers. The chancellor wasthe chief of royal administration and inspired and prepared the im¬portant edicts; thus such legislation usually showed his hand.30 Thechancellor, furthermore, presided over the two royal councils in theabsence of the king.The chancellor received his appointment for life, and Henry in¬herited Francois Olivier in the office. Like most chancellors of thesixteenth century, he had previously been first president of the Par-lement of Paris. He was one of the few high officials of Francis I whokept their offices in 1547, but he was not close to Henry and mayhave kept his office because of the chancellor’s life tenure. Accordingto several late sixteenth-century writers, he had incurred the wrathof the Guises and Diane de Poitiers because of his objections to thelarge gifts the king was bestowing on them. Considering the num¬ber of times that Henry called on him for advice and the importanceof several missions that he gave him, it seems more probable thatdeclining eyesight and health were the reasons why he agreed inJanuary 1551 to give up his duties. The edict giving most of his du¬ties to Jean Bertrand (or Bertrandi) specifically referred to Olivier’sill health. Bertrand had recently been promoted to first president ofparlement and been given the title of garde des sceaux. Olivier re¬tired to his estates but continued to perform services for the king.Shortly before his death, he was recalled to active service in the firstmonths of Francis II’s reign. Given the Guises’ thorough dominationover that reign, his return to office calls into question the assertionthat the Guises were responsible for his retirement.31Bertrand was from Languedoc and had risen in the governmentthrough the influence of Montmorency, but it is not clear whether hewas still the constable’s client in 1551. He was said to have becomea favorite of Diane de Poitiers, whose influence was regarded as pro¬pelling Bertrand’s rapid rise to high office. Bertrand was less wellregarded than Olivier, but he was more amenable to Henry’s policies.In 1551, having been widowed, he became the bishop of Comminges,then in 1557 archbishop of Sens and a cardinal. The numerous giftsand favors he received from Henry suggest that he was considered avaluable member of the royal government.While the office of chancellor underwent little change duringHenry’s reign, the office of secretaire d’etat was greatly transformed.The office arose out of the clercs du secret, who had been the king’sprivate notaries. By the beginning of Francis I's reign, several had54Henry IIemerged as the secretaires cLes finances and had received a numberof privileges; the most valuable was their automatic ennoblementshould they have come from common stock.Upon his father’s death, Henry dismissed all but two of his secre¬taires des finances, retaining Guillaume Bochetel and Claude deL’Aubespine. Two additional secretaries were immediately named:Come Clausse, who had been serving as chief secretary in Henry’shousehold, and Jean Duthier, “a creature of the constable.” About aweek after his father’s death, Henry issued letters patent that explic¬itly set out the duties of these four secretaries in order to “expeditehis affairs of state and prepare the despatches and responses” forthe provinces and foreign lands. The decree listed the regions of re¬sponsibility for each; Bochetel, for instance, was assigned Normandy,Picardy, Flanders, Scotland, and England. The title that the edictgave them was “Conseillers et secretaires de ses commandemens etfinances.” By 1559 they were being called simply secretaires d’etat,which title historians have used for Henry’s reign as well.In September 1547, Henry further clarified the status of the foursecretaries by raising their salaries to 3,000 livres from 1,623, be¬cause of their importance and the need to travel continually with theking.32 The expense of staying with the court in its nearly constantmovement alone justified the increase in salary. The four secretaries,who were all related through marriage, were well rewarded for theirservices. Six of their close relatives were given French bishoprics,and Clausse and Bochetel passed on the offices to their sons-in-lawwhen both died in 1558. All four also received large gifts from Henry,such as the 10,000 livres given to Bochetel in 1547.33The change in the nature of the secretaries’ duties and compe¬tence was among the most important and enduring of the administra¬tive decisions of Henry’s reign. The fact that he made it immediatelyafter he became king strongly suggests that he had given the situa¬tion serious thought beforehand, which further suggests that he wasfar more prepared for rule than is usually thought. The reorganiza¬tion of the secretaries’ functions indicates as well an appreciation onthe part of Henry of the need for a more orderly system to replace theconfusion previously in existence. Nonetheless, Henri Noel’s state¬ment: “This reform is one of the most characteristic of the constantcare of Henry II to assure to the realm a rational and perfected ad¬ministration” must be regarded as an exaggeration.34The beginning of Henry IPs reign, therefore, differed considerablyVive Le Roi Henri55from his father’s first days in that the royal favorites and powerfuladvisers were more clearly defined and came from outside of his im¬mediate family, having no equivalent to Francis’s mother and sisterin power and influence. Henry took care to be kind to his stepmother,Queen Eleanor, expressing “his great desire to treat her well whethershe decide to remain in France or reside elsewhere”; but she had nomore influence under him than with her late husband. She repliedthat she knew he would continue to be a good son as he had alwaysbeen, but by late 1548 she had returned to the Netherlands.35 Shedied in Spain in 1558.Henry’s sister, Marguerite, found her position considerably im¬proved upon his accession, although she never had the influence thather aunt and namesake had had over Francis. She was always keptwell-informed, even if she usually had little to do with making policy.She remained very close to Catherine de Medici, which, however,did not increase her influence in government. In all other respectsshe was treated as befitted Madame la soeur unique du roi, and in1549 had a household of 150 persons who received 22,834 livres inwages.36 Unwedded despite her twenty-three years, Marguerite wasthe object of considerable matrimonial diplomacy throughout Henry’sreign, but she would not marry until its last days.The influence and patronage power of the two principal womenin Henry’s life was very disproportionate in the first years of hisreign. His wife, Catherine de Medici, who had an annual allowance of200,000 livres, was able only to procure royal office for her cousins,the Strozzi, the sons of the aunt who had been her surrogate motherin her early years. Piero Strozzi was named captain-general of theItalian infantry in French service, and his brother Leone was madecaptain-general of the royal galleys. A third brother, Lorenzo, re¬ceived the bishopric of Beziers six months after Henry’s accession;Catherine immediately set to work to gain him the red hat but wassuccessful only in 1557.37 The few Italians favored by the king in thefirst years of his reign confirm the remark of the imperial ambas¬sador: “An infinite stream of Italians came to the new court to offertheir services but they are not being placed on the pension list.” Af¬ter 1550 the Italians were far more successful in gaining royal favor,in part because Catherine’s influence over her husband increasedconsiderably later in his reign. In 1557 Cardinal Carlo Carafa, aftera stay at the French court, described how news was treated there:“The King consults with the Constable . . . and then his Majesty an-56Henry IInounces them to the Queen and Madame de Valentinois [Diane].”Carafa’s words, spoken in the context of a complaint of how fast statesecrets became public knowledge at the court, suggest that he sawCatherine as being by then a person of importance.38Diane de Poitiers was far more successful in reaping a plentifulharvest of patronage and gifts from her relationship with the newking. A week after Francis’s death the English ambassador, withconsiderable understatement, reported that “of the dames Madamela Grande Seneschalle [from her late husband’s title] seemth to behighly esteemed.” There is a strong consensus in the reports of con¬temporaries that she was a powerful force in royal decisionmaking,although specific examples of her influence are hard to find. Early inthe reign she received requests to use her influence for the benefitof the solicitors, but there is no evidence that she did. The requestssoon ended. There is, furthermore, one documented case in whichDiane’s influence was not sufficient to win the king’s approval fora request. In September 1548 she asked Henry to give the positionof auditor of royal accounts to d’Humieres’s son. He refused, despiteDiane’s solicitation, because the importance of the post for royal fi¬nances required someone with fiscal experience.39According to Saint-Mauris, writing in June 1547, Henry discussedall decisions and policy with her after the noon meal, giving heran account of all the business he had transacted in the morning. Itis difficult to determine, however, whether Henry simply kept herinformed, used her as a sounding board, or actively sought and tookher advice. A thorough analysis of the diplomatic correspondencebetween the French court and Germany in Henry’s reign found nomention of her name. But Saint-Mauris was convinced that “the kingallows himself to be led and approves everything that [Diane] and hisnobles advise. ... He continues to yield himself more and more toher yoke and has become entirely her subject and slave.”40Through her influence Robert de La Marck, her son-in-law, wasgiven the baton of a marshal of France and added to the conseil desaffaires. Three of her nephews received bishoprics in the next twoyears. Her confidant Andre Blondet received the position of treasurerof the Epargne. But the claim that he informed Diane each day ofthe judgments confiscating property so that she could demand thechoicest pieces seems in the original source to have been restrictedto the properties of Anne de Pisseleu.41There is no question La Grande Seneschalle was avaricious, andVive Le Roi Henri57Henry catered to that flaw in her character. He gave her the beau¬tiful chateau of Chenonceaux almost immediately upon gaining thethrone, two of the estates seized from the late king’s mistress, andthe jewels worth 50,000 ecus also taken from her. A year later Dianereceived the title duchesse de Valentinois with additional property tosupport the title. She was equally successful in gaining huge sums ofmoney as gifts from her lover. French tradition dictated that all officeand fief-holders pay a special fee to the new king for reconfirmationof their titles and offices. Henry gave the sum, or at least a large partof it, to Diane.42According to two contemporary memoirs, all of the king’s favoriteswere avaricious. “Nothing escaped their greedy appetites as little asa fly escapes a swallow. Positions, dignities, bishoprics, abbeys, everygood morsel was greedily swallowed.” They were accused of hav¬ing their creatures everywhere in France to inform them of newlyvacant positions and even of bribing physicians of Paris to hastenthe demise of holders of valuable offices.43 Nonetheless, one musttake the statements from Tavannes and Vieilleville in the context oftheir disappointment in their search for offices, since Henry gave fewfavors to those outside of his intimate circle.Within the new court occupied by so many ambitious and talentedindividuals, clashes over royal favor were necessarily numerous. Inthe triangle of persons who were closest to the king—Montmorency,the Guises and Diane de Poitiers—Diane’s position was in one sensethe most precarious, since she could not prove herself to be indis¬pensable by military and diplomatic victories, and she faced the realpossibility of being shunted aside as she aged. Shrewd and intelligentpolitician that she was, she saw the need to balance the other twodominant influences against each other, lest one would become over¬whelmingly preeminent and turn the king against her. If power andinfluence remained divided three ways, Diane could hope to serve asthe determining voice between the often contradictory advice of theconstable and the Guises.Such an approach required that the Grande Seneschalle supportthe Guises in the first several years of Henry’s reign, since Mont¬morency had the king’s ear more than did the two brothers44 InVieilleville’s memoirs it is said that “in the first days of the reign, theconstable took possession of the King in such a way that he carriedhim off to all his residences and, wherever the prince was, no onecould approach his person, save by his favor and introduction.”4558Henry IIThese comments were supported by the reports of the variousambassadors, who noted frequently that Henry was at one of Mont¬morency’s chateaux, usually to hunt. When an Italian sought topresent his credentials from Cosimo de Medici, duke of Tuscany, tothe king through Catherine, she told him that it was necessary togo through the constable, as did all the foreign ambassadors until atleast 1552.46 Blaise de Monluc, no friend of Montmorency’s it is true,wrote that “the king abdicated his power and his dignity before thisbaron of the Ile-de-France.” Another contemporary related in 1552that it had been difficult to tell whether the king loved the GrandeSeneschalle or the constable more.47The relationship between Diane and Montmorency, by far the twoeldest members of the inner circle of the court, was largely one ofcordial competition for the king’s favor. They were often in disagree¬ment over points of policy, and especially patronage, but united indevotion to and support of the king.48 But they were not close, and theroyal mistress had reason to seek to prevent the complete ascendancyof the constable until the last two years of the reign.The Guises, for their part, had cultivated the Grande Seneschallewell before Henry had become king; after March 1547 they becameeven more assiduous. For two years Charles de Guise gave up his owntable to dine with Madame, as all at the court, even the king, calledDiane.49 In 1547 a marriage was arranged between the third Guisebrother, Claude, and her daughter, Louise de Breze. In 1548, whenCharles de Guise had been in Rome for six months, Montmorencyreportedly sought to convince Henry to require him to remain there,having already persuaded the king to order Francois de Guise to in¬spect the frontier fortresses in Dauphine. When Diane became awareof the constable’s machinations, she informed Charles, who quicklyreturned to the court. The authenticity of the story, however, is calledinto question by the fact that the French representatives in Romeknew the date of the cardinal’s return well in advance.50While Montmorency and the Guises also had a common bondin their mutual desire for promoting the well-being of the king andhis realm, their relationship was clearly less cordial. In August 1547Saint-Mauris wrote to Prince Philip that “the Constable is all pow¬erful in this court at present, but there is bitter jealousy on thepart of the Guises, who bear secret enmity to him, and many obsta¬cles are thrown in the Constable’s way.”51 The ambassador reportedten months later, when Charles de Guise returned from Rome, thatVive Le Roi Henri59Montmorency referred to him as “that great calf.” Frangois de Guiseretorted by calling the constable a robber.52For most of Henry’s reign the struggle for power and influencewas intense and fairly evenly matched. The Guises’ greater ability,youthfulness and the presence of the two brothers—which nearlyalways allowed one to be with the king—combined with the usualsupport of Diane de Poitiers, nearly balanced the great, almost filialreverence that Henry had for the constable.According to Lucien Romier, Montmorency dealt with the situa¬tion with bad grace. He threw gross insults at his rivals, system¬atically opposed all their projects, and contradicted without scrupletheir advice. His hostility extended as well to the Guises’ clients, likeVieilleville and Blaise de Monluc. As for the Guises, their attitudetoward Montmorency revealed itself in the accusations against himof poisoning when Duke Claude died in 1550 and his son Frangoiswas seriously ill at the same time.53 However, a keen observer of theFrench court, Simon Renard, the Habsburg ambassador for twoterms, advised Philip II in 1558 against allowing Montmorency, thenin captivity in Flanders, to return to the court to help formulate theFrench terms for peace: “It would be a mistake to allow him to go toFrance on the plea that he is at odds with the House of Guise, for thequarrel between them is not as serious as is made out. They under¬stand each other far better than they allow it to appear.”54 Despiteepisodes of real bitterness, the two rival families worked relativelywell together for advancement of their mutual interest: the well-beingand authority of their king. Rarely was there serious conflict overpolicy, and only over the issue of peace or war in 1556 and 1558 didthe rivalry create serious embarrassment for the king.Even if it was not as serious as often made out to be, the fac¬tionalism was apparent to all observers and must have been obviousto Henry II as well. Yet he did nothing to resolve it. Each favoritefilled an essential need in his personality, and he could not bear to bewithout Diane, Montmorency, or the Guises for any length of time.When one of the group was absent, Henry wrote letters to the absentperson filled with declarations of love and welcomed him or her backto the court with extravagant displays of affection. Since the Guisesand Montmorency did have differing views on royal policy, Henry’spolicy, as a consequence, was often the product of his efforts to bal¬ance them; but if one point of view did prevail it was Montmorency’s,with one major exception: the decision to send Guise to Italy with6oHenry IIa French army in 1556. Nonetheless, one must not see Henry as amere cipher; as the Venetian Contarini said in 1551: “It is seen thatfrom day to day his Majesty tends to act more of himself.”55 Manypolicy decisions, especially later in his reign, appear to be entirelyhis.The factionalism of both the old regime and the new intruded inthe first months of Henry’s reign in the form of the famous Jamac-La Chataigneraie duel.56 Guy Chabot de Jamac was part of the partyof Anne de Pisseleu, since he was married to her sister. He wasable to maintain a high style of life at the court in the last yearsof Francis I largely through the financial support of his stepmother.This situation gave rise to rumors spread by the party of DauphinHenry that Jamac was his stepmother’s lover. Jamac publicly deniedthe accusation, which was attributed to Henry. The prince and thenobleman were placed in an embarrassing situation that called for aduel in defense of honor, but it could not take place because Henry’srank prohibited him from taking part.Then La Chataigneraie, one of Henry’s close friends from hisyouth, stepped forward to claim responsibility for the allegation andaccept the challenge to a duel. Francis I had refused the request forformal judicial combat, which required the consent of the king (nottrue of a private duel), because Anne de Pisseleu was convinced thatJamac would be easily killed by his much stronger and more expe¬rienced foe. Within a month of Henry’s accession La Chataigneraierequested permission for the duel to death, which Jamac secondedin his own letter. In May 1547 the royal council agreed to permit thecombat to occur and set the date of July 10.The combat took place at Saint-Germain-en-Laye with an “end¬less array of persons of all sorts” present. The factionalism of thenew court revealed itself in this feud left over from the old in thechoice of seconds for the combatants. Frangois de Guise served as LaChataigneraie’s second, while Jamac’s second, Claude de Boisy, thegrand ecuyer, was a friend of Montmorency. Once the combat hadbegun, Jamac disabled his opponent with a quick and unexpectedthrust to the back of the knee. That manner of attack in dueling wasknown for centuries after as le coup de Jamac.With his prostrate enemy slowly bleeding to death on the field,Jamac appealed to Henry to declare his honor restored and to acceptthe fife of La Chataigneraie, which according to the rules of judicialcombat was now in the hands of Jamac. Henry, stunned by the quickVive Le Roi Henri61defeat of the man all saw as his champion, refused to answer untilboth his sister Marguerite and the constable added their voices tothe call for mercy. Even as the king recognized Jamac as victor andfreed him from the obligation of killing his fallen enemy, he refusedto add the customary phrase: “You are a man of honor.” Jamac hadthe good sense to refuse the victory march to which he was enti¬tled. Henry, having recovered his composure, embraced Jamac andtold him that “he had fought like Caesar and spoken like Aristotle.”La Chataigneraie for his part, recognizing that he had been dishon¬ored, cut off the bandages on his leg and bled to death, despite thephysicians’ opinion that he had not been mortally wounded.Beyond providing a grand spectacle for the court, the affair hadseveral consequences and implications for the new regime. Perhapsmost significantly, Gaspard de Coligny, Montmorency’s nephew, re¬ceived the office of colonel-general of the infantry that was to havegone to a victorious La Chataigneraie. Jamac served as a captain offifty lances under Coligny at the siege of Saint-Quentin in 1557.57The duel is illustrative of the fact that medieval attitudes of personalhonor and combat had not disappeared from the France of this eraand that Henry was more sympathetic to them than his father hadbeen. This latter point was further demonstrated early in the reignby the several large tournaments that Henry held. He did, however,outlaw the settling of disputes by judicial combat. The Jamac affairalso underscored the existence of a certain obstinacy in the king’scharacter that had nearly caused his own disgrace in his handling ofJamac’s victory. Last, the defeat of the king’s champion at the verybeginning of his reign was seen as a bad omen. It helps to explainthe numerous predictions of impending tragedy and violent death forthe king, which, of course, were all too accurate.For Henry, the sour note struck by the duel was shortly rectifiedby the harmony of his coronation-consecration ceremony at Reims,the traditional site of the crowning of French kings since Clovis hadbeen baptized there.58 The long delay before his coronation reflectedthe growing sense among French legalists that coronation was notnecessary to confer royal power, since authority was transferred tothe new king at the moment of death of his predecessor. Therefore,the coronation did not confer the power of kingship but was seen asthe last step in giving public and ecclesiastical recognition of the suc¬cessor’s right to rule. Nonetheless, a king who remained uncrownedwould have certainly been disregarded by the people. No longer con-62Henry IIsidered a sacrament, as it had been in the early Middle Ages, thesacre still was seen as a unique and necessary opportunity for thenew king to receive heavenly sanction and divine grace to rule hispeople as le roi tres-chretien.On July 25 Henry made his formal entry into Reims, the firstof many such entries into French cities that marked the early yearsof his reign. As in all such entries, the city government and guildsput on a fine show to impress the new king, but Reims’s was alwaysovershadowed by the coronation itself. The ceremony began early thenext morning when the tenants of the four most ancient baronies,including Montmorency, who had to be represented by his oldest sonsince his office required him to be elsewhere, went to the abbey-church of Saint-Remy to command the abbot to take the ampullaof sacred oil to the cathedral. The four nobles remained there ashostages for the return of the ampulla.59Meanwhile, at the archbishop’s palace, the two bishop-peers ofLangres and Beauvais attended the king at his lever and then es¬corted him to the cathedral, with the constable leading the proces¬sion, carrying the naked sword of the king. Charles de Guise, asarchbishop of Reims, presided over the ceremony, and each of theother five ecclesiastical peers and the six lay peers had his own spe¬cial role in it.60 For example, the peer of Burgundy fixed the goldenspurs on the heels of the king. The bishop-peers of Beauvais andLangres demanded of the assembly in the cathedral whether it ac¬cepted Henri de Valois as king. When the congregation, speaking forthe entire people of France, shouted its assent, Henry, dressed in along robe of silver cloth, took the royal oath. It began with a pledgeto conserve the Catholic church in peace and to aid it at all times; itthen moved on to pledge the king to preserve Christendom in peaceand protect his people against attack and injustice, and to be just andmerciful in his decisions. Finally, the royal oath required the king todrive from his lands all heretics denounced by the church.61After the oath had been sworn, the anointing with the holy oiltook place, using a minute quantity of the solidified oil from theampulla of Saint-Remy mixed with the chrism used in anointing abishop. Then, invested with all of the coronation robes, newly madefor Henry, the most important being the blue tunic, Henry receivedfrom the archbishop of Reims the royal sword, the diamond ring thatsymbolized his espousal to his kingdom,62 the scepter, and the handof justice. Aided by the other eleven peers, the archbishop held theVive Le Roi Henri63heavy crown of Charlemagne over the king’s head while they saidthe prayer Accipe coronam. Having placed it on Henry’s head, thearchbishop shouted: “Vivat Rex in aetemam!” and the cry was takenup by all in the cathedral and those outside as well. The ceremonythen proceeded to a solemn high Mass in which the king received theEucharist in both forms, demonstrating the quasi-sacerdotal qualityof the king in the eyes of the church. Afterward, a great sum ofmoney was distributed to the crowds outside, including newly mintedcoins bearing Henry’s image, apparently the first time that such royallargess was shown at a coronation.63During the ceremony, the Venetian ambassador reported, Henrywas seen praying long and devoutly. When Diane de Poitiers askedhim afterward the reason for his prayer, he replied that he had beenpraying that “God would be pleased to leave the crown to him for along time if it promised good government and assured the happinessof his people; but if otherwise, that He would deprive him of it veryquickly.”64 For the next twelve years less two weeks, Henry was thepersonification of the power and authority of the kingdom of France.Whether that length of time represented God’s favor or displeasurewith Henry’s rule is up to the reader.5 THE FIRST YEARAfter his coronation Henry and his court went to Fontaine¬bleau, where they remained until April 1548. The nearlyeight months that the court was at Fontainebleau wasthe longest span of time that it was in one place dur¬ing Henry’s entire reign, although the king himself was absent onnumerous occasions, largely for hunting trips to royal chateaux andat Montmorency’s. The sixteenth-century French monarch was ex¬traordinarily peripatetic, and Henry was no exception, finding it verydifficult to stay in one place for any length of time.French royalty’s great fondness for hunting was one reason forthe court’s frequent moves and the usual choice of the chateauxas places of residence. The chateaux were mostly located in broadforests, but the massive hunting parties, often involving hundreds ofmen, quickly depleted the easily accessible game of any locale andrequired movement on to another chateau. Like his father, Henrytook a passionate interest in hunting and riding. He spent at leasttwo afternoons a week hunting virtually every week of the year, evenwhen in residence in Paris, and when at a chateau he often huntedevery day except Sunday. The English ambassador noted on severaloccasions that he was unable to have an audience with Henry be¬cause the king was off hunting. On one occasion Henry passed up anopportunity to inspect the gift of six great horses that Edward VI hadsent him because the hunting party was about to depart. In 1557 heput off receiving a declaration of war from Mary Tudor for two daysbecause he was hunting.1Henry preferred hunting stags with dogs to birding with falconsand had two packs of dogs—black ones that he inherited from Fran¬cis and white ones that he had selected himself. In 1555 his dogsThe First Year65and their handlers cost the crown 3,600 livres. The two chief hunts¬men, the grand veneur, Francois de Guise, and the grand fauconnier,Charles de Brissac, were among the great officers of the realm andreceived salaries of 3,900 livres for their offices. Catherine de Mediciwas also fond of the chase and, at the beginning of Henry’s reign, thehunt was virtually the only opportunity she had to talk with her hus¬band away from Diane de Poitiers, who did not like to hunt, despiteher image as Diane la Chasseresse. Henry also had a small zoo ofAfrican animals that he had received at the beginning of his reign.2The king’s preference for his chateaux as his usual places of resi¬dence was also a consequence of the general suspicion of cities foundamong most French nobles. They disliked the confined spaces of acity and the presence of so many commoners. Furthermore, beingin a city meant that the kings had to deal directly with the munici¬pal commune, whose more popular nature they distrusted. Conse¬quently, Henry spent little time in French cities, not even Paris. How¬ever, the English ambassador reported that in March 1548 Henry andseveral courtiers had slipped into Paris incognito to visit his friendsand to partake in the amusements of the city in secret.3The need to visit Paris secretly reflected the fact that the kinghad not yet made his formal entry into the city, in part because thecity government needed time to prepare for the elaborate and highlyexpensive ceremony. Henry, nonetheless, insisted on the full sum of300,000 livres that the bourgeois of Paris owed for the confirmationof their offices and privileges. The imperial ambassador proposedthat Henry treated Paris, and Orleans as well, in this fashion to keepthe cities from having the funds to build up their fortifications andcause future trouble.4When the king secretly visited Paris or went on a brief huntingtrip, he left the court behind. In the sixteenth century the courtwas essentially the maison du roi. It was regarded as being separatefrom the king in that the two could be in different places. The courtincluded the adult members of the king’s family, the principal officersof the realm, the foreign ambassadors, the French cardinals if theywere not in Rome, and an enormous supporting entourage.In 1556 the maison du roi numbered 807 persons with clearlydefined salaries; the total was 292,258 livres, up from 214,918 in1535 f°r 622 people.5 There were sixty-six different categories ofmembers of the household. The greatest prestige and salary were at¬tached to the hundred gentilshommes de la chambre, at 1,200 livres66Henry IIa year. Since they had ready access to the king, their roll includedsome of the highest-ranking nobles. Claude Gouffier de Boisy wastheir captain. Another category of high-ranking officials was thatof the maitres d’hotel, who oversaw the smooth functioning of thehousehold. The grand master, an office held by Montmorency underHenry, was a major official of the realm and had an important role inboth diplomacy and royal ceremonies. Other categories included thealmoners and chaplains of the court, singers and instrument players,physicians, surgeons, apothecaries and barbers, librarians, paintersand tapestrymakers, and a vast army of clerks, ushers, aides andporters. Even a position such as the premier panetier (breadcarrier)was occupied by a member of the well-placed Brissac family at 600livres a year.Associated with the royal household but kept as separate depart¬ments were the argenterie, which purchased furnishings, plate, andclothing for the court, the ecurie, which was in charge of the royalstables and furnished messengers and couriers for the king, and theabove-mentioned two divisions of royal huntsmen. In addition to theenormous salary outlay for all of these people, there were the vastsums needed for food, supplies, and furnishings for the royal house¬hold. Separate household accounts were maintained for the queen,at 200,000 livres, Henry’s sister Marguerite, 50,000, and the king’ssons, 200,000. These households were organized very similarly to theking’s. Furthermore, there were the 800 royal guards whose salariestotaled 120,000 livres.6Adding to the nearly 2,000 guards, officials, and servants wereseveral thousand merchants and hangers-on. The movement of thecourt was an enormous logistical undertaking that involved the trans¬portation of vast quantities of food and drink, clothing, armor andweapons, musical instruments, and the accoutrements of hunting,including dogs and falcons. In traveling from one place to anotherthe court took almost all of the furniture, bedding, and even thetapestries along, stripping the current place of residence nearly bareof furnishings and servants to take to the next. Despite the difficultyand expense of moving so vast an amount of people and furnishingsacross often rough terrain over the muddy ruts that served as roads,the French court moved frequently, much to the annoyance of theforeign ambassadors, who had to pay their own expenses, for whichtheir salaries were usually insufficient.Wherever he was, Henry always engaged in vigorous physicalThe First Year67exercise, such as tennis, wrestling, and jousting, in addition to ridingand hunting, and in more sedate pastimes like pallmall (croquet)and card games. Brantome, who stated that the king was never idle,described how he enjoyed ice skating at Fontainebleau when the lakefroze over. Nonetheless, Brantome and Monluc both emphasized thathe also worked hard at the business of being king. The former relatedhow he spent two or three hours, or more if affairs demanded it,in the morning on matters of state and a similar amount of time inthe evening. Brantome’s tone suggests that he thought Henry wasunusual in devoting so much time to public business.7While at Fontainebleau in 1547, Henry attended to organizinghis government and distributed gifts to his favorites and the influen¬tial persons of the realm. The carefree life-style of the king and thecourt in the second half of 1547 disguised the fact that military anddiplomatic affairs were never far from the minds of the king and hisadvisers. The dispatches of Saint-Mauris make it clear that Henryfelt his father had left the army and the frontier defenses in a state ofunreadiness. Henry ordered all the captains to join their commandsunder threat of dismissal. With the exception of the governors, hedid not allow captains to hold offices in his household so they wouldhave no excuse for failing to join their commands. They were orderedto strengthen the fortifications in their districts, and several highranking officers were sent to the frontier provinces to inspect theirdefenses.8The French insisted that all of this activity was strictly defensivein purpose. Henry told Saint-Mauris through Montmorency that hehad only goodwill toward the emperor and had no intention of goingto war with him. One reason why Henry was eager to convey thatmessage to Charles V was the situation in Scotland, which was threat¬ening to draw France into war with England. Scottish affairs hadlong been of importance to France because of Scotland’s usefulnessas a check on English ambitions on the continent. With Henry II’saccession, they took on added importance because the child-queenof Scotland, five-year old Mary, was the niece of the Guises. Theirinfluence with Henry ensured that he would take a special interestin Scotland and its queen.Very shortly after Mary’s birth in 1542 the Scottish court hadagreed on a marriage compact between her and Henry VIII’s son, Ed¬ward. When Edward became king in 1547 the English began to insistthat the marriage take place. Neither Henry II nor the Guises were68Henry IIwilling to let it happen. Henry also had not forgotten the humiliationof his defeat by the English at Boulogne in 1544 and was fiercelydetermined to win back the town.9 He certainly was not prepared tosee the English monarchy enhance its position by union with Scot¬land, thereby removing what had been for centuries a most usefuldistraction of English power away from the continent.By July 1547 the situation in Scotland seemed to be disintegrat¬ing. The several recent defeats of the Scots at the hands of the En¬glish and the turmoil caused by the murder of Cardinal Beaton in1546 made it appear obligatory for the French to take a direct rolein Scotland to prevent an English takeover. Therefore, Henry sentfifteen galleys under the command of Leone Strozzi, Catherine deMedici’s cousin, to Scotland to recapture the castle of Saint Andrew,which the assassins of Beaton had held for nearly a year. Amongthose whom Strozzi captured and condemned to serve on French gal¬leys was John Knox. The English response to French interventionin Scotland was to send an army across the Tweed that engaged theScots in September 1547 at Pinkie Cleugh. The devastating defeatinflicted on the Scots placed Marie de Guise and her daughter inreal danger of being captured by the English and taken to London.Saint-Mauris recognized the importance to Henry II of what was hap¬pening in Scotland in his comment that Henry was eager to mix theFrench in Scotland: “He sees clearly that otherwise Scotland will beutterly lost and totally ruined. He has this subject much at heart andwould avoid such a wound at the beginning of his reign.”10The opportunity had clearly come to broach a proposal to Mariede Guise that certainly must have been in the minds of the Frenchleaders, and Marie’s as well, for some time: bring the girl queen ofScotland to France to be reared at the French court and among herGuise relatives. No mention was made of any French marriage forher at this point, but the presence at the French court of the youngDauphin Francis, two years younger, could not have gone unnoticed.In November 1547 the Scottish leaders agreed to permit Mary to betaken to France. In the following January a contract between Henry IIand the regent of Scotland, the Earl of Arran, in the name of theScots nobility, called for the marriage of the queen of Scotland andthe French dauphin, her removal to France, and the garrisoning ofseveral Scottish fortresses by French troops. Arran was to receive aFrench duchv.11In June 1548, after several irritating delays, a French fleet withThe First Year69some 6,000 men aboard sailed for Scotland. Shortly after they landed,augmented by 8,000 Scots, they laid siege to the town of Haddingtonheld by the English. In an abbey near the ruined town the ScottishParliament met and agreed to the marriage compact. Henry 11 wasacknowledged as the protector of the realm of Scotland. Meanwhile,four French galleys sailed around Scotland to Dumbarton, whereQueen Mary was waiting to embark for France. After a week’s delayat Dumbarton because of bad weather and a suspenseful two weeksat sea, during which an English fleet had to be outrun, Mary and hercourt were landed at Roscoff in western Brittany. At Tours she mether grandmother, Antoinette de Guise, and in mid-October she andher party reached Saint-Germain-en-Laye, where she met her futurehusband.12On August 24, 1548, Henry had written that the marriage be¬tween his son and the queen of Scotland was assured, but there wasstrong objection to the Scottish alliance at the French court. Manyimportant persons, in particular Marguerite d’Angouleme, objectedto it on the grounds that it benefited only the Guises, while it exacer¬bated the already bad relations with England. Modem historians havepicked up on Marguerite’s complaint that the king “gives in so muchto the House of Guise which has nowadays acquired so much powerthat it can make the king do anything as this last alliance clearlyproves.”13 Henry, however, had to be so well aware of the enormouspotential benefit of the proposed marriage for France, and especiallyfor his dynasty, that he hardly needed the Guises to persuade himto act. Nonetheless, their family ties with Mary Stuart did provide auseful justification for bringing her to France and keeping her outof English hands. The comments against the Guises do demonstratethe depth of resentment and envy toward the brothers by late 1548.The betrothal of Mary and Francis and their subsequent mar¬riage in 1558 did not bring the long-term advantages that the Frenchexpected; it was, in fact, a significant factor in the events that precipi¬tated the eventual loss of French influence in Scotland. Nonetheless,it is easy to see why Henry’s first foreign initiative was regarded atthe time as a major success. French troops were manning severalScottish forts against the traditional English enemy, and the Scot¬tish queen was in France, pledged to marry the successor to theFrench throne, who would become king of Scotland at the appro¬priate time. Furthennore, there was a distinct possibility that hisson and daughter-in-law or a grandson might rule England, as well.70Henry IIFrench control of England’s northern neighbor seemed set for a longtime to come.The success of Henry’s Scottish policy contrasted with the failureof his first Italian initiative. Henry was as determined to win controlof northern Italy as his father had been, with perhaps greater justi¬fication since his claims to Milan, Parma, and Piacenza were moreimmediate because of the compact of his marriage to Catherine deMedici. At the time of Henry’s accession, the French controlled mostof western Piedmont, including Turin, where the prince of Amalfi,Giovanni Caracciolo, was governor for the French monarch. But themain prize, Milan, was controlled by Charles V’s forces. In Novem¬ber 1547 Saint-Mauris, the imperial ambassador, reported Henry’sprotests of peaceful intentions but added his suspicions that the movewas in preparation for war the next spring since “the king says thatPiedmont belongs to this crown and he speaks only of the defense ofhis realm.”14Henry insisted that he had only peaceful intentions towardCharles V. Seeking to use marriage diplomacy to gain his goals inItaly, he had already arranged a marriage contract for his legitimizeddaughter, Diane de France, then nine years old, with Pope PaulIll’s grandson, Orazio Famese. Famese was to receive Parma andPiacenza in Italy, and Avignon and Comtat-Venaissin, the papalenclaves in France. His older brother, Ottavio, had already marriedCharles’s natural daughter, Margaret, and had hopes bolstered bypromises from Charles of becoming the duke of Parma.The marriage compact further complicated an already enormouslycomplex situation in northern Italy and drew Henry much moredeeply into the quagmire of Italian politics. Paul Ill’s ambitions tocarve out principalities for his two sons and several grandsons clashedwith both French and imperial interests, especially the latter sinceCharles V controlled most of the region in question. In September1547 Pier Luigi Famese, the pope’s son and Orazio’s father, wasassassinated by men whom all assumed were imperial agents. Paul’srage at Charles V, his erstwhile ally, provided an opportunity at thepapal court for French diplomacy of the sort that had not existedsince he had been elected in 1534. Charles de Guise, who had goneto Rome to receive his cardinal’s hat, was instructed to convince thepope to agree to a defensive alliance with France. Paul, who haddeclared that he was ready to die a martyr in order to punish theassassins, was ready to listen to French proposals. He stated to GuiseThe First Year7ithat he hoped to see Henry raised to be one of the most powerfulprinces in the world.15The proposed alliance depended upon the addition of Venice, andthe Venetians were reluctant to involve themselves in a war that theysaw as largely for the personal revenge of an eighty-four-year-oldman. Henry II and the Guises, who were eager for a victory in Italy inorder to be successful where Francis I had failed, were nonethelessreluctant to involve France in a war without a more substantial allythan the papacy. Feelers sent to the Turks about an attack in southernItaly were not encouraging. The French army was not well preparedfor war, since, in the words of Saint-Mauris, “their troops are verybadly equipped.” The ambassador noted that the French king wasfinding it difficult to accumulate the financial resources for a warsince Henry did not have much ready cash. Therefore, he was forcedto be very careful with his gifts and “is as stingy as his father wasliberal.”16Perhaps the most important restraint on war was Montmorencywho argued persuasively against a war fought largely for the advan¬tage of an old pope and of the Guises, who had pretensions to thecrown of Naples through their descendency from the dukes of An¬jou, rulers of Naples in the fourteenth century. The constable’s casewas clinched when word came from Venice that it would not jointhe alliance. Ultimately, the only benefit for Henry that came out ofthe negotiations with Paul III was the issuance of the indults neededto keep the Concordat of Bologna in effect in Provence and Brittany,since they had to be renewed for every new French king. Paul III,who was in principle opposed to the concordat, had delayed issuingthe indults in hope of securing more rights for the papacy in episco¬pal appointments in France.17Henry had intended to lead an army into Italy in the spring of1548; with the decision not to go to war, he decided to journey toItaly anyway in the hope that his presence would settle some of thedisputed points in his favor. In April Henry took leave of the court atFontainebleau and began the journey to Piedmont with many of thegreat nobles of the realm. He left Catherine de Medici at Macon witha governing council of five notables, including Chancellor Olivier andCardinal Jean de Lorraine, to govern the kingdom in his absence.As the king traveled southeastward, he made his formal entriesinto several cities, the first such ceremonies except for the one atReims associated with his coronation. These entry ceremonies were72Henry IIlavish and expensive, with the one at Beaune on July 18 perhapsthe most extravagant. A large mock fort was built that was defendedby some 1,500 locals and attacked by a comparable number. Themock combat was real enough to result in “numerous broken limbsand concussions” but no deaths. The king pronounced himself mostpleased with the entertainment and the decorations in the town,about which “even the greatest nobles raised cries of delight declar¬ing that they had never seen anything so beautiful.”18At Chambery, in western Savoy, one such entry led to an incidentthat presents perfectly the conflicts over position and status that socompletely permeated the French court. Antoine de Bourbon, in hisrank as first prince of the blood, was accustomed to ride or walk aloneimmediately behind the sovereign in any formal procession. He wassurprised to find Francois de Guise at his side during the entry intoChambery. When Bourbon objected. Guise replied that since he wasgovernor of the region, a conquered territory, he had the right to bedirectly behind the king. Bourbon was so angry at this challenge tohis prerogative that he made a move to leave the procession. Henryordered him to return and march with Guise. While those who sawthe incident attributed it to Guise’s being “the slave of honors andglory,” it was also indicative of the Guises’ constant effort to enhancetheir status and Henry’s willingness to humor such efforts.19After crossing the Alps, the royal party reached Turin in August.Montmorency had advised Henry to impress the Italians with hispower and wealth by the magnificence of his entry into Turin andhis suite while there.20 Among the ways Henry sought to impress thepopulation was to assume all the debts owed to the Piedmontese bythe French troops who had died or deserted. He also arranged that allthe soldiers who had been disabled in the previous campaign in Italybe returned to France and given residence for life in various abbeys.It has been suggested that this act was the first recognition on thepart of a European monarch that the state had an obligation to thosewho had suffered in its service.21Among the Italians who came to salute the French king at Turinwas the duke of Ferrara, Ercole d’Este. He had a further purpose: ar¬ranging the details of the marriage of his daughter Anne to Francoisde Guise. Anne d’Este, reputed to be the most beautiful princess inItaly, was the daughter of Renee de France and thus the granddaugh¬ter of Louis XII, which made her a first cousin to Henry II. Anotherin a series of brilliant successes for the Guises, the marriage broughtThe First Year73the family into closer affinity with the royal family and also annoyedthe constable, who had hoped for the princess’s hand for one of hisnephews.The d’Estes were already well represented at the French courtin the person of Ippolito, the cardinal of Ferrara. He was one of thefew persons who was prominent at the courts of both Francis andHenry; he had French benefices worth 80,000 livres. After the deathof Cardinal Trivulzio in 1549, d’Este became the protector of Frenchaffairs at the Curia, which position conveyed revenues of 150,000livres. The d’Estes had their own ambitions in Italy that meshedwell with the Guises’. Accordingly, the cardinal was their ally at theFrench court and in Rome.22 D’Este was Henry’s principal candidatefor the throne of St. Peter in the three papal elections that took placeduring his reign.The French presence in northern Italy was very expensive; inthe month of August 1547 alone, it had cost 36,912 livres to main¬tain the French garrisons in Piedmont. Henry also needed to pro¬vide 80,000 livres in 1547 for work on fortifications in the region.23These expenses were vastly compounded by other fiscal needs andhelped to create enormous pressure on royal revenue-raising. Thus,the festivities and negotiations in Turin came to an abrupt halt inearly September 1548, when news arrived from France that a violentrebellion had broken out in the southwestern provinces against thehuge increase in the tax on salt, the gabelle, recently imposed on thatregion.In 1541 Francis I, always searching for new revenues, had man¬dated a huge increase in the salt tax in the provinces of the south¬west, raising them to the same level as the other provinces, andimposed the tax on salt for export and the fish trade. A revolt in theregion of La Rochelle in 1543 and 1544 persuaded Francis to backdown for the moment. A new edict imposing a system of farming thegabelles at a uniformly high rate across the realm was issued in 1546,but it did not go into effect until Henry confirmed it in 1547.The resentment toward the new tax was compounded by theappearance of the tax farmers, the gabelleurs, who swarmed intothe southwestern provinces “as locusts devouring the substance ofthe people and going away when they had made enormous fortunes.”In early April 1548 the first tremors of revolt were felt in the provinceof Saintonge.24 As was common in peasant revolts, the specific griev¬ances that the peasants had against the tax collectors were broadened74Henry IIto include attacks on the nobility and royal officials. The city ofSaintes fell to the rebels, some 5,000 strong, and by August the revolthad spread into the province of Guyenne and to Bordeaux. The king’sabsence from France delayed an effective response to the crisis.25By the time Henry was fully informed of the situation in earlySeptember, the number of people killed and the damage done by therebels were substantial. Most ominously, Henri d’Albret’s lieutenantin Guyenne, Tristan de Moneins, had been struck down while ne¬gotiating with the rebels, and the first president of the Parlement ofBordeaux had been coerced into declaring for the rebellion.Badly shaken by the news, Henry left Turin immediately forFrance. On September 7 he crossed back into Dauphine and gavecommissions to Montmorency and Francois de Guise, as the consta¬ble’s lieutenant, to crush the revolt.26 Montmorency was to lead anarmy of 1,000 gens d’armes to Guyenne via Languedoc, and Guisean army of 4,000 landsknechts via Tours and the Loire valley. Bythe time the constable reached Toulouse, the leaders of the city ofBordeaux met him to inform him that their city and much of the sur¬rounding region had been pacified. They told him that only a smallnumber of men were needed to complete the pacification. They alsoasked for clemency for their city.In accepting his commission from the king, Montmorency had re¬vealed his intentions of dealing harshly with the rebels, which he didnot tell the representatives of Bordeaux. According to Vieilleville’smemoirs, the constable noted that the region had revolted five yearsbefore, and he proposed that the population be completely removedor exterminated and replaced by a more docile one. To Henry’s credit,he had flatly rejected such extreme vengeance and informed the con¬stable that his troops were not to plunder or slay and all executionsof rebels were to be done through completely legal procedures 27Nonetheless, Montmorency, with Henry’s approval, exacted harshpenalties on the rebellious regions upon his arrival in the southwest.Hundreds of rebels, including 150 in Bordeaux, were executed, manyonly after the most excruciating tortures. The city of Bordeaux lostits charter granting its citizens the rights and privileges of bourgeoisstatus. The charter was burned at the same time as the city hall wasrazed. Bordeaux was fined 200,000 livres and surrendered to thecrown property with revenues of 40,000 livres a year. The city alsohad to give up bells to furnish bronze for cannon. The Parlement ofBordeaux was dissolved and replaced by a council of royal commis-The First Year75sioners. The body of the dead Moneins was exhumed28 and carriedin procession to be reburied in the cathedral. As a city, Bordeaux per¬haps had more to lose for its participation in the revolt, but similardraconian measures were imposed in all of the rebellious provinces.The repressive measures were, however, of rather short duration. TheBordelais had not forgotten the communal liberties that they had en¬joyed under the English a century earlier, and with tensions betweenEngland and France running high, the court feared that the Borde¬lais would call on the English for aid.29 Within six months amnestywas granted, and the fines and repression of civic institutions wererescinded.The harsh measures inflicted on a region that had already largelyreturned to obedience before Montmorency’s arrival reflected badlyon him and on Henry, who gave his approval to the constable’sactions. Historians of the later sixteenth century were particularlyoutspoken in their denunciation of what they saw as unnecessarycruelty on Montmorency’s part, although some contemporaries likeBrantome thought the punishment had not gone far enough.30 Cer¬tainly one must keep in mind the prevailing attitude of the time,which saw rebellion as one of the most heinous of crimes. Further¬more, the region had rebelled earlier and, having been treated veryleniently by Francis I, rebelled again. Henry and Montmorency weredetermined to make Bordeaux an object lesson of the penalties forrebellion, especially since it was early in Henry’s reign and he andthe constable may have felt that they were being tested by the affair.31The salt tax revolt was the only significant popular uprising duringHenry’s reign, but one must attribute that largely to good luck, thebrevity of his reign, and, probably, the lingering reputation for severitycreated in 1548.32 It certainly was not a consequence of Henry’s taxpolicy, which continued to impose heavier taxes on the population.Nonetheless, despite the complaints about the heavy taxes that hiswars inflicted on the people, there was little open opposition to theking during his reign.The nobles were much taken with Henry since he was very muchone of them. In the decades after his death, nobles like Brantomeand Monluc would look back with unabashed nostalgia to the goodtimes under Henry. His wars provided numerous opportunities forthe nobility to exercise its God-given right to fight and win glory; formany nobles the monarchy’s only purpose was to provide wars. I lenrywas also a consummate sportsman, who reveled in the same rough76Henry IIsports like hunting and jousting that the nobles did, and enacted aharsh edict against poaching by non-nobles in 1555. He was regardedas being of champion quality in the more genteel sport of jeu depaume (tennis) that had recently caught the fancy of the well-born.Shortly after he became king, Henry issued an edict that restrictedthe use of silk to the nobles, an act that one presumes greatly pleasedthem since they were always at odds with the wealthy bourgeoisieover such issues as dress and conspicuous consumption. When theVenetian Contarini referred to Henry’s kindness, graciousness, andcourtesy to all, never refusing an audience to anyone, even the mosthumble, he was reflecting the opinion largely of the nobles, who hadthe greatest opportunity to appreciate those virtues. The ordinarysoldier also had cause to appreciate Henry, since he paid promptlyand well and was as solicitous of their well-being as any king of thecentury.Henry also was well liked by much of the the bourgeoisie. The fi¬nanciers appreciated the vast business he gave them and the promptpayment of interest. Many of those involved in making loans to theFrench king were French merchants, who were eager for the greatprofits that lending to the king at high rates of interest promised.Despite the fact that many other merchants were forced to makeloans to the monarchy at low rates of interest through the rentes,Henry’s popularity with the merchant class remained high. The En¬glish ambassador Pickering wrote: “This king continueth wonderfullythe augmenting of his credit with the merchants, which kind of menhe maketh much of.” The various ambassadors frequently noted thatHenry recognized the value of mercantile activity for his treasury.Pickering’s comments about Henry’s efforts to lure foreign merchantsto France are suggestive of mercantilism: “To allure them more andmore into the realm, he giveth them such privileges and exemptionsfrom the ordinary payments, as they come from all parts daily hitherto inhabit. This is reckoned a notable policy to avoid always extremi¬ties that may come by lack of money.”33The heavy burden of lending to the monarchy and taxes for thewars of the king had not yet had a negative impact on the affectionthat the people of Paris had for Henry at the time of the battle ofSaint-Quentin in 1557. Vast sums were needed to rebuild the Frencharmy after that defeat, and the king looked first of all to Paris, where“very great inclination is visible on the part of everyone to contributefor this need, much affection being demonstrated universally for hisThe First Year77Majesty who, by reason of his natural graciousness and from theopinion entertained by all Frenchmen of his valour and prudence, isso generally loved that they will not deny him anything.”34As for the common peasants or day laborers, they had little con¬tact with the king, although he is noted as being very courteousto them when they did; and they left no record of their opinion oftheir monarch, although Claude Haton, the parish priest from Cham¬pagne, asserted that they loved him.35 On occasion Henry showedthat he had concern for their interests. While returning from Italy in1548, he attended a meeting of the Estates of Dauphine at Grenobleand resolved a bitter dispute over the removal from the tax rolls oftaxable properties by wealthy bourgeoisie in favor of the less affluentvillagers.36 Henry also touched the lives of some of the common peo¬ple in a more direct way than by taxes and general edicts. In 1549he eliminated the last vestiges of serfdom on the royal lands in theBourbonnais and in 1554 he did the same in Burgundy: “It is ourwill and desire that all men and women bom and dwelling in theselands . . . with their heirs and issue shall be free and unconstrainedas regards both their persons and property, and they shall remainhereafter in a condition of complete and total liberty.”37 In the sameyear, while campaigning in Artois, Henry stood as godfather for thenewborn child of the peasant woman in whose hovel the royal partyhad taken shelter. Charles de Guise baptized the boy, named Henri,and the king gave the woman ten silver coins.38It was by such acts of charity that the king usually came intocontact with the lower classes, most frequently when he touched forscrofula. His first official act after his coronation was to touch forthe king’s illness, and the ambassadors’ reports note several timesthat he did so. Claude Haton provided a description of Henry touch¬ing for scrofula at Fontainebleau on the feast of John the Baptistin 1556, at which Haton was present. After touching the sick per¬sons, the king gave the group an admonition to be good and faith¬ful Catholics and devoted servants of God, Mary, and their localseigneur. Henry’s almoner, Louis de Breze, bishop of Meaux (Dianede Poitiers’s nephew), gave each person touched a small coin andasked that they pray for the king.39There is no question that Henry had a strong sense of the dutyof the king to see to the welfare of his people, but his sense of whatwas best for his subjects was almost entirely molded by the nobilityaround him. He had little understanding of and sympathy for the life78Henry IIof the common folk. He expected that their response to him would beone of gratitude and obedience.40 Thus, when commoners revolted,as they did in the southwest in 1548, his sense of betrayal led himto approve of the draconian acts of Montmorency, whose very similarbut even more strongly felt attitudes certainly helped to form Henry’s.6 SILVER IS THE SINEW OF WARHenry II was confronted with only one violent tax protestduring his reign, despite an ever-increasing tax burdenon the French people and a royal fiscal system that wasjerry-built, inefficient, and decidedly unfair. His good for¬tune was in large part a consequence of the fact that he ruled arealm whose economy seems to have been quite robust until the lastyear or two of his reign. The vast increase in specie in circulationduring the previous two decades was stimulating the economy with¬out as yet creating high inflation. In the first half of the reign, theprice of wine, meat, herring, wood, and coal all remained steady, butmanufactured goods were more inflationary, probably reflecting theincrease in wages that had occurred in the previous decade. Wageswere almost completely stagnant in Henry’s reign, and by the endof it, the consequence was the impoverishment of the rural and ur¬ban day laborers. Under Henry, however, the pause in inflation inbasic commodities, coupled with increases in prices of manufacturedgoods, resulted in large profits for merchants and some artisans. Butby 1559 both nature and economic trends had conspired to hit theFrench people with a deadly combination of bad harvests, spiralinginflation, and a decline in productivity and profits.1Henry’s policy of confronting the emperor in every possible arenaand in every possible way, and his insistence on maintaining thetype of court, cultural patronage, and building projects that he feltwere necessary for a king of a great realm like France, put tremen¬dous pressure on the system of revenues. Thus Henry, like all thesixteenth-century French monarchs, was always in desperate needof new revenues since expenditures outstripped income. In seek¬ing to remedy the problem, the kings constantly made changes in8oHenry IIthe fiscal system and taxation, and the system for collecting revenueand making expenditures that Henry inherited in 1547 had alreadyundergone vast changes in Francis’s reign.2 Francis had created anew office, the tresorier de I’Epargne, to receive the royal revenuesthat exceeded the expenses of the local royal bureaucracy. Localroyal receveurs always paid local officials from the gross revenuesbefore forwarding the surplus on to the Epargne. The royal treasurygathered together the net revenues from the king’s “ordinary” in¬come, such as rents and feudal dues from royal lands, and his “ex¬traordinary” income, which came from tolls and taxes. The latter,however, had become as ordinary and as sure as death. The Epargnewas responsible for paying all expenses of the central governmentand the court except those that went unchanged from one year tothe next. The Epargne now paid the decharges, warrants issued bythe king for payments of pensions, royal gifts, or emergency expen¬ditures. The establishment of the treasurer of the Epargne did noteliminate the previous high-level financial officers, the gens de fi¬nances, but it reduced their power and status.The creation of the treasurer of the Epargne did little, however,to change the system of financial courts that had emerged in thelate Middle Ages. Broad fiscal policy was decided by the two royalcouncils, but the fiscal courts also had a voice in policymaking aswell as in judging fiscal disputes. The two principal fiscal courts, theChambre des comptes and the Cour des aides, were sovereign courts,which gave them the power to serve as the court of last appeal infinancial matters, although the royal councils often heard furtherappeals in important cases, and to register or refuse to accept royaledicts affecting royal finances. If a fiscal court refused to register aroyal edict, the king could order it to do so with a lettre de jussion.The major area of jurisdiction of the Chambre des comptes wasover the disputes that arose between the government and tax officials,while the Cour des aides was concerned with disputes between taxofficials and taxpayers over the various royal taxes. They also servedas an archive for the tax-collecting system since all account bookshad to be forwarded eventually to them. Since ennoblements meanta loss of tax revenue for the crown, the Chambre des comptes also hadcompetence over patents of nobility and disputes over noble status.3Henry II sought to give sovereign status to a third court, the Courdes monnaies, in an edict of 1552. This court, which controlled thecoinage in the realm and was therefore charged with finding outSilver Is the Sinew of War81and prosecuting counterfeiters, was not accepted by the other courtsas sovereign, despite the royal edict. All three financial courts hadcounterparts, or branches, in the view of the Parisian members, inthe major provinces, several of which were created in Henry’s reign.The reforms of Francis I’s reign and the enhanced status andeffectiveness of the fiscal courts were not very successful in elimi¬nating the corruption that pervaded the royal fiscal system, nor didthey greatly increase the flow of revenues into the king’s war chest.They did, however, give him far greater control over expendituresand better information about the amount of money available for war.The actual money chests of the Epargne were fixed in the Louvre in1532 after the system of moving them with the court in its travelshad become too unwieldy. Each chest had four keys; the king and thechancellor were among the four officials who held a key.The expenses of the wars with Charles V usually kept the sumsin the treasury well below the 500,000 ecus that Francis had consid¬ered the minimum reserve. A further reform was necessary to bringroyal revenues up to the appropriate level. In the Edict of Cognac of1542 Francis divided the four existing generalites des finances intoseventeen, each with a receveur general responsible for collectingroyal revenues and payment of local expenditures. In regard to thelatter the receveur now had much broader authority to expend money,especially for military matters, so that far fewer payments had tocome from Paris. The result was an obvious increase in efficiency,since there was far less movement of cash to and from Paris, and theattendant delays were reduced.4 At the beginning of Henry’s reignthere had emerged essentially seventeen regional treasurers who hadcompetence over most of the royal financial transactions. Only pay¬ments connected with the court and major extraordinary expendi¬tures came out of the Epargne, although the tresorier de I’Epargnedid have the authority, frequently used, to order payments from theregional generalites.Having left his successor a somewhat more rational system ofrevenue collection and expenditure, Francis also left him both sub¬stantially increased revenues and expenses. Total revenues from theroyal lands, tolls, and taxes increased from 5 million livres in 1515to over 9 million by 1546, an increase of 2.6 percent per annum at atime when inflation was slightly lower. The key taxes were the tallies,the aides, and the gabelles. The first was a tax on nonseigneurialland and wealth—land that did not confer a noble title on its holder.82Henry IIThe taille applied to urban property owners as well as rural, but agood many cities were entirely exempt from the tax by royal patent.The total sum of the tailles expected to be collected each year wasdetermined by the royal council. The appropriate sums to be leviedon each province were then determined, and on down to the localparish. These sums were fixed for the year; if a piece of propertyhad escaped from the taille, every other taillable parcel in the parishhad its levy increased. Thus, the question of whether a recently soldproperty could be removed from the rolls of the taille was a sourceof never-ending litigation, often carried to the Corn des aides in Parisand occasionally to the royal council. In 1547 the taille contributed4,889,000 livres to the crown, or nearly 80 percent of the total reve¬nue raised from the three major taxes.5 Since the major cities wereexempt from the taille, they were asked to contribute a subsidy knownas the soldes des 50,000 hommes de pied to help finance the army.6Second in value among the major taxes were the aides, a saletax placed on almost every commodity usually sold in large amounts,ranging from grain to wine to stones for building. In 1547 it wasassessed at 700,000 livres. The tax was usually one sol per livreof retail price (5 percent); but some items were taxed at wholesale,and wine was taxed at both. Items sold at less than five sous wereexempted from the aides, which freed the ordinary transactions of asmall village from the tax and also freed the government from theexpenses that the huge bureaucracy needed to collect the small sumswould have cost. The government rarely collected the aides directly;it farmed them out to tax farmers, who paid the government a sumset by auction for the right to extract that sum and more from thepeople. Nobles and clerics were forbidden to farm the aides, andthe government preferred established businessmen who knew wellboth the businesses and the businessmen generating the tax. Royalgifts of the right to collect a specific aide in a region or the entirerealm were quite commonly given to favorites and pensioners, as wellas to cities to maintain their fortifications. By the time of Henry’sreign the late medieval prejudice against farming the aides for severalprovinces or several different aides together was disappearing. By1559 such grosses fermes were numerous and could last for severalyears. The system of collecting the aides obviously was open to vastcorruption and conflict, but contemporaries still regarded them asthe most equitable tax because all members of society paid them,despite numerous exemptions to specific aides for nobles and clerics.Silver Is the Sinew of War83Because of the nature of the aides as a sales tax, which made itdifficult to establish beforehand a set amount to be collected fromeach province, the farming of the aides at a vast number of auctions,and the alienation of numerous aides, it is most difficult to determinethe total of the aides that the crown collected in any given year. In1558 Soranzo placed the sum at only 600,000 livres.7The third major impdt was the tariff on salt, the gabelles. Salt,as a necessary but none too plentiful commodity, lent itself well toroyal revenue-raising. Salt sold in central and northern France, theprovinces of the grand gabelles, was purchased only from royal ware¬houses (greniers), where its price had been augmented by 75 percentor more by the tax. Each family was required to buy a set amount con¬sidered appropriate for a household’s use in a year; for many house¬holds the required amount was far more than was needed. In thesouthwest, the Midi, and Burgundy, the tax was considerably lower,at 20 to 25 percent of the sales price. In Brittany, the gabelle wasnot imposed at all, and the enormous difference in price with theprovinces to the east encouraged wholesale smuggling. The gabelleshad increased in the sixteenth century from 483,000 livres in 1523 to720,000 in 1547, and one million by 1557, but the proportion of totaltax revenues the gabelles represented declined from over 10 percentto 8 percent.8The total of taxes and tolls for 1547 was 8.4 million livres, anincrease of 22 percent since 1523.9 To that substantial income thecrown added another 1 million livres from the royal domain. Thesums raised in these ways came nowhere close to providing themoney needed for the monarchy. The kings had to turn to a source offunds increasingly tapped by the French monarchy in the sixteenthcentury—the Catholic church. The monarch had been collecting theclerical tenth (decime) under the guise of a gift—which the clergyalways insisted it was—since 1516. By 1542 the tenth had become anannual contribution, and after that year four decimes (about 1.4 mil¬lion livres) were regularly collected. The only exceptions in Henry’sreign were 1550, when two were levied, and 1557, when he de¬manded eight. The decime in fact did not come close to being a tenthof clerical income. Thus the four decimes that became standard after1542 was likely closer to such a percentage for most of the higherclergy. The clerical tenth had become a regular element of royal in¬come and could not be counted on to make up the shortfall caused bythe war. Even the exemption from the clerical tenth granted in 154984Henry IIto the theologians of the Sorbonne was revoked in 1551. In 1552,Henry called a meeting of five cardinals and thirty bishops to raisefunds for war. They agreed to a new levy of 1.4 million livres, to beraised through a tax of twenty livres on each church steeple. Thesum implied that France contained the staggering number of 70,000steeples.10Another way in which the church was milked for money involveda delay in sending the nominations to bishoprics and abbeys to Rome.While these major benefices were vacant, the king collected theirrevenues. Various other schemes to raise money from the clergy,reported by the various foreign ambassadors, involved the sale ofchurch lands or requiring each parish to support a soldier by sellinga chalice. The more elaborate schemes did not materialize; it is notclear whether some of the more modest were implemented.11Despite the substantial income of nearly 11 million livres, theking’s expenses nearly always outstripped his revenues, in 1547 by3,131,000 livres. To make up the deficit, the crown turned to newtaxes and borrowing vast sums. In 1549 Henry created a new tax, thetaillon, which was announced to the public as a means of supportingFrench troops so they would not have to pillage French villages andtowns. As initially levied, it collected 720,000 livres for the crown,but it was hardly of real significance in terms of the needs of war.12Far vaster sums were made available through borrowing. One sys¬tem of making loans was the rente. Usually defined simply as anannuity, a rente was an arrangement by which the lender (rentier)bought the income from a source of revenue, whether a piece of prop¬erty, a toll, or a tax, for a period of years in exchange for a large sumof money, the principal. The annual income served as interest for theprincipal, which was to be repaid in a lump sum at the end of thecontract. The contract was often renewed or extended indefinitely.The arrangement was necessary to avoid the church’s prohibitionon interest-taking, since the rentes were not regarded as involvinginterest.The rentes predated Francis I, but in 1522 that king raised thefirst such loans from the city government of Paris. Such loans becameknown as the rentes sur I’Hotel de ville, because the city governmenttook responsibility for raising the loans and paying the interest. Cer¬tain taxes and tolls that were considered dependable, such as thoseon meat and wine, which city hall was already collecting for the king,were designated to pay the interest. Francis used the rentes sparinglySilver Is the Sinew of War85so that rentes outstanding at the end of his reign totaled 725,000livres.13 Henry found the practice a seemingly painless way of raisingmoney and created a great many more rentes, increasing the fundsavailable by an average of 500,000 livres a year.The rentes, however, did not fill the king’s need for more money;he was forced to resort to outright borrowing, primarily from thebankers of Lyon, both French and Italian. By 1542 Francis I wasborrowing regularly at the four Lyon fairs, paying 16 percent interest.It is clear that Francis borrowed more than he spent in his last years,leaving some 500,000 ecus in his war chests in the Louvre and asubstantial sum in the Epargne. Presumably he was preparing forthe next war, although there has been the suggestion that he wasseeking to ruin his enemies by creating a capital shortage in the restof Europe.14The sum of 500,000 ecus that Francis left to Henry in the Lou¬vre has been used by historians hostile to Henry to argue that hisfather left him a full treasury, which he quickly bankrupted throughwar and his spendthrift ways.15 But Saint-Mauris made it clear thatsuch was not the case. Writing in April 1547, he reported that “therewas less money in the Louvre than had been reported—500,000 or600,000 ecus at most. Money is still owed to the Lyon merchants,and it is considered important to pay them their interest. ... In shortthe finances are not so brilliant as they boast.”16Henry quickly went through that money and was soon seekinghuge loans at Lyon, primarily from the Italian banking communitythere. Albisse del Bene, a Florentine exile, served as Henry’s liaisonwith the Lyonnais bankers. He raised 1,177,165 livres in 1552, and1,691,168 in 1553, just for use in Italy alone.17The usual rate of interest was 4 percent from one of the fourbanking fairs of Lyon to the next, a rate of 16 percent a year.18 Not allof Henry’s loans had that high a rate of interest. He had an excellentreputation for paying interest on time and for repaying the principalwhen the lender requested it.19 For those reasons, loans to the Frenchcourt were very attractive, and the banks of Lyon attracted moneyfrom Germany and Flanders, as well as Italy. As a result, the interestrates often dropped to 12 percent and even lower—as it did in 1550,when there was little demand for money—down to 5 percent. By thetime of the Easter fair of 1553 interest had mounted to 16 percentbecause of the demands of the war. Henry had loans outstandingof 3,658,400 livres. German financiers had contributed nearly half86Henry IIof that sum, despite the war against the emperor.20 Despite such alarge debt, Henry had no problem in raising another 120,000 scudi(300,000 livres) at the Easter fair.21 By October 1553 the Lyon fairhad attracted so much money that Henry was able to get a loan of400,000 livres at 14 percent interest.Henry continued to borrow huge sums at the Lyon financial fairs,even when his immediate needs do not appear to have been so ur¬gent. Part of his purpose was apparently to build up his war chests,as the various ambassadors noted a number of times. But Henryappears to have had another motive as well—drying up the creditavailable to the emperor. The regent of the Lowlands, Mary of Hun¬gary, wrote to her brother Charles in 1552 to report that she had pro¬hibited the Lyonnais bankers from receiving credit on the Antwerpexchange because of her fear of that possibility.22 Thirty years laterJean Bodin ascribed such a motive to Henry but criticized him for it,because, he argued, the rate of interest required for the effort even¬tually bankrupted the crown.23In 1555 Henry reorganized his debts and borrowing in a fashionthat for a time was most pleasing to the bankers. In March 1555he consolidated all of his previous loans from the Lyonnais bankers,some 1,521,000 ecus, and raised a new loan equal to a third of thatby means of what became known as the Grand Parti.24 Any loan to aprince was known in Italian as a partito, or parti in French; sincethis one was open to all, it was the Grand Parti. Henry pledged to theGrand Parti the most secure revenues of the generalities of Toulouse,Lyon, and Montpellier. This pledge made it attractive to a great num¬ber of foreign bankers, Italian, German, Flemish, Portuguese, andeven Islamic, at a time when the emperor was finding it difficult topay his interest. The scheme seems designed to siphon capital awayfrom the principal Habsburg money centers—Antwerp and Genoa—as well as to provide funds for war. A receveur was appointed tohandle the funds and payments for the king.What made the Grand Parti especially attractive to lenders was itssystem of payment of interest and principal. At the time of each fairof Lyon (four a year) the king would repay a sum equal to 5 percentof the original loan. The first payment consisted of 4 percent for theinterest (16 percent per year) and 1 percent to repay the principal. Butsince the interest was on only the unpaid principal, a larger part ofthe 5 percent payment at every fair went to amortizing the principal.The loan was to be repaid in full in forty-one fairs (ten years and fourSilver Is the Sinew of War8?months). The Venetian ambassador Soranzo reported in 1557 exactlyhow the system was to work:The King has contracted a loan bearing interest at the rate of 16per cent, of which the fourth part is to be paid at each fair, theKing disbursing simultaneously at each fair one per cent of thecapital, which being diminished at each fair yet will the disburse¬ment not be diminished, although at each succeeding fair theamount due for interest will be lessened; but the surplus in theKing’s hands through the debasement of the interest will be addedto the repayment of the capital; so that in 41 fairs, which will havebeen held in 10 years and one quarter, the payment of the capitaland the interest will be completed; and in the said term of tenyears and one quarter his Majesty, to those who now disburse 100crowns capital, will have paid only 204 crowns, including capitaland interest, thus saving 60 per cent on what he would have hadto disburse had he during the said period paid interest at the rateof 16 per cent, and on its expiration chosen to repay the capital.25It was the first time that any monarch in Europe had set up a definiteschedule of amortizing a loan. In order to avoid being charged withbreaking the church’s laws against usury, the interest was describedin the contract as a don gratuit.26Substantial loans continued to be made in the same way. In 1557,the Venetian ambassador Soranzo reported 1.5 million ecus raisedfrom the bankers of Lyon and the prospect of a similar sum frommostly German financiers.27 By the end of that year the king hadborrowed some 9,658,000 ecus but was forced momentarily to haltpayment on it at the November fair. The brief interruption in amortiz¬ing the loans did little to reduce confidence in the French monarchybefore Henry’s death, as he continued to obtain substantial loans onessentially the same terms.28But the demands of the war efforts required money beyond thatavailable from taxation and loans. One document placed militaryexpenses in 1553 at 13,193,260 livres.29 That total did not includethe money needed for building or repairing fortifications and for thepolitical side of the conflict. For the latter purpose Henry distributed234,960 livres in Italy alone.30Any monarch with financial troubles usually resorted to tinkeringwith the currency, and Henry II was no exception. In 1550 he re¬duced the gold content of the ecu and renamed it the henri, as which88Henry IIit was officially known until 1561. Shortly after its appearance, theregent of the Lowlands ordered the imperial ambassador in Franceto complain that the new coin did not contain the amount of goldestablished for its exchange rate—as established by its value in themoney of account, the livre.31 The official ratio between the ecu andthe livre had already been adjusted, although apparently not enoughto reflect the reduced gold content. The gold ecu had been peggedat two livres five sols (twenty sols to the livre) in 1533; in 1550 itwas changed to 2 livres 10 sols. The change in the exchange rate re¬flected at least two factors. One was that it made the gold reserves ofthe crown more valuable, since the royal accounts were calculated inlivres, the money of account, but paid in ecus or other real coins. Thesecond factor was the increase in the ratio of silver to gold in circu¬lation, in large part a result of Spanish exploitation of the Americas.The livre was based on the value of silver, and the change reflectedthe inflation of the era and the monarchy’s attempt to adjust to it.Many of the dizains and other small coins of the realm, thosemade of billon (copper), had already been badly debased by 1550. InJanuary 1550 Henry issued an edict that prohibited the circulation ofthe most common of these debased coins and ordered that they be ex¬changed for new coins, but at a rate profitable for the monarchy. Theedict created serious problems at the level of the petty retail transac¬tions in the cities and villages, since many people had not exchangedtheir coins. Merchants refused to accept all old coins, whether theywere the proscribed type or not. This real crisis for the ordinaryFrenchman was alleviated only by time after the new coins began tocirculate in large enough numbers. The episode demonstrates howa rather insignificant decision by the monarch could have a seriouseconomic impact on the common people.32Still another source of revenue for the monarchy was the royalbureaucracy. The French kings had long been using venality, the pay¬ment of money for a royal office, as a source of income33 Francis Ihad made a substantial number of offices venal; Henry II greatly ac¬celerated the trend. In 1552 he introduced the semester system tothe fiscal courts in order to augment the number of offices availablefor sale. Each office had two incumbents who exercised its functionsfor six-month terms. Far more significant was the extension of thesemester system to the parlement, which gave the king hundredsof offices to sell at a very good price. In January 1554 the EnglishSilver Is the Sinew of War89ambassador reported that new offices in the Parlement of Paris werebeing sold for 4,000 ecus apiece.34 The magistrates objected to thesemester system because the change reduced the prestige and in¬come of their offices.Until the dispute over the presence of Protestants in the Par¬lement of Paris erupted in late May 1559, the semester system wasthe biggest point of contention between Henry and the judges. Itproved to be highly inefficient since many cases had to be heardtwice. In 1558 Henry ordered a return to the old system but withouteliminating the new officers. The semester system was maintainedin the fiscal courts.Financial exigencies also played a major role in the major changein the judicial system made during Henry’s reign. The French judi¬cial system of mid-century provided for an almost unlimited right ofappeal for even the most petty cases to the parlements, and even tothe king. Cases often lasted seemingly forever; and minor litigationchoked the parlements. Henry, likely responding to complaints fromthe parlementaires, issued an edict in 1551 that created the siegepresidial as an intermediate court to serve as the court of final ap¬peal for civil and criminal cases with a value of less than 250 livres.The new courts were erected on top of the some sixty local baillisand senechaussees. (The latter term was used in the Midi.) Eightvenal offices were created for each new court. The civil lieutenantand the seven magistrates for the new presidial court came from thelower court and continued to serve in it, as well. The districts for thepresidial courts consisted of several baillis.35In 1557 Henry created a chancery and the office of president forthe presidial courts. At the same time, a new upper limit of 1,000livres was imposed, but it failed to take hold. In general, the systemof the siege presidial worked well, effectively reducing the case loadof the parlements and rendering justice more quickly and cheaply forthe small cases. However, constant tinkering by both Henry and hissuccessors, designed largely to increase the number of venal offices,did reduce the potential effectiveness of the new courts.While the new courts made an improvement in the judicial sys¬tem, Henry also saw the sale of these new offices as a source ofrevenue for the crown. Venality was a factor of some weight in everychange in administrative structure that Henry made, such as theerection of a new parlement at Rennes in 1552, and the institution90Henry IIof the semester system in the parlements. First President of the Par-lement of Paris Pierre Sequier reproached Henry in December 1558for the open sale of offices.At the meeting of the Estates of 1560 the annual payroll of thenew offices created by Henry was calculated at 1,200,000 livres,which was a third of the total sum gained for the treasury throughvenality and therefore amounted to an interest rate of 33.3 percent.36In one respect, however, Henry appears to have refused to allow hisquest for revenue to compromise his principles. The sale of patents ofnobility seems to have declined during his reign and may well havebeen at the lowest level of the century. Only ninety-four such patentswere issued, usually at a hefty price.37 This fact is illustrative of thegreat respect Henry had for the nobility of the sword, and his senseof the proper structure of society left little room for social mobility,even at a loss of revenue for the monarchy.A proper sense of the structure of society in that era also calledfor the extensive giving of alms to the unfortunate; it was as mucha cost of government as was the military. Henry cannot be regardedas especially generous in that regard. Royal charity was largely theconcern of the royal almoners, who served as chaplains of the courtas well. The grand aumonier was a major figure at court. He was,in a way, the bishop of the court, although in Henry’s reign he wasalways a bishop of his own see, as were many of the other almoners.The great almoner escorted the king from his chamber to Mass everymorning and alone administered him the Eucharist. He supervisedthe royal chapel and the clergy attached to it. He also filled all eccle¬siastical benefices at the disposal of the king except bishoprics andabbeys. Pierre Du Chastel, bishop of Macon, was grand aumonier formost of Henry’s reign; he was followed by Louis de Breze, Diane dePoitiers’s nephew.38By title, at least, the great almoner’s first concern was the super¬vision of royal charity. He had ultimate authority over hospitals andleprosariums of the realm and the distribution of royal alms. If thesporadic accounts still extant of Henry’s almsgiving can give a rea¬sonably accurate picture, the sums given as alms varied greatly fromyear to year and even month to month. In September 1551 Chastelsigned receipts totaling 1,323 livres. The next month the total wasonly 495. These sums, however, included a number of donations topriests for Masses at thirty-five sous apiece; the money did not allgo to the poor. The year 1551 seems to have seen Henry at aboutSilver Is the Sinew of War9ihis most generous, with an average sum for alms of 950 livres amonth. In 1548 his almoners distributed an average of 700 livres,and for 1557, 620.39 The salaries of the almoners came close tomatching those amounts as the great almoner had an annual gage of1,200 livres, the first almoner, who was also the royal confessor, 600,and the fifteen aum&niers ordinaires, 180.40 Most of the sums givenas alms were distributed in and around Paris and the major royalchateaux.41The total royal almsgiving, as suggested by the extant documents,appears to have been only an infinitesimal part of the monarchy’s bud¬get. Most of the royal income went to pursue Henry’s foreign policy bydiplomatic and military means, but the costs of the royal court, build¬ing projects, and patronage also required vast sums. Henry never wasmiserly when he felt that the prestige and grandeur of the monar¬chy were on display, but it was largely in the first four years of hisreign that he had both the time and the funds to devote to his build¬ing projects and grand pageants. After 1551 war occupied most ofHenry’s attention and funds.7 LIFE AT COURTFor the most expensive pageantry of the French monarchy,the royal entry into a major city, the kings drew on the fi¬nancial support of the urban commune. The greatest suchpageants were the entries into the three largest cities—Paris,Lyon, and Rouen. Having entrusted the suppression of the gabellerevolt to Montmorency and Guise, Henry prepared for his entry intoLyon. Returning from Italy in early September 1548, he met his wifeand his mistress south of Lyon on the Rhone to prepare for his formalentry into the city, the realm’s financial center and a clear rival toParis as France’s cultural center. Henry had already made at least adozen such entries, but the ceremony at Lyon was matched or sur¬passed in splendor and significance only by his Parisian entry.Few events of a sixteenth-century king’s reign were as repletewith symbolism and significance as was his first entry into one of thekingdom’s major cities.1 The joyeuse entree had developed rapidly inthe fifteenth century and, it can be argued, reached its apex underHenry II. It was based on the feudal jocundus adventus, in which anew lord received the homage of his vassals and cities. The majornobles of the realm still had the obligation to receive the king intotheir chateaux, and the new king collected a substantial sum fromhis vassals and nonurban officers upon his joyeux avenement (ac¬cession). However, the ceremony of the “joyous entry” had becomerestricted to the large cities. It emphasized the nonfeudal relation¬ship between a city and the crown. The royal entry demonstrated theconstitutional position of the city as a corporate whole that had tomake a formal act of obedience to the king and had to have its officersreconfirmed in their authority.By Henry’s time the king had acquired a number of distinct rightsLife at Court93associated with the formal entry. He received a substantial gift fromthe city, which also bore the heavy expenses of the ceremony, ban¬quet, and entertainments for the king. He had the right to fill a vacantchurch benefice in the city and to create a new master in every guild.Furthermore, the new king could reduce or eliminate various taxes,which the city fathers usually vigorously petitioned him to do, pardoncriminals, and remit fines.2The pageantry associated with the royal entry usually over¬shadowed the constitutional elements. In a society where pomp andritual were intimately associated with power and status, the entryceremony gave king and bourgeoisie the opportunity to impress eachother and the lower-class residents of the city, and to forge the bondsof common purpose and goodwill that such endeavors usually helpto create. The royal entry was indeed “a most effective fonn of royalpropaganda” to impress the subjects with royal splendor,3 but it wasequally an opportunity for the cities to enhance their status andsolicit special favor from the new king.It was because of the mutual benefits obvious to the royal andurban participants that the entry ceremonies were among the mostspectacular events of a king’s reign. Hoping to outdo their rival, Paris,the city leaders of Lyon organized a magnificent entry for Henry.4The aspect of the event that most caught Henry’s fancy was the mockcombat of twelve gladiators dressed in what was regarded as authen¬tic Roman garb and using two-handed swords. He asked that it berepeated six days later. Others noted the beauty of the Lyonnais girlswho participated in the pageantry, including those who “more nakedthan Lady Godiva” rode on the backs of beflowered oxen.5 Particu¬larly striking was the beauty of the young woman who representedthe goddess Diana leading a tame lion on a silver chain. She led thelion, the symbol of the city, to Henry and presented the keys of thecity to him.The clear homage to Diane de Poitiers was a result, accordingto Brantome, of her request to Jean de Saint-Andre, the governorof Lyon, to ensure that she was properly honored during the Lyonentry.6 It was made more obvious in the extensive use of the famousmonogram and the crescent, Diane’s symbol. The monogram is usu¬ally regarded as an interlaced H and D. It is true that some historians94Henry IIhave argued that it stood for the menage a trois C, D, and H—andthere is nothing in the appearance of the device for ruling that out—and a few even for C and H. But the livret recording the royal entryof the king into Rouen in 1550, in noting the use of the device, de¬scribed it as two Ds interlaced and an H. The nephew of the Venetianambassador Capello left a record of an audience with Henry in 1551in which he described the king as wearing the H-D device “evenas the two souls of the two lovers are united and reunited in closeattachment.”7 His letters to Diane de Poitiers are signed with the de¬vice, while those to Catherine are not. One only has to view Diane’schateau of Anet or the ceiling of the Sainte-Chapelle in Vincennes,decorated under Henry, to be convinced that the device stood forHenry and Diane.On the day after the king’s ceremony Catherine made her formalentry into Lyon. According to the imperial ambassador, who statedthat he was present, the slight given to the queen the previous daywas compounded by her husband’s decision to delay her entry un¬til darkness was setting in “so that her ugliness should pass unno¬ticed.” Brantome agreed that Catherine’s ceremony took place in lateevening but found the explanation in the general confusion of theevent. He declared that the appearances of the ladies of the court“rivaled each other in making light and beauty everywhere.”8Even if the queen’s Lyon entry was not a purposeful slight, itmade manifestly clear the exalted status of Diane and the subordi¬nate position of Catherine at this point in Henry’s life. Henry’s colorswere black and white, which Diane wore because of her widowhood,but also, according to the court gossips, because the simplicity ofdress and color enhanced her beauty. He also adopted her crescentas his device, and his motto, Donee Totum Impleat Orbum, “Until itfill the whole world,” reflected it. Time saw no wavering in his loveand obeisance, and every Venetian ambassador reported that she oc¬cupied the center of Henry’s attention and affection. A number ofletters from Henry to Diane have survived and reveal the depth of hisfeelings for her. The following letter is undated but probably datesfrom late 1547:9I beg you to send me news of your health, because of the distresswith which I have heard of your illness, and so that I may governmy movements in accordance with your condition. For, if yourillness continues, I should not wish to fail to come and see you,Life at Court95to endeavour to be of service to you, and also because it would beimpossible for me to live so long without seeing you. And, sinceI did not fear, in time past, to lose the good graces of the lateKing, in order to remain near you, I should scarcely complain ofthe trouble that I might have in rendering you any service, andI assure you that I shall not be at my ease until the bearer ofthis returns. Wherefore, I entreat you to send me a true accountof the state of your health and to inform me when you will beable to start. I believe that you understand the little pleasure thatI experience at Fontainebleau without seeing you, for, being farfrom her upon whom all my welfare depends, it is very hard forme to be happy. With which I will conclude this letter, from fearthat it will be too long, and will weary you to read it, and willpresent my humble recommendation to your good graces, as tothat which I desire ever to retain.Diane also moved Henry to write poetry. The literary critics havetermed it mediocre but, for Henry’s clearly unpoetic personality, thefact that he wrote any at all is noteworthy and demonstrates howDiane alone sparked any artistic creativity in him.10The only challenge to Diane’s ascendancy over Henry involveda Scots woman, Lady Fleming. She was a lady-in-waiting for MaryStuart, and had accompanied the young queen to France. One ofher own daughters was a fille d’honneur for Mary, as she was awidow in her mid-thirties. Like Diane, she had been able to pre¬serve her beauty, and she took advantage of Diane’s absence fromthe court while recovering from a broken leg to infatuate the king.According to the Venetian ambassador, Anne de Montmorency en¬couraged Henry’s interest in Lady Fleming as a way of reducing Di¬ane’s influence over him.11 In early 1550 she had persuaded Henryto use his influence to free her son, a captive of the English. By thefall of 1550 she had become pregnant and openly revelled in theroyal paternity of her unborn child. Neither Diane de Poitiers norCatherine de Medici could ignore this open challenge to their ownrelationships with the king. They combined to pressure Henry intoexiling Lady Fleming from the court. In early 1551 she gave birthto a son named Henri d’Angouleme, whom the king acknowledgedas his. Ironically Catherine gave birth shortly after to her third son,Edouard-Alexander, the future Henry III, in whose service his half-brother Henri d’Angouleme would be killed.96Henry IILady Fleming returned to Scotland in October 1551 with Mariede Guise after Marie’s year-long stay in her homeland. She eagerlyawaited an opportunity to return to the French court. The Englishambassador watched the situation carefully because of her poten¬tial influence on French diplomacy in the British Isles. He reported:“The Lady Fleming departed hence with child by this King; and it isthought that . . . she shall come again to fetch another. If she do so,here is like to be combat, the heart-burning being already very great.The old worn pelf [Diane de Poitiers?] fears thereby to lose some partof her credit, who presently reigneth alone, and govemeth withoutimpeach.”12The episode of Lady Fleming had a more important point thanwhat it revealed about Henry’s morals. Both the queen and La GrandeSeneschalle were furious with the constable for his role in the matter.He was able to convince Catherine that he had directed his schemeagainst Diane and so she remained on good terms with her “goodgossip.” As for Diane, if, as likely, she heard of Montmorency’s ex¬planation, it could only have infuriated her further. Much to theking’s annoyance, they refused to speak to one another for a time. AtHenry’s insistence they made a show of making up, but the antago¬nism remained present for several years. Despite the Lady Flemingaffair, all of the evidence suggests that Henry’s love for Diane neverreally waned. Nonetheless, the only point of policy on which she defi¬nitely was reported as using her influence was the question of peaceor war before both the Truce of Vaucelles and the Peace of Cateau-Cambresis. The foreign ambassadors mentioned her infrequently intheir routine reports. When she was referred to, it usually was eitherin the context of Henry going to Anet or her presence with the othergreat ladies of the court at a major court event.13After the Lady Fleming affair, Henry’s generosity to Diane in¬creased for a time beyond its usual high level, as if he were makingamends. Diane was the major recipient of Henry’s gifts of patronage,money, and property. Although she was usually described as avari¬cious, a tag well deserved, Diane did give generous support to art andliterature. Most French poets of the era, in particular the Pleiade,wrote works in her praise. Obviously it was a literary convention tohonor the royal mistress, but the poets Melin de Saint-Gelais andJoachim Du Bellay made it clear in their works that they had receivedpatronage from Diane. On the other hand, Pierre de Ronsard, theLife at Court97most noted poet of the era, was badly disappointed in his failure tosecure more than token support from her.14Diane was better noted as a patron of artists. Her reputation as atruly beautiful woman and her pride in that reputation meant that shewas the subject of a vast number of paintings and sculpture pieces, anumber of which she or Henry commissioned. It was, however, herbeautification of her chateaux of Anet and Chenonceaux that wasmost responsible for her reputation as Mecene. Shortly after her royallover gained the throne, Diane began a building program at Anet,her late husband’s residence, which made it the centerpiece of lateRenaissance art and architecture in France.Philibert de L’Orme, the supervisor of royal buildings, was chosento redo Anet. He had already received the commission to do the tombfor Francis I. His close association with Henry, and the king’s closeattention to the work being done at Anet, prompted L’Orme later towrite that “all I did at Anet was by command of the late king who wasmore anxious to learn what was being done there than in his ownresidences. ... All I did there was for the king.”15When the rebuilding of Anet was completed, the chateau had be¬come one of the masterpieces of French art. The noted Italian artistsPrimaticcio, Cellini and Rosso produced art works for it, but the artistwho produced its most notable piece, Diane Chasseresse, which isfrequently called the greatest French sculpture piece, is unknown.16The happy coincidence of the name of the Greek goddess of the huntand the royal mistress was unabashedly exploited. According to arecent study, Diane de Poitiers hoped to defuse the implications ofher adulterous liaison with the king by becoming Diana the goddess,who, by a curious Christian appropriation of the myth, had becomethe symbol of purity and chastity as well.17 Thus Anet became thetemple of Diana, but the king who made it possible was not forgotten,since the H-D monogram was profusely emblazoned throughout thechateau.Henry’s close attention to the reconstruction of Anet was matchedby his enthusiasm for the palace when it was completed, an enthu¬siasm that was shared by everyone who saw it. Although Henry hadspent some time there before its reconstruction, the number andduration of the visits increased markedly after. Anet was, however,more distant from the northern frontier than several royal chateauxand residences of Montmorency and certainly more isolated; thus the98Henry IIwars of Henry’s last years forced a reduction in the amount of timehe spent at Anet. But there is no hint of any slackening in the king’slove for Diane, a love, it seems fair to say, that had no equal in thehistory of French monarchs.While the perseverance and depth of Henry’s love for Diane wasprobably unique among royal loves, the situation in which Catherinede Medici found herself was not at all unusual. For most of Eu¬ropean history royal marriages were based on politics, not on love;and the spouse of a king knew very early that she would have toshare him with other women. What was unusual about Catherinewas the extent to which she obviously loved her husband and themanner in which she appeared to have reconciled herself to the royalmenage a trois. Clearly, however, she never really accepted the situa¬tion. Three decades after Henry’s death, she wrote to her confidentBellievre: “If I was cheerful toward Madame de Valentinois, it was theking that I really was entertaining; and furthermore I always madehim understand that I was doing it against the grain since never dida woman who loved her husband love his mistress.18Certainly Catherine was forced to endure a great deal in regardto Diane, even having her as a nurse when the queen was seriouslyill in 1552. Diane had already received a gift of 5,500 livres fromHenry in 1551 for “her good services to the queen.”19 According tothe Venetian ambassador Contarini, reporting in 1552, “the queen iscontinually in the company of the duchess, who for her part rendersher excellent service in winning for her the king’s good opinion andoften she urges him to go and pass the night with the queen.”20 Thislast remark is sufficient proof of the fact that Henry largely ignoredhis wife in his private life, although by 1553 he had come to use hertalents in the public realm. Catherine was usually cordial to her hus¬band’s mistress, but occasionally her resentment overtook her, as inthe incident reported by the ambassador of Ferrara in late 1558, atthe time of the bitter debate over whether to abandon French inter¬ests in Italy in order to gain peace. Diane now supported the consta¬ble in urging peace, against the Guises and Catherine, who could notabandon her Florentine friends and relatives. Diane reportedly en¬tered the queen’s chamber and, seeing her with a book, asked whatit was. Catherine’s reply: “I am reading the history of this kingdomand I find that from time to time courtesans have been influentialin the affairs of state.”21 Certainly illustrative of Catherine’s angerover Diane’s interference in that particular affair of state, the reportLife at Court99also demonstrated Diane’s easy familiarity with the queen. And theremay have been a blacker element to Catherine’s resentment. There iscircumstantial evidence that at one point she plotted to have the duede Nemours arrange for acid to be thrown in Diane’s face to disfigureher famed beauty.22There is no question, however, that Henry began to make moreextensive use of Catherine’s political talents after 1550. She servedas regent the several times that the king was outside the realm withenthusiasm and a certain flair, being especially successful in raisingmoney from Italian bankers. By 1554 Henry seems to have given heropinions more weight. Despite Henry’s indifference to her in theirpersonal life, it must be said that Catherine had more influence anda larger role in government than any other royal wife of the sixteenthcentury. In several edicts Henry enhanced the queen’s authority, ap¬parently because he was concerned about the public perception of herposition. She used that influence largely to champion the interests ofher Italian relatives and clients, with fair success 23Catherine de Medici’s increased influence with her husband waslikely a factor in the far greater number of Italians at the court andin positions of authority in France after 1552. Henry’s generosity toItalian petitioners was also a reflection of his pursuit of military anddiplomatic victory in the peninsula and the wealth of many of theItalian families on which Henry drew for loans. Italians began to ap¬pear in large numbers in lucrative positions in the French church. In1557 a quarter of French sees had Italian bishops, although a num¬ber of them had been appointed by the popes under various clausesof the Concordat of Bologna. Henry had made extensive promises ofwealthy French benefices to the Italian cardinals who would vote forIppolito d’Este in 1555; d’Este’s failure to win the papacy saved theking from having to fulfill his pledges. The rolls of royal pensionersincluded an extensive number of Italians, many of whom were still inItaly 24 By the end of Henry’s reign, the presence of so many Italiansin the church and the military and on the pension rolls sparked bittercomplaints from Frenchmen.25The consequences of the nights that Diane persuaded Henry tospend with Catherine were ten children, the last bom only a fewyears before Henry’s death. Even in regard to her children, sevenof whom survived infancy, Catherine had to contend with the domi¬neering presence of Madame. It was Diane who chose the nurses forthe children and ordered the removal of one wet nurse because her100Henry IImilk was thought to be no good, and who informed the governor ofthe children’s household, Jean d’Humieres, how to treat an injury toone of the daughters. Her letters to d’Humieres and his wife, the chil¬dren’s governess, and theirs to her, were generally very informativeabout the royal children’s activities.26There is, therefore, far more information available about Henry’schildren than there is about his own childhood. Few, if any, of thekings of France were as solicitous of their children as Henry was.The duties of state and his love of hunting kept him apart from hischildren for lengthy periods, but clearly he remained in close contactwith them through d’Humieres. About a quarter of Henry’s extantletters were written to d’Humieres concerning his children. For ex¬ample, in October 1548 he wrote that he had not written for a longtime to inquire on the health of his children. His previous extantletter to their governor was dated four weeks earlier. The king’s af¬fection and concern for his children is the most engaging aspect ofhis personality.27Henry decided to move the nursery to Saint-Germain in 1547because of the plague in the vicinity of Blois, and gave detailedinstructions for its furnishings. On several other occasions he or¬dered d’Humieres to move the children because of plague near Saint-Germain. Once he was ordered not to allow anyone from Paris intothe chateau. It is probable that one reason for placing the nurseryat Saint-Germain was Henry’s desire to see his children often, sincethat chateau was a frequent choice of residence when the king hadbusiness in Paris. On several occasions in the first years of the reign,Saint-Mauris reported that Henry had gone to see his children. Forinstance, in late 1548 he noted that the court was at Saint-Germain,for “the king keeps his children, whom he would like to have alwaysnear him, as much about him as he can.” In 1555 the next impe¬rial ambassador, Simon Renard, reported that the French king wasplanning to spend Christmas at Blois with his children28An example of Henry’s affection for his offspring appeared in aletter to d’Humieres when the dauphin was about four. Apparentlythe boy had been asking to be dressed like an adult male. Henry wrotethat he agreed with his son: “It is quite reasonable that he shouldhave breeches, since he asks for them.”29 The memoirs of Henry’syoungest daughter. Marguerite, who was only six when her fatherdied, contain the affectionate memory of sitting on her father’s kneeand talking about the boys of the court. That Henry was very goodLife at CourtIOIwith children is further shown by his close relationship with MaryStuart and the story told about him and Henry of Navarre. Whenthe four-year-old prince came to the French court for the first timein 1557, Henry playfully asked him if he would like to be his son.Navarre turned to his father and replied: “Here is my father.” Theking, amused by that quick answer, then asked him if he would liketo be his son-in-law, to which young Henry answered yes.30While extravagant spending for one’s children does not serve as atrue indication of fatherly love, Henry did provide plentiful financialsupport for his children’s household. At first, Henry tried to be frugalbecause of the need to build his war chests, but the arrival of MaryStuart in 1548 led to a vast expansion of the household. The Scotsdid contribute 50,000 livres a year for her upkeep, but the king addedanother 30,000. In 1553 the establishment of a separate householdfor the dauphin gave positions to an additional 300 persons and cost68,000 livres in salaries alone.31Among the officers of the children’s household were the chieftutors, Pierre Danes and Jacques Amyot. Both men were well-regarded Greek scholars and humanists; the latter was noted as thetranslator of Plutarch. Despite such learned tutors, the dauphin wasnot a good student. Taking after his father in this regard, he muchpreferred hunting and playing at war, despite his frail health andphysique. His father took him to tour the frontier garrisons in October1557, giving him his own coat °f mail, “whereof he rejoiced not alittle.” His younger brothers were considered much better students.32Henry’s daughters were regarded as bright, attractive, and virtuous,with Marguerite, the youngest, the best student but also the mostrebellious child.The already vast attention paid to the household of the royal chil¬dren increased still more when Mary Stuart joined it in mid-1548.Henry ordered that the little queen be given precedence over hisdaughters, for she was a queen and would be the wife of the dauphin.He also arranged for her to share a room with his oldest daughter,Elisabeth, who was two years younger. Henry met the queen of theScots for the first time in November and immediately was very takenwith her. His reaction to her was summed up in his statement that“the little Queen of Scots is the most perfect child I have ever seenCharles de Guise soon reported to his sister in Scotland that the kingwas content to spend hours in conversation with the little princess.Dauphin Francis also took enthusiastically to his new playmate and102Henry IIintended spouse. In December 1548, after the young twosome dancedtogether at the wedding of Francois de Guise and Anne d’Este, Henrywrote to Marie de Guise about what a beautiful pair they made.34An earlier marriage in 1548 had also occupied the attention ofHenry. The marriage of his cousin, Jeanne d’Albret, to the duke ofCleves had been annulled in 1545, and the question of a spousefor the princess, eighteen years old in 1547, was again an issue.Shortly before the death of Francis I, rumors had begun to circu¬late that Jeanne was intended for Antoine de Bourbon. Her father,Henri d’Albret, had far more ambitious plans for Jeanne—to becomequeen of Spain by marrying Prince Philip, Charles V’s son. Throughsuch a marriage he hoped to regain Haute-Navarre from the Spanish.Jeanne’s mother, Marguerite d’Angouleme, also supported the pro¬posal after her brother had died, since she no longer felt as compelledto support royal policy.35Henry II, who at first thought of arranging the princess’s marriageto Francois de Guise, sharply objected to the proposed Spanish mar¬riage, for the obvious reason that it would pass the extensive d’Albretholdings in the southwest to the Habsburgs. For her part, Jeannesupported the idea of marrying Antoine de Bourbon since she waspersonally attracted to him. Perhaps because of his own experience,Henry was reluctant to force marriages on his kin, but Jeanne’s pref¬erence for Bourbon made it easy for him to settle the issue by orderingher to marry the prince, despite her parents’ annoyance. The wed¬ding took place at Moulins on October 21, 1548, but, as Saint-Maurisreported, “everything was arranged too quickly for the ceremonies tobe very imposing.” Henry was present and wrote to Montmorency: “Ihave never seen a happier bride than this one.”36 The fruit of thesehappy early years, before the marriage soured because of Antoine’spromiscuity, was, of course, Henry IV.After the wedding the court went to Saint-Germain for the winter.Saint-Mauris summed up the concerns of the court at that time:The king is continuing the jousts in which he has had little luckup to the present, whereas it was hoped he would do far better,being held to be a good horseman, and of a good figure. He usuallyrises early, plays tennis the greater part of the time, rides a greatdeal, taking all this exercise so as to avoid getting fat. He is begin¬ning already to fill out and take on a paunch. He is going huntingfor about a fortnight, and will return to Saint-Germain in time forLife at Court103the christening of the son he hopes to have. A few days ago, 2,000soldiers were shipped to Scotland from La Rochelle. There is aloud rumour here that next year he will send over a large army, ifhe can feel sure of keeping the peace with his Majesty.37Sports and Scotland were the centers of attention in what wasprobably the most carefree period of Henry’s reign, and his entirelife. Henry had always been fond of jousting, and upon his accessionthe court began to give tournaments to an extent not seen since theend of the fourteenth century.38 The foreign ambassadors frequentlymentioned the tournaments at the court, although they also noted, asSaint-Mauris did, that the king had not done as well as they seem tohave expected him to do. His reputation as an expert horseman andstrong wrestler, as well as the fact that he was the king, may have ledobservers to expect better of him in the tilts. His often poor showing,however, may well have been a consequence of his refusal to allowany deference to his royal status when he engaged in sports. As theVenetian Capello noted about his tennis playing, “no one would knowthat it is the king who is playing because they observe neither cere¬mony nor etiquette for him. They even discuss his faults, and I haveobserved on several occasions that a disputed point has been givenagainst him.”39 Those accustomed to seeing royalty being invincibleon the playing fields were surprised to see Henry defeated.Henry’s fondness for jousting reflected his enthusiasm for the lastmedieval romance, Amadis de Gaule. A lengthy series of romantictales with obscure fifteenth-century Iberian origins, its translationinto French was begun in 1540. The inspiration behind its publica¬tion in France was made clear when the last two volumes were dedi¬cated to Diane de Poitiers. Brantome reported that Henry and Dianeread the tales to each other during their afternoon tete-a-tetes. TheAmadis emphasizes the true knight-errant, constant in his love forhis lady and in his defense of the defenseless. In his quests, Amadisis involved in an enormous number of tilts with friend and foe alike.Because of his true love for his lady, the fact that they have premaritalintercourse is not in the least blameworthy. Quite literally, the idealknight in this work is either jousting or making love.40It has been argued that Diane encouraged the dissemination ofthe Amadis de Gaule because it would serve to elevate her relation¬ship with the king to a higher, more idealized plane than that ofmistress. Henry, for his part, seems to have taken the romance seri-104Henry IIously as an ideal way of life. In that attitude he was followed by muchof the court, so that the romance was “less a mirror in which a gen¬eration was reflected than a model it chose to emulate.” Even thevery practical Parisian bourgeoisie made the romance a best-seller inthat city.41Something of the spirit of the medieval romance was present atthe formal entry ceremony of Henry II into Paris in June 1549, in thetournaments, mock combats, and decorations, but for the most part itwas far more a Renaissance ceremony.42 It can, in fact, be termed theexemplary model of French Renaissance culture. Only the funeralsand coronations of the kings were the equal of the Parisian entryfor pomp, ceremony, symbolism, and expense, but those events werefar more bound by tradition. The entry was a unique opportunity tointroduce new themes and techniques to the court and the public.Henry’s entry into Paris took place unusually long after his ac¬cession. Except for the unique case of Henry IV, the delay was thelongest for any French king after Charles VII; Francis I, for example,made his formal entry six weeks after reaching the throne. Only fourdays after Francis’s death, Henry had authorized the city leaders tobegin to prepare for the entry, but it was in fact delayed for more thantwo years. Since one reason for the formal entry was to confirm theincumbents of the royal and municipal offices in the city (a new kingtheoretically had the right to replace every officer of the realm), partof the explanation for delay was apparently Henry’s goal of reducingthe city government’s control over “an infinitude of offices.” If suchwas the reason, it did not in fact take place; but the delay did enablethe king to extract large subsidies from the Parisians anxious aboutlosing their offices43The length of the delay meant that Prince Philip had alreadymade several elaborate entries into the cities of Brabant as governorof the Lowlands. Henry II and the French were determined not to beoutshone by their rival. The Parisians succeeded in making the royalentry of 1549 the most significant such ceremony of the century, andperhaps in the history of the French monarchy, in both the expense(40,025 livres) and the splendor of the decorations and pageantry.Equally noteworthy were the significant presence of extensive clas¬sical motifs and symbols and the caliber of the artists called uponto create the artworks. Extensive records are available to study theentry.The formal entry of the king was preceded by the coronation ofLife at Court105Queen Catherine at Saint-Denis on June 10, and the entry of thedauphin into Paris the next day. Torrential rains forced several days’delay so that it was not until June 16 that the royal entry took place.An enormous number of princes, nobles, and high churchmen as¬sembled in Paris for the event; it was a gathering of notables matchedat no other time during Henry’s reign. On the morning of the entry,at 8:00 a.m., the procession of the corporations and guilds of the citybegan to pass by the royal reviewing stand located in the faubourgSaint-Denis. It took some five hours for everyone to reach the king.The various guilds then carried the royal litter their assigned dis¬tances into the city to Notre Dame, passing through elaborate archesand over lavishly ornamented bridges on the way. It was exactly thesame route in reverse that the funeral entourage of a dead king tookto his final resting place at the abbey of Saint-Denis.At the cathedral, Henry was met by the clergy and entered fora solemn Mass. In the evening an immense banquet was given forthe huge throng of princes, great nobles, high churchmen, and civicleaders. The banquet was marred, as all such functions were, bysquabbling among the wellborn over their proper places close to theking.After the customary delay of two days, Queen Catherine made herentry. As at Lyon the chronicles make note of the striking appear¬ances of the ladies of the court, expressing a threefold admiration oftheir dignity, beauty, and jewelry.44 Unlike the entry at Lyon, Dianede Poitiers received rather little attention and homage, although theH-D monogram was much in evidence.45 The queen’s entry was alsoconcluded by a banquet and a dance.On June 20 the city of Paris presented its gift to the king. JeanCousin was the principal designer of the silver statuary set, costing10,085 livres, that joined together images of Louis XII, Francis I, andHenry, representing the beginning, the prime maker, and the perfec¬tion of a new age.46 The court remained at the Toumelles for anothermonth because the entry festivities were not yet completed. Amongthe continuing events was a tournament on June 23. To prepare forit, a street near the Bastille had to be cleared of its paving stones. Thecity also prepared a fort on an island in the Seine that was stormedin a mock assault. A last-minute addition to the schedule was a mockbattle between galleys on the Seine, which Henry apparently hadpersonally requested. Its cost was 14,171 livres.47The entry ceremony continued into the next month when, on Julyio6Henry II2, Henry went to the Parlement of Paris to honor it with his presence.The queen was present with a vast entourage of courtiers. The mag¬istrates were dressed in their red robes reserved for the most solemnoccasions and knelt bareheaded before the king at the opening ofthe session. Chancellor Olivier gave a lengthy address, in which hediscussed the nature of the authority of the parlement and its depen¬dency on the king.48 In this era the term parlement could refer to theentire judicial complex that included the Parlement of Paris and thesix provincial courts at Rouen, Bordeaux, Toulouse, Aix, Grenoble,and Dijon (Henry created a seventh at Rennes in 1552); or it could re¬fer only to the Parlement of Paris.49 The Parisian magistrates alwaysthought of themselves as forming the sovereign court of the entirerealm and looked on the provincial parlements as mere branches oftheir own court. The case for the Parisian view did have both his¬torical and jurisdictional grounds, in that appeals from the provincialparlements were heard in Paris.The parlements were the courts of first instance for cases in¬volving offenses against the royal person and the king’s rights anddemanse, and they heard appeals from the presidial and seigneurialcourts. All the parlements were divided into four chambers: the re-quetes, for determining what cases the court would hear; the enquetes,which heard appeals from lower courts; the toumelle or chambrecriminelle, which heard criminal cases, usually involving persons oflower status; the grand’ chambre, which heard cases involving im¬portant persons or points of law and was the place of final appeal(although the royal council could overturn its decisions). This lastchamber also announced the decisions of the other chambers.Henry had comparatively little conflict with the Parlement ofParis over its most important power—the right to register royal edictsbefore they could be published and enforced. (Papal edicts also hadto be so registered.) The magistrates could declare that royal edictsviolated the fundamental laws of the realm, as they did in 1526 indeclaring that the proposed concession of Burgundy violated the lawagainst alienation of any part of the realm. Another reason for re¬fusing to register a royal edict was that it violated the traditionalprivileges of any of the orders or corporations of the kingdom, as themagistrates did in refusing to register the Concordat of Bologna in1516 for violating the rights of the clergy. The king could requestthem to reconsider in a lettre de jussion. If the magistrates still re-Life at Court107fused, he could come in person in what was called a royal seance toreclaim the authority he had given them and order them to registerthe edict.50 The parlement, having arisen out of the curia regis in thethirteenth century, drew its authority from the king, despite occa¬sional statements by parlementaires that their authority really camefrom the nation.The monarch kept a close watch on the Parlement of Paris be¬cause of its power and its location. He filled its major offices of firstpresident and the four presidents a mortier, and, although the mag¬istrates themselves usually filled vacant offices of ccmseiller, he couldimpose his choice. In 1547 Henry II attempted to upgrade the caliberof new magistrates for the Parlement of Paris by fixing the minimumage for admission at thirty years and requiring a mandatory exami¬nation for all candidates except those already members of anotherparlement. The protests of those magistrates who wanted to hand ontheir offices to their sons led to a lowering of the minimum age totwenty-five.Nonetheless, the relationship between the monarchy and the Par¬lement of Paris was the least contentious of any time in the sixteenthcentury. Henry rarely resorted to royal seances, appearing in persononly once to demand that the parlement register an edict, and heavoided the harsh language that his father had customarily used indealing with the magistrates. He also kept them well informed onmatters of state. There were points of contention over such mattersas the creation of the semester system, taxation of parlementairerevenues, and filling of offices, but Henry’s overall respect for theParlement of Paris was made manifest in the extensive broadeningof its authority over heresy cases.After Henry’s appearance in the parlement, the king and thecourtiers continued to enjoy a vast range of entertainments and dis¬plays of art. The Parisian entry thus provides a unique opportunity toexamine the artistic and literary trends associated with the Frenchcourt at the beginning of Henry’s reign. Because the ceremonies andartworks were carefully planned and coordinated and involved a vastnumber of people, the entry provides a better sense of the prevailingartistic attitudes than the study of individual artworks, or even of con¬struction of a contemporary chateau. The Parisian festival made useof the talents of mostly French artists, many of them young and ea¬ger to make their reputation. The native origins of the entry’s artistsio8Henrv IIresulted from the fact that Paris did not have as large or as powerfulan Italian community as Lyon did, and from Henry’s preference for adifferent, more French coterie of artists than Francis I had preferred.Prominent among those responsible for the entry decoration wereJean Martin, Philibert de L’Orme, Jean Cousin, and Jean Goujon.These artists were heavily imbued with neoclassicism; therefore,myths and symbols from antiquity were predominant. A major themewas Hercule-Gaulois—the idea that Hercules was the original Gaul.The myth enabled the artists to make reference to Henry’s pastmilitary exploits and designate him the new French Hercules. TheParisian entry placed considerable emphasis on the Gallic origins ofthe French nation; it reflected much the same spirit of appreciationof French culture and literature as was found in Joachim Du Bel-lay’s Defense et illustration de la langue frangaise of the same year.The members of the literary circle, the Pleiade, however, were littleinvolved in the entry festivities.51The Parisian entry served as a very visible presentation of thetalents of French artists and architects, demonstrating a high levelof skill and learning that all greatly admired. Having been giventhis opportunity to show their talents to the leading patrons of therealm, many of the artists would receive commissions from Henryand the leading courtiers in the future. Clearly, the kings had onlymarginal responsibility for the artistic achievements of the entry fes¬tivals, but each king set the tone for the cultural style in his reign byhis commissions and patronage. For the most part Henry continuedthe cultural tradition begun by his father.In regard to architecture, the Venetian ambassador Soranzo statedin 1558 that Henry was not that fond of building, although he didhope to build a grand palace if the war with Philip II were ever toend.52 But in fact Henry’s reign saw an enormous amount of construc¬tion. One reason was the presence of several architects and designersof real genius, whose talents probably spurred the king on to findprojects for them. Another was that Francis I’s plans for several newroyal chateaux barely had been undertaken at his death; they werecontinued largely unchanged. But Henry’s tastes did impose them¬selves in at least two of these chateaux. At Fontainebleau two majorrooms, the gallery of Ulysses and the great ballroom, were completedaccording to plans revised with Henry’s approval, and much of theinterior decoration was done during Henry’s reign. His H-D mono¬gram appeared prominently in several rooms. Primaticcio, who hadLife at Court109lost his position as royal architect to Philibert de L’Orme in 1547,continued as the principal designer for Fontainebleau, and in 1552he was joined by Niccolo dell’Abbato, regarded as one of the greatMannerist artists.53 Similarly, the idea of rebuilding the Louvre wasFrancis’s, but the impact of Henry’s accession was far greater sincethe work had barely begun in 1547. The principal architect for theproject was Pierre Lescot, who was on Henry II’s payroll as a royalarchitect at 500 livres a year.54 Lescot’s work well exemplifies theimpact of the classical tradition on French architecture, producing astyle that combined the straight lines and symmetry of the classicalperiod with the decoration of the sculptor Jean Goujon, said to be ofa refined delicacy entirely in tune with the architecture.Henry’s most productive relationship was with Philibert deL’Orme, who was described prior to Francis’s death as the architectof the dauphin. Immediately upon Henry’s accession he receivedthe office of architecte du roi, which gave him complete authorityover all royal buildings except the Louvre. Perhaps his best pieceof work was the chateau of Anet, done for Diane de Poitiers butwith close supervision from Henry. The design of Anet demonstratedextensive classical and Italian influences put in a profoundly Frenchcontext. L’Orme did a great amount of work for Henry directly, aswell. The long-destroyed chateau of Saint-Leger is believed to havebeen a less ambitious version of Anet. The last major project hedid for the king was the chateau-neuf at Saint-Germain-en-Laye.It was a small outbuilding intended to serve the king as a placeof retreat away from the crowded main chateau. Construction ofthe building had barely begun when Henry was killed, and it wascompleted under Henry IV. L’Orme also designed chapels for theroyal chateaux of Villers-Cotterets, Saint-Germain, and Vincennes.The latter was done in a Gothic style fully compatible with itsfourteenth-century origins. L’Orme’s most highly regarded project isthe tomb of Francis I, which has endured the centuries with littlechange. Drawing largely on classical inspiration for its basic design,the architect gave commissions to Pierre Bontemps and the youngGermain Pilon for its decoration, which is more clearly French ininspiration. L’Orme’s biographer, Anthony Blunt, concludes that thearchitect was one of the founders of modem French architecture.^Extensive work along much the same lines was done for I lenrv atChambord, for Diane at Chenonceaux, for the Guises at Joinville, andfor Saint-Andre at his chateau of Villery. Jean Bullant’s designs fornoHenry IItwo of Montmorency’s chateaux, Ecouen and Chantilly, were furtherexamples of the French adoption of styles and techniques importedfrom Italy.56Very much the same can be said about painting and sculpturein Henry’s reign. The influence of the Italian Renaissance, broughtto France by Italian artists in Francis’s lifetime, bore results amongthe French artists after 1547. Henry preferred to patronize Frenchartists, but he was appreciative of the Italian Mannerist style. Con¬sequently, the artwork of his reign was Italian and classical in inspi¬ration, but done by French artists. Perhaps the best example of thatwas Jean Goujon’s gallery in a new wing of the Louvre. His statuaryfollow Greek prototypes so closely that “they might be mistaken atfirst sight for Greek statues . . . but these graceful reinterpretationsof the Greek ideal are treated in a very personal manner.”57 Goujon,who had already received commissions from Henry and Diane dePoitiers before 1547, such as the tomb of her husband in the cathe¬dral of Rouen, did a number of pieces in Paris in collaboration withLescot the architect, including some brilliant bas-relief fully classi¬cal in style. The other great sculptor of the era, Germain Pilon, wassomewhat younger, and his first major commission was the tomb ofFrancis I, for which he received 9,110 livres. His more solemn style,in contrast to Goujon’s sensual figures, brought him numerous com¬missions for funerary pieces, including the tomb of Henry himself in1560. Pilon’s monument for the heart of Henry II, originally placedin the Church of the Celestins in Paris, has been called one of themost beautiful items now in the Louvre. His tomb for Henry has beendescribed as a work in which French funeral sculpture came to termswith Italian methods and was, therefore, a model for all of Europe.58Both sculptors are sometimes said to be representatives of theFontainebleau school, so called because of the influence of the Italianartists who decorated that chateau, particularly Rosso and Primatic-cio, both Mannerists. Mannerism, with its movement away from theclassical simplicity of the high Renaissance toward a greater enthu¬siasm for movement, a crowding of figures, and the transcendental,caught the lingering taste for the gothic still present at mid-sixteenthcentury. The Fontainebleau school, however, produced no importantFrench painter. The greatest painter of the era was Francois Clouet,who revealed little of the Fontainebleau style. Son of Jean Clouet, theFlemish court painter for Francis I, he demonstrated far more theinfluence of the Flemish school with his close attention to detail inLife at Courthithe portraits of the members of the royal family and the court. Hisposition as court painter gave him an annual pension of 250 livres.59Clouet had done the funeral effigy for Francis I from the king’s deathmask and would receive the same commission in 1559.In the allied field of armor emblazoning, Henry also proved him¬self to be a connoisseur of fine craftsmanship. Henry’s personal ar¬mor is exceptionally well regarded for its beauty. In 1548 he broughtthe Gambres brothers from Milan to establish a shop in Paris. Theirwork and that of their French assistants, called the Louvre schoolof armor, has been described as brilliant in design, superbly exe¬cuted, and magnificent in effect. Because of its remarkable workman¬ship, Henry’s armor is considered one of the best examples of artisticmetalwork.60While not as avid a book collector as his father was, Henry didarrange for exceptionally beautiful bindings for his literary acquisi¬tions. His books were bound “with an expense and an elegance thattestified to his taste and the favor he had for them.” In particular, hisBook of Hours, which he had commissioned for his own use, is oneof the most beautiful examples of the art of the miniature from theRenaissance.61French art did achieve a high level of style and technique duringHenry’s reign, but it was in literature that the period made its greatestmark. Again, it was a situation where Italian and classical influencesreached fruition among French authors. The reign did see the publi¬cation of the last works of Marguerite d’Angouleme and Rabelais, butthe emergence of the Pleiade, or the Brigade, as this group of poetswas first called, was largely responsible for the literary brilliance ofthe period. Joachim Du Bellay’s Defense et illustration de la languefrangaise of 1549 came almost as a manifesto of the new reign in itsreflection of Henry’s preference for things French. While declaringthat French was as legitimate a language for literature as Latin, DuBellay revealed the same attitude as the artists of the era in admit¬ting that native French talent could be improved only by studyingthe classics and imitating and incorporating Latin words and clas¬sical genres into French literature. Du Bellay’s career correspondedalmost exactly with Henry II’s, since he published his last work in1559 and died in 1560.Even more closely identified with Henry II was Pierre de Ronsard,generally regarded as the greatest of the Pleiade.62 His first poetrywas published in 1550. This work, the first four books of the Odes,112Henry IIwith its bold new style, provoked considerable opposition. In 1551Henry and the court were listening to a poetry reading by Melin deSaint-Gelais, the current poet laureate of the court, when the kingasked about Ronsard. Saint-Gelais denigrated him and provoked con¬siderable laughter by reading Ronsard’s poems in a mocking fashion.Henry’s sister, Marguerite, came forward to read the verses as theywere intended, and Henry gave the verdict to Ronsard and namedhim a royal poet. As a consequence, Ronsard joined Saint-Gelais,Jean Dorat, Antoine de Baif and Du Bellay on the royal pension roll asroyal poets, at 1,200 livres a year.63 Ronsard and the latter two weremembers of the Pleiade, as was Pontus de Tyard, a royal almoner.This group of rather similar poets received extensive royal patronageand in turn dedicated numerous poems to the king and members ofhis family and court.64Henry II was very much involved in one of the noteworthy eventsof French literary history: the first French tragedy was performed forhim at Paris in 1552. Etienne Jodelle, then barely twenty years old,wrote the play Cleopatre captive, and played the title role. Severalother poets, including Remy Belleau, had parts. Henry’s enthusiasmfor the play led him to give Jodelle 500 ecus. In the same year Jodellepublished the first French comedy, Eugene. It is not known whetherHenry attended the premiere, but in 1558 a performance of JacquesGrevin’s comedy, La Tresoriere, was performed at his request. Whenthe sire de Gouberville visited the court at Blois in 1556, he attendeda French comedy put on for Henry.65Henry was also interested in seeing to the writing of an offi¬cial history of his reign. At least three writers, Mathieu Bosseil-lure, Pierre Paschal, and Bernard Du Haillan, were given the title ofhistoriographe royal and paid 1,200 livres from the royal treasury. Itappears, however, that none of the works produced by these histori¬ans during Henry’s reign are extant66Henry added to the royal library at Fontainebleau a wide range ofhistory works, including histories of the church, the ancient world,and France.67 It also included the entire corpus of Plato, numerousworks of Aristotle and commentaries on them, studies of canon andcivil law, grammar and rhetoric, Greek and Latin classics, and a broadrange of religious works. Machiavelli’s Art of War was also presentwith several other works on military matters. Among the strongestareas were science and mathematics. Represented were many of theclassics of the ancient tradition, such as Galen and Ptolemy, but thereLife at Courtii3were a number of contemporary examples: George Agricola on min¬ing, Jean Femel on medicine, and Copernicus’s De RevolutionibusOrbium Coelestium. Perhaps the king’s apparent interest in Coperni¬cus can help to explain why the decade after 1550 saw the publicationof a very large percentage of the sixteenth-century French works thatmade mention of the Polish astronomer. In 1557 this early French in¬terest in Copernicus peaked with the publication of eight books thattook note of the heliocentric theory, although none of the authorsopenly adopted it. The most enthusiastic author was a royal almoner,Pontus de Tyard, whose reputation as a poet earned him entranceinto the Pleiade and patronage from Henry and Diane de Poitiers.Despite his high regard for Copernicus’s work, he did not accept it asproviding the true description of the universe.68Without question Henry was an active patron of art and litera¬ture. Claude Haton called him “protector of letters and sciences,” andBrantome said that “he loved men of letters and treated them as hadhis father, even if himself was not as well-lettered.” Shortly after hebecame king, he released the famed anti-Aristotelian, Peter Ramus,from the royal censure of 1544 that had prohibited him from teach¬ing. In 1551 Ramus received an appointment to the College Royal. InJanuary 1559, at a time of serious fiscal crisis, Henry granted an ex¬emption from the decimes to six men named as professors of Greek,Latin, and Hebrew. Among them were the noted scholars Ramusand Pierre Galland.69 But historians are inclined to take the wordof the Venetian Contarini, who stated that he was less liberal thanhis father in that regard.70 It seems accurate to say that his inter¬ests were less inclined toward genteel culture. His sister, Marguerite,who certainly deserves greater recognition as a patron of literatureduring this era, probably was responsible for much of the support ofthe Pleiade. Kings generally have been given more credit than theydeserve for the cultural achievements of their reigns. To treat Henryfairly, one must acknowledge that he was king when the FrenchRenaissance reached its highest achievements, but note as well thathe had rather little to do with creating the spectacular burst of talentof his reign. Nonetheless, he did provide support and encouragementbeyond what he is usually given credit. In doing so, he enabled theFrench artists and writers to assimilate the classical and Italian tra¬ditions that Francis I had done so much to bring into the realm.8 LE ROITRES-CHRETIENThe Paris entry, so much a showcase for the brilliance ofFrench culture, ended on a much more somber note. OnJuly 4 the king led a religious procession through the streetsof the city, preceding several thousand clerics, universitystudents, and major officers of the realm and the city, to Notre Damefor a solemn Mass.1 After the Mass the royal party paused on its returnto the Toumelles at the Place Maubert to witness the execution offour “Lutheran” heretics.This event dramatized two major aspects of Henry’s reign— hisrole as head of the French church and the rise of French Protes¬tantism. One reason why many have found the Reformation so diffi¬cult to understand is that they fail to appreciate the predominant roleof the head of the political system in making decisions concerningreligion and the church. Catholic rulers decided most issues involv¬ing the corporate body called the church without reference to Rome,and they forced the pope to negotiate the remainder with them. Evendecisions involving doctrine and morals were implemented by coop¬eration between pope and ruler. Few men of the era challenged theright of the king to decide the major questions of religion for hisrealm, including the possibility of schism or worse.In France, therefore, the king was the head of the church in away only slightly less complete than the authority that Henry VIIIclaimed for the English monarchy. He controlled the corporate bodiesthat made it up and delegated to them their authority. As with everyother government institution, the king could recall his authority anddecide the issue at hand himself. However, far more than for theother corporate bodies, such an act on the part of the king raisedLe Roi Tres-Chretien”5a storm of protest from the hierarchy that inhibited the king fromacting too arbitrarily in regard to religious issues.The precise nature of royal authority over the French church hadbeen made much more explicit by the Concordat of Bologna of 1516,in which the papacy acknowledged the king’s right to nominate the112 French bishops and some 600 abbots subject to confirmation bythe Roman Curia. By 1547, having been in effect for thirty years, thesystem of royal nomination and papal confirmation was fairly wellestablished. While the paucity of records concerning the episcopalnominations makes any generalizations difficult, it became the pat¬tern that within six months of the incumbent’s death, as required bythe concordat, the king sent the nomination to Rome, praising thecandidate’s moral character and learning. But he also made mentionof the usually more pertinent reason for the choice—the service ofthe cleric himself or his family to the crown.2 Within another sixmonths, the Curia acted on the nomination, nearly always confirmingit. In the period between 1516 and 1559 only one French candidatewas rejected for episcopal office on the grounds of his unsuitabilityfor the office.If the standards to which the pre-Tridentine papacy held theFrench episcopate were not so high as to cause friction with themonarchy, several other aspects of the concordat were extraordinarilyproductive of disputes. One involved the point that while the basicconcordat itself was permanent, several codicils, called indults, hadbeen added that had to be renewed by every new pope and for everynew king. The most significant indult added Brittany and Provence,referred to as the pays d’obedience, to the territory originally coveredby the concordat.When Henry II became king in 1547, he sent a memorandumto his ambassador in Rome outlining his ideas on relations with thepapacy. In particular, he objected to the annates, the papal tax ofthe first year’s revenues on a newlyfilled clerical benefice. The taxwas drawing money from France, to Henry’s vast annoyance. He alsoobjected to the numerous papal appointments of Italian prelates toFrench benefices.3 Pope Paul III, for his part, sought to increase theopportunities for papal appointments by refusing to renew the indultsfor the pays d’obedience, in part because he had been opposed to theconcordat in 1516 for yielding too much to the French king and inpart because he felt that the monarchy had not been fulfilling itsn6Henry IIobligations under the agreement. The principal point of contentionregarding the latter was the right of the papacy to fill the sees ofprelates who had died at Rome, referred to as ad Sedem Apostolicam.With many French bishops in residence at Rome, the popes had beenable to appoint to numerous French sees, and Henry was determinedto reduce those opportunities. He accordingly refused to allow severalpapal appointees to take their offices and was reluctant to permit theFrench cardinals to reside in Rome. Paul’s reluctance to renew theindults for the pays d’obedience disappeared when Henry agreed tothe marriage between Orazio Famese, Paul’s grandson, and Diane deFrance. But upon Julius Ill’s election, the dispute became far moreheated, since Julius was even more hostile to the concordat and wasdetermined to exercise the prerogatives of the papacy to their fullest.The contentiousness over the concordat was made all the morebitter because relations between the French court and Rome wereperhaps at their lowest point of the sixteenth century during JuliusIll’s reign. The death of Paul III in late 1549 had given rise to hopeamong the French that a French cardinal, like Jean de Lorraine, ora client, like Ippolito d’Este or Giovanni Salviati, the queen’s rela¬tive, could be elected.4 Because of the length of the electoral conclaveand the very loose enforcement of the restrictions against outsidecommunications, the papal election of 1549 serves as an excellentexample of how the rulers controlled and manipulated the ballotsof the cardinals. Although the absence of all but two French cardi¬nals from Rome at the beginning of the conclave gave the imperialparty the upper hand, it was unable to get the two-thirds majority forits candidate, Reginald Pole of England. Thus, the French cardinalswere able to reach Rome before a decision was reached, and theirpresence deadlocked the conclave even tighter.Consequently, the conclave of 1549, at seventy-two days, wasthe second-longest of the sixteenth century, and the length gaveCharles V and Henry ample opportunity to learn of the direction ofthe balloting and to send orders to their parties in the conclave. Henrysent the leader of the French party, Cardinal Charles de Guise, tothe conclave with a vast sum to be used for bribes.5 Simon Renard,the new ambassador from Charles V to the French court, reportedthat the French cardinals had given a pledge to their king that theywould accept no other guide in their conduct than the commands andwill of the king. In particular, they agreed not to vote for CardinalLe Roi Tres-Chretien117Pole, who was distrusted as an imperial candidate and a native of aland traditionally hostile to France. The cardinals in conclave corre¬sponded regularly with the courts, despite .the prohibitions againstsuch activities. Renard, in discussing the deadlocked conclave, wrotewith intentional irony that the cardinals might eventually be forced toelect “a poor stranger whose only recommendations are his virtues.”6On February 14, 1550 news came from Rome via a courier called“the Cripple,” who made the journey in five days and seventeenhours, of the election of Julius III. Julius was a compromise candi¬date, not especially pleasing to the French but acceptable becausehe was the papal legate who had closed the Council of Trent threeyears earlier. Thus he was regarded as anti-imperial. The French hadexamined him thoroughly and became convinced that he was mal¬leable to their interests. They expected that their role in electing himwould pay dividends. Immediately one payoff came: Julius, in returnfor the part that Cardinal Alessandro Famese had played in electinghim, restored the duchy of Parma, a papal fief, to Ottavio Famese.Since Charles V was strongly opposed to the aggrandizement of theFamese, Ottavio turned to Henry II and signed an alliance withhim in March 1550. Julius, however, had strongly warned Famese,his vassal, against dealing with foreign powers. When Famese pro¬ceeded with the French alliance, the pope threatened to deprive himof Parma. Henry reacted to the threat with rage, in part because heintended to use Parma as a base to attack Milan, and in part becausethe French cardinals had led him to believe that Julius would be acompliant French client.Compounding Henry’s anger were the clear signals from Romethat Julius intended to reconvene the Council of Trent. Francis I hadrefused to endorse the council when first called in 1544 because heobjected to its location in an imperial city, which was presumed tohave made the council a tool of Charles V. Furthermore, the Frenchhad little desire to help settle the religious problems in Germany thatso usefully distracted Charles from France and reduced his ability toraise troops and money in Germany. In addition, the French churchprior to 1560 had a sense of self-sufficiency and lacked a sense of acommunity of interests with foreign Catholics, making it difficult forFrenchmen to concern themselves with what was happening else¬where. Neither monarchy nor clergy saw any reason to be placed ina position to be asked to agree to decisions that might reduce their118Henry IIprerogatives and incomes. Ultimately, Francis I had agreed to senda small number of bishops to Trent, but their presence was more ahindrance than an aid to the work of the council.7Henry’s attitude toward the council was even more negative; heworked to prevent its reconvening and, when that failed, to break itup. His attitude was formed by the belief that the French church re¬mained “holy and Catholic”; thus there was no need for the council,or its reforms, since he had no difficulty in enforcing the Catholicrite in his realm. In August 1551 he told the papal nuncio that hiskingdom had no need of a general council to regulate its religious af¬fairs; if a reform of practices was necessary, he had his pious bishopsto accomplish it without involving France in the quarrels of others.The king later wrote to his ambassador in Rome that he had made acall for a national council to provide an excuse for refusing to sendFrench prelates to Trent.8Developments in Germany had demonstrated further the advan¬tage to France of the religious ferment there. Now that the GermanLutherans were again in arms against the emperor, after severalyears of uneasy truce following their defeat at Miihlberg in 1547,the French were not about to let Charles off the hook by workingfor religious peace in the empire. Thus Henry on several occasionsproclaimed his intention of making an alliance with the English andSwiss to prevent the council from meeting.9In the midst of Henry’s growing distrust of Julius III came wordthat the see of Marseille had become vacant in early 1550 with thedeath of Giovanni di Cibo. Since the pope had refused to renew theindults for Provence and Brittany, he proceeded to name his nephew,Christopher del Monte, to Marseille. Henry had already nominateda French cleric and was deeply angered with the pope’s action. Thegovernor of Provence was ordered to refuse the episcopal revenues toDel Monte, who had intended to treat the appointment as a sinecureby naming Cibo’s vicar as his administrator. Julius insisted on hisprerogative, not only to favor his nephew, but also to reestablish papalrights under the concordat. But with the king holding the better handthrough his control of episcopal revenues, Julius was obliged to nego¬tiate on the matter of the indults. These negotiations were describedas drawing up the “ultimate concordat.” In exchange for a pledge toobserve exactly the clauses of the concordat and to suppress abusesin the French church, Julius issued the indults in October 1550.10Despite the temporary resolution of the problems involving theLe Roi Tres-Chretien"9concordat, relations between pope and French king grew more bitter.The bull convening the Council of Trent of November 1550, triggereda sharp outburst from Henry, who regarded it as proof of Julius’sdefection to the imperial camp. The following February, Henry or¬dered the French bishops to take up residency in their dioceses andmake visitations in order to deal with heresy and to inform them¬selves on conditions there in preparation for a national council. Thethreat of such a national council, over which the king would preside,had always terrified the popes, but Julius did not retreat. He took theoffensive by threatening to depose Henry if he went ahead with thenational council and hinted that he would offer the French throne toPrince Philip of Spain.11Henry II, perhaps not expecting so vehement a response, pulledback a little from his threat and wrote to Julius that he was notplanning a schism. Charles de Guise, now known as the Cardinal deLorraine, said the same to the papal nuncio. Henry, however, hadsent the noted commander Paul de Termes to Rome as his ambas¬sador in order to have him present in Italy in case of war. De Termes,a gruff military man, was hardly the right choice to deal with thetemperamental pope. When, in May 1551, Julius declared OttavioFamese forfeit of Parma for signing the alliance with France, de Ter¬mes declared that should the pope take Parma from Famese, the kingwould take Avignon from the pope. If he should try to deprive theFrench cardinals of their revenues, perhaps the king would forsakeobedience to Rome.12Julius was not to be outdone in the use of threatening rhetoric.In early August he sent a letter to Henry lacking the customary for¬mal greetings, which bluntly summoned Henry before the tribunal ofGod to answer for the destruction that French troops were wreakingin Italy. The papal legate who carried the letter to France also toldthe king that the pope had spoken of excommunicating him if hepersisted in his alliance with the Turks. In his anger Henry all butbroke relations with Rome, withdrawing all of his diplomats from theHoly See except for a secretary, and ordering the legate to retire tohis see of Toulon. He prohibited French clerics from going to Rometo receive their benefices, cut off the flow of money from the annatesto the Holy See, and spoke further of a national council.11It was fitting that, at the time of the monarchy’s most extreme Gal-licanism of the sixteenth century, Henry commissioned the Gallicanjurist Charles Du Moulin to write a book attacking papal pretensions120Henry IIto governing the church of France and abuses in curial appointmentsto French benefices. Certainly more radical than Henry wished, thebook created a sensation and prompted Swiss Protestants to givethanks that “enlightenment had come to France.”14On August 5, 1551, the royal council discussed an explosive pro¬posal: Cardinal de Bourbon would be erected provisionally as patri¬arch of the French church until the papacy admitted defeat. Henrysummoned several prominent bishops to establish the necessary of¬fices for a patriarchate. Imperial ambassador Renard reported thatthe patriarch would have been established if it had not been for theopposition of the Parlement of Paris and, perhaps more important,the Cardinal de Lorraine. The cardinal, who could have reasonablyexpected to become the French patriarch in the future, curbed hisambition and argued against an independent church for the sake ofCatholic unity against the Protestants and the Turks.15 His objec¬tions apparently carried weight with Henry, who may well have beenspeaking so bellicosely only to terrify the pope into retreating. OnSeptember 4 the English ambassador Pickering reported that “theFrench were once about to choose a patriarch . . . but since then Ihave heard no more of the matter.” Nonetheless, Henry refused toback down on the questions of French benefices, the annates, and at¬tendance of French bishops at the council, sending Jacques Amyot toTrent to explain the absence of French representation. There Amyotcreated a scandal by addressing the assembly as a “congregation”rather than a council. The council fathers refused to allow him tocontinue reading the letter from Henry.16By early September Henry had received a very conciliatory letterfrom Julius that conceded most of the disputed points to the king.Henry, while accepting the offer of reconciliation, refused to restorefull relations with the papacy but did send Cardinal de Toumon, indisgrace since 1547, to Rome.17 By early 1552 war with Charles Vwas raging, and Henry was reluctant to push his dispute with Juliusbeyond the breaking point. The “Crise gallicane” of 1551 did have itspositive aspects. Henry’s letter to the bishops in February resulted inat least fourteen bishops providing for the visitation of their dioceses.Another consequence was the holding of a provincial synod for thearchdiocese of Narbonne late in the same year, as required by theking’s order. The vicar-generals who met (no bishops were present)produced an important set of decrees for regulating religious life inLanguedoc.18Le Roi Tres-ChretienI 21Nonetheless, relations with Rome remained very rocky. Again itwas a dispute over a clause of the Concordat of Bologna that trig¬gered the next dispute—over the right of the pope to fill beneficesof French prelates who died in Rome. In April 1553 Claude de LaGuiche, bishop of Mirepoix, died ad Sedem Apostolicam. Before hisdeath he had resigned his bishopric, transferring it to his brother, aclient of Montmorency’s. Canon law declared invalid such resigna¬tions if they occurred within twenty days of the incumbent’s death,as La Guiche’s had. Thus, Julius III claimed the right to fill the seeof Mirepoix and named another nephew, Innocenzo del Monte. Thepope, having just agreed to extend the concordat to cover Savoy andPiedmont, as the French monarchy had been demanding since 1516,an act that recognized French sovereignty there, was enraged to findthat Henry refused to allow Del Monte to take the bishopric. It ap¬pears that the king was determined to undermine the clause, despitehis pledge in 1550 to honor the concordat exactly. Until Julius’s deathin March 1555, he constantly demanded that Del Monte be seatedat Mirepoix or, more precisely, receive his revenues. Upon Julius’sdeath, Del Monte immediately resigned the see for a pension of 1,500ecus, obviously taking what he could get since he no longer had papalsupport.19The conflict over the see of Mirepoix had broader implications be¬yond serving as a further example of the bad blood between pope andking and of the disputes involving the concordat. Henry’s responseto Julius’s action was to order all French prelates to leave Rome andreside in France, so as to prevent the pope from having any furtheropportunity to invoke the disputed clause. For the next several years,the popes pleaded with Henry to send some of the French cardinalsto Rome; the concordat did in fact require such a French presence.Certainly the papal insistence that French cardinals reside in Romereflected the pope’s desire to fill an occasional French benefice, sincethe French cardinals were all pluralists of the highest degree. Fur¬thermore, the presence of French cardinals at the Curia was seenas necessary for the orderly handling of curial business relating toFrance, and it had the symbolic value of reaffirming the ultimatejurisdiction of the papacy over the French church.Henry’s pique in refusing to allow his cardinals to reside in Romeproved damaging to French interests. It left the Curia dominated bythe imperial party and helps to explain why Henry continued to havedifficulties in getting decisions favorable to France. When Julius III122Henry IIdied in March 1555, there were no French cardinals in Rome to ad¬vance the French candidates, again primarily Ippolito d’Este, in thepreconclave negotiations. The French party did not arrive in timeto prevent the election of Marcellus II, whom Henry II sharply op¬posed. Fortunately for Henry, Marcellus was dead in two months.The French cardinals, still in Rome, were present to elect Paul IV,not Henry’s first choice but very acceptable since Paul was anathemato Charles V.20 Under Paul, relations between papacy and Frenchmonarchy improved enormously. Paul was far more supportive ofFrench goals in Italy and less concerned about maintaining papalprerogatives under the concordat. He routinely issued waivers of denon vaccando to French prelates at Rome, by which the pope gave upthe right to fill their benefices should they die en curie.Henry’s determined effort to reduce the opportunities for the popeto fill French benefices resulted in fair success for him, but the issuewas not completely resolved until the end of the century, with victoryfor the monarchy. By his efforts Henry complicated the aggrieved re¬lations with Rome to the point that a schism nearly occurred. WouldHenry have accepted a schism if Julius III had not backed down?Henry was thoroughly imbued with a monarchical Gallicanism thatviewed the French church governed by the king as an autonomousinstitution; he may well have been willing to take that step with en¬couragement from Montmorency. The Guises, with their own inter¬ests in Italy, were opposed and made use of the argument that such astep would encourage the spread of heresy in France.21 Regardless ofthe king’s real intentions, his threats were taken seriously in Rome,and they helped to produce considerable change in papal policy.Making Henry’s threats appear even more plausible to the papacywere his relations with foreign Protestants. For Henry, the religionof a potential ally was inconsequential if he could be used in thestruggle against Charles. Henry followed his father’s policy in thatrespect, making alliances with the German Lutherans and the Turks,but he carried it out with an even clearer conscience. The policy ofalliances with non-Catholic states and groups outside of France wasconsistent with the Gallican position that religious problems in otherlands were of no concern to the French. Swiss and German troopsin French service were permitted to hold Protestant services in theircamps and were accused of proselytizing, with no reaction from theking.Henry also had no qualms about using suspected heretics asLe Roi Tres-Chretien123diplomatic agents in other lands. Among them were a number ofItalians, such as Piero Vergerio. Vergerio, who fled to Switzerland in1549, continued to receive a pension of 200 crowns from Henry atleast until 1554, for the last two years reporting on events at the courtof the duke of Wurttemberg. As Frederic Church has written: “Theagents of Henry II were appointed with the same disregard for reli¬gious opinion as had characterized his father from a class of hereticsand other semi-heretics or cultivated freethinkers.”22In several respects Henry’s dealings with the English were mostindicative of his attitude. One aspect was his willingness to workwith the English to prevent the reconvening of the Council of Trent.Simon Renard reported that Henry was trying to attract the Englishinto an alliance, “having as a special object to oppose the council.”23More important was Henry’s acceptance of a marriage between hisoldest daughter, Elisabeth, and Edward VI. The discussion of such amarriage had begun in 1550, when the princess was only five yearsold. The negotiations took place during the dispute with the papacy,and the possibility of a marriage between Henry’s daughter and aheretical prince had greatly increased concern at Rome, for it seemedto augur a religious union between France and England independentof Rome.In June 1551 it was reported that Julius “will excommunicateboth” (Henry and his daughter?) if the marriage took place. Such athreat probably only made Henry more determined to see the mar¬riage through. In July the marriage compact was agreed upon; Henrywas to provide 200,000 ecus as a dowry.24 Certainly European mon-archs never regarded marriage compacts as sacrosanct, but there isno evidence to suggest that Henry would have broken the compactwith Edward when Elisabeth reached the age of marriage in 1557 ifEdward had not died in 1553. In November 1551 there was furtherevidence of the warming relations between England and France, andof Henry’s willingness to ignore the religious issue, when Edwardwas called on to serve as godfather for his son, the due d’Angouleme,the future Charles IX.Equally serious in the minds of conservative Catholics25 wasHenry’s latitude in allowing the English ambassadors in France topractice their religion openly. In June 1550 the imperial ambassadorreported in some pique that the English ambassador “is as free to ob¬serve the new religion here as he was in England." A year later, whenan English delegation arrived to negotiate the marriage compact andI24Henrv IIto induct Henry into the Order of the Garter, there were several in¬cidents in which the more zealous among the English flaunted theirbeliefs. At Angers they paraded a sacred image about with a hat onit; at Nantes they desecrated the religious images in the house inwhich they were lodged; at Orleans they pretended to consecratebread in public and distributed it to the crowd; at Saumur they in¬sulted a priest carrying the sacrament to the sick. All of this wentwithout interference from the French government to the point thatsome Frenchmen were asking “if they had become Turks or Englishor heretics.” All was reported to Rome, as well.26Unlike Francis, however, who tended to relax the pressure onFrench Protestants when he was actively courting the Protestantprinces, Henry made few concessions to domestic Protestantism. Herefused to reduce the pressure on French Protestants, even if perse¬cution was at best making his negotiations with foreign Protestantsmore difficult. When, for example, five young Protestants, natives ofFrance but students at Lausanne, were sentenced to death at Lyonin 1553, Henry refused to pardon them, despite urgent appeals fromseveral Swiss cantons, crucial sources of mercenaries for the Frencharmy. The English ambassador in the empire reported late in 1551that the French king’s persecution of pious men strongly alienatedthe Germans from him. The imperialists were busy disseminating theharsh Edict of Chateaubriand to incite the Germans further. If any¬thing, negotiations with foreign Protestants seem to have increasedHenry’s severity at home, perhaps as a means of salving his con¬science for dealing with the foreign heretics.27Despite Henry’s boasts to pope and emperor that France had noneed for a reforming council since it was free of heresy, he andsome church leaders clearly had become concerned about the rapidgrowth of religious dissent in the realm.28 Henry’s sincere but un¬critical commitment to the established faith and his determination tomaintain religious unity led him without hesitation to use the powerand legal violence of the state for that purpose. Almost no one of thesixteenth century disagreed with the operative political theory thatreligious disunity naturally led to civil strife and even civil war. Ina society that depended so completely on personal oaths, how couldsomeone who swore to a false god or on a false bible be trusted tokeep his oath? Unity of state dictated unity of religion, and no one ofthe period believed that dictum more strongly than Henry II. Therewas, as well, the ancient tradition that heresy was a matter for theLe Roi Tres-Chretien125civil government. The Christian emperors of Rome had made heresya civil crime, as did the early Capetians, who mandated the stakefor heretics. Holy Roman Emperor Frederick*II defined heresy aslese-majeste divine and therefore high treason against the monarch.When Henry came to the throne, the Protestant movement hadbeen present in France for more than twenty years. The first execu¬tion of a “Lutheran,” as most who had a belief in the basic princi¬ples of Protestantism were usually called until 1559, had occurred in1523. Francis I’s attitude toward heresy was that it was a crime ofsedition and sacrilege found mostly among the lowborn. Even afterthe Affair of the Placards had aroused his anger to mount a brief butsharp persecution of the “sacramentaires,” the term for those whodenied the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, the wellborn hadlittle to fear from the heresy courts. With a small number of excep¬tions, like the nobleman Louis de Berquin, executed in 1529, and thenoted humanist Etienne Dolet in 1546, the nobles and the favored in¬tellectuals were not found among the martyrs of early French Protes¬tantism. Of course some, like Jean Calvin, were not prepared to testthat thesis and fled into exile.Early French Protestantism was a disorganized and diverse move¬ment, with no single set of doctrines or system of church gover¬nance. Calvin’s organizational skills and the publication in 1541 ofthe Institutes in French gave the movement a focal point previouslylacking, but it was not until 1550 that Calvinism began to havea strong impact in France. French Protestantism at the beginningof Henry’s reign was largely a lower-class movement with strengthamong the urban artisans and the lower clergy. It was part of Calvin’sgenius that despite his own bourgeois origins and inclinations, histheology attracted much of the French nobility.In the last years of Francis I’s reign he had made greater use ofthe repressive power of the state against the reformers, including thedestruction of the Waldensian villages in Provence, but persecutionwas unsuccessful in halting the growth of heresy for a multitude ofreasons. The absence of any clear definitions of doctrine, whetherProtestant or Catholic, enabled the many less reactionary authoritiesto be lenient in their application of the heresy laws. Francis’s incli¬nation to halt or at least reduce heresy prosecution when he wantedgood relations with Protestant states tended to confuse the judicialauthorities and increase the hopes of the Protestants that he wouldjoin their cause. When trials on heresy and blasphemy charges did126Henry IIoccur, they were judicial rather than theological in nature and weredrawn out by legal procedures and appeals. Nor were the penaltiesfor heresy convictions uniform; they varied according to the natureof the offense, the locale of the trial, and the status of the convicted.29Perhaps the most important factor in reducing the effectivenessof the heresy laws was the conflict between the civil and the eccle¬siastical authorities. The nature of the relationship between the twojudicial systems had been changed drastically in the Edict of Villers-Cotterets of 1539. It had turned about 80 percent of the cases for¬merly tried in the church courts over to the civil courts. The parame¬ters of the new relationship were still being worked out in 1547. Thecivil authorities, especially the parlements, were intent on pushingtheir authority even further into ecclesiastical jurisdiction, includingheresy cases. The particular device for doing so was the appel commed’abus by which anyone convicted in a church court could appealto the parlement on the grounds that the ecclesiastical judges hadexceeded their authority.The parlementaires’ intervention in heresy cases, however, wasfurther motivated by their perception that the bishops had abdicatedtheir responsibility to eradicate heresy in their sees. Indeed, froma conservative point of view, the record of the hierarchy’s pursuitof heretics was sorely deficient. A Protestant historian has put it inanother way: “The reformers might be well justified in regardingthe negligence of the bishops as a providential arrangement. Manya feeble germ of truth was spared the violence of persecution untilthey had achieved greater power of endurance.”30 It is also true thata number of humanist bishops and other prelates sympathetic to theReform appear to have decided not to use the legal machinery thatthey controlled against the early Protestants.In large part because of the lack of enthusiasm for prosecutingheresy cases among the high churchmen and the local civil magis¬trates, Francis began to make changes in the judicial system. An edictof 1540 extended to all the parlements the right first given to theParlement of Toulouse in 1539 to take the initiative in prosecutingheresy. The edict defined heresy as sedition so that it was now clearlya criminal matter, to be tried as such in the chambre criminelle of theparlements. Clerics, however, remained under the jurisdiction of thechurch courts.31The enhancement of the parlements’ competence over heresygreatly irritated the churchmen, who protested strenuously. TheirLe Roi Tres-Chretien127complaints caused both Francis and Henry to make adjustments inthe laws governing heresy jurisdiction, and the resulting confusionover the exact nature of authority in heresy cases of civil and churchcourts greatly complicated the task of eradicating heresy—and thejob of the historian trying to explain the legal process.Early in his reign Henry II favored the parlement in the disputeover heresy jurisdiction, which he was determined to make moreeffective. There is nothing obvious in his life before 1547 to ex¬plain his determined anti-Protestantism. He had even given hope tothe German Lutherans in 1546 that he would support the Reform.Certainly those closest to him, Constable Montmorency, Diane dePoitiers, and Jacques de Saint-Andre, were conservative Catholics,while the reputation of the Guises for orthodox Catholicism hardlyneeds to be repeated. The constable’s faith was simple and sincere,but his willingness to give weight to political considerations and thefact that his nephews, especially his favorite, Cardinal de Chatillon,were attracted to Protestantism made him less outspoken in supportof a policy of persecution. It is a common theme in histories of thisera that Diane and Saint-Andre strongly encouraged Henry in hispursuit of heresy because they wished to receive the property con¬fiscated from convicted heretics, but precise proof of that charge hasyet to be found.32A different explanation for Diane’s antagonism to Protestantismis found in the Histoire ecclesiastique. The work states that prior tothe auto-da-fe that marked the end of the Parisian entry festivities,Henry decided to interrogate one of the accused heretics, a Parisiantailor, to find out for himself what the “Lutherans” believed. Thebishop of Macon, Pierre Du Chastel, who during Francis’s reign wasregarded as sympathetic to the Reform, led the interrogation and wasforcefully answered by the tailor. Diane then sharply questioned him.He supposedly answered: “Madam, is it not enough that you haveinfected France without trying to mingle your poison and filth withsomething as sacred as the true religion?” As the story goes, Henrywas so angered with this rebuke to his mistress that he decided toview the tailor’s execution in person. As the flames mounted, thetailor stared at the king with such a resolute eye that Henry hadnightmares about the execution afterward, and vowed never to viewanother execution.33 Whether or not Diane’s hatred of Protestantswas due to this event, and the story lacks plausibility, in 1558 thepapal nuncio was able to report that Madame la duchesse showed128Henry IIgreat devotion to the church and was ardent in her desire to seethe religious malcontents punished for their sins. Brantome wrotethat Diane was a very good Catholic and hated the reformers; theytherefore slandered her to the best of their ability.34It is, however, unlikely that Henry needed Diane’s persuasion toprosecute religious dissenters. He took very seriously his coronationoath to drive heresy out of the realm, an oath that Charles de Guisehad emphasized strongly at his sacre. That portion of the coronationoath dated from the era of the Albigensian Crusade, but Henry’s coro¬nation was the first time since the thirteenth century that it had anyurgency.35 Henry also took seriously his title roi tres-chretien, whichmeant, for him, being king of the most Catholic realm in Christen¬dom. Whether Henry’s harshness toward heresy was motivated by adesire to atone for his adulterous liaison with Diane, as some havesuggested, is impossible to determine, but it appears more likely tohave been a natural consequence of a deep but unthinking loyalty tothe traditional faith and a sharp repugnance at what he perceived asthe low social origins of the heretics and their support of sedition. Inmany ways a generous and kindhearted man,36 he felt no incongruityin his harshness toward the Protestants.From the beginning of his reign Henry worked to improve theeffectiveness of heresy prosecution and prevention. A strong edictagainst blasphemy of April 5, 1547, reaffirmed the use of judicialtorture, public whipping and the cutting off of the tongue for such anoffense.37 In November 1547 he reconfirmed the appointment of theDominican Matthieu Ory as inquisitor for the realm.38 In the nextmonth a new edict prohibited the publication of books on religion thathad not been approved by the Sorbonne and the possession of bookson the Index of Forbidden Books. But the most significant step hadbeen taken in October 1547, when Henry created a new chamber inthe Parlement of Paris whose exclusive purpose was to hear heresycases.39Known from early on as the chambre ardente because of its zeal¬ous pursuit of heresy, the new chamber was created as a secondToumelle to relieve the case load on the original chamber, which hadbeen hearing appeals in heresy cases as well as criminal cases. Thefirst Toumelle was to become exclusively a criminal court.40 Two ofthe presidents of the parlement, Pierre Lizet and Francois de Saint-Andre, were to preside over the new chamber’s fourteen memberson the rotating semester system. Lizet clearly was more hostile toLe Roi Tres-Chretien129the Protestants, as most of the death sentences were issued whenhe presided. The new Toumelle bypassed the ecclesiastical courtsentirely. It was both an appeals court and a court of first instance,receiving charges of heresy and blasphemy directly from the localseneshaux and baillis of the provinces over which the Parlement ofParis had competence. These provinces, in north and central France,constituted about a third of the kingdom. Any discussion of thechambre ardente must bear in mind that the provincial parlementswere responsible for heresy in the rest of the realm.In the six months before the new chamber began to function inOctober 1547, the original Toumelle heard fifty-seven cases involv¬ing heresy and blasphemy; it sentenced two persons to death. In theseventeen months of its existence for which records exist, from May1548 to March 1550 (the records for one six-month period are notextant), the court handed down thirty-seven death sentences, or 17percent of those 215 cases that received a final disposition. Thirty-nine persons were completely exonerated, and the rest had sentencesranging from an admonition to lead a good Christian life (thirty-one persons) to public penance for their sin (sixty-seven persons)to a public whipping (forty-one persons). Twenty-one of those foundguilty but not executed had their properties confiscated and werebanished from the realm, while two persons were sent to the galleys.41Another 105 persons had their cases continued without resolutionbefore the chamber closed in March 1550.These figures (for a fuller analysis, see appendix B) are perhapssomewhat less severe than one would be led to expect from a courtwith such a reputation for harshness.42 Nonetheless, one must alsokeep in mind that the cases under study came from only one-thirdof the realm. The other parlements and courts also condemned ac¬cused heretics to death in the period. The Parlement of Toulousecondemned at least eight in the two years 1550-1551, while Bor¬deaux executed eighteen between 1541 and 1559.43While the new Toumelle was clearly a more efficient way to dealwith heresy cases, it aroused the ire of both churchmen and othermagistrates in the Parlement of Paris. The former resented the com¬plete loss of jurisdiction over heresy except for accused clerics; amongthe latter, some opposed the increased authority of their colleaguesand the innovations involved, and others objected to the use of capi¬tal punishment for heresy. In November 1549 Henry tried to reducethe contentiousness with an edict that gave church courts jurisdic-130Henry IItion over simple heresy where the accused had not manifested theirbeliefs in public misbehavior or sedition.44Complaints over disputed jurisdiction continued to annoy theking, and rumors of heterodoxy in the parlement itself may havereached him. In response, still another edict was drawn up in June1551. This last, the notorious Edict of Chateaubriand, clearly showedHenry’s exasperation with the bickering over jurisdiction and hisrecognition that the measures taken thus far had failed to eradicateheresy.45 The edict again made it clear that what was especially fearedabout heresy was its perceived affinity with sedition and public dis¬order. The edict was far more explicit about the power of judgesto investigate private beliefs in order to prevent sedition, not onlyto punish it. New prohibitions on the printing, sale, and possessionof dangerous books strongly suggested that the spread of Protestantbooks, especially from Geneva, was an effective means of proselytiz¬ing. Both the importing of books from Geneva and communicationswith the city were expressly prohibited.The property of anyone who fled abroad to avoid prosecution forheresy was to be seized, and one-third of any property seized fromheretics was to go to the informers. To ensure that there would bea public test of adherence to the established religion, the edict re¬quired public attendance at Sunday Mass, at which the articles offaith drawn up by the Sorbonne were to be read. In what can betermed the most “modem” aspect of the edict, proof that a would-beoffice holder or teacher was a good Catholic was to be required beforeappointment. After 1553, the nominees to the courts were requiredto produce witnesses who attested to their orthodoxy. Last, to ensurethat the parlement would pursue heresy more vigorously, it was or¬dered to undergo self-examination every three months to root out anyheterodox members. This procedure was called the mercuriale, fromthe day of the week on which it was to be held.46In the edict Henry attempted to solve the problem of conflictingjurisdiction by closing the new Toumelle and returning heresy prose¬cution to the local courts—the civil courts for heresy cases involvingsedition, church courts for simple heresy. But seditious heresy wasinterpreted so broadly that few cases were left to the ecclesiasticalcourts. The edict failed to end all of the bickering over heresy juris¬diction, but it remained, with only slight tinkering, the system ofprosecuting heretical opinion to the end of Henry’s reign. It made thelaw governing heresy much more explicit and easier to win convic-Le Roi Tres-Chretien131tions, but nonetheless, it failed to accomplish the goal of eradicatingProtestantism.One reason for that failure was the nature of Henry’s attitudetoward heretics. Until the very end of his life he regarded heresy as avice that infected the lower classes and was symptomatic of seditionand rebellion. He wrote to the Parlement of Rouen: “The Protestantshave no other aim and no other effect than to spread plague andfire throughout our kingdom, to the ruin of the gens de bien andthe wealthiest personages.”47 Henry found it hard to believe that awell bom person, especially one close to him, would be attracted toProtestantism. The prejudice in favor of the nobility, so much a partof French society, was illustrated in the chambre ardente where onlysix persons called before that court were noted as noble, and nonewas executed. That attitude was evident also in Henry’s failure totake action against several bishops who publicly became Protestantor were inordinately lax in enforcing the heresy laws. Henry showedsome clemency in individual cases to heresy suspects, but they wereall well-placed people. For example, immediately upon coming to thethrone he pardoned Robert Estienne, the noted printer, who thenfled to Geneva in 1551. In the records of the chambre ardente thereare several examples of the king extending pardon to its suspects, butagain to people of good position like the noted theologian ThibaultBrasses. Shortly after the pardon Brasses was again being pursuedby the authorities.48A clear example of Henry’s attitude was the case of the Car¬dinal de Chatillon. In September 1551, shortly after the Edict ofChateaubriand had been issued, the English ambassador reportedthat Chatillon “is a great aider of Lutherans, and hath been a greatstay in this matter.” He wrote a year later that the cardinal was ingreat honor in the court, and in fact Chatillon expected to be namedprotector of French affairs at the Curia. The factionalism of theFrench court made the move impossible, but his religious attitudewas not a factor.49 In 1553 female members of the court were involvedin an episode where some ten ladies, including the wife of Saint-Andre, held a communion service among themselves. Henry got windof it and was “much offended” but did nothing to the women.1"Henry’s attitude against the Protestants was, therefore, rathermore ambivalent that it usually has been portrayed. On one handdetermined to eradicate heresy, on the other prepared to make al¬lowances for high rank and the needs of diplomacy, Henry was not132Henry IIable to pursue the goal of religious conformity with single-mindedintent. The still uncertain attitude of Henry toward the church andits ties to Rome was noted in the report of Richard Morrison, thenin Augsburg, in May 1551. at the height of the French dispute withJulius III. His words underline clearly the contemporary perceptionof the predominant role of a king in determining the religion of hisrealm:If the French King may by any means be brought to the setting outof God’s glory to the licensing of true doctrine to be taught to thepeople, whether it be rightly meant or upon occasion done thoughit be to spite some others, as Paul sayeth he must rejoice to beglad, that Christ may, by any means, be set out to the people. ThePapists are wonderfully afraid that their doctrine must come to thebar in France, and be as well there found guilty of a marvelloussort of crimes as hath been in England.51That hope was, however, misplaced, for the most significant fac¬tor in Henry’s failure to enforce religious unity, which he thoughtessential, was war, not any sympathy to Protestantism. War forcedhim to bring foreign Protestants into his army, required him to beaccommodating to Protestant princes, and distracted him from hiscampaign against domestic heresy.9 CHEF DES HOMMES DE GUERREAs for the emperor the king hates him and declares openlyhis hatred. He wishes him every evil that it is possibleto desire for one’s mortal enemy. This virulence is sodeep that death alone or the total ruin of his enemy cancure it.”1 Written in 1554, these words of the Venetian GiovanniCapello sum up succinctly Henry II’s foreign policy—the destructionof Charles V’s power and prestige.Inheriting the Burgundian-Valois feud and the disputes over Italy,Flanders, and Navarre, Henry added to them a personal antagonismtoward Charles that went to the core of his being, a result of hisimprisonment in Spain. Nothing motivated Henry quite as much asthe thought that some action he could take might injure the emperor.This is not to argue that Henry’s foreign policy was an unthinkingflailing at his enemy; Henry’s anger for the most part manifesteditself in a cold, calculating determination to make his enemy pay,at rather small risks for France. Furthermore, the circumstances ofthe geopolitical situation (with Habsburg lands bordering France atnearly every point) at the beginning of Henry’s reign made such apolicy virtually inevitable. While Henry’s hatred may have borderedon the pathological, his cold single-mindedness, it can be argued,proved to be more beneficial to the French monarchy than the morefitful and less impassioned policy of Francis I.From the first, Henry demonstrated his implacable antagonism.Shortly after his accession, he ordered Charles to come to his courtto render homage for Flanders, ignoring the treaty of 1529 that hadgiven it to Charles in sovereignty. Charles’s pique at this insult wasexpressed in his statement that if he came, it would be at the head of50,000 men.2 From the first day of his reign Henry sought to harm134Henry IICharles’s interests; but he did not want to get involved in a full-scalewar immediately because his finances and forces were not prepared,nor was his only major ally, the Turks.3No French king since Charles V was as experienced in war andmilitary matters as was Henry at the moment of his succession, andnone until Henry IV had as deep an interest in them. His opinion thatthe French army was not in shape for a major war in the first severalyears after 1547 must be regarded as credible. Part of the reasonwhy the army needed more time to prepare for war was that theFrench had been very slow7 about making the transition from a forcein which the heavily armored mounted man-of-war was regarded asthe dominant element to one in w'hich gunpowder weapons won thebattle. Henry II may well have been greatly enamored of the chivalricromance Amadis de Gaule, but he made far less use of the cavalrythan his father had. Nonetheless, he was also far too appreciative ofthe mounted, armored warrior and of the nobility who fought in thatarm to seek to eliminate the cavalry. It is clear, however, that neitherHenry nor his commanders ever contemplated using cavalry as themain arm in any major engagement.With the exception of the chancellor, the major officers of thecrown were first of all military commanders. The first in rank wasthe constable, “the count of the stables” of the Frankish kings.4 Hecommanded the royal army in the king’s absence and led the van¬guard if the king w7as present with the army. The constable in thefield ranked over even the princes of blood. His exalted military rankalso meant that he was regarded as one of the major councillors ofthe king, although for two extended periods in the early sixteenthcentury, constables Charles de Bourbon and Anne de Montmorencywere in disgrace and out of the privy council. The appointment wasfor life and brought an annual income of 24,000 livres. The task ofadministering the army with which the constable was entrusted was,by the mid-sixteenth century, so time-consuming that he had begunto lose his position as the primary strategist for the French army, ashe had been in the late Middle Ages.The actual command of armies in the field w7as often taken bythe marshals, the two of the Middle Ages having been increased tothree by 1547.5 The marshals often were given major commands inprovinces or theaters distant from the court, whereas the constableusually commanded when a French army was in action rather closeto the court. In Italy, for example, Giovanni Caracciolo, Piero Strozzi,Chef des Homines de Guerre135and Rene de Brissac, successively commanders of the French forcesthere, were all named marshals. Accordingly, the marshals were notnecessarily members of the royal council, even if Marshal Saint-Andre was a prominent member under Henry II. In June 1547 Henryattempted to give greater rationality to the system of command in anedict that divided northern and eastern France, where the greaterpart of the army was based, into three regions. A marshal was tohave authority over military affairs and recruiting as well as overthe provincial governors of each division.6 There is no evidence thatHenry made an effort to put his plan into effect, and by 1560 it seemsto have disappeared.The most ambiguous major military office was that of admiral.The Arabic word from which the term came has little to do withthe sea, but perhaps confusion with the French mer gave it a navalconnotation. In late medieval period the admiral had commanded thefleet, but in the sixteenth century he was primarily a commander ofland forces. The two admirals of Henry’s reign, Claude d’Annebaultand Gaspard de Coligny, were associated largely with the army. Therewere also provincial admirals for Guyenne, Brittany, and Provence,and several vice admirals. Command of the fleets at sea was, how¬ever, usually in the hands of officers with such titles as captain-general of the galleys.Although it appears that Henry was never to sea in his life, he tooka strong interest in the navy. According to Charles de La Ronciere,the fleet that Henry inherited was in “lamentable state.”7 From thefirst days of his rule, he set to rebuilding it. Naval matters were placedunder one of the secretaries of state, Come Clausse, who handledcorrespondence for the fleets of the Ponant (the Atlantic) and theLevant (the Mediterranean). The king was determined to put a fleetto sea at least as powerful as his enemy’s. Thus, in 1549 five newships were added to the fleet in the Atlantic, “built in the new styleof the English men-of-war.” In the Mediterranean, the new Frenchgalleys resisted the trend toward gigantism of the era. The willing¬ness to think small was largely caused by financial restraints, but itwas a sound decision, since the small galley was far better suitedto the exigencies of Mediterranean warfare. In the first three yearsof his reign Henry budgeted some 1,060,200 livres for the navy. Hewrote in September 1554 that, since one of the principal sources ofroyal power was to be strong at sea, he was ordering the building of agood number of round ships for the Atlantic and forty galleys for the136Henry IIMediterranean.8 Henry was blessed with a captain-general of the gal¬leys of the first caliber in Leone Strozzi, although his loyalty wasnone too reliable. La Ronciere, the historian of the French navy, wasso impressed with Henry’s work in regard to the fleet that he calledhim the precursor of Colbert.Henry was also aware of the importance of good maps and mari¬time charts for the enhancement of sea power. He provided a pensionfor the famed cartographer Oronce Fine and consulted him about apossible Northwest Passage. He encouraged the work of the Dieppeschool of marine cartography, and one of its members dedicated tohim a fine example of a world map (mappemcmde). In 1556 Henryappointed Guillaume Le Testu to the position as royal pilot at LeHavre; his Cosmographie universelle is highly regarded as an earlyatlas.9It is probable that Henry encouraged the building of a strong fleetbecause he wished to be able to strike at the source of so much of theemperor’s wealth, the Americas. He was eager to seize the wealth thatby 1547 was flowing in vast sums to Spain, or at least to disrupt itsflow. Although Henry had agreed in 1547 to prohibit French seamenfrom sailing to Portuguese colonies at the request of the Portugueseking, a situation that lasted for three years, he refused to extend theedict to the Spanish lands. In 1549 a fleet sailed to the Caribbeanwith the quiet blessing of the king.10 In 1553 Henry provided FrangoisLe Clerc, an experienced sea captain, with letters of marque and afleet of ten ships and dispatched him as the first officially recognizedprivateer to the Caribbean. Le Clerc attacked isolated targets, but inJuly 1555 his second-in-command, the Protestant Jacques de Sores,attacked Havana with a part of the fleet and occupied it for eigh¬teen days. De Sores so thoroughly plundered the city that a secondFrench fleet that arrived in November found nothing left to take. LeClerc’s expedition remained active until the peace of 1559. Upon hisreturn home with a substantial treasure, Le Clerc received a patentof nobility, anticipating Francis Drake’s reward by two decades.11After rescinding the edict prohibiting voyages to Portuguese colo¬nies, in large part a consequence of the royal entry into Rouen inAugust 1550, with its display of Brazilian exotica, Henry was de¬termined to assert the right of the French to sail anywhere and toestablish colonies in unsettled lands.12 Up to the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis, French corsairs were active across the world. The rangeof seas and lands in which they appeared may not have been matchedChef des Hommes de Guerre137until the time of Colbert. During Henry’s reign French ships wereinvolved in what naval historians regard as a momentous event—the first battle between broadside-firing sailing ships. Several Frenchand English ships joined together in a slaving expedition to the westcoast of Africa, where they were confronted by a Portuguese fleet. Inthe battle that ensued, the Portuguese demasted the French flagshipwith cannon fire and gained the victory. Protestant seamen from theNorman ports were especially prominent in the largely clandestineand little studied naval activity of the 1550s.13The admiral, despite his title, and all the other major militaryofficers served as the general staff for the army. With heavy duties inadministration, they took the field only at times of war or major crisis.Routine command of the forces was in the hands of commissionedofficers with titles like colonel-general d’infanterie, capitaine-generalde iartillerie, capitaine-general des galeres. Many of these officerswere Italians, such as Piero Strozzi, the queen’s cousin, who wassuccessively captain of the Italians in the service of the French king,colonel of the French foot, and marshal.In the royal accounts one finds also a colonel-general des che¬valiers, who under Henry II was Francois de Guise. The office doesnot appear to have been very significant, as shown by its salaryof 3,600 livres, but that ought not be taken as reflective of a lackof appreciation for the mounted man-at-arms in sixteenth-centuryFrance. The gendarmerie was recruited from the nobles of the swordas a permanent cavalry force. In times of full-scale war more cavalry,some 16,000 men, was made available through the ban et arriere-ban, the feudal obligation of the vassal to give military service tohis lord.14 The hommes d’armes were in fact no longer the dominantforce on the battlefield, but tradition and noble pride dictated thatthey still be regarded as such. Encased in heavy plate armor astridegreat war-horses, they still depended on the long lance as their prin¬cipal weapon and were still counted in terms of the number of lancespresent. Francis I’s edict of 1534 established the number of supporttroops at three archers for every two gens d’armes. Thus, a companyof 100 lances consisted of 100 knights and 150 archers. Companieswere established at fifty lances, except for those of the dauphin, com¬manded by Jean d’Humieres until he became old enough, and ofseveral great nobles, whose companies consisted of 100 lances. ByHenry IPs time the archers were mostly from the lower nobility, whocould not afford the plate armor of the knights. Despite their title,138Henry IItheir weapons by 1550 were the short lance and the pistol, not thebow.The companies of the gendarmerie were commanded by mem¬bers of the high-ranking noble families. The captains of compagniesd’ordonnance often held other major offices in the realm. In 1547there were fifty-one companies, totaling some 5,975 men. Becauseservice in the gendarmerie was a function of wealth as well as blood,its size could not be increased substantially. Thus in 1553, after a yearof war, the number of men in the lance companies had increased byless than 1,000 to 6,900 men in all. Another 200 gens d’armes servedas gentlemen of the king’s household and bodyguards.15Because of the more effective utilization of gunpowder weapons,and the difficulty of breeding enough great war-horses, the slow,heavily armored gens d’armes were rapidly becoming obsolete; but thekings of the sixteenth century dared not attempt to disband them orprobably even admit to themselves the truth of the situation. Seekinga more mobile force, the French army also included a force of lightcavalry armed with short lances and pistols and wearing little armor.Made up of companies of various nationalities, and commanded bya colonel de la cavalerie legere established in 1553, they numberedsome 3,000 men early in Henry’s reign. Henry made greater andgreater use of them and recruited them heavily from Germany, hav¬ing some 8,000 German pistoliers in service in 1558. Furthermore,there was a force of 2,000 mounted arquebusmen who were usedlargely to provide firepower for the gendarmerie.16Despite the enduring prejudice in favor of the cavalryman, by1547 the infantry had clearly come to dominate the battlefields ofwestern Europe. In recruiting foot soldiers, the French monarchywas at a decided disadvantage because of the deeply ingrained me¬dieval opposition to arming French peasants. Only among the Gasconpeasants, whom the English had used extensively in the HundredYears’ War, was there a tradition of military service. Thus, the bulkof French hommes a pied was Gascon, which fact was revealed inthe title of the commander of the French foot—colonel des gens deguerre a pied frangais et gascons. Furthermore, the French were slowto adopt the arquebus. Blaise de Monluc noted that in 1523 therewere no arquebusmen in his unit, and he had to recruit severalamong deserters from the Spanish army.17 As a result, the French de¬pended heavily on foreign mercenaries. Nonetheless, after 1547 thevast number of Swiss pikemen recruited en bloc from the cantonsChef des Hommes de Guerre139declined considerably, from the 15,000-20,000 that Francis I hadhired, to 6,000-10,000. There were several reasons for the decline:the Swiss were no longer as overwhelmingly effective as they hadbeen at the turn of the century; they were tardy in adopting the ar¬quebus; and they were more expensive.18 Henry II turned more andmore to German landsknechts because they had a much higher pro¬portion of arquebusmen and they were willing to serve longer withoutreceiving their pay. The French monarchy also utilized Italian mer¬cenaries, primarily in Italy.The attempt in 1534 to create “legions” of 1,000 infantrymenfailed to take hold, and in Henry’s reign the foot was usually identifiedby the name of the captains, always noblemen, of the companies,or enseignes, which companies varied in size from 270 to 450 men.The permanent companies of French infantry were referred to as thevieilles bandes, with a higher proportion of arquebusmen than thetemporary companies. Military captains like Blaise de Monluc andthe baron de Fourquevaux did not have a very high opinion of theFrench foot soldier in comparison to the infantry of other nations.19They still regarded the gendarmerie as the true defenders of therealm.Since, by mid-century the gens d’armes had little impact on thecourse of battle, one must look elsewhere to explain why the Frencharmy was largely successful in the wars of Henry II’s reign. Onemajor reason was the high quality of the French artillery. For a cen¬tury before 1547 the French had led Europe in producing good fieldartillery pieces and continued to do so under Henry, notwithstand¬ing the dramatic improvements in gun founding made by Germanfounders in England after 1540.In 1550 Henry appointed Jean d’Estrees (grandfather of the fa¬mous Gabrielle, Henry IV’s mistress) as grand master and captain-general of the artillery. He supervised the founding of guns thatcould be fired 100 times in rapid succession, instead of having to becleansed with vinegar every few firings. His contemporary, frangoisde Rabutin, regarded him very highly.20 It was probably his advicethat prompted Henry to reduce the number of calibers of Frenchguns to six in 1551.21While Henry’s heart may have been with the gens d'armes, theartillery fascinated him. During the siege of Ivoy in 1552 he venturedinto the trenches with the gunners and touched off several cannon.Montmorency was furious with him for disregarding the clear danger140Henry IIthat both the enemy and the likelihood of a cannon bursting pre¬sented.22 French success in Henry’s wars depended heavily on theartillery because most of the major actions were sieges.Henry had a largely successful record in war, and part of theexplanation for that record was his own talent as a commander-in-chief. He was very knowledgeable about warfare and the military, anda significant proportion of the ordinances of his reign involved thearmy. As in most other aspects of French government, Henry facedthe task of consolidating and regularizing the advances in the militarybegun in his father’s reign. Henry had a keen eye for contemporarytactics, and if he had not been king, he might well have made afirst-rate siege master. The king also had an unusual concern for thewelfare of his men, especially for those who became invalids in hisservice.23 An edict of May 1551 established a special service of oldor injured soldiers to do tasks for the military that did not requirecomplete physical capacity. They were to be paid five livres a month.24The evidence affirms Monluc’s comment that Henry was the bestking the soldiers had.Another reason for Henry’s success in war was the generally cau¬tious use he made of his forces, at least in the context of his era. Hiswar aims usually were limited and realistic, and he was willing toaccept partial success or take small advances rather than gamblingall on a complete victory, although his most brilliant victory, at Calais,was one of the greatest gambles in French military history. He wasalso well aware of the need to secure lines of communication andsupply. Henry also, it should be noted, was the first French comman¬der to use a map to plan a march. On the “Promenade to the Rhine”of 1552, he was shown a map of a region of Alsace and was so im¬pressed with its usefulness, especially to determine the best route forhis army, that he remarked that a commander of an army ought notmarch without a map, no more than a good pilot of a ship would sailwithout a compass.25Henry was also fortunate to have the services of several first-ratecaptains of war and was shrewd enough to appreciate them. Blaisede Monluc was always in royal favor and rose from the captaincy ofa Gascon foot company to colonel of all the French infantry in 1558.Another such commander was Piero Strozzi, whom Brantome calleda “great engineer and marvelously industrious.”26 He had risen tothe rank of marshal before his death at the siege of Thionville in1558. Montmorency’s nephews, Gaspard de Coligny and FrangoisChef des Hommes de Guerre141d’Andelot, combined the elan of the French nobles with a good senseof tactics. But the greatest was certainly Francois de Guise. He had anextraordinary reputation for his concern for his men and the civilianscaught up in war. During his expedition to Italy in 1557 a reportnoted that “everyone speaks of the prudence, valour, and humanityof the duke and his camp is abundantly supplied with everything.” Inparticular, he was noted for his care and generosity for the woundedand captured enemy. Guise was always on the best of terms with hismen and captains, yet was able to impose rigorous discipline on them.Such discipline enabled Guise to control the consumption of suppliesboth as besieged at Metz and as besieger at Thionville and securevictory. He also greatly reduced the pillage and cruelties usually as¬sociated with the taking of a town. One modem military historianhas rated the band of captains under Henry as “unsurpassed in theFrance of their century. . . . Guise and his generation were in everyway qualified to take over the role of conqueror which later fell to thegenerals of Louis XIV,” had it not been for the civil war.27Henry’s philosophy of war, as reported by the Venetian ambas¬sador Capello in 1554, was “to wage war always far from France. Hespares nothing, neither trouble nor cost, to that end, for he judgesthat any loss at home is most serious and the weakest suffer themost.” Henry certainly made an effort to carry his wars to foreignlands, and this point must be kept in mind for any discussion ofHenry’s campaigns, especially the Italian expedition of 1557. Whenthe enemy did invade France, Henry’s response, at least on one occa¬sion in 1551, was to order his troops to attack a town in Flanders anddo as much damage as possible “to show my enemy what happenswhen he attacks my lands.”28At the beginning of his reign, however, Henry was a little toounsure of himself and of his forces to take on the emperor in a full-scale war. Also, the treaty by which the French could recruit Swisstroops had expired with his father’s death, and it was renegotiatedonly in 1549. Henry gave explicit instructions against any borderincidents that might have led to war. Furthennore, he was distractedby a brief conflict with England over the town of Boulogne in Picardy,south of Calais. Henry and his captains regarded the English controlof Boulogne as a serious threat, even more so than Calais, shouldEngland ally itself with Charles V in a war against France.Calais, massively fortified, seemed to be irredeemably in Englishhands, but the Boulonnais had passed back and forth several times142Henry IIbetween English and French control. In 1544 Henry VIII’s forceshad regained control, and a full-scale French effort, with Henry, asdauphin, nominally in command, had failed to dislodge them. In June1546 a treaty ended hostilities with the town in English hands, butthey agreed to return it to France for 2,000,000 ecus in eight years’time.In October 1547 Henry, now king, traveled to Picardy to recon-noiter Boulogne and was depressed to the point of tears when he sawhow well the town was defended.29 The thought of paying out theenormous sum needed to redeem Boulogne probably also troubledHenry, since it would give no return in glory.With French troops fighting the English in Scotland by early1549, Henry decided to try to take Boulogne by force. Hostile actsand war preparations marked the first months of 1549. An abortiveattack made on an English strongpoint in May, led by Gaspard deColigny, cost the French 200 dead and wounded. Henry for sometime took the tack that he was unaware of the acts of his lieutenantsagainst Boulogne, but the imperial ambassador accurately predictedthat a full attack waited only for the conclusion of the Parisian entryfestival.30On July 14 Henry ordered 10,000-15,000 infantry to the regionto frighten the English into making concessions. When bluster failedto gain anything, he led a still larger force personally into Picardy.31He and his captains had found it difficult to raise both the moneyand the manpower to invest the English forts of the region. Gasconywas still smarting over its treatment in the gabelle revolt, and as aresult Henry was able to raise only 1,000 Gascons.32 The latenessin the campaigning season also bothered the French commanders,with good reason, since the weather forced the French to halt theirattacks after taking several outlying forts. The imperial ambassadornoted the ridicule that Montmorency took for this failure and thecriticism directed at Henry that he had already spent more than thesum required for redeeming Boulogne.33Both king and constable expressed their determination to press onwith the war, but both sides seemed willing to negotiate in January1550. On the French side, it was motivated by the hotly contestedpapal election of that moment. Whether a French or an imperialcandidate was elected pope, trouble was sure to follow in Italy; andHenry did not want a war with England at the same time. Thus,on January 26, negotiations began, even as Henry was reported asChef des Hommes de Guerre143“against concluding the peace, as his wish has always been to leadhis army to the reconquest of Boulogne, sword in hand.”34On March 24 terms were agreed upon and sent to the two sover¬eigns. The only significant clause called for the return of the Boulon-nais to France for 400,000 ecus. On May 16 Henry made a triumphalentry into Boulogne, presenting himself as a conquering hero, muchto the annoyance of the imperial ambassador, who regarded the trans¬fer as strictly a financial transaction.35 The French expressed theiramazement at the strength of the defenses of the town and congratu¬lated themselves on the fine bargain they had made, since an assaulton the town would have been considerably more costly. The Catholicrite was reestablished, and Henry gave a silver statue of the Virgin tothe principal church.36The successful, if less than glorious, conclusion of the Boulogneaffair raised Montmorency’s stock to perhaps its highest level. It waslargely his policy that had been carried out, and it was largely his in¬fluence that created an alliance with England the next year, cappedby a marriage compact between Edward VI and Henry’s daughter,Elisabeth. His reward for these services was the elevation of hisbarony of Montmorency into a duchy-peerage, with the additionalboon that the title would pass to a daughter in default of a survivingson.Nonetheless, the constable’s influence, with its tendency to op¬pose foreign adventures,37 did not remain dominant when Henry’sattention turned to Italy. There the Guises had greater influence.Their ancestors, the dukes of Lorraine, fancied themselves as kingsof Naples, Sicily, and Jerusalem through the lineage of the dukes ofAnjou. Rene de Lorraine, the grandfather of the generation at hand,freely used the title king of Sicily. When Charles de Guise receivedhis red hat in 1547, he wanted to be known as the cardinal d’Anjouto emphasize the family claim to the Angevin inheritance. Paul III,however, refused the request. (He would be known as the Cardinalde Lorraine after his uncle’s death in 1550.) Henry II was at that timerather uninterested in the French claim to south Italy, concentratinginstead on Milan. In 1549 he had given letters of naturalization to theresidents of Piedmont, the final step toward full incorporation intohis realm.38 The Guises hoped to take advantage of Henry’s willing¬ness to go to war for Milan to divert some French forces southward.Thus the Guises, while always ready to fight the English, preferredto see Henry’s attention directed toward Italy.144Henry IIThe Guises found their opportunity to redirect attention to Italy inlate 1550, when Charles V ordered Ottavio Famese to give up Parma.Since Paul III was now dead, Charles saw no reason to humor theFamese family. Julius III, despite his promises to Cardinal Famese atthe time of his election, found himself supporting the emperor. TheFamese turned to Henry II, who was eager to accommodate them.On May 27 a treaty between Henry and Ottavio Famese providedthe latter with 2,000 infantrymen, 200 gens d’armes, and a grant of12,000 ecus a year.39 With both Charles and Julius outraged, warseemed inevitable.Henry had been preparing for war in Italy by quietly slippingseveral of his best commanders into the peninsula. Paul de Termeswas acting as ambassador to the Holy See. Piero Strozzi had slippedinto Parma to aid Famese, who was poorly regarded as a militaryman. Blaise de Monluc was given command of a fortress near Turin.Overall command of the French forces in Italy was given to Charlesde Brissac, son of Henry’s childhood governor; in 1550 Brissac wascreated both a marshal and the governor of Piedmont.40Fighting broke out in June 1551, when Famese invaded the PapalStates and devastated the countryside around Bologna. The impe¬rial governor of Milan, Ferrante Gonzaga, a bitter enemy of the Far-nese, was named commander of the papal forces and led a combinedimperial-papal army that drove Famese’s forces back. The pope’s ef¬forts to limit the war to this brief action failed in the face of thedetermination of both Henry and Charles to bloody the other’s nose.A strong French force was already present in Piedmont, and Brissacsupplemented it with Italian mercenaries. Henry soon strengthenedhis army further by sending six companies of lances. Present was theflower of the young French nobility—Jean d’Enghien and his brotherLouis de Conde, Claude and Rene de Guise, and Francois de Mont¬morency, the constable’s eldest son.When the imperial army under Gonzaga laid siege to Parma inthe summer of 1551, Brissac decided not to try to relieve the city, butto strike instead at three imperial strongholds, without a declarationof war. The reduction of Chieri was regarded as especially impressivein Monluc’s effective use of artillery against what were considered tobe excellent ramparts.41 For the remainder of 1551 the two armiesscrimmaged in Italy without significant results. Technically, Henryand Charles still remained at peace by maintaining the fiction thatChef des Hommes de Guerre145they were fighting only as allies of Ottavio Famese and Julius III,respectively.It was clear, however, that the fiction could not be maintainedfor long. The festering hatreds were being aggravated by such actsas the massacre of several hundred Italian soldiers in the pay ofFrance, a French fleet’s seizure of a Spanish merchant fleet in theMediterranean, and the open overtures that the French were makingto the Turks.Henry II continued the close ties with the Turkish empire thathis father had begun, although the relationship began badly whenHenry failed to send the sultan the usual diplomatic notice of hissuccession. Henry never engaged in as blatant an alliance with thesultan as allowing the Turkish fleet to winter at Toulon, although heoffered it to them in 1552, but he hoped to coordinate his own strat¬egy with Ottoman attacks on Charles V’s lands. French ambassadorswere in residence at Constantinople, and the sultan so respected oneof them, Gabriel d’Aramon, that he took d’Aramon with him on acampaign against the Persians in 1548.42 Henry’s plans to execute acombined offensive in the summer of 1548 had failed, but in early1551 an urgent effort was made to persuade the sultan to send hisfleet against southern Italy. Simon Renard reported that the Turkshad promised to attack when the French king made a move againstCharles.43 In September 1551 Henry wrote to his agent d’Aramonthat he should urge the sultan to attack in Hungary and Italy thenext spring. D’Aramon was to arrange for the Turkish fleet to join theFrench in a joint offensive against Naples.44In the first four years of his reign, the king had been reluctantto get caught up in a large-scale conflict with Charles because of hisdoubts about the strength of his army, preferring to test and probewith limited forces. By the fall of 1551, however, Henry and his advis¬ers were ready to commit themselves to a project that would requirethe use of the military forces that he had so diligently built up andthat might lead to all-out war with Charles V—the expedition to theRhine.10 PROTECTOR OF GERMAN LIBERTIESThe close relationship between France and the Turkish em¬pire vastly complicated Henry I Fs diplomacy in Germany,where it risked alienating his most useful allies, the Lu¬theran princes. The presence of the Protestant party in theempire offered the French monarchy an arena where a relativelysmall investment in funds and diplomatic activity promised largereturns in creating problems for Charles V. Virtually from the firstappearance of the Lutheran party in Germany, the French monar¬chy sought to use it to weaken Charles V’s authority. Henry’s reign,however, got off to a bad beginning in regard to Germany, when theemperor crushed the Lutherans at Miihlberg in early April 1547 andcaptured their leaders. But Charles let his religious convictions get inthe way of statesmanship and imposed the Augsburg Interim on theempire. Its essentially Catholic position on almost all points enragedthe Lutherans.German distrust of Charles was exacerbated by the emperor’s be¬lated attempt to secure the title of Holy Roman Emperor for his son,Philip, as successor to his brother Ferdinand. Ferdinand had alreadybeen elected king of the Romans, the title of the designated suc¬cessor, but Charles hoped to replace Ferdinand’s son, Maxmilian,with his own in the line of succession. Philip’s Spanish manners andreserve contrasted sharply with Maxmilian’s outgoing personality,and his rigid Catholic orthodoxy frightened the Lutherans familiarwith Maxmilian’s more tolerant views. Charles’s labors to secure hisson’s place in the line of succession alienated those Lutheran princeswhom the interim had not already angered, as well as a number ofCatholic princes.Into this mass of alienated Germans came the leaven of FrenchProtector of German Liberties147diplomacy and promises of aid. French agents and diplomats in Ger¬many affirmed the potential for French gains at the expense of theemperor. Henry and Montmorency decided to make the most of it bypromoting the French monarch as the protector of German liberties.Henry, probably remembering the discussions in 1546 about beingelected emperor, also entertained some hope of yet gaining that titlefor himself.The news in June 1551 that the Turkish fleet was moving west¬ward further strengthened Henry’s eagerness to go to war. The dis¬patches of the imperial and the English ambassadors that summerwere full of reports of preparations for war: the raising of taxes andloans, negotiations for alliances with England, Denmark, Poland, andthe Lutheran princes, the comings and goings of Swiss and Germanmercenary captains, the movements of the French and the Turkishfleets. In early August, Renard wrote: “Nothing is talked here exceptof war.” It was his second-to-last dispatch, for by mid-August he hadbeen arrested and prohibited from reporting to Charles.1 The absenceof an imperial ambassador from the French court for nearly fouryears deprived historians of a most valuable source of information onHenry II.The arrest and eventual expulsion of the imperial ambassador wasa manifest declaration of war, but it occurred too late in the seasonfor an offensive to be mounted. Henry did order his fleet of thirty-three galleys in the Mediterranean to raid Spanish shipping, butthe French fleet was missing its commander, Leone Strozzi. He hadabandoned French service because of a conflict with Montmorencyover the appointment of Gaspard de Coligny as captain-general of thegalleys.2 In the southwest, Henri d’Albret was authorized to build uphis forces to threaten an offensive against Haute-Navarre.The crowning piece of the war preparations was the treaty withthe German Lutheran princes, negotiated in early October 1551, be¬tween Maurice of Saxony and Bishop Jean de Fresse of Bayonne, theFrench representative to the Schmalkaldic League. Acting as the “de¬fender of German liberties,” France agreed to provide the Lutheranprinces 240,000 ecus immediately to raise troops and a monthly sub¬sidy of 60,000 for an indefinite time. In return for that relativelysmall sum Henry received a prize of extraordinary value: the rightto take possession of “those towns, which, although they have be¬longed to the Empire for all time, are yet not of German speech.'They were identified as Cambrai, Toul, Metz, Verdun, “and any other148Henry IIof the same kind.” Henry was to govern them as a vicar of the HolyRoman Empire. The latter three were, of course, the famous ThreeBishoprics of Lorraine, although the treaty mentioned only the cities,not the entire dioceses. The agreement was intended to provide fora temporary occupation of the towns to defend them from Charles V,who was declared to have been violating German liberties.3A recent study of Henry’s negotiations with the Germans argues,however, that Henry and his advisers had a much broader project inmind when they signed the treaty—nothing less than the creationof a new empire of the ancient Merovingian lands of France, theLow Countries, and the Rhine valley, with Henry as its emperor.4It would have been an empire whose crown Henry would have heldby virtue of his coronation as king of France and not by election,but he would have been first among equals in regard to the Germanprinces who would belong. The Cardinal de Lorraine designed a sealfor this league/empire with the French monarch’s seal surroundedby those of the German princes. In October 1551 the bishop of Ba¬yonne reported that the princes were ready to recognize Henry astheir “superior and protector.” Henry’s repression of Protestantismin his realm did not overly concern Lutherans like Jacob Sturm ofStrasbourg, an important advocate of the alliance, who still in 1552believed that Henry was sympathetic to them and could be convincedto be their patron and even perhaps institute the Reform in France.The Guises and the La Marcks served well as symbols of this newFranco-German union, since they were feudatories of the empire whowere serving the French king. A propaganda campaign was begunto show that the Germans and the French were cousins and shouldbe united against the Latin emperor Charles of Spain. The Frenchpropagandists presented Henry as a new Charlemagne, uniting theFrench and the Germans.To what extent all of this was actually present in Henry’s mindis difficult to say, but the dispatches between him and his envoysin Germany certainly appear to undermine the account found in theMemoires de Vieilleville that presented Vieilleville as convincing aking who was reluctant to go to war because of the destruction andruin that war would bring to his people. Vieilleville is quoted as argu¬ing powerfully for seizing the opportunity to occupy the Three Bish¬oprics in order to create “an impregnable rampart for Champagneand Picardy” and open a free road to the duchy of Luxembourg andall the way to Brussels.5 Vieilleville’s account is appealing, since itProtector of Gennan Libertiesi49shows Henry in a more sympathetic way than is usual and calls intoquestion the image of the king as a warmonger. But since it conflictssharply with the diplomatic record of Henry’s active involvement inthe negotiations with the German princes, it serves better as an ex¬ample of how the author of the memoirs appears to have distortedhistory in order to enhance Vieilleville’s role in the major decisionsof Henry’s reign.On January 15, 1552, at Chambord, Henry and the council for¬mally ratified the agreement with the Germans and issued a declara¬tion of war against Charles V at the same time. On February 11 theGerman Lutherans accepted a still stronger version of the alliance.On the following day the king went before the Parlement of Paris toannounce that Queen Catherine would serve as regent if he shouldneed to lead the French army against the emperor beyond the bor¬ders of the realm. The choice of the parlement for the announcementand the king’s explanation to it of the reasons for the war were novelacts in the history of the monarchy. What, if anything, Henry meantby his appearance before the magistrates is unclear. His unexpectedarrival upset the magistrates, who had not had time to prepare forhis coming, but his appearance probably was a reflection of his highopinion of the parlement.6Tradition dictated that the regent come from among the closemembers of the royal family; but the dauphin was only eight yearsold, and the princes of blood, the Bourbons, were not in high favorwith Henry. Catherine de Medici was the only remaining possibility.While Henry tended to take little notice of his wife, except as themother of his children, he had appointed her head of a council togovern France when he went to Italy in 1548. Although the termregent is used for her position in 1552, in reality she was again thehead of a council that included Jean Bertrand, the garde des sceaux,and Admiral Claude d’Annebault. While her power clearly was lessthan that Francis I gave to Louise de Savoie as regent in 1524, it wasgreater than that Louise received in 1515, when the chancellor tookthe royal seals with him to Italy.7Henry’s address to the parlement did not mention Bertrand, butby April he apparently had emerged as presiding officer of the re¬gency council, much to the annoyance of both Catherine and d’Anne¬bault. The latter wrote to Henry complaining about it and about thequeen’s sense of humiliation at the degrading of her authority. Thereis no evidence regarding the disposition of the problem, but it must150Henry IIhave been favorable to Catherine. She threw herself into her job withenthusiasm; for example, she wrote to Cardinal de Bourbon, governorof Paris, telling him to arrest several preachers who had criticizedthe alliance with the German heretics. She involved herself so deeplyin diplomatic and military matters that the constable advised her tomoderate her efforts.8Having made the necessary preparations, Henry left the court toreview the French army near Chalons in early April. Public supportfor the war was enthusiastic; a large number of volunteers appearedin the ranks. The French cities had approved a subsidy of 1,200,000livres to pay the wages of 50,000 foot soldiers for four months’ ser¬vice. A meeting of thirty bishops and six archbishops agreed to atax of twenty livres per church steeple in the realm, which wasto raise 1,400,000 livres. A large number of nobles gave the kinggifts of silver plate and vessels for the war effort, although Henryseems never to have given any thought to taxing the nobility. Some35,250 men were present for the review: 17,400 French infantrymen,13,500 landsknechts, 1,260 lances (1,260 gens d’armes with 1,890mounted archers), 200 light cavalrymen, and 100 mounted arque-busmen. Since the king was present, the 200 gentlemen of the royalhousehold and the 400 archers of the royal guard were present aswell.9 Another 2,000 light cavalrymen and 400 mounted arquebus-men had already moved on to the east, giving a total of over 37,000men available. A home defense force of 11,000 men, including 6,000Swiss pikemen, was left under the command of Admiral d’Annebault.After complimenting each arm on its fine appearance, the kingproceeded to the testing of the artillery, some sixty pieces in all. Itsurprisingly went off without incident, which was taken as a goodomen. Henry then moved to Joinville, the Guises’ chateau, wherehis queen was seriously ill.10 While waiting for her recovery he metwith the duchess of Lorraine, Christina of Denmark, a niece of theemperor. She was serving as regent for her ten-year-old son. Henryconstrained her to place the duchy and her son under the protectionof the French monarchy, which gave him greater legal pretext for theinvasion. Shortly after, at Nancy, she was pressured into giving upthe regency to her brother-in-law, the comte de Vaudemont, who wasfar more pro-French. The young duke was sent to the French court,and his marriage to Henry’s daughter Claude, at the proper age, wasagreed upon.The French army was divided, and the vanguard commandedProtector of German Liberties151by Montmorency, very close to half of the forces available, crossedthe Meuse to Toul. Charles V, then in residence in southwest Ger¬many, had refused to believe that Maurice of Saxony and the Germanprinces were conspiring against him. It was only in March 1552 thatit had become obvious to him that he faced a serious threat from theLutherans, to his person as well as his power. By the time the Frencharmy had crossed the Meuse, Charles was rushing almost in panic tothe safety of Innsbruck. Thus, he had done nothing to strengthen thegarrisons in the cities of Lorraine and Alsace. Weakly defended andsympathetic to France, the first towns in Lorraine that Montmorencyapproached quickly capitulated. At Toul, the bishop, a Frenchman,opened the gates to the constable without a shot fired.The first resistance was met at a fortified abbey near Metz wherea small Spanish garrison made a stand. It was taken by assault andburned. Four of the defenders were hanged for presuming to makea stand against so great a force. Bringing his forces to the walls ofMetz, Montmorency demanded that the city open its gates. The cityfathers agreed to permit the constable, his principal officers, andtwo companies of infantry to enter peaceably. Montmorency chosehis best soldiers to form the two companies. Once in the city theyseized the center of the town and a gate, and any resistance wasimpossible.11Henry, who had moved the rest of the army eastward to Nancy,made his entry into Metz on April 17, Easter Sunday. According tothe Memoires de Vieilleville, the king asked Vieilleville to serve asgovernor of Metz, but he recommended that the city be left in thehands of its own mayor and council. Vieilleville argued that such amove would encourage the other towns of Lorraine and Alsace to sub¬mit peaceably. Montmorency, angry that he had not been consultedfirst, objected strongly and dismissed the need to treat Metz kindlyto encourage the other towns to submit. He declared that they wereno smarter than Metz and he would take Strasbourg and the othercities as easily as slicing butter. Henry, who usually conceded to theconstable when he was adamant, agreed to appoint Artus de Brissac,a Montmorency client, as governor.12This disregard for sound advice, it has been argued, was largelyresponsible for the failure of the expedition to the Rhine to occupy Al¬sace, since Metz proved that the French king was no more solicitousof the liberties of the empire than Charles was. The strategy of thealliance with the German Lutherans was that the French would push152Henry IIon to the Rhine and wait there for an army of the German princes tojoin them. The combined forces were then to occupy the east bank ofthe Rhine, perhaps as far as Mainz, or, as another option, push intothe eastern Low Countries.13On April 20, the king left Metz for the Rhine. At Hagenau, northof Strasbourg, Henry performed one of those acts of generosity forwhich he justly had a good reputation. In the city he found the wid¬ows and children of several of the German captains whom Charles Vhad executed in 1548 for serving the French monarchy. The execu¬tion of the noted Captain Vogelsperger and his comrades was one ofthe grievances that both the French and the Germans had againstthe emperor. Henry distributed 10,000 ecus among their families,gave commissions to several of the older sons to serve in his Germancompanies, and found places as pages in his household for nine ofthe younger boys.Despite this act of generosity and the fact that Hagenau submittedpeaceably, the French found the territory east of the Moselle con¬siderably more hostile. The Memoires de Vieilleville may well havepointed out the reason. It noted that as long as the army movedthrough French-speaking land, the populace was very friendly, andthe French wanted for nothing. As soon as the they entered German¬speaking regions, the people became hostile. It was suggested thatthe arrogance of the French troops had much to do with the changein attitude.14The city of Strasbourg let it be known that it had no intentionof admitting the French army.15 Only the king and forty of his gen¬tlemen were to be permitted to enter, and the French troops wereforbidden to come within cannon range of the walls. Since it was awell-defended city, Henry decided against attempting to storm it. Thedecision was prompted further by the arrival of a delegation from theGerman princes urging him not to proceed any further. The Germansmade it clear that if the French did push on, the act would rally manyin Germany to the emperor. Compounding the need for caution wasthe news that Mary of Hungary, Charles’s sister and his regent inthe Low Countries, had gathered a large force in Luxembourg thatthreatened the French lines of communication, and northern Franceitself.Accordingly, having “watered his horses in the Rhine” as Henryhad pledged to do, the French army turned back on May 13, althoughMaurice of Saxony urged Henry to remain on the Rhine in order toProtector of German Liberties153rally the German princes.16 On the return the French entered severaltowns in Luxembourg, but only in two cases, Ivoy and Damvillars,was sharp resistance encountered. On June 12 Henry entered Ver¬dun, but the splendor of his entry had to be reduced because of thepresence of the plague. In late June the king reentered his realm andrecalled his authority from the regent and her council. On July 26 heformally discharged about half of the troops, sending most of thosestill in service, under the command of Antoine de Bourbon, on toinvest Hesdin, an important fort in Artois in imperial hands. Henrywas back in Fontainebleau by mid-August.The Promenade to the Rhine, or the Austrasian Expedition, orthe Voyage to Germany, the latter term used by Henry himself, 17was one of the most successful military excursions in French his¬tory. At very little cost in lives or property the French monarchy hadestablished its control over three strategic positions on its northeastborders and gave itself a foothold in Lorraine from which it wouldnever be dislodged. Furthermore, the pro-Habsburg regent in Lor¬raine was replaced by a pro-French one, and the young duke broughtto the French court to be wedded to the king’s daughter. The Frenchpresence in Lorraine was irreversible.Some historians have used the term “the natural borders ofFrance” to define the goals that Henry had in mind for the expedi¬tion.18 It is, however, not clear that Henry thought that way in 1552.Sixteenth-century monarchs thought largely in terms of dynasticclaims and historical precedents. The Rhine was so distant from theFrench border of the time and so remote from any dynastic claimor precedent, except perhaps for the Frankish kingdom of Austrasia,that it is difficult to conceive of Henry having a premeditated plan ofconquest of territory beyond those cities to which his treaty with theGermans gave him a claim. Henry did have an excellent eye for thestrategic importance of forts and walled cities, and the occupation ofLorraine, if not Alsace, clearly had its strategic value for protectingnortheastern France from attack from Germany or the Low Coun¬tries. Ultimately, however, the key motivation may well have beensimply the desire to humiliate his bitter enemy by aiding Charles’sGerman enemies.Having decided for whatever reason to march to the Rhine, Henryshowed considerable wisdom in turning back without trying to oc¬cupy the Rhineland, despite rumblings of discontent in the army atthe decision to turn back when conquest seemed so sure. At numer-154Henry IIous times before and after in French history, French rulers failedto recognize the limitations of their power and pushed beyond themonly to be met with defeat and at times catastrophe. It can be arguedthat Henry himself was guilty of that flaw in regard to the Italianexpedition of 1557, but in 1552 the general intelligence of Henry’sdecisions deserves the recognition of historians.After the Promenade to the Rhine, Henry II and his advisers ex¬pected that the revolt of the German princes would have so weakenedCharles V that he could not retaliate. Unfortunately for them, thosecalculations were not accurate. The march of the French to the Rhinebadly frightened the German princes, as did the advance of the Turksinto central Europe, which the French had encouraged. Charles V,furthennore, was by no means as powerless as the French thought hewas in April 1552. Although he was aging rapidly and nearly crippledwith gout, Charles was still capable of vigorous action, especially ifit involved striking back at the hated Valois. He swallowed his prideand agreed to have his brother Ferdinand negotiate with the rebelprinces at Passau in June 1552. Maurice of Saxony, who by the actof discussing terms was breaking his alliance with France, agreed tomarch into Hungary to fight the Turks.One Lutheran prince, Margrave Albert of Brandenburg, still re¬mained allied with Henry. His substantial army of more than 15,000men marauding in the Rhine valley posed a serious threat to the em¬peror, should he move to recover Lorraine. For a time Charles’s prideand resentment prevented any approach to the margrave. Thus theassembling of an army to retake Metz had to be delayed. It was notuntil October that Charles, persuaded by the duke of Alba, who hadarrived from Spain with a large force, agreed to treat with Albert.Winning him to the imperial side with amnesty and extensive con¬cessions, Charles then threw all of his energy into preparing an armyto recapture Metz.The recovery of Metz could occupy the emperor’s full attentionbecause the other hot spots of Europe had cooled down, at least tem¬porarily. In Italy the War of Parma had ground to a halt as a resultof negotiations between Julius III and Cardinal de Toumon, back inroyal favor after being absent since 1547. The pope also swallowedhis pride and granted extensive concessions to the French-supportedFamese. The Famese were confirmed in their territories for two yearswhile further negotiations were to be carried on. An armistice thatinvolved only the Famese and the pope was agreed upon, but theProtector of German Liberties155French and imperial forces, while not directly included, disengagedas well.Shortly after the French success in the Parma conflict came afar more noteworthy gain in Italy. Encouraged by French agents andvarious fuorusciti—Italian political exiles who had the active supportof the French queen—the people of Siena on July 26, 1552 expelledthe Spanish garrison that held the city for Charles V. The cry ofthe rebellion was: “Francia! Francia!”19 The newly restored republicimmediately called on Henry II for protection against the expectedreturn of the imperial forces. The French king was only too pleasedto honor that request.20 At the beginning of October Cardinal d’Estereceived a commission from Henry to serve as his lieutenant-generalin Siena and was given 12,000 ecus and 4,500 French infantrymento defend the city. This unexpected turn of events gave the French astrong position in north-central Italy from which they could threatenFlorence, where Cosimo de Medici was an imperial ally, outflank theimperial positions in Piedmont, or move quickly into the Papal States.Although all knew that Charles could not let the defection of Siena gounchallenged, in late 1552 other matters concerned him more. For atime no overt action against the city was in evidence.Northern Italy was, therefore, relatively quiet in the fall of 1552.So also was the south. The Turkish fleet had anchored in the Bayof Naples in mid-June with the French agent d’Aramon aboard tocoordinate a joint attack on some imperial position in the region. TheFrench fleet, however, failed to leave Marseille in time to rendezvouswith the Turks before the Turkish fleet left the area on July 22.21 Thesultan had also pushed a great offensive into western Hungary inthe summer of 1552, but the arrival of Maurice of Saxony and otherProtestant leaders in August blunted that attack and forced the Turksto retreat into winter quarters earlier than usual.With other trouble areas either quiet or put on hold, Charles feltfree to gather a huge force to retake Metz, although he surely wasaware that the army could not reach the city until well after thecampaigning season was over. Henry, of course, expected a counter¬attack, although he hoped that the German Lutherans would occupyCharles’s attention longer than they did. Thus he did not expect theattack until the next spring. In order to be prepared for it, Henryappointed Francois de Guise as his lieutenant-general in Metz inAugust 1552. At the same time he ordered that as much grain aspossible be purchased in Flanders in order to deprive the enemy156Henry IIof supplies. Piero Strozzi arrived at Metz several days later to serveas the chief engineer. Also present was the Frenchman Saint-Remy,whom the Memoires de Vieilleville called “the most ingenious in for¬tification building,” praising his prominence in a discipline at whichthe Italians believed themselves to be the only experts. Montmorencyhad captured Metz so easily because of the weakness of its defenses,so Guise and Strozzi faced the major task of strengthening them towithstand the assault of a great army. Vieilleville argued that strongdefenses, especially a powerful citadel, were essential for a city, notonly for defense against an invader, but also to forestall the possibilityof revolt or mutiny in the city.22Frangois de Guise showed himself at his best during the prepa¬rations for the attack on Metz. His courtesy to the Messians reducedtheir resistance to the extensive demolition of houses and churchesnecessary for the defense and overcame the problems caused bythe presence of thousands of troops. According to the Memoires deVieilleville, some inhabitants aided in the demolition of their ownhomes. His example to his soldiers was also inspiring, appearing atall hours of the day or night to encourage his engineers and laborerson the walls. “He was not seen to waste a single hour” and took upshovel and pick himself to give example to his men, who numberedat least 6,ooo.23The huge imperial army, nearly 80,000 men in number, movedinto Lorraine in October. Henry’s strategy was to send Montmorencywith a force of 50,000 men to harass Charles’s army and perhapsprevent it from reaching Metz or Verdun. The defense of the lattercity had been entrusted to Saint-Andre. With the constable was one ofthe younger Guise brothers, the due d’Aumale. He was captured andheld for ransom; the demand for 60,000 ecus complicated relationsbetween France and the Habsburgs for the next two years.The emperor also had devised a strategy that effectively foiledthat of the French. An imperial army pushed into Picardy and laidsiege to the fortress of Hesdin, which had changed hands twice in theprevious year. Henry ordered 22,000 men from his forces in Cham¬pagne to Picardy, having received assurances from Guise that he hadenough men to defend Metz. The decision was well advised, sincethe loss of Metz would have merely placed the frontier back whereit had been a year earlier, along a string of powerful forts in Cham¬pagne. The permanent loss of Hesdin, on the other hand, would haveProtector of German Liberties157cracked the defensive perimeter that protected Amiens and, beyondit, Paris. Henry intended to go himself to Hesdin but was dissuaded.24The defense of Metz was one of the great feats in the annals of thesixteenth century. Frangois de Guise rightly has received much ofthe glory; he was the heart and soul of the French forces in the city.Henry, however, does deserve some reflected glory. He took a very ac¬tive interest in the prepar ations for the siege and its course. Since theimperial forces never completely sealed off the city, a vast numberof letters passed back and forth between Metz and the court. Thosefrom Henry and Montmorency were filled with advice, recommenda¬tions, and notices of tactical moves that they were making to defeatthe emperor. To what extent Guise followed the advice is impossibleto say, but he always took time to thank the king and the constableprofusely, and intimate that their suggestions were being carried out.The only request that Guise made was for more artillery.25 Henryspent most of the time of the siege at Reims and Soissons in order tobe close to the fighting; he then moved to Compiegne in order to bemidway between the fighting in Picardy and Lorraine.Slowed by foul weather, the imperial army had not reached Metzuntil October 14; by October 20 the city was under full siege. OnNovember 20 Charles V finally arrived, carried on a litter. It wasonly after his arrival that the battering of the walls began in earnest.The imperialists concentrated on the south wall since the other threesides of Metz were protected by rivers. After several changes in thechoice of points on the wall to concentrate their fire, they settled onthe “Tour d’Enfer,” which they hammered with forty great guns. OnNovember 28 the tower and part of the curtain wall collapsed, leavinga breach some fifty paces across. The elation of the imperial soldierswas crushed when they saw that Guise had erected an earthen walleight feet high behind the curtain wall. The shock of finding anotherformidable defensive work bristling with French arms so disheart¬ened the imperial commanders that they refused to order an assaulton the ramparts, despite Charles’s insistence. They continued thebombardment of the wall at another point, caused it to collapse, andfound it backed by a similar earthern wall.26The imperial forces were completely demoralized, which condi¬tion the terrible weather of the last two months of 1552 did muchto compound. They were said to be among the coldest and wettestmonths in memory, and the Spaniards and the Italians suffered espe-158Henry IIciallv severely. Charles’s adamant refusal to admit defeat prolongedthe misery of his army until Christmas, when he finally gave the or¬der to retreat. In hope of a last-second miracle, Charles remained inthe camp until January 1, when he began his return to Brussels.When the French moved into the abandoned imperial camp, theyfound a most pitiable scene “like that of a badly beaten army ratherthan one that merely raised a siege.”27 In addition to a vast numberof new graves, a great many men and horses lay unburied on thewet ground, intermingled with an equal or greater number of sickand wounded men. Francois de Guise, whose reputation as a greatcommander the defense of Metz irrevocably established, also firmlyestablished a reputation for humaneness by his care for the unfortu¬nate men left behind in the imperial retreat.28 The French also foundin the abandoned tent of the emperor six magnificent tapestries thatwere a century old and part of his legacy from the dukes of Burgundy.Their abandonment was highly symbolic, for in retreating from MetzCharles had also abandoned any hope of recovering the full inheri¬tance of his Burgundian ancestors.Guise rushed the news of the retreat of the enemy, once he wasconvinced of its truth, to Henry. In an effusive letter of praise theking told the duke that he would write a personal letter of thanks toall of the nobles and captains who had served in Metz. He also or¬dered food rushed to the city.29 Henry had already received good newsfrom Artois where, on December 19, 1552, Antoine de Bourbon tookHesdin in a two-day assault.30 Late 1552 had also seen several smallvictories in Piedmont. One can imagine, therefore, the enormous joyat the French court in the first days of 1553. When Guise and othernotables involved in the war in Lorraine arrived at Fontainebleauat the end of January, they were greeted as conquering heroes, andHenry ordered a commemorative medal to be struck in honor of thedefense of Metz. In early February the court celebrated the marriageof Henry’s legitimized daughter, Diane, to Orazio Famese, who hadbeen in Metz for the siege.In the fall of 1553, because of his extensive borrowing of thatyear, Henry was awash in borrowed money. Nonetheless, he veryrapidly disbanded his forces after the siege of Metz clearly had beenlifted. He and his advisers were convinced that there was nothing tofear from Charles in the near future. Much of the available moneywas turned over to the celebrations of the victory at Metz and theProtector of German Liberties159marriage of Diane de France. Rabutin wrote that the just-concludedwar was spoken of only in murmurs, while all spoke openly only offestivals, games, and pastimes.31 After a hard and often dangerousyear, Henry clearly felt entitled to enjoy himself in the company ofhis friends and family.11 WAR AND TRUCEHenry II’s decision to enjoy the victory at Metz with anextensive round of pleasure-taking and festivities, mostlyat Saint-Germain-en-Laye, was the one point in his reignthat he lost his concentration on the dominant goal of hisreign—the ruin of Charles V. Convinced that Charles could not makea new enterprise in 1553, Henry failed to follow up on the victoryat Metz, enabling the emperor to gather a substantial army in theNetherlands. In early April 1553 Charles directed it toward Picardy.Before Henry had a chance to react, the imperial forces investedthe fortified town of Therouanne, an isolated French outpost thrustbetween Calais to the east and imperial-ruled Flanders. Therouannewas a valuable salient; in particular, it threatened any English armymoving out of Calais. Accordingly, it was kept in good repair andwell provisioned. Even with the surprise attack, it took the imperialforces over a month to reduce the fort. In late June the fortress fellto Charles’s men, who razed it and captured 1,000 men, includingFrancois de Montmorency, the constable’s oldest son.1The fall of Therouanne was a great shock to the French. Mont¬morency had made light of the attack on the fortress to the Englishambassador, only to have to inform him the next day of its fall. WhenHenry heard the news, he was reported to have thrown himself on hisbed and spoken to no one except Diane de Poitiers and Saint-Andrefor a full day. Henry was said also to have been deeply angered atMontmorency for having assured him that the fort was in no danger.Henry had so completely disbanded his forces after Metz that it tookthe French well into the summer to organize an army.2 The imperialarmy easily pushed on to Hesdin, putting that fort under siege for thethird time in less than a year. The fortress had not been sufficientlyWar and Truce161repaired after the French assault on it six months earlier, and a newfort in the area planned at an estimated cost of 100,000 ecus had notyet been begun. Hesdin quickly succumbed to the imperial artillery,surrendering on July 19. It suffered the same fate as Therouanne.Among those killed at Hesdin was Orazio Famese, the recent groomof Diane de France, and the captives included Robert de La Marck,the son-in-law of Diane de Poitiers.The death of Orazio Famese sparked a major crisis at Henrv’scourt. It left Diane de France a widow only a few months after herwedding. The constable hoped to make his bond with the king moresecure by arranging for her marriage to his eldest son, Francois. Notonly did Henry agree to the marriage, but he also named Francoisgovernor of Paris and the Ile-de-France, although at that momenthe was a prisoner in Flanders. Before he had gone off to the war inPicardy, however, he had privately pledged marriage to Jeanne dePiennes, one of Catherine de Medici’s filles d’honneur. In both civiland church law of the time, such pledges of marriage were binding.After Francois was ransomed, his father was furious with him forthwarting his plans for aggrandizing the family and strengtheninghis position with the king. The constable went in a rage to his hotelin Paris where he spoke to no one for two weeks.3Montmorency, however, was not about to concede defeat. He ar¬ranged for Mademoiselle de Piennes to be taken to a convent in hopethat she could be persuaded to become a nun and release his sonfrom his vow. The son was sent off to Rome to get a papal dispen¬sation to allow him to marry Diane de France. After a protractedhearing, Paul IV, who usually did not allow his political needs ofthe moment to interfere with his judicial decisions, refused the dis¬pensation. Montmorency then got a favorable opinion from the Sor-bonne and persuaded Henry to issue a decree that all marriages, pastand future, made without parental consent were invalid. Francoisde Montmorency wrote to Jeanne de Piennes releasing her from hispledge and begging her to do the same for him. The constable hadalready arranged for her to marry Florimond Robertet, who becamea secretary of state in 1560, and receive 40,000 livres from the king.Francois and Diane were married in May 1557.4This affair had its implications for foreign policy, since Mont¬morency was much more determined to break the alliance with thepapacy after Paul’s refusal. It also had its implication at court, for thequeen, always protective of her ladies-in-waiting, was furious with162Henry IIthe constable. She cast her weight on the side of the Guises in thedebate over French involvement in Italy, ending the balancing actbetween her affection for her “best gossip” and her desire to see thefuomsciti victorious in Florence. But it did not harm her relationshipwith Diane de France, which always remained warm. It was Dianewho saw to it that Catherine’s last wishes were carried out, bringingher body back from Blois to be buried with Henry in Saint-Denis.Indeed, all of the court loved Diane, and she always remained onintimate tenns with her siblings.Henry hardly needed the tears of his daughter to rouse himself toaction against the emperor, but the failure of French intelligence toinform him of Charles’s activities prior to the attack on Therouanneleft him slow- to respond to the imperial invasion. Montmorency wasgiven most of the blame for the situation, although it may well havebeen an example of “the fiction of the evil adviser” at work, permit¬ting the critics to avoid criticizing the king. The more malicious saidthat the constable was a coward for failing to follow up on the victoryat Metz by pursuing the beaten imperials into Flanders and therewould be no hard fighting as long as he was head of the army.5The due de Guise ought to have profited from Montmorency’sdiscomfiture and well may have behind the scenes, but at least pub¬licly he had largely withdrawn from view in the year after Metz.He had the good sense to avoid antagonizing the king by overplay¬ing his triumphs and nourishing the king’s envy, at least until 1558.Certainly one could forgive Henry for an occasional pang of envy inregard to his brilliant commander. One of the few boons that Guiseasked for after Metz was that Henry give the governorship of Metzto Vieilleville, replacing Artus de Brissac, Montmorency’s client. Theconstable’s anger at Henry’s agreement created a period of bad bloodbetween him and Guise.6Nonetheless, Montmorency clearly remained Henry’s dominantadviser in this period; it is demonstrated by the fact that Guise wasnot called on to command a large French force for three years afterthe defense of Metz. It was Montmorency, along with Saint-Andre,who commanded the French army in Picardy in the campaign of1553. The constable’s tactical style is obvious in the campaign thatthe French undertook in August; he took a largely defensive pos¬ture, with little thought given to taking the offensive against a muchsmaller army. The army that he gathered at Amiens was some 36,000strong, while Charles’s was at best 25,000 men. Despite having theWar and Truce163larger force, Montmorency proceeded very cautiously, using it onlyto force the imperials to raise the siege of Doullens, less than twentymiles north of Amiens, in mid-August. Henry joined the army at thatpoint, leaving Catherine as regent in his absence, but his presencefailed to spark it to greater accomplishments.7Henry and Montmorency were always very cautious in the useof the French army in Picardy, except for its use in the taking ofCalais in 1558, but never so much so as in the campaign of 1553.By September Montmorency had become extremely ill, to the pointthat many thought he was dying, and his physical problems likelywere reflected in the army’s poor performance. Francis DeCrue, usu¬ally sympathetic to the constable, conceded his pitiful performance:“Commanding a magnificent army he seemed to search uselessly foran easy victory, recoiling before the slightest appearance of an ob¬stacle.”8 He was the object of derision and lampoons.9 Nonetheless,the army of Picardy remained Montmorency’s command. For what¬ever reason, Henry refused to take it away from him, nor did the kingsuggest a more effective way to use it.Although king and constable gave a poor performance in Picardyin the campaign of 1553, it can be argued that they were distractedby events in England that year. From mid-February on, the reportson the health of young King Edward VI were grave. The conclusiveaddition of England, a second-rate power in this era, to the Frenchor the imperial side would not have too drastically affected the bal¬ance of power; but it would have reduced considerably the militaryand political problems of the side winning England’s service and in¬creased those of the loser. The threat to France of an England firmlyallied to the Habsburgs was substantial. It would have given con¬trol of Calais, the “key to France,” to Charles, threatened the Frenchposition in Scotland, and completed the Habsburg encirclement ofFrance. On the other hand, an English-French pact would have ef¬fectively closed off the Channel to shipping between Spain and theNetherlands and presented the real possibility of the half-FrenchMary Stuart, the great-granddaughter of Henry VII, gaining the En¬glish throne at some point.During the four years that the duke of Northumberland directedthe English government, he favored France because of his fear ofCharles’s intrigues to place Mary Tudor on the throne. He was willingto concede Boulogne in order to remove a sore point, which per¬mitted the two sides to draw closer in policy. The illness of Edward164Henry IIthreatened Northumberland’s hold on power and the pro-French pol¬icy. Henry sent the capable Antoine de Noailles, the eldest of threebrothers to serve there, to England as ambassador to try to turn theconfusion in England over the forthcoming royal succession to hisadvantage. Charles likewise sent his best diplomat, Simon Renard,who for a time had been ambassador in France.Charles’s goal in the last days of Edward’s life was to ensure thesuccession of his cousin Mary, a task that proved to be simpler thanit appeared in early 1553. Henry’s policy was more complex. He re¬garded Northumberland as a useful, if unreliable, ally and did not letthe duke’s support of Protestantism stand in the way of foreign policy.In order to keep him in power, which required excluding Mary fromthe throne, Noailles actively supported the accession of Lady JaneGrey, Northumberland’s daughter-in-law. Of course the French ex¬pected to exact a price for their support: England was to turn over theCalais Pale and Ireland. In anticipation of the success of the conspir¬acy Montmorency reportedly sent a letter to the governor of Calaiscalling on him to surrender his forts to the French.10Henry and his advisers were both genuinely surprised and deeplydisappointed when word came from England in mid-July 1553 thatMary had been acclaimed queen. Coming in the midst of the im¬perial offensive in Picardy, it augured ill for the French. Even moreominous was the prospect of her marriage to Charles’s son, Philip.The French did all that was possible to convince Mary to marry anEnglishman, but to no avail.11 The new queen and her mentor, theemperor, did make several concessions to try to ease French fearsabout the proposed marriage to Philip, but the marriage compact ofDecember 1553 did nothing to reduce French anxieties.12 Englandwas for the foreseeable future going to be firmly in the Habsburgcamp. Not only would the French fears about Calais and the Chan¬nel appear likely to be realized, but even more terrifying than thepresence of Prince Philip in England as royal consort was the in¬heritance intended for the first son of the union. He would inheritthe Netherlands and Franche-Comte along with England and, in de¬fault of Philip’s son, Prince Carlos, surviving or having heirs, Spain,Naples, and Milan as well. The ultimate threat to the French monar¬chy was that such a child would also inherit the old English claim tothe throne of France, a title that the English monarchs of this era stillused. If a son of Mary and Philip wanted to make good that claim, hewould have the full resources of the Habsburg empire behind him.War and Truce165Little wonder, then, that Henry II, in conversing with the Englishambassador on December 18, “showed by his gestures and drawlinghalf-swallowed words that he was so exceedingly put out that hecould not frame a reply or finish his sentences.” It was left to theconstable to put into intelligible form the French objections to themarriage.13The danger to France of an England in Habsburg control had beenmade manifestly clear by the capture from the French of the smallChannel island of Sark in September 1553 by a Dutch captain. AsSimon Renard wrote to Charles V, “the island can afford the means tocause great damage and annoyance to the French,” but the Englishhad never attempted to seize it to avoid war with France. By the endof the year, the French had retaken the island, but its importancewas demonstrated by the 1,000 man force dispatched to effect therecapture.14The French had been conspiring against Mary even before thedeath of Edward. When they failed to prevent her accession and hermarriage to Prince Philip, they turned to more active interference ininternal English politics. E. H. Harbison has argued that the consta¬ble’s illness in the fall of 1553 allowed the Guises to push a harderline against England. While it is true that Montmorency was absentfrom the court for about six weeks, Henry twice visited him at Chan¬tilly for periods of five or six days and wrote to him every day theywere apart. Furthermore, to argue that Henry needed the influenceof the Guises to see the danger of the Spanish marriage is to un¬derestimate seriously the political foresight of both the king and theconstable.15Ambassador Noailles had made contact with dissatisfied English¬men, and instructions of November 23 gave him the authority toencourage dissent. In January (well after Montmorency’s return tothe court) Noailles was told to suggest to the disaffected English thata rebellion against the queen would get French aid. With promisesof French money, munitions, and perhaps even soldiers, the con¬spirators organized what became known as Wyatt’s rebellion. By mid-January Henry and Montmorency were convinced that there wasgoing to be a rebellion in England and that France would get directlyinvolved. The Atlantic fleet was ordered to prepare for action; royal of¬ficials were sent to the Norman coast; and Henry searched for moneyfor a war.In January 1554 the French were probably more eager to of-166Henry IIfer military aid than the English rebels were to accept it, since aidfrom the ancient enemy would compromise any English faction.16 AFrench courier was dispatched on January 26 to London with 5,000ecus and a pledge of support to the rebels.17 By the time he arrived,the conspirators had already taken arms and called for a public up¬rising. The failure of even a small part of the populace to join therevolt doomed it to defeat, and by February 7 the rebel leaders werein chains. Prince Philip, already wedded to the queen by proxy, ar¬rived in England in July 1554. and England was now securely, if onlytemporarily, in the Habsburg camp. Henry’s efforts to suborn En¬glishmen into treason had failed, but the very fact that he had backeda rebellion against legitimate authority, which violated every instinctof the sixteenth-century prince, demonstrated yet again the depth ofhis hatred and fear of Charles V.Henry, for his part, might have replied that Mary Tudor was notthe legitimate ruler of England, a tack he took in regard to Siena,where his men and money had helped to topple the pro-Habsburggovernment in 1552. After Henry had declared the city a Frenchprotectorate, he rushed more men and money to Siena and installedCardinal Ippolito d’Este as governor. Choosing d’Este proved to be amistake because of his high-handed treatment of the Sienese. For sixmonths, however, everything went smoothly for the French becausethe viceroy of Naples, Pedro de Garcia, had to delay a response tothe loss of the city until he had gathered a large force of ships andsoldiers. In January 1553 he marched northward and laid siege toSiena but was forced to lift it in June when the arrival of the Ottomanfleet off Naples required strengthening the garrisons in the south.The relationship between the sultan and the French monarch waslikely at its best in late 1552. In November, just after Charles hadlaid siege to Metz, Henry had written to Suleiman II requesting himto send his fleet against Italy the next spring and offering him theuse of a French harbor to winter the fleet.18 In the spring of 1553 theFrench naval captain and occasional diplomat Baron de La Garde wassent to Constantinople to coordinate a Turkish attack in conjunctionwith the French fleet. He was also to convince Suleiman to appoint adifferent commander for the Turkish fleet since Henry did not trustthe current one.19 The Ottoman fleet reached southern Italy in earlyJune, resulting in the lifting of the siege of Siena. By early July it wasoff the coast of Tuscany, w'here the French galleys joined it.With Siena momentarily out of danger, Paul de Termes, theWar and Truce167French military commander in Tuscany, and Ippolito d’Este per¬suaded Henry to use the vast naval power available to him for a newproject—the conquest of Corsica.20 The island held a crucial positionin the lines of communication across the western Mediterranean.It was particularly important for the Spanish, since the presence ofMoslem galleys south of Sardinia forced all traffic between Spain andItaly to pass by Corsica and usually to put into its harbors. Cardinald'Este also advised that an attack on Corsica would deflect pressurefrom Siena. Henry himself defended the expedition on the groundsthat the Spanish were about to occupy the island.Corsica was governed by the republic of Genoa, which had beenmaintaining a precarious neutrality in the war. When the combinedTurkish-French fleet appeared off Bastia and landed 4,000 infantry¬men, it brought Genoa, with its considerable naval and financial re¬sources, into the war on the side of Charles V. But Genoa found itimpossible to reinforce its defenses on the island, and by the endof September 1553, only the fort of Calvi held out. Despite the easymilitary victory, the invasion of Corsica was costly to the French: ithigh-handedly violated the neutrality of Genoa and brought it intothe war on the other side, and it gave the Christian world still anotherblatant example of the French fighting alongside the infidel againstChristian forces.21Despite the negative aspects of the occupation of Corsica, theFrench controlled the island for the next six years, and Henry setabout establishing a government for it, appointing de Termes as gov¬ernor. From the first years of his reign he had recognized the needto establish a better system of supervision over the provincial andoverseas officials. The outbreak of the gabelle revolt when he wasout of the realm impressed on him the need to improve his controlover the provinces. Thus he expanded the system of sending maitresdes requites de I’hotel du roi into the provinces. As the title suggests,they had originally received appeals and requests from the variouslevels of government to present to the king. By 1547 they had becomethe principal assistants to the chancellor in supervising the judicicalsystem at the provincial level. Henry added six more to the eighteenin existence when he became king. In the edict that expanded theirnumber, Henry also added to their duties and powers. They wereobliged to undertake regular tours of the local courts and report anyabuse of office by local officials. Already in 1548 the term intendantwas in use for those maitres des requites who were sent to supervisei68Henry IIthe provincial governors. An edict of 1553 more specifically describedtheir duties as attending to the matters of justice and finance.Michel Antoine has declared that the true origins of the inten-dant ought to be sought in the governor’s councils created by Henryin such lands as Piedmont and Corsica.22 The king always movedquickly to incorporate newly occupied territory into the realm withthe exception of the Three Bishoprics, which kept their old govern¬ments because Henry governed them as fiefs of the Holy Roman Em¬pire. In Italy and Corsica he appointed French governors; and wherelocal institutions did not correspond to the French, new ones basedon French models were erected. Henry moved to impose tighter royalcontrol over the new governors and their governments, necessary be¬cause of the greater distances involved. The solution Henry found toeffect such control was to place royal officials in the governor’s coun¬cils with the authority to supervise the officers of the new provinces.In Piedmont that official was called the surintendant des finances, inCorsica, the intendant de la justice. Both positions were filled by menof the long robe. The commission given in 1555 to Pierre Panisse,former president of the Cour des Aides of Montpellier, as intendant ofjustice and police in Corsica, used terms that were virtually identicalto those used in the commissions for intendants of the next century.The fact that Henry, as a result of the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis,soon abandoned the occupied lands and uprooted their French offi¬cials did not destroy the principle established. After the strife of thereligious wars, the French monarchs again turned to Henry’s offi¬cers to secure tighter control over their provinces, giving rise to theintendant of the next century.The success of the Corsican enterprise did compensate for thedismal campaign of the summer of 1553 in Artois. The king was de¬termined to make a better showing in 1554. In the spring the Frenchforces were divided into three armies that were sent into Artois, Hain-ault, and Luxembourg. One was commanded by Charles de Bourbon-Montpensier; a second by Francois de Nevers; and the largest byMontmorency. Francois de Guise appeared again only as a captainof a company of 100 lances. These armies devastated the southernNetherlands and captured several fortresses. The most important ofthese was Marienburg, which Montmorency stormed in late June; itsname was changed to Henrienbourg. In late July the three armieswere reunited, and Henry reviewed his forces on July 29. Since heintended to lead his army beyond the borders of the realm, he againWar and Truce169appointed a regency council with the queen at its head.23 His inten¬tion was to march to Brussels, but Charles V’s new commander inthe Netherlands, Emmanuel-Philibert of Savoy, foiled that plan withhis own strategy of marching toward Boulogne. The plan of attackingBoulogne appears to have been designed to show the English thatthe Spanish marriage of the queen could pay dividends.The French army’s march westward to defend the Boulonnaiswas halted by the imperial fort of Renti, to which Henry laid siege.The imperial forces moved into the area to relieve it. There thenoccurred the largest field battle of the year, although the Frenchforces involved, under the command of Nevers, Coligny, and Guise,numbered only some 2,000 men. Guise had been sent to shadow theimperial army, but on August 13 he suddenly found himself facingthe entire enemy force. By a clever ruse, using a forest for cover andwell supported by infantry under Coligny, he inflicted a sharp blowon the enemy, but the inability of Henry and Montmorency to decidehow to follow up that advantage prevented a possibly decisive victory.Charles was able to resupply Renti, and in mid-September Henryordered the siege lifted and disbanded his army for the winter.24The only meaningful result of the campaign of 1554 was the de¬cision to build a fort at Rocroi. With Marienburg in French hands, afort at Rocroi would control the only road across the Ardennes west ofthe Meuse river.25 It soon became a formidable stronghold and was amajor obstacle to any force pushing southward from the Netherlandsfor the next two centuries.As seen by contemporary French, however, the campaign of 1554was a great disappointment, since they had a clear advantage in man¬power. The English ambassador Wooton remarked that, except fortaking Marienburg, the French did nothing “to boast of in this expe¬dition beyond the burning and spoiling of all sorts of poor people.”26By the end of 1554 it was clear that Henry and Montmorency hadbecome too cautious in the field; they were unwilling to commit theirforces to battle even against what was described as “a beaten andalmost flying enemy.” It was suggested that the constable was moreinterested in ransoming his son than in defeating the imperials andthat he realized his more talented rivals, Frangois de Guise espe¬cially, would outshine him in battle and capture the king’s favor.-Nonetheless, Montmorency still was the dominant influence at thecourt.The failure of French designs in the Netherlands was com-170Henrv IIpounded by the greater disappointment of French plans in Italy. InAugust 1554 Cosimo de Medici of Florence, involved in the war be¬cause of Florentine claims on Siena and his hatred for Piero Strozzi,newly appointed governor of Siena, inflicted a serious defeat onStrozzi at Marciano. Strozzi’s defeat was caused largely by the fail¬ure of the French-Ottoman fleet to bring him the 4,000 men thathad been used a year earlier to invade Corsica. The missed oppor¬tunity was typical of the French-Turkish alliance, which promisedgreat benefits to France but produced very few. La Garde, who servedaboard the Turkish fleet as the French liaison, complained on severaloccasions about his inability to prevent the Turks from plundering thecoastal towns of Italy and seizing Christians as slaves. John Mason,serving as English ambassador to the emperor in 1554, referred tothe poor Christian souls who had fallen into Moslem hands by meansof the French king. He wrote that Henry was gaining nothing byhis alliance with the sultan except dishonor and the wrath of God.28La Garde received a cold reception when he returned to the Frenchcourt in late 1554, because of the problems in the Mediterranean.Henry, however, had to continue to use him because Leone Strozzi,a more capable galley commander, had been killed in battle shortlyafter returning to French service earlier in 1554. But Rene de Guise,not La Garde, received Strozzi’s title of grand prior.29After his defeat at Marciano, Piero Strozzi, newly created mar¬shal of France, was forced to retreat into Siena, and the city wasbesieged. Strozzi chafed under the inactivity of governing a city andhad asked Henry for a coadjutor to govern Siena while he com¬manded in the field. The king consulted with Montmorency, Guise,and Saint-Andre since “all things passed through the hands of thesethree.” After they had suggested candidates, Henry noted that no onehad nominated Blaise de Monluc. Montmorency objected strongly be¬cause he greatly disliked Monluc and was annoyed at having his ad¬vice disregarded. But Henry stood fast and placed Monluc in Siena.30Thus it was Monluc who was in command in Siena during thelong and dreadful siege that lasted from September 1554 to April1555. On April 12 Monluc and the French forces marched out withfull military honors as the Spanish marched in. The loss of Sienawas a serious blow, since Henry had hoped to use it as the centerof his efforts to control Italy. Henry’s failure to relieve Siena, despitenumerous promises and false reports of relief, was also an embarrass¬ment. The blame must fall firstly on Strozzi and Charles de Brissac,War and Truce171the French commanders in Italy, for failing to make a real effort tolift the siege. Brissac was having some success in Piedmont and didnot want to give up an opportunity for a great victory. Henry andhis advisers were also surprisingly passive in light of the strategicand symbolic importance of Siena. The king’s pledge to avenge thedefeat of Strozzi went unfulfilled, largely because of lack of reinforce¬ments from France, although he did send 500,000 ecus to Siena inlate 1554. A factor, however, in the loss of the city was the refusalof the principal French officers in Italy to agree on a plan of action.Henry was said to have complained bitterly about the feuds amonghis people, especially between Strozzi and d’Este.31It may well have been that the strong words of support for Sienathat Henry voiced were for the benefit of his wife, who took a pas¬sionate interest in the effort to defeat her hated cousin Cosimo. Theyear 1554 was the high point of the influence at the French court ofthe Italian exiles, who saw a French victory in Italy as a ticket hometo Florence or Naples. The loss of Siena reduced their importanceand created a clear rift between those determined to push Henryinto redoubling his efforts in Italy and those who began to accommo¬date themselves to Charles V. Some of the Italians disappeared fromthe French court and dropped off the pension roll. Strozzi himselfreached the French court in July 1555, where he was coldly received.Catherine de Medici advised him to withdraw and wait until hisservices were again needed. Monluc, on the other hand, received ahero’s reception and was made a knight of the Order of Saint Michael,a very rare honor.32The motif of Henry’s reign seems to have been that a bitter blow tohis schemes was quickly balanced by a great success. Thus, the lossof Siena was followed by the election of Paul IV. Julius III had diedon March 23, 1555, and the cardinals of both parties rushed off toRome for the conclave. The dean of the College of Cardinals, CardinalCarafa, would have none of the delay that Cardinal d’Este had createdin 1549 to give the French cardinals time to reach Rome. The con¬clave opened eleven days after Julius’s death with all of the Frenchcardinals and a majority of the imperial prelates absent. D’Este againwas Henry’s first choice followed by Toumon and Du Bellav. In late1553 d’Este was reported to have boasted that he had a letter from theFrench king in his own hand promising to have him elected pope “bylove or by force.”33 If a French partisan could not be elected, then theFrench party was to vote for Carafa or, surprisingly, Cardinal Pole.172Henry IIApparently, Pole’s opposition to Mary Tudor’s marriage had won himFrench support.34 But the conclave was concluded before any of theten French cardinals arrived. The reform party controlled the con¬clave and elected Marcello Cervini, whom both Henry and Charleshad opposed in 1549. Henry had expressly forbidden the Frenchcardinals to vote for Cervini because he was seen as too ardent areformer, who would attempt to reduce the privileges and powers ofthe king and the French prelates in the French church.35The French were prepared to admit that the new Marcellus II wasa worthy choice, but they were not slow to jump at the opportunity toelect another pope when Marcellus died on May 1. All but two of theseven French cardinals who had gone to Rome a month earlier stillwere there, so the French party was considerably stronger. D’Estewas still Henry’s first choice, but Henry expressed himself stronglyin favor of Pole, calling him “most worthy.”36 Pole, however, had re¬mained in England, and his absence hurt his prospects, as did theold charge of heterodoxy first raised in 1549. Alessandro Famese wasagain the key figure, and having decided that Pole was unelectable,swung his support to Carafa. A month earlier Prince Philip had de¬clared Carafa “entirely unsuitable.”37 For that reason Henry backedCarafa, and the French cardinals gave him their votes. On May 23Carafa was acclaimed as Paul IV. The French ambassador wrote toHenry: “Your holy intention and will have been served.”38The French and their allies were elated; the imperials werecrushed39 Paul IV quickly demonstrated that becoming pope had notmade him forget his hatred of Charles V and the Spanish. From thefirst, he acted against the interests of the Habsburgs and in favor ofthe French. It was clear that an alliance between pope and Frenchking could be made at any time. In October 1555, cardinals Lorraineand Toumon were sent to Rome to negotiate a league with Paul. Afterseveral sharp exchanges with the imperial ambassador, Paul signeda treaty with Henry, the final draft of which the pope wrote in hisown hand. It committed Henry to come to the defense of the PapalStates and provide 350,000 scudi and 12,000 men in case of war.The pope would decide whether the forces would be directed againstNaples or Milan, but both territories would be given to a younger sonof Henry II. The treaty was so well-kept a secret that it was not untilthe middle of 1556 that the Habsburgs learned its details.40In signing the alliance with Paul IV, Henry clearly was playinga double game, since he was at the same time deeply involved inWar and Truce173peace negotiations with the imperials. Since 1553 Julius III had madevaliant efforts to bring the two warring sides to the peace table, butone side or the other always had a ripe opportunity to exploit againstthe other or a new grievance to repay.Mary of England and Cardinal Pole made a serious effort in late1554.41 Mary hoped to avoid the looming war with France and sin¬cerely wished to serve as peacemaker. By late 1554 Henry was muchmore willing to discuss peace because his campaign of the previoussummer was largely a failure and Philip was now in England, in¬creasing the likelihood that England would join his enemies. Afterlong haggling over details of protocol, the conference began on May23 at Mark, in the Calais Pale. Its beginning at a time when thecampaigning season was under way was an encouraging sign.Cardinal Pole and Bishop Stephan Gardiner served as mediatorsbetween the principal imperial representative, Cardinal Granvelle,and the French, Montmorency and the Cardinal de Lorraine. TheVenetian ambassador reported that Lorraine was matched with theconstable because there was some fear that Montmorency’s eagernessfor peace would warp his judgment on what was best for the king.Soranzo attributed this situation to the constable’s desire to see hisson freed, his respect for the emperor, and his general inclination to¬ward peace. The rivalry between the constable and the cardinal “willprevent any agreement save such as shall be beneficial to the Frenchcrown.” That consideration kept Lorraine from going to Rome for thepapal election.42 What is intriguing about the report is that, despitesuch misgivings about the constable’s judgment, he was nonethelessnamed to the delegation. It demonstrates how securely he stood inHenry’s affection and confidence.Montmorency’s attitude and the presence of Lorraine producedthe interesting episode reported by the imperial delegation toCharles V. After Granvelle had appealed to the constable as a lover ofpeace and a prudent man of vast experience, Montmorency becameeffusive in his praise of the emperor. “He knew that in your majestyhe had to do with a person who knows what is what. At this point theCardinal [Lorraine] cast a glance at the Constable, who reddened alittle, and added ‘after my master.’”43 This episode is strong evidenceof Montmorency’s respect for the emperor and his wish to be knownas a man of peace.Even the constable, however, was not prepared to concede all thatthe imperials demanded. Milan occupied the center of the discus-174Henry IIsion, but Burgundy, Flanders, Naples, Boulogne, and Metz all wereconcerns of first importance and were discussed at length. With theword that Paul IV had been elected pope, the French saw that thesituation in Italy had turned greatly in their favor. They lost interestin the peace negotiations, and the conference broke up in early Junewithout any results.The summer of 1555, therefore, saw the war carried on in half¬hearted measures. Brissac took the Piedmontese fort of Casale in lateJune and the fort of Vulpiano in September. The Turkish fleet againjoined the French in the sea off Italy, but the combined fleets couldnot prevent Genoa from resupplying the fortress of Calvi on Corsica,forcing the French to abandon their siege and allowing the Genoeseto recover much of the island. A campaign on the northern borders ofFrance accomplished nothing of note. Meanwhile, contacts betweenthe two sides to explore the grounds for concluding a peace settle¬ment continued.It was the abdication of Charles V that enabled serious negotia¬tions to begin again. Worn out in body, mind, and spirit, the agedemperor began to divest himself of his responsibilities in the fall of1555. In October he surrendered sovereignty over the Netherlandsto Philip and in January over the Spanish kingdoms. In September1556 he wrote to his brother, Ferdinand, conceding the imperial title,but the formal transfer of the crown did not occur until 1558. Thebreakup of the Habsburg realms reduced one of the cardinal fearsthat Henry had had about Charles—that he intended to become uni¬versal emperor. Metz was also far less important a point of contentionbetween Henry and Philip. Perhaps the most important result of theabdication was that Henry was no longer so distracted by his hatredof Charles and was able to negotiate with Philip in reasonably goodfaith. Henry, however, was not about to pass up a possible openingfor sowing dissension in the enemy camp. In August 1555 he ordereda French envoy (de Gardes) to involve himself in the quarrel betweenCharles and Ferdinand over the division of the Habsburg lands inhopes of alienating the two branches of the family from each other.44The basis for the continued contact between the enemies was theexchange of prisoners. The imperials held a number of very impor¬tant Frenchmen, including Francois de Montmorency, the consta¬ble’s son, his nephew, Francois d’Andelot, captured in 1551 at Parma,and Robert de La Marck, Diane de Poitiers’s son-in-law. Discussionsabout ransoming the prisoners continued through the summer andWar and Truce175into the fall of 1555. In December these contacts were quietly turnedinto a more extensive peace conference at the abbey of Vaucelles inHainault. Since it was officially still concerned only with the prison¬ers, the governor of Picardy, Admiral de Coligny, served as the chiefof the French delegation. Both sides used that point as an excuseto keep the negotiations low-key and to threaten to withdraw whenthe discussion of important issues was not to their liking. Thus, onJanuary 14, 1556, the report of the Venetian ambassador was verypessimistic, but a dispatch of the next day reported a French proposalfor a truce of up to ten years.45Two days later Coligny was reported to be returning to the Frenchcourt, but on January 23 he turned back toward Vaucelles. Accordingto Soranzo, “This has surprised everybody, but it is known that theConstable wishes for it [a truce], much more than he does for theLeague [with the pope]. It is supposed that if he can conclude thistruce, his authority will enable him to persuade the King to accept itregardless of anything,” even the alliance with the pope.46By February 1 rumors were spreading that a truce had beenagreed upon. In reporting the rumors, Soranzo made one of the mostrevealing statements about the lines of influence at the French court.Now that this negotiation seems to narrow itself, the conflictingpassions in this court come to light; the adherents of the Con¬stable, together with the public, being desirous of its conclusion;whilst, on the other hand, the dependants both of the Queen andof the house of Guise, together with those of Madame de Valenti-nois, demonstrate openly that for the benefit of his affairs hismost Christian Majesty ought not to come to this agreement, butpursue the execution of the League, for which they say anotheropportunity will not so easily occur; and that although the Popemay not be able to furnish such great assistance as would be re¬quired, . . . yet nevertheless he cannot fail to be very useful . . .and as it is heard that the Cardinal of Lorraine will be here in afew days, they hope that, should the ratification not have takenplace by that time, his coming may serve greatly to interrupt it,and having already heard something about these negotiations, heis expected to speed his journey.47Despite the objections of most of the heavyweights of the court,on February 5 the five-year truce was published with all forces re¬maining in place and all prisoners exchanged, except for the two176Henry IIhighest-ranking Frenchmen, Montmorency’s son and La Marck, andthe highest-ranking imperial officer in French hands.48The opposition of the Guises to the truce, while the source of agreat altercation49 between them and Montmorency, should not beinterpreted simply as a consequence of the rivalry between them.Six weeks earlier the due de Guise had written to the cardinal: “TheConstable and I, we are getting on well together; he always shows mesome sign of friendship as he did before your departure.”50 The dis¬pute also ought to be explained in terms other than the Guises’ ambi¬tion to win the throne of the kingdom of Naples, since the treaty ne¬gotiated with the pope would have given it to Henry’s second son. Butthe duke expected to receive a commission as the king’s lieutenant-general in Italy and command a substantial force there. He had nothad a significant command since the defense of Metz four years ear¬lier. One can presume that he was chafing at the bit to win greaterglory. He also hoped to have substantial power in a French regime inNaples as regent for Henry’s son.51As for Cardinal de Lorraine, he had been sent to Italy to negotiatean alliance with the pope, the duke of Ferrara, and Venice. He hadbeen most successful with the first two, although not the last. Onecan presume that he was reluctant to see the fruits of his labor lostand miss the opportunity to be hailed as a great diplomat. The Guisesfelt that his honor was at stake. Furthermore, the youngest Guisebrothers had reached the age when they could command companiesof lances, and they hoped to win glory in the field under the commandof their oldest brother.One has to wonder how accurate Soranzo’s remark about Dianewas, since her son-in-law waited to be ransomed. If true, it was likelya reflection of her usual support for the Guises against Montmorency.In regard to the queen, she was passionately interested in seeing herbeloved cousins, the Strozzi, overthrow Cosimo de Medici and freeFlorence. Surrounded by Florentine exiles, she had as one of theconsuming goals of her life to win for them the right to go home. Thusshe threw her influence, which by this time seems to have become ofconsiderable import, behind the Guises. The Venetian Capello wrotethat if the liberty of Florence were restored, “the queen will have allthe merit.”52With the formidable weight of all but one of the major figures ofthe court against the truce, why did Henry agree to it? Certainly thewar had been expensive, costing the crown some 45 million ecus.53War and Truce177But he seemed to have had no trouble in raising funds to continue it.In early January he had borrowed 900,000 ecus at 16 percent interestfrom the Italian bankers at Lyon and Rome. They agreed to advancehim another 200,000 at no interest.54 The king had already sent alarge sum to the sultan as a gift to persuade him to bring a large fleetinto Italian waters the next summer.55 Several regiments of Swissand German infantry had already been recruited. The alliance withthe papacy was the final element needed to wage a major campaign.Against these factors must be placed those that swung the deci¬sion in favor of peace. They were nicely summarized by Soranzo atthe time of the Conference of Mark a year before. He said that theking was not much inclined to peace; but constable, the Cardinal deLorraine, and others laid before him the poverty of the people, thedeath and captivity of so many of his subjects, the expense incurred;and they convinced him to treat of peace.56 Certainly important wasthe need to ransom the prisoners, for Henry could not have forgottenhis own captivity, nor the duty of the chivalrous lord to ransom hisvassals. In his letter to the sultan explaining the truce, Henry citedthe fear of Philip bringing England into the w'ar.57 Also a factor wasthe unrest among the French people over the heavy taxes needed forthe war. But of most weight was certainly the influence of the consta¬ble. When Montmorency pressed hard for a point of policy, he rarelylost. The Guises, as influential as they were, had yet to win a policydisagreement with him. The constable remained the dominant influ¬ence on the king. When Philip’s representative went to the Frenchcourt in April to accept Henry’s oath on the truce, it was obvious tohim that Montmorency was in charge of royal policy.58Several historians have noted what they regard as the strange sit¬uation at the French court at the time of the truce: two ministershad the right to conclude clearly contradictory treaties with foreignpowers. Henry, they argue, could not adhere to one without compro¬mising his honor on the other. Lucien Romier has gone on to writethat this situation serves to refute those historians who have arguedthat Henry conducted his own policy and equally serves as proof ofthe vast powers of both parties.59Yet one must not be too hasty to conclude that Henry was soeasily manipulated by his favorites and was devoid of any politicalacumen. He had made what he regarded as good faith efforts to reacha peace at the Conference of Mark. If providence so favored him asto place on the papal throne so hostile a foe of the Habsburgs as178Henry IIPaul IV, he had to put himself in a position to take advantage of itshould the war continue. On the other hand, when the discussions ofprisoner exchange suddenly blossomed into broader negotiations fora truce, he felt obliged to grasp the opportunity. If those negotiationshad failed, then Henry had the treaty with the pope in hand forrenewed war. Romier ought to have noted that the treaty with Paulremained in effect after the truce. Furthermore it was largely becauseof rumors that an alliance had been signed that Philip was convincedof the need to press for a truce.60 While it is true that there is nodirect evidence that such a sophisticated approach existed in Henry’smind from the beginning, it can be argued that Henry had skillfullymanipulated the situation in order to secure a truce in which he keptall of the substantial French gains of the past five years.12 DISASTER AT SAINT-QUENTINThe Truce of Vaucelles had not healed the major irritantsbetween French monarchy and Habsburg dynasty. All ob¬servers recognized that a pretext for resuming war would beeasy to come by and that continued peace depended upona determined effort by all parties, the small as well as the great, toensure its continuance. Given the depth of the hatreds that engulfedEurope, it is not surprising that one of the lesser powers had thepotential for touching off a new round of warfare, but it is rathersurprising that it was the papacy that did it.Paul IV was deeply dismayed by the news of the truce that ar¬rived in Rome on February 14, 1556, since he had just concluded anadvantageous defensive alliance with France. He called it a disgraceand declared that he had refused to take part in its negotiation.1 Paul,and even more so his nephew, Cardinal Carlo Carafa, would not giveup hope that the papacy could call on France to drive the Habsburgsout of Italy. Cardinal Carafa, hoping to use French power for the ag¬grandizement of his family, pushed even more actively for Frenchintervention. But given Paul’s volatile nature, he may well have beensincere when he announced in April that he was sending legates tothe two courts to discuss peace and arrange for a new general councilfor church reform. If he was sincere, he could not have made a worsechoice to go to the French court than Carlo Carafa. No legate everreached the court of Philip II.On June 14, 1556, Carafa arrived at Fontainebleau. Paul IV hadspared no expense for his nephew’s party in order to impress papalgreatness on all. Henry, for his part, treated the legate as “if themightiest prince of the world were passing through France.”2 Thecardinal arrived at a French court that was extremely apprehensivei8oHenry IIabout the durability of the truce and badly divided over a courseof action. Neither the constable’s son Frangois nor Marshal de LaMarch had yet been ransomed because of haggling over the amounts.The situation worsened in May, when the duke of Arschot, the onlyremaining imperial prisoner in French hands, escaped from Vin¬cennes. His escape, regarded by the French as a violation of hisword of honor, especially angered Montmorency because Henry hadpledged to him the duke’s ransom to help pay his son’s. Frangois deMontmorency’s ransom had been set at 100,000 ecus but had beenreduced to 80,000. Diane de Poitiers had agreed to collect the ransomfor her son-in-law, La Marck. pegged at 80,000 ecus, then 70,000.She declared that she could not pay that much, although Henry hadgiven her 633 Turks captured along the Mediterranean coast. Shesold them for 26 ecus apiece in Corsica (a sum of some 16,500 ecus).3The concern that the continued captivity of the two captainscaused Henry and Montmorency was obvious. They threatened onseveral occasions to resume the war if ransoms were not agreed upon,but the Venetian ambassador Soranzo recognized that the continuedcaptivity of his son pressured Montmorency to work to maintain thepeace, as it had earlier persuaded him to negotiate the truce.4Another cause of apprehension at the French court when Carafaarrived was the relationship with England, where the French govern¬ment was deeply involved in conspiracies against Mary and Philip.The increasing popular resentment against Philip and his Spanishadvisers, the ever more numerous executions for heresy, and Mary’splacing of English interests behind those of her husband had createda fertile field for the French ambassador Antoine de Noailles to cul¬tivate rebellion. The most serious revolt was Sir Henry Dudley’s.5 Inearly 1556 Henry II had agreed to allow Noailles to enter into nego¬tiations with Dudley. The truce of February did not halt the intrigue,because the French remained on the diplomatic offensive againstthe Habsburgs at all points. In March 1556 Dudley and several co¬conspirators crossed the Channel and met with Henry at Blois. Hetold them to go through with their enterprise, and should the trucecollapse, he would aid them with men and money.Shortly after the interview one of the plotters broke the conspir¬acy to the English government. A number of conspirators were taken;they confessed, implicating the French government and its ambas¬sador. Despite that blatant casus belli, Mary ignored the opening forwar. She genuinely wanted peace but was also unsure of how muchDisaster at Saint-Quentin181popular support she would have for war. Accordingly, Mary ignoredthe confessions that the conspirators had an understanding with theking of France and a pledge of aid. England remained nominally atpeace with France, but at the time Carafa reached France, Henrycould not be certain that war with England would not erupt at anymoment.While Carafa’s announced purpose for traveling to France wasto further peace, no one at the French court, according to the for¬eign ambassadors, believed that he had the slightest desire for it.6Dispatches from Rome on the views of Pope Paul were in a similarvein. The cardinal found, however, that the French were not at themoment interested in a war in Italy. Henry had made his decisionin February in favor of the truce, and there was yet no good reasonto change it, despite his irritation over the continued captivity of thetwo captains.Montmorency remained strongly in favor of the truce, and hehad a firm control over royal policy in the spring of 1556. In MarchSoranzo wrote that the king remained constantly alone with the con¬stable, who decided everything, and in early July he reported thatnothing of importance was decided except by the constable.7 TheGuises, for their part, felt humiliated by the repudiation of the policyformulated by Cardinal de Lorraine. They stayed in the backgroundduring these months as much as their massive egos permitted. Butthey had not conceded a thing to Montmorency. As Simon Renardreported on June 13:The Guises have all along been advising a breach of the truce inorder to pursue the plans started in Italy by the Cardinal of Lor¬raine, arguing that precious time is being lost. At present, I hearthat the King is holding conference every day as to whether ornot to break on what pretext. It appears that the Constable insiststhat the season is too far advanced to do anything this year exceptto continue intriguing and making difficulties for your Majestywherever possible, collecting money and making preparations. Heis unwilling to allow the Guises to have the advantage over him inthat he was the cause of the truce, which they try to represent asunfavourable to the King. . . . The Guises and their party considerthat it would be a great mistake to miss the opportunity affordedby the readiness of the Pope and other potentates of Italy alliedwith the French to damage your Majesty; . . . the upshot will de-182Henry IIpend on the negotiations which Cardinal Carafa is coming here toundertake.8Having learned the tone of the French court, Carafa played therole of the peacemaker for a time. But on July 5, while serving as god¬father to Henry’s short-lived daughter (a twin was stillborn), namedVittoria after the pope’s mother, which pleased Paul enormously,Carafa vented his passionate hatred of the Spanish. All of the ambas¬sadors present were shocked at the vehemence of his harangue.9What had touched off the cardinal were events in Rome, wherehis uncle the pope was doing his best to present Henry with a fait ac¬compli of war between the papacy and the Habsburgs. He excommu¬nicated two members of a powerful Roman family, the Colonna, whowere staunch imperialists, and declared their estates confiscated.He then conferred the estates on another nephew, GioVanni Carafa.Papal troops were dispatched to secure Paliano, which the Spanishin Naples regarded as their protectorate. Quickly following that wasthe arrest on July 7 of a Spanish courier with a letter from the Span¬ish ambassador in Rome to the duke of Alba, the Spanish viceroy inNaples, which advised Alba that the only way to deal with Paul waswith 12,000 veteran troops. Its author also was quickly arrested. Onseveral occasions in June and July Paul harangued the Venetian am¬bassador in Rome, to whom he freely opened his heart, with violentdenunciations of Charles V and Philip II. He called them hereticsand threatened to depose them and give their titles to Henry II.10Paul probably was encouraged in his bravado by his nephew’sreports from France. Carafa repeated Henry’s words that he woulddefend the papacy at any price against all aggression. The constable,in bad temper over the delay in the ransom of his son, stated that heknew the imperialists were preparing for war but they would find theFrench in like manner. Ironically, as if to prove that Montmorencyand the Guises could never agree, Cardinal de Lorraine declared thathe would exert himself to the utmost for the quiet of Christendomand urged the pope not to make Paliano the cause of war.11On July 25 word came from Brussels that Francois de Mont¬morency could be ransomed for 50,000 ecus. The constable becamemore outspoken for continued peace. Accordingly, on July 30, Soranzowrote:The King of France, for the present not wishing to break the truce,provided he can do so without loss of dignity, has often endeav-Disaster at Saint-Quentin183oured to satisfy the Legate with general expressions, assuring himthat not only will he not fail in his promised protection, but thatshould the need require it, he, for the defense of the Holy Church,would pass into Italy in person, together with all his forces. . . .But the Legate does not cease urging the King to answer himmore precisely, and having understood that his Majesty wouldwish him to depart, he says he will not do so until he obtains aclearer determination from the King, who diverts him with everysort of amusement.12Carafa asked for a commitment from Henry for 350,000 ecus, 300or 400 gens d’armes, and 8,000 to 12,000 Swiss. Montmorency an¬swered negatively for the king, on the grounds that he did not wishto break the truce. Furthermore, the king had already provided thepope with vast sums of money, and his captains Monluc and Strozziwere already in Rome. Henry had also sent 800 Gascon infantrymento Rome, who arrived there at the end of July; they were told not totake the offensive. When the cardinal left the French court on Au¬gust 17, he went away virtually empty-handed, although he wrote tothe pope that he had gained nearly all he had wanted. A month laterHenry did agree to contribute 350,000 ecus to a war chest that was tobe kept in Venice until it was needed. The dispatches of the Frenchambassador in the Netherlands strongly suggested that there wouldbe no threat from that direction, since the situation there was mis¬erable; no money or food would be available for a campaign againstFrance.13By the time Carafa left the French court, however, a new devel¬opment strengthened Henry’s resolve not to be dragged into war inItaly. The duke of Parma, Ottavio Famese, had been reconciled withthe Habsburgs and switched alliances. The reasons for his decisionwere several. Cardinal Alessandro Famese had become annoyed atHenry’s favoritism toward Ippolito d’Este; the Famese were on betterterms with Philip than with his father; and the Truce of Vaucelleshad reversed the reciprocal seizures of property of five years earlier—that of Queen Eleanor by her stepson Henry and that of Margaretof Parma by her father, Charles V. The return of Margaret’s landsremoved the major obstacle to better ties between the Famese andthe Habsburgs, and negotiations resulted in an alliance. When, inearly September, Henry received definitive word of the Fameses’ de¬cision, he was reported to have remarked bitterly: “The ingratitude of184Henry IIthe Italians surpasses all others.” He confiscated Cardinal Famese’sbenefices in France and gave most of them to Cardinal d’Este.14 Thedefection of the Fameses not only hurt Henry emotionally, for he wasdeeply attached to them, but also cost him a strategic position in thepeninsula.While the defection of the Famese was unfolding, the constable’sson was released and returned to the French court, to the great joy ofall. The ransom of La Marck was somewhat slower to be achieved. Itwas not until his wife traveled to Brussels to plead with his captors toaccept 50,000 ecus that he was released. He was freed for that sumbecause he was seriously ill, and he died several days after returningto France. His death left a marshal’s baton available, which Paulde Termes expected to receive, but the third Guise brother, the dued’Aumale, Diane de Poitiers’s other son-in-law, also requested it.15Henry left the office vacant for the next two years and then gave it tode Termes.Montmorency’s joy at his son’s ransom quickly turned to angerwhen he found out that his plan to have him marry Diane de Francewould be foiled by Francois’s engagement to Jeanne de Piennes. Theconstable realized rather quickly that his son would probably need apapal dispensation from what was regarded as a legitimate maritalcontract, and his attitude toward the pope began to soften. Nonethe¬less, in early September he wrote to the French diplomats in Rometo tell the pope to make peace at any price.16 But on the basis of theearlier pledges from the French monarch, Paul IV had already defiedthe viceroy of Naples, the duke of Alba, after Alba had issued whatamounted to an ultimatum on August 27. A week later Alba’s troopscrossed the frontier into the Papal States.Faced with an invading force vastly superior to his own forcesand terrified by the prospect of a second sack of Rome, the popesearched desperately for help, even suggesting that the French usetheir good offices with the Turks to get them to attack Naples.17 Thenews of Alba’s invasion put Henry in a most difficult quandary—whether to send French troops to his aid and risk war with Philip, orlose the pope’s friendship by refusing. Renard, Philip’s ambassadorin France, made a strenuous effort to maintain the truce, makingpromises beyond what, in fact, his master was prepared to give. Theprincipal element of Renard’s scheme was that Henry’s second sonbe named duke of Milan as a vassal of the emperor. Even Cardinal deLorraine was favorable to Renard’s proposal, at least for a time. OnDisaster at Saint-Quentin185September 19 Soranzo reported that “the Cardinal of Lorraine keepsthis scheme alive.”18On September 23, with a full report of events in the Papal Statesin hand, Henry called his council together to decide on a course ofaction. The constable urged him to declare that Alba’s action hadnot broken the truce but to aid the pope with money. The Guises,and even more so Brissac, urged Henry to declare war if Alba didnot withdraw immediately, since the king’s honor depended on de¬fending the pope. On September 28 Henry decided in favor of theItalian expedition. He emphasized, however, that he was only goingto the aid of the pope and did not regard the decision as a violationof the truce.19 Military preparations were hastened: a muster of thegendarmerie was ordered, and Francois d’Andelot and Gaspard deColigny were sent to Picardy to inspect the defenses there. Henry,however, hoped that the truce could be maintained on the northernfrontier even if fighting between French and Spanish forces occurredin Italy.A letter was sent to Strozzi in Rome announcing the decision tosend a French army to Italy. Commanded by Francois de Guise, itwas to consist of 6,000 French foot and 6,000 Swiss, 500 lances, 600light cavalry, and twenty-five artillery pieces. Brissac was to accom¬pany Guise back to Piedmont. Annoyed because he had not receivedthe command of the entire expedition, Brissac lost much of his en¬thusiasm for the campaign. The constable remained opposed to thewar and was reported to have remarked: “We shall all ride across theAlps but come back on foot.”20 But he had just decided to send hisson to Rome for the dispensation from his engagement, and his op¬position was muted. Nonetheless, when word came that the duke ofFerrara objected to the financial demands on him and the role in thewar designated for him, the first in a long series of problems that hewould cause for the French in this endeavor, Montmorency seized onthe news to try to convince Henry to change his mind. For her part,Catherine de Medici eagerly supported the decision for war, send¬ing a messenger to Lyon to urge the Italian bankers to offer financialsupport for the campaign.21Nearly a year after the idea first had been broached, the due deGuise had his commission to lead an army into Italy. There is littleevidence as to the goals that Guise himself had for it. The tradi¬tion that he intended to win Naples22 seems to be refuted by lettersbetween Guise and Henry that clearly stated that the purpose of186Henry IIthe expedition was to place the king’s second son on the Neapolitanthrone.23 The office of pere et administrateur for the young princewould have been Guise’s, and it meant that he could have expected tobe regent of Naples for a long time. Francois de Guise had too keen asense of honor to violate the trust that his king had placed in him byclaiming the throne of Naples for himself. Nonetheless, the Guisessaw war, and particularly the expedition into Italy, as a means of es¬tablishing irrevocably the power and wealth of their house throughtheir services to the French crown.It would have been possible, as Montmorency insisted, for Henryto ignore the developments in the Papal States. Nonetheless, it isdifficult to see how the king, with his sense of duty and honor andhis fondness for the fight, could have failed to go to the pope’s aid.With the pope firmly allied and Cardinal Carafa in Venice seeking toinclude that state in the alliance, the expedition seemed to promise agreat return for rather little investment. Henry and his advisers wereconvinced that Philip could not muster much of a force for an attackin northern France or for war in Italy. Pope Paul had begun to speakof giving Naples to one of Henry’s younger sons and Milan to another.He fantasized about bringing them to Italy as youngsters and makingItalian princes out of them, thus ridding Italy of both the French andthe Spanish. Paul also spoke of deposing Philip and giving his titlesto Henry.24 In accepting the pope’s offer of Naples for his son, Henrywas threatening to create a situation as dangerous to his successoras that created by Francis I in regard to Charles d’Orleans. Henry,however, had four sons to provide for, and such schemes touched aresponsive chord. Soranzo reported in early 1557 that Henry talkedof Naples incessantly and had a map of the realm in his chambersthat he examined several times a day.25The prominent Roman nobleman, Camilio Orsini, summed upnicely the factors that led to the decision to let Guise march into Italy:“It may come to pass that the youth of France, the incitements of theGuise family, the necessity for providing for his sons, the opportunityafforded by having a Pope so resolutely in his favour that centurieswill pass before such another be found, the Emperor’s retirementfrom politics, and King Philip’s little experience of public business,might stimulate him [Henry] to war.”26Guise had not even reached Lyon when a new complication arose.In November 1556 Alba took Ostia, cutting off Rome from the sea.Cardinal Carafa, who was deeply suspicious about Henry’s resolve,Disaster at Saint-Quentin187accepted an offer of a ten-day truce from Alba. At the end of the periodit was extended for another forty days, on the grounds that commu¬nications between Alba and Philip in Brussels took time. Carafa’sexplanation to Henry was that he was buying time until the Frenchforces arrived. Henry was greatly annoyed, and his misgivings aboutthe trustworthiness of the Carafas and the success of the Guise expe¬dition increased apace. With so many of the voices that had favoredwar gone from the court, the constable’s opinion that this was nota convenient time for war carried even more weight. Lorraine, fear¬ful that Henry would recall Guise, lamented that if his brother wererecalled before he gained a victory, “it would not be to his honor.”27Meanwhile, Guise and his army pushed on toward Italy, reachingTurin on December 28. There he remained for two weeks, holdingcouncil with his captains and several prominent members of theFrench party in Italy. By the time Guise took to the road again, GiulioOrsini, a special envoy from Cardinal Carafa, had reached the Frenchcourt to explain to Henry the reasons for the truce with Alba and con¬vince the king to commit himself to open war. His mission was com¬pletely successful. On January 31, 1557, the Truce of Vaucelles wasdeclared to have ended. The breaking of the truce, however, appearsto have had little to do with Orsini’s mission, since the event thatcaused it occurred the same night that he arrived at Saint-Germain-en-Laye. In the early hours of January 6 troops under Admiral deColigny, hoping to catch the garrison at Douai celebrating the feast ofthe Epiphany with too much drink, attacked the fortress. Finding thegarrison on alert, Coligny retreated and instead attacked and burneda smaller fort at Lens.28The attempt on Douai is shrouded in mystery. Most historianswho have mentioned the attack (it is surprising how many ignoreit entirely) declare that Coligny was following orders from the king.There is no contemporary evidence that supports that view, andHenry’s actions afterward can be interpreted as trying to undo thedamage that the attack caused. The Venetian ambassador providedthe most immediate and plausible explanation for the incident. Ac¬cording to Soranzo, prior to January 5 Henry, annoyed at severalincidents along the border, had ordered the border between Picardyand Flanders closed to the movement of cattle, trapping many Flem¬ish herds on the French side. Spanish raids to get the cattle backprompted Coligny’s decision to retaliate by attacking Douai.2'' (Seeappendix C for a further discussion of the attack on Douai.)i88Henry IIHenry’s actions after the attack on Douai indicate that he didnot wish it to spread into general war. He ordered that all prisonerstaken be released and plunder returned. Writing to the commanderof the fortress of Peronne on January io, on the orders of the king,Montmorency told him not to do anything until they saw what wasto follow. The constable wrote that the king hoped the enemy wouldnot use the event as an excuse to break the truce.30 Nonetheless, thedrift toward war continued as further incidents on the northern fron¬tier by both sides occurred. Carafa then wrote to Henry, predictingthat Venice would join their alliance. With that optimistic, but infact false, report in hand, on January 27 Henry ordered the arrest ofthe Spanish ambassador and embargoed trade with the Netherlands.Four days later an exchange of declarations of war formally endedthe truce.31It was recognized that the French people had not recovered fromthe burden imposed by the previous war, and the summer of 1556had seen a disastrous famine caused by a drought. The king wasforced to reduce the solde des 50,000 hommes by half. Nonetheless,Henry had little trouble raising money for the new war. From theGrand Parti of Lyon, Henry borrowed 1.5 million in gold at the samerate of interest and schedule of repayment arranged two years earlier.In addition to that sum, lent by mostly Italian bankers, the sameamount was offered by a group of mostly German financiers. Theking also took a forced loan from the merchants and “other personsof easy circumstance” throughout the kingdom, taking at least fourecus but not more than twenty from each. It was expected to netnearly a million ecus.32From the municipal government of Paris, Henry also demanded aloan of 400,000 livres in rentes. The government also put up for auc¬tion the collection of the salt tax (the gabelles) for ten years, whichwas bought for a sum of 400,000 ecus annually. It was the first timethat the gabelles had been farmed for the entire realm. Henry alsoordered the suspension of the payment of the royal pensions for threemonths. He proposed the creation of a parlement for Savoy; the saleof its offices was expected to net 200,000 ecus. Last he reversed adecision made at the beginning of his reign that had left much ofthe royal revenue in the hands of the seventeen receveurs-generauxto pay the government’s local expenses. The revenues for the yearwere again to be collected at the Louvre, despite the greater expenseof transporting the cash to and from Paris. The purpose was to ac-Disaster at Saint-Quentin189cumulate a war fund, while the payment of local expenses could belong delayed.33The expected payoff for these huge expenditures, which wouldburden the monarchy with an incredible debt,* was to win Naples forHenry’s second son and perhaps Milan for the third. Brissac emphati¬cally urged Henry to order Guise to join forces with him to attackMilan, which its governor, Ferrante Gonzaga, later admitted was veryvulnerable in early 1557. The queen and the Florentine exiles ar¬gued that Guise’s forces should attack Florence.34 Paul IV insistedthat Guise drive Alba out of the Papal States and then invade Naples.Henry, for whom the conquest of Naples was as acceptable as anyof the other possibilities, conceded to the pope and ordered Guise topush on to Rome. The duke arrived there on March 2 only to find thatnothing was ready for a campaign against the Spanish.Henry’s anger at that state of affairs was vastly compounded whenPaul announced on March 15 the creation often new cardinals. Onlyone was a Frenchman—Jean Bertrand, the garde des sceaux, who hadbecome a cleric after his wife’s death. Although Antonio Trivulzio,the bishop of Toulon, and Lorenzo Strozzi, the brother of the marshal,were named, neither was regarded as a committed French partisanand certain to vote for the French candidate in the next conclave.Henry was furious, since he had what he regarded as a pledge fromCardinal Carafa that several French cardinals would be named at thenext consistory. Henry had expected to see four new French cardi¬nals as well as several from among the French partisans in Italy. Thequeen was furious at the passing over of her cousin Bernardo Salviati,and she and Henry had pushed for the red hat for Bishop AntonioCaracciolo of Troyes, son of the late French governor for Piedmont.Ironically, Caracciolo would become openly Protestant three yearslater. Even Bertrand’s promotion was not especially useful for Henry,since his age (seventy-five years) and his duties made it unlikely hecould attend the next papal conclave.35 But the frequently expressedview that Cardinal de Lorraine was furious because he hoped to beelected pope after Paul fails to take into account the facts that Ippolitod’Este was still Henry’s first choice and that, at age thirty-two, Lor¬raine was far too young to be elected.Following closely on the bad news about the appointments ofcardinals came word that Paul would not grant Francois de Mont¬morency’s dispensation from his engagement to Jeanne de Piennes.The constable was furious but proceeded to make arrangements forhis son’s marriage to Diane de France on the opinion of the theolo¬gians of the Sorbonne that a papal dispensation was not necessary.Francois de Guise was also upset, fearing that “the Constable maysuspect him of having thwarted the dispensation by reason of therivalry between them.” Certainly Francois de Montmorency blamedGuise for the outcome and burned for revenge.36By March 1557 Henry had good reason to question whether hisalliance with Paul IV would yield any benefits. As the campaign¬ing season approached, he had to focus more attention on Picardy.The king intended to keep the northern frontier as quiet as possi¬ble because his best military units and captains were in Italy. Therewas talk of establishing a local truce with the Spanish commander,but there was small-scale skirmishing on the frontier throughout thespring. Henry also took steps to try to ensure that Mary Tudor wouldnot provide extensive aid to her husband. In late 1556 and early 1557Ambassador Wooton’s reports to the English government were filledwith details of French plots to seize the Calais Pale and to aid Englishrebels. Henry himself told the Venetian ambassador in early Marchthat Mary would have a difficult time aiding Philip, because “she willhave so much to do at home that it will suffice her.”37Henry felt compelled to prevent close cooperation between En¬gland and Philip, since for nearly two centuries such an alliancebetween the English and the Burgundians had usually spelt disasterfor the French. As Soranzo wrote on several occasions, the Frenchfeared the English forces the most, “even if they are not what theyonce were.”38 Although Henry expressed confidence, gained from thereports of Gilles de Noailles, brother to Antoine and new ambassador,that Mary would not declare war, he became involved in several plotsto distract her from the continental war.One way was to encourage the Scots to raid northern England.Several hundred additional Gascons were sent to Scotland to helpdefend it against reprisal attacks. Far more dangerous to Mary wasthe Stafford rebellion. Thomas Stafford, nephew to Cardinal Pole andclaimant to the English throne through his grandfather, the last dukeof Buckingham, had been in France for over a year requesting Frenchaid for his rebellion. He had an audience with Henry II in March,although the king’s memory of the interview exonerated himself fromany part in the plot.39On April 28 Stafford landed from several French ships on the En¬glish coast with about 100 English exiles and French sailors. TheyDisaster at Saint-Quentin191seized Scarborough Castle and declared Stafford king. The local mili¬tia quickly overwhelmed them, and a month later Stafford went to theblock. Henry disclaimed any role in the affair, maintaining that thecompany was supposed to be on its way to Scotland. Nonetheless, theincident occurred at a most inconvenient time for France. Philip IIhad been in England for a month, trying with increasing pessimismto persuade the royal council to declare war on France. All hesitationquickly ended when news of Stafford’s landing became known. OnJune 7, a formal declaration of war was read in London. It declaredthat the king of France was implicated in all the plots and rebellionsagainst Queen Mary and guilty of seizing English ships, merchants,and goods.40At the same time as the declaration of war in London, an Englishherald appeared at the French court, but Henry was about to go hunt¬ing and put off receiving him for two days. On June 9 the king heardMary’s resolve to wage war on him by “fire, sword, and bloodshed.”Henry refused to allow the herald to read Mary’s justifications for warin order to avoid responding to them. Henry later told Soranzo thatsince it was a woman who declared war on him, he did not try todefend himself against her accusations. Clearly, it was an affront tohis sense of honor.41Almost entirely as a result of Henry’s miscalculations, Englandwas now in the war. The threat to Picardy was thus made substan¬tially greater, and Henry became concerned about his defenses there.Prior to May 1557 his attention had been focused on Italy. He had be¬lieved that Philip could not mount a major offensive from the Nether¬lands because of the lingering effects of the previous war and the badharvest of the previous year, and because he had also sent troops intoItaly. At the end of May Henry replaced Antoine de Bourbon withMontmorency as commander in northern France and announced hisintention to raise an army of 30,000 men. Because of the scarcity ofprovisions caused by the previous year’s famine, he did not expect tohave an army in the field before July, and in fact did not anticipate amajor battle at all that summer.At the same time as Henry and his advisers were becoming moreconcerned with the threat in the north, they were becoming disillu¬sioned about the likely success of Guise’s expedition as was Guisehimself.42 Having reached Rome, Guise found that there were vastdifferences of opinion among the pope, his nephews, the Frenchdiplomats present, and himself as to how to proceed. Guise found192Henry IIhimself arguing against Paul’s insistence that he invade Naples im¬mediately, because his army was smaller than Alba’s and it lackedprovisions. The failure of the Carafas to procure sufficient provisionsfor Guise’s men was a major French complaint. Appraised of theseproblems, Henry wrote to the duke not to invade Naples. Before hisletter arrived, the pope had prevailed on Guise, whose orders were toaid the pope in any way possible. On April 5 he rejoined his army tobegin preparations for the move into Neapolitan territory. But Guise’sluck had deserted him. Alba fought a war of attrition rather thanrisking all on one great battle. The rapid dwindling of the French-papal army from disease and desertion proved the wisdom of Alba’sstrategy.By the end of May 1557 the French court was talking of the recallof Guise from Naples and sending him against Milan. Even Cardinalde Lorraine, beginning to despair of his brother winning glory inItaly, urged Henry to recall Frangois and leave his younger brother,Claude, in command. Reports of Paul IV’s negotiations with Philip IIincreased the anxiety of the court that the Italian expedition wouldcome to disaster. There was concern that the aged pope would soondie and because of the recent promotions to the college of cardinals, apope hostile to France might well be elected. In such an event Guiseand his men would find themselves cut off from a place to retreat.French demands for several fortresses in the Papal States for such aneventuality went unmet.On May 28 Montmorency, on orders from Henry, wrote to Guiseto abandon the attack against Naples and take his army northwardagainst Florence, Siena, or Milan, leaving it to the duke’s discretionas to the choice.43 Guise was to ensure the security of Rome before heleft. This last point required that he keep his army in the Papal Statesfor several more months. That delay enabled Piero Strozzi, after alengthy audience with the pope, to hurry to the French court with ar¬dent assurances from Paul. Again, the argument that abandoning thepapacy to its enemies would dishonor the French monarchy carriedthe day. New orders of July 8 to Guise required him to do all that wasnecessary to protect Rome from Alba’s forces for the indefinite future,despite being outnumbered by Alba’s forces nearly two to one.44By that time the threat of a major battle in northern France wasbecoming real. French preparations were aided by what was calledthe best wheat crop in memory. In July new venal offices were cre¬ated in the parlements to raise a sum of 500,000 livres. The popeThe marriage of Henry and Catherine, by Georgio Vasari, Vecchio, Florence (Scala/ArtResource)Catherine de Medici as a young woman, Civico Raccolta Bertarelli, Milan(SEF/Art Resource)Catherine de Medici as an older woman, by Francois Clouet, MuseeTesse, LeMans (Giraudon/Art Resource)Diane de Poitiers, anonymous, Palace of Versailles (Alinari/Art Resource)Henry II, by Francois Clouet, Galleria Palatina, Florence(Scala/Art Resource)Anne de Montmorency, anonymous, Musee Conde, Chantilly (Giraudon/Art Resource)Francis I, by Francois Clouet, Galleria degli Uffizi, Florence (Scala/Art Resource)Henry II attending the Mercuriale of the Parlement of Paris, from Tortorel and PerissinGrandes scenes historiques du XVJe siecle (Paris, 1886)Ki|\\& 1Hjsup * Q»jgt7Tjan9*~\ ;T-;. j-kTi.|MJ1 *"21JiBM |1|b InL- [ / -; A JiThe fatal tournament of Henry II, from Tortorel and Perissini ^ *."vrim, ,1] | fJ rr^J| ^ 'jf**-'_Rm'SoSThe death of Henry II, from Tortorel and PerissinDisaster at Saint-Quentin193approved of the collection of eight decimes from the clergy, and Henryordered an inventory of the church’s objects of precious metal so thatthey could be collected and melted down, if necessary. They weresaid to be the last major source of money in the realm.45 More moneywas borrowed at Lyon. Henry pledged the bankers that as a princeof honor, he would not fail to pay his interest as Philip had. He con¬vinced Italian and German bankers to loan him 500,000 ecus. Thatsum was barely enough to cover the expenses of Guise’s army in Italy,which for the months of March, April, and May 1557 totaled some434,000 ecus.46There was considerable speculation that Henry would go in per¬son to command in Picardy; it is not clear why he did not. Instead,on July 28, the constable departed from the court to lead the army,taking with him all of the fighting men of the court, since Henry hadmade it clear to all of his servants who could bear arms that theyshould go. As a consequence, of his usual advisers, only Cardinal deLorraine was present with him at the chateau of Compiegne nearthe frontier. Henry was obliged to attend to the details of raising andvictualing troops himself. As of August 7, he still had hopes of joininghis army in person.47The size of the army that Philip II had on the frontier is a matter ofdispute among the sources. Rabutin, who was present in the Frencharmy, put Philip’s at 47,000 men; Soranzo reported 40,000; twoFlemish documents put it at 53,000 and 60,000. For the French, thesources are in somewhat closer agreement. Rabutin placed Frenchstrength at 17,000-18,000 infantry and 5,000-6,000 cavalry; So¬ranzo, at 16,000 foot and 5,000 cavalry (although he noted the arrivalof several thousand more infantry several days after he gave thesefigures); and an anonymous Spanish source, at 20,000 infantry and6,000 cavalry.48 Regardless of the exact numbers, the French clearlywere at a serious manpower disadvantage.It appeared to the French that the main object of Philip’s forceswas either Marienburg or the new fortress of Rocroi.49 But the com¬mander of Philip’s forces, Emmanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, wasmerely feinting in the east; he had decided to strike into Picardy. OnAugust 1 several enemy companies appeared before the fortified townof Saint-Quentin on the Somme river, some 120 kilometers northeastof Paris.50 They were wearing white crosses in hope of deceiving thedefenders, but, by a stroke of fortune, the company of 100 lances ofthe dauphin (who was not with them) had stopped there on their way194Henry IIto join the constable. The gens d’armes stiffened the 500 militiamenof the town and its unprepared defenses and repulsed the attack.When Montmorency heard of the incident, he ordered Coligny to take300 gens d’armes and two companies of infantry to the fort to secureit, since Saint-Quentin was a major bulwark in the defense of Picardy.Receiving the report that Saint-Quentin appeared weakly defended,the duke of Savoy rushed his entire army to invest it, but Colignyand about 800 men, after an all-night march, were able to slip bythe enemy at daybreak into the town. Henry II was reported as beingvery angry with Coligny—the governor of Picardy—and his uncle forfailing to reinforce so important a fort and told Montmorency that heexpected him to do everything possible to hold it.Consequently, on August 7, the constable rushed his army north¬ward from Laon. Since he was so badly outmanned, Montmorencyprobably did not intend to give battle to Savoy. He meant to pro¬vide cover by which Frangois d’Andelot, another nephew, could enterSaint-Quentin with 1,200 men. D’Andelot had made an attempt onAugust 4, but the Spanish had completely encircled the town anddrove him off after a sharp exchange. Another attempt was made onAugust 10, covered by the entire French army.51 At about 9:00 a.m.,twelve French cannon opened fire on the enemy companies at thesouthwest comer of the town and drove them back from the Sommeand the marshes that bordered the south end of the wall. But therafts that were to ferry Andelot’s men across the Somme were bothtoo few in number and too far to the rear. By the time the Frenchbegan to cross the river, the Spanish had regrouped in force, andtheir arquebusmen began to devastate the French. Only some 200men and d’Andelot himself were able to enter the town.Seeing that nothing more could be accomplished and not wishingto take on the much larger enemy army, Montmorency gave the orderto withdraw, probably a full hour later than it ought to have beengiven. A large force of cavalry was seen crossing the Somme, but theconstable thought it was the French returning from a skirmish, sincethe ford was supposed to be guarded by a company of his infantry. Herefused to hasten his retreat in order to secure his cannon, of whichhe was in short supply. It was this second delay that apparently dealtdisaster, since a woods that could have covered the French retreatwas close by. Attacked by a vastly larger enemy, the French wereoverwhelmed. Several new companies of French foot panicked andcrashed into the better disciplined German units behind them, end-Disaster at Saint-Quentin195ing any chance of an orderly withdrawal. By 5:00 p.m., the massacrewas over.The extent of the catastrophe was revealed by the fact that theSpanish captured all but one of the fifty-seven standards of theFrench companies. At least 2,500 French soldiers were killed; amongthem was Jean d’Enghien, the younger brother of Antoine de Bour¬bon. More than 7,000 were captured. The list of notables includedthe constable himself, his fourth son, Gabriel, Marshal Saint-Andre,Francois de La Rochefoucault, Louis de Bourbon-Montpensier, andnumerous others of the high nobility. The number of great prisonerstaken at the Battle of Saint-Quentin or the Day of Saint Laurent,as contemporaries called it, having been fought on the feast of St.Lawrence, was the most devastating aspect of the defeat. Not onlydid it deprive Lrance of most of its experienced captains not in Italy,but the need to ransom them had tremendous implications for futurepolicy.About half of the French army was able to reach safety undersuch captains as Louis de Conde, Francois de Nevers, and Frangoisde Montmorency. The news of the disaster was rushed to Henry atCompiegne, less than sixty kilometers from the battle site. It reachedhim early the next morning.52 He ordered the court to Paris becauseCompiegne was unfortified. Henry remained there almost alone fortwo more days in order to receive full information about what re¬mained of the army and to make provisions to cover for the defeat.The defeat at Saint-Quentin was not quite as disastrous as that atPavia a half-century earlier in terms of French casualties. In somerespects, however, it was more catastrophic. It occurred on the fron¬tier of the realm itself and opened up momentarily the entire northand the road to Paris to invasion. While the king himself was notcaptured as at Pavia, his alter ego was, and since Henry had a some¬what higher sense of honor than his father, ransoming the constableproved to be more costly. Third it forced Henry to recall Guise fromItaly and resulted in the end of French military involvement in thepeninsula.Montmorency was burdened with most of the blame for defeat,although the Guises were criticized for having pushed the Italian ex¬pedition and deprived the defenses of the realm of its best manpower.The constable’s failure at Saint-Quentin was not one of lack of daringto take on the enemy, as it had been earlier in Henry’s reign, butone of slowness to comprehend the enemy’s tactics and a hesitationi g6Henry IIto make quick decisions on the battlefield, another fault that he hadrevealed earlier.Henry II remained largely above the criticism, but there is noquestion that he deserved a good deal of it.53 Entrusting the army toMontmorency, who in several earlier campaigns had already revealedthe flaws that proved disastrous on August io, was in retrospect an er¬ror. Henry and his advisers had given little attention to Picardy beforethe summer of 1557, focusing instead on Italy. His best commanderand several of the best captains were bogged down in the peninsulawith some of the best companies of the French army. (It must benoted, however, that contrary to numerous historians’ opinions, theaddition of Guise’s men would not have made Montmorency’s armyequal in number to the duke of Savoy’s.) Like his father, Henry hadoverreached, and he, his kingdom, and thousands of his soldiers suf¬fered greatly as a consequence.13 MARS REMAINS ASTRIDEFor two days Henry II was alone at the chateau of Compiegnein the wake of the bitter defeat at Saint-Quentin. Not one ofhis usual cadre of friends and advisers was present. Charlesde Lorraine left for Paris on August 12, 1557, and Diane dePoitiers and Catherine de Medici were already in the city with Odetde Chatillon. Two secretaries of state, L’Aubespine and Clausse, re¬mained with the king to write the vast number of dispatches that hesent in every direction.1 It was the only time in his reign that Henryhad to make decisions without consulting his close friends. His han¬dling of the crisis demonstrated that he was capable of acting as hisown first minister, although he clearly preferred not to. Perhaps theexperience of deciding alone inspired greater confidence in his ownabilities, for after August 10 he appears to have been far more deci¬sive than previously.The report of the ambassador of Ferrara that the king was crushedand dejected at the news of the defeat was probably true, 2 but herecovered quickly and acted decisively and intelligently to begin torepair the damage. The first order of business was to put togethersomething of an army to defend Paris from the expected attack. Be¬tween 10,000 and 15,000 men were left from Montmorency’s forces;but they were badly disorganized, and many of the mercenaries hadslipped away. While momentarily very short of manpower, Henry wasin this desperate situation for a fairly short time because a great dealof the manpower called to service in June and July had yet to reachnorthern France. Some 15,000 French infantrymen had been calledup; they were dribbling into the camps one company at a time. Theadmittedly poorly trained cavalrymen available from the summoningof the ban and arriere-ban for the most part had not arrived; and a198Henry IIlarge portion of the Swiss and German mercenaries under contracthad not crossed into France. These reinforcements were, however,still days and weeks from joining the army, and the French elementswere mostly ill trained. Therefore, the situation remained extremelydangerous for another month.The best units were those fighting in Italy under several of thebest French captains. Paul de Termes and Henri de Montmorencywere ordered to rush from Piedmont to Picardy, while Brissac, whowas to remain, was to put a part of his army into the French fortsin northern Italy and send the rest home. Francois de Guise, PieroStrozzi, Blaise de Monluc, and the gendarmerie with them were themen that Henry wanted most to return. The king’s message of Au¬gust 11 reached Guise in the march of Ancona northeast of Romeon August 23. A second dispatch was sent on August 15.3 Guise wasordered to rush to Rome to inform the pope that he was leaving Italyand to return to France as quickly as possible. Pope Paul was to betold to treat with the duke of Alba as best he could.Guise was ill with influenza and had to be carried on a Utter toRome. He arrived there on August 31 and spent several days dealingwith Paul, who was extremely irate at being abandoned by Guise andmost of the French forces. Guise told him bluntly to make peace,although the pope swore he would shut himself up in Castel SanAngelo and die there first.4 Guise also had to make provisions for hisFrench army. His brother, d’Aumale, was put in command of the bulkof the forces, which were to cross Italy and return to France. Thebest units were to go with Guise and Strozzi by sea back to France.By good fortune, twenty-two French galleys under Baron de la Gardewere in Italian waters and available. It was only on September 15that Guise took to sea for Marseille.Meanwhile, Henry was working feverishly to prepare the defensesof Paris as best he could. Catherine de Medici was sent to the Par-lement of Paris on August 13 to demand of the bourgeoisie of thecity a large subsidy of 300,000 Uvres. Accompanied by Henry’s sis¬ter Marguerite and many other ladies, all dressed in black as if inmourning, the queen gave her first important public address. It wasa remarkable combination of flattery and cajolery:Her Majesty spoke with such earnestness and eloquence thatevery one was moved; and she said, in conclusion, that the mostChristian King required a vote of 300,000 francs for the paymentMars Remains Astridei99of 25,000 infantry for two months, adding that she would thenretire, to leave them free, as usual, to deliberate, which she didby withdrawing into a chamber; but it was immediately voted tocomply with her Majesty’s demand, and when she returned to herplace they freely promised her to pay these 300,000 francs, and,to give the most Christian King greater assistance, 100 of theircity burgesses offered to give immediately 3,000 francs each, sothat his Majesty might promptly avail himself of this sum.5The representatives of the city asked that she use her good officeswith the king in respect to their privileges; she replied that she wouldappoint the dauphin as their solicitor before the king.6 Since it wastraditional that the other French cities would contribute in the sameproportion as did Paris, it was expected that the cities would providethe king with 1.5 million crowns.The defeat of Saint-Quentin seems not to have affected the will¬ingness of the Lyonnais bankers to loan money to the king. Henry toldthe Venetian ambassador Soranzo that they competed with one an¬other to lend him 600,000 ecus: 100,000 at no interest and 500,000“at the usual terms.” The king expressed his surprise that the Ger¬man bankers were as eager as the Italians to lend him money. OnAugust 21, after his audience with Soranzo, he apparently felt the sit¬uation sufficiently under control to go hunting for the first time sinceSaint-Quentin.7One reason why Henry felt he could take the time to go hunt¬ing was the growing evidence that Philip II did not intend to pushon to Paris until he had taken the fortified town of Saint-Quentin.After the battle on August 10, every observer, French and foreign,was convinced that a drive on Paris would follow immediately. Blaisede Monluc, when he heard of the defeat, thought the kingdom lost,and Charles V, at his retreat in Spain, fully expected that the nextdispatch would bring the news of the fall of Paris.8To the duke of Savoy’s great disappointment, Philip refused toallow him to push on to Paris. Monluc attributed Philip’s decision tothe intervention of God addling the mind of the Spanish king, butPhilip’s decision was basically sound, even if a dash on Paris did havea good chance of succeeding for several days after August 10. He wasaware of what had happened to his father in 1543, when Paris layopen to attack from the east. Charles could not move his army fastenough to invest the city. A Spanish contemporary said about Philip:200Henry II“Philip feared lest, like his father, he might march into France eatingpheasant and leave it eating only roots.”9 The danger of leaving aforce like the garrison of Saint-Quentin in one’s rear was obvious,and, furthermore, Philip was on the verge of bankrupcy.10On August 20 Henry told Soranzo that it appeared the Spanisharmy would not move before taking Saint-Quentin, which was wellmanned and supplied.11 Coligny told the king that he had a six-weeksupply of food, and the discovery of a ditch full of wheat raised theestimate to ten weeks. He assured the king that he would be able tohold the town. Shortly before August 25 a company of arquebusmenslipped into the town by wading through water “up to their beards.”The Spanish had begun to bombard the walls on August 14 but ap¬peared to be making little progress. Since the French had strippedthe region of everything of use to an army, the Spanish had to foragefor food as far away as Noyon, some forty kilometers to the south.Henry’s renewed confidence was rudely shattered on August 29with the news of the fall of Saint-Quentin. The king expressed sharpcriticism of the admiral for the rapid fall of the town, for whichmodem historians have rebuked Henry. But, given the good garrisonand Coligny’s assurances, although its defenses were rather obsolete,Henry clearly expected it to hold out longer. The captured includedColigny, d’Andelot, who soon escaped, Jamac, and Saint-Remy, thenoted artillery officer.12Paris was again thrown into a panic, and numerous residents fledsouthward to Orleans. The king ordered the removal of the preciousvessels from the abbey of Saint-Denis and made preparations to movethe court to Orleans. He was advised to abandon Paris himself, buthe refused to desert “so great a city.” He increased the size of hisbodyguard by 400 archers and ordered the clearing of all structureswithin 500 paces of the exterior of the city walls to prepare for asiege. Soranzo reported that Henry, both in appearance and language,revealed deep grief and he had said in private that those who were toexecute his orders had failed to do so. In the future he would regulatehis affairs in the way that God should choose to inspire him.13 Theroad to Paris, however, was still blocked by several small fortifiedtowns like Ham and La Fere, and, somewhat to the west, the greatfort of Peronne was a threat to any force pushing toward Paris. Someenemy cavalry did penetrate to the outlying suburbs of Paris in searchof food, since Picardy was virtually stripped clean.On September 2 La Vigne, the French ambassador to the sultan,Mars Remains Astride201arrived with the bad news that Suleiman was very angry with theFrench for agreeing to the Truce of Vaucelles at the same time asthey had been urging him to send his fleet westward. As a result,the summer of 1557 had been the quietest in several decades in thewestern Mediterranean. The French badly needed the diversion ofSpanish forces that the presence of a Turkish fleet created, and LaVigne was sent back to Constantinople with Henry’s pledge not tomake peace with Philip for at least a year, several costly gifts, and arequest for a loan of 2 million ecus.H Although Henry never felt trulyobliged by his pledges to the Great Turk, it is worth noting that thebeginning of serious peace talks the next year largely correspondedwith the fulfillment of his pledge.On September 8 more bad news arrived. The fortress of Le Chaletsurrendered, relieving the Spanish of a serious threat to their supplylines.15 A week later Ham also capitulated as the Spanish were aboutto assault it. The last obstacle on the direct road to Paris had beenremoved, but several nearby fortified towns continued to pose a threatto any dash on Paris. Equally distressing to Henry was the lack of anynews about the due de Guise’s return to France.Some good news finally appeared with the arrival of Paul deTermes from Italy. He took command of the French army until Guise’sarrival. The available manpower was reported at 10,000 French in¬fantry, 6,000 Swiss, and 500 cavalrymen; reinforcements from Ger¬many, Switzerland, and Italy were expected to add another 13,000foot and 2,000 horse shortly. Henry expressed his hope of takingcommand in person soon.16From the moment the news came of Montmorency’s defeat, Henryhad taken over his responsibilities in regard to the army; for example,telling d’Humieres at Peronne that he was sending him 200 pioneersto work on its walls but he could not send all the powder and artilleryhe had asked for. However, the king needed help for the constable’sother administrative duties. Shortly after the defeat Cardinal de Lor¬raine was given the royal signet that enabled him to give routineorders for most administrative matters. Soranzo called Lorraine theprime minister but added that “many people doubt his ability to bearso heavy a burden.”17 Although it has been said that Lorraine ruledFrance for the next fifteen months, there is in fact little evidenceof his hand in most major decisions, except for religion, where healways had vast influence.On September 20 Guise, along with Piero Strozzi, 2,000 arque-202Henry IIbusmen, and 500 gendarmes, arrived at Marseille. The court wasoverwhelmed with joy at the news. His illness slowed down hisprogress, and it was only on October 9 that he arrived at the court.As Soranzo reported:The King was in the park playing at pallmall and on being toldthat his Excellency was coming he left the game and went to meethim. The Duke, having thrown himself at his feet, was receivedby his Majesty so lovingly, and with so many embraces, that heseemed unable to detach himself from his neck. ... It may becredited that his Majesty felt very great joy at this arrival, andprincipally from now having a companion for his business and histoils, he alone having hitherto despatched the numberless affairsof recent urgency, rarely employing the Cardinal of Lorraine inmilitary matters.18Guise was given the title lieutenant-general of the realm, whichgave him the authority of the constable without the title.19 In the nextseveral weeks the other three Guise brothers arrived from Italy, join¬ing Francois, Charles, and Louis at the court; the family completelydominated it. Only Odet de Chatillon was present to protect the con¬stable’s interests, but soon it became increasingly clear that Henryhad taken that task on himself.With d’Aumale bringing with him the last significant Frenchunits from Rome, the pope was placed in an untenable position. OnSeptember 14 he agreed to peace terms with the duke of Alba that re¬turned matters in Rome and Naples to the status quo before the war.Fernand Braudel has writen very emphatically about this cessation ofhostilities, calling it a turning point in Western history, for it createdan alliance that enabled the triumph of the Counter-Reformation,“which but for this alliance of temporal and spiritual forces wouldnever have been assured.”20While successful in Italy, Philip saw the opportunity for completevictory in France slipping away. Desperately short of money, and withthe campaigning season coming to an end, he began to disband hisforces for the winter. On October 15 Henry received a report that hewas returning to Brussels. Henry, on the other hand, was determinedto use the army on which he had expended so much effort and moneythrough the winter. This decision seems to have been entirely his.His advisers appear to have argued against it with much the samearguments they would use against the assault on Calais.Mars Remains Astride203Although there is no hint of Henry’s decision to attack the CalaisPale until November 1557, in hindsight it appears that he had fromvirtually the first days after Saint-Quentin thought of conqueringCalais as a way to overcome the humiliation of that defeat, and asa valuable bargaining chip in any future peace negotiations. The re¬conquest of Calais was a long-held French dream, if for no otherreason than the arrogant boast the English had written over the maingate: “Then shall the Frenchmen Calais win; when iron and lead likecork shall swim.” Plans for an assault on the city were not lacking,and Henry from the beginning of his reign longed to bring them tofruition.21 Coligny is said to have drawn one up in early 1557, and inJune of that year Bishop Francois de Noailles, passing through Calaison his return from London, reported that its defenses were weak.The plans of the defenses of the town had been passed to the Frenchsometime before November 1557, and they were given to Guise toplan his attack.22Motivated by this information, Henry was without question theprimary force behind the decision to attack Calais. The intelligencereports convinced him of both its feasibility and the importance ofdoing it in the winter. The governor of Boulogne, Jean de Seranpont,was ordered in October to reconnoiter the pale, and his presenta¬tion to the privy council on November 21 at Compiegne supportedHenry’s position. The king argued for the winter attack, not only onthe point of surprise, but also in order to use the large number ofmercenaries before their contracts ran out. No thought was given, itappears, to retaking Saint-Quentin, perhaps because Henry expectedthe Spanish to be prepared for such a move. The reaction of his prin¬cipal captains to the planned attack on Calais was negative. Guise, inparticular, objected to the proposed season for the attack. There wasalso a reluctance to risk the last forces available for the defense ofParis 23Henry decided to get an opinion from a most experienced andrespected engineer, Piero Strozzi. He and Seranpont went into thepale in mid-November to examine its defenses yet another time.24Strozzi’s report to the royal council at Compiegne emphasized thevulnerability of Calais but cautioned the king about the proposedseason.To this the King replied, that if it was feasible at all, he wishedto show them that this was the best time to do it, because thecity is a place full of water and marshes, where it is most neces-204Henry IIsary for assailants to have freezing weather; such weather wouldcome in January or never. He added that what rendered the en¬terprise easier, was the small number of men there because theyhad no suspicion of attack. If they saw an army beginning to movein that direction at the commencement of spring, they could putmore men into the garrison, but they would never do it now ata season so unusual for military operations. He added also that,in the spring, the sea was higher and therefore it was easier tohelp the besieged, and the swamps were fuller. In addition, theplace was so far from the forces which must be assembled that theforces of the enemy would always get there before ours were mo¬bilized, and that, if they had the least army in the world, there wasno means of taking it. Besides the English were much occupiedwith the war in Scotland, and their best men were there, whichstopped them from helping the city or doing anything to preventits capture. These reasons, being entirely his own, and enforcinghis will which was fixed on that point, gave him as much desireto try that enterprise as if our Lord Himself had inspired the ideaagainst the counsel and opinion of everybody. It was impossibleto turn him from it.25Guise still was not convinced of the prudence of a winter expe¬dition against Calais, and it was only on the direct order of the kingthat he agreed to lead it.26 The ability of the French to keep theinformation secret from their enemies and their friends was amaz¬ing. On November 4 Soranzo realized that something was afoot; onNovember 20 he thought it was an attack against Luxembourg; onlyon December 6 did he pick up the rumor that the target might beCalais. As for the English, reports reached London in mid-December,and precise evidence was provided on December 21, but the near¬paralysis that had struck the English government in the last year ofMary’s reign prevented a quick response. Calais was badly under¬manned in late 1557, but its commander, Lord Thomas Wentworth,was utterly convinced that the French would not attack in the winter.Thus, he dismissed the report of a well-placed spy in the French armywho described precisely the French strategy for attacking Calais. Heremained untroubled as late as December 29, despite informationthat the French were baking all their grain into bread at Ardres, theFrench fort closest to Calais27 It was only with the French attack onJanuary 1 that Wentworth was convinced that Calais was their target.Mars Remains Astride205With the enemy so unprepared, Guise’s forces, numbering some20,000-22,000 foot, 4,000 cavalry, and thirty pieces of artillery,faced what was essentially a peacetime garrison of about 2,500 menspread among a dozen strongholds.28 The strength of the pale, how¬ever, lay in its defensive works rather than the size of its garrisons;that was especially true of Calais itself, which combined the pres¬ence of the sea, tidal flats, and marshes with man-made works toappear invincible. The preparation of the French was very thorough,to the point of having made pitch-covered mats to serve as bases forartillery pieces in the marshes. Nonetheless, it was largely the ele¬ment of surprise of attacking in the winter that carried the day forthe French. The cold weather also aided them by freezing some ofthe shallower marshes, enabling the French to cross easily with theirequipment and guns.Upon the sudden appearance of the French forces, the Englishpulled back from some of their smaller outlying forts. Guise’s menthus advanced quickly to the fort of Rysbank, across the harbor fromCalais. It surrendered on January 2, putting the French within can¬non range of Calais Castle. Because of its position on the water’sedge, surrounded by the fortifications of the city itself, the English re¬garded the castle as unassailable and had not done much to improveit when Henry VIII had modernized most of the forts in the pale.After two days of bombarding it from across the harbor, a breach wasmade in the castle wall. Using attacks on the city walls as diversions,Guise sent several companies across the neck of the harbor, whichwas fordable at low tide, to attack the castle. He rightly anticipatedthat the English defenders would be drawn off to the fighting else¬where. His troops easily took the castle and held it against two fierceEnglish counterattacks. The fall of the castle compromised the restof Calais’s defenses, and on January 8 Wentworth asked for terms.29Some 500 English soldiers were allowed to leave for the Flemish bor¬der, along with those inhabitants of the town who wished to leave.Wentworth and several officers were held for ransom, although hewas eventually released for no ransom at all. An enormous amountof military supplies and commercial goods were seized, and Guisedistributed the latter among his captains.The secretary Florimond Robertet rushed with the news to Henry.He arrived at the Toumelles in Paris on the evening of January 9.The court was celebrating the marriage of the second son of the duede Nevers, and the king was dancing when Robertet reached him.206Henry IIEveryone made great displays of joy but no one as much as Cardinalde Lorraine. Robertet also informed Henry that Guise was leaving5,000 troops in Calais under Paul de Termes and was moving on tothe English fort of Guisnes, some ten miles from the coast. It wasa modem fort, reasonably well manned for its size, under a capablecommander, Lord Grey. With his own guns and some taken fromCalais, Guise quickly made a breach in its walls, but it took threesharp assaults before it fell on January 20. The French then turnedtheir attention to the last English position, the small fort of Hammes.The garrison, recognizing its inevitable fate, slipped away at night,leaving an empty fort for the French to enter.30The moment Henry heard that Calais was in French hands, hewas determined to go to it in person. He took with him the dauphinand Cardinal de Lorraine, leaving the queen to manage the govern¬ment until his return. On January 24 he and his entourage madetheir entry into the town, going immediately to the principal churchto reestablish the Catholic rite. While in Calais, he handed out re¬wards to the captains who fought under Guise. Piero Strozzi, in par¬ticular was heaped with praise and gifts; he was added to the conseildes parties and given confiscated estates worth 15,000 ecus a year.Guise also gave him the right to the ransom of Lord Grey, who hadfought so well at Guisnes. The family of Frangois de La Rochefou-cault, captured at Saint-Quentin, offered Strozzi 15,000 ecus in orderto exchange Grey for him. Guise’s brother, d’Aumale, was appointedgovernor of Piedmont, replacing Brissac who was to return to France,and the due de Nemours was to receive d’Aumale’s command of thelight cavalry. Cardinal de Lorraine, as a reward for his work and hisbrother’s, received extensive lands in the pale. Henry returned toParis on February 4.As for the due de Guise, his reward came in the form of the finalcommitment of the king to the marriage of the dauphin and MaryStuart. Their marital compact dated back to 1548, but there was asteady and powerful opposition to the marriage, led by Montmorency.The marriage was seen as cementing permanently the place of theGuises at the court, something that a number of courtiers besidesthe Montmorencys had no desire to see occur. In November 1557the Venetian ambassador had reported that Henry intended to hurrythe marriage because he hoped it would give him a better claim touse the Scottish army against England the next summer, but “theMars Remains Astride207constable and all the men in his power continually seek to preventit.”31Montmorency made a strong effort to derail the proposed weddingin December, sending Henry from captivity a proposal to have thedauphin marry Philip II’s sister, while Henry’s daughter Elisabethwould marry Philip’s son, Carlos. The potential advantages of theseunions caused Henry to halt preparations for the marriage ceremonyscheduled for January 8. Other factors entered into that decision aswell: the expected absence of the due de Guise on the Calais expedi¬tion, the desire to have a great victory in hand before celebrating thewedding, and the forthcoming meeting of the Estates.32With no further word from Brussels on the Spanish marriage pro¬posals, and after the victory at Calais, Henry decided to proceed withthe Scottish marriage. Some historians have argued that the mar¬riage to Mary Stuart was a clear demonstration of the dominance ofthe Guises at court in early 1558.33 Certainly they were at the peakof their authority under Henry II after the conquest of Calais. Whenthe Venetian ambassador wrote to his government about sending con¬gratulations to the king and Guise on their victory, he added thatthe Cardinal de Lorraine should also be included, since “this victorygives them such repute that the administration of France will remainin their hands forever.”3,1 But it must be noted that the value of theScottish alliance had been further enhanced since it had been pro¬posed in 1548. The French crown more than ever needed the helpof the Scots against England, and the current situation in Englandmade the marriage even more attractive. Edward VI had died; MaryTudor was not expected to bear any children; and Princess Elizabethcould perhaps be kept off the English throne as a bastard, makingMary Stuart the successor. Even if Elizabeth were to get the throne,Mary or her children were in line for the succession immediately afterher.35 The potential for the aggrandizement of the Valois dynasty wasso obvious that to argue that the Guises pushed Henry into agreeingto the marriage is to brand him a political ignoramus of the lowestcaliber.The date for the wedding was set for the end of April, to allow timefor the Scottish ambassadors to cross over and Antoine de Bourbonand Jeanne d’Albret to reach the court from Beam. On April 19 theformal betrothal took place. Francis pledged to espouse the queen ofScotland the next Sunday, and both signed the marriage contracts—208Henry IIone public and one secret. The public contract gave the title of kingof Scotland to Francis; until he inherited the French crown, he wasto be called the king-dauphin. If Mary were to die without children,the throne was to pass to the Scotsman closest in blood to her. Thesubjects of each realm were to be naturalized as subjects of the other,as the Scots were in letters patent given by Henry in June 1558. IfFrancis died before Mary, she would have the option of returningto Scotland or staying in France with an income of 600,000 livresfrom lands in the Touraine. If the couple had only daughters, theeldest would rule in Scotland but could not in France because of theSalic law. The crowns of the two realms were joined together in theircoat of arms, and in November, after Mary Tudor’s death, they addedEngland’s to it.The secret clauses were far more ominous for Scotland. One re¬quired that if Mary died without a child, her rights to England andScotland were to pass to the Valois dynasty; should Mary die in thenear future, Scotland and its revenues were to pass to Henry until herecovered the expenses of defending Scotland. Another clause statedthat no agreement that Mary might make with the Scottish Parlia¬ment would annul the secret agreement.36 The more sympathetic ofMary’s biographers rightly relieve her of responsibility for the secretcontract and blame Henry and his advisers for imposing it on thesixteen-year-old girl.On April 21, 1558, one of the grandest festivals in French historymarked the marriage of Francis and Mary at the cathedral of Notre-Dame. In the words of the ever-present Venetian ambassador:These nuptials were really considered the most regal and tri¬umphant of any that have been witnessed in this kingdom formany years, whether from the concourse of the chief personagesof the realm both temporal and spiritual thus assembled, therebeing present and assisting at all the solemnities the CardinalLegate and all the other ambassadors, or from the pomp and rich¬ness of the jewels and apparel both of the lords and ladies; or fromthe grandeur of the banquet and stately service of the table; orfrom the costly devices of the masquerades and similar revels. Inshort, nothing whatever that could possibly be desired was want¬ing for the embellishment of such a spectacle, except jousts andtournaments, which were reserved for a more convenient oppor¬tunity.37Mars Remains Astride209Among those present was Duke Francis of Lorraine, whose ownengagement to Henry’s daughter Claude would be celebrated in aweek, and the four-year-old Henry of Bourbon, whose marriage toHenry’s youngest daughter, Marguerite, had been agreed upon inApril 1557.38 Very prominent in all of the proceedings were all theGuises, except for Mary’s mother, who felt it too dangerous to leaveher realm at that moment. Due Francois performed Montmorency’soffice of grand-maitre to perfection, especially seeing to it that thecrowd of nobles present did not prevent the crush of common peoplefrom seeing the splendor of the wedding. Like all royal ceremonies,a royal wedding was an opportunity to impress on the populace thepower, wealth, and majesty of the monarchy. Guise several days laterdeeply annoyed Henry by asking for the pennanent confirmation ofthe office of grand-maitre.The festivities continued for a week afterward; Henry clearly feltthat an extravagant wedding for his oldest son was a necessary ex¬penditure for the monarchy, even at a time when it was in seriousfinancial difficulty. Raising the money for the Calais expedition hadgone as well as anyone could have hoped for. Guise had been pro¬vided with 548,000 livres, only 2,000 less than he had requested.By January 7 all but 80,000 were in his hands. The money for theCalais army was in addition to the 378,000 livres that the garrisonsof the forts in Picardy required. Once the pale was occupied, another260,000 was needed for rebuilding the fortifications.39Part of these expenses were covered by loans, as a great deal ofthe disbursements of the crown since 1551 had been. Henry had heldback the payment of the Grand Parti at the last Lyon fair of 1557 inorder to have cash for the army. The foreign bankers then refused tomake him any new loans for a time. He turned to the townspeople ofLyon, who provided 500,000 livres at 14 percent interest. Repaymentof the loan was to come from a 5 percent duty on silk cloth.40It was the developing crisis in the royal finances that had ledHenry to call a meeting of the Estates for January 1558 in Paris.Throughout its history, the Estates-General was very much an instru¬ment that the monarchy used when it was having serious financialproblems, although the previous time a full gathering of the threeEstates had occurred, in 1484, its purpose was to establish the gov¬ernment during Charles VIII’s minority. The paucity of meetings ofthe Estates in the sixteenth century was a result not only of themonarchs’ fear that they might be forced to make concessions to the210Henry IIEstates, but also a consequence of the existence of the provincial es¬tates, which were more easily manipulated into granting the monar¬chy its demands. As of 1547, provincial estates continued to meeton a regular basis in the great provinces of the realm—Languedoc,Dauphine, Provence, Guyenne, Brittany, Normandy, and Burgundy.Some of the smaller provinces on the fringes of the kingdom, such asLyonnais and Foix, also had local estates, but in the vast central andnorthern part of the realm, they had disappeared.The existing provincial estates met in their usual pattern underHenry II; he appears to have made no effort to suppress their activi¬ties. In 1555, for instance, he prohibited the Parlement of Toulousefrom interfering in the affairs of the Estates of Languedoc. Anotherincident of 1555 was typical of the relationship. The king had or¬dered the creation of six new tax-collecting offices for the provinceof Burgundy, which were sold for a good price. The provincial estatesprotested, and Henry agreed to suppress the new offices for 20,000livres and refunds to the purchasers. A letter of September 1552 tothe royal officers of Brittany ordered them to assemble the provincialestates at Rennes and request of them the same subsidy as they hadgranted the previous year. He explained in some detail the expensesof the expedition to the Rhine and of the court to justify the request.41The financial problems of late 1557 required more money thancould be raised from the provincial estates, and on December 15 theking ordered the mayors of the cities to assemble in Paris. No specificreason was given for their convocation. Although elected delegateswere not called for, some cities proceeded to choose their own. Theirinstructions were to protest against the heavy taxes. There were noelaborate cahiers of the sort that marked the Estates of later in thecentury, probably because there was so little time before the Es¬tates met. The Estates of 1558 had a very limited membership, andmany historians have been hesitant to call it an assembly of Estates-General, preferring the term Assembly of Notables. Most contempo¬rary accounts, however, use Estates.42 Five cardinals and thirty-fivebishops represented the clergy; the baillis and senechaux representedthe nobles, with the addition of a large part of the court nobility. Thetraditional third estate was divided into two: the mayors of the townsrepresented the populace, but the presidents of the provincial par-lements and magistrates of the Parlement of Paris were present as aseparate estate. Henry himself referred to the convocation as a meet-Mars Remains Astride211ing of the Four Estates, and the spokesman for the parlementairesthanked the king for erecting a “fourth estate of his justice.”43On January 5, after separate meetings to elect speakers and todecide how to respond to the king’s request for money, the Estatesmet in the Salle Saint-Louis in the Palais de Justice. Accompanied bythree of the secretaries of state, the treasurers-general, and his sonFrancis,44 Henry arrived to deliver a lengthy address. He stated theobvious: since the beginning of his reign he had been at war againstthe English and the Burgundians (note the term) with much success.In order to meet the expenses of these wars, he had been forced tosell some of his domain and impose heavy taxes and subsidies on hissubjects. For their sake he hoped to win a good peace for the reposeof the realm, but the pernicious designs of his enemies required agreat effort to achieve such a peace. Since silver was the sinew ofwar, he prayed the Estates to provide the means to resist the enemy.He pledged himself on the word of a good king to secure a good peaceand to order the affairs of the realm to the contentment of all.45The Cardinal de Lorraine, speaker for the clergy, gave “a learnedand grave address of an hour’s length,” in which he offered the kingthe lives and goods of the clerics for his needs. The speakers forthe nobility, the parlementaires, and the towns all reaffirmed thecardinal’s pledge for their respective estates. The last two speakers,however, called on the king to relieve the burden of taxes and re¬duce the disorder in the realm caused by war. The garde des sceaux,Bertrand, then took the floor to announce that the king was request¬ing the deputies of the towns to submit written statements of theirgrievances and reforms to their speaker, who would present them tothe king.Three days later Cardinal de Lorraine and the rest of the councilmet with the deputies of the towns to hammer out the size of thethird estate’s grant. The king, he said, wanted 3 million ecus fromthe Estates-General. The towns were to provide 2 million, and theclergy the other third. The nobility and royal officials were able toavoid any new taxation. The two estates providing money were tocome up with lists of enough men who could contribute 1,000 ecusto reach the sums involved. Lorraine promised that the king wouldpay 8.3 percent interest and would reduce the taille and the tax onthe sale of merchandise (the aides?). The deputies were encouragedto attach their cahiers to the roll of contributors. But they refused212Henry IIto submit such a roll because they had no way of knowing who waswealthy enough to afford such a sum. It was finally agreed that eachtown would contribute an appropriate portion of the 2 million ecus.46The arrival the next day of the news of the victory at Calais sothrilled the clergy and the town representatives that they immedi¬ately offered to make a gift of the sums they had agreed to loan theking at interest. If the money were not enough to make a good peace,they were ready to provide more. Negotiations over the next weekswith the towns showed, however, that their contributions remaineda loan.47 In February Henry took steps to eliminate the taxes on ex¬ports, citing their requests.48 On January 15, after a royal seance inthe parlement to procure the registration of his edicts on heresy of theprevious July, Henry was off to view his new town, and the meetingof the Estates was quietly ended.The extraordinary demands of the war had forced Henry to callthe Estates-General for the first time since 1484; it is not clearwhether his success in getting what he wanted from them wouldhave persuaded him to call them again soon. Obviously, he could notcount on having so great a boost as the victory of Calais come at themost opportune moment to induce the deputies to be generous. How¬ever, the fact that a meeting of the Estates was called six monthsafter his death by a government controlled by several of his closestadvisers suggests that he might well have had it in mind. Certainly,the financial crisis at the time of his death dictated their convocation.While the taking of Calais, the Estates, and the dauphin’s mar¬riage dominated the thoughts of the court in early 1558, the questfor peace was being quietly conducted. From the first the defeat atSaint-Quentin was interpreted as God’s way of making the two greatmonarchs equal so that they could work out an equitable peace49 Alsofrom the first Philip II hoped to use the captivity of Montmorencyas a way to procure a favorable settlement. He intended to play onthe constable’s fear of being superseded in power and fear of theGuises’ effect on Henry to induce him to persuade Henry to acceptpeace on Philip’s terms. It was made clear that Montmorency’s ran¬som depended upon the signing of a peace treaty. Thus, in early Oc¬tober 1557, the duchess of Lorraine visited him at Ghent to discuss“the means of coming to some agreement between the two kings.”The idea of sending the constable to the French court on parole wasalready being bandied about. Not that he truly needed to worry aboutMars Remains Astride213losing Henry’s affection. The king wrote several letters to him in hisown hand and spoke of him “more than ever with much affection.”50Negotiating for peace was put largely in the hands of the Cardinalde Lorraine in the first months of 1558. Henry and the due de Guisewere too busy with military matters to attend to it. Although thatmay seem like putting the fox in charge of the chickens, given hisadvocacy of the war policy, he appears to have been diligent in thepursuit of a settlement. Now that his brother had raised the militaryreputation of his house to its highest possible level, Lorraine maywell have been attracted by the prospect of being the statesman whobrought peace to Europe. If successful, he could expect to place theking in a position of debt to the Guises almost impossible to repay andsecure permanently his place at the head of the government. Theseconsiderations and his conduct in the months that followed force oneto question seriously the opinion that “it is impossible to believe thatLorraine was seriously trying to make peace.”51After numerous contacts with the duchess of Lorraine, who wasat Brussels, a conference between her and the cardinal was arrangedfor early May on the pretext that she was visiting her son in residenceat the French court. There was much haggling over the location of ameeting since neither Cardinal de Lorraine nor Cardinal Granvelle,Philip’s representative, was willing to cross the border into the other’sterritory on the grounds that it would look as if each was begging forpeace. It was agreed to meet on May 14 in the abbey of Cercamp righton the border. According to the Venetian ambassador in Brussels:The common opinion is that some agreement may ensue, becauseon this side the King and all these Lords are much inclinedtowards it, and their suspicion that the French feigned a wish forpeace, but did not really desire it, has much diminished, owingto the desire evinced for it by the proceedings of the Cardinal ofLorraine. Besides this, there are advices that the Turkish fleetwill not put to sea in such force as was believed; so these respectsrender it credible that the French likewise will be content to makepeace.52Nonetheless, the meeting broke up abruptly with no results.Cardinal de Lorraine did not return from Cercamp completelyempty-handed. Granvelle told him that a letter written by Mont¬morency’s nephew, Francois d’Andelot, to a Lutheran prince had214Henry IIfallen into Spanish hands. He said that it requested that somemove be made to aid the French Protestants, which proved that notonly d’Andelot but also his brother Coligny were clearly Lutherans.Although Granvelle promised to show Lorraine the letter in twenty-four hours, he accepted his word without seeing it. It turned out tobe a serious error, since the letter in question was simply a note fromdAndelot to Coligny telling him to remain steadfast in his faith. InJuly Lorraine admitted that he had been deceived.53Motivated both by his hatred of heresy and the opportunity toembarrass the constable, Lorraine took the tale to Henry on May 18.Four days later the king called dAndelot before him to deny the accu¬sations; the principal one was that he refused to attend Mass. Henryreminded him of the love and offices he had given him and his family.DAndelot responded that his goods and life were at the service of theking, but he could not retreat from his refusal to attend Mass. Henrybecame so angry that he could hardly refrain from striking him; butinstead he picked up a plate from the table and smashed it on thefloor. The king ordered his archers to arrest dAndelot. Many men re¬portedly were irritated at his arrest, “bearing in mind the need of thewar, doing his Majesty such good service as he does, he should havebeen treated with greater respect.” More ominously the Reformedpastor in Paris wrote to Calvin on May 25: “Many commanders andsoldiers are murmuring and threatening not to fight.”54Great pressure was put on dAndelot by his family to make thesubmission demanded by the king. After two months under arrest heagreed to attend Mass, although he took no part in the service. Theact of attending was sufficient for Henry, who immediately orderedhis release.55 Henry’s treatment of the constable’s nephew is furtherstrong evidence of his attitude toward heresy—namely, that he re¬garded it as sedition and treason found among the lower classes. Hefound it most difficult to believe that those close to him or possessinghigh rank could become heretics. Despite persistent rumors aboutd’Andelot, he had been given the functions of the admiral’s office inthe absence of his brother and had been ordered to go to Normandy amonth earlier to prepare the coastal defenses for an expected Englishattack. Indeed, it was said that Henry was more angry with Lorrainefor forcing him to confront the situation than with d’Andelot him¬self. It has been argued that Henry’s resentment about it caused thebeginning of the decline of the authority of the Guises.56By the time d’Andelot was released the last major fighting ofMars Remains Astride215Henry’s reign had ended. The king had kept most of his army intactthrough the winter and had vastly augmented it in the spring. Heparticularly sought to hire a large number of German light cavalry(the reitres), whose principal weapon was the pistol. Henry had at¬tributed much of the Spanish success at Saint-Quentin to them, andhe was determined to draw as many as possible away from Philip anduse them to teach the French how to fight in their style. By May 1,1558, his army, augmented by 2,000 reitres, was on the move east¬ward. On May 22 the due de Guise left the court to join it, and fivedays later the first French units reached the outskirts of Thionville,a fortress directly south of Luxembourg in Lorraine. By June 1 afull-scale siege was under way.57Despite the size of the army that the French put before Thionville,all was not going well for them. The Turks were not prepared to senda large fleet into the western Mediterranean that summer, despiteHenry’s earnest entreaties and the sultan’s promises. At Lyon, Bris-sac found that he could not get the 400,000 livres from the financiersthat he had been promised for use in Piedmont. In the English Chan¬nel a large English fleet was at sea, threatening the entire Atlanticcoast of France.Despite these potentially dangerous developments, Henry pushedforward with the assault on Thionville.58 It was regarded as a well-defended position; Blaise de Monluc called it the best he had seen.Guise arrived on June 4; he was soon joined by Piero Strozzi andMonluc. The latter had been given the office of colonel of the infantrytaken from d’Andelot. The French army had some 4,000-5,000 cav¬alrymen and 13,000-14,000 foot, mostly German.59 They faced awell-built fort, defended by at least 2,000 men with considerable ar¬tillery. Thionville promised to be a much truer test of the Frencharmy than either Metz or Calais.The French began to dig trenches toward the walls, but artilleryfire limited their digging to the hours of darkness. Since the seasonmade for few of those, progress was slow. After Monluc complainedabout the design of the trenches, Strozzi, as chief engineer, gavehim permission to dig the trenches as he thought best. Accordingly,in Monluc’s words: “At every twenty paces I made a back comer, orreturn, winding sometimes to the left hand and sometimes to theright, which I made so large that there was room for twelve or fifteensoldiers with their arquebuses and halberds. And this I did to theend that should the enemy gain the head of the trench and should2l6Henry IIleap into it, those in the back comer might fight them, they beingmuch more masters of the trench than those who were in the straightline.”60 Thus was created the arriere-coin of the siegemasters thatwas perfected by Vauban 150 years later. One military historian re¬gards it as the only important advance in siegecraft of the era.61On June 21 Guise’s men took the outlying Tour-aux-Puces, whichput them in position to mine the curtain wall. At that point thegarrison asked for terms, and surrendered on June 22. The speedwith which Thionville fell prevented the relief army dispatched byPhilip II from coming to its aid. But the French had suffered a seriousloss when Strozzi was killed by a musket ball fired from 500 paceswhile he was talking with Francois de Guise.After the capture of Thionville, Guise pushed northward towardLuxembourg, while in the west Paul de Termes moved an army outof Calais into Flanders to draw Spanish forces away from Luxem¬bourg. It was on Henry IPs direct orders that de Termes made themove, since he had been informed that the forts and towns of west¬ern Flanders were weakly defended.62 De Termes’s army of 9,000infantrymen and 1,500 horse bypassed the strong fort of Gravelinesdirectly across the border and pushed on to Dunkirk, which fell intwo days. The town had become the depot for English goods enteringFlanders since the fall of Calais, and the French took vast plunder.After plundering several more towns in the region, de Termes turnedback toward Calais. Unknown to him, a large force under the countof Egmont, assembled largely from the garrisons in western Flan¬ders, had rushed to the coast to cut off the French withdrawal. DeTermes first became aware of his precarious position when a chargeby enemy cavalry forced him to form battle lines.De Termes found himself facing an army several thousand menlarger than his own on ground that offered no cover. It was, how¬ever, the appearance of a completely unexpected element that gavevictory to Egmont’s forces. An English fleet cruising the Channelsaw the fighting, which came right down to the beach, and movedin as close as possible to blast the seaward wing of the French army.That wing collapsed immediately, and the rest of the army followedquickly. Only a small number of cavalrymen reached the safety ofCalais. About 5,000 men were killed, and most of the rest captured.Among the French captains taken were de Termes and Seranpont.Had Egmont pushed on to Calais, he would have found it nearly un¬defended, but he preferred not to risk his army, which had been veryMars Remains Astride217hastily assembled and therefore was poorly equipped and supplied.According to the Venetian Michiel, Henry blamed himself for order¬ing de Termes to move out from Calais, but in his report to Guise, deTermes admitted that he had advanced too far and had disregardedorders to ensure the safety of his army.63Again, the two rival monarchs had seen two major battles go twodifferent ways, and the two sides came away nearly equal in gains andlosses. It seemed even more obvious that God was making clear Hiswill for peace. But the war threatened to go on. Guise immediatelydropped his plans for an attack on Luxembourg and rushed back intoPicardy. There, on July 28, Henry reviewed the army of 40,000 menat Pierrepont near Laon.64After the review, the army moved northward toward Saint-Quentin, but it was halted by the news that a large Spanish force wasseveral miles away across the Somme. For the rest of the campaigningseason, the two great armies were within ten miles of one another,but the only action was a little skirmishing and feinting. It maywell have been physical and financial exhaustion that prevented afinal, conclusive battle.65 Certainly a factor, however, was the greatdanger of crossing a river in the face of a strong enemy. The twokings kept their armies in camp until November and then disbandedmany of their companies. Thus, the long and bitter war sputteredignominiously to an end.14 PAXBy September of 1558 Henry II appears to have had a com¬plete conversion to peace. He wanted badly to bring Annede Montmorency back to the court; absence indeed madehis heart fonder of the captive in Flanders. His letters tothe constable, several of which were written in his own hand and withDiane de Poitiers, were full of professions of love. Furthermore, themonarchy was close to bankruptcy. Henry realized that it would bevery difficult to raise the money needed to carry on the war. Anotherstrong incentive for peace was the rapid growth of Protestantism inFrance. Finally, there is some suggestion that the king’s physicalstrength was beginning to slip. He was afflicted with gout and boutsof vertigo and had spent much of the summer of 1558 in his tent witha cold.1Yet another motive for ending the war was Henry’s growing re¬sentment of the Guises, although the weight of that factor is hardto determine. Their role in convincing him to send the duke to Italywith his army, the impudence with which they worked to improvetheir position and to aid their clients, their efforts to eliminate anycompetition, and their role in the case of Francois d’Andelot all con¬tributed to Henry’s desire to bring Montmorency back to the court.2Diane de Poitiers had also turned against the Guises. The captivityof the constable ruined the balance between him and the Guises,and she used her influence over the king in Montmorency’s favor.The Venetian ambassador Michiel reported on November 15 that theconstable had recently written to the Grande Seneschalle “knowingwhat her influence can effect with the king, and at the present wherethere is an open rupture and enmity between her and the Cardinalof Lorraine, she being so united with the constable that they are onePax219and the same thing.” This new alliance was sealed with the mar¬riage of Diane’s granddaughter to Montmorency’s second son, Henride Damville. Last, Coligny was ill in his bleak prison on the Flemishcoast, where the dampness and cold winds were regarded as almostcertain to kill him.3Philip II and his advisers fully recognized the value of their twoprisoners, Montmorency and Saint-Andre, in any peace negotiations.Philip made good use of their wish to be ransomed to push them intosupporting Spanish peace proposals. Thus, Saint-Andre was paroledin early June 1558, “in hopes that he may effect something.” In earlySeptember he returned to Flanders with Henry’s commission to de¬termine what terms the Spanish were demanding. He conferred withthe constable, and they agreed to inform Philip of their king’s desirefor peace.4It was at about this time that Simon Renard, the former am¬bassador in France, wrote a memorandum to Philip that, for its in¬sights into the French situation and personalities, is worth quoting atlength:It will be difficult to obtain restitution of places which the Frenchhave occupied, for they have spent 29 years and 50 million crownsto gain these places, lost great numbers of their nobility and peo¬ple, and pledged all the Crown property. Without being reduced toextreme necessity, they will certainly not wish to give back whatthey have shown such determination in conquering. We have todeal with a prince who has little conscience, is ambitious andof a somber disposition, and much inclined to making war. Thesecond person in the realm is now a prisoner. As he knows hismaster, he will take care not to give him any advice for whichhe might afterwards be blamed and which might cause the ruinof his house. The Constable is very sharp. It will be a mistake toallow him to go to France on the plea that he is at odds with theHouse of Guise, for the quarrel between them is not as seriousas is made out. They understand each other far better than theyallow it to appear, as will be seen in connexion with the ransom.It is easy to read the Constable’s mind. His words, his expression,his changing colour immediately give him away. The safest courseis to negotiate with him in a resolute and determined manner,without ever deviating from the object in view, and not to believeanything he says, but always to bring him back to the point. If220Henry IIpossible, negotiations had better be carried on with him in writ¬ing. He always avoids this method if he can. The House of Guisehas profited so much by the recent conquests and has made sucha good business out of war, that its members will not easily bewon over to the cause of peace and restitution.5Despite Renard’s caution against sending Montmorency back toFrance, Philip II decided to do it. He gave his ambassador in Englandhis reasons: first because of Montmorency’s years, next his illness,which it was feared would prove fatal, and third, “if he returns toFrance the Guises will not have so much power as now that theyentirely control both war and finance, whereas if the Constable bethere the war matters will be in his care, and he will probably removethe ministers and officers appointed by the others, and thus causedivisions and dissensions amongst them, which will be good for ouraffairs.”6Although Renard’s comments on the principals at the Frenchcourt were very perceptive, Philip was proven correct in his deci¬sion to parole the constable. On October io Henry, then at Amiens,received word that Montmorency was coming to see him. After wait¬ing impatiently for most of the day, Henry rode out in late afternoonto meet him. About a league from camp he met the constable rid¬ing alone toward him. They embraced for a long time and rode backto Amiens, where Montmorency spent the night in the king’s ownchamber. The two were together for every moment of the two daysthat the constable had before his return.Henry listened without response to Montmorency’s explanation ofthe defeat of Saint-Quentin and to his sharp excoriation of the Guisesfor their war policy. He protested that he wanted nothing for himselfwhile the Guises were taking “all the honors of land and sea.” Henryproceeded then to add his own complaints about them. There wereseveral witnesses to the conversation, so word of it quickly went backto the Guises. Frangois was so crestfallen that he left the court tohunt at his own chateau. Ironically, it was exactly a year since Henryhad welcomed Guise back to the court in virtually the same way. Asfor Henry, the pain of seeing Montmorency leave after so short a timewas so great that he wrote him a letter in his own hand declaring that“nothing in the world can turn me from the love I have for you."The Guises’ loss of favor exacerbated the tensions at court, sinceMontmorency’s faction became active again after having remainedPax221largely out of sight since Saint-Quentin. The only important ally thatthe Guises had was Queen Catherine, who supported them in orderto prevent the concession of French interests in Italy. Catherine atthis time was also upset with her husband, since she had not seenhim for three months before she asked to join him at Amiens inOctober.8Henry was then in Amiens, in part because he and Philip hadagreed to a truce and the creation of peace commissions on Octo¬ber 6, 1558. The French commission included Montmorency, Saint-Andre, Cardinal de Lorraine, Bishop Jean de Morvilliers, and Secre¬tary of State Claude de L’Aubespine. The Spanish negotiators werethe duke of Alba, William of Orange, Ruy Gomez de Silva, CardinalAntoine Granvelle, and Ulrich Vigilius, the president of the Councilof the Low Countries. Henry ordered Chancellor Olivier to draw upan analysis of the previous treaties with the Habsburgs to prepare hisnegotiators. He gave the use of the town of Cercamp on the Flemishborder to the commissioners, and the first meeting took place on Oc¬tober 12. From the first it was clear that Calais and Piedmont werethe major points in dispute.9When the first set of negotiations ended on October 29, the com¬missioners, including Montmorency and Saint-Andre, returned to thecourt to report to the king. On November 2 Henry spent two hoursalone with the constable and had him again sleep in his chamber.Although it is assumed that the constable again advised peace, whenthe negotiators returned to Cercamp, they found themselves furtherapart than ever. When Henry was appraised of the impasse, he or¬dered an end to the negotiations. Resumption of the war seemed cer¬tain. That same night, letters to the king and Diane de Poitiers fromMontmorency arrived. The next morning Henry went on a long huntand returned for a long discussion with Diane. When he emerged, hecalled for a meeting of the conseil des affaires. He dramatically an¬nounced that he had resolved to make peace with Philip II. In order togain it he was willing to give up the territories in Luxembourg, Italy,and Corsica that he controlled. He intended to keep only Calais andthe Three Bishoprics. Henry ended with the statement that he hadcalled the meeting to announce his decision, not to discuss it. WhenBishop Charles de Marillac alone tried to protest, the king sharplyordered him to be quiet. New instructions were sent immediately toCercamp.10As can be imagined, the consternation of the Guises and Cather-222Henry IIine de Medici was immense. Only the day before, the due de Guisehad gained Henry’s oath that he would never surrender Piedmont.When Catherine heard of her husband’s decision, she rushed to himand begged him not to give up the French positions in Italy, evenkneeling at his feet in order to turn him from his resolution andtelling him that the constable had never done anything but evil. Tothis the King replied that the constable had always done well and thatthey had done evil who had ever counseled him to break the truce."Francois de Guise, seeing the fruits of his labors about to be lost,was nearly beside himself. He bluntly told the king that those whohad advised him on his plans had lost their heads. He embarrassedHenry by publicly demanding that the king reaffirm his pledge togive him the office of grand-maitre, which Montmorency expected topass on to his oldest son upon his return to the court, and threateningto leave royal service if he did not receive it. Henry wrote to theconstable: “Monsieur de Guise does not want peace, pointing out tome every day that I have more means for continuing the war.”12 It istrue that Henry continued to look for money even after he committedhimself to peace. At the end of November he contracted for a loan ofi .5 million crowns from the German bankers.13It is easy to understand Guise’s rage. He had won several bril¬liant victories for the king, and he now found his interests ignoredin favor of one who had been disgraced in the field. Guise’s humorbecame even blacker when, in December 1558, Henry offered to paythe 200,000 ecus that the duke of Savoy demanded as a ransom forMontmorency—60,000 to be paid immediately and the rest over eigh¬teen months. Saint-Andre’s ransom was only 50,000 ecus, but a hitchdeveloped in the exchange and he was not freed until March 1559.Montmorency arrived at the court at Saint-Germain on December21, after a triumphal march from the Flemish border “as if he werethe king himself.”14 According to the Venetian ambassador: “Imme¬diately upon his arrival at the court, there returned into his hands,not only all the affairs, the Duke de Guise and the Cardinal of Lor¬raine having withdrawn themselves entirely, but all that concourseof followers which he used to have heretofore, so that no differencebetween his past and present position is perceptible, he continuinghis usual procedure, and with the same, and it may be said greater,authority in all his actions.”15Cardinal de Lorraine returned the signet to him the same eveningPax223without any order from Henry. The cardinal, more flexible and politicthan his brother, well recognized the dangers of pushing too far theirresentment, but he did tell the king that he was withdrawing becausehe did not intend to become the constable’s varlet.16It was probably Francois de Guise’s deep anxiety over his lossof favor that was responsible for a strange episode of December 24,1558. Having asked two prominent courtiers to watch from hiding,he accosted Francois de Montmorency and challenged him to a duelfor having maligned him. The young Montmorency, a smaller andless experienced person, swore that he had done nothing to dishonorGuise. Having thus avoided a fight, he reported to the king and hisfather what had happened. Henry was decidedly put out, but theconstable laughed it off, which was regarded as making Guise’s im¬pudence even more obvious.17 It is probable that the cause of Guise’srash action was the affair of the young Montmorency’s secret mar¬riage, since he had openly blamed Guise for his failure to get a papaldispensation.The constable could easily laugh off his rival’s indiscretion, sincehe had taken complete control of the government to an extent hehad never had before Saint-Quentin. Henry was happy to give up theburden of attending carefully to the routine affairs, especially mili¬tary matters, as he had been doing since August 1557. Montmorencyplaced his nephew, d’Andelot, in charge of the army in Picardy andordered him to undo most of the changes effected by Guise. He alsorevoked a large number of the pensions and gifts given out by Cardi¬nal de Lorraine. As for himself, he received from Henry the moneyfor his ransom, the right to pass the office of grand-maitre to hisson Francois, and the governorship of Languedoc and a promise of amarshal’s baton for his second son, Henri.18Although the Guises had lost much of their authority in the gov¬ernment, the cardinal continued to serve as one of the negotiatorsat Cercamp to show, presumably, that all of the realm supported thedesire for peace. Even with Henry’s vast concessions, hammeringout a treaty proved to be slow work. The major obstacle now wasCalais, about which Henry had said that he would sooner give up histhrone than surrender. Philip II could not accede to the French onCalais if he hoped to maintain any semblance of credibility as kingof England. The news of the death of Mary Tudor on November 19,although hardly unexpected, threw the conference into confusion. It224Henry IIwas agreed to continue the truce for two more months and suspendthe negotiations for the same length of time, until the new govern¬ment in England could send its own representatives.Mary’s death relieved Philip of the need to be adamant about thereturn of Calais, although he continued to pay lip service to the ideain hope of maintaining his alliance with England. As for Henry, itmattered little whether it was Mary or Elizabeth who demanded thereturn of the town, but he and his advisers recognized that Philip’sstake in it had been significantly reduced. However, Henry hoped fora better relationship with England under its new queen, so he couldnot brusquely deny her claim.19 The French negotiators searched fora formula that would keep Calais in French hands while saving facefor Elizabeth.The French king’s relations with the new English queen were,however, greatly complicated by the claim of his daughter-in-law tothe English throne. Henry began the process of having Mary Stuartlay claim to the throne by making her observe the formalities requiredof the royal successor upon the death of the predecessor, such as thewearing of white, required of French princesses in mourning. It wasdecided not to push Mary’s claim too stridently in hope that Elizabethwould become amenable to the French position on Calais. It was alsoproposed that if Elizabeth would agree not to marry a foreign prince,Henry would require Mary to concede her claim of precedence overElizabeth in the English succession. It would appear, however, thatHenry’s proposals were designed to induce Elizabeth to refuse tomarry Philip, who had proposed to her almost immediately after MaryTudor’s death. On December 31, 1558, the English ambassador inRome reported that the French were trying to convince the pope todeclare Elizabeth illegitimate and recognize Mary Stuart as queen ofEngland. In January Mary and Francis definitely added the crown ofEngland to their coat of arms.20 The French behavior for the next sixmonths strongly suggests that Henry had no intention of ignoring hisdaughter-in-law’s rights to England.In early January 1559 preparations were under way to resumeformal negotiations. Because the abbey of Cercamp was too cold inwinter, it was agreed to use the nearby chateau of Cambresis (Cateau-Cambresis). Before the commissioners returned to the peace table,the marriage of Henry’s daughter Claude and Duke Francis of Lor¬raine was celebrated on January 22 “with no less pomp than that ofthe king-dauphin last year.” The young duke had received 200,000Pax225crowns from the estates of his duchy and reportedly spent most ofit for his wedding. Since the duke was the Guises’ cousin, they werevery prominent at the festivities, and it marked a step in their returnto favor.21 Henri de Montmorency was supposed to marry Diane dePoitiers’s granddaughter at the same time, but “for the greater sat¬isfaction of his relatives and to obtain greater honor,” it took placea week later at Chantilly.22 Thus, the French representatives did notreach Cateau-Cambresis until February 5.On February 11 the first session of the resumed conference tookplace, and rapid progress was made, except for the problem of Calais.The arguments over the town became so heated that the constableadvised Henry that he should begin to prepare for the possibility of re¬sumed war by drawing loans from Lyon. Montmorency suggested thatthe king at least give the appearance of preparing for war by sendingout captains on recruiting missions. Henry was assured that moneyfor war could be obtained from the Lyonnais bankers23 Nonethe¬less, the negotiators continued their work, although the Cardinal deLorraine told the Spanish that his king would never consent to therestoration of Calais.24The nut of Calais was cracked on March 12, only a day after itappeared that the conference would break up in failure.25 France andEngland agreed to a truce of eight years, at the end of which Calaiswould be returned to England. France was to provide a security of500,000 ecus for its return. Disputes over details of various matterscontinued to agitate the commissions for two more weeks, and onMarch 27 Lorraine and Ruy Gomez hurried off to consult their mas¬ters on the last unresolved issues. Both kings agreed to concessionson these final concerns so that on March 28 the news began to bebroadcast that a peace had been agreed upon. On April 2 the agree¬ment between England and France was signed, and on the next daythe more substantial treaty between Philip and Henry.26 These twotreaties, known collectively as the Peace of Cateau-Cambresis, werethe most comprehensive agreements drawn up prior to the Peaceof Westphalia and established the legal and political status quo forWestern Europe for the next ninety years.The treaty between England and France called for peace, not justa truce as in the first drafts, with Calais remaining in French handsfor eight years on security of 500,000 ecus and several prominentFrench hostages, who were to rotate every two months. The Frenchwere to return sixteen cannon found in the pale, and since the peace226Henry IIextended to Scotland as well, they were to demolish several fortson the Scottish border with England. The treaty would become nullupon any violation by the forces of either side. Given the Frenchrecord of ignoring similar provisions in previous treaties, Elizabethcould not have been optimistic that she would recover Calais in eightyears, but she ensured that the return would not occur by occupyingLe Havre in 1563. The French used the incident to refuse to concedeCalais when the eight years had passed.The agreement between the French and Spanish monarchs wasfar more complicated.27 In regard to the northern frontier of France,Henry was to return four forts (including Thionville) in exchangefor four forts (including Saint-Quentin) held by Philip. Henry gaveup the duchy of Bouillon, held by Diane de Poitiers’s grandson, tothe bishop of Liege, while Philip kept Hesdin. The treaty did notrecognize French rule over Lorraine, but France kept those parts ofthe Three Bishoprics of Lorraine it had occupied—namely, the threecities themselves. Since Philip was not the Holy Roman Emperor, hemerely made a formal protest on behalf of his cousin Ferdinand. InItaly the French were to return to the duke of Savoy his ancestrallands of Bresse, Savoy, and Piedmont, retaining the small duchy ofSaluzzo and for a time five fortresses in Piedmont, including Turin.The Spanish rights to Milan and Naples were recognized, and theFrench forts in Lombardy handed over to Spanish forces. In Tus¬cany all the French positions were turned over either to the duke ofMantua or the duke of Florence. Genoa was to recover all of Corsica.Despite Spanish insistence on including a clause prohibiting Frenchseamen from sailing to the Americas, the treaty made no mention ofthe colonies, which was a victory for the French position.28The treaty called for both monarchs to support a meeting of a gen¬eral council of the church. That clause was the only one that touchedon religion. Despite the persistent rumors that a secret agreement ondestruction of Protestantism had been agreed on, no such evidencehas ever been found. Such an agreement was hardly needed, for thetwo kings understood each other very well on the question of heresy.Two marriages were also arranged in the treaty. In order to re¬duce the appearance of outright surrender of Savoy and Piedmont, amarriage between Duke Emmanuel-Philibert and Henry’s sister Mar¬guerite was agreed upon. Marguerite de France was still unwedded atthirty-six years of age. Her advanced age raised a question of whethershe would have children, but marrying her was a precondition of thePax227duke’s reclaiming his lands. He clearly regarded returning home torule as being more urgent than the possibility of not having an heirfor his recovered estates.The other marriage involved Henry’s oldest daughter, Elisabeth.Having just turned fourteen on the day of the treaty, she was a valu¬able pawn in her father’s marriage diplomacy. Throughout the dis¬cussions prior to the treaty, it was expected that she would manyDon Carlos, Philip’s only son, the same age as she. But with MaryTudor now dead, the widower Philip had the option of his marriageto the princess inserted at the last moment.No other treaty of the Ancien Regime has been as controversialas Cateau-Cambresis. Contemporaries and historians ever since havebeen largely negative in their assessment of it. The principal Frenchcommanders, Guise, Brissac, Vieilleville, Monluc, and probably mostof the nobility denounced it in no uncertain terms. At the end ofMarch 1559 Brissac had sent DuVillars from Turin to protest the re¬ports that the king was about to surrender Italy. Listening to Henry’sdefense of the proposals, Guise broke in to object. “I swear to you,Sire, that there is evil in taking this road. For if you do nothingbut lose for the next thirty years you would not give up as much asnow at a single stroke.” The duke went on to say that most of theking’s servants felt as he did.29 DuVillars also recorded the words ofBrissac when he arrived at Turin with the terms of the peace: “Omiserable France! To what ruin and loss have you allowed yourselfto be reduced!”30 According to the Memoires de Vieilleville, Henryconceded lands that had cost 40 million crowns and 100,000 livesto win. According to the memoirs, Vieilleville attacked the treaty toHenry’s face and attributed it to the king’s desire to see his sister wed,“who ought to end her days in a good convent.” He also declared thatTurin was as much a part of France as Lyon and its population spokeFrench just as well. Henry was depicted as not replying to Vieilleville.Tavannes, Monluc, and Brantome denounced the treaty in similartones.31 All of these men, however, had been involved in the victoriesthat Vieilleville declared were now blemished and were angered tosee their glory diminished by the concession of their conquests.Most French historians have also seen Cateau-Cambresis as dis¬astrous, or at best disadvantageous for France, if for no other reasonthan that the return of the soldiers from the foreign lands causedthem to turn to fighting each other in the religious wars. In his as¬sessment, Lucien Romier called attention to the fact that France had228Henry IInot received clear title to Calais and the Three Bishoprics while con¬ceding the same to the Italian lands and Savoy. Henri Lemonnier hasargued that the loss of Savoy, Bresse, and Piedmont retarded for morethan a century the French annexation of Franche-Comte32There were, however, a number of contemporaries besides Henryand Montmorency who regarded the treaty favorably. La Vigne, theambassador to the sultan, said: “A second Salic law should be passedto have the first man who advises the renewal of the Italian wars . . .burnt as a heretic.” Etienne Pasquier wrote: “Italy was never any useto us French except as a tomb when we invaded it.” Claude Hatonemphasized how badly the poor people of France and especially Pi¬cardy wanted peace, and he praised Henry for securing it. Michel deL'Hopital wrote a Carmen de pax in favor of the treaty.33 None of thesemen was a soldier, which may explain their willingness to praisethe treaty, but one veteran warrior who did was Francois Rabutin,who concluded his commentaries on the wars of Henry’s reign witha tribute to “this fortunate peace.”34The pros and cons of the treaty could be argued endlessly. On theone hand, Henry disgracefully abandoned the Piedmontese, whomthe French had already begun to incorporate into their realm, theCorsicans, and the Sienese republicans to their enemies, and all ofItaly to Spanish domination. On the other hand, France had extracteditself from the enormous sinkhole of French manpower and moneythat Italy had been for the past seventy years. On the one hand, theend of the foreign wars returned home a vast number of men ofwar who quickly turned to plying their trade in the religious wars.On the other, the French control of Calais made it more difficultfor England to come to the aid of the Huguenots or any other rebelgroup. On the one hand surrendering Savoy and Bresse resurrectedan independent duchy of Savoy, which caused serious problems forthe French monarchy for the next two centuries. On the other, theretention of Calais and the Three Bishoprics effected the beginningsof a defensible northern frontier; the flanks, which had been theweakest sectors, had been converted into the strongest35 While thetreaty did not give French seamen the right to navigate the waters ofthe New World, it placed no specific barrier to the French to claimsuch a right in the future.36In regard to Savoy, while the long-term consequences of the reap¬pearance of the independent duchy were troublesome for France, theimmediate results seemed to be very beneficial for the French monar-Pax229chy. According to the Venetian ambassador, the duke “is evidentlytied and bound and more in the hands of the French than those ofKing Philip ... all able politicians believe that he will be compelledto follow the will of the French” because of the fortresses the Frenchstill held in his duchy.37 The concession of the French positions inthe southern Alps did make the southeast of France more vulnerableto invasion, but past history had seen few significant attacks into thatregion. The French had far less reason to fear attack from that direc¬tion than they did from the Low Countries. There, the treaty put theFrench in a far better situation. Control of Calais put them in positionto outflank the major fortresses of western Flanders, and control ofMetz put them within easy striking range of Luxembourg, the key tothe eastern Low Countries. From a strategic point of view the Frenchhad gained vastly more from Cateau-Cambresis than they lost.Henry has also been criticized for accepting the peace in orderto make good marriages for his sister and daughter. Yet dynasticmarriages were an important part of the political scene of the six¬teenth century and often highly successful, as the Habsburgs wellproved. The marriage of Elisabeth de Valois to Philip was in this re¬gard most important, because it preempted the possibility of Philipmarrying Elizabeth of England and continuing the Anglo-Spanish al¬liance, an even more frightening prospect because Elizabeth’s agepromised to make such a union more fruitful than Philip’s withMary Tudor had been. The absence of an Anglo-Spanish marriageincreased the possibility that the papacy would excommunicate Eliza¬beth and enable Henry to put his son and daughter-in-law on theEnglish throne as part of a crusade against heresy, something thatPhilip would have been hard-pressed to oppose.38The hindsight of historians permits them to see that a marriagebetween Philip and Elizabeth Tudor was never a serious possibility;but if Henry had lived, she might well have found an alliance withPhilip a mortal necessity. Henry would have leapt at any pretextto place Mary and Francis on the English throne. That conditionalclause, “if Henry had lived,” underlies the real defect of the Peaceof Cateau-Cambresis from the French point of view. Its success de¬pended upon a strong French monarchy to take advantage of theopportunities presented and to overcome its liabilities. Henry’s death,a direct, albeit certainly not intentional, result of the treaty, exagger¬ated its defects while diminishing its benefits for France. It is hardto believe, for example, that so many of the French nobility would230Henry IIhave taken arms against Henry as did against his successors, thusreducing substantially or at least delaying the wars of religion. It ishard to believe, also, that Henry would not have been quick to takeadvantage of the revolt against Philip in the Netherlands. Henry’sdeath was largely responsible for what Noel Williams has argued wasthe major flaw of the treaty—that it cost France its rank as a powerequal to Spain and its claim to be arbiter of European affairs.39 Onemust agree with him that such a development occurred after 1559;but rather than being a direct result of the treaty, it was largely aconsequence of the weakness of the French monarchy after Henry’sdeath.15 "THIS LUTHERAN SCUM"Henry II wanted peace badly in April 1559. Perhaps heconceded more than was necessary in order to gain thefreedom of Montmorency and Saint-Andre, to relieve theenormous financial burden imposed by war, and to ar¬range good marriages for his sister and daughter; but it is difficultto escape the conclusion that he wanted most of all to turn his at¬tention to the religious problems in France. Numerous ambassadorsattested to the relationship between the signing of the peace and theonslaught of heresy trials. Cardinal de Lorraine told the parlementshortly after the treaty that it had been agreed upon so that the kingcould drive out the heretics, and Henry confirmed it with his ownwords in early June 1559.1The conservative Catholics had reason to have become seriouslyconcerned about the progress of French Protestantism since 1555.The kingdom seemed about to be overwhelmed by heresy. Reportsfrom virtually every province gave strong, if at times exaggerated,accounts of the spread of Protestantism. Both the king and the con¬stable stated on several occasions that France needed peace in orderto attend to the presence of the heretics. When the imperial repre¬sentative Lalaing was at the French court in April 1556 to receiveHenry’s oath to the Truce of Vaucelles, the king told him that he hadnot been able to deal with heresy because of the press of other busi¬ness. He complained about Geneva, “which is a source of much evilbecause many heretics are received there and thence disseminatetheir errors throughout France.”2Even as the number of Protestants increased rapidly during themiddle years of Henry’s reign, the effectiveness of the legal systemof repression had declined considerably. The number of heresy trials232Henry IIand executions for the period 1555-1558 was less than for the previ¬ous four years, despite a much larger group of persons liable to suchactions.3 Henry had certainly not given up the effort to enforce reli¬gious conformity, but his edicts in this time span were ineffective. Anedict of 1553 to reestablish a chamber for heresy in the Parlement ofParis, in effect rebuilding the chambre ardente, was not registered bythe court, and Henry never ordered it to do sodHenry could hardly have been unaware of the growth of Protes¬tantism in his realm. In 1554 he was told that three towns in Francehad “declared themselves heretic.” The number of nobles fleeing toGeneva had reached 120 in 1555, and the Bourbon prince Louis deConde and his entourage had visited that city on their return fromItaly the same year.5 Henry made another effort to stem the growthof the Reform in 1555. An edict designed to broaden the powers ofecclesiastical judges in heresy cases and to stop appeals to secularcourts was presented to the Parlement of Paris for registration.6 Theparlementaires refused to accept it, and one of the presidents, PierreSeguier, and a magistrate, Adrien DuParc, were sent to Henry atVillers-Cotterets to defend the court’s action. They were told whenthey arrived that the king was very angry with the parlement and hadwondered aloud if he could find twelve of its magistrates who couldserve as worthy judges of heretics.Seguier’s address of October 22 before the king, Montmorency,the Guises, Saint-Andre, and other notables was a masterpiece.7 Hepresented the dangers of creating a system by which the adminis¬tration of justice would be removed from the king’s own judges andgiven to others who did not answer to the monarch. The edict threat¬ened to cut off appeal to the king, who was the embodiment of justicein the realm. Seguier argued that the best way to deal with heresywas through the good examples of devoted priests and prelates inresidence in their charges. Last, he raised the specter of the courtiersthemselves falling under the jurisdiction of the heresy court and see¬ing their properties confiscated because of false witnesses, withoutthe right to appeal to the king.Henry was reported to have listened to Seguier’s remonstrancewithout interrupting even a syllable. The next day he wrote to theparlement, seconded by Montmorency and Guise, praising Seguier’spresentation and withdrawing the request for registration.8 Eightmonths later, when the Sorbonnists complained to the king that theparlement was itself infected with heresy, Henry replied in irrita-This Lutheran Scum233tion: “Do you want me to put you in the place of the Parlement andabandon to you the direction of my kingdom?”9Despite these acts seemingly ending the effort to change the sys¬tem of heresy jurisdiction, there was considerable activity behind thescenes to establish the Inquisition in France. In early 1557 the kingrequested from Pope Paul IV the authority to establish the Holy Officein his realm. The exact chronology of the negotiations and decisionsthat led to this request cannot be clearly established. Nor can it bedetermined whether the initiative came from France or Rome.10 Thefirst explicit mention of the Inquisition came in February 1557, in aletter from Henry to his ambassador de Selve in Rome, in which hetold de Selve to ask the pope for a brief establishing the Inquisition.The language strongly suggests that this letter was not the first wordon the matter.11Paul IV responded in April with a brief that authorized thecreation of the French Inquisition, with three cardinals—Bourbon,Chatillon, and Lorraine—as grand inquisitors. The choice of Chatil-lon has been questioned by some historians who note that he hadalready revealed a sympathy toward Protestantism and would openlyconvert in 1561. Following Theodore Beza, they argue that it was aneffort to force the cardinal either to side openly with the Protestantsor take part in their destruction.12 Lucien Romier’s explanation de¬nies such a Machiavellian twist to the decision; he proposes that thethree cardinals were chosen because they were the ones ordinarilypresent at the court and in the royal council.13 Furthermore, it wouldhave been near impossible for Henry to have taken so momentousa step without Montmorency’s approval. While the constable was afirm Catholic, he would never have allowed Lorraine to so enhancehis authority without some sort of counterbalance, namely, the ad¬dition of his nephew to the roll of inquisitors. The appointment ofChatillon despite his Protestant leanings reinforces the argumentthat Henry paid little attention to such matters when they involved ahigh-ranking nobleman. Nonetheless, it is unlikely that Bourbon orChatillon would have taken an active part in the Inquisition’s work,leaving the authority in Lorraine’s hands.On July 24, 1557, Henry issued a decree confirming the papalbull establishing the Inquisition. It imposed some limitations on thepowers of the three cardinal-inquisitors. The most important wasthat appeals courts were to be established in all the cities with par-lements and made up of twelve persons, six of whom had to be234Henry IIparlementaires chosen by the cardinal-inquisitors. Seguier’s remon¬strance must have remained in Henry’s mind. With that change, theparlement retained secular control over the Inquisition. Despite thisbow to the sensibilities of the parlement, the magistrates refused toregister it until January 1558. Even then the edict remained inopera¬tive and was quietly rescinded in April.14Henry was evidently not persuaded that the creation of the In¬quisition was going to be effective; he may well have been awareof the unrelenting hostility to the tribunal by the magistrates of thelaw courts and, indeed, by a good part of the French clergy with itsGallicanism. Therefore, on the same day he accepted the papal bull,he issued the Edict of Compiegne, which greatly strengthened thepenalties that the secular courts could impose on heretics.15 Henrynoted that previous edicts had failed to achieve religious conformitybecause of disputes over jurisdiction and the maliciousness and soft¬heartedness of both ecclesiastical and secular judges. The edict didnothing to solve the first problem but sought to ensure that the sec¬ond would no longer intrude by mandating the death penalty for thoseconvicted of being obstinate or relapsed sacramentarians. That wasthe legal term for Calvinism and, accordingly, the Lutherans wereexempted from the edict. Henry thus avoided a confrontation withhis German allies and the vast number of German mercenaries inhis army.That the edict was directed principally against the Calvinistswas made very clear by the clause that proscribed death for thosewho visited Geneva or had books published there. Other acts forwhich execution was mandated included blasphemy against imagesof Christ or the saints and illegal preaching and religious assemblies,whether private or public. The edict stated that because the num¬ber of heretics had increased so greatly, the nature of the crime hadchanged from secret opinion to open sedition. Therefore, the kingannounced his intention to use the force of arms as well as the ju¬dicial system to deal with heresy. The foreign war, however, made itimpossible for Henry to make good this threat, which has been calleda “manifest declaration of war” against the Protestants.16 For Henryand the conservative Catholics, the identification of heresy with re¬bellion justified in their own minds the call to arms. The final clauseof the edict proclaimed that the fines and goods confiscated from thecondemned heretics would no longer be distributed by the crown butused to pay the costs of the court system, and the remainder was toThis Lutheran Scum235go to charity. It is unclear how carefully Henry kept to his own edictin this matter; in November 1557 the son-in-law of Jean Bertrandreceived the estate of a noblewoman executed for heresy.17The opposition of the parlement and the defeat at Saint-Quentinthree weeks after the edict prevented the enactment of its harshmeasures. As before, Henry himself granted exemptions to the lawsagainst heresy. In June 1557 ambassadors from four Swiss cantonsarrived at the court to complain that several of the ministers of anAlpine region occupied by the French had been executed. Needingfriendly relations with the Swiss, Henry agreed to allow the residentsof the valley to practice their religion, since they had held it beforethey fell under French jurisdiction, but no ministers were allowed topreach. In early 1558 merchants from Protestant lands appealed toHenry that the Inquisition be denied jurisdiction over them. Again,the king agreed in order not to drive them off, especially the Ger¬man bankers at Lyon who were making such vast loans to him. TheVenetian ambassador reported that many French Protestants in exilein Switzerland were applying for merchant licenses in order to re¬turn home.18 Henry took more direct action against the Protestantsas well. On July 3, 1557, he ordered the seneshal of Nimes to assem¬ble the ban and arriere ban of his district to arrest the rebels in theCevennes, “who are assembled under arms to the number of 200 or300 men.”19 There were continued reports of Protestant mercenariesin the French army harassing the Catholic clergy, disrupting services,and preaching, but Henry dared not take steps against them.Given the king’s very repressive edicts against heresy, it comes asa surprise that the only major French expedition to the New Worldduring Henry’s reign should have had a significant Protestant ele¬ment involved in it. The Villegaignon expedition to Brazil has beenseen by some historians as an attempt to create a place of refuge forFrench Calvinists, with the apparent blessing of the monarch. Thepoint remains unproven but possible, since Henry was sympatheticto any attempt to colonize the Americas; for he claimed, as did hisfather, that the New World was open to all to settle. He also ac¬cepted the argument that a strong French presence anywhere in theAmericas would weaken Spain by breaking its monopoly there.The expedition to Brazil was planned and led by Nicolas de Ville¬gaignon, a Knight of Malta who had spent over twenty years in navalaction, including the command of the fleet that had brought MaryStuart to France in 1549. That action had brought him to the atten-236Henry IItion of the king, who named him vice admiral of Brittany in 1553. Hehad a vast number of contacts among the French seamen, and theirtales of the wealth and exotic character of the Americas convincedhim to lead an expedition to Brazil.20Whether Villegaignon was also motivated by the desire to finda haven for French Protestants is a point sharply disputed amonghis contemporaries and modem historians.21 For some historians theProtestant character of the expedition is proven by the fact that Gas-pard de Coligny had to have been involved, as admiral of France, atitle he had received in late 1552 after the death of d’Annebault. Asof 1554, however, Coligny had shown no sign of being sympatheticto the Reformation and as new governor of Picardy spent most of1554 inspecting its defenses. There is no question, however, that asignificant proportion of the colonists were Protestants. It may havereflected the greater appeal of Protestantism among seamen or thefact that, according to Claude Haton, many of the expedition mem¬bers were drawn from prison.22 Many of the prisoners of this era werereligious dissenters.After Henry II agreed to give Villegaignon three ships totaling500 tons, and 10,000 livres, the vice admiral by various means founda full ship’s company and sailed in July 1555.23 The French reachedGuanabara Bay, the site of Rio de Janeiro, where they found the Indi¬ans friendly and the climate suitable. They built a stronghold calledFort Coligny on an island in the bay. The colony was referred to asLa France Antarctique, which name was intended to serve for all ofSouth America.As happened in most new colonies, Villegaignon faced a revoltthat ended in several executions and a manpower shortage. A re¬quest for reinforcements made through Coligny, who was much moreclearly involved in the second voyage than the first, persuaded theking to provide three new ships, which carried 300 persons, includ¬ing five women, to the colony. Correspondence between the colonistsand Geneva induced Jean Calvin to handpick two ministers andseven laymen to journey to Brazil. Whether Henry was aware that asignificant proportion of the passengers were Protestant is impossibleto determine, but it is again suggestive of how readily Henry accededto those close to him, regardless of any religious implications.In Brazil, however, the arrival of the more ardent Protestantsboded ill for the colony. Villegaignon began to dispute points of the¬ology with the ministers, although he did not necessarily maintainThis Lutheran Scum237the Catholic positions. Bad blood developed, and the commander be¬gan to take on the airs of a tyrant. In late 1556 a ship was dispatchedback to France with a cargo of brazilwood and ten Indians, as wellas a minister to get Calvin’s opinion on several of the disputed pointsof theology. The Indians were given to Henry, who distributed themamong his favorites. Before the Protestant minister could return toBrazil, the religious factionalism had broken out in violence. A num¬ber of the Protestants fled from the colony, and Villegaignon returnedto France in 1559 to find more colonists. The death of Henry II andthe outbreak of the French religious wars prevented the sending ofreinforcements, and in 1560 the Portuguese attacked and destroyedFort Coligny. It was not until 1567 that all of the French were drivenout of the region. Further French efforts to colonize Brazil were madeuntil 1615, but farther north toward the Amazon. The only remainingmemorial to La France Antarctique is Villegaignon Island in Guana-bara Bay.It appears to have been widely known that Villegaignon’s expe¬dition was heavily manned by Protestants, and Henry presumablyought to have been aware of it. Does that mean that Henry, at leasttacitly, acquiesced in a plan to settle the Huguenots in the NewWorld? It is a possibility, since the major reason why future kingsrefused to allow them to migrate to the colonies was the fear thatthey would cooperate with the Protestant enemies of France. Thatthreat surely did not hold in regard to Spain and Portugal; FrenchProtestants would have been ardently determined to defend them¬selves against those Catholic powers.To some extent, such speculation about Henry’s intent in regardto the colony in Brazil is bolstered by his general attitude of “out ofsight, out of mind” in regard to the Protestants. If such was indeedhis attitude, several incidents in Paris, literally under the nose ofthe king, had to have vastly increased his concern. On September5, 1557, some 400 “Lutherans” assembled in a house on the rueSaint-Jacques to celebrate the Lord’s Supper. They were attacked bystudents of a nearby college of theology, and municipal authoritieswere called out to end the tumult. Some 120 to 140 persons werearrested. “Amongst the prisoners were about 20 gentlewomen, someof them of great importance by reason of their nobility, but amongstthe men there was no person of quality, though some friars, nuns,and other low people formed part of the congregation.”24Occurring less than a month after the disaster at Saint-Quentin,238Henry IIthe assembly probably reflected the situation after the defeat, eitherto pray for the realm, as Beza stated, or to take advantage of the king’sweakness and preoccupation of the moment. Henry, clearly shockedby this manifestation of disregard for his authority, ordered the fullmachinery of the local court systems in motion to interrogate theprisoners. Both the lieutenant criminel and the lieutenant civil wereput to work, confusing the distinction between the two. Because theevent had occurred in Paris, “capital of our realm, we being in it,” theking ordered the creation of a special commission of the parlementmade up of two presidents and sixteen councillors, to hear the cases.Contrary to standard procedure, the lieutenant civil also took part inthe deliberations of the panel. The parlement protested, and Henryagreed to withdraw him. Henry’s handling of the legal aspects of thisaffair demonstrated again his willingness to ignore the usual proce¬dures and create new ones to expedite the trying of heresy cases, butit showed as well his pattern of reversing himself upon protest fromthe parlementaires.On September 27 three death sentences were handed down andcarried out, against a lawyer and a tutor, both elders in the recentlyorganized Reformed Church of Paris, and the young widow of anotherelder. But the great number of cases was bogging down the judicialsystem, and the king was coming under considerable pressure fromforeign Protestants to be lenient. Theodore Beza had requested thatthe Protestant cantons ask the king for clemency and remind himof their services. Their embassy arrived at the court on November4, 1557, about the same time as one from Count Palatine. At a timewhen Henry desperately needed Swiss and German troops, he couldnot ignore them. His reply of November 7 pledged his affection forthem, although it gave no hint of clemency.25 By that time the entireparlement had taken over the cases and had ordered the execution offour more persons—a physician, a minor government official, and twostudents. Henry did order that he be informed of any death sentencehanded down, presumably in order to prevent the execution of anyone whose death might have caused problems with foreign statesor French nobles. As of February 7, 1558, some twenty-five personsfrom the assembly remained in prison; some had abjured; and mostof the younger persons had been sent to monasteries to repent. Aneighth person from the affair would be executed in July 1558.When one considers that eight persons, none of whom was well¬born, were executed out of the 120-130 who were caught at a “sacra-This Lutheran Scum239mentarian” assembly, it confirms the view that Henry found his driveto extirpate heresy enormously complicated by jurisdictional disputesand considerations of social status and foreign policy. Further for¬eign pressure was put on him in March 1558. Upon a request fromCalvin, three German princes wrote to the king expressing their con¬cern about the heresy trials in Paris. Cardinal de Lorraine, havingreceived prior word of their intention, had written to the princes ar¬guing that the French heretics, being Zwinglians and Calvinists, didnot merit the solicitude of the Lutheran princes. Nonetheless, theysent their letter. Since perhaps half of the royal army was at thispoint German, the intervention of the princes was a disconcertingdevelopment. The king promised them that he would be accommo¬dating, and seems to have reduced the pressure on the Huguenotsfor a time.26In May the German princes sent two envoys to the court. Theybrought with them a confession of faith drawn up by Calvin. Henryagain promised satisfaction in the request for clemency; but at thevery time he gave his reply, another popular assembly of ParisianProtestants was taking place. It was known as the Affaire du Pre-aux-clercs because it took place on the playing fields of the university stu¬dents. According to the report of the Venetian ambassador, Michiel:There assembled publicly a concourse of some three to four thou¬sand individuals, though others estimate the amount at from sixto seven thousand, of every grade and condition, men and women,old and young, noblemen, plebians and artificers, who marchedin dense battalions, singing aloud, in the French tongue a sortof psalmody, the precise counterpart of that which is chanted inthe churches of Geneva . . . adding at the close of each psalm aninvective against the pope. For their defense, not only did theyhave a considerable force armed with pistols and other concealedweapons, but likewise several companies of cavalry, the greaterpart noblemen and adherents of great personages.Included among the notables present were Antoine de Bourbon andJeanne dAlbret. D’Andelot was reported to have been present also.The assemblies continued for three days, each day attracting a greaternumber of onlookers, finally reaching 10,000. Michiel noted the “ex¬treme audacity” of those involved and wondered how the mischiefcould be stopped, it “having spread so far as it has and taken suchdeep root in the aristocracy.”27240Henry IICardinal Bertrand was ordered to restore order to Paris and inves¬tigate the affair. He offered a large reward to those who informed onthe participants, but only about a hundred persons, all of the lowerclasses, were arrested. The authorities proceeded “with great consid¬eration by reason of the quality and quantity of the great personageswho openly favor similar opinions.”28The coincidence of the embassy from the German princes, theAffaire du Pre-aux-clercs, and the arrest of Francois d’Andelot infu¬riated Henry, and his anger was increased by reports that Antoine deBourbon and the Protestants were continuing to solicit the supportof the Germans for their cause. When he heard of the efforts of acivic leader of Metz to persuade the German princes to ask Henryfor freedom of conscience, he was reported to have raged: “Do thesepeople think they can tear my crown off my head?”29 Very shortlyafter the Affaire du Pre-aux-clercs, Henry is said to have sworn to freehimself of “this Lutheran scum,” if he could get his foreign affairs inorder. According to Claude Haton the open activity of the Protestantsat Meaux moved him to threaten to bum them in their houses andscour the ground.30 Since, however, Henry had just ordered Guise toattack Thionville, he dared not put into action any designs againstthe Protestants. The next year until the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresissaw few heresy trials and executions.The evidence continued to mount that Henry regarded the well¬born as being above suspicion of heresy. He asked Antoine de Bour¬bon if he had been at the Pre-aux-clercs. Bourbon replied that hehad gone there as an onlooker and defied anyone to show that hehad done anything contrary to his dignity as a prince. Henry wasso satisfied by the answer that he assigned him the confiscations inthe provinces of the southwest.31 D’Andelot, having been completelyrestored to favor, was made a knight of the Order of Saint Michaelin October 1558, and the collar of the order was also offered to theLutheran duke of Saxony. The duke refused it because accepting itrequired attendance at Mass, which d’Andelot did do.32There was yet another powerful reason for Henry’s determinationto destroy the Reformation in France. In August of either 1557 or1558 a young man named Caboche, who worked as a scribe in theroyal chancery, tried to assassinate the king as he left the Sainte-Chapelle after Mass.33 Shouting “Ha, Defiler. I must kill you!” oraccording to another version, “Stop, king! God has commanded meto kill you!” Caboche rushed at the king with his sword, aiming forThis Lutheran Scum241his stomach. Henry avoided the thrust by stepping backward, and hisguards disarmed the man. They wanted to kill him on the spot, butthe king ordered him taken to the prison in the Conciergerie. Henryreturned to the Louvre thoroughly shaken.According to Claude Haton, the attack on the royal person waspart of a Protestant conspiracy to destroy a tyrant who persecuted theTrue Church. To that end Caboche had been promised a good sumof money. Haton also attributed the quick execution of the would-beassassin—by midaftemoon the same day—to Protestant sympathiz¬ers at the highest levels of the court who wished to prevent him fromrevealing the conspiracy.34 Henry wished to interrogate the prisonerbut was surprised to find that he was already dead. One does not haveto subscribe to Haton’s conspiracy theory to recognize that a beliefthat such a plot existed was a plausible reaction to the event. Cer¬tainly, the attempt would be seen as a consequence of the presenceof heresy, which in the opinion of the orthodox always encouragedsedition. Only a lunatic or a heretic would strike at God’s anointed.The tenor of the times was such that the ardent Catholics wouldhave preferred to believe that Caboche was a heretic. (For a furtherdiscussion, see appendix D.)Henry clearly needed peace if he hoped to deal with heresy withthe freedom and force that was needed. Already, in May 1558, he hadexpressed himself on the point; thus the influence of Montmorencyon the decisions of the fall of 1558 to make peace may not havebeen as decisive as often argued. Having made peace in April 1559,Henry began to mobilize his resources against the Huguenots. Thedecision to use the full range of power available to the monarchyagainst Protestantism seems to have been largely Henry’s. It is truethat Montmorency had resumed his full authority immediately uponhis return to the court in December 1558, as the new English am¬bassador Throckmorton reported the following June 7: “He rules allhere as much as he ever did.”35 But while the constable was a sin¬cere and conservative Catholic, he never had been associated with apolicy of violent repression of heresy, and there is no evidence thathe had changed. Furthermore, Montmorency had to be aware that allthree of his beloved nephews were, at the very least, sympathetic toProtestantism. Throckmorton wrote on May 30, 1559, that the admi¬ral had conducted him to Notre-Dame but had slipped away withouthearing Mass.36It is a commonplace in histories from the era that Cardinal de Lor-242Henry IIraine was the dominant force responsible for the policy of repression.The sources from the spring of 1559, however, suggest that he hadnot completely recovered his credit with the king. Similarly, the rolesof Diane de Poitiers and Saint-Andre in urging repression have beenemphasized. The papal legate did note the attitude of Diane in hisreport of April 1, 1559: “She is full of the best zeal” on the question ofpurging the realm of heresy. The legate, encouraged by the responsehe received from the major figures at court, urged the pope to writepersonal letters to the king, Montmorency, Lorraine, Bertrand, andDiane.37 Nonetheless, the problem of demonstrating the direct influ¬ence of the Grande Seneschalle on policy decisions remains, as it hasfor the entire reign.Others at the court who had some impact on Henry were hiswife and his oldest son. The legate reported Catherine as respond¬ing favorably to his words on the need to eradicate heresy. As forFrancis, now king of Scotland, he had to be concerned about recentreports from there about religiously inspired revolts. Lucien Romieradds Cardinal de Toumon and the Jesuits to those with influence onHenry. The first is plausible, although Toumon had never been closeto the king and had once been out of favor for several years. His letterto Henry from Rome of July 9, before he had heard of his accident,enthusiastically defended both the peace treaty and the measures theking had taken against the Protestants. As for the Jesuits, Romier’sargument that they were a powerful influence on the king’s thinkingis highly implausible. Although Henry did draw up, at the requestof the Cardinal de Lorraine, a lettre dejussion to force the Parlementof Paris to permit their establishment in France, he seems to havehad little to do with them, and they had little influence at the court.Even the arrival of the capable Ponce Cogordan at Paris in November1558 did not change the situation that quickly, since he was then indisfavor with his superiors.38Ever since the battle of Saint-Quentin, Henry had been acting farmore as his own man. The return of the constable did not changethat, even if he took over the more routine matters of government.Henry certainly was encouraged by those around him in his policytoward heresy, but the campaign to destroy Protestantism was largelyHenry’s.Henry’s resolve was made more firm with the news in April 1559that the well-respected bishop of Nevers, Jacques Spifame, had fled toGeneva. In 1558 Henry had ordered an investigation into the charge“This Lutheran Scum243that Spifame had said “Receive the symbol of the Body of Christ”while giving communion. Before the investigation was completed,Spifame resigned his bishopric and fled to Calvin’s city.39 It is truethat Henry had ignored the apostasy of at least two other bishopsbefore Spifame, but the latter was from a wealthy Parisian family thathad made large loans to the monarchy, making his defection a fargreater threat to the monarchy.It seemed to the king that the Parlement of Paris had becomea serious obstacle to his goal of eradicating heresy. The parlement’sobjections and delaying tactics in registering edicts of repression andits reduction of sentences of convicted heretics were increasinglyirritating to him. Henry had too much respect for the institution tochange drastically the way it handled cases, but he expected it topurge itself of the suspect members who were promoting leniencyand impeding the sentencing of suspects. The procedure for self¬correction in the parlement was known as the mercuriale, takingplace one Wednesday every three months, and it was supposed tobe a routine but secret affair. It was largely intended to deal withdisagreements over the handling of cases of any sort and disputesover jurisdiction among the several chambers.Henry and several of the more conservative presidents saw it asa way to purge the court of its more liberal members. The eventthat triggered the demand for a mercuriale on the problem of heresyoccurred in early March 1559, when the Chamber of the Toumelleunder President Pierre Seguier reduced three death sentences to ex¬ile from France. Those who had levied the death sentences wereenraged, as were Cardinal de Lorraine and the king. Lorraine wentbefore the court to protest the lighter sentences and accused the mag¬istrates of evading their responsibilities by returning accused hereticsto the courts of the bishops, where they were usually released. It wasan interesting comment on the lack of attention on the part of thebishops to their duties.40On April 26 the parlement initiated a special mercuriale to in¬vestigate charges that some of its members favored the heretics andto settle the disputes over heresy jurisdiction among the chambers.In the meetings that continued through May several magistrates re¬vealed opinions that were suspect. On June 7 two of the conservativepresidents informed Henry of that fact. According to the Memoires deVieilleville, Cardinal de Lorraine strongly urged the king to appearin person in the court to see to its cleansing. He asked Henry how244Henry IIit would appear to the Spanish king and the duke of Alba if he didnot purge the corruption from his court, infected with heresy downto the ushers and clerks. Henry then agreed to attend the session thenext day.41All of the major courtiers and a company of royal archers wentwith the king on June io to the Salle des Augustins, where the par-lement was sitting because the Palais was being decorated for theweddings. After taking the royal seat before the court, Henry gave ashort address in which he declared that now, with peace in hand, hewas determined to root out heresy.42 He proclaimed his dissatisfac¬tion with the prosecution of heretics up to that time and wanted tohear the advice of the magistrates on how best to proceed.The procedure of the mercuriale had an important impact on theevents that followed. The magistrates proceeded by seniority, andby the time Henry attended, only a handful of junior members hadyet to speak. Several of the earlier speakers had already raised sus¬picions among conservative members with their calls for leniency,church reform, and a general council. It was the misfortune of sev¬eral of the youngest and least orthodox magistrates to take their turnin the presence of the king. Claude Viole and Louis Du Faur set thetone by enumerating the abuses in the church and calling for a freegeneral council. Du Faur was even bold enough to recall the wordsof the prophet Elias to King Achob: “It is you who trouble Israel”(I Kings 18:17-18). The boldest was Anne Du Bourg, a member ofthe court for only eighteen months. Du Bourg, who later acknowl¬edged having received Easter communion in the Reformed Churchof Paris, advocated suspension of all heresy trials until a council hadmet. He warned the king on the evil of burning at the stakes thosew hose only crime was to call on the name of Christ while adulterers,blasphemers, and murderers escaped punishment.Henry became extremely angry at Du Bourg’s words; it is assumedthat he took the reference to adulterers as an attack on himself.43He conferred with the presidents of the parlement and demanded tosee the full record of the previous sessions of the mercuriale, violat¬ing the traditional secrecy of the proceedings. After that he orderedthe arrests of Du Faur and Du Bourg, certainly for the hardly sub¬tle attacks on him. According to several Huguenot authors, Henryswore to see Du Bourg burned alive before his eyes. However, noneof the immediate sources mention such an oath. The English ambas¬sador, who reported Montmorency’s w'ords to Du Bourg, “Vous faictesThis Lutheran Scum245la bravade,” made no reference to it.44 It seems plausible that theProtestant writers, recalling how Henry was killed by being struck inthe eye, could not resist a small invention to emphasize the obviousmoral of how God punished the king for persecuting the saints.45In the afternoon of June 10 Cardinal de Lorraine and the ultra¬conservative magistrates prevailed on Henry to order the arrest ofsix more suspect members. One was Viole, who had spoken beforethe king; among the others, who had made their presentations pre¬viously, was Paul de Foix, a relative of the d’Albrets. Three of theaccused escaped and went into hiding.Throckmorton, who wrote a lengthy report for his governmentthree days later, proposed a number of explanations for the events ofJune 10: to please King Philip and the duke of Savoy, to give great ter¬ror to others if such great men as magistrates of the parlement couldbe arrested, to raise a great deal of money from the goods of thosewho will be condemned. The Englishman added what he thoughtwere important reasons: undercutting President Seguier, who was aclose adviser of the constable, a motive attributed to the Guises; andpreventing the Protestants from presenting their confession of faithto the king while the Spanish party was in Paris for the weddings.46The English ambassador regarded this last point as being of majorimportance, since on May 26 the first national synod of the FrenchReformed Church had convened in Paris. The small but dedicatedbody of persons present had drawn up a confession of faith that sev¬eral noblemen apparently intended to present to Henry during themarriage festivities.47 The king seems to have received word of thatproject and was determined to prevent it in order not to be embar¬rassed before the duke of Alba.The king continued to be deeply involved in the religious prob¬lems, meeting with the papal legate for the entire morning of June12. The proceedings against Du Bourg and the other accused mag¬istrates began on June 19, with the appointment of a commission bythe king. It included several senior members of the parlement, thebishop of Paris, and a theologian of the Sorbonne. Ultimately, DuBourg would be convicted and executed, partly on the argument thatit would be an affront to the memory of the dead Henry II if he wereacquitted.In the last weeks of his life Henry made it clear that he intended totake a much more active part in eradicating heresy. He was reportedas planning to go to the southwest provinces after the marriage festivi-246Henry IIties to lead the royal forces against Protestant strongholds in person,having been told that “Lower Normandy, Poitou, Limousin, Sain-tonge and almost the whole of Guienne and Gascony are freely exer¬cising the Lutheran rites.”48 He was also making plans to strengthengreatly the French forces in Scotland to aid Marie de Guise againstthe Calvinists there. Schemes for an attack on Geneva were also un¬der discussion, although hopes that Philip II would join were dashedby his fear of threatening his supply of Swiss mercenaries and thefree passage of Spanish troops across the Alps.49Had he lived, Henry might well have truly merited his reputa¬tion in history as the great persecutor of French Protestantism. As itwas, however, with his death barely a month after these resolutionsto eradicate heresy, Henry’s policy toward Protestantism appears in-consistant and vacillating. He was quick to make allowances for thewellborn and constantly distracted by foreign intrigue and war. TheReform was, at the end of his reign, far stronger and better organizedthan it had been in 1547.16 REOUIESCAT IN PACEAfter the mercuriale, Henry turned his attention almostentirely to the upcoming weddings, but in early June1559 there were several other problems that required hisattention. Because any final decisions were put on holduntil after the weddings, it is not clear how Henry planned to dealwith these matters.One problem was the constant rumor that the new Holy RomanEmperor, Ferdinand I, who had not been a party to the Peace ofCateau-Cambresis, was preparing a force of 20,000 men to recaptureMetz for the Empire. A sum of 6,000 ecus was sent to bolster thedefenses of the city; the French regarded the threat of an attack onthe city as very real.' Henry was also concerned with the disman¬tling of the forts in Savoy, Piedmont, and Corsica, and the return oftheir garrisons as required by the peace treaty, despite the very vocalopposition of his soldiers in those lands.'2The financial affairs of the realm also required attention. Fraudand shoddy bookkeeping had resulted in a deficit of “several millionsof francs since the Constable’s absence.” The receivers and treasurerswere suspected of having embezzled much of that sum.3 The enor¬mous debt that had been accumulated in the wars may have reached43 million livres at his death, of which 16 million had been raisedfrom the Grand Parti at the high interest rate of 16 percent. Thecity of Paris alone had been forced to create rentes to the sum of3.1 million livres. Among the other forms of debts was an amount of2,320,000 livres that was without interest.4 The total indebtednesswas about two-and-a half times the yearly income of the monarchy.Such a large proportion of the sources of revenues had been com¬mitted to repaying the loans that the monarchy could hope to have248Henry IIless than 10 million livres a year available for its other expenses un¬less it defaulted on its debts. The privy council was said to have “sathard” on finances on June 9, but there is no indication of how Henryintended to solve his cash flow problem.5By mid-June, however, Henry’s attention had turned almost ex¬clusively to the forthcoming marriages. Besides his loyalty to hisfriends, the one constant of his character was his love of festivals.No other French king had as many major weddings to celebrate in asshort a time or celebrated them as extravagantly. This occasion was,however, truly special. Not only would the marriages of the king’sdaughter and sister be celebrated, but also the representatives ofPhilip II were coming to swear to the peace treaty. Henry proceededto borrow another 1.1 million ecus, despite his already enormous in¬debtedness.6In mid-May Cardinal de Lorraine had traveled to Brussels toswear the peace to Philip II, and a month later the duke of Albaheaded to Paris to give Philip’s oath and to serve as proxy for theSpanish king for his marriage to Princess Elisabeth. Ironically, Alba’sofficial companions were William of Orange and Lamoral of Egmont,both of whom would soon become his mortal enemies.According to the peace treaty, Philip had the right to decidewhether to wed the princess himself or to give her to his son,Don Carlos. Immediately after the peace was agreed upon, Philipannounced that he would take Henry’s daughter as his third bride;there was talk of marrying Henry’s youngest daughter, Marguerite, toDon Carlos. Despite the decision, contacts about a possible marriagebetween Philip and Elizabeth of England continued as late as May4. The Venetian ambassador in Brussels noted that nothing wouldoffend the French more than for Philip to cancel his French marriagefor one with Queen Elizabeth.7Once it was firmly settled that Philip would marry Elisabeth deValois, Henry expressed the hope that his future son-in-law wouldcome in person to Paris to claim his bride. Henry seems to have beendeeply interested in the son of his despised enemy and was trulydisappointed by Philip’s curt reply that “the kings of Spain do notgo after their brides.” Alba was designated to be Philip’s proxy. OnJune 4 an enormous throng of nobles and courtiers, numbering over1,000 horsemen, left Brussels with Alba, Orange, and Egmont. Theyreached Paris on June 15, the same day that Emmanuel-Philibert ofSavoy left Brussels for Paris to claim his bride. Upon Alba’s arrival atRequiescat in Pace249the Louvre, he began to prostrate himself before Henry, but the kingrefused to allow it, insisting on treating him as if he were Philip inperson.8Upon the arrival of the Spanish party, a full round of tournamentsbegan. Henry and the French courtiers had been practicing for sev¬eral weeks in order to impress their guests.9 On June 18 the swearingof the peace took place in Notre-Dame, and four days later the mar¬riage of Philip and Elisabeth was celebrated. The marriage contractcalled for a dowry of 400,000 livres for Elisabeth, to be paid in threeinstallments six months apart. Henry insisted that she be treated asqueen of Spain from the moment she was married, establishing forher a household made up of several of the greatest ladies of the realm.On the wedding night the grotesque ritual of the consummation ofthe marriage by proxy took place, in which Alba placed an uncoveredfoot under the bedcovers and touched the bride’s foot. It would not beuntil January 30 of the next year that she would meet her husbandin Spain.The duke of Savoy had arrived in Paris on June 21, and on June27 the official betrothal of Marguerite of France and the duke wasdone at the Toumelles. Her dowry was set at 300,000 livres. Themarriage itself was scheduled for July 4.10Henry could not let these great occasions pass without a grandtournament.11 It was to last five days and take place in the rue Saint-Antoine in front of the Toumelles. The paving stones had been re¬moved, and a great wooden amphitheater with raised boxes for theladies built. On June 28 the dauphin’s company of lances made thefirst jousts. On the next day the companies of gens d’armes of sev¬eral other great nobles took to the lists. On the third day, June 30, aFriday, Henry himself entered the tournament.12He had celebrated his fortieth birthday several months earlier, buthe was still an imposing figure on horseback. His beard had takenon considerable gray, but he was regarded as being in fine physicalshape, despite having something of a paunch. He had had, however,several bouts of vertigo in recent months, especially after strenuousexercise.13 Historians have speculated that his accident may havebeen caused by vertigo brought on by fatigue. Henry was dressed inblack and white to honor Diane de Poitiers, “the lady that he served,”and rode a Turkish stallion that the duke of Savoy gave him. The tagof “Le Malheureux” surely was given the horse after the tournament.Although Henry had jousted frequently in the past and as re-250Henry IIcently as June 17, the portents of misfortune had become alarming.In 1555 Nostradamus had published his Centuries, in which oneverse was taken to refer to Henry’s death.14 More directly applicableto the king and more foreboding were the predictions of Luc Gauier,the astrologer of the Medici family. He had predicted before DauphinFrancis’s death that Henry would become king and that his reignwould begin with a sensational duel. Thus his prediction that anotherduel would put an end to the reign was given credence. In a con¬sultation made at the request of Catherine de Medici after 1547, hewarned Henry about the danger of single combat in a closed fieldduring his forty-first year. If he survived that danger, Gauier pre¬dicted that he would live to be sixty-nine years old. When Henry wasinformed of the prediction, he reportedly said: “It does not bother meto die at the hand of someone provided he be brave and valiant andthat gloire remain to me.” Since his royal status prohibited such aduel, Henry laughed off the prediction. The memory of the warningprobably prompted the troubling dream that his wife had the nightbefore his appearance in the tournament. She begged him not to par¬ticipate, but he laughed that off as well.15 There was not the slightestchance that he would have missed the opportunity to joust.Joining several of the great nobles like the dukes of Guise, Nevers,and Nemours in the lists, Henry ran the prescribed three coursesand against his first two opponents was adjudged the victor. In thethird course, against Gabriel de Montgommery, captain of the Scot¬tish Guards, he was shaken by the hard blow that the tall and power¬ful horseman had given him and was almost unhorsed.16 Henry wasdetermined to run against him again to make a better showing andrefused to listen to those such as the queen, the duke of Savoy, andMontgommery himself, who urged him not to. As often happenedwhen he was given unwanted advice, Henry became obstinate andordered Montgommery to take up his lance again. At about five inthe afternoon the two lancers ran at each other again. Each shatteredhis lance on the other, but the inexperienced Montgommery held onto his stump instead of dropping it immediately. As it glanced up¬ward from the contact, it struck Henry’s visor. The visor flew open—whether simply because of the force of the blow, or because Henryin his eagerness to joust again had forgotten to have it fastened, orbecause an inexperienced page had not fastened it right—and theshattered lance drove several splinters into the king’s forehead overhis right eye. The force and pain of the blow made Henry reel in hisRequiescatin Pace251saddle, and he probably would have fallen off if several nobles had notreached him immediately and lifted him off the horse. They strippedoff his armor and helmet and saw the wound bleeding profusely withseveral splinters clearly showing. Throckmorton reported: “Marry Isaw a splinter taken out of a good bigness.” He further stated thatHenry appeared almost benumbed and moved neither hand nor foot.Montmorency, Guise, and several other great nobles carried Henryinto the Toumelles. At the foot of the great staircase he said thathe wanted to walk up, but he had to be supported by several men.Behind him another group of nobles carried the dauphin, who hadfainted—a sad portent for the coming reign. Henry fainted before hereached his chamber but was briefly revived with vinegar and rosewater. Before fainting again he forgave Montgommery as a valiantknight who had obeyed his command. The king said some fifteenwords of prayer and struck his breast in contrition.17Catherine de Medici, Montmorency, Guise, Cardinal de Lorraine,and the duke of Savoy remained with Henry through the night,“who had a very evil rest.”18 The Toumelles was sealed off, and onlythe highest placed nobles and the three official representatives ofPhilip II were permitted to enter. The best French physicians werecalled in, and Andreas Vesalius, the noted anatomist and physician toPhilip II, was dispatched from Brussels on July 2 and arrived in Parison July 3. Montmorency arranged for Vesalius to experiment on thehead of a murder victim in Paris in order to show the constable thenature of Henry’s wound.19 The French physicians were supposedto have experimented on the heads of several executed criminals aswell. Vesalius agreed with the French physicians that Henry’s brainhad not been pierced and expressed the opinion that he would live,but would probably lose the eye. On July 4 the English ambassadorwrote to his court that Montmorency had told him that there was“good hope the king should be well shortly.”20For three days, July 2-4, the king did considerable talking andattended to a little state business. He asked for Montgommery, andwhen told that he had fled from Paris, he ordered that he be broughtback at all costs to be told that the king did not blame him. On July3 he asked for music in his chambers and made a vow to go on apilgrimage to a shrine of the Virgin near Orleans. His physiciansmade him eat small pieces of bread and were pleased that the painwas not great. He also dictated a letter to the French ambassadorin Rome announcing the results of the mercuriale and proclaiming252Henry IIhis intention to use royal forces to extirpate heresy.21 Henry told thequeen to proceed with the nuptials of his sister Marguerite, whichwere rescheduled for July 9.Suddenly, in the evening of July 4, Henry’s fever returned in fullforce.22 Blood poisoning clearly had set in. By July 8 his case washopeless, but he had enough strength to ask the dauphin to write toPhilip II to call on him to protect his son and his people after hisdeath. Francis was in the sickroom as much as his frail mental andphysical constitution could bear. Presumably, Catherine de Mediciwas present a great deal of the time, but there is sparse mention ofher presence.23 It appears that none of the rest of Henry’s family sawhim after the accident. Diane de Poitiers came to the gates of theToumelles, but Catherine had forbidden the guards to admit her.Henry lingered on through July 9, recovering consciousness longenough to say a few last words to his son: “My son, you are goingto be without your father but not without my blessing. I pray to Godthat you will be more fortunate than I have been.” Francis faintedagain and was later seen crying: “My God, how can I live if my fatherdies?” During the night of July 9 the physicians, convinced that des¬perate measures were in order, considered trepanning Henry’s skull,but after removing the bandages they found so much pus that theydecided it was hopeless. Meanwhile, the marriage of Marguerite deFrance and Emmanuel-Philibert took place in the chambers of herniece Elisabeth. Catherine was too disconsolate to attend.24The next morning Henry was given the last sacraments, and atone o’clock in the afternoon he died. An autopsy done immediatelyafterward revealed that a splinter had indeed pierced Henry’s brain,and the physicians expressed their surprise that he had lived as longas he did.25His death precipitated a palace revolution almost identical to theone that had begun his reign. The major difference was that thosewho dominated the new king, the Guises, had already been promi¬nent. Francis II had never liked Montmorency and had been forcedby his father to call him “compere,” a term of respect and affectionthat he clearly did not feel for the old constable.26 Already, as Henrylay dying, the jockeying for power filled the corridors of the Tour-nelles. While Montmorency and his party must have expected a lossof authority when Henry died, they could not have been preparedfor the nearly complete eclipse that followed. The constable, AdmiralColigny, and Saint-Andre were assigned to attend to the corpse ofRequiescatin Pace253the dead king for the forty days before the funeral. This assignmentremoved them from any participation in the affairs of state for thatperiod and was a clear signal of their loss of influence. Montmorencytook his loss of power with good grace. Heartbroken at the deathof his friend and king, he may well have truly meant his refusal ofFrancis’s offer to keep him at court, saying that he was old and tired.27Diane de Poitiers also quickly disappeared from the court, havingnot been allowed to visit the dying king. Francis informed her thathe had forgiven her the injuries she had caused him and his mother,but she was to live in retirement far from the court. He also orderedher to give up the jewels that Henry had given her, many of whichhad been taken from Anne de Pisseleu at Francis I’s death. While theGuises probably had not forgiven her for her support of Montmorencyin the last two years of Henry’s reign, she was the mother-in-law ofClaude de Guise, and they allowed her to live in quiet retirement atAnet, as Catherine also did once she became regent. Catherine didrequire her to give up the chateau of Chenonceaux and the last ofthe jewels she had received from Henry. Diane died in 1567.“The house of Guise rules.” So wrote Throckmorton three daysafter Henry’s death. And it was clearly true. The cardinal was givencharge of all the affairs of state, taking the signet back from the con¬stable, and the duke received command of the military, taking all thepowers of the constable except the title. Apparently on the advice ofthe Guises, Francois Olivier was recalled to his duties as chancellor,and Jean Bertrand, the friend of Diane de Poitiers, was dismissed.The royal councils were reconstituted without any of the Bourbons orMontmorencys. The Venetian ambassador noted a month later thatthe first thing every morning Francois and Charles de Guise, Olivier,and Catherine met with the king to “discuss privately all the mattersof the greatest importance.”28Francis II stripped Coligny of his governorship of Picardy andd’Andelot of his colonelcy of the French infantry. Antoine de Bourbon,who had been in Beam when Henry died and slowly made his way toParis, hoped to take direction of the government as first prince of theblood. His arrival, six weeks after July 10, found the Guises solidlyentrenched in power, to Antoine’s great dissatisfaction. The otherBourbon princes were also complaining because of their exclusionfrom the royal councils. The resentment of those who were oustedfrom influence in this new palace revolution was a major factor inthe coming civil wars29 The fact that Montmorency did not join with254Henry IIhis nephews suggests that his retirement was not a source of deepresentment on his part.While all of the great courtiers of Henry’s reign had reason tolament his demise, no one mourned him as greatly as did his widow.Catherine de Medici grieved for her husband for thirty years, alwayswearing black and frequently recalling his memory to her friendsand family. Within a year of her own death, in early 1589, she toldHenry of Navarre that she was not angry with him for having brokenan appointment with her, because “it was the day when the king. . . was wounded; a wound that brought to me principally and to allthe kingdom so much evil that I cannot think on that day I can doanything good.”30Although Throckmorton made his often-quoted remark about howthe townsmen and people “do rejoice at the accident to the king, ” itis probable that he was only reflecting his contacts with the ParisianProtestants. For them the fatal blow was a stroke of Divine Provi¬dence, lifting the terrible tempest of persecution.31 For most French¬men the death of the king was a terrible shock. The bells of Paris,which had been ringing constantly prior to the accident, were silentthroughout his death agony, and the population carried on their livesin subdued tones. Claude Haton wrote at great length describing thesorrow of the common people, even the laborers in the field, at thedeath of their beloved king32The obsequies of a French king were designed to provide a cathar¬sis for the people in their sorrow at their loss, as well as to emphasizethe continuity of the authority of the monarchy. They were drawn outover forty days33 On July 11 Henry’s body was embalmed, and by cus¬tom, the heart and entrails removed. The heart was placed in an urnthat was deposited at the high altar of the Church of the Celestins inParis. His entrails were placed in a lead vessel and entombed in thesepulcher of the dukes of Orleans, also in the Church of the Celes¬tins. The body itself was placed back in the deathbed in the Tour-nelles, where Montmorency and a vast number of princes, nobles,and prelates kept vigil. An effigy of the dead king was created anddressed very ornately. Laid out on a bed of honor in a salle d’honneurbuilt in the park of the Toumelles, the effigy was surrounded by thesymbols of royal power—the scepter, the crown, the hand of justice.On July 29 the corpse of the dead king replaced the effigy on the bedof honor, and the usual servants and courtiers were in attendance asif Henry were still alive. Meals were prepared and placed on a table,Requiescatin Pace255and the food then given to the poor. Altars had been set up in thehall for the saying of requiem Masses, which were said constantly.On August 4 the salle d’honneur was turned into a funeral halldraped in black. The royal corpse was placed on a funeral bier, stillsurrounded by the symbols of office. On August 6 the new king, witha great number of prelates and notables, came to bless his father’scorpse with holy water. It was the only time that the successor wasallowed to make a public appearance with the body of the dead king.Until August 11 a vast number of royal officials such as the par-lementaires came to the Toumelles for the same purpose. After alast funeral Mass, the corpse was transported to Notre-Dame in alarge, solemn procession, preceded by twenty-four criers who calledfor prayers for the dead king. There, the official requiem Mass wascelebrated by the bishop of Paris, and the funeral oration given byHieronimo della Rovere, bishop of Toulon.On August 12 an enormous entourage of townspeople, clergy, andnotables accompanied the coffin to the abbey-church of Saint-Denis.There, another series of funeral Masses and services were said, cul¬minating with the final Mass of interment said by Cardinal de Lor¬raine, as abbot of Saint-Denis. The effigy of the king was removedfrom the coffin, along with the symbols of royal office, and the coffinwas lowered into a vault. The various officers of the royal guards andgendarmerie and the principal officers of the court were called on,one by one, to place the insignia of their offices in the vault.34 Aftereveryone had done so, Montmorency, as the grand-maitre cried, “LeRoi est Mort!” The royal herald took up the cry three times, adding“Let us all pray to God for his soul!” All went to their knees for asilent prayer for the dead king, “not without tears for having lost sogood a king, so good a lord and master.” After the length of time forthree paternosters, Montmorency rose, retrieved the royal baton fromthe vault where he had placed it, and cried, “Vive le Roi!” The heraldagain repeated it more loudly three times and added: “Vive le RoiFrancois, deuxieme de ce nom, par la grace de Dieu Roi de Francetres-chrestien!” The new reign had officially begun.17 CONCLUSIONSHenry II was dead at what would probably have been mid¬reign, given the life spans of his forebears. One can onlyspeculate on what he might have accomplished had helived out his natural life, but the twelve years that he wasking produced a record of achievement that serves to emphasize theloss that France suffered by his foolhardy insistence on returning tothe lists on June 30, 1559.In matters of diplomacy and war, Henry’s accomplishments areobvious—the occupation of the Three Bishoprics and Calais and theTreaty of Cateau-Cambresis. It is by no means certain that Henryreally intended to withdraw completely from involvement in Italy, asrequired by the treaty, and direct French energies to the northernfrontier. It was, nonetheless, the consequence of his labors, and it putthe French in good position to make further gains in the north afterthe civil wars. The greater attention to the north was in large part aproduct of Henry’s character, which was more interested in tangiblegains like taking a fort and occupying a town. He was led in the direc¬tion where such victories were more easily gained, which in his erawas to the north and east. His was not the sort of mind that thoughtin tenns of schemes like a Franco-German confederation, which hadstruck the fancy of a number of humanists and diplomats. Henry’sforeign policy was largely a product of pragmatism and antagonism,not imagination.Practical thinking was also the mark of Anne de Montmorency, al¬ways the dominant influence on Henry. While the Guises had greaterimagination, they usually were not able to persuade Henry to supporttheir schemes, except for the Italian expedition of 1556 in which thepayoff for the king was to have been a throne for one of his sons.Nonetheless, it is often very difficult to trace the lines of influenceConclusions257on Henry. That fact is well demonstrated by the disagreement amongseveral respected historians over which faction was responsible forthe expedition into Lorraine in 1552. Some attributed the decisionto the Guises, the others to Montmorency.’ Perhaps Henry’s role inthese matters should be given greater emphasis, for it is clear that theking took a direct hand in decisionmaking. The constable certainlyhad a large part in forming Henry’s decisions, even while in captivity,but that is not tantamount to saying that the king abdicated his ownjudgment to him.Diane de Poitiers appears surprisingly absent from most majordecisions. It is true that foreign ambassadors frequently referred toher place in Henry’s heart and regarded her as very influential. Yetthey rarely thought it necessary to report her views on major issues,except on the question of war or peace in late 1556. Of course, shemay have been off-limits to their inquiries. Even more than Diane,Saint-Andre was a cipher in the diplomatic reports. On the otherhand, while most of what has been written about Henry’s indiffer¬ence to his wife in their domestic life is accurate, he did give her amuch greater role in politics than any other king of the century gaveto his spouse. Catherine had a long and clearly fruitful apprentice¬ship in government before the king’s death that served her well inthe decades that followed.The problem of the lines of influence is particularly crucial forHenry’s reign because of the celebrated Montmorency-Guise feud.The feud, however, has been exaggerated as an element in decision¬making. Certainly the two families battled bitterly for favors fromthe king for themselves and their clients, and more than one mo¬ment of pique was noted by observers. Nonetheless, Simon Renardseems to have been truly perceptive in his comment of 1557 thatthe two factions understood each other far better than they allowedit to appear. It almost appears that they had agreed to disagree onmajor points of policy in order to free the king from blame shouldwhatever policy chosen go awry. Admittedly that possibility appears alittle too Machiavellian for Henry’s uncomplicated mind, but to treatthe Montmorency-Guise contretemps as the major theme of Henry’sreign, as Lucien Romier has, is to exaggerate badly the implicationsof their disagreements upon Henry’s decisionmaking. As was sug¬gested during the negotiations at Vaucelles, the rivalry between theconstable and Cardinal de Lorraine was regarded as preventing anyconcessions unfavorable to France.258Henry IIThe issues over which the two factions argued largely involvedforeign policy; concerning domestic policy it is far less apparent whoadvocated what. Neither Montmorency nor the Guises were the typesto have been much concerned with administrative structures. It maywell be that some of the secondary figures, like Francois Olivierand Jean Bertrand, had important roles in formulating policy re¬garding the functioning of the government. The fact that importantchanges in administration were implemented almost immediatelyupon Henry’s accession suggests that he had formulated them be¬fore he became king and took an active part in such decisions. Toa large extent, however, the administrative decisions of his reigninvolved rationalizing and refining the extensive changes made byFrancis I. That was certainly true for the fiscal system. In enhancingand defining the office of secretary of state and creating the siegepresidial as an intermediate court, Henry was more truly innovativeand had a permanent impact on government structure. That was alsotrue regarding the governance of conquered lands. The placing ofintendants in the councils of the governors of the new provinces,with the authority to supervise the officers of the new acquisitions,established a principle that was not undermined by the Treaty ofCateau-Cambresis. After the strife of the religious wars, the Frenchmonarchs again turned to Henry’s offices to secure tighter controlover their provinces, giving rise to the intendant of the next century.As Michel Antoine has maintained, “the true origins of the intendantought to be sought in the governors’ councils” created by Henry insuch lands as Piedmont and Corsica. The twelve years of Henry’sreign were, therefore, a period of solid, while not spectacular, accom¬plishment in government, extending to such matters as the plantingof tall elms along the main roads of the realm.2Despite being probably the most medieval in his outlook of anyking since the end of the Hundred Years’ War, loving to joust anddeeply admiring the gens d’armes, Henry oversaw a number of keydevelopments in the French military that marked its final transfor¬mation from a medieval force to an early modem one. The artillerywas reorganized and integrated more closely into the army. Siege-craft was advanced through the appearance of Monluc’s arriere-coin,which led in a direct line to Vauban’s three parallels of the next cen¬tury. The trace italienne began to appear in the new French forts,most notably at Rocroi, which needed little modernization before itplayed its role in one of the major battles of the Thirty Years’ WarConclusions259in 1643. Henry’s insistence on attacking Calais in the winter wasalso highly unmedieval, although its success did not establish war asa winter sport. In the Dutch War of 1672, however, Louis XIV wasadvised specifically to follow his predecessor’s example in order to re¬duce the defensive advantage that the wet terrain of Holland gave itsdefenders. The failure of the French cavalry at Saint-Quentin forcedHenry to lose some of his faith in the armored man-of-war, and hebegan to shift to light cavalry, recruiting 8,000 German pistoleersand encouraging the training of French light horse.It was, however, the nature of Henry’s death that struck the hard¬est blow to the medieval tradition. Jousting was outlawed at the court,and the romances disappeared there. Both had served to emphasizethe traditional skills and values of the medieval knight. With the oldtradition of knightly combat in disfavor, without the opportunity topractice their skills in tournaments and impress the noble ladies, andwithout the romances to fire their imaginations, the nobles let the oldstyle of combat die out. In the rest of Europe many of these develop¬ments in the military had already occurred, but it was in France, thebirthplace of the feudal system, the knight, and the romance, wherethe system and the code of medieval warfare had lasted the longest.Certainly, the final demise of medieval warfare would have occurredrather soon anyway, for the trends were irreversible; but the decisionsmade by Henry II and the manner of his death definitely acceleratedthem.The king left a record of achievement in government and themilitary that would be useful for his successors in the next century,but his immediate legacy to his sons was far less desirable: virtualbankruptcy and civil war. Royal finances were in a terrible state inmid-1559. The royal debt of perhaps as high as 43 million livres wasbetween two and three times the annual income of the monarchy.What, if anything, Henry had decided prior to his death to do tosolve the crisis is unknown, but there is no question that he wouldhave found it easier to impose the hard choices necessary than hisinexperienced sons did.The financial crisis helped contribute to the outbreak of the warsof religion, but Henry’s unfortunate and entirely unnecessary deathwas a more immediate factor. He left the throne in turn to his threeweak and inexperienced sons, who lacked his ability and standingwith the nobility. It is difficult to imagine Conde, the Chatillons, andother prominent Huguenot nobles taking the field against Henry,26oHenry IIeven if he had continued the policy of religious repression of his lastmonths. Certainly his sons did not have the claim on the affections ofthe warrior class that Henry had. The Venetian ambassador, MicheleSuriano, told his government in 1562 that Francis II had put thekingdom entirely in the hands of the Guises and had had nothing todo with the other great nobles; thus the big men of the realm weresupporting the Protestant party.3While the great nobility probably would have remained loyal toHenry had he lived, his decision to use force to obtain religious con¬formity left his son with the beginnings of religious rebellion at thelower levels of society. By June 1559 the Huguenots in the provinceshad already been organizing and arming themselves in anticipationof a large-scale drive by the king to crush religious dissent in thesouthwest. Sporadic violence had already occurred in the south, andany effort to destroy the Reformation by military means would haverequired a major effort and entailed much hard fighting. Nonethe¬less, a successful conclusion to such a campaign should not havebeen beyond the reach of an experienced and determined king in1559 or 1560.One must ask, however, how long Henry would have kept to sucha resolution to eradicate heresy. He has been called vacillating in hisconduct of foreign policy, but that designation is far more accuratein regard to his religious policy. Confronted by two rival institutions,the episcopacy and the parlement, which claimed primacy in judgingheresy, Henry could not decide which to give final jurisdiction. Onseveral occasions during his reign he issued decrees strengtheningthe authority of one of these two institutions, only to retreat in theface of loud protests of the other. He then proceeded to issue a newedict that largely undid the changes of the previous one. Such vac¬illation badly undermined the effectiveness of the heresy laws andtribunals and permitted Protestantism to flourish under Henry, de¬spite his reputation for severe orthodoxy. Eventually, some blatantpublic display of heresy would again shock him into responding witha new and harsher edict and a declaration that he would see to theend of religious dissent in the realm. It was at such a point thatmatters stood at the moment of his death.Whether he would have held to his resolve or allowed himself tobe distracted again cannot be answered, but it was usually war thatserved as the distraction diverting him from pursuing the Protes¬tants. No war was on the immediate horizon in 1559, although thereConclusions261was some anxiety in England over a possible conflict with France,and the French thought Emperor Ferdinand was threatening warover Lorraine. Suriano, reporting in 1562, blamed Henry for thespread of the poison, as he called it, for being “busy with war andwas also more pleasure-seeking than was suitable for a king. Henryignored the problem and did not take the pains that his father didto keep the kingdom purged of the disease.”4 It is noteworthy thata well-informed diplomat of the time would regard Francis as moredetermined to eradicate heresy than Henry, even if it was probablynot true.Henry passed to his immediate successor both the policy of re¬pression and the advisers who most firmly had advocated it. He mighthave been successful in implementing the policy, but his inexperi¬enced son most certainly was not. The policy of repression was aban¬doned by Catherine de Medici once she became regent for CharlesIX. By that time, however, decisions on religion made by Henry hadbegun to bear bitter fruit, and civil strife was well under way.Although Henry took harsh, albeit inconsistent, measures againstthe Protestants, he had little interest in reforming the Catholic churchto solve the problems that were encouraging the spread of Protes¬tantism. Except for ineffective edicts that the Catholic clergy were toreside in their sees and curates, he was clearly hostile to the currentsof Catholic reform. His motives in selecting whom to support in thepapal elections were entirely political, and his relationship with thepapacy was largely political as well. Although he did agree to the callfor a general council that appeared in the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis,he had for the previous twelve years worked energetically to scuttlethe convocation at Trent and prevent its resumption. His appoint¬ments to the episcopacy were in several respects the least worthy ofthe sixteenth century. His episcopal nominees included the highestproportion of lawyers and those without a university education, andthe lowest of theologians and members of religious orders, of anyking of the century. A third of his bishops resigned their sees, usuallytaking substantial pensions on the revenues of their bishoprics. Theconstant disruption that the frequent changes at the highest level ofthe church caused in the administration of the sees clearly aided thegrowth of Protestantism.5Henry also ignored the apostasy or obvious sympathy of six oreight bishops to the Reformation until the flight of Jacques Spifamein April 1559 shocked him into recognition of the presence of het-262Henry IIerodoxy in the episcopate. Yet after Spifame fled to Geneva, theking hoped to replace him with a court preacher whom the papalCuria later rejected as a suspect heretic. Even as Henry attended themercuriale of 1559, he sought to persuade the pope to appoint thebishop of Amiens as legate to Scotland, despite his reputation as aProtestant sympathizer.While it may well have been too late for Henry II to prevent theappearance of a dynamic Protestant party in France by active sup¬port of church refonn and appointment of worthy and reform-mindedprelates, he added to the problems of the French church by continu¬ing to use it as a font of political patronage and refusing to recognizethe need for reform. His several edicts requiring clerical residencywent unobserved because the type of prelate he appointed to highchurch office involved diplomats, officials, and sycophants, not truechurchmen. By both commission and omission Henry contributedsubstantially to the religious crisis that broke over the heads of hissuccessors. By insisting on running again in the lists, he ensured thatan inexperienced youth would be wearing the crown when the stormhit.Because the violence of the religious wars followed almost im¬mediately upon Henry’s death, historians have seen his reign as the“sinister vestibule to the wars of religion,” to use Jules Michelet’sloaded phrase. His considerable accomplishments in government,war, diplomacy, and the military, and as a patron of artists and poets,have thus been largely overlooked.6As a king and as a person, Henry II was a bundle of contradictions.In outlook still largely medieval, he oversaw a number of importantdevelopments that gave a more modem bent to the French govern¬ment and military. He was a loving parent, his best characteristic,but a cold and indifferent husband; he was most loyal to his friendsbut unforgiving to his enemies; he was easily swayed by his advis¬ers, yet often obstinate and stubborn. It was this last flaw that ledto his death in the jousting lanes. The four decades following hisdeath saw the near destruction of the monarchy and of nearly all forwhich he had labored. Had he lived out the natural course of his life,French history may well been changed considerably; and perhaps hisaccomplishments, not his failures, would have become the focus ofattention of historians.APPENDIX AThe Monetary SystemIn the sixteenth century the French monetary system was, aswere those of all of Europe, very complicated and confusing.The ecu d’or soleil, also known as the ecu au soleil, was theprincipal and largest gold coin in circulation in France. It hadroughly the same value as the scudi of the papal Curia. Most ac¬counts, however, were expressed in terms of the livre toumais, amonetary unit of account. Its rival, the livre parisis, had largely dis¬appeared by 1547. All references to the livre in this work are to thetoumais. The livre (l)was divided in 20 sous (s), which in turn weredivided into 12 deniers (d), 240 d to the livre. No such coins actuallyexisted. In 1519 the ecu was pegged at two livres; it rose to 2.25 1 in1533; to 2.50 1 in 1550 (at which time the henri replaced the ecu forten years); and was set at 3 1 in 1575. The monetary reform of 1577declared that the ecu was to be the unit of account as well as a realcoin, but most accounts continued to be expressed in livres. Henry IVreturned to the livre as the unit of account in 1602. Silver coins in¬cluded the franc, worth one livre, and the teston and quart d’ecu, bothworth one-fourth of an ecu or 15 sous at the rate established in 1577.1There were also a number of coins of silver mixed with copper usedlargely for retail trade. The most common coin in circulation was thedomain, worth 12 d.APPENDIX BThe Decisions of the Chambre ArdenteThe arrets on heresy found in Weiss, Chambre ardente, cov¬ered the periods May 1548, to April 1549 and November1549 to March 1550 and totaled 366. Many named morethan one defendant, but, on the other hand, many deal withan accused person a second and even a third time. A number of arretsdeal with the procedures of the tribunal, and several note crimes notreligious in nature. Finally, five arrets involve cases of false testimony.In all, 325 persons were noted as charged with religious offenses.Torture was ordered for thirty-six persons to determine their guilt;six of them were eventually ordered to be executed. Table 1 showsthe disposition of the cases of religious offenses.J. H. M. Salmon has analyzed the occupations of those who werecalled before the chambre ardente as accused heretics.1 His findingsare shown in table 2. Twenty-nine women were also among the ac¬cused. Five of the women were condemned to death, but none ofthe nobles were. Artisans and small shopkeepers not only providedthe largest proportion of the accused; they also made up the largestgroup of condemned. Eight persons condemned to death and identi¬fied by profession in the arrets were artisans. A ninth was a player ofinstruments.Although the Livre des habitants of the city of Geneva revealsthat there was substantial migration from France to that city duringHenry’s reign, there are only twenty names on the rolls of new resi¬dents registered in Geneva that correspond to names of individualscalled before the chambre ardente.2 Only nine of them can be iden¬tified with certainty by home town and/or occupation as the samepersons. One of the immigrants, in fact, appears to have been con-Appendixes265deificepsnurorehtOysereHdnalatoTsegrahcymehpsalBegelircas”nairatnemarcaS“”narehtuL“sesacfonoitisopsiD~ O01 (N CO^ 05CO COd 00CN CDCO ^<NLO 05<N CDCOlo ,-rr- 05CJoLOLOCpajS -3X Ho oCo -qT3 cu■ti <->^ 15T3a?CC/3cc3Q"OoobJD<15■5T3 "L■a 5- -u w05 5515 <5 05 033 S D ^ g Jw Q< 15tT* rnO c 15 K S4 ccC5 1 Cl 1 p rx ■*- x ^ ^ 5w & w 2; -5 815£ c -5§ c ?T3 -a05 Q-< qja ^ OJ153 -QdfjC/33 15 -n 15 03a- c£ & < cjcoC/3 |40)a,cn35oXO 4>^ "a§3o3dC/3C/315 05^ C03£ «3 ^O "2£ Oa cO 15w >g '3d03 ^15 Cs 00a30; £XC  -C  dO  Oh  "315  O  c15  015bC  W5'O0315OS-,£C/315T33Oh15,£0  c  eS15  0  G15a3>T5o303"OcRjCcObo  bi)  c3  G‘3dc<3 c CC 3 03U -O -Crtr$ X XCo3 C« >3 Vh^ oO Q5bJD£ -213 Oy 5a xo W00 a05 033O15x c/38 “w 2 H266Henry IITABLE 2 Occupation of persons indicted by the Chambre Ardente,1547-50OccupationRegular clergySecular clergySeigneursRoyal officersAdvocats and procureursMerchantsArtisans and small shopkeepersSource. Salmon, Society in Crisis, p. 87.Number302561491660demned to death in Paris. Five persons condemned to exile appearon the Genevan registers.The place of origin is noted for about a third of the accused. Thebailliages represented in any number are few: Amiens, 30 persons;Paris, 24; Chartres, 10; Langres, 9; Sens, 8; Riom, 6; Blois, 6. It mustbe kept in mind, however, that the territory under the jurisdiction ofthe chambre ardente comprised only about a third of the realm.APPENDIX CThe Attack on Douai, January 6, 1557Did Henry II order Coligny to attack Douai, thus bearingresponsibility for breaking the Truce of Vaucelles? Manymodem historians, especially Coligny’s biographers, havetaken as proof of it the unequivocal statements byJacques-Auguste de Thou and Agrippa d’Aubigne that the king gavethe admiral an order to assault the enemy stronghold.1 Both de Thouand d’Aubigne, however, wrote their accounts nearly a half-centurylater. I have not been able to find any earlier sources that clearlyidentified the king as responsible. Sources from close to the timeof the event—the Venetian and the Spanish ambassadors, FrancoisRabutin, the Memoires de Vieilleinlle—provide various explanationsfor the attack, but none suggest that Henry ordered it.2More significantly, the letters exchanged between the principalfigures of the French government do not support the proposition, butneither do they provide clear evidence to settle the dispute in oneway or the other. Still extant are several letters from Henry to thedue de Guise from both before and after January 6. It is plausibleto assume that if Henry had intended an action to take place in Pi¬cardy, he would have informed Guise, but the letters give no hint.Nor do those written after January 6 suggest that the attack wasdone on royal orders.3 On the other hand, two letters from Coligny tod’Humieres, governor of Peronne, from shortly before the attack, donot give any indication of an impending action.4 That fact suggeststhat the decision was made very close to January 6, regardless of whomade it.Two days after the assault on Douai, Coligny reported to the king.He began the letter by saying that nothing displeased him more thanto have to tell him what had happened “at the place whence 1 come.”5268Henry IIThe admiral then went on to say that the courier bearing the letterwould give a full report—an excellent example of how that prac¬tice can frustrate the modem historian. He did state that he wouldnot make a long discourse on the matter because the turmoil from“this enterprise” had already commenced, including complaints fromsome local nobles about losses of property and goods to the enemy.Coligny’s attitude in the letter, which is the same in his other lettersof the period, is one of neither blaming anyone else for the attack noraccepting responsibility himself for the decision.On January 9 Montmorency wrote to d’Humieres at Peronne that“my nephew' the admiral has failed in his enterprise”; d’Humierestherefore must be on the alert for what may happen next. Coligny,writing to d’Humieres the next day, referred to “the enterprise madeon the enemy” but again gave no hint of who made the decision. Inthe next several days Montmorency sent two more letters to Peronnewith essentially the same content: the king has ordered me to tell younot to do anything on your part until we see what the enemy will do.Meanwhile, d’Humieres was told to release any prisoners taken andreturn any goods.6The last pertinent letter was sent by Coligny to d’Humieres onJanuary 17,7 He clearly was very angry at both the order to returnprisoners and goods to the other side and the fact that Montmorencyhad wTitten directly to one of his captains, rather than going throughhim as proper procedure called for. Coligny asked whether those atthe court could know as well as he the affairs of his province orlearn as quickly as he what his neighbors were up to. He went onto say that the enemy had burned a village on the French side ofthe border, but it is not clear whether that event occurred before orafter January 6. Montmorency’s actions and Coligny’s pique have sev¬eral possible explanations. Lilliane Crete has taken them as evidencethat the king and the constable ignored Coligny in decisionmakingand demonstrated their ingratitude to him for having followed ordersagainst his better judgment.8 On the other hand, Montmorency’s ac¬tions can be seen as revealing royal anger at Coligny, whether forfailing in the attack or making the decision by himself is undeter¬minable. Coligny’s letter does demonstrate his strong sense of theautonomy of the provincial governor and suggests that he was capa¬ble of making major decisions affecting his province on his own.The cumulative evidence does not reveal a definite answer to thequestion of who decided to attack Douai, but it seems to me thatAppendixes269the documentation supports more heavily the inference that Henrydid not give the order to Coligny. The king and the constable wereclearly upset at the timing of the attack, at the least, and were activelyinvolved in damage control afterward. With his best troops and cap¬tains in Italy with Guise, Henry would have been foolhardy to stir upaction on the northern frontier. But, of course, the same point appliesto Coligny. While the evidence seems not to support the existence ofa direct order to assault Douai, it does not rule out the possibility ofa long standing order to Coligny to take advantage of any weaknessesin the enemy’s position on the frontier.In the months that followed, both the king and the constabletreated the admiral rather coldly, and perhaps his valiant but quiterash actions at Saint-Quentin may have been an effort to get back intotheir good graces. But regardless of whether such is true, it does notreveal whether their attitude was sparked by the failure of the attackon Douai or by a solo decision by Coligny to strike at the fortress.In all, the matter is an interesting historical problem, becauseit reveals how difficult it is to find precise information on decision¬making during Henry’s reign, despite the existence of a rather largenumber of pertinent letters. It does seem, however, that the evidencedoes not support the conclusion that Henry II gave Coligny a directorder to attack Douai.APPENDIX DThe Assassination Attempt on Henry IIThere are a number of questions and problems concerningthe episode of Caboche’s attack on Henry II that must beresolved if historians are to include it as an event in his life.The first is the paucity of references to it in contemporaryor near-contemporary sources. Claude Haton’s Memoires have thefullest discussion of the attempt on the king’s life, but his emphasison the attack as motivated by a Protestant conspiracy dictates greatcare in using his account. If it were the unique source, it might wellhave to be discounted. But two other sources refer to the attempt.Both Jean de Serres and Jean de Glaumeau were Protestants.1 Theirmuch shorter versions essentially summarized the information onthe attack found in Haton, although neither mentioned a conspiracyof any sort. Serres used the name Caboche; Glaumeau did not. Thememoirs of both Haton, from Provins in Champagne, and Glaumeau,from Bourges, remained in manuscript form and were very obscureuntil their publication in the nineteenth century. It is highly unlikelythat either could have drawn the story from the other, or that Serrestook it from either. A fourth source that very briefly mentioned theattempt was Pierre Mathieu, in his Histoire de la mort de Henri IV,who could have very easily drawn on Serres.2Given what appear to be certainly two, if not three, corroboratingsources on the fact of the attempt on Henry’s life, the conclusion thatit occurred is appropriate. There are, however, other problems. One isCaboche’s social status. Haton called him un gentilhomme and statedthat he was degraded from the nobility before he was hanged. Serresand Glaumeau referred to him simply as a young man who becauseof his fine hand, worked in the royal chancellery as a clerk. The nameCaboche appears in the recherches de noblesse of the seventeenthAppendixes271century for four different families, including a Picard family thatclaimed to have as an ancestor one Adrien Caboche, ecuyer, alive in1540. Ivan Cloulas has found a reference to a heresy trial in Meauxfor Gilles and Jean Caboche, who were sentenced to death in 1556.He suggests that Adrien Caboche was probably a younger brother ofthe two, who was seeking revenge.3Perhaps the most confusing aspect of the story is its date. Hatonclearly placed it in 1558. In speaking of the death of Henry II, hereferred to the attack of Caboche Van dernier passe, and it is placedamong events of 1558. However, neither Henry nor Coligny, twoprincipals of Haton’s version, were in Paris in the summer of 1558.Serres stated that the event occurred shortly after the battle of Saint-Quentin, and Glaumeau put it in August or September of 1557. Henrywas in Paris after the defeat at Saint-Quentin, but he was there inthe summer of 1556, as well. Coligny was absent from Paris fromAugust 1556 to April 1559. Either the attempt occurred in August1556, or Coligny was not involved in the condemnation of Caboche.4Haton placed himself in Paris at the time and should not have beenmistaken in the date or whether Coligny was at the court. Perhapshis anti-Protestant bias led him to include the admiral in the story todiscredit him.Most of the details of the judgment against Caboche and hisexecution come from Haton, although Serres and Glaumeau bothconfirm that he was quickly hanged. It likely was the speed withwhich he was dispatched that explains the paucity of references tothe event. Furthermore, he was executed in private, according toGlaumeau, because he made des propos grans et merveilleux, a fur¬ther hint that Caboche was a Protestant. Haton said that the magis¬trates of the parlement who passed judgment on him were sworn tosecrecy. The speed and the secrecy would explain why there is norecord of his trial in the records of the parlement, in which the editorof Haton’s Memoires searched in vain, and why the references to theevent are so few.Given the corroboration from three very different sources, it canbe concluded that there indeed was an attempt on Henry II as hewent to or came from Mass at the Sainte-Chapelle at some point inhis last three years, but probably 1557. The further details, as largelysupplied by Haton, must await corroboration from other sources, asunlikely as finding any new ones at this point in time would be.APPENDIX EMapsNorthern Italy in the sixteenth centuryAppendixes273274Henry IIFrance in 1547Appendixes275Places of captivity of French princes in northern Spain(Fortresses used as prisons of the princes are indicatedby an *.)276Henry IINorthern France in 1547Appendixes277Calais pale and its forts278Henry IIThe French attack on CalaisNOTESABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTESAlberi Eugenio Alberi, ed., Relazioni degli ambasiatori veneti al Senato duranteil secolo decimosesto, ist series, 6 vols. Florence, 1830-1862.an Archives Nationales, Parisang Acta Nuntiaturae Gallicae, 16 vols. Edited by J. Lestocquoy, et al. Rome,1962-1985.Archives curieuses Cimber et Danjou (Louis Lafaist) eds. Archives curieuses deVhistoire de France, vols. X-XIV. Paris, 1834-50.bshpf Bulletin de la Societe de Vhistoire du Protestantisme frangais.bn Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.Cloulas Ivan Cloulas, Henri II (Paris, 1985).clp Calendar of Letters and Papers of the Reign of Henry VIII, 21 vols. Edited byJames Gairdner. Reprint Vaduz, 1965.cspf Edward Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Edward VI.Edited by William Turnbull, Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1979.cspf Elizabeth Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Elizabeth,vol. 1. Edited by Joseph Stevenson. Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1966.cspf Mary Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Mary. Editedby William Turnbull. Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1967.csp Italy Calendar of State Papers relating to English Affairs existing in thearchives of Venice and Northern Italy, vols. 1—7. Edited by Rawdon Brown.Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1970.csp Spain Calendar of Letters, Despatches, and State Papers Relating to Negotia¬tions Between England and Spain, vols. 1-15. Edited by Royall Tyler. ReprintNendeln, Liechtenstein, 1969.dbf Dictionnaire de Biographie frangaise, 15 vols. Paris, 1932-.Lubinskaja A. Lubinskaja, Documents pour servire a Vhistoire des querresd'ltalie. Moscow, 1963.Petitot Claude Petitot, Collection complete des memoires relatifs d Vhistoire deFrance, 130 vols. Paris, 1818-1829.Weiss C. Weiss, Papiers d’etat du Cardinal de Granvelle, 6 vols. Paris, 1840.28oNotes to Pages ix-4PREFACE1 Hauser, Les sources de ihistoire de France au XVIe siecle, 4 vols. (Paris, 1909),2: 158.2 (Paris, 1944), p. 324.3 (London, 1910). Williams is also the author of The Brood of False Lorraine:The House of Guise (London, 1914), which covers many of the same events,but in a slightly more scholarly fashion.4 (Paris, 1887).5 Guerres de Religion, vol. 8 of Oeuvres Completes (Paris, 1980), 66.6 La lutte contre la Maison d’Autriche. La France sous Henri ll (1519-1559), vol.5, pt. 2, of Lavisse, Histoire de France (Paris, 1911).7 Neale, The Age of Catherine de Medici (New York. 1962), p. 39; Roelker, Re¬view of R. J. Knecht, Francis I (Cambridge, 1982), in The Sixteenth CenturyJournal, 13 (1982), 125. Knecht's own assessment of Henry is not quite thatnegative, but his French Renaissance Monarchy: Francis I and Henry II (Lon¬don, 1984), virtually ignores him.8 (Paris, 1913-14).9 (Paris, 1985).10 (Moscow, 1963). See also V. N. Malov, “Les archives d’un secretaire d’Etatde roys, princes et ambassadeurs sous les regnes de Franpois I et Henri II,”Bibliotheque de I’ecole des chartes, 135 (1977), 313-39.11 Melanges de I’ecole frangaise de Rome, 94 (1982), 759-818.12 (Strasbourg, 1983).1 SECOND SON1 Albert, 2: 401-3, for the Venetian ambassador Soranzo’s description of therealm. He said that there were 130 cities in France, with Paris the largest at400,000 people. See also Georges Duby, Histoire de la France urbaine, 4 vols.(Paris, 1981), 3: 33, who places the population at 20 million for all of France.Other sources for the following paragraphs are Pierre Chaunu and RichardGascon, Histoire economique et sociale de France, 3 vols. (Paris, 1977); Gas¬con, Grand commerce et vie urbaine au XVIe siecle Lyon et ses marchands, 2vols. (Paris, 1971); and E. Leroy Ladurie, The French Peasantry 1450-1660(Berkeley, Calif.. 1987). Ladurie, p. 9, argues that the population reached 20million by 1560, which number he regards as the highest population thatpreindustrial France could support.2 For a more negative assessment of the French economy in the middle decadesof the sixteenth century, see Henry Heller, The Conquest of Poverty: TheCalvinist Revolt in Sixteenth Century France (Leiden, 1986). Heller’s thesisis that economic distress was a major factor in the appeal of Protestantismto the urban population. To demonstrate his point, he examines seven townswhere it was strong. By concentrating on those towns, however, he may beextrapolating local economic troubles into widespread ones.3 Journal de Jean Barillon, ed. Pierre de Vaissiere, 2 vols. (Paris, 1894), 2: 78.Another useful source on the court at Henry’s birth is the Journal de BourgeoisNotes to Pages 4-8281de Paris sous le regne de Francois /, ed. L. Lalanne (Paris, 1854), pp. 79-80.Since the king of England was his godfather, the English ambassador’s reportsin CLP, III-1, ggff., are also informative.4 Journal de Bourgeois de Paris, p. 80. The king’s first child, bom in 1515, haddied two years after her birth.5 The best account of Francis’s life is by R. J. Knecht, Francis I (Cambridge,1982), despite the fact that it is more truly a political history of his reign.Others include Jean Jacquart, Frangois I (Paris, 1981); C. Terrasse, Frangois I:le roi et le regne, 3 vols. (Paris, 1945-70); and D. Seward, Prince of the Re¬naissance, The Life of Francis l (London, 1973).6 The full statement by Gaspard de Tavannes is: “Alexandre voit les femmesquand il n’a point d’affaires, Frangois voit les affaires quand il n’a plus defemmes.” Memoires, in Petitot, 23: 279.7 Marguerite d’Angouleme, Nouvelles Lettres de la Reine de Navarre, ed.F. Genin (Paris, 1842), pp. 116-17. On the Spanish captivity of the twoprinces, see below, chapter 2.8 Pierre Jourda, ed., Correspondance de Marguerite d’Angouleme (Paris, 1930),1, no. 474.9 For example, she described to Brigonnet the fatal illness and death of Henry’solder sister, Charlotte, in September 1524. Lettres de Marguerite d’Angouleme,ed. F. Genin (Paris, 1841), pp. 168-69.10 Nouvelles Lettres, p. 71.11 As king, Henry had a serious dispute with his aunt and her husband over thechoice of a husband for their daughter, Jeanne d’Albret; but there appears tobe no reason for the condescending tone of “my good old aunt” that NancyRoelker, Queen of Navarre Jeanne d’Albret (Cambridge, Mass., 1968),. p. 73,gives to the phrase ma bonne tante in Henry’s letter to Montmorency in Octo¬ber 1548. See the letter in H. de La Ferriere-Percy, Marguerite d’Angouleme,Son livre de defenses 1540-1549 (Paris, 1862), pp. 128-29.12 bn, Fonds frangais 26,272, fol. 596. The household of the dauphin and theprinces received 60,000 livres for wages and expenses; that of the queen,160,000; of the king, 543,000. See Cloulas, pp.34-35, for the menu of theprinces’ table in 1525.13 Charles Marchand, Charles ler de Cosse Comte de Brissac (Paris, 1889), pp.9-i i-14 clp, 111-2, no. 2035.15 See Pierre Jourda, “Un humaniste italien en France,” Revue de seizieme siecle,16(1929), 40-57.16 A. L. Herminjard, Correspondance des reformateurs dans les pays de languefrangaise, 10 vols. (Geneva, 1866-69), 3: 219-21.17 Nouvelles Lettres, p. 71.18 Brantome, Oeuvres completes, ed. L. Lalanne, 11 vols. (Paris, 1867), 3: 289.19 Niccolo Tommaseo, Relations des ambassadeurs Venitiens sur les affaires deFrance au XVIe siecle, 2 vols. (Paris, 1838), 1: 287, 375.20 Brantome, Oeuvres. 3: 289.21 Mezeray, Abrege chronologique, 6: 722. Report of Sir John Mason, June 23,282Notes to Pages 8-171551, printed in Patrick Tytler, England under the Reigns of Edward VI andMary, 2 vols. (London, 1839), 387; csp Spain, X, 214.22 Ernest Quentin-Bauchart, La Bibliotheque de Fontainebleau et les livres desdemiers Valois a la Bibliotheque Nationale (Paris, 1891), pp. 77-134.23 Noell, Henri II, PP- 42-43. One has to wonder if Noell and others who madesimilar comments about the poetry written in Henry’s hand in bn, Fondsfrangais 3143, would have changed their evaluation had they known that atleast one of the sonnets was probably Joachim Du Bellay’s. See Geoffrey Hope,“The Verses of Henri II: A Note of Attribution," bhr, 44 (1982), 127-31.24 Alberi, 2: 426.2 HOSTAGE1 Karl Brandi, The Emperor Charles V (London, 1963), pp. 51, 143; Henry Ka-men, Spain 1469-1714 A Society of Conflict (London, 1984), p. 69.2 For a discussion of the formulation of the Concordat of Bologna, see Knecht,Francis /, pp. 48-65.3 On the Battle of Pavia, see ibid., pp. 161-72; V. F. Bourrilly, ed., Memoiresde Martin et Guillaume Du Bellay, 4 vols. (Paris, 1908-19), 1: 332-57; F. L.Taylor, The Art of War in Italy, 1494-1929 (Cambridge, 1921), pp. 99-102.4 See Francis’s letter in Jean Duhamel, La Captivite de Francois Ier et desDauphins (Paris, 1958), pp. 127-31. Francis proposed that he would againbecome king upon any future repatriation to France with his son’s coronationthen held in abeyance until the father’s death.5 That it was a ploy was the opinion of F. Mignet, La rivalite de Frangois Ier etde Charles-Quint, 2 vols. (Paris, 1875), 2: 160.6 In Aime Champollion-Figeac, ed., Captivite du Rot Frangois Ier (Paris, 1847),pp. 300-3. Louise was probably not aware of a second similar oath of reserva¬tion of January 1526, when Francis had agreed publicly to accept the Treatyof Madrid.7 clp, IV-1,896-97. Taylor states that Madame Louise went by water from Bloisto Amboise with the dauphin and his brother, indicating that they had joinedher at Blois and not at Amboise, as Knecht, Francis /, p. 191, and others state.8 clp, IV-1,896-97.9 The protocol further dictated that the boats be of precisely the same size andhave the same number of rowers and that ten gentlemen armed with a swordand dagger be in each boat.10 Report of Jean de Selve to the Parlement de Paris, in Captivite du Roi Frangois,p. 522.11 Ibid. According to the imperial ambassador, “In France [people] have a badopinion of their king, whom they do not love. They say that they would havemuch preferred his remaining in prison; and at Bayonne, when the Dauphinand his brother left, there was much sadness shown.” csp Spain, III-1,615.12 Duhamel, La captivite, pp. 153-55; Marchand, Charles de Brissac, pp. 13-15;Jean Plattard, “Humaniste Theocrenus en Espagne,” Revue du seizieme siecle,16 (1929), 68-69.13 csp Spain, III-1, 706-7.Notes to Pages 17-1928314 For a discussion of the second point, see Knecht, Francis /, pp. 206-7.15 csp Italy, IV, 29. The Venetian ambassador said that the escape plot involvedthe use of false keys. He stated that the French denied any plot and com¬plained that the accusation was an excuse to confine the princes more rigidlyto force Francis into an agreement. See also the documents in Martin Fer¬nandez Navarette et al., Coleccion de Documentos Ineditos para la Historia deEspaha (Madrid, 1842), 1: 242-44; 2: 209-58. Most of the documents are let¬ters from Charles to his Spanish officers, admonishing them to keep a strongguard on the two princes.16 Marchand, Charles de Brissac, appendix 1.17 clp, IV-2, 1512, 1515, 1517.18 Ibid., p. 1527.19 Ibid., p. 1585.20 Ibid., p. 1770; csp Spain, III-2, 550-52. A letter of Rene de Brissac to the king,of March 1528, reveals that the French nobles in the princes’ entourage werescattered in various fortresses, while their servants were sent to the galleys.These latter, in the number of forty-one, were the victims of a shipwreck thatput them in the hands of the Turks. Charles V rescued ten of the unfortunateFrenchmen during his expedition against Tunis in 1535. Marchand, Charlesde Brissac, appendix 1, p. 535 and note.21 clp, IV-2, 1770. The report added: “The Princes are very well.”22 csp Spain IV-2, 573, 627.23 There are, however, the two curious letters from Charles V to the constableof Castile and his brother, dated February 2 and 3, 1529, in csp Spain, III-2,883-84: “Constable, our cousin, &c.,—Your letter of the 28th ulto. has beenduly received. Secretary Cobos gave us an account of what you had donerespecting the French Princes. We approve of all the measures proposed, withthe single exception of that which concerns the household of the Princes, foralthough We wish them to be as well served and entertained as possible at ourown expense, yet We object to their having so many titled officers about theirperson as come daily from France for the purpose of attending on them. Threeor four gentlemen to serve at table and minister to their wants are a sufficienthousehold for them.—Burgos, 2nd February 1529.” The second, shorter letterof the next day contained the same advice. The content of the letters stronglysuggests that they date from 1528, but since they are addressed to Don Pedro,constable of Castile, a position he apparently gained only upon his father’sdeath in October 1528, the date of 1529 remains plausible. Nonetheless, thefact that they were written from Burgos, where Charles was on January 31,1528, and not from Toledo, where he was on February 6, 1529, seems to clinchthe earlier date. It seems impossible that Charles could have covered the 320km from Burgos to Toledo in three days. It is likely, therefore, that the editorof the csp Spain erroneously dated the letters.24 clp, IV-3, 2413, 2524.25 Ibid., p. 2504. The princes seem to have been moved rather rapidly from onecastle to another prior to Pedraza. At least eight places are mentioned in thesources; they fall in a pattern of being further and further into the interior ofCastile.284Notes to Pages 19-2326 Letter of M. de Clermont to Montmorency, August 2, 1529, bn, CollectionClairaumbault 329, fol. 269. Also in Marchand, Charles de Brissac, appendix1, pp. 538-39. It states that the spy saw the princes at Villalpando on July10 and 12, where they were in 1528, not 1529. Clermont also informed Mont¬morency of the departure of Charles V from Spain, which occurred in July1529. The positive dating of the letter to 1529 provides three options for in¬terpreting the information on the princes: it took a whole year for the reportto reach Clermont; the spy gave the wrong place-name; or they really were inVillalpando in the summer of 1529. Cloulas, p. 44, ascribes the letter to 1528,but without explanation.27 Brandi, Charles V, pp. 276-80.28 “Lettre de l'hussier Baudin a la reyne-mere Loyse de Savoie,” Le CabinetHistorique, 2: 217-225. A manuscript copy of the report is in bn, Fonds Morelde Thoisey 338. Also Mignet, Rivalite, 2: 484-88. Baudin’s report gives nodate for his visit to the princes, but it prompted a sharp letter from Louise ofSavoy to Margaret of Austria dated October 6, 1529. On September 27, beforeLouise’s letter, Empress Isabella wrote to the constable of Castile, orderinghim to spend 2,000 ducados on clothes for the princes and 8,000 for food.Navarette, Coleccion, 2: 237.29 Probably at the time the princes were removed to Pedraza. According to Plat-tard, “Theocrenus en Espagne,” p. 69, Tagliacamo spent the remainder ofhis time in Spain at Villalpando, where he tried to secure a position at theSpanish court.30 I am indebted to Dr. Thomas Ollendick for this point. Dr. James T. Axtell hasinformed me that his study of white captives of Amerindian tribes suggeststhat children could forget their mother tongue that quickly, although he agreesthat the two brothers being together reduced the likelihood in this situation.31 Whether because of Louise of Savoy’s letter to Margaret of Austria of October6, 1529, and Margaret’s subsequent letter to Charles, (in Mayer, The GreatRegent, p. 278), or because Charles decided that, with the peace agreed to,there was less need for harshness, is unclear.32 Marchand, Charles de Brissac, pp. 17-18, and appendix 1, pp. 539-41.33 Clausse described this routine as being in effect on the day he and Brissacarrived at Pedraza, indicating that their French attendants had been returnedto the princes before then. An account of the salaries for the attendants of thetwo princes for 1529 indicates that the sum of 29,900 livres was paid out. bn,Fonds frangais 3010.34 Writing to Montmorency on March 28, Come Clausse reported that on theprevious Thursday the princes had left Pedraza. The entourage was travelingat a rate of only four leagues a day because of the bad roads. Marchand,Charles de Brissac, appendix 1, pp. 547-49.35 Frangois, Cardinal de Toumon, pp. 77-82; Knecht, Francis /, pp. 221-23;Williams, Henry 11, p. 57.36 Sebastian Moreau, “La prinse et delivrance du Roi Frangois,” Archives curi-euses, 2: 422-37; Francis Decrue, Anne de Montmorency a la cour, aux armeeset au conseil du roi Frangois I (Paris, 1885), pp. 145-53. Montmorency was incharge of the exchange.Notes to Pages 23-2828537 Navarette, Coleccion, 2: 238, gives two Spanish contracts to provide meat andstaples for the princes; they indicate a plentiful amount for their table.38 Moreau, “La prinse et delivrance,” p. 436.39 Duhamel, La captivite, pp. 174-75.40 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3; 273.41 Henri II, pp. 61-62. The reference to the Venetian ambassador is fromBaschet, La diplomatie Venitienne, p. 430.42 Again, I thank Dr. Thomas Ollendick for his advice on these points.43 Monluc, Commentaires et lettres, ed. A. de Ruble, 2 vols. (Paris, 1887), 2: 318.3 HUSBAND AND DAUPHIN1 The king had declared that July 5 was a day of thanksgiving and celebration“en soient faictz les feux de joye.” Processions and celebrations lasted formore than a week and “n’est point memoire d’homme avoir veu demonstreune plus grand joye au peuple et gens de Paris.” Journal d’un Bourgeois deParis, p. 412. The court did not reach Paris until December 1530.2 Lucien Romier, La carriere d’un favori, Jacques d’Albon de Saint-Andre (Paris,1909), p. 12. See Cloulas, pp. 57-59, for a fuller description of the princelyhousehold. In late 1532, after Dauphin Francis had been crowned duke ofBrittany, his household was separated from his brothers, with members of theBrissac family dominating it. Marchand, Charles de Brissac, p. 28.3 Jourda, “Un humaniste Italien,” p. 49; dbf, 12: 94.4 Reproduced in E. Charavay, “Les enfants de Frangois Ier,” Revue des docu¬ments historiques, 2 (1875), 41-47.5 Brantome, Oeuvres 3: 240.6 csp Italy, IV, 225. The Peace of Cambrai called for the marriage of the dauphinto the same princess.7 Ibid., p. 494.8 Ibid., p. 726. The English also were apparently pleased to be free of the pro¬posed union, since the imperial ambassador in London wrote that the Englishcourt expressed its pleasure at the impending marriage between the duke ofOrleans and Catherine de Medici because it would please the pope and freeit of a problem, clp, V, 188.9 On September 1, 1532, a member of the English court stated unequivocallythat the marriage between Henry and Mary would take place, csp Italy, V,797-10 Francis I had promoted the marriage between Catherine’s parents to furtherhis interests in Italy. Although it is clear that her French ancestry had littleinfluence on her upbringing, because of the death of her mother soon afterher birth, numerous contemporaries and modem historians conveniently haveoverlooked it in referring to Catherine as “the Italian shopkeeper’s daugh¬ter.” A marriage between Henry and Catherine was not an entirely new ideasince, as early as December 1523, it was reported that Pope Clement VII hadsuggested it to the French ambassador. Pastor, History of the Popes, 9: 269.11 Because Catherine had limited influence as queen, and because there is avast number of biographies of her, I will not detail her life before 1534. The286Notes to Pages 28-31best account other childhood is Alfred von Reumont, La jeunesse de Catherinede Medicis (Paris, 1866).12 csp Italy, IV, no. 650.13 Ibid., no. 723.14 Ibid., nos. 378, 848, 876. The original marriage contract was drawn up at theChateau of Anet, the home of Diane de Poitiers, as the court was visiting herhusband, Louis de Breze, at the time. The irony of this circumstance has beennoted by a number of historians, including Williams, Henri II, p. 73.15 Pope Clement, of course, had just gone through the annulment case of HenryVIII, in which one of the key points was whether Henry’s older brother hadconsummated his marriage with Catherine of Aragon. On the marriage cere¬mony, see Terrasse, Frangois ler, 2: 199-206; Ivan Cloulas, Catherine deMedicis (Paris, 1979), pp. 54-57; Williams, Henry II, pp. 83-87. On the bridalchamber visitation, see Relation anonyme des ceremonies du marriage . . .(Marseille, 1533).16 On the value of Catherine’s lands in France, see csp Italy, IV, no. 926.17 See the report of the Venetian ambassador in 1535, where it was stated thatthe entire nation felt that the pope had deceived the king. Baschet, La diplo¬matic Venitienne, p. 469.18 csp Spain, V-i, no. 232.19 Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, p. 469.20 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 270-73.21 The best scholarly treatment of Diane de Poitiers is the introduction toG. Guiffrey, Les Lettres inedites de Dianne de Poytiers (Paris, 1866).22 Regnier de La Planche, Histoire de I’Estat de France sous Frangois II, p 233;Brantome, Les Dames Galantes, ed. Maurice Rat, (Paris, n.d.), p. 64.23 Diane was mentioned as one of the ladies who attended Queen Eleanor ather entry into Bordeaux on July 11. Denys Godefroy, Le ceremonial frangois, 2vols. (Paris, 1649), 1: 771,773-74. I owe this reference to Patricia Thompson.The tradition cited by Jehanne D’Orliac, The Moon Mistress: The Duchess deValentinois (Philadelphia, 1930), p. 103, that Diane had comforted Henry atBayonne before he went into exile in 1526, appears far less plausible. Thenature of Louise of Savoy’s quick trip to Bayonne made it unlikely that Dianewould have joined the entourage.24 Marino Cavalli, the Venetian ambassador, wrote in 1547, at the time of Henry’saccession to the throne, that the king had for Diane, then forty-eight years ofage, real affection, “but one thinks that there is nothing lewd there but it is asbetween mother and son.” Tommaseo, Relations, 1: 287.25 Cloulas, p. 78; Williams, Henri II, pp. 123-24, argues for late 1536 on thegrounds that his brother’s death that year now made Dauphin Henry a con¬quest worth winning for Diane.26 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 270-73.27 The autopsy report by the royal physicians is given in Charavay, “Les enfants,”p. 63, n. It is rather uninformative on the prince’s death, which appears tohave been caused by a respiratory problem, perhaps pleurisy. There is nosuggestion of poison. The squire’s confession and the judgment against himis in Du Bellay, Memoires, 3: 215-17.Notes to Pages 32-3728728 Report of Marino Giustiniano, in Tommaseo, Relations, 1: 63. Giustinianopointed out that the marital compact by which Brittany passed to the Valoisdynasty called for a younger son of the king to serve as its duke because theBretons did not want to come directly under the king. Thus, Henry’s requestdid have a legal basis, although his mother, the last autonomous ruler of theduchy, had willed it to her oldest son. Knecht, Francis and Henry, p. 3.29 Tommaseo, Relations, 1: 104-5.30 Romier, Saint-Andre, p. 25; Matteo Dandolo, cited by Cloulas, p. 60.31 Decrue, Montmorency sous Frangois I, pp. 276-80.32 The nature of this liaison is unclear. Some historians, for example, Seward,Prince of the Renaissance, p. 192, have used the term rape for it. But thecontemporary sources most likely to be well informed indicate that Henryseduced the daughter of his host in a town in Piedmont. Cloulas, pp. 96-97.See also Diane de France’s biography in dbf, 2: 1213-17, and J.-C. Soumia,Blaise de Monluc (Paris, 1981), p. 81. Soumia writes that the girl enteredthe convent afterward. Montmorency is supposed to have told Catherine deMedici that Diane looked the most like Henry of all his children.33 Memoires de la vie de Frangois de Scepeaux sire de Vieilleville, vols. 26—28 of Petitot, 26: 192-98. The memoirs were said to have been written byVieilleville’s secretary, Vincent Carloix, but C. Marchand, Le marechal deVieilleville et ses memoires (Paris, 1893), argued that they dated from about1600 and are rather unreliable. Henry’s two companions supposedly told himthe story because of his grief at the sight of the coffins of his father andtwo brothers on their way to final burial in Saint-Denis. However, Vieillevillemay not yet have returned from a diplomatic mission to London at that time.Romier, Saint-Andre, p. 49, n.34 clp, XIII, 935. The English ambassador included Queen Eleanor and “almostall the Cardinals” in Henry’s faction.35 Genin, Lettres de Marguerite dAngouleme, pp. 274-75.36 The crowning insult to Montmorency was Francis’s order that he carry therecalcitrant Jeanne d’Albret to the altar for her marriage to the Duke of Cleves,“a task so far below his rank.” Roelker, Jeanne DAlbret, p. 55, citing Brantome.37 This point was made clear in Tavannes, Memoires, 23: 312-13, where hereported himself as telling Charles, who had been ordered by the king to liftthe siege of Ivoy near Luxembourg: “Your brother will get Perpignan; you,only disgrace.” Charles ordered the siege continued and took the fortress.Tavannes later advised Charles to ask to have Guise replaced with Marshald’Annebault “to show that the victory belonged to him alone,” p. 331. See alsoDu Bellay, Memoires, 1: 193.38 Ibid.39 On the Peace of Crepy, see clp, XIX-2, 128-30; Knecht, Francis I, pp. 370-71;Brandi, Charles V, pp. 518-22. The French alliance with the sultan had ex¬tended to permitting the Turkish fleet to winter at Toulon in 1542, completelyscandalizing Western Christendom.40 ang, 3: 138. Tavannes, Memoires, 23: 384, noted that Charles hoped to getBurgundy from his father and the emperor. Tavannes, when writing his mem¬oirs, repented of his encouragement of this proposal, “being then still young.”288Notes to Pages 37-4141 clp, XIX-2, 443. See Ribier, Lettres, 1: 578-80, for the text of Henry’s protest.Also, Williams, Henri II, pp. 158-59.42 Alberi, 1: 83. It is usually said that Diane de Poitiers easily persuaded Henrynot to seek an end of his marriage because she feared a new wife might proveto be a true rival for his affections, while Catherine passively accepted therelationship between Henry and Diane. One wonders, however, how readilyHenry did reject the possibility of a divorce, given the strength of his rivalrywith his brother, who was next in line for the throne because of Henry’s lackof a son.43 ang, 3: 25.44 The physician Jean Femel advised Henry to sleep with his wife during men¬struation, although children conceived in such circumstances were thoughtlikely to become lepers. Femel received 10,000 ecus for each of Catherine’spregnancies. Eugene de France, Catherine de Medicis, ses astrologues et sesmagiciens-envouteurs (Paris, 1911), pp. 37-44. See F. Bourquelot, “Notice surle Journal de Jean Glaumeau,” Memoires de la societe des antiquites de France,22 (1858), 199-200, for a description of the celebration of the birth of thedauphin in Bourges.45 Tavannes, Memoires, 23: 389; ang, III, 389-91; Cloulas, p. 126.46 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 71-73. Vieilleville was reported as cautioningHenry that “he was selling the skin before the bear was dead.” The memoirsdescribe at length Francis’s rage at the report.47 ang, 6: 58; Sarah Hanley, The Lit de Justice of the Kings of France (Princeton,N.J., 1983), PP 92-93-48 Ftomier, Origines politiques, 1: 9-10. It seems to me, however, that Romierexaggerated when he spoke of Henry living “as in exile at the court of hisfather,” p. 11.49 Monluc, Commentaires (Paris, 1964), pp. 142-43. Monluc’s statement andthat of the papal nuncio, ang, 6: 58, disprove what the Venetian ambassador,Contarini, wrote about Henry in 1551: “His father . . . not only did not trainhim in the business of state but did not even summon him to his council.”Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, pp. 431-33.50 Pariset, Relations, pp. 48-49; Gustave Zeller, Le Reunion de Metz a France, 2vols. (Paris, 1926), 1: 88-89.51 ang, 6: 100. This episode is the only known incident in which Henry involvedhimself in foreign affairs prior to his accession. On the symbolism of themotto, see V. Hoffman, “Donee Totum impleat orbem Symbolisme imperial,”Bulletin de la Societe d’histoire de Fart fran^ais (1978), pp. 29-42.52 Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, 1: 385-87. Henry was, however, suscep¬tible to numerous fevers, as frequently recorded by the papal nuncios, ang,1, 3, 6: passim. Saint-Mauris, the imperial ambassador in France, also notedthat he was often subject to abdominal flux, csp Spain, II, 517.53 Monluc, Commentaires et lettres, ed. A. de Ruble (Paris, 1887), 2: 318.54 See Knecht, Francis I, p. 418, n., on demonstrations of joy among the populaceat Francis’s death.55 The last hours of Francis I are described in Knecht, Francis /, pp. 416-19;ang, 6: 175-76; R. Doucet, “La mort de Francois I,” Revue historique, 113Notes to Pages 41-46289(1913), 309-16; C. Paillard, “La mort de Francois I et les premiers tempsdu regne de Henri II d’apres les depeches de Jean de Saint-Mauris,” Revuehistorique, 5 (1877), 84-120. Several additional dispatches of Saint-Maurisare in csp Spain, IX, 73ff.56 Dispatch of the English ambassador, Nicolas Wooton, in Tytler, Edward andMary, 1: 38.57 Memoires de Vieilleville, 31: 193-97; Williams, Henri II, pp. 188-92. Cloulas,p. 139, disputes the authenticity of the statement attributed to Henry: “Voiladone le beletre qui mene l’avant-garde de ma felicite!” He argues that it is tooslick for Henry’s rather unpolished personality.58 bn, Collection Clairaumbault 341, fols. 58-61. See also Ralph Giesey, TheRoyal Funeral Ceremony in Renaissance France (Geneva, i960), for a descrip¬tion of Francis’s funeral and an explanation of the symbolism involved, sinceFrancis’s funeral is the focus of this work. Saint-Mauris reported that theobsequies cost 400,000 livres. Paillard, “Mort de Francois,” p. no. But quit¬tances of September 27, 1548, authorized the payment of only 101,333 livres.an, K 89, fol. 11. Henry paid 9,110 livres to Germain Pilon, “sculptor of Paris,”for statues of his brothers, an, K 89, piece 2.4 VIVE LE ROI HENRI1 The dispatches of the imperial ambassador, Saint-Mauris, in Paillard, “Mortde Francois,” and in csp Spain, IX, are the most important sources about thechanges at court. Also valuable are the reports of the papal nuncio, Dandino,ang, 6: 175-84.2 See the inventory of crown jewels made at Francis’s death, in Marchand,Charles de Cosse, appendix 2, p. 549.3 csp Spain, IX, 75.4 Ibid.; Decrue, Montmorency, p. 7. Decrue meant this as a general statementabout the French monarchy in the sixteenth century, not just about the ac¬cession of Henry II, to which it is usually taken to refer. Comparison withthe beginning of Francis’s reign is inappropriate because there were so manyvacancies in major offices in 1515, including the positions of constable andtwo marshals. One must also keep in mind that Henry was the only Frenchking of the century to come to the throne in a peaceful succession as a matureadult with established opinions, friends, and advisers.5 Saint-Mauris, csp Spain, IX, 74; Knecht, Francis I, pp. 414-15.6 Saint-Mauris, csp Spain, IX, 115. See also Francois, Toumon, pp. 228-35.7 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 12: 179-180. On the governors, see Robert Hard¬ing, Anatomy of a Power Elite (New Haven, 1978), pp. 17-39.8 Salmon, Society in Crisis, p. 24.9 Harding, Anatomy, p. 29.10 On these councils, see Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 140-49; Sutherland, Secre¬taries of State, pp. 39-42; Salmon, Society in Crisis, pp. 66-67.11 No two lists of the membership are the same. The above is taken from G.Ribier, Lettres et memoires d’estat, 2 vols. (Paris, 1616), 2: 1. See also ang, 6:180.290Notes to Pages 46-5112 Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 145.13 Decrue, Montmorency, pp. 5-7. For the edict reestablishing Montmorency inLanguedoc, see Devic et al., Histoire g&nerale de Languedoc, 12 vols. (Tou¬louse, 1889), 12: col. 529.14 ang, 9: 101; 6: 197. Montmorency went on, however, to say that he couldnot stand by while the majesty of the French king was being injured by theemperor.15 Brantome, Oeuvres, 8: 129. Regnier de La Planche, Histoire de I’estat deFrance, p. 330.16 cspf Edward, p. 56.17 csp Spain, IX, 75; letter of Guillaume Bochetel to Claude de L'Aubespine,April 4, 1547, in Fauvelet Du-Toc, Histoire des secretaires d’etat (Paris, 1667),pp. 25-27. Bochetel stated that Montmorency “incontinent a embrasse tout lefait des affaires.”18 Tytler, Edward and Mary, 1: 36.19 Ibid.20 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 119. For a recent study of the Guises, see Jean-Marie Constant, Les Guises (Paris, 1984), pp. 21-54, for Henry IPs generation.21 For the more positive view of Guise as a politician, see David Potter, “The duede Guise and the fall of Calais, 1557-58,” The English Historical Review, 388(1983). 495-96.22 Cited by Bouille, Histoire des dues de Guises, 1: 245; and Romier, Originespolitiques, 1: 47, n. The only modem work on Charles de Lorraine is H. O.Evennett, The Cardinal of Lorraine and the Council of Trent (Cambridge,1930). Evennett’s portrayal of Lorraine as a high-principled and moderateman willing to seek accommodation with the Protestants, especially at thetime of the Colloquy of Poissy, has come under considerable fire but has yetto be effectively refuted.23 Bouille, Histoire des dues de Guises, 1: 151.24 The ambassador of Ferrara, February 4, 1547; cited by Romier, Origines poli¬tiques, 1: 50.25 Nicolas Boucher, Caroli Lotharingii . . . Litterae (1577); cited by Evennett,Cardinal of Lorraine, p. 5.26 The often-cited story, found first in Regnier de La Planche, Histoire de I’estatde France, p. 261, and given credence in De Thou, Histoire universelle, 1:237, that Francis warned his son about the Guises, “whose aim was to striphim and his children to their doublets and his people to their shirts,” strikesme as apocryphal, in part for the reason given by Van Dyke, Catherine deMedicis, 1: 39, that the two Guises in question were both too young to be theobject of such special attention at the king’s deathbed. Furthermore, it wasFrancis I himself who had raised the Guises to the level of an important familyin France because of the valuable services rendered the crown by Claudede Guise. There was no reason for Francis to be so hypocritical. Third, nocontemporary account, several of which give a detailed account of Francis’slast words, contains this story.27 Lubinskaja, p. 234; csp Spain, IX, 74-75. Saint-Mauris went on to say thatMontmorency chose the archbishop of Reims because he was of princely rankNotes to Pages 51-57291and because the constable had been accused (during Francis I’s reign) ofwanting to do everything himself.28 On the Saint-Andres, see bn, Collection Clairaumbault 341, fol. 93; FondsDupuy 86; Alberi, 2; 437; csp Spain, XIII, 413; Romier, Jacques d'Albon. InJuly 1547, Henry gave Jacques de Saint-Andre 10,000 ecus confiscated froma Parisian merchant for violating an edict. Catalogue des actes de Henri 11, 1:657-29 De Thou, Histoire universelle, 1: 158.30 Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 106.31 De Thou, Histoire universelle, 1: 158, 329; Devic, Histoire de Languedoc, 12:551-53; de Ruble, Antoine de Bourbon, 2: 13-14. Zeller, Reunion de Metz, 1:131, cites several major contributions by Olivier to royal diplomacy after 1551and argues strongly against the view that he had been disgraced, an opinionshared by Helene Michaud, La Grande Chancellerie et les ecritures royales auseizieme siecle (Paris, 1967), p. 26.32 ang, 6: 176; Du-Toc, Secretaires d’etat, pp. 44-45; Sutherland, Secretaries ofState, pp. 29-31; Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 161.33 Catalogue des Actes de Henri II, 1: no. 1,000; Du-Toc, Secretaires d’etat, p. 38;Sutherland, Secretaries of State, pp. 27-28.34 Noel, Henri II, p. 132. Michel Antoine, “Un toumant dans l’histoire des insti¬tutions monarchiques: le regne de Henri II,” Collogue franco-suedois (Paris,1978), is nearly as positive in his assessment of Henry’s administrative re¬forms.35 csp Spain, IX, 77, 133. Saint-Mauris reported that Henry was acting “mostdutifully in a filial fashion” in regard to Eleanor’s properties. The papal nuncioreported in October 1548, that within ten days Queen Eleanor was goingto Brussels, ang, 6: 402. In 1552, however, Henry seized Eleanor’s Frenchrevenues and gave them to Charles V’s daughter Margaret. She had marriedOttavio Famese, and Charles had seized her lands in Italy because of herhusband’s alliance with Henry. Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 238.36 bn, Fonds frangais 10934.37 Alberi, 2: 73; csp Spain, IX, 115; E. Bellaud-Dessalles, Les eveques italiens deI’ancien diocese de Beziers (Toulouse, 1901), pp. 17-62.38 Van Dyke, Catherine de Medicis, 1: 56; csp Italy, VI-2, 1099.39 Tytler, Edward and Mary, p. 37; bn. Collection Clairaumbault 341, fol. 93;Cinq cens de Colbert 23, fol. 26V. Henry promised to give the young d’Humi-eres a sum equivalent to the income of the office.40 Jean-Daniel Pariset, Relations entre la France et VAllemagne au milieu duseizieme siecle (Strasbourg, 1983), p. 205. Paillard, “Mort de Francois,” pp.111-12. Saint-Mauris further reported that, after discussing business, Henrywould sit in Diane’s lap and play a guitar, touch her breasts and gaze at heras a man completely captured with love.41 “Histoire particuliere de la cour de Henri II,” bn, Fonds frangais 17472, fol.147. See De Thou, Histoire universelle, 1: 154, for the view that Blondetinformed Diane on the choicest pieces throughout Henry’s reign.42 Saint-Mauris, in Paillard, “Mort de Frangois,” p. no, put the sum at 300,000francs (the equivalent of the livre), but Brantome says 100,000. Either sum292Notes to Pages 57-62appears to have been only a fraction of the total due to the new king. Saint-Mauris noted that Francis I had given the money to his mother, and somecourtiers thought the sum should have been given to Henry’s sister. Mar¬guerite. There is no entry regarding the gift in the Catalogue des actes deHenri II. On the gift of Chenonceaux, see Catalogue des actes, 1: 592; the giftof the Valentinois, bn, Fonds Dupuy 654, fol. 60.43 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 186-87; Tavannes, Memoires, 23: 410. Many ofthe royal gifts are noted in an, P 2648, “Creances du chambre de comptes.”44 ang, 6: 176. It was the consensus of the contemporary reports that Mont¬morency was the dominant person in pohcymaking, but a minority opinionplaced Charles de Guise in that position; e.g., the Florentine ambassador inAugust 1547, cited by Romier, Origines politigues, 1: 50.45 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 178-79.46 Desjardins, Negociations avec Toscane, 3: 189; Baschet, La diplomatic Veni-tienne, p. 437.47 The Venetian ambassador, Contarini, in 1552, cited by Baschet, La diplomaticVenitienne, p. 440. Contarini made this comment in the context of notingDiane’s ascendancy by 1552.48 See Battifol, Century of the Renaissance, pp. 130-31.49 “Histoire particuhere,” bn, Fonds frangais 17472, fol. 151. The modem editionof this work, usually attributed to Claude de L’Aubespine (Archives curieuses,3; 281), is apparently in error in giving the phrase as "par la Royne mesme.”This error has been repeated by numerous historians since, especially to em¬phasize Catherine de Medici’s subjugation to Diane.50 Saint-Mauris, June 1547, in Paillard, “Mort de Francois,” p. 117; Romier,Origines politiques, 1: 37. Romier’s account is challenged by the correspon¬dence in Lubinskaja. pp. 26off.51 csp Spain, IX, 131-32.52 Paillard, “Mort de Frangois,” p. 117; Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 45, n.53 Romier, ibid., 1: 38, citing the reports of the ambassador of Ferrara, whom heregarded as very close to the Guises. Romier writes that “one cannot imaginean animosity more vexing and tenacious.” On the accusation of poison, seeRomier, ibid., 1: 81. Nonetheless, Guise seems to have worked well under theconstable in a number of military expeditions.54 csp Spain, XIII, 413; Weiss, 5; 226.55 Albert, 2: 63.56 For the duel and its circumstances, see bn, Fonds frangais 4740, fols. 1-83; Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 198-200; Brantome, Oeuvres, 5: 87-88;Williams, Henri II, pp. 193-206.57 Jamac is said to have been in permanent disfavor, but in April 1557 he re¬ceived a gift of 260 ecus from Henry, bn, Fonds frangais 21405, fol. 315.58 The best source on the sixteenth-century rite is Godeffov, Le ceremonialfrangois, which described at length the various coronations of the era. Seealso bn, Fonds frangais 21716, 24047; and Richard Jackson, Vive Le Roi! AHistory of the French Coronation from Charles V to Charles X (Chapel Hill,N. C., 1984), pp. 86-87. Jackson points out that the French use the word“sacre,” consecration, as the common word for coronation. Ibid., p. 3.59 The ampulla was said to have been brought to Saint-Remv for the baptism ofNotes to Pages 62-66293Clovis by a dove. It had been used since the tenth century for the coronation.A pin was used to take out a minute quantity of the solidified oil for eachcoronation. The ampulla was destroyed in 1793.60 Henry’s coronation was the occasion of a heated row, caused by Louis deMontpensier representing the peerage of Champagne. He maintained that, asa Bourbon and a prince of blood, he ought to have the first place before theother lay peers. Henry refused to humor him, but the episode was the firstshot in a long battle that eventually led to victory for the princes of blood. SeeJackson, Vive Le Roi, pp. 155-67.61 The oath can be found in The Coronation Book of Charles V of France, ed.E. S. Dewick (London, 1899), col. 19. Jackson, Vive Le Roi, pp. 59, 211, 249,n.io, proposes that Henry did not swear the oath that contained the clauseagainst heresy. The ordo of his coronation contained the phrase “I promisethese three things!” at the beginning of his oath. Jackson takes the phrase asevidence that Henry took an early medieval oath that lacked the clause onheresy. It is not clear, however, why Jackson assumes that the heresy clausewas the one omitted.62 Ernst Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies (Princeton, 1957), p. 222, notes thatthe specific rubric “Le roy espousa solemnellement le royaume,” appeared forthe first time in 1547. See also Jackson, Vive Le Roi, pp. 86-87.63 Jackson, Vive Le Roi, pp. 48-52.64 Alberi, 2: 173.5 THE FIRST YEAR1 cspf Edward, pp. 50, 194, 289; csp Spain, XIII, 295. For a vivid description ofthe sixteenth-century royal hunt, see W. L. Wiley, The Gentleman of Renais¬sance France (Westport, Conn., 1971), pp. 137-44; ar>d Ivan Cloulas, La viequotidienne dans les Chateaux de la Loire au temps de la Renaissance (Paris,1983), pp. 154-94. For a more general look at the life of the French nobility,see Jean-Marie Constant, La vie quotidienne de la noblesse frangaise aux XVIeet XVlle siecles (Paris, 1985). The court also had to move at times because thechateaux, when lived in for any length of time, began to stink and had to becleansed, csp Italy, VI-i, 87, 320.2 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 276; an, K 91, piece 29, KK 286, fol. 52. There isno evidence in the financial records that Henry’s personnel for hunting hadsalaries of 150,000 ecus a year (387,500 livres) as the Venetian ambassadorreported for Francis I in 1546. In 1559 the sum of hunting expenses appearsto have been some 68,000 livres. bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 8.3 csp Edward, p. 16; Tytler, Edward and Mary, p. 80.4 csp Spain, IX, 209.5 The roll of the royal household is in bn, Collection Clairaumbault 1216, fol.4gff. For its organization, see Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 125-27. On Fran¬cis I’s household, see Knecht, Francis I, pp. 89-91. See also Mack Holt,“Patterns of Clientele and Economic Opportunity at Court during the Warsof Religion: The Household of Francois, Duke of Anjou,” French HistoricalStudies, 13 (1984), 305-22.6 Alberi, 2: 420-21; an, K 113; bn, Fonds franfais 25753, which has thecomptes294Notes to Pages 66-74de bouche (expenditures for food) for six months of 1558. The sum was 5,332livres. For a more complete description of the royal alimentary habits, seeCloulas, La vie quotidienne, pp. 181-88.7 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 279. Monluc, Commentaires et lettres, 2: 143.8 Monluc, ibid., pp. 130-33.9 The importance of Boulogne in the diplomatic calculations of the time waswell summarized in 1547 by Mary of Hungary, the regent of the Low Coun¬tries: “Upon this point [Boulogne] depends the principal problem of how En¬glish affairs will generally turn out. If the English give up Boulogne, it maybe fairly assumed that in the future they will tend to the side of France thento us whereas if they retain it, the contrary will be the case.” csp Spain, IX,40. On the retaking of Boulogne, see below, pp. 142-43.10 Ibid., pp. 132, 176; October 15, 1547.11 csp Scotland, I, 41-43.12 Charles de La Ronciere, Histoire de la Marine frangaise, 4 vols. (Paris, 1906),3: 432-43-13 bn, Fonds frangais 3134, fol. 12. csp Spain, IX, 312, 576. Marguerite d’Angou-leme’s remarks must be put in the context of her resentment in late 1548over Henry II’s refusal to allow her daughter Jeanne to marry Prince Philipof Spain, and the fact that he had had her correspondence opened to ensurethat a secret marriage compact was not being arranged.14 csp Spain, IX, 206.15 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 74-75; Pastor, History of the Popes, 13: 372-79.16 csp Spain, IX, 209-13.17 ang, 6: 276-80; Baumgartner, “Henry IPs Italian Bishops: A Study in theUse and Abuse of the Concordat of Bologna,” Sixteenth Century Journal, 11(1980), 49-5818 Charles Aubertin, Le roi Henri II a Beaune en 1548 (Beaune, 1888), pp. 17,27. See bn, Fonds frangais 3120, fol. 63, for Henry’s announcement that heintended to go to Italy and that he was establishing his wife with a council atMacon to govern his realm.19 Williams, The Brood of False Lorraine, pp. 90-91.20 Decrue, Montmorency, p. 55. See also bn, Fonds Frangais 3120, fol. 63.21 DeCrue, ibid., p. 97; Henri Martin, Histoire de France, 16 vols. (Paris, i860),13: 380.22 Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 90-104. Romier has exaggerated the depen¬dency of Ippolito d’Este on the Guises. D’Este was a member of a well-placedfamily with an ancient bloodline. Romier seems to have taken coincidence ofmutual interests for dependency.23 Lubinskaja, pp. 21, 56-57.24 csp Spain, IX, 561. Paradin, Histoire de nostre temps (Lyon, 1550), p. 710.Saint-Mauris’s report on the first hint of revolt is a month earlier than anyother.25 This description of the salt tax revolt and its aftermath is based largely on De¬crue, Montmorency, pp. 62-67; Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 261-84; Paradin,Histoire de nostre temps, pp. 730-42; and especially S. Gigon, La revoke de lagabelle en Guyenne, 1548-7549 (Paris, 1906).Notes to Pages 74-8029526 According to the papal nuncio, Henry had intended to remain in Piedmontuntil about September 10 and return to Lyon by the 25th, ang, 6: 31-36. Thecommission to Montmorency is dated September 12. Catalogue des actes deHenri II, 2: 360.27 Memoires, 26: 262. Gigon argues that it is highly unlikely that Montmorency,admittedly a cruel man in such circumstances, would have been as vindictiveas the report presented. Gigon, Revolte de la gabelle, pp. 151-52. See Henry’sletters to the constable in Ribier, Lettres, 2: 163-83.28 The story related by De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 344, that Montmorencyforced the leading citizens of Bordeaux to dig up the body with their barehands is probably apocryphal.29 See the letter of an English agent in France in Gigon, Revolte de la gabelle,pp. 215-16; and also csp Spain, IX, 594.30 For example, De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 345-47; the author of theMemoires de Vieilleville-, Belleforest, Chroniques et annales de France (Paris,1585), pp. 443-46. Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 304-5.31 See Decrue’s spirited defense of the constable in Montmorency, pp. 67—69.32 Tytler, Mary and Edward, 1: 357-58.33 Ibid.34 csp Italy, VI-2, 1245.35 Haton, Memoires, 1: 106-07.36 Daniel Hickey, The Coming of French Absolutism: The Struggle for Tax Reformin the Province of Dauphine 1540-1640 (Toronto, 1986), pp. 23-24.37 Cited in J. H. Shennan, Government and Society in France 1461-1661 (Lon¬don, 1969), p. 113; Bodin, Six Books of the Republic, p. 41.38 La Popeliniere, Histoire de France, p. 53V.39 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 236-37; Haton, Memoires, 1: 28-29.40 These comments are based largely on Brantome’s many references to thecharacter of Henry II, whom he greatly admired.6 SILVER IS THE SINEW OF WAR1 For these paragraphs see especially Richard Gascon, Grand commerce et vieurbaine au XVIe siecle, Lyon et ses marchands, 2 vols. (Paris, 1971), 2: 542-72,659; Jean Jacquart, La crise rurale en Ile-de-France (Paris, 1974), pp. 762-63;Braudel, La Mediterranee, 2: 217; Chaunu, Histoire economique, 1: 920-21;Ladurie, French Peasantry, passim.2 On the financial system, see especially Martin Wolfe, The Fiscal System ofRenaissance France (New Haven, 1972). See also R. Doucet, L’etat des financesde 1523 (Paris, 1923); and L’etat des finances de 1567 (Paris, 1929); andL. S. Van Doren, “War Taxation, Institutional Change and Social Conflict inProvincial France—The Royal Taille in Dauphine, 1494-1559,” Proceedingsof the American Philosophical Society, 121 (1977), 70-96. Van Doren’s workdemonstrates the hazards of making generalizations on the fiscal system ofsixteenth-century France by showing that Dauphine usually was an exceptionto any generalization.3 Henry IPs edict of May 7, 1554, ruled that even royal letters patent granting296Notes to Pages 80-85noble status were inoperative unless they were examined and registered bythe Chambre des comptes. Wolfe, Fiscal System, p. 270.4 Wolfe, Fiscal System, p. 99.5 bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fols. giff.; Gigon, Revoke de la gabelle, p. 17. Therewere two types of taille: reelle and personnelle. The former was levied oneligible property, even if it was purchased by a noble or cleric, whose personsand other property were exempt. In the most of the realm except the Midithe taille personnelle was in force, which enabled non-taillable persons to takeeligible property off the tax rolls when they bought it. A point of confusionabout the tailles is the common but mistaken identification of the taille reellewith a land tax and the taille personnelle as a head tax. Wolfe, Fiscal System,pp. 314-16. In 1550 the tailles were assessed at 4,000,000 livres. bn, Fondsfrangais 3127, fol. 97.6 In 1550 the sum asked from the cities for the soldes de 50,000 hommes de piedwas 1,200,000 livres. Registres de ville de Paris, 4: 281.7 bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol 91; Alberi, 2: 417. See also Doucet, Les Institu¬tions, 2: 557-61; Wolfe, Fiscal System, pp. 318-19.8 bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol. 91; Gigon, Revolte de la gabelle, appendix A;Wolfe, Fiscal System, pp. 340-41.9 bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol. 91; Fonds Dupuy 958, fol. 49. The latter has only14 of the 17 generalites, while Fonds Dupuy 958, fol. 57, has a complete rollfor 1559. A comparison of the fourteen generalites found on both rolls showedthat their receipts increased by an average of 23 percent in the twelve years.10 an, K 90, fol. 20; ang, 9: 119; V. Carriere, Introduction aux etudes d’histoireecclesiastique locale, 3 vols. (Paris, 1936), 3; 256; Alberi, 2: 408; P. Gagnal,“Les decimes et les dons gratuits,” Revue d'Histoire de I’Eglise frangaise, 2:(1911), 465; J. Clamageran, Histoire de I’impot en France, 3 vols. (Paris, 1867-76), 1: 130-31. The roll of decimes for 1516 is in bn, Fonds frangais 17657.11 See, for example, ang, 9: 119; csp Spain, X, 334, 579, 591; cspf Edward,p. 246.12 bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol. 91; Fontanon, Ordonnances, 3: 97; Wolfe, FiscalSystem, pp. 116, 311.13 Bernard Schnapper, Les Rentes au XVIe siecle (Paris, 1957), pp. 42-43, 172-73. Wolfe, Fiscal System, pp. 92-93. It is often assumed that only the kingcreated rentes, but it was possible for cities and individuals to do so also. See,for example, Archives departementales d’llle-et-Vilaine, G. 13, for examplesof rente contracts between the bishop of Rennes and several bourgeoisie.14 Knecht, Francis I, pp. 382, 389, citing Jean Bodin, Les six livres de la Re-publique (Paris 1577), p. 683.15 This view has drawn heavily from Bodin, who was influenced by the wishto represent the reign of Francis I as the golden age of French finance, incontrast to the fiscal mismanagement of his own day. See Richard Ehrenberg,Capital and Finance in the Age of the Renaissance (New York, 1963,), pp.295-97, who argues against Bodin’s view.16 Paillard, “Mort de Frangois,” p. 118. See similar statements from Henry’s firstyear in csp Spain, IX, 213; and ang, 6: 191.Notes to Pages 85-8929717 an, KK 112. According to Michel Frangois, “Albisse Del Bene surintendantgeneral des finances frangaises en Italie,” Bibliotheque de I’ecole des chartes,94 (T933). 337-6°. the sums in Del Bene’s accounts represented money bor¬rowed from the bankers in Lyon.18 On royal borrowing at Lyon, see Wolfe, Fiscal System; Ehrenberg, Capital andFinance, pp. 216-18, 281-306; R. Doucet, “Le Grand Parti de Lyon au XVIesiecle,” Revue historique, 171 (1933), 471-513; 172, 1-41.19 See, for example, cspf Edward, p. 59.20 Ehrenberg, Capital and Finance, p. 301. He gave the sum in ecus as 1,463,375.Ehrenberg’s calculation is confirmed by the papal nuncio’s report that theFrench king had borrowed 1.5 million in gold, ang, 9: 140. See also cspfMary, p. 19.21 ang, 9: 141. The scudi was an Italian coin about the equivalent of the ecu.22 csp Spain, X, 469.23 Bodin, The Six Books of a Commonweale, ed. Kenneth McRae (Cambridge,Mass., i960), p. 674. Bodin stated that Henry eventually had to pay 18 percentinterest.24 On the Grand Parti, see R. Doucet, “Grand Parti”; and Wolfe, Fiscal System,pp. no—11.25 csp Italy, VI-2, 956. As Doucet pointed out, there has been a great deal ofconfusion over the system of amortizing the loans. Several sixteenth-centuryauthors, and Ehrenberg, Capital and Finance, pp. 303-5, mistakenly calcu¬lated the interest on the entire principal for the entire length of the loan.Although the loans were to be paid up in less than eleven years, more thantwenty years later Henry III was still paying on them. Lettres de Henri III, ed.Michel Frangois et al. (Paris, 1984), 4: 44.26 A contract is printed in Doucet, “Grand Parti,” pp. 35-41.27 csp Italy, VI-2, 956. Doucet, “Grand Parti,” p. 510, found loans of only 400,000ecus for that time.28 Doucet, ibid., p. 510; csp Italy, VI-3, 1365. The Venetian report stated thatHenry had not paid for two fairs and the sum involved was 200,000 ecus,equaling two payments of the original loan of the Grand Parti. The financiersagreed to make Henry a loan of that sum under the same terms.29 bn, Fonds frangais 4523, fols. 43-51; Lot, Armees frangaises, pp. 241-53. Theaccounts for 1554 are incomplete, but the partial sums available suggest aslightly higher total for that year.30 an, KK 112.31 csp Spain, X, 73. The badly debased coins apparently had ceased being struckby the time of the complaint.32 Gascon, Grand commerce, 2: 568-72.33 On venality, see Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 191; R. Mousnier, La venalite desoffices sous Henri IV et Louis XIII (Paris, 1971).34 cspf Mary, p. 52.35 Isambert, Recueildes lois, 14: 77-78; Doucet, Les Institutions, 1: 264-67; PaulBondois, “Les Chancelleries presidials au XVIe Siecle,” Revue du SeiziemeSiecle, 1 (1913), 521-28.298Notes to Pages 90—9436 Doucet, 1: 170; Maugis, Histoire du Parlement, 1: 194-201. When the par-lementaires objected to the semester system and a new tax on their revenues,Henry told them that the public need was the worst in 500 years.37 Jean-Richard Bloch, L’anoblissement en France au temps de Frangois I (Paris,1934). In 1548 Henry issued a total of nine patents. Catalogue des actes deFlenri 11, 2: passim.38 On the aumoniers, see Doucet, Les Institutions, 2: 803-12; and “Pierre DuChastel, grand aumonier de France,” Revue historique, 133 (1920), 212-57;124, 1-57.39 bn, Fonds frangais 10393, fols. 3-4; an. KK 106, in. Cloulas has found thesum of 9,700 livres for 1549. Cloulas, p. 361.40 bn, Collection Clairaumbault 1216, fol. 49, for 1556. A number of almonersserved without salaries.41 an, KK in, fols. 1-16.7 LIFE AT COURT1 On the royal entries, see Theodore Godefroy, Le ceremonial frangois, 2 vols.(Paris, 1649); Lawrence Bryant, “The French Royal Entry Ceremony: Politics,Society and Art in Renaissance Paris,” Ph D. diss., University of Iowa, 1978;and V. E. Graham, “The Triumphal Entry in Sixteenth-Century France,”Renaissance and Reformation, 22 (1986), 237-56.2 Bryant, “Royal Entry,” pp. 6-14. Bryant points out that by the time ofLouis XIV, most of these rights were exercised across the entire realm upon anew king’s accession and were no longer associated specifically with the royalentry. At the time of Henry II the new king did have the right to fill a vacantbenefice in every diocese.3 Knecht, Francis I, p. 96.4 On the Lyon entry, see La magnificence de la superbe et triomphante entree dela noble et antique cite de Lyon au treschrestien roy de France Henri deuxiesme. . . , ed. Georges Guigue (Lyon, 1927); Louis Bourgeois, Quand la cour deFrance vivait a Lyon (Paris, 1980), pp. 267-87.5 Comment of Henri Estienne, cited by Wiley, Gentleman of RenaissanceFrance, p. 65.6 Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 250.7 L’Entree de Henri II a Rouen 1550. ed. Margaret McGowan (New York, n.d.),fol. C, p. viii; Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, pp. 442-43. Guiffrey, Lettresinedites, p. 157, n., pointed out that Henry used the monogram in his lettersto Diane, clinching the H-D interpretation for him. Williams, Henri II, p. 230,and Marcel Mayer, Le Chateau d’Anet (Paris, 1952), p. 48, accept the H-Dinterpretation. Noell, Henri II, p. 94. and Bourciez, Moeurs, argue for the C-D-H monogram. For a further discussion of the topic, see Quentin-Bauchart,Bibliotheque de Fontainebleau, pp. 185-88.8 csp Spain IX, 32*7; Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 250.9 The extant letters of Henry to Diane are in Guiffrey, Lettres inedites, pp. 219-29. The following translation is in Williams, Henri II, pp. 253-54. None ofDiane’s letters to Henry have survived, perhaps because it was consideredNotes to Pages 94-98299bad form for a lover to keep his mistress’s letters, although the mistress couldkeep her lover’s.10 The following is one of four poems to Diane written entirely in Henry’s hand,according to Guiffrey, Lettres inedites, p. 228.Hellas, mon Dyu, combyen je regreteLe tans qui je pertu an majeunese;Conbyen de foys je me fuys fouetAvoyr Dyane pour ma seul mestrese;Mes je cregnoys qu’ele, quy est deese,Ne se voulut abeser juques laDe fayre cas de moy, quy sa(n) selaN’avoys plesyr, joye, ny contantementJuques a l’eure que se delyberaQue j’obeyse a son coumandemant.Hope, “The Verses of Henri II,” 127-31, has demonstrated that the first of thepoems found in bn, Fonds frangais 3143, fols.6-9, was a sonnet of JoachimDu Bellay’s copied by Henry in his own hand. Hope is prepared to agreethat the less polished style of the other three, including the one cited above,increases the probability that they were authored by the king.11 Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, p. 440. On Lady Fleming, see Cloulas,Catherine de Medicis, pp. 89-90. Henry II is said to have had another illegiti¬mate child in 1558; but since the mother was married, he did not recognize itas his.12 Pelf: Trash, Waste, oed. Tytler, Edward and Mary, 1: 361. In October 1552Marie de Guise wrote to Cardinal de Lorraine that Lady Fleming was stillseeking to return to the French court, an event she knew would annoy allof the major figures of the court. She pledged that the woman would not goto France, csp Spain, X, 588, n. The letter was one of several that had beenseized from a French courier and sold to the imperial government.13 For example, the nuncio Santa Croce, from September 1552 to May 1554,mentioned her only twice, and both times in reference to her sons-in-law. ang,9: 112, i99-14 Henri Chambard, Histoire de La Pleiade, 4 vols. (Paris, 1961), 2: 267-317;Isidore Silver, Ronsard and the Hellenic Renaissance in France (Geneva, 1981),P- 35i-15 Cited by Williams, Henri II, pp. 252-53. L’Orme received a small abbeyfrom Diane in 1548, although she kept a portion of the revenues for herself.The abbey was originally intended for Cardinal de Chatillon. Guiffrey, Lettresinedites, p. 22.16 Mayer, Anet, p. 16.jv'00Frangoise Bardon, Diane de Poitiers et le My the de Diane (Paris, 1963).Lettres de Catherine de Medici, 8: 181. In 1561 Catherine wrote to her daugh¬ter, Elisabeth, that before Henry’s death she had no problems except “notbeing loved as much as I wanted to be by the king your father.” Ibid., 10: 494.19 Guiffrey, Lettres inedites, p. 78.20 Tommaseo, Relations des ambassadeurs Venitiens, 1: 287. Catherine’s jealousy300Notes to Pages 98-103clearly was kept well under control, but according to Brantome, at one pointit got the best of her. She ordered a hole cut in the floor of her apartmentat Saint-Germain so she could see what was happening in Diane’s apartmentdirectly below. Dames galantes, p. 176.21 Cited by Romier, Origines politigues, 2: 313-14. See below, pp. 221-23, forthe debate over whether to make peace in late 1558.22 Van Dyke, Catherine de Medicis, 1: 96-98.23 bn, Cinq cents de Colbert 4, fols. 61,95; Ancel, hlonciatures, p. 99, where theinfluence of Catherine on Henry’s Siennese policy is described.24 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 605; an, KK 89, fols. 18-29.25 Baumgartner, “Henry II’s Italian Bishops,” pp. 49-58.26 Guiffrey, Lettres inedites, passim. For Henry’s reaction to Claude’s accident,see bn, Fonds frangais 3140, fol. 79.27 See the some fifty letters from Henry to d’Humieres in bn, Fonds fran^ais3120; Collection Clairaumbault 341; Cinq cents de Colbert 23. The packetsalso include the appointments of the sons of the great nobles such as Saint-Andre as pages in the dauphin’s household.28 bn, F’onds frangais 3120, fols. 12, 69; csp Spain, IX, 326, 559; XIII, 255. InNovember 1548 he had gone to Saint-Germain without the court in order toenjoy the company of his children alone. See Leon de Laborde, Les comptesdes batiments du roi (1528-1571), 2 vols. (Paris, 1877), 2: 2giff., for theaccounts for building and repair at Saint-Germain from 1547 to 1550. A totalof 22,200 livres was expended, much of which went for improvements to thechildren’s rooms.29 Catherine de Medici, Lettres, 1: 18, n.30 Marguerite de Valois, Memoires, p. 5; David Buisseret, Henry IV (Boston,1984), p. 3.31 bn, Fonds franfais 3134, fol. 126; Alberi, 2: 421. For further details about thehousehold of Henry’s children, see de Ruble, La premiere jeunesse de MarieStuart, pp. 60-62.32 cspf Mary, p. 187. According to the Venetian Capello, the dauphin “n’aimeguere les lettres ce qui deplait fort a sa majeste. On lui a donne de tres-bonsprecepteurs.” His brother Charles was noted as loving letters. Relations desambassadeurs Venitiens, p. 373.33 “Letters from Henry II to Henry’s Cousin Mary Queen Dowager of Scotland,”Miscellany of the Maitland Club (Edinburgh, 1834), 1: letter 9.34 Ibid., letter 13.35 csp Spain, IX, 45, 191, 276; Paillard, “Mort de Francois I,” pp. 98-99. Seealso Roelker, Jeanne d’Albret, pp. 71-72.36 csp Spain, IX, 311-12. Roelker, Jeanne d’Albret, p. 73. Marguerite d’Angou-leme complained to Saint-Mauris after the wedding that she would have pre¬ferred her daughter marry Prince Philip but Henry refused to hear a word ofit.37 csp Spain, IX, 325.38 See the program for a tournament in honor of the king’s coronation in Noell,Henri II, p. 80.39 Baschet, La Diplomatie Venitienne, p. 445.Notes to Pages 103-11030140 Amadis de Gaule, ed. Edwin Place, 4 vols. (Lexington, Ky., 1974). Bourciez,Moeurs polies, p. 89.41 H. I. Martin, “What Parisians Read in the Sixteenth Century,” French Hu¬manism, ed. L. Gundersheimer (New York, 1970), p. 138.42 For excellent discussions of the Paris entry of 1549, see Lawrence Bryant,“The French Royal Entry Ceremony,” and Ian McFarlane, The Entry ofHenry 11 into Paris 16 June, 1549 (Binghamton, N.Y., 1982). The latter in¬cludes a reprint of the official description of the entry: Cest I’ordre qui a estetenu a la nouvelle et ioyeuse entree. . . . (Paris, 1549). See also Registres deville de Paris, 3: 158-85; V. E. Graham, “The Triumphal Entry in Sixteenth-Century France,” Renaissance and Reformation, 22 (1986), 237-56.43 csp Spain, IX, 209; Bryant, “Entry Ceremony,” p. 89, n. 45.44 Belleforest, Chroniques, p. 576; cited by McFarlane, Entry, p. 25.45 See the illustrations in L’ordre a la ioyeuse entree, pp. 14, 37.46 Bryant, Royal Entry, p. 20.47 McFarlane, Entry, pp. 65-67.48 Hanley, The Lit de Justice, pp. 127-33.49 On the parlements, see E. Maugis, Histoire du Parlement de Paris a I’avene-ment des rois Valois a la mort d’Henri IV, 3 vols. (Paris, 1913-1916); J. H.Shennan, The Parlement of Paris (Ithaca, N.Y., 1968).50 According to Hanley, The Lit de Justice, historians have incorrectly used theterm lit de justice to describe the ceremony in which the king ordered theparlement to register his edicts; the proper term is the royal seance. The litwas a ceremony at which major constitutional questions were addressed. Itseems to me, however, that Hanley has drawn a distinction that probablywould not have been understood by Henry’s contemporaries.51 McFarlane, Entry, pp. 58-60. McFarlane argues that the entry probablyprompted Du Bellay to hasten the publication of the Defense in order to takeadvantage of the coming festival. Both Du Bellay and Pierre Ronsard wrotepoems for the entry, but they clearly had not been commissioned.52 Alberi, 2: 426. Henry’s death prevented the construction of a vast domededifice at the crest of Montmartyre, planned by Philibert de L’Orme, thatuncannily prefigured Sacre-Coeur. Cloulas, p. 385.53 an, K 91, fol. 40; Pierre Guilbert, Description historique du chateau deFontainebleau, 2 vols. (Marseille, 1978), 1: 11-14, 57-58; Sylvie Beguin,L’Ecole de Fontainebleau (Paris, i960); Cloulas, pp. 365-85. In 1558, a yearof dire financial straits for the monarchy, Henry expended 146,953 livresfor new building and repairs of existing structures. Fontainebleau received31,935. Laborde, Comptes des batiments, 1: 355-80.54 bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 3; Marianna Jenkins, “The Henry II Wing of theLouvre,” The Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 7 (1977), 289-307. In 1558 Henry budgeted 24,000 livres to the new wing of the Louvre.Laborde, Comptes des batiments, 1: 355.55 Catalogues des actes de Henri II, 2: 179; Anthony Blunt, Philibert de L’Orme(London, 1958), pp. 28-87.56 Alastair Smart, The Renaissance and Mannerism outside Italy (London, 1972),pp. 185-86. See also Robert Wolf, Renaissance and Mannerist Art (New York,302Notes to Pages 110-1131968), pp. 144-57; and David Thomson, Renaissance Paris Architecture andGrowth 1475-1600 (Berkeley, Calif., 1984), pp. 83-97.57 Smart, The Renaissance, p. 185.58 an, K 89, fol. 2; Edwin Panofsky, Tomb Sculpture (London, 1964), pp. 79-80,147. Pierre Bontemps received 230 livres for the figures of Henry’s brothers.59 bn, Fonds fran^ais 21450, fol. 6.60 Stephan Grancsay, “Royal Armorers: Antwerp or Paris,” Bulletin of the Metro¬politan Museum of New York, 18 (1959), 68-80; Cloulas, pp. 347-48.61 Quentin-Bauchart, Bibliotheque de Fontainebleau, pp. 23-33, and the descrip¬tions of the books, pp. 77-134.1 have had the good fortune to examine Henry’scopy of Copernicus's De Revolutionibus. It is still today truly an exquisiteexample of bookmaking.62 While Brantome stated that Henry especially cared for the works of Ronsard(Oeuvres, 3: 287), it is clear from his poetry that his efforts to gain finan¬cial support from Henry were not as successful as Ronsard hoped, and heconsequently turned to other members of the court. Nonetheless, he did re¬ceive 1,200 livres annually as a pension, and several minor church benefices.Isidore Silver’s comment, in Ronsard and the Hellenic Renaissance, p. 345,that Ronsard would have done much better under Francis I because Francis“would not have forgotten that Ronsard's father . . . had been for four yearsone of the guardians” of the French princes in Spain is contradicted by theevidence that shows that Henry was far more remindful of his companions inSpain than Francis had been.63 Antoine d’Artigny, Nouveaux Memoires d’histoire, 7 vols. (Paris, 1749-50), 5;204; bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 3.64 For example Ronsard:Le Plus grand Roi qui se trouveSoit en armes ou en lois.Oeuvres completes, ed. Gustave Cohen, 2 vols. (Paris, 1950), 1: 368. On thePleiade and Henry II, see especially Henri Chamard, Histoire de La Pleiade,4 vols. (Paris, 1961), 2: 266-317.65 Abbe Tollemer, Le Journal du sire de Gouberville (reprint Paris, 1972), pp.401-20. Gouberville escorted one of the younger daughters of Montmorencyto a ball given by the king.66 bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 3; Paul Bandois, Henri II et ses Historiographes(Paris, 1927); Orest Ranum, Artisans of Glory (Chapel Hill, N.C., 1980), pp.70-75-67 Quentin-Bauchart, Bibliotheque de Fontainebleau, pp. 77-134.68 See Baumgartner, “Scepticism and French Interest in Copemicanism to1630 "Journal for the History of Astronomy, 17 (1986), 77-86. Henry II’s copyof De Revolutionibus is in the Bibliotheque Nationale; Tyard’s well-annotatedcopy is in the Bibliotheque Municipale of Vienne.69 Haton, Memoires, 1: no; Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 285; an, K 92, fol. 19. Thedocument placed all six scholars in the university, but Ramus and two ofthe lesser-known men on the fist, Jean Cinquarbes, a teacher of Hebrew andSyriac, and Pasquier Duhamel, a mathematician, were all at the College deNotes to Pages 113-119303France, dbf, 8: 1315; 12: 19. Cinquarbes had received his appointment in1555-70 Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, p. 436. Brantome’s final comment onHenry was: “Voyla le grand roy aymoit les armes et les lettres.” Oeuvres, 3:289.8 LE ROI TRES-CHRETIEN1 For Henry’s orders to the parlementaires to attend the procession, see an,K 90, fol. 18.2 Louis Madelin, “Les premieres applications de Concordat de 1516,” Melangesd’archeologie et d’histoire d’ecole frangaise de Rome, 14 (1897), 323-85.3 Romier, “La crise gallicane de 1551,” Revue historique, 108 (1911), 225-50;109 (1912), 27-55.4 csp Spain, X, 29. According to Simon Renard, who had replaced Saint-Maurisas imperial ambassador, Francois de Guise had persuaded Henry to supportd’Este, since a Frenchman or so obviously a French client as Salviati could notget elected. See ibid., IX, 40iff.; X, 1-39; and csp Italy, V, 274ff; for detailedaccounts of the French and imperial interference in the conclave. See alsoBaumgartner, “Henry II and the Conclave of 1549,” The Sixteenth CenturyJournal, 16 (1985), 301-15.5 Ludwig von Pastor, The History of the Popes, 36 vols. (St. Louis, 1951), 13:30, n.; Ribier, Lettres, 2: 249-68. A partial register of decharges for 1549 withan entry for Guise’s sum is in an, JJ 259.6 Spain, X, 2—4, 14-16, 29—30.7 Evennett, Cardinal of Lorraine, pp. 26-33; Nuncio Antonio Trivulzio, cited byRomier, Origines politiques, 1: 227. See also Venard, “Une reforme gallicane?”p. 203.8 Bishop Charles de Marillac to Henry in 1551, cited by Evennett, p. 27.9 csp Spain, X, 54, and passim; csp Edward, pp. 170-72; ang, 6: 475ff.; Romier,“La crise gallicane.” For a French view that recalling the council to Trentmade Julius a “slave” of the emperor, see M. Frangois, Correspondance duCardinal Frangois de Toumon (Paris, 1946), p. 259.10 ang, 6: 23, 275—76; R. Ancel, Nonciatures de France. Nonciatures de Paul /V(Paris, 1909), pp. ivi-ivii; Lubinskaja, p. 94. The amicable settlement of theproblem did not result in Del Monte receiving his episcopal revenues fromMarseille. The papal nuncio raised the issue several times until 1553, butwithout success, ang, 9: 46-47.11 Henry’s letter is in J. Roserat de Mebn, Antoine Caracciolo eveque de Troyes(Paris, 1923), pp. 396-98. Desjardins, Negociations avec Toscane, 3: 250; cspfEdward, p. 93; Venard, “Une reforme gallicane?” p. 204; Romier, “La crisegallicane,” 241-45.12 cspf Edward, p. 127. The author of this report, an Italian agent for the Englishgovernment in Rome, stated that the last point was not thought to be veryprobable.13 csp Spain, X, 343. Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 211-14; Venard, “Unereforme gallicane?” pp. 204-5. Julius’s letter is in ang, 6: 474. The editor of3°4Notes to Pages 119-126ang, 6, argues, p. 477, n., that Romier, Origines politiques, p. 255 n., was mis¬taken in his statement that the letter lacked the usual diplomatic formalities.He presumes that Romier had seen only a copy; but csp Spain, X, 343, seemsto support Romier’s position.14 On Du Moulin, see bn, Fonds frangais 4737, fol. 18; and Donald Kelley, “TheFides Historicae of Charles Du Moulin and the Gallican View of Histori¬cal Tradition,” Traditio, 22: (1966), 347-403. The book was condemned inSeptember 1552.15 csp Spain, X, 344-45. Renard attributed the plan largely to Chancellor Olivier,who had been called to the court specifically to give Henry advice on how torespond to Julius’s letter. Bishop Jean de Monluc was also seen as having arole, ang, 6; 506. Evennett, Cardinal of Lorraine, pp. 38-39, argues that Lor¬raine refused the offer of the patriarchate in 1551 but, according to Renard, ithad not been offered to him.16 Tvtler, Mary and Edward, p. 420. In the same dispatch, Pickering repeatedwith clear relish the harsh words spoken by Montmorency against the pope.On Amyot at Trent, see Ribier, Lettres, 2: 344-45.17 Toumon, Correspondance, pp. 271-78; Venard, “Une reforme gallicane?” pp.215-25-18 bn, Fonds frangais 23102, fol. 92V.19 ang, 9: 50-59, and passim. For a further discussion of the Mirepoix disputeand the clause of ad Sedan Apostolicam, see Baumgartner, “Henry II’s ItalianBishops,” The Sixteenth Century Journal, 9 (1980), 54-55.20 Ribier, Lettres, 2; 612; Pastor, History of the Popes, 14; 4-15, 56.21 Pickering to the English Court, September 4, 1551, in Tvtler, Edward andMary, p. 420.22 Lubinskaja, p. 32; Church, The Italian Reformers 1534-1564 (New York,1932), p. 184.23 csp Spain, X, 307.24 cspf Edward, pp. 120, 342-43; Masone et al., to the English Council, June20, 1551, in Tytler, Edward and Mary, pp. 399-402. Masone related how theFrench negotiators responded with uproarious laughter when the original En¬glish demand for a dowry of 1,500.000 crowns was presented. The marriagecompact is in Thomas Rymer, Foedera, Conventus . . . Acta publica inter RegesAnglicae (London, 1749), 6: 207-10.25 See csp Spain, X, 309, for the objections of “several people on the Frenchside” against an alliance of the king’s daughter with a schismatic and excom¬municated prince.26 csp Spain, X, 309-10; cspf Edward, p. 130; ang, 6: 129.27 Baird, Rise of Huguenots, 1. 283-85; cspf Edward, p. 200; Pariset, Relations,PP 48-49-28 Venard, “Une reforme gallicane?” pp. 201-5.29 E. de Moreau et al.. La Crise religieuse du XVle siecle (n.p., 1950), p. 273.30 Baird, Rise of Huguenots, 1: 52. See also Donald Kelley, The Beginning ofIdeology of Consciousness and Society in the French Reformation (Cambridge,1981), p. 171; and Baumgartner, “Heterodoxy and Humanism in the FrenchNotes to Pages 126-128305Episcopacy Under Francis I,” Proceedings of the Western Society for FrenchHistory, 8 (1982), 57-68.31 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 12: 676-81; Sutherland, The Huguenot Strugglefor Recognition (New Haven, 1980), pp. 32-39, 337-338; Knecht, Francis I,pp. 397~99- Raymond Mentzer, Heresy Proceedings in Languedoc 7500-1560(Philadelphia, 1984), p.34, argues that the edict of June 1539 was in largepart the result of the execution for heresy of the inquisitor for Languedoc inI538-32 Aubigne, Histoire universelle (Geneva, 1981), p. 221; De Thou, Histoire uni-verselle, 2: 181; Romier, Saint-Andre, p. 199, citing LeLaboreur, Additions auxmemoires de Castelnau, 2: 75. On the question of Diane’s use of her client,Blondet, the treasurer of the Epargne, to keep her informed of judicial confis¬cations, see above, p. 56. There are a number of sources that show that Dianereceived property of convicted heretics as gifts from the king, but there is nocontemporary proof that she requested it.33 Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 50-51; also Jean Crespin, Histoire des martyrs, 3vols. (Toulouse, 1885-89), i: 538-39. Contrary to a number of historians,who cite Beza and Crespin, they did not call him a “court tailor” but a “poor”tailor, whose name was unknown. Stories of this sort from contemporaryProtestant sources are difficult to deal with. Like most hagiographical writing,they are often greatly embellished, if not apocryphal. In this case one has towonder how a “poor tailor” would have known who the woman was, especiallysince the court had not been in Paris since long before Francis Is death.See Mentzer, Heresy Proceedings, p. 121, for a discussion of the problem ofembellishment in the Protestant martyrologies.34 ang, 14: 104, December 24, 1557. See also the statement in ibid., p. 195,March 1559, about the opposition of Diane, “full of the best zeal,” to theheretics.35 “Item de terra mea ac luridicone mihi subdita universos hereticos ab ecclesiadenotatos pro veribus bona fide exterminare studeba,” in The Coronation Bookof Charles V of France, ed. E. S. Dewick (London, 1899), col. 19. On the thesisof Richard Jackson that Henry did not swear the clause on heresy, see above,chapter 4, n. 61. Weiss, Chambre ardente, pp. lxi-lxii, implies that this portionof the oath was an innovation for Henry’s coronation, a point repeated moreexplicitly by other historians, such as Sutherland, Huguenot Struggle, p. 41.The proper translation of “exterminare” is “to drive out,” not “to exterminate.”36 De Thou, Histoire universelle, 1: 496.37 Weiss, Chambre ardente, p. lvii and note. Immediately upon coming to thethrone Henry ordered the arrest of those responsible for the destruction of theWaldensian villages in 1545. This act probably should be regarded as moti¬vated by the rivalries at the court in 1547, rather than by any reluctance onHenry’s part to use violence against heretics. Eventually, one of the accusedwas executed.38 an, K 90, fol. 4; bn, Fonds frangais 4737, fol. 33. Weiss, Chambre ardente,p. lxiv. Ory’s duties as inquisitor apparently required him to investigate sus¬pected heretics and report them to the proper authorities.3°6Notes to Pages 128-13239 See Weiss, Chambre ardente, pp. 418-21, for the document creating it. It israther surprising to see Weiss speculating that the Clausse who notarizedthe document was one Engebert Clausse, whom Francis I had appointedprocureur general of the Inquisition. Obviously it was the royal secretary ComeClausse.40 In this respect Henry was following the example of his father, who had cre¬ated a similar chamber in the Parlement of Rouen in 1545. Ibid., p. xxxiv. Thefirst use of the term chambre ardente is unknown; it is found in the Histoireecclesiastique, 1: 87, “qu’on appeloit chambre ardente.”41 Weiss, Chambre ardente, has both full arrets and summaries of the sentencesagainst those charged with heresy. Linda Taber, “Royal Policy and ReligiousDissent within the Parlement of Paris,” unpublished diss., Stanford Univer¬sity, 1982, pp. 13-14, is the only work that has made an analysis of the cham¬ber’s sentences published by Weiss. She found a somewhat smaller numberof death penalties—twenty-seven. The smaller figure appears to be a resultof a confusion between the number of arrets (27) ordering the death penaltyand the number of persons named in them (37).42 In comparison to the chambre ardente, to take just two events of Francis Isreign, twenty-four “Lutherans” were condemned to death as a result of theAffair of the Placards in 1534, and fourteen heretics of Meaux in 1546, to saynothing of the hundreds of Waldensians condemned under Francis I.43 Mentzer, Heresy Proceedings, pp. 120-23, n- 42- The Parlement of Grenoblewas regarded as the most lenient. Moreau, Crise religieuse, p. 272.44 In response to the edict sixty-eight persons held in prison in Paris were turnedover to their bishops for trial. Weiss, Chambre ardente, pp. 376-79. No recordexists of any further proceedings for those persons.45 For the text of the edict, see Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 189-208. Fordiscussions of it, see Sutherland, Huguenot Struggle, pp. 44-46; Taber, “RoyalPolicy,” pp. 18-19; and Baird, Rise of Huguenots, 1: 279-82.46 See the analysis of the appointments to the Cours des monnaies in C.Kaiser, “Les cours souveraines au XVIe siecle: Morale et Contre-Reformation,”Annales, 37 (1982), 18-19. Kaiser notes that the concept of the mercuriale wasnot new to Henry’s reign. It dated from 1493 and applied to the supervisionof morals as well as procedure. Ibid., pp. 23-26.47 Quoted in Jonathan Dewald, “The Perfect Magistrate: Parlementaires andCrime in Sixteenth-Century Rouen,” Archiv fur Reformationsgeschichte, 67(1976), 298.48 Weiss, Chambre ardente, pp. 339-342.49 Tytler, Edward and Mary, p. 420.50 cspf Edward, p. 250. For a further discussion of the involvement of severalwomen of the court in the Reformation, see Roelker, “The Role of Noble¬women in the French Reformation,” Archiv fiir Reformationsgeschichte, 63(1972), 168-95.51 Ibid., pp. 100-1. Morrison also reported that a proclamation had been recentlyissued in France that “no one shall speak ill of the English for their religion.”Notes to Pages 133-1373079 CHEF DES HOMMES DE GUERRE1 Giovanni Capello, in Tommaseo, Ambassadeurs Venitiens, 1: 385. Capellowent on to note that Henry had a high regard for Charles’s brother, Ferdinand.By focusing his hatred on Charles, Henry probably then found it possible todeal more easily with Ferdinand and Philip II after Charles’s abdication in1556.2 Memoires de Vieilleville, 16: 247.3 csp Spain, IX, passim; cspf Edward, p. 16; Tytler, Edward and Mary, pp.329-30.4 On the French army and its major officers, see especially Doucet, Les In¬stitutions, 1: 112-24; 2: 608-50; Ferdinand Lot, Recherches sur les effectifsdes armees frangaises des guerres d’ltalie aux guerres de Religion 1494-1562(Paris, 1962); Harding, Anatomy, pp. 21-31.5 The marshals received a pay of 20,600 livres a year, an, KK 127, piece 36.6 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 19-22.7 On the French navy under Henry, see La Ronciere, Marine frangaise, 3: 453ft.;J. Fournier, “Les Galeres de France sous Henri II,” Bulletin de geographichistorique et descriptive, 2 (1904), 174-95; Doucet, Les Institutions, 2: 659-60. The admiral’s pay was 10,000 livres. bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 41.8 bn, Fonds frangais 25724, fol. 11. csp Spain, XI, 20. According to Fondsfrangais 3127, fol. 61, the sums for the navy were a little lower: 1,400,000for the three first years of the reign. The best work on galley warfare is JohnGuilmartin, Galleys and Gunpowder (Cambridge, 1974).9 David Buisseret, “Monarchs, Ministers and Maps: Sixteenth and Seventeenth-Century France,” a paper presented at the Newberry Library, Chicago,November 1985. I wish to thank Dr. Buisseret for providing me a copy.10 bn, Fonds frangais 18153, fol. 18; Catalogues des actes de Henri II, 2: 78; cspSpain, IX, 400.11 La Ronciere, Marine frangaise, 3: 574-76; Louis Doucet, Quand les Frangoischercharient fortune aux Caraibes (Paris, 1981), pp. 56-58. Le Clerc’s ex¬ploits were largely responsible for the development of the Spanish fleet systemacross the Atlantic.12 On the entry of Rouen, with its display of Brazilian exotica and wealth, de¬signed to persuade the king of the value of trade with Brazil, see F. Denis,Une fete bresilienne celebree a Rouen en 1550 (Paris, 1850). For a further dis¬cussion of overseas expeditions in Henry’s reign, see Baumgartner, “Adam’sWill Act II: Henry II and French Overseas Expeditions,” Proceedings of theFrench Colonial History Society, forthcoming.13 Guilmartin, Galleys and Gunpowder, pp. 85-94; La Ronciere, Marine fran¬gaise, 3: 480-87.14 bn, Fonds Dupuy 27, fol. 41; Alberi, 2: 407. The ban was defined as theking’s right to call on his immediate vassals; the arriere-ban as those vassalscalling on their vassals, down through the system of subinfeudation. Theterms were virtually inseparable in the sixteenth century. See Henry’s edictconcerning both of February 1548, in Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 40-49.On the archers, see La Popeliniere, Histoire de France, p. 30. See also Hans3°8Notes to Pages 137-142Delbriick, History of the Art of War within the Framework of Political History,trans. W. J. Renfroe, 4 vols. (London. 1985), 4: 117-38.15 Lot, Armees fran^aises, pp. 247-48. Dandolo in 1547 put the number of menin the gendarmerie a little higher, at 7,000 men. Alberi, 2: 413. The salariesof the gendarmerie came to nearly 3,000,000 livres in 1550, a year when thecompanies were at 80 percent of full strength, bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol. 3.16 bn. Cinq cents de Colbert 23, fol. 42V; Doucet, Les Institutions, 2: 644-45. A“harquebusier a cheval” was paid fourteen livres a month. Ibid., 16, fol. 153.17 Monluc, Commentaires, pp. 34-35. Actually they were Gascons who were inthe sendee of Spain.18 A Swiss infantryman cost the king 11.5 livres a month, a German, 9, and aFrench foot soldier, 8.5. These rates are calculated from bn, Fonds frangais3090, fol. 12, which included the pay of the captains—usually 100 livres amonth—and other officers, so the ordinary foot soldier was paid less than theabove sums.19 Fourquevaux, Instructions sur le faict de la guerre . . . de 1548, ed. GladysDickinson (London, 1954).20 Brantome, Oeuvres, vol. 1; Rabutin, Commentaires des guerres en la GauleBelgique (1551-1559), 2 vols. (Paris, 1932), 1: 53, 98, 224. On Estrees, seeDiscours des villes, chasteaux et forteresses batues, assaillies et prises par laforce de I’artillerie durant les regnes des roys Henri second et Charles IX (Paris,1568), in bn, Collection Clairaumbault 1080.21 Carlo Cipolla, Guns, Sails and Empires (London, 1965), p. 29, n. As an ex¬ample of the enormous range of guns available, see the list of artillery piecessurrendered by the English at Boulogne in 1550. Rymer, Foedera, 6: 217.22 Brantome, Oeuvres, 1: 164.23 See above, chapter 6.24 Doucet, Les Institutions, 2: 647.25 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 441-43. Buisseret, “Monarchs, Ministers, andMaps,” discusses Henry’s involvement in the drawing of the great plan ofParis in 1550, designed largely to establish new city limits for Paris.26 Brantome, Oeuvres, 1: 168.27 cspf Mary, p. 308; Christopher Duffy, Siege Warfare: The Fortress in the EarlyModem World 1494-1660 (London, 1979), pp. 50-51.28 Baschet, La diplomatie Venitienne, p. 449; bn, Melanges de Colbert 16, fols.18r-v.29 csp Spain, IX, 524-25; bn, Fonds frangais 3127, fol. 49; 6611, fol. 3. Henryis reported to have proposed to Edward VI that he would ensure the marriagebetween the English king and Mary Stuart in exchange for the Boulonnais.csp Spain, IX, 236.30 csp Spain, IX, 380. As early as January 1548, Henry called for meetings ofseveral provincial estates to provide subsidies for the recovery of Boulogne.Catalogues des Actes de Henri II, 2: 19-20.31 Ibid., 402-4. The English ambassador at the imperial court was trying topersuade Charles V to come to the aid of Boulogne, as he was committed bytreaty to do for Calais, but Charles refused.32 Ibid., p. 422.33 Ibid., pp. 443-44.Notes to Pages 143-14730934 Ibid., 10: 44-45. But, see Henry’s letter to La Rochepot of February 6, 1549,in which he stated his preference for peace, bn, Fonds frangais 3134, fol. 3.35 csp Spain, X, 92-93. See the treaty in Rymer, Foedera, pp. 182-84. For anEnglish view of the Boulogne affair, see A. F. Pollard, England under theProtector Somerset (New York, 1966). The English spent £1,500,000 in takingand defending Boulogne. P. 265.36 Du Parcq, Henri II, p. 42. The French infantry alone in Picardy cost 3,019,373livres, or 1,341,943 ecus, for the two years of the Boulonnais affair. Lot,Armees frangaises, p. 251, citing bn, Fonds franfais 4523. The pay of the gensd’armes was 2,650,000 livres, and the cost of artillery and siegeworks 434,490livres, for a total of 6,103,863 livres or 2,712,820 ecus. But a large part of thatsum would have been paid out even in peacetime. In short, it seems that, fi¬nancially, Henry came out about even by refusing to wait to redeem Boulognein 1554.37 In late 1550, when the dispute over Parma was beginning to boil, imperialambassador Simon Renard wrote: “Were it not for the advice of the Constableand the unpropitious season, the king would have taken the field, so eager ishe to fight.” csp Spain, X, 307.38 Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 47; Cloulas, p. 184.39 Romier, Origines politiques, pp. 245-60; Frangois, Toumon, pp. 249-55.40 Reports in Alberi, 4: 79, and Memoires du Sieur Frangois de Boyvin, BaronDu Villars, vols. 28-29 °f Petitot, Collection complete des memoires, 28: 385,attributed Brissac’s appointment to the influence of Diane de Poitiers, againstthe wishes of Montmorency, who wanted to gain the office for Gaspard deColigny. But that supposition has to be questioned on two points: Henryhardly needed Diane’s prodding to be mindful of any member of the Bris-sac family, which had been intimately associated with him since his infancy;second, Brissac’s brother Artus was a client of Montmorency’s, as reportedin Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 411, of whom the constable was particularlyprotective.41 Monluc, Commentaires, pp. 192-97. See also Soumia, Monluc, pp. 95-97;Paul Courteault, Blaise de Monluc historien (Geneva, 1970), pp. 193-203.42 Lubinskaja, p. 70; Charriere, Negociations de la France dans le Levant (Paris,1848), 2: 146-48. On the relationship between Henry and the sultan, seethe letters and reports in Charriere; Lubinskaja; and Ribier, Lettres, vol.2. The words of Cardinal Du Bellay to Montmorency set the tone for theFranco-Turk alliance: “Servez-vous des corps des Turcs et laissez les amesaux theologiens.” Ribier, ibid., 1: 613.43 csp Spain, X, 333-34-44 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 310. See also the letter of Nicolas de Villegaignon to Mont¬morency, in which he discussed the operations to be undertaken with theTurkish fleet. Charles Marchand, Documents pour I’histoire du regne de HenriII (Paris, 1902), piece 1.10 PROTECTOR OF GERMAN LIBERTIES1 csp Spain, X, 333-34; cspf Edward, pp. 146-62. See also Marillac’s letters inGuise, Memoires, pp. 44-61. Francois de Guise received copies of all of his3ioNotes to Pages 147-151dispatches in this period. On Marillac’s embassy in Germany, see Pierre deVaissiere, Charles de Manllac: ambassadeur et homme politique (Paris, 1896),PP 134-94-2 cspf Edward, pp. 176-77. The defection of her cousin caused Catherine deMedici a great deal of embarrassment and concern, and she spent a great dealof effort trying to reconcile him with her husband. Lettres, 1: 45, 46.3 Pariset, Les relations, pp. 84-87; “France et les princes allemands,” pp. 252-84. See also Zeller, Reunion de Metz, 1: 145-80; Brandi, Charles V, pp. 603-4. The Germans proposed to Henry that the insignia of their league be awhite cross with the seal of the French king surrounded by the words: VindexLibertatis Germanorum. Pariset, “France et les princes allemands,” p. 264.4 Pariset, “France et les princes allemands,” pp. 259-81; and Les relations, pp.84-114.5 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 383. The memoirs have a lengthy descriptionof the reception of the German representatives who came to France for theformal signing of the treaty.6 See Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13; 260-62, for Henry’s appearance before theparlement. See also Hanley, The Lit de Justice, pp. 136-37. Hanley maintainsthat the objections and annoyance expressed by the magistrates at the unan¬nounced visit of the king proves that his relations with the parlementaireswere contentious. But, as Henry told them, his appearance was only to in¬form them, not to seek advice or judge. There was no need for the elaborateceremony of a lit de justice.7 Cloulas, Catherine de Medicis, pp. no—11; Knecht, Francis I, p. 42. The cre¬ation of the regency council of 1548 is in bn, Fonds frangais 3120, fol. 63. Thebiographers of Catherine de Medici consider the appointment to the councilof Bertrand, considered Diane de Poitiers’s creature, as evidence of Diane’sdomination of the regency council. Any evaluation of that assertion must keepin mind that the garde des sceaux was required to notarize all royal edicts.8 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 387-88; Cloulas, Catherine de Medicis, p. in; Van Dyke,Catherine de Medicis, pp. 64-66.9 bn, Fonds frangais 3130, fols. 1-9; Cloulas, pp. 313-14; Lot, Armees fran-gaises, pp. 128-30, and appendix 7. Lot used a contemporary muster rollto calculate the French manpower. The confusion over the exact size ofthe army is made clear in Henry’s letter to de Fresse of April 8, in whichhe stated that he had 8,000-9,000 cavalry and nearly 35,000 foot. Pariset,“France et les princes allemands,” p. 292. The contemporary memoirs arealso hopelessly confused on the number of men. They include Memoires deVieilleville, 26: 400-402; Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgigues, 1: 32-120; Guise,M&moires, 70-74; Paradin, Continuation de I’histoire de nostre temps (Lyon,1555). PP- 28-33.10 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgigues, 1: 39. Rabutin stated that “for the love ofthe queen,” Henry remained at Joinville until she was well.11 Montmorency to the Hotel de ville of Paris, Registres d'Hotel de la Ville (Paris,1886), 3: 300. Zeller, Reunion de Metz, 1; 351-53, downplays the importanceof Montmorency’s ruse, arguing that Metz was in no way prepared to resistsuch a large force, nor did it have any good reason to try.Notes to Pages 151-1583ii12 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 405-12.13 Pariset, Relations, p. 113. Others, like Zeller, Reunion de Metz, 1: 243-44,have been less convinced that Henry ever had such a far-reaching plan.14 Memoires de Vieilleville, 26: 413. For a detailed itinerary, see Paradin, Con¬tinuation, pp. 5off.15 As early as 1547, an Italian agent of the French monarchy had examined thedefenses of Strasbourg. Pariset, “France et les princes allemands,” p. 230,n. 6.16 Pariset, Relations, p. 140.17 Bondois, “Un recit officiel de la campagne de 1552,” p. 124. The document isa letter of Henry to his high officials in Brittany.18 There is some question whether the concept of the natural frontiers of Francecould have been found in Henry’s era. There are a number of contemporarysources that suggest it was. A Venetian ambassador of the time describedFrance as defended on all sides by seas, mountains, and rivers. Baschet, Ladiplomatic Venitienne, pp. 456-57. See also De Thou, Histoire universelle,2: 117; G. Daniel, Histoire de France, 16 vols. (Paris, 1779), 8: 55; Zeller,Reunion de Metz, 1: 115, 421-27. Zeller maintains that the idea was expressedfor two decades before 1552.19 Tournon, Correspondance, pp. 279-84; Ribier, Lettres, 2: 406-7; Francois,Toumon, pp. 279-86; Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 320-22; communicationfrom Dr. Delamar Jensen, who is preparing an edition of previously unpub¬lished letters of Catherine de Medici. See Romier, ibid., pp. 317-19, for adiscussion of a meeting two weeks prior to the revolt between the principalFrench representatives in Italy, the major fuorusciti, and several Italian con-dottieri. Both Frangois and Romier call Toumon the architect of the Sieneserevolt.20 The formal letter accepting the obligation of protection was dated December18, 1552; cited by Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 327.21 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 406-7; Charriere, Negociations, 2: 209-12.22 Memoires de Vieilleville, 27: 19.23 Bertrand de Salignac, Le Siege de Metz par I’Empereur Charles V, in vol. 32of Petitot, Collection complete des memoires, pp. 272-76. The forces at Metzincluded twenty-four companies of footmen and one of light cavalry. Guise,Memoires, p. 120. The English ambassador put the manpower in Metz at5,000 infantry and 500 cavalry, cspf Edward, p. 229.24 cspf Edward, p. 231; Guise, Memoires, pp. 107, 118-24.25 Guise, Memoires, pp. 77ff. According to Decrue, Montmorency, p. 135, theconstable was later accused of not having done everything possible to aidGuise out of envy; but the contemporary correspondence gives no hint of sucha problem. Furthermore, two of Montmorency’s sons were with Guise.26 On the events of the siege, see Guise, Memoires, pp. 99-157, for the due deGuise’s reports to Henry; and Salignac, Siege de Metz. See also G. Zeller, Lasiege de Metz par Charles-Quint (Nancy, 1943).27 Salignac, Siege de Metz, p. 388; Cloulas, p. 332.28 All of the contemporary sources note Guise’s solicitude for the imperialwounded; the most extensive and authoritative account is in the memoirs312Notes to Pages 158-164of the noted surgeon Ambroise Pare, sent into Metz by Henry II during thesiege. Oeuvres, 3 vols. (Paris 1840), 3: 6g6ff.29 bn, Fonds frangais 3130, fol. 48; Guise, Memoires, p. 154. I have not beenable to determine if any of the letters to the captains in Metz are extant.30 On the assault of Hesdin, see Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 1: 167-69.The victory at Hesdin was clearly the highlight of Antoine de Bourbon’s mili¬tary career. Contrary to Roelker, Jeanne d’Albret, p. 91, Charles V was notpresent at Hesdin and thus was not forced to flee before Bourbon’s forces.31 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 1. 191. La Popeliniere, Histoire de France,p. 44V, stated that the marriage was an occasion of rare magnificence.11 WAR AND TRUCE1 bn, Melanges de Colbert 16, fol. 63V; cspf Mary, p. 149; DuVillars, Memoires,29. 162-74. The bishopric located in Therouanne was transferred to Boulognein 15592 cspf Edward, pp. 289-90; ang, 9: 150. The slowness of the French responsedisproves the nuncio’s statement of March 1553 that the French were prepar¬ing for some enterprise the coming summer, probably against Naples. Henoted that Henry expected to take in 18,000,000 livres from taxes and thesale of offices that year.3 On the Montmorency-Piennes affair, see Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 231; cspfMary, p. 263; csp Italy, VI-i, 682-83; Van Dyke, Catherine de Medicis, 2:83-85; Decrue, Montmorency, pp. 177-82.4 csp Italy, VI-2, 987, 1120; Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 469-71. Some havefound the edict to be directed against Protestant children marrying otherProtestants contrary to their parents’ wishes; e.g., Kelley, Beginning of Ide¬ology, p. 72. The edict contains nothing to support that interpretation directly,but it is possible that Montmorency used that argument with Henry to get theedict. See Barbara Diefendorf, Paris City Councillors in the Sixteenth Century(Princeton, N.J. 1983), pp. 156-68, for a further discussion of the law and itsimpact on the later sixteenth century.5 Baschet, La diplomatic Venitienne, p. 450.6 Memoires de Vieilleville, 27: 109-21.7 See Lot, Armees frangaises, pp. 139-41; and Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques,1: 221-24, for a breakdown of the various arms in the army. See Frangois,Toumon, p. 304, on Catherine’s appointment as regent. Toumon was namedto assist her.8 Decrue, Montmorency, p. 146.9 cspf Mary, p. 131.10 csp Spain, XI, 208-9. This report came from Simon Renard, who became ex¬ceptionally close to Mary after her victory. She permitted him to read all of thedispatches from the English ambassadors across Europe, and his experiencein France enabled him to make intelligent comments on affairs in France inthe absence of an imperial ambassador because of the war.11 Rene de Vertot, Ambassades de Messieurs de Noailles en Angleterre, 5 vols.(Leyden, 1763), 2; 164-82; csp Spain, XI, i72ff. E. H. Harbison, Rival Am-Notes to Pages 164-1693i3bassadors at the Court of Queen Mary (Freeport, N.Y., 1970), p. 80, suggeststhat Noailles would have been more successful if he had argued that Maryshould not marry at all.12 See the compact in Rymer, Foedera, 15: 387-88.13 csp Spain, XI, 467. Renard had been allowed to read Wooton’s dispatch abouthis meeting with Henry and largely repeated it for Charles. His descriptionof Henry’s reaction is more succinctly, but also more dramatically, put thanWooton’s, in Tytler, Edward and Mary, 2: 261-76. The anger of the Frenchwas all the greater because Cardinal Pole had told them that the marriagewould not take place.14 csp Spain XI, 233-37, and passim.15 Harbison, Rival Ambassadors, p. 115; ang, 9: 218, 225, 234; cspf Mary, p. 52.16 Vertot, Ambassades de Noailles, 3: 61-85; CSPF Mary, pp. 56-65; Harbison,Rival Ambassadors, pp. 118-30.17 Vertot, Ambassades de Noailles, 3: 34-37.18 Charriere, Negociations, 241-42. Whether Henry meant the winter of 1552 orof 1553 is not clear, but it was far too late in the season for a galley fleet totransverse the Mediterranean at the time he wrote.19 Ibid., pp. 260-62; csp Spain, XI, 51.20 Charriere, Negociations, pp. 275-84; Ribier, Lettres, 2: 450-53; ang, 9:214-228; Michel Antoine, “Institutions fran^aises en Italie sous le regne deHenri II: gouvemeurs et intendants,” Melanges de I’ecole frangaise de Rome,94 (1982), 776-77; Pierre Heinrichs, LAlliance frangaise-algeriene au XVIesiecle (Lyon, 1898), pp. 76-122. One of La Garde’s letters to Henry suggeststhat he, de Termes, d’Este, and the Turk commander, Dragut, made thedecision to attack Corsica before advising the king. On that point see alsoang, 9: 218.21 I must disagree with Romier, Origines politigues, 1: 384-88, that the invasionof Corsica was a Guisard enterprise, undertaken while the constable was tooill to control affairs of state. De Termes, in Ribier, Lettres, 2: 450, indicatesas early as August 3 that thought was being given to the invasion, long beforeMontmorency became incapacitated. He left Henry’s side only on October 18.22 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 313; Hubert Methivier, LAncien Regime enFrance (Paris, 1981), p. 80; Gabriel Hanotaux, Origines de Finstitution desIntendants des provinces (Paris, 1886); Antoine, “Institutions frangaises enItalie sous le regne de Henri II,” pp. 759-818; and “Genese de finstitutiondes intendants,” Journal des Savants, (1982), p. 290. See also Malov, “Lesarchives d’un secretaire d’Etat sous les regnes de Francois I et Henri II,” pp313-3923 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 1: 271; Toumon, Correspondance, pp. 291-92-24 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 1: 308-22; Lot, Armees frangaises, pp. 145-47. According to Brantome, Oeuvres, 2: 287, a dispute between Guise andColigny over credit for the victory permanently soured the relationship be¬tween the two former friends. See Delaborde, Coligny, 1: 129-30.25 Rabutin, 2: 23; csp Spain, XIII, 242.26 cspf Mary, p. 115.3MNotes to Pages 169-17627 Tommaseo, Ambassadeurs Venitiens, 1: 379; Deerue, Montmorency, pp. 158-62.28 cspf Mary, p. 118.29 Ibid., p. 137. Diane de Poitiers had to intercede with the king before he wouldreceive La Garde.30 Monluc, Commentaires, p. 252. Monluc stated that he heard the full storyfrom Saint-Andre.31 Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 446.32 Ibid., pp. 426-54; Soumia, Monluc, pp. 149-50. Henry gave Monluc a gift of2,000 ecus and an annual pension of the same sum.33 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 604-5. See also csp Italy, VI-1, 95.34 csp Spain, XI, 462.35 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 606.36 Ibid., p. 607.37 csp Spain, XIII, 155.38 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 611-12: For a longer description of the election of Paul IV,see Pastor, Popes, 14: 56-57.39 The imperial ambassador in Rome wrote to Charles: “So this man is pope. Hewill have to understand that he must be a good father to all; otherwise he willfind that he has bad sons.” csp Spain, XIII, 180.40 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 615-27; csp Italy, VI-i, 309-10; Pastor, Popes, 14: 105—90.Henry’s mandate to Lorraine and Toumon is in Guise, Memoires, pp. 257-59.See also Francois, Toumon, pp. 318-22.41 See Harbison, Rival Ambassadors, pp. 228-50, for the English peace efforts.See also csp Spain, XIII, 173-217; csp Italy VI-i, 86-104; and Vertot, Am-bassades de Noailles, pp. 286-356.42 csp Italy, VI-i, 60, 66. Chancellor Olivier was early on named as one of thesix French negotiators, but it is likely that he was the person noted as beingill and unable to take part. Ibid., p. 68; csp Spain, XIII, 167.43 csp Spain, XIII, 203. The report does not support Harbison’s contention thatLorraine cut Montmorency off because he was about to make extensive con¬cessions to the emperor. Rival Ambassadors, p. 248.44 Charles Marchand, Documents pour Vhistoire du regne de Henri II (Paris,1902), piece 1. Henry did write a cordial letter to Charles in 1556 after hisretirement. The abdication of the emperor creates the problem of how to referto Henry’s enemies after it. I will use Spanish, although many of Philip'sadvisers were still Flemish, as was much of his army.45 csp Italy, VI-i, 315-16, 320. See also csp Spain, XIII, 254-57; Weiss, 4: 513-34; Delaborde, Coligny, 1: 152-75.46 csp Italy, VI-i, 324.47 Ibid., p. 335. Soranzo had made a similar statement on January 12; ibid., p.314. Lorraine had been in Italy to organize the league in question.48 For the text of the agreement, see Ribier, Lettres, 2: 626-31. The French copyhas the date of February 5, the imperial copy, February 6. For both see cspSpain XIII, 258.49 Soranzo’s term, csp Italy, VI-i, 329.50 Guise, Memoires, pp. 251-52. This was a private letter to his brother; thereNotes to Pages 176-1823i5was no reason for Guise to dissemble. Concerning the truce negotiations, hewrote that he hoped they would not proceed so fast as to prevent the cardinalfrom completing his work in Italy. He also appears to suggest that Diane dePoitiers was more supportive of peace than Soranzo was.51 See the royal commission in Guise, Memoires, pp. 255-56, where he is des¬ignated as “pere et legitime administrateur de nostre fils le due d’Orleans.”The editor of the memoirs placed the commission at the end of 1555, but thecontext suggests a year later.52 See her letter to the duke of Ferrara, Lettres, 1: 581-84. Capello is cited byFrancois, Toumon, p. 309.53 csp Italy, VI-i, 343. See Renard’s report of May 8, 1556, in which he de¬scribed at considerable length the financial difficulties of the realm “devoid ofsilver.” Renard was convinced that financial difficulties were the sole reasonfor Henry’s consent to the truce. Weiss, 4: 556-57.54 csp Italy, VI-1, 314-30. The interest on a loan of 400,000 ecus was to bepaid by consignment of 64,000 per year from the salt works of Normandy.The Venetian ambassador referred to the Lyon bankers as “the Florentineoutlaws.”55 Charriere, Negotiations, 2: 361.56 csp Italy, VI-1,79. Note that Lorraine was said to be of the peace party at thattime.57 Ancel, Nonciatures de Paul IV, 1: 337; Charriere, Negotiations, 2: 361.58 csp Spain, VIII, 259-66. See also csp Italy, VI-i, 369.59 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 46. See also Decrue, Montmorency, pp. 187—8960 csp Spain, XIII, 254, 256-57; csp Italy, VI-i, 311.12 DISASTER AT SAINT-QUENTIN1 csp Italy, VI-i, 345, 353. Paul declared that his rigid stance had persuadedthe imperialists to make the concessions that made the truce possible.2 csp Spain, XIII, 271. Simon Renard had, a month earlier, returned to Franceas ambassador. A half year later he would again be expelled.3 csp Italy, VI-i, 449, 552; VI-2, 724-25. The sultan requested their releaseshortly after their sale. Henry ordered that those still in Corsica were to befreed, but few if any were. One has to wonder whether this incident con¬tributed to the difficulty Henry had in getting Turkish cooperation in the nextwar.4 Ibid., pp. 263-65, 458.5 On the Dudley conspiracy, see csp Italy, VI-i, 283-452, passim; cspf Mary,pp. 222-30; Vertot, Ambassades de Noailles, 5: 73, 253; Harbison, Rival Am¬bassadors, pp. 260-96.6 csp Italy, VI-i, 459; Weiss, 4: 572.7 csp Italy, VI-i, 369, 533.8 Weiss, 4: 572, 594; csp Spain, XIII, 269; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 60-61.9 Weiss, 4: 628-29; cspf Mary, p. 240; csp Italy, VI-i, 507-9; Harbison, Rival3i6Notes to Pages 182-187Ambassadors, p. 296. Henry disavowed the legate’s harsh words. Weiss, 4:632.10 csp Italy, VI-i, 418-525; Pastor, Popes, 14: 124-34; Ancel, Nonciatures, 2:422-26.11 Ancel, Nonciatures, 2: 420-21; csp Italy, VI-i, 499, 502, 520. In a letter tohis brother, Lorraine gave his opinion that “we will perform the truce for thetime that is accorded and longer if it please God.” Guise, M&moires, p. 287.Delaborde, Coligny, 1: 220-26, argued that the admiral strongly opposed thesending of aid to the pope, but his letters to Paul IV, printed in H. Patry, “Col¬igny et La Papaute en 1556-1557,” bshpf, 51 (1902), 577-89, show that afteran initial reluctance to see the truce he had negotiated broken, he supportedthe decision.12 csp Italy, VI-i, 548.13 Ancel, Nonciatures, 1: 617-19, 627; csp Italy, VI-1, 548; Romier, Originespolitiques, 2: 74; Pariset, Relations, pp. 175-76.14 csp Italy VI-i, 559-60, 603-4; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 75-90.15 csp Italy, VI-2, 864.16 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 656.17 Pastor, Popes, 14: 142-43.18 csp Italy, VI-2, 595, 612, 625, 634-36. See also Lorraine’s letter to Guise ofJuly 27, in which he told his brother that affairs were then so tangled thathe was most happy that he was not involved in them. Guise, M&moires, pp.288-89.19 csp Italy, VI-2, 641,649. According to Soranzo, Brissac was the most outspo¬ken for war. But, see Bishop Charles de Marillac’s defense of the decision,“Discours sur la roupture de la trefve,” in Archives curieuses, 3: 173-201. Mar-illac blamed Philip for violating the truce by attacking the Papal States. I havenot been able to find the source of Romier’s statement, in Origines politiques,2. 100, that Lorraine accused Montmorency of making a liar out of the king.20 csp Italy, VI-2, 715, 750; Etienne Pasquier, Lettres historiques, ed. D. Thickett(Geneva, 1966), p. 22.21 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 101.22 As presented by ibid., p. 115. It is a commonplace in the Protestant historiansof the era and most modem historians.23 Guise, M&moires, pp. 256, 302, 347. See also Weiss, 4: 604. The pope andLorraine had agreed to the idea in December 1556.24 csp Italy, VI-2, 735.25 Ibid., p. 953.26 Ibid., p. 831. A month earlier Orsini was convinced that Henry would keepthe truce. Ibid., pp. 753-55.27 Ibid., p. 863.28 Ibid., pp. 902, 916; cspf Mary, p. 281; Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2:86—87. According to one story, an old woman spotted the French and raisedthe alarm.29 csp Italy, VI-2, 916, 1357; Aubigne, Histoire universelle, p. 62. De Thou,Histoire universelle, 2: 456, is the earliest account to blame the king. Rabutin,Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2: 87, blamed the Habsburgs for increasing theirNotes to Pages 187-1933i7forces on the frontier and threatening an attack on Picard towns, but he madeno suggestion that Henry had given any order. Curiously, Lucien Romier isone of those who do not mention the attack on Douai.30 bn, Fonds franfais 3135, fol. 67; Harbison, Rival Ambassadors, p. 314.31 bn. Collection Clairaumbault 350, fol. no. Montmorency to Henry, January27, states that Philip had already arrested the French ambassador in Brussels.For Renard’s arrest, see Weiss, 4: 762; and csp Italy, VI-2, 934.32 Weiss, 4: 663, 698; csp Italy, VI-2, 956.33 Registres de I’hotel de Ville de Paris, 5: 469, 472-73, 479; Wolfe, Fiscal System,p. no.34 csp Italy, VI-2, 1128; Pastor, Popes, 14: 156. Duke Cosimo, fearful of a Frenchattack on Florence, had begun negotiations with Henry, but after Guise’s armyhad marched past, he broke them off. Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 139-40.35 csp Italy, VI-2, 978-79; Pastor, Popes, p. 201; Ancel, Nonciatures, 2: 342,357-58-36 csp Italy, VI-2, 1032, 1037; II, 157.37 Ibid., p. 967.38 Ibid., pp. 1042, 1149.39 Ibid., pp. 1106-7. On the Stafford rebellion, see also cspf Mary, pp. 294-300,326-27; csp Spain, XIII, 295-96; Vertot, Ambassades de Noailles, 5: passim;Harbison, Rival Ambassadors, 270-96.40 csp Italy, VI-2, 1041. Soranzo protested to Henry the seizure of Venetiangoods bound for England, but he reported that his protest was ignored, largelybecause of the presence of Admiral de Coligny. Coligny “did his utmost to havethe prize legalized, to favor his sailors and encourage them to fresh plunder. . . and the admiral will make much profit.”41 Ibid., pp. 1148-51; csp Spain, XIII, 295-96. What appears to be the originalof the declaration of war is in bn, Collection Clairaumbault 350, fol. 148. TheFrench account was printed and is reproduced in Archives curieuses, 3: 213-18. Wooton was expelled with a present of 1,200 ecus; and the herald, whohad come to France without the proper passport, prompting Montmorency tosay that he ought to be hanged as a spy, received 200.42 The following paragraphs are based largely on csp Italy, VI-2, 1017-108; bn,Collection Clairaumbault 350, fols. 148-209; Romier, Origines politiques, 2:141-78; Pastor, Popes, 14: 152-65.43 Guise, Memoires, pp. 358-59.44 Ibid., pp. 369-70; bn, Collection Clairaumbault, 350, fol. 148; Pastor, Popes,14: 163; Ancel, Nonciatures, 1: cvii; csp Italy, VI-2, 1187-88, 1238-39. Thedefeat at Saint-Quentin a month later ended this saga of vacillation.45 csp Italy, VI-2, 1201-16; csp Spain, XIII, 301. An anonymous report’s refer¬ence to the king’s plan to collect all of the revenues of the clergy probablyreferred to the eight decimes.46 bn, Fonds fran^ais 20454, fol. 39. The sum given is 1,084,784 livres.47 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 106-7; csp Italy, VI-2, 1242.48 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2: 104-5; csp Italy VI-2, 1234; Lot, ArmAesfrangaises, pp. 155-58. These figures hardly justify Romier’s use of the termune armec immense under Montmorency. Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 179.3i8Notes to Pages 193-20049 bn, Collection Clairaumbault 350, fol. 209. This letter from Montmorency tod’Humieres in Peronne reveals that the perceived threat to Champagne forcedHenry to pull forces out of Picardy.50 For the Battle of Saint-Quentin, see Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, pp.124-31; Gaspard de Coligny, “Discours sur le siege de Saint-Quentin,” inPetitot, Memoires, 32: 417-67; csp Italy, VI-2, 1243-48; csp Spain, XIII, 313-15; Lot, Armees frangaises, pp. 163-66; Emmanuel Lemaire et al., La Guerrede 1557 en Picardie (St. Quentin, 1896), pp. xli-xlvi; C. W. Oman, The Historyof the Art of War in the Sixteenth Century (reprint New York, 1971), pp. 254—66; Decrue, Montmorency, pp. 203-6; G. Le Cocq, Histoire de la ville deSaint-Quentin (reprint Marseille, 1977), pp. i27ff.51 Saint-Andre sharply protested against the plan to Montmorency. Romier,Saint-Andre, p. 124. It is the only point on which I have found him ever takinga stand.52 It was announced to Henry at his lever by Sieur Descars. Claude de La Chas-tre, “Memoire du voyage de M. Le Due de Guise en Italie ... La prinse deCalais et de Thionville,” in Petitot, Collection complete, 32: 479.53 The “Histoire Particuliere de la cour de Henry II” contains this ditty:Le peuple excuse Henry, maudit Montmorency,Hait Diane, surtout ceux de Guise aussi.13 MARS REMAINS ASTRIDE1 “Memoires d’Etat des Affaires et Histoire de France soubs la fin du Regne deHenri II,” bn, Fonds Cinq cents de Colbert 26. Other copies are bn, Fondsfrangais 4742, and Fonds Dupuy 561. The author was almost certainly thesecretary of state, Florimond de Robertet de Fresne, whose name appearsin the title of Fonds frangais 4742. One of the secretaries stated that 200dispatches and letters were written in the two-day period. See Sutherland,French Secretaries, p. 86.2 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 181. La Chastre’s comment that Henry wastedno time with regrets or useless complaints rings less true; furthermore, theauthor was with Guise in Italy at the time. Guise, Memoires, p. 479.3 The first dispatch seems not to be extant; the second is in Ribier, Lettres, 2:701-2. See also several letters to and from Guise in this period, in Guise,Memoires, pp. 377-90. The French ambassador in Rome received the newsof Saint-Quentin on August 17.4 Registres de ville de Paris, 4: 496-98; csp Italy, VI-2, 1278-314.5 Ibid., p. 1250. See also Cloulas, Catherine de Medicis, pp. m-12; and Fur-geot, “L’attitude de Henri,” pp. 478-80.6 csp Italy, VI-2, 1250. Soranzo told Catherine in an audience on August 20 thatthe whole city was giving her “infinite praise,” p. 1256.7 Ibid., p. 1257; Furgeot, “L’attitude de Henri,” pp. 485-87.8 Monluc, Commentaires, p. 412; Braudel, The Mediterranean, 2: 944.9 Cited by Bouille, Histoire des dues de Guise, 1: 400.10 The danger of simply masking a fort and moving beyond it was made clear inthe days after August 10 by the example of Le Chalet, a small French fort onNotes to Pages 200-2033i9the road between Brussels and Saint-Quentin, which Savoy had not taken thetime to reduce in early August. Sorties by its garrison badly disrupted suppliesto the Spanish army; 25,000 crowns for the Spanish soldiers were seized onAugust 24. csp Italy, VI-2, 1261. See also Lemaire, Guerre en Picardie, p. xlvii.11 On the siege, see Coligny, Discours sur le siege de Saint-Quentin, pp. 417-67; csp Italy, VI-2, 1258-62; Lemaire, Guerre en Picardie, pp. xlvii-lxxii; LeCocq, Histoire de Saint-Quentin, pp. 129ft'. The number of men that Colignyhad in the fort is a matter of dispute. He said that he had only 800 men ofwar, foot and horse, not including the militia. Coligny, Discours, p. 463. TheVenetian ambassador in Brussels reported eighteen companies of well-chosenmen. If the defenses of the city were obsolete, as has been argued, Colignywas partly responsible, since he was governor of Picardy. He had been in thecity at least twice in the previous two years.12 bn, Fonds Dupuy 561, fols. 7or-7i v. See Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2:152—53, for a complete list of the dead and captured captains. An anonymousSpanish account stated that the final assault cost the French 800-1,000 deadand 500 captured. It also detailed the large amounts of powder, grain, can¬nonballs, and the fifty cannon seized. Philip II wrote to his sister that the cityhad had 1,000 infantry and 300 cavalry as defenders. He did not include thecity militiamen. Lemaire, Guerre en Picardie, pp. 59-93, 293.13 bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol. 6gr; csp Italy, VI-2, 1267.14 Charriere, Negociations, 2: 405-11; csp Italy, VI-2, 1277-78, 1330; Braudel,The Mediterranean, 2: 940-41.15 The garrison of Le Chalet was accused of accepting generous terms from theSpanish so it could escape with the 25,000 in gold taken from the Spanishthree weeks earlier, csp Italy, VI-2, 1303. The baron de Solignac was arrestedon Henry’s orders, but there is no evidence of a trial, bn, Cinq cens de Colbert26, fol. 75r; Colbert 23, letter of September 7, 1557; Guise, Memoires, p. 395;Lemaire, Guerre en Picardie, pp. Ixxxviii—xli.16 csp Italy, VI-2, 1266-72.17 Ibid., p. 1267; bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol. 64V. See Henry’s dispatchesto d’Humieres in Peronne, which show his close attention to military matters.Ibid., 23, passim.18 csp Italy, VI-2, 1341. See also ang, XIV, 89; Guise, Memoires, p. 391.19 Guise, Memoires, pp. 387-90. The document is undated but is placed betweentwo items from September 1557. The version reprinted in Villars, Memoires,30: 485, is dated October 5. See also bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 26, fol. 81 r.20 Braudel, The Mediterranean, 2: 942.21 For a short summary of the earlier French schemes, see Potter, “The due deGuise,” pp. 483-85.22 See Noailles’s letter from ten years later, in Charriere, Negocitations, 3: 476.See also Harbison, Rival Ambassadors, p. 334; Anon., “The Loss of Calais,”North British Journal, 90 (1866), 443; Potter, “Due de Guise,” p. 484. Accord¬ing to N. Juge, Nicolas Denisot Du Mans (Paris, 1907), pp. 113-23, Denisotwent to Calais as a tutor and drew plans of its defenses in 1557 that were usedby the French in 1558.23 Paul van Dyke, “Francois de Guise and the Taking of Calais,” American His-320Notes to Pages 203-209torical Association Annual Report, 1 (1911), 103-7, has gathered the evidenceproving that it was Henry who pushed for the winter attack on Calais.24 It appears that Strozzi went into the pale on November 16, if Soranzo’s reportabout his secret trip with a single servant refers to his reconnaissance ofCalais, as seems likely, csp Italy, VI-3, 1371; bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol.97r-25 “Memoires d’estat des affaires,” ioir-3v. The translation is from van Dyke,“Guise and Calais," p. 106. On the decision to attack Calais, see also csp Italy,VI-3, 1371-72, 1381.26 bn. Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol. 102V; La Place, Commentaires, 1: 9.27 csp Italy, VI-3, 1359, 1385; cspf Mary, pp. 348-52; Anon., “Fall of Calais,” pp.446-47. This last article seeks to absolve Mary Tudor of the burden of blamefor the loss of Calais.28 csp Italy, VI-3, 1410. See also the English documents in Edward Arber, AnEnglish Gamer: Ingatherings from our history and literature, 8 vols. (London,1877-97), 4: 143-214; and Le discours de la prinse de Calais, in Archivescurieuses, 3: 238-47. Guise’s letters from this period are in bn, Fonds franfais23191-29 See Arber, English Gamer, for the terms. An English report put the dead at800 English and 4,000 French.30 csp Italy, VI-3, 1416-17, 1437-38; bn. Fonds frangais 4742, fols. 36r-v; Pot¬ter, “Guise and Calais," pp. 492-94 and n. 7. See also Michiel’s report ofan audience with Henry after his tour of Calais in which Henry spoke veryknowledgeably on the details of the defenses of Calais and the mistakes madeby Wentworth, csp Italy, VI-3, 1444-46.31 csp Italy, VI-3, 1365-66.32 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 221. Romier notes that there is no evidencethat the marriage proposal came from Philip. It may have been simply a ployon the constable's part to delay the dauphin’s marriage.33 For example, ibid., p. 222.34 csp Italy, VI-3, 1423.35 See bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 26, fols. io8r-v, for a contemporary assessmentof the political ramifications of the marriage. One may wonder why Henryinsisted on marrying his eldest son and successor to Mary. Perhaps the answeris that his second son was only eight.36 csp Italy, VI-3, 1487; Fraser, Mary Queen of Scots, pp. 77-79.37 csp Italy, VI-3, 1486-87. See also bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 465, fol. 328;Discours du Grand et Magnifique Triomphe Fact au Marriage de tres-noblePrince Frangois . . . et Marie d’Estreuart, in Archives curieuses, 3: 251-59;Registres de ville de Paris, 4: 535-39; Williams, Henri 11, pp. 321-26; de Ruble,Jeunesse de Marie Stuart, pp. 148-50.38 csp Italy, VI-3, 1501. See Roelker, Jeanne dAlbret, pp. 112-13 for the evidencethat Antoine de Bourbon had initiated the idea. The marriage was, of course,celebrated in August 1572.39 Potter, “Guise and Calais,” pp. 497-99. Potter has a most valuable discussionof how money and other supplies were raised for the Calais expedition. OneNotes to Pages 209-215321source he missed was a toll Henry placed on merchandise exported fromSaint-Malo that was to raise 50,000 livres. bn, Fonds latin 2241, fol. 16.40 bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol. 94r; csp Italy, VI-3, 1423; Doucet, “Le GrandParti,” 171: 511-13.41 bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fols. i3or-3iv; J. R. Major, Representative Gov¬ernment in Early Modem France (New Haven, 1980), especially pp. 88-89,164; Bondois, “Un recit officiel.”42 Registres de ville de Paris, 5: 512-13. On the Estates of 1558, see especiallyMajor, Representative Institutions in Renaissance France 1421-1559 (Madi¬son, Wis., i960), pp. 144-47, 176, n.; and also csp Italy, Vl-3, 1423; Hanley,Lit de Justice, p. 137 and n. 21; Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, in Peti-tot, 32: 164-68. The Taurines edition of Rabutin, which I have been citing,excised Rabutin’s description of the Estates.43 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques (Petitot edition), p. 167.44 De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 554, stated that the dauphin was present topledge himself to fulfill whatever his father promised the Estates.45 Rabutin, pp. 165-67; Discours des Estats tenuz a Paris par le tres chrestienroy de France, Henry second, au moys de lanvier, ceste presente annee mil cinqcent cinquante huict (Paris, 1558); Major, Representative Institutions, p. 145.46 Discours, pp. 9-10; Registres de ville de Paris, 4: 517.47 Major, Representative Institutions, p. 147.48 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 506—9; Georges Picot, Histoire des Etats Gene-raux de 1355 a 1614, 4 vols. (reprint Geneva, 1979), 2: 5-7; Registres de villede Paris, 4: 519-20. Grain and munitions were excluded.49 See Catherine de Medici’s remarks of August 25, in csp Italy, VI-2, 1256.50 Ibid., VI-3,1346, 1476; bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fol. 164^ Guiffrey, Lettresinedites.51 Sutherland, French Secretaries, p. 90.52 csp Italy, VI-3, 1492. See also Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 268-70. Thereseems to be no basis for De Thou’s accusation that Lorraine made a treach¬erous secret agreement with the Spanish at Cercamp. Histoire universelle, 2:563. His account also wrongly placed the due de Guise at the conference.53 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 270-72. According to Baird, Rise of the Hugue¬nots, 1: 316, d’Andelot was in fact fully committed to Protestantism by thattime, having taken two Calvinist ministers with him to Brittany a monthearlier.54 csp Italy, VI-3, 1504-6; bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 16, fols. i72r-74v; OperaCalvini, 17: 179.55 See the letters of d’Andelot, Jean Calvin, and Simon Macar, a minister inParis, on these events in bshpf, III, 238-55; also Histoire ecclesiastique, 1:91-92.56 Williams, Henri II, p. 326.57 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 32: 194-95. On the siege of Thionville, seeibid., 2: 198-213; Monluc, Commentaires, pp. 423-44; “Le siege et prinse deThionville . . . ,” in Archives curieuses, 3: 263-72; bn, Fonds Dupuy 561, fols.86-102; csp Italy, VI-3, 1506-8.322Notes to Pages 215-22258 Charriere, Negotiations, 2: 475-76; csp Italy, VI-3, 1505.59 Lot, Armees frangaises, p. 174.60 Monluc, Commentaries, English translation by Ian Roy (Hamden, Conn.,1972), p. 179.61 Duffy, Siege Warfare, p. 51.62 csp Italy, VI-3, 1520. De Thou attributed the decision to the privy council.Histoire universelle, 2: 574.63 On the defeat at Gravelines see de Termes, “Discours du voyage de Dun-querque,” in Du Villars, Memories, 30; 176-85; Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques (Petitot), 32: 196-203; Oman, The Art of War, pp. 274-81. cspItaly; VI-3, 1519-21, provides evidence of the presence of the English fleetthat, surprisingly, none of the French sources mention. Oman relied on anEnglish account of twenty years later.64 On the review, see Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2; 224-28; Monluc,Commentaries, p. 455, and Lot, Armees frangaises, pp. 176-85.65 Oman, The Art of War, p. 280.14 PAX1 J. B. Gail, Lettres inedites de Henri ll, Diane de Poitiers .. ,au Connetable Annede Montmorency (Paris, 1818), pp. 15-29; DuVillars, Memories, 30: 217. Thereis some confirmation of this point in csp Italy, VI-3, 1528; Michiel reported onSeptember 3 that the king was troubled with a toothache and a sore throat.2 See DuVillars, Memories, 30: 189, for an episode in which Cardinal de Lor¬raine refused to reward a client of Brissac’s; and p. 217, for the Guises’ effortsto keep all others from the presence of the king when he was ill.3 csp Italy, VI-2, 1359; VI-3, 1545. See also the letter of Ercole Strozzi inRomier, Origines politiques, 2: 311, n. Coligny was being poorly treated be¬cause the rupture of the truce was attributed to him and "all the persons whohave been prisoners in France accuse him of cruelty, avarice, and baseness,by reason of the shameful way in which he treated them.” csp Italy, VI-2,13594 csp Italy VI-3, 1506, 1513; Romier, Saint-Andre, pp. 135-38.5 Weiss, 5: 226-27; translation in csp Spain, XIII, 413. Romier, Origines poli¬tiques, 2: 298-99, has quoted part of this document but gave no notice of thecomment about the relationship between the Guises and Montmorency.6 csp Spain, XIV, 16.7 Gail, Lettres inedites, p. 15; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 300-303, citingthe ambassador of Ferrara. See also ang, 14: 138-39.8 csp Italy, VI-3, 1524.9 bn, Fonds frangais 3153, fol. 147V, for the authority given to the French com¬missioners. See also Ribier, Lettres, 2: 778; csp Italy, VI-3, 1532-37; Weiss, 5:229-30; Cloulas, p. 501.10 ang, 14: 155-56, is the principal source for this episode. See also csp Italy,VI-3, 1545-47; Gail, Lettres inedites, p. 28; and Romier, Origines politiques,2; 312-13-11 Report of the ambassador of Ferrara, in Romier, Origines politiques, p. 314,Notes to Pages 222-228323n. It was after this that the incident involving the queen and Diane, notedabove, p. 98, occurred.12 Ibid., p. 314; Guiffrey, Lettres inedites, p. 155, n.13 csp Italy, VI-3, 1562. It was to be repaid by ten decimes of the clergy overthree years.14 Ibid., pp. 1563, 1570.15 Ibid., p. 1558. See also ang, 14: 168.16 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 324. Lorraine seems not to have made good onhis threat.17 csp Italy, VI-3, 1572-73. It may have been this episode that led the ambas¬sador of Ferrara to write that the quarrel between the two factions nearlycame to swords. Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 326.18 csp Italy, VII, 8-9; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 327.19 csp Italy, VI-3, 1564.20 cspf Elizabeth, I, 16-17, 3J4. 324; ang, 14- W3-21 csp Italy, VII, 19-20; ang, 14: 175-83. The nuncio’s reports suggest thatthe Guises had remained active in governmental affairs after Montmorency’sreturn, since he cited them frequently.22 csp Italy, VII, 20.23 Ibid., p. 38-44; ang, 14: 185.24 Weiss, 5: 436-581; Forbes, A Full View of the Public Transactions in the Reignof Elizabeth (London, 1740), i: 1-66. Another element in the French intran¬sigence on Calais was that the cardinal had put the Guise arms on the housein Calais that Henry had given him and it would have been a dishonor to takethem down. See bn, Fonds frangais 4737, fol. 66, for the gift of the house.25 DuVillars, Memoires, 30: 269.26 bn, Fonds frangais 3139, fol. 74; Weiss, 5: 547-87; csp Italy, VII, 58-60;Forbes, Public Transactions, 1: 66—84; Decrue, Montmorency, pp. 226—27.27 On the treaty, see especially A. de Ruble, Le Traite de Cateau-Cambresis(Paris, 1859).28 Frances Davenport, European Treaties bearing on the History of the UnitedStates, 3 vols. (reprint, 1967), 1: 219-22. Davenport found in the Spanisharchives evidence of an oral agreement between the French and the Spanishthat interlopers in Spanish waters were there at their own risk. Any violencethat resulted was not to be regarded as breaking the peace.29 DuVillars, Memoires, 30: 267.30 Ibid., p. 274.31 Memoires de Vieilleville, 27; 408-10; Tavannes, Memoires, 32: 7-10; Monluc,Commentaires, 462-63; Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 271, 282; 8: 129-32. See alsoDe Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 662.32 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 345-47; Lavisse, Histoire de France, 5: 175-78.33 La Vigne, quoted in Battifol, Century of the Renaissance, p. 152; Pasquier,Lettres historiques, p. 26; Haton, Memoires, 1: 78-79. The destruction in Pi¬cardy is revealed by the decline in tax receipts from the generality of Amiens,from 188,496 livres in 1547 to 67,654 in 1559, a span during which theyincreased across the realm by 23 percent, bn, Fonds Dupuy 158, fol. 49.34 Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques, 2: 242.324Notes to Pages 228-23635 This last point is the opinion of Duffy, Siege Warfare, p. 54.36 Davenport, Treaties, 1: 219-20. The Spanish would fall back on the Truce ofVaucelles to try to prevent the French from colonizing North America, but ithad no legal value since it was to hold only for five years and in fact had beenbroken within a year.37 csp Italy, VII, 62.38 Braudel, Mediterranean World, 2: 946-49.39 Williams, Henri II, p. 333.15 "THIS LUTHERAN SCUM"1 csp Italy, VII. 63; ang, 14: 193-95; Pasquier, Lettres historiques, p. 30; Romier,Origines politiques, 2: 355, 362, citing Henry’s letters patent of June 2. Seealso the letter of Pastor Macar in Paris to Calvin, in Jules Bonnet, “La Reformesous Henri II, lettres inedites,” bshpf 26 (1877), 99.2 csp Spain, XIII, 84. 262-64; csp Italy. VI-i, 364-69.3 Based on Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 44; Baird, Rise of Huguenots, 1: 287. InToulouse there were 447 heresy cases from 1551 to 1554; from 1555 to 1558there were 120, declining to seven cases in 1558. Mentzer, Heresy Proceed¬ings, p. 170.4 ang, 9: 143; Romier. Origines politiques, 1: 502; Taber, “Royal Policy,” p. 18.5 Geisendorf, Livre des habitants, 1: passim; Robert Kingdom Geneva and theComing of the Wars of Religion in France (Geneva, 1956), pp. 58-60.6 No copy of the edict is extant. De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 375. providesthe most detail on its clauses.7 A summary of Seguier’s address is in Guise, Memoires, pp. 246-49. See alsoMaugis, Histoire de Parlement, 2: 3-6; and Taber, “Royal Policy,” pp. 18-22.The term Inquisition was used, but it appears that Seguier meant any church-based heresy court and not the “Holy Office of the Inquisition.”8 Guise, Memoires, pp. 249-50.9 Quoted by Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 249.10 Sutherland, Struggle for Recognition, pp. 53-55, presents a plausible case thatPaul IV and Lorraine worked out the call for the Inquisition while the cardinalwas in Rome in late 1555. Conclusive evidence, however, is lacking.11 Ribier, Lettres, 2: 677-78.12 Williams, Henri II, p. 335; Baird, Rise of Huguenots, 1: 300.13 Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 65; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 244.14 Sutherland, Struggle for Recognition, pp. 54-55, 344.15 Isambert, Recueil des lois, 13: 494-97.16 Sutherland, Struggle for Recognition, p. 55. See also Taber, “Royal Policy,” pp.22-23.17 La Place, Commentaires, p. 418 csp Italy, VI-2, 1201, 1216, 1217; VI-3, 1463. What appears to be such alicense can be found in an K 910, piece 2.19 Devic, Histoire de Languedoc, 12: col. 559.20 See Paul Gaffarel, Histoire du Bresil frangais au seizieme siecle (Paris, 1878);Notes to Pages 236-242325Regina Tomlinson, The Struggle for Brazil, 1500-/550 (New York, 1970). Fora further discussion of the French overseas activity during Henry’s reign, seeabove, chapter 9, and Baumgartner, “Adam’s Will Act II: Henry II and FrenchOverseas Expeditions,” Proceedings of the French Colonial History Society,(1987), forthcoming.21 Jean de Lery, Histoire d’un voyage fait en la terre du Bresil, ed. Jean Morisot(Geneva, 1975). De Lery, who sailed to Brazil on the second voyage to thecolony, was a convinced Protestant and wrote that Villegaignon wished “toserve God according to the reformation of the Gospel, ” p. 2. The mod¬em editor, p. xix, doubts that point and accepts as more likely the oppositeopinion of Villegaignon’s almoner, Andre Thevet, in his Les singularity dela France antarctique, ed. Frank Lestringant (Paris, 1983). See also Histoireecclesiastique, 1: 88-91; La Popeliniere, Histoire de France, pp. 117V-22V;and A. Heulhard, Villegaignon roi d’Amerique (Paris, 1897).22 Haton, Memoires, 1: 38.23 bn, Fonds frangais 5128, piece 6.24 On the Affair of the rue Saint-Jacques, see bn, Cinq cens de Colbert 23,fols. 82r-v; Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 66-67; csp Laly- VI-2, 1303; Romier,Origines politiques, 2: 252-56; Haton, Memoires, 2: 51-53; Taber, “Royal Pol¬icy,” pp. 24-28. Romier, 2: 254-55, printed a list of those arrested, totaling128 names. No noblemen were among them, but there were several notables,such as the son of Guillaume Bude.25 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 264 n.; Beza, Correspondence, 2: 254-63.26 Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 80.27 Ibid., p. 81; bn, Cinq cents de Colbert 23, fol. 171V; csp Italy, VI-3, 1500-128 csp Italy, VI-3, 1505; “Lettres inedites,” bshpf, 26 (1877), 100-1.29 Macar to Calvin, “Lettres inedites,” bshpf, 26 (1877), 100.30 Report of the ambassador of Ferrara, May 22, 1558, in Romier, Origines poli¬tiques, 2: 286-87. The ambassador got his information from Blaise de Monluc,so it was secondhand.31 csp Italy, VI-3, 1507; Monluc, Commentaires, p. 1148, n. 5. The purpose ofthe grant was to allow Bourbon to carry on his fight to recover Haute-Navarrefrom Spain.32 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 289.33 The principal source for this incident is Haton, Memoires, 1: 86-89. For adiscussion of the sources, see appendix D.34 Ibid., p. 88. Haton included Conde and the three Chatillon brothers in theconspiracy and specified the admiral as having a major role in the quickcondemnation of Caboche. However, Coligny was not in Paris from late 1556to April 1559.35 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 118.36 Ibid., p. 115.37 ang, 14: 195, 197. There is no mention of Saint-Andre in either report.38 Romier, “Mort de Henri II,” p 121; Ribier, Lettres, 2: 806-8. In a privatecommunication, Dr. A. L. Martin has informed me that his study of the Jesuitsin France in this era contradicts strongly Romier’s thesis.326Notes to Pages 243-24739 “Acta Consistorialia,” bn, Fonds latin 12559, fol. 23; ang, 14: 182-83; Forbes,Transactions, 1: 119; Andre Delmas, “Le proces et la mort de Jacques Spi-fame,” Bibliotheque d’humanisme et renaissance, 5 (1944), 105-37.40 Sources for the mercuriale of 1559: Memoires de Vieilleville, 27: 401-6; DeThou, Histoire universelle, 2: 60-67; La Place, Commentaires, pp. 12-19; theletters of Pastor Macar in Opera Calvini, 17: 504ff.; Le Vraye histoire contenantL’inique jugement . . . contre Anne du Bourg, in Memoires de Conde (Ams¬terdam, 1743), 1: 217-304; Forbes, Transactions, 1: 126-29. Among modemaccounts see especially Noel Didier, “Paul de Foix a la mercuriale de 1559,”Melanges de I’ecole frangaise de Rome, 56 (1939), 402-35; M. Lelievre, “Leproces et le supplice d’Anne du Bourg," bshpf, 37 (1888), 281-95, 337_55>506-29. The best account in English is Taber, “Royal policy,” pp. 45-62.41 27: 401-2. According to the memoirs, Vieilleville in the evening before themercuriale had persuaded Henry not to go, but early the next morning Lor¬raine and six other prelates convinced him again to go to the parlement, lesthe endanger his soul by not doing his duty.42 Ibid. The author of these memoirs used the term lit de justice for Henry’sappearance in the court. See also Didier, “Paul de Foix,” p. 414, citing acontemporary report. Kaiser, “Les cours souveraines,” p. 19, states that it wasprobably the second time that a king had attended a mercuriale and wascertainly the last.43 Memoires de Conde, 1: 627; La Place, Commentaires, p. 14, and drawing fromhim, De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 671; and Memoires de Vieilleville, 2:406.44 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 126.45 See Baird, Rise of the Huguenots, 1: 341; and Nancy Roelker, “Family, Faith,and Fortuna: The Chatillon Brothers in the French Reformation,” in RichardDemolen, ed., Leaders of the Reformation (Toronto, 1985), p. 251, as examplesof precisely that use of the story.46 Text taken from cspf Elizabeth, I, 309-10. See also Forbes, Transactions, 1:127. According to Forbes’s text, Throckmorton called Seguier a Protestant.Curiously, the editor of the cspf left out Throckmorton’s statement that onefurther reason was the influence of the cardinals who, considering the evilhandling of their ministers in diverse places of the realm, saw the need toremedy the situation.47 Histoire ecclesiastique, 1: 97. The Confession of Faith is given on pp. 97-107.see also P. de Felice, “Le Synode national de 1559,” bshpf, 105 (1959), 1-8.48 csp Italy, VII, 86.49 cspf Elizabeth, I, 272, 327, 341-49. See also Baird, Rise of the Huguenots, 1:328-29.16 REQUIESCAT IN PACE1 csp Italy, VII, 87; Forbes, Transactions, 1: 115, 121, 124; bn, Melanges deColbert 16, fol. 129.2 See Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 370-75, for a full discussion of the situa¬tion.Notes to Pages 247-2513273 csp Italy, VII, 86.4 Bodin, Republic, p. 675, gave the total indebtedness as 41,830,000 livres.Doucet, “Grand Parti,” p. 9, accepts the figure of 43,000,000 that Michel deL’Hopital gave to the Estates of 1560. The Venetian ambassador reported thatthe royal debts amounted to 38,000,000. Tommaseo, Ambassadeurs Venitiens,2: 407.5 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 121, 123. bn, Fonds Dupuy 958, fol. 57, shows thatexpected royal income in 1559 was to have been 18,050,000 livres.6 Forbes, 1: 123.7 csp Italy, VII, 72-80.8 Williams, Henri II, pp. 339-419 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 141.10 See Guise, Memoires, pp. 442-49, for the ceremonies and their costs. Themarriage contracts for the two princesses are in bn, Fonds Dupuy 7, fol. 102,and Fonds Dupuy 156, fol. 5. See also de Ruble, Traite, pp. 238-39.11 an, K 92, fol. 25, for the king’s order to the city of Paris to pay the expenses ofthe tournament.12 On the fatal tournament, see Forbes, Transactions, 1: 150-51. Throckmortonwas an eyewitness and stated that he was the only ambassador present onJune 30, which makes the loss of the dispatches of the Venetian ambassadoruntil July 12 less costly. See also Haton, Memoires, 1: 101—4, who was in Parisbut not an eyewitness; Discours de la mort du roi Henri II, in Memoires deConde, 1: 2i2ff.; ang, 14: 209-12; Pasquier, Lettres historiques, pp. 33-34;the letter of Bishop Antonio Caracciolo, in Williams, Henri II, pp. 341-42;Romier, “Mort de Henri II,” pp. 140-57.13 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 92.14 Le lion jeune le vieux surmonteraEn champ bellique, par singulier duelle,Dans cage d’or les yeux lui crevera,Deux classes une puis, puis mourir, mort cruelle.In Charles Ward, Oracles of Nostradamus (London 1940), p. 91. Ward hasan interesting commentary of how the death of Henry fulfilled the quatrain.Nostradamus’s Centuries was dedicated to Henry II, but it is not clear that thequatrain was taken as referring to the king before his death.15 See Brantome, Oeuvres, 3: 280; De France, Catherine de Medicis ses astro-logues, pp. 53-60; and the collection of “Predictions astrologiques,” in bn,Fonds frangais 14772—73. Pasquier, Lettres historiques, p. 34, noted that anItalian seer, Hieronimo Cardano, had predicted the manner of Henry’s deathin 1534-16 Montgommery rode against Henry because he had done so well in his earliermatches. Haton, Memoires, 1: 105.17 The order of events after the accident differs somewhat in the various ac¬counts. Haton, p. 194, for instance, stated that Henry pardoned Montgommerybefore he was carried into the Toumelles. I follow the account of AntonioCaracciolo in Williams, Henri II, pp. 342-43, which seems the most consis¬tent with the other accounts. It is clear from all the contemporary reports thatHenry was able to speak after the accident, contrary to later versions.328Notes to Pages 251-25418 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 152; Romier, “Mort de Henri II,” p. 140.19 G. Roviglio to the duke of Ferrara, in Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 384.Roviglio was part of the entourage of Alphonso d’Este, the duke’s brother, whowas at the French court. Since d'Este was permitted to enter the Toumelles,Roviglio’s reports and those of the ambassador of Ferrara have to be regardedas far better informed than other contemporary accounts.20 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 154.21 Lemmonier, Histone de France, 5: 247, quotes part of the letter but gives nosource. Given the nature of the letter and the absence of any other referenceto it, one has to wonder whether there is an error for June 3 in Lemmonier’stext. It would fit far better for that date.22 For the last days of Henry II and his death, see ang, 14: 212-18; and theFerrarese sources cited in Romier, “Mort de Henri II,” and Origines politiques,2: 384-90. The Ferrarese representatives are the only sources that have anyclaim to having been reasonably close to the scene.23 Memoires de Vieilleville, 27: 416-17, presents a very melodramatic account ofCatherine’s last visit to Henry’s deathbed.24 ang, 14: 218; Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 388, citing the ambassador ofFerrara. These reports correct the common account that the marriage tookplace in the church of Saint Paul in the presence of the weeping queen.25 Ambroise Pare, Oeuvres, 2; 25. Pare was one of those who performed theautopsy.26 Romier, Origines politiques, 2: 342, citing the ambassador of Ferrara. Thepoint is affirmed by Tavannes, Memoires, 24: 256.27 Forbes, Transactions, 1: 157; csp Italy, VII, 108-9. Michiel noted that none ofthe constable’s sons, nephews, or clients were present at the court after July10.28 csp Italy, VII, 109.29 csp Italy, VII, 116. “The Prince [Charles de Bourbon] has been seen with M.d'Andelot, whom he formerly hated mortally . . . and he has several times heldlong conferences, not only with the Constable’s nephew, but with the latter’sbrother the Admiral.”30 Cited by van Dyke, Catherine de Medicis, 1: 106-7.31 cspf Elizabeth, I, 345. Morel to Calvin, Opera Calvini, 27.32 Haton, Memoires, 1: 106-7. Haton also has a lengthy panegryic to Henry,pp. 107-11. See also Romier, Origines politiques, 2; 389. There are, as well,tributes to Henry as a great and good king in the memoirs of the militarymen like Monluc, Tavannes, Brantome, and Vieilleville. The poems writtenin tribute to him are studied in D. J. Hartley, “La Mort du roi Henri II (1559)et sa commemoration poetique,” bhr, 47 (1985), 379-88.33 An official description of Henry’s obsequies is “Le Trespas et ordre desobseques, funerailles et enterrement de feu de tres-Heureuse memoire le RoyHenry deuxieme de ce nom,” in Archives curieuses, 3: 309-48. Further detailscan be found in bn, Fonds fran^ais 2762, 4339-41. See also Giesey, RoyalFuneral Ceremony in Renaissance France, and Knecht, Francis I, pp. 419-22,since Henry’s funeral ceremonies were identical to his father’s in all but thesmallest details.Notes to Pages 255-26732934 Gabriel de Montgommery, as captain of the Scottish Guards, was called on toproduce the insignia of his office. There is no indication that he was present.“Trespas et ordre,” p. 345.17 CONCLUSIONS1 For Guise influence, see Zeller, Reunion de Metz, 1: 117—19; and Pariset, Lesrelations, 205-6. For Montmorency, see Romier, Origines politiques, 1: 294;and Decrue, Montmorency, p. 112.2 Antoine, “Institutions frangaises en Italie sous le regne de Henri II.” Bourque-lot, “Notice sur le journal de Jean Glaumeau,” pp. 202-3. These elms werecalled “les ormes de Henri,” but the term has usually been taken to refer toHenry IV.3 Alberi, 4: 139.4 Ibid.5 These points about Henry II’s episcopal appointments are developed furtherin Baumgartner, Change and Continuity in the French Episcopate: The Bishopsand the Wars of Religion (Durham, N.C., 1986), especially pp. 33-37.6 Except by Noell, Henri II, p. 324. His conclusion is a panegyric to Henry asthe creator of a second French Renaissance and founder of a new Frenchsociety.APPENDIX A1 See Frank Spooner, The International Economy and Monetary Movements inFrance 1493-1725 (Cambridge, Mass. 1972), pp. 101, 163; Knecht, Francis I,pp. 432-33-APPENDIX B1 Salmon, Society in Crisis, p. 87. Contrary to Salmon, the tribunal did not nameall of its victims Lutherans (p. 89), nor were the majority ordered tortured.2 Geisendorf, Livre des habitants, 1: passim.APPENDIX C1 De Thou, Histoire universelle, 2: 456; d’Aubigne, Histoire universelle, 9 vols.(Paris, 1886), 1: 65. Among those who stated that Henry gave the order, see,e.g., Delaborde, Coligny, 1: 242; Crete, Coligny, p. 55. Many historians nevermention the attack on Douai as a factor in the resumption of war, and, mostcuriously, Lucien Romier is one of them.2 csp Italy, VI-2, 916, 1357; Weiss, 4: 667; Rabutin, Guerres Gaule-Belgiques,2: 87.3 bn, Fonds frangais 20422, fols. 77, 79; Archives du ministere des affairesetrangeres, correspondance politique, 14, 15.4 bn, Fonds franfais 3155, fols. 41, 47.5 bn, Fonds fran^ais 6611, fol. 55.330Notes to Pages 268-2716 bn, Fonds frangais 3135, fols. 51,55, 67. Seventeenth-century copies of theseand other letters to d’Humieres can be found in Collection Clairambault 350,fols. 6, 9, 11, 207, 208.7 bn. Collection Clairaumbault 350, fol. 406.8 Crete, Coligny, p. 55.APPENDIX D1 Jean de Serres, Recueil des choses memorables advenues en France (Paris,1598), p. 53; Felix Bourquelot, “Notice sur le journal de J. Glaumeau,”Memoires de la societe des antiquites de France, 22: (1856).2 Pierre Mathieu, Flistoire de la mort de Flenri IV, in Archives curieuses, 15: 61.3 F. de La Chenoye-Desbois, Dictionnaire de la Noblesse, 19 vols. (Paris, 1863-76), 3: 396; Cloulas, Henri II, p. 559. Cloulas accepts the point that Cabochewas a nobleman.4 Cloulas accepts September 1557 as the date of the attack. The only othermodem historian who mentions the episode is Noell, Henri II, p. 175. Herepeats Haton’s version without hesitation.BIBLIOGRAPHYThe following bibliography is largely a list of works cited in the notes,but in several cases works important for understanding Henry’s erathat I had no occasion to cite are included. Furthermore, a numberof works of lesser significance cited in the notes are not included.PRIMARY SOURCESManuscriptsArchives Departementales d’llle-et-Vilaine, Rennes, Fonds G, 13.Archives Nationales, ParisFonds K 90,91,92,113, 148, 190-192, 910.Fonds KK 89, 90, 106, 107, 109, hi, 112, 113, 114, 118, 125, 127.Fonds JJ 258-633.Fonds P 2648.Archives du ministere des Affaires etrangeres, ParisCorrespondance politique 14, 15.Bibliotheque Nationale, ParisFonds frangais 30, 2762, 3120, 3127, 3130, 3134-41, 4523, 4737, 4740, 4742,5128,5129,6611,6762,10190,10393,10934, 14772-73.17472,16965, 17657,18153, 20454, 20522,21405,21447,21450, 23191, 24047-49, 25753, 26272,30393-Collection Cinq cents de Colbert 4, 16, 23, 26, 39, 299, 312-13, 342, 465.Collection Clairaumbault 329, 334, 341,350, 1080, 1216.Fonds Dupuy 7, 27, 86, 156, 158, 561,654, 846, 958.Fonds latin 2241, 12558-60.Collection Melanges de Colbert 16.Collection Morel de Thoisey 338.Printed worksActa Nuntiaturae Gallicae. Edited by J. Lestocquoy, et al. 16 vols. Rome, 1962-85.332Henry IIAlberi. Eugenio, ed. Relazioni degli ambasiatori veneti al Senato durante il secolodecimoseto. ist series. 6 vols. Florence, 1830-62.Ancel, R. Nonciatures de France. Nonciatures de Paul IV. Paris, 1909.Angouleme, Marguerite d’. Lettres. Edited by F. Genin. Paris, 1841.. Nouvelles Lettres de la Reine de Navarre. Edited by F. Genin. Paris, 1842.Arber, Edward. An English Gamer. 8 vols. London, 1877-97.Artigny, Antoine d’. Nouveaux Memoires d’histoire. 7 vols. Paris, 1749-50.Aubigne, Agrippa d’. Histoire universelle. Geneva, 1981.Baschet, Armand. La diplomatie Venitienne. Paris, 1862.Belleforest, Frangois de. Chromgues et annales de France. Paris, 1585.Beza, Theodore. Correspondance de Theodore de Beze. Edited by H. Aubert, et al.Geneva, i960-.Bodin. Jean. The Six Books of a Commonweale. Edited by Kenneth McRae. Cam¬bridge, Mass., i960.Boucher, Nicholas. Caroli Lotharingii. . . Litterae. N. p., 1577.Bourrilly, V. F., ed. Memoires de Martin et Guillaume Du Bellay. 4 vols. Paris,1908-19.Brantome. Les Dames galantes. Edited by Maurice Rat. Paris, n.d.. Oeuvres completes. Edited by L. Lalanne. 10 vols. Paris, 1867.Calendar of Letters and Papers of the Reign of Henry VIU. Edited by James Gaird-ner. 21 vols. Reprint Vaduz, 1965.Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Edward VI. Edited byWilliam Turnbull. Reprint Nendeln. Liechtenstein, 1979.Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Elizabeth. Edited by JosephStevenson. Vol. 1. Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1966.Calendar of Letters, Despatches, and State Papers Relating to Negotiations betweenEngland and Spain. Edited by Royall Tyler. Vols. I—XIII. Reprint Nendeln,Liechtenstein, 1969.Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series of the Reign of Mary. Edited by WilliamTurnbull. Reprint Nendeln, Liechtenstein, 1967.Calendar of State Papers Relating to English Affairs Existing in the Archives ofVenice and Northern Italy. Edited by Rawdon Brown. Vols. 1-7. Reprint Nen¬deln, Liechtenstein, 1970.Calvin, Jean. Opera quae Supersunt omnia. Edited by G. Baum, et al. 59 vols.Brunswick, 1863-1900.Catalogue des actes de Henri II. Edited by M.-N. Baudouin-Matuszek, et al. Vols.I—II. Paris, 1979-86.Champollion-Figeac, Aime, ed. Captivite du Roi Frangois Ier. Paris, 1847.Charriere, E. Negociations de la France dans le Levant. 2 vols. Paris, 1848.Cimber, L., and Danjou, F. [Louis Lafaist], eds. Archives curieuses de I’histoire deFrance, ist series. Vols. X-XIV. Paris, 1734-50.Conde, Louis de. Memoires de Conde. 6 vols. The Hague, 1743.Coussergues, Clausel de. Du Sacre des rois de France. Paris, 1825.Crespin, Jean. Histoire des martyrs. 3 vols. Toulouse, 1885-89.Davenport, Frances. European Treaties Bearing on the History of the UnitedStates. 3 vols. n.p., 1967.Desjardins, Abel. Negociations diplomatiques de la France avec la Toscane. 6 vols.Paris, 1859-86.Bibliography333De Thou, Jacques-Auguste. Histoire universelle, depuis 1543 jusqu’en 1607. 16vols. London, 1734.Dewick, E. S., ed. The Coronation Book of Charles V. London, 1899.Discours des estats tenuz a Paris par le tres chrestien roy de France, Henry Second,au moys de Ianvier, ceste presente annee mil cinq cent cinquante huict. Paris,I558-DuVillars, Francois. Memoires. In Petitot, Collection complete des memoires. Vols.XXVIII-XXIX.Forbes, P. A Full View of the Public Transactions in the Reign of Elizabeth. Vol. I.London,1740.Fourquevaux, R. de. Instructions sur le faict de la guerre . . . de 1548. Edited byGladys Dickinson. London, 1954.Frangois, M. Correspondance du Cardinal Frangois de Toumon. Paris, 1946.Gail, J. B. Lettres inedites de Henri II, Diane de Poitiers . . . au Connetable Annede Montmorency. Paris, 1818.Geisendorf, Paul. Livre des habitants de Geneve. 2 vols. Geneva, 1957-63.Godefroy, D. Le ceremonial frangois. 2 vols. Paris, 1649.Guigue, Georges, ed. La magnificence de la superbe et triomphante entree de lanoble cite de Lyon au treschrestien roy de France, Henri deuxiesme. Lyon,1927-Guise, Frangois de. Memoires-Joumaux. In Michaud, Memoires pour I’histoire deFrance. Vol. VI.Haton, Claude. Memoires. Edited by F. Bourquelot. 2 vols. Paris, 1857.Herminjard, A. L. Correspondance des Reformateurs dans les pays de languefrangais. 10 vols. Geneva, 1866-69.Histoire ecclesiastique des Eglises reformees au royaume de France. Edited byG. Baum et al. Paris, 1889.Isambert, F. Recueil general des anciennes lois frangaises depuis Pan 420 jusqu’ala revolution 1789. 20 vols. Paris, 1821-33.Jourda, Pierre, ed. Correspondance de Marguerite d’Angouleme. Paris, 1930.La Ferriere-Percy, H. de. Marguerite d’ Angouleme, Son livre de depenses 1540-1549. Paris, 1862.La Place, Pierre de. Commentaires de I’estat de la religion et republique. N.p.,1565-La Planche, Louis Regnier de. Histoire de I’estat de France. Paris, 1576.La Popeliniere, L. de. Histoire de France. N.p., 1581.La Ronciere, Charles de. Histoire de la Marine frangaise. 4 vols. Paris, 1906.Lalanne, L., ed. Journal de Bourgeois de Paris sous le regne de Frangois I. Paris,1854.Lery, Jean de. Histoire d’un voyage fait en la terre du Bresil. Edited by JeanMorisot. Geneva, 1975.“Letters from Henry II King of France to His Cousin Mary Queen Dowager ofScotland.” Miscellany of the Maitland Club. Edinburgh, 1834.“Lettre de l’hussier Boudin a la reyne-mere Loyse de Savoie.” Le Cabinet His-torique, 2, 217-25.Lubinskaja, A. Documents pour servire a I’histoire des guerres d’ltalie. Moscow,1963-Marchand, Charles. Documents pour I’histoire du regne de Henri II. Paris, 1902.334Henry IIMedici, Catherine de. Lettres. Edited by G. Baguenault de Puchesse. 9 vols. Paris,1901.Memoires de la vie de Frangois de Scepeaux, sire de Vieilleville. In Petitot, Collec¬tion complete des memoires. Vols. 26-28.Monluc, B. de. Commentaires. Edited by Paul Courteault. Paris, 1964.. Commentaires et Lettres. Edited by A. de Ruble. Paris, 1887.Moreau, Sebastian. “La prinse et delivrance du Roi Frangois.” In Cimber et Dan-jou, Archives curieuses. Vol. 2, 422-37.Navarette, Martin Fernandez, et al. Coleccion de Documentos Ineditos para laHistoria de Espaha. Madrid, 1842.Paillard, C. “La mort de Frangois I et les premiers temps du regne de Henri IId’apres les depeches de Jean de Saint-Mauris.” Revue Historique, 5 (1877),84-120.Paradin, G. Continuation de I’histoire de nostre temps. Lyon, 1555.. Histoire de nostre temps. Lyon, 1550.Pare, Ambroise. Oeuvres. 3 vols. Paris, 1840.Pasquier, Etienne. Lettres historiques. Edited by D. Thickett. Geneva, 1966.Petitot, Claude. Collection complete des memoires relatifs a I’histoire de France.130 vols. Paris, 1818-29.Place, Edwin, ed. Amadis de Gaule. 4 vols. Lexington, Ky., 1984.Poytiers, Dianne de. Lettres inedites. Edited by G. Guiffrey. Reprint Geneva, 1970.Rabutin, F. de. Commentaires des guerres en la Gaule-Belgique (1551-1559)- 2vols. Paris, 1932.Registres des deliberations du Bureau de la ville de Paris. Edited by P. Guerin etal. 32 vols. Paris, 1879-1952.Relation anonyme des ceremonies du marriage du dauphin. Marseille, 1533.Ribier, G. Lettres et memoires d’estat. 2 vols. Paris, 1616.Rymer, Thomas. Foedera, Convertus . . . Acta publica inter Reges Anglicae. Lon¬don, 1749.Salignac, Bertrand de. Le Siege de Metz par I’Empereur Charles V. In Petitot,Collection complete des memoires. Vol. 32, 253-406.Saulx, Jean de, Vicomte de Tavannes. Memoires de tres-noble et tres-illustreGaspard de Saulx seigneur de Tavannes. In Petitot, Collection complete desmemoires. Vols. 23-25.Sauze de Lhoumeau, C. Correspondance politique de M. de Lansac (Louis de Saint-Gelais) 1548-57. Poitiers, 1904.Serres, Jean de. Recueil des choses memorables advenues en France. Paris, 1598.Teulet, A., ed. Relations politiques de la France et de FEspagne avec I’Ecosse. 3vols. Paris, 1862.Thevet, Andre. Les singularites de la France antarctique. Edited by Frank Les-tringant. Paris, 1983.Tollemer, Abbe. Le journal du sire de Gouberville. Reprint Paris, 1972.Tommaseo, Niccolo. Relations des ambassadeurs Venitiens sur les affaires deFrance au XVIe siecle. 2 vols. Paris, 1838.Toumon, F. de. Correspondance. Edited by Michel Frangois. Paris, 1946.“Le Trepas et ordre des obseques . . . de feu de tres-Heureuse memoire le RoyHenry deuxieme de ce nom.” In Cimber et Danjou, Archives curieuses. Vol.3, 309-48.Bibliography335Tytler, Patrick. England under the Reigns of Edward VI and Mary, 2 vols. London,1839-Vaissiere, Pierre de, ed. Journal de Jean Barillon. 1 vols. Paris, 1894.Valois, Marguerite de. Memoires. Edited by L. Lalanne. Paris, 1858.Vertot, Rene. Ambassades de Messieurs de Noailles en Angleterre. 5 vols. Leyden,1763.Vitalis, A. Dominique Du Gabre tresorier des armees a Ferrare, ambassadeur deFrance a Venise, Correspondance politigue. Paris, 1905.Weiss, C. Rapiers d’Etat du Cardinal de Granvelle. 6 vols. Paris, 1840.SECONDARY STUDIESBooks and dissertationsBaguenault du Puchesse, G .Jean de Morvillier. Reprint Geneva, 1977.Baird, Henry. History of the Rise of the Huguenots of France. 2 vols. Reprint NewYork, 1970.Bardon, Franyoise. Diane de Poitiers et Le Mythe de Diane. Paris, 1963.Battifol, Louis. The Century of the Renaissance. Reprint New York, 1967.Bellaud-Dessalles, E. Les evegues italiens de I’ancien diocese de Beziers. Toulouse,1901.Bequin, Sylvie. L’Ecole de Fontainebleau. Paris, i960.Bloch, Jean-Richard. L’annoblissement en France au temps de Frangois I. Paris,934-Blunt, Anthony. Philibert de L’Orme. London, 1958.Bondois, Paul. Henri II et ses historiographes. Paris, 1927.Bouille, R. de. Histoire des dues de Guise. 4 vols. Paris, 1849—50.Bourciez, M. Les Moeurs polies et la litterature de cour sous Henri II. Paris, 1888.Bourgeois, Louis. Quand la cour de France vivait a Lyon. Paris, 1980.Brandi, Karl. The Emperor Charles V. London, 1963.Braudel, Fernand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age ofPhilip II. Trans. Sian Reynolds. 9 vols. New York, 1973.Bryant, Lawrence. “The French Royal Entry Ceremony: Politics, Society, and Artin Renaissance Paris.” Ph.D. diss., University of Iowa, 1978.Carriere, V. Introduction aux etudes d’histoire ecclesiastique locale. 3 vols. Paris,1936.Chambard, Henri. Histoire de la Pleiade. 4 vols. Paris, 1961.Chaunu, Pierre, and Gascon, Richard. Histoire economique et sociale de France.3 vols. Paris, 1977.Church, W. F. The Italian Reformers 1534-1564. New York, 1932.Cloulas, Ivan. Catherine de Medicis. Paris, 1979.. Henri II. Paris, 1985.. La vie quotidienne dans les chateaux de la Loire au temps de la Renais¬sance. Paris, 1983.Constant, Jean-Marie. La vie quotidienne de la noblesse frangais aux XVIe et XVIIesiecles. Paris, 1985.. Les Guises. Paris, 1984.Courteault, Paul. Blaise de Monluc historien. Geneva, 1970.Crete, Liliane. Coligny. Paris, 1985.336Henry IIDaniel, G. Histoire de France. 16 vols. Paris, 1779.Deerue, Francis. Anne de Montmorency a la cour, aux armees et au conseil du roiFrangois l. Paris, 1885.. Anne de Montmorency, connetable et pair de France sous les rois Flenri II,Frangois II, et Charles IX. Paris, 1889.Delabarre-Du Parcq, Nicolas. Histoire de Henri II, 1547-1559. Paris, 1887.Delaborde, Jules. Gaspard de Coligny: Amiral de France. 2 vols. Paris, 1879.Delbriick, Hans. History of the Art of War within the Framework of Political His¬tory. 4 vols. Trans. VV. J. Renfroe. London, 1985.Denis, F. Une fete bresilienne celebree a Rouen en 1550. Paris, 1850.De Vic, Claude, et al. Histoire generale de Languedoc. 12 vols. Toulouse, 1889.Dictionnaire de Biographie frangaise. 15 vols. Paris, 1932-.Diefendorf, Barbara. Paris City Councillors in the Sixteenth Century. Princeton,N.J. 1983.D’Orliac, Johanne. The Moon Mistress: The Duchess de Valentinois. Philadelphia,1930.Doucet, B. Les Institutions de la France au XVIe Siecle. 2 vols. Paris, 1948.Duby, Georges. Histoire de la France urbaine. 4 vols. Paris, 1981.Duffy, Christopher. Siege-Warfare: The Fortress in the Early Modem World 1494-1660. London, 1979.Duhamel, Jean. La Captivite de Frangois Ier et des Dauphins. Paris, 1958.Du-Toc, Favrelet. Histoire des secretaires d’etat. Paris, 1688.Ehrenberg, Richard. Capital and Finance in the Age of the Renaissance. New York,1963-Evennett, H. O. The Cardinal of Lorraine and the Council of Trent. Cambridge,1930.Febvre, Lucien. Life in Renaissance France. Trans. M. Rothstein. Cambridge,Mass., 1977.Fomeron, Henri de. Les dues de Guise et leur epoque. 2 vols. Paris, 1877.France, Eugene de. Catherine de Medicis: ses astrologues et ses magiciens-envouteurs. Paris, 1911.Franyois, Michel. Le Cardinal Frangois de Toumon. Paris, 1951.Fraser, Antonia. Mary Queen of Scots. London, 1971.Giesey, Ralph. The Royal Funeral Ceremony in Renaissance France. Geneva, i960.Gigon, Claude. La revolte de la gabelle en Guyenne 1548-1549. Paris, 1906.Guilbert, Pierre. Description historique du chateau de Fontainebleau. 2 vols. Mar¬seille, 1978.Guilmartin, John. Gunpowder and Galleys. Cambridge, 1974.Hanley, Sarah. The “Lit de Justice’’ of the Kings of France. Princeton, N.J., 1983.Hanotaux, G. Origines de I’institution des Intendants des provinces. Paris, 1886.Harbison, E. H. Rival Ambassadors at the Court of Queen Mary. Freeport, N.Y.,1970.Harding, Robert. Anatomy of a Power Elite. New Haven, 1978.Hauser, Henri. Les sources de I’histoire de France au XVIe siecle. 4 vols. Paris,1909-Heller, Henry. The Conquest of Poverty. Leiden, 1986.Heulard, A. Villegaignon: roi d’Amerique. Paris, 1897.Bibliography337Hickey, Daniel. The Coming of French Absolutism: The Struggle for Tax Reformin the Province of Dauphine 1540-1640. Toronto, 1986.Jackson, Richard. Vive Le Roi! A History of the French Coronation from Charles Vto Charles X. Chapel Hill, N.C., 1984.Jacquart, Jean. Francois I. Paris, 1981.Juge, N. Nicolas Denisot Du Mans. Paris, 1907.Kantorowicz, Ernst. The King’s Two Bodies. Princeton, 1957.Kelley, Donald. The Beginning of Ideology of Consciousness and Society in theFrench Reformation. Cambridge, 1981.Kingdon, Robert. Geneva and the Coming of the Wars of Religion in France.Geneva, 1956.Knecht, R. J. Francis I. Cambridge, 1982.. French Renaissance Monarchy: Francis I and Henry IF London, 1984.Laborde, Leon de. Les comptes des batiments du roi (1528-1571). 2 vols. Paris,1877.Le Coq, G. Histoire de la Ville de Saint-Quentin. Reprint Marseille, 1977.Lemaire, Emmanuel, et al. La Guerre de 1557 en Picardie. Saint-Quentin, 1896.Lemmonier, H. La lutte contre la Maison d’Autriche. Vol. 5, pt. 2, in E. Lavisse,Histoire de France. Paris, 1911.Lot, Ferdinand. Recherches sur les effectifs des armees frangaises des guerresd’ Italie aux guerres de Religion 1494-1562. Paris, 1962.Major, J. R. Representative Government in Early Modem France. New Haven,1980.. Representative Institutions in Renaissance France 1421-1559. Madison,Wis., i960.Mandrou, Robert. Introduction to Modem France, 1500-1640. Trans. R. Hallmark.New York, 1977.Marchand, Charles. Charles Ier de Cosse Comte de Brissac. Paris, 1889.. Le Marechal de Vieilleville et ses memoires. Paris, 1893.Maugis, E. Histoire du Parlement de Paris a I’avenement des rois Valois a la mortde Henri IV. 3 vols. Paris, 1913-16.Mayer, Marcel. Le Chateau d’Anet. Paris, 1952.McFarlane, lan. The Entry of Henry II into Paris 16 June, 1549. Binghamton,N.Y., 1982.McGowan, Margaret. L’Entree de Henri II a Rouen 1550. New York, n.d.Mentzer, Raymond. Heresy Proceedings in Languedoc 1500-1560. Philadelphia,1984.Methivier, H. L’Ancien Regime en France. Paris, 1981.Michaud, H. La Grande Chancellerie et les ecritures royales au seizieme siecle.Paris, 1967.Michelet, Jules. Oeuvres Completes. Paris, 1980.Mignet, F. La rivalite de Frangois Ier et de Charles-Quint. 2 vols. Paris, 1875.Moreau, E. de, et al. La Crise religieuse du XVIe siecle. Louvain, 1950.Mousnier, R. Le venalite des offices sous Henri IV et Louis XIII. Paris, 1971.Noell, Henri. Henri II et la naissance de la Societe modeme. Paris, 1944.Oman, C. W. The History of the Art of War in the Sixteenth Century. Reprint NewYork, 1971.338Henry IIPanofsky, Edwin. Tomb Sculpture. London, 1964.Pariset, Jean-Daniel. Relations entre la France et I’Allemagne au milieu du sei-ziemesiecle. Strasbourg, 1983.Pastor, Ludwig von. The History of the Popes. 36 vols. St. Louis, 1951.Picot, Georges. Histoire des Etats Generaux de 1355 a 1614. 4 vols. ReprintGeneva, 1979.Pollard, A. F. England Under the Protector Somerset. New York, 1966.Quentin-Bauchart, Ernest. La bibliotheque de Fontainebleau et les livres desdemiers Valois a la Bibliotheque Rationale. Paris, 1891.Ranum, Orest. The Artisans of Glory. Chapel Hill, N.C., 1980.Roelker, Nancy. Queen of Navarre Jeanne dAlbret. Cambridge, Mass., 1968.Romier, Lucien. La carriere d'un favori Jacques dAlbon de Saint-Andre. Paris,1909-. Les origines politiques des guerres de religion. 2 vols. Paris, 1913-14.Ruble, A. de. Antoine de Bourbon et Jeanne dAlbret. 4 vols. Paris, 1881-86.. La premiere jeunesse de Marie Stuart. Paris, 1891.. Le Traite de Cateau-Cambresis. Paris, 1859.Salmon, J. H. M. Society in Crisis France in the Sixteenth Century. New York,1975-Schnapper, B. Les Rentes au XVle siecle. Paris, 1957.Seward, D. Prince of the Renaissance: The Life of Francis 1. London, 1973.Shennan, J. H. Government and Society in France 1461-1661. London, 1969.. The Parlement of Paris. Ithaca, N.Y., 1968.Silver, Isadore. Ronsard and the Hellenic Renaissance in France. Geneva, 1981.Smart, A. The Renaissance and Mannerism Outside of Italy. London, 1972.Soumia, J.-C. Blaise de Monluc. Paris, 1981.Spooner, Frank. The International Economy and Monetary Movements in France1493-1725. Cambridge, Mass., 1972.Stone, Donald. France in the Sixteenth Century: A Medieval Society Transformed.Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1969.Sutherland, N. M. French Secretaries of State in the Age of Catherine de Medici.Westport, Conn., 1975.. The Huguenot Struggle for Recognition. New Haven, 1980.Taber, Linda. “Royal Policy and Religious Dissent Within the Parlement of Paris,1559-1563.” Ph.D. diss., Stanford University, 1982.Terrasse, C. Frangois /. le roi et le regne. 3 vols. Paris, 1945-70.. Germain Pilon. Paris, 1930.Thomson, David. Renaissance Paris Architecture and Growth 1475-1600. Berke¬ley, Calif., 1984.Tomlinson, Regina. The Struggle for Brazil, 1500-1550. New York, 1970.Vaissiere, Pierre de. Charles de Marillac: ambassadeur et homme politique. Paris,1896.Van Dyke, Paul. Catherine de Medicis. 2 vols. New York, 1922.Ward, Charles. Oracles of Nostradamus. London, 1940.Weiss, N. La Chambre ardente. Reprint Geneva, 1970.Wiley, W. The Gentleman of Renaissance France. Westport, Conn., 1971.Williams, Noel. The Brood of False Lorraine: The House of Guise. London, 1914.Bibliography339. Henri II: His Court and Times. London, 1910.Wolfe, M. The Fiscal System of Renaissance France. New Haven, 1972.Wolfe, R. Renaissance and Mannerism Art. New York, 1968.Zeller, G. La Reunion de Metz a la France. 1 vols. Paris, 1926.. La Siege de Metz par Charles-Quint. Nancy, 1943.ArticlesAntoine, Michel. “Genese de l’institution des intendants.” Journal des savants(1982), 283-318.. “Institutions franyaises en Italie sous le regne de Henri II: gouvemeurset intendants.” Melanges de I’ecole frangaise de Rome, 94 (1982), 759—818.. “Un toumant dans fhistoire des institutions monarchiques: le regne deHenri II.” Collogue franco-suedois (Paris, 1979).Aubert, F. “Le Parlement et la Reforme.” Revue des Questions Historiques, 83(1908), 91-128.Baumgartner, F. “Henry II and the Conclave of 1549.” The Sixteenth CenturyJournal, 16 (1985), 48-57.. “Henry II’s Italian Bishops: A Study in the Use and Abuse of the Concor¬dat of Bologna.” The Sixteenth Century Journal, 11 (1980), 49-61.. “Heterodoxy and Humanism in the French Episcopacy under Francis I.”Proceedings of the Western Society for French History, 8 (1982), 57-68.. “Skepticism and the French Reception of Copemicanism to 1630.” Jour¬nal for the History of Astronomy, 17 (1986), 77-88.Bondois, Paul. “Les Chancelleries presidials au XVIe siecle.” Revue du SeiziemeSiecle, 1 (1913), 521-28.Bonnet, Jules. “La Reforme sous Henri II, lettres inedites.” bshpf, 26 (1877),97-iog-Charavay, E. “Les enfants de Franyois Ier.” Revue des documents historiques, 2(1875), 41-47.Delmas, Andre. “Le proces et la mort de Jacques Spifame.” Bibliothequed’humanisme et renaissance, 5 (1944), 105-37.Dewald, Jonathan. “The Perfect Magistrate: Parlementaires and Crime inSixteenth-Century Rouen.” Archiv fiir Reformationsgeschichte, 67 (1976),298.Didier, Noel. “Paul de Foix a la mercuriale de 1559.” Melanges d’archeologie etd’histoire de I’ecole frangois de Rome, 56 (1939), 402-35.Doucet, R. “Le Grand Parti de Lyon au XVIe siecle." Revue historique, 171 (1933),471-513; 172, 1—41. “La Mort de Franyois I.” Revue historique, 63 (1913), 309-16.. “Pierre Du Chastel, grand aumonier de France.” Revue historique, 83(1920), 212-57; 74, 1-57.Felice, P. de. “Le Synode national de 1559.” bshpf, 105 (1959), 1-8.Fournier, J. “Les galeres de France sur Henri II.” Bulletin de geographic his¬torique et descriptive, 21 (1904), 174-95.Franyois, Michel. “Albisse Del Bene surintendant general des finances franyaisesen Italie.” Bibliotheque de I’ecole des chartes, 94 (1933). 337-60.340Henry IIFurgeot, Henri. “L'attitude de Henri II le lendemain de la joumee de Saint-Quentin.” Revue des Questions Historiques, 32 (1882), 464-93.Gagnol, P. “Les decimes et les dons gratuits.” Revue d’Histoire de I’Eglise fran-gaise, 2 (1911), 465.Graham, V. E. “The Triumphal Entry in Sixteenth-Century France.” Renaissanceand Reformation, 22 (1986), 237-56.Grancsay, S. “Royal Armorers: Antwerp or Paris?” Bulletin of the MetropolitanMuseum of Art, 18 (1959), 68-80.Hartley, D. “La mort du roi Henri II (1559) et sa commemoration poetique.”Bibliotheque d’humanisme et renaissance, 47 (1985), 379-88.Holt, Mack. “Patterns of Clientele and Economic Opportunity at Court duringthe Wars of Religion: The Household of Francois, Duke of Anjou.” FrenchHistorical Studies, 13 (1984), 305-22.Hope, Geoffrey. “The Verses of Henri II: A Note on Attribution.” Bibliothequed’humanisme et renaissance, 44 (1982), 127-31.Jenkins, Marianna. “The Henry II Wing of the Louvre.” The Journal of Medievaland Renaissance Studies, 7 (1977), 289-307.Jourda, Pierre. “Un humaniste italien en France.” Reime de seizieme siecle, XVI(1929), 40-57-Kaiser, Colin. “Les Cours souveraines au XVIe siecle: morale et Contre-Reforme.”Annales ESC, 37 (1982), 15-31.Kelley, Donald. “The Fides Historiae of Charles Du Moulin and the Gallican Viewof Historical Tradition.” Traditio, 22 (1966), 347-403.Lelievre, M. “Le proces et la supplice d’Anne du Bourg.” bshpf, 37 (1888), 281-95- 337-55- 506-29.“The Loss of Calais.” North British Journal, 90 (1866), 433.Madelin, Louis. “Les premiers applications de Concordat de 1516.” Melangesd’ecole frangaise de Rome, 14 (1897), 323-85.Malov, Vladimir. “Les archives d'un secretaire d’Etat de roys, princes et ambas-sadeurs sous les regnes de Francois I et Henri II.” Bibliotheque de I’ecole deschartes, 135 (1977). 313-39-Martin, H. I. “What Parisians Read in the Sixteenth Century.” In French Human¬ism. Edited by L. Gundersheimer. New York, 1970.Pariset, Jean-Daniel. “La France et les princes allemands.” Francia, 10 (1980),229-301.Plattard, Jean. "Humaniste Theocrenus en Espagne.” Revue du Seizieme Siecle,16 (1929), 68-69.Potter, David. “The Due de Guise and the Fall of Calais, 1557-1558.” The EnglishHistorical Review, 388 (1983), 495-96.Roelker, Nancy. “Family, Faith and Fortuna: The Chatillon Brothers in the FrenchReformation.” In Leaders of the Reformation. Edited by Richard Demolen.Toronto, 1985, pp. 247-77.. “The Role of Noblewomen in the French Reformation.” Archiv fur Refor-maticmsgeschichte, 63 (1972), 168-95.Romier, Lucien. “La crise gallicane de 1551.” Revue historique, 108 (1911), 225-50; 109 (1912), 27-55.. “La mort de Henri II.” Revue de seizieme siecle, 1 (1913), 99-152.Bibliography34iVan Dyke, Paul. “Francois de Guise and the Taking of Calais.” American Histori¬cal Association Annual Report, 1 (1911), 103-7.Venard, Marc. “Une reforme gallicane? Le projet de concile national de 1551.”Revue d’histoire de ieglise de France, 67 (1981), 201-21.Weiss, N. “Episode de la Reforme a Paris—L’assemblee de la rue Saint-Jacques,4-5 septembre 1557 ” bshpf, 65 (1916), 195-235-Zeller, G. “Gouvemeurs de provinces au XVIe siecle.” Revue historique, 185(1939), 225-56.. “Les rois de France candidats a l’Empire, essai sur l’ideologie imperialeen France.” Revue historique, 173 (1934), 273-311,497-534.INDEXAbbato, Niccolo dell’, 109196,213-14, 218, 223, 240, 253Admiral, office of, 135, 214. See alsoAndouins, Jean d’, 32, 51Annebault, Claude d'; Coligny,Anet, chateau of, 94, 96, 97-98, 109,Gaspard deAffair of the Placards, 125253Angers, 124Affaire du Pre-aux-clercs, 239-40Angouleme, Henri d’ (Henry’s natu¬Africa, 137Aides. See Taxesral son), 95Angouleme, duchy of, 36Alba, Fadrique Alvarez, duke of, 154;Anjou, house of, 12and Peace of Cateau-Cambresis,Annates, 115, 119221; as proxy for Philip II, 244,Annebault, Claude d’ (admiral of248-49; viceroy of Naples, 182,France), 36, 43-44, 135, 149, 236184, 185, 186, 189, 192, 198, 202Antoine, Michel, 168, 258Albert of Hohenzollem, margrave ofAntwerp, 3, 86Brandenburg, 154-55Apostate bishops, 242-43, 261-62Almoners, 77, 90-91Almsgiving, 77, 90-91Aramon, Gabriel d’, 145, 155Archers, 65—66, 137-38, 150Alps, 12, 14, 33, 72, 235, 246Ardres, fortress of, 204Albret, house of, n, 44, 45, 245Argenterie, 66Albret, Jeanne d’, queen of Navarre,Arquebusmen, 138-39, 150, 194, 20037, 52, 102, 207, 239-40Arran, James, earl of, 68Albret, Henri d’, king of Navarre, n,Arschot, duke of, 176, 18014, 46, 52,74,102,147Army, 134-40; roll of manpower of,Alsace, 140, 151, 152-53Amadis de Gaule, 103-4, J34Amboise, chateau of, 23, 25150, 162-63, 193, 197-98, 201,205,215, 216, 217Arriere-coin, 215-16, 258Americas, 3, 88, 136-37, 226, 228,Art, 107-11235-37Artillery, 139-40, 150, 205-6, 258Amiens, 2, 157, 162, 163, 220, 221,Artois, 15, 33, 77, 153, 158, 168262Amyot, Jacques, 101, 120Aubigne, Agrippa d’, 267Augsburg Interim, 146Andelot, Francois de Chatillon,Auvergne, Madeleine de La Tour d’,seigneur d’, 48, 141, 185, 194,28, 29344Henry IIBaillis and senechaux, 89, 129, 210Bourges, 1, 2, 70Ban and arriere-ban, 137, 197, 235Brabant, 104Bankers, foreign, 85-87, 209. SeeBrantome, Pierre de Bourdeille, abbealso Lyon, bankers ofof: cited, 8, 27, 67, 75, 93, 94,Banking fairs of Lyon, 85-87, 209113, 128, 140, 227Bastille, fortress of, 46, 105Braudel, Fernand, 202Baudin (usher of Louise of Savoy), 5,Brazil, 136, 235-3719-22Bresse, duchy of, 51, 226, 228Bayonne, 10, 15, 16, 23Breze, Louis de, 15, 30, 56Beam, 11, 253Beaune, 72Breze, Louis de (bishop), 77, 90Breze, Louise de, 58Belanga, Marquis de, 20-21Brissac, Artus de Cosse-, 6, 26, 151,Bene, Albisse del, 85Berquin, Louis de, 125162Brissac, Charles de Cosse-, 6, 26, 36,Bertrand, Jean (garde des sceaux and65; governor of Piedmont, 144,cardinal), 53, 149-50, 189, 211,170-71, 185, 189, 198, 206, 215;235, 240, 242, 253, 258opposes peace plan, 227Beza, Theodore, 50, 233, 238Brissac, Rene de Cosse-, 6, 16, 17, 22,Bidassoa River, 16, 19, 22, 23135Blois, chateau of, 4, 5, 6, 8, 14, 15,Brittany, duchy of, 1,5, 32, 42, 69,100, 112, 162, 180Blondet, Andre, 46, 5671, 83, 115, 118, 210, 236Brosses, Thibault, 131Bochetel, Guillaume (secretaireBrussels, 148, 158, 169, 182, 184,d’etat), 54Bodin, Jean, 86187,207,213, 248, 251Bucer, Martin, 39Boisy, Claude Gouffer de, 60, 66Bude, Guillaume, 7, 26Boleyn, Sir Thomas, 4Bologna, 144Bordeaux, 2, 23, 74-76Bouillon, duchy of, 226Bullant, Jean, 109-10Bullinger, Heinrich, 39Burgundy, county of. See Franche-ComteBoulogne, 49, 68, 141-43, 163, 169,Burgundy, duchy of, 11, 14, 15, 19,203175,210Bourbon, Antoine de (duke of Ven-Burgundy, house of, 10-12, 133, 158,dome and king of Navarre), 37,21146, 52, 72, 102, 153, 191, 195,207, 239-40, 253-54Caboche, 240-41, 270-71Bourbon, Charles de (cardinal), 46,Calais, city of, 203, 205-6, 216, 21752,120, 150, 233Calais Pale, 141, 160, 164, 190, 221,Bourbon, Charles de (constable of243; conquest of, 140, 202-6,France), 5, 14, 15, 30, 34, 52, 134209,212,215,223-26, 256,259;Bourbon, duchy of, 226Bourbon, house of, 45, 52strategic value of, 140, 163, 228Calvi, fortress of, 167Bourbon-Montpensier, Charles de,Calvin, Jean, 125, 214, 236, 237, 239168Calvinism, 125, 234, 246Bourbon-Montpensier, Louis de, 195Cambresis, chateau of, 224, 225Bourbonnais, 77Bourgeoisie, 76-77Cambrai, 147; peace of (1529), 19,21,27,133Index345Capello, Giovanni: reports cited, 8,Chabot, Philippe (admiral of France),94,103,133Caracciolo, Antonio (bishop), 189Caracciolo, Giovanni, 70, 134, 18915. 35Chalons, 150Chambery, 72Carafa, Carlo (cardinal), 55-56, 178-Chambord, chateau of, 109, 14983,186,188,189, 191Chambre ardente. See Parlement ofCarafa, Giovanni, 182, 191ParisCarlos, Prince, 164, 207, 227, 248Chambre des comptes, 51, 80-81Caribbean Sea, 136Cartography, 136, 140Castile, 11, 16-19Champagne, duchy of, 36, 77, 106,148, 199-200Chantilly, chateau of, no, 165Cateau-Cambresis, peace of (1559),Chancellor, office of, 52-53. See also96, 136, 168, 221-30, 240, 246,Olivier, Francois256, 258, 261; effect on France,Charlemagne, 48, 148227-28Charles, duke of Orleans (Henry’sCatherine de Medici (queen ofbrother), 5, 7, 15, 27; rivalry withFrance), 13, 25, 32, 65, 68, 70,Henry, 32-38, 186; death, 38-39153, 161, 250; childhood, 28;Charles V (Holy Roman Emperorchildren, 32; coronation, 105;and king of Spain): abdication,at deathbed of Henry, 251-52;174; battle of Saint-Quentin, 199;illness, 150; marriage, 28-31;captivity of Francis I, 14-15, 16;mourns Henry, 254; opposescaptivity of princes, 16-18, 22;Peace of Cateau-Cambresis, 221-English policy, 163-66; German22; relationship with Diane depolicy, 39, 146-47, 148, 151.Poitiers, 30, 98-99, 252; relation¬152, 153, J54', Italian policy, 70,ship with the Guises, 162, 221,117, 144-45, 183; papal election,222; relationship with Henry,116, 122, 172; relationship with3G 37- 55-56, 98-99, 222; rela¬tionship with Montmorency, 96,Henry, 25, 67, 132—33; rivalrywith French monarchy, 10-13;161-62; religious views, 242;siege of Metz, 154-58, 160; warregent, 71, 149-50, 153. 163,169, 261; in royal entry to city,92-95, 105; support of relatives,55. 99. 171. 176, 189; supportswar in Italy, 155, 171, 185, 189,with France, 12, 35-36, 120,141, 144-45, 149, 154-58, 160,162-63, 169, 199-200Charles VII (king of France), 104Charles VIII (king of France), 4, 12,221,222209Catholic church, 114-32; generalCharles IX (king of France, Henry’scouncil called for, 226, 261;hierarchy, 115, 122. See alsoson), 37, 116, 123, 154-55, 187.261Concordat of Bologna; Decimes;Charlotte, Princess (Henry’s sister),Heresy5, 8Cavalli, Marino: report cited, 39Chateaubriand, edict of, 124, 130-31Cavalry. See Gens d’armesChateaux, royal, 64-65, 91,97, 109Celestins, Church of the, 254Chatillon, Odet de (cardinal), 29, 46,Cellini, Benvenuto, 97Cercamp, 221-22, 224Cevennes, 23548,127,131, 202, 233, 259Chenonceaux, chateau of, 57, 109,253346Henry IIChristina, duchess of Lorraine, 150,Council of Trent, 117-18, 120, 123,153Church, Frederic, 123Classics, 7, 8, 112-13261Council, royal, 38-39, 44, 45-46, 52.60, 82, 135, 211, 248. See alsoClaude, Princess (Henry's sister), 6Conseil des affaires; Conseil desClaude, Queen (Henry’s mother), 3,parties4-5. 8Claude of Valois (Henry’s daughter),37.150, 153. 209, 224-25Counter-Reformation, 202Cour des aides, 80, 82, 168Cour des monnaies, 80-81Clausse, Come (secretaire d’etat), 22,Cousin, Jean, 105, 10854. 135. 197Crepy, treaty of (1544), 36-37, 49Clement VII (pope), 28-31Crete, Lilliane, 268Cleves, William, duke of, 37, 102Curia, papal, 29, 73, 115, 131, 262Clouet, Francois, 110-11Clouet, Jean, noCloulas, Ivan, 271Clovis, 47, 61Dampierre, Claude de, 32, 51Dandolo, Matteo: report cited, 24Danes, Pierre (bishop), 101Coinage, 22, 23, 80, 87-88, 263Dauphine, 49, 51, 58, 74, 210;Coligny, Gaspard de (admiral ofEstates of, 77France), 7, 61; as admiral, 135,Debt, royal, 84, 85, 87, 247-48, 257236-37; and attack on Douai,Decimes, 13, 29, 83-84, 113, 193187-88, 267-69; and battle ofDecrue, Francis, 43, 163Saint-Quentin, 194-96, 200,Denmark, 147219; military activities of, 61,Diane Chasseresse, 97140, 142, 169, 185, 203; religiousDiane de France (Henry’s naturalviews of, 213, 241, 271daughter), 34, 70, 116, 158, 159,Coligny, Fort, 236-37161, 162,184,190Compiegne, chateau of, 193, 195,Dianne de Poitiers (duchesse de197, 203; edict of, 234Valentinois); Amadis de Gaule,Concordat of Bologna, 13, 71,99,zeal for, 103-4; character, 30,106, 115, : 21-22; clause of Ad56-57; chateau of Anet, 97-98,Sedem Apostalicam, 116, 121, 122109; death, 253; and death ofConde, Louis de Bourbon de, 144,Henry, 252; early life, 30-31;195, 232, 259family, 15, 30-31,45, 161, 174,Conseil des parties, 45-46, 52, 206180, 184, 219, 225, 226; giftsConseil des affaires, 45-46, 48, 51,from Henry, 43, 56-57, 96; influ¬52, 56, 221ence on Henry, 56-57, 96, 175,Constable, office of, 134-35. See176, 221, 257; Lady Flemingalso Bourbon. Charles de; Mont¬affair, 95—96; oversees Henry’smorency, Anne dechildren, 99-101; patronage, 53,Contarini, Lorenzo: reports cited. 8,96-97, 103-4, no, H3; relation¬60, 76, 98Copernicus, Nicolaus, 7, 113ship with Catherine de Medici,30, g8-gg; relationship withCoronation: ceremony, 61-63; oath,the Guises, 57-60, 222; rela¬63,128Corsica, 167-68, 180, 221, 226, 228,247,258tionship with Henry, 24, 30-34,40, 56-60, 63, 97-98, 160, 249;relationship with Montmorency,Index34753. 57-60, 162, 219, 221; reli¬gious views, 127-28, 242; at royalentries, 97-98, 109; subject ofHenry’s poetry, 8, 95Dieppe, 136Dolet, Etienne, 125Donee Totum Impleat Orbum, 39, 94Douai, 187-88, 267-69Doullens, siege of. 163Du Bellay, Jean (cardinal), 46, 171Du Bellay, Joachim, 96, 108, 111-12Du Bourg, Anne, 244-45Du Chastel, Pierre, 90, 127Dudley, Henry, 180Dueling, 39, 60-61,223Du Faur, Louis, 244Du Haillan, Bernard, 112Du Maine, Guillaume, 7, 26Du Moulin, Charles, 119-20Dunkirk, 216Duthier, Jean (secretaire d’etat), 54Du Villars, Frangois, 227Economy, French, 2-3, 79Ecouen, chateau of, noEcurie, 66Edward VI (king of England), 64,67-68,123, 143, 163-64,207Egmont, Lamoral, count of, 216, 248Eleanor of Habsburg (queen of Por¬tugal and then of France), 15, 16,17, 18, 22, 26, 29, 31,40, 43. 55.183Election: papal, 116-17, I22. 142-43,172-73, 189, 192; of Holy RomanEmperor, 11-12, 39, 146, 147Elisabeth (queen of Spain, Henry’sdaughter), 37, 123, 143, 207:marriage to Philip II, 227, 231,252Elizabeth I (queen of England), 29,207, 224, 225, 229, 248Emmanuel Philibert (duke of Savoy):commands Habsburg forces,228-29, 245. 248-50, 252Enghien, Frangois de Bourbon d', 37Enghien, Jean de Bourbon d’, 144,195England, kingdom of, 2, 10, 16, 17,18, 27, 54, 67, 75, 147, 261; andBoulogne, 139, 141-43; andPeace of Cateau-Cambresis, 226-29; revolts in, 165, 180-81; royalsuccession in, 163, 207, 229-30;strategic value of, 163-64, 165;war with France, 190-91English ambassadors: practice theirreligion in France, 123-24; re¬ports cited, 24, 27, 47, 56, 65,67, 89, 123, 147. See also Mason,John; Morrison, Richard; Pick¬ering, William; Taylor, John;Throckmorton, NicolausEnglish Channel, 163, 164, 165, 180,215, 216English fleet, 216Entry, royal, 65, 71,92-93. See alsoBeaune; Chambery; Lyon; Paris;Reims; Rouen; VerdunEscars, Frangois d’, 32, 51Epargne, tresor de 56, 80-81, 85Estates General, 90, 207, 210-12Estates, provincial, 210Este, house of, 72-3Este, Anne d’, 39, 72, 102Este, Ercole d’, duke of Ferrara, 72-73.185, 197Este, Ippolito d’ (cardinal), 46, 48,73, 99, 183-84; governor ofSiena, 155, 166-67; papal can¬didate, 73, 99, 116, 122, 171-72,189Estienne, Robert, 131Estrees, Jean d’, 139Etampes, Jean d’, 45, 46Eucharist, sacrament of the, 63, 90,124,125,237, 243, 244169, 193, 194. 196,199. 222;at Henry’s deathbed, 251-52;marriage to Henry’s sister, 226,Famine, 188, 191Famese, Alessandro (cardinal), 50,144,183-84348Henry IIFamese, Orazio, 70, 116, 158. 16155; ransom of sons, 17, 19, 20,Famese, Ottavio, 70, 119, 144-4522—23; relationship with Henry,Famese, house of, 70, 154-55, 183-8424, 25, 27, 31.36-39. 4E 186;religious policy, 13, 118, 124, 125,Ferdinand I (Holy Roman Emperor),127, 261; rivalry with Charles V,18, 36, 146, 154, 226, 246, 26111-12, 133; tax policy, 73, 81;Ferrara, ambassador of, 98, 197war with Charles V, 8-9, 18,Financial courts, 80-8132-33. 35-36Finances, royal, 3, 79-88. See alsoFrancis II (king of France and Scot¬Debt, royal; Taxationland, Henry’s son), 37, 100, 101,Fine, Oronce, 136105, 149, 199,211, 229, 249;Fiscal generalities (generalites desbecomes king, 253, 255, 260; atfinances), 2, 81, 86Henry’s deathbed, 252; marriageFlanders, n, 15, 54, 59, 85, 133,to Mary Stuart, 68-70, 101-2,155, 161; in the Peace of Cateau-206-8, 212; religious views, 242Cambresis, 218, 219, 221,222,Franco-German Confederation, 147-229; war in, 141, 162, 187, 21654.256Fleming, Lady, 95-96Fresse, Jean de (bishop), 147, 148Florence, 28, 29, 155, 162, 170. 171,Fuorusciti, 13, 155, 162, 171189,192Foix, Estates of, 210Foix, Paul de, 245Gabelle. See TaxationGabelle revolt, 73-76, 78, 92Fontainebleau, chateau of, 64, 67, 71,Galland, Pierre, 113108-9, 112. 153. 158. 179Fontainebleau School, 110-11Gallican crisis, 119-20, 132Gallicanism, 119-20, 182, 234France, social divisions in, 1-3, 75-Gardiner, Stephan (bishop), 17378Gascon infantry, 138, 140, 142, 183,France Antarctique, 236-37190Franco-German Confederation, 147-Gascony, duchy of, 1, 11, 24654.256Gauier, Luc, 250Franche-Comte, 36, 164, 228Geneva, 231, 232, 234, 236, 239,Francis, Dauphin (Henry’s brother),242,246,262, 2643, 5, 7; captivity of, 15-23; deathGenoa, 7, 86, 226of, 31-32Gens d’armes, 2, 44, 46, 58, 65-66,Francis I (king of France): army, 67,137; battle of Pavia, 8-9, 195;137. 139. 150. 193-94. 198. 249,258, 259captivity, 8-9, 14-16; children,Gentilshommes de la chambre, 65-663-4, 6; death, 25, 31,38, 39-German liberties, 147-48, 15141, 51,56, 88, 102, 253; earlyGerman Lutherans, 118, 122, 127,life, 4-5, 47; fiscal policy, 76,238-3980-81,84-85, 88, 258; funeral,German princes, 146-54, 234, 238-34, 41; gabelle revolt, 73-74;39. 240and Henry’s marriage, 27-30;Germany, 56, 85, 117, 124, 127, 146-Italian policy, 8, 13-14, 29, 33,5471; promotion of the Guises, 48-Giustiniano, Sebastiano: report cited,50; Queen Eleanor, 15, 22, 26,32Index349Glaumeau, Jean de, 270-71Gomez de Silva, Ruy, 221,225Gonzaga, Ferrante, 144, 189197, 206; crowns Henry, 62, 128;early career, 50; at Estates of1558, 211-12; hatred of heresy,Gouffier, Guillaume, Admiral Bon-213-14, 233, 239, 241-42; lossnivet, 6, 9, 14Goujon, Jean, 108, 109, 110of influence, 222-23; negotiatestreaties, 172, 173, 176, 181, 213,Governors, provincial, 44-45, 267221, 225, 257; offices, 46, 50, 51,Grand-maitre, office of, 47, 209, 222,202, 253; opposes schism, 119,255. See also Montmorency, Anne120; papal elections, 116, 189;dereceives signet, 201, 253; rela¬Grand Chamberlain, office of, 51-52.tionship with Diane de Poitiers,See also Saint-Andre, Jacques de58, 222; relationship with Mont¬Grand Parti, 86-87, 188, 209, 247morency, 58-59, 182, 223, 257;Granvelle, Antoine de (cardinal), 173,supports peace, 182, 184-85,213-14, 221213; supports war, 181, 185Gravelines, battle of, 216-17Guise, Claude, first due de, 15, 59Greek classics, 7, 112, 113Guise, Claude de, due de Mayenne,Grenoble, 77Grey, Lord, 206Guanabara Bay, 236, 237Guiffrey, Georges, 30Guise, duchy of, 48-49then due d’ Aumale, 35, 46, 48,49, 51, 58, 144, 156, 184, 192,198,202,206,253Guise, Francois, due d’Aumale, thendue de; early career, 49; gabelleGuises: chateau of Joinville, 109,revolt, 74-75, 92; marriage, 72-150; criticized, 69, 72, 195, 260;73, 102; military command, 141,at Henry’s deathbed, 251; influ¬155-58, 168,169,176, 185-86,ence on policy, 67, 165, 175,187, 189, 191-92, 195, 202, 204,177,181, 220, 252-54, 256-57,205-6, 215-17, 267; offices,260; Italian interests, 71, 73,46, 51, 65, 72, 137, 186, 202,143-44, 176, 181, 185-86; loss208, 253; opposes Calais expe¬of authority, 214, 218, 222-23;dition, 203-4; opposes Peace ofmarriage of Mary Stuart, 67-69,Cateau-Cambresis, 227; recalled206-9; offices, 45, 46, 51; rela¬from Italy, 198-99, 201-2, 220;tionship with Diane de Poitiers,relationship with brothers, 50-53, 176; relationship with Fran¬51, 176, 202; relationship withcis II, 53, 252-54, 260; rela¬Henry, 37, 223; relationship withtionship with Henry, 50, 57, 59;Montmorency, 58-59, 162, 176,relationship with Montmorency,223; role in Piennes affair, 190,58, 176, 182, 212, 218, 219-20,223; siege of Calais, 205-6; siege223, 257; religious views, 127,of Metz, 155-58, 162; siege of241-42, 245; rewarded for CalaisThionville, 215-16; support ofvictory, 206; as royal favorites,war policy, 22248-49, 51; support war policy,Guise, Louis de (bishop), 48, 51,202181, 185, 220, 222Guise, Marie de (queen of Scotland),Guise, Charles de (cardinal of Lor¬49, 68-69, 96, 102, 209, 246raine): becomes cardinal, 50, 58,Guise, Rene de, 46, 144, 17070; companion of Henry, 193,Guisnes, fortress of, 206350Henry IIGuyenne, duchy of, 74-76, 135, 210,193, 198, 221, 242, 257; deci¬246Habsburg, house of, 163, 172, 179,180Hagenau, 152Hainault, 168, 175Ham, fortress of, 200, 201Harbison, E. H., 165sionmaking in military matters,152-54,155-56, 157, 199-201,215, 258-59; description, 7, 16,17, 23-24, 27, 32, 39-40, 102,243; education, 6-7, 18; factionsat court, 35, 39, 43; family, 4-6,26, 40, 55, 159, 224; fiscal policy,56, 84-87, 188, 193, 199, 209,Haton, Claude, 77, 113, 209, 228,211, 247-48, 259-60; foreign236, 240,241,251,270-71policy, 25, 39, 40, 67-70, 133-34,Havana, 136Hebrew, 7, 113143, 146, 148, 153, 163-66, 174,180-85, 190-92,207,224,257-Henry II (duke of Orleans, then dau¬58; foreign trips, 34, 71-73, 150-phin, and then king of France):53, 206; French army, reviewsabsolutism, 42-43; adminis¬of, 150, 168, 216; friends, 32,trative changes, 43-46, 53, 54,88-90, 167-68, 188-89, 255,48-49, 5i, 65, 159, 177; funeral,254-55; gens d’armes, respect258; alliance with foreign Protes¬for, 134, 137, 138, 139, 159; gov¬tants, 122-24, 131-32, 146-48,ernorships, 44-45; health, 16,149, 151-52, 239-40; alliance23, 218, 249; heresy, view of,with Paul IV, 180-87, 189-90;124,127,128,131-32, 214-15;alliance with Turks, 145, 146,as hostage, 15-25; household,147, 154,155,170,201, 213, 215;65-66; hunting, 6, 51, 58, 64-almsgiving, 77, 90-91; Amadisde Gaule, fondness for, 103-4;65, 75, 199; jousting, 24, 61-62,102-3, 248-49; learning, 8, 18,ambitions for family, 69-70, 99,113-14; marriage, 27-37, 39;151, 224; Americas, interest in,marriage diplomacy, 55, 123,136—37, 235-37; armaments143, 207, 224, 226-27, 229, 248;and military affairs, interest in,military command, 32-33, 35-36,135-37.138. 139-40,150, 215;assassination attempt, 240-41,163, 168; monogram, 93-94,105, 108; motto, 39, 94; papal270—71; attitude toward nobility,elections, interference in, 73,75-76, 259-60; attitude toward99, 116-17, 121-22, 171, 172,commoners, 65, 76-78; battles,189, 192; parlement, respect for,36, 141, 154-58,187, 193-95.203—5, 214-16; birth and bap¬127, 128, 149, 238; patronage ofartists, architects, and writers,tism, 3-4; character, 23-25,8, 91, 97, 108-13,262;peace39-40, 61, 262; children, 34, 37,agreements, 175-77, 212-13,95- 99-102. 25°. 258; claim toMilan, 29, 32, 33-34. 185-86,222-27; ransom of subjects, 180,184, 195, 209,212,218, 220,189; claim to Naples, 143, 185-222; relationship with Catherine86, 189; convocation of Estatesde Medici, 29-31,34, 37, 55-56,General, 209-11; coronation,61-63; death, 250-52; death offather, 34, 41; decisionmaking ingovernment, 54, 59-66, 176-78,149-50, 171, 198-99, 257; rela¬tionship with Diane de Poitiers,31, 34, 56-57, 59, 93-95, 96, 98,257; relationship with Francis I,Index35i23-24, 27, 38-41; relationshipHungary, 33, 145, 154, 155with the Guises, 48-51, 59, 201,218-19, 222, 255; relationshipwith Montmorency, 32-33, 34,35, 46-48, 58, 59, 78, 169, 177,218-19, 255; religious policy, 71,114-23, 261-62; religious policytoward Protestants, 123-32, 226-46, 260-61; sports, 8, 19, 24-25,27, 32, 41.49- 67, 75. 102-3,201; tax policy, 75, 76, 79-80,83-84, 193, 211; training for gov¬ernment, 38-39; training for war,32-33, 36; war, philosophy of,141; weddings, 28-29, 102, 158,206-9, 224-25. 248-49Henry III (king of France, Henry’sson), 37, 95Henry IV (king of France andNavarre), 101, 102, 104, 254, 263Henry VIII (king of England), 3-4,16, 27-28,31,49,114, 142, 205Hercule-Gaulois, 108Hercule Francois (due d’Anjou,Henry’s son), 37Heresy: attitude of Henry toward,122-32, 214, 231-46, 261-62;confiscation of property for, 127,129, 130, 232, 234; executionfor, 125, 127, 129, 131, 180, 234,Ile-de-France, duchy of, 48, 58, 161Imperial ambassador, 42. See alsoRenard, Simon; Saint-Mauris,Jean deIndex of Forbidden Books, 128Indians, 236, 237Infantry, 138-39, 194Inflation, 3, 79, 88Inquisition, 233-34, 235Intendant, 167-68, 258Italy: French military in, 8, 12-13,14, 32, 59, 119, 134-35. MG149, 154,183,187-93,196, 202,269; French political interest in,40, 70, 71,72-73, 142, 143-44.145, 181; in Peace of Cateau-Cambresis, 222, 256, 258Ivoy, fortress of, 139, 153James V (king of Scotland), 49Jamac, Guy de, 38, 51,60-61, 200Jodelle, Etienne, 112John, duke of Burgundy, 10John II (king of France), 4Joinville, chateau of, 109, 150Julius III (pope), 116-18, 119, 121-22, 123, 132, 144-45. 154. i7G173235, 238, 239, 240, 243, 244,La Bicocca, battle of, 13245, 264, 266; jurisdiction over,La Chataigneraie, Francois de, 32,129-30; regarded as sedition,39, 51, 60-61128, 130, 131, 234, 241; trials,La Garde, Antoine, baron de, 170,125, 126-27, I28-3i, 231-35,198238-40, 243, 245, 264-66La Guiche, Claude de (bishop), 121Hesdin, fortress of, 153, 156-57, 158,Lalaing, Charles de, 231160-61, 226Histoire ecclesiastique, 127Historiographers, 112La Marck, Robert de (due de Bouil¬lon), 45, 46, 56, 148, 161, 180,184Holy Roman Empire, 39, 146-48,Lance companies, 137-38, 144, 150168,247Languedoc, 45, 46, 53,74, 120, 223Humanists, 7-8, 26, 256Lannoy, Charles de (viceroy ofHumieres, Jean I d’, 46, 48, 56, 100Naples), 14, 16Humieres, Jean II d', 137, 201, 267,Laon,217268La Rochefoucault, Francois de, 195,Hundred Years War, 10, 258206352Henry IILa Rochelle, 73Louise of Savoy, 4-6, 14, 15-16, 17,La Rochepot, Frangois de, 4819. 20, 55, 149La Ronciere, Charles de, 135Louvre, palace of, 81, 85, 109, no,Latin, 8, hi, 112188, 249La Tremoille, Frangois de, 26-27Louvre school of armor, 111L'Aubespine, Claude de (secretaireLow Countries, 36, 37, 55, 86, 88,d’etat), 54, 196, 221Lausanne, 124160,163,164,183,191, 221, 229,230, 234, 259La Vigne, sire de, 200-201, 228Lutherans, 36, 39, 114, 148, 154.Le Chalet, fortress of, 199, 201See also French Protestantism;Le Clerc, Frangois, 136Le Harve, 136, 226Lemonnier, Henri, 228Leo X (pope), 13Lescot, Pierre, 109Le Testu, Guillaume, 136L’Hopital, Michel de, 228Light cavalry, 138, 215, 259. See alsoReitresLimoges, 1Limousin, 246German LutheransLuxembourg, 35-36, 148, 152-53,168,204,216,217, 221, 229Lyon, 2-3, 15, 186, 227; bankers of,3, 85-87, 185, 193, 209, 215,235; royal entry of, 92-94, 105,108Machiavelli, Niccolo, 112, 233Macon, 71Madeleine, Princess (Henry’s sister),Lizet, Pierre, 128-295- 49Loans, royal, 84-87, 158, 188, 193,Madrid, 19; Treaty of (1526), 15, 16,199, 201,209, 212, 222, 243,19247-48Loire River, 74London,68,166, 203, 204Maitres des requites, 167-68Maitres d’hotel, 66Mannerism, 109, noLongevy, Mathieu de, Bishop, 46Marcellus II (pope), 122, 172L'Orme, Philibert de, 97, 108, 109-Marciano, battle of, 17010Margaret of Habsburg (duchess ofLorraine, Cardinal de. See Guise,Parma), 70, 183Charles deMargaret of Austria (regent of theLorraine, Francis, duke of, 150, 209,Low Countries), 19224-25Marguerite d’Angouleme, 5-7, n, 14,Lorraine, Christina, duchess of, 212,15. 35- 55- 69, 102, in213Marguerite of France (Henry’s sis¬Lorraine, Jean de (cardinal), 46, 50,ter), 5, 8, 40, 55, 61,66, 112;51, 71, himarriage of, 226-27, 229, 231,Lorraine, Rene, duke of, 48, 143248-50, 252Lorraine, duchy of, 39, 150-58, 261Marguerite of Valois (Henry’s daugh¬Lorraine, house of, 48-50Louis, duke of Orleans, 4, 10Louis VI (king of France), 10ter), 37, 100-101, 113, 209, 248Marienburg, fortress of, 169, 193Marillac, Charles de (bishop), 221Louis XII (king of France), 4, 12, 72,Mark, conference of, 173-74, lll105Marseille, 2, 14, 28, 29, 118, 155,Louis XIV (king of France), 8, 141,198,202259Marshal, office of, 134-35- See alsoIndex353Brissac, Charles de; Saint-Andre,Monetary system, 22, 23, 80, 87-88,Jacques de; Strozzi, Piero263Martin, Jean, 108Monluc, Blaise de, 59, 139, 144;Mary of Habsburg (queen of Hun¬military activities of, 170-71,gary), 34, 36, 86, 88, 152183, 198, 215-16, 258; viewsMary Stuart (queen of Scotland andcited, 25, 28, 40, 58, 67, 75, 138,France), 29, 49, 95-96, 101, 163,140, 199, 227224, 235, 239; arrives in France,Monte, Christofero del (bishop), 11867-69; marriage of, 206-8Monte, Innocenzo del (bishop), 121Mary Tudor (queen of England), 27,Montgommery, Gabriel de, 44, 249-28, 64, 163-64; declares war on50France, 191, 204; death of, 207,Montgommery, Jacques de, 44208, 223-24, 227, 229; facesMontmorency, Anne, due de (grand-revolt, 180-81, 190-91; marriagemaitre and constable): battle ofof, 169, 172Saint-Quentin, 194-96; captivity,Mason, John: report cited, 17014, 195, 212, 247; character, 46-Maurice, duke of Saxony, 147, 152-48; chateaux, 64, 97—98; coro¬53. 154. 155nation of Henry, role at, 61-62;Maxmilian I (Holy Roman Emperor),court factions, 35, 57-60, 147;10crushes gabelle revolt, 74-76, 78;Maxmilian II (Holy Roman Emperor),early career, 47; grand maitre, 66,146Meaux, 77, 240, 271252; at Henry’s deathbed, 251-52; illness, 163, 165; influenceMedici, Cosimo de (duke of Tuscany),on policy, 46-48, 51, 57-60, 147,58, 155, 170, 226162-63,181, 222-23, 255~56;Mediterranean Sea, 2, 33, 135-36,military command, 32-33, 47,145, 147, 170, 180, 201, 215Memoires de Vieilleville, 34, 148-49,139-40,142, 151, 156-57. 160,162, 191, 196, 223; negotiates151, 152, 156, 229, 243, 267peace treaties, 171-74, 221-Mercenaries: German, 74, 122, 138,26; offices, 34, 45, 46, 47, 134;139, 147, 150, 194, 198, 201, 215,opposition to war, 35, 71, 181,234, 238; Italian, 55, 139; Swiss,185-87, 189, 222; patronage,13, 74, 122, 138-39, 14C 147,150, 183, 198, 201, 238-39, 24647. 53. 54; ransom, 195, 212-13,218-19, 221-22, 231; ransomMetz, 147, 151-52, 160, 162, 229,of Henry, 22, 24; ransom of son,240, 247; siege of, 141, 154-58112, 180, 182, 184; relationshipMeuse River, 151, 169Michelet, Jules, 262with Catherine de Medici, 95,150, 161-62; relationship withMichiel, Giovanni: reports cited, 217,Diane de Poitiers, 53, 57-60,218,239Midi, 1, 35, 83, 89Milan, duchy of, 14, 33-34, 64,162, 219, 221; relationship withthe Guises, 57-60, 206-7; rela¬tionship with Henry, 32-33, 35,in; French claims to, 8, 12-13,36, 143, 220-21; religious views,15, 29, 32, 143, 184, 189, 192;47, 122, 127, 233, 241; son’sFrench concession of, 226-28engagement, 161-62, 189-90,Mirepoix, 121223Moneins, Tristan de, 74, 75Montmorency, Francois de, 62, 144,354Henry IIMontmorency, Francois de, (cont.)Notre Dame, cathedral of, 105, 114,160, 161-62, 180, 181, 182, 184,205,241,255185, 189-90, 195, 223Noyon,200Montmorency, Gabriel de, 195, 250-Nuncio, papal: reports cited, 37, 47,5iMontmorency, Henri de, 198, 219,119,127223,225Oath of coronation, 62, 128Montmorency, house of, 47Olivier, Francois (chancellor ofMontpellier, 86, 168France), 46, 52-53, 71, 106, 221,Morrison, Richard: report cited, 132253.258Morvilliers, Jean de (bishop), 221Order of the Garter, 124Moselle River, 152Order of Saint Michael, 51, 171, 240Miihlberg, battle of, 39, 118, 146Orleans, 65, 124, 200, 251Nancy, 10, 150, 151Nantes, 124Narbonne, 19, 120Orleans, duchy of, 29, 36Orsini, Camilio, 186-87Orsini, Giulio, 187Ory, Matthieu, 128Naples, kingdom of, 8, 14, 15, 71,Ottoman Empire, 33, 43; allied with143, 164, 166,171, 182, 185, 189,France, 71, 120, 122, 145,146,192, 202, 226-28147, 154, 158, 166, 170,184,National Council, 118-20200,215“Natural Borders of the realm," 153-54Paix des dames. See Cambrai, peaceNavarre, college de, 50ofNavarre, kingdom of, 6, 11, 15, 102,“Palace revolution,” 43-44, 252-53133.147Palais de Justice, 211Navy, 55, 68, 105, 129, 135-37. M5.Palencia, 18147,155, 190Paliano, duchy of, 182Nemours, Jacques, due de, 99, 206,Panisse, Pierre, 168250Papacy, 115-24, 224, 229. See alsoNetherlands. See Low CountriesJulius III; Paul III; Paul IVNevers, Francois, due de, 168, 169,Papal States, 144, 155, 172, 184, 185,195, 205, 250186,192Nevers, Louis, due de, 46Paris, 1, 2-3, 36, 57, 64, 65, 81,91,Nice, 33Nimes, 23592, 100, no, hi, 150, 161, 188,205, 270-71; Hotel de ville of,Noailles, Antoine de, 164, 16522, 84, 188; loans from, 76, 198-Noailles, Frangois de (bishop), 20399; Protestants in, 214, 237-40,Noailles, Gilles de (bishop), 190245; royal entry into, 104-7, JI4.Nobility, 2, 75-76, 90Noel, Henri, 54Normandy, duchy of, 45, 54, 210,214, 246Northumberland, John, duke of,163-64Nostradamus, 250127, 142; site of Estates, 209-12;site of Henry’s death and funeral,249-55; site °f royal weddings,208-9, 248-50; threatened byattack, 195, 197-98, 199-200,202; University of, 3, 50, 84, 128,130,190,232, 245Index355Parlement, 2, 52-53, 88-89, 106-8,146, 230, 251; as king of Eng¬126,192,210—Aix, 106—Bordeaux, 74-75, 106, 129—Dijon, 106—Grenoble, 106land, 180-81, 190, 191; marriageto Elisabeth of Valois, 248-49;marriage to Mary Tudor, 164-68,223-24; military activities, 193-200, 202, 216; negotiates Peace—Paris, 46, 53, 149, 210, 271;of Cateau-Cambresis, 212-13,Catherine de Medici’s address to,219-26; policy in Italy, 182, 183,198-99; Chambre ardente (sec¬186ond Toumelle), 126, 128-30, 232,Piacenza, 29, 70264-66; at the Estates of 1558,Picardy, duchy of, 48, 54; devastation210-12; Henry visits, 149, 212,in, 228; governor of, 236, 253,243-45, 262; heresy trials, 230,267-68; war in, 38, 141, 148,232, 233, 234; lettre dejussion,156, 160, 162-64, 185, 187, 190,80, 106, 242; lit de justice, 38;I93~2°I- 2°9» 217> 223. 267Mercuriale, 130, 243-45, 247-Pickering, William, 76, 120251, 262; presidents, 53, 90, 107,Piedmont, 13, 14, 33-34, 40, 70, 71,232, 244, 245; royal seance, 107,73, 143, 158, 168, 185, 198, 206,212; semester system, 88, 89,258; French concession of, 215,107; Toumelle, 106, 243221,222,226,228, 246, 247—Rennes, 89, 106—Rouen,106,131Piennes, Jeanne de, 161—62, 184, 189Pierrepont, 217—Toulouse, 106, 126, 129, 210Pinkie Cleugh, battle of, 68Parliament of Scotland, 208Pisa, 29Parma, duchy of, 29, 70, 120, 144Pisseleu, Anne de (duchesseParma, war of, 154-55Pasquier, Etienne, 228Passau, 154d’Etampes), 31,35, 37, 45- 56,60,253Pleiade, 96-97, 108, m-12Patents of nobility, 80, 90Poitou, 246Paul III (pope), 29, 33, 70, 71, 115-16,143,144Poland, 1, 147Pole, Reginald (cardinal), 71-72,Paul IV (pope), 122, 161; election,116-17, 190171-72; policy of, 172, 179, 181,Portugal, 136, 237182-84, 186, 189, 192, 198,Presidial courts, 89-90, 258202; urges repression of heresy,Primaticcio, Francesco, 97, 108-9,233-34.242Pavia, battle of, 9, 15, 195Pays d’obedience, 115-16Pedraza, fortress of, 19-22Peers of the realm, 62-63110Princes of blood, 134, 149Privateers, French, 136-37“Promenade to the Rhine,” 140, 145,210, 257Peronne, fortress of, 188, 200, 201,Protestantism and Protestants,267,268, 269Perpignan, 36French, 89,114, 125-32, 148,164,214,226,228,231-46, 254,Philip II (king of Spain and England,259-62prince of the Low Countries):Provence, 15, 33, 45, 71, 115, 118,19. 35- 52> 58. 59. 102, 104, 119,125, 135, 210356Pyrenees, nRabutin, Francois, 139, 159, 193,228,267Rambouillet, chateau of, 40, 44Ramus, Peter, 113Raymon, Pierre, 46Receveurs-g&neraux, 81, 188Reformed Church of Paris, 238, 244,245Reformed Confession of Faith, 245Reims, 50, 61-63, 71, 157Reitres, 215, 259Renard, Simon: advocates peace plan,183-84; expelled from France,147, 188; imperial ambassadorto England, 169; reports cited,28, 59, 116-17, 123, 147, 165,219-20,257Renee de France (duchess of Parma),39. 72Rennes, 210Rentes, 84-85, 188, 247Revenue collection, 79-90. See alsoTaxationRhine River, 148, 152, 153, 154Rio de Janeiro, 236Robertet, Florimond (secretaired’etat), 161, 205-6Rocroi, fortress of, 169, 193, 258Rome, 88, 115, 116, 119, 121, 122,172,182,184,198,202,233, 251Romier, Lucien, 59, 227, 233, 242,257Ronsard, Pierre, 16, 97, 111-12Rosso, Giovanni Baptista, 97, noRouen, 2, 92, no; royal entry into,94,136Roussillon, 36Royal guards, 138, 150, 200Rue Saint-Jacques, affair of, 237-38Rysbank, fortress of, 205Henry II224-25; influence of, 52, 135,252, 257, military activity, 156,162, 195; ransom of, 219, 222,231; religious views of, 127, 232,242Saint-Andre, Jean de, 26, 32, 45, 127Saint-Denis, abbey-church of, 41,105,200, 255Saint-Gelais, Melin de, 96, 112Saint-Germain-en-Laye, chateau of,3, 43, 48, 60, 69, 100, 102, 109,160,187Saint-Leger, chateau of, 109Saint-Mauris, Jean de: reports cited,30, 43, 51, 56, 58, 67, 68, 70, 71,85, 100, 102Saint-Quentin, 76, 217, 226, 242;battle of, 61, 193-96, 197, 203,206, 212, 215, 220, 223, 235,237-38, 259, 271; siege of, 61,200,269Saint-Remy, abbey of, 62Saint-Remy, Jean de, 156, 200Sainte Chapelle de Paris, 240, 270,271Saintes, 74Saintonge, 73, 246Salic Law, 12Salle des Augustins, 244Salmon, J. H. M., 44, 264, 266Saluzzo, duchy of, 226Salviati, Bernardo, 189Salviati, Giovanni (cardinal), 116Sark, island of, 165Savoy, duchy of, 3, 72, 188, 226, 228,229,246Scarborough Castle, 191Scrofula, 77Secretaire des finances, 46, 54Secretaire d’etat, office of, 46, 53-54,197Seine River, 105Sacramentaires, 125, 234, 238-39Selve, Odet de, 233Saint-Andre, Frangois de, 128Sequier, Pierre, 90, 232-33, 234,Saint-Andre, Jacques dAlbon de243,245(marshal of France), 26, 34, 41,Seranpont, Jean de, 203, 21645, 46, 47, 51-52, 93, 109, 160,Serres, Jean de, 270-71Index357Sforza, Francesco, 28Sicily, 12, 143Tende, Claude de, 45Termes, Paul de (marshal of France),Siena, 155, 166, 170-71, 192, 228119, 144', 167, 184, 198, 201, 206,Social divisions in France, 1-3, 75-216-1778Society of Jesus, 248Therouanne, siege of, 160-61, 162Thionville, fortress of, 140, 141, 215-Somme River, 193, 194, 21716,226,240Soranzo, Michele: reports cited, 83,Thou, Jacques-Auguste de, 52, 26787,108,181, 182,186,187, 190,Three Bishoprics of Lorraine, 148,igj, 193, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204168,221,226, 256Sorbonne. See Paris, University ofThrockmorton, Nicolaus: report citeSores, Jacques de, 136241, 244-45,251- 252, 253, 254Spain, 3, 9, 11, 14, 16, 17-23, 24,Torture, judicial, 128, 129, 26425, 26, 55, 163, 164, 235-37;Toul, 147, 151ambassador of, 188, 267. See alsoToulon, 119, 145, 189, 255Renard, SimonSpanish, 8, 19, 20Toulouse, 74, 86Toumelles, Palace of, 105, 114, 205,Spifame, Jacques (bishop), 242-43,249,251-55261Toumon, Francois de (cardinal), 15,Stafford, Thomas, 190-9122,43-44,54,120,171, 242Strasbourg, 39, 148, 151, 152Tours, 2, 69, 74Strozzi, Leone, 55, 136Trace italienne, 258Strozzi, Lorenzo (cardinal), 55, 189Treasury, royal. See EpargneStrozzi, Piero (marshal of France),Trivulzio, Antonio (cardinal), 73, 18955, 134; death of, 216; diplomaticTurin, 70, 72, 73, 74, 144, 187, 226,activities, 183, 185, 192; military227activities, 144, 156, 198, 201-4,Turks. See Ottoman Empire206,215-16Sturm, Jacob, 39, 148Suriano, Michele, 260, 261Suleiman (Ottoman sultan), 33, 166,210, 215Switzerland, 13, 118, 120, 124, 235,238Tuscany, duchy of, 166-67, 226Tyard, Pontus de (bishop), 112, 113Universities, 2. See also Paris, Uni¬versity ofUsury, 87Valentinois, duchy of, 57Valois, house of, 1,4, 10, 11, 12, 133,Taglicamo, Benedetto, 7, 16, 18, 21,207, 208, 26226Vauban, Sebastien de, 216, 258Tavennes, Gaspard de Saulx, comteVaucelles, truce of (1556), 96, 175-de, 35. 57- 22785,188,201,231, 257Taxation, 73, 79, 80, 81-84, I5°>Velasco, Inigo Hernandez de, 16, 18188, 211; aides, 81-83, 211;Velasco, Pedro Hernandez de, 16, 20,gabelles, 73, 81,83, 188; soldes23des 50,000 hommes, 82, 188;Venality, 88-91, 192steeple tax, 150; tailles, 81-82,Venice, 17, 71, 183, 186, 188; ambas¬211; tax farming, 73, 82-83, 188sador of, reports cited, 8, 27,Taylor, John: reports cited, 15-16,28, 30, 37, 63, 208, 222, 229,17-18235, 248. See also Capello, Gio-35»Henry IIVenice (cont.)fortress of, 46, 181vanni; Cavalli, Marino; Con-Viole, Claude, 244-45tarini, Lorenzo; Dandolo, Matteo;Visconti, Valentina, 12, 13Giustiano, Sebastiano; Miehiel,Vitoria, 16, 22Giovanni; Soranzo, Michele;Suriano, MicheleWaldensians, 125Verdun,147,151, 153, 156Wars of religion, 168, 253-54, 256,Vergerio, Piero, 123259-60, 262Vesalius, Andreas, 251,252Weiss, Nathaniel, 264Vieilleville, Franyois de Scepeaux,Wentworth, Thomas, Lord, 204, 205sire de, 34, 41, 57, 59, 148-49,Westphalia, Peace of (1648), 225151,162, 227William of Orange, 221, 248Villegaignon, Nicolas de, 235-37Williams, H. Noel, 23-24, 230Villeroy, Nicolas de, 46Villery, chateau of, 109Wolsey, Thomas (cardinal), 16Wooton, Nicholas: reports cited, 169,Villers-Cotterets: chateau of, 109,190232; Edict of, 126Wurttemberg, duchy of, 123Vincennes: chapel of, 94, 109;Wyatt, Thomas, 165-66Frederic J. Baumgartner is Associate Professorof History, Virginia Polytechnic Institute andState University, Blacksburg, Virginia.Faculty ChargeDuke UniversityPerkins Library660-5870