XXIX.
CONFISCATION OF LANDS IN IRELAND,

In 1560, under the reign of Elizabeth, the Protestant
Parliament met in Dublin. It was deeided that Ireland
should be reformed according to the model of the Angliean
Chureh ; but the nobility and the people detested this
change, and the new laws were not enforeed, exeept in
places where they eould be maintained by the bayonet,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. I21

Of all the native chiefs, the man who most alarmed the
Government was Shane O'Neill, eldest son of the Earl of
Tyrone. The old Irish respected and obeyed him as the
chief man of the island. In 1565, he took part in some acts
of open rebcllion. Frequent losses obliged him to seck
refuge among the Scotch of Ulster, enemies alike of Irish
and English; and this Irish prince was basely murdered
by his new friends, at the instigation of Pierse, an English
officer. The name, as well as the title, of O’Neill was
blotted out for ever by an Act of Parliament: to resume
it was declared an act of high treason. The lands of Shane
and his followers, comprising half of Ulster, were confis-
cated for the benefit of the Crown.

But this reduction of Ulstcr did not bring back peace.
The restless feeling of the chiefs of the country, both Irish
and English, continually drew them into local wars ; and
their attachment to the Catholic Faith made them enemies
.to the Government, which proscribed their religion.. In-
surrections broke out in all the provinces. The usual
punishment was the confiscation of the lands of the delin-
quents ; but it was easicr to pronounce this punishment
than to put it into execution.

A new plan was proposed to Queen Elizabeth—that of
colonising the confiscated districts with English peasants,
who, having an interest in the soil, would be obliged to
combat the old Irish without expense to the Crown.

A trial of it was begun in 1572. Immense grants were
made to some of the adventurers. The Earl of Essex
offered to colonise with 1,200 men the district of Clanna-
boy, in Ulster. By a contract made between Elizabeth
and him, it was agreed that the expense should be bornc
in equal portions by them.

This new plan of colonisation was regarded with horror
by the natives both of Irish and English origin. They
saw the fate that was in store for them. Several chiefs,
either in person or by messenger, implored the help of
Catholic powers for the defence of their property and their
religion. The Kings of France and Spain were then en-
gaged with matters of more immediate interest; but

1Every horseman who volunteered in the enterprise for two years
was to obtain four hundred acres of land at:two pence per acre, and
every footman two hundred acres at the same rate.-~Tvans.

122 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Gregory XIII. lent an ear to their complaints and their
supplications. Ireland had not becn namcd in the Bull of
Saint Pius V. This omission was supplicd for, and
Gregory signed, but without publishing, a new Bull, by
which he declarcd that Elizabeth had lost the Crown of
Ireland, as wellas that of England. (Becchetti, xii., § 21.)

In 1586, the Earl of Desmond was condemned by Tar-
liament, and the lands of his earldom, consisting of about
600,000 acres, were confiscated to the Crown. These
lands were granted to English colonists, and nearly all the
favourites of Queen Elizabcth obtained extensive tracts,
under condition of not admitting any person of Irish origin
to dwell among them. Half the region lapsed into a
wilderness. A considerable number of the old inhabitants
rather than abandon their birth-place, consented to hold
from strangers the lands that came to them from their
ancestors.!

1 The following note is from the Introduction toa “ Brief Descrip-
tion of Ireland, 1590,"’ published by the Archzological Society, Dublin,
1841 :—

‘* Her Majesty was bent on peopling Munster with English settlers,
and letters were written to every county in England to encourage
younger brothers to become ‘undertakers’ in Ireland, a name applied
‘to the settlers on account of their being obliged to undertake to observe
certain conditions enjoined by the Queen.

‘* Phe plan devised for the plantation of Munster was, to divide the
forfeited lands into seignories; and to require each undertaker for.12,000
acres to plant eighty-six families upon his estate, viz.—

His own family to have . . . : 1,600 acres
One chief farmer . . . 400 ,,
Two good farmers . . . . 600 _,,
Two other farmers . . . . 400 ,,
Fourteen free-holders, each 300 acres . . 4,200 ,,
Forty copy-holders, each roo acres . . 4,000 ,,
Twenty-six cottagers and labourers . . 800 ,,
12,000 ,,

‘‘ And so proportionably for smaller seignories.

“The inducements to settle in Ireland were very great. The Queen
proposed to give estates in fee, at two-pence per acre, in the: counties of
Cork and Waterford, to be rent free till March, 1590, and to pay but
halt the rent for the next three years. Thenceforth they were to hold
in soccage ; to have liberty for ten years to transport the growth of their
lands, duty free, to any placein amity with England ; to be free from
cess for ever; to have liberty to import necessaries from England, free
of custom: and no Irish were to be permitted to reside on the lands;
with several other covenants, some of which her Majesty did not

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, 123

Catholic sentiment in Ireland felt a strong re-aetion
against a Queen placed under sentence of excommunica-
tion and deposition. Some champions of independence
appealed to the Sovereign Pontiff as their lord, not only
spiritual, but temporal.

Dr. Lingard remarks that he does not know if this title
was accepted or rejected. But the Popes often sent pecu-
niary, and sometimes military help, and exhorted the Irish
to shake off the English yoke, and to free their country
from civil and religious bondage. These exhortations had
considerable influence on many persons, but the majority
of the two races continued faithful to Elizabeth.4 (History
of England, Reign of Elizabeth, Chapter VI.)

Although Parliament had passed an Act to abolish
Catholic worship in Ireland, it was not in the power of a

perform. particularly that of keeping troops for the security of the
settlers in Munster.”

The author of the book, one Robert Payne, encouraging English-
men to come over to Ireland, says :—'* Let not the reports of those tbat
have spent all their own and what they could by any means get from
others in England disconrage you from Ireland, altbough they and
such others by bad dealings have wrought a general discredit to
Englishmen in tbat country which are to the Irish unknown. These
men will say there is great danger in travelling the country, and much
‘more to dwell or inhabit there; yet are they freed from three of the
greatest dangers: first, they cannot meet in all that land any worse
than themselves; secondly, they need not fear robbing, for that they
have nothing to lose; lastly, they are not likely to run in debt, for that
there is none will trust them... .

‘33 herrings, 6 mackerel, 6 sea-breams, a fat hen, 30 eggs, a fat pig,
one pound of butter, or 2 gallons of new milk, fora penny. A red deer
without the skin, for 2s. 6d.... You may keep a better house in
Ireland for £50 a year than in England for £200 a year.”—Trans.

1 This last remark, attributed to Dr. Lingard, appears to be an
interpolation. I have searched through two editions of his History of
England (Mawman, London, 1823, and Baldwin and Cradock, London,
1838), and can find nothing like it. Onthe contrary, I find bim to say:
‘In Ireland almost the wbole population, whether of English or Irish
origin, was leagued in open or clandestine hostility against the English
government.”—‘“ Tbe O’Neill was celebrated in every district as the
saviour of his country; and the whole of the indigenous population,
and many of the chieftains of English origin, arose in arms to assert
the independence of their country.”

It is possible that a French edition may have been tampered with.

As a general rule, our learned author, who often quotes Dr. Lingard,
is exceedingly correct in his views regarding Ireland, especially when
we consider that he is a foreigner.—Trans.

£24 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

handful of Protestants to deprive a whole people of their
religious rites. If the laws were observed, it was only in
the towns of the garrison. The news of Elizabeth’s death
was immediately followed by a restoration of the ancient
worship.

The violent abolition of Catholic worship, and the fines
inflicted on those who were absent from the Protestant
Church on Sunday, were not the only blows of which
the Catholics of Ircland had to complain. The law obliged
every person to take the oath of supremacy, if he wished
to practise at the bar, or to become a magistrate, or to
obtain investiture or possession of feudal lands.

This law was often relaxed. Sometimes it seeined to fall
into desuetude. But the Irish always knew that such favour
came only from toleration, and that they were at the mercy
of the Government, and of every perfidious or interested
informer. During the greater part of the reign of James I.
the laws were executed with some indulgence, but this in-
dulgence was only accidental, and even when it took place,
it did not proceed from any just idea of equity. It arose
from a sense of weakness, and a conviction that the
moment for another course was not yet come.}

In 1605, James issued a proclamation, commanding all
Catholic priests to quit Ireland under pain of death, and
requiring the chief inhabitants to attend the Protestant
service. Some great families of the country cried out
against the unlawfulness of this ordinance, and asked that
liberty of worship should be allowed them ; but the peti-

2 A certain author, to whom we have several times referred, takes
a mere passing remark from aletter (in Sficil. Ossor., p. 113) which has
no name attached, but was probably written by some Englishman or
Anglo-Irishman in London to the Spanish ambassador there in 1604,and
he presents it as the national sentiment of Ireland during the seventeenth
century. It is to the effect that all the Catholics of Ireland believed
the title by which the English Kings obtained the dominion of Ireland
to be that the rights of the Church should be preserved whole and invio-
late, according to the decree of Pope Adrian IV., as shown in some
documents sent the previous year from England to be printed in Frank-
fort. Now, who does not see that the nameless writer of this letter has
no Claim to be regarded as an exponent or a representative of the views
held by the Old Irish? It was always the endeavour of the English to
obtain belief for Adrian's Bull; but the Old Trish in general knew too
well what to think of it. Their confidence in the Pope, their devotion
to the Holy See, never failed for a single day. No doubt many of the
Anglo-Irish followed their example.—Trans,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 125

tioners were arrested, and lodged in the Castle. Many
were banished out of the country.

By confiseating the property of fugitives, two million
acres of land, forming nearly the whole of six counties in
the North, fell to the Crown. James I. ordered a new trial
of colonisation. Immense lots were reserved for the best
known adventurers of England and Seotland, and for
military and civil offecrs. Some of the smallest lots were
given to native Irish ; but these were obliged to take the
oath of supremacy, and to admit no tenant except of Eng-
lish origin. Such was the plan. Its exeeution, however,
required many modifications. Of the whole region, in
great part mountainous and uncultivated, a vast portion
was never divided in any manner ; and many of the indi-
genous chiefs, either under pretext of loyalty or by means
of gifts, had their old possessions yielded to them. Mean-
while, about a hundred thousand acres were colonised ;
and the vigour of the measure, joined with thc amalgama-
tion of a new race, hclpcd to kecp in awe those turbulent
spirits who had so often despised the authority and the
power of the English Government.

Under the reign of Charles I., rcligious persecution be-
came doubly intense.! The Irish then held a_ general

‘Mr. Lecky, though no great friend of Ireland, felt himself
bouud as an honest historian to write thus of Ireland in the latter
part of the sixteenth century :—

“The slaughter of Irishmen was looked upon as literally the
slaughter of wild beasts. Not only men, but even the women
and children who fell into the hands of the English were deliberately
and systematically butchered. The sword was not found efficient.
But another method was found much more efficacious. Year
after year, over a great part of all Ireland, all means of human
subsistence was destroyed, no quarter was given to prisoners who
surrendered, and the whole population was skilfully and steadily
starved to death. The pictures of the condition of lreland at
this time are as terrible as anything in human history.”

We may indeed with all truth say, that during the last seven
hundred years, Ireland has presented innumerable scenes for the
proper description of which no historian can find words, no painter
colours.

Again, speaking of the early part of the seventeenth century,
Mr. Lecky says : ‘‘ It had become clear beyond all doubt to the native
population that the old scheme of rooting them out from the soil
was the scttled policy of the Government; that the land which
remained to them was marked as a prey by hungry adventurers,
by the refuse of the population of England and Scotland, by men

120 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

assembly. A national association was formed, and the
members bound themselves by oath to maintain the free
and public excrcise of Catholic worship, and to claim for
the people of Ireland the same privileges as wcre cnjoyed
by the people of England. All the Irish, with the excep-.
tion of persons who lived in fortified places occupied by
the English garrisons, conscnted to draw the sword
against the common enemy of thcir rights and of their
rcligion, and resolved never to lay down arms until they
had obtained a recognition of the independencc of the Irish
Parliament, a removal of cvery degrading disqualification
madc on account of religion, and an exclusion of strangers
from all civil and military charges in the kingdom.

The King signed a proclamation on the 1st of January,
1642, declaring that the insurgents were traitors, and
again prohibitcd the exercise of Catholic worship.

Parliament borrowed a large sum of money on a pledge
of the lands of the insurgents, which were regarded as
already confiscated in consequence of the rebellion. For
this design, two million five hundred thousand acres were
set apart. Thcse measures served to cement the union of
the insurgents and to increase their efforts.

A council of Catholic prelates and theologians was con-
vened at Kilkenny, on the 1oth of May, 1642. A report of
the grievances that had led the insurgents to take up arms
was laid before them, and they decided that the reasons
were sufficient, and that the war was lawful, pro-
vided that it was not carried on through motives
of private interest or personal hatred, nor dis-
honoured by acts of needless cruelty. An _ oath
was ordered to be taken, by which each man bound
himself to protect, at the risk of his life and fortune, the

who cared no more for their rights and happiness than they did
for the rights and happiness of the worms which were severed by
their own spades.”

While this sad state of affairs prevailed among the Irish, the
English and Scotch settlers, favoured by the Government, were of
course prospering in every way.

The President of the United States, Theodore Roosevelt, in
a lecture on Cromwell, refers to the same period thus: ‘ Ireland,
utterly foreign in speech and culture, had been ground into the
very dust by the crushing weight of England’s overlordship.”
How admirable to see such sentiments of humanity in a man of
such exalted and extensive influence !—Tvans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND, I27

liberty of Catholic worship, and the lawful immunities and
rights of the kingdom of Ireland, against all invaders or
usurpers. Sentence of excommunication was also dcerccd
against any Catholic who should abandon the union, and
against any who should take advantage of the war to kill,
wound, or rob another.

The republican Parliament of London had a design to
exterminate the Catholic population. Cromwell, seeing
the impossibility of cffecting such a massacre,! had re-
course to an expedient. This was to engage the chiefs to
expatriate themselves, with great numbers of their fcllow-
countrymen, and to pass into the service of forcign powers.
An Act of Parliament banished all Catholic officers. In
this manner, the Irish population was lessened by thirty or
forty thousand men able to bear arms. As for women and
children, they were assembled in crowds of thousands, put
on board of ships, and transported to America, especially
ta Jamaica.?

Notwithstanding all this emigration, and the frequent
arrival of English and Scotch colonists, it was found that
the Catholic population excceded the Protestant in the pro-
portion of eight to one.

A proclamation of the 6th of January, 1653, commanded
all Catholic priests to leave Ircland within twenty days,
under pain of being treated as guilty of high treason.
Every person was forbidden to give shelter to any of the
clergy, under pain of dcath.

A fine of half-a-crown was imposed on those who should
fail to be present at the Sunday service of the Protestant
Church. Magistrates were empowered to seizc the children
of Catholics, so as to have them brought up in England.

Some Priests who remained in the country were dis-

' Cromwell, after his barbarous massacres at Drogheda and Wex-
ford, in which no mercy was shown to man, woman, or child, writes to
the Parliament that it has “ pleased God to give into your hands this
other mercy, for which, as for all, we pray God may have all the glory.”
Drogheda was the first ‘‘ mercy”; Wexford the second !

A more inhuman monster than Cromwell, always ready to call
black white and white black, has seldom been seen. If sophistry were
Aa honourable study, his writings might serve as a text-book for it.—

rans.

*For many interesting particulars of those crucl days, sec
Spicilegium Ossoriense, by Cardinal Moran. Thc poor Irish exiles
were often sold as slaves for a very small sum,.—Tvans,

128 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

covered and hanged. Those who eseapcd scarch concealed
themselves in the caves of mountains, or in lonely huts
rudely built in the midst of bogs, from which thcy went
forth at night, to carry the consolations of religion to the
dwellings of their people.

A proclamation was also issued, ordering all Nuns to
marry, or else to quit the island. Many of them were
shipped to Belgium, France, and Spain, where they found
hospitality in the convents of their Orders.

As a consequence of the confiseations made by Cromwell,
and confirmed, at the time of the Restoration, by
Charles IJ., the Irish lost the greatest part of their lands,
for only a tenth part was left them.

The position of the indigenous Irish improved somewhat
after the fall of the Stuarts. In 1691, frecdom in the exer-
cise of the Catholic religion, with a formal promise of pro-
tection from all trouble on account of it, was guaranteed to
them by the ‘Treaty of Limerick. It was stipulated that
any Irishman might leave Ircland with his family and
goods, and go to any country he pleased, except England
or Seotland,?

