AANI.
EMANCLPALION OF THE IRISLL.

‘Yaucur by long experience that it was impossible to over-
come the Irish in matters of religion, the English Govern-
ment at last understood that it should grant Emancipation,
with full religious liberty. But this great change was not
wrought in a day ; the English yielded only little by little,
and when compelled by necessity.!

Since the eonquest, Ireland had been subjected to iniqui-
tous treatment. The conquerors began by despoiling the
natives of a great part of their lands. The next step was,
by ill treatment, to drive them into rebellion, so as to have
a plausible pretext for depriving them of what was left.

Protestantism made no proselytes among the old Irish ;
the only Irishmen who embraeed it were the deseendants of
the English who settled in Ireland since the eonquest.
But, intead of allowing those men who had been so
pitilessly robbed the exercise of the religion of their ances-
tors, the English banished the priests from their churches,
and gave their goods to Protestants. Some Irishmen had
still preserved lands ; their fidelity to the Stuarts served as
a pretext for their spoliation. Cromwell first, and after-
wards William IIJ., greedily eonfiscated whatever had not
been already confiscated, so that there remained in the
hands of Catholies only a tenth part of the lands of Ireland.

To eomplete the evil, the new proprietors were not slow
in returning to England—leaving thcir estates in the hands
of middlemen, who sublet them in various portions to the
unfortunate peasants at enormous rack-rents, and on con-
ditions so hard that Russian serfs were less to be pitied.

In 1793, the English Parliament passed a Bill that freed

1 Hence O’Connell’s celebrated maxims, ‘‘ England’s difficulty
is Treland’s opportunity,” and, “‘ We must take justice by instal-
ments,’ These maxims were the practical application of the
-words of one of O’Connell’s warmest friends and supporters, the
Most Rev. Dr. Maginn, Bishop of Derry: “ Treland is our second
mother ; her soil is sacred for us; her honour, her glory, her in-
dependence should, after God and His holy faith, enlist all our
sympathies, excite our warmest affection, and concentrate all our
energies.’ —T vans.

132 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

the Catholics of Scotland from several disqualifications to
which they had been subject. The Catholics of Ireland
were likewise permitted by a Bill! to engage in civil and
military employments, as also to exercise electoral rights.
But many restrictions were imposed on them. They
acquired civil rights, but they were denied political rights.

In 1798, an insurrection burst out in Ireland. It cost the
lives of more than 30,000 men, and was the ruin of innu-
merable families. But it was well proved, by the acknow-
ledgment of many leaders in it, that it had not at all for its
its original object the emancipation of Catholics. The
chief insurgents wished only to found a republic on the
ruins of the ancient government, and to be totally indepen-

dent of Great Britain.
The union of the two Kingdoms and their Parliaments,
which was effected in 1800,? did not modify the condition

TEngland had lately been taught a severe lesson by the with-
drawal of the United States of America from their allegiance to
her. She was also alarmed at the spread of republican principles
in France, and feared an invasion of Ireland. She therefore
believed it more for her interest to be less tyrannical.—Tyvans.

* For a very interesting account of Ireland’s losses since the
Union of 1800,—of which Union, Lord Clare, the son of an apostate
lawyer, was said to be the Father—see England's Wealth and
Iyeland’s Poverty, by Mr. Thomas Lough, M.P. The author shows
that the gross income of Great Britain is reckoned at fifteen hundred
and thirty millions, and that of Ireland at seventy millions. Then,
deducting {12 per head for average support of population, the
taxable income of Great Britain is about £30 a head, and that of
Ireland £3 a head. If the Briton and the Irishman were to he
taxed with equal fairness, each Briton should pay ten times as
much as each Irishman. . . . In Great Britain the total tax-
ation does not amount to quite one-ninth, in Ireland it amounts
to four-fifths, of the taxable income. . . . The theory of the
government of the two islands under one system is that like benefits
should be enjoyed by both. Therefore, according to this theory,
one-ninth of the taxable income is all that should be demanded
in Ireland. ‘‘ Let it not be said that this would be nothing for
the people to pay. It would be just as much as the people now
pay in Great Britain, and as much as they paid in Ireland when
her own statesmen controlled the destinies of the country”
(pp. 106, 107, 121). Elsewhere, he shows, that the taxation of
Ireland ought to be reduced by about six millions a year (pp. 97, 98,
TOO
not long ago, Mr. John Redmond, M.P., in a very able speech,
abounding with instructive statistics, spoke as follows :—-‘* What
a cruel thing it is that while every industry and interest in the
country is neglected, while education is starved, while the labourers

A FRIEND OF TRELAND. T33

of the Irish Catholies, who took no part in it, as they were
excluded from politieal rights. It seems certain that Pitt
had promised full Emancipation.

In 1829, troubles continued in Ircland, and as [celings
grew more and more excited on each side, a civil war was
to be feared. Emancipation became necessary: the de-
mands of the Irish could no longer be resisted.1

can get no justice, while the artisans of the towns cannot get decent
habitations, while the drainage of Irish rivers is neglected, while
the Irish railways are the worst and dearest in the world, and
nothing is done to improve transit facilities, while the piers and
harbours of the country are a disgrace and a danger to human
life, and while all these things are so because of ‘ want of money’
—what a scandal and a crime it is that all the while we are support-
ing the most expensive government in the world, and are paying
from £3,000,000 to £5,000,000 a year more than our taxable
capacity warrants as compared:to Great Britain. Just think of
how Ireland would be transformed if even a portion of this money
of which we are annually robbed were spent under the paternal
care of a native government upon some of these matters I have
mentioned, instead of being squandered, as it is to-day.’’—Tvans.

1 The Irish were led on to this great victory by Daniel O'Connell:
who was therefore called the ‘Irish Liberator.’ An ardent
patriot, of giant mind and sympathetic heart, he laboured for many
years to procure ‘‘ Repeal of the Union,” The pride of his country-
men, he was regarded as an uncrowned king, and was followed
with unbounded confidence. He was a great advocate for moral
force, though some people believe that moral force shows itself
better by a well organised policy of passive resistance than by
speeches in the House of Commons; and even the Times has ad-
mitted that passive resistance may become ‘‘ more troublesome
than armed rehellion.’’ However, as far as can be judged at present,
it seems a much wiser course for the Jrish people to rally round their
parliamentary representatives, and to pull well with them. It
is to be feared that no other plan would work ; and great disunion
might be caused by advocating some crude scheme. After many
a strugele for faith and fatherland, O’Connell died in 1847 at Genoa,
on his way to the Eternal City, bequeathing “‘ his soul to God, his
heart to Rome, and his body to Treland.’”’ He is buried in Glas-
nevin Cemetery (near Dublin), where a noble monument—a round
tower 160 feet high, surmounted by a cross eight feet high—does
honour to his memory. The chief street in Dublin, one of the
finest in Europe, is called O’Connell Street, that his sentiments,
his aspirations, and his lifelong endeavours may never be forgotten
by Irishmen.

Thanks to Father Eugene O’Growney and the Gaelic League,
a wonderfully strong national spirit, such as would have delighted
O’Connell, has been awakened in the country during the past
few years by the Irish Language Movement! Never, perhaps,

134 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

The Duke of Wellington proposed, and the two Houses
of the English Parliament carried, a Bill which abolished
civil distinctions, and recognised equality in political
rights, with a few exceptions. Before being able to en-
gage in public functions, Catholics should take an oath of
fidelity to the Crown. It was forbidden them to display
the insignia of their office or their rank in Catholic
churches. Bishops could not bear the same titles as
Bishops of the Protestant Church. Some precautions were
taken against too grcat an increase of monastic bodies.

The Government made few friends for itself among the

did any movement take such a hold on the popular mind, or lead
so directly to national life. ‘‘ Our primary object,’’ says Father
O’Growney in the Gaelic Journal, ‘“‘ should be to.make the Gaelic
language live in the homes of the people.” As a friend of his
who knew him well informs us, he believed that if the Irish would
not re-learn their language, and cultivate their own literature
and art, they would wander farther and farther away from
Irish thought and feeling, and at lasi forget that they had
a country of their own to honour and defend. He believed
that without Irish poetry, music, and story, they would
never be themselves ; would never listen to the voice of patriotism ;
would never make a step on the road to independence, but let
their ancient land, in spite of all its glorious memories, sink to the
level of a British province. He was deeply convinced that “‘ native
martial song is the Nurse of Freedom in ‘every land beneath the
sun.’ A man of great ideas and ideals, he did not decry the
value of the English language, mor did he fail to see what a mighty
bulwark the old language would be for the preservation of the
old faith, His life, written by Miss Agnes O’Farrelly, M.A., is
a work highly interesting.

In the coining of new Irish words, to meet modern requirements,
it would seem better not to follow the example of the English,
French, etc., who take Latin or Greek roots, but rather the example
of the Germans, who try to find expressive terms in their own
language. Thus, for magnanimity, they say gvossmuth, great-
spirit ; for telescope, fernrohr, far-tube ; for synonymous, gleick-
hedeutend, like-meaning ; for transparent, duvchsichtig, through-.
see-able ; for to navigate, schiffen, to ship, or segeln, to sail; and
for to demonstrate, bewetsen, to make wise on—that is, to instruct.
Still it must be admitted that they have adopied a good many
other words which (though perhaps with a slight change of spelling)
are now in general use everywhere ; as astronomie, telegraph, etc.
Occasionally the coined words seem rather far-fetched, as anhang,
a hang-on, for appendix, and thronhimmel, a throne-heaven, for
canopy. We also meet words of an originality that is amusing,
as handschuh, a hand-shoe, for glove, and schlaguhy, a strike-hour,
for clock. Sometimes, words very much alike have quite a different
meaning, as vorsehung, foreseeing, providence, and versehung,

A FRIEND OF IRKLAND. 135

Catholics, who felt little gratitude for what the force of
eireumstances, rather than any sense of justice, had
extorted. The Emaneipation Bill plaeed the two countries
on the same levcl, but it did not unite hearts.

The English Government did not grant Emancipation
without first expressing its intention of making Irishmen
disown and abjure the Bull of Adrian IV., and every other
Bull that implied any right in the Pope to dispose of king-
doms or crowns. As a matter of fact, this question eon-
tinually turned up in the long inquiries that preceded the
Act of Emancipation. No one ever saw a contradiction

overlooking, mistaking, The prefixes voy and ver here correspond
to fore and over in English.

It is to be hoped that with the spread of Irish literature, now
so rapidly going on, a well-recognised standard, not only of style, but
also of spelling and pronunciation, will soon be attained. Of course
a great latitude must be allowed for variety of expression, without,
however, letting it run wild. We should not forget what is often
seen in bistory, that the dialects of people who once spoke the same
language, have, by imperceptible changes and for want of pruning,
at last become different languages, no longer intelligible to all.

About a century ago, the Welsh language was nearly extinct,
but by a vigorous effort it was revived, and isnowin a most flourish-
ing condition. About three-fourths of the people of Wales usc
the Welsh language in the daily intercourse of life. There arc
large districts in which a word of English is never heard from
January to December. In 1887, there were seventeen weekly
newspapers in the Welsh language, The smallest circulation of
any of these was 1,500, while the largest was returned at 23,000.
Then there wcre monthly, bimonthly, arid quarterly magazines,
one of which had attained a circulation of 37,600. (These par-
ticulars are taken from the Welsh Review, quoted in the Irish
Gaelic Journal, of June, 1892.) It was chiefly to the voluntary
work, we are told, of untrained teachers for an hour in the Sunday
Schools, that 999 out of every 1,000 Welshmen were able to read
Welsh. About 1886 a ‘‘ Society for the Utilization of the Welsh
Language ’’e was formed, and such has been its success that edu-
cation in Wales is now thoroughly bilingual.

Large powers, as well as large sums of public money, have
been granted to the school authorities in Wales. Books on every
subjcct, and in every standard, may have Welsh and English
readings sidc by side. Welsh headlines for copybooks, Welsh
airs with Welsh words, Welsh history, etc., may be systematically
taught. The annual Welsh Eisteddfod is an occasion of great
national enthusiasm.

Other countries of Europe—Bohemia, Finland, Poland, Belgium
—have saved their languages in likc manner. But Irish is far more
worthy of rescuc and preservation than any of these. ‘ Keltic

136 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

more palpable. For ages the English had relied on the
false Bull of Adrian as the title-deed of their rights over
Ireland ; in 1829, they repudiated this title-deed, and any
argument that might be brought forward to sustain it.!

