NN.

APPEARANCE OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL IN ENGLISH
CHRONICLES.

Ir seems to me certain, and I shall prove it in the course
of the following chapters, that the English chroniclers
took the Apocryphal Bull from Giraldus Cambrensis, who,
first of all,! published it, in his history of the Conquest of
Ireland.

Giraldus composed a great many works. Being in Rome,
he presented copies of them to the Pope, and to other per-
sonages ; but he took care not to let them see the Expug-
natio Hibernica, which contained the false Bull of
Adrian IV.2 Thus, having gone to Rome in 1199, he
presented six of his works to Pope Innocent II].—among
others, the Gemma Sacerdotalis : the conquest of Ireland
does not figure there. (Works of Giraldus, new edition,
Brewer, 1861, vol. 1, p. xx.)

In the Symbolum Electorum we scc a letter written by
Giraldus to the Dean or Chancellor of the Roman Court.
He sent him the Topography of Ircland and the Descrip-
tion of Cambria, but no History of the Conquest. (Jbid.,
p. 308.

As oan revising his Expugnatio, made of it, during

‘Tt is likely that Giraldus, being a courtier, accepted without
any question any document supplied to him by Henry, and gladly
inserted it in his book. It is likely also that the King regarded the
publication of the book as a golden opportunity for the introduction of
a forgery, and considered himself fortunate in meeting with such a
credulous author as Giraldus, who always thought himself twice the
man he was, and expected everybody to believe him.—Tvans.

?This would seem to imply that Giraldus himself had some
suspicions regarding the Bull, and was afraid to bring it under the
notice of the authorities at Rome, lest some more scrutinising glance
should reveal its true character. But then he would no longer be in
bona fide, We may therefore suppose that his motive was not to draw
any attention to the doings of the English in Ireland, which were so
contrary to the intentions of the Pope, and which, if known, might
lead to a revocation of the supposed Bull.—Trans,

68 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

his lifetime, two or three different editions, of which the
last, dedicated to King John, seems to have been in 12009,
I cannot dispense myself from a notice of the author’s life
and works. ‘This task is now easy, thanks to the laborious
studies of Mr. Brewer and the Rev.. Mr. Dimock, who
have published the most recent cdition.

Born about 1150, Giraldus went to study in Paris, and
returned to England at twenty-two years of age. In 1175,
the Archbishop of Canterbury confided to him a mission
in Wales, and appointed him Archdeacon of Breclknock.
It seems certain that Giraldus returned to Paris about the
end of 1176,

It was only in 1184 that King Henry II. brought him to
Court, in quality of chaplain. Giraldus rendercd him all
the services he could, in Ireland and in Wales, by his acts
and by his writings. Nevertheless, Henry bestowed no
favours on him, because he was related to some of the
chief families among the Welsh. Giraldus complained
bitterly of this neglect, especially in his biography (De
rcbus a se gestis), written about 1204: ‘f Cum ergo pluri-
bus annis curiam sequendo fidclitcr servasset, et ad Wal-
liam pacificandam et in pace tenendam profecisset ; tamen
propter parentelam qua Resum filium Griffini et alios
Walliz principes contingebat, nihil a rege (Henrico) qui
tot ditabat et promovebat indignos, preter vacua veris
promissa suscepit.”” (Vol. 1., 57.)

Sent into Ireland in 1185, as tutor and counscllor of
Kiang John, he there found materials for his Topography,
and for the History of the Conquest, which he wrote in the
two or three years following.

In 1189 he was in France. After the death of Henry JI.,
Richard Coeur de Lion sent Giraldus to put Wales into a
state of defence. ‘The same year Giraldus was named
ce to the supreme justiciary of England, the Bishop
of Ely.

The fixed idea of Giraldus, that which filled his life, was
to withdraw his country, Cambria, from the metropolitan
jurisdiction of Canterbury, and to erect an archbishopric
in the Cathedral of St. David. With this view, he had
placed himself at the service of the Court. From the same
motive, he constantly refused the bishoprics that were

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 69

offered to him : Bangor, in 1190 ; Landaf, in 1191 ; and
so of others.

Having abandoned the Court in 1192, he retired to Lin.
coln, and remained there seven ycars, occupied with
studies, and with the writing of various works : such as
the Life of Galfridus, Archbishop of York, written in 1193.
and the Gemma Sacerdotalis, about 1197.

The next year saw the beginning of the troubles of Gir.
aldus, as a candidate for the Bishopric of St. David’s.
Postulated by the Chapter, with three other subjects, in
1198, he was the only one at the commencement of the
following year. On the z9th of June, he obtained, no
longer simple postulation, but canonical election. Having
set out for Rome to pursue the matter, he arrived there
about the feast of St. Andrew, 1199, and found Pope
Innocent III. disposed to restore the metropolitan right of
St. David’s. The Pontiff, however, asked for the vouchers
of ancient erection. Giraldus could not present them, and
after a suit of four years, he had to yield before the im-
placable opposition of the King of England and the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury.

Discouraged and embittcred, he rcturned to England,
and resigned his archdeaconship to his nephew William.
During the years 1204 and 1205, he wrote a Description of
Cambria, Symbolum Electorum, Speculum Duorum, In-
vectiones, the Life of St. Regimus, and his own Auto-
biography. About 1209, he prepared the last edition of
Hibernia Expugnata, with a dedication to King John.
About 1218, he wrote the Dialogues De jure Menevensis
Ecclesia. About 1220, he completed De Principis Instruc-
tione, in which he disclaimed the diploma of Alex.
ander III. ; afterwards the Speculum Ecclesie, and a
second edition of the Dialogues. The year of his death is
not known.

The first edition of the Conquest, dedicated to Richard
Ceeur de Lion, Earl of Poitiers, could hardly have been
finished before 1188!—previously to the death of Henry II.
As regards the last edition, the time is fixed by its dedica-

‘If it contained Adrian’s Bull, this would be thirty-three years after
the supposed date (1155) of the Bull. Pope Adrian IV., King Louis VII.,
and John of Salisbury, being long dead, Henry might now have the
Bull spoken of, in public as well as in private, with little fear. —Trans,

70 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

tion to King John, about 1209. Thercfore, between these
two dates we must place the divulging of the Bull attri-
buted to Pope Adrian IV. It is not easy to be more
precise.

In the manuscripts that have come down to us, we re-
mark some important variations and considerable sup-
pressions. We also find there some parts inextricably
confused. Thus, some manuscripts leave out the diploma
of Alexander III., and do not even allude to it. Scribes
have, in consequence, modified the preamble ; and by an
inconccivable mistakc, they have represented Henry II. as
soliciting in 1172 a privilege from Adrian IV., who died
in 1159. Then, by a confusion no less strange, they re-
present John of Salisbury, who, it is said, obtained a
privilege in 1155, as sent in 1172, not to Ircland, but to
Rome, with the view of publishing the diploma at Water-
ford in 1174 or 1175. (Sec the judicious observations of
the Rev. Mr. Dimock, vol. v., p. xlii.-li.)

In the last edition, finished about 1209, the suppressions
are more considerable than in the previous ones. Dimock
sees in it a trace of that resentment which Giraldus
nourished against the royal family, who, instead of re-
warding his services, had opposed his most ardent wishes
for the religious independence of Cambria. (/bid., p. xlv.)

Camden, in his compendium : Anglica, Hibernica, &c,
followed the manuscripts which show considerable suppres-
sions, and which have caused the greatest confusion in re-
xard to pontifical diplomas connected with Ircland. (Ibid.,
P- 315-)

What may lead us to belicve that the pretended Bull of
Adrian IV. was pretty late in being divulged is that neither
William of Newburgh nor Roger. de Hoveden appears to
have had any knowledge of it.

Giraldus scems to have belicved bona fide in the genuine-
ness of the Bull. He inserted it anew in his autobiography
(De rebus ase gestis), written about the year 1205 ; but he
cited the Bull only with a view to show that the reverses of
the English in Ireland came from the fact of their not
having observed the conditions prescribed by Pope Adrian,
cspccially in regard to Peter’s Pence. (Jbid., p. 61.)

In the autobiography, the diploma of Alexander III. is
completely omitted, as well as all reference to a pretended

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 71.

publication of the two Bulls in a Council at Waterford, re-
lated in the Expugnatio. These suppressions and contra-
dictions leave everything in confusion and uncertainty.
About 1209, all Ireland was in revolt,! and the English
prince lost nearly all his possessions. In a letter accom.
panying a copy of the last edition, Giraldus represented to
King John that these misfortunes ought to be attributed
to a violation of the promises made ‘in regard to Ireland.
‘Your father,” he says, “‘ wisely providing for himself
and his posterity, promised two things to Pope Adrian IV.,
in order to obtain authority to invade the land of Ireland
and make a conquest of it. This aggression, so terrible
and so bloody against Christians, was sanctioned by the
highest authority on earth, on condition of exalting the
Church in that region, and of giving to the Blessed Peter
the annual penny for every house, as is done in England,
according to the privilege of the said Pope, which your
father asked with prudence and circumspection, and which
is faithfully kept? in the archives of Winchester. . . . It is
without doubt by reason of these two promises, not yet ful-
filled, that the advantages of the conquest and the good
effects that it ought to producc have been so long delayed,
and that the chief men among the conquerors of Ireland. .
have not deserved to leave any legitimate descendants.
Nor is this surprising. In point of fact, the clergy of the
island, impoverished, are plunged in the deepest misery.
The cathedral churches mourn the loss of the cxtensive
lands and domains with which, in former days, they were
piously and devoutly cndowed ; they have becn despoiled
of them by the first conquerors, or by their companions
and successors. And thus an exaltation of the Church
there is changed into a spoliation of the churches.
That God may share in something of this conquest which
has cost so much blood, it will be necessary to give hence-

* At this period, the Irish had learned by sad experience what were
the real objects of the invaders, and could not but be filled with
indiguation at such a record of hypocrisy, treachery, and villainy.
The motto of the English in plundering Ireland would seem to have
been ‘‘ Quocunque modo.”—Tvans,

"If “faithfully kept,” as of the utmost importance, how is it that
no trace of it can now be found, or indeed has ever been seen, while we
have other documents, both genuine and forged, of the same period ?
The reason seems to be that it never existed.—T vans.

72 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

|

forth the promised Penny. It is a very small, a very
modest eontribution. It frees everybody, and burdens
nobody. JI add with the same earnestness that, to preserve
the memory of the eonquest of Ireland by the English, it
would be well to establish firmly an annual tribute of gold,
of game, or even of trees, as a perpetual testimony that
the kingdom of Ireland is bound by an inviolable ehain to
the Crown of England.” (Giraldus, v. 408.)

Hence result several important faets. 1. In 1209, Peter’s
Penee had never existed in Ireland. 2. The families of the
first conquerors were destroyed, annihilated. 3. The Irish
elergy were redueed toa state of extreme poverty. 4. The
property of ehurehes had been pillaged by the English.
5. The false Bull of Adrian was preserved, aeeording to
rumour, in the arehives of Winehester. 6. Giraldus, it
seems, eontinued in good faith, sineerely believing in the
genuineness of the Bull. 7. The adviee that Giraldus gave
to establish an annual tribute as a perpetual testimony of
the subjugation of Ireland to the Crown of England, seems
to have been followed by King John, when, four years
afterwards, he offered to Pope Innoeent III. to pay to the
Holy See an annual quit-rent of three hundred marks
sterling, in the name of Ireland. Later on, I shall say
whether the Pope aeeepted this token of sovereignty.

 

