XVIII.
EXAMINATION OF THE APOCRYPHAL BULL,

Was Henry II. incapable of forging a Bull? Would he
have shrunk back with horror at a crime of falsehood?

He feared excommunication very much, it is true. His
flight into Ireland in 1171 showed the terror with which
the thunders of the Church had filled him. But in his
time, the Bull In coena Domini not yet existing, the
falsifiers of acts of the Holy See did not incur excommu-
nication by the very fact.

Under a deceitful exterior, Henry concealed a heart
capable of descending to the vilest artifices, and of sport.
ing with his own honour and veracity. No one could be-
lieve his assertions or.trust his promises. He justified his
habits of duplicity by the maxim that “‘ it is better to re-
pent of words than of facts, to be guilty of falsehood than
to fail in a favourite pursuit.” (Lingard.)

Giraldus Cambrensis, on the subject of the King’s
duplicity, says :—‘‘ Naturali quadam inconstantia, verbi
spontaneus plerumque transgressor. Nam quoties in
arctum res devenerat, dc dicto malens quam facto peni-

1 It is likely that John of Salisbury was one of the greatest letter-
writers of hisday. Although more than 320 of his letters are preserved
in the Migne collection, they are said to be only afew. The Rev. W.
B. Morris, of the Oratory, London, thinking that if Salisbury had
really obtained a grant of Ireland for Henry II., as related in Chapter
XLII, of the Metalogicus, he must have alluded to it in some of these
letters, examined them all. He found twenty-seven letters addressed
to Pope Adrian IV., eleven to King Henry II., and twenty-three to
Pope Alexander I1J—but in none of them a single word about a dona-
tion of Ireland, or anything bearing on such a subject. Is it not
therefore morally certain that Salisbury is not the author of Chapter
XLII? Again, as Cardinal Moran remarks, Salisbury, after the death
of Adrian IV., having fallen into disgrace at Henry's court, wrote
many letters setting forth his merits, and defending himself against the
displeasure of the King, but in none of them did he refer to a signal
service that he had rendered in obtaining a grant of Ireland. Is it not
thus evident that he had never rendered any such service, and that
Chapter XLII. is a mere forgery ?—Trans.

52 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

tere, verbumque facilius quam factum irritum habere.”’
(Vol. v., p. 304.)

Cardinal Vivian, after a long conversation with the
King, remarked that he had never seen a man tell lies with
such a brazen face. (Epist. S. Thom., 3, 6.)

His anger was that of a madman ; his fury, that of a
wild beast. Est leo, aut leone truculentior, dum vehemen-
tius excandescit. (Peter of Blois, Epist. 66, 75.)

A page having presented a letter to him, the King tried
to pull out his eyes, and it was only with wounds that the
youth escaped. (Epist. S. Thom., 1, 45.)

Pride and anger, cunning and duplicity, were the chief
traits in his character.

The falsity of the letter attributed to Pope Adrian has
already been proved by extrinsic arguments, set forth at
length in the preceding chapters. A document that is
produced only thirty years or so after the date given it,
while one had the greatest interest in using it if it existed,
necessarily falls to the ground by a presumption so over.
whelming against it. It is time to examine the Apocryphal
Bull in itself—in its intrinsic characteristics.

SECTION I.

Above all I remark that the document, such as Giraldus
Cambrensis gives it and most chroniclers repeat it, does
not express the name of the prince to whom it is
addressed : Adrianus episcopus, servus servorum Dei,
carissimo in Christo filio illustri Anglorum regi, salutem
et apostolicam benedictionem.

I search in vain for the initial H. at the very least.?
Ought we to suppose that the forger took care not to
mention the name because he could not foresee the time
when somebody would be in a position to utilise the Bull?

SECTION 2.

The preamble is copied almost word for word from the
true letter of Adrian IV., that which he wrote to
Louis VII., King of France, in 1159, in order to point

1¥For a full translation of the apocryphal Bull, see Document
No. 1 at the end of the book.—Tvans.
? To denote Henry.—Trans,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 53

out to him the injustice and the danger of an expedition
to Ireland. A comparison of the two preambles suffices
to demonstrate the falsity of the Bull. It happens more
than once that Pontifical Letters begin with three or four
words identically the same, as in other diplomas, especi-
ally if they are of different years ; but that ten or fifteen
lines, substantially the same, should appear in two dis-
tinct letters—I do not think that an cxample of it can be

found in the whole Roman Bullarium.

The true letter of Adrian IV.
begins thus:—Satis laudabiliter
et fructuose de christiano nomine
propagando in terris, et «ternze
beatitndinis przemio tibi cumu-
lando in ccelis, tua  videtur
magnificentia cogitare, dum ad
dilatandos terminos populi chris-
tiani, ad paganorum barbariem
debellandam, et ad gentes aposta-
trices, et quze Catholice fidei
refugiunt nec recipiunt veritatem,
christianorum jugo et ditioni sub-
dendas, simul cum _  charissimo
filio nostro Henrico illustri Ang-
lorum rege, in H. properare
intendis, et studes assidue (ut opus
hoc felicem exitum sortiatur) exer-
citum et quz sunt itineri neces-
saria congregare. Atquead id con-
venientius exsequendum, matris
tuze sacrosancte Romanz Eccle-
siz consilium exigis et favorem.
Quod quidem propositum tanto
magis gratum acceptumque tene-
mus, et amplius sicut commen-
dandum est, commendamus,
quanto de sinceriore charitatis
radice talem intentionem et votum
tam laudabile processum credi-
mus, ac de majori ardore fidei et
religionis amore propositum et
desiderium tuum  principium
habuerunt.

The apocryphal bull begins
thus :—Laudabiliter satis et fruc-
tuose de glorioso nomine propa-
gando in terris,et zternz felicita-
tis premio cumulando in cceelis,
tua magnificentia cogitat; dum
ad dilatandos Ecclesiz terminos,
ad declarandam indoctis et rudi-
bus populis christianz fidei veri-
tatem, et vitiorum plantaria de
agro Dominico extirpanda, sicut
catholicus princeps intendis; et
ad id convenientius exsequendum
consilium Apostolic sedis exigis,
et favorem. In quo facto, quanto
altiori consilio et majori discre-
tione procedis, tanto in eo felicio-
rem progressum te, przstante
Domino, confidimus habiturum ;
eo quod ad bonum exitum semper
et finem solent attingere que de
ardore fidei et religionis amore
principium acceperunt ... Sig-
nificasti siquidem nobis, fili in
Christo carissime, te Hiberniz
insulam, ad subdendum illum
populum legibus,' et vitiorum
plantaria inde extirpanda, velle
intrare . . . Nos itaque, pium et
laudabile desiderium tuum cum
favore congruo prosequentes, et
petitioni bonz benignum impen-
dentes assensum, gratum et accep-
tum habemus, ut pro dilatandis
Ecclesie terminis, pro vitiorum
restringendo decursu, pro corri-
gendis moribus, et virtutibus
inserendis, pro christiane religio-
nis augmento, insulam  illam
ingrediaris,

1 Addend. forsan tuis vel christiants,

54 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

The counterfeiting is so close that it is amazing how
it has not awakened the suspicions of historians. It
might be said that not one of them had gone to the
trouble of comparing the two documents, or of reading
them over with attention. Other passages imitated from
the true letter may be seen in the Apocrypha! Bull.

The true letter says: In H. pROPERARE intendis. On
the contrary, we read in the Apocryphal Bull: Signift-
casti nobis te Hibernie insulam . . . velle INTRARE...
Gratum habemus ut . . . insulam illam INGREDIARIs.
These expressions seem to mean that there is question of
penetrating into the interior of Ireland, and suppose that
the King of England occupies a few points along the
coast. It was only a dozen years after the death of Pope
Adrian that the adventurers and the King took Dublin and
Waterford. It is therefore impossible that the Bull should
be from Pope Adrian.

It is said in the true letter that Louis VII. was prepar-
ing an army, and such things as were necessary for the
voyage: Studes assidue . . . exercitum, et que sunt
ilineni necessaria, congregare. An expedition on the con-
tinent requires little more than a good army. This goes
to prove that the expedition on which Louis VII. and
Henry II. consulted Pope Adrian related to Ireland, and
not to Spain, as I have shown (in Chapters VI. and VII.).

How surprising that Pope Adrian should raise no objec-
tion against the conquest of Ireland—he who, in his letter
to Louis VII., weighed with so much wisdom and circum-
spection the difficulties of the enterprise, and the injustice
of an intervention that was not asked for by the Church,
the princes, or the people of the land!

SECTION 3.

The forger makes Pope Adrian IV. say that Ireland,
and in general all islands enlightened by Christ, the Sun
of Justice, that is to say, those which have received the
teachings of Faith, belong to the Apostle Saint Peter
and to the Roman Church: Sane Hiberniam, et omnes
insulas, quibus sol justitia Christus illuxit, et que docu-
menta fidei christianw ceperunt, ad jus beati Petri et
sacrosancte Roman@e Ecclesie, quod tua etiam nobilitas

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 55

_recognoscit, non est dubium pertinere. Thus, the King of

England, writing to the Pope in.order to ask Ireland,
would have admitted that all islands belong to the Holy
See.

1. The power of Constantine, from a political point of
view, was the same in pagan islands as in those which had
embraced Christianity. I see no reason for limiting the
concession to Christian countries. Had Ireland received
Christianity at the beginning of the fourth century?

2. At the most, Constantine could only have given
islands dependent on the empire. Now, the Romans, far
from conquering Ireland, always left it outside their fron-
tiers. Constantine could not be unaware of this fact—he.
who spent a great part of his life in insular Great Britain.

3. The Popes did not avail themselves of a donation
from Constantine for Rome, nor for the Italian continent,
nor even for islands. Consult the letters of Codex Caroli-
nus, whose authenticity cannot be doubted ; examine the
register of St. Gregory the Great; study the imperial
diplomas from the ninth to the fifteenth century : you will
always see that, if Constantine gave some territorial pos-
sessions or patrimonies, political authority had an origin
quite different, which was nothing but the piety of Pepin,
Charlemange, and other emperors, who established the
Pontifical Sovereignty. Now, these solemn, authentic,
and official diplomas never make any allusion to a dona-
tion of Constantine.

4. Among the notes that Mr. O’Callaghan has added to
the Macari@ Excidium, I remark one (p. 246) relating to
the donation of Constantine, and in it I find, to my great
regret, some unjustifiable prepossessions, which cannot
be reconciled with the truth of history. He speaks thus :

“Upon the famous apocryphal donation of Constantine,
on which the request of Henry the Second’s envoy for a
grant of Ireland from Adrian IV. was based, Gibbon, who
assigns the <dlate of that fabrication to the latter end of
the eighth century, says :—-‘ This memorable donation
was introduced to the world by an epistle of Adrian the
First, who exhorts Charlemange to imitate the liberality
and revive the name of the great Constantine. Accord-
ing to the legend, the first of the Christian emperors, .. .
healed of the leprosy .. . by St. Sylvester, .. . declared

56 POPE ADRIAN iv.,

his resolution of founding a new capital in the East, and
resigned to the Popes the free and perpetual sovereignty
of Rome, Italy, and the provinces of the West. . .. So
deep was the ignorance and credulity of the times, that
the most absurd of fables was received, with equal revcr-
ence, in Greece and France, and is still enrolled among
the decrees of the canon law. In the revival of letters
and liberty, this fictitious deed was transpierced by the
pen of Laurentius Valla, the pen of an eloquent critic, and
a Roman patriot. His contemporaries of the fifteenth
century were astonished at his sacrilegious boldness ; yet
such is the silent and irresistible progress of reason that

. the fable was rejected by the contempt of historians
and poets.”

I am going to show that these assertions contain as
many errors as words.

(a) Gibbon is mistaken. The supposition of a grant
from Constantine reaches back much farther than the
eighth century ; but it is right to add that the Popes did
not avail themselves of it. Did St. Gregory the Great
pretend to be the sovereign of Rome or of Italy? When
Belisarius and Narses reconquered the peninsula from the
Goths, I do not see that the Popes of the time cried out in
the name of Constantine’s donation. On the contrary, the
imperial exarchs, during several centuries, governed, in
the name of the emperor, ‘not only Rome and Ravenna,
but even the islands.

(b) If Pope Adrian I. advised Charlemagne to imitate
the generosity of Constantine, he referred to territorial
possessions, to fruitful domains, and not to political
sovereignty, which this emperor never conferred on the
Holy See. For the rest, what more could Adrian I. ask
of Charlemagne, who had already, with his father, Pepin,
either bestowed on the Holy See or restored to it the exar-
chate of Ravenna, from Spezia and Plaisance as far as
Rimini and Ancona, and then Rome and its provinces ;
besides a great part of central and southern Italy, and
many islands lying near Italy, Corsica among the num-
ber? Could the Popes have desired more?

(c) It matters little if some writers are mistaken about
a grant of Constantine—believing it to be authentic and
true. The esscntial point is that the Popes did not avail

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 57

themselves of this apocryphal title-deed. In point of
fact, they derived their political sovereignty from the resti-
tutions, donations, and confirmations of Pepin, Charle-
magne, and their successors. St. Gregory VII. never
made use of the donation of Constantine, although St.
Peter Damian employs it in his arguments against the
Teutons, followers of the anti-Pope Cadolaus. The dona-
tion was also cited in a lettcr of Leo IX. to Michael
Cerolarius. (Patrologie, tome 143, p. 752.)

(2d) O’Callaghan insists on a pretended diploma of Pope
Urban II., grounded on a donation of Constantine, to dis-
pose of Corsica in favour of the Pisans. ‘‘ This non-
sense,” says the writer, “ of the Pope’s being the head
owner of all Christian islands had been partially
announced to the world in a Bull of Urban II., dated
A.D. 1091, in which, on disposing of the island of Corsica,
he said that the Emperor Constantine had given the
Sen to St. Peter and his vicars.”’ ee Fleury, lib, 64,
sec. 8

I answer that the diploma attributed to Urban II. is
apocryphal. It is notin the Roman Bullarium.

Urban II. could not be unaware that Corsica was in-
cluded in the donation of Charlemagne, and that the con-
firmatory diplomas of all the emperors expressly desig-
nated it as belonging to the Holy See: what need then
of relying on a title so uncertain as a donation of Con-
stantine ?

In reality, the Roman archives possessed from that
time, and preserve to this day, those imperial diplomas of
the ninth and tenth centuries which attest the donation of
Corsica by Kings Pepin and Charlemagne—notably Manu-
script 1964 of the Vatican. The celebrated diploma in
gold letters, on an azure ground, of the Emperor Otho,
A.D. 962, kept in the same archives, mentions Corsica
among the pontifical dominions. Likewise, a diploma of
the Emperor Henry II. in the year t1or4.

Scarcely fifteen years before Urban II., Pope
Gregory VII., preparing for a crusade, had the strong
castles of Corsica surrendered to him, and appointed a
governor of the island, as representative of the Roman
Church.

Could Urban II. be unaware of these public and recent

58 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

facts? Moreover, prudence forbade the substitution of
feudal investiture for an immediate governor, at a time
when the strategic position of Corsica was of supreme 1m-
portance for the security of the “ grand army ” of the
Crusaders, and for the freedom of maritime communica-
tions with the East. Urban IJ. consequently took care
not to partially alienate Corsica, by yielding it to investi.
ture. It is a real mockery to place a donation of Constan-
tine on the lips or on the pen of the Pope in such circum.
stances. Therefore, the diploma of tog1 is apocryphal.
It has been known only to the annalists of Pisa, interested
in making us believe that the Pope gave to their people
the investiture of Corsica. So say Dal Borgo! and
Tronci.2 Such are the sources of the diploma!

(e) O’Callaghan objects, with Gibbon, that the false
donation of Constantine was inserted in the canonical col-
lection : ‘ Is still enrolled among the decrees of the canon
law.’? Now the famous donation is found, certainly not
in official codes or in pontifical decretals, but only in the
compilation of the monk Gratian, which is a work in all
respects private, which the Popes have always taken care
not to authorise or to authenticate, and: whose contents
have no other value than what they carry per se. Every
student of theology knows this. It is surprising that men
so studious as Gibbon and O’Callaghan should be ignorant
of a fact so elementary.

(f) Considering that the Popes abstained from making
use of a donation of Constantine, and that the example of
Urban II., the only one adduced to the contrary, is forged
and false, it is not possible that Pope Adrian IV. took, as
the foundation of a grant of Ireland to the King of Eng-
land, the said donation of Constantine. It follows that
the Bull Laudabiliter satis, attributcd to Pope Adrian IV.,
is apocryphal.

1 Raccolta di diplomi Pisant, p. 31.

2 Memorte di Pisa, p. 31.

’Gratian was a Benedictine monk at Bologna in the twelfth
century. His work was not simply a collection of canons, but a
treatise“on canon law. In spite of his good intentions, it contained
many mistakes.— Trans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 59

SECTION 4.

After the oath of Avranches, which recognised the feudal
sovereignty of the Pope over the kingdom of England,
Henry II. could naturally say that islands belonged to the
Holy See. But in the case of the Apocryphal Bull, which,
as is pretended, was written seventeen years previously,
the King could not without inconvenience acknowledge
the right of the Pope over islands, because he would
thereby have engaged and conpromised the independence
of the kingdom of England itself. Hence, it follows, that
the Apocryphal Bull was drawn up after the oath of
Avranches, which was taken in 1172-~consequently a long
time after Adrian IV., who died in 1159. This is another
argument against the gcnuinencss of the Bull.

O’Callaghan quotes approvingly a conjecture from Dr.
Lanigan, who thinks that Pope Adrian hinted to the King
that the kingdom of England, being in an island, belonged
to the Holy See, like other islands.

“The Doctor cites and criticises the following
passage in the Bull :—Sane Hiberniam et omnes insulas
quibus sol justitie illuxit, et que documenta fidei Chris-
tiane ceperunt, ad jus beati Petri et sacrosante Romane
ecclesia (quod tua etiam nobilitas recognoscit) non est
dubium pertinere.’’ By the words in the parenthesis, re-
marks the Doctor, the Pope probably meant to hint to
Henry that also his kingdom of England, as being in an
island, belonged to the Holy See ; and we find that, in the
year 1173, Henry declared himself a vassal of Pope Alex-
ander ITI.

But since the King recognised in his letter (which
nobody has ever seen) the right of the Pope over all
islands, what need had Pope Adrian to suggest this
maxim to a prince who was the first to formulate it? On
the other hand, if the Pope intended an allusion to Eng-
land, we must admit that he expressed himself in a
manner not to be understood. In fact, Henry allowed
seventcen years to roll by before acquitting himself in
regard to feudal subjection.

, It is natural to suppose that the King put the maxim
into the Apocryphal Bull, with a view to availing himself
of it against Ireland, and perhaps against Scotland, the

60 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

Isle of Man, and other islands that he coveted. At the
time of the fabrication of the Bull, Henry had nothing to
fear for England, seeing the engagements that he had
taken by the oath of Avranches.

SECTION 5.

The forger tells us that the King promised to establish
Peter’s Pence through all Ireland : Significasti nobis ...
te Hibernia insulam .. . velle intrare ; et de singulis domi
bus annuam unius denarii beato Petro velle solvere pen-
sionem. Adrian IV., on his side, authorises the King to
penetrate into the country, and orders the people to wel-
come him with respect, on condition that the rights of
the churches will be safeguarded, and that Peter’s Penny
will be paid annually from every house: Salva beato
Petro, et sacrosancta Romane ecclesia, de singulis domi-
bus annua unius denarii pensione. So we read in the
Apocryphal Bull.

1. If all this is true, the Pope and the King made an
unworthy bargain. Henry bought Ireland, and Adrian IV.,
to gain a pecuniary pension, sacrificed the independence
of a nation.

2. Diplomas of investiture usually prescribed an
annual payment, in recognition of sovereign dominion ;
but this payment was exceedingly small, one or two
crowns a year. Herc, on the contrary, Pope Adrian re-
quired an enormous contribution ; for the Anglo-Norman
penny was worth four or five shillings of our present
money.! Thanks to these data, we can approximately
calculate the annual income. It would have amounted to
a sum truly unexampled in the history of pontifical inves-
titures.

3. The Kings of Naples paid a pretty high tribute, be-
cause it included the revenues of some ancient patri-

1 That is, a penny in former times would purchase as much as
three or four shillings in our day.

England has often used debased coin in Ireland, by which the
people suffered heavy loss. This method of cheating is much the same
as to take good silver from a mah and give him its weight in pewter.

It is not very long since two values were given to money in these
islands. Thus up to 1825 the English shilling passed in- Ireland for
thirteen pence, and the English guinea for £1 2s. gd,—Tvrans.

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 6r

monies which Constantine gave to the Roman Church,
and which were wasted by the Saracens.

4. In England, the Peter’s Pence came from ancient
usage, from the spontaneous offering that princes and
people had formerly made of the tribute.

5. Peter’s Pence were not established in Ireland: no
Pope claimed them. The clause of the Apocryphal Bull is
therefore false and forged. Giraldus Cambrensis, who be-
lieved bona fide in the genuineness of the Bull, attributed
the misfortunes of the English Kings in Ireland to the
violation of their promise regarding Peter’s Pence, as I
shall say further on.

6. Henry II. really posscssed some towns along the
Irish coast, and his barons subjected some adjacent coun-
ties. How is it that he did not establish Peter’s Pence at
least in these towns and counties? In the treaty of Wind.
sor, of which I have spoken above, supposing the fact
to be authentic, Henry II., required of the King of Con-
nacht to promise an annual tribute of one cowhide or
sheepskin on every ten beasts ; but there was not a word of
Peter’s Pence promised to Pope Adrian.

7. Henry II. had the clause inserted in the Apocryphal
Bull, probably to furnish a pretext for penetrating into
Ireland, and exacting tributes for himself, not for the
Pope.! Innocent III. claimed Peter’s Pence from the
English bishops ; but, I repeat it, no Pope ever asked
Peter’s Pence from the Irish bishops, or from the Irish
people.

SECTION 6.

St. Stephen of Hungary received from Rome a kind
of apostolic legateship for the propagation and advance-
ment of religion in his kingdom, as we see in the Roman
Breviary, at the date September 2nd : Vere propter ingens
dilatande fidei studium, illius gentis Apostolus nuncu-
patus, facta a Romano Pontifice ipst posterisque regibus
preferende crucis potestate. It is an analogous mission

' The flaunting of Peter’s Pence would seem to have been a kind
of hypocritical bribe, employed to gain credence for the Bull. Neither
Henry nor his snccessors ever established Peter’s Pence in Ireland.—
Trans,

62 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

that the false Bull attributes to Henry II. ; but this kind
of moral delegation has no connection with political in-
vestiture. Having treated of this point in a previous chap-
ter, when I examined an addition to the Metalogicus, I
need not return to it.

Henry II. simply wished to penetrate into Ireland, and
to see himself wclcomed there without distrust. As for
the rest, he took it on himself, hoping very much that
once he had entered the sheep-fold, he would never come
out again.

This is the reason why thc Apocryphal Bull allows an
entrance into Ireland, and recommends the people to re-
ceive the King with respectful and submissive behaviour.
This mission is purely personal: it does not extend to
the successors of the King of England.

The most surprising thing of all is that the Bishops of
Ireland are never mentioned in the false Bull. For the
King alone the pre-eminently religious mission of propa-
gating the faith, repressing vices, and planting virtues!
We might suppose that Ireland at the time had not one
Bishop, or one clergyman!

The pseudo-Adrian concludes by giving the King full
power to regulate by himself, or by his agents, whatever
is of a nature to procure the glory of God, an increase of
faith, and the salvation of souls. What other secular
prince has ever received ecclesiastical jurisdiction in a
manner so complete?

‘““ Let it be your study to form that people to good
morals, and take such orders both by yourself and by
those whom you shall find qualified in faith, in words,
and in conduct, that the Church there may be adorned,
and the practices of the Christian faith be planted and
increased ; and let all that tends to the glorv of God and
the salvation of souls be so ordered by you that you may
deserve to obtain from God an increase of everlasting re-
ward, and may secure on earth a glorious name through-
out all time.”

If Henry had ‘succeeded in causing his false Bull to be
accepted, he would have recovered in Ireland that supre-
macy which the labours and the martrydom of Saint
Thomas of Canterbury had compelled him to abandon in
England,

A FRIEND OF IRELAND. 63

SECTION 7.

The forger contented himself with writing an ordinary
letter in the name of Pope Adrian IV. He did not go to
the trouble of fabricating a solemn diploma, a Bull pro-
perly so called, with the formalities employed by the
Roman Chancery. Yet the transaction deserved a Bull.
Adrian answered Louis VII. with an ordinary letter, be-
cause he granted nothing, and was satisfied to point out
the dangers of an Irish expedition ; but the case is very
different for an act of the kind here considered.

The Bulls of the grant of investiture! were consistorial
acts, which should be furnished with the signatures of
cardinals. The forger, fearing perhaps that some one of
the signatories might still be in the world and raise a pro-
test, judged it prudent to name no other person than Pope
Adrian, who had died about thirty years before.?

What must be my conclusion? I shall not formulate it.
I prefer to leave it to the judgment of the reader.

The following will show the manner in which the Pope and
Cardinals ‘usually added their names to documents. It is taken from
Pope Adrian’s letter No. 98.

Ego Adrianus catholic Ecclesiz episcopus.

Ego Guido presb. card. tit. Sancti Chrysogoni.

Ego Julius presb. card. tit. Sancti Marcelli.

Ego Octavianus presb. card. tit. S. Cecilie.

Ego Gerardus presb. card. tit. S. Stephani in Ceelio Monte.

Datum SBeneventi per manum Roljandi, sancte Romane
Ecclesize presbyteri cardinalis et cancellarii, Kal. Junii, indict. IV.,
Incarnationis Dominica anno 1156, pontificatus vero domni
Adriani papz IV. anno secundo.

The Cardinal Roland here mentioned as Chancellor became Pope
Alexander III. in r1s9, after the death of Adrian IV., and reigned till
1181. He had doubtless learned from Pope Adrian what to think of
Henry II.—Trans.

2In Migne’s collection there are 258 letters (including bulls,
privileges, &c.) attributed to Pope Adrian IV., and all appear to be
genuine except No. 76 Laudabiliter satis. Generally found without
any clear mention, at the beginning, of the person to whom it is
addressed, or, at the end, of the place or the date at which it was
written, it is said to be “without head or tail.” If we had no other
evidence in regard to the qualifications of Pope Adrian IV., any one,
examining this collection, will readily see that hé was a man of real
merit, great wisdom, and calm moderation—not at all likely to

64 POPE ADRIAN IV.,

