CHAPTER 	6A	Free,	Independent,	and	Powerful	NationWhen	John	Quincy	and	his	bride	crossed	London	Bridge	to	theJohnson	 family	 mansion	 after	 their	 honeymoon,	 they	 expectedrelatives,	 friends,	 and	 other	 well-wishers	 to	 greet	 them.Instead,	 they	 found	 a	 mob	 of	 angry,	 twisted	 faces,	 screamingfor	“money!	my	money!”	During	John	Quincy	and	his	new	wife’sabsence,	 Louisa’s	 father’s	 business	 had	 collapsed.	 A	 cargo-filled	 ship	 had	 sunk	 in	 mid-ocean,	 and	 one	 of	 his	 partnersabsconded	 with	 company	 funds.	 Bankrupt	 and	 facing	 debtors’prison	 if	 he	 remained	 in	 England,	 he	 fled	 to	 America	 with	 hiswife	and	children,	leaving	behind	the	angry	creditors	who	nowblocked	John	Quincy	and	Louisa’s	access	to	her	parents’	home.With	no	other	recourse,	Joshua	Johnson’s	creditors	demandedthat	 John	 Quincy	 cover	 his	 father-in-law’s	 debts.	 The	 pressaccused	Louisa	and	her	father	of	having	lured	the	unsuspectingAmerican	 into	 marrying	 a	 penniless	 woman	 to	 bilk	 him	 of	 hismoney.	 “It	 is	 forty-three	 years	 since	 I	 became	 a	 wife,”	 Louisawould	 recall	 years	 later,	 “and	 yet	 the	 rankling	 sore	 is	 nothealed	which	then	broke	upon	my	heart	of	hearts.”1Her	 father’s	 bankruptcy	 erased	 the	 £500	 dowry	 he	 hadpledged	to	John	Quincy	and,	indeed,	gave	John	Quincy	the	legalright	 to	 recant	 his	 marriage	 vows,	 but	 he	 stood	 by	 his	 brideeven	 as	 she	 sank	 into	 despondency	 under	 the	 weight	 ofhumiliation.	 As	 he	 tried	 to	 comfort	 her,	 John	 Quincy	 facedserious	difficulties	of	his	own.	Having	arranged	to	transfer	hisbelongings	 from	 Lisbon	 to	 Berlin,	 he	 now	 learned	 that	 theSenate	 had	 postponed	 voting	 on	 his	 appointment	 to	 thePrussian	 court.	 Although	 it	 had	 unanimously	 approved	 hisappointment	 to	 Lisbon	 by	 President	 Washington,	 it	 balked	 atapproving	 his	 appointment	 by	 President	 Adams	 afternewspapers	assailed	the	President	for	nepotism.Noting	 that	 Washington	 had	 refused	 to	 select	 even	 the	 mostdistant	 relatives	 for	 office,	 Boston’s	 Independent	 Chroniclecalled	 John	 Quincy	 “the	 American	 Prince	 of	 Wales”—sentabroad	 “to	 prosecute	 his	 studies.”	 The	 newspaper	 chargedthat,	 as	 the	 first	 appointment	 of	 his	 father’s	 administration,“this	 young	 man,	 from	 an	 obscure	 practitioner	 of	 the	 law,	 hasbeen	 mounted	 on	 the	 political	 ladder	 with	 an	 uncommoncelerity.	Young	John	Adams’s	negotiations	have	terminated	in	amarriage	 with	 an	 English	 lady.	 .	 .	 .	 It	 is	 a	 happy	 circumstancethat	 he	 has	 made	 no	 other	 treaty.”2	 And	 Aurora	 editorBenjamin	 Franklin	 Bache,	 Benjamin	 Franklin’s	 grandson	 andJohn	 Quincy’s	 former	 schoolmate,	 demanded	 that	 PresidentJohn	 Adams	 resign	 “before	 it	 is	 too	 late	 to	 retrieve	 ourderanged	affairs.”3Abigail	 was	 furious	 at	 what	 she	 called	 “misrepresentations”and	 “billingsgate”	 (vulgar	 abuse).	 John	 Quincy	 reacted	 withequal	 rage.	 “My	 old	 schoolfellow	 Bache,”	 he	 snapped,	 “hasbecome	 too	 thoroughbred	 a	 democrat	 to	 suffer	 any	 regard	 forancient	 friendship	 or	 any	 sense	 of	 generosity	 for	 an	 absentenemy	to	suspend	his	scurrility.”4Despite	 Abigail’s	 protests,	 Bache’s	 “billingsgate”	 had	 itsdesired	effect	on	the	Senate,	which	postponed	consideration	ofJohn	 Quincy’s	 Berlin	 appointment	 three	 times	 before	 accedingto	the	President’s	wishes.	John	Quincy	Adams,	his	wife	Louisa,and	 his	 brother	 Thomas	 set	 sail	 for	 Hamburg,	 on	 October	 18,1797,	elated	by	the	prospects	of	a	new	adventure.	As	they	putto	sea,	Louisa	added	to	their	collective	joy	by	announcing	thatshe	was	pregnant.On	November	7,	the	Adamses	reached	Berlin’s	gates,	only	tobe	“questioned	by	a	dapper	young	lieutenant	who	did	not	know—until	 one	 of	 his	 private	 soldiers	 explained	 to	 him—who	 theUnited	States	of	America	were.”5By	 the	 time	 they	 reached	 Berlin,	 King	 Frederick	 William	 IIhad	died,	and	John	Quincy	had	to	send	to	Philadelphia	for	newpapers	 designating	 him	 minister	 plenipotentiary	 to	 the	 newcourt	 of	 King	 Frederick	 William	 III.	 The	 papers	 arrived	 justbefore	Christmas—as	did	all	the	furniture,	baggage,	and	booksfrom	 Lisbon.	 With	 all	 their	 personal	 possessions	 in	 hand,	 JohnQuincy,	 Louisa,	 and	 Thomas	 were,	 at	 last,	 able	 to	 move	 fromtheir	 hotel	 into	 a	 house	 of	 their	 own.	 A	 few	 days	 later,	 JohnQuincy	presented	his	papers	at	court,	where	the	new	king,	histhree	 highest	 ministers,	 and	 other	 dignitaries	 received	 himwarmly	 after	 he	 demonstrated	 his	 fluency	 in	 both	 French	 andGerman.	Royal	society	embraced	John	Quincy	and	Louisa	as	anAmerican	 prince	 and	 princess.	 The	 pair	 attended	 royalbanquets	 and	 balls,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 spent	 three	 days	 as	 aguest	 of	 honor	 at	 “the	 grand	 annual	 reviews	 of	 the	 troops”—aspectacle	 of	 color,	 parades,	 and	 precision	 marching	 by	 tens	 ofthousands	of	soldiers	over	hundreds	of	acres.	Always	gatheringintelligence	to	relay	to	the	secretary	of	state,	he	noted,	“Therewere	five	regiments	of	cavalry	of	twelve	hundred	men	each	andten	regiments	of	infantry	of	two	thousand	men	each.	The	troopsfinein	 admirable	 condition	 and	 exhibit	 a	 veryareappearance.”6With	 an	 elegant	 house—and	 expense	 account—John	 Quincyand	Louisa	opened	their	doors	to	European	society	and	lookedforward	 to	 a	 festive	 Christmas,	 when	 tragedy	 struck.	 Louisamiscarried—not	once,	but	twice	in	succession	over	the	next	sixmonths.	“For	ten	days,”	he	wrote	to	his	father,	“I	could	scarcelyleave	her	bedside	for	a	moment.”7Her	miscarriages	left	her	so	pale	that	the	queen	urged	her	touse	 rouge	 on	 her	 cheeks	 and	 gave	 her	 a	 box,	 which	 JohnQuincy	 insisted	 she	 must	 return.	 Only	 actresses	 and	 “fallenwomen”	wore	makeup	in	New	England,	and	when	John	Quincysaw	 his	 wife	 wearing	 rouge	 as	 they	 were	 to	 leave	 for	 the	 ballone	evening,	he	told	her	that	“unless	I	allowed	him	to	wash	myface,	he	would	not	go.”	Louisa	said,	“He	took	a	towel,	drew	meon	his	knee,	and	all	my	beauty	was	washed	away.”8Although	 John	 Quincy	 kissed	 her	 later	 and	 put	 the	 incidentbehind	 him,	 Louisa	 never	 forgot	 it.	 Decades	 later,	 the	 woundstill	festered,	as	she	recalled	her	husband’s	response.	Louisa’spallor,	 however,	 continued	 to	 provoke	 “teasing	 about	 my	 paleface”	 at	 court.	 Months	 after	 the	 first	 incident,	 she	 againapplied	 a	 touch	 of	 rouge	 and	 “walked	 boldly	 forward	 to	 meetMr.	Adams.	As	soon	as	he	saw	me,	he	requested	me	to	wash	itoff,	 while	 I	 with	 some	 temper	 refused,”	 and	 John	 Quincy	 leftwithout	 her.	 Louisa	 went	 on	 her	 own	 to	 dine	 with	 friends,	 andwhen	 John	 Quincy	 met	 her	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 evening,	 “wereturned	 home	 as	 good	 friends	 as	 ever.”9	 John	 Quincy	 neverexplained	his	uncharacteristically	hurtful	behavior.Between	 Louisa’sillnesses,	 John	 Quincy	 attempted	 tonegotiate	 extending	 a	 treaty	 of	 amity	 and	 commerce	 withfor	 another	 ten	 years.	 Benjamin	 Franklin	 hadPrussianegotiated	 the	 original	 treaty,	 but	 by	 the	 time	 John	 QuincyAdams	appeared	in	Berlin,	the	status	of	the	United	States	hadchanged.	Now	a	trading	nation	of	consequence	and	all	but	outof	 debt,	 the	 United	 States	 had	 become	 a	 valuable	 tradingpartner,	and	the	Prussians	eagerly	renewed	their	ties—on	JohnQuincy’s	birthday,	July	11,	1799.The	treaty	renewal,	however,	came	at	just	the	wrong	time	forboth	 countries.	 The	 French	 Directory’s	 foreign	 minister,Talleyrand,	 had	 just	 proclaimed	 what	 he	 called	 France’s“natural	right”	to	give	law	to	the	world	and	recover	the	colonialempire	 of	 the	 1750s	 that	 France	 had	 lost	 to	 Britain	 in	 theSeven	 Years	 War.	 French	 troops	 swept	 across	 the	 Rhineland,Switzerland,	Italy,	Venice,	Dalmatia,	and	the	Ionian	Islands,	andFrench	 warships	 wreaked	 havoc	 on	 Anglo-American	 trade	 inthe	 Caribbean	 and	 on	 the	 Atlantic.	 By	 the	 time	 John	 Adamsassumed	 the	 presidency,	 the	 French	 had	 seized	 340	 Americanships—more	 than	 half	 the	 American	 merchant	 fleet,	 withcargoes	 valued	 at	 more	 than	 $55	 million.	 Hundreds	 ofAmerican	 seamenin	 Brest,Bordeaux,	 and	 the	 French	 West	 Indies.	 Insurance	 rates	 onAmerican	 cargoes	 soared	 and	 threatened	 to	 price	 Americanexports	 out	 of	 world	 markets.	 After	 France	 rejected	 CharlesPinckney	 as	 America’s	 new	 ambassador,	 President	 Adams	 andthe	Federalist-controlled	Senate	threatened	war.in	 prison	 chainslanguished“France	 has	 already	 gone	 to	 war	 with	 us,”	 the	 Presidentbellowed.	 “She	 is	 at	 war	 with	 us,	 but	 we	 are	 not	 at	 war	 withher.”10The	 Republican	 majority	 in	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives,however,	demanded	that	Adams	send	a	mission	to	France	to	tryto	heal	the	rupture—much	as	Washington	had	sent	John	Jay	toBritain	 three	 years	 earlier,	 in	 1794,	 to	 heal	 relations	 with	 thatnation.	 In	 the	 fall	 of	 1797,	 Adams	 sent	 Republican	 ElbridgeGerry	 of	 Massachusetts	 and	 Federalists	 John	 Marshall	 ofVirginia	and	Charles	Cotesworth	Pinckney	of	South	Carolina,	acousin	of	Charles	Pinckney.	When	they	arrived	in	France,	threeintermediaries	 told	 the	 Americans	 that	 the	 Directory	 expectedthe	 same	 fealty	 and	 remunerations	 as	 “the	 ancient	 kings	 ofFrance”	and	that	to	begin	negotiations	they	would	have	to	paya	tribute	of	$250,000	in	cash	to	Talleyrand	and	arrange	a	loanto	the	French	government	of	$12.8	million.11“No!”	Pinckney	shouted.	“Not	even	six	pence!	We	are	unableto	 defend	 our	 commerce	 on	 the	 seas,	 but	 we	 will	 defend	 ourshores.”12	 In	 April	 1798,	 Marshall	 and	 Pinckney	 abandonedtheir	 mission.	 “Thereleast	 hope	 of	 anis	 notaccommodation	 with	 this	 government,”	 Pinckney	 declared.13Talleyrand	insisted	the	three	American	envoys	had	“twisted	themeaning	of	honest	conversations.”14theBy	 then,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 been	 sending	 a	 stream	 of	 vitalintelligence	 reports	 to	 both	 his	 father	 and	 the	 secretary	 ofstate,	 gleaned	 in	 part	 through	 clever	 banter	 with	 the	 Frenchminister	 to	 the	 Prussian	 court—“the	 citizen	 Caillard,	 whom	 Ihad	 formerly	 known	 as	 secretary	 of	 the	 French	 legation	 in	 St.Petersburg.”15“The	 fleet	 from	 Toulon,”	 he	 wrote	 in	 one	 report	 to	 thesecretary	 of	 state,	 “is	 said	 to	 have	 arrived	 in	 Corsica.	 .	 .	 .	 Itsdestination	 is	 Alexandria	 in	 Egypt.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 Danish	 chargéd’affaires	 told	 me	 that	 .	 .	 .	 by	 his	 last	 accounts	 fromCopenhagen,	 they	 were	 expecting	 the	 arrival	 of	 the	 Russianfleet.	.	.	.	He	said	that	.	.	.	they	were	substantially	in	a	state	ofwar	 with	 France.”16	 And	 in	 another	 report,	 he	 warned	 thesecretary	of	state	that	a	group	of	French	agents	masqueradingas	the	“friends	of	liberty	.	.	.	threatens	the	United	States	with	aspeedy	 revolution.”17	 When	 William	 Vans	 Murray,	 whoreplaced	 John	 Quincy	 in	 The	 Hague,	 complained	 that	 foreignagents	 had	 deciphered	 his	 coded	 letters	 to	 the	 secretary	 ofstate,	 John	 Quincy	 warned	 that	 “your	 private	 letters	 to	 thesecretary	 of	 state	 cannot	 escape	 the	 inspection	 of	 persons	 notentitled	 to	 them.	 .	 .	 .	 Everything	 leaks	 out,	 either	 throughor	 misplacedortreacheryconfidence.”18ungovernablecuriosityOutraged	by	French	government	conduct	toward	his	envoys,President	 Adams	 asked	 Congress	 for	 funds	 to	 strengthenAmerican	 defenses,	 arm	 merchant	 ships,	 build	 a	 navy,	 andprepare	for	war.	When	Republicans	insisted	on	proof	of	Frenchgovernment	 demands	 for	 bribes,	 the	 President	 sent	 them	 thedispatches	he	had	received	from	Pinckney,	Marshall,	and	Gerry,describing	 their	 encounters	 with	 the	 men	 who	 had	 solicitedbribes	 but	 identifying	 them	 as	 only	 “X,”	 “Y,”	 and	 “Z.”	 WhenRepublicans	 scoffed	 atJohn	 Quincy’sintelligence	work	exposed	the	three	mystery	men	as	the	shadySwiss	 financier	 Jean	 Conrad	 Hottinger;	 another	 Swiss-bornbankerfrom	 Hamburg,	 Monsieur	 Bellamy;	 and	 LucienHauteval.the	 allegations,“Z,	or	Hauteval,”	John	Quincy	wrote,	“I	knew	very	well	whenlong	before	the	establishment	of	the	French	Republic	he	calledhimself	Monsieur	le	Comte	d’Hauteval.”I	was	present	at	the	performance	of	mass	after	the	headof	 Louis	 XVI	 was	 cut	 off,	 at	 which	 the	 said	 Hautevalthundered	 out	 the	 ‘Domine	 salvum	 fac	 regem’	 with	 asmuch	devotion	and	enthusiasm	as	if	he	had	been	ready	tosuffer	 martyrdom	 for	 the	 cause.	 I	 know	 not	 how	 manymillions	 of	 livres	 he	 assured	 us	 he	 had	 lost	 by	 the	 revoltof	 the	 blacks	 in	 St.	 Domingo.	 He	 had	 been	 a	 member	 ofthe	colonial	assembly	.	.	.	been	obliged	to	flee	the	island.	..	.	The	next	I	heard	of	him	was	in	Paris	in	1796	when	andwhere	 he	 .	 .	 .	 had	 been	 trying	 to	 get	 appointed	 Ministerof	France	to	the	United	States.19As	 Federalists	 had	 hoped,	 the	 XYZ	 dispatches—and	 JohnQuincy’s	 revelations	 of	 their	 identities—muffled	 Francophilevoices	 in	 Congress	 and	 across	 America.	 Even	 Abigail	 Adamsput	 aside	 her	 Anglophobia	 and	 recognized	 that	 “the	 olivebranch	tendered	to	our	Gallic	allies	.	.	.	has	been	rejected	withscorn.	 .	 .	 .	 Public	 opinion	 is	 changing	 here	 very	 fast,	 and	 thepeople	begin	to	see	who	have	been	their	firm	unshaken	friends,steady	 to	 their	 interests,	 and	 defenders	 of	 their	 rights	 andliberties.”20Abigail	was	prescient.	The	XYZ	dispatches	provoked	a	frenzyof	 war	 fever	 and	 violent	 anti-French	 demonstrations.	 Mobsattacked	the	home	of	John	Quincy’s	schoolmate,	the	fanaticallypro-French	Aurora	editor	Benjamin	Franklin	Bache,	and	acrossthe	 nation,	 town	 after	 town	 formed	 militia	 companies	 to	 servethe	 nation.	 More	 than	 1,000	 young	 men	 in	 Philadelphiamarched	to	the	President’s	house	and	volunteered	to	fight	theFrench.	 President	 Adams	 came	 out	 to	 address	 them,	 dressedincongruously	 in	 full-dress	 military	 uniform	 complete	 withsword—and	 a	 scabbard	 that	 was	 too	 long	 for	 his	 stature	 andscraped	 the	 ground.	 Abigail	 greeted	 another	 group	 wearing	 aflowerlike	 device	 radiating	 bows	 of	 black	 ribbonthatFederalists	 immediately	 converted	 into	 a	 black	 cockade	 tosymbolize	their	opposition	to	the	tricolor	cockade	of	the	FrenchRevolution.“Every	 black	 cockade	 will	 be	 another	 Declaration	 ofIndependence,”	 wrote	 the	 editor	 of	 Boston’s	 ColumbianCentinel.	Within	days,	Abigail’s	black	cockade	had	sprouted	onthe	 hats	 of	 the	 President,	 his	 cabinet	 members,	 and	 every“good	American”	man,	woman,	and	child	across	the	land.“I	 will	 never	 send	 another	 minister	 to	 France,”	 PresidentAdams	 proclaimed	 to	 Congress	 at	 the	 end	 of	 June	 1798,“without	 assurances	 that	 he	 will	 be	 received,	 respected	 andhonored	 as	 the	 representative	 of	 a	 great,	 free,	 powerful,	 andindependent	nation.”21Federalists	and	Republicans	alike	held	their	collective	breathas	they	awaited	the	President’s	request	for	a	declaration	of	waragainst	 America’s	 former	 ally.	 Instead,	 he	 asked	 Congress	 tocreate	 a	 Department	 of	 the	 Navy	 and	 authorize	 acquisition	 oftwelve	 ships	 with	 up	 to	 twenty	 guns	 each.	 He	 asked	 for	 anembargo	 on	 all	 trade	 with	 France,	 and	 once	 Congresssupported	 his	 requests,	 he	 ordered	 the	 navy	 to	 seize	 Frenchprivateers	 and	 other	 raiders	 in	 or	 near	 American	 waters.Congress	 authorized	 the	 President	 to	 call	 80,000	 statemilitiamen	 to	 active	 duty,	 and	 the	 President	 appointed	 GeorgeWashington	 commanderin	 chief.	 The	 aging	 Washingtonimmediately	named	Alexander	Hamilton	inspector	general	andsecond	in	command.“I	am	happy	.	.	.	to	express	my	warm	and	cordial	participationin	 the	 joy	 which	 all	 true	 Americans	 have	 felt	 .	 .	 .	 by	 youracceptance	of	the	command	of	her	armies,”	John	Quincy	wroteto	the	former	President.However	much	to	be	regretted	is	the	occasion	which	hasagain	summoned	you	from	your	beloved	retirement,	thereis	 every	 reason	 to	 hope	 that	 the	 spirit	 of	 firmness	 anddignity	which	your	example	has	so	powerfully	contributedto	 inspire	 and	 maintain	 will	 either	 obviate	 the	 necessityof	 another	 struggle	 for	 our	 independence	 or	 once	 morecarry	us	victoriously	and	gloriously	through	it.22To	 the	 President’s	 delight,	 construction	 and	 refitting	 ofAmerican	warships	proceeded	faster	than	expected,	and	by	theend	 of	 October,	 the	 navy	 had	 launched	 three	 frigates,	 armedmore	than	1,000	merchant	ships,	and	cleared	American	coastalwaters	of	French	marauders.	With	offshore	shipping	protectedfrom	 French	 assault,	 the	 President	 ordered	 the	 U.S.	 Navy	 to“sweep	 the	 West	 India	 seas”	 of	 French	 ships.	 Although	 theFrench	 had	 captured	 more	 than	 eight	 hundred	 Americanvessels	by	then,	in	fewer	than	four	months	after	the	embryonicU.S.	 Navy	 went	 to	 sea,	 it	 had	 captured	 eighty-four	 Frenchships.	American	squadrons	gained	control	of	Caribbean	waters,and	 on	 February	 9,	 1799,	 Captain	 Thomas	 Truxton’sConstellation	 scored	 the	 first	 major	 victory	 in	 the	 quasi-war,engaging	 and	 capturing	 the	 French	 navy’s	 bigInsurgente	off	the	island	of	Nevis.frigateAmerica’s	 naval	 success	 stunned	 Talleyrand	 andtheDirectory.	France	was	already	suffering	from	the	embargo	thathad	 closed	 American	 markets	 to	 important	 French	 exports,such	 as	 wines,	 brandies,	 silks,	 linen,	 and	 porcelain,	 whileBritish	 ships	 prevented	 French	 ships	 from	 carrying	 sugar	 andother	 essentials	 from	 the	 French	 Antilles	 back	 to	 France.French	fortunes	were	declining	dramatically	on	other	fronts	aswell.	 Napoléon	 and	 his	 forces	 had	 invaded	 Egypt,	 and	 onAugust	 1,	 1798,	 a	 week	 after	 French	 troops	 marched	 intoCairo,	 Admiral	 Horatio	 Nelson’s	 British	 fleet	 surprised	 andannihilated	the	French	fleet	of	55	warships	and	280	transportsat	Aboukir	Bay,	near	Alexandria.	The	French	army	was	trappedin	Egypt....	 prescribing“The	 present	 situation	 of	 France,”	 John	 Quincy	 reported	 tohis	father,	“has	produced	a	great	and	important	change	in	herconduct	 toward	 us.	 It	 is	 no	 longer	 an	 overbearing	 minister	 ofexternal	 relations	 [Talleyrand]	 who	 keeps	 three	 ministerswaiting	 five	 months	 without	 reception	 .	 .	 .	 attempting	 to	 dupeand	 swindle	 them	 by	 his	 pimping	 spies.	 .	 .	 .	 No	 longer	 a	 self-imagined	 conquerorthepreliminaries	to	hearing	claims	for	justice.”23	John	Quincy	toldhis	father	that	the	French	government	now	seemed	determined“to	 effect	 a	 reconciliation	 with	 the	 United	 States”—and	 withgood	reason:	plague	had	killed	half	the	French	army	in	Egypt,and	 Napoléon	 had	 abandoned	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 troops	 andsecretly	 sailed	 away	 in	 the	 dead	 of	 night	 for	 France	 with	 ahandful	of	trusted	aides.	Within	a	year,	invading	English	forceswould	force	the	ill-fated	French	expeditionary	force	in	Egypt	tolay	 down	 its	 arms	 and	 surrender.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 Francesuffered	 a	 similar	 humiliation	 in	 Ireland	 when	 a	 British	 fleettrapped	 and	 captured	 nine	 French	 warships	 and	 transportvessels	carrying	a	French	invasion	army	into	Donegal	Bay.tribute	 asAs	the	aura	of	French	invincibility	began	to	dissipate,	Russiaorganized	 alliances	 to	 halt	 French	 expansion	 in	 Europe.	 AnAnglo-Russian	 army	 landed	 in	 Holland,	 while	 another	 Russianforce	joined	the	Austrians	and	pushed	French	forces	out	of	theBavarian	 and	 Italian	 Alps,	 Switzerland,	 and	 the	 Rhineland.	 InTuscany,	 Italian	 patriots	 rebelled	 and	 sent	 French	 forcesfleeing	 northward,	 while	 slaves	 in	 what	 is	 now	 Haiti	 staged	 amassive	rebellion,	butchering	more	than	10,000	French	troops,3,000	 French	 civilians,	 and	 the	 army’s	 commander	 in	 chief,Napoléon’s	brother-in-law.	In	France	proper,	royalists	staged	amassive	 counterrevolutionthe	 western	 and	 centralinprovinces.	 Besieged	 from	 all	 directions	 and	 stripped	 ofrevenues	from	foreign	plunder,	France	faced	economic	collapseunless	 Talleyrand	 could	 restore	 the	 flow	 of	 supplies	 andfoodstuffs	from	her	former	ally,	the	United	States.Under	 pressure	 from	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 Directory,	 Talleyrandordered	 American	 seamen	 and	 other	 Americans	 released	 fromprison,	reopened	French	ports	to	American	ships,	and	orderedan	 end	 to	 French	 attacks	 on	 American	 ships.	 He	 issued	 aformal	 invitation	 to	 peace	 talks	 that	 conspicuously	 includedPresident	 Adams’s	 own	 words	 to	 Congress,	 pledging	 that“whatever	plenipotentiary	the	government	of	the	United	Statesmight	send	to	France	to	put	an	end	to	the	existing	differencesbetween	the	two	countries	would	be	undoubtedly	received	withthe	 respect	 due	 to	 the	 representative	 of	 a	 free,	 independent,and	powerful	nation.”24Sensing	a	sharp	increase	in	official	European	respect	for	theUnited	 States,	 John	 Quincy	 urged	 his	 father	 to	 acceptTalleyrand’s	 invitation,	 and	 his	 father	 sent	 a	 new	 group	 ofpeace	commissioners	to	Paris.With	 the	 massive	 retreat	 of	 French	 troops,	 central	 Europegrew	 safe	 for	 travel,	 and	 after	 Louisa	 had	 recovered	 from	 stillanother	 miscarriage,	 she	 and	 John	 Quincy	 left	 Berlin	 in	 mid-July	for	a	three-month	vacation	in	the	Silesian	countryside,	withstops	 in	 Toplitz	 and	 Dresden	 along	 the	 way.	 John	 Quincy	 senthis	 brother	 Thomas	 an	 astonishing	 forty-three	 pages	 ofbeautifully	 written	 letters,	 which	 Thomas	 forwarded	 to	 aPhiladelphia	 literary	 weekly,	 Port	 Folio,	 for	 publication.	 Theylater	 appeared	 in	 London	 as	 an	 elegant	 387-page	 book	 titledLetters	 from	 Silesia,	 by	 “His	 Excellency	 John	 Quincy	 Adams.”Translated	 into	 French,	 they	 also	 appeared	 in	 Paris	 to	 greatacclaim.	Although	John	Quincy’s	literary	ambitions	centered	onpoetry,	 he	 suddenly	 emerged	 as	 a	 renowned	 author	 ofmagnificent	prose.When	 the	 Adamses	 returned	 to	 Berlin,	 they	 learned	 to	 theirastonishment	 that	 Napoléon	 had	 returned	 from	 Egypt	 andlanded	 at	 Saint-Raphaël	 on	 the	 south	 coast	 of	 France	 nearpresent-day	Cannes,	setting	off	joyful	street	demonstrations	inParis.	 He	 marched	 into	 that	 city	 a	 week	 later	 to	 the	 cheers	 oftens	 of	 thousands,	 and	 the	 French	 army,	 its	 spirits	 revived	 byhis	 return,	 forced	 the	 Anglo-Russian	 forces	 to	 withdraw.	 Amonth	later,	Napoléon	masterminded	a	coup	d’état	that	left	himin	 sole	 control	 of	 the	 French	 government.	 He	 retainedTalleyrand	 as	 foreign	 minister,	 ordering	 him	 to	 negotiate	 animmediate	 peace	 with	 the	 United	 States	 and	 restore	 traderelations.	 On	 September	 30,	 1800,	 the	 French	 and	 Americangovernments	 signed	 a	 new	 treaty	 of	 peace	 and	 amity	 thatindependence—under	 therespected	 American	 rights—andNeutrality	 Proclamation	 that	 George	 Washington	 had	 issuedseven	years	earlier.New	 England	 Federalists,	 however,	 were	 furious,	 havingalready	geared	up	their	shipbuilding	facilities	to	build	the	newnavy.	War	had	generated	wealth	for	New	Englanders	for	nearlya	century	of	perennial	Anglo-French	conflicts.	When	Secretaryof	 State	 Pickering,	 already	 at	 odds	 with	 the	 President	 overother	 issues,	 added	 his	 voice	 to	 the	 cry	 for	 war,	 PresidentAdams	 dismissed	 him	 for	 insubordination,	 and	 Pickeringreturned	 to	 New	 England	 harboring	 a	 bitterness	 for	 JohnAdams	 that	 would	 affect	 the	 entire	 Adams	 family	 for	 years	 tocome—especially	 John	 Quincy.	 John	 Adams	 named	 Virginia’sJohn	Marshall	to	replace	Pickering	as	secretary	of	state.With	 little	 left	 to	 do	 on	 the	 diplomatic	 front	 in	 Berlin,	 JohnQuincy	Adams	and	Louisa	spent	much	of	the	winter	dining	anddancing	at	royal	dinners	and	balls.	John	Quincy	used	his	sparemoments	 to	 plunge	 into	 translations	 of	 German	 literature,including	 the	 epic	 poem	 Oberon,	 a	 medieval	 legend	 about	 afairy	 king,	 and	 the	 fables	 of	 Christian	 Gellert.m	 Free	 of	 anytension-producing	 diplomatic	 obligations,	 the	 Adamses	 thrivedin	 the	 relaxed	 gaiety	 of	 the	 winter	 social	 season,	 and	 whenLouisa	 found	 herself	 pregnant	 again,	 she	 actually	 blossomedfor	 a	 change—eating	 heartily	 at	 holiday	 dinners	 and	 oftendancing	into	the	morning	hours	at	royal	balls.	For	the	first	timeever,	 she	 joined	 her	 husband	 on	 his	 vigorous,	 five-mile	 walkseach	day.	As	she	approached	term,	the	king	banned	all	traffic	inthe	street	in	front	of	the	Adams	home	to	ensure	quiet,	and	thequeen	sent	a	servant	to	wait	on	Louisa.Until	 Louisa’s	 pregnancy,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 seldom	 attendedreligious	 services,	 but	 in	 the	 winter	 of	 1801,	 he	 added	 dailyBible	reading	to	his	routine	after	the	sudden	death	of	a	youngarmy	 officer	 at	 an	 otherwise	 joyful,	 turn-of-the-century	 NewYear’s	party	on	December	31,	1799.	The	young	man	fell	to	thefloor	in	mid-sentence,	without	a	final	cry	or	gasp.It	 was	 at	 first	 supposed	 he	 had	 only	 fainted.	 A	 surgeonand	 physician	 were	 called	 in	 and	 every	 expedientpossible	 was	 used	 to	 bring	 him	 to	 life,	 in	 vain.	 I	 cameaway	.	.	.	to	prevent	the	story	from	coming	too	abruptly	tomy	 wife	 .	 .	 .	 and	 when	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 youth	 wascertainly	 dead	 had	 become	 unquestionable,	 the	 scenethat	 ensued	 was	 dreadful—faintings,	 hystericfits,convulsions,	 and	 raving	 madness	 marked	 the	 shock	 ofthis	calamitous	accident.	.	.	.	I	passed	the	period	betweenthe	two	centuries	in	communion	with	my	own	soul	and	inprostration	 to	 the	 being	 who	 directs	 the	 universe,	 withthanksgiving	 for	 his	 numerous	 blessings	 in	 the	 pasttimes.25John	 Quincy	 feared	 the	 young	 man’s	 death	 was	 an	 omen	 ofworse	things	to	come,	and	a	few	days	later	he	learned	that	hisnation’s	 revered	 leader,	 George	 Washington,	 had	 died	 twoweeks	 earlier,	 on	 December	 14,	 1799.	 For	 once,	 it	 was	 Louisawho	 had	 to	 calm	 and	 comfort	 her	 husband	 when	 the	 newsarrived.In	the	days	that	followed,	John	Quincy	discovered	and	studiedthe	 sermons	 of	 John	 Tillotson,	 archbishop	 of	 Canterbury	 from1691	 to	 1694	 and	 advocate	 of	 simpler,	 more	 comprehensibleterms	 that	 eschewed	 obscure	 metaphors.	 A	 contemporary	 ofJohn	 Locke,	 he	 called	 for	 reconciliation	 between	 Christianfaiths	 and	 emphasized	 morality.	 John	 Quincy	 embracedTillotson’s	 thesis,	 reading	 and	 rereading	 the	 ten	 volumes	 ofTillotson’s	 sermons	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 his	 life.	 As	 he	 began	 toembrace	 religion,	 however,	 he	 had	 no	 idea	 that	 AmericanFederalists,	 infuriated	 by	 federal	 property	 taxes,	 had	 splitranks	and	allowed	Thomas	Jefferson’s	Democrat-Republicans	tostrip	his	father	of	the	American	presidency.With	 his	 former	 secretary	 of	 state,	 Boston’s	 TimothyPickering,	 calling	 for	 secession,	 New	 England	 Federalists	 hadturned	 against	 the	 President.	 “The	 five	 States	 of	 New-England,”	 Pickering	 ranted,	 “can	 have	 nothing	 to	 fear	 .	 .	 .[from]	 instituting	 a	 new	 .	 .	 .	 nation	 of	 New-England,	 andleav[ing]	the	rest	of	the	Continent	to	pursue	their	own	imbecileand	disjointed	plans,	until	they	have	.	.	.	acquired	magnanimityand	 wisdom	 sufficient	 to	 join	 a	 confederation	 that	 may	 rescuethem	from	destruction.”26After	 counting	 the	 Electoral	 College	 votes	 in	 1800,	 VicePresident	 Thomas	 Jefferson	 and	 former	 New	 York	 senatorAaron	 Burr	 Jr.	 had	 each	 won	 seventy-three	 votes,	 while	 JohnAdams	 had	 garnered	 only	 sixty-five.	 Ironically,	 Adams	 wouldhave	 easily	 won	 reelection	 if	 Hamilton	 and	 Pickering	 had	 notdivided	 the	 Federalists,	 shunting	 sixty-four	 Federalist	 votes	 toPinckney.	It	was	a	politically	fatal	defeat	for	the	President	andsuicide	for	the	Federalist	Party,	which	would	never	again	field	aviable	candidate	for	national	leadership.The	tie	vote	in	the	Electoral	College	sent	the	decision	to	theHouse	of	Representatives,	which	elected	Jefferson	President	onthe	 thirty-sixth	 ballot,	 on	 February	 17,	 and	 relegated	 Burr	 topolitical	 obscurity	 as	 vice	 president.	 In	 two	 of	 his	 last	 acts	 inoffice,	 President	 John	 Adams	 named	 Secretary	 of	 State	 JohnMarshall	as	chief	justice	of	the	Supreme	Court,	and	to	preventpossible	 dismissal	 and	 humiliation	 of	 his	 son	 when	 theRepublicans	 took	 control	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 State,	 herecalled	 John	 Quincy	 from	 Berlin,	 ending	 his	 seeminglyunobstructed	rise	to	national	leadership.When	he	learned	of	his	father’s	defeat,	John	Quincy	wrote	toconsole	 him,	 adding,	 “I	 hope	 and	 confidently	 believe	 that	 youwill	 be	 prepared	 to	 bear	 this	 event	 with	 calmness	 andcomposure,	if	not	with	indifference;	that	you	will	not	suffer	it	toprey	on	your	mind	or	affect	your	health.”In	your	retirement	you	will	have	not	only	the	consolation	..	 .	 that	 you	 have	 discharged	 all	 the	 duties	 of	 a	 virtuouscitizen,	but	the	genuine	pleasure	of	reflecting	that	by	thewisdom	 and	 firmness	 of	 your	 administration	 you	 left	 .	 .	 .[the]	 country	 in	 safe	 and	 honorable	 peace.	 .	 .	 .	 Inresisting	.	.	.	the	violence	of	France,	you	saved	the	honorof	the	American	name	from	disgrace.	.	.	.	By	sending	thelate	 mission	 you	 restored	 an	 honorable	 peace	 to	 thenation,	 without	 tribute,	 without	 bribes,	 without	 violatingany	previous	engagements.	.	.	.	You	have,	therefore,	giventhe	most	decisive	proof	that	.	.	.	you	were	the	man	not	ofany	party	but	of	the	whole	nation.27On	 March	 4,	 Thomas	 Jefferson	 took	 the	 oath	 of	 office	 asAmerica’s	third	President	at	the	first	inauguration	to	be	held	inthe	 new,	 permanent	 federal	 capital	 of	 Washington	 City,	 as	 itwas	called	at	first.	In	his	inaugural	address,	the	new	Presidentappealed	 for	 an	 end	 to	 the	 bitter	 conflict	 between	 Anglophilesand	 Francophiles	 and	 between	 Federalists	 and	 Republicans.“Every	 difference	 of	 opinion	 is	 not	 a	 difference	 of	 principle,”Jefferson	 asserted.	 “We	 have	 called	 by	 different	 namesbrethren	of	the	same	principle.	We	are	all	republicans;	we	areall	federalists.”28In	 the	 written	 transcript	 of	 his	 address	 that	 he	 sent	 toCongress,	 he	 purposely	 left	 the	 words	 “republicans”	 and“federalists”	 uncapitalized.	 The	 election	 campaign,	 however,had	left	John	Adams	too	bitter	to	attend	the	inauguration,	andhe	never	heard	Jefferson’s	speech.	In	any	case,	few	Federalistsbelieved	 Thomas	 Jefferson	 could	 halt	 the	 secessionist	 feverinfecting	the	nation.	The	death	of	Washington	in	1799	had	leftthe	 young	 republic	 without	 a	 strong	 leader	 to	 unite	 vastlydifferent,	 conflicting	 regional	 interests	 across	 the	 continent,and	 Congress	 had	 become	 a	 battleground	 for	 those	 interestsinstead	 of	 a	 center	 of	 collegial	 mediation,	 compromise,	 andunification.On	 April	 12,	 1801,	 after	 four	 miscarriages,	 Louisa	 Adamsgave	birth	to	John	Quincy’s	first	child.	“I	have	this	day	to	offermy	humble	and	devout	thanks	to	almighty	God	for	the	birth	of	ason	at	half-past	three	o’clock	in	the	afternoon,”	he	prayed	as	hewrote	in	his	diary.29	Three	weeks	later,	the	infant	was	baptizedGeorge	 Washington	 Adams,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 prayed	 for	 “thefavor	 of	 almighty	 God	 that	 he	 may	 live	 and	 never	 proveunworthy	of	[the	name].”30	By	then,	John	Quincy	had	receivedhis	letter	of	recall,	and	the	following	day	he	presented	it	to	hisfriend	 King	 Frederick,	 then	 went	 to	 say	 farewell	 to	 Louisa’sfriend	the	queen.	“In	less	than	half	an	hour,	all	was	over.”31On	 June	 17,	 Louisa	 and	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 sailed	 fromHamburg,	 Germany,	 with	 their	 infant	 son,	 and	 after	 anuneventful	Atlantic	crossing,	they	disembarked	in	Philadelphia,where	 brother	 Thomas	 Boylston	 Adams	 awaited	 with	 theshocking	 news	 that	 their	 middle	 brother,	 twenty-nine-year-oldCharles,	had	died	of	alcoholism.	Several	days	later,	Louisa	andJohn	 Quincy	 separated	 for	 the	 first	 time	 since	 their	 marriage,with	 John	 traveling	 northward	 for	 a	 reunion	 with	 his	 parentsand	relatives,	while	Louisa	took	the	baby	to	Washington,	whereher	parents	had	settled	after	fleeing	London.	All	but	pennilesswhen	 they	 arrived,	 they	 had	 turned	 for	 help	 to	 their	 son-in-law’s	family,	and	John	Adams	had	not	only	loaned	them	moneybut	 appointed	 Joshua	 Johnson	 superintendent	 of	 the	 Treasuryfor	 hisStamp	 Office,	 drawing	 enormous	 politicalgenerosity.	By	the	time	Louisa	arrived,	however,	her	father	haddied,	and	the	rest	of	the	family	was	living	in	the	home	of	one	ofher	married	sisters.flakAfter	 a	 joyful	 reunion	 with	 his	 family,	 John	 Quincy	 suddenlyfound	 himself	 without	 prospects	 for	 a	 job	 in	 the	 public	 sector.Republicans	controlled	government,	and	his	mother	and	fathercould	 only	 suggest	 his	 “applying	 yourself	 solely	 to	 your	 ownprivate	affairs”	by	reestablishing	a	law	practice.32John	 Quincy	 bought	 a	 house	 in	 Boston,	 then	 traveled	 toWashington	for	the	first	time	to	escort	Louisa	and	baby	Georgeback	 to	 Massachusetts.	 While	 in	 the	 capital,	 he	 dined	 withThomas	Jefferson,	his	friend	from	his	adolescence	in	Paris	andnow	third	President	of	the	United	States.	When	he	took	office,Jefferson	 promptly	 fired	 most	 of	 his	 predecessor’s	 appointees,including	 Joshua	 Johnson.	 Jefferson	 apologized,	 saying	 he	 hadnot	known	that	Johnson	was	John	Quincy’s	father-in-law.After	meeting	with	the	President,	John	Quincy	took	Louisa	toMount	 Vernon	 to	 visit	 Martha	 Washington	 and	 show	 her	 thebaby	 boy	 who	 had	 joined	 legions	 of	 newborn	 American	 boysbearing	her	husband’s	name.The	 Adamses	 arrived	 in	 Massachusetts	 in	 late	 November	 intime	for	Louisa’s	formal	induction	into	the	huge	Adams	clan	ather	 first	 Thanksgiving	 in	 America.	 After	 settling	 in	 their	 homein	 Boston,	 John	 Quincy	 set	 up	 his	 embryonic	 law	 practice	 andsoon	 found	 it	 as	 boring	 as	 he	 had	 on	 his	 first	 try	 a	 decadeearlier.	 Boston,	 however,	 reeked	 of	 politics,	 and	 the	 scentquickly	lured	him	from	his	office—to	the	firehouse,	for	example,influentialto	 become	 a	 volunteercongregation	 of	 the	 Old	 Brick	 Meeting	 House,	 where	 hepurchased	 a	 pew.	 He	 also	 joined	 organizations	 that	 generatedspeaking	 opportunities	 before	 audiences	 of	 prominentBostonians.fireman	 and	 to	 theIn	 April	 1802,	 he	 won	 election	 to	 the	 state	 senate	 on	 theFederalist	 ticket	 and	 started	 two	 years	 of	 what	 he	 called	 “thenovitiate	 of	 my	 legislative	 labors.”	 He	 spent	 most	 of	 his	 timetilting	at	political	windmills—as	he	would	the	rest	of	his	life.	Inone	sortie,	he	tried	unsuccessfully	to	strip	the	legislature	of	itscontrol	 over	 thejust	 asunsuccessfully	 to	 block	 legislators	 from	 using	 public	 funds	 tounderwrite	 a	 new	 bank	 “whose	 shares	 were	 reserved	 to	 .	 .	 .members	 of	 the	 legislature.”	 33	 About	 his	 futile	 politicalbattles,	he	wrote,in	 another	 he	 triedjudiciary;I	 was	 not	 able	 either	 to	 effect	 much	 good	 or	 to	 preventmuch	 evil.	 I	 attempted	 some	 reforms	 and	 aspired	 tocheck	 some	 abuses,	 I	 regret	 to	 say,	 with	 little	 success.	 I[lacked]	 experience,	 and	 I	 discovered	 the	 danger	 ofopposing	 and	 exposing	 corruption.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 mammon	 ofunrighteousness	was	too	strongly	befriended.34Because	Federalists	often	shared	the	same	beds	of	corruptionwith	 opposition	 Republicans,	 they	 soon	 found	 John	 Quincy’scampaigns	 against	 corruption	 as	 much	 a	 threat	 to	 their	 ownpolitical	health	as	it	was	for	their	political	foes.	“A	politician	inthis	country	must	be	a	man	of	a	party,”	he	lamented.	“I	wouldfain	 be	 the	 man	 of	 my	 whole	 country.”	 Then,	 with	 a	 maliciousgrin,	 he	 added,	 “I	 have	 strong	 temptation	 and	 have	 greatprovocation	to	plunge	into	political	controversy.”35At	 the	 time,	 each	 state	 legislature	 elected	 two	 of	 its	 ownmembers	 to	 the	 U.S.	 Senate.	 To	 remove	 John	 Quincy	 from	 itsmidst	 without	 alienating	 powerful	 Adams	 family	 supporters	 inBoston,	the	Massachusetts	legislature	pretended	to	honor	JohnQuincy	by	electing	him	to	the	U.S.	Senate	and	sending	him	offto	 Washington	 in	 the	 hope	 that	 it	 would	 not	 hear	 from	 himagain	for	at	least	six	years.	John	Quincy,	however,	was	about	toshock	 the	 Massachusetts	 legislature	 and	 the	 nation’s	 entirepolitical	 establishment	 with	 what	 became	 a	 courageous,lifelong	crusade	against	injustice.