CHAPTER 	12The	End	of	the	BeginningAlthough	 President	 James	 Monroe	 believed	 John	 Quincy	 wasthe	 most	 qualified	 candidate	 for	 the	 presidency,	 he	 remainedsilent.	 “He	 thought	 it	 incumbent	 on	 him	 to	 have	 nothing	 to	 dowith	 party	 politics,”	 explained	 Egbert	 R.	 Watson,	 Monroe’sprivate	 secretary.	 Watson	 said	 Monroe	 considered	 it	 “beneaththe	dignity”	of	an	outgoing	President	and	“unjust	to	the	people.	 .	 .	 to	 throw	 the	 weight	 of	 his	 name	 and	 character	 on	 eitherside	of	any	contest.”1Having	 no	 organizational	 structure,	 political	 parties	 held	 nonominating	 conventions,	 leaving	 it	 to	 state	 legislatures	 tonominate	 presidential	 candidates—so-called	 favorite	 sons.	 Tofind	 qualified	 candidates,	 however,	 states	 often	 had	 to	 adoptsons	 of	 other	 states.	 The	 Tennessee	 legislature	 nominatedCarolina-born	 Andrew	 Jackson,	 while	 Kentucky	 nominatedVirginia-born	 Henry	 Clay.	 The	 Massachusetts	 legislature	 stoodalone	 in	 nominating	 a	 true	 native	 son,	 John	 Quincy	 Adams.	 Agroup	 of	 rogue	 Republicans	 in	 Congress	 ignored	 the	 Georgialegislature	 and	 nominated	 that	 state’s	 William	 H.	 Crawford,while	 John	 C.	 Calhoun	 of	 South	 Carolina	 snubbed	 his	 statelegislature	and	nominated	himself.	With	little	national	support,however,	Calhoun	withdrew	from	the	presidential	race	and	ranfor	vice	president—a	post	he	knew	no	one	else	would	seek.	Toensure	 his	 securing	 the	 office,	 he	 ran	 on	 both	 the	 Adams	 andJackson	tickets.Secretary	 of	 War	 John	 C.	 Calhoun,	 of	 South	 Carolina,recognized	he	lacked	the	support	to	contend	for	the	presidencyand	ran	for	vice	president	instead.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)In	 September	 1823,	 Crawford	 suffered	 a	 paralytic	 stroke,leaving	 Adams,	 Jackson,	 and	 Clay	 as	 the	 only	 activepresidential	contenders.	Adams	was	the	clear	early	favorite.By	 the	 end	 of	 1823,	 however,	 Andrew	 Jackson	 had	 madeenough	inroads	in	the	Northeast	to	threaten	John	Quincy’s	leadin	the	presidential	race.	Surprisingly,	John	Quincy	asked	Louisato	 throw	 a	 ball	 to	 honor	 the	 popular	 western	 candidate.Privately,	 John	 Quincy	 called	 Jackson	 “a	 barbarian	 and	 savagewho	 could	 scarcely	 spell	 his	 own	 name,”2	 and	 he	 feared	 aJackson	presidency	as	a	danger	to	the	nation.	The	only	way	hesaw	 to	 block	 such	 an	 outcome	 was	 to	 win	 the	 presidencyhimself	 and	 relegate	 Jackson	 to	 political	 impotence	 as	 vicepresident.	Louisa’s	ball	was	to	serve	as	an	opportunity	to	inviteJackson	 to	 be	 his	 running	 mate—a	 partnership	 that	 wouldensure	John	Quincy	the	support	of	the	many	Jackson	followersin	 the	 East	 and	 a	 huge	 bloc	 of	 Jacksonians	 in	 the	 West,	 whileleaving	Jackson	in	the	political	doldrums.	Although	the	generalwas	 too	 skilled	 a	 leader	 not	 to	 suspect	 John	 Quincy’s	 motives,he	 nonetheless	 accepted,	 and	 Louisa’s	 ball	 proved	 one	 of	 themost	brilliant,	most	memorable	social	events	in	capital	history.in	 smart	 suits	 and	 uniforms—pouredMore	than	1,000	guests—bejeweled	ladies	in	flowing	gowns,into	 Louisa’smensparkling	 mansion.	 They	 dined,	 drank,	 and	 danced	 until	 earlymorning,	paying	homage	to	what	seemed	like	the	ideal	politicalunion	 between	 the	 brilliant	 statesman	 from	 Boston	 and	 theheroic	 soldier	 and	 general	 from	 Tennessee.	 Anticipating	 thehuge	 turnout,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 the	 foresight	 to	 order	 pillarswedged	 under	 the	 floor	 to	 add	 support	 to	 the	 second-floorballroom.“The	 floor	 of	 the	 ballroom	 was	 chalked	 with	 spread-eagles,flags,	 and	 the	 motto	 ‘Welcome	 to	 the	 hero	 of	 New	 Orleans,’”according	 to	 John	 Quincy’s	 niece.	 “The	 pillars	 were	 festoonedwith	 laurel	 and	 wintergreen,	 while	 wreathings	 of	 evergreensand	 roses	 interspersed	 with	 small,	 variegated	 lamps,	 with	 alustre	in	the	center.”	Jackson	stood	next	to	Louisa,	with	guestsentering	in	pairs	and	bowing.Officers	 of	 the	 army	 and	 navy	 and	 the	 diplomatic	 corpsappeared	in	regimentals	and	regalia,	while	plain	citizensdisported	 themselves	 in	 pumps,	 silk	 stockings,	 ruffledcravats	 .	 .	 .	 with	 gold	 buckles	 and	 a	 big	 seal	 of	 topaz	 orcarnelian,	 regulation	 frock	 coats	 of	 green	 or	 claretcolored	 cloth	 .	 .	 .	 gilded	 buttons,	 and	 Hessian	 top-bootswith	gold	tassels.	.	.	.In	striking	contrast	with	the	diplomatic	corps	.	.	.	weregentlemen	 and	 representatives	 from	 the	 Far	 West,	 whohad	not	lost	the	free	stride	of	the	forest	and	the	prairie	orits	 freedom	 of	 speech	 and	 manner.	 No	 more	 remarkablewas	 the	 sight	 of	 Pushmataha,	 the	 “Eagle	 of	 theChoctaws”	 .	 .	 .	 than	 that	 of	 the	 woodsman	 and	 Indianfellow.fighter	 David	 Crockett.	 besides	 such.representatives	 from	 Tennessee	 as	 James	 K.	 Polk	 andJohn	Bell.3With	 all	 of	 Washington	 society	 in	 or	 around	 the	 Adamses’	 FStreet	mansion,	some	wag	with	a	poetic	bent	created	lines	thatevery	one	in	the	capital	sang	in	unison:Wend	your	way	with	the	world	tonight.Sixty	gray	and	giddy	twenty,Flirts	that	court	and	prudes	that	slight,State	coquettes	and	spinsters	plenty,Belles	and	matrons,	maids	and	madames,All	are	gone	to	Mrs.	Adams.4The	 poet	 went	 on	 to	 incorporate	 names	 of	 the	 Washingtonelite	in	subsequent	verses,	all	of	which	ended,Belles	and	matrons,	maids	and	madames,All	are	gone	to	Mrs.	Adams.The	ball	was	indeed	a	spectacle	and	a	lasting	social	triumphfor	Louisa,	if	not	for	John	Quincy.Andrew	 Jackson	 did	 nothing	 to	 unsettle	 the	 joy	 of	 Louisa’sextravaganza—or	 to	 dispel	 the	 notion	 of	 an	 Adams-Jacksonpolitical	 alliance.	 The	 hero	 of	 New	 Orleans	 even	 raised	 hisglass	 and	 delivered	 a	 warm	 and	 gracious	 toast	 to	 his	 hostessand	 left	 all	 the	 guests	 convinced	 that	 he	 and	 John	 Quincy	 hadformed	the	most	perfect	political	tandem	since	the	Washington-Adams	ticket	of	1789.Jackson,	 however,	 soon	 dispelled	 the	 notion	 and	 announcedhis	 intention	 to	 seek	 the	 presidency	 himself.	 Within	 days,	 he,Calhoun,	 Clay,	 and	 Crawford	 launched	 a	 bitter	 campaign	 ofcharges	 and	 countercharges	 about	 each	 other’s	 views	 onslavery,	 banking,	 tariffs,	 and	 other	 issues,	 and	 although	 JohnQuincy	tried	to	remain	above	the	fray,	they	dragged	him	into	it.“Every	 liar	 and	 calumniator	 in	 the	 country,”	 John	 Quincycomplained,	 “was	 at	 work	 day	 and	 night	 to	 destroy	 mycharacter	.	.	.	run	down	my	reputation	.	.	.	defame	and	disgraceme.”5Andrew	 Jackson	 of	 Tennessee,	 the	 hero	 of	 the	 Battle	 of	 NewOrleans	 in	 the	 War	 of	 1812,	 refused	 John	 Quincy	 Adams’sinvitation	 to	 be	 his	 running	 mate	 in	 the	 1824	 presidentialelection.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)By	 midsummer,	 Jackson’s	 status	 as	 the	 hero	 of	 New	 Orleansmade	 him	 the	 popularfront-runner	 among	 presidentialcandidates,	and	an	atmosphere	of	gloom	engulfed	the	house	onF	 Street	 when	 both	 Louisa	 and	 John	 Quincy	 suddenlyabandoned	the	campaign.	Physically	and	emotionally	exhaustedby	then,	Louisa	fell	victim	to	a	debilitating	skin	condition	callederysipelas,	or	St.	Anthony’s	Fire—a	strep	infection	that	left	herfeverish,	 with	 headaches	 and	 burning,	 gangrenous	 skininflammations.	Doctors	sent	her	to	bathe	in	mineral	waters	at	aleftspa.John	 Quincy,	 meanwhile,forPennsylvaniaMassachusetts	after	receiving	word	that	his	father	was	failing.To	make	matters	worse,	he	was	unable	to	elicit	any	informationfrom	his	son	George,	who	was	studying	law	at	Daniel	Webster’sBoston	office	and	was	responsible	for	overseeing	family	affairs.When	 John	 Quincy	 reached	 Quincy,	 he	 found	 his	 fatherunattended—crippled	 by	 arthritis	 and	 nearly	 blind.	 Adding	 tohis	 shock,	 his	 son	 George	 Washington	 was	 drunk	 andunconscious.	 Like	 many	 of	 his	 forebears,	 he	 had	 starteddrinking	 in	 his	 idle	 time	 and	 fell	 prey	 to	 chronic	 alcoholism.Even	worse,	he	turned	to	gambling	to	pay	for	his	habit	and	felldeeply	in	debt.George	 Washington	 Adams,	 firstborn	 son	 of	 John	 Quincy	 andfrom	 Harvard	 andLouisa	 Catherine	 Adams,	 graduatedpracticed	 law	 in	 Boston	 before	 succumbing	 to	 alcoholism.(NATIONALADAMS	 NATIONALSERVICE,HISTORICAL	PARK)PARKSHelpless	to	rein	in	the	sins	of	his	son,	John	Quincy	tended	tohis	father,	arranged	for	permanent	nursing	care,	and	returnedto	 Washington,	 deeply	 discouraged	 and	 resigned	 to	 puttingState	Department	affairs	in	good	order	for	his	successor	whileawaiting	 what	 he	 believed	 would	 be	 his	 inevitable	 loss	 in	 thepresidential	election.	In	anticipation	of	defeat,	John	Quincy	hadkept	 alert	 for	 a	 business	 opportunity	 in	 the	 private	 sector	 tooccupy	 his	 time	 after	 he	 left	 the	 White	 House.	 In	 July	 1823,Louisa’s	 fast-talking	 cousin	 George	 Johnson	 sold	 John	 Quincywhat	 he	 said	 was	 a	 stable,	 profitable	 local	 flour	 business,Columbian	 Mills,	 for	 $32,000.	 Within	 weeks,	 John	 Quincydiscovered	 that	 Columbian	 Mills	 had	 been	 operating	 at	 a	 loss.Worse,	Johnson	had	not	only	doctored	the	books	but	disguisedstructural	 damage	 at	 the	 plant,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 found	 hewould	 have	 to	 invest	 an	 additional	 $12,000	 to	 restore	 thebuilding	and	replace	or	repair	aging	machinery.As	 his	 new	 business	 faced	 financial	 collapse,	 John	 Quincy’spolitical	 life	 seemed	 destined	 for	 the	 same	 fate.	 AndrewJackson	won	far	more	popular	votes	than	his	rivals—just	under153,000,	 compared	 with	 114,000	 for	 John	 Quincy	 and	 about47,000	each	for	Clay	and	Crawford.	None	of	the	candidates	hada	 majority	 of	 Electoral	 College	 votes,	 however,	 with	 Jacksonwinning	 ninety-nine;	 John	 Quincy,	 eighty-four;	 Crawford,	 forty-one;	 and	 Clay,	 thirty-seven.	 Under	 the	 Constitution,	 the	 Houseof	 Representatives	 had	 to	 decide	 the	 election,	 with	 each	 statecasting	one	vote	under	a	unit	rule.By	 then,	 however,	 the	 states	 had	 ratified	 the	 Twelfthlimiting	 the	 number	 ofAmendment	 to	 the	 Constitutionpresidential	 candidates	 in	 a	 House	 runoff	 to	 three.	 AlthoughClay	 had	 more	 popular	 votes	 than	 Crawford,	 they	 came	 fromstates	with	fewer	Electoral	College	votes	and	forced	Clay	out	ofthe	race.	He	nonetheless	retained	enough	political	influence	tothrow	the	votes	of	the	three	states	he	had	won	to	the	candidateof	 his	 choice.	 Apart	 from	 their	 personal	 dislike	 for	 each	 other,Clay	 balked	 at	 ceding	 the	 highest-ranking	 civilian	 post	 to	 amilitary	 man,	 while	 Jackson	 had	 never	 forgiven	 Clay	 forcondemning	the	Tennessean’s	military	campaign	in	Florida	as	ausurpation	of	congressional	war-making	powers.At	6	p.m.	on	January	9,	1825,	Henry	Clay	arrived	at	the	houseon	F	Street	and,	according	to	John	Quincy,	“spent	the	eveningwith	me	in	a	long	conversation.”He	said	that	the	time	was	drawing	near	when	the	choicemust	 be	 made	 in	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives	 of	 aPresident	.	.	.	that	he	had	been	much	urged	and	solicitedwith	regard	to	the	part	in	that	transaction	that	he	shouldtake.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 time	 had	 now	 come	 at	 which	 he	 might	 beexplicit	in	his	communication	with	me	and	he	had	for	thatpurpose	 asked	 this	 confidential	 interview.	 He	 wished	 meas	far	as	I	might	think	proper	to	satisfy	him	with	regardto	 some	 principles	 of	 great	 public	 importance,	 butwithout	 any	 personal	 considerations	 for	 himself.	 In	 thequestion	 to	 come	 before	 the	 House	 between	 GeneralJackson,	Mr.	Crawford	and	myself,	he	had	no	hesitation	insaying	that	his	preference	would	be	for	me.6Clay	 had	 good	 reasons	 for	 supporting	 John	 Quincy.	 Not	 onlyhad	 they	 worked	 well	 together	 at	 Ghent,	 but	 Clay	 had	 anintimate	 knowledge	 of	 John	 Quincy’s	 thinking.	 Both	 werefervent	nationalists	with	a	deep	belief	in	the	nation’s	“manifestdestiny”	 and	 the	 necessity	 of	 building	 a	 federally	 financednetwork	 of	 highways	 and	 canals.	 John	 Quincy	 favored	 Clay’s“American	 System,”	 and	 Clay	 had	 always	 supported	 Johnforeign	 policy	 of	 American	 neutrality	 andQuincy’snoninvolvement	 in	 foreign	 wars.	 Neither	 wanted	 to	 see	 a	 manas	 reckless	 and	 uneducated	 as	 Jackson	 sitting	 in	 the	 WhiteHouse.	 Although	 John	 Quincy	 intended	 to	 retain	 the	 entireMonroe	cabinet,	if	elected	President	he	would	have	to	name	anew	secretary	of	state	to	replace	himself	and	a	secretary	of	warto	 replace	 William	 Crawford.	 Even	 if	 he	 and	 Clay,	 as	 theyclaimed,	 did	 not	 discuss	 filling	 the	 two	 posts,	 there	 was	 noneed	 for	 them	 to	 do	 so.	 Clay	 had	 made	 it	 clear,	 when	 herejected	 the	 War	 Department	 post	 eight	 years	 earlier,	 that	 hislust	 for	 the	 presidency	 made	 the	 State	 Department	 post	 theonly	cabinet	position	he	would	ever	accept.On	 January	 24,	 Clay’s	 Kentucky	 delegation	 announced	 itwould	 cast	 its	 vote	 for	 Adams,	 despite	 express	 instructionsfrom	 the	 state	 legislature	 to	 vote	 for	 Jackson.	 Jackson	 hadscored	an	overwhelming	popular	victory	in	Kentucky’s	popularelection,	while	John	Quincy	had	failed	to	win	even	a	single	vote.All	 votes	 had	 gone	 to	 Clay	 and	 Jackson.	 Congressionaldelegates	 from	 Ohio	 and	 Missouri—the	 other	 states	 Clay	 hadwon—also	cast	their	votes	for	John	Quincy,	and	on	February	9,after	only	one	House	ballot,	John	Quincy	Adams	won	election	asthe	 nation’s	 sixth	 President.	 In	 doing	 so,	 he	 became	 the	 firstnon-Virginian	 to	 win	 the	 presidency	 since	 his	 father’s	 electionthirty	 years	 earlier	 in	 1796.	 He	 also	 became	 the	 first	 son	 of	 aFounding	 Father	 and	 President	 to	 become	 the	 nation’s	 chiefexecutive.	 For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 three	 decades,	 northernersflocked	to	Washington	to	attend	the	inauguration	of	one	of	theirown.House	Speaker	Henry	Clay	of	Tennessee	finished	fourth	in	thepresidential	 election	 of	 1824	 and	 threw	 his	 votes	 to	 JohnQuincy	 Adams,	 who	 named	 Clay	 secretary	 of	 state.	 (LIBRARYOF	CONGRESS)“The	 city	 is	 thronged	 with	 strangers,”	 complained	 thesouthern-born	socialite	Sarah	Seaton,	whose	brother	publishedthe	National	Intelligencer,	“and	Yankees	swarm	like	the	locustsof	Egypt	in	our	houses,	our	beds,	and	our	kneading	troughs!”7John	 Quincy	 was	 more	 enthusiastic	 than	 Mrs.	 Seaton	 andwrote	to	his	“dear	and	honored	father”	to	tell	him	of	“the	eventof	this	day,	upon	which	I	can	only	offer	you	my	congratulationsand	 ask	 your	 blessings	 and	 prayers.”	 He	 signed	 the	 letter,“Your	affectionate	son.”8The	ailing	former	President	answered	immediately:I	have	received	your	letter	of	the	9th.	Never	did	I	feel	somuch	 solemnity	 as	 upon	 this	 occasion.	 The	 multitude	 ofmy	 thoughts	 and	 the	 intensity	 of	 my	 feelings	 are	 toomuch	for	a	mind	like	mine,	in	its	ninetieth	year.	May	theblessing	 of	 God	 Almighty	 continue	 to	 protect	 you	 to	 theend	 of	 your	 life,	 as	 it	 has	 heretofore	 protected	 you	 in	 soremarkable	 a	 manner	 from	 your	 cradle.	 I	 offer	 the	 sameprayer	 for	 your	 lady	 and	 your	 family	 and	 am	 youraffectionate	father,	John	Adams.9Contrary	 to	 its	 affect	 on	 former	 President	 John	 Adams,	 JohnQuincy’s	victory	appalled	many	American	political	leaders,	whoit	 “a	 mockery	 of	 representative	 government.”10calledOutraged	by	what	he	considered	the	“monstrous	union”	of	Clayand	 Adams,	 Jackson	 cried	 out,	 “I	 weep	 for	 the	 liberty	 of	 mycountry.	 The	 rights	 of	 the	 people	 have	 been	 bartered	 forpromises	of	office.	.	.	.	The	voice	of	the	people	of	the	West	havebeen	 disregarded,	 and	 demagogues	 barter	 them	 as	 sheep	 intheand	 personalshamblesaggrandizement.”11viewstheirownforFew	members	of	the	Washington	political	scene	doubted	thatJohn	Quincy	had	promised,	tacitly	or	otherwise,	to	reward	Clayfor	 his	 support,	 and	 knowing	 how	 Clay	 lusted	 for	 thepresidency,	 all	 assumed	 that	 John	 Quincy	 would	 appoint	 himsecretary	 of	 state,	 the	 stepladder	 to	 the	 presidency	 for	 morethan	two	decades.	Rumors	of	“bargain	&	sale”	swept	across	thepolitical	 landscape,	 with	 some	 Jackson	 supporters	 growlingabout	possible	civil	war	and	secession	in	the	West.	The	mood	inthe	White	House	turned	less	than	relaxed	a	few	days	after	theHouse	 vote,	 as	 President	 Monroe	 hosted	 a	 reception	 for	 thePresident-elect.	The	President	was	chatting	with	a	guest	whenAndrew	 Jackson,	 still	 recovering	 from	 a	 debilitating	 illness,thrust	 his	 grim,	 gaunt	 face	 through	 the	 doorway.	 Armed	 asalways	with	two	pistols,	he	snapped	his	head	from	side	to	sideuntil	 he	 spotted	 John	 Quincy.	 As	 the	 President	 and	 othercelebrants	 collectively	 held	 their	 breath,	 Jackson	 boundedforward,	 broke	 into	 a	 warm	 smile,	 and,	 hand	 outstretched,offered	John	Quincy	his	congratulations.Five	 days	 after	 his	 election	 victory,	 John	 Quincy	 announcedhis	decision	to	appoint	Henry	Clay	as	secretary	of	state.“So	 you	 see,”	 Andrew	 Jackson	 wailed	 in	 outrage,	 “the	 Judasof	 the	 West	 has	 closed	 the	 contract	 and	 will	 receive	 thirtypieces	 of	 silver.	 His	 end	 will	 be	 the	 same.	 Was	 there	 everwitnessed	such	a	bare-faced	corruption	in	any	country	before?”Others	 agreed	 that	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Clay	 had	 arranged	 a“corrupt	 bargain”	 that	 undermined	 the	 election	 process	 andstripped	 voters	 of	 their	 chosen	 candidate.	 New	 York	 senatorMartin	Van	Buren,	who	had	backed	Crawford’s	candidacy,	wasas	outraged	as	Jackson,	warning	a	Kentucky	congressman	that,in	 voting	 for	 Adams,	 “you	 sign	 Mr.	 Clay’s	 political	 deathwarrant.”12	Corrupt	or	not,	in	appointing	Henry	Clay	secretaryof	 state,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 also	 signed	 his	 own	 political	 deathwarrant	as	President.On	 March	 4,	 1825,	 “after	 two	 successive	 sleepless	 nights,	 I[John	 Quincy]	 entered	 upon	 this	 day	 with	 a	 supplication	 toheaven,	first,	for	my	country,	secondly	for	myself	and	for	thoseconnected	 with	 my	 good	 name	 and	 fortunes,	 that	 the	 lastresults	 of	 its	 events	 may	 be	 auspicious	 and	 blessed.”13	 At11:30	 a.m.	 John	 Quincy	 rode	 to	 the	 Capitol	 in	 a	 carriage	 withhis	 friend	 Attorney	 General	 William	 Wirt.	 President	 Monroefollowed	in	a	second	carriage,	with	several	companies	of	militiaescorting	 the	 two	 vehicles,	 along	 with	 thousands	 of	 citizenswho,	 according	 to	 custom	 then,	 escorted	 the	 President	 to	 theinauguration	 before	 a	 joint	 session	 of	 Congress.	 Missing	 wasLouisa	Catherine	Adams,	whose	entertainments	had	done	moreto	 elect	 John	 Quincy	 than	 he	 had	 done	 for	 himself.	 Ill	 in	 bed,still	 suffering	 the	 aftereffects	 of	 her	 strep	 infection,	 she	 wasunable	to	face	the	crowds.John	 Quincy	 began	 his	 inauguration	 address	 in	 fine	 fashion,countering	 Jacksonian	 polemics	 by	 proclaiming,	 “Our	 politicalcreed	 is	 .	 .	 .	 that	 the	 will	 of	 the	 people	 is	 the	 source,	 and	 thehappiness	 of	 the	 people	 the	 end	 of	 all	 legitimate	 governmentupon	 earth.”14	 Greeted	 with	 enthusiasm	 at	 first,	 his	 speechmet	 with	 ever	 increasing	 disbelief,	 then	 outright	 disapproval,as	he	asked	that	“all	constitutional	objections	.	.	.	be	removed”for	 construction	 of	 interstate	 roads	 and	 canals	 and	 other“internal	improvement”	by	the	federal	government.	As	he	wenton,	 it	 became	 clear	 that	 his	 years	 in	 the	 foreign	 service,	 hisscholarly	 pursuits,	 and	 his	 refusal	 to	 campaign	 had	 left	 himwoefully	 out	 of	 touch	 with	 ordinary	 Americans,	 and	 hisreferences	 to	 classical	 civilizations	 and	 ancient	 republicsperplexed	almost	all	the	members	of	Congress.President	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 proved	 the	 most	 ineffectivePresident	 in	 early	 American	 history—only	 to	 metamorphoseinto	one	of	the	nation’s’s	greatest	congressmen	as	a	championof	 abolition,	 free	 speech,	 and	 the	 right	 of	 petition.	 (LIBRARYOF	CONGRESS)“The	 magnificence	 and	 splendor	 of	 their	 public	 works,”	 hewaxed	 in	 Demosthenic	 oratory,	 “are	 among	 the	 imperishableglories	 of	 the	 ancient	 republics.	 The	 roads	 and	 aqueducts	 ofRome	 have	 been	 the	 admiration	 of	 all	 after	 ages	 and	 havesurvived	 thousands	 of	 years	 after	 all	 her	 conquests	 have	 beenswallowed	up	in	despotism	or	become	the	spoil	of	barbarians.”Although	 some	 members	 misunderstood	 his	 reference	 tobarbarians,	 none	 failed	 to	 recognize	 his	 clear	 intention	 ofassuming	 powers	 reserved	 to	 the	 states	 under	 the	 TenthAmendment	of	the	Constitution.After	 John	 Quincy’s	 speech,	 Chief	 Justice	 John	 Marshall,	 aheroic	soldier	in	the	Revolutionary	War	whom	John	Adams	hadappointed	 to	 the	 court	 at	 the	 end	 of	 his	 administration,	 sworein	the	new	President.	John	Quincy	had	spent	his	life	training	forthe	 presidency	 and	 now	 left	 to	 review	 “military	 companiesdrawn	up	in	front	of	the	Capitol”	before	returning	home	to	joinLouisa	 and	 “a	 crowd	 of	 visitors”	 for	 a	 two-hour	 reception.Later,	John	Quincy	went	to	a	White	House	reception	and,	afterdinner	at	home,	attended	the	inaugural	ball.	It	was	to	be	one	ofthe	last	joyous	moments	of	his	administration.He	 and	 Louisa	 spent	 the	 next	 six	 weeks	 moving,	 graduallydismantling	their	home	on	F	Street	and	settling	into	the	WhiteHouse,	selling	furniture	they	did	not	need	and	buying	furniturethey	 did	 need,	 including	 a	 billiard	 table	 for	 John	 Quincy.	 Themove	 was	 not	 simple.	 In	 addition	 to	 caring	 for	 their	 own	 twoyounger	 sons,	 John	 II	 and	 Charles	 Francis,	 the	 Adamses	 werestill	 caring	 for	 Louisa’s	 orphaned	 niece	 and	 two	 ill-behavednephews,	 one	 of	 whom	 raced	 right	 into	 the	 White	 Housekitchen	 to	 flirt	 with	 maids.	 To	 add	 to	 the	 family’s	 immediateproblems,the	 Marquis	 de	 Lafayette,	 his	 son	 GeorgeWashington	Lafayette,	his	secretary	Auguste	Lavasseur,	and	hisvalet	Bastien	arrived	at	the	White	House	late	in	July	for	a	hugebanquet.	 The	 feast	 climaxed	 Lafayette’s	 triumphant	 yearlongU.S.	 tour	 as	 “the	 nation’s	 guest”	 to	 commemorate	 the	 fiftiethanniversary	 of	 American	 independence.	 He	 had	 just	 returnedfrom	New	England,	where	he	had	said	farewell	to	John	Adamsand	 now	 came	 to	 bid	 John	 Quincy	 good-bye.	 The	 two	 hadknown	 each	 other	 since	 John	 Quincy	 was	 a	 winsome	 boy	 offifteen	 living	 with	 his	 father	 at	 Benjamin	 Franklin’s	 residencein	 Paris.	 To	 Louisa’s	 dismay,	 her	 husband	 waxed	 enthusiasticand	 insisted	 that	 Lafayette	 and	 his	 entourage	 remain	 at	 theWhite	House	as	his	personal	guests	for	the	rest	of	their	stay	inthe	United	States—all	of	August	into	September.“I	 admire	 the	 old	 gentleman,”	 Louisa	 complained,	 “but	 noadmiration	 can	 stand	 family	 discomfort.	 We	 are	 all	 obliged	 toturn	out	of	our	beds	to	make	room	for	him	and	his	suite.”15After	 celebrating	 Lafayette’s	 birthday	 on	 the	 night	 ofSeptember	 6,	 John	 Quincy	 bid	 Lafayette	 an	 official	 farewell	 inthe	peristyle	of	the	White	House.	With	his	cabinet	surroundinghim	and	a	huge	crowd	of	Lafayette	well-wishers	looking	on,	thePresident	spoke	with	deep	emotion:	“We	shall	always	look	uponyou	 as	 belonging	 to	 us	 .	 .	 .	 as	 belonging	 to	 our	 children	 afterus.”Congress	 invited	 sixty-seven-year-old	 Marquis	 de	 Lafayette	 totour	America	as	a	“guest	of	the	nation”	to	celebrate	the	fiftiethanniversary	 of	 the	 victory	 at	 Yorktown.	 President	 John	 QuincyAdams	invited	Lafayette	to	stay	at	the	White	House	during	hislast	 weeks	 in	 America.	 (FROM	 AN	 ENGRAVING	 IN	 THECHÂTEAU	 DE	 VERSAILLES,	 RÉUNION	 DES	 MUSÉESNATIONAUX)You	are	ours	by	more	than	the	patriotic	self-devotion	withwhich	 you	 flew	 to	 the	 aid	 of	 our	 fathers	 at	 the	 crisis	 ofour	 fate;	 ours	 by	 that	 unshaken	 gratitude	 for	 yourservices	 which	 is	 a	 precious	 portion	 of	 our	 inheritance;ours	 by	 that	 tie	 .	 .	 .	 which	 has	 linked	 your	 name	 forendless	 ages	 of	 time	 with	 the	 name	 of	 Washington.	 .	 .	 .Speaking	 in	 the	 name	 of	 the	 whole	 people	 of	 the	 UnitedStates	 .	 .	 .	 I	 bid	 you	 a	 reluctant	 and	 affectionatefarewell.16“God	 bless	 you,	 sir,”	 Lafayette	 sobbed.	 “God	 bless	 theAmerican	 people.”	 He	 embraced	 John	 Quincy	 and,	 with	 tearsstreaming	down	his	face,	rushed	back	into	the	White	House	tocollect	 himself	 before	 leaving	 American	 shores	 for	 the	 lasttime.Lafayette’s	 departure	 ended	 the	 few	 weeks	 of	 civil	 behaviorthat	the	French	hero’s	arrival	had	provoked	among	Washingtonpolitical	 leaders.	 Even	 Vice	 President	 Calhoun	 now	 turned	 onJohn	 Quincy	 in	 a	 political	 tidal	 wave	 of	 outrage	 over	 whatAmericans	 perceived	 as	 “the	 theft	 of	 government”	 anddisregard	of	the	popular	will.	In	designating	Clay	his	secretaryof	state,	John	Quincy	inadvertently	provoked	the	founding	of	anew	 political	 party,	 with	 a	 broad	 popular	 base	 spanning	 theWest	and	South.Calling	 themselves	 Democrats,	 the	 new	 party	 set	 out	 fromthe	first	to	cripple	John	Quincy’s	administration	and	ensure	hisdeparture	 after	 one	 term.	 John	 Quincy	 tried	 to	 forestall	 theinevitable	 by	 offering	 Jackson	 a	 cabinet	 post	 as	 secretary	 ofwar,	but	Jackson	all	but	laughed	in	his	face	and	refused	even	toconsider	serving	an	administration	he	was	determined	to	bringdown.While	 Jackson	 was	 building	 a	 political	 party	 to	 support	 hisown	presidential	ambitions,	John	Quincy	held	stubbornly	to	hisnaive	dismissal	of	political	parties	as	antithetical	to	union.	Evenmore	naively,	he	refused	to	take	advantage	of	patronage	to	putmen	 in	 office	 who	 would	 support	 him	 and	 his	 policies.	 Theresult	was	a	cabinet	and	government	bureaucracy	that,	for	themost	 part,	 worked	 to	 undermine	 both	 his	 policies	 and	 hischances	of	winning	a	second	term.As	 Jackson	 and	 his	 supporters	 filled	 the	 press	 with	 chargesheadlined	 “Corrupt	 Bargain,”	 John	 Quincy	 reacted	 scornfully,calling	 the	 Democratic	 Party	 a	 “conspiracy”	 against	 nationalunity.	 Henry	 Clay	 grew	 so	 angry	 at	 Virginia	 senator	 JohnRandolph’s	 constant	 references	 to	 a	 “corrupt	 bargain”	 that	 hechallenged	 Randolph	 to	 a	 duel.	 Although	 both	 men	 emergedunhurt,	 Clay	 managed	 to	 send	 a	 bullet	 through	 Randolph’ssleeve.The	threat	of	duels	notwithstanding,	Jacksonians	in	Congressstepped	up	their	obstructionist	tactics.	When	a	group	of	newlyindependent	 Latin	 American	 nations	 invited	 the	 United	 Statesto	 send	 representatives	 to	 a	 conference	 in	 Panama	 to	 form	 aJacksonian	 congressmen	 purposelypan-American	 union,debated	the	qualifications	of	John	Quincy’s	appointees	until	theconference	had	ended,	leaving	the	American	delegates	with	noconference	to	attend.In	 addition	 to	 his	 political	 humiliations	 in	 Congress,	 JohnQuincy	faced	unexpected	personal	humiliation	when	he	and	hisvalet	 tried	 rowing	 across	 the	 Potomac	 River	 one	 afternoon,with	 John	 Quincy	 intending	 to	 swim	 back.	 “Before	 we	 got	 halfacross,”	he	explained,the	 boat	 had	 leaked	 itself	 half	 full	 and	 .	 .	 .	 there	 wasnothing	 on	 board	 to	 scoop	 up	 the	 water.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 jumpedoverboard	.	.	.	and	lost	hold	of	the	boat,	which	filled	withwater	and	drifted	away.	.	.	.	Antoine,	who	was	naked,	hadlittle	 difficulty.	 I	 had	 much	 more	 .	 .	 .	 struggling	 for	 lifeand	gasping	for	breath.	.	.	.	The	loose	sleeves	of	my	shirt	..	 .	 filled	 with	 water	 and	 hung	 like	 two	 fifty-six-poundweights	upon	my	arms.17The	 President	 managed	 to	 strip	 and	 swim	 ashore,	 where	 hisson	John	II	pulled	him	from	the	water,	while	Antoine	scamperedout	and	dressed	as	best	he	could,	before	running	to	the	Adamshouse	across	the	bridge	to	get	a	carriage.	“While	Antoine	wasgone,”	 the	 President	 confided	 to	 his	 diary,	 “John	 and	 I	 werewading	 and	 swimming	 up	 and	 down	 on	 the	 other	 shore,	 orsitting	naked	basking	on	the	bank	at	the	margin	of	the	river.	.	..	 The	 carriage	 came	 and	 took	 me	 and	 Antoine	 home,	 halfdressed.”18Although	 he	 escaped	 injury,	 the	 President	 did	 not	 escape	 atorrent	 of	 ridicule,	 and	 later	 in	 the	 year,	 in	 October,	 theTennessee	 legislature	 heaped	 insult	 on	 top	 of	 ridicule	 bynominating	Jackson	for	the	presidency—three	years	in	advanceof	 the	 next	 presidential	 race	 in	 1828.	 Jackson	 immediatelyresigned	 his	 Senate	 seat	 to	 begin	 a	 national	 campaign	 tounseat	John	Quincy	Adams—sooner	or	later.Rather	 than	 reinforcing	 his	 presidency,	 John	 Quincy	 seemedto	go	out	of	his	way	to	undermine	it.	Apparently	unaware	of	orunable	 to	 address	 the	 needs	 of	 a	 semiliterate	 rural	 populationin	 his	 speeches,	 he	 always	 appeared	 to	 address	 Harvardscholars	 or	 their	 ilk,	 insisting	 that	 “the	 great	 object	 of	 civilgovernment	 is	 the	 improvement	 of	 the	 condition	 of	 those	 whoare	parties	to	the	social	compact.”Roads	 and	 canals	 .	 .	 .	 are	 among	 the	 most	 importantmeans	 ofimprovement.	 But	 moral,	 political	 andintellectual	 improvement	 are	 duties	 assigned	 by	 theAuthor	 of	 our	 existence.	 .	 .	 .	 Among	 the	 first	 .	 .	 .instruments	for	the	improvement	of	the	condition	of	menis	 knowledge,	 and	 to	 the	 acquisition	 of	 much	 of	 theknowledge	 adapted	 to	 the	 wants,	 the	 comforts	 andinstitutions	 andlife,	 publicenjoyments	 of	 humanseminaries	of	learning	are	essential.19thecultivationand	 manufactures,In	 what	 he	 considered—and	 what	 really	 was—a	 brilliant,forward-looking	 address	 to	 advance	 the	 nation,	 he	 called	 onimprovement	 of	 agriculture,Congress	 to	 promote	 “thecommerceandencouragement	 of	 the	 mechanic	 and	 of	 the	 elegant	 arts,	 theadvancement	 of	 literature,	 and	 the	 progress	 of	 the	 sciences.”Among	the	sciences,	he	cited	astronomy	as	the	most	importantand	 calledfederal	 construction	 of	 astronomicalobservatories,	or	“lighthouses	of	the	sky,”	to	study	the	heavens.He	 warned	 that	 failure	 to	 do	 so	 “would	 be	 treachery	 to	 themost	 sacred	 of	 trusts.”	 If	 any	 congressmen	 still	 supported	 hisprogram	 at	 that	 point,	 he	 proceeded	 to	 lose	 them	 all	 with	 oneof	 the	 most	 politically	 inept	 statements	 of	 his	 career:	 “Whileforeign	 nations	 .	 .	 .	 are	 advancing	 with	 gigantic	 strides	 in	 .	 .	 .public	improvement,	were	we	to	slumber	in	indolence	.	.	.	andforproclaim	 to	 the	 world	 that	 we	 are	 palsied	 by	 the	 will	 of	 ourconstituents,	would	it	not	be	to	.	.	.	doom	ourselves	to	perpetualinferiority?”20Even	 his	 most	 loyal	 supporters	 misunderstood	 the	 phrase“palsied	 by	 the	 will	 of	 our	 constituents.”	 North	 Carolinacongressman	 Nathaniel	 Macon	 charged	 that	 “the	 message	 ofthe	 President	 seems	 to	 claim	 all	 the	 power	 to	 the	 federalgovernment.”21	 And	 General	 Edmund	 Gaines,	 whom	 formerPresident	 Monroe	 had	 sent	 to	 rid	 Amelia	 Island	 of	 pirates,predicted	 that	 “the	 planters,	 farmers	 and	 mechanics	 of	 thecountry”	 would	 see	 the	 next	 presidential	 election	 as	 “a	 greatcontest	between	the	aristocracy	and	democracy	of	America.”22Jackson	 thundered	 a	 reply	 that	 devastated	 John	 Quincy,	 whoseemed	unaware	of	the	implications	of	what	he	had	written	andsaid.	“When	I	view	.	.	.	the	declaration	that	it	would	be	criminalfor	 the	 agents	 of	 our	 government	 to	 be	 palsied	 by	 the	 will	 oftheir	constituents,	I	shudder	for	the	consequence.	.	.	.	The	voiceof	the	people	.	.	.	must	be	heard.	Instead	of	building	lighthousesin	 the	 skies,	 establishing	 national	 universities,	 and	 makingexplorations	round	the	globe	.	.	.	pay	the	national	debt	.	.	.	thenapportion	 the	 surplus	 revenue	 amongst	 the	 several	 states	 .	 .	 .leaving	the	superintendence	of	education	to	the	states.”23While	newspapers	ridiculed	John	Quincy’s	“lighthouses	in	theskies,”	 Jackson	 addressed	 the	 needs	 and	 concerns	 of	 ordinarypeople.	He	called	for	an	end	to	debtors’	prisons,	citing	a	blindman	 in	 a	 Massachusetts	 prison	 for	 a	 debt	 of	 $6	 and	 a	 RhodeIsland	woman	behind	bars	for	a	debt	of	sixty-eight	cents.	Therewere	 five	 times	 as	 many	 debtors	 as	 criminals	 in	 prisons,	 mostof	them	indigent,	with	debts	of	less	than	$50,	and	forced	to	payfor	their	food	in	jail—or	starve.u	Jackson	also	called	for	reformof	 bankruptcy	 laws	 to	 prevent	 employers	 from	 declaringbankruptcy	to	avoid	paying	wages.Although	many	of	his	proposals	were	two	centuries	ahead	oftheir	 time,	 John	 Quincy	 was	 out	 of	 touch	 with	 his	 America.	 Inwhat	 was	 clearly	 a	 clash	 of	 cultures—indeed,	 a	 clash	 ofin	 general,	 and	 thegenerations—John	 Quincy	 saw	 manAmerican	 man	 in	 particular,	 as	 having	 unlimited	 talents,restrained	 only	 by	 lack	 of	 educational	 opportunities	 that	 hebelieved	 the	 federal	 government	 could	 and	 should	 provide.	 Infact,	Americans	were	largely	a	society	of	small	landowners	andlaborers,	 tilling	 the	 soil,	 accepting	 their	 lot	 as	 all	 butpredestined,	and	largely	intent	on	meeting	their	physical	ratherthan	 any	 perceived	 intellectual	 needs.	 The	 average	 Americanman	yearned	not	to	attend	school	or	college	but	to	own	a	plotof	 land—to	 work	 its	 soil,	 to	 plant	 and	 harvest	 enough	 to	 feedhimself	 and	 his	 family,	 and	 to	 sell	 any	 surplus	 at	 market.	 JohnQuincy’s	 proposals	 were	 so	 alien	 to	 American	 thinking	 of	 histime	 that	 his	 programs—along	 with	 his	 presidency—met	 withnothing	 but	 ridicule	 and	 rejection,	 his	 chance	 for	 leadershipspent,	 his	 dream	 of	 advancing	 the	 nation,	 culturally	 andeconomically,	shattered.Depressed,	 he	 moped	 about	 the	 White	 House,	 lost	 weightnoticeably,	 and	 reduced	 his	 presidential	 routine	 to	 early-morning	 Bible	 reading,	 a	 daily	 walk	 or	 swim	 in	 the	 Potomac,dinner	 with	 Louisa	 and	 the	 family,	 then	 an	 evening	 chat	 or	 agame	 of	 billiards.	 In	 the	 course	 of	 the	 day,	 he	 kept	 up	 withnewspapers,	 signed	 letters,	 and	 received	 occasional	 visitors,but	 grew	 so	 moody	 he	 stopped	 writing	 in	 his	 diary,	 unable	 tounderstand	why	and	how	he	had	failed	to	make	his	countrymenunderstand	 what	 he	 was	 trying	 to	 do	 for	 them	 and	 the	 nation.His	depression	made	Louisa’s	life	miserable.“There	 is	 something	 in	 this	 great,	 unsocial	 house	 whichdepresses	 my	 spirits	 beyond	 expression,”	 she	 complained	 inher	 diary.	 Evidently	 weary	 of	 the	 burdens	 of	 married	 life,	 shegrumbled	 that	 a	 husband	 expected	 his	 wife	 to	 “cook	 dinner,wash	his	clothes,	gratify	his	sexual	appetites,”	and	then	“thankhim	 and	 love	 him	 for	 permission	 to	 drudge	 through	 life	 at	 themercy	of	his	caprices.”24	She	and	her	husband	grew	strangelydistant,	 and	 when	 he	 traveled	 to	 Quincy	 for	 his	 usual	 summervacation,	Louisa	went	off	on	her	own,	up	the	Hudson	Valley	andthen	to	New	Hampshire.	Their	estrangement	would	last	for	therest	of	their	stay	in	the	White	House,	although	she	appeared	atfamily	dinners	and	public	entertainments.intheirinterferenceThe	mood	of	the	country	worsened	as	well.	Planters,	farmers,craftsmen,	 and	 frontiersmen	 who	 made	 up	 the	 majority	 ofAmericans	 were	 independent	 and	 self-sufficient—unwilling	 tofederalbrookgovernment.	 They	 developed	 a	 deep	 resentment	 for	 theHarvard	scholar	who	suggested	he	knew	better	than	they	whatthey	needed	to	know	and	what	they	needed	to	do.	They	wantedless	 government,	 not	 more.	 They	 would	 read	 and	 learn	 whatthey	 liked—or	 not.	 They	 would	 build	 their	 own	 roads	 if	 theythought	they	needed	any	and	grow	and	hunt	what	they	pleasedwhen	they	pleased.lives	 by	 afar-offEnglish-born	 First	 Lady	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Adams	 despised	 lifein	 the	 White	 House,	 saying,	 “There	 is	 something	 in	 this	 great,unsocial	house	which	depresses	my	spirits	beyond	expression.”(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)Sensing	 the	 outrage	 of	 ordinary	 voters,	 Congress	 blockedevery	 Adams	 proposal	 and	 brought	 federal	 government	 to	 ahalt.	 And	 still	 clinging	 to	 his	 belief	 that	 the	 public	 wouldrecognize	 merit,	 John	 Quincy	 refused	 to	 campaign	 for	 hisprograms,	 refused	 to	 answer	 critics,	 refused	 to	 explain	 hisvision	 in	 terms	 the	 public	 could	 understand.	 In	 short,	 herefused	 to	 lead	 or	 fight	 back—even	 after	 journalist	 RussellJarvis	 of	 the	 Daily	 Telegraph	 assaulted	 his	 son	 John	 II	 in	 therotunda	of	the	Capitol.Jarvis	had	attended	a	White	House	reception	after	publishinga	vicious	attack	on	the	President,	and	young	Adams	proclaimedin	a	loud	voice	that	Jarvis	should	have	shown	the	propriety	notto	 show	 his	 face	 at	 the	 President’s	 home.	 Jarvis	 sent	 John	 II	 aletter	 challenging	 him	 to	 a	 duel,	 and	 when	 John	 II	 ignored	 it,Jarvis	waited	in	the	Capitol	rotunda	for	the	young	man	to	arrivewith	messages	from	the	President	for	Congress.	He	went	up	toJohn	 II,	 pulled	 his	 nose,	 then	 slapped	 his	 face—the	 standard,public	 provocation	 to	 duel.	 Unskilled	 with	 swords	 or	 pistols,John	 II	 faced	 certain	 death	 if	 he	 accepted	 the	 challenge.	 Hewisely	walked	away,	and	John	Quincy	responded	with	a	letter	ofprotest	 to	 the	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House	 that	 his	 son	 had	 been“waylaid	and	assaulted.”	He	demanded	a	congressional	inquiry.The	second-born	son	of	John	Quincy	and	Louisa	Adams,	thirty-one-year-old	 John	 Adams	 II.	 (NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)“Assault	Within	the	Capitol,”	ran	the	headline	of	a	pro-Adamsnewspaper,	 while	 Jarvis’s	 Telegraph	 called	 “the	 pulling	 of	 thePrince’s	nose	.	.	.	a	signal	chastisement	.	.	.	of	the	Royal	puppy.”Congress	held	hearings,	questioned	both	Jarvis	and	John	II,	anddid	nothing.	The	President	never	said	another	word.Politically	impotent,	John	Quincy	recognized	that	he	would	bethe	 first	 chief	 executive	 in	 the	 nation’s	 short	 history	 tocontribute	 nothing	 to	 his	 country.	 With	 little	 else	 to	 do,	 hejoined	 Louisa	 in	 breeding	 silkworms	 outside	 his	 office	 andlengthened	 the	 time	 he	 spent	 walking,	 swimming,	 andhorseback	riding	each	day.The	political	misery	that	Jacksonians	inflicted	on	John	Quincyhurt	Louisa	as	well.	Calling	the	White	House	a	“dull	and	statelyprison,”	 she	 continually	 searched	 for	 ways	 to	 quash	 rumorsthat	 she	 and	 her	 husband	 had	 imported	 the	 aristocraticgrandeur	 of	 European	 palaces	 to	 the	 executive	 mansion.	 Sheopened	White	House	doors	to	the	public	and	turned	her	homeinto	 a	 public	 museum	 that	 left	 her	 all	 but	 imprisoned	 in	 herliving	quarters,	making	it	“impossible,”	she	said,	“for	me	to	feelat	home	or	to	fancy	that	I	have	a	home	anywhere.”25In	addition,	she	resumed	the	weekly	receptions,	or	“levées,”vthat	 Martha	 Washington,	 Dolley	 Madison,	 and,	 for	 a	 time,Elizabeth	 Monroe	 had	 held.	 Like	 Elizabeth	 Monroe,	 Louisastood	 under	 the	 rotunda	 as	 visitors	 passed	 before	 her,	 one	 byone,	 bowing	 or	 curtsying—shaking	 hands	 was	 forbidden—acknowledging	 her	 welcoming	 nod	 and	 short	 greeting	 andpassing	 on	 to	 partake	 of	 refreshments.	 “All	 classes	 of	 societymingled	 in	 the	 throng	 that	 crowded	 outside	 the	 audiencechamber	 and	 surged	 into	 the	 great	 East	 Room,”	 according	 toone	participant.	Diplomats	in	powdered	wigs	and	high-rankingofficers	with	medals	mixed	with	farmers	and	hunters	in	muddyboots	and	frontiersmen	with	jingling	spurs.John	 Quincy’s	 inability	 to	 discuss	 the	 mundane	 at	 publicfunctions,	 however,	 often	 stripped	 White	 House	 parties	 of	 themirth	that	had	filled	the	mansion	during	the	tenures	of	some	ofhis	 predecessors.	 What	 provoked	 John	 Quincy’s	 laughter—forexample,	 a	 misinterpretation	 he	 had	 read	 of	 Tacitus—leftothers	 staring	 in	 disbelief	 without	 the	 slightest	 understandingof	what	he	was	talking	about.	Only	Louisa	understood.Going	 to	 the	 White	 House	 levée.	 First	 Lady	 Louisa	 CatherineAdams	 hosted	 weekly	 “levées,”	 or	 open	 houses,	 for	 the	 publicto	 visit	 the	 presidential	 mansion	 and	 see	 the	 President	 andFirst	Lady.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)“Mrs.	Adams,	like	her	husband,	had	.	.	.	a	love	of	literature,”explained	 one	 observer	 of	 the	 social	 scene	 of	 that	 era.	 “Themost	scholarly	woman	who	has	presided	over	the	White	House,she	 possessed	 the	 adaptability	 of	 a	 French	 woman	 or	 of	 anAmerican	 and	 could	 turn	 gracefully	 from	 her	 books	 or	 herfamily	 cares	 to	 inaugurate	 certain	 much	 needed	 reforms	 inofficial	circles.	By	her	grace,	tact,	and	savoir	faire,	Mrs.	Adamsdid	 much	 to	 neutralize	 the	 effect	 of	 the	 President’s	 cold	 andoften	forbidding	manner.”26The	 President,	 of	 course,	 had	 no	 intention	 of	 being	 cold	 orforbidding—and,	 indeed,	 did	 not	 realize	 he	 was.	 He	 could	 not,after	all,	alter	the	lines,	shadows,	and	shape	of	his	face.	Thoughhis	 thoughts	 often	 contained	 a	 smile,	 it	 did	 not	 leak	 onto	 hisface	or	into	his	words.	“I	am	by	nature,”	he	said	repeatedly,	“asilent	 animal,	 and	 my	 mother’s	 constant	 lesson	 in	 childhood,that	 children	 in	 company	 should	 be	 seen	 and	 not	 heard,confirmed	me	irrevocably	in	what	I	now	deem	a	bad	habit.”27On	 July	 4,	 1826,	 the	 fiftieth	 anniversary	 of	 America’sDeclaration	of	Independence	from	Britain,	John	Adams	died	inQuincy,	 Massachusetts—an	 hour	 after	 the	 death	 at	 Monticelloof	 his	 onetime	 vice	 president	 and	 longtime	 friend,	 ThomasJefferson.	George	Washington	Adams	was	with	his	grandfatherwhen	he	died.	John	Quincy	arrived	with	John	II	in	time	for	thefuneral	 and	 burial	 at	 the	 local	 churchyard,	 after	 which	 hereturned	 to	 his	 father’s	 house	 and	 went	 into	 his	 father’sbedroom.	 “That	 moment	 wasinexpressibly	 painful,”	 hemoaned.My	 father	 and	 my	 mother	 have	 departed.	 The	 charmwhich	 has	 always	 made	 this	 house	 to	 me	 an	 abode	 ofenchantment	 is	 dissolved;	 and	 yet	 my	 attachment	 to	 itand	to	the	whole	region	round	is	stronger	than	I	ever	feltbefore.	I	feel	it	is	time	for	me	to	begin	to	set	my	house	inorder	 and	 to	 prepare	 for	 the	 churchyard	 myself.	 .	 .	 .	 Ishall	 within	 two	 or	 three	 years	 .	 .	 .	 need	 a	 place	 ofretirement.	 Where	 else	 should	 I	 go?	 This	 will	 be	 a	 safeand	 pleasant	 retreat,	 where	 I	 may	 pursue	 literaryoccupations	as	long	and	as	much	as	I	can	take	pleasure	inthem.28His	father’s	death	gave	John	Quincy	more	work	to	do	than	hisjob	 as	 President.	 John	 Adams	 left	 a	 complicated	 will.	 For	 JohnQuincy	 to	 assume	 sole	 ownership	 of	 the	 ninety-five-acreproperty,	 the	 will	 required	 him	 to	 establish	 a	 trust	 for	 hisbrother,	Thomas	Boylston,	who	lived	in	his	father’s	house	withhis	 wife	 but	 had	 grown	 too	 dependent	 on	 alcohol	 to	 supporthimself.	Thomas’s	drunken	orgies	so	disgusted	Louisa	that	sherefused	 even	 to	 visit	 the	 Quincy	 homestead	 with	 her	 husband,and	 when	 John	 Quincy	 left	 to	 spend	 the	 summer	 at	 hisbirthplace,	 she	 remained	 at	 the	 White	 House,	 neither	 writingletters	of	any	consequence	to	the	other.Meanwhile,	 midterm	 congressional	 elections	 only	 added	 tothe	 Jacksonian	 majority	 and	 further	 stifled	 John	 Quincy’sefforts	 to	 serve	 the	 nation.	 Although	 the	 best-prepared	 chiefexecutive	 in	 American	 history	 at	 the	 time,	 he	 was	 the	 leasteffective	 and	 least	 popular,	 and	 he	 did	 not	 understand	 why,given	 his	 deep	 love	 for	 his	 country.	 “I	 must	 await	 my	 allottedtime,”	he	sighed.	“My	career	is	closed.”29As	 the	 new,	 decidedly	 hostile	 Congress	 assembledinWashington,	 John	 Quincy’s	 son	 John	 II	 provided	 the	 Presidentand	 Louisa	 with	 a	 bright	 moment	 by	 marrying	 Louisa’s	 nieceMary	Hellen	in	the	Blue	Room	of	the	White	House.“The	 bride	 looked	 very	 handsome	 in	 white	 satin,	 orange-blossoms,	and	pearls,”	wrote	John	Quincy’s	niece,	who	said	thatshe	and	the	other	three	bridesmaids	had	“an	amusing	time	.	.	.arranging	flowers	and	ribbons.”	They	then	“passed	the	cake	.	.	.[and]	cut	slices	to	distribute	among	their	friends.”30	Even	thePresident	 joined	 in	 the	 festivities	 that	 followed	 the	 cutting	 ofthe	cake	by	entering	“with	spirit	into	the	mazes	of	the	Virginiareel.”31	After	the	wedding,	Louisa’s	nephew	Thomas,	who	hadloafed	 about	 the	 White	 House	 after	 dropping	 out	 of	 Harvard,ran	 off	 with	 one	 of	 the	 young	 White	 House	 maids	 and,mercifully,	 left	 John	 Quincy	 with	 one	 less	 family	 member	 tosupport.By	spring	of	1828,	the	President’s	daily	activities	were	devoidof	consequence	for	the	nation:I	rise	generally	before	five—frequently	before	four.	Writefrom	 one	 to	 two	 hours	 in	 this	 diary.	 Ride	 about	 twelvemiles	 in	 two	 hours	 on	 horseback	 with	 my	 son	 John.Return	 home	 about	 nine;	 breakfast;	 and	 from	 that	 timetill	dinner,	between	five	and	six,	afternoon,	I	am	occupiedletters,incessantly	 with	 visitors,	 business,	 readingdispatches,	and	newspapers.	I	spend	an	hour,	sometimesbefore	 and	 sometimes	 after	 dinner,	 in	 the	 garden	 andnursery;	an	hour	of	drowsiness	on	a	sofa;	and	two	hoursof	 writing	 in	 the	 evening.	 Retire	 usually	 between	 elevenand	midnight.32The	 President’s	 political	 inactivity	 triggered	 a	 barrage	 ofscurrilous	attacks	by	Jacksonian	newspapers,	which	took	aim	atevery	member	of	John	Quincy’s	cabinet	as	well	as	John	Quincyhimself.	 The	 attacks	 left	 Henry	 Clay	 so	 distraught	 he	 took	 amedical	leave	of	absence.	Although	John	Quincy	did	not	want	toallow	 his	 enemies	 to	 topple	 him	 from	 office	 without	 defendinghimself,	everything	he	tried	failed.	Invited	to	preside	at	a	July	4groundbreaking	 for	 the	 heralded	 Chesapeake	 and	 Ohio	 Canal,a	 symbol	 of	 the	 very	 national	 improvements	 he	 espoused,	 headdressed	a	friendly	crowd	of	more	than	2,000	spectators,	thentook	a	gilded	spade	to	turn	the	first	shovel	of	dirt—only	to	feelthe	shovel	clang	and	rebound	sharply,	then	slip	from	his	handsafter	 hitting	 a	 hiddentree	 stump.	 As	 murmurs	 ofdisappointment	 spread	 through	 onlookers,	 the	 President	 triedagain—and	again.	Finally,	he	did	something	he	had	never	donein	public:	“I	threw	off	my	coat	and,	resuming	the	spade,	raiseda	 shovelful	 of	 the	 earth,	 at	 which	 a	 general	 shout	 burst	 forthfrom	the	surrounding	multitude,	and	I	completed	my	address.”It	was	the	first	time	in	months	that	an	audience	had	cheeredthe	 President,	 and	 he	 left	 elated,	 inviting	 the	 officers	 whoescorted	 him	 home	 to	 join	 him	 for	 drinks	 in	 the	 White	 House.Although	 it	 was	 too	 late,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 evidently	 learned	 alesson	about	relating	to	the	general	public:	“My	casting	off	mycoat,”	 he	 wrote	 later,	 “struck	 the	 eye	 and	 fancy	 of	 thespectators	 more	 than	 all	 the	 flowers	 of	 rhetoric	 in	 myspeech.”33	 He	 was,	 of	 course,	 a	 master	 at	 interrelating	 withczars,	 kings,	 counts,	 and	 courtiers,	 but	 had	 simply	 never	 hadthe	chance	to	befriend	ordinary	citizens—at	home	or	abroad.Although	eager	for	the	first	time	to	enter	the	election	fray,	itwas	all	too	new	to	him,	and	he	let	others	do	the	electioneering.They	 attacked	 Jackson	 and	 his	 allies	 viciously,	 with	 Clayallegedly	 coaxing	 the	 editor	 of	 Cincinnati’s	 Gazette	 to	 chargeJackson	with	having	maintained	an	adulterous	relationship	withhis	 wife,	 Rachel,	 before	 she	 had	 divorced	 her	 first	 husband.The	 Jacksonians	 fired	 back	 with	 equally	 vicious	 libels	 againstthe	Yankee	“aristocrat”	with	an	“English	wife,”	who	had	spentpublic	 funds	 to	 purchase	 a	 billiard	 table	 for	 her	 husband’samusement	in	the	White	House.In	the	end,	election	campaign	rhetoric	made	little	difference.The	hero	of	the	Battle	of	New	Orleans	was	simply	too	popular,and	 the	 public	 was	 thoroughly	 convinced	 that	 the	 aristocraticNew	 Englander	 from	 Harvard	 had	 ignored	 the	 will	 of	 thepeople	and	purchased	his	election	by	appointing	Henry	Clay	assecretary	 of	 state.	 Unlike	 John	 Quincy,	 Jackson	 had	 formed	 anew	 and	 well-organized	 political	 party	 that	 operated	 at	 bothlocal	 and	 state	 levels	 and	 acquired	 consummate	 skills	 inobtaining	newspaper	publicity.in	 1816	 and	 againAs	 the	 1828	 election	 approached,	 New	 England	 textilemanufacturers	 set	 up	 a	 drumbeat	 of	 demand	 for	 higherprotective	 tariffs.	 The	 War	 of	 1812	 had	 cut	 off	 cloth	 importsfrom	 England	 and	 given	 New	 England	 manufacturers	 amonopoly.	 After	 the	 war,	 however,	 renewed	 competition	 fromlarger,	 more-efficient	 British	 mills	 saw	 American	 marketsless	 costly,	 high-quality	 British	 cloth,	 andflooded	 withCongress	responded	to	complaints	from	New	England	mills	bypassing	 protective	 tariffsin	 1824.Agricultural	interests	in	the	South—especially	cotton	growers—protested,	fearing	that	their	best	customers,	the	British	cottonmills,	would	retaliate	and	curtail	purchases	of	American	cotton.Ignoring	 such	 protests,	 other	 raw	 materials	 producers	 andmanufacturers	 demanded	 similar	 tariff	 protection—for	 wool,cotton,	 hemp,	 flax,	 iron,	 distilled	 spirits	 .	 .	 .	 the	 list	 grewendless—with	 the	 final	 bill	 called	 a	 “Tariff	 of	 Abomination”	 byits	 opponents.	 Passed	 by	 a	 huge	 veto-proof	 congressionalmajority,	 the	 bill	 left	 John	 Quincy	 no	 choice	 but	 to	 sign	 it	 intolaw.	 Southern	 states	 reacted	 with	 outrage,	 with	 SouthCarolina’s	 legislature	 calling	 the	 tariff	 unconstitutional	 andblaming	 John	 Quincy	 for	 not	 having	 vetoed	 it.	 Georgia,Mississippi,	and	Virginia	followed	suit	and	cost	John	Quincy	theentire	South	in	the	1828	election.When	 the	 votes	 were	 counted	 on	 December	 3,	 Jackson	 hadhumiliated	John	Quincy	Adams—with	647,276	Americans	votingfor	 Jackson	 and	 508,064	 for	 Adams.	 In	 the	 Electoral	 College,Jackson	captured	178	votes,	more	than	twice	John	Quincy’s	83votes.	“The	sun	of	my	political	life	sets	in	the	deepest	gloom,”John	Quincy	sighed,	“but	that	of	my	country	shines	unclouded.”To	 ease	 the	 pain	 of	 his	 loss,	 he	 took	 “a	 ride	 of	 an	 hour	 and	 ahalf	on	horseback.”34Louisa	 stepped	 forward	 to	 try	 to	 cheer	 her	 husband	 byorganizing	 a	 huge	 party	 to	 celebrate	 his	 return	 to	 private	 life.“The	 defeated	 party	 .	 .	 .	 are	 more	 smiling	 and	 gracious	 andagreeable	 than	 they	 ever	 were	 before,”	 Mrs.	 Samuel	 HarrisonSmith,	wife	of	the	owner	of	the	National	Intelligencer,	wrote	toher	son.At	 Mrs.	 Adams’s	 drawing	 room	 last	 week,	 every	 oneattached	to	the	administration,	as	well	as	the	members	ofthe	 cabinet,	 appeared	 with	 their	 best	 looks	 and	 bestdresses.	 Mrs.	 Adams	 never	 on	 any	 former	 occasion	 wasso	social,	attentive,	and	agreeable.	Instead	of	standing	inone	place,	making	formal	courtesies,	she	walked	throughthe	 rooms	 conversing	 with	 every	 one	 in	 the	 mostanimated	 manner.	 To	 add	 to	 the	 gaiety	 and	 brilliancy	 ofthe	 evening	 the	 great	 audience	 chamber	 was	 lit	 up,	 theband	of	music	stationed	there,	and	dancing	took	place.35Shortly	 afterthe	 election	 results	 appearedthenewspapers,	 Rachel	 Jackson	 saw	 the	 story	 alleging	 heradulterous	 relationship	 with	 Andrew	 Jackson	 before	 shedivorced	 her	 first	 husband.	 Shocked	 to	 the	 core	 as	 she	 read,she	 collapsed—a	 stroke,	 perhaps,	 or	 a	 heart	 attack.	 She	 diedseveral	 days	 later	 and	 was	 buried	 on	 Christmas	 Eve	 withoutseeing	her	husband	assume	the	presidency.inOn	 March	 4,	 1829,	 Andrew	 Jackson	 was	 inaugurated	 asseventh	President	of	the	United	States.	Ignoring	tradition,	JohnQuincy	 refused	 to	 attend	 either	 the	 inauguration	 or	 the	 newPresident’s	 White	 House	 reception	 afterwards.	 “I	 can	 yetscarcely	 realize	 my	 situation,”	 he	 shuddered	 in	 disbelief,saying,	 “posterity	 will	 scarcely	 believe	 .	 .	 .	 the	 combination	 ofparties	and	of	public	men	against	my	character	and	reputationsuch	 as	 I	 believe	 never	 before	 was	 exhibited	 against	 any	 mansince	this	Union	existed.”	He	continued:This	combination	against	me	has	been	formed	and	is	nowexulting	 in	 triumph	 over	 me,	 for	 the	 devotion	 of	 my	 lifeand	of	all	the	faculties	of	my	soul	to	the	Union	and	to	theimprovement,	 physical,	 moral	 and	 intellectual,	 of	 mycountry.	 The	 North	 assails	 me	 for	 my	 fidelity	 to	 theUnion;for	 my	 ardent	 aspirations	 ofimprovement.	 Yet	 .	 .	 .	 passion,	 prejudice,	 envy,	 andjealousy	 will	 pass.	 The	 cause	 of	 Union	 and	 ofimprovement	 will	 remain,	 and	 I	 have	 duties	 to	 it	 and	 tomy	country	yet	to	discharge.36the	 South,Although	 the	 vast	 majority	 of	 American	 voters	 had	 rejectedJohn	 Quincy	 and	 his	 vision	 for	 America,	 he	 refused	 to	 accepttheir	judgment	and	vowed	to	continue	his	struggle	to	lead	themand	the	nation	to	greatness.	His	only	uncertainty	was	how	to	doit.