CHAPTER 	8Diplomatic	ExileAlthough	 Republicans	 urged	 John	 Quincy	 to	 run	 as	 their	 1808senatorial	 and	 even	 gubernatorial	 candidate,	 he	 was	 toodisgusted	 with	 public	 service	 and	 chose	 to	 return	 to	 privatelife.	 At	 their	 request,	 however,	 he	 continued	 feeding	 his	 viewson	foreign	relations	to	Republican	leaders	in	Congress.	Thougha	 private	 citizen,	 he	 remained,	 after	 all,	 one	 of	 the	 nation’sleading	foreign	affairs	analysts,	and	his	first	advice	went	to	hisfriend	 President	 Jefferson.	 With	 New	 England	 secessioniststhreatening	 armed	 insurrection,	 he	 advised	 the	 President	 tonarrow	 the	 scope	 of	 the	 embargo	 to	 France	 and	 England;	 thePresident	 heeded	 John	 Quincy’s	 advice,	 and	 the	 renewal	 oftrade	 with	 noncombatant	 nations	 immediately	 improved	 thenation’s	economy.Although	 Boston	 Federalists	 shunned	 him	 professionally	 andsocially,	 enough	 Republicans	 found	 their	 way	 to	 John	 Quincy’slaw	office	to	set	him	on	the	path	to	prosperity.	Indeed,	his	legaland	 oratorical	 skills	 even	 earned	 him	 several	 cases	 before	 theU.S.	Supreme	Court—some	of	historic	importance.Early	 in	 March	 1809,	 Boston	 land	 speculator	 John	 Peckretained	 John	 Quincy	 for	 what	 grew	 into	 a	 landmark	 case	 incontract	 law	 and,	 indeed,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 cases	 inSupreme	 Court	 history.	 For	 $3,000,	 Peck	 had	 sold	 RobertFletcher	 15,000	 acres	 that	 Peck	 had	 obtained	 in	 a	 state	 grantfrom	 the	 30-million-acre	 Yazoo	 land	 tract	 in	 Georgia.	 As	 itturned	 out,	 land	 speculators	 like	 Peck	 had	 bribed	 Georgialegislators—en	 masse—to	 make	 the	 grants.	 After	 the	 pressexposed	the	scandal,	a	new	legislature	cancelled	all	Yazoo	landsales,	including	Peck’s	sale	to	Fletcher.	Fletcher	sued	to	get	hismoney	 back,	 but	 John	 Quincy	 argued	 that	 the	 legislature’scancellation	 of	 Fletcher’s	 agreement	 to	 buy	 Peck’s	 landviolated	 Article	 I	 of	 the	 Constitution,	 which	 prohibits	 statesfrom	 “impairing	 the	 obligation	 of	 contracts.”	 The	 SupremeCourt	 stunned	 the	 nation	 by	 sustaining	 John	 Quincy’sargument,	 ignoring	 the	 justice	 of	 Fletcher’s	 claim	 in	 favor	 ofthe	 letter	 of	 the	 Constitution	 declaring	 the	 inviolability	 ofcontracts	and	reasserting	the	constitutional	prohibition	againststate	 interference	 in	 the	 rights	 of	 Americans	 to	 acquireproperty.	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 had	 put	 it	 bluntly	 in	 an	 earlierpronouncement	 on	 the	 French	 Revolution:	 “Property	 must	 besecured	or	liberty	cannot	exist.”1	Now	John	Quincy	had	eliciteda	 Supreme	 Court	 decision	 banning	 state	 interference	 in	 therights	 of	 Americans	 to	 life,	 liberty,	 and	 property.	 Hailed	 byAmericans	across	the	nation,	the	decision	raised	John	Quincy	tothe	top	of	his	profession.On	March	8,	1804,	three	days	after	James	Madison	had	takenhis	 oath	 as	 fourth	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States,	 Madisonasked	 John	 Quincy	 to	 be	 American	 minister	 plenipotentiary	 toRussia	and	asked	for	an	immediate	reply.	John	Quincy	accepted—without	 consulting	 his	 wife	 and	 engendering	 a	 furiousresponse	 from	 her	 when	 he	 returned	 to	 Boston.	 He	 tried	 toexplain	his	rash	decision—as	much	to	himself	as	to	her:My	 personal	 motives	 for	 staying	 at	 home	 are	 of	 thestrongest	kind:	the	age	of	my	parents	and	the	infancy	ofmy	children	both	urge	to	the	same	result.	My	connectionwith	the	college	is	another	strong	tie	which	I	break	withgreat	reluctance.	.	.	.	To	oppose	all	this	I	have	the	duty	ofa	citizen	to	obey	the	call	of	his	country	.	.	.	by	the	regularconstitutional	authority	.	.	.	the	vague	hope	of	renderingto	my	country	some	important	service;	finally,	the	desireto	justify	the	confidence	reposed	by	Mr.	Madison	in	me	.	..	 by	 devoting	 all	 my	 powers	 to	 .	 .	 .	 the	 welfare	 of	 theunion.	These	are	my	motives—and	I	implore	the	blessingof	Almighty	God	upon	this	my	undertaking.2John	 Quincy’s	 explanation	 was	 an	 elaborate	 rationalization.As	he	himself	admitted	later,	Federalists	despised	him	so	muchthey	 had	 pledged	 to	 prevent	 his	 ever	 again	 entering	 publicservice.	It	was	James	Madison’s	friendship	and	generosity	thatreopened	 the	 door	 just	 enough	 for	 Adams	 to	 slip	 back	 intogovernment.	“I	was	proscribed	in	my	native	state	for	voting	forthe	 embargo	 andimpressment	 andcommercial	 depredations,”	 he	 wrote	 to	 a	 friend	 years	 later.“Mr.	 Madison	 sent	 me	 for	 eight	 years	 to	 honorable	 diplomaticexile	in	Europe.”3resenting	 BritishIn	his	last	lecture	at	Harvard,	he	issued	a	stirring	encomiumfor	 his	 implacable	 embrace	 of	 neutrality:	 “Let	 us	 rejoice,”	 hecried	out	against	Federalist	Anglophiles,	“that	the	maintenanceof	our	national	rights	against	Great	Britain	has	been	committedto	men	of	firmer	minds.”If	 our	 nominal	 independence	 of	 France	 rested	 upon	 noother	foundation	of	power	than	the	navy	of	England,	theconsequence	would	be	that	we	should	again	be	under	thedomination	of	England.	Her	argument	would	be	that	in	allreason	 we	 ought	 to	 contribute	 our	 share	 to	 support	 theexpense	 of	 protecting	 us	 and	 we	 should	 soon	 be	 calledupon	for	our	contribution	of	men	as	well	as	money.4Federalist	 attacks	 on	 John	 Quincy	 did	 not	 influence	 hisstudents,	who	crowded	about	him	after	his	lecture,	many	withtears	 in	 their	 eyes,	 inventing	 questions	 to	 keep	 him	 in	 theirmidst.	“I	called	the	students	my	unfailing	friends,”	he	wrote	tohis	brother	a	few	days	after	his	ship	had	put	to	sea	on	the	wayto	 Russia.	 He	 had	 asked	 his	 brother	 to	 have	 his	 two	 dozenHarvard	lectures	bound	and	published,	and	they	later	appearedin	two	volumes,	Lectures	on	Rhetoric	and	Oratory.5	He	said	hiscompliment	to	the	students	“was	justly	their	due.	For	they	hadwithstood	a	most	ingenious	and	laborious	attempt	to	ruin	me	intheir	estimation.”Youth	 is	 generous,	 and	 although	 the	 majority	 of	 thestudents	 were	 made	 to	 believe	 that	 I	 was	 a	 sort	 of	 devilincarnate	 in	 politics	 .	 .	 .	 yet	 they	 never	 could	 bepersuaded	to	believe	.	.	.	and	they	have	all	confirmed	mein	 the	 belief	 that	 the	 safest	 guide	 for	 human	 conduct	 isintegrity.	I	have	inflexibly	followed	my	own	sense	of	duty..	 .	 .	 I	 have	 lost	 many	 friends	 and	 have	 made	 manyenemies	.	.	.	but	the	students	at	college	are	.	.	.	the	onlysteady	 friends	 that	 I	 have	 had.	 They	 have	 been	 willingstill	 to	 be	 considered	 as	 my	 friends	 at	 a	 time	 whenneither	 my	 name	 nor	 my	 character	 was	 in	 fashionablerepute.6John	 Quincy’s	 decision	 to	 go	 to	 Russia	 without	 a	 word	 ofwarning,	 let	 alone	 discussion,	 devastated	 Louisa—left	 herangry,	 distraught,	 heartbroken.	 The	 boys	 were	 hysterical.	 Themeager	State	Department	budget—and	the	lack	of	an	English-language	 school	 in	 St.	 Petersburg—would	 mean	 leaving	 nine-year-old	George	and	six-year-old	John	II	behind	in	Quincy.	WithJohn	 Adams	 too	 old	 and	 Abigail	 ill	 too	 often	 to	 cope	 with	 twogrowing	 boys,	 John	 Quincy	 boarded	 them	 with	 John	 Quincy’saunt	 and	 uncle.	 He	 put	 brother	 Thomas	 in	 charge	 of	 theireducation.Fearful	 they	 would	 die	 before	 ever	 again	 seeing	 their	 son,John	 and	 Abigail	 Adams	 were	 too	 distraught	 even	 to	 come	 toshipside	 to	 say	 good-bye.	 “This	 separation	 from	 a	 dear	 son,”sixty-four-year-old	 Abigail	 wrote	 to	 one	 of	 her	 grandchildren,“at	the	advanced	age	both	of	your	grandfather	and	me	was	liketaking	 a	 last	 leave	 of	 him	 and	 was	 felt	 by	 us	 both	 with	 theheaviest	anguish.”7Although	 former	 Federalist	 friends	 stayed	 away,	 a	 crowd	 ofRepublicans	cheered	at	dockside	as	the	champion	of	union	andindependence	 boarded	 his	 ship	 with	 his	 wife	 and	 baby	 onin	 Boston	 andAugust	 5,	 1809.	 Church	 bells	 rang	 outCharlestown	 as	 the	 ship	 left	 the	 quay	 and	 sailed	 into	 the	 bay,and	all	the	ships	in	the	harbor	sounded	a	salute—including	thelegendary	Chesapeake.	As	darkness	fell	and	he	lost	sight	of	hisnative	 land,	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 retreated	 to	 a	 quiet	 corner	 ofthe	ship	with	his	God	and	penned,Oh,	grant	that	while	this	feeble	hand	portraysThe	fleeting	image	of	my	earthly	days,Still	the	firm	purpose	of	this	heart	may	beGood	to	mankind	and	gratitude	to	Thee!	8John	Quincy	and	Louisa	were	not	without	friends	aboard	ship.Louisa’s	younger	sister	Catherine	had	come	as	a	companion	tohelp	mind	Charles	Francis,	and	William	“Billy”	Smith,	Nabby’sson,	had	come	as	John	Quincy’s	secretary.	Four	young	Harvardgraduates	 each	 paid	 their	 own	 way	 to	 sit	 at	 the	 feet	 of	 andassist	 John	 Quincy—much	 as	 he	 had	 assisted	 Francis	 Danawhen	 he	 was	 a	 youngster.	 Two	 were	 studying	 law	 with	 him	 inhis	 Boston	 office	 and	 planned	 studying	 international	 law	 withhim	in	Russia.	A	third	was	the	son	of	Maryland	senator	SamuelSmith,	 brother	 of	 the	 new	 secretary	 of	 state,	 Robert	 Smith,while	 the	 fourth,	 Alexander	 H.	 Everett,	 planned	 making	 acareer	in	the	diplomatic	service.Despite	the	presence	of	friends	and	companions,	John	Quincyand	Louisa	missed	their	boys	dreadfully,	and	John	Quincy	tookto	writing	all	but	daily	“Letters	to	My	Children,”	describing	hisand	 their	 mother’s	 adventures.	 He	 also	 tried	 to	 impart—as	 hisfather	had	imparted	to	him—his	deep	sense	of	obligation	to	hiscountry	 for	 the	 liberties	 he	 enjoyed	 and	 his	 passion	 for	 publicservice.	“Take	it,	then,	as	a	general	principle	to	be	observed	asone	 of	 the	 directing	 impulses	 of	 life,”	 he	 wrote	 to	 his	 boys,“that	you	must	have	some	one	great	purpose	of	existence	.	.	.	tomake	your	talents	and	your	knowledge	most	beneficial	to	yourcountry	and	most	useful	to	mankind.”9John	Quincy	lightened	the	tone	of	some	letters,	noting	in	onethat	he	had	passed	a	night	on	the	Grand	Bank	of	Newfoundland“catching	 cod,	 of	 which	 in	 the	 interval	 of	 a	 six-hour	 calm,	 wehave	 caught	 upwards	 of	 sixty.”	 He	 then	 posed	 a	 conundrumthat	 he	 left	 unanswered,	 asking	 for	 the	 “links	 .	 .	 .	 in	 theassociation	 of	 ideas”	 between	 “cod	 fishing	 on	 the	 Grand	 Bankand	the	history	of	the	United	States.”10After	 a	 pleasant	 Atlantic	 crossing,	 they	 approached	 a	 line	 ofstorms	 as	 they	 neared	 the	 Danish	 coast	 and	 put	 into	 port,where	John	Quincy	“had	the	mortification	to	find	there	upwardsof	 four	 hundred	 of	 my	 countrymen,	 the	 masters	 and	 crews	 ofthe	 greater	 part	 of	 thirty-six	 American	 vessels,	 belonging	 withtheir	 cargoes	 to	 citizens	 of	 the	 United	 States	 captured	 anddetained	 by	 privateers	 under	 Danish	 colors,	 and	 arrested	 formany	 months.”11	 Without	 diplomatic	 credentials	 to	 show	 theDanish	 government,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 no	 authority	 to	 lodge	 aformal	protest,	but	he	displayed	“a	memorial”	that	he	drew	up,addressed	 “to	 the	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States,”	 hoping	 tointimidate	 Danish	 officials	 into	 releasing	 the	 Americans.	 Hethrust	 it	 under	 the	 nose	 of	 every	 official	 he	 could	 find,	 beforeadmitting	 in	 his	 report	 to	 the	 secretary	 of	 state,	 “My	 goodoffices	may	probably	be	of	no	avail	to	them.”12On	October	13,	1809,	eighty	days	after	they	had	left	Boston,John	 Quincy’s	 ship	 reached	 Kronstadt,	 on	 Kotlin	 Island	 in	 theGulf	 of	 Finland	 opposite	 St.	 Petersburg.	 A	 Russian	 admiralgreeted	them	and	sailed	John	Quincy	and	his	entourage	acrossto	 the	 Russian	 capital—only	 days	 before	 the	 Arctic	 windssurged	 in	 from	 the	 North	 Pole	 and	 wrapped	 the	 gulf—and	 allRussia—in	an	impenetrable	deep	freeze	for	the	winter.The	 map	 and	 political	 fortunes	 of	 Europe	 had	 changedradically	 in	 the	 eight	 years	 since	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 had	 lastset	 foot	 in	 the	 Old	 World.	 Napoléon	 had	 seemed	 on	 the	 run	 in1801,	 having	 suffered	 humiliating	 defeats	 by	 a	 powerfulEnglish	 fleet	 in	 Egypt	 and	 raging	 mobs	 of	 hungry	 slaves	 inHaiti.	 After	 selling	 Louisiana	 and	 abandoning	 his	 territorialambitions	 in	 the	 New	 World,	 he	 turned	 to	 consolidating	 hispower	 at	 home—first,	 by	 restoring	 troop	 morale,	 then	 byensuring	the	superiority	of	their	arms	and	artillery,	and	finally,by	 setting	 them	 loose	 to	 assault	 the	 fragile	 defenses	 ofEurope’s	 tiny,	 divided	 nations.	 By	 the	 time	 John	 Quincyreturned	 to	 Europe,	 Napoléon’s	 armies	 ruled—directly	 or	 byproxy—the	 lands	 stretching	 from	 the	 North	 Sea	 to	 theMediterranean	 and	 from	 the	 Straits	 of	 Gibraltar	 to	 Russia’swestern	borders.	Napoléon’s	boot	had	trampled	over	Portugal,Spain,	Italy,	Naples,	the	Vatican,	Switzerland,	western	Austria,the	 Netherlands,	 Belgium,	 the	 German	 states,	 Prussia,	 andPoland.	 Although	 French	 troops	 had	 stopped	 short	 of	 Vienna,they	encamped	so	near	that	Austrian	officials	feared	shifting	aleaf	 of	 official	 paper	 without	 a	 nod	 of	 approval	 by	 a	 Frenchofficer.Emperor	Napoléon	I	brought	the	Pope	from	Rome	to	crown	himand	his	wife,	Josephine,	emperor	and	empress.	(RÉUNION	DESMUSÉES	NATIONAUX)Determined	to	outdo	even	Charlemagne,	Napoléon	ordered	areligiously	based	coronation	that	would	exceed	in	grandeur	thecoronation	 ceremonies	 of	 all	 previous	 French	 kings.Charlemagne	at	least	had	traveled	to	Rome	to	force	the	Pope	tocrown	him;	Napoléon	abducted	Pope	Pius	VII	and	brought	himto	Paris	for	the	coronation.	Like	Charlemagne,	Napoléon	took	acrown	from	the	Pope,	placed	it	on	his	own	head,	and	anointedhimself	 “Emperor	 for	 Life.”	 He	 then	 took	 a	 second	 crown	 andput	it	on	the	head	of	his	wife,	Josephine.	13By	 the	 time	 John	 Quincy	 arrived	 in	 St.	 Petersburg,	 Britainstood	 alone	 with	 her	 powerful	 navy	 as	 the	 only	 westerndeterrent	 to	 French	 territorial	 ambitions.	 With	 French	 troopsmassed	 along	 the	 channel	 coast	 for	 an	 invasion	 of	 Britain,British	warships	attacked	and	sank	any	and	all	ships	bound	toor	 from	 continental	 Europe	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 starve	 Napoléon’sGrande	 Empire.	 British	 attacks	 had	 destroyed	 almost	 as	 manyneutral	Russian	ships	on	the	Baltic	and	North	Seas	as	they	hadAmerican	 ships	 on	 the	 Atlantic.	 Both	 Russia	 and	 the	 UnitedStates	 saw	 establishment	 of	 diplomatic	 relations	 as	 a	 possibleway	of	solving	their	common	problems	with	England.	PresidentMadison,	 therefore,	 purposely	 flattered	 the	 Russians	 byappointing	 the	 son	 of	 a	 former	 American	 President	 as	 U.S.minister	plenipotentiary.	His	gesture	did	not	go	unnoticed.Besides	 the	 United	 States,	 only	 Napoléon’s	 France	 and	 theKingdom	of	Sweden	had	ministers	plenipotentiary	at	the	czar’scourt,	 while	 ten	 other	 nations	 maintained	 diplomatic	 tiesthrough	 ordinary	 ministers.	 The	 Russian	 chancellor,	 or	 primeminister,	 therefore	 invited	 John	 Quincy	 to	 a	 private	 audiencethe	 day	 after	 his	 arrival	 and	 to	 be	 guest	 of	 honor	 at	 anelaborate	 banquet	 for	 the	 diplomatic	 corps.	 A	 week	 later,	 theczar	 summoned	 John	 Quincy	 to	 the	 breathtakingly	 beautifulImperial	Palace	where,	to	John	Quincy’s	enormous	surprise	andrelief,	 the	 Russian	 ruler	 awaited	 him	 in	 his	 private	 office—alone.	When	John	Quincy	entered,	Czar	Alexander	I—about	tenyears	 younger	 than	 the	 American—stepped	 forward,	 handoutstretched	 to	 greet	 Adams,	 saying,	 “Je	 suis	 très	 content	 devous	 recevoir”—“I’m	 very	 happy	 to	 see	 you	 here.”14	 JohnQuincy	 reported	 that	 the	 czar	 took	 him	 by	 the	 arm—anastonishing	 gesture	 of	 familiarity	 in	 a	 world	 where	 divinelyappointed	royals	never	touched	commoners.Alexander	 I	 had	 acceded	 to	 the	 throne	 after	 a	 band	 ofnoblemen	 assassinated	 his	 father,	 the	 harsh	 despot	 Paul	 I.Unlike	 his	 father,	 Alexander	 had	 studied	 under	 a	 liberal	 Swisseducator,	 and	 after	 becoming	 czar,	 he	 granted	 amnesty	 topolitical	 prisoners	 and	 repealed	 many	 of	 his	 father’s	 harshestlaws	and	edicts.	Foreign	wars,	however,	erupted	along	Russia’sborders,	 and	 Alexander	 found	 himself	 in	 a	 vise,	 first	 joiningBritain	 in	 the	 war	 against	 Napoléon	 and,	 when	 the	 Frencharmy	 defeated	 Russian	 forces	 at	 the	 Battle	 of	 Friedland	 in1806,	 agreeing	 to	 join	 the	 French	 coalition	 against	 Britain.Russia	 was	 still	 a	 nominal	 French	 ally	 when	 John	 Quincyarrived	 in	 St.	 Petersburg	 in	 1810,	 although	 Alexander	 refusedto	restrict	overseas	trade	to	the	French	sphere	of	influence	asNapoléon	 had	 demanded.	 Like	 the	 United	 States,	 Russiachampioned	 freedom	 of	 the	 seas	 as	 a	 basic	 tenet	 ofinternational	law.John	 Quincy,	 of	 course,	 spoke	 French	 as	 well	 as	 or	 betterthan	the	czar.	He	also	understood	enough	Russian	to	allow	theczar	 to	 digress	 into	 occasional	 anecdotes	 in	 his	 native	 tongue.At	their	first	meeting,	the	czar	walked	John	Quincy	to	a	windowoverlooking	 the	 Neva	 River,	 then	 confided	 that	 he	 consideredthe	American	foreign	policy	of	neutrality	to	be	“wise	and	just”and	that	“they	may	rely	on	me	not	to	do	anything	to	withdrawthem	from	it.”15	John	Quincy	was	ready	with	a	reply:The	 political	 duty	 of	 the	 United	 States	 towards	 thepowers	 of	 Europe	 is	 to	 forbear	 interference	 in	 theirdissensions.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 United	 States,	 by	 all	 the	 means	 intheir	 power,	 consistent	 with	 their	 peace	 and	 theirseparation	 from	 the	 political	 system	 of	 Europe,	 willcontribute	 to	 the	 support	 of	 the	 liberal	 principles	 towhich	 your	 majesty	 has	 expressed	 so	 strong	 and	 so	 justan	attachment.	16John	Quincy’s	first	meeting	with	the	czar	quickly	grew	into	anunprecedented	 relationship	 between	 a	 monarch	 and	 ainternational	 news,	 andcommoner,	 with	 the	 czar	 inviting	 John	 Quincy	 to	 join	 him	 inmorning	 walks	 on	 the	 quay	 along	 the	 Neva.	 The	 two	 mendiscussedthe	 czar	 continuallypeppered	 John	 Quincy	 with	 questions	 about	 life	 in	 America.Nor	 was	 the	 friendship	 limited	 to	 the	 two	 men,	 althoughLouisa’s	 friendship	 with	 the	 czarina	 had	 started	 somewhatdifferently.“I	went	with	a	fluttered	pulse,”	Louisa	recalled,	“dressed	in	ahoop	 with	 a	 silver	 tissue	 skirt	 with	 a	 train,	 a	 heavy	 crimsonvelvet	robe	with	a	very	long	train	.	.	.	white	satin	shoes,	gloves,fan,	 etc.	 and	 over	 all	 this	 luggage	 my	 fur	 cloak	 .	 .	 .	 and	 thusaccoutered	 I	 appeared	 before	 the	 gentlemen	 of	 our	 party	 whocould	not	refrain	from	laughter	at	my	appearance.”	A	countessgreeted	 her,	 escorted	 her	 to	 the	 reception	 room	 where	 theempress	 was	 to	 enter,	 and	 instructed	 her	 “that	 I	 must	 standunmoved	 until	 her	 Imperial	 Majesty	 walked	 up	 to	 me;	 thatwhen	 she	 came	 up	 I	 must	 affect	 to	 kiss	 her	 hand	 which	 herMajesty	would	not	permit	and	that	I	must	take	my	glove	off	soas	 to	 be	 ready	 and	 take	 care	 in	 raising	 my	 head	 not	 to	 touchher	majesty.”17It	 was	 two-year-old	 Charles	 Francis	 Adams,	 however,	 whoinadvertently	shattered	imperial	protocol,	catching	the	Russianroyal	 couple	 by	 surprise	 and	 winning	 their	 hearts.	 When	 JohnQuincy	and	Louisa	brought	him	to	the	palace	for	his	first	visit,the	childless	czar	and	czarina	fell	to	their	hands	and	knees	withjoy,	laughing	at	the	antics	of	the	little	American	boy,	whom	theysubsequently	invited	regularly	to	attend	balls	and	banquets	forchildren	at	the	Imperial	Palace.Clearly	 favorites	 of	 the	 czar	 and	 his	 court,	 the	 Adamsesbecame	the	centerpieces	of	social	events	in	the	Russian	capital.Invited	 to	 every	 diplomatic	 function,	 large	 and	 small,	 JohnQuincy	 sent	 more	 intelligence	 about	 European	 affairs	 to	 theState	Department	than	any	other	U.S.	minister	in	Europe.	Witheasy	 access	 to	 the	 czar,	 John	 Quincy	 persuaded	 the	 Russianleader	 to	 intervene	 with	 the	 Danish	 government	 to	 freeAmerican	 ships	 and	 their	 seamen.	 The	 czar	 then	 ordered	 therelease	 of	 American	 ships	 held	 for	 ransom	 by	 local	 satraps	 inRussian	ports	and	opened	Russian	waters	to	free	trade	with	theUnited	 States.	 Within	 weeks,	 American	 ships	 were	 sailing	 inand	 out	 of	 Russian	 ports,	 developing	 profitable	 new	 traderoutes	for	both	the	United	States	and	Russia.As	 in	 Berlin,	 most	 of	 John	 Quincy’s	 work	 in	 Russia	 was	 tolisten	 to	 other	 diplomats	 and	 gather	 intelligence	 for	 the	 StateDepartment.	 Trapped	 by	 Russia’s	 bitterly	 cold	 winter,	 thediplomatic	 community	 warmed	 itself	 with	 free-flowing	 vodkaand	 champagne	 at	 lavish	 banquets	 and	 balls	 that	 routinelylasted	 until	 3	 or	 4	 a.m.	 and	 left	 most	 participants	 drunk,talkative,	and	exhausted.to	 describe“I	 went	 in	 a	 chariot	 and	 four,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 to	 hisbrother	 Thomasthe	 Russian	 chancellor’shospitality,	 “attended	 by	 two	 footmen	 and	 driven	 by	 acoachman	on	the	carriage	box	and	a	postilion	.	.	.	on	the	right-side	 horse	 of	 the	 leading	 pair.”	 Upon	 his	 entering	 thechancellor’s	 palace,	 a	 row	 of	 twenty	 footmen	 stood	 “like	 somany	 statues”	 on	 either	 side	 of	 a	 broad	 marble	 staircase.	 Adinner	 of	 innumerable	 courses	 of	 fish,	 poultry,	 and	 meatsclimaxed	 with	 multiple	 desserts	 of	 fruits	 and	 ice	 creams,accompanied	 by	 a	 choice	 of	 liquors	 and	 frozen	 champagne.“The	 attention	 of	 the	 servants	 to	 the	 guests	 at	 the	 table	 is	 sovigilant,”	 John	 Quincy	 told	 Thomas,	 “that	 you	 scarcely	 haveoccasion	 to	 ask	 for	 anything.	 The	 instant	 you	 have	 emptiedyour	 plate	 or	 that	 you	 lay	 down	 your	 knife	 and	 fork	 or	 spoon,your	 plate	 is	 taken	 away	 and	 a	 clean	 one	 is	 given	 you	 in	 itsstead.”	He	said	the	footmen	“see	your	need	for	fresh	bread	assoon	 as	 you	 do	 yourself.	 .	 .	 .	 Everything	 moves	 like	 a	 piece	 ofclockwork.”18Louisa	 was	 equally	 astonished,	 calling	 the	 chancellor’sbanquet	“like	a	fairy	tale,”	with	the	emperor’s	table	“served	onsolid	 gold.	 That	 of	 the	 corps	 diplomatique	 with	 silver.	 Thechancellor	 was	 said	 to	 have	 300	 servants	 of	 different	 grades,150	 at	 least	 wearing	 magnificent	 liveries	 according	 to	 theirgrades.”19The	evenings	of	luxury,	however,	contrasted	sharply	with	theAdamses’	own	living	conditions.	With	a	salary	of	only	$9,000	ayear	and	another	$9,000	in	annual	living	expenses,	John	Quincycould	 hardly	 compete	 with	 the	 French	 ambassador’s	 expenseallowance	 of	 $350,000	 a	 year	 or	 even	 the	 Dutch	 minister’smodest	 $17,500-a-year	 allowance.o	 It	 took	 months,	 but	 JohnQuincy	 finally	 found	 an	 affordable	 house	 to	 rent	 for	 about$2,100	 a	 year,	 but	 he	 had	 to	 spend	 nearly	 $6,000	 onfurnishings.	“The	firewood,”	he	explained,	“is,	luckily,	includedas	 a	 part	 of	 the	 rent,”	 as	 were	 salaries	 for	 more	 than	 a	 dozenservants—a	steward,	a	cook	and	two	assistant	cooks,	a	servantto	 tend	 the	 fires,	 a	 coachman	 and	 postilion,	 two	 footmen,	 aporter,	 valet,	 lady’s	 maid,	 housemaid,	 and	 laundry	 maid.	 “Theporter,	 the	 cook,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 footmen	 are	 married,”	 JohnQuincy	complained	in	a	letter	to	his	mother,and	 their	 wives	 live	 in	 the	 house.	 The	 steward	 has	 twochildren,	 and	 the	 washerwoman	 a	 daughter,	 all	 of	 whomare	 kept	 in	 the	 house.	 I	 have	 baker’s,	 milkman’s,butcher’s,	 greengrocer’s,	 poulterer’s,	 fishmonger’s	 andgrocer’s	 bills	 to	 pay	 monthly,	 besides	 tea,	 coffee,	 sugar,wax	 and	 tallow	 candles.	 On	 all	 these	 articles	 ofconsumption,	 the	 cook	 and	 steward	 first	 make	 theirprofits	on	the	purchase	and	next	make	free	pillage	of	thearticles	 themselves.	 The	 steward	 takes	 the	 same	 libertywith	my	wines.20One	 evening,	 John	 Quincy	 stepped	 into	 his	 cellar	 and	 found373	bottles	missing—272	of	them	“the	choicest	and	most	costlywines	I	had.”21Their	 expenses	 left	 the	 Adamses	 unable	 to	 reciprocate	 themany	 invitations	 they	 received	 from	 the	 czar	 and	 members	 ofthe	diplomatic	corps,	but	no	one	seemed	to	care.	The	Adamses—John	 Quincy,	 Louisa,	 and	 her	 attractive	 younger	 sisterCatherine—all	 spoke	 French	 beautifully	 and	 made	 up	 in	 socialskills	what	they	lacked	in	their	ability	to	entertain.	John	Quincydid	 such	 a	 good	 job	 explaining	 the	 Puritan	 American	 ethos	 tothe	 czar	 that	 the	 Russian	 ruler	 gave	 his	 staff	 instructions	 toexempt	 the	 Adamses	 from	 the	 many	 dress	 requirements,including	 the	 costly	 and	 elaborate	 wigs	 worn	 by	 men	 andwomen	 and	 the	 exorbitantly	 expensive,	 bejeweled	 gowns	 ofnoble	ladies—a	different	one	each	night	through	the	season.After	 the	 Adamses	 arrived	 at	 an	 Imperial	 Palace	 ball	 withLouisa’s	sister	Catherine—“Kitty,”	as	her	family	called	her—thethirty-two-year-old	 czar	 made	 the	 twenty-four-year-old	 thetarget	 of	 amorous	 advances.	 Day	 after	 day,	 he	 appearedmagically	at	one	turning	or	another	as	the	two	American	ladiestook	 their	 daily	 walks.	 Louisa	 recalled	 that,	 at	 a	 ball	 at	 theFrench	 embassy,	 “he	 sought	 [Kitty]	 out	 himself	 to	 dance,	 andshe,	 not	 knowing	 the	 etiquette,	 began	 laughing	 and	 talking	 tohim	 as	 she	 would	 have	 done	 to	 an	 American	 partner	 .	 .	 .	 andproduced	 a	 buzz	 of	 astonishment”—especially	 as	 he	 dancedinto	 the	 dinner	 hour	 and	 forced	 hungry	 guests	 to	 delay	 theirmeal	until	he	took	a	seat.Her	 dance	 floor	 tryst	 with	 Czar	 Alexander	 provoked	 a	 spateof	 invitations	 for	 Kitty	 and	 her	 family	 to	 attend	 theaterpresentations,	 receptions,	 and	 other	 events	 that	 the	 czarattended.	Each	invitation	included	instructions	for	the	Adamsesto	 use	 the	 czar’s	 private	 entrance.	 Soon,	 his	 attentionsbroadened,	 with	 the	 czar	 appearing	 wherever	 Kitty	 and	 hersister	 happened	 to	 be—in	 the	 park,	 at	 the	 museum,	 at	 theconcert	hall	or	theater	.	.	.	anywhere	and	everywhere.	Althoughunnerved	 by	 the	 frequency	 of	 their	 encounters,	 Louisa	 darednot	interfere	with	the	czar’s	attentions.	Although	he	acted	likea	 smitten	 schoolboy,	 he	 was	 nonetheless	 a	 schoolboy	 withabsolute	power	over	the	life	and	death	of	every	living	being	inthe	land.As	 the	 Adamses	 continued	 dining	 and	 dancing	 in	 St.Petersburg,	 Abigail	 Adams	 had	 taken	 her	 son’s	 complaintsabout	 his	 low	 wage	 and	 high	 living	 costs	 straight	 to	 thePresident.	 Even	 the	 President	 hesitated	 tangling	 with	 AbigailAdams,	 andin	 September	 1810,	 when	 Supreme	 CourtAssociate	 Justice	 William	 Cushing	 died,	 Madison	 submittedJohn	Quincy’s	name	to	the	Senate,	which	immediately	approvedthe	 appointment.	 Born	 and	 raised	 in	 Massachusetts	 andeducated	 at	 Harvard,	 Cushing	 had	 been	 the	 first	 justiceappointed	 to	 the	 Supreme	 Court	 by	 President	 GeorgeWashington	twenty-one	years	earlier.To	 the	 astonishment	 of	 all,	 John	 Quincy	 turned	 down	 theappointment,	using	as	his	excuse	the	pregnancy	of	his	wife	andthe	 impossibility,	 given	 her	 history	 of	 miscarriages,	 of	 hertraveling	 without	 endangering	 her	 own	 life	 and	 that	 of	 herunborn	 child.	 His	 refusal	 devastated	 his	 parents,	 with	 hismother	 saying	 the	 Supreme	 Court	 appointment	 would	 haveensured	 “the	 preservation	 of	 your	 family	 from	 ruin.”	 JohnAdams	feared	his	son’s	refusal	would	provoke	“national	disgustand	resentment.”22	As	he	had	when	his	son	had	resigned	fromthe	 Senate,	 John	 Adams	 again	 predicted	 an	 end	 to	 JohnQuincy’s	career	in	public	service	and	to	his	hopes	for	assumingnational	leadership.