CHAPTER 	3The	Land	of	Lovely	DamesFor	 the	 first	 time	 during	 his	 extensive	 travels,	 John	 Quincyfound	 his	 2,000-mile	 midsummer	 journey	 from	 Holland	 to	 St.Petersburg	 free	 of	 threats	 to	 life	 or	 limb.	 Although	 he	 missedhis	 father	 and	 brother,	 he	 seemed	 composed,	 wore	 a	 pleasantexpression,	and	proved	an	amiable	companion	to	Francis	Dana,who,	 at	 thirty-eight,	 was	 twenty-four	 years	 older	 than	 his“secretary.”	The	journey	proved	instructive	for	both.“The	 tradesmen	 always	 ask	 the	 double	 of	 what	 a	 thing	 isworth,”	 John	 Quincy	 complained,	 “and	 if	 you	 have	 anythingmade,	you	will	certainly	get	greatly	cheated	if	you	do	not	makethe	 bargain	 beforehand.”	 In	 Catholic	 Palatine,	 he	 found	 that“Protestants	 can	 not	 own	 houses	 or	 farms,”	 and	 across	 theRhine	 from	 Cologne,	 he	 fell	 on	 “a	 village	 inhabited	 by	 Jews.	 Anasty,	 dirty	 place	 indeed.	 .	 .	 .	 In	 Frankfurt	 am	 Mein	 .	 .	 .	 thereare	600	Jewish	families	who	live	all	in	one	street	which	is	shutup	every	night	and	all	day	Sundays,	when	the	gates	are	shut.”1On	 July	 25,	 he	 reached	 Berlin,	 which	 he	 called	 “thehandsomest	 and	 the	 most	 regular	 city	 I	 ever	 saw,”2	 but	 hecriticized	 the	 king,	 who	 “treats	 his	 people	 like	 slaves.”	 Theyfound	conditions	worse	when	they	crossed	into	Poland,	where,for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 his	 life,	 John	 Quincy	 encountered	 slaves.“All	the	farm	workers	are	in	the	most	abject	slavery,”	he	notedwith	 disgust.	 “They	 are	 bought	 and	 sold	 like	 so	 many	 beasts,and	 are	 sometimes	 even	 changed	 for	 dogs	 or	 horses.	 Theirmasters	have	even	the	right	of	life	and	death	over	them,	and	ifthey	kill	one	of	them	they	are	only	obliged	to	pay	a	trifling	fine.[The	 slaves]	 may	 buy	 [their	 freedom],	 but	 their	 masters	 .	 .	 .take	care	not	to	let	them	grow	rich	enough	for	that.	If	anybodybuys	land,	he	must	buy	all	the	slaves	that	are	upon	it.”3Panoramic	 view	 of	 St.	 Petersburg,	 where	 fifteen-year-old	 JohnQuincy	 Adams	 spent	 the	 winter	 of	 1782	 as	 secretary	 andtranslator	 for	 American	 minister	 Francis	 Dana.	 The	 palatialbuildings	in	the	center	include	the	famed	Winter	Palace	and	thethen	new	Hermitage,	in	which	Catherine	the	Great	housed	herart	collection.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)On	 August	 27,	 1781,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Dana	 reached	 St.Petersburg	and	settled	in	the	luxurious	Hotel	de	Paris,	near	theWinter	 Palace.	 “The	 city	 of	 Petersburg,”	 he	 wrote	 to	 JohnThaxter	in	Paris,	“is	the	finest	I	ever	saw.	It	is	by	far	superior	toParis,	 both	 for	 the	 breadth	 of	 its	 streets,	 and	 the	 elegance	 ofthe	private	buildings.”To	 Dana’s	 dismay,	 Russian	 foreign	 ministry	 officials	 refusedto	receive	him	or	even	recognize	his	presence.	His	notes	wentunanswered,	and	sentries	refused	him	entry	through	the	palacegates.	In	frustration,	he	turned	to	the	French	chargé	d’affairesfor	help,	but	Foreign	Minister	Comte	de	Vergennes	at	Versailleshad	 sent	 instructions	 not	 to	 aid	 the	 Americans.	 The	 Frenchdiplomat	exuded	warm	words	and	pledged	to	help,	but	stunnedDana	by	suggesting	that	the	American’s	reliance	on	a	child	ashis	secretary	and	interpreter	might	compromise	his	status.Massachusetts-born	 and	 Harvard-educated	 Francis	 Danaserved	 at	 Valley	 Forge	 with	 George	 Washington	 beforebecoming	 an	 American	 diplomat	 and	 the	 first	 American	 envoyto	Russia.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)Not	 long	 thereafter,	 stunning	 news	 arrived	 of	 GeorgeWashington’s	 remarkable	 victory	 at	 Yorktown.	 Although	 Danawas	 certain	 the	 American	 triumph	 would	 open	 doors	 at	 theWinter	 Palace,	 weeks	 passed	 without	 success.	 As	 winter’sparalyzing	 deep	 freeze	 enveloped	 the	 Russian	 capital,	 JohnQuincy	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 but	 study.	 Although	 their	 lodgingswere	 warm	 enough,	 temperatures	 outside	 dropped	 to	 levelsinto	 the	 fresh	 air	 foolhardy.	 “Thethat	 made	 venturingthermometer	 at	 night,”	 John	 Quincy	 noted	 in	 early	 February1782,	 “was	 15	 degrees	 below	 freezing.”	 It	 fell	 to	 twenty-fivebelow,	then	twenty-eight	below.	“Stayed	at	home	all	day.”4By	 then,	 his	 diary	 entries	 had	 shrunk	 to	 a	 sentence	 or	 two,noting	 only	 the	 temperature	 and	 his	 decision	 to	 remain	 insideand	read.	Both	he	and	Dana	were	idle	most	of	the	time,	with	nodiplomatic	 work	 or	 contact	 with	 Russian	 authorities.	 It	 wasfortunate	 that	 St.	 Petersburg	 had	 at	 least	 one	 bookshop	 withEnglish-language	 works,	 and	 both	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Danapurchased	an	enormous	quantity.	Before	the	end	of	winter,	JohnQuincy	had	read—among	other	things—all	eight	volumes	(morethan	 five	 hundred	 pages	 each)	 of	 David	 Hume’s	 History	 ofEngland,	 Catherine	 Macaulay’s	 eight-volume	 The	 History	 ofEngland	from	the	Accession	of	James	I	to	that	of	the	BrunswickLine,	 William	 Robertson’s	 three-volume	 The	 History	 of	 theReign	of	Charles	V,	Robert	Watson’s	two-volume	The	History	ofthe	Reign	of	Philip	the	Second,	King	of	Spain,	Thomas	Davies’sMemoirs	 of	 the	 Life	 of	 David	 Garrick,	 and	 the	 two-volumelandmark	 work	 in	 economics	 by	 Adam	 Smith,	 An	 Inquiry	 intothe	 Nature	 and	 Causes	 of	 the	 Wealth	 of	 Nations.	 He	 alsorestudied	Cicero’s	Orations	and	John	Dryden’s	Works	of	Virgil,copied	 the	 poems	 of	 Dryden,	 Alexander	 Pope,	 and	 JosephAddison—and	learned	to	read	and	write	German.“I	don’t	perceive	that	you	take	pains	enough	with	your	handwriting,”	 his	 father	 growled	 in	 response.	 “When	 the	 habit	 isgot,	it	is	easier	to	write	well	than	ill,	but	this	habit	is	only	to	beacquired	 in	 early	 life.”	 Adams	 ended	 his	 letter	 more	 warmly,however:	 “God	 bless	 my	 dear	 son	 and	 preserve	 his	 health	 andhis	 manners	 from	 the	 numberless	 dangers	 that	 surround	 uswherever	we	go	in	this	world.	So	prays	your	affectionate	father,J.	Adams.”5Crestfallen	 at	 his	 father’s	 response	 to	 his	 studies,	 JohnQuincy	did	not	reply	for	a	month,	and	when	he	did,	he	wrote	inFrench	to	make	it	difficult	for	the	elder	Adams	to	read.	Adamsanswered	 acerbically,	 “It	 is	 a	 mortification	 to	 me	 to	 find	 thatyou	 write	 better	 in	 a	 foreign	 language	 than	 in	 your	 mothertongue.”	 Adams	 was,	 however,	 worried	 about	 his	 son—anadolescent,	all	but	alone	in	a	foreign	land,	with	no	companionsbut	a	middle-aged	man	and	a	pile	of	books.“Do	 you	 find	 any	 company?”	 John	 Adams	 wrote.	 “Have	 youformed	any	acquaintances	of	your	own	countrymen?	There	arenone	I	suppose.	Of	Englishmen	you	should	beware.	.	.	.	My	dearboy,	 above	 all	 preserve	 your	 innocence.”6	 He	 grew	 moreanxious	as	the	winter	progressed	without	John	Quincy’s	gainingany	 substantial	 diplomatic	 experience.	 “I	 am	 .	 .	 .	 very	 uneasyon	your	account,”	he	wrote	in	mid-May.	“I	want	you	with	me.	.	..	I	want	you	to	pursue	your	studies	at	Leyden.	.	.	.	Your	studies	Idoubt	 not	 you	 pursue,	 because	 I	 know	 you	 to	 be	 a	 studiousyouth,	 but	 above	 all	 preserve	 a	 sacred	 regard	 to	 your	 ownhonor	and	reputation.	Your	morals	are	worth	all	the	sciences.”7John	Quincy	finally	admitted	to	himself—and	to	his	father—“Ihave	not	made	many	acquaintances	here.”	Although	he	had	“asmuch	 as	 I	 want	 to	 read,”	 he	 longed	 for	 companions	 his	 ownage.	In	addition,	the	crushing	poverty,	deprivation,	and	lack	offreedomlife—and	 the	 oppressive	 slavery	 hewitnessed—left	him	depressed.	“Everyone	that	is	not	a	noble,”he	lamented,	“is	a	slave.”8in	 RussianHis	 father	 responded	 by	 urging	 John	 Quincy	 to	 return	 toHolland.	Adams	had	succeeded	in	winning	Dutch	recognition	ofAmerican	 independence	 and	 had	 moved	 to	 The	 Hague	 asAmerican	minister	plenipotentiary.Although	eager	to	rejoin	his	father,	John	Quincy	was	enjoyinghis	 independence	 and	 took	 a	 long,	 circuitous	 route	 back	 toHolland	 through	 Scandinavia	 and	 Germany.	 After	 three	 weeksexploring	 Finland	 (then	 a	 part	 of	 Sweden),	 he	 reachedStockholm,	 and	 ignoring	 his	 father’s	 exhortations	 on	 theimportance	 of	 preserving	 his	 innocence,	 John	 Quincy	 Adamsplunged	into	Swedish	life	for	nearly	six	rapture-filled	weeks.“I	believe	there	is	no	country	in	Europe,”	he	exulted,	“wherethe	 people	 are	 more	 hospitable	 and	 affable	 to	 strangers	 ormore	hospitable	.	.	.	than	the	Swedes.	In	every	town,	howeversmall	 it	 may	 be,	 they	 have	 these	 assemblies	 [dances]	 .	 .	 .	 topass	away	agreeably	the	long	winter	evenings.	.	.	.	There,	onemay	 dance	 country	 dances,	 minuets	 or	 play	 cards,	 just	 as	 itpleases	 you,	 and	 everybody	 is	 extremely	 polite	 to	 strangers.”Years	 later,	 he	 recalled,	 that	 “the	 beauties	 of	 the	 women	 .	 .	 .could	 not	 be	 concealed.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 Swedish	 women	 were	 asmodest	as	they	were	amiable	and	beautiful.	To	me	it	was	trulythe	‘land	of	lovely	dames,’	and	to	this	hour	I	have	not	forgottenthe	palpitations	of	heart	which	some	of	them	cost	me.”9While	 he	 was	 sampling	 Sweden’s	 wine	 and	 women,	 hisparents	 grew	 frantic.	 “I	 hope	 our	 dear	 son	 abroad,”	 Abigailfretted	 to	 John,	 “will	 not	 imbibe	 any	 sentiments	 or	 principleswhich	 will	 not	 be	 agreeable	 to	 the	 laws,	 the	 government	 andreligion	 of	 our	 own	 country.	 He	 has	 been	 less	 under	 your	 eyethan	I	could	wish.	.	.	.	If	he	does	not	return	this	winter,	I	wishyou	 to	 remind	 him	 that	 he	 has	 forgotten	 to	 use	 his	 pen	 to	 hisfriends	 upon	 this	 side	 of	 the	 water.”10	 John	 Adams	 feignednonchalance	in	replying	to	Abigail	but	sent	inquiries	to	Frenchconsulsin	 Germany	 and	 Scandinavia	 about	 his	 son’swhereabouts.John	 Quincy	 had	 reached	 Göteborg	 on	 the	 west	 coast	 ofSweden	 with	 every	 intention	 of	 remaining,	 when	 the	 Frenchconsul	 reported	 his	 father’s	 anxieties	 and	 set	 the	 boyscrambling	to	make	travel	arrangements	to	Holland.	He	took	afinal	 fling	 at	 a	 masquerade	 ball	 where	 “the	 men	 dressed	 assailors	and	the	women	[as]	country	girls.	.	.	.	I	stayed	there	tillabout	4	o’clock	this	morning.	When	I	returned	to	my	lodgings,	Ithrew	 myself	 upon	 the	 bed	 and	 slept	 till	 about	 7	 o’clock,	 thenpacked	my	trunks	and	set	away.”11In	 the	 weeks	 that	 followed,	 John	 Quincy	 traveled	 toCopenhagen,	Hamburg,	and	Bremen,	finally	rejoining	his	fatherin	 The	 Hague	 on	 July	 22—noticeably	 more	 mature	 than	 whenhe	had	left.“John	 is	 every	 thing	 you	 could	 wish,”	 Adams	 explained	 toAbigail	 without	 revealingin	 hispersonality	or	probable	causes.	“Wholly	devoted	to	his	studies,he	has	made	a	progress	which	gives	me	entire	satisfaction.	.	.	.the	 obvious	 changesHe	is	grown	a	man	in	understanding	and	stature	as	well.	.	.	.	Ishall	 take	 him	 with	 me	 to	 Paris	 and	 shall	 make	 much	 of	 hiscompany.”12	 Even	 Abigail	 was	 impressed	 after	 reading	 JohnQuincy’s	 first	 letter	 to	 her	 upon	 his	 return	 to	 Holland.	 “Theaccount	 of	 your	 northern	 journey,”	 she	 conceded,	 “would	 docredit	to	an	older	pen.”13Adams	 was	 more	 than	 delighted	 with	 his	 son,	 and	 early	 inAugust,	 the	 two	 left	 The	 Hague	 for	 Paris,	 where	 John	 Adamsjoined	 Benjamin	 Franklin	 and	 John	 Jay	 in	 negotiating	 a	 peacetreaty	with	England—and	elated	John	Quincy	by	recruiting	himas	 a	 secretary	 to	 edit	 and	 transcribe	 documents.	 John	 Adamsnow	 accepted	 his	 precocious	 sixteen-year-old	 son	 as	 a	 man,	 afriend,	 and	 a	 pleasant,	 sophisticated	 companion,	 not	 only	 atconcerts,	 the	 opera,	 and	 museums	 but	 at	 luncheons,	 dinners,and	 other	 functions	 with	 some	 of	 Europe’s	 most	 distinguishedfigures.	They,	in	turn,	also	accepted	the	young	man	as	an	equal.“Dined	 at	 .	 .	 .	 the	 Dutch	 ambassador	 with	 a	 great	 deal	 ofcompany,”	 John	 Quincy	 reported	 in	 his	 diary	 in	 mid-August1783.	 “Dined	 at	 the	 Duke	 de	 la	 Vauguyon	 .	 .	 .	 the	 Frenchambassador	 at	 the	 Hague	 .	 .	 .	 the	 Baron	 de	 la	 Houze	 .	 .	 .	 theminister	 of	 France	 at	 the	 court	 of	 Denmark.”14	 With	 eachencounter,	 helearning	 thelistened	 carefully,	 graduallylanguage	of	diplomacy	in	which	spoken	words	seldom	matchedtheir	 literal	 meanings.	 An	 “interesting	 concept”	 often	 meant“unacceptable,”	 while	 a	 “different	 approach”	 could	 well	 meanwar.With	France	a	center	of	scientific	advances,	John	Quincy	alsowitnessed	 astounding	 new	 processes	 and	 inventions	 anddeveloped	 a	 deep	 interest	 in	 science.	 “My	 Lord	 Ancram,”	 herecounted	 in	 his	 diary,	 “has	 undertaken	 to	 teach	 people	 borndeaf	 and	 dumb	 not	 only	 to	 converse	 .	 .	 .	 fluently	 but	 also	 toread	and	write.”	Another	entry	described	his	having	witnessed“the	first	public	experiment	.	.	.	of	the	flying	globe.”A	 Mr.	 Montgolfier	 has	 discovered	 that	 if	 one	 fills	 a	 ballwith	 inflammable	 air	 much	 lighter	 than	 common	 air,	 theball	of	itself	will	go	up	to	an	immense	height.	It	was	.	.	.14	foot	in	diameter	.	.	.	placed	in	the	Champs	de	Mars.gAt	 5	 o’clock,	 two	 great	 guns	 fired	 from	 the	 ÉcoleMilitaire.	.	.	.	It	rose	at	once,	for	some	time	perpendicularand	 then	 slanted.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 it	 succeeds	 it	 may	 become	 veryuseful	to	mankind.15The	launch	of	the	first	balloon	set	off	a	mania	in	France,	withJoseph	de	Montgolfier	and	his	brother	Étienne	sending	balloonsin	 Versailles	 and	 elsewhere.	 “Theinto	 the	 atmosphereenthusiasm	 of	 the	 people	 of	 Paris	 for	 the	 flying	 globes	 is	 verygreat,”John	 Quincy	 noted	 with	 excitement.	 “Severalpropositions	 have	 been	 made	 from	 persons	 who,	 to	 enjoy	 thehonor	 of	 having	 been	 the	 first	 travelers	 through	 the	 air,	 arewilling	 to	 go	 up	 in	 them	 and	 run	 risks	 of	 breaking	 theirnecks.”16In	 the	 midst	 of	 the	 whirlwind	 of	 social	 and	 scientificactivities,	 John	 Adams	 worked	 out	 the	 final	 stages	 of	 treatynegotiations	 with	 Britain,	 with	 John	 Quincy	 helping	 preparecopies	 of	 the	 final	 documents.	 On	 September	 3,	 Adams,Franklin,	Jay,	and	British	minister	David	Hartley	met	on	the	rueJacob,	 on	 the	 Left	 Bank,	 to	 sign	 a	 treaty	 of	 peace	 betweenBritain	 and	 the	 United	 States,	 with	 Britain	 recognizing	 theUnited	States	of	America	as	a	free	and	independent	nation.In	 the	 months	 that	 followed,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 his	 fathertraveled	back	and	forth	between	France,	England,	and	Holland.They	 spent	 the	 autumn	 of	 1783	 in	 Britain,	 where	 John	 Quincyvisited	 London’s	 wonders—Westminster	 Abbey,	 St.	 Paul’sCathedral,	and	so	on.	He	tramped	through	great	museums	andlibraries,	 attended	 opera	 at	 Covent	 Garden,	 and	 sawproductions	of	Hamlet	 and	 Measure	 for	 Measure	 at	 the	 DruryLane	Theatre,	where	the	legendary	Sarah	Siddons	starred	eachnight.	Benjamin	West,	the	Pennsylvania-born	Quaker	artist	whohad	 moved	 to	 London,	 took	 him	 to	 see	 the	 art	 collection	 atBuckingham	 Palace	 and	 several	 art	 galleries,	 and	 he	 went	 tothe	 opening	 of	 Parliament	 to	 hear	 the	 King’s	 Speech	 from	 theThrone	 and	 the	 debates	 between	 Edmund	 Burke,	 Lord	 North,William	Pitt,	Charles	Fox,	and	other	great	figures	in	the	Houseof	Commons.At	 the	 end	 of	 the	 year,	 the	 Adamses	 returned	 to	 The	 Hague,where	 John	 Adams	 sought	 new	 loans	 for	 the	 United	 States,while	 John	 Quincy	 resumed	 his	 studies.	 In	 the	 spring,	 Abigailannounced	 that,	 after	 a	 separation	 of	 four	 years,	 she	 wascoming	 to	 Europe	 “in	 the	 joyful	 hope	 of	 soon	 holding	 to	 mybosom	the	dearest,	best	of	friends.”17	John	Adams	was	elated,saying	 his	 wife’s	 letter	 “has	 made	 me	 the	 happiest	 man	 uponearth.	I	am	twenty	years	younger	than	I	was	yesterday.”	And	hesigned	it,	“Yours,	with	more	ardor	than	ever.”18A	month	later,	Abigail	arrived	in	England	with	her	daughter,Nabby.	 Not	 long	 after	 they	 checked	 into	 their	 London	 hotel,	 aservant	knocked	at	the	door	to	announce,	“Young	Mr.	Adams	iscome.”“Where,	 where	 is	 he?”	 Abigail	 and	 Nabby	 screeched	 inunison.	 Abigail	 described	 the	 scene	 in	 a	 letter	 to	 her	 sister:“Impatient	enough	I	was,	yet	when	he	entered	.	.	.	I	drew	backnot	really	believing	my	eyes—till	he	cried	out,	‘Oh,	my	momma!And	 my	 dear	 sister.’	 Nothing	 but	 his	 eyes	 at	 first	 sightappeared	 what	 he	 once	 was.	 His	 appearance	 is	 that	 of	 aman.”19Moved	 to	 tears	 as	 she	 wrote,	 Abigail	 told	 her	 sister	 she	 felt“exceedingly	 matronly	 with	 a	 grown	 up	 son	 on	 one	 hand	 anddaughter	upon	the	other.”20	And	to	husband	John	she	wrote,	“Iwas	this	day	made	very	happy	by	the	arrival	of	a	son	in	whom	Ican	trace	the	strongest	likeness	of	a	parent	in	every	way	dearto	me.”21John	 Quincy	 rented	 a	 coach	 and	 took	 his	 mother	 and	 sisterfor	 a	 reunion	 with	 his	 father	 in	 Paris,	 where	 the	 whole	 familymoved	 into	 a	 luxurious	 home	 in	 Auteuil,	 six	 miles	 west	 of	 thecity	 in	 the	 Bois	 de	 Boulogne.	 Thomas	 Jefferson	 and	 hisdaughter—both	lonely	for	family	life	after	the	death	of	his	wifetwo	 years	 earlier—frequently	 came	 to	 dinner.	 Following	 Pariscustom,	 Jefferson	 enrolled	 his	 daughter	 in	 a	 convent	 school,and	 he	 compensated	 for	 her	 absence	 by	 bonding	 with	 JohnQuincy,	 taking	 him	 to	 theater,	 concerts,	 and	 museums,	 andbecoming	an	important	figure	in	the	young	man’s	life.	The	twoformed	 such	 close	 ties	 that	 John	 Adams	 remarked	 to	 Jeffersonthat	 John	 Quincy	 “appeared	 to	 me	 to	 be	 almost	 as	 much	 yourboy	as	mine.”22The	 Adamses	 also	 spent	 time	 with	 the	 Lafayettes,	 whoentertained	 Americans	 with	 huge	 buffet	 dinners	 at	 their	 homeevery	Monday.	After	Queen	Marie	Antoinette	gave	birth	to	herfirst	 son	 and	 heir	 apparent,	 France	 rejoiced,	 and	 AdrienneLafayette	 invited	 the	 Adamses	 to	 accompany	 her	 to	 the	 TeDeum	 at	 the	 cathedral	 of	 Notre	 Dame	 de	 Paris,	 where	 bothKing	 Louis	 XVI	 and	 the	 Marquis	 de	 Lafayette	 were	 toparticipate.	“What	a	charming	sight,”	John	Quincy	wrote	in	hisdiary,	“an	absolute	king	of	one	of	the	most	powerful	empires	onearth	 and	 perhaps	 a	 thousand	 of	 the	 first	 personages	 in	 thatthem	 andempire	 adoringacknowledging	 that	 he	 can	 in	 a	 moment	 reduce	 them	 to	 thedust	from	which	they	sprang.”23the	 divinity	 who	 createdBy	now,	John	Quincy	was	as	much	a	celebrity	in	Paris	as	hisfather—treated	 as	 an	 equal	 by	 the	 likes	 of	 Jefferson	 andLafayette,	 addressed	 as	 “Mr.	 Adams,”	 and	 referred	 to	 as“young	Mr.	Adams”	to	differentiate	him	from	his	father.	He	hadseen	more	of	Europe	than	many	of	them	and	knew	more	of	thelands—Germany,social	 conditions	 and	 politics	 of	 distantPoland,	 Russia,	 and	 Scandinavia.	 When	 artist	 Benjamin	 Westarrived,	 he	 went	 to	 see	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 not	 his	 father,	 toarrange	introductions	to	Jefferson	and	Lafayette.	John	Quincy’sdiary	describes	his	winter	in	Paris:	“Dined	at	the	Marquis	de	laFayette’s	.	.	.	dined	with	Mr.	Jefferson	[and]	Captain	John	PaulJones	.	.	.	Dined	at	Dr.	Franklin’s.	.	.	.	Walked	into	Paris	to	theMarquis	de	la	Fayette’s	to	go	with	him	to	Mr.	Jefferson’s	uponthe	subject	of	importation	of	our	whale	oil	into	this	country.”24The	 Swedish	 ambassador,	 who	 had	 known	 John	 Quincy	 inStockholm,	invited	him	to	bring	his	family	to	dinner.	“Mon	dieuque	 mademoiselle	 vôtre	 soeur	 est	 belle,”	 he	 whispered	 ofNabby’s	 beauty	 to	 John	 Quincy,	 saying	 he	 had	 seen	 few	 aslovely	as	she.	“J’ai	vu	peu	d’aussi	jolies	femmes	qu’elle.”h	JohnQuincy	 apparently	 did	 not	 translate	 for	 Nabby.	 “He	 thoughtdoubtless	 that	 I	 should	 tell	 her	 what	 he	 said,”	 John	 Quincynoted	in	his	diary	later.	“He	is	a	very	agreeable	man.”25Abigail	 was	 less	 sanguine	 about	 dining	 with	 celebrities,saying	she	was	“astonished”	when	“this	lady	I	dined	with	at	Dr.Franklin’s	.	.	.	gave	him	a	double	kiss	one	upon	each	cheek	andanother	 upon	 his	 forehead.	 .	 .	 .	 She	 carried	 on	 .	 .	 .	 at	 dinner,frequently	locking	her	hand	into	the	Dr.’s	.	.	.	then	throwing	herarm	carelessly	upon	the	Dr.’s	neck.	.	.	.	I	must	say	I	was	highlydisgusted	and	never	wish	for	an	acquaintance	of	this	cast.”26In	 the	 course	 of	 the	 winter,	 John	 Quincy	 drew	 close	 to	 hismother	 and	 sister	 as	 never	 before,	 taking	 them	 to	 theater,concerts,	operas,	and	museums—and	introducing	them	to	suchcelebrities	 as	 the	 heroic	 Jean-Pierre	 Blanchard,	 who	 only	 twoweeks	earlier	had	been	the	first	person	to	cross	from	Dover	toCalais	in	an	air	balloon.The	 following	 spring,	 John	 Adams	 received	 word	 thatCongress	 had	 named	 him	 America’s	 first	 ambassador	 toBritain.	 By	 then,	 John	 Quincy	 recognized	 that	 he	 could	 nolonger	“loiter	away	my	precious	time	in	Europe”—that	the	timehad	 come	 for	 him	 to	 enroll	 full	 time	 in	 university,	 finish	 hisformal	education,	and	choose	a	profession.	27Abigail	Adams	II	(“Nabby”),	the	oldest	child	of	John	and	AbigailAdams,	 came	 with	 her	 mother	 to	 join	 her	 father	 and	 youngerin	 the	 summer	 of	 1784.brother	 John	 Quincy(NATIONALADAMS	 NATIONALPARKSHISTORICAL	PARK)SERVICE,in	 ParisAlthough	 Harvard	 seemed	 a	 backward	 country	 schoolcompared	 with	 the	 University	 of	 Leyden	 or	 England’s	 greatinstitutions	 at	 Oxford	 and	 Cambridge,	 the	 pathway	 toprofessional	 and	 political	 leadership	 in	 America	 began	 inCambridge,	Massachusetts,	not	Cambridge,	England.	“Harvardrendered	her	sons	fit	to	serve	their	country,”	historian	SamuelEliot	 Morison	 explained,	 “not	 by	 practical	 courses	 on	 politicsand	 government,	 but	 by	 a	 study	 of	 antique	 culture	 thatbroadened	their	mental	vision,	stressed	virtue,	and	promoted	.	..	 the	 character	 appropriate	 to	 a	 republican.	 .	 .	 .	 Americanrevolutionary	 leaders,	 both	 North	 and	 South	 .	 .	 .	 could	 neverhave	 rendered	 their	 distinguished	 services	 to	 the	 youngrepublic	without	that	classical	learning	which	is	denied	to	mostAmericans	today.”28Intent	on	his	son’s	rising	to	American	leadership,	John	Adamswrote	 to	 Reverend	 Joseph	 Willard,	 who	 had	 awarded	 JohnAdams	 an	 honorary	 LL.D.	 at	 Willard’s	 first	 commencement	 asHarvard’s	 president	 in	 1781.	 Adams	 assumed	 Willard	 wouldautomatically	 admit	 John	 Quincy,	 given	 the	 boy’s	 studies	 atLeyden,	 his	 mastery	 of	 two	 classical	 and	 three	 modernlanguages,	and	his	command	of	an	enormous	body	of	classicaland	 modern	 literature,	 philosophy,	 and	 science.	 As	 Adamsdescribed	 his	 son,	 “He	 has	 translated	 Virgil’s	 Aeneid	 .	 .	 .	 thewhole	 of	 Sallust	 and	 Tacitus’	 [s]	 Agricola	 .	 .	 .	 a	 great	 part	 ofHorace,	some	of	Ovid,	and	some	of	Caesar’s	Commentaries	.	.	.besides	Cicero’s	Orations.	.	.	.”In	 Greek	 his	 progress	 has	 not	 been	 equal;	 yet	 he	 hasstudied	 morsels	 of	 Aristotle’s	 Politics,	 Plutarch’s	 Lives,Lucian’s	 Dialogues.	 .	 .	 .	 In	 mathematics	 I	 hope	 he	 willpass	 muster.	 .	 .	 .	 We	 went	 with	 some	 accuracy	 throughthe	 geometry	 in	 the	 Preceptor,	 the	 eight	 books	 ofSimpson’s	 Euclid	 in	 Latin.	 .	 .	 .	 We	 went	 through	 planegeometry	 .	 .	 .	 algebra,	 and	 the	 decimal	 fractions,arithmetical	 and	 geometrical	 proportions.	 thedifferential	 method	 of	 calculations	 .	 .	 .	 and	 Sir	 IsaacNewton.29..Under	 no	 circumstances,	 Adams	 told	 the	 Harvard	 president,would	 he	 permit	 his	 son	 to	 enter	 Harvard	 as	 a	 freshman	 orsophomore,	but	if	Willard	admitted	him	as	a	junior	or	senior,	“Ishould	 choose	 to	 send	 him	 to	 you	 rather	 than	 to	 Leyden.”Adams	 also	 suggested	 that	 his	 own	 services	 to	 the	 nationwarranted	Harvard’s	waiving	all	expenses	other	than	tuition.Willard	 responded	 curtly,	 saying	 he	 would	 admit	 the	 boysubject	to	examination.On	 May	 12,	 1785,	 a	 cabrioleti	 pulled	 up	 to	 the	 Adams	 homein	Auteuil	to	take	John	Quincy	to	Lorient	and	a	ship	bound	forAmerica.	He	embraced	his	family	and	“took	leave	of	my	parentsand	my	sister	.	.	.	at	half	after	twelve	with	such	feelings	as	noone	 that	 has	 not	 been	 separated	 from	 persons	 so	 dear	 canconceive.”30	 He	 had	 said	 his	 good-byes	 to	 Lafayette	 andJefferson	 the	 previous	 day	 and	 carried	 letters	 from	 each	 todeliver	 to	 America,	 along	 with	 a	 pack	 of	 hunting	 dogs	 thatLafayette	asked	him	to	take	as	a	gift	to	George	Washington.	Healso	 carried	 jars	 of	 whale	 oil	 that	 Jefferson	 had	 asked	 him	 tooffer	 New	 York	 merchants	 as	 a	 commercial	 opportunity	 forilluminating	 the	 streets	 of	 Paris.	 For	 Jefferson,	 John	 Quincy’sdeparture	 was	 wrenching,	 and	 when	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 Adamsfamily	 left	 Paris	 for	 London,	 Jefferson	 lamented	 in	 a	 letter	 toJohn	 Adams,	 “The	 departure	 of	 your	 family	 has	 left	 me	 in	 thedumps.”	 Without	 John	 Quincy’s	 companionship,	 he	 admitted,“My	afternoons	hang	heavily	on	me.”31Nine	 days	 later,	 on	 May	 21,	 1785,	 John	 Quincy	 Adamsboarded	one	of	the	first	four	passenger	ships	to	sail	the	Atlanticbetween	 France	 and	 America—the	 ninety-six-foot-long	 Courierde	 l’Amérique.	 “Every	 passenger	 pays	 five	 hundred	 livresj	 forhis	passage.	.	.	.	You	live	at	the	captain’s	table	and	have	a	smallapartment	 on	 board	 to	 yourself.	 You	 must	 provide	 whateverrefreshments	 you	 may	 be	 in	 need	 of	 and	 must	 bring	 your	 ownsheets	and	pillows	and	napkins	[towels].”On	 the	 morning	 of	 July	 18,	 the	 ship	 reached	 New	 York—theAmerican	 capital	 at	 the	 time—and	 Adams	 went	 directly	 toSecretary	of	State	John	Jay’s	magnificent	Broadway	residence,where	he	was	to	stay.	Recognized	as	a	celebrity	in	New	York	asmuch	 as	 in	 Paris,	 John	 Quincy	 dined	 with	 Jay,	 then	 went	 withhim	 to	 meet	 Elbridge	 Gerry	 and	 Rufus	 King,	 the	 twoMassachusetts	delegates	to	Congress.	“I	was	introduced	to	thePresident	 of	 Congress	 [Richard	 Henry	 Lee],”	 he	 wrote	 of	 hisfirst	 evening	 in	 New	 York,	 “and	 Mr.	 [James]	 Monroe	 of	 theVirginia	 delegation.	 I	 went	 to	 [New	 York]	 Governor	 [George]Clinton,	 but	 he	 was	 not	 within.	 ”32	 The	 next	 morning,	 hebreakfasted	 with	 Gerry	 and	 King.	 “The	 President	 of	 Congresswho	 was	 there	 was	 so	 kind	 as	 to	 offer	 me	 a	 room	 in	 hishouse.”33	As	president	of	the	Confederation	Congress,	RichardHenry	Lee	was,	in	effect,	President	of	the	United	States,	and	heinvited	 John	 Quincy	 to	 the	 weekly	 formal	 dinners	 he	 gave	 forAmerican	notables	and	visiting	dignitaries.After	his	experiences	in	Scandinavia	and	the	long	trip	acrossthe	Atlantic,	John	Quincy	was	quick	to	note	the	characteristicsof	 every	 attractive	 young	 lady	 he	 met.	 “Miss	 Jarvis,”	 heremarked	in	his	diary,	“is	very	fair,	but	Miss	Ogden	is	a	beauty..	.	.	There	are	five	or	six	young	ladies	in	the	family,	one	only	ishandsome.”34	 And	 on	 another	 afternoon,	 John	 Quincy	 went	 tosee	the	eighteen-year-old	widow	of	the	nearly	seventy-year-oldBritish	officer	Jacob	Wheate.	Lady	Wheate,	as	he	called	her,	“isone	 of	 the	 most	 reputed	 beauties	 in	 the	 town.	 I	 own	 I	 do	 notadmire	 her	 so	 much	 as	 I	 expected	 to	 before	 I	 saw	 her.	 She	 islike	too	many	of	the	handsome	ladies	here:	very	affected.”35In	 mid-August,	 John	 Quincy	 set	 off	 for	 Boston,	 stopping	 inNew	 Haven,	 where	 Yale	 College	 president	 Ezra	 Stiles—a	 heroin	 the	 defense	 of	 New	 Haven	 against	 the	 British—greeted	 theboy	 on	 what	 was	 then	 a	 tiny	 hilltop	 campus.	 Adams	 wasunimpressed,	writing	Nabby	that	the	Yale	library	“is	neither	aslarge	 nor	 as	 elegant	 as	 your	 pappa’s.”	 His	 comment	 on	 Yalewas	but	one	installment	of	a	letter	written	over	a	ten-day	spanthat	began	in	New	York,	where,	he	reported	to	Nabby	that	oneafternoon,	 “I	 dined	 in	 company	 with	 Mr.	 [Thomas]	 Paine,	 theauthor	of	Common	Sense,	and	[Rev.]	Dr.	[John]	Witherspoonk	.	..	 I	 have	 been	 introduced	 at	 different	 times	 to	 almost	 all	 themembers	 of	 Congress.”	 Young	 Adams	 was	 apparently	 tiring	 ofhis	celebrity	status,	however,	and	told	Nabby	that	“wherever	Igo	I	hear	a	repetition	of	the	same	questions[:]	.	.	.	‘How	do	youlike	 Europe?’	 What	 country	 do	 you	 like	 best?’	 .	 .	 .	 and	 ahundred	 other	 such.	 I	 am	 almost	 wearied	 to	 death	 with	 them,and	I	sometimes	think	of	writing	a	list	of	the	questions	with	theanswers,	and	whenever	a	person	begins	to	make	any	questions,I	 would	 give	 him	 the	 paper.	 .	 .	 .	 Since	 my	 arrival	 here,	 everymoment	of	my	time	has	been	taken	up	and	yet	I	have	had	littleor	nothing	to	do.”36From	New	Haven,	he	went	to	Hartford	and,	finally,	to	Bostonand	 his	 childhood	 home	 at	 Braintree.	 “No	 person	 who	 has	 notexperienced	 it,”	 he	 told	 his	 diary,	 “can	 conceive	 how	 muchpleasure	 there	 is	 in	 returning	 to	 our	 country	 after	 an	 absenceof	six	years,	especially	when	it	was	left	at	the	time	of	life	that	Idid	 when	 I	 went	 last	 to	 Europe.	 The	 most	 trifling	 objects	 nowappear	 interesting	 to	 me.”37	 His	 aunt	 Mary,	 Abigail’s	 sister,and	her	family	greeted	him	in	what	proved	a	deeply	emotionalreunion	for	them	all.“We	sat	and	looked	at	one	another,”	John	Quincy	wrote	to	hismother.	“I	could	not	speak.	.	.	.	How	much	more	expressive	thissilence	 than	 anything	 we	 could	 have	 said.”	 After	 dinner,	 JohnQuincy	 and	 his	 uncle	 went	 to	 Cambridge	 to	 see	 John	 Quincy’sbrother	Charles,	who	had	enrolled	in	Harvard	six	weeks	earlier.In	the	days	that	followed,	John	Quincy	visited	his	grandparents,aunts,	uncles,	cousins—as	well	as	such	illustrious	family	friendsJohn	 Hancock.	 Heasimpressed	 them	 all—with	 his	 height	 as	 much	 as	 his	 erudition.He	had	left	Massachusetts	as	a	boy	and	returned	a	young	manof	five	feet	seven	and	a	half	inches—a	half	inch	taller	than	hisfather	and	far	thinner.former	 Massachusetts	 governor“Cousin	 John	 is	 come,”	 his	 Aunt	 Mary	 wrote	 to	 her	 sisterAbigail	 after	 his	 visit,	 “and	 brought	 with	 him	 in	 his	 own	 facesuch	 a	 resemblance	 of	 his	 papa	 and	 mama	 as	 I	 never	 beforesaw	 blended	 in	 one.	 And	 I	 am	 happy	 to	 perceive	 that	 it	 is	 notonly	in	his	person	that	he	bears	such	a	likeness	to	his	parents.	Ihave	 already	 discovered	 a	 strength	 of	 mind,	 a	 memory,	 asoundness	of	judgment	which	I	have	seldom	seen	united	in	oneso	young.	His	modesty	is	not	the	least	of	his	virtues.	.	.	.	If	hisapplication	 is	 equal	 to	 his	 abilities,	 he	 cannot	 fail	 of	 making	 agreat	man.”38Eventually,	 John	 Quincy	 had	 to	 face	 the	 inevitable,	 and	 onAugust	 31,	 1785,	 he	 went	 to	 Harvard	 to	 see	 its	 president,Reverend	Joseph	Willard.	Although	Harvard	boasted	America’slargest	 library,	 with	 12,000	 volumes,	 the	 jaded	 young	 Adamsfound	the	latter	only	“good,	without	being	magnificent.”	39	Hehad,	after	all,	studied	in	the	Bibliothèque	du	roi,	in	Paris,	withits	more	than	1	million	books	and	80,000	manuscripts.	He	wasless	 than	 impressed,	 as	 well,	 with	 the	 president’s	 office	 and,indeed,	with	President	Willard	himself.Raised	 in	 poverty	 after	 losing	 his	 father	 at	 the	 age	 of	 two,Willard	 was	 a	 mathematician	 with	 little	 appreciation	 for	 theromance	 of	 opera,	 music,	 and	 the	 grand	 arts	 that	 had	 formedso	 much	 of	 John	 Quincy’s	 education.	 He	 was	 a	 serious	 man—dour,	 with	 a	 deep	 distaste	 for	 the	 boy’s	 elegant	 clothes,	 hisconfident,	worldly	ways,	and	the	ease	with	which	he	addressedolder	 men	 as	 if	 they	 were	 social	 equals.	 Willard	 ran	 Harvardlike	 a	 military	 institution,	 demanding	 that	 all	 who	 approachedhim—tutors	 and	 students	 alike—doff	 their	 hats	 when	 theypassed.	 He	 banned	 wearing	 silk	 and	 limited	 student	 dress	 tocoarse	 brown,	 olive,	 or	 black	 cotton	 jackets	 and	 pants	 called“homespun.”	 From	 the	 first,	 he	 resented	 John	 Quincy’seffervescent	 demeanor,	 enthusiasm,	 and	 joy.	 Even	 more,	 heresented	 the	 boy’s	 assumption	 that,	 as	 John	 Adams’s	 son,	 hisadmission	to	Harvard	was	a	mere	formality.After	 asking	 John	 Quincy	 a	 few	 questions	 in	 Latin,	 thenGreek,	Willard	scowled,	then	stunned	the	boy	by	telling	him	hewas	 ineligible	 for	 admission	 to	 Harvard.	 It	 was	 the	 harshestblow	he	could	possibly	have	delivered	to	the	son	of	a	FoundingFather.	Every	man	of	note	in	Massachusetts	history	had	gone	toHarvard	since	its	founding	in	1634;	eight	of	the	fifty-six	signersof	 the	 Declaration	 of	 Independence	 were	 Harvard	 graduates,including	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 and	 his	 cousin	 Sam	 Adams	 Jr.And	 now,	 with	 a	 few	 words,	 an	 undistinguished	 pedagogue,who	 had	 contributed	 nothing	 of	 note	 to	 his	 nation’s	 freedom,had	shattered	the	hopes	of	a	Founding	Father’s	son	to	completehis	 higher	 education,	 obtain	 a	 law	 degree,	 and	 assume	 theleadership	of	his	country.	He	had	crushed	John	Quincy	Adams’scareer	before	it	could	begin.