CHAPTER 	9Restoring	Peace	to	the	WorldJohn	Quincy	and	Louisa	Adams	were	enjoying	life	in	Russia	toomuch	 to	 leave,	 and	 he	 still	 hated	 the	 thought	 of	 devoting	 hisentire	 life	 to	 the	 law.	 As	 he	 told	 his	 brother	 Thomas,	 “I	 amconscious	of	too	little	law	even	for	practice	at	the	bar,	still	lessshould	 I	 feel	 myself	 qualified	 for	 the	 bench	 of	 the	 SupremeCourt	of	the	United	States.”I	 am	 also	 and	 always	 shall	 be	 too	 much	 of	 a	 politicalpartisan	 to	 be	 a	 judge.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 the	 servile	 drudgery	 ofcaucuses,	 the	 savage	 buffeting	 of	 elections,	 the	 filth	 andvenom	 of	 newspaper	 and	 pulpit	 calumny,	 and	 thedastardly	desertion	of	.	.	.	friends	.	.	.	are	to	be	my	lot	asit	has	been	in	time	past,	I	shall	with	the	blessing	of	Godlive	through	it	again	as	I	have	done	before.1AfterJohn	 Quincythe	 Supreme	 Courtturned	 downnomination,	two	of	his	law	students	decided	to	return	home	toAmerica,	 freeing	 the	 Adamses	 of	 two	 responsibilities.	 On	 July11,	John	Quincy	celebrated	his	forty-fourth	birthday;	two	weekslater,	 he	 and	 Louisa	 celebrated	 their	 fourteenth	 weddinganniversary;	 and	 two	 weeks	 after	 that,	 on	 August	 11,	 Louisagave	birth	to	a	baby	girl.“My	child!”	Louisa	cried	joyfully	“A	daughter!	The	first	I	wasever	blessed	with.	.	.	.	My	sister	went	and	announced	her	birthto	her	father	and	he	soon	came	in	to	bless	and	kiss	the	babe.”2The	 birth	 of	 a	 girl	 enthralled	 John	 Quincy	 as	 much	 as	 it	 didLouisa.	“I	think	this	will	convince	you,”	he	wrote	playfully	to	hismother,	 “that	 the	 climate	 of	 St.	 Petersburg	 is	 not	 too	 cold	 toproduce	an	American.”In	an	Anglican	service	on	September	11,	“my	little	babe	waschristened,”	Louisa	wrote,	“and	she	was	named	after	me	by	herfather’s	special	desire	contrary	to	my	wish.”	Although	the	czaroffered	 to	 be	 the	 little	 girl’s	 godfather,	 John	 Quincy	 declineddiscreetly	 for	 a	 myriad	 of	 religious,	 political,	 and	 logisticalreasons.In	 the	 ecstasy	 of	 watching	 her	 baby	 grow,	 Louisa	 wrote,	 “Oshe	 grows	 lovely.	 Such	 a	 pair	 of	 eyes!!	 I	 fear	 I	 love	 her	 toowell.”3The	renewed	joys	of	fatherhood	combined	with	watching	themysterious	 mother-daughter	 bond	 to	 make	 John	 Quincy	 longfor	his	sons.	“My	dear	boys	are	never	out	of	my	thoughts,”	hewrote	 to	 his	 brother	 Thomas.	 “Your	 account	 of	 George’s	 rapidimprovement	 in	 learning	 to	 read	 was	 a	 banquet	 to	 my	 soul.There	are	so	many	things	that	I	want	them	to	learn	that	I	canscarcely	 wait	 with	 proper	 patience	 for	 the	 time	 when	 theyought	to	be	taught	them.”4The	birth	of	his	daughter	seemed	to	him	“the	proper	time”	tochange	 the	 tone	 of	 his	 daily	 letters	 to	 his	 children.	 “I	 want	 towrite	 to	 my	 son	 George	 upon	 subjects	 of	 serious	 import,”	 hesaid,	“but	I	.	.	.	find	my	ideas	so	undigested	and	confused.”	Hisheart	 wanted	 to	 tell	 his	 eleven-year-old	 that	 he	 loved	 him,	 buthis	Puritan	mind	could	only	express	that	love	as	his	father	had—with	 guidance:	 “I	 advise	 you,	 my	 son,	 in	 whatever	 you	 readand	 most	 of	 all	 in	 reading	 the	 Bible	 to	 remember	 that	 it	 is	 forthe	purpose	of	making	you	wiser	and	more	virtuous.”I	 have	 myself	 for	 many	 years	 made	 it	 a	 practice	 to	 readthrough	 the	 Bible	 once	 every	 year	 .	 .	 .	 that	 it	 maycontribute	to	my	advancement	in	wisdom	and	virtue.	.	.	.You	 must	 soon	 come	 to	 the	 age	 when	 you	 must	 governyourself.	.	.	.	You	know	some	of	your	duties	and	.	.	.	it	is	inthe	 Bible	 that	 you	 must	 learn	 them	 and	 from	 the	 Biblehow	 to	 practice	 them.	 Those	 duties	 are	 to	 God,	 yourfellow	creatures	and	you	yourself.5Writing	 to	 his	 son	 made	 John	 Quincy	 regret	 having	 rejectedthe	Supreme	Court	appointment.	His	rash	decision	would	meanremaining	 in	 Europe,	 apart	 from	 his	 boys,	 indefinitely.	 Hewrote	to	his	parents	declaring,	“I	can	no	longer	reconcile	eitherto	my	feelings	or	to	my	sense	of	duty	their	absence	from	me.	Imust	go	to	them	or	they	must	come	to	me.”6In	 the	 spring	 of	 1811,	 Secretary	 of	 State	 Robert	 Smithresigned.	 From	 the	 first,	 he	 had	 proved	 himself	 incompetentand	all	too	cozy	with	the	British	ambassador,	who	promised	anend	 to	 the	 British	 blockade	 of	 American	 ports	 if	 PresidentJames	 Madison	 ended	 the	 embargo	 on	 British	 trade.	 AfterMadison	 responded	 accordingly,	 the	 British	 governmentrepudiated	 their	 minister	 and	 recalled	 him	 from	 the	 UnitedStates,	 leaving	 an	 embarrassed	 President	 puzzling	 whether	 toreimpose	 the	 embargo	 and	 risk	 plunging	 the	 nation	 intoanother	recession.tothe	 stepladderPresident	 Madison	 dismissed	 Smith	 and	 appointed	 JamesMonroe	 secretary	 of	 state.	 Experienced	 in	 foreign	 affairs,Monroe	had	represented	the	nation	in	both	Britain	and	Franceand,	 next	 to	 John	 Quincy,	 was	 the	 nation’s	 foremost	 Europeanaffairs	 expert.	 The	 appointment,	 however,	 outraged	 NewEngland’s	 Federalists,	 who	 accused	 Madison	 of	 perpetuatingthe	 “Virginia	 dynasty”	 by	 giving	 Monroe	 an	 office	 that	 hadbecomethe	 presidency.	 Federalistnewspapers	called	Madison	and	Monroe	James	I	and	James	II.The	British	were	even	less	pleased.	Monroe	was	as	outspoken	aFrancophile	as	his	mentor	Jefferson,	and	the	British	respondedto	his	appointment	by	attacking	an	American	ship	within	sightof	New	York	and	impressing	a	seaman.	Under	orders	to	protectAmerican	 ships,	 the	 frigate	 President	 countered	 by	 attackingthe	 British	 ship	 Little	 Belt,	 killing	 nine	 and	 wounding	 twenty-three.	 Whenthe	 new	 British	 minister	 demanded	 anexplanation,	Monroe	replied	angrily	that	American	ships	had	asmuch	right	to	recover	impressed	seamen	as	British	ships	had	toimpress	 them	 in	 the	 first	 place.	 He	 then	 renewed	 Americandemands	that	Britain	cease	depredations	on	American	shippingand	respect	the	rights	of	neutral	ships	carrying	noncontraband.the	 British	 refused,	 Congress	 declared	 Britishimpressment	and	ship	seizures	an	affront	to	the	nation’s	rightsWhenand	 honor.	 On	 April	 1,	 1812,	 Madison	 went	 to	 Congress	 andrequested	 a	 sixty-day	 reinstatement	 of	 the	 embargo	 on	 Britishtrade;	 ten	 days	 later,	 Congress	 authorized	 him	 to	 prepare	 forwar	and	call	up	100,000	militiamen	for	six	months’	service.War	fever	was	infecting	Europe	as	well.	After	Russia	refusedto	cease	trading	with	Britain,	Napoléon	ordered	French	troopsto	the	Russian	border.	Fearful	of	an	imminent	invasion,	foreigndiplomats	 sent	 their	 wives	 and	 daughters	 home	 from	 St.Petersburg,	 leaving	 Louisa	 Adams	 and	 her	 sister	 Kitty	 as	 theonly	 foreign	 ladies	 in	 the	 diplomatic	 corps—and	 Kitty	 as	 theonly	 target	 for	 the	 czar’s	 amorous	 glances.	 In	 mid-January1812,	however,	the	Adamses—and	the	czar—noticed	a	decidedchange	in	Kitty’s	demeanor.	She	was	pregnant—not	by	the	czar,but	 by	 John	 Quincy’s	 nephew	 Billy	 Smith,	 Nabby’s	 son.	 Johnirate,	 and	 after	 he	 had	 a	 “very	 solemnQuincy	 wasconversation”	with	his	nephew,	Smith	married	Kitty	Johnson	ina	private	ceremony	at	the	Adams	house	in	early	February.Tragedy	marred	their	marriage	from	the	start,	however,	andseemed	 to	 envelop	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 family.	 Kitty’s	 baby	 wasstillborn.	 Then	 the	 two	 newlyweds	 learned	 that	 Billy’s	 mother,John	 Quincy’s	 older	 sister	 Nabby,	 was	 dying	 from	 cancer,	 andas	Billy	and	Kitty	prepared	to	leave	for	America,	the	Adamses’one-year-old,	 Louisa	 Catherine,	 came	 down	 with	 dysentery.	 Acommon	 disease	 in	 St.	 Petersburg,	 it	 gripped	 the	 baby	 inconvulsions,	 fever,	 and	 dehydration	 for	 two	 months—thenclaimed	her	life.“At	 twenty-five	 minutes	 past	 one	 this	 morning,”	 John	 Quincysobbed	over	his	diary	on	September	15,	“expired	my	daughterLouisa	Catherine,	as	lovely	an	infant	as	ever	breathed	the	air	ofheaven.”7	Louisa	was	out	of	the	room	when	the	baby	died,	buthaving	 nursed	 her	 daughter	 for	 nearly	 two	 months,	 she	 hadspent	 her	 last	 emotions	 and,	 according	 to	 John	 Quincy,“received	 the	 shock	 with	 fortitude	 and	 resignation.”	 Two	 dayslater,	 he	 and	 his	 nephew	 accompanied	 the	 baby’s	 diminutivecoffin	 to	 the	 graveyard	 of	 the	 Anglican	 church,	 where	 JohnQuincy	“saw	her	deposited	in	her	last	earthly	mansion.”	Louisahad	 caught	 a	 bad	 cold	 and	 was	 too	 sick	 to	 accompany	 herhusband,	 who	 returned	 home	 in	 a	 state	 of	 near	 collapse.	 Hetried	to	make	sense	of	his	loss,	to	explain	the	inexplicable:Perhaps	an	affectionate	parent	praying	only	for	the	happyexistence	of	his	child	could	wish	no	better	for	it	than	thatit	 might	 be	 transported	 to	 the	 abodes	 of	 blessednessbefore	 it	 has	 lived	 to	 endure	 the	 pangs	 and	 sorrowsinseparable	from	existence	in	the	body.	As	life	is	the	giftof	God	.	.	.	it	is	our	duty	to	be	grateful	for	it.	.	.	.	We	oughtperhaps	 be	 no	 less	 grateful	 for	 the	 death	 of	 a	 tenderlyloved	 child	 than	 for	 its	 life.	 .	 .	 .	 Had	 it	 pleased	 God	 toprolong	 the	 life	 of	 my	 darling	 infant,	 to	 what	 miseries,distress	and	sufferings	might	she	not	have	been	referred?.	.	.	In	the	bosom	of	her	Father	and	her	God,	she	has	nomore	suffering	to	endure.8By	spring	of	1812,	the	American	embargo	had	combined	withNapoléon’s	 embargo	 to	 cripple	 British	 foreign	 trade	 anddomestic	industrial	production.	Factories	and	mills	shut	down,unemployment	 rose,	 and	 food	 prices	 soared.	 British	 exportsdropped	 by	 one-third,	 and	 employers	 and	 workers	 united	 indemanding	 that	 Parliament	 restore	 good	 relations	 with	 theUnited	 States	 by	 ending	 depredations	 against	 American	 ships.On	June	23,	Parliament	agreed.	The	Americans	had	at	last	wontheir	long-running	conflict	with	Britain’s	parliament.But	the	victory	came	too	late.It	 took	 a	 month	 or	 more	 for	 messages	 to	 cross	 the	 Atlantic,and	unaware	of	Parliament’s	decision,	President	Madison	askedCongress	 to	 declare	 war	 on	 Britain,	 citing	 impressment,	 theblockade	 of	 American	 ports,	 seizure	 of	 American	 ships,	 andincitement	of	Indians	on	the	frontier	as	his	reasons.	On	June	4,after	 three	 days	 of	 debate,	 the	 House	 agreed;	 the	 Senatefollowed	suit	two	weeks	later.	Not	knowing	that	the	British	hadsued	 for	 peace,	 American	 troops	 charged	 into	 Canada	 alongthree	fronts	in	northern	New	York:	at	the	Saint	Lawrence	River,at	 Niagara	 in	 western	 New	 York,	 and	 farther	 west	 at	 theDetroit	River.Just	 as	 American	 troops	 were	 invading	 Canada,	 war	 eruptedin	 Europe	 when	 Napoléon	 ordered	 his	 450,000-man	 GrandeArmée	 into	 Russia.	 With	 Britain’s	 fleet	 in	 control	 of	 the	 BalticSea,	 Russian	 forces	 blocked	 the	 paths	 to	 St.	 Petersburg,funneling	 French	 troops	 westward	 onto	 the	 Russian	 steppes.Within	 weeks,	 the	 French	 had	 overrun	 Minsk	 and	 reachedSmolensk—almost	without	firing	a	shot.	After	a	fierce	battle	atBorodino,	 Russian	 troops	 retreated	 to	 Moscow,	 and	 after	 thecivilian	 population	 had	 fled,	 the	 soldiers	 set	 the	 city	 afire,leaving	 nothing	 but	 smoldering	 ashes	 for	 the	 French	 army	 toplunder	when	it	marched	in	on	September	14.Only	an	occasional	echo	of	battlefield	explosions	reached	St.Petersburg,	 but	 the	 war	 nonetheless	 brought	 diplomaticactivity	 to	 a	 halt	 and	 left	 John	 Quincy	 with	 almost	 nothing	 todo.	Even	the	czar	had	left—to	be	with	his	generals	at	the	front.John	 Quincy	 managed	 to	 score	 a	 last-minute	 diplomatictriumph,	however,	by	coaxing	the	czar	to	give	America’s	RobertFulton	“the	privilege	for	the	term	of	fifteen	years”	to	build	andsail	 steamboats	 between	 St.	 Petersburg	 and	 Kronstadt	 andalong	navigable	Russian	rivers	whenever	the	war	permitted.9Without	 food	 or	 other	 resourcesin	 Moscow	 for	 theapproaching	winter,	the	French	had	to	retreat.	On	October	19,however,	 swarms	 of	 mounted	 Cossacks	 thwarted	 the	 Frenchabout-face	with	fierce	hit-and-run	attacks.	Darting	in	and	out	ofsnow	 gusts	 like	 ghosts,	 the	 Cossacks	 slaughtered	 Frenchtroops	 at	 will	 and	 left	 every	 farm	 and	 village	 along	 the	 way	 inashes,	 without	 a	 grain	 of	 wheat,	 stick	 of	 wood,	 or	 shred	 ofcanvas	 to	 nourish,	 warm,	 or	 shelter	 a	 Frenchman.	 The“scorched	 earth”	 strategy	 left	 the	 French	 nothing	 to	 harvestbut	 cold,	 hunger,	 and	 death.	 With	 surviving	 French	 troops	 infull	 flight,	 Napoléon	 abandoned	 them	 on	 December	 3	 and	 fledto	 Paris.	 Only	 about	 20,000	 of	 his	 half	 million	 troops	 survivedtheir	 long	 retreat.	 John	 Quincy	 described	 the	 disaster	 to	 hismother:Of	 the	 immense	 host	 with	 which	 he	 [Napoléon]	 invadedRussia,	 nine-tenths	 at	 least	 are	 prisoners	 or	 food	 forworms.	They	have	been	surrendering	by	ten	thousands	ata	time,	and	at	this	moment	there	are	at	least	one	hundredand	 fifty	 thousand	 of	 them	 in	 the	 power	 of	 EmperorAlexander.	From	Moscow	to	Prussia,	eight	hundred	milesof	road	have	been	strewed	with	French	artillery,	baggagewagons,	 ammunition	 chests,	 dead	 and	 dying	 men	 .	 .	 .pursued	 by	 three	 large	 regular	 armies	 of	 a	 mostembittered	 and	 exasperated	 enemy	 and	 by	 an	 almostnumberless	 militia	 of	 peasants,	 stung	 by	 the	 destructionof	their	harvests	and	cottages.	.	.	.	It	has	become	a	sort	ofby-word	 among	 the	 common	 people	 here	 that	 the	 twoRussian	 generals	 who	 have	 conquered	 Napoléon	 and	 allhis	marshals	are	General	Famine	and	General	Frost.10The	 slaughter	 of	 the	 French	 army	 convinced	 John	 Quincymore	 than	 ever	 of	 the	 wisdom	 of	 America’s	 policy	 “not	 toinvolve	 ourselves	 in	 the	 inextricable	 labyrinth	 of	 Europeanpolitics	 and	 revolutions.	 The	 final	 issue	 .	 .	 .	 is	 not	 yetcompletely	 ascertained,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 longer	 a	 doubt	 that	 itmust	be	disastrous	in	the	highest	degree	to	France.”11Although	they	lacked	the	magnitude	of	the	French	invasion	ofRussia,	American	incursions	into	Canada	in	1812	proved	just	asfutile.	In	the	West,	the	British	forced	2,200	American	troops	tosurrender	 without	 firing	 a	 shot	 in	 Detroit,	 ceding	 control	 ofLake	 Erie	 and	 the	 entire	 Michigan	 Territory	 to	 the	 British.	 Tothe	 east,	 some	 six	 hundred	 American	 troops	 in	 western	 NewYork	 crossed	 into	 Canada	 and	 seized	 the	 heights	 above	 theNiagara	 River,	 only	 to	 face	 a	 devastating	 counterattack	 by1,000	 crack	 Britishthe	 Americantroops,	 whocommander	 to	 send	 for	 help.	 New	 York	 militiamen,	 however,refused	 to	 cross	 into	 Canada,	 saying	 their	 terms	 of	 servicerequired	 them	 to	 defend	 only	 New	 York	 State	 and	 no	 otherstates	 or	 foreign	 territories.	 As	 the	 British	 savaged	 the	 littleAmerican	legion,	survivors	fled	back	into	New	York.forcedFarther	to	the	east,	just	north	of	Lake	Champlain,	the	largestof	 the	 three	 American	 forces	 faced	 similar	 humiliation	 whenanother	 group	 of	 New	 York	 militiamen	 refused	 to	 cross	 intoforeign	territory	to	the	north.Out	 at	 sea,	 America’s	 little	 navy—twelve	 fast	 and	 highlymaneuverable	 ships—had	 better	 results.	 The	 forty-four-gunfrigate	 Constitution	 demolished	 Britain’sthirty-eight-gunGuerrière	 off	 the	 coast	 of	 Nova	 Scotia	 in	 only	 thirty	 minutes,killing	 seventy-nine	 British	 sailors	 and	 losing	 only	 fourteen	 ofher	own.	Other	American	ships	humiliated	Britain’s	navy	off	thecoasts	of	Virginia	and	Brazil.	Captain	Stephen	Decatur’s	UnitedStates	 captured	 a	 thirty-eight-gun	 British	 frigate	 near	 theMadeira	 Islands	 off	 the	 African	 coast	 and	 brought	 her	 all	 theway	 back	 across	 the	 Atlantic	 Ocean	 to	 New	 London,Connecticut,	 as	 a	 prize	 of	 war.	 Complementing	 the	 tinyAmerican	 navy	 were	 five	 hundred	 privateers,	 which	 capturedabout	 1,300	 British	 cargo	 ships	 valued	 at	 $39	 million	 andforced	the	British	navy	to	plug	America’s	outlets	to	the	sea	withan	impenetrable	blockade	of	gunboats	along	the	Atlantic	coastand	the	mouth	of	the	Mississippi	River.Although	the	navy’s	exploits	lifted	American	morale,	they	didlittle	 to	 turn	 the	 tide	 of	 war,	 and	 less	 than	 three	 months	 afterthe	 American	 army	 had	 fired	 its	 first	 shots,	 Secretary	 of	 StateMonroein	 London	 toapproach	the	British	foreign	office	with	an	offer	of	peace.	Theproposal	simply	repeated	America’s	prewar	demands,	however,and	Britain	rejected	it.instructed	 the	 American	 ministerAs	 word	 of	 American	 defeats	 reached	 St.	 Petersburg,	 JohnQuincy	 Adams’s	 friend	 the	 czar	 offered	 to	 mediate	 the	 Anglo-American	dispute.	John	Quincy’s	influence	had	left	the	czar	anadmirer	of	all	things	American,	although	he	remained	allied	toBritain	 in	 the	 war	 against	 France.	 With	 the	 U.S.	 Navy	 bottledup	 and	 British	 forces	 in	 Canada	 poised	 to	 invade,	 PresidentMadison	 jumped	 at	 the	 czar’s	 offer,	 hailing	 John	 Quincy	 as	 amaster	 diplomat.	 The	 President’s	 peace	 envoys	 had	 no	 soonersailed	 off	 to	 St.	 Petersburg,	 however,	 when	 a	 British	 frigaterenewed	 the	 fighting	 with	 another	 attack	 on	 the	 ill-fated	 USSChesapeake,	killing	146	American	seamen	before	capturing	theship	 and	 sailing	 it	 to	 Nova	 Scotia	 as	 a	 prize.	 With	 the	 Britishsensing	 victory	 in	 the	 war	 near	 at	 hand,	 London	 abruptlyrejected	 the	 czar’s	 offer	 to	 mediate,	 leaving	 America’s	 peaceenvoys	bobbing	across	the	Atlantic	on	a	useless	voyage.The	humiliation	of	the	Chesapeake	set	Americans	aroar	withanger	 at	 what	 they	 now	 called	 “Madison’s	 War.”	 NewEnglanders	 demanded	 Madison’s	 resignation,	 and	 settlers	 inthe	West	took	matters	into	their	own	hands,	pouring	into	armycamps	 to	 avenge	 defeats	 by	 the	 British.	 General	 HenryDearborn,	 who	 had	 failed	 in	 his	 first	 invasion	 of	 Canada	 atNiagara,	 now	 had	 a	 corps	 of	 ardent	 patriots	 to	 replace	 therecalcitrant	 New	 York	 militiamen	 who	 had	 refused	 to	 fightoutside	 state	 borders.	 They	 sailed	 across	 Lake	 Ontario	 andswept	 into	 York	 (now	 Toronto),	 the	 capital	 of	 Upper	 Canada(now	Ontario),	burning	the	city’s	public	buildings,	including	theAssembly	houses	and	governor’s	mansion.After	the	raid,	the	Americans	trekked	westward	around	LakeOntario	 to	 Niagara	 and	 joined	 2,500	 troops	 under	 ColonelWinfield	 Scott	 in	 capturing	 Fort	 Niagara,	 Fort	 Erie,	 andBuffalo’s	 Black	 Rock	 Navy	 Yard,	 where	 they	 freed	 fiveAmerican	 warships.	 To	 these	 ships,	 Secretary	 of	 the	 NavyWilliam	 Jones	 added	 six	 new	 warships,	 giving	 Captain	 OliverHazard	 Perry	 a	 lake	 fleet	 of	 ten	 ships—four	 more	 than	 theBritish	 squadron.	 On	 September	 10,	 1813,	 Perry	 engaged	 theBritish	at	Put-in-Bay	for	three	hours.	The	battle	left	Perry’s	shipin	 splinters	 and	 killed	 or	 wounded	 80	 percent	 of	 his	 men,	 butinflicted	 even	 more	 damage	 on	 the	 enemy.	 The	 Britishretreated,	 ceding	 control	 of	 Lake	 Erie	 to	 the	 Americans.	 Perryemerged	from	the	wreckage	and	sent	his	famous	message:	“Wehave	met	the	enemy,	and	they	are	ours.”12Perry’s	 victory	 allowed	 General	 William	 Henry	 Harrison’stroops	 in	 the	 west	 to	 rout	 a	 combined	 force	 of	 British	 andIndian	 warriors	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 the	 Thames	 River,	 killingShawnee	 chief	 Tecumseh	 and	 giving	 Harrison	 control	 of	 theIllinois,	 Indiana,	 and	 other	 northwestern	 territories.	 Whennews	 of	 the	 American	 victories	 reached	 London,	 the	 Britishprime	minister	reversed	his	previous	stance	and	sent	Secretaryof	State	Monroe	an	offer	to	begin	direct	negotiations	for	peaceat	 a	 neutral	 site	 in	 Ghent,	 Belgium.	 President	 Madison	 namedJohn	 Quincy	 to	 lead	 the	 negotiations,	 promising,	 as	 a	 rewardfor	success,	promotion	to	the	highest	post	in	the	foreign	serviceas	 minister	 plenipotentiary	 to	 Great	 Britain.	 Rather	 than	 riskhaving	 Louisa	 and	 seven-year-old	 Charles	 Francis	 travelthrough	 areas	 where	 fighting	 might	 still	 be	 taking	 place,	 JohnQuincy	 left	 St.	 Petersburg	 alone	 on	 April	 28,	 1814,	 relieved	 atdistancing	himself	from	the	scene	of	his	daughter’s	death.tothe	 Connecticut	 River,	 Buzzard’s	 BayBy	 the	 time	 John	 Quincy	 had	 crossed	 out	 of	 Russia,	 theRussian,	 Prussian,	 and	 other	 armies	 allied	 against	 Napoléonhad	 captured	 Paris	 and	 forced	 the	 French	 army	 to	 surrender.Napoléon	abdicated	and	accepted	exile	on	the	tiny	isle	of	Elbe,in	 the	 Mediterranean	 Sea	 off	 the	 Italian	 west	 coast.	 LouisXVIII,	 the	 dead	 Louis	 XVI’s	 younger	 brother,	 acceded	 to	 theFrench	 throne,	 freeing	 14,000	 British	 troops	 to	 sail	 for	 NorthAmerica	 for	 a	 massive	 land	 and	 sea	 attack	 against	 the	 UnitedStates.	 Even	 as	 British	 and	 American	 peace	 negotiators	 werepreparing	 to	 meet	 in	 Europe,	 British	 ships	 began	 shelling	 U.S.coastal	cities,	allowing	British	troops	to	seize	Fort	Niagara	andtake	 control	 of	 Lake	 Champlain.	 Coastal	 raids	 devastated	 theentranceinMassachusetts,	 and	 Alexandria,	 Virginia,just	 across	 thePotomac	 River	 from	 Washington	 City.	 The	 United	 Statesseemed	helpless	to	respond.	The	government	was	bankrupt	andthe	President	impotent,	with	no	command	of	his	armed	forces,no	 credit	 with	 Congress,	 and	 little	 influence	 over	 or	 respectfrom	 the	 American	 people.	 Everything	 he	 said	 or	 did	 onlyalienated	 more	 of	 his	 countrymen.	 He	 coaxed	 Congress	 intoreimposing	the	Embargo	Act—and	almost	starved	the	people	ofNantucket	 Island.	 The	 embargo	 so	 devastated	 the	 New	 Yorkand	 New	 England	 economies	 that	 stateleaders	 againthreatened	 secession	 to	 negotiate	 a	 separate	 peace	 withEngland.	 Northern	 merchants	 openly	 defied	 the	 President	 andfederal	 law	 by	 trading	 at	 will	 with	 the	 enemy	 across	 theCanadian	 border—and	 with	 British	 vesselsthat	 sailedunimpeded	in	and	out	of	New	England	ports.Recognizing	 the	 Embargo	 Act	 as	 a	 failure	 and	 a	 personalhumiliation,	 Madison	 asked	 Congress	 to	 end	 the	 charade	 andrepeal	 it.	 Congress	 erupted	 into	 cheers	 and	 overwhelminglyin	 early	 August,agreed.	 Congressmen	 stopped	 cheeringhowever,	and	fled	for	their	lives	when	a	British	fleet	sailed	intoChesapeake	 Bay.	 Some	 4,000	 British	 troops	 landed	 and	 set	 upcamps	 along	 the	 Patuxent	 River	 near	 Benedict,	 Maryland,about	forty	miles	southeast	of	Washington	and	sixty	miles	southof	 Baltimore.	 Within	 days	 they	 were	 on	 the	 banks	 of	 IndianCreek	 outside	 Washington	 at	 Bladensburg.	 As	 the	 Britishforded	 the	 stream,	 the	 shrill	 scream	 of	 rockets	 piercedAmerican	skies	for	the	first	time	in	history,	sending	bolts	of	fireinto	 the	 midst	 of	 defending	 militiamen.	 To	 the	 terror-strickenAmericans,	 the	 heavens	 had	 unleashed	 the	 stars.p	 Their	 frontline	 broke	 and	 fled	 in	 panic.	 With	 bugler	 retreats	 piercing	 theair,	 2,000	 Americans	 sprinted	 away,	 tripping	 over	 andtrampling	 each	 other	 to	 escape	 the	 advancing	 British,	 neverfiring	a	shot	at	the	enemy.A	 few	 hours	 later,	 British	 troops	 entered	 Washington	 andbegan	 an	 all-night	 spree	 of	 destruction,	 burning	 all	 publicbuildings	 to	 punish	 the	 American	 government	 for	 havingburned	 the	 public	 buildings	 in	 York.	 The	 British	 spared	 mostprivate	property	in	the	city,	although	they	set	fire	to	four	homeswhose	 owners	 repeatedly	 shot	 at	 passing	 redcoats.	 They	 alsospared	 the	 Patent	 Office,	 as	 it	 contained	 models	 of	 inventionsand	 records,	 which	 the	 British	 commander	 deemed	 privateproperty	that	might	well	belong	to	British	as	well	as	Americanpatent	holders.A	storm	the	following	morning	brought	bursts	of	heavy	windsthat	 sent	 flames	 flying	 erratically	 in	 all	 directions	 and	 forcedthe	British	to	withdraw	to	their	boats	on	the	Patuxent	River.As	 British	 troops	 burned	 Washington,	 British	 governmentnegotiators	 sat	 down	 with	 their	 American	 counterparts	 inGhent	 to	 negotiate	 an	 end	 to	 the	 war—unaware,	 of	 course,	 ofthe	 flames	 consuming	 Washington.	 Joining	 John	 Quincy	 wasKentucky	 congressman	 and	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House	 Henry	 Clay,who,	 like	 John	 Quincy,	 was	 a	 fierce	 champion	 of	 manifestdestiny.	 Virginia-born	 and	 self-educated,	 Clay	 believed	 in	 whathe	 called	 the	 “American	 System,”	 with	 Americans	 settling	 theentire	 continent	 and	 the	 federal	 government	 underwriting	 anetwork	 of	 roads,	 canals,	 and	 bridges	 for	 a	 comprehensivetransportation	system.	He	also	favored	erecting	a	tariff	wall	toprotect	 American	 manufacturers	 from	 foreign	 competition	 indomestic	 markets.	 He	 arrived	 in	 Ghent	 unprepared	 to	 yield	 toBritish	pretensions	to	governance	over	the	seas.Also	 a	 champion	 of	 westward	 expansion	 was	 formerPennsylvania	 senator	 Albert	 Gallatin.	 Born	 and	 educated	 inGeneva,	 Switzerland,	 he	 and	 John	 Quincy	 had	 become	 goodfriends	 in	 the	 Senate,	 and	 Gallatin	 went	 on	 to	 become	 U.S.secretary	 of	 the	 Treasury	 under	 Jefferson	 for	 eight	 years.Delaware	 senator	 James	 Bayard,	 a	 Federalist,	 and	 careerdiplomat	 Jonathan	 Russell,	 the	 new	 American	 minister	 toSweden,	made	up	the	rest	of	the	delegation.Although	 President	 Madison	 had	 purposely	 appointedmembers	 from	 all	 sections	 of	 the	 nation,	 they	 presented	 aunited	 front	 at	 the	 negotiating	 table	 behind	 John	 Quincy,	 whowas	the	most	experienced	diplomat	in	the	group	and	America’sreigning	 authority	 on	 European	 affairs.	 And	 despite	 theircultural	 and	 regional	 differences,	 they	 meshed	 togethermagnificently,	sharing	a	rented	house,	whose	servants	providedfor	 their	 needs	 as	 efficiently	 as	 the	 staff	 of	 a	 hotel.	 AlthoughJohn	Quincy	took	umbrage	at	Clay’s	all-night	card	parties,	theyfound	 so	 much	 in	 common	 politically	 that	 they	 became	 goodfriends.“Thereis	 on	 all	 sides	 a	 perfect	 good	 humor	 andunderstanding,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 to	 Louisa	 in	 one	 of	 hisweekly	 letters	 to	 her.	 “We	 dine	 all	 together	 at	 four	 and	 situsually	 at	 table	 until	 six.	 We	 then	 disperse	 to	 our	 severalamusements	 and	 avocations.	 Mine	 is	 a	 solitary	 walk	 of	 two	 orthree	 hours—solitary	 because	 I	 find	 none	 of	 the	 othergentlemen	disposed	to	join	me	at	that	hour.	They	frequent	thecoffee	 houses,	 reading	 rooms	 and	 the	 billiard	 tables.	 We	 arenot	troublesome	to	each	other.”13Both	sides	began	negotiations	from	positions	of	strength	andweakness.	 In	 North	 America,	 British	 coastal	 raids	 had	 pushedthe	 Americans	 behind	 their	 borders,	 and	 the	 superior	 Britisharmy	 threatened	 to	 invade	 at	 a	 time	 when	 the	 Americangovernment	 was	 bankrupt,	 unable	 to	 pay	 or	 rearm	 its	 troops.Clearly,	 the	 Americans	 wanted—and	 needed—peace.	 Britain,however,	 was	 just	 as	 eager	 for	 peace.	 Her	 forces	 had	 justfought	a	brutal	war	in	Europe,	but	with	Napoléon	alive	in	Elbe,the	British	government	realized	he	might	return	to	France	andfire	up	his	troops	again.	Britain	also	faced	possible	conflict	withRussia,	which,	like	the	United	States,	was	demanding	freedomof	 the	 seas	 but,	 unlike	 the	 United	 States,	 had	 the	 oceangoingfire	power	to	attack	British	ships.	In	short,	Britain	did	not	wantto	 drain	 its	 resources	 in	 another	 long	 war	 in	 the	 Americanwilderness	where	it	knew	from	experience	it	could	never	scorea	decisive	victory.The	 Americans	 sat	 down	 with	 demands	 for	 an	 end	 toimpressment,	 which	 John	 Quincy	 termed	 nothing	 less	 thanslavery,	but	before	the	talks	even	got	under	way,	the	end	of	thewar	in	Europe	left	Britain	with	no	need	to	expand	its	navy,	andit	voluntarily	ended	the	practice.	John	Quincy’s	other	demandsincluded	 an	 end	 to	 British	 blockades	 as	 well	 as	 Britishdepredations	 on	 the	 high	 seas	 and	 recognition	 of	 freedom	 ofthe	 seas	 for	 neutral	 ships.	 John	 Quincy	 also	 demandedcompensation	 for	 British	 depredations	 on	 American	 shipsduring	the	long	Anglo-French	war.	British	negotiators	not	onlyrejected	 his	 demands	 but	 countered	 with	 demands	 of	 theirown,	including	a	southward	revision	of	the	Canadian	boundarywith	 the	 United	 States	 by	 about	 150	 miles.	 The	 British	 alsodemanded	 that	 the	 United	 States	 cede	 most	 of	 Maine	 toCanada	 and	 agree	 to	 demilitarization	 of	 the	 Great	 Lakes	 andestablishment	 of	 a	 huge	 Indian-controlled	 buffer	 zone	 acrosspresent-day	 Wisconsin,	 Illinois,	 Michigan,	 Indiana,	 and	 Ohio.The	 British	 also	 wanted	 to	 end	 American	 fishing	 rights	 off	 theCanadian	 Atlantic	 coast	 unless	 Americans	 granted	 Britain	 anequivalent	 privilege,	 such	 as	 navigation	 rights	 on	 theMississippi	River.	John	Quincy	rejected	all	the	British	demands,and	 as	 negotiations	 dragged	 on,	 each	 side	 backed	 away	 orincreased	 its	 demands,	 according	 to	 news	 from	 Americanbattlefields,	 with	 British	 negotiators	 stiffening	 after	 theburning	of	Washington.In	 America	 itself,	 the	 press	 and	 public	 had	 unleashed	 atorrent	of	abuse	on	President	Madison	after	the	British	burnedthe	federal	capital,	but	Secretary	of	State	Monroe	emerged	asa	 hero,	 and	 the	 President	 appointed	 him	 acting	 secretary	 ofwar.	Monroe	mobilized	the	nation,	calling	in	militia	from	otherstates,	 ordering	 and	 distributing	 supplies,	 and	 setting	 up	 anintelligence	system	and	teams	of	riders	to	transmit	intelligenceto	 his	 headquarters.	 He	 acted	 to	 protect	 other	 parts	 of	 thecountry	as	well,	sending	a	message	to	General	Andrew	Jacksonin	 Mobile,	 Alabama,	 to	 take	 1,000	 troops	 to	 defend	 NewOrleans	against	attack.	He	promised	Jackson	10,000	additionalmen,	 then	 sent	 express	 messages	 to	 the	 governors	 ofTennessee	 and	 Kentucky	 to	 send	 militiamen	 and	 volunteers	 toNew	 Orleans.	 Ignoring	 the	 Constitution,	 Monroe	 essentiallyseized	 the	 reins	 of	 government	 from	 the	 President	 andCongress,and	 municipalcorporations	into	lending	him	more	than	$5	million	on	his	ownsignature	to	pay	and	arm	more	troops.intimidating	 private	 banksSecretary	 of	 State	 James	 Monroe	 named	 John	 Quincy	 AdamsAmerican	minister	to	Russia,	then	lead	peace	commissioner	attalks	 in	 Ghent,	 Belgium,	 to	 end	 the	 War	 of	 1812	 with	 Britain.(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)By	 September	 12,	 the	 troops	 that	 had	 burned	 Washingtonsailed	 out	 of	 the	 Patuxent	 River	 and	 up	 the	 Chesapeake	 Baytoward	 Baltimore,	 landing	 about	 fourteen	 miles	 from	 the	 city.As	 British	 warships	 came	 within	 firing	 distance	 of	 FortMcHenry,	 troops	 on	 shore	 fought	 their	 way	 to	 the	 foot	 of	 thefort.	The	ships	opened	fire	on	the	fort	the	next	day,	September13,	 and	 continued	 the	 bombardment	 through	 the	 night.	 On	 anearby	 ship,	 attorney	 Francis	 Scott	 Key	 watched	 “the	 rockets’red	 glare,	 the	 bombs	 bursting	 in	 air,”	 and,	 to	 his	 amazement,“by	dawn’s	early	light	.	.	.	our	flag	was	still	there,”	fluttering	intatters	 over	 the	 fort	 and	 inspiring	 his	 poem	 “Defense	 of	 FortMcHenry.”	 A	 newspaper	 published	 it	 a	 few	 days	 later	 andrenamed	it	“The	Star-Spangled	Banner.”On	 September	 14,	 the	 British	 abandoned	 their	 fruitlessassault	on	Fort	McHenry,	withdrew	their	troops,	and	sailed	outof	Chesapeake	Bay	for	Jamaica	in	the	British	West	Indies.	Theirflight	 weakened	 the	 British	 negotiating	 position	 in	 Ghent,where	 John	 Quincy	 rejected	 the	 British	 demand	 for	 an	 Indianbuffer	 zone.	 The	 United	 States,	 he	 argued,	 would	 not	 cedeterritorial	 rights	 to	 “savages,	 whose	 known	 rule	 of	 warfare	 isthe	 indiscriminate	 torture	 and	 butchery	 of	 women,	 children,and	prisoners.”14After	 a	 month	 of	 talks	 with	 no	 progress,	 John	 Quincy	 grewfrustrated.	 “It	 appears	 to	 me	 to	 be	 the	 policy	 of	 the	 Britishgovernment,”	he	wrote	to	Louisa	in	St.	Petersburg,	“to	keep	theAmerican	 war	 as	 an	 object	 to	 continue	 or	 close,	 according	 tothe	 events	 which	 may	 occur	 in	 Europe	 or	 America.	 If	 so	 theywill	neither	make	peace,	nor	break	off	the	negotiation,	and	thecircumstances	 may	 be	 such	 as	 to	 detain	 us	 here	 the	 wholewinter.”	 15	 The	 British,	 he	 said	 in	 a	 subsequent	 letter,	 “havewithdrawn	 just	 so	 much	 of	 their	 inadmissible	 demands	 aswould	 avoid	 the	 immediate	 rupture	 of	 the	 negotiation.	 Theyhave	 varied	 their	 terms	 .	 .	 .	 abandoned	 the	 claims	 which	 theyhad	 declared	 indispensable	 preliminaries,	 only	 to	 bring	 themforward	 again	 whenever	 the	 circumstances	 of	 the	 war	 mightencourage	 them	 to	 insolence	 and	 .	 .	 .	 are	 now	 delaying	 theirreply	 to	 our	 last	 note	 .	 .	 .	 only	 to	 receive	 accounts	 of	 successfrom	America	.	.	.	to	dictate	new	terms	to	us.”16As	 both	 sides	 realized	 they	 had	 reached	 an	 impasse,negotiators	 fixed	 on	 a	 solution	 that	 would	 relieve	 them	 ofhaving	 to	 solve	 any	 problems.	 They	 would	 simply	 end	 the	 warand	 relegate	 all	 demands	 of	 both	 sides	 to	 an	 arbitrationcommission	to	be	set	up	at	a	later	date.In	the	end,	the	Treaty	of	Ghent	represented	a	stinging	defeatfor	 both	 sides,	 each	 of	 which	 accepted	 nothing	 more	 than	 areturn	 to	 the	 status	 quo	 ante	 bellum	 after	 a	 costly	 two-yearwar.	 Nevertheless,	 John	 Quincy	 was	 jubilant	 at	 having	 endedthe	bloodletting.“My	 DEAR	 AND	 HONORED	 MOTHER,”	 John	 Quincy	 exultedon	Christmas	Eve	of	1814.A	 treaty	 of	 peace	 between	 the	 United	 States	 and	 GreatBritain	 has	 this	 day	 been	 signed	 by	 the	 British	 andAmerican	 plenipotentiaries	 at	 this	 place.	 .	 .	 .	 You	 knowdoubtless	 that	 heretofore	 the	 President	 intended	 in	 caseof	peace	to	send	me	to	England.If	the	treaty	should	be	ratified,	I	am	uncertain	whetherhe	 will	 still	 retain	 the	 same	 intention	 or	 not.	 I	 haverequested	 to	 be	 recalled	 from	 the	 mission	 to	 Russia.	 Ishall	proceed	from	this	place	in	a	few	days	to	Paris,	to	bethere	in	readiness	to	receive	the	President’s	orders,	and	Ishall	 write	 immediately	 to	 my	 wife	 requesting	 her	 tocome	and	join	me	there.	If	we	go	to	England,	I	beg	you	tosend	 my	 sons	 George	 and	 John	 there	 to	 me.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 anyother	 person	 should	 be	 sent	 to	 England,	 I	 intend	 toreturn	 as	 soon	 as	 possible	 to	 America	 and	 shall	 hopebefore	 midsummer	 to	 see	 once	 more	 my	 belovedparents.17The	 Treaty	 of	 Ghent	 called	 for	 release	 of	 all	 prisoners	 andrestoration	of	all	conquered	territories	except	for	West	Florida,which	now	fell	under	American	sovereignty.	Negotiators	did	notinclude	 a	 word	 about	 the	 Great	 Lakes	 or	 disputed	 boundariesalong	 the	 northern	 frontier	 with	 Canada—or	 about	 the	 issuesthat	President	Madison	had	deemed	vital	enough	for	the	UnitedStates	 to	 declare	 war:	 ship	 seizures	 and	 impressment.	 Onpaper	 at	 least,	 the	 war	 had	 been	 a	 waste,	 leaving	 1,877Americans	 dead	 and	 4,000	 wounded	 and	 costing	 millions	 ofdollars	in	war	matériel.	It	had	cost	tens	of	millions	of	dollars	inlost	 domestic	 and	 foreign	 trade	 and	 provoked	 the	 collapse	 ofthe	 economy—and	 the	 United	 States	 had	 failed	 to	 achieve	 anyof	the	goals	for	which	it	went	to	war.	The	only	triumph	at	Ghent—for	 either	 side—was	 an	 end	 to	 war	 and	 establishment	 ofpeace	between	the	two	nations—or	so	they	hoped.Agreement	 at	 Ghent.	 Admiral	 Lord	 Gambier,	 Britain’s	 chiefnegotiator,	 holds	 the	 treaty	 ending	 the	 Anglo-American	 War	 of1812	 and	 shakes	 hands	 with	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 America’schief	 negotiator.	 Albert	 Gallatin	 stands	 to	 Adams’s	 immediateleft,	while	Henry	Clay	is	seated	on	the	right	at	the	rear.	(FROMTHE	SIGNING	OF	THE	TREATY	OF	GHENT,	CHRISTMAS	EVE,1814,	 A	 PAINTING	 BY	 SIR	 AMÈDÉE	 FORESTIER,	 1914;SMITHSONIAN	 AMERICAN	 ART	 MUSEUM,	 GIFT	 OF	 THESULGRAVE	 INSTITUTION	 OF	 THE	 UNITED	 STATES	 ANDGREAT	BRITAIN)At	the	signing,	John	Quincy	declared	to	the	delegates	of	bothcountries,	 “I	 hope	 it	 will	 be	 the	 last	 treaty	 of	 peace	 betweenGreat	Britain	and	the	United	States.”18	At	a	farewell	banquet,Adams	 stood	 to	 toast	 “His	 majesty	 the	 king	 of	 England,”	 afterwhich	 an	 orchestra	 played	 “God	 Save	 the	 King”;	 then	 LordGambier,	 the	 chief	 British	 delegate,	 rose	 to	 toast	 “the	 UnitedStates	 of	 North	 America,”	 and	 the	 orchestra	 played	 “Hail,Columbia,”	which	was	then	the	American	national	anthem.“I	consider	the	day	on	which	I	signed	it	[the	Treaty	of	Ghent]as	 the	 happiest	 of	 my	 life,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 to	 Louisa,“because	 it	 was	 the	 day	 on	 which	 I	 had	 my	 share	 in	 restoringpeace	to	the	world.”19On	 December	 24,	 1814,	 as	 John	 Quincy	 and	 the	 othernegotiators	 signed	 the	 Treaty	 of	 Ghent,	 a	 fleet	 of	 fifty	 Britishships	 with	 7,500	 battle-hardened	 veterans	 approached	 theLouisiana	 shore	 and	 glided	 into	 Lake	 Borgne—a	 large	 bay	 onthe	southeastern	coast	of	Louisiana	near	New	Orleans.	Landingforty	miles	east	of	the	city,	a	British	advance	guard	marched	towithin	 seven	 miles	 of	 the	 city	 where,	 to	 their	 shock,	 GeneralAndrew	 Jackson	 awaited	 in	 ambush	 with	 more	 than	 2,000frontiersmen.	 The	 Americans	 opened	 fire	 and	 sent	 the	 Britishreeling	back	to	their	main	force.	Jackson	then	pulled	back	to	apoint	five	miles	from	the	city	and	deployed	5,000	men	in	a	drycanal	that	blocked	the	only	route	into	the	city.	Compared	withthe	 trim-cut	 uniforms	 of	 advancing	 British	 troops,	 theAmericans	 were	 a	 largely	 unwashed,	 unshaven	 mixture	 ofmilitiamen,	frontiersmen,	woodsmen,	hunters,	and	farmers—toa	 man,	 fiercely	 independent,	 loyal	 Jacksonians.	 Wild,	 willful,reckless,	 and	 often	 drunk,	 they	 were	 like	 Jackson	 himself:fighting	cocks	who	gave	no	ground	in	battle.After	 a	 spectacular	 but	 indecisive	 artillery	 battle	 on	 January1,	the	British	pulled	back	and	waited	a	week	to	attack	again.	Asthe	 redcoats	 advanced	 in	 traditional	 linear	 style	 of	 Europeanwarfare,	the	Americans	pressed	against	the	forward	wall	of	thecanal	and	poised	their	long	hunting	rifles	on	the	rim.	A	suddenexplosion	of	high-pitched	music	startled	soldiers	on	both	sidesas	the	British	line	moved	forward.	Jackson	had	ordered	a	bandto	 sound	 out	 “Yankee	 Doodle,”	 then	 thundered	 a	 command	 tohis	troops:	“Give	it	to	’em,	boys.	.	.	.	Let’s	finish	it	up	today!”20Tennessee	 and	 Kentucky	 woodsmen—all	 of	 them	 crackmarksmen	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 big	 ditch—opened	 fire.	 Theforward	 mechanically,	 suicidallyBritishpressing	 onward	 into	 the	 sprays	 of	 rifle	 fire,	 toppling	 one	 bytroops	 steppedone,	each	atop	the	other,	then	by	the	dozens.	The	bodies	piledhigher	and	higher	until	the	“horror	before	them	was	too	greatto	be	withstood:	and	they	turned	away,	dropping	their	weaponsand	running	to	the	rear.”21	After	only	thirty	minutes,	the	battlewas	 over;	 the	 British	 commanding	 general	 and	 two	 othergenerals	 lay	 dead,	 along	 with	 more	 than	 2,000	 British	 troops.Jackson’s	men	suffered	thirteen	dead,	thirty-nine	wounded,	andnineteen	 missing	 in	 action.	 British	 survivors	 limped	 back	 totheir	 ships	 and,	 on	 January	 27,	 sailed	 away	 from	 what	 provedto	be	the	last	battle	of	the	war	and	the	last	hostile	incursion	byBritish	troops	on	American	soil.A	few	days	later,	Secretary	of	State	Monroe	called	membersof	 Congress	 into	 the	 Patent	 Office	 building	 in	 Washington,	 theonly	 public	 building	 the	 British	 had	 spared	 from	 flames.	 Theyunleashed	a	chorus	of	sustained	cheers	when	he	delivered	thenews	of	Jackson’s	victory.	Federalists,	Republicans,	hawks,	anddoves	 alike	 slapped	 each	 other	 on	 the	 back,	 exchangedin	 the	 news	 withhandshakes,	 and	 adjourned	 to	 soakappropriate	 drinks.	 What	 they	 did	 not	 know,	 however,	 was	 theutter	 uselessness	 of	 Jackson’s	 victory.	 It	 had	 not	 changed	 thecourse	of	the	war	at	all.	Two	weeks	earlier,	John	Quincy	Adamsand	 his	 American	 negotiators	 had	 signed	 a	 treaty	 ending	 thewar,	but	like	the	negotiations	when	the	war	began,	news	of	thesettlement	did	not	arrive	until	weeks	later,	when	a	British	sloopsailed	into	New	York	Harbor	flying	a	flag	of	truce.	The	war	theUnited	States	could	have	won	without	firing	the	first	shot	hadended	before	they	had	fired	the	last.powerfulnation—aNonetheless,Americans—almostunanimously—deludedthemselves	 into	 calling	 the	 war	 a	 glorious	 triumph	 over	 theworld’s	 mostofindependence.”	The	national	delusion	resulted	from	a	series	ofcoincidences—the	United	States	had	scored	the	victory	at	NewOrleans	 just	 before	 news	 of	 peace	 arrived,	 and	 in	 the	 publicmind,	 the	 chronology	 of	 the	 victory	 made	 it	 seem	 decisive	 inforcing	 the	 British	 to	 sue	 for	 peace	 and	 end	 depredations	 onAmerican	 shipping.	 In	 fact,	 it	 was	 the	 defeat	 of	 Napoléon	 thatallowed	Britain	to	harbor	her	warships	and	ended	her	need	to“second	 warimpress	seamen	and	seize	ships	carrying	contraband.On	 January	 7,	 1815,	 John	 Quincy’s	 colleagues	 on	 theAmerican	 peace	 commission	 left	 Ghent,	 with	 John	 Quincy,Henry	Clay,	and	Albert	Gallatin	having	grown	especially	close—socially	 as	 well	 as	 politically.	 One	 evening,	 when	 the	 threereturned	 to	 their	 hotel	 after	 negotiations,	 the	 often	 hot-tempered	 Clay	 remarked	 that	 one	 of	 the	 British	 negotiatorswas	“a	man	of	much	irritation.”John	Quincy	corrected	his	colleague’s	grammar:“Irritability	 is	 the	 word,	 Mr.	 Clay,”	 said	 John	 Quincy.“Irritability.”	 And	 then	 fixing	 him	 with	 an	 earnest	 look	 and	 atone	 of	 voice	 midway	 between	 seriousness	 and	 jest,	 he	 added,“Like	somebody	else	I	know.”Clay	 laughed	 and	 said,	 “Aye	 we	 do	 all	 know	 him—andnone	better	than	yourself.”And	 Mr.	 Gallatin,	 fixing	 me	 exactly	 as	 I	 had	 done	 Mr.Clay,	 said	 emphatically,	 “That	 is	 your	 best	 friend.”“Agreed,”	said	I,	“but	one.”And	there	was	.	.	.	truth	in	the	joking	on	all	sides.	.	.	.	Ican	scarcely	express	to	you	how	much	both	he	[Clay]	andMr.	Gallatin	have	risen	in	my	esteem	since	we	have	beenhere,	living	together.	22Two	weeks	later,	having	put	his	papers	in	order	and	receivedword	of	his	promotion	to	the	London	embassy,	John	Quincy	setout	for	Paris	to	await	Louisa	and	his	seven-year-old	son	CharlesFrancis.	His	wife	had	left	St.	Petersburg	on	January	26,	but	aseach	 day	 passed	 with	 no	 word	 of	 their	 whereabouts,	 JohnQuincy	 regretted	 not	 having	 gone	 to	 St.	 Petersburg	 toaccompany	 them.	 Reports	 soon	 reached	 Paris	 of	 pillaging	 byrenegade	 soldiers	 and	 savage	 attacks	 on	 travelers	 alongLouisa’s	route	from	Russia.