CHAPTER 	5Never	Was	a	Father	More	SatisfiedThe	 entire	 world	 seemed	 aboil	 as	 John	 Quincy	 Adams’s	 shipbounded	 into	 the	 dark	 Atlantic	 toward	 Europe.	 As	 he	 and	 hisbrother	 saw	 their	 native	 land	 slip	 over	 the	 horizon,	 war	 andrevolution	 engulfed	 the	 world.	 Behind	 them	 in	 America,	 rebeltorches	had	set	skies	aglow	in	western	Pennsylvania	to	protesta	federal	tax	on	whiskey.	Congress	had	imposed	it	without	theconsent	 of	 the	 states—much	 as	 Parliament	 had	 imposed	 thestamp	 tax	 without	 the	 consent	 of	 the	 colonies	 thirty	 yearsearlier	in	1765.	Adding	to	the	turmoil,	Indian	tribes	had	sweptacross	Ohio,	Indiana,	and	Illinois,	attacking	white	settlements.Although	 Britain	 had	 ceded	 the	 territory	 to	 the	 United	 Statesafter	 the	 Revolutionary	 War,	 British	 troops	 had	 remained	 andfostered	 the	 Indian	 attacks	 to	 harass	 the	 new	 Americangovernment	and	provoke	its	collapse.In	 Europe,	 meanwhile,	 the	 revolutionary	 zeal	 of	 MaximilianRobespierre’s	 Jacobins	 had	 metamorphosed	 into	 insanity,	 withRobespierre	striding	into	the	Convention,	or	national	assembly,and	 demanding	 the	 arrest	 and	 execution	 of	 every	 member.	 Bythen,	 the	 number	 of	 widows	 and	 orphans	 created	 by	 theguillotine	had	reached	staggering	proportions;	they	and	tens	ofthousands	 of	 ordinary	 citizens	 who	 had	 gone	 into	 hiding	 toescape	 the	 blade	 suddenly	 emerged	 en	 masse	 and	 marched	 tothe	 Convention	 doors	 roaring,	 “À	 bas	 Robespierre!”	 (“Downwith	 Robespierre!”).	 Facing	 the	 same	 fate	 on	 the	 guillotinewhether	 or	 not	 they	 continued	 to	 shy	 before	 Robespierre’sschizophrenic	 screams,	 a	 handful	 of	 Convention	 delegatessummoned	 the	 courage	 to	 demand	 his	 arrest	 and	 that	 of	 eachof	 his	 terrorist	 confederates.	 To	 the	 surprise	 of	 all,	 the	 rest	 ofthe	 Convention	 stood	 and	 shouted	 their	 agreement.	 Puzzledsoldiers	in	the	Convention	hall	looked	at	each	other,	then	sidedwith	the	delegates	and	led	the	psychotic	Norman	lawyer	awayin	 chains.	 The	 following	 day,	 July	 28,	 1794,	 troops	 loyal	 to	 theConvention	 carted	 Robespierre,	 his	 brother,	 and	 twenty	 of	 hispolitical	 allies	 to	 the	 guillotine	 for	 execution.	 The	 guillotineclaimed	 the	 heads	 of	 seventy	 more	 Robespierre	 confederatesthe	 following	 day.	 Although	 the	 French	 people	 celebrated	 bymassacring	 hundreds	 more	 Jacobins	 across	 the	 nation,	 theslaughter	 did	 not	 end	 the	 famine	 that	 gripped	 the	 nation,	 andthe	 new	 revolutionary	 government	 that	 took	 over	 fromRobespierre—a	 five-man	 Directory	 that	 included	 Corsicangeneral	 Napoléon	 Bonaparte—proclaimed	 an	 end	 to	 privateproperty.“The	earth	belongs	to	no	one;	its	fruits	belong	to	every	one,”declared	 François	 Noël	 Babeuf.	 “There	 is	 but	 one	 sun,	 one	 airfor	all	to	breath.	Let	us	end	the	disgusting	distinctions	betweenrich	 and	 poor	 .	 .	 .	 masters	 and	 servants,	 governor	 andgoverned.”1	 As	 the	 poor	 rose	 in	 rebellion	 and	 joined	 equallydeprived	 soldiers	 in	 rioting,	 Napoléon	 rallied	 them	 to	 hisbanner,	assuaging	their	anger	and	hunger	with	promises	of	richpastures	across	French	borders:	“You	have	no	shoes,	uniforms,shirts	and	almost	no	bread,”	he	called	out	to	his	followers.Our	 stores	 are	 empty	 while	 those	 of	 our	 enemies	 areoverflowing.	I	will	lead	you	into	the	most	fertile	plains	inthe	world.	Rich	provinces	and	great	cities	will	be	in	yourpower.	 There	 you	 will	 find	 honor,	 glory	 and	 wealth.	 It	 isup	to	you	to	conquer.	Marchons!	2At	Napoléon’s	command,	French	revolutionary	armies	pouredinto	 neighboring	 Dutch,	 Austrian,	 German,	 andItalianterritories,	 pillaging	 farmlands,	 villages,	 and	 towns.	 Royalarmies	seemed	helpless.“The	 war	 has	 not	 been	 very	 favorable	 to	 the	 glory	 ofsovereigns,”	John	Quincy	said,	observing	the	obvious.3Thomas	 Adams	 wrote	 to	 his	 mother	 to	 calm	 her	 fears.“Holland	 will	 negotiate	 the	 most	 favorable	 terms	 with	 theFrench	 that	 they	 can,	 but	 it	 scarce	 admits	 a	 doubt	 that	 theFrench	 will	 be	 able	 to	 impose	 what	 terms	 they	 please.	 It	 willnot	be	a	pleasant	thing	to	reside	in	that	country	at	this	period,but	.	.	.	we	may	chance	to	escape	molestation.”4Meanwhile,	the	French	navy	warred	with	Britain	on	the	highseas	 and	 provoked	 the	 British	 to	 attack	 and	 seize	 ships	 theysuspected	 of	 trading	 with	 their	 enemy—neutrals	 as	 well	 asbelligerents.	Apart	from	preventing	arms	and	ammunition	fromreaching	 France,	 the	 British	 intended	 to	 halt	 the	 flow	 offoodstuffs	 and	 starve	 the	 French	 into	 submission.	 With	 eachAmerican	 ship	 the	 British	 seized,	 they	 impressed	 dozens	 ofEnglish-speaking	 seamen	 into	 the	 Royal	 Navy,	 and	 without	 anavy	of	its	own	to	protect	her	merchant	fleet,	the	United	Statescould	not	retaliate.A	month	before	John	Quincy	Adams	left	for	Europe,	PresidentWashington	 acted	 decisively	 to	 end	 the	 turmoil	 on	 Americansoil.	He	ordered	Major	General	“Mad”	Anthony	Wayne	to	attackIndians	in	the	West,	and	on	August	20,	Wayne’s	legion	of	1,000marksmen	crushed	the	Indian	force	and	sent	surviving	warriorsreeling	 westward.	 Buoyed	 by	 Wayne’s	 victory,	 PresidentWashington	ordered	Treasury	Secretary	Alexander	Hamilton	toassemble	 a	 fighting	 force	 to	 attack	 the	 whiskey	 rebels	 outsidePittsburgh.	On	September	19,	with	John	Quincy	two	days	out	tosea,	 nearly	 13,000	 troops	 from	 four	 states	 converged	 onCarlisle	 and	 Bedford,	 Pennsylvania,	 and	 at	 10	 a.m.	 onSeptember	 30,	 Washington	 took	 field	 command	 of	 the	 army—the	first	and	last	American	President	to	do	so.	Only	at	the	lastminute	 did	 he	 cede	 command	 when	 aides	 warned	 him	 he	 wastoo	important	to	the	nation	to	risk	injury	or	death	in	battle.At	 Washington’s	 side	 was	 Hamilton,	 who	 had	 first	 servedWashington	 as	 a	 twenty-two-year-old	 captain	 seventeen	 yearsearlier	 during	 the	 Revolutionary	 War,	 which	 also	 began	 as	 aprotest	 against	 taxes.	 Now,	 as	 secretary	 of	 the	 Treasury,Hamilton	 had	 imposed—and	 Washington	 had	 endorsed—a	 taxthat	 provoked	 a	 similar	 rebellion,	 which	 the	 two	 old	 comradesin	 arms	 were	 determined	 to	 crush.	 The	 irony	 was	 not	 lost	 oneither	man.By	early	December,	an	elated	vice	president	wrote	to	his	son,“Our	army	under	Wayne	has	beaten	the	Indians	and	the	militiahave	 subdued	 the	 insurgents,	 a	 miserable	 though	 numerousrabble.”	 Abigail	 Adams	 was	 equally	 enthusiastic:	 “Theinsurgency	 is	 suppressed	 in	 Pennsylvania	 .	 .	 .	 [and]	 GeneralWayne’s	 victory	 over	 the	 savages	 has	 had	 a	 happy	 effect	 uponour	 tawny	 neighbors.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 aspect	 of	 our	 country	 is	 peaceand	 plenty.	 The	 view	 is	 delightful	 and	 the	 more	 so	 whencontrasted	with	the	desolation	and	carnage	which	overspread	agreat	proportion	of	the	civilized	world.”5Both	 parents	 enthused	 over	 their	 son’s	 career.	 “Your	 risingreputation	 at	 the	 bar,”	 John	 Adams	 wrote	 to	 his	 son,	 “youradmired	writings	upon	occasional	subjects	of	great	importance,and	 your	 political	 influence	 among	 the	 younger	 gentlemen	 ofBoston	sometimes	make	me	regret	your	promotion	and	the	lossof	your	society	to	me.”	He	signed	it,	“With	a	tender	affection	aswell	 as	 great	 esteem,	 I	 am,	 my	 dear	 son,	 your	 affectionatefather	John	Adams.”	Abigail	ended	her	letter	with	the	hope	that“you	 will	 not	 omit	 any	 opportunity	 of	 writing	 to	 her	 whosehappiness	 is	 so	 intimately	 blended	 with	 your	 prosperity	 andwho	 at	 all	 times	 is	 your	 ever	 affectionate	 Mother	 AbigailAdams.”6Although	 John	 Quincy’s	 ship	 developed	 leaks	 “like	 a	 waterspout,”	 he	 and	 his	 brother	 landed	 safely	 in	 Dover	 on	 October14,	 less	 than	 a	 month	 after	 leaving	 Massachusetts.	 As	 theircoach	 from	 shipside	 reached	 London	 Bridge,	 however,	 “weheard	 a	 rattling	 .	 .	 .	 a	 sound	 as	 of	 a	 trunk	 falling	 from	 thecarriage.	My	brother	immediately	alighted	and	found	the	trunkof	 dispatches	 under	 the	 carriage.	 .	 .	 .	 Our	 driver	 assured	 usthat	the	trunks	could	not	have	fallen	unless	the	straps	had	beencut	away.”	The	incident	left	John	Quincy	shaken:Entrusted	with	dispatches	of	the	highest	importance	.	.	.to	 negotiations	 between	 the	 two	 countries,	 with	 papersparticularly	 committed	 to	 my	 care	 because	 they	 werehighly	confidential	by	the	President	of	the	United	States	..	 .	 with	 what	 face	 could	 I	 have	 presented	 myself	 to	 theminister	 for	 whom	 they	 were	 intended?	 .	 .	 .	 The	 storywould	be	resounded	from	one	end	of	the	United	States	tothe	other.7John	Quincy	Adams,	at	twenty-nine,	sailed	to	Europe	to	assumethe	 post	 his	 father	 had	 once	 held	 as	 American	 minister	 toHolland.	(AFTER	A	PORTRAIT	BY	JOHN	SINGLETON	COPLEY;NATIONAL	PARKS	SERVICE,	ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICALPARK)His	 memoirs	 go	 on	 interminably,	 as	 he	 relived	 the	 incidentand	 postulated	 how	 “the	 straps	 were	 cut	 by	 an	 invisiblehand.”8	Adams	was	immensely	relieved	to	deliver	the	trunk	toJohn	 Jay’s	 quarters	 the	 next	 morning,	 along	 with	 papers	 forThomas	 Pinckney,	 the	 American	 minister	 plenipotentiary	 inBritain.Far	from	being	in	“a	situation	of	small	trust	and	confidence,”as	he	had	feared	when	he	accepted	his	assignment	in	Holland,John	 Quincy	 Adams	 spent	 the	 next	 three	 days	 helping	 todetermine	the	fate	of	his	nation	with	Chief	Justice	John	Jay	andU.S.	ambassador	to	England	Thomas	Pinckney,	former	governorof	South	Carolina.	Together	they	put	the	finishing	touches	on	atreaty	that	would	set	the	course	of	Anglo-American	relations—and,	 indeed,	 much	 of	 the	 Western	 world—for	 the	 foreseeablefuture.Jay	had	arrived	in	London	four	months	earlier,	on	June	6,	andobtained	 the	 British	 government’s	 agreement	 to	 excludenoncontraband	 goods	 from	 the	 ban	 on	 American	 trade	 withFrance	 and	 the	 French	 West	 Indies.	 He	 had	 also	 won	 threeother	 major	 concessions:	 withdrawal	 of	 British	 troops	 behindthe	 Canadian	 border	 from	 the	 Northwest	 Territory,	 limitedresumption	 of	 American	 trade	 with	 the	 British	 East	 and	 WestIndies,	and	establishment	of	a	most-favored-nation	relationshipbetween	 the	 two	 nations,	 with	 preferential	 tariffs	 for	 each.Both	 sides	 agreed	 to	 set	 up	 a	 joint	 commission	 and	 acceptbinding	 arbitration	 to	 settle	 British	 and	 American	 financialclaims	 against	 each	 other.	 The	 treaty	 made	 no	 mention	 of	 twoissues	that	had	long	provoked	American	anger	toward	Britain:impressment	 of	 American	 sailors	 into	 the	 British	 navy	 andfailure	to	compensate	southern	planters	for	thousands	of	slavesthe	British	had	carried	away	during	the	Revolutionary	War.	Theslave	issue	lay	behind	the	fanatical	southern	support	for	Franceand	the	willingness—indeed,	eagerness—of	southerners	to	joinFrance	in	war	against	Britain.Although	Jay	had	hoped	to	win	concessions	on	both	issues,	herecognized	 that	 Britain	 had	 little	 incentive	 to	 yield	 on	 either.Aside	 from	 her	 economic	 and	 military	 power,	 Britain	 hadscored	 an	 important	 naval	 victory	 over	 the	 French	 fleet	 thatleft	 British	 warships	 in	 full	 command	 of	 the	 Atlantic	 Ocean,with	no	need	to	cede	privileges	to	weaker	nations.“As	a	treaty	of	commerce,”	John	Quincy	concluded,	“we	shallnever	obtain	anything	more	favorable.	.	.	.	It	is	much	below	thestandard	 which	 I	 think	 would	 be	 advantageous	 to	 the	 country,but	 with	 some	 alterations	 which	 are	 marked	 down	 .	 .	 .	 it	 ispreferable	 to	 a	 war.	 The	 commerce	 with	 their	 West	 IndiaIslands	.	.	.	will	be	of	great	importance.”9John	Quincy	left	with	his	brother	for	Holland	on	October	29,arriving	 in	 The	 Hague	 two	 days	 later	 and	 settling	 into	 theirofficial	 quarters.	 He	 had	 effectively	 established	 himself	 asAmerican	minister	by	January	19,	1795,	when	General	CharlesPichegru,	 commander	 of	 the	 French	 Army	 of	 the	 North,marched	 into	 the	 Dutch	 capital	 with	 a	 contingent	 of	 2,000	 to3,000	 soldiers.	 Their	 arrival	 caused	 so	 little	 disruption	 thatJohn	 Quincy’s	 brother	 Thomas	 went	 to	 theater	 the	 followingevening	with	the	American	consul	general,	Sylvanus	Bourne.	Aday	 later,	 John	 Quincy	 went	 with	 Thomas	 and	 Bourne	 to	 theFrench	 authorities,	 who	 told	 them	 “they	 received	 the	 visit	 ofthe	citoyen	ministre	 of	 a	 free	 people,	 the	 friend	 of	 the	 peuplefrançais	with	much	pleasure.	That	they	considered	it	tout	à	faitune	visite	fraternelle.”lThe	 substance	 of	 the	 business	 was	 that	 I	 demandedsafety	 and	 protection	 to	 all	 American	 persons	 andproperty	 in	 this	 country,	 and	 they	 told	 me	 .	 .	 .	 that	 allproperty	 would	 be	 respected,	 as	 well	 as	 persons	 andopinions.	.	.	.	They	spoke	of	the	President,	whom,	like	allEuropeans,	 they	 called	 General	 Washington	 .	 .	 .	 that	 hewas	 a	 great	 man	 and	 they	 had	 veneration	 for	 hischaracter.10General	 Pichegru	 had	 served	 with	 French	 forces	 in	 theAmerican	 Revolution	 and	 was	 true	 to	 his	 word,	 doing	 nothingto	 interfere	 with	 John	 Quincy’s	 activities	 or	 those	 of	 otherAmericans	 in	 Holland.	 Despite	 the	 presence	 of	 French	 troops,The	 Hague	 proved	 to	 be	 exactly	 what	 Secretary	 of	 StateEdmund	Randolph	and	President	Washington	had	anticipated—a	 listening	 post	 in	 the	 heart	 of	 Europe,	 and	 for	 John	 QuincyAdams,	 it	 proved	 the	 perfect	 first	 post	 in	 the	 diplomaticservice.	His	academic	training	combined	with	his	knowledge	oflanguages	and	an	extraordinary	memory	to	accumulate	names,descriptions,	 and	 thinking	 of	 dozens	 of	 diplomats	 fromeverywhere	 in	 Europe,	 along	 with	 invaluable	 military	 andpolitical	intelligence	from	warring	parties	and	other	sectors	ofthe	continent.	“Dined	with	the	French	generals	Pichegru,	Elbel,Sauviac,”	the	pages	of	his	journal	disclose,	“and	a	Colonel	.	.	.“	 .	 .	 .	 the	 Dutch	 general	 Constant	 and	 a	 colonel	 Comted’Autremont	.	.	.“	.	.	.	the	minister	of	Poland	Midleton	.	.	.“	.	.	.	the	Prussian	secretary	Baron	Bielefeld	.	.	.“	.	.	.	the	Russian	minister	.	.	.“The	 French	 made	 use	 of	 balloons	 during	 the	 last	 campaignin	 discovering	 the	 positions	 of	 their	 adverse	 armies	 .	 .	 .Pichegru	 and	 the	 other	 generals	 assured	 us	 on	 the	 strongestterms	 that	 it	 was	 of	 no	 service	 at	 all.	 .	 .	 .	 ‘Oh!	 yes,’	 saidSauviac,	‘the	effect	was	infallible	in	the	gazettes.’”11John	Quincy	spent	as	many	as	six	hours	a	day	writing	reports,which	 included	 twenty-seven	 letters	 to	 the	 secretary	 of	 statefrom	 November	 1794	 to	 August	 1795	 and	 ten	 long,	 explicitletters	 to	 his	 father,	 the	 vice	 president.	 He	 emerged	 as	 one	 offinestEurope’s	 most	 skilled	 diplomats	 and	 America’sintelligence	 gleaner.	 He	 prophesied	 that	 while	 Britain	 andFrance	wore	each	other	down	in	war,	America	would	grow	andprosper.	 “At	 the	 present	 moment,ispreserved,”	he	predicted,	“ten	more	years	will	place	the	UnitedStates	 among	 the	 most	 powerful	 and	 opulent	 nations	 onearth.”12if	 our	 neutralityJohn	 Quincy’s	 reports	 elated	 his	 father.	 “Never	 was	 a	 fathermore	 satisfied	 or	 gratified,”	 Vice	 President	 John	 Adams	 wroteto	 John	 Quincy	 in	 the	 spring	 of	 1795,	 “than	 I	 have	 been	 withthe	kind	attention	of	my	sons.”Since	they	went	abroad,	I	have	no	language	to	express	toyou	the	pleasure	I	have	received	from	the	satisfaction	youhave	 given	 the	 President	 and	 secretary	 of	 state,	 as	 wellas	from	the	clear,	comprehensive,	and	masterly	accountsin	 your	 letters	 to	 me	 of	 the	 public	 affairs	 of	 nations	 inEurope,	whose	situation	and	politics	it	most	concerns	usto	know.	Go	on,	my	son,	and	by	a	diligent	exertion	of	yourgenius	 and	 abilities,	 continue	 to	 deserve	 well	 of	 yourfather	but	especially	of	your	country.13In	 addition	 to	 visits,	 dinners,	 and	 other	 social	 events	 withdiplomats	 and	 French	 officers,	 John	 Quincy	 continued	 hisstudies,	reading	histories	of	every	European	state	while	addingSpanish	 to	 the	 three	 other	 languages	 he	 was	 able	 to	 read	 andspeak.	 “The	 voice	 of	 all	 Europe,”	 he	 discovered,	 had	 hailedPresident	 George	 Washington’s	 Neutrality	 Proclamation.Although	it	had	not	attracted	much	attention	initially,	it	quicklyestablished	 a	 new	 principle	 of	 international	 law	 as	 well	 asAmerican	 constitutionalrules	 aboundedgoverning	 relations	 between	 warring	 nations,	 the	 world	 hadignored	 the	 rights	 of	 neutrals	 until	 George	 Washington	 raisedthe	issue.law.	 Although“The	 nations	 that	 have	 been	 grappling	 together	 with	 thepurpose	of	mutual	destruction,”	John	Quincy	wrote,	“are	feeble,exhausted,	 and	 almost	 starving.	 Those	 that	 have	 had	 thewisdom	to	maintain	neutrality	have	reasons	more	than	ever	toapplaud	 their	 policy,	 and	 some	 of	 them	 may	 thank	 the	 UnitedStates	for	the	example	from	which	it	was	pursued.”14As	 the	 end	 of	 his	 first	 year	 in	 the	 diplomatic	 serviceapproached,	 John	 Quincy	 was	 quite	 content	 with	 his	 newcareer.	 Although	 he	 called	 Holland	 “insignificant”incomparison	to	diplomatic	posts	in	Paris	and	London,	he	told	hisfather	 that	 it	 was	 “adequate	 to	 my	 talents	 .	 .	 .	 without	 beingtedious	or	painful	.	.	.	and	leaves	me	leisure	to	pursue	a	courseof	 studies	 that	 may	 be	 recommended	 by	 its	 amusement	 orutility.	 Indeed,	 Sir,	 it	 is	 a	 situation	 in	 itself	 much	 preferable	 tothat	of	.	.	.	a	lawyer’s	office	for	business	which	.	.	.	is	scarcelysufficient	 to	 give	 bread	 and	 procures	 more	 curses	 thanthanks.”15To	 his	 surprise,	 John	 Quincy’s	 next	 set	 of	 State	 Departmentorders	 emanated	 from	 a	 new	 secretary	 of	 state—TimothyPickering	 of	 Massachusetts,	 whom	 Washington	 had	 named	 toreplace	 John	 Randolph.	 Randolph	 had	 resigned	 followingcharges	 he	 had	 accepted	 bribes	 from	 the	 French	 government.For	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 the	 appointment	 was	 not	 unpleasant.Born	in	Salem,	Pickering	was	a	Harvard	graduate	and	lawyer,	astaunch	 Federalist	 who	 had	 served	 with	 distinction	 in	 theRevolutionary	War	and	as	postmaster	general	before	becomingsecretary	of	war	early	in	1795.Pickering	 asked	 John	 Quincy	 to	 travel	 to	 London	 in	 theabsence	of	American	minister	Thomas	Pinckney	to	execute	theformal	 exchange	 of	 signed	 copies	 of	 the	 Jay	 Treaty	 with	 theBritish	government.	Pinckney	had	gone	to	Spain	to	negotiate	atreaty	 giving	 Americans	 navigation	 rights	 on	 the	 MississippiRiver.When	the	terms	of	the	Jay	Treaty	became	known	in	Americain	 March	 1795,	 Washington	 loyalists	 hailed	 Jay	 for	 avertinganother	 brutal	 war	 with	 England	 and	 forcing	 Britain	 to	 dealwith	 the	 United	 States	 for	 the	 first	 time	 as	 an	 equal	 andindependent	 sovereign	 state.	 But	 as	 Washington	 and	 Jay	 bothknew	it	would,	the	treaty	provoked	a	storm	of	controversy	overwhat	 it	 did	 not	 accomplish—especially	 among	 advocates	 forstates’	 rights,	 Francophiles,	 and	 Anglophobes,	 all	 of	 whomattacked	 the	 treaty	 as	 pro-British.	 Washington	 loyalists	 in	 theSenate,	 however,	 outnumbered	 opponents,	 and	 the	 Senateratified	 the	 treaty	 on	 June	 24—ironically,	 just	 as	 Jay	 himselfslipped	 away	 from	 the	 fray	 over	 foreign	 affairs	 by	 winningelection	as	governor	of	New	York.By	 then,	 the	 savagery	 of	 the	 French	 Revolution	 had	 erodedpopular	support	for	the	French	in	America,	while	the	Jay	Treatywith	 Britain	 was	 producing	 economic	 benefits.	 In	 the	 West,Britain’s	 troop	 pullback	 into	 Canada	 had	 ended	 the	 flow	 ofarms	 to	 hostile	 Indians.	 Without	 British	 military	 support,	 theIndians	 ceded	 most	 of	 Ohio,	 Indiana,	 Illinois,	 and	 Michigan	 tothe	 United	 States,	 ending	 Indian	 forays	 in	 the	 West	 andopening	the	vast	Ohio	and	Mississippi	river	valleys	to	Americansettlement.	 Meanwhile,	 Thomas	 Pinckney	 won	 Spain’sagreement	 to	 free	 Mississippi	 River	 navigation	 for	 Americansand	 to	 allow	 them	 to	 deposit	 goods	 in	 New	 Orleans	 for	 exportoverseas.	Elated	by	the	prospects	of	a	western	economic	boom,Americans	quickly	forgot	their	objections	to	the	Jay	Treaty.Although	John	Quincy	had	set	out	for	England	on	October	20to	 exchange	 copies	 of	 the	 signed	 treaties,	 ill	 winds	 and	 avariety	 of	 dockside	 misunderstandings	 prevented	 his	 reachingLondon	until	November	11,	by	which	time	Pinckney’s	secretaryhad	 completed	 the	 transaction.	 All	 that	 remained	 was	 theceremonial	 presentation	 of	 the	 document	 to	 the	 king.	 Early	 inDecember,	 British	 undersecretary	 of	 foreign	 affairs	 GeorgeHammond,	 a	 cunning	 and	 vicious	 anti-American	 whom	 JohnQuincy	 knew	 from	 the	 1783	 Paris	 peace	 talks,	 summonedAdams	 to	 his	 office.	 Although	 Hammond	 had	 been	 England’sfirst	 minister	 to	 the	 United	 States	 in	 1791	 and	 had	 married	 aPhiladelphian,	 his	 effortsthe	 Americangovernment	seemed	to	know	no	bounds.	He	lost	no	time	tryingto	trap	John	Quincy	in	an	indiscretion	by	asking	if	he	had	heardof	 the	 President’s	 “intending	 to	 resign”	 in	 the	 wake	 of	 theGenet	affair.to	 undermine“No!”	John	Quincy	replied	simply	and	sharply.“What	 sort	 of	 a	 soul	 does	 this	 man	 suppose	 I	 have?”	 JohnQuincy	 confided	 to	 his	 diary	 that	 night.	 “He	 talked	 ofVirginians,	 the	 southern	 people,	 the	 Democrats,	 but	 I	 let	 himknow	 that	 I	 consider	 them	 all	 in	 no	 other	 light	 than	 asAmericans.”	 He	 asked	 whether	 Pinckney	 had	 worked	 out	 anagreement	 with	 Spain,	 then	 hammered	 John	 Quincy	 withrumors	 of	 a	 political	 revolt	 against	 George	 Washington.	 JohnQuincy	deftly	parried	Hammond’s	thrusts.“All	 governments	 have	 their	 opposition	 who	 find	 fault	 witheverything,”	 John	 Quincy	 said	 nonchalantly.	 “Who	 has	 betterreason	 to	 know	 that	 than	 you	 in	 this	 country?”	 he	 smiledcondescendingly.	“But	in	America,	you	know,	opposition	speaksin	a	louder	voice	than	anywhere	else.	Everything	comes	out;	wehave	not	lurking	dissatisfaction	that	works	in	secret	and	is	notseen,	 nothing	 that	 rankles	 at	 the	 heart	 while	 the	 face	 wears	 asmile	so	that	a	very	trifling	opposition	makes	a	great	show.”16“Hammond	is	a	man	of	intrigue,”	John	Quincy	reported	in	hisdiary.	“His	question	whether	Mr.	Pinckney	has	signed	the	treatyin	 Spain,	 implies	 at	 least	 that	 he	 knows	 there	 was	 a	 treaty	 tosign.	.	.	.	If	I	stay	here	anytime,	he	will	learn	to	be	not	quite	soimpertinent.”17	 Adams	 surmised	 that	 Hammond	 was	 eitherintercepting	his	mail	or	having	him	followed.	He	determined	tobe	more	discreet	in	what	he	did,	said,	and	wrote.In	 fact,	 Hammond’s	 intelligence	 was	 better	 than	 JohnQuincy’s—and	 even	 better	 than	 that	 of	 Vice	 President	 JohnAdams.	 On	 January	 5,	 a	 month	 after	 Hammond	 had	 met	 withJohn	 Quincy,	 John	 Adams	 wrote	 to	 Abigail,	 “I	 have	 this	 dayheard	news	that	is	of	some	importance.	It	must	be	kept	a	secretwholly	 to	 yourself.	 One	 of	 the	 ministry	 told	 me	 that	 thePresident	was	solemnly	determined	to	serve	no	longer	than	theend	of	his	present	period.	.	.	.	You	know	the	consequence	of	thisto	 me	 and	 to	 yourself.	 Either	 we	 must	 enter	 into	 ardors	 moretrying	 than	 any	 ever	 yet	 experienced	 or	 retire	 to	 Quincy,farmers	 for	 life.	 I	 am	 .	 .	 .	 determined	 not	 to	 serve	 underJefferson.	.	.	.	I	will	not	be	frightened	out	of	the	public	servicenor	will	I	be	disgraced	in	it.”18Far	 from	 expressing	 joy	 at	 her	 husband’s	 thinking,	 Abigailquoted	a	warning	from	Charles	Churchill’s	epic	poem	Gotham:You	 know	 what	 is	 before	 you:	 “the	 whips	 and	 scorpions,the	 thorns	 without	 roses,	 the	 dangers,	 anxieties	 andweight	 of	 empire”—and	 can	 you	 acquireinfluencesufficient	as	the	poet	further	describes:	“to	still	the	voiceof	discord	in	the	land”?19The	 day	 after	 meeting	 with	 Hammond,	 John	 Quincypresented	his	credentials	to	King	George	III	before	addressinghim	with	prepared	remarks:	“Sir.	To	testify	to	your	majesty	thesincerity	of	the	United	States	of	America	in	their	negotiations,their	 President	 has	 directed	 me	 .	 .	 .	 ”	 and	 he	 went	 on	 to	 givethe	 king	 a	 copy	 of	 the	 Jay	 Treaty	 along	 with	 a	 letter	 fromPresident	Washington.“To	 give	 you	 my	 answer,	 Sir,”	 the	 king	 responded	 with	 atypically	 noncommittal	 royal	 reply,	 “I	 am	 very	 happy	 to	 havethe	 assurances	 of	 their	 sincerity,	 for	 without	 that,	 you	 know,there	would	be	no	such	things	as	dealings	among	men.”20In	 France,	 however,	 the	 Directory	 responded	 angrily	 to	 theJay	 Treaty,	 insisting	 it	 was	 a	 violation	 of	 “the	 alliance	 whichbinds	the	two	peoples.”	The	French	recalled	their	ambassador,and	 when	 the	 American	 government	 retaliated	 by	 recallingambassador	 James	 Monroe,	 the	 French	 ordered	 seizure	 of	 allAmerican	ships	sailing	into	French	waters,	with	confiscation	ofall	cargoes	and	imprisonment	of	American	seamen	for	ransom.While	 waiting	 for	 Pinckney’s	 return	 to	 London,	 John	 Quincywent	 to	 hear	 debates	 at	 the	 House	 of	 Commons	 and	 visitedJoshua	Johnson,	the	wealthy	Maryland	merchant	who	lived	nearthe	 Tower	 of	 London	 in	 a	 lavish	 brick	 mansion,	 where	 he	 alsoserved	 as	 American	 consul.	 Staffed	 by	 eleven	 servants,Johnson’s	 home	 was	 a	 center	 of	 opulence	 and	 hospitality	 forvisiting	 diplomats	 and	 other	 dignitaries.	 John	 Quincy	 had	 firstmet	 Johnson	 in	 1781	 as	 a	 fourteen-year-old,	 when	 he	 and	 hisfather	were	in	Nantes,	awaiting	passage	to	America	after	JohnAdams’s	 first	 diplomatic	 assignment	 in	 Paris.	 Johnson’s	 threeoldest	 daughters—barely	 more	 than	 infants	 when	 John	 Quincyfirst	 met	 them—had	 blossomed	 into	 attractive	 young	 ladies.Burdened	 with	 four	 other,	 younger	 girls	 and	 a	 young	 son,	 theJohnsons	 were	 eager	 to	 marry	 off	 their	 three	 oldest,	 and	 theywelcomed	 the	 son	 of	 America’s	 vice	 president	 with	 greatwarmth.	 They	 invited	 him	 to	 their	 oldest	 daughter’s	 birthdayball,	 where	 John	 Quincy	 “danced	 till	 3	 in	 the	 morning”	 andfound	 “Mr.	 Johnson’s	 daughters	 pretty	 and	 agreeable.	 Theoldest	 performs	 admirably	 on	 the	 pianoforte;	 the	 second,Louisa,	sings;	the	third	plays	the	harp.”21Evidently	 enchanted	 by	 the	 three	 girls,	 he	 spent	 part	 ofalmost	 every	 succeeding	 day	 or	 evening	 in	 January	 with	 theJohnsons,	 playing	 cards,	 walkingthe	 park,	 andaccompanying	 them	 to	 theater,	 concerts,	 and	 balls.	 Althoughthe	 Johnsons	 expected	 he	 would	 marry	 their	 oldest	 daughter,inJohn	Quincy	surprised	the	entire	family	on	February	2,	1796,	bytelling	 twenty-year-old	 Louisa	 Catherine,	 the	 Johnsons’	 seconddaughter,	that	he	intended	to	marry	her.Louisa	 was	 beautiful,	 cultured,	 and	 fluent	 in	 French,	 thelanguage	 of	 diplomats.	 Musically	 talented,	 elegant	 in	 dress,bearing,	 and	 manners,	 she	 was	 quiet	 and	 respectful	 in	 thepresence	 of	 gentlemen	 and	 a	 lively	 conversationalist	 whenappropriate.	 And	 she	 was	 comfortable	 among	 the	 rich	 andpowerful.	For	John	Quincy,	a	rising	star	in	the	diplomatic	world,Louisa	 Catherine	 Johnson,	 the	 English-born	 daughter	 of	 anAmerican	diplomat,	seemed	a	perfect	match.In	 his	 letters	 home,	 John	 Quincy	 only	 hinted	 of	 a	 liaison	 atfirst,	 without	 identifying	 Louisa.	 Fearing	 her	 son’s	 intendedwas	 English	 and	 would	 destroy	 his	 prospects	 for	 politicalsuccess	in	America,	Abigail	fretted,	“I	would	hope	for	the	love	Ibear	my	country,	that	the	siren	is	at	least	half-blood	.”22	Withmemories	 of	 Bunker’s	 Hill	 and	 the	 Boston	 occupation	 swirlingin	 her	 head,	 Abigail	 still	 despised	 the	 British.	 John	 Quincy’sfather	 was	 more	 philosophical	 than	 his	 wife,	 however.	 “Alas!Poor	 John!”	 he	 remarked	 to	 Abigail.	 “If	 the	 young	 man	 reallyloves	 her,	 I	 will	 not	 thwart	 him.	 .	 .	 .	 Ambition	 and	 love	 livetogether	well.	.	.	.	A	man	may	be	mad	with	both	at	once.	.	.	.	Hisfather	and	his	mother	too	know	what	it	is.	.	.	.	Witness	Caesarand	Anthony	with	Cleopatra	and	many	others.”23Twenty-year-old	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Johnson,	 the	 English-borndaughter	 of	 the	 American	 consul	 in	 London,	 caught	 JohnQuincy	 Adams’s	 eye,	 and	 he	 proposed	 marriage	 to	 her	 inFebruary	1796.	 (PORTRAIT	 BY	 EDWARD	 SAVAGE,	 NATIONALPARKS	SERVICE,	ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)A	letter	from	John	Quincy	eventually	calmed	both	their	fears:Your	apprehensions	as	to	the	tastes	and	sentiments	of	myfriend	[were]	perfectly	natural,	and	all	your	observationson	 the	 subject	 were	 received	 by	 me	 with	 gratitude,	 as	 Iknow	 them	 to	 proceed	 from	 serious	 concern	 and	 thepurest	 parental	 affection.	 .	 .	 .	 But	 she	 has	 goodness	 ofheart	 and	 gentleness	 of	 disposition	 as	 well	 as	 spirit	 andcharacter	 and	 with	 those	 qualities,	 I	 shall	 venture	 uponthe	 chances	 of	 success	 and	 hope	 you	 will	 find	 her	 .	 .	 .such	a	daughter	as	you	would	wish	for	your	son.24Moved	 by	 his	 letter,	 Abigail	 answered	 contritely,	 “I	 considerher	 already	 as	 my	 daughter.”	 She	 went	 on	 to	 ask	 for	 aminiature	 portrait	 and	 lock	 of	 her	 future	 daughter-in-law’shair.25	John	Adams	also	sent	his	blessing,	telling	his	son,	“Youare	 now	 of	 age	 to	 judge	 for	 yourself;	 and	 whether	 you	 return[to	England]	and	choose	her	or	whether	you	choose	elsewhere,your	deliberate	choice	will	be	mine.”26Although	 Louisa	 had	 wanted	 to	 marry	 immediately,	 JohnQuincy	 refused,	 insisting	 he	 could	 not	 consider	 marriage	 untilhe	 was	 financially	 secure.	 His	 salary,	 he	 insisted,	 was	 notenough	to	afford	proper	lodgings	for	a	minister	and	his	wife,	letalone	a	wife	used	to	luxuries.	His	plan	was	to	finish	his	three-year	 assignmenttoMassachusetts,	reestablish	his	law	practice,	and	then	marry.	Amonth	 after	 John	 Quincy	 had	 proposed,	 he	 spent	 one	 last“evening	 of	 delight	 and	 of	 regret,	 and	 I	 took	 my	 leave	 of	 the[Johnson]	family	with	sensations	unusually	painful.”27in	 Holland	 and,in	 1797,	 return“On	 my	 return	 from	 England,”	 he	 wrote	 in	 his	 diary,	 “Idetermined	 to	 resume	 a	 life	 of	 applications	 to	 business	 andstudy,”28	and,	indeed,	he	reveled	in	the	calm	and	relaxation	ofintense,	 solitary	 study.	 “To	 improve	 in	 the	 Dutch	 language,	 Ihave	 usually	 translated	 a	 page	 every	 day.	 .	 .	 .	 My	 progress	 inItalian	 is	 slow.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 language	 is	 enchanting.	 .	 .	 .	 To	 keepalive	 my	 Latin,	 I	 have	 begun	 to	 translate	 a	 page	 of	 Tacitusevery	day	.	.	.	into	French.”29His	 official	 duties	 seldom	 required	 more	 than	 a	 few	 hours	 aday.	 He	 wrote	 to	 the	 Leyden	 Gazette,	 for	 example,	 protestingan	 article	 asserting	 that	 “disgust	 at	 the	 ingratitude	 of	 theAmerican	 people	 had	 induced	 General	 Washington	 to	 retirefrom	 his	 eminent	 station.”	 John	 Quincy	 asked	 the	 editor	 to“have	the	goodness	to	correct	.	.	.	an	imputation	both	injuriousto	the	President	and	people	of	the	United	States.”The	 reasons	 assigned	 by	 the	 President	 himself	 fordeclining	to	be	viewed	as	a	candidate	for	the	approachingelection	 are	 his	 time	 of	 life,	 his	 strong	 inclinationstowards	 a	 retired	 life,	 and	 the	 peaceable,	 calm	 andprosperous	 state	 of	 affairs	 in	 that	 country.	 .	 .	 .	 Theimputation	 of	 disgust	 to	 General	 Washington	 and	 ofingratitude	 to	 the	 Americans	 is	 merely	 the	 calumny	 ofEnglish	spirits	beholding	the	felicity	of	the	Americans.30As	summer	neared	its	end,	John	Quincy	learned	that	GeorgeWashington	 had	 promoted	 him	 from	 minister	 to	 ministerplenipotentiary,	 with	 a	 new	 assignment	 in	 Lisbon,	 Portugal,	 tobegin	in	the	spring	of	1797.	His	salary	would	double	to	$9,000a	year	and	allow	him	an	additional	$4,500	a	year	for	expenses—enough	 to	 marry	 Louisa	 and	 take	 her	 with	 him	 to	 his	 newpost.	 The	 promotion	 was	 not	 only	 a	 reward	 for	 his	 good	 workand	 steadfast	 loyalty	 to	 the	 President’s	 policies;	 it	 was	 thePresident’s	 way	 of	 publicly	 demonstrating	 his	 confidence	 inJohn	Quincy’s	diplomatic	skills.	Although	reluctant	to	postponehis	 return	 to	 America	 by	 another	 three	 years,	 John	 Quincyagreed	 to	 take	 the	 post	 after	 his	 brother	 Thomas	 promised	 togo	as	well.“I	am	still	delighted	with	your	facts,	your	opinions,	and	yourprinciples,”	 Vice	 President	 John	 Adams	 wrote	 to	 his	 son.	 “Youneed	not	be	anxious	about	the	succession	to	the	presidency.	.	.	.No	man	who	has	been	mentioned	or	thought	of,	but	has	a	justvalue	of	your	merits.	Even	if	your	father	should	be	the	person,he	 will	 not	 so	 far	 affect	 a	 disinterest	 as	 to	 injure	 you.	 IfJefferson,	 Henry,	 Jay,	 Hamilton	 or	 Pinckney	 should	 be	 elected,your	honor	and	promotion	will	be	in	no	hazard.”31On	 September	 19,	 1796,	 the	 American	 Daily	 Advertiserpublished	 President	 Washington’s	 Farewell	 Address	 statingemphatically	 that	 he	 would	 not	 serve	 after	 his	 second	 term	 inoffice.	 He	 also	 warned	 Americans	 of	 the	 dangers	 of	 divisivepolitical	parties	at	home	and	urged	them	to	unite	in	a	“fraternalunion.”	In	foreign	affairs,	he	urged	keeping	the	United	States	aperennially	 neutral	 nation,	 out	 of	 foreign	 wars	 and	 with	 nolong-term	ties	to	any	foreign	nations.In	 the	 vicious	 election	 campaign	 that	 followed,	 Federalistssupported	Vice	President	John	Adams,	who	pledged	to	continueWashington’s	 policy	 of	 rapprochement	 with	 Britain	 within	 thecontext	 of	 neutralityin	 foreign	 conflicts.	 Adams’s	 chiefopponent	was	former	secretary	of	state	Thomas	Jefferson,	whocalled	 himself	 a	 Democrat-Republican,	 supported	 the	 FrenchRevolution,	and	sought	closer	ties	to	France,	regardless	of	theeffects	on	trade	with	England.French	 minister	 Pierre	 August	 Adet	 tried	 to	 influence	 theelection	with	pamphlets	urging	Americans	to	vote	for	Jeffersonbut	 only	 succeeded	 in	 provoking	 widespread	 revulsion	 againstFrance	 and	 eroding	 the	 influence	 of	 Francophiles	 in	 America.Federalists	 demonized	 Adet	 and	 warned	 that	 a	 Jeffersonpresidency	 would	 be	 “fatal	 to	 our	 independence,	 now	 that	 theinterference	 of	 a	 foreign	 nation	 in	 our	 affairs	 is	 no	 longerdisguised.”32	The	Connecticut	Courant	warned	that	the	Frenchminister	 was	 trying	 to	 “wean	 us	 from	 the	 government	 andadministrators	 of	 our	 own	 choice	 and	 make	 us	 willing	 to	 begoverned	by	such	as	France	shall	think	best	for	us—beginningwith	 Jefferson.”33	 Even	 Republicans	 were	 offended	 by	 Adet’smeddling,	 with	 one	 of	 them	 railing	 that	 Adet	 had	 destroyedJefferson’s	 chances	 for	 election	 and	 “irretrievably	 diminishedthe	 good	 will	 felt	 for	 his	 government	 and	 the	 people	 ofFrance.”34In	 the	 end,	 John	 Adams	 eked	 out	 a	 victory	 over	 ThomasJefferson	 by	 three	 Electoral	 College	 votes,	 by	 rule	 relegatingJefferson	to	the	vice	presidency.In	the	days	before	the	election,	Abigail	Adams	had	repeatedlywarned	her	son	not	to	demand	any	special	consideration	if	hisfather	 won,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 had	 responded	 accordingly:	 “Ihope	 my	 ever	 dear	 and	 honored	 mother	 .	 .	 .	 that	 upon	 thecontingency	of	my	father’s	being	placed	in	the	first	magistracy,I	 shall	 never	 give	 him	 any	 trouble	 by	 solicitation	 for	 office	 ofany	kind.”Your	late	letters	have	repeated	so	many	times	that	I	shallin	 that	 case	 have	 nothing	 to	 expect	 that	 I	 am	 afraid	 youhave	imagined	it	possible	that	I	might	form	expectationsfrom	such	an	event.	I	had	hoped	that	my	mother	knew	mebetter;	 that	 she	 did	 me	 the	 justice	 to	 believe	 that	 I	 havenot	 been	 so	 totally	 regardless	 or	 forgetful	 of	 theprinciples	which	my	education	has	instilled,	nor	so	totallydestitute	 of	 a	 personal	 sense	 of	 delicacy	 as	 to	 besusceptible	of	a	wish	in	that	direction.35President	 John	 Adams,	 America’s	 second	 President,	 ignoredcharges	of	nepotism	and,	on	the	advice	of	George	Washington,retained	 his	 son	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 in	 America’s	 foreigndiplomatic	corps.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)Deeply	 touched	 by	 her	 son’s	 letter,	 Abigail	 Adams	 sent	 it	 onto	her	husband,	who	shared	it	with	Washington.	The	Presidenthad,	 in	 fact,	 worried	 that	 John	 Adams’s	 revulsion	 at	 nepotismmight	 lead	 him	 to	 dismiss	 his	 son	 from	 the	 diplomatic	 corps,and,	 indeed,	 Adams	 had	 planned	 to	 do	 just	 that.	 AfterWashington	 read	 John	 Quincy’s	 letter,	 he	 told	 Adams,	 “Thesentiments	do	honor	to	the	head	and	heart	of	the	writer,	and	ifmy	 wishes	 would	 be	 of	 any	 avail,	 they	 should	 go	 to	 you	 in	 thestrong	 hope	 [his	 italics]	 that	 you	 will	 not	 withhold	 meritedpromotion	 for	 Mr.	 John	 [Quincy]	 Adams	 because	 he	 is	 yourson.”For	 without	 intending	 to	 compliment	 the	 father	 or	 themother	 .	 .	 .	 I	 give	 it	 as	 my	 decided	 opinion	 that	 Mr.Adams	 is	 the	 most	 valuable	 public	 character	 we	 haveabroad,	and	that	he	will	prove	himself	to	be	the	ablest	ofall	 our	 diplomatic	 corps.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 public,	 more	 and	 moreas	 he	 is	 known,	 are	 appreciating	 his	 talents	 and	 worth,and	his	country	would	sustain	a	loss	if	these	are	checkedby	over	delicacy	on	your	part.36“Go	to	Lisbon,”	the	President-elect	wrote	to	reassure	his	son,“and	send	me	as	good	intelligence	from	all	parts	of	Europe	asyou	have	done.”37After	 John	 Quincy	 told	 Louisa	 of	 his	 new	 appointment—andthe	 enormous	 increase	 in	 his	 salary—they	 saw	 no	 reason	 topostpone	 their	 marriage.	 He	 and	 Thomas	 packed	 up	 theirthings	 and	 shipped	 everything	 to	 Lisbon	 before	 sailing	 toLondon	 for	 the	 wedding.	 To	 their	 consternation,	 however,unexpected	letters	arrived	from	the	secretary	of	state	and	fromJohn	 Quincy’s	 father,	 the	 new	 President,	 directing	 him	 not	 toproceed	to	Lisbon	but	to	wait	for	a	commission	to	the	Prussiancourt	in	Berlin.	Although	Berlin	was	a	far	more	important	postthan	 Lisbon,	 neither	 John	 Quincy	 nor	 Louisa	 (nor	 Thomas,	 forthat	 matter)	 was	 pleased	 about	 foregoing	 Portugal’s	 sunnyclimes	 for	 the	 long,	 grey,	 dismal	 winters	 of	 northern	 Europe.And	 John	 Quincy	 was	 livid	 about	 having	 spent	 $2,500	 to	 shipmost	 of	 his	 and	 Thomas’s	 clothes,	 furniture,	 and	 books—especially	his	books—to	Lisbon.John	 Quincy	 Adams	 married	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Johnson	 in	 anAnglican	 service	 in	 London	 on	 July	 26,	 1797,	 with	 his	 brotherand	her	parents	and	sisters	attending.	Two	weeks	earlier,	JohnQuincy	had	turned	thirty;	his	bride	was	twenty-two;	and	in	thecourse	 of	 three	 idyllic	 months	 honeymooning	 in	 the	 Englishcountryside,	 they	 wrote	 to	 his	 “Dear	 and	 Honored	 Parents”	 toshare	 their	 joy:	 “I	 have	 now	 the	 happiness	 of	 presenting	 youanother	 daughter,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote,	 “worthy	 as	 I	 fullybelieve	of	adding	one	to	the	number	of	those	who	endear	thatrelation	to	you.	The	day	before	yesterday	united	us	for	life.	Myrecommendation	 of	 her	 to	 your	 kindness	 and	 affection	 I	 knowwill	be	unnecessary.”Louisa	Catherine	appended	her	own	appeal	for	the	Adamses’parental	support:The	 day	 before	 yesterday,	 by	 uniting	 me	 to	 your	 belovedson,	 has	 given	 me	 a	 claim	 to	 your	 parental	 affection,	 aclaim	 I	 already	 feel	 will	 inspire	 me	 with	 veneration	 topursue	the	path	of	rectitude	and	render	me	as	deservingof	 your	 esteem	 and	 tenderness.	 .	 .	 .	 To	 be	 respected	 .	 .	 .and	to	meet	the	approbation	of	my	husband	and	family	isthe	 greatest	 wish	 of	 my	 heart.	 Stimulated	 by	 thesemotives	 .	 .	 .	 will	 prove	 a	 sufficient	 incitement	 never	 tosully	 the	 title	 of	 subscribing	 myself	 your	 DutifulDaughter.38The	 joys	 of	 their	 honeymoon	 suddenly	 vanished,	 however,when	they	returned	to	London.	They	knew,	of	course,	that	theyfaced	 three	 years	 of	 northern	 European	 winters	 in	 Berlin	 andenormous	 difficulties	 recovering	 John	 Quincy’s	 possessions	 inLisbon.	 What	 they	 did	 not—could	 not—expect	 was	 an	 angrymob	 at	 the	 front	 door	 of	 the	 Johnson	 mansion	 in	 London,screaming	 for	 John	 Quincy	 to	 pay	 thousands	 of	 pounds	 inoverdue	bills.