CHAPTER 	10Stepladder	to	the	PresidencyAs	 the	 War	 of	 1812	 faded	 from	 national	 memory,	 Americansbegan	to	enjoy	the	greatest	peacetime	prosperity	they	had	everexperienced	in	the	more	than	thirty-two	years	since	Yorktown.Secretary	 of	 State	 James	 Monroe	 had	 taken	 advantage	 ofGeneral	 William	 Henry	 Harrison’s	 victories	 in	 the	 West	 tonegotiate	 purchase	 of	 Indian	 lands	 east	 of	 the	 Mississippi,making	 the	 western	 territory	 between	 the	 AppalachianMountains	 and	 Mississippi	 River	 safe	 for	 American	 migration.Secure	 from	 attack	 by	 British	 troops	 and	 Indians,	 tens	 ofthousands	of	Americans	streamed	westward	to	carve	out	farmsfrom	 virgin	 plains,	 harvest	 furs	 and	 pelts	 from	 superabundantwildlife,	cull	timber	from	vast	forests,	and	chisel	ores	from	richmountainsides.	 The	 land	 rush	 added	 six	 states	 and	 scores	 ofvillages	and	towns	to	the	United	States.	It	generated	wealth	foralmost	every	free	white	man	in	the	nation	and	engendered	thegreatest	 social	 and	 economic	 revolution	 in	 history.	 Neverbefore	 had	 a	 sovereign	 state	 in	 the	 modern	 world	 transferredso	 much	 land	 to	 ordinary	 citizens,	 or	 “commoners.”	 Themillions	 of	 acres	 of	 land	 they	 claimed	 lifted	 them	 into	 thecategory	of	“property	owners”—the	landed	gentry—with	rightsto	 vote,	 serve	 in	 public	 office,	 and	 govern	 their	 communities,states,	 and	 nation.	 To	 facilitate	 economic	 recovery,	 Congressreestablished	 a	 central	 bank—the	 Second	 Bank	 of	 the	 UnitedStates—to	issue	federal	currency	and	serve	as	a	depository	forgovernment	funds.As	 foreign	 trade	 resumed	 with	 its	 attendant	 prosperity,Americans	 hailed	 “Old	 Hickory”—Andrew	 Jackson—for	 hisvictory	 at	 New	 Orleans,	 Secretary	 of	 War	 and	 of	 State	 JamesMonroe	for	his	military	strategy,	and	John	Quincy	Adams	for	hissuccessful	peace	negotiations.On	 February	 12,	 1815,	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Adams	 left	 St.Petersburg	with	young	Charles	Francis	to	rejoin	her	husband	inParis,	where,	he	had	written,	“I	shall	be	impatiently	waiting	foryou.”1	Like	her	husband,	she	was	eager	to	cast	off	the	pall	thatconfined	her	with	memories	of	their	dead	infant	daughter.	Sheleft	 St.	 Petersburg	 “without	 a	 sign,	 except	 that	 which	 waswafted	 to	 the	 tomb	 of	 my	 lovely	 babe.”2	 In	 accordance	 withJohn	 Quincy’s	 instructions,	 she	 set	 out	 in	 a	 large	 carriagetemporarily	 set	 on	 runners	 to	 negotiate	 the	 snows	 until	 theyreached	 roadbeds	 that	 permitted	 normal	 travel	 on	 wheels.Charles	 Francis	 and	 a	 French	 nurse	 rode	 with	 her,	 while	 twomanservants	followed	in	a	second	carriage	on	runners,	and	thetwo	 vehicles	 traveled	 uneventfully	 across	 the	 Russian	 snowsinto	 Latvia.	 After	 an	 innkeeper	 warned	 that	 “last	 night	 adreadful	 murder	 had	 been	 committed	 on	 the	 very	 road	 I	 wasabout	 to	 take,”	 they	 immediately	 got	 lost.	 She	 and	 her	 sonendured	 a	 terrifying	 evening	 “jolted	 over	 hills,	 throughswamps,	and	holes	and	into	valleys	into	which	no	carriage	hadsurely	 ever	 passed	 before,	 and	 my	 whole	 heart	 was	 filled	 withunspeakable	terrors	for	the	safety	of	my	child.”3	A	local	farmerled	them	back	safely	to	the	road	toward	Konigsberg,	Prussia.Many	 more	 frights	 followed—a	 broken	 wheel	 and	 a	 night	 atan	inn	that	Louisa	described	as	“little	more	than	a	hovel,”	witha	 “dirty,	 ugly,	 and	 ill-natured”	 innkeeper	 and	 “surly,	 ill-lookingmen”	as	clients.4	The	worst	horrors	of	war	confronted	them	asthey	crossed	a	battlefield	covered	with	“an	immense	quantity	ofbones.”	 Adding	 to	 their	 terror	 was	 the	 refusal	 of	 her	 twomanservants	to	continue	past	Frankfurt.	Napoléon	had	escapedfrom	Elbe	and	was	leading	a	growing	army	to	Paris	to	reclaimhis	 crown.	 The	 two	 men	 feared	 being	 drafted	 into	 his	 army	 ifthey	entered	France.Louisa	 decided	 to	 gamble	 that	 the	 confusion	 created	 byNapoléon’s	 return	 would	 leave	 government	 officials	 uncertainwhether	 to	 close	 any	 borders,	 and	 she	 ordered	 her	 driver	 tospeed	to	the	French	frontier.	After	crossing	safely	into	France,her	 Russian	 carriage	 reached	 the	 outskirts	 of	 Épernay	 in	 theheart	 of	 Champagne,	 where	 a	 company	 of	 French	 troops,	 ontheir	 way	 from	 the	 Russian	 campaign	 to	 join	 the	 emperor,stopped	 and	 surrounded	 them,	 shouting,	 “They	 are	 Russians!Tear	 them	 out	 of	 the	 carriage!	 .	 .	 .	 Kill	 them!”	 Fortunately,	 ageneral	rode	up	and	examined	Louisa’s	papers,	then	“called	outthat	 I	 was	 an	 American	 lady	 going	 to	 meet	 her	 husband	 inParis.	At	which	the	soldiers	shouted,	‘Vive	les	Améri-cains’	anddesired	 that	 I	 should	 cry	 ‘Vive	 Napoléon,’	 which	 I	 did	 wavingmy	handkerchief.	They	repeated	their	first	cry,	adding,	‘Ils	sontnos	amis’	[They	are	our	friends]	and	a	number	of	soldiers	wereordered	to	march	before	the	horses.”My	poor	boy	seemed	to	be	absolutely	petrified	and	sat	bymy	side	like	a	marble	statue.	.	.	.	The	general	warned	thatmy	 situation	 was	 a	 very	 precarious	 one;	 the	 army	 wastotally	 undisciplined;	 that	 I	 must	 appear	 perfectly	 easyand	 unconcerned.	 .	 .	 .	 In	 this	 way	 we	 journeyed,	 thesoldiers	 presenting	 their	 bayonets	 at	 us	 with	 loud	 andbrutal	 threats	 every	 half	 hour.	 The	 road	 lined	 each	 sidefor	 miles	 with	 intoxicated	 men,	 ripe	 for	 every	 species	 ofvillainy,	 shouting	 and	 vociferating	 “À	 bas	 Louis	 dix-huit!Vive	 Napoléon!	 [Down	 with	 Louis	 XVIII!	 Long	 liveNapoléon!]”	 till	 the	 whole	 welkin	 [firmament]	 rang	 withthe	 screech,	 worse	 than	 the	 midnight	 owls’	 most	 direalarm	to	the	startled	ear.5After	two	more	days	of	travel	and	one	night	at	an	inn,	where“soldiers	were	crowding	into	the	house	all	night,	drinking,	andmaking	 the	 most	 inappropriate	 noises,”	 Louisa	 and	 CharlesFrancis	 reached	 Paris	 unharmed	 on	 the	 morning	 of	 March	 20,forty	 days	 after	 they	 had	 left	 St.	 Petersburg.	 At	 11	 a.m.,	 sheand	her	seven-year-old	and	his	French	nurse	entered	the	Hoteldu	Nord	on	the	rue	de	Richelieu	and	reunited	with	John	QuincyAdams	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 eleven	 months.	 That	 evening,	 asJohn	 Quincy	 held	 “my	 best	 friend”	 in	 his	 arms,	 huge	 crowdssurged	 through	 the	 Paris	 streets	 cheering	 the	 arrival	 ofNapoléon	I	and	his	army	of	tens	of	thousands	in	the	capital	andat	the	gates	of	the	Tuileries	Palace	near	the	Adamses’	hotel.Napoléon	 had	 left	 Elbe	 on	 March	 1	 with	 seven	 hundredarmed	followers	and	sailed	to	the	Gulf	of	Juan,	between	Cannesand	 Antibes.	 He	 led	 his	 men	 northward,	 planning	 to	 cross	 theMaritime	 Alps	 to	 Grenoble,	 but	 a	 regiment	 of	 troopsintercepted	 them.	 Instead	 of	 attacking,	 however,	 they	 ralliedaround	him,	then	led	his	way	northward	across	the	mountains,with	the	number	of	his	followers	swelling	at	each	village,	town,and	city.	The	people	of	Grenoble	turned	out	to	cheer	his	return.Lyon	followed	suit.	Marshal	Michel	Ney,	the	commander	of	theFrench	 army	 who	 had	 promised	 Louis	 XVIII	 to	 present	 hismajesty	 with	 Napoléon	 in	 an	 iron	 cage,	 delivered	 his	 sword	 toNapoléon,	 welcomed	 him	 back	 to	 France,	 and	 turned	 overcommand	 of	 his	 regiments.	 On	 the	 night	 of	 March	 20,it	 seemed,	 by	 the	 entire	 FrenchNapoléon,	 surrounded,population,	 marched	 into	 Paris	 and	 seized	 power—and	 thepalace—from	the	king,	who	had	fled	with	his	court.With	 Paris	 in	 a	 state	 of	 riotous	 flux,	 John	 Quincy	 packed	 uphis	 family	 and	 prepared	 to	 travel	 to	 his	 new	 assignment	 inEngland.	 Before	 leaving	 they	 drove	 out	 to	 La	 Grange,	 east	 ofParis,	 to	 say	 farewell	 to	 the	 Lafayettes,	 then	 headed	 for	 thechannel	 port	 of	 Le	 Havre,	 where	 thousands	 of	 royalists	 milledabout	in	panic	seeking	passage	to	England.	Just	after	the	boatcarrying	 John	 Quincy	 and	 his	 family	 passed	 out	 of	 Frenchwaters,	authorities	imposed	martial	law	and	prevented	all	otherboats	from	leaving	port.The	 Adamses	 arrived	 in	 London	 on	 May	 25	 and	 went	 to	 theAmerican	government’s	Harley	Street	house	to	find	their	sons,fourteen-year-old	 George	 Washington	 Adams	 and	 John	 AdamsII,	nearly	twelve,	waiting	for	them.	It	had	been	six	years	sincetheir	 parents	 had	 seenintouncontrollable	 sobs,	 clasping	 her	 two	 boys	 in	 her	 arms.	 Eight-year-old	Charles	Francis	was	just	turning	two	when	he	had	lastseen	 his	 brothers	 and,	 of	 course,	 had	 no	 recollection	 of	 eitherof	 them.	 Neither	 parent	 recognized	 George.	 Without	 a	 wordabout	 his	 own	 feelings,	 John	 Quincy	 confided	 to	 his	 diary	 thatLouisa	 had	 been	 “so	 much	 overcome	 by	 .	 .	 .	 the	 agitation	 ofthem,	 and	 Louisa	 burstmeeting	so	unexpectedly	her	long	absent	children	that	she	.	.	.twice	fainted.	She	was	relieved	by	a	warm	bath.”6Also	 waiting	 for	 John	 Quincy	 in	 London	 were	 his	 old	 friendsfrom	Ghent,	Henry	Clay	and	Albert	Gallatin.	Both	were	there	tojoin	 him	 in	 negotiating	 a	 new	 Anglo-American	 treaty	 ofcommerce	 and	 maritime	 law—a	 logical	 outcome	 of	 peace.	 TheUnited	 States	 had	 been	 Britain’s	 largest	 source	 of	 rawmaterials	 for	 two	 centuries,	 and	 Britain	 had	 been	 the	 largestsupplier	 of	 finished	 and	 manufactured	 goods	 to	 settlers.	 Withthe	 economies	 of	 the	 two	 lands	 so	 interdependent,	 bothgovernments	were	eager	to	resume	trade	relations.inthe	 AlgerinesTreaty	negotiations	had	only	just	gotten	under	way	when	theDuke	of	Wellington	triumphed	at	Waterloo	in	mid-June,	endingNapoléon’s	 one-hundred-day	 reign	 and	 provoking	 a	 stifferBritish	 attitude	 toward	 the	 Americans	 at	 the	 negotiating	 table—until	 news	 arrived	 of	 American	 Captain	 Stephen	 Decatur’sspectacular	 naval	 victories	 overtheMediterranean.	 During	 the	 Anglo-American	 War	 of	 1812,	 thedey	 of	 Algiers	 had	 declared	 war	 against	 the	 United	 States,demanding	 tribute	 for	 the	 right	 to	 sail	 the	 Mediterranean,seamen	 andships,	 enslavingseizing	 Americanpassengers,	 and	 selling	 most	 of	 the	 ships	 to	 the	 British.	 WhenAmerican	 hostilities	 with	 Britain	 ended,	 Congress	 authorizedDecatur	 to	 lead	 a	 ten-vessel	 fleet	 to	 attack	 the	 Algerines.	 Inmid-June,	over	the	course	of	two	days,	Decatur’s	fleet	capturedtwo	 Algerine	 frigates,	 one	 with	 forty-four	 guns,	 the	 other	 withtwenty-two;	 he	 then	 sailed	 into	 Algiers	 Harbor	 and	 forced	 thedey	 to	 release	 U.S.	 prisoners,	 end	 his	 depredations	 againstAmerican	ships,	and	withdraw	his	demands	for	tribute.	Decaturwould	 go	 on	 to	 similar	 successes	 against	 Tunis	 and	 Tripoli,which,	 together	 with	 Algiers,	 agreed	 to	 pay	 the	 U.S.compensation	for	the	vessels	they	had	seized.theirDecatur’simpressive	 display	 of	 American	 naval	 powersurprised	 the	 British	 government,	 which	 immediately	 softenedits	 tone	 at	 the	 talks	 with	 John	 Quincy	 and	 his	 colleagues.British	foreign	secretary	Viscount	Castlereagh	even	went	out	ofhis	way	to	send	a	warm	personal	note	to	notify	John	Quincy	ofWellington’s	 victory.	 Instead	 of	 locking	 horns	 over	 terms	 of	 aformal	 treaty,	 Castlereagh	 and	 John	 Quincy	 worked	 out	 a	 lessformal,	 but	 far	 broader,	 four-year,	 renewable	 commercial“convention.”	 It	 allowed	 reciprocal	 establishment	 of	 consulsand	 free	 commerce	 by	 the	 ships	 of	 both	 nations	 between	 theUnited	 States	 and	 Britain	 and	 all	 British	 territories,	 with	 allproducts,	 ships,	 citizens,	 and	 subjects	 of	 both	 nations	 grantedequal	 status	 in	 all	 ports	 of	 both	 nations.	 The	 convention	 alsobanned	 discriminatory	 duties	 and	 port	 fees	 and	 allowedAmericans	 to	 trade	 directly	 in	 British	 East	 Indies	 ports—Calcutta,	 Madras,	 Bombay,	 and	 so	 forth—as	 a	 most	 favoredcostly	 markups	 by	 Britishnation,intermediariesitsnondiscrimination	 provision,	 would	 serve	 as	 a	 framework	 forU.S.	trade	with	all	other	nations	for	decades	thereafter.in	 England.	 The	 convention,	 withthus	 eliminatingWhen	 the	 time	 came	 to	 approve	 the	 finished	 convention,however,	 John	 Quincy	 balked	 suddenly,	 saying	 the	 documentshad	 not	 provided	 for	 the	 alternat—a	 French	 diplomatic	 termdefining	the	order	of	appearance	of	participating	parties	in	thetexts	 of	 international	 agreements	 and	 of	 the	 signatures	 at	 thebottom	 of	 such	 agreements.	 Under	 the	 alternat	 protocol,	 theorder	 of	 participating	 nations	 and	 their	 signatories	 alternateswith	 each	 copy	 of	 the	 treaty,	 with,	 for	 example,	 “Great	 Britainand	 the	 United	 States”	 in	 the	 British	 copy	 appearing	 as	 “theUnited	 States	 and	 Great	 Britain”	 in	 the	 American	 copy.	 Untilthat	moment,	the	name	of	U.S.	signatories	had	always	appearedafter	 “His	 Most	 Christian	 Majesty,”	 in	 the	 case	 of	 U.S.agreements	 with	 France,	 or	 “His	 Most	 Britannic	 Majesty,”	 inthe	 case	 of	 the	 peace	 treaty	 with	 Britain	 in	 1783.	 When	 timecame	 to	 approve	 the	 new	 convention	 with	 Britain,	 however,John	 Quincy	 found	 that	 the	 document	 “named	 the	 Britishgovernment	 and	 plenipotentiaries	 first,	 which	 was	 right	 fortheir	copy.”But	at	the	close	they	had	put	“done	in	duplicate,”	 whichwas	improper.	.	.	.	I	.	.	.	directed	that	our	copy	should	bemade	 out,	 taking	 the	 alternative	 throughout	 the	 wholetreaty,	 always	 naming	 the	 American	 government	 andplenipotentiaries	 first,	 but	 without	 any	 change	 either	 insubstance	or	in	the	words.7Fearing	 John	 Quincy’s	 demand	 might	 scuttle	 the	 entireagreement,	Gallatin	called	the	alternat	protocol	“a	matter	of	noimportance,”	 and	 Clay	 agreed,	 but	 America’sJuly	 4Independence	Day	was	just	days	away,	and	John	Quincy	refusedto	 yield.	 He	 reiterated	 his	 father’s	 furious	 demand	 to	 thearrogant	 French	 prime	 minister	 Talleyrand	 seventeen	 yearsearlier	that	the	United	States	be	treated	with	“the	respect	dueto	.	.	.	a	free,	independent,	and	powerful	nation.”8“It	will	throw	the	business	into	confusion,”	Gallatin	insisted.“Mr.	Gallatin,”	John	Quincy	replied	angrily,	“you	and	Mr.	Claymay	do	as	you	please,	but	I	will	not	sign	the	treaty	without	thealternative	[alternat	]	observed	throughout.”“Now	don’t	fly	off	in	this	manner,”	Gallatin	countered.“Indeed,	sir,”	John	Quincy	continued	growling,	“I	will	not	signthe	treaty	in	any	other	form.”I	 am	 so	 far	 from	 thinking	 with	 Mr.	 Clay	 that	 it	 is	 of	 noimportance	 that	 I	 think	 it	 by	 much	 the	 most	 importantthing	that	we	shall	obtain	by	this	treaty.	The	treaty	itself	Ivery	 much	 dislike,	 and	 it	 is	 only	 out	 of	 deference	 to	 youand	 Mr.	 Clay	 that	 I	 consent	 to	 sign	 it	 at	 all.	 I	 shouldinfinitely	 prefer	 to	 sign	 no	 treaty	 at	 all,	 being	 perfectlyconvinced	 that	 we	 obtain	 nothing	 by	 it	 but	 what	 weshould	 obtain	 by	 the	 regulations	 of	 this	 governmentwithout	it.9On	 July	 3,	 1815,	 the	 signatories	 penned	 their	 names	 on	 thefinal	 documents,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 savored	 the	 joy	 ofhaving	 ensured	 the	 appearance	 of	 his	 nation’s	 name	 first	 onone	 of	 the	 copies	 of	 an	 international	 document	 as	 a	 full	 equalwith	Great	Britain	for	the	first	time	in	history.	He	then	went	tocelebrate	 his	 nation’s	 Independence	 Day	 with	 his	 wife	 andchildren.As	 minister	 plenipotentiary,	 John	 Quincy	 next	 turned	 to	 thetask	 of	 improving	 his	 nation’s	 relations	 with	 Britain.	 Toeveryone’s	surprise	in	London’s	diplomatic	circles,	John	Quincyestablished	a	solid	working	relationship	with	Britain’s	brilliant,politically	powerful	foreign	secretary	Robert	Stewart,	ViscountCastlereagh.	 Castlereagh	 had	 organized	 the	 grand	 alliance	 ofEuropean	 nations	 that	 defeated	 Napoléon,	 then	 organized	 theCongress	 of	 Vienna,	 where	 he	 effectively	 dictated	 terms	 of	 acommon	peace	settlement.	In	organizing	the	so-called	Concertof	Europe,	he	established	a	precedent	that	presaged	the	intra-European	 ties	 of	 the	 late	 twentieth	 and	 early	 twenty-firstcenturies.	 Two	 years	 younger	 than	 John	 Quincy,	 he	 was	 tooyoung	 to	 harbor	 any	 of	 the	 deep	 antagonisms	 born	 of	 theAnglo-American	 disputes	 of	 the	 previous	 century.	 Raised	 inwealth	 and	 educated	 at	 Cambridge,	 he	 commanded	 the	 sameerudition	as	John	Quincy	and	was	an	equally	skilled	diplomat.Wellington’s	 army	 had	 been	 the	 dominant	 force	 at	 Waterloo,and	 Castlereagh	 again	 dictated	 terms	 of	 peace	 to	 ensureEurope’s	 return	 to	 pre-Napoleonic	 borders,	 thus	 preventingRussia	 from	 swallowing	 Poland	 and	 Prussia	 from	 seizingSaxony.	In	an	expansive	mood	after	his	diplomatic	triumphs	inEurope,	 Castlereagh	 showed	 great	 respect	 for	 John	 Quincy—not	 only	 because	 of	 the	 latter’s	 position	 in	 the	 Americanpolitical	 world	 and	 his	 experience	 in	 international	 diplomacybut	 because	 of	 John	 Quincy’s	 breathtaking	 erudition.	 As	 CzarAlexander	 I	 had	 learned,	 few	 Western	 diplomats	 could	 matchJohn	 Quincy’s	 mastery	 of	 classical	 literature,	 history,	 andmodern	 languages.	 And	 unlike	 most	 diplomats,	 John	 Quincynever	 felt	 the	 need	 to	 equivocate.	 From	 the	 first,	 he	 made	 itclear	that	his	primary	goal	was	to	ensure	his	nation’s	territorialintegrity	and	the	safety	of	her	ships	and	men	at	sea.	He	couldnot	have	arrived	in	London	at	a	better	time	to	do	just	that.	WithWaterloo	 and	 the	 exile	 of	 Napoléon	 to	 a	 volcanic	 island	 in	 theAtlantic	 where	 he	 could	 bother	 no	 one,	 Europe	 settled	 into	 anunearthly	peace	after	centuries	of	constant	war.	“The	world	ofEurope	 is	 in	 a	 glassy	 calm,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 to	 his	 father.“Not	a	breath	of	wind	or	a	ripple	of	water	is	moving.”10Like	John	Quincy,	Lord	Castlereagh	embraced	the	concept	ofJohn	 Quincy’sreconciliation,	 and	 atAnglo-Americansuggestion,	he	agreed	in	principle	to	total	disarmament	on	theGreat	Lakes,	pledging,	“I	will	propose	it	to	the	government	forconsideration.”11	While	the	government	considered,	both	menagreed	to	freeze	armaments	at	then-current	levels.	A	year	later,both	 nations	 agreed	 to	 reduce	 naval	 armaments	 on	 the	 GreatLakes	 to	 four	 ships	 each,	 armed	 only	 enough	 to	 enforcecustoms	 regulations—a	 landmark	 voluntary	 agreement	 forreciprocal	 naval	 disarmament	 that	 would	 become	 the	 longest-lasting	and	most	successful	agreement	of	its	kind	in	the	world.inthe	 years	 afterWith	 the	 Great	 Lakes	 eliminated	 as	 a	 danger	 zone,	 JohnQuincy	addressed	other	issues	that	had	soured	Anglo-Americanthe	 Revolutionary	 War:relationsimpressment,	 American	 access	 to	 fisheries	 off	 the	 CanadianAtlantic	 coast,	 and	 the	 return	 of	 slaves	 who	 had	 fled	 to	 theBritish	 West	 Indies	 with	 the	 British	 after	 the	 war.	 Castlereaghbrushed	 each	 of	 them	 aside,	 however,	 saying	 they	 were	 bestpostponed	 until	 reconciliation	 between	 the	 two	 countries	 hadprogressed	 and	 each	 could	 address	 emotional	 issues	 moreobjectively.	 In	 the	 matter	 ofimpressment,	 for	 example,Castlereagh	pointed	out	the	difficulties	of	determining	the	truecitizenship	of	seamen	not	born	in	one	country	or	the	other.	Asfor	 returning	 slaves	 to	 their	 owners,	 he	 deferred	 to	 PrimeMinister	Charles	Jenkinson,	the	Earl	of	Liverpool,	who	assertedas	 diplomatically	 as	 he	 knew	 how,	 “I	 do	 not	 think	 they	 can	 beconsidered	precisely	under	the	general	denomination	of	privateproperty.	 A	 table	 or	 a	 chair,	 for	 instance,	 might	 be	 taken	 andrestored	 without	 changing	 its	 condition;	 but	 a	 living	 humanbeing	is	entitled	to	other	considerations.”Although	he	insisted	that	the	treaty	ending	the	RevolutionaryWar	 had	 made	 no	 such	 distinction,	 John	 Quincy	 relented,admitting	 the	 validity	 of	 Liverpool’s	 point.	 “Most	 certainly	 aliving,	sentient	being,	and	still	more	a	human	being,	was	to	beregarded	 in	 a	 different	 light	 from	 the	 inanimate	 matter	 ofwhich	other	private	property	might	consist.”12Convinced	 by	 the	 arguments	 of	 Castlereagh	 and	 Liverpool,John	 Quincy	 stopped	 discussing	 unresolved	 issues	 that	 had	 noevident	 solutions	 and	 turned	 his	 attention	 to	 reconciliationbetween	the	two	governments	and	the	two	peoples.	“My	socialduty	 at	 present,”	 John	 Quincy	 explained	 to	 his	 father,	 “is	 topreach	peace.	And	from	the	bottom	of	my	soul	I	do	preach	it	aswell	 to	 those	 to	 whom	 as	 to	 those	 from	 whom	 I	 am	 sent.	 I	 amdeeply	 convinced	 that	 peace	 is	 the	 state	 best	 adapted	 to	 theinterest	and	the	happiness	of	both	nations.”13Becoming	 the	 consummate	 ambassador	 of	 goodwill,	 he	 and,when	 appropriate,	 Louisa	 attended	 every	 public	 function	 andaccepted	 every	 invitation	 they	 could,	 including	 the	 dinner	 ofLondon’s	lord	mayor	in	the	spring	of	1816	to	honor	the	Duke	ofWellington.	After	presenting	Wellington	to	John	Quincy,	the	lordmayor	 toasted	 “the	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States.”	 JohnQuincy	responded,	“My	lord,	I	pray	your	lordship	to	accept	myhearty	thanks	for	the	honor	you	have	done	my	country.	.	.	.	Topromote	peace,	harmony,	and	friendship	between	Great	Britainand	 the	 United	 States	 is	 the	 first	 duty	 of	 my	 station.	 It	 is	 thefirst	wish	of	my	heart.	It	is	my	first	prayer	to	God.”14The	all-pervasive	peace	in	the	Western	world	left	John	Quincyand	other	diplomats	with	few,	if	any,	formal	negotiations.	Theyand	 he	 spent	 much	 of	 their	 time	 creating	 and	 improvingpersonal	 ties	 to	 each	 other	 at	 receptions,	 dinners,	 and	 balls,and	 John	 Quincy	 established	 warm—and,	 as	 it	 turned	 out,lasting—relationships	 with	 both	 Lord	 Liverpool	 and	 ViscountCastlereagh	and	many	others	of	note.	“The	Duke	of	Wellingtoncalled	 in	 person,”	 John	 Quincy	 enthused	 in	 his	 diary,	 “andinvited	 me	 and	 Mrs.	 Adams	 to	 the	 wedding	 in	 his	 house.	 .	 .	 .The	 duchess	 afterwards	 called	 and	 left	 her	 card.”15	 JohnQuincy	 sought	 out	 and	 befriended	 as	 many	 academic	 leaders,jurists,	 and	 thinkers	 as	 possible	 and	 established	 a	 closefriendship	 with	 jurist	 and	 philosopher	 Jeremy	 Bentham,	 whopioneered	penal	reform	in	England	and	with	whom	John	Quincyoften	walked	and	talked	for	hours.With	 so	 little	 official	 work	 to	 do	 in	 London,	 John	 Quincymoved	 his	 family	 into	 a	 rented	 house	 in	 rural	 Ealing,	 abouteight	 miles	 from	 his	 London	 quarters.	 John	 Quincy	 called	 thehouse	 “one	 of	 the	 most	 delightful	 spots	 upon	 which	 I	 everresided.”16	 He	 enrolled	 the	 two	 older	 boys	 in	 a	 local	 privateschool,	 then	 supplemented	 George’s	 daily	 academic	 choreswith	advanced	work	in	Greek,	Latin,	and	history—essentials	forentrance	 into	 Harvard.	 He	 and	 Louisa	 occasionally	 went	 intotown	 to	 the	 opera—they	 both	 loved	 Mozart’s	 Don	 Giovanni—and	he	took	John	II	to	see	several	debates	in	Parliament.	Buthe	spent	most	of	his	time	at	Ealing.At	night,	he	and	the	boys	gazed	at	the	heavens,	and	he	tooktime	 to	 write	 long,	 intimate	 letters	 to	 his	 father,	 oftendigressing	 into	 complex	 discussions	 of	 political	 philosophy.Louisa,	 meanwhile,	 began	 writing	 Abigail,	 and	 the	 two	 ladies,often	 cool	 to	 each	 other	 during	 the	 first	 years	 of	 Louisa’smarriage,	 established	 a	 deep	 and	 warm	 mother-daughterrelationship.	 To	 Abigail’s	 delight,	 Louisa	 described	 her	 sortiesto	the	opera,	theater,	and	formal	dinners	in	London	and	detailsof	 her	 activities	 with	 the	 boys	 in	 Ealing.	 She	 was	 particularlygenerous	 in	 describing	 the	 progress	 of	 the	 boys—knowing,	 ofcourse,	 how	 much	 Abigail	 and	 John	 Adams	 missed	 theirgrandchildren.“How	delighted	I	should	be	to	have	them	all	about	me,”	JohnAdams	 wrote	 in	 one	 of	 his	 increasingly	 emotional	 letters	 toJohn	 Quincy.	 “Yet	 they	 would	 devour	 all	 my	 strawberries,raspberries,	 cherries,	 currants,	 plums,	 peaches,	 pears	 andapples.	And	what	is	worse,	they	would	get	into	my	bedchamberand	disarrange	all	the	papers	on	my	writing	table.”17	The	elderAdamses	 also	 missed	 their	 son.	 “A	 man	 should	 be	 in	 his	 owncountry,”	the	former	President	admonished	John	Quincy.Inspired	 perhaps	 by	 his	 nightly	 studies	 of	 the	 stars,	 JohnQuincy	 started	 writing	 poetry	 again—serious	 poetry.	 He	 hadharbored	 ambitions	 of	 writing	 poetry	 since	 his	 days	 inNewburyport,	 when	 he	 wrote	 rhymes	 to	 ease	 the	 boredom	 ofreading	 law.	 “Could	 I	 have	 chosen	 my	 own	 genius	 andcondition,”	 he	 now	 thought	 to	 himself,	 “I	 should	 have	 mademyself	 a	 great	 poet.”18	 John	 Quincy	 often	 read	 some	 of	 hispoems	to	his	family	and	neighborhood	friends,	after	which	theyall	gathered	about	Louisa	and	her	harp	to	sing.	While	at	Ealing,Louisa	 assumed	 chores	 as	 her	 husband’s	 private	 secretary,writing	 and	 answering	 routine	 letters—mostly	 from	 Americansin	Britain	needing	or	complaining	about	one	thing	or	another—or,	too	often,	stranded	without	money.While	Louisa	replied	to	his	letters,	John	Quincy	was	writing“Man	wants	but	little	here	below,Nor	wants	that	little	long.”q’Tis	not	with	me	exactly	so,But	’tis	so	in	the	song.My	wants	are	many,	and	if	toldWould	muster	many	a	score;And	were	each	wish	a	mint	of	gold,I	still	should	long	for	more.19In	 1816,	 Secretary	 of	 State	 James	 Monroe	 rode	 a	 wave	 ofpopularity	for	his	wartime	successes	to	an	easy	election	victoryto	succeed	his	friend	James	Madison	as	President.	Next	to	thePresident	 himself,	 the	 secretary	 of	 state	 held	 the	 mostimportant	 and	 powerful	 post	 in	 any	 administration,	 with	 aportfolio	 that	 included	 far	 more	 than	 simple	 foreign	 relations.In	 modern	 terms,	 the	 secretary	 of	 state	 in	 the	 early	 1800scontrolled	 many	 functions	 of	 today’s	 Secret	 Service,	 CentralIntelligence	 Agency,	 Department	 of	 Interior,	 Department	 ofCommerce,	 Department	 of	 Agriculture,	 Department	 ofTransportation,	 and	 a	 number	 of	 agencies	 such	 as	 the	 Bureauof	 Indian	 Affairs.	 Given	 the	 secretary	 of	 state’s	 range	 ofexecutive	 authority,	 it	 was	 no	 coincidence	 that	 the	 Americanelectorate	 had	 chosen	 three	 successive	 secretaries	 of	 state	 tosucceed	 the	 Presidents	 they	 had	 served—Thomas	 Jefferson,James	 Madison,	 and,	 in	 1816,	 Monroe.	 Two	 days	 after	 hisinauguration,	 President	 Monroe	 named	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 ofMassachusetts	to	be	secretary	of	state—the	first	sign	of	a	breakin	 the	 Virginia	 dynasty	 that	 had	 provided	 four	 of	 the	 first	 fivePresidents.Despite	 widespread	 calm	 in	 the	 Western	 world,	 the	 UnitedStates	 remained	 surrounded	 on	 land	 and	 sea	 by	 powerfulforeign	powers,	each	greedily	eyeing	the	rich	resources	of	theAmerican	 continent	 and	 ready	 to	 pounce	 if	 an	 opportunityarose.	 The	 secretary	 of	 state	 and	 his	 overseas	 envoys	 weretherefore	 central	 to	 the	 nation’s	 survival,	 tiptoeing	 away	 frommilitary	 confrontations	 while	 maintaining	 trade	 relationsessential	 to	 the	 American	 economy.	 John	 Quincy	 had	 been	 themost	 visible	 and	 most	 eloquent	 American	 diplomat	 in	 Europefor	 seven	 years	 and,	 like	 Monroe	 himself,	 had	 proved	 himselfthe	 most	 skillful—parrying	 and	 thrusting	 delicately	 andeffectively,	 taking	 a	 stand	 or	 not,	 as	 the	 situation	 required,	 toextract	 the	 best	 terms	 he	 could	 realistically	 obtain,	 given	 hisnation’s	relatively	weak	military	and	naval	posture.“The	question	whether	I	ought	to	accept	the	place	.	.	.	is	notwithout	 difficulties	 in	 my	 mind,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 about	 hisnew	 appointment.	 “A	 doubt	 of	 my	 competency	 for	 it	 is	 veryseriously	 entertained.”20	 Former	 President	 John	 Adams	 hadsensed	his	son’s	fatigue	with	public	service	and	his	infatuationwith	the	poet’s	quiet	life	in	Ealing.	Fearing	his	son	might	rejectthe	appointment—as	he	had	the	Supreme	Court—he	urged	JohnQuincy	toaccept	 without	 hesitation	 and	 share	 the	 fortunes	 of	 yourcountry	whatever	they	may	be.	You	are	now	fifty	years	ofage.	 In	 my	 opinion	 you	 must	 return	 to	 it	 or	 renounce	 itforever.	 I	 am	 well	 aware	 of	 the	 critical	 situation	 you	 willbe	in.	I	know	you	have	not	the	command	of	your	feelingsor	the	immutable	taciturnity	of	Franklin	and	Washington,but	you	must	risk	all.21Abigail	added	her	voice	to	her	husband’s	appeal,	saying	thatAmerican	 political	 leaders	 were	 already	 pointing	 to	 him	 as“worthy	to	preside	over	the	councils	of	a	great	nation.”22	Someof	 John	 Adams’s	 colleagues	 from	 the	 Continental	 Congress	 of1774	 had	 indeed	 written	 to	 congratulate	 him	 on	 his	 son’sappointment:	“It	seems	that	the	office	of	secretary	of	state	.	.	.is	 the	 stepladder	 to	 the	 presidential	 chair,	 at	 least	 it	 has	 beenso	 in	 the	 case	 of	 the	 last	 three	 presidents,”	 wrote	 one	 of	 JohnAdams’s	 friends.	 “Now,	 as	 your	 son	 .	 .	 .	 is	 appointed	 to	 thatstation,	 if	 he	 makes	 the	 best	 advantage	 of	 his	 situation,	 it	 ismore	 than	 probable	 that	 he	 may	 be	 the	 next	 President	 of	 theUnited	States.”23As	 he	 had	 in	 the	 past,	 John	 Quincy	 yielded	 to	 his	 parents’ambitions	 and	 accepted	 his	 new	 assignment.	 Critics	 predictedthat	 as	 a	 former	 Federalist,	 he	 and	 the	 Republican	 Presidentwould	soon	be	at	odds	over	foreign	policy,	but	he	scoffed	at	theallegations,	 pointing	 out	 that	 he	 had	 worked	 harmoniouslyunder	Secretary	of	State	Monroe	for	eight	years.	“I	have	knownfew	of	his	opinions	with	which	I	did	not	cordially	concur.	.	.	.	Myduty	 will	 be	 to	 support	 and	 not	 to	 counteract	 or	 oppose	 thePresident’s	administration.”24On	June	15,	John	Quincy	Adams	abandoned	his	idyll	at	Ealingand,	 with	 his	 wife	 and	 three	 sons,	 set	 sail	 for	 America,	 takingwith	 him	 two	 maids,	 a	 household	 manager,	 thirty-one	 trunks,barrels,	 and	 boxes,	 and	 furniture	 accumulated	 in	 Russia	 andEngland.	 Without	 any	 space	 to	 spare	 left	 on	 board,	 he	 had	 tosell	 his	 560	 bottles	 of	 red	 wine	 and	 298	 bottles	 of	 champagnebefore	leaving.After	 celebrating	 his	 fiftieth	 birthday	 in	 mid-ocean,	 JohnQuincy	Adams	stepped	on	shore	in	America	for	the	first	time	ineight	 years,	 landing	 in	 New	 York	 City	 on	 August	 6,	 1817.	 Heimmediately	 sent	 word	 to	 his	 parents	 of	 his	 and	 his	 family’ssafe	arrival.“Yesterday	 was	 one	 of	 the	 most	 uniformly	 happy	 days	 of	 mywhole	 life,”	 the	 ecstatic	 former	 President	 replied	 to	 his	 son.“Kiss	 all	 the	 dear	 creatures	 for	 me,	 Wife,	 George,	 John	 andCharles.	 I	 hope	 to	 embrace	 them	 all	 here	 in	 a	 few	 days.	 GodAlmighty	bless	you	all.	So	prays	John	Adams.”25“God	be	thanked,”	an	equally	joyful	Abigail	wrote	to	her	sonin	 a	 separate	 note.	 “We	 now	 wait	 in	 pleasing	 expectation	 ofwelcoming	you,	one	and	all,	to	the	old	habitation,	altered	onlyby	 the	 depredation	 of	 time,	 like	 its	 ancient	 inhabitants.	 Comethen	all	of	you;	we	will	make	you	as	comfortable	as	.	.	.	love	andaffection	can	render	you.”26After	 attending	 several	 functions	 in	 New	 York	 in	 his	 honor,John	 Quincy	 and	 his	 family	 left	 by	 boat	 for	 Boston,	 and	 at	 10a.m.,	on	August	18,	their	carriage	pulled	up	to	John	and	AbigailAdams’s	 house	 in	 Quincy.	 Abigail	 stood	 in	 the	 door	 as	 JohnAdams	II	flew	from	the	carriage	into	his	grandmother’s	arms	intears,	 with	 George	 Washington	 Adams	 just	 behind	 him	 crying,“Oh!	Gran’!	Oh!	Gran’!”Poor	 little	 Charles,	 only	 ten,	 held	 back.	 He	 had	 not	 seen	 hisgrandparents	since	he	was	an	infant,	didn’t	know	them	or	whatto	 do	 or	 say,	 and	 could	 not	 yet	 share	 their	 “affection	 andreverence.”27	 He	 quickly	 changed	 his	 mind,	 however,	 asseventy-three-year-old	 Abigail	 resumed	 her	 role	 as	 familygovernor	 and	 hectored	 all	 three	 boys	 to	 be	 diligent,	 punctual,neat	and	clean,	and	so	forth.	Like	his	older	brothers,	he	learnedthat	 hectoring	 was	 the	 only	 way	 his	 grandmother	 knew	 toexpress	her	“love	and	warm	affection.”28Overthe	 nextthree	 weeks,friends,	 relatives,	 andenthusiastic	 Republican	 supporters	 of	 President	 Monroe	 tookturns	 entertaining	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa,	 and	 they	 managedto	settle	briefly	into	the	old	house	that	had	been	John	Quincy’sbirthplace.	 His	 brother,	 Thomas	 Boylston	 Adams,	 hadprospered	in	Boston.	A	successful	lawyer	and	father	of	five,	hehad	 won	 appointment	 as	 a	 judge	 and,	 privately,	 built	 JohnQuincy’s	 estate	 to	 more	 than	 $100,000	 in	 cash	 and	 securitiesand	 acquired	 five	 income-producing	 residential	 properties	 forfamily	 was	 growinghis	 brother.	 But	 the	 size	 of	 hisuncontrollably,	and	the	strain,	it	seems,	motivated	him	to	begindrinking—a	fatal	error	for	anyone	with	Abigail	Adams’s	genes.Less	than	a	month	after	their	arrival,	John	Quincy	and	Louisahad	 to	 leave	 Quincy	 for	 their	 new	 home	 in	 Washington.	 Theyenrolled	 Charles	 Francis	 and	 his	 older	 brother	 John	 II	 in	 theprestigious	 Boston	 Latin	 School	 and	 took	 George	 WashingtonAdams	to	Cambridge	to	enroll	in	Harvard,	but	the	faculty	foundthe	 boy	 academically	 unprepared	 for	 admission.	 John	 Quincyarranged	for	him	to	board	with	the	family	of	a	Harvard	facultymember	who	agreed	to	tutor	the	young	Adams	and	prepare	himfor	the	college	curriculum.Satisfied	 that	 he	 had	 provided	 for	 the	 education	 of	 his	 sons,John	 Quincy	 set	 off	 with	 Louisa	 for	 New	 London,	 Connecticut,where	 they	 stepped	 aboard	 a	 steamboat	 for	 the	 first	 time	 intheir	 lives.	 They	 “steamed”	 successively	 to	 New	 Haven,	 NewYork,	 and	 Philadelphia,	 covering	 in	 a	 day	 and	 a	 half,	 incomfortable	 quarters,	 a	 distance	 that	 would	 have	 taken	 threetimes	 longer	 by	 coach—and	 that	 produced	 a	 collection	 ofbruises.	 They	 arrived	 in	 Washington	 on	 September	 20,	 1817,and	 went	 to	 stay	 with	 another	 of	 Louisa’s	 sisters	 and	 herhusband	until	they	could	find	their	own	property.	In	accordanceJohn	 Quincy	 wentwithimmediately	 to	 confer	 with	 Monroe.	 Because	 of	 the	 thick,gleaming	 coats	 of	 white	 paint	 workers	 had	 slathered	 on	 itsblackened	 exterior	 after	 the	 War	 of	 1812,	 the	 presidentialmansion	had	acquired	a	new	name:	the	White	House.the	 President’sinstructions,Work	on	the	interior	was	still	progressing	when	John	Quincyarrived	to	see	the	President.	Out	of	deference	for	the	secretaryof	 state’s	 first	 rank	 in	 the	 cabinet,	 Monroe	 had	 awaited	 JohnQuincy’s	arrival	to	announce	his	other	cabinet	appointees.	ThePresident	 had	 intended	 to	 ensure	 representation	 of	 all	 thenation’s	 regions	 in	 his	 cabinet	 by	 naming	 Kentucky’s	 HenryClay	 as	 secretary	 of	 war,	 Georgia’s	 William	 H.	 Crawford	 assecretary	of	the	Treasury,	Maryland’s	William	Wirt	as	attorneygeneral,	 and	 Benjamin	 Crowninshield	 of	 Massachusetts	 assecretary	of	the	navy.	Clay,	however,	lusted	for	the	presidency—and	 had	 sought	 appointment	 to	 head	 the	 State	 Department	 ashis	 own	 “stepladder”	 to	 the	 White	 House.	 When	 Monroeappointed	John	Quincy,	Clay	decided	to	remain	in	his	powerful,high-profile	 post	 as	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House	 rather	 than	 recedeinto	 semi-obscurity	 as	 a	 peacetime	 secretary	 of	 war.	 ThePresident	named	John	C.	Calhoun	of	South	Carolina	instead.Although	John	Quincy	had	expected	cabinet	members	to	workas	 a	 team,	 he	 realized	 after	 its	 first	 meeting	 that	 far	 from	 acooperative	 venture,	 James	 Monroe’s	 cabinet	 was	 a	 hornet’snest	 of	 ruthless,	 politically	 ambitious	 adversaries,	 bent	 oncrushing	 his	 chances	 of	 becoming	 President.	 And	 beyond	 theconfines	 of	 the	 cabinet	 meeting	 room,	 Henry	 Clay	 sat	 inCongress	 ready	 for	 every	 opportunity	 to	 promote	 his	 owncandidacy	by	undermining	John	Quincy.My	office	of	secretary	of	state	makes	it	the	interest	of	allthe	partisans	of	the	candidates	for	the	next	presidency	.	..	to	decry	me	as	much	as	possible	in	the	public	opinion.The	most	conspicuous	of	these	candidates	are	Crawford.	.	.	Clay	.	.	.	and	De	Witt	Clinton,	governor	of	New	York.Clay	 expected	 himself	 to	 have	 been	 secretary	 of	 state,and	 he	 and	 all	 his	 creatures	 were	 disappointed	 by	 myappointment.	He	is	therefore	coming	out	as	the	head	of	ato	 Mr.	 Monroe’snew	 oppositionadministration,	 and	 he	 makes	 no	 scruples	 of	 giving	 thetone	to	all	his	party	of	running	me	down.29in	 CongressIndeed,	Clay,	as	Speaker	of	the	House,	acted	immediately	torestrict	 John	 Quincy’s	 activities	 in	 the	 State	 Department	 withso	 low	 a	 budget	 that	 he	 could	 barely	 function.	 His	 salary,	 forexample,	 was	 a	 mere	 $3,500	 a	 year,	 compared	 with	 the	 morethan	 $75,000	 a	 year	 that	 British	 foreign	 secretary	 LordCastlereagh	earned	in	London.	With	only	eight	employees,	theState	Department	had	a	budget	of	less	than	$125,000	a	year—one-tenth	 the	 budget	 of	 the	 British	 Foreign	 Office.	 Underfrom	 President	 Monroe,	 Congress	 raised	 JohnpressureQuincy’s	salary	to	$6,000	a	year	in	1819	but	gave	him	no	fundsto	 cover	 his	 annual	 entertainment	 expenses,	 which	 totaledabout	$11,000,	or	nearly	twice	his	salary.Monroe	 himself,	 of	 course,	 had	 struggled	 under	 the	 samebudgetary	restrictions	as	a	U.S.	minister	overseas	for	six	yearsand	as	secretary	of	state	for	five,	and	because	of	his	experienceinin	 StateDepartment	 business	 than	 that	 of	 any	 other	 executivedepartment—with	the	warm	approval	of	his	secretary	of	state.involved	 himself	 moreforeign	 affairs,	 he“They	were	made	for	each	other,”	Thomas	Jefferson	declared.“Adams	 has	 a	 pointed	 pen;	 Monroe	 has	 judgment	 enough	 forboth	and	firmness	enough	to	have	his	judgment	control.”30	AsJefferson	 predicted,	 the	 two	 men	 worked	 so	 closely	 andcomfortably	 together	 and	 became	 such	 intimate	 friends	 thatJohn	 Quincy	 could	 anticipate	 what	 the	 President	 was	 thinkingbefore	 the	 President	 himself	 even	 knew.	 The	 warmth	 thatdeveloped	 between	 the	 two	 men	 was	 evident	 years	 later,	 afterthe	 President’s	 retirement,	 when	 he	 told	 Adams,	 “It	 wouldafford	me	great	satisfaction	if	we	resided	near	each	other	andcould	frequently	meet	and	indulge	in	that	free	and	confidentialcommunication	 whichinWashington,	our	practice	to	do.”31it	 was,	 during	 our	 residenceJohn	 Quincy	 was	 all	 too	 aware,	 of	 course,	 how	 Secretary	 ofState	 Jefferson’s	 opposition	 had	 undermined	 President	 GeorgeWashington’s	neutrality	policy,	and	he	was	even	more	cognizantof	 Secretary	 of	 State	 Timothy	 Pickering’s	 unconscionableefforts	to	undermine	the	John	Adams	administration.	On	takinghis	constitutional	oath	and	assuming	office,	John	Quincy	vowedto	 be	 a	 loyal	 and	 effective	 secretary	 of	 state—advising	 thePresident	 but	 allowing	 him	 to	 make	 all	 policy	 decisions	 andputting	 those	 decisions	 in	 effect	 to	 the	 best	 of	 his	 ability.“Extend,	 all-seeing	 God,	 thy	 hand,”	 he	 prayed	 in	 a	 poem	 hewrote	the	night	before	he	took	his	oath,In	mercy	still	decree,And	make	his	hand	to	bless	my	native	landAn	instrument	of	me.32“From	 the	 information	 given	 to	 me,”	 he	 added,	 “the	 pathbefore	 me	 is	 beset	 with	 thorns.	 .	 .	 .	 At	 two	 distinct	 periods	 ofmy	 life	 heretofore	 my	 position	 has	 been	 perilous	 and	 full	 ofanxious	forecast,	but	never	so	critical	and	precarious	as	at	thistime.”33As	 it	 turned	 out,	 Louisa’s	 path	 was	 as	 beset	 with	 thorns	 asher	 husband’s.	 She	 still	 displayed	 a	 “continental	 accent,”	 andWashington’s	 social	 elite	 soon	 referred	 to	 the	 Adamses	 as“aliens”—especially	 after	 John	 Quincy	 began	 walking	 in	 thewinter	 weather	 wearing	 his	 exotic	 Russian	 fur	 hat	 and	 greatcoat.	 To	 make	 matters	 worse,	 the	 Adamses	 decided	 to	 foregothe	 long-standing	 practice	 of	 cabinet	 members’	 wives	 payingthe	first	visit	to	each	member	of	Congress	at	the	start	of	eachsession.	 John	 Quincy	 scorned	 the	 practice	 as	 a	 waste	 of	 time,and	 Louisa	 simply	 saw	 no	 point	 in	 soiling	 herself	 in	 themudflows	 that	 separated	 the	 buildings	 and	 homes	 of	 thecapital.	 Although	 they	 had	 bought	 a	 lovely	 home,	 most	 ofWashington	 City	 remained	 a	 relative	 wasteland	 of	 woods,swamps,	cheap	brick	buildings,	and	tumbledown	shacks.	Seamsof	 squalid	 slave	 quarters	 wove	 through	 every	 neighborhood.Streets	 were	 still	 unpaved,	 and	 every	 rain	 turned	 them	 intovermin-infested	marshland	that	often	provoked	epidemics.	Ratsand	snakes	were	commonplace,	as	were	cows,	horses,	pigs,	andother	 livestock,	 and	 Louisa	 hated	 stepping	 outside	 her	 door.Washington’s	 ladies	 were	 outraged	 by	 the	 snub,	 however,	 andeven	 complained	 to	 the	 First	 Lady.	 Elizabeth	 Monroeresponded	 by	 asking	 Louisa	 to	 the	 White	 House—not,	 as	 itturned	 out,	 to	 admonish	 her	 but	 to	 explain	 the	 malignity	 thatmotivated	 the	 custom—namely,	 the	 ambitions	 of	 cabinetmembers,	 who	 sent	 their	 wives	 to	 court	 votes	 in	 Congress	 fortheir	 husbandsthe	 presidency.	 AfterWashington’s	 retirement,	 few	 in	 the	 capital	 expected	 anypresidential	 candidate	 to	 win	 a	 majority	 of	 Electoral	 Collegevotes,	 thusleaving	 the	 final	 decision	 to	 the	 House	 ofRepresentatives.	As	a	result,	candidates’	wives	made	a	show	ofvisiting	every	representative’s	wife	when	she	and	her	husbandarrived	in	town.to	 succeedtoCows	graze	near	the	Capitol	in	what	was	still	the	undevelopedcapital	 city	 of	 the	 United	 States.	 At	 the	 time,	 the	 SupremeCourt	 met	 in	 an	 area	 beneath	 the	 Senate	 floor.	 (LIBRARY	 OFCONGRESS)“All	 ladies	 arriving	 here	 as	 strangers,	 it	 seems,	 expected	 tobe	 visited	 by	 the	 wives	 of	 the	 heads	 of	 departments	 and	 evenby	 the	 President’s	 wife,”	 John	 Quincy	 learned.	 “Mrs.	 Madisonsubjected	herself	to	this	torture.	.	.	.	Mrs.	Monroe	neither	paysnor	 returns	 visits.	 My	 wife	 returns	 all	 visits	 but	 adopts	 theprinciple	of	not	visiting	first	any	stranger	who	arrives,	and	thisis	 what	 the	 ladies	 have	 taken	 in	 dudgeon.”	 Louisa	 told	 thePresident’s	 wife	 she	 had	 no	 intention	 of	 changing	 her	 habits—“not	 on	 any	 question	 of	 etiquette,”	 John	 Quincy	 emphasized,but	 simply	 because	 “she	 did	 not	 exact	 of	 any	 lady	 that	 sheshould	visit	her.”34	Surprised	by	the	controversy	over	Louisa’svisits,	 an	 editor	 questioned	 John	 Quincy	 whether	 “I	 wasdetermined	 to	 do	 nothing	 with	 a	 view	 to	 promote	 my	 futureelection	to	the	presidency	as	the	successor	of	Mr.	Monroe,”	towhich	John	Quincy	replied,	“Absolutely	nothing!”He	 said	 that	 as	 others	 would	 not	 be	 so	 scrupulous,	 Ishould	not	stand	upon	equal	footing	with	them.	I	told	himthat	 was	 not	 my	 fault—my	 business	 was	 to	 serve	 thepublic	to	the	best	of	my	abilities	in	the	station	assigned	tome,	and	not	to	intrigue	for	further	advancement.	I	never,by	the	most	distant	hint	to	anyone,	expressed	a	wish	forany	 public	 office,	 and	 I	 should	 not	 now	 begin	 to	 ask	 forthat	 which	 of	 all	 others	 ought	 to	 be	 most	 freely	 andspontaneously	bestowed.35John	 Quincy	 said	 he	 had	 accepted	 his	 appointment	 “for	 thegood	 of	 my	 country”—not	 for	 the	 good	 of	 his	 career.	 Althoughwilling	 to	 accept	 higher	 office,	 he	 was	 determined	 that	 thepublic	should	decide	on	his	fitness	for	any	office	by	his	recordrather	 than	 his	 words.	 He	 would	 soon	 learn	 he	 had	 adopted	 anaive	approach	fraught	with	enormous	political	danger.