CHAPTER 	2The	Seeds	of	StatesmanshipFrom	the	first,	the	Boston	seemed	doomed.“The	 wind	 was	 very	 high,”	 John	 Adams	 noted	 as	 they	 lostsight	 of	 the	 Massachusetts	 coastline.	 “The	 sea	 very	 rough	 .	 .	 .the	snow	so	thick	the	captain	thinks	he	cannot	go	to	sea.	.	.	.	Allis	 yet	 chaos	 on	 board.	 His	 men	 are	 not	 disciplined.”1	 WithBritish	 gunboats	 poised	 on	 the	 horizon,	 the	 Boston	 rolledalmost	helplessly	and	threatened	to	send	Adams	sliding	acrossthe	 deck.	 He	 kept	 a	 tight	 grip	 on	 the	 rail	 with	 one	 arm	 andwrapped	the	other	around	his	ten-year-old	son.“I	 confess,”	 he	 said	 to	 himself,	 “I	 often	 regretted	 that	 I	 hadbrought	 my	 son,	 [but]	 Mr.	 Johnny’s	 behavior	 gave	 me	 asatisfaction	that	I	cannot	express.	Fully	sensible	of	our	danger,he	was	constantly	endeavoring	to	bear	it	with	manly	patience,very	 attentive	 to	 me	 and	 his	 thoughts	 constantly	 running	 in	 aserious	strain.”2Adams	 looked	 at	 the	 oncoming	 gunboats	 and	 wondered	 howthey	would	survive	if	the	British	overtook	them—until	the	stingof	a	crashing	wave	made	him	question	how	they	would	surviveif	the	British	did	not	overtake	them.	“The	constant	rocking	androlling	of	the	ship	made	us	all	sick.	Half	the	sailors	were	sick.	Iwas	 seized	 with	 it	 myself	 this	 forenoon.	 My	 servant	 JosephStevens	 and	 the	 captain	 have	 both	 been	 very	 bad.”	 Adamswaxed	 philosophic	 for	 a	 moment	 and	 analyzed	 the	 causes	 of“mal	 de	 mer”	 as	 stemming	 from	 “the	 effect	 of	 agitationcombined	with	a	variety	of	odors	from	coal,	stagnant	water,	andthose	parts	of	the	ship	where	sailors	slept—often	unwashed	fordays.	 There	 is	 the	 same	 inattention	 to	 the	 cleanliness	 of	 theship	 and	 the	 persons	 and	 health	 of	 the	 sailors,”	 Adamscomplained,	“as	there	is	at	land	of	the	cleanliness	of	the	campand	 the	 health	 and	 cleanliness	 of	 the	 soldiers.	 The	 practice	 ofprofane	 cursing	 and	 swearing	 .	 .	 .	 prevails	 in	 a	 mostabominable	degree.”3Adams	 and	 his	 son	 slept	 together	 in	 a	 small	 space	 in	 the“’tween	decks”	on	the	double	mattress	he	had	brought	aboard,beneath	 their	 own	 sheets	 and	 blankets	 and	 using	 bolsters	 forpillows.As	the	main	deck	was	almost	constantly	under	water,	thesea	rolling	in	and	out	at	the	ports	and	scuppers,	we	wereobliged	 to	 keep	 the	 hatchways	 down—whereby	 the	 airbecame	so	hot	and	so	dry	in	the	’tween	decks	that	.	.	.	Icould	not	breathe	or	live	there.	Yet	the	water	would	pourdown	 whenever	 a	 hatchway	 was	 opened,	 so	 that	 all	 wasafloat.4Although	the	Boston	was	“overmetalled”—that	is,	the	weightof	her	guns	(five	twelve-pounders	and	nineteen	nine-pounders)was	too	great	for	her	tonnage—the	captain	ordered	her	“to	sailwith	the	guns	out,”	Adams	explained,	“in	order	to	be	ready,	andthis	.	.	.	made	the	ship	labor	and	roll	so	as	to	oblige	us	to	keepthe	 chain	 pumps	 as	 well	 as	 the	 hand	 pumps	 almost	 constantlygoing.”	 The	 weight	 of	 the	 gun	 barrels	 extending	 off	 the	 sidesmade	 the	 ship	 “wring	 and	 twist	 in	 such	 a	 manner	 as	 toendanger	the	masts	and	rigging.”5Father	 and	 son	 had	 sought	 shelter	 in	 their	 bunk,	 when	 thestorm	 slammed	 the	 ship	 with	 explosive	 wind	 bursts	 and	 theyheard	 the	 terrifying	 crash	 from	 above.	 An	 officer	 appearedalmost	immediately	“and	told	us	that	the	ship	had	been	struckwith	 lightening	 and	 the	 noise	 we	 had	 heard	 was	 a	 crash	 ofthunder	 .	 .	 .	 that	 the	 large	 mainmast	 was	 struck.	 .	 .	 .	 We	 lostsight	of	our	enemy,	it	is	true,”	John	Adams’s	shaky	hand	pennedhis	 diary	 the	 next	 morning,	 “but	 we	 found	 ourselves	 in	 adreadful	storm.	.	.	.It	 would	 be	 fruitless	 to	 attempt	 a	 description	 of	 what	 Isaw,	 heard	 and	 felt	 during	 these	 next	 three	 days.	 Todescribe	 the	 ocean,	 the	 waves,	 the	 winds,	 the	 ship,	 hermotions,	 rollings,	 wringings	 and	 agonies—the	 sailors,their	countenances,	language,	and	behavior	is	impossible.No	man	could	keep	his	legs,	and	nothing	could	be	kept	inits	 place.	 A	 universal	 wreck	 of	 everything	 in	 all	 parts	 ofthe	 ship,	 chests,	 casks,	 bottles	 &c.	 No	 place	 or	 personwas	 dry.	 On	 one	 of	 these	 nights,	 a	 thunder	 bolt	 struckthree	 men	 upon	 deck	 and	 wounded	 one	 of	 them.	 .	 .	 .	 Helived	three	days	and	died	raving	mad.6Just	 as	 calm	 settled	 over	 the	 surrounding	 sea,	 a	 boy	 aboutJohn	 Quincy’s	 age—the	 son	 of	 Connecticut	 merchant	 SilasDeane—approached	 John	 Adams	 with	 a	 note	 that	 startledAdams	by	asking	him	to	“take	care	of	the	child	in	his	situationas	 you	 would	 wish	 to	 have	 done	 to	 a	 child	 of	 your	 own.	 It	 isneedless	to	mention	his	youth	and	helplessness.”7	In	effect,	thenote	 told	 Adams	 he	 was	 now	 the	 boy’s	 guardian.	 Althoughtaken	 aback,	 Adams	 was	 well	 aware	 of	 the	 bonds	 that	 tiedmembers	 of	 New	 England’s	 Christian	 elite	 to	 each	 other—especially	 their	 minor	 children.	 Evenif	 unrelated	 andunacquainted,	all	felt	a	deep	kinship	through	their	common	tiesto	Puritan	founders,	whose	intermarriages	left	many,	if	not	all,somewhat	related—even	when	they	did	not	know	it.Silas	Deane’s	brother,	Barnabas,	saw	Adams’s	departure	as	agood	 opportunity	 to	 divest	 himself	 of	 responsibility	 for	 raisinghis	 brother’s	 son	 Jesse,	 and	 he	 simply	 put	 the	 boy	 on	 boardwith	 a	 note	 charging	 Adams	 to	 deliver	 him	 to	 his	 father	 inFrance.John	Adams	had	no	sooner	read	Deane’s	presumptuous	letterwhen	 another	 boy—eighteen-year-old	 William	 Vernon—handedhim	an	even	more	presumptuous	missive	from	a	member	of	theContinental	 Navy	 Board.	 “I	 presume	 it	 is	 unnecessary	 to	 sayone	 word	 in	 order	 to	 impress	 your	 mind	 with	 the	 anxiety	 aparent	is	under	in	the	education	of	a	son.	.	.	.	Therefore	I	haveonly	 to	 beg	 the	 favor	 of	 you,	 Sir,	 to	 place	 my	 son	 with	 such	 agentleman	whom	you	would	choose	for	one	of	yours.”	He	askedAdams	 to	 find	 a	 merchant	 “either	 at	 Bordeaux	 or	 Nantes,	 ofProtestant	 principles,”	 to	 teach	 him	 “general	 and	 extensivebusiness,”	and	he	enclosed	“a	gratuity	of	one	hundred	poundssterling	 that	 may	 be	 given	 to	 a	 merchant	 of	 eminence	 to	 takehim	for	two	or	three	years.”8“Thus,”	 Adams	 puzzled	 in	 his	 diary,	 “I	 find	 myself	 investedwith	 the	 unexpected	 trust	 of	 a	 kind	 of	 guardianship	 of	 twopromising	 young	 gentlemen,	 besides	 my	 own	 son.”	 It	 wasfortunate	 for	 all	 the	 boys	 that	 Adams	 had	 started	 hisprofessional	 life	 as	 a	 teacher	 and	 found	 “few	 things	 that	 haveever	given	me	greater	pleasure	than	the	tuition	of	youth.”9	Asit	 turned	 out,	 Jesse	 Deane	 was	 only	 a	 year	 older	 than	 JohnQuincy,	 and	 the	 two,	 each	 grateful	 to	 have	 found	 someone	 hisown	age,	became	inseparable	shipboard	companions.Between	storms	and	other	crises	at	sea,	Adams	himself	readFrench	literature	and	put	his	son	and	Jesse	Deane	in	the	handsof	 the	 ship’s	 French	 surgeon,	 Nicholas	 Noël,	 who	 agreed	 toteach	the	boys	French.	To	ease	tension	among	the	seamen,	thecaptain	 allowed	 them	 to	 stage	 “frolics,”	 with	 all	 the	 mendousing	 each	 other	 with	 flour	 then	 dancing	 on	 the	 main	 deck.Adams	 suspected	 the	 captain	 ordered	 such	 “whimsicaldiversions	in	order	to	make	the	men	wash	themselves.”10A	 more	 prized	 diversion	 came	 a	 month	 after	 they	 leftMassachusetts,	 when	 “we	 spied	 a	 sail	 and	 gave	 her	 chase	 .	 .	 .and	came	up	beside	her.”	To	Adams’s	shock,	“She	fired	upon	us.	.	.	so	that	the	ball	went	directly	over	my	head.”	Adams’s	shipimmediately	 turned	 broadside	 with	 her	 big	 guns	 aimedsquarely	 at	 the	 other	 ship,	 which	 immediately	 surrendered,yielding	a	prize	Adams	estimated	at	£80,000.	Half	went	to	theowner	 of	 the	 Boston,	 12	 percent	 to	 the	 captain,	 and	 sharesranging	 from	 1	 to	 6	 percent	 to	 the	 ship’s	 officers	 and	 crew,depending	on	rank.On	 March	 29,	 1778,	 six	 weeks	 after	 they	 hadleftMassachusetts,	John	Adams	and	his	son	sailed	into	the	estuaryleading	to	Bordeaux,	when	a	pilot	came	aboard	and	announcedthat	France	and	England	were	at	war.	On	April	1,	the	Adamsesset	 foot	 on	 shore	 with	 Jesse	 Deane,	 eighteen-year-old	 WilliamVernon,	and	Dr.	Noël.	Two	American	merchants,	who	regularlychecked	incoming	cargoes,	took	the	famed	John	Adams	and	hisfriends	for	a	sumptuous	lunch	and	a	tour	of	the	town,	a	visit	totheater	 before	 tea	 and	 the	 opera	 in	 the	 evening.	 Adamsmarveled	at	the	splendor	of	French	grand	opera.	“The	scenery,the	 dancing,	 the	 music,”	 he	 gasped.	 “Never	 seen	 anything	 ofthe	kind	before.”11Adams	 placed	 young	 Vernon	 with	 one	 of	 the	 merchants,	 andon	 April	 4,	 he	 set	 off	 with	 his	 son	 by	 carriage	 for	 Paris,	 alongwith	 Jesse	 Deane	 and	 a	 small	 retinue.	 Covering	 150	 miles	 inonly	 two	 days,	 they	 reached	 Poitiers	 in	 west-central	 France.“Every	 part	 of	 the	 country	 is	 cultivated,”	 Adams	 remarked.“The	 fields	 of	 grain,	 the	 vineyards,	 the	 castles,	 the	 cities,	 theparks,	 the	 gardens,	 everything	 is	 beautiful.	 Yet	 every	 placeswarms	with	beggars.”12From	Poitiers,	they	rode	north	to	Tours,	then	east	to	Orleansand	 finally	 Paris,	 where	 they	 checked	 into	 an	 expensive	 hoteland	John	Adams	put	two	tired	little	boys	to	bed.	“My	little	son,”he	wrote	in	his	diary,	“has	sustained	this	long	journey	of	nearly500	miles	at	the	rate	of	an	hundred	miles	a	day	with	the	utmostfirmness,	as	he	did	our	fatiguing	and	dangerous	voyage.”13After	 meeting	 Benjamin	 Franklin	 in	 Paris,	 John	 Adamslearned	to	his	distress	that	Jesse	Deane’s	father,	Silas,	had	leftfor	 America	 to	 present	 himself	 to	 Congress	 and	 dispute	 thecharges	 made	 about	 him.	 Adams	 would	 now	 have	 to	 care	 forJesse	indefinitely.Putting	 servants	 in	 charge	 of	 the	 boys,	 Adams	 followedFranklin	 on	 a	 whirlwind	 tour	 of	 diplomatic	 receptions	 at	 thePalais	 de	 Versailles	 and	 the	 châteaus	 of	 the	 ruling	 Frenchnobility—the	 Duc	 de	 Noailles,	 the	 Marquis	 de	 Lafayette’sfather-in-law;	Prime	Minister	Comte	de	Maurepas;	and	Ministerof	 Foreign	 Affairs	 Comte	 de	 Vergennes,	 who	 took	 Adams	 tomeet	King	Louis	XVI.To	 eliminate	 the	 high	 cost	 of	 lodging,	 Adams	 moved	 into	 afurnished	 apartment	 in	 the	 Hotel	 Valentois,	 a	 château	 thatFranklin	was	renting	in	Passy,	then	a	small	town	between	Parisand	Versailles.c	Franklin	charged	Adams	no	rent	and	gave	himthe	use	of	his	nine	servants	as	well	as	his	elegant	carriage	andcoachman.	 Adams	 enrolled	 his	 son	 and	 Jesse	 Deane	 withFranklin’s	grandson,	nine-year-old	“Benny”	Bache,	in	a	privateboarding	school	that	was	near	enough	to	allow	John	Quincy	tospend	 Sundays	 with	 his	 father.	 Hardly	 an	 intimate	 occasion,Sunday	 dinners	 chez	 Franklin	 saw	 a	 small	 army	 of	 celebratedfigures	 in	 the	 arts	 and	 government	 feasting	 on	 a	 galaxy	 ofdelicacies	 and	 fine	 wines	 from	 Franklin’s	 cellar	 of	 more	 than1,000	bottles	from	renowned	French	vineyards.“He	 lives	 in	 all	 the	 splendor	 and	 magnificence	 of	 a	 viceroy,”John	Adams	wrote	of	Franklin	after	one	Sunday	feast,	“which	islittle	inferior	to	that	of	a	king.”14In	 addition	 to	 Latin	 and	 French,	 the	 boys	 learned	 music,dancing,	 fencing,	 and	 drawing,	 and	 within	 a	 few	 weeks,	 JohnQuincy	 spoke	 fluent	 French,	 the	 universal	 language	 of	 theEuropean	 upper	 classes	 and	 diplomats	 everywhere.	 Not	 asharsh	 as	 many	 such	 schools,	 Monsieur	 Le	 Coeur’s	 Pensionbegan	 the	 school	 day	 at	 6	 a.m.	 and	 ended	 at	 7	 p.m.	 butincluded	 frequent	 periods	 for	 play	 to	 ease	 the	 strain	 ofacademic	discipline.“It	 was	 then	 that	 the	 idea	 of	 writing	 a	 regular	 journal	 wasfirst	suggested	to	me,”	John	Quincy	recalled.	As	he	wrote	to	hismother	 at	 the	 time,	 “My	 pappa	 enjoins	 it	 upon	 me	 to	 keep	 ajournal	or	diary	of	the	events	that	happen	to	me,	and	of	objectsthat	I	see	and	characters	that	I	converse	with	from	day	to	day.”All	 but	 breathing	 his	 father’s	 thoughts	 and	 words,	 he	 told	 hismother,I	 am	 convinced	 of	 the	 utility,	 importance	 &	 necessity	 ofthis	 exercise	 .	 .	 .	 and	 although	 I	 shall	 have	 themortification	a	few	years	hence	to	read	a	great	deal	of	mychildish	 nonsense,	 yet	 I	 shall	 have	 the	 pleasure	 andadvantage	of	remarking	the	several	steps	by	which	I	shallhave	 advanced	 in	 taste	 and	 judgment	 and	 knowledge.	 Ihave	been	to	see	the	palace	and	gardens	of	Versailles,	theMilitary	 School	 at	 Paris	 [École	 Militaire]	 .	 .	 .	 &	 otherscenes	of	magnificence	in	and	about	Paris.	.	.	.I	 am,	 my	 ever	 honored	 and	 revered	 Mamma,	 yourdutiful	&	affectionate	son	John	Quincy	Adams15Benjamin	 Franklin	 invited	 John	 Adams	 and	 his	 eleven-year-oldson,	John	Quincy	Adams,	to	live	in	his	château	on	the	outskirtsof	 Paris	 after	 Adams’s	 arrival	 as	 one	 of	 the	 Americancommissioners	 soliciting	 financial	 and	 military	 aid	 from	 theFrench	government.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)His	 father’s	 mission	 to	 Paris	 would	 prove	 short-lived,however.	After	barely	a	month,	John	Adams	wrote	to	Congressurging	the	appointment	of	 Franklin	 as	 sole	 American	 envoy	 toFrance,	 saying	 that	 commissions	 inevitably	 generate	 too	 manyinternal	 frictions	 to	 make	 them	 effective	 in	 internationaldiplomacy.The	 Palais	 de	 Versailles,	 where	 Benjamin	 Franklin	 took	 JohnAdams	to	meet	French	foreign	minister	Comte	de	Vergennes.“The	 public	 business	 has	 never	 been	 methodicallyconducted,”	 he	 grumbled,	 “and	 it	 is	 not	 possible	 to	 obtain	 aclear	idea	of	our	affairs.”16	 He	 found	 his	 fellow	 commissionerArthur	 Lee	 argumentative,	 sharp-tongued,	 and	 disagreeable,with	a	violent	temper,	and	he	considered	Franklin	a	dissipated“charlatan,”	 posing	 as	 a	 philosopher	 without	 ever	 havingstudied	 philosophy	 or	 the	 great	 thinkers.	 Although	 Franklinwas	 exceptionally	 generous,	 he	 was	 a	 confirmed	 sybarite,rising	 late	 in	 the	 morning	 and,	 according	 to	 Adams,	 “cominghome	at	all	hours.”	Franklin,	Adams	concluded,has	 a	 passion	 for	 reputation	 and	 fame	 as	 strong	 as	 youcan	 imagine,	 and	 his	 time	 and	 thoughts	 are	 chieflyemployed	to	obtain	it,	and	to	set	tongues	and	pens,	maleand	 female,	 to	 celebrating	 him.	 Painters,	 statuaries,sculptors,	 china	 potters	 and	 all	 are	 set	 to	 work	 for	 thisend.	He	has	the	most	affectionate	and	insinuating	way	ofcharming	the	woman	or	the	man	that	he	fixes	on.	It	is	themost	 silly	 and	 ridiculous	 way	 imaginable,	 in	 the	 sight	 ofan	American,	but	it	succeeds	to	admiration,	fulsome	andsickish	as	it	is,	in	Europe.17With	 Franklin	 pursuing	 his	 rich	 social	 life,	 few	 diplomaticreports	 had	 flowed	 from	 Paris	 to	 Congress,	 and	 Adamsassumed	 the	 burden	 of	 combing	 through	 hundreds	 ofaccumulated	 documents	 and	 condensing	 them	 into	 a	 series	 ofreports	 that	 left	 him	 with	 too	 little	 time	 to	 enjoy	 Paris	 or,	 forthat	 matter,	 get	 enough	 sleep.	 All	 but	 dismissed	 by	 a	 loyalistacquaintance	as	“a	man	of	no	consequence,”	the	work-orientedAdams	seemed	“out	of	his	element”	in	the	world	of	diplomacy—especially	in	Paris.“He	cannot	dance,	drink,	game,	flatter,	promise,	dress,	swearwith	 the	 gentlemen	 and	 talk	 small	 talk	 or	 flirt	 with	 the	 ladies.In	short,	he	has	none	of	the	essential	arts	or	ornaments	whichconstitute	 a	 courtier,”	 one	 of	 his	 friends	 remarked.18	 Adamshimself	admitted,	“I	am	wearied	to	death	with	gazing	whereverI	 go	 at	 a	 profusion	 of	 unmeaning	 wealth	 and	 magnificence.Gold,	 marble,	 silk,	 velvet,	 silver,	 ivory,	 and	 alabaster	 make	 upthe	show	everywhere.”19In	 March	 1779,	 eleven	 months	 after	 they	 had	 arrived	 inFrance,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 his	 father	 were	 elated	 to	 begin	 theirtrip	 home	 to	 America,	 taking	 a	 coach	 from	 Paris	 to	 Nantes,where	the	Loire	estuary	empties	into	the	Bay	of	Biscay	and	theAtlantic	 Ocean.	 Franklin	 agreed	 to	 care	 for	 Jesse	 Deane	 andrelieve	John	Adams	of	that	responsibility.Few	ships	sailed	or	docked	on	schedule	in	a	world	at	war,	andtheir	ship,	the	Alliance,	was	not	in	port.	The	two	Adamses	spentthe	 next	 seven	 weeks	 seeing	 the	 countryside,	 reading	 books,writing	 letters,	 attending	 theater,	 concerts,	 and	 operas,	 andvisiting	 the	 castlelike	 home	 of	 Maryland	 merchant	 JoshuaJohnson,	his	English	wife,	Catherine,	and	their	three	little	girls.Adams	 had	 befriended	 Johnson’s	 brother,	 Maryland	 governorThomas	 Johnson,	 at	 the	 Continental	 Congress,	 establishing	 atie	that	would	bind	the	two	families	for	the	rest	of	their	lives.On	April	22,	the	Alliance	arrived	at	Nantes,	and	the	Adamsesall	but	leaped	aboard—only	to	be	told	to	disembark.	The	vesselwould	not	sail	to	America	because	the	French	government	hadassigned	 it	 to	 John	 Paul	 Jones’s	 squadron	 to	 harass	 Britishshippingis	 a	 cruelthe	 English	 Channel.	 “Thisdisappointment,”	Adams	railed	in	his	diary.inA	 few	 days	 later,	 the	 Adamses	 traveled	 westward	 along	 thesouthern	 shore	 of	 Brittany	 to	 the	 port	 of	 Lorient,	 where	 theywere	 told	 they	 were	 more	 likely	 to	 find	 a	 ship	 bound	 forAmerica.	 What	 they	 found	 were	 weeks	 of	 boredom	 in	 a	 towndevoid	 of	 culture.	 The	 highlights	 of	 their	 stay	 were	 severaldinners	 with	 John	 Paul	 Jones	 and	 a	 visit	 to	 his	 ship,	 theBonhomme	 Richard—once	 a	 decrepit	 French	 ship	 that	 Joneshad	 refitted	 with	 forty-two	 guns	 and	 renamed	 in	 Franklin’shonor.dOn	 June	 17,	 three	 months	 after	 leaving	 Paris,	 John	 Quincyand	 his	 father	 boarded	 the	 French	 frigate	 Sensible	 in	 Lorient,along	 with	 the	 first	 French	 ambassador	 to	 the	 United	 States,the	Chevalier	de	la	Luzerne,	and	his	aide,	the	Marquis	Françoisde	 Barbé	 Marbois.	 In	 what	 proved	 a	 smooth,	 uneventfulcrossing,	John	Quincy	Adams	displayed	both	his	language	skillsand	his	pedagogical	skills	absorbed	from	teachers	at	his	Frenchschool,	 as	 he	 succeeded	 in	 teaching	 the	 two	 French	 diplomatsto	speak	serviceable	English—in	just	eight	weeks.“The	Chevalier	de	la	Luzerne	and	Mr.	Marbois,”	John	Adamsbeamed,	“are	in	raptures	with	my	son.”I	 found	 them	 this	 morning,	 the	 ambassador	 seated	 on	 acushion	 in	 our	 state	 room,	 Mr.	 Marbois	 in	 his	 cot	 at	 hisleft	hand	and	my	son	stretched	out	in	his	at	his	right—theambassador	reading	out	loud	in	Blackstone’s	Discourse	.	..	and	my	son	correcting	the	pronunciation	of	every	wordand	 syllable	 and	 letter.	 The	 ambassador	 said	 he	 wasastonished	at	my	son’s	knowledge;	that	he	was	a	masterof	 his	 own	 language	 like	 a	 professor.	 Mr.	 Marbois	 said“your	 son	 teaches	 us	 more	 than	 you.	 He	 shows	 us	 nomercy.	We	must	have	Mr.	John.”20The	 Sensible	 reached	 Boston	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 August1779,	 and	 John	 Adams	 had	 no	 sooner	 stepped	 ashore	 than	 hisfriends,	 neighbors,	 and	 family	 elected	 him	 to	 a	 specialconvention	 to	 draft	 a	 constitution	 for	 Massachusetts.	 Theconvention,	 in	 turn,	 asked	 him	 to	 draft	 the	 document	 himself,and	 drawing	 from	 his	 brilliant	 Thoughts	 on	 Government,	 hewrote	 most	 of	 the	 Massachusetts	 Constitution	 of	 1780.Beginning	 with	 a	 bill	 of	 rights,	 it	 placed	 all	 political	 power	 inthe	 hands	 of	 the	 people	 and	 guaranteed	 such	 “natural,essential,	and	unalienable	rights”	as	free	speech,	a	free	press,and	 free	 assembly.	 It	 also	 guaranteed	 free	 elections	 and	 theright	 of	 freemen	 to	 trial	 by	 jury	 and	 to	 protection	 againstunreasonable	searches	and	seizures,	the	right	to	keep	and	beararms,	 the	 right	 to	 petition	 government	 for	 redress	 ofgrievances,	and	“the	right	of	enjoying	and	defending	their	livesand	 liberties”	 and	 “of	 acquiring,	 possessing,	 and	 protectingtheir	property.”21arrivedWhen	John	Adams	had	blotted	the	ink	at	the	end	of	his	draft,on	 hiswordrecommendations,	 it	 had	 dissolved	 the	 commission	 in	 Paris	 infavor	 of	 a	 single	 ambassador,	 but	 instead	 of	 Franklin,	 it	 votedunanimously	to	appoint	him,	John	Adams,	to	fill	the	post.from	 Congressthat,	 basedSeventy-one	days	after	landing	in	Boston,	Adams	and	his	sonboarded	 the	 same	 ship	 that	 had	 brought	 them	 home,	 theSensible,	and	sailed	for	France	for	the	second	time	in	a	year.“My	 habitation,	 how	 disconsolate	 it	 looks!”	 Abigail	 raged	 atAdams,	 however,	 had	 not	 hesitatedher	husband.	“My	table,	I	set	down	to	it	but	cannot	swallow	myfood.	 O	 why	 was	 I	 born	 with	 so	 much	 sensibility	 and	 whypossessing	it	have	I	so	often	been	called	to	struggle	with	it?”22theappointment,	 which	 he	 believed	 would	 allow	 him	 to	 negotiateof	 Americanpeace	 with	 Englandindependence.	 “Let	 me	 entreat	 you,”	 he	 pleaded	 with	 Abigail,“to	 keep	 up	 your	 spirits	 and	 throw	 off	 cares	 as	 much	 aspossible.	.	.	.	We	shall	yet	be	happy.	I	hope	and	pray	and	I	don’tdoubt	 it.	 I	 shall	 have	 vexations	 enough.	 You	 will	 have	 anxietyand	 tenderness	 enough	 as	 usual.	 Pray	 strive	 not	 to	 have	 toomuch.”23recognitionto	 acceptandKnowing	he	would	no	longer	live	in	Franklin’s	orbit	and	beingmore	 familiar	 than	 before	 with	 Parisian	 life,	 John	 Adamsbrought	 his	 middle	 boy,	 ten-year-old	 Charles,	 as	 a	 companionfor	 John	 Quincy,	 and	 Abigail’s	 cousin	 John	 Thaxter	 as	 a	 tutorand	 part-time	 guardian	 for	 both	 children.	 Thaxter	 had	 tutoredJohn	 Quincy	 once	 before,	 while	 studying	 law	 at	 John	 Adams’sBoston	 law	 offices.	 Also	 traveling	 with	 Adams	 aboard	 theSensible	 was	 the	 new	 legation	 secretary,	 Francis	 Dana,	 aHarvard	graduate	like	Adams	and	a	successful	Boston	lawyer.	ARevolutionary	War	veteran,	he	had	served	five	months	at	ValleyForge	with	George	Washington.	All	were	elated	by	the	prospectof	life	in	Paris	except	John	Quincy,	who	had	wanted	to	preparefor	 Harvard.	 Setting	 aside	 her	 own	 disappointment,	 Abigailtried	 to	 lift	 her	 son’s	 spirits:	 “These	 are	 the	 times	 in	 which	 agenius	 would	 wish	 to	 live,”	 she	 told	 him.	 “It	 is	 not	 in	 the	 stillcalm	 life	 .	 .	 .	 that	 great	 characters	 are	 formed.	 .	 .	 .	 When	 amind	 is	 raised	 and	 animated	 by	 scenes	 that	 engage	 the	 heart,then	 those	 qualities	 which	 would	 otherwise	 lay	 dormant	 wakeintolife	 and	 form	 the	 character	 of	 the	 hero	 and	 thestatesman.”24Having	 onlyjust	 turned	 twelve,	 John	 Quincy	 saw	 noadvantages	 to	 being	 either	 a	 hero	 or	 a	 statesman,	 but	 hisparents	were	raising	him	to	be	both,	and	he	knew	he	had	littlechoice	 but	 to	 try	 to	 fulfill	 their	 ambitions.	 Although	 he	 hadmade	 several	 false	 starts	 at	 keeping	 a	 diary,	 he	 now	 beganagain	in	earnest.	He	had	no	way	of	knowing	then,	but	his	newdiary	 would	 become	 an	 addictive,	 lifelong	 pastime	 and	 evolveinto	 one	 of	 the	 greatest	 personal	 histories	 of	 the	 times	 everrecorded	by	an	American.	He	left	no	doubt	of	its	design	on	thetitle	page:AJournal	by	MeJQAHis	 journal’s	 opening	 words	 were	 far	 more	 prophetic	 thaneither	 he	 or	 his	 mother	 could	 realize	 at	 the	 time:	 “1779November	 Friday	 12th.	 This	 morning	 I	 took	 leave	 of	 myMamma.”25Three	 days	 of	 savage	 storms	 in	 the	 North	 Atlantic	 split	 theship’s	seams,	and	as	water	seeped	through	the	hull,	the	captainordered	 all	 adults	 to	 take	 turns	 working	 pumps,	 each	 of	 themenduring	 four	 hour-long	 shifts	 per	 day.	 Even	 twelve-year-oldJohn	 Quincy	 manned	 a	 pump	 until	 he	 fell	 to	 the	 floorexhausted.	On	December	9,	1779,	the	ship	came	within	sight	ofthe	 northwestern	 coast	 of	 Spain,	 and	 abandoning	 plans	 to	 sailto	 Bordeaux,	 the	 captain	 put	 into	 the	 tiny	 port	 of	 Ferrol.	 Lessthan	 an	 hour	 after	 the	 men	 stopped	 pumping,	 seven	 feet	 ofwater	had	filled	the	hull	of	the	ship.“One	more	storm	would	very	probably	have	carried	us	to	thebottom	 of	 the	 sea,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 to	 frighten	 his	 motherand	demonstrate	his	heroism	in	having	manned	the	pumps.Although	 they	 were	 safely	 ashore,	 gale-force	 winds	 andrelentless	 rain	 made	 further	 travel	 by	 sea	 impossible—on	 anyship.	 They	 nowfaced	 crossing	 the	 all-but-impenetrablePyrenees	to	reach	France,	over	dangerous	roads	and	mountaintrails	 where	 highwaymen	 lurked	 behind	 every	 bend,	 ready	 toassault	 unsuspecting	 travelers.	 John	 Adams	 organized	 a	 muletrain	 with	 thirteen	 mules	 and	 three	 old	 carriages	 that	 JohnQuincy	said	had	been	“made	in	the	year	one.”	Adams	hired	twolocal	 muleteers,	 one	 to	 guide	 them,	 the	 other	 to	 take	 up	 therear,	and	he	bought	himself	a	set	of	pistols.“We	set	out	like	so	many	Don	Quixote’s	and	Sancho	Panza’s,”John	 Quincy	 scrawled	 in	 his	 diary	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 first	 day.When	 they	 reached	 Coronna	 near	 the	 base	 of	 the	 Pyrenees,they	dined	at	the	house	of	the	French	consul,	then	lodged	at	alocal	 inn.	 Heavy	 rains	 pinned	 them	 down	 until	 the	 day	 afterChristmas,	 when	 they	 began	 their	 trek	 through	 the	 Pyreneesand	 what	 John	 Quincy	 called	 “the	 worst	 three	 weeks	 I	 everpassed	in	my	life.”The	 roads	 in	 general	 are	 very	 bad.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 streets	 arefilthy	 and	 muddy.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 lodgings	 I	 will	 not	 try	 todescribe,	 for	 it	 is	 impossible	 .	 .	 .	 chambers	 in	 whichanybody	would	think	a	half	dozen	hogs	had	lived	there	sixmonths.	.	.	.	As	for	the	people,	they	are	lazy,	dirty,	nasty,and	in	short	I	can	compare	them	to	nothing	but	a	parcelof	hogs.26Making	 their	 trip	 even	 worse,	 they	 all	 contracted	 “violentcolds,”	developed	fevers,	and,	according	to	John	Adams,	“wentalong	 the	 road,	 sneezing,	 coughing	 in	 all	 that	 uncomfortableweather	 .	 .	 .	 and	 indeed	 were	 all	 of	 us	 more	 fitted	 for	 thehospital	 than	 for	 travelers.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 children	 were	 sick.	 Mr.Thaxter	 was	 not	 much	 better.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 was	 in	 a	 deplorablesituation.	I	knew	not	where	to	go	or	what	to	do.	.	.	.	I	had	neverexperienced	anything	like	this	journey.	.	.	.	In	my	whole	life,	mypatience	was	never	so	near	being	totally	exhausted.”27Although	 rain	 and	 snow	 slowed	 travel,it	 apparentlydiscouraged	 highwaymen	 as	 well	 as	 ordinary	 travelers.	 TheAdamses	 encountered	 none	 and	 escaped	 the	 Pyrenees	 onSunday,	January	15,	1780,	when	Adams,	his	sons,	and	his	aidesreached	 the	 Spanish	 port	 city	 of	 Bilbao—and	 the	 luxurioushome	 of	 merchant	 Joseph	 Gardoqui.	 After	 several	 daysrecuperating,	they	set	off	in	comfortable	carriages	and	reachedParis	 on	 February	 9,	 settling	 into	 the	 posh	 Hotel	 de	 Valois	 onthe	rue	de	Richelieu,	in	the	heart	of	the	city.	A	day	later,	Adamsenrolled	 both	 boys	 in	 a	 boarding	 school,	 where	 John	 Quincyresumed	 his	 studies	 of	 Latin	 and	 Greek,	 geography,mathematics,	drawing,	and	writing.	To	his	delight,	he	reunitedwith	 Jesse	 Deane,	 whom	 Franklin	 had	 taken	 under	 his	 carewhile	the	boy’s	father,	Silas	Deane,	was	in	America.eOnce	 Abigail	 Adams	 learned	 that	 her	 son	 was	 safe	 and	 inschool,	she	wrote	pleading	for	a	word	from	him.My	dear	Son,Writing	 is	 not	 a	 la	 mode	 de	 Paris,	 I	 fancy,	 or	 sure	 Ishould	have	heard	from	my	son;	or	have	you	written	andhave	I	been	so	unfortunate	as	to	lose	all	the	letters	whichhave	 been	 written	 to	 me	 for	 this	 five	 months.	 .	 .	 .	 Bedutiful	my	dear	son.28John	 Adams,	 meanwhile,	 took	 up	 his	 duties	 as	 Americanambassador,	 writing	 Foreign	 Minister	 Comte	 de	 Vergennes	 atVersailles,	“I	have	now	the	honor	to	acquaint	you	that	.	.	.	theUnited	 States	 Congress	 did	 me	 the	 honor	 to	 elect	 me	 theirMinister	 Plenipotentiary	 to	 negotiate	 a	 peace	 with	 Britain	 andalso	to	negotiate	a	treaty	of	commerce	with	that	kingdom.”29To	Adams’s	consternation,	Vergennes	responded	to	his	everyeffort	to	promote	peace	negotiations	with	objections	couched	indiplomatic	 niceties.	 Although	 Adams	 could	 not	 know	 it	 at	 thetime,	 Vergennes	 had	 no	 intention	 of	 fostering	 peace	 betweenthe	Americans	and	their	former	overlords.	Intent	on	weakeningBritain	 enough	 to	 permit	 French	 reconquest	 of	 Canada,Vergennes	 planned	 on	 providing	 the	 Americans	 with	 enoughmilitary	 aid	 to	 prolong	 the	 American	 Revolution	 indefinitelyand	 sap	 the	 military	 strength	 of	 both	 sides—without	 allowingeither	 to	 win.	 As	 an	 autocratic	 monarchy,	 France	 had	 nointerest	 in	 promoting	 the	 rights	 of	 man	 or	 independence	 forAdams’s	self-governing	republic.Frustrated	 by	 Vergennes’s	 diplomatic	 obstructions,	 Adamsdecided	 to	 go	 to	 Amsterdam	 to	 enlist	 financial	 help	 from	 theDutch	government	“to	render	us	less	dependent	on	France,”	ashe	explained	to	Congress.Once	there,	Adams	enrolled	the	boys	in	the	city’s	famed	Latinschool,	but	the	headmaster	found	their	inability	to	speak	Dutchtoo	 great	 an	 impediment,	 and	 Adams	 withdrew	 them.	 At	 thesuggestion	 of	 a	 friend	 who	 was	 studying	 medicine	 at	 theUniversity	of	Leyden,	Thaxter	took	John	Quincy	and	Charles	tothat	 city,	 rented	 lodgings,	 then	 enrolled	 in	 the	 universityhimself	 and	 took	 the	 boys	 with	 him	 to	 lectures.	 He	 tutoredthem	 intensively	 until	 each	 of	 them—first	 John	 Quincy,	 thenCharles—acquired	enough	knowledge	to	enroll	in	the	universityas	full-time	students,	despite	their	ages.“You	 have	 now	 a	 prize	 in	 your	 hands	 indeed,”	 the	 proudfather	 told	 his	 older	 son,	 who	 had	 turned	 thirteen.	 “If	 you	 donot	improve	to	the	best	advantage,”	he	cautioned	the	boy,	“youwill	be	without	excuse.	But	as	I	know	you	have	an	ardent	thirstfor	knowledge	and	a	good	capacity	to	acquire	it,	I	depend	on	it,you	 will	 do	 no	 dishonor	 to	 yourself	 nor	 to	 the	 University	 ofLeyden.”30Abigail	 was	 equally	 proud.	 “What	 a	 harvest	 of	 trueknowledge	 and	 learning	 may	 you	 gather	 from	 the	 numberlessvaried	scenes	through	which	you	pass	if	you	are	not	wanting	inyour	assiduity	and	endeavors.	Let	your	ambition	be	engaged	tobecome	 eminent,	 but	 above	 all	 things,	 support	 a	 virtuouscharacter	 and	 remember	 that	 ‘an	 honest	 man	 is	 the	 noblestwork	 of	 God.’”31	 Still	 a	 mother,	 however,	 she	 did	 not	 neglectmaternal	 concerns:	 “I	 hope,	 my	 dear	 boy,	 that	 the	 universalneatness	 and	 cleanliness	 of	 the	 people	 where	 you	 reside	 willcure	 you	 of	 all	 your	 slovenly	 tricks	 and	 that	 you	 learn	 fromthem	industry,	economy,	and	frugality.”32Slovenly	 though	 he	 may	 have	 been,	 thirteen-year-old	 JohnQuincy	 was	 scholarly	 to	 a	 degree	 that	 astonished	 manyaccomplished	university	professors	and	caught	the	attention	ofJean	 Luzac,	 a	 prominent	 lawyer,	 history	 scholar,	 and	 editor	 ofthe	influential	Gazette	de	Leyde.	He	became	great	friends	withthe	boy,	who	scored	his	first	diplomatic	triumph	by	introducingLuzac	 to	 his	 father.	 Their	 encounter	 turned	 Luzac	 intoHolland’s	 most	 outspoken	 advocate	 of	 Dutch	 financial	 aid	 tothe	Americans	and	produced	substantial	loans	to	the	Americansand	eventual	recognition	of	American	independence.In	 early	 summer	 1781,	 Congress	 appointed	 Francis	 Danaminister	to	the	court	of	Empress	Catherine	II	in	St.	Petersburgto	seek	Russian	recognition	of	American	independence.	Thougha	 fierce	 autocrat,	 Catherine	 pretended	 to	 embrace	 socialprogress,	 when,	 in	 fact,	 she	 had	 reduced	 Russia’s	 freepeasantry	 to	 serfdom.	 Some	 members	 of	 Congress	 hopedinterests	 might	 encourage	 her	 to	 establishcommercialdiplomatic	ties	to	the	New	World	and	encourage	other	neutralnations	to	follow	suit.	Oddly,	the	otherwise	brilliantly	educatedDana	 spoke	 no	 French,	 which	 was	 the	 language	 not	 only	 ofinternational	 diplomacy	 but	 of	 everyday	 social	 inter-courseamong	the	Russian	aristocracy.	Taken	by	John	Quincy	Adams’serudition,	social	maturity,	and	language	skills,	Dana	invited	theboy,	 who	 was	 still	 fourteen,	 to	 serve	 as	 his	 secretary	 andinterpreter,	 and	 John	 Quincy,	 eager	 for	 independence	 and	 inawe	of	working	with	a	veteran	of	Valley	Forge,	accepted.	It	wasan	 incredible	 choice,	 but	 Dana—like	 most	 people	 who	 talkedwith	 John	 Quincy—often	 forgot	 he	 was	 talking	 to	 a	 mere	 boy.John	Quincy	was	remarkable,	and	Dana	believed	it	would	taketoo	long	to	find	and	transport	to	Europe	another	American—ofany	age—to	serve	as	a	more	effective	secretary	of	legation.John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 seen	 here	 at	 sixteen,	 a	 year	 after	 havinggone	 to	 St.	 Petersburg,	 Russia,	 as	 American	 minister	 FrancisDana’s	 translator	 and	 legation	 secretary.	 (NATIONAL	 PARKSSERVICE,	ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)“This	morning,	brother	Charles	and	I	packed	up	our	trunks,”John	Quincy	wrote	in	his	diary	on	June	28,	1781,	“and	I	went	totake	 leave	 of	 our	 riding	 master.”	 Unlike	 his	 older	 brother,Charles	had	been	unhappy	in	Europe	and	was	returning	to	hismother	 in	 America.	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 was	 about	 to	 turnfifteen	and	begin	life	on	his	own—in	the	service	of	his	countryas	a	foreign	diplomat.	A	devoted	scholar	by	then,	he	would	notleave	 without	 copying	 some	 of	 his	 favorite	 works	 to	 take	 withhim.	 In	 the	 days	 before	 his	 departure,	 he	 copied	 AlexanderPope’s	 “Ode	 for	 Music	 on	 St.	 Cecilia’s	 Day”	 and	 “UniversalPrayer,”	as	well	as	“Mr.	Addison’s	Tragedy	of	Cato.”	Americanpatriots—none	 more	 than	 George	 Washington—cherished	 theRoman	statesman	Cato’s	noble	sentiments:	“What	pity	is	it	thatwe	can	die	but	once	to	serve	our	country.”f33On	 the	 day	 of	 his	 departure,	 John	 Quincy	 made	 this	 entry	 inhis	 diary:	 “Saturday,	 July	 the	 7th,	 1781:	 This	 morning	 wepacked	 up	 everything	 to	 go	 on	 a	 journey.”	 The	 boy	 diplomatclosed	his	journal,	slipped	it	into	his	coat,	and	embarked	on	thebeginning	 of	 what	 would	 be	 a	 lifelong	 adventure	 of	 service	 tohis	country.34