INTRODUCTION 	1A	First	Son	for	a	Founding	Father“Mr.	 Adams!”	 the	 old	 lady	 shrieked.	 “You’re	 embarking	 undervery	threatening	signs.	The	heavens	frown,	the	clouds	roll,	thewinds	howl,	the	waves	of	the	sea	roar	upon	the	beach.”1Ten-year-old	John	Quincy	Adams	looked	up	at	his	father,	whonodded	to	the	lady,	smiled	and	excused	himself,	then	whisperedreassurances	in	his	son’s	ear:	the	woman,	was	“a	good	lady	.	.	.an	 Adams	 with	 very	 delicate	 health	 .	 .	 .	 much	 afflicted	 withhysterical	 complaints	 .	 .	 .	 often	 a	 little	 disarranged	 in	 herimagination.”2	With	that,	father,	son,	and	their	servant	boardedthe	 barge	 and	 bounded	 over	 the	 angry	 waters	 toward	 thetwenty-four-gun	 frigate	 Boston	 that	 waited	 in	 the	 bay	 to	 takethem	 across	 the	 Atlantic	 to	 France.	 All	 but	 echoing	 the	 lady’swarning,	 the	 waves	 lapped	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 barge—slappingpassenger	 faces,	 stinging	 John	 Quincy’s	 eyes	 with	 salty	 spray,and	filling	him	with	fear	of	impending	disaster	at	sea.Several	 days	 later,	 the	 captain	 of	 the	 Boston	 confirmed	 theboy’s	 fear—shouting	 to	 crewmen	 and	 pointing	 to	 the	 horizon:three	British	navy	frigates	had	climbed	into	view.	Heeling	overwith	 sails	 full,	 the	 Boston	 fled	 and	 lost	 sight	 of	 two	 ships,	 butthe	third	stayed	in	sight,	pursuing	the	entire	day,	night,	and	allnext	day,	intent	on	capturing	the	American	ship	and	its	famouspassenger.“Our	powder,	cartridges	and	balls	were	placed	by	the	guns,”John	Adams	recalled,	“and	everything	made	ready	to	begin	theaction.”3	As	night	fell,	the	enemy	“was	gaining	on	us	very	fast,”and	 John	 Quincy	 knew	 that	 if	 the	 British	 captured	 them,	 hisfather	faced	summary	hanging	from	the	yardarm,	while	the	boyhimself	faced	impressment	and	a	life	of	servitude	in	the	Britishnavy.Nightfall	only	added	to	their	danger	as	winds	picked	up	andswelled	 into	 a	 hurricane.	 The	 Adamses	 went	 below	 to	 theircabin,	where	“it	was	with	the	utmost	difficulty	that	my	little	sonand	 I	 could	 hold	 ourselves	 in	 bed	 with	 both	 our	 hands	 .	 .	 .bracing	ourselves	with	our	feet.”Then,	“a	sudden,	tremendous	report”	rocked	the	ship.	Adamsand	his	boy	had	no	way	of	knowing	“whether	the	British	frigatehad	overtaken	us	and	fired	on	us	or	whether	our	guns	had	beendischarged.”4As	 they	 waited	 for	 the	 sea	 to	 smash	 through	 the	 door	 andrush	into	their	cabin,	John	Adams	held	his	frightened	little	sonin	 his	 arms,	 but	 said	 nothing,	 as	 the	 last-minute	 thoughts	 andregrets	 of	 every	 man	 facing	 death	 raced	 through	 his	 head.	 Ofall	 his	 regrets,	 he	 rued	 his	 decision	 to	 take	 his	 boy	 on	 theAtlantic	crossing—a	foolhardy	decision	for	an	adult,	let	alone	achild,	in	midwinter.	But	Adams	and	his	son	had	been	apart	fornearly	 two	 years;	 John	 Quincy	 needed	 paternal	 attention,	 andJohn	 Adams	 missed	 the	 joys	 of	 nurturing	 his	 oldest	 son.	 Onlearning	 he	 would	 have	 to	 go	 to	 France,	 he	 thought	 the	 trip	 aperfect	 opportunity	 for	 the	 two	 to	 grow	 close	 again—and	 toexpose	“Johnny”	to	the	glories	of	French	and	European	culture,with	their	history,	art,	music,	architecture,	and	languages.	TheAmerican	Revolution	had	deprived	the	boy	of	most	educationaland	 cultural	 advantages,	 not	 to	 mention	 his	 father’s	 attention.Now	the	boy	and	his	father	faced	death	together	at	sea	in	eachother’s	arms.John	 Quincy	 Adams	 had	 been	 born	 a	 decade	 earlier,	 when	 thefirst	 seeds	 of	 the	 Revolution	 were	 sprouting;	 periodic	 riotserupted	in	Boston,	New	York,	Philadelphia,	and	other	Americantowns.	Britain’s	Parliament	had	raised	taxes	 on	 goods	 shippedto	the	colonies,	then	it	shredded	the	Magna	Carta	and	orderedadmiralty	 courts	 in	 Canada	 to	 try	 American	 smugglers—without	juries	of	their	peers.“And	 this	 sequence	 of	 events,”	 John	 Quincy	 explained,	 “wasto	affect	the	fortunes	of	no	single	individual	more	than	those	ofthe	 infant	 then	 lying	 in	 his	 cradle	 in	 the	 little	 village	 ofBraintree,	in	the	Massachusetts	Bay.”5That	 infant	 was	 the	 second	 child	 and	 first	 son	 of	 John	 andAbigail	 Adams,	 of	 Braintree,	 Massachusetts,	 afarmingcommunity	 about	 six	 miles	 south	 of	 Boston,	 later	 renamedQuincy.	At	birth,	John	Quincy	was	the	most	recent	in	a	long	lineof	 illustrious	 forebears	 who	 helped	 shaped	 the	 destiny	 of	 theEnglish-speaking	 world.	 The	 first	 recorded	 Quincy	 sailed	 withWilliam	 the	 Conqueror	 across	 the	 English	 Channel	 fromNormandy	 in	 1066	 to	 crush	 English	 forces	 at	 Hastings.	 Acentury	 and	 a	 half	 later,	 in	 1215,	 Saer	 de	 Quincy,	 Earl	 ofWinchester,	rode	to	Runnymede	and	helped	force	King	John	tosign	 the	 Magna	 Carta,	 which	 guaranteed	 English	 freemen	 theright	to	trial	by	a	jury	of	their	peers.family	 alsoSubsequently,	the	Quincy	and	Adams	clansa	produced	a	hostof	 distinguished	 noblemen,	 churchmen,	 physicians,	 andscientists—among	 the	 last,	 Thomas	 Boylston,	 a	 renownedEnglish	surgeon	who	emigrated	to	Massachusetts	with	his	son,Zabdiel	 Boylston,	 who	 pioneered	 smallpox	 inoculation	 in	 theincluded	 ordinaryNew	 World.	 The	 Adamscraftsmen,	of	course—among	them,	John	Alden,	who	may	havebeen	 the	 least	 significant	 until	 Henry	 Wadsworth	 Longfellowrhymed	 him	 into	 poetic	 immortality	 in	 The	 Courtship	 of	 MilesStandish.	 A	 cooper	 on	 the	 Mayflower,	 Alden	 caughtLongfellow’s	odic	fancy	by	wedding	Priscilla	Mullins.	John	andPriscilla	Alden’s	granddaughter	would	marry	Joseph	Adams	Jr.,great-grandfather	 of	 John	 Quincy	 Adams.	 His	 son,	 JosephAdams	III,	tied	his	family’s	academic	future	to	Harvard	College,becoming	the	first	of	a	long	line	of	Adamses	to	study	there.	Thesecond	 was	 John	 Adams,	 John	 Quincy’s	 father,	 who	 graduatedin	1755	at	the	age	of	twenty.Harvard	 was	 the	 first	 college	 established	 in	 the	 New	 World,and	within	a	decade	of	its	founding	in	1636,	it	had	evolved	intomore	 than	 a	 mere	 college:	 it	 was	 a	 “school	 of	 prophets”—adivinity	 school	 engaged	 in	 “a	 noble	 and	 necessary	 work”6	 tocreate	and	lead	a	new	sort	of	nation	conceived	in	liberty.	Fromthe	first,	its	students	and	graduates	were	extraordinaries—andAmericans	 recognized	 them	 as	 such.b	 Their	 motto	 was“Veritas”—a	“truth,”	enhanced	by	the	divine,	that	gave	Harvardmen	 the	 wisdom	 of	 both	 God	 and	 man	 to	 transform	 America’swilderness	into	a	Paradise.Although	 John	 Adams’s	 parents	 hoped	 he	 would	 enter	 theministry	after	Harvard,	the	school	broadened	its	curriculum	toinclude	secular	studies,	and	he	opted	for	teaching	at	first,	thenlaw.	After	winning	admission	to	the	bar,	he	settled	in	Braintreeto	practice	law,	fell	in	love,	and,	on	October	25,	1764,	marriedAbigail	 Quincy	 Smith.	 Abigail	 was	 the	 second	 of	 threedaughters	of	the	Reverend	William	Smith	of	nearby	Weymouthand	 granddaughter	 of	 Colonel	 John	 Quincy,	 longtime	 Speakerof	the	Massachusetts	colonial	legislature.	Unlike	the	illustriousQuincys,	many	of	the	Smiths	lived	in	the	shadows	of	humanity—victims	 of	 genetically	 transmitted	 mental	 illnesses,	 includingalcohol	 abuse,	 that	 usually	 led	 to	 premature	 death.	 AbigailSmith’s	 brother,	 William	 Smith	 Jr.,	 suddenly	 and	 inexplicablyabandoned	 his	 wife	 and	 children	 to	 poverty	 and	 plunged	 intohumanity’s	 gutter—whoring,	 drinking,	 and	 finally	 dying	 at	 anearly	age.	In	raising	her	own	children,	Abigail	Adams	resolvedto	 instill	 in	 them	 principles	 of	 self-discipline	 and	 prayer	 toprotect	 them	 from	 alcohol	 and	 other	 sins.	 “Nothing,”	 shebelieved,	“bound	the	human	mind	but	religion.”7Abigail	 Adams,	 wife	 of	 John	 Adams,	 America’s	 secondPresident,	 and	 mother	 of	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 America’s	 sixthPresident.	 Her	 family’s	 roots	 stretched	 back	 to	 the	 Battle	 ofHastings	in	1066	and	the	signing	of	the	Magna	Carta	in	1215.(NATIONALADAMS	 NATIONALSERVICE,HISTORICAL	PARK)PARKSDeprived	 of	 formal	 education	 as	 a	 woman,	 she	 more	 thancompensated	 by	 devouring	 the	 books	 in	 her	 father’s	 hugelibrary	of	religious	and	literary	works,	including	Shakespeare’splays,	 the	 English	 poets,	 and	 a	 wide	 range	 of	 classical	 talesthat	 gave	 her	 a	 broader	 education	 than	 that	 of	 most	 men.Indeed,	 Harvard’s	 young	 John	 Adams	 found	 Abigail	 more	 thanan	intellectual	equal	as	well	as	a	romantic	match.	Nine	monthsafter	 she	 married	 John	 Adams,	 she	 gave	 birth	 to	 their	 firstchild,	 a	 daughter	 they	 named	 Abigail	 but	 called	 “Nabby”	 todistinguish	her	from	the	senior	Abigail.	Two	years	later,	on	July11,	 1767,	 Abigail’s	 second	 child	 was	 born—a	 son	 they	 namedJohn	 Quincy	 Adams,	 after	 the	 infant’s	 father	 and	 maternalgrandfather.The	 ninety-five-acre	 Adams	 family	 farm,	 in	 Braintree	 (nowQuincy),	 Massachusetts,	 with	 the	 birthplace	 of	 John	 QuincyAdams	on	the	left,	the	birthplace	of	his	father,	John	Adams,	toits	 immediate	 right,	 and	 John	 and	 Abigail	 Adams’s	 retirement“mansion”	 on	 the	 far	 right.	 In	 the	 rear	 is	 Penn’s	 Hill,	 whereAbigail	 Adams	 took	 seven-year-old	 John	 Quincy	 to	 witness	 theBattle	 of	 Bunker’s	 Hill.	 (NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,	 ADAMSNATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)At	John	Quincy’s	birth,	his	father’s	reputation	had	spread	farbeyond	 Braintree.	 “The	 disputes	 [with	 Britain]	 grew,”	 JohnQuincy	 explained,	 and	 “agitated	 no	 household	 more	 than	 thatin	 which	 this	 boy	 was	 growing	 up.	 My	 father,	 from	 pursuing	 aprofessional	life,	began	to	feel	himself	impelled	more	and	moreinto	 the	 vortex	 of	 controversy.	 .	 .	 .	 My	 mother’s	 temperamentreadily	 caught	 the	 rising	 spirit	 of	 popular	 enthusiasm	 andcommunicated	it	to	me.”8A	 move	 from	 Braintree	 to	 Boston	 put	 John	 Quincy’s	 fatherclose	to	the	state’s	most	influential	clients—and	at	the	center	ofpopular	 anger	 over	 British	 rule.	 “America	 is	 on	 the	 point	 ofbursting	 into	 flames,”	 Boston’s	 Sons	 of	 Liberty	 warned,9	 andon	 March	 5,	 1770,	 two	 years	 after	 John	 Quincy’s	 family	 hadsettled	 in	 town,	 an	 angry	 mob	 transformed	 the	 Sons	 ofLiberty’s	warning	into	the	Boston	Massacre,	with	British	troopskilling	two	men	and	wounding	eight,	two	of	whom	quickly	diedfrom	their	injuries.To	 prevent	 disorder	 from	 spreading,	 the	 royal	 governorordered	 the	 soldiers	 and	 commanding	 officer	 arrested	 andcharged	with	murder.	He	thwarted	accusations	of	favoritism	bynaming	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 and	 his	 mother’s	 cousin	 JosiahQuincy—two	 outspokenly	 anti-British	 lawyers—to	 defend	 thesoldiers	in	an	out-of-town	trial	before	a	jury	of	farmers,	none	ofthem	 Tories.	 Motivated	 in	 part	 by	 political	 ambition,	 Adamsgambled	that,	win	or	lose,	the	case	would	show	him	as	a	man	ofstature	who	eschewed	hatred	in	favor	of	the	law	and	the	rightof	 every	 free	 Englishman	 to	 a	 trial	 by	 a	 jury	 of	 his	 peers.Fearing	 reprisals	 against	 his	 family,	 he	 sent	 his	 wife,	 who	 hadjust	 given	 birth	 to	 their	 second	 son,	 Charles,	 to	 the	 safety	 oftheir	 Braintree	 farm	 with	 their	 children.	 He	 need	 not	 haveworried.	 After	 his	 brilliant	 summation,	 the	 jury	 unanimouslyacquitted	 the	 soldiers,	 saying	 they	 had	 legitimately	 defendedthemselves	against	unprovoked	mob	assault.internationalHis	 courtroom	 triumph	 gained	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 nationalandBoston’srepresentative	in	the	Massachusetts	House	of	Representatives.The	trial	also	ended	mob	protests;	the	troops	retired,	and	withBoston	at	peace,	the	Adams	family	moved	back	to	town,	whereAbigail	gave	birth	to	their	third	son,	Thomas	Boylston	Adams.fame—andelectionasAlthough	 street	 disorders	 ended	 for	 a	 while,	 new	 importduties	 provoked	 more	 smuggling,	 and	 by	 the	 end	 of	 1773,protests	against	a	British	tea	tax	climaxed	with	a	mob	boardingthree	 ships	 in	 Boston	 Harbor	 and	 dumping	 more	 than	 threehundred	 chests	 of	 tea,	 worth	 about	 $1	 million,	 overboard.British	 troops	 returned	 to	 Boston,	 declared	 martial	 law,	 andclosed	the	city	to	commerce,	threatening	to	keep	it	closed	untilBostonians	 either	 repaid	 the	 East	 India	 Company	 for	 thevandalized	tea—or	starved.“Boston	 became	 a	 walled	 and	 beleaguered	 town,”	 JohnQuincy	 recounted.	 “Among	 the	 first	 fruits	 of	 war,	 was	 theexpulsion	 of	 my	 father’s	 family	 from	 their	 peaceful	 abode	 inBoston	 to	 take	 refugein	 his	 and	 my	 native	 town	 ofBraintree.”10Outraged	by	the	British	threat	to	starve	the	innocent	with	theguilty,	 colonial	 leaders	 elsewhere	 convened	 a	 ContinentalCongress	in	the	fall	of	1774	to	respond,	and	after	ensuring	hisfamily’s	 safety	 in	 Braintree,	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 rode	 off	 toPhiladelphia	 withfour	 other	 Massachusetts	 delegates.Although	 the	 First	 Continental	 Congress	 ended	 indecisively	 inlate	 October,	 orders	 arrived	 in	 the	 spring	 for	 British	 troops	 tocrush	 the	 rebellion	 and	 “arrest	 the	 principle	 actors	 andabettors	 in	 the	 Congress,”11	 including	 John	 Adams.	 JohnQuincy	 never	 forgot	 the	 terror	 he	 felt	 when	 he	 heard	 of	 thethreat	to	arrest	his	father:	“My	mother	with	her	infant	children,dwelt	 every	 hour	 of	 the	 day	 and	 of	 the	 night	 liable	 to	 bebutchered	 in	 cold	 blood,	 or	 taken	 and	 carried	 into	 Boston	 ashostages	by	any	foraging	or	marauding	detachment	of	men.”12In	May	1775,	John	Quincy’s	father	again	left	for	Philadelphiaand	a	Second	Continental	Congress,	where	forty-three-year-oldGeorge	 Washington	 arrived	 in	 uniform	 dressed	 for	 war.	 At	 sixfoot	 three,	 he	 towered	 over	 other	 delegates—especially	 forty-year-old	John	Adams,	who,	even	his	wife	Abigail	conceded,	was“short,	 thick	 and	 fat.”13	 Nonetheless,	 their	 mutual	 interest	 infarming	gave	Adams	and	Washington	common	ground	to	form	afirm	friendship	that	often	included	dining	and	attending	churchservices	together.On	 June	 2,	 a	 letter	 from	 Dr.	 Joseph	 Warren,	 a	 close	 familyfriend	 of	 the	 Adamses	 and	 president	 of	 the	 MassachusettsProvincial	 Congress,	 urged	 the	 Continental	 Congress	 to	 takecontrol	of	disorganized	New	England	militiamen	laying	siege	toBoston	 by	 appointing	 a	 commander	 in	 chief.	 “The	 swordshould,	 in	 all	 free	 states,	 be	 subservient	 to	 the	 civil	 powers,”Warren	 argued.	 “We	 tremble	 at	 having	 an	 army	 (althoughconsisting	 of	 our	 own	 countrymen)	 established	 here	 without	 acivil	power	to	provide	for	and	control	them.”14In	a	more	dire	letter,	Abigail	Adams	wrote	to	her	husband	ofthe	 chaos	 engulfing	 Braintree,	 with	 their	 home	 a	 “scene	 ofconfusion—soldiers	 coming	 in	 for	 lodging,	 for	 breakfast,	 forsupper,	for	drink,	&c.	&c.”Sometimes	 refugees	 from	 Boston	 tired	 and	 frightenedseek	 an	 asylum	 for	 a	 day	 or	 night,	 a	 week—you	 canhardly	imagine	how	we	live.	.	.	.	I	wish	you	were	nearer	tous.	 We	 know	 not	 what	 a	 day	 will	 bring	 forth	 nor	 whatdistress	one	hour	may	throw	us	into.15John	 Adams,	 second	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States	 and	 fatherof	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 the	 nation’s	 sixth	 President.	 He	 hadbeen	 a	 prominent	 lawyer	 before	 attending	 the	 first	 twoContinental	 Congresses,	 and	 his	 Thoughts	 on	 Governmentserved	 as	 the	 basis	 for	 constitutions	 in	 nine	 of	 the	 thirteenstates	 after	 independence.	 (AFTER	 A	 PORTRAIT	 BY	 JOHNSINGLETON	 COPLEY;	 NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,	 ADAMSNATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)Visibly	 upset	 by	 Abigail’s	 letter,	 John	 Adams	 replied	 byreturn,	“Oh	that	I	was	a	soldier!	I	will	be.	I	am	reading	militarybooks.	Everybody	must	and	will	and	shall	be	a	soldier.	.	.	.	Mydear	Nabby	and	Johnny	and	Charley	and	Tommy	are	never	outof	my	thoughts.	God	Bless,	preserve	and	prosper	them.”16A	few	days	later,	John	Adams	reacted	to	Dr.	Warren’s	warningand	 asked	 Congress	 to	 draft	 patriot	 forces	 besieging	 Bostoninto	 a	 Continental	 Army	 and	 appoint	 a	 supreme	 commander.Congress	 agreed,	 and	 again	 Adams	 rose	 to	 speak.	 He	 hadmingled	 discreetly	 with	 delegates	 from	 middle	 and	 southerncolonies	 and	 discovered	 “a	 jealousy	 against	 a	 New	 EnglandArmy	under	the	command	of	a	New	England	General,”	who,	ifhe	defeated	the	British,	might	give	law	to	the	other	states.“I	 had	 no	 hesitation	 to	 declare,”	 he	 responded,	 “that	 I	 hadbut	 one	 gentleman	 in	 mind	 for	 that	 important	 command,	 andthat	 was	 a	 gentleman	 from	 Virginia	 .	 .	 .	 whose	 skill	 andexperience	 as	 an	 officer,	 whose	 independent	 fortune,	 greattalents,	and	excellent	universal	character,	would	command	theapprobation	of	all	the	colonies	better	than	any	other	person	inthe	 Union.”17	 Two	 days	 later,	 Boston’s	 John	 Hancock,	 thepresident	 of	 Congress,	 wrote	 to	 Dr.	 Joseph	 Warren,	 “TheCongress	 here	 have	 appointed	 George	 Washington,	 Esq.,General	 and	 Commander-in-Chief,	 of	 the	 Continental	 Army.”18As	 Hancock	 penned	 his	 inimitable	 signature,	 however,	 Warrenalready	 lay	 dead	 on	 the	 field	 of	 battle	 at	 Breed’s	 Hill,	 on	 theCharlestown	peninsula	opposite	Boston.Like	 Boston,	 Charlestown	 sat	 in	 Boston	 Bay	 on	 what	 wasnearly	an	island,	connected	to	the	mainland	by	a	narrow	neck.Two	 hills	 dominated	 the	 neck,	 Bunker’s	 Hill,	 as	 it	 was	 thencalled,	near	the	mainland,	and	the	smaller	Breed’s	Hill,	nearerthe	 water.	 Warren	 had	 gone	 to	 Bunker’s	 Hill	 to	 warn	 thecommander	 of	 ammunition	 shortages	 and	 joined	 the	 troopsbehind	a	makeshift	fortification	on	Breed’s	Hill.When	 she	 heard	 the	 first	 cannon	 blasts,	 Abigail	 Adamsshuddered,	 then	 suppressed	 her	 fears	 of	 running	 into	 Britishsoldiers	and	took	seven-year-old	John	Quincy	to	a	hilltop	behindtheir	 home	 in	 Braintree,	 where	 they	 watched	 a	 battle	 unfoldacross	 the	 bay.	 By	 day’s	 end,	 the	 battle	 had	 turned	 into	 aslaughter.	 The	 first	 British	 troops	 to	 land	 had	 set	 Charlestownaflame,	while	2,400	of	their	comrades	swarmed	up	the	hillsidelike	 ants—only	 to	 topple	 by	 the	 hundreds	 under	 a	 rain	 ofAmerican	fire	from	above.“The	 town	 all	 in	 flames	 around	 them,”	 Abigail	 wrote	 to	 herhusband,	“and	the	heat	from	the	flames	so	intense	as	scarcelyto	be	borne	.	.	.	and	the	wind	blowing	the	smoke	in	their	faces	..	.	the	reinforcements	not	able	to	get	to	them.”19An	 1830	 map	 of	 Boston	 Harbor	 shows	 Quincy	 Bay	 at	 thebottom,	 with	 the	 site	 of	 President	 John	 Quincy	 Adams’s	 homeindicated	in	small	print.Seven-year-old	John	Quincy	and	his	mother	watched	a	secondwave	of	British	troops	surge	upward	over	their	fallen	comrades—only	 to	 fall	 back	 again,	 regroup,	 and	 charge	 a	 third	 time,tripping	over	lifeless	bodies,	sprawling	to	the	ground	into	poolsof	blood	and	torn	flesh,	then	crawling	upwards	on	their	handsand	knees	until	enough	reached	the	summit	to	silence	the	fewpatriot	arms	not	out	of	ammunition.	One	thousand	dead	Britishsoldiers	 covered	 the	 hillside;	 100	 dead	 patriots	 and	 267wounded	lay	on	the	hilltop.	John	Quincy	said	the	battle	and	thecarnage	it	left	made	“an	impression	in	my	mind”	that	hauntedhim	the	rest	of	his	life.Seven-year-old	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 witnessed	 the	 Battle	 ofBunker’s	Hill	with	his	mother	from	a	distant	hilltop.	Nearly	270patriots	 perished,theRevolutionary	 War	 leader	 and	 the	 Adams	 family’s	 physician,seen	 in	 the	 throes	 of	 death	 in	 an	 engraving	 by	 Gotthard	 vonMuller,	 after	 the	 painting	 by	 John	 Trumbull.	 (NATIONALPORTRAIT	GALLERY,	SMITHSONIAN	INSTITUTION)Joseph	 Warren,including	 Dr.“I	 saw	 with	 my	 own	 eyes	 the	 fires	 of	 Charlestown,”	 heexclaimed,	 “and	 heard	 Britannia’s	 thunders	 in	 the	 battle	 .	 .	 .and	 witnessed	 the	 tears	 of	 my	 mother	 and	 mingled	 them	 withmy	 own	 at	 the	 fall	 of	 Dr.	 Joseph	 Warren,	 a	 dear	 friend	 of	 myfather,	and	a	beloved	physician	to	me.”20	Only	days	before	hisdeath,	Warren	had	devised	an	ingenious	array	of	splints	to	saveJohn	 Quincy’s	 forefinger	 from	 amputation	 after	 the	 boy	 hadsuffered	a	bad	fracture.John	 Quincy	 watched	 his	 mother	 sob	 as	 she	 describedWarren’s	 death	 to	 her	 husband:	 “Our	 dear	 friend	 .	 .	 .	 fellgloriously	 fighting	 for	 his	 country—saying	 better	 to	 diehonorably	 in	 the	 field	 than	 ignominiously	 hang	 upon	 thegallows.”21When	the	last	patriot	lay	still	on	Bunker’s	Hill	and	the	Britishhad	 ceased	 firing,	 Abigail	 led	 her	 frightened	 seven-year-oldhome,	and	together	they	recited	the	Lord’s	Prayer.	“My	motherwas	 the	 daughter	 of	 a	 Christian	 clergyman,”	 John	 Quincyexplained,	 “and	 therefore	 bred	 in	 the	 faith	 of	 deliberatedetestation	 of	 war.”22	 Abigail	 made	 John	 Quincy	 promise	 torepeat	 the	 Lord’s	 Prayer	 each	 morning	 before	 rising	 from	 hisbed—a	promise	he	kept	for	the	rest	of	his	life.	The	memory	ofBunker’s	 Hill,	 he	 said,	 “riveted	 my	 abhorrence	 of	 war	 to	 mysoul	 .	 .	 .	 with	 abhorrence	 of	 tyrants	 and	 oppressors	 .	 .	 .	 [who]wage	war	against	the	rights	of	human	nature	and	the	libertiesand	rightful	interests	of	my	country.”23A	few	days	later,	Abigail	and	John	Quincy	were	still	shaken	bythe	slaughter	at	Bunker’s	Hill.	“We	live	in	continual	expectationof	 hostilities,”	 she	 wrote	 to	 her	 husband.	 “Scarcely	 a	 day	 thatdoes	not	produce	some,	but	like	good	Nehemiah	.	.	.	we	will	sayunto	them,	‘Be	not	afraid.	Remember	the	Lord	who	is	great	andterrible,	 and	 fight	 for	 your	 brethren,	 your	 sons,	 and	 yourdaughters,	 your	 wives,	 and	 your	 houses.’”24	 Her	 sorrow	 overWarren’s	 death	 soon	 turned	 into	 fury,	 however,	 and	 Abigaildeclared	 a	 personal	 war	 against	 the	 British.	 With	 John	 Quincyat	 her	 side,	 unwrapping	 each	 piece	 and	 handing	 it	 to	 her,	 shemelted	 all	 her	 prized	 pewter	 spoons	 in	 molds	 to	 make	 musketballs	for	patriot	soldiers.In	the	days	that	followed,	John	Quincy	lived	“in	unintermitteddanger	 of	 being	 consumed	 with	 my	 family	 in	 a	 conflagrationkindled	by	a	torch	in	the	same	hands	which	.	.	.	lighted	the	firesof	Charlestown.”25	As	dangerous	as	the	threat	of	fire	was	thatof	 disease.	 Eight	 neighbors	 died	 of	 dysentery,	 distemper,	 andother	 maladies	 that	 raged	 through	 Braintree	 and	 nearbyhamlets.	 Hunger	 spared	 no	 one;	 soldiers	 and	 refugees	 alikeplundered	 kitchen	 gardens	 and	 root	 cellars	 of	 whatever	 foodthey	 could	 find,	 often	 stealing	 into	 the	 Adams	 house	 andterrifying	Abigail	and	the	children	as	they	searched.“Does	 every	 member	 feel	 for	 us?”	 Abigail	 pleaded	 to	 herhusband	 about	 his	 colleagues	 in	 Congress.	 “Can	 they	 realizewhat	we	suffer?”26Despite	 the	 disorder,	 Abigail	 and	 John	 maintained	 theirregular	 correspondence,	 each	 addressing	 the	 other	 as	 “MyDearest	Friend,”	with	Abigail	always	conveying	their	children’slove	 and	 “duty”	 to	 their	 father.	 Whenever	 his	 letters	 arrived,she	told	him,	“You	would	laugh	to	see	them	run	upon	the	sightof	a	letter—like	chickens	for	a	crumb	when	the	hen	clucks.”27With	 schools	 closed	 and	 her	 husband	 absent,	 Abigail	 Adamstook	command	of	John	Quincy’s	education,	encouraging	him	toread	 ever	 more	 books	 from	 his	 father’s	 library	 and	 calling	 inJohn	 Thaxter,	 a	 cousin	 who	 was	 studying	 law	 in	 John	 Adams’soffice,	 to	 tutor	 the	 boy	 in	 mathematics	 and	 science.	 When	 shediscovered	 her	 son	 turning	 pages	 of	 some	 prose	 or	 poetrywithout	 reading,	 the	 resourceful	 mother	 complained	 aloudabout	 her	 eyes	 and	 asked	 John	 Quincy	 to	 read	 to	 her.	 Afterwriting	to	her	husband	about	her	ruse,	John	Adams	replied	thathe	 was	 “charmed	 with	 your	 amusement	 with	 our	 little	 Johnny.Tell	him	I	am	glad	to	hear	he	is	so	good	a	boy	as	to	read	to	hisMamma	for	her	entertainment	and	to	keep	out	of	the	companyof	rude	children.”28John	 Adams	 went	 on	 to	 provide	 a	 complete	 curriculum	 for“our	little	Johnny.”I	 am	 under	 no	 apprehension	 about	 his	 proficiency	 inlearning.	With	his	capacities	and	opportunities	he	can	notfail	 to	 acquire	 knowledge.	 But	 let	 him	 know	 that	 thesentiments	 of	 his	 heart	 are	 more	 important	 than	 thefurniture	 of	 his	 head.	 Let	 him	 be	 sure	 that	 he	 possessesthe	 great	 virtue	 of	 temperance,	 justice,	 magnanimity,honor,	and	generosity,	and	with	these	added	to	his	parts,he	cannot	fail	to	become	a	wise	and	great	man.Does	 he	 read	 the	 newspapers?	 The	 events	 of	 this	 warshould	not	pass	unobserved	by	him	at	his	years.As	 he	 reads	 history,	 you	 should	 ask	 him	 what	 eventsstrike	 him	 most.	 What	 characters	 he	 esteems	 andadmires?	 Which	 he	 hates	 and	 abhors?	 Which	 hedespises?Treachery,	 perfidy,	 cruelty,	 hypocrisy,	 avarice,	 &c	 &cshould	be	pointed	out	to	him	for	his	contempt	as	well	asdetestation.29Adams	insisted	that	his	son	master	Greek,	“the	most	perfectof	 all	 languages,”	 and	 that	 he	 read	 the	 original	 text	 ofThucydides’s	 History	 of	 the	 Peloponnesian	 War.	 Besidespressing	 him	 to	 meet	 his	 father’s	 academic	 demands,	 Abigailconstantly	reminded	John	Quincy	of	his	family	heritage	and	hisfather’s	 achievements	 as	 a	 scholar,	 lawyer,	 and	 legislator,	 aswell	as	his	courage	in	defying	British	rule	and	risking	death	byserving	 in	 the	 Continental	 Congress.	 John	 Quincy	 respondedwith	 bold	 displays	 of	 his	 own	 courage	 that	 added	 to	 hismother’s	pride.“Master	 John,”	 Abigail	 reported	 to	 her	 husband,	 “cheerfullyconsented‘post-rider,’”	 venturing	 alone	 onhorseback	 past	 British	 troop	 encampments	 to	 carry	 familynews	between	Braintree	and	Boston.to	 become“As	 the	 distance	 was	 not	 less	 than	 eleven	 miles	 each	 way,”John	Quincy	boasted,	“the	undertaking	was	not	an	easy	one	fora	boy	barely	nine	years	old.”30Abigail’s	 demands,	 discipline,	 expectations,	 and	 hectoring—along	 with	 fears	 generated	 by	 war—took	 a	 toll	 on	 the	 boy,however,	often	leaving	him	depressed	and	convinced	he	wouldnever	match	the	achievements	of	his	“Pappa.”	Abigail	read	andreread	 her	 husband’s	 letters	 from	 Philadelphia	 exhorting	 hisson	to	achieve	“great	and	glorious	deeds.”	The	letters	insistedthat	 scholarship	 be	 central	 to	 the	 boy’s	 life	 to	 ensure	 hisachieving	 his	 father’s	 ambition	 to	 “become	 a	 wise	 and	 greatman.”31“At	 ten	 years	 of	 age,”	 John	 Quincy	 recalled	 later,	 “I	 readShakespeare’s	 Tempest,	 As	 You	 Like	 It,	 Merry	 Wives	 ofWindsor,	Much	Ado	About	Nothing,	and	King	Lear.”There	was	also	a	small	edition	of	Milton’s	Paradise	Lost,which	 I	 believe	 I	 attempted	 ten	 times	 to	 read	 and	 nevercould	get	through	half	the	book.	.	.	.	I	was	mortified,	evento	 the	 shedding	 of	 tears,	 that	 I	 could	 not	 even	 conceivewhat	it	was	that	my	father	and	mother	admired	so	muchin	 that	 book,	 and	 yet	 I	 was	 ashamed	 to	 ask	 them	 anexplanation.	 I	 smoked	 tobacco	 and	 read	 Milton	 at	 thesame	 time,	 from	 the	 same	 motive—to	 find	 out	 what	 wasthe	 recondite	 charm	 in	 them	 which	 gave	 my	 father	 somuch	 pleasure.	 After	 making	 myself	 four	 or	 five	 timessick	 with	 smoking,	 I	 mastered	 that	 accomplishment	 .	 .	 .but	I	did	not	master	Milton.	I	was	thirty	when	I	first	readParadise	Lost	with	delight	and	astonishment.32inFollowing	 his	 success	 placing	 George	 Washingtoncommand	 of	 the	 military,	 John	 Adams’s	 erudition	 and	 quicklegal	 mind	 raised	 him	 to	 leadership	 in	 Congress—perhapshigher	 than	 he	 wanted.	 By	 summer’s	 end	 in	 1775,	 he	 wassitting	 on	 ninety	 committees,	 serving	 as	 chairman	 of	 twenty-five,	and	by	his	own	admission,	he	was	“worn	out”—and	longedfor	his	wife	and	children.“My	 dearest	 friend,”	 he	 wrote	 to	 Abigail.	 “I	 have	 somethoughts	of	petitioning	for	leave	to	bring	my	family	here.	I	am	alonely,	forlorn	creature.	.	.	.”I	want	to	walk	with	you	in	the	garden—the	Common—thePlain—the	 Meadow.	 I	 want	 to	 take	 Charles	 in	 one	 handand	 Tom	 in	 the	 other	 and	 walk	 with	 you,	 Nabby	 on	 yourright	 and	 John	 upon	 my	 left,	 to	 view	 the	 corn	 fields,	 theorchards,	 &c.	 Alas,	 poor	 imagination.	 How	 faintly	 andimperfectly	 do	 you	 supply	 the	 want	 of	 originality	 andreality.33Abigail	longed	for	John	as	much	as	he	longed	for	her.	She	toobegan	her	letters	“My	Dearest	Friend.”My	anxiety	for	your	welfare	will	never	leave	me	but	withmy	parting	breath.	’Tis	of	more	importance	to	me	than	allthis	 world	 contains.	 The	 cruel	 separation	 to	 which	 I	 amnecessitated	cuts	in	half	the	enjoyments	of	life;	the	otherhalf	are	comprised	in	the	hope	that	what	I	do	and	what	Isuffer	 may	 be	 serviceable	 to	 you	 and	 the	 little	 ones	 andour	country.34In	 August,	 John	 Adams	 learned	 that	 his	 thirty-four-year-oldbrother,	 Elihu,	 had	 died	 of	 dysentery	 at	 his	 army	 camp,	 andreports	 from	 Boston	 about	 troop	 outrages	 left	 him	 worriedabout	his	family’s	safety.	He	pleaded	with	Abigail	to	“fly	to	thewoods	 with	 our	 children”	 in	 the	 face	 of	 danger.	 John	 Quincytried	 assuaging	 his	 father’s	 fears	 with	 a	 pledge	 to	 defend	 thefamily	and	the	family	home.“John	 writes	 like	 a	 hero,”	 Adams	 wrote	 back	 to	 Abigail,“glowing	 with	 ardor	 for	 his	 country	 and	 burning	 withindignation	against	her	enemies.”35Adams	 surprised	 his	 wife	 in	 December	 by	 appearing	 at	 thefarm	 unexpectedly—only	 to	 surprise	 her	 even	 more,	 four	 dayslater,	by	leaving	for	Watertown,	Massachusetts,	to	report	to	theProvincial	Congress.	He	returned	home	three	weeks	after	that—then	 left	 for	 Philadelphia	 almost	 immediately,	 with	 hardly	 amoment	for	John	Quincy	and	the	other	children.By	then,	Abigail	was	so	lonely	for	her	husband	that	she	grewangry,	 asking	 bluntly,	 “Shall	 I	 expect	 you	 or	 do	 you	 determineto	stay	out	the	year?”	After	he	left,	she	decided	to	cease	writinghim	after	one	last	message.	“I	miss	my	partner,”	she	admitted.“I	have	not	felt	in	a	humor	to	entertain	you	with	letters.	If	I	hadtaken	 up	 my	 pen	 perhaps	 some	 unbecoming	 invective	 mighthave	 fallen	 from	 it.	 .	 .	 .	 Our	 little	 ones	 whom	 you	 so	 oftenrecommend	to	my	care	and	instruction	shall	not	be	deficient	invirtue	or	probity	if	the	precepts	of	a	mother	have	their	desiredeffect,	 but	 they	 would	 be	 doubly	 enforced	 could	 they	 beindulged	 with	 the	 example	 of	 a	 father	 constantly	 beforethem.”36“I	 cannot	 leave	 Congress,	 without	 causing	 injury	 to	 thepublic,”	 her	 husband	 snapped,37	 but	 then	 reiterated	 hisloneliness	 for	 her	 and	 his	 family.	 “I	 never	 will	 come	 againwithout	 you	 if	 I	 can	 persuade	 you	 to	 come	 with	 me,”	 hepromised.	“Whom	God	has	joined	together	ought	not	to	be	putasunder	 so	 long	 with	 their	 own	 consent.	 We	 will	 bring	 masterJohnny	with	us.”38In	 the	 spring	 of	 1776,	 Adams	 and	 the	 Continental	 Congresslearned	that	George	Washington’s	Continental	Army	had	forcedthe	 British	 to	 evacuate	 Boston	 on	 March	 17.	 Adams	 and	 theothers	 cheered	 as	 Virginia’s	 Richard	 Henry	 Lee	 then	 resolvedthat	the	United	Colonies	“are,	and	of	right	ought	to	be,	free	andindependent	 states.”	 Congress	 postponed	 voting	 on	 theresolution	 until	 July	 1	 to	 permit	 Adams,	 Benjamin	 Franklin,Thomas	 Jefferson,	 Robert	 Livingston,	 and	 Roger	 Sherman	 toprepare	 a	 formal	 Declaration	 of	 Independence.	 Congressapproved	it	without	dissent	on	July	4.Adams	 subsequently	 achieved	 still	 greater	 prominence	 bywriting	a	document	he	called	Thoughts	on	Government,	which,by	the	end	of	the	year,	had	served	as	the	basis	for	constitutionsin	 nine	 states.	 Adams’s	 Thoughts	 on	 Government	 called	 forestablishment	 of	 republican	 governments,	 each	 with	 anexecutive	 and	 a	 bicameral	 legislature	 with	 separate,	 clearlydefined	powers.In	June	1777,	a	month	before	his	tenth	birthday,	John	Quincywrote	 to	 his	 father,	 whose	 long	 absence	 and	 exalted	 positionhad	transformed	him	into	a	distant,	godlike	fantasy	in	the	boy’simagination.	Although	he	was	ahead	of	most	students	twice	hisage,	his	mother’s	hectoring	convinced	him	he	was	falling	shortof	his	father’s	expectations.Dear	 Sir:	 I	 love	 to	 receive	 letters	 very	 well;	 much	 betterthan	 I	 love	 to	 write	 them.	 I	 make	 a	 poor	 figure	 atcomposition,	my	head	is	much	too	fickle,	my	thoughts	arerunning	after	birds	eggs,	play	and	trifles,	till	I	get	vexedwith	 myself.	 Mamma	 has	 a	 troublesome	 task	 to	 keep	 mesteady,	and	I	own	I	am	ashamed	of	myself.	I	have	but	justentered	the	3d	volume	of	Smollett,	tho’	I	had	designed	tohave	got	it	half	through	by	this	time.John	 Quincy	 pledged	 to	 devote	 more	 time	 to	 reading	 andpromised	to	write	again	in	a	week	“and	give	a	better	account	ofmyself.”I	 wish,	 Sir,	 you	 would	 give	 me	 some	 instructions	 withregard	 to	 my	 time	 &	 advise	 me	 how	 to	 proportion	 mystudies	 &	 my	 play	 .	 .	 .	 and	 I	 will	 keep	 them	 by	 me	 &endeavor	 to	 follow	 them.	 I	 am,	 dear	 Sir,	 with	 a	 presentdetermination	of	growing	better,	Yours.39torecognizeforeign	 nationEarly	 in	 winter	 1778,	 the	 French	 government	 became	 thefirstthe	 United	 States’independence.	 By	 then,	 John	 Adams	 was	 chairman	 ofCongress’s	Board	of	War	and	Ordnance—in	effect,	the	nation’ssecretary	 of	 war.	 Shortly	 thereafter,	 he	 wrote	 to	 Abigail	 of	 hisintention	 to	 retire	 from	 government	 and	 return	 home	 “to	 mypractice	at	the	bar.”	 After	 four	 years	 in	 Congress,	 he	 realized,he	 hadleft	 too	 many	 debts	 unpaid,	 and,	 with	 moneydepreciating,	 “I	 was	 daily	 losing	 the	 fruits	 of	 seventeen	 years’industry.”My	family	was	living	on	my	past	acquisitions	which	werevery	moderate.	.	.	.	My	children	were	growing	up	withoutmy	 care	 in	 their	 education,	 and	 all	 my	 emoluments	 as	 amember	 of	 Congress	 for	 four	 years	 have	 not	 beensufficient	 to	 pay	 a	 laboring	 man	 upon	 my	 farm.	 Some	 ofmy	 friends	 .	 .	 .	 suggested	 to	 me	 what	 I	 knew	 very	 wellbefore,	 that	 I	 was	 losing	 a	 fortune	 every	 year	 by	 myabsence.40With	 her	 husband	 gone	 for	 all	 but	 four	 of	 the	 previoustwenty-four	 months,	 Abigail	 had	 taken	 a	 dominant	 role	 in	 theAdams	 household.	 When	 a	 smallpox	 epidemic	 swept	 intoBoston,	 she	 confronted	 the	 dreaded	 disease	 by	 taking	 herchildren	 and	 sixteen	 relatives	 to	 Boston	 to	 submit	 toinoculation	 with	 live	 infected	 serum.	 Although	 she	 and	 JohnQuincy	 emerged	 unscathed,	 the	 vaccine	 left	 eleven-year-oldNabby	 ill	 for	 several	 days	 and	 six-year-old	 Charles	 so	 sick	 heneeded	 weeks	 to	 recover.	 She	 also	 oversaw	 the	 farm,farmhands,	and	household	servants,	as	well	as	the	buying	andselling	of	lands.“I	 have	 supported	 the	 family!”	 she	 complained	 to	 herhusband.Late	 in	 1777,	 John	 Adams	 arrived	 home	 before	 Christmas	 towhat	he	called	“a	blissful	fireside,	surrounded	by	a	wife	and	aparcel	of	chattering	boys	and	girls”—and	a	stack	of	letters	frompotential	 clients	 promising	 lucrative	 fees	 to	 take	 their	 cases.After	 he	 had	 left	 for	 Portsmouth,	 New	 Hampshire,	 to	 take	 onesuch	case,	a	letter	from	Congress	staggered	Abigail:	Congresshad	 appointed	 her	 husband	 a	 commissioner	 to	 France	 toreplace	 Connecticut’s	 Silas	 Deane	 and	 to	 join	 BenjaminFranklin	 and	 Virginia’s	 Arthur	 Lee	 in	 soliciting	 financial	 aidfrom	the	French	government.“Dr.	 Franklin’s	 age	 alarms	 us,”	 explained	 Massachusettscongressman	James	Lovell,	and	because	they	suspected	ArthurLee	 of	 spying	 for	 England,	 “We	 want	 one	 man	 of	 inflexibleintegrity	 on	 that	 embassy.”41	 As	 for	 Deane,	 Congress	 hadrecalled	 him	 after	 receiving	 an	 accusation	 that	 he	 hadembezzled	congressional	funds	intended	for	arms	purchases.Abigail	was	furious	and	tried	to	reverse	the	appointment	withan	irate	letter	to	Lovell:	“How	could	you	contrive	to	rob	me	ofall	my	happiness?”	she	demanded.You	who	so	lately	experienced	what	it	was	to	be	restoredto	your	family	after	a	painful	absence	from	it.	.	.	.	I	haveoften	 experienced	 the	 want	 of	 his	 aid	 and	 assistance	 inthe	 last	 three	 years	 of	 his	 absence,	 and	 that	 demandincreases	 as	 our	 little	 ones	 grow	 up,	 three	 of	 whom	 aresons	 and	 at	 this	 time	 of	 life	 stand	 most	 in	 need	 of	 thejoint	 force	 of	 his	 example	 and	 precepts.	 And	 can	 I,	 Sir,consent	 to	 be	 separated	 from	 him	 whom	 my	 heartesteems	 above	 all	 earthly	 things	 and	 for	 an	 unlimitedtime?	My	life	will	be	one	continued	scene	of	anxiety	andapprehension,	 and	 must	 I	 cheerfully	 comply	 with	 thedemand	of	my	country?42The	 prospect	 of	 another	 long	 separation	 from	 her	 husbandterrified	 her.	 Even	 if	 he	 survived	 the	 dangerous	 transatlanticwinter	voyage,	he	faced	summary	hanging	for	treason,	withouttrial,	 if	 a	 British	 ship	 captured	 his	 vessel.	 Who	 would	 supporttheir	family	if	he	failed	to	return,	she	demanded	to	know.	Withtheir	family’s	finances	already	in	a	“very	loose	condition,”	JohnQuincy	 and	 her	 other	 children,	 she	 wailed,	 faced	 “growing	 upin	poverty	without	ever	knowing	their	father.”43Knowing	 her	 husband	 would	 never	 refuse	 his	 country’s	 call,Abigail	decided	to	ask	him	to	take	the	entire	family	with	him	toFrance.	 And	 when	 he	 returned	 from	 Portsmouth,	 he	 surprisedher	 by	 agreeing	 enthusiastically—only	 to	 learn	 a	 few	 weekslater	 that	 Congress	 lacked	 funds	 for	 the	 family’s	 passage	 andliving	expenses	overseas.John	 Adams	 was	 no	 more	 eager	 to	 leave	 his	 family	 thanAbigail	 was	 to	 see	 him	 go,	 and	 to	 John	 Quincy’s	 dismay,	 hisparents	decided	he	should	accompany	his	father	on	the	voyage.His	 presence	 would	 not	 only	 ease	 some	 of	 his	 father’sloneliness	for	his	family	but	allow	John	Adams	and	his	firstbornto	 reforge	 father-son	 bonds	 and	 give	 John	 Adams	 greaterinfluence	over	his	son’s	development.	Foreign	travel	would	alsoenhance	 John	 Quincy’s	 education	 and	 accelerate	 his	 evolutioninto	 the	 “wise	 and	 great	 man”	 his	 parents	 expected	 him	 tobecome.	John	Quincy	hated	the	idea	at	first.	Instead	of	rompingwith	 friends	 at	 school,	 he	 faced	 possible	 drowning	 at	 sea	 orcapture	 and	 impressment	 in	 the	 British	 navy—or	 worse,	 bypirates.	 Just	 as	 dismal	 were	 the	 prospects	 of	 endless	 days	 ofincessant	 study	 under	 constant	 watch	 and	 criticism	 by	 hisscholar-father,	 whom	 he	 hardly	 knew	 and	 whose	 impossiblesuccess	his	parents	expected	him	to	emulate	or	surpass.“My	 dear	 son,”	 Abigail	 tried	 to	 console	 him,	 “It	 is	 a	 verydifficult	task	for	a	tender	parent	to	bring	her	mind	to	part	witha	 child	 of	 your	 years	 going	 to	 a	 distant	 land	 nor	 could	 I	 haveacquiesced	in	such	a	separation	under	any	other	care	than	thatof	 the	 most	 excellent	 parent	 and	 guardian	 who	 accompaniedyou.”Let	 me	 enjoin	 it	 upon	 you	 to	 attend	 constantly	 andsteadfastly	to	the	precepts	and	instructions	of	your	fatheras	you	value	the	happiness	of	your	mother	and	your	ownwelfare.	 You	 arein	 possession	 of	 a	 natural	 goodunderstanding	 and	 of	 spirits	 unbroken	 by	 adversity	 anduntamed.	 Improve	 your	 understanding	 by	 acquiringuseful	 knowledge	 and	 virtue	 such	 as	 will	 render	 you	 anornament	 to	 society,	 an	 honor	 to	 your	 country,	 and	 ablessing	to	your	parents.44Preparations	 for	 an	 eighteenth-century	 transatlantic	 voyagewere	not	simple	and,	indeed,	needed	all	the	efforts	of	John	andAbigail	Adams	and	their	children.	In	the	absence	of	passengerships,	travelers	usually	had	to	bribe	captains	of	cargo	or	navalvessels	 to	 take	 them	 aboard,	 then	 pay	 more	 bribes	 to	 obtainsheltered	sleeping	quarters.	Congress,	however,	had	ordered—and	 agreed	 to	 pay—the	 captain	 of	 the	 frigate	 Boston	 totransport	 John	 Adams	 to	 Europe.	 Like	 passengers	 on	 otherships,	however,	Adams	still	had	to	bring	his	own	provisions	fora	 voyage	 of	 unpredictable	 length	 and	 hardships.	 Transatlanticcrossings	 couldlast	 thirty	 to	 sixty	 days,	 depending	 onprevailing	winds	and	possible	detention	by	enemy	naval	vesselsor	 privateers.	 Apart	 from	 the	 clothes	 they	 would	 need	 at	 seaand	in	France,	John	and	John	Quincy	Adams	bought	and	carriedaboarda	bushel	of	corn	meal,	thirty	pounds	of	brown	sugar,	twobottles	 of	 mustard,	 two	 pounds	 of	 tea,	 two	 pounds	 ofchocolate,	six	live	chickens,	a	half-barrel	of	“fresh	meat,”five	 bushels	 of	 corn,	 a	 barrel	 of	 apples	 [a	 precautionagainst	scurvy],	six	small	barrels	of	cider,	“a	fat	sheep,”	aten-gallon	 keg	 of	 rum;	 three	 dozen	 bottles	 of	 Madeirawine,	 thirty	 bottles	 of	 port	 wine	 [water	 and	 milk	 wereunsafe	 to	 drink],	 fourteen	 dozen	 eggs,	 seven	 loaves	 ofsugar,	a	box	of	wafers,	and	a	pound	of	pepper	.	.	.	and	.	.	.three	 reams	 of	 paper,	 two	 account	 books,	 twenty-fivequills;	 a	 dozen	 clay	 pipes;	 two	 pounds	 of	 tobacco,	 twomattresses,	 two	 bolsters	 [as	 pillows],	 and	 £100	 in	 silvercurrency	of	various	denominations	stuffed	in	shoes.45Not	 making	 preparations	 easier	 or	 more	 pleasant	 werewarnings	 from	 well-meaning	 relatives,	 friends,	 and	 neighborsabout	 everything	 from	 seasickness	 to	 pirates,	 privateers,	 andEnglish	 gunboats.	 All	 knew	 that	 if	 the	 British	 captured	 JohnAdams,	they	would	hang	him	and	impress	young	John	Quincy.On	 the	 day	 of	 departure,	 family	 members	 and	 friendsescorted	Adams	and	his	son	from	their	door	to	water’s	edge	onQuincy	 Bay,	 where	 a	 barge	 bobbed	 about	 under	 thickeningclouds,	waiting	to	take	them	to	their	ship.On	 February	 13,	 1778,	 John	 Adams	 and	 his	 son	 John	 Quincyignored	 the	 ominous	 warnings	 of	 a	 hysterical	 relative	 whoshrieked	 of	 “threatening	 signs”	 in	 the	 sky	 and	 sea;	 with	 theirservant,	 they	 climbed	 aboard	 the	 Boston	 and	 set	 sail	 forFrance.	Six	days	out,	John	Quincy	and	his	father	saw	the	threeBritish	frigates	materialize	on	the	horizon,	speeding	under	fullsails	 to	 capture	 the	 Boston	 and	 its	 famous	 passenger.	 Thecaptain	 told	 John	 Adams	 that	 “his	 orders	 were	 to	 carry	 me	 toFrance	 .	 .	 .	 to	 avoid	 fighting	 if	 he	 could,	 but	 if	 he	 could	 notavoid	 an	 engagement	 he	 would	 give	 them	 something	 thatshould	make	them	remember	him.	.	.	.	Our	powder,	cartridgesand	balls	were	placed	by	the	guns	and	everything	made	readyto	begin	the	action.”46John	 Quincy	 watched	 his	 father	 “encourage	 the	 officers	 andmen	 to	 fight	 to	 the	 last.”	 He	 knew	 his	 father	 intended	 “to	 bekilled	on	board	the	Boston	or	sunk	to	the	bottom	in	her	ratherthan	be	taken	prisoner.”47By	 nightfall	 on	 the	 second	 day	 of	 the	 chase,	 the	 Britishfrigate	 chasing	 the	 Boston	 was	 no	 closer,	 and	 as	 the	 windspicked	 up	 and	 reached	 hurricane	 force,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 hisfather	 went	 to	 bed.	 Suddenly,	 they	 heard	 a	 thunderous	 crashabove	 as	 the	 hurricane’s	 wind	 rocked	 the	 ship.	 John	 Adamsclasped	his	boy	in	his	arms	and	prayed:	he	was	ready	to	die	forhis	country,	but	asked	God	to	spare	his	little	son.