CHAPTER 	11The	Great	and	Foul	StainAlthough	 the	 controversy	 over	 Louisa’s	 refusal	 to	 visitcongressional	wives	persisted	for	a	while,	she	gradually	calmedthe	 social	 storm	 by	 turning	 her	 house	 into	 a	 coveted	 socialdestination	 with	 elegant	 receptions	 for	 illustrious	 friends	 fromEurope.	 Washington’s	 ladies	 (and	 their	 men)	 soon	 soughtinvitations	to	Louisa’s	Tuesday	evening	receptions	more	than	toany	 other	 social	 event	 in	 Washington.	 And	 most	 gossip	 abouttheir	“alien”	tastes	ended	abruptly	when	the	Adamses	hosted	aNew	Year’s	ball	in	January	1818	for	three	hundred	guests,	whocalled	 it	 the	 finest	 Washington	 festivity	 in	 memory.	 Louisasparkled	in	a	magnificent	gown	and	emerged	as	a	gracious	andebullient	hostess.	John	Quincy,	on	the	other	hand,	was	a	bit	of	agrouch.	 Although	 brilliant	 at	 serious	 gatherings	 andconferences,	his	face	turned	sour	when	the	music	began	to	playand	 those	 around	 him	 chitchatted	 and	 immersed	 the	 scene	 inbadinage.“I	 am	 a	 silent	 animal,”	 he	 grumbled1—although	 he	 usuallyexuded	 cheer	 with	 his	 immediate	 family	 in	 private.	 After	 thelast	guests	had	left	one	Christmas	ball,	he	broke	into	a	grin	andeven	 danced	 a	 reel	 with	 Louisa	 and	 his	 sons,	 who	 were	 homefor	the	holidays	from	college.At	the	State	Department,	John	Quincy	asserted	firm	authorityover	 his	 department	 from	 the	 moment	 he	 entered.	 StateDepartment	papers	had	been	in	disarray	since	the	War	of	1812,so	 he	 ordered	 clerks	 to	 create	 an	 index	 of	 diplomaticcorrespondence	 and	 cross-reference	 every	 topic	 in	 everydispatch	 and	 letter	 to	 and	 from	 overseas	 consulates	 andministries,	 foreign	 ministers,	 and	 foreign	 consuls.	 He	 thenorganized	 and	 expanded	 the	 State	 Department	 Library,	 whichbecame	one	of	the	world’s	largest	collections	of	references	andother	 works	 relating	 to	 foreign	 affairs.	 He	 also	 assumed	 an1817	 congressional	 mandate	 that	 directed	 the	 secretary	 ofstate	 to	 report	 on	 the	 systems	 of	 weights	 and	 measures	 ofvarious	 states	 and	 foreign	 countries	 and	 to	 use	 these	 topropose	a	uniform	system	for	the	United	States.	His	Report	onWeights	and	Measures	would	take	three	years	to	complete,	butit	 became	 a	 classic	 in	 its	 field	 and	 led	 to	 the	 establishment	 ofthe	Bureau	of	Weights	and	Measures	and	was	the	basis	for	theuniform	system	that	still	exists	in	the	United	States.When	he	finished	the	tasks	of	office	management,	he	turnedto	foreign	affairs	policies.	Always	careful	to	obtain	presidentialapproval,	 he	 issued	 a	 standing	 order	 that	 all	 U.S.	 ministersabroad	 adhere	 firmly	 to	 the	 alternat	 protocol	 he	 hadchampioned	 in	 London,	 ensuring	 that	 the	 name	 of	 the	 UnitedStates	 appeared	 ahead	 of	 the	 other	 nation	 on	 alternatingcopies	of	international	agreements.rDespite	 peaceful	 relations	 with	 the	 world’s	 great	 powers,many	 stretches	 along	 the	 United	 States’	 frontiers	 seemed	 atwar.	 Pirates	 repeatedly	 attacked	 American	 shipping	 fromencampments	 on	 Amelia	 Island	 in	 the	 Atlantic	 Ocean	 on	 theFlorida	 side	 of	 the	 Florida-Georgia	 border	 and	 on	 GalvestonIsland	 in	 the	 Gulf	 of	 Mexico	 off	 the	 Texas	 coast.	 In	 addition,runaway	 slaves	 and	 Seminole	 Indians	 encamped	 in	 SpanishFlorida	were	raiding	and	burning	farms	and	settlements	acrossthe	 border	 in	 Georgia.	 In	 the	 North,	 the	 British	 had	 blockedAmerican	access	to	rich	fisheries	in	and	about	the	Gulf	of	SaintLawrence	 between	 Newfoundland	 and	 the	 Canadian	 coast.Other	 unsettled	 issues	 between	 Britain	 and	 the	 United	 Statesincluded	 impressment	 and	 Britain’s	 compensation	 for	 slaveswho	had	fled	to	the	West	Indies	at	the	end	of	the	RevolutionaryWar.John	 Quincy	 Adams	 as	 secretary	 of	 state,	 an	 office	 considered“the	 stepladder	 to	 the	 presidential	 chair.”	 (AFTER	 THOMASSULLY	 AND	 GILBERT	 STUART,	 NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)By	the	time	John	Quincy	was	ready	to	return	to	America,	heand	 Lord	 Castlereagh	 had	 grown	 closer	 and	 learned	 to	 trusteach	 other	 enough	 to	 discuss	 most	 remaining	 issues	 betweentheir	 two	 nations—and	 both	 were	 eager	 to	 reach	 agreement.Britain	 wanted	 to	 focus	 on	 European	 affairs	 without	 fear	 offriction	 with	 the	 Americans,	 and	 the	 United	 States,	 in	 turn,needed	 to	 deal	 with	 the	 Spanish	 menace	 in	 the	 south	 withoutfear	 of	 a	 British	 attack	 in	 the	 north.	 After	 several	 months	 ofcomplicated	 give-and-take	 on	 both	 sides,	 John	 Quincy	 Adamsand	 Richard	 Rush,	 the	 new	 American	 minister	 in	 London,finally	worked	out	an	agreement	with	the	British	that	solved	afew	things,	postponed	others,	and,	most	importantly,	producedlasting	peace	between	the	two	nations.Under	 the	 agreement	 signed	 in	 1818,	 the	 British	 agreed	 toban	impressment	for	ten	years,	restore	American	inland	fishingrights	along	the	Canadian	coast,	and	allow	Czar	Alexander	I	ofRussia	 to	 mediate	 the	 slave-compensation	 issue.s	 The	 historictreaty	 also	 fixed,	 for	 the	 first	 time,	 the	 American-Canadianfrontier	 from	 the	 Great	 Lakes	 to	 the	 Rocky	 Mountains,	 givingthe	 United	 States	 undisputed	 sovereignty	 over	 the	 so-calledAdams	 Strip.	 By	 extending	 the	 boundary	 line	 along	 the	 Forty-ninth	Parallel	westward	from	the	northwesternmost	tip	of	Lakeof	 the	 Woods	 in	 northern	 Minnesota	 to	 the	 Rocky	 Mountains,the	 Americans	 acquired	 a	 150-mile-wide	 strip	 across	 northernMinnesota,	 North	 Dakota,	 and	 Montana.	 (See	 map	 on	 page134.)	 Recognition	 of	 the	 Adams	 Strip	 as	 American	 territoryestablished	 a	 precedent	 for	 eventually	 extending	 the	 northernborder	 line	 to	 the	 Pacific	 Ocean,	 giving	 the	 United	 Statessovereignty	 over	 Puget	 Sound	 and	 the	 mouth	 of	 the	 ColumbiaRiver.	 In	 the	 meantime	 the	 Oregon	 Territory	 west	 of	 theRockies	would	remain	open	to	both	English	and	Americans,	totrade	with	each	other	freely	and	come	and	go	as	they	pleased,with	 neither	 nation	 claiming	 sovereignty	 over	 them	 or	 theirlands.In	 a	 subsequent	 discussion	 with	 John	 Quincy,	 however,Stratford	 Canning,	 the	 British	 minister	 to	 the	 United	 States,seemed	 to	 dismiss	 the	 agreement	 by	 claiming	 Britishownership	 of	 the	 mouth	 of	 the	 Columbia	 River.	 When	 JohnQuincy	 disagreed,	 Canning	 replied	 sharply,	 “Why?	 Do	 you	 notknow	we	have	a	claim?”“I	 do	 not	 know	 what	 you	 claim	 nor	 what	 you	 do	 not	 claim,”John	 Quincy	 snapped	 back.	 “You	 claim	 India,	 you	 claim	 Africa—”“Perhaps,”	Canning	interrupted,	“a	piece	of	the	moon.”“No,”	John	Quincy	replied	angrily.	“I	have	not	heard	that	youclaim	exclusively	any	part	of	the	moon;	but	there	is	not	a	spoton	this	habitable	globe	that	I	could	affirm	you	do	not	claim,	andthere	 is	 none	 which	 you	 may	 not	 claim	 with	 as	 much	 color	 oflight	as	you	can	have	to	Columbia	River	or	its	mouth.”“And	 how	 far	 would	 you	 consider	 this	 exclusion	 of	 right	 toextend?”	Canning	asked.“To	 all	 the	 shores	 of	 the	 South	 Sea	 [Pacific	 Ocean],”	 JohnQuincy	asserted.2In	 the	 end,	 the	 British	 Foreign	 Office	 disavowed	 Canning’sclaim	of	British	sovereignty	at	the	mouth	of	the	Columbia	River,thus	 ensuring	 peace	 along	 the	 U.S.	 frontier	 with	 Britain.	 Freeto	 turn	 its	 attention	 to	 the	 conflict	 with	 Spain,	 the	 Monroeadministration	 ordered	 Secretary	 of	 War	 John	 C.	 Calhoun	 toorganize	 two	 military	 expeditions—one	 to	 crush	 pirates	 onAmelia	 Island	 and	 another	 to	 pursue	 and	 attack	 Indians	 andrenegade	slaves	in	Florida.Two	 weeks	 later,	 General	 Edmund	 P.	 Gaines	 led	 troops	 toAmelia	 Island,	 while	 Tennessee	 militia	 commander	 GeneralAndrew	 Jackson	 led	 a	 campaign	 into	 northern	 Florida,	 withPresident	 Monroe	 exhorting	 Jackson	 that	 “great	 interests	 areat	issue,	and	until	our	course	is	carried	through	triumphantly	.	..	you	ought	not	to	withdraw	your	active	support	from	it.”3	ThePresident	 made	 it	 clear	 that	 he	 considered	 acquisition	 of	 theFloridas	essential	to	the	security	of	the	United	States.	With	theSpanish	army	attempting	to	suppress	wars	of	independence	inChile,	Colombia,	Venezuela,	and	Panama,	President	Monroe	didnot	 believe	 Spain	 would	 be	 able	 to	 spare	 enough	 troops	 todefend	the	Floridas.Aware	 that	 his	 mission	 was	 a	 de	 facto	 declaration	 of	 war,Jackson	 at	 first	 refused	 to	 violate	 the	 Constitution	 by	 warringagainst	 another	 nation	 without	 a	 congressional	 mandate.Before	 setting	 out	 for	 Florida,	 he	 demanded	 a	 letter	 from	 thePresident	clarifying	his	mission,	but	he	never	received	one	andinvaded	 Florida	 without	 it.	 After	 seizing	 Spanish	 posts	 at	 St.Marks,	 about	 forty	 miles	 south	 of	 the	 Georgia	 border,	 he	 andhis	 men	 swept	 eastward	 to	 the	 Sewanee	 River,	 where	 hecaptured	 the	 Seminole	 village	 of	 Bowleg’s	 Town	 and	 burnedthree	 hundred	 houses.	 He	 then	 marched	 his	 force	 westwardacross	 the	 panhandle,	 leveling	 every	 Seminole	 fort	 and	 blackvillage	he	could	find.	To	terrify	the	population	into	submission,he	hanged	two	captured	Creek	chieftains.“They	will	foment	war	no	more,”	Jackson	declared.4On	May	24,	Jackson’s	troops	marched	into	Spanish-controlledPensacola,	 on	 the	 Gulf	 of	 Mexico	 near	 the	 Alabama	 border,effectively	 taking	 control	 of	 the	 entire	 Florida	 panhandle.	 Healso	captured	two	British	traders,	one	of	them	a	shipowner,	andaccused	 them	 of	 aiding	 the	 enemy.	 He	 hanged	 the	 shipownerfrom	the	yardarm	of	his	own	ship	in	front	of	a	group	of	terrifiedIndians	 and	 ordered	 a	 firing	 squad	 to	 execute	 the	 other.	 OnJune	2,	Jackson	sent	a	message	to	Monroe	that	he	had	won	theSeminole	 War,	 and	 if	 the	 President	 would	 send	 him	 the	 FifthInfantry,	 he	 would	 march	 his	 men	 eastward	 to	 deliver	 Fort	 St.Augustine.	“Add	another	regiment	and	one	frigate,”	he	boasted,“and	I	will	insure	you	Cuba	in	a	few	days.”5“The	 President	 and	 all	 the	 members	 of	 the	 cabinet	 exceptmyself,”	John	Quincy	was	surprised	to	find,	“are	of	opinion	thatJackson	 acted	 not	 only	 without,	 but	 against	 his	 instructions;that	 he	 has	 committed	 war	 against	 Spain.	 The	 question	 isembarrassing	and	complicated,	not	only	as	involving	an	actualwar	 with	 Spain,	 but	 that	 of	 the	 executive	 power	 to	 authorizehostilities	 without	 a	 declaration	 of	 war	 by	 Congress.”	 JohnQuincy	 stood	 alone	 in	 disagreement,	 arguing	 that	 Jackson’sactions	were	“justified	by	the	necessity	of	the	case	and	by	themisconduct	 of	 the	 Spanish	 commanding	 officers	 in	 Florida.”John	Quincy	insisted	that	Jackson	“was	authorized	to	cross	theSpanish	 line	 in	 pursuit	 of	 the	 Indian	 enemy”	 and	 that	 theConstitution	 authorized	 the	 executive	 to	 wage	 “defensive	 actsof	hostility”	without	notifying	Congress.America’sinternationalAlthough	 John	 Quincy	 failed	 to	 convince	 the	 rest	 of	 thecabinet,	 he	 convinced	 the	 President	 that	 Jackson	 had	 actuallystrengthenedbydemonstrating	a	will	to	defend	national	interests.	Switching	toJohn	 Quincy’s	 position,	 Monroe	 rewarded	 Jackson	 by	 naminghim	 governor	 of	 Florida—to	 the	 cheers	 of	 the	 overwhelmingmajority	of	Americans.	The	Spanish	king,	of	course,	protested,as	 did	 English	 and	 European	 governmentleaders	 andnewspapers,	 all	 condemning	 Jackson’s	 invasion	 of	 Florida	 asbrutal,	runaway	imperialism.standingOn	June	13,	Speaker	of	the	House	Henry	Clay	added	his	voiceto	the	chorus	of	criticisms,	charging	Jackson	with	underminingthe	constitutional	authority	of	Congress	to	declare	war.	“Effortswere	forthwith	made	in	Congress,”	John	Quincy	explained,	“toprocure	 a	 vote	 censuring	 the	 conduct	 of	 General	 Jackson,whose	fast	increasing	popularity	had,	in	all	probability	excitedthe	 envy	 of	 politicians	 .	 .	 .	 but	 the	 President	 himself,	 and	 Mr.Adams	 .	 .	 .	 warmly	 espoused	 the	 cause	 of	 the	 Americancommander.”6With	 President	 Monroe	 now	 giving	 him	 free	 rein	 on	 theFlorida	 issue,	 John	 Quincy	 sent	 instructions	 to	 the	 Americanminister	in	Madrid	to	present	the	Spanish	government	with	anultimatum:	 cede	 Florida	 or	 act	 decisively	 to	 prevent	 furtherattacks	on	American	territory	by	Florida-based	renegades.	JohnQuincy	 then	 called	 Spanish	 minister	 Don	 Luis	 de	 Onis	 yGonzales	to	the	State	Department.	He	did	not	like	the	fifty-five-year-old	 Spaniard,	 called	 him	 “wily	 Don”	 in	 private,	 anddisparaged	him	as	“cold,	calculating	.	.	.	supple	and	cunning	.	..	overbearing	.	.	.	careless	of	what	he	asserts	or	how	grossly	itis	proved	to	be	unfounded.”I	 had	 an	 hour’s	 conversation	 with	 him.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 mentionedthe	hostilities	of	the	Seminole	Indians	upon	our	frontiers,and	 I	 urged	 that	 if	 we	 should	 not	 come	 to	 an	 earlyconclusion	 of	 the	 Florida	 negotiation,	 Spain	 would	 nothave	the	possession	of	Florida	to	give	us.7President	 Monroe	 then	 prepared	 to	 go	 before	 Congress	 forhis	 second	 annual	 address,	 in	 which	 he	 planned	 to	 answer	 hiscritics.	 He	 instructed	 John	 Quincy	 to	 prepare	 a	 single	 policystatement	that	would	respond	to	the	king	of	Spain,	to	critics	inEngland	 and	 Europe,	 and	 to	 the	 American	 Congress.	 JohnQuincy	 had	 no	 sooner	 started	 working	 on	 a	 draft,	 however,when	a	letter	arrived	from	his	son	John	II	that	left	him	all	butprostrate	 with	 shock	 and	 grief:	 Abigail	 Adams	 had	 died	 onOctober	 28,	 1818,	 two	 weeks	 short	 of	 her	 seventy-fourthbirthday.“Oh,	God!”	he	cried	out,	tears	streaming	down	his	face.	“Oh,God!	 My	 mother,	 beloved	 and	 lamented	 more	 than	 languagecan	 express,	 yielded	 up	 her	 pure	 and	 gentle	 spirit	 to	 itscreator.”Oh,	 God!	 Never	 have	 I	 known	 another	 human	 being	 theperpetual	object	of	whose	life	was	so	unremittingly	to	dogood.	.	.	.	There	is	no	virtue	in	the	female	heart	.	.	.	[that]was	not	the	ornament	of	hers.	.	.	.	She	had	been,	duringthe	 war	 of	 our	 Revolution,	 an	 ardent	 patriot,	 and	 theearliest	 lesson	 of	 unbounded	 devotion	 to	 the	 cause	 oftheir	country	that	her	children	received	was	from	her.8After	 recovering	 his	 composure,	 he	 wrote	 to	 his	 “Ever	 Dearand	Revered	Father”:By	a	letter	from	my	son	John,	I	have	.	.	.	been	apprised	ofthat	 afflictive	 dispensation	 of	 Providence	 which	 hasbereft	you	of	the	partner	of	your	life;	me	of	the	tenderestand	 most	 affectionate	 of	 Mothers.	 .	 .	 .	 How	 shall	 I	 offeryou	 consolation	 for	 your	 loss	 when	 I	 feel	 that	 my	 own	 isirreparable?	.	.	.	Let	me	hear	from	you,	my	dearest	father,let	me	hear	from	you	soon.	And	may	the	blessing	of	thatGod	 whose	 tender	 mercies	 are	 over	 all	 his	 works	 stillshed	 rays	 of	 heavenly	 hope	 and	 comfort	 over	 theremainder	of	your	days.He	 signed	 it,	 “Your	 distressed	 but	 ever	 affectionate	 anddutiful	son.”9Although	 President	 Monroe	 was	 deeply	 sympathetic,	 only	 afew	 days	 remained	 before	 he	 would	 have	 to	 justify	 the	 attackand	 seizure	 of	 Florida	 to	 the	 world	 and	 obtain	 retroactiveapproval	from	Congress.	As	Thomas	Jefferson	had	predicted	ofthe	Monroe-Quincy	relationship,	John	Quincy’s	“pointed	pen”—despite	 the	 sorrow	 of	 its	 holder—prepared	 a	 response	 thatarticulated	 the	 President’s	 thoughts	 better	 than	 the	 Presidentcould	 have	 done	 himself.	 Using	 John	 Quincy’s	 carefullyconsidered	words,	the	President	hailed	Jackson’s	attack	as	“anact	 of	 patriotism,	 essential	 to	 the	 honor	 and	 interests	 of	 yourcountry.”	Brushing	aside	constitutional	issues,	Monroe	declaredthatthe	United	States	stand	justified	in	ordering	their	troopsinto	 Florida	 in	 pursuit	 of	 their	 enemy.	 They	 have	 thisright	 by	 the	 law	 of	 nations	 if	 the	 Seminoles	 wereinhabitants	of	another	country	and	had	entered	Florida	toelude	pursuit.	It	is	not	an	act	of	hostility	to	Spain.	It	is	theless	 so,	 because	 her	 government	 is	 bound	 by	 treaty	 torestrain	.	.	.	the	Indians	there	from	committing	hostilitiesagainst	the	United	States.10The	 message	 scoffed	 at	 the	 Spanish	 king’s	 portrayal	 ofJackson’s	assault	as	an	outrage	and	Jackson	himself	as	lacking“honor	 and	 dignity.”	 Monroe	 then	 quoted	 a	 letter	 from	 asurvivor	of	one	of	the	Indian	attacks	on	settlers.There	was	a	boat	that	was	taken	.	.	.	that	had	in	it	thirtymen,	 seven	 women,	 and	 four	 small	 children.	 There	 weresix	 of	 the	 men	 got	 clear,	 and	 one	 woman	 saved,	 and	 allthe	 rest	 of	 them	 got	 killed.	 The	 children	 were	 taken	 bythe	leg	and	their	brains	dashed	out	against	the	boat.	.	.	.Should	 inquiry	 be	 made	 why	 .	 .	 .	 after	 this	 event	 thesavage	 Hamathli-Meico	 [the	 Creek	 chieftain]	 upon	 beingtaken	 by	 the	 American	 troops	 was	 by	 order	 of	 theircommander	 immediately	 hung,	 let	 it	 be	 told	 that	 thatsavage	 was	 the	 commander	 of	 the	 party	 by	 whom	 thosewomen	were	butchered	and	those	helpless	infants	dashedagainst	the	boat.11President	Monroe	went	on	to	cite	the	law	of	nations	[le	droitdes	gens]	as	drafted	by	Swiss	jurist	Emmerich	von	Vattel,	whowrote,	“When	at	war	with	a	ferocious	nation	which	observes	norule	 and	 grants	 no	 quarter,	 they	 may	 be	 chastised	 by	 thepersons	 of	 them	 who	 may	 be	 taken.”12	 As	 for	 the	 Englishmenthat	 Jackson	 ordered	 hung,	 John	 Quincy’s	 response	 for	 thePresident	 called	 them	 “accomplices	 of	 savages,	 and,	 sinningagainst	their	better	knowledge,	worse	than	savages.”General	 Jackson,	 possessed	 of	 their	 persons	 and	 of	 theproofs	 of	 their	 guilt,	 might,	 by	 the	 lawful	 and	 ordinaryusages	of	war,	have	hung	them	both	without	formality	ofa	 trial.	 .	 .	 .	 He	 gave	 them	 the	 benefit	 of	 trial	 by	 a	 court-martial	of	highly	respectable	officers.	.	.	.	The	defense	ofone	consisted	.	.	.	of	technical	cavils	at	the	nature	of	partof	the	evidence	against	him,	and	the	other	confessed	hisguilt.13John	 Quincy’s	 text	 then	 addressed	 Henry	 Clay’s	 criticisms:“The	 President	 will	 neither	 inflict	 punishment	 nor	 pass	 acensure	 on	 General	 Jackson	 for	 that	 conduct,	 the	 motives	 ofwhich	 were	 founded	 in	 the	 purest	 patriotism	 .	 .	 .	 and	 thevindication	 of	 which	 is	 written	 on	 every	 page	 of	 the	 law	 ofnations	as	well	as	in	the	first	law	of	nature—self-defense.”And	finally,	the	presidential	address	referred	to	John	Quincy’snegotiations	with	Don	Luis	de	Onis,	saying	that	the	restorationof	Florida	to	Spanish	sovereignty	was	based	on	the	President’sconfidence	that	Spain	wouldrestrain	by	force	the	Indians	of	Florida	from	all	hostilitiesagainst	the	United	States	.	.	.	that	there	will	be	no	moremurders,	 no	 more	 robberies	 .	 .	 .	 by	 savages	 prowlingalong	the	Spanish	line,	seeking	shelter	within	it	to	displayin	their	villages	the	scalps	of	our	women	and	children	andto	 sell	 with	 shameless	 effrontery	 the	 plunder	 from	 ourcitizens	 in	 Spanish	 forts	 and	 cities.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 duty	 of	 thisgovernment	 to	 protect	 the	 persons	 and	 property	 of	 ourfellow	 citizens	 on	 the	 borders	 of	 the	 United	 States	 isimperative.	 It	 must	 be	 discharged.	 And	 if,	 after	 all	 thewarnings	 Spain	 has	 had	 .	 .	 .	 the	 necessities	 of	 self-defense	 should	 again	 compel	 the	 United	 States	 to	 takepossession	of	the	Spanish	forts	and	places	in	Florida	.	.	.restoration	of	them	must	not	be	expected.14Faced	 with	 revolts	 across	 South	 America	 and	 terrified	 ofagain	 confronting	 the	 man	 they	 called	 “the	 Napoléon	 of	 the[Jackson],”15thewoodsnegotiations	 that	 followed,	 John	 Quincylet	 the	 Spanishgovernment	 save	 face	 by	 asking	 the	 secretary	 of	 war	 tothe	 Spaniards	 capitulated.Inwithdraw	 American	 troops	 from	 Florida	 and	 restore	 nominalsovereignty	 over	 the	 Florida	 panhandle	 to	 Spain.	 Spain	 thenceded	 both	 East	 and	 West	 Florida	 to	 the	 United	 States	 andrenounced	 all	 claims	 to	 both	 territories.	 The	 United	 States,	 inturn,	 renounced	 all	 claims	 to	 Texas	 and	 used	 the	 $5	 millionowed	 to	 Spain	 for	 the	 Florida	 acquisition	 to	 settle	 claims	 ofAmerican	 citizens	 against	 Spain	 for	 Indian	 depredations.	 Inaddition	to	ceding	the	Floridas,	the	Adams-Onis	agreement,	orTranscontinental	 Treaty,	 defined	 the	 western	 limits	 of	 theLouisiana	 Territory,	 with	 the	 Spanish	 ceding	 all	 claims	 to	 thePacific	 Northwest	 and	 extending	 nominal	 U.S.	 sovereignty	 tothe	Pacific	coast.Cowed	by	the	President’s	annual	address,	Henry	Clay	and	theSenate	approved	the	Adams-Onis	treaty.	Together	with	the	restof	the	Louisiana	Purchase	and	the	Florida	conquest,	the	treatyexpanded	the	small,	East	Coast	nation	that	George	Washingtonhad	 governed	 into	 a	 vast,	 rich,	 and	 powerful	 empire,	 within	 arelatively	impregnable	wall	of	natural	defenses.On	 February	 22,	 1821,	 George	 Washington’s	 birthday,	 JohnQuincy	Adams	effected	the	exchange	of	treaties	ceding	Floridato	 the	 United	 States—a	 transaction	 he	 called	 “the	 mostimportant	of	my	life	.	.	.	an	event	of	magnitude	in	the	history	ofthis	Union.”Let	 my	 sons,	 if	 they	 ever	 consult	 this	 record	 of	 theirfather’s	life	.	.	.	remark	the	workings	of	private	interests,of	perfidious	fraud,	of	sordid	intrigues,	of	royal	treachery,of	malignant	rivalry,	and	of	envy	masked	with	patriotism	..	.	all	combined	to	destroy	this	treaty.	Under	the	petals	ofthis	garland	of	roses	.	.	.	Onis	had	hidden	a	viper	.	.	.	andall	 the	 calculations	 of	 my	 downfall	 by	 the	 Spanishnegotiation	has	left	me	with	credit	rather	augmented	.	.	.by	the	result.16Stung	 by	 their	 attempts	 to	 censure	 him,	 Jackson	 rode	 overthe	mountains	to	Washington	City	to	confront	his	congressionalchallengers.	 An	 adoring	 public	 intervened.	 “Whenever	 theGeneral	 went	 into	 the	 streets,”	 one	 newspaper	 reported,	 “itwas	difficult	to	find	a	passage	through,	so	great	was	the	desireof	people	to	see	him.	.	.	.	Among	the	people	.	.	.	his	popularity	isunbounded—old	 and	 young	 speak	 of	 him	 with	 rapture.”17Congress	responded	to	the	public	euphoria	by	overwhelminglydefeating	 Clay’s	 proposed	 censures,	 and	 when	 Clay	 went	 toJackson’s	 hotel	 to	 apologize,	 the	 general	 had	 already	 left	 forNew	York.In	 addition	 to	 silencing	 Clay,	 John	 Quincy’s	 masterful	 policystatements	 silenced	 the	 British	 press	 and	 government.Jackson’s	 execution	 of	 two	 British	 subjects	 would,	 a	 few	 yearsearlier,	have	provoked	a	British	naval	attack,	but	after	readingJohn	Quincy’s	paper,	Lord	Castlereagh	agreed,	“It	is	impossiblenot	 to	 admit	 that	 the	 unfortunate	 sufferers	 .	 .	 .	 had	 beenengaged	 in	 unauthorized	 practices	 of	 such	 a	 description	 as	 tohave	deprived	them	of	any	claim	on	their	own	government	forinterference	in	their	behalf.”	He	ordered	the	British	minister	inWashington	not	to	take	“any	further	step	in	the	business.”18In	 the	 fall	 of	 1819,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa	 returned	 toQuincy	 to	 visit	 John	 Adams—only	 to	 find	 that	 John	 Quincy’sbeloved	 brother	 Thomas	 Boylston’s	 occasional	 drinking	 hadbecome	chronic.	Not	only	had	his	law	practice	deteriorated,	hehad	allowed	John	Quincy’s	affairs	to	fall	into	disarray.	AlthoughThomas	promised	to	reform,	John	Quincy	had	no	choice	but	totransfer	 his	 estate	 to	 another	 firm.	 By	 1820,	 its	 attorneys	 hadrestored	enough	order	to	his	investments	for	him	to	buy	a	largenew	 double-house	 in	 Washington—on	 present-day	 F	 Street	 atThirteenth,	at	the	time	within	view	of	the	White	House.	It	camewith	 a	 second-floor	 ballroom	 for	 Louisa’s	 huge	 Christmasassemblies,	 and	 its	 proximity	 to	 the	 Potomac	 allowed	 JohnQuincy	 to	 add	 a	 swim	 to	 his	 regular	 regime	 of	 daily	 walks.Bathing	 suits	 having	 not	 yet	 been	 invented,	 he	 simply	 left	 hisclothes	on	a	rock	at	the	shore	and	waded	in	stark	naked—andno	one	paid	attention.To	 break	 the	 routine	 of	 diplomatic	 paperwork,	 John	 Quincyreturned	 to	 his	 old	 reading	 habits—Tacitus,	 Alexander	 Pope,scientific	 journals,	 and,	 of	 course,	 the	 Bible.	 He	 becamepresident	of	the	American	Bible	Society	and,	in	1820,	presidentof	 the	 American	 Academy	 of	 Arts	 and	 Sciences,	 which	 hisfather	had	helped	found.To	 John	 Quincy’s	 dismay,	 the	 Adams-Onis	 treaty	 he	 hadnegotiated	 created	 almost	 as	 many	 problems	 as	 it	 solved.Although	 it	 opened	 the	 West	 to	 settlement	 and	 promised	 anunprecedented	 period	 of	 growth	 and	 prosperity,it	 alsoextended	 the	 problem	 of	 slavery	 far	 beyond	 the	 confines	 ofsouthern	 slave	 states.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 1819,	 the	 MissouriTerritory	applied	for	statehood,	provoking	a	motion	in	Congressto	 exclude	 slavery	 from	 new	 states.	 Although	 John	 Quincy	 haddespised	slavery	since	his	first	encounter	with	it	in	Germany	asa	youngster,	he	had	never	before	involved	himself	politically	indisputes	 over	 the	 issue	 because	 it	 was	 virtually	 nonexistent	 inhis	native	New	England	and	seldom	a	topic	of	discussion	there—certainly	not	in	Quincy.“I	 take	 it	 for	 granted,”	 he	 now	 realized,	 “that	 the	 presentquestion	[of	slavery]	is	a	mere	preamble—a	title	page	to	a	greattragic	 volume.”	 As	 he	 further	 studied	 the	 issue,	 he	 concluded,“This	is	a	question	between	the	rights	of	human	nature	and	theConstitution	 of	 the	 United	 States.	 Probably	 both	 will	 suffer	 bythe	issue	of	the	controversy.”19The	controversy	divided	Congress—and,	indeed,	the	nation—for	political	and	economic	reasons	as	well	as	moral.	The	Northfeared	 Missouri’s	 entry	 into	 the	 Union	 as	 a	 slave	 state	 wouldalter	 the	 free-state/slave-state	 balance	 in	 the	 Senate,	 where	 asuccession	of	northern	vice	presidents	had	invariably	tilted	tievotes	 in	 favor	 of	 northern	 interests.	 When	 Alabama—a	 slavestate—won	admission	as	the	twenty-first	state,	the	admission	ofIllinois—a	 free	 state—restored	 senatorial	 balance.	 There	 wasno	 semblance	 of	 balance	 in	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives,however.	In	the	years	since	ratification	of	the	Constitution,	thepopulation	 of	 the	 North	 had	 grown	 faster	 than	 that	 of	 theSouth.	 Free	 states	 counted	 about	 5.2	 million	 people,	 with	 105House	 votes,	 by	 1819,	 while	 the	 population	 of	 slave	 statestotaled	 about	 4.5	 million,	 with	 only	 81	 House	 votes.	 WithMissouri’s	 admission,	 the	 South	 saw	 the	 opportunity	 to	 gain	 aone-state	majority	in	the	Senate	to	compensate	for	its	minoritystatus	in	the	House	of	Representatives.Monroe	 had	 formed	 his	 cabinet	 with	 members	 from	 eachregion,	and	he	ordered	them	not	to	involve	themselves—or	him—in	 the	 controversy.	 The	 dispute	 over	 slavery	 in	 the	 MissouriTerritory,	 however,	 grew	 too	 widespread	 to	 ignore,	 and	 themore	 John	 Quincy	 heard	 cabinet	 members	 from	 the	 Southdefend	 slavery,	 the	 more	 convinced	 he	 became	 that	 it	 was“false	and	heartless.”	Slavery,	he	asserted,	made	“the	first	andholiest	rights	of	humanity	depend	upon	the	color	of	the	skin.”It	perverts	human	reason	.	.	.	to	maintain	that	slavery	issanctioned	 by	 the	 Christian	 religion,	 that	 slaves	 arehappy	 and	 contented	 in	 their	 condition,	 that	 betweenmaster	and	slave	there	are	ties	of	mutual	attachment	andaffection,	 that	 the	 virtues	 of	 the	 master	 are	 refined	 andexalted	by	the	degradation	of	the	slave;	while	at	the	sametime	 they	 vent	 execrations	 upon	 the	 slave	 trade,	 curseBritain	 for	 having	 given	 them	 slaves,	 burn	 at	 the	 stakeNegroes	 convicted	 of	 crimes	 for	 the	 terror	 of	 theexample,	 and	 writhe	 in	 agonies	 of	 fear	 at	 the	 verymention	of	human	rights	as	applicable	to	men	of	color.	.	..	The	bargain	between	freedom	and	slavery	contained	inthe	 Constitution	 of	 the	 United	 States	 is	 morally	 andpolitically	 vicious,	 inconsistent	 with	 the	 principles	 uponwhich	alone	our	Revolution	can	be	justified.20Cabinet	 members	 William	 H.	 Crawford,	 from	 Georgia,	 andJohn	C.	Calhoun,	from	South	Carolina,	were	both	slaveholders,as	 was	 the	 President.	 Hardly	 a	 champion	 of	 manumission,Monroe	steered	clear	of	the	issue—not	because	of	indifferencebut	 because	 the	 Constitution	 gave	 only	 Congress	 jurisdictionover	the	admission	of	states,	and	it	gave	territories	the	right	tobecome	states	without	restrictions	or	preconditions.	As	for	hispersonal	 views,	 Monroe	 had	 no	 strong	 objections	 to	 slavery,saying	 only,	 “The	 God	 who	 made	 us,	 made	 the	 black	 people,and	they	ought	not	to	be	treated	with	barbarity.”21Apart	from	morality,	both	sides	used	the	Constitution	to	presstheir	 arguments.	 Although	 its	 power	 to	 regulate	 interstatetrade	 gave	 Congress	 the	 right	 to	 prohibit	 interstate	 traffic	 inslaves,	 the	 Constitution	 did	 not	 give	 either	 Congress	 or	 thestates	powers	to	abolish	slavery	in	states	and	territories	whereit	 already	 existed	 or	 to	 establish	 slavery	 in	 states	 where	 it	 didnot	exist.	Although	it	was	not	his	purview	as	secretary	of	state,John	Quincy	had	enough	standing	as	a	constitutional	scholar	tostep	into	the	debate	to	help	the	President	and	Congress	resolvethe	 issue	 as	 it	 affected	 Missouri.	 While	 admitting	 he	 despisedslavery	 as	 “a	 sin	 before	 the	 sight	 of	 God,”22	 he	 said	 his	 rolewas	not	to	debate	the	pros	and	cons	of	the	institution	but	solelyto	 determine	 whether	 the	 Constitution	 gave	 the	 federalgovernment	 power	 to	 abolish	 it	 without	 a	 constitutionalamendment.	Clearly,	it	did	not.“For	 the	 admission	 of	 a	 state	 where	 no	 slavery	 exists,”	 JohnQuincy	explained,	“Congress	may	prescribe	as	a	condition	thatslavery	 shall	 never	 be	 established	 in	 it,	 as	 they	 have	 done	 tothe	states	of	Ohio,	Indiana,	and	Illinois.	But	where	it	exists,	asin	 Missouri	 and	 Arkansas,	 the	 power	 of	 extirpating	 it	 is	 notgiven	to	the	Congress	by	the	Constitution.”23John	Quincy’s	pronouncements,	like	those	of	a	judge	on	high,silenced	 the	 debaters	 for	 a	 while,	 and	 before	 the	 end	 of	 theyear,	 an	 opportunity	 for	 compromise	 materialized	 with	 apetition	 from	 Maine	 to	 separate	 from	 Massachusetts	 and	 jointhe	Union	as	a	new	state.	When	the	Sixteenth	Congress	met	inmid-February	 1820,	 it	 needed	 only	 two	 weeks	 to	 admit	 Maineas	a	free	state	and	Missouri	as	a	slave	state.	It	then	drew	a	lineacross	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 Louisiana	 Territory,	 excluding	 slavery	 inall	 new	 states	 above	 latitude	 36°30’	 and	 permitting	 slavery	 innew	states	below	that	line.	(See	map	on	page	214.)The	 Missouri	 Compromise	 solved	 the	 problem	 of	 admittingnew	states	but	postponed	the	question	of	abolition	for	nearly	adecade,	 at	 which	 time	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 would	 have	 nochoice	 but	 to	 confront	 it	 head-on.	 “Slavery,”	 he	 declaredpresciently,is	 the	 great	 and	 foul	 stain	 upon	 the	 North	 AmericanUnion,	 and	 it	 is	 a	 contemplation	 worthy	 of	 the	 mostexalted	 soul	 whether	 its	 total	 abolition	 is	 or	 is	 notpracticable:	 if	 practicable,	 by	 what	 means	 it	 may	 beeffected	 .	 .	 .	 at	 the	 smallest	 cost	 of	 human	 sufferance.	 Adissolution,	 at	 least	 temporary,	 of	 the	 Union	 as	 nowconstituted	 would	 be	 certainly	 necessary,	 and	 thedissolution	must	be	upon	a	point	involving	the	question	ofslavery	 and	 no	 other.	 The	 Union	 might	 then	 beofreorganizedemancipation.24fundamentalprincipletheonThe	 Missouri	 Compromise	 of	 1820	 estabilished	 a	 dividing	 linebetween	free	territory	and	slave	territory,with	slavery	illegal	inany	 new	 states	 in	 the	 lands	 above	 the	 line	 and	 legal	 statesformed	below	the	line.The	Missouri	Compromise	seemed	to	settle	America’s	future,and	 when	 James	 Monroe	 stood	 for	 reelection	 at	 the	 end	 of1820,	 no	 one	 opposed	 him.	 Of	 235	 electoral	 votes,	 Monroereceived	 231,	 with	 three	 abstentions	 and	 only	 one	 electorcasting	 a	 dissenting	 vote	 to	 prevent	 Monroe	 from	 matchingGeorge	 Washington	 as	 the	 only	 President	 to	 have	 wonfor	 me,”unanimously.	 “And	 that	 vote,	 to	 my	 surprise	 and	 mortification,wasrecounted	 withJohn	 Quincy	 Adamsembarrassment.	 He	 was,	 however,	 pleased	 with	 the	 electionresults.	“Party	conflict	has	performed	its	entire	revolution,”	hesaid	 with	 satisfaction,	 “and	 that	 unanimity	 of	 choice	 whichbegan	 with	 George	 Washington	 has	 come	 around	 again	 in	 theperson	of	James	Monroe.	In	the	survey	of	our	national	history,this	 latter	 unanimity	 is	 much	 more	 remarkable	 than	 thefirst.”25Monroe’s	unopposed	reelection,	however,	marked	the	end	ofthe	 Federalist	 Party	 and	 left	 his	 own	 Republican	 Party	 indisarray,	with	leaders	in	each	state	casting	greedy	eyes	on	thePresident’s	chair	if	and	when	Monroe	decided	to	vacate	it.	JohnQuincy	 warned	 the	 President	 that	 “as	 the	 first	 term	 .	 .	 .	 hashitherto	been	the	period	of	the	greatest	national	tranquility	.	.	.it	 appears	 to	 me	 scarcely	 avoidable	 that	 the	 second	 term	 willbe	among	the	most	stormy	and	violent.	I	told	him	that	I	thoughtthe	 difficulties	 before	 him	 were	 thickening	 and	 becominghourly	more	and	more	formidable.”26In	1821,	a	rising	tide	of	populist	sentiment	swept	in	from	theWest,	 where,in	 a	 monumental	 clash	 of	 generations,frontiersmen	 and	 settlers	 rejected	 property	 ownership	 as	 aqualification	 for	 voting	 and	 holding	 office	 in	 the	 new	 statesthey	founded.	A	concept	that	dated	back	to	eighteenth-centurycolonial	 rule,	 when	 land	 ownership	 depended	 on	 royal	 grantsfrom	 Britain,	 property	 qualifications	 for	 voting	 were	 alien	 toyoung,frontiersmen.Kentucky,	Indiana,	Illinois,	and	other	western	states,	therefore,rejected	 the	 concept	 in	 writing	 their	 constitutions,	 providinginstead	 for	 white	 manhood	 suffrage.	 Although	 New	 Jersey	 hadexpanded	suffrage	in	1807	and	Maryland	in	1810,	Connecticutwaited	 until	 1818	 to	 eliminate	 property	 requirements	 forvoting,	with	Massachusetts	following	in	1820	and	New	York	in1821.nineteenth-centuryfree-spirited,In	 addition	 to	 demands	 for	 greater	 democracy	 at	 home,western	 populists	 embraced	 the	 spread	 of	 democracy	 abroad,with	Speaker	Henry	Clay	asking	Congress	in	1818	to	recognizethe	 growing	 number	 of	 revolutionary	 governments	 in	 SpanishAmerica.	 The	 House	 expressed	 its	 sympathy	 with	 the	 Latinif	 heAmericans	 and	 pledged	 to	 support	 the	 Presidentrecognized	 any	 of	 the	 new	 regimes.	 Inspired	 by	 America’sRevolutionary	War,	South	America’s	wars	of	independence	hadbroken	 out	 in	 1810,	 but	 James	 Madison’s	 administration,	 andMonroe	himself	during	his	first	term	in	office,	had	treated	thein	 the	 tradition	 of	 Georgeconflicts	 as	 civil	 wars	 and,Washington,	kept	the	United	States	neutral.In	 March	 1822,	 President	 Monroe	 was	 ready	 to	 assertAmerica’s	 voice	 as	 a	 world	 power	 and	 asked	 Congress	 torecognize	 Latin	 American	 republicsthat	 had	 declaredindependence	 from	 Spain.	 It	 was,	 he	 said,	 “manifest	 that	 allthose	 provinces	 are	 not	 only	 in	 the	 full	 enjoyment	 of	 theirindependence,	 but	 .	 .	 .	 that	 there	 is	 not	 the	 most	 remoteprospect	 of	 their	 being	 deprived	 of	 it.”	 The	 new	 governments,he	asserted,	“have	a	claim	to	recognition	by	other	powers”	andthe	 United	 States	 “owe	 it	 to	 their	 station	 and	 character	 in	 theworld,	as	well	as	to	their	essential	interests,”	to	recognize	them.27	 Led	 by	 Speaker	 Henry	 Clay,	 Congress	 supported	 thePresident,	 and	 the	 United	 States	 recognized	 Colombia	 andMexico	as	independent	nations.tAlthough	 Monroe	 believed	 Spain	 unable	 “to	 produce	 anychange	 .	 .	 .	 in	 the	 present	 condition”	 of	 its	 former	 SouthAmerican	 colonies,	 French	 king	 Louis	 XVIII	 led	 an	 alliance	 ofabsolute	 monarchs	 in	 pledging	 to	 send	 troops	 to	 his	 Bourboncousin,	 Spanish	 king	 Ferdinand	 VII,	 to	 help	 him	 recapture	 hisrich	 South	 American	 colonies.	 After	 decades	 of	 war	 againstNapoléon	 to	 prevent	 French	 expansion,	 Britain	 threatened	 toresume	 her	 war	 with	 France	 rather	 than	 tolerate	 Frenchmilitary	 expeditions	 to	 South	 America—and	 asked	 the	 UnitedStates	to	join	her.When	they	learned	of	the	European	threats	to	suppress	Southformer	 PresidentsAmericanJefferson	 and	 Madison	 intruded	 into	 the	 political	 picture	 byindependence	 movements,urging	President	Monroe	to	accept	England’s	invitation,	as	didSecretary	 of	 War	 Calhoun	 and	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House	 Clay	 andhis	 legion	 of	 congressional	 war	 hawks.	 John	 Quincy	 stoodalone,	 arguing	 against	 any	 American	 ties	 to	 England	 orentangling	 alliances	 with	 any	 other	 foreign	 nation,	 for	 thatmatter.	 Like	 his	 father,	 he	 believed	 that	 even	 the	 slightestsubservience	 to	 a	 foreign	 power	 represented	 aloss	 ofindependence—symbolically	 if	 not	 materially,	 but	 probablyboth.	Still	the	champion	of	George	Washington’s	policies,	JohnQuincy	 called	 “the	 principle	 of	 neutrality	 in	 all	 foreign	 warsfundamental	 to	 the	 continuance	 of	 our	 liberties	 and	 of	 ourUnion.”So	 far	 as	 [South	 Americans]	 were	 contending	 forindependence,	 I	 wished	 well	 to	 their	 cause,	 but	 I	 haveseen	 and	 yet	 see	 no	 prospect	 that	 they	 would	 establishfree	 or	 liberal	 institutions	 of	 government.	 They	 are	 notlikely	to	promote	the	spirit	either	of	freedom	or	order	bytheir	example.	They	have	not	the	first	element	of	good	orfree	 government.	 Arbitrary	 power,	 military	 andecclesiastical,	 was	 stamped	 upon	 their	 education,	 upontheir	habits,	and	upon	their	institutions.28Proclaiming	 a	 policy	 the	 President	 would	 later	 claim	 as	 hisown,	John	Quincy	urged	the	President	to	disclaim	any	intentionof	“interference	with	the	political	affairs	of	Europe”	so	that	theUnited	 States	 could	 hold	 the	 “expectation	 and	 hope	 thatEuropean	 powers	 will	 equally	 abstain	 from	 the	 attempt	 tospread	 their	 principles	 in	 the	 American	 hemisphere	 or	 tosubjugate	by	force	any	part	of	these	continents	to	their	will.”29No	 sooner	 had	 he	 spoken	 than	 his	 friend	 Russian	 czarAlexander	I	extended	his	nation’s	claims	along	the	Pacific	coastof	North	America	to	the	Fifty-first	Parallel	in	the	middle	of	theOregon	Territory	and	closed	the	waters	of	the	Bering	Strait	tocommercial	 fishing	 by	 other	 nations.	 John	 Quincy	 urged	 thePresident	 to	 “contest	 the	 right	 of	 Russia	 to	 any	 territorialestablishment	 on	 this	 continent”	 and	 to	 “assume	 .	 .	 .	 theprinciple	 that	 the	 American	 continents	 are	 no	 longer	 subjectsfor	any	new	European	colonial	establishments.”30Just	 at	 that	 time,	 John	 Quincy	 learned	 that	 Britain	 intendedclaiming	 Graham	 Land,	 an	 island	 rich	 in	 seals	 that	 Americanhunters	 had	 discovered	 off	 the	 northern	 section	 of	 theAntarctic	Peninsula.	At	John	Quincy’s	urging,	President	Monroeordered	a	U.S.	Navy	frigate	to	sail	around	Cape	Horn	to	claimGraham	 Land	 before	 the	 British.	 With	 the	 Russian	 attempt	 toclaim	 the	 Oregon	 coast,	 he	 ordered	 a	 second	 warship	 to	 jointhe	one	at	Graham	Land	and	sail	to	Oregon.	Although	Monroeonce	again	flirted	with	an	unconstitutional	de	facto	declarationof	war,	the	Russians	relented	and	agreed	to	move	the	boundaryof	the	lands	they	claimed	three	hundred	miles	to	the	north	andto	remove	all	maritime	restrictions	on	the	surrounding	seas.	Ineffect,	 President	 Monroe	 successfully	 extended	 the	 UnitedStates’	sphere	of	influence	beyond	its	western	boundaries	intothe	rich	Pacific	Ocean	fisheries.With	 American	 warships	 showing	 the	 flag	 in	 all	 parts	 of	 theworld—from	 the	 Mediterranean	 coast	 of	 North	 Africa	 to	 thePacific	 coast	 of	 North	 America—the	 President	 decided	 toexplain	 America’s	 intentions	 to	 the	 world.	 He	 asked	 cabinetmembers	 for	 written	 and	 oral	 suggestions	 for	 a	 policystatement	 that	 he	 would	 include	 in	 his	 annual	 message	 toCongress.	“The	ground	I	wish	to	take,”	he	told	them,	“is	that	ofearnest	remonstrance	against	the	interference	of	the	Europeanpowers	 by	 force	 with	 South	 America,	 but	 to	 disclaim	 allinterference	 on	 our	 part	 with	 Europe,	 to	 make	 an	 Americancause,	and	adhere	inflexibly	to	that.”31John	 Quincy	 submitted	 a	 proposal	 that	 “the	 Americancontinents	 by	 the	 free	 and	 independent	 condition	 which	 theyhave	 assumed,	 and	 maintain,	 are	 henceforth	 not	 to	 beconsidered	 as	 subject	 for	 future	 colonization	 by	 any	 Europeanpower.”32	 The	 President	 included	 it	 verbatim	 in	 his	 annualmessage,	later	called	the	Monroe	Doctrine.In	his	two-hour	address—aimed	at	foreign	leaders	as	well	asCongress	 and	 the	 American	 people—Monroe	 embraced	 JohnQuincy’s	 political	 philosophy	 and	 formally	 closed	 the	 Westerntofurther	 colonization.	 He	 explainedthatHemisphereAmerica’s	political	system	differed	substantially	from	Europe’sand	 that	 the	 United	 States	 would	 consider	 any	 Europeanattempts	 to	 extend	 its	 system	 anywhere	 in	 the	 WesternHemisphere	as	a	threat	to	the	United	States.	From	its	origins,he	 said,	 the	 United	 States	 had	 sought	 nothing	 but	 peace—forits	citizens	to	fish,	hunt,	and	plow	their	fields	unmolested.	TheUnited	States	had	never	interfered	in	Europe’s	internal	affairsand	 would	 not	 do	 so—indeed,	 it	 wanted	 no	 part	 of	 Europe’sincessant	 wars.	 To	 that	 end,	 he	 pledged	 not	 to	 interfere	 withEurope’s	existing	colonies	in	the	New	World.	But	he	declared	itto	 be	 “a	 principle	 in	 which	 the	 rights	 and	 interests	 of	 theUnited	 States	 are	 involved”	 that	 “the	 American	 continents,	 bythe	 free	 and	 independent	 condition	 which	 they	 have	 assumedand	 maintain,	 are	 henceforth	 not	 to	 be	 considered	 as	 subjectsfor	 future	 colonization	 by	 any	 European	 powers.”	 He	 warnedthat	the	United	States	would	view	“any	interposition	.	.	.	by	anyEuropean	 power	 .	 .	 .	 as	 the	 manifestation	 of	 an	 unfriendlydisposition	 toward	 the	 United	 States”—in	 effect,	 a	 declarationof	war.33thelessons	 ofMonroe’s	 new	 “doctrine”	 drew	 universal	 acclaim	 acrossAmerica.	 Although	 much	 of	 the	 European	 press	 and	 someEuropean	leaders	condemned	it,	few	European	powers	had	notthe	 AmericanlearnedRevolutionary	War	and,	more	recently,	of	the	French	in	Russia.As	the	Duke	of	Wellington	had	warned,	no	nation	on	earth	waspowerful	enough	to	sustain	military	supply	lines	long	enough	tochallenge	 American	 hegemony	 in	 the	 Western	 Hemisphere.With	 the	 Monroe	 Doctrine,	 most	 European	 leaders	 realized	 itwould	be	far	less	costly	to	trade	with	Americans	than	to	try	tosubjugate	them.the	 Britishin“I	went	to	the	President’s,”	John	Quincy	described	the	hoursfollowing	 delivery	 of	 the	 Monroe	 Doctrine,	 “and	 found	 Gales,the	half-editor	of	the	National	Intelligencer,	there.	He	said	themessage	 was	 called	 a	 war	 message	 and	 spoke	 of	 newspapersfrom	 Europe	 announcing	 that	 an	 army	 of	 twelve	 thousandSpaniards	 was	 to	 embark	 immediately	 to	 subdue	 SouthAmerica.”John	 Quincy	 all	 but	 laughed	 in	 the	 half-editor’s	 face,	 callingthe	 reports	 absurd.	 “The	 same	 newspapers,”	 John	 Quincyscoffed,	 “announced	 .	 .	 .	 the	 disbanding	 of	 the	 Spanisharmy.”34As	the	Monroe	Doctrine	quelled	European	ambitions	for	newconquests	 in	 the	 Americas,	 it	 also	 dispelled	 American	 fears	 ofimminent	 attack	 by	 foreign	 powers	 and	 unleashed	 a	 surge	 ofpopular	energy	that	strengthened	the	nation	economically	andmilitarily.	 State	 governments	 worked	 with	 builders	 andvisionaries	to	cover	the	Atlantic	states	with	networks	of	canals,free	 roads,	 and	 toll	 roads,	 or	 turnpikes,	 that	 generatedrevenues	 from	 user	 fees	 to	 pay	 the	 costs	 of	 maintenance	 andexpansion.	The	Lancaster	Pike	tied	Philadelphia	to	Gettysburg;the	 Boston	 Post	 Road	 connected	 Worcester	 to	 Springfield	 andBoston	 to	 Providence;	 and	 work	 began	 to	 extend	 the	 greatCumberland	 Road—then	 often	 called	 the	 National	 Road—fromBaltimore	 to	 the	 Mississippi	 River.	 Speaker	 Henry	 Clayenvisioned	its	eventual	extension	to	the	Pacific	Ocean.	In	NewYork	 State,	 continuing	 construction	 on	 the	 great	 Erie	 Canalextended	the	link	between	Rome	and	Utica	westward	to	SenecaLake.	 Already	 tied	 to	 the	 Atlantic	 Ocean	 by	 the	 Mohawk	 andHudson	 Rivers,	 the	 canal’s	 western	 tip	 stood	 only	 120	 milesfrom	 Buffalo	 and	 the	 entrance	 to	 the	 Great	 Lakes.	 Plans	 forother	 roads,	 turnpikes,	 and	 canals	 were	 legion.	 One	 proposedcanal	was	to	stretch	from	Boston	to	Savannah,	while	a	turnpikeout	of	Washington	was	to	reach	New	Orleans.Economic	 expansion	 spurred	 advances	 in	 the	 arts	 andeducation,	 as	 well	 as	 industry	 and	 agriculture.	 The	 works	 ofAmerican	writers—Washington	Irving,	James	Fenimore	Cooper,and	others—replaced	English	literature	as	the	most	widely	readin	 the	 United	 States.	 In	 addition	 to	 female	 academies,	 freeschools	 openin	 New	 York,to	 all	 children	 sproutedPennsylvania,	 Massachusetts,	 and	 Connecticut.	 Boston	 openedthe	 nation’s	 first	 “high	 school”	 in	 1821,	 and	 Massachusettspassed	 a	 law	 requiring	 every	 town	 of	 five	 hundred	 families	 toestablish	a	high	school	for	their	children.	Institutions	for	adulteducation	 appeared	 as	 well,	 with	 3,000	 “lyceums”	 in	 fifteenstates	offering	adult	education	and	self-improvement	courses.The	 apparent	 end	 to	 threats	 from	 abroad	 and	 the	 boundlessopportunities	at	home	left	the	Monroe	administration	with	fewmajor	 projects	 to	 pursue	 in	 the	 time	 it	 had	 left	 in	 office,	 thusfreeing	 cabinet	 members	 to	 pursue	 personal	 ambitions.	 In	 thenaive	 assumption	 that	 his	 cabinet	 and	 other	 governmentleaders	 would	 serve	 the	 nation	 as	 selflessly	 as	 he,	 Monroeemulated	his	presidential	predecessors	and	announced	early	inhis	 second	 term	 that	 he	 would	 limit	 himself	 to	 two	 terms	 inoffice.	With	the	exception	of	John	Quincy,	cabinet	members	allbut	renounced	their	oaths	of	office	and	personal	pledges	to	thePresident	 and	 launched	 a	 bitter	 struggle	 for	 political	 powerthat	 left	 the	 President	 impotent—and	 ended	 what	 a	 Bostonnewspaper	had	labeled	the	“Era	of	Good	Feelings.”35The	frenetic	activity	of	the	Monroe	years	had	left	John	Quincyexhausted	and	without	the	physical,	let	alone	emotional,	energyto	 seek	 the	 presidency	 himself.	 Although	 based	 in	 his	 nativecountry	after	so	many	years	overseas,	his	time	as	secretary	ofstate	 had	 left	 him	 few	 moments	 to	 spend	 with	 his	 wife	 andfamily,	 and	 he	 was	 simply	 too	 tired	 and,	 in	 effect,	 lonely	 forfamily	 life	 to	 concern	 himself	 with	 the	 forthcoming	 elections.Not	so	the	other	cabinet	members	and	presidential	aspirants.When	budget	restrictions	forced	a	reduction	in	the	number	ofarmy	 officers,	 Treasury	 Secretary	 Crawford	 pressed	 Monroenot	to	dismiss	any	Crawford	confederates.	When	the	Presidentignored	 the	 request,	 Crawford	 went	 to	 the	 White	 House	 in	 arage,	 calling	 the	 President	 an	 “infernal	 scoundrel”	 and	 raisinghis	 cane	 as	 if	 to	 assault	 him.	 According	 to	 Navy	 SecretarySamuel	 L.	 Southard,	 who	 witnessed	 the	 confrontation,	 “Mr.Monroe	seized	the	tongs	and	ordered	him	instantly	to	leave	theroom	 or	 he	 would	 chastise	 him,	 and	 he	 rang	 the	 bell	 for	 theservant.”36	 Realizing	 how	 closely	 he	 had	 flirted	 with	 treason,Crawford	 left	 and	 never	 again	 set	 foot	 in	 the	 White	 Houseduring	Monroe’s	presidency.In	 Florida,	 meanwhile,	 Andrew	 Jackson,	 whom	 Presidenthadgovernor,appointedembarrassedtheMonroeadministration	 by	 violating	 the	 outgoing	 Spanish	 governor’sdiplomatic	immunity	and	arresting	him	for	failing	to	surrenderdocuments	 needed	 in	 a	 legal	 proceeding.	 The	 arrest	 caused	 afuror	 in	 the	 press,	 which	 assailed	 Jackson	 as	 a	 would-bedictator.	 Jackson	 resigned	 in	 a	 rage,	 went	 home	 to	 Tennessee,won	 election	 as	 senator,	 and	 returned	 to	 Washington	 to	 wreakhavoc	on	his	political	enemies.As	 cabinet	 members	 and	 other	 presidential	 aspirants	 turnedon	the	President	or	on	each	other,	the	vicious	rhetoric	createdpolitical	 schisms	 in	 Congress	 not	 seen	 since	 the	 days	 of	 theConfederation	of	American	States.	“I	have	never	known	such	astate	of	things,”	Monroe	lamented	to	his	predecessor	in	office,James	 Madison,	 “nor	 have	 I	 personally	 ever	 experienced	 somuch	embarrassment	and	mortification.”Secretary	of	the	Treasury	William	H.	Crawford	of	Georgia	hadambitions	to	succeed	James	Monroe	as	President	but	suffered	aparalytic(LIBRARY	 OFCONGRESS)the	 elections.stroke	 beforeWhere	there	is	an	open	contest	with	a	foreign	enemy	.	.	.the	course	is	plain	and	you	have	something	to	cheer	andanimate	 you	 to	 action,	 but	 we	 are	 now	 blessed	 withpeace.	 .	 .	 .	 There	 being	 three	 avowed	 candidates	 in	 theadministration	 is	 a	 circumstance	 which	 increases	 theembarrassment.	 The	 friends	 of	 each	 endeavor	 to	 annoythe	 others.	 .	 .	 .	 In	 many	 cases	 the	 attacks	 are	 personal,directed	against	the	individual.37Only	one	candidate	remained	silent	and	above	the	fray.	JohnQuincy,	 the	 most	 obvious	 and	 logical	 choice	 to	 succeedPresident	Monroe,	refused	to	state	whether	he	even	wanted	theoffice.	 Raised	 in	 a	 society	 where	 the	 ignorant	 deferred	 to	 theeducated	 propertied	 class,	 he	 hewed	 to	 what	 his	 grandsonlater	 call	 “the	 Ciceronianidea	 ofHenry	 Adams	 wouldgovernment	 by	 the	 best,”	 selected	 by	 an	 elevated	 class	 ofeducated,	 propertied	 professionals	 who	 “chose	 men	 torepresent	 them	 because	 they	 wanted	 to	 be	 well	 representedand	 they	 chose	 the	 best	 they	 had.”	 Those	 selected	 did	 notaccept	 “pay”	 for	 their	 services	 but	 “honoraria.”	 Those	 whoaccepted	 public	 office	 were	 “statesmen,	 not	 politicians;	 theyguided	public	opinion	but	were	little	guided	by	it.”38Clearly	 alarmed	 byformercongressman	 Joseph	 Hopkinson,	 a	 close	 family	 friend	 andprominent	Philadelphia	lawyer,	wrote	to	Louisa,John	 Quincy’s	 reticence,I	think	our	friend	Mr.	A.	is	too	fastidious	and	reserved	ona	 certain	 subject	 as	 interesting	 to	 the	 country	 as	 it	 is	 tohimself	 .	 .	 .	 .	 His	 conduct	 seems	 to	 me,	 as	 it	 does	 toothers,	 to	 be	 calculated	 to	 chill	 and	 depress	 the	 kindfeeling	 and	 fair	 exertions	 of	 his	 friends.	 They	 arediscouraged	 when	 they	 see	 a	 total	 indifference	 assumedon	his	part.	.	.	.	Now,	my	dear	madam,	this	won’t	do.	TheMacbeth	 policy—“if	 chance	 will	 make	 me	 king,	 whychance	 may	 crown	 me”—will	 not	 answer	 where	 little	 isleft	to	chance	or	merit.	Kings	are	made	by	politicians	andnewspapers,	 and	 the	 man	 who	 sits	 down	 waiting	 to	 bejust	 right,	 will	 gocrowned,	 either	 by	 chance	 orbareheaded	all	his	life.39Louisa,	of	course,	showed	Hopkinson’s	letter	to	her	husbandand	 urged	 him	 to	 campaign	 more	 aggressively.	 “Do	 for	 oncegratify	me,”	she	pleaded.	“Show	yourself	if	only	for	a	week	.	.	.and	if	harm	comes	of	it	I	promise	never	to	advise	you	again.”40But	John	Quincy	was	adamant,	insisting	that	the	presidency	“isnot	in	my	opinion	an	office	to	be	either	solicited	or	declined.	.	..	The	principle	of	the	Constitution	in	its	purity	is	that	the	dutyshall	be	assigned	to	the	most	able	and	the	most	worthy.”The	 law	 of	 friendship	 is	 a	 reciprocation	 of	 good	 offices.He	 who	 asks	 or	 accepts	 the	 offer	 of	 friendly	 servicecontracts	 the	 obligation	 of	 meeting	 it	 with	 a	 suitablereturn.	 He	 who	 asks	 or	 accepts	 the	 offer	 of	 aid	 topromote	 his	 own	 views	 necessarily	 binds	 himself	 topromote	the	views	of	him	from	whom	he	receives	it.	.	.	.Between	the	principle	.	.	.	that	a	President	of	the	UnitedStates	 must	 remember	 to	 whom	 he	 owes	 his	 elevationand	 the	 principle	 of	 accepting	 no	 aid	 on	 the	 score	 offriendship	 or	 personal	 kindness	 to	 him,	 there	 is	 noalternative.	 The	 former	 .	 .	 .	 I	 deem	 to	 be	 essentially	 andvitally	corrupt.	The	latter	is	the	only	principle	to	which	noexception	can	be	taken.41For	one	of	the	few	times	in	their	marriage,	Louisa	decided	toignore	 her	 husband	 and	 take	 matters	 into	 her	 own	 hands.Aware	of	his	ambitions	and	fearful	of	the	effects	of	a	loss	on	hisspirit,	 she	 decided	 to	 compete	 with	 wives	 of	 other	 candidatesby	 expanding	 the	 scope	 of	 her	 popular	 Tuesday	 eveningreceptions.	 “My	 Tuesday	 evenings	 appear	 to	 have	 someattractions,”	she	realized.At	 least	 they	 afford	 the	 probable	 certainty	 of	 givingopportunity	for	amusement	throughout	the	winter	and	inthis	 consists	 the	 charm.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 Mr.	 A	 instead	 of	 keepingme	 back	 when	 I	 was	 a	 young	 woman	 had	 urged	 meforward	in	the	world	I	should	have	better	understood	themaneuvering	 part	 of	 my	 situation.	 But	 instead	 of	 this	 Ifind	 myself	 almost	 a	 stranger	 to	 the	 little	 arts	 andintrigues	of	the	world	in	which	I	move.42Louisa	learned	quickly,	however,	realizing	that	“wine	makeththe	 heart	 glad”	 and	 gradually	 enlarging	 the	 number	 of	 guestsshe	invited.	One	party	drew	one	hundred	guests;	another,	“onehundred	 and	 thirty	 odd	 persons	 all	 very	 sociable	 and	 goodhumored.	The	young	ladies	danced,	played,	and	sang	and	werevery	merry.	.	.	.	I	am	very	willing	to	show	that	I	am	the	publicservant.”	 As	 she	 enlarged	 her	 parties,	 she	 hired	 the	 MarineBand	for	a	fee	of	“five	dollars	to	each	performer	plus	wine	andsupper.”	 She	 then	 organized	 a	 party	 for	 252—“ladies	 being	 amuch	 larger	 proportion	 than	 we	 have	 had	 this	 winter.”Although	 William	 H.	 Crawford’s	 wife,	 Susanna,	 sent	 sixhundred	 invitations	 to	 a	 ball	 she	 sponsored,	 Louisa,	 notsurprisingly,	 found	 it	 “dull	 and	 uncomfortable,	 and	 we	 leftbefore	ten	o’clock.”43Consciously	 or	 unconsciously,	 John	 Quincy	 refused	 to	 helpLouisa	 plan	 the	 parties	 she	 hosted	 for	 his	 campaign,	 actingdisinterested	 at	 times	 and	 even	 failing	 to	 appear	 at	 someevents.	 She,	 in	 turn,	 suppressed	 her	 growing	 irritation	 at	 herinto	 organizing	 herhusband	 and	 simply	 threw	 herselfentertainments.	Her	ambitions	seemed	to	surpass	those	of	herhusband.	 “My	 whole	 morning	 was	 occupied	 with	 visits	 andwriting	cards	of	invitation,”	she	smiled.	“We	have	had	forty	ormore	 members	 of	 Congress	 already	 here	 and	 all	 who	 call	 Iinvite	 to	 my	 evenings.	 If	 I	 can	 help	 it	 I	 will	 invite	 only	 thosewho	call,	lest	it	should	be	said	I	am	courting	them	to	further	apolitical	purpose.”44With	the	approach	of	summer,	Louisa	curtailed	her	campaignwork,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 left	 for	 Cambridge	 to	 enroll	 theiryoungest	 son,	 Charles	 Francis,	 in	 Harvard—and	 to	 attend	 thegraduation	of	his	oldest	son,	George	Washington	Adams.	Onceat	 his	 beloved	 alma	 mater,	 however,	 he	 met	 with	 nothing	 butdisappointment.	 Although	 George	 did	 graduate,	 he	 finishedonly	thirtieth	in	his	class	of	eighty-five.	Then,	to	John	Quincy’sdismay,	 he	 learned	 that	 his	 middle	 boy,	 John	 II,	 in	 his	 next-to-last	year	at	the	school,	ranked	even	lower—forty-fifth	in	a	classof	 eighty-five.	 To	 compound	 John	 Quincy’s	 disappointment,fourteen-year-old	 Charles	 Francis	 did	 so	 poorly	 on	 his	 Latinentrance	 examination	 that	 the	 college	 granted	 him	 only	 aconditional	 admission.	 He	 had	 spent	 years	 teaching	 CharlesFrancis	his	Latin	and	erupted	in	anger,	storming	into	PresidentJohn	 Kirkland’s	 office	 charging	 that	 his	 son	 had	 been	 unfairlytreated.	 In	 no	 mood	 for	 a	 confrontation	 with	 the	 man	 likely	 tobe	 the	 next	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States,	 Kirkland	 orderedCharles	 Francis	 retested,	 and	 to	 every	 one’s	 relief,	 the	 boypassed	 and	 gained	 unconditional	 entry	 into	 his	 father’s	 almamater.John	Quincy	sensed,	however,	that	his	troubles	with	the	boyswere	just	beginning.	“I	find	them	all	three	coming	to	manhoodwith	 indolent	 minds,	 flinching	 from	 study	 whenever	 theycan.”45	He	could	not	and	would	not	allow	what	he	deemed	theindolence	 of	 the	 boys	 to	 go	 unpunished	 and	 told	 them	 theycould	 not	 return	 to	 Washington	 for	 Christmas.	 Instead	 ofenjoying	 holiday	 balls	 and	 lavish	 White	 House	 dinners,	 theywould	have	to	spend	Christmas	and	New	Year’s	in	the	sombermansion	 of	 their	 grandfather	 in	 Quincy—studying.	 Not	 untilthey	ranked	among	the	top	ten	students	in	their	classes	wouldhe	 allow	 John	 II	 and	 Charles	 Francis	 to	 enjoy	 holidays	 withtheir	 parents.	 In	 the	 meantime,	 he	 sent	 George	 to	 study	 lawwith	Daniel	Webster	in	Boston.A	 few	 months	 later,	 John	 Quincy’s	 discipline	 produced	 theopposite	 of	 its	 intended	 effects:	 John	 II	 joined	 a	 student	 riot,Harvard	 expelled	 him,	 and	 he	 returned	 to	 his	 parents	 in	 totaldisgrace.	 The	 boy	 could	 not	 have	 returned	 home	 at	 a	 worsetime.	 The	 Adamses	 were	 already	 caring	 for	 Louisa’s	 sister’sthree	orphaned	children—two	boys,	Johnson	and	Thomas,	whowere	 proving	 more	 difficult	 than	 the	 Adamses	 own	 sons,	 andthe	flirty	Mary	Catherine.	John	Quincy	had	paid	for	Thomas	toattend	 Phillips	 Academy	 at	 Exeter,	 New	 Hampshire,	 thenHarvard,	 but	 he	 dropped	 out	 and	 returned	 to	 Washington	 toloaf	in	the	Adams	home—without	a	degree,	a	skill,	or	a	job.	Hisolder	 brother,	 Johnson,	 did	 not	 even	 bother	 enrolling	 inHarvard.	From	the	first,	he	preferred	loafing.Young	 Charles	 Francis,	 meanwhile,	 fell	 in	 love	 with	 MaryCatherine,	but	the	two	were	both	too	young	to	marry,	and	whenCharles	Francis	went	off	to	Harvard,	their	relationship	cooled.When	 George	 Washington	 arrived	 for	 a	 visit,	 however,	 he	 tookhis	brother’s	place	in	Mary	Catherine’s	heart.	John	Quincy	puta	quick	end	to	the	relationship,	sending	George	back	to	Bostonto	finish	his	legal	studies	with	Daniel	Webster.Depressed	 by	 his	 sons’	 failure	 at	 Harvard,	 John	 Quincyresigned	 himself	 to	 failure	 in	 the	 presidential	 race	 andreturned	to	his	boyhood	home	in	Quincy	to	spend	time	with	hisaging	 father	 and	 to	 look	 at	 farming	 as	 a	 possible	 occupationafter	he	retired	from	public	office.	Not	only	his	father	but	threeprevious	 generations	 of	 the	 Adamses	 had	 farmed	 the	 land	 inQuincy	 successfully,	 and	 he	 concluded	 that,	 once	 out	 ofgovernment,	 he	 might	 have	 to	 do	 the	 same.	 He	 soon	 realized,however,	that	a	life	in	diplomacy	had	not	prepared	him	for	thephysical	demands	of	farm	life.	His	only	skills	lay	in	the	law,	buthe	feared	he	had	made	too	many	political	enemies	in	Boston’spowerful	Federalist	community	to	ensure	much	success.A	 run	 for	 the	 presidency	 was	 clearly	 the	 most	 logical	 nextstep	in	his	career,	but	he	stubbornly	refused	to	demean	himself,the	American	people,	or	the	office	of	the	presidency	by	activelycampaigning.	 He	 believed	 that	 merit	 alone,	 not	 party	 orpolitical	campaign	rhetoric,	should	determine	the	choice	of	theAmerican	people—a	unique	concept	voiced	only	once	before,	byGeorge	Washington,	but	never	since.“My	career,”	John	Quincy	proclaimed,	“has	attached	no	partyto	me	precisely	because	it	has	been	independent	of	all	party	.	.	.and	the	consequence	has	been	that	all	parties	disown	me.”I	 have	 followed	 the	 convictions	 of	 my	 own	 mind	 with	 asingle	eye	to	the	interests	of	the	whole	nation.	.	.	.	If	I	amto	be	a	candidate,	it	must	be	by	the	wishes	.	.	.	of	others,not	 by	 mine.	 If	 my	 countrymen	 prefer	 others	 to	 me,	 Imust	not	repine	at	their	choice.	Indifference	at	the	heartis	 not	 to	 be	 won	 by	 .	 .	 .	 the	 loudest	 trumpet.	 Merit	 andjust	right	in	this	country	will	be	heard.	And	in	my	case,	ifthey	 are	 not	 heard	 without	 my	 stir,	 I	 shall	 acquiesce	 inthe	conclusion	that	it	is	because	they	do	not	exist.46As	his	opponents	resorted	to	every	ruse	they	could	invent	towin	 votes,	 John	 Quincy	 refused	 to	 compromise	 his	 values	 andpolitical	beliefs—even	if,	as	seemed	likely,	those	values	doomedhim	to	defeat	in	his	lifelong	quest	for	national	leadership.