CHAPTER 	7A	Profile	in	CourageOn	 July	 4,	 1803,	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Adams	 gave	 birth	 to	 herillustrioussecond	 child,	 John	 Adams	 II,	 named	 for	 hisgrandfather.	Two	months	later,	John	Quincy	sold	their	house	inBoston,	 and	 the	 family	 started	 for	 the	 nation’s	 new	 capital	 inWashington.	The	move	did	not	go	smoothly.	After	carting	theirtrunks	to	New	London,	Connecticut,	they	boarded	the	packet	toNew	York,	only	to	have	two-year-old	George	Washington	Adamsbehave	like	a	two-year-old	and	throw	his	shoes	overboard,	thenscamper	 away	 giggling	 with	 a	 bundle	 of	 keys	 to	 the	 familytrunks,	 which	 promptly	 followed	 the	 little	 boy’s	 shoes	 into	 thesea.When	they	sailed	into	Newark,	New	Jersey,	the	inns	were	full—indeed	 overflowing—with	 hysterical	 New	 Yorkers	 fleeing	 ayellow	 fever	 epidemic.	 The	 Adamses	 huddled	 in	 a	 room	 at	 atavern	until	Thomas	Adams,	still	practicing	law	in	Philadelphia,learned	 of	 their	 plight	 and	 sent	 a	 carriage	 to	 bring	 them	 toPhiladelphia	and	then	to	Washington.The	 city	 of	 Washington	 remained,	 at	 best,	 a	 developingoutpost	 of	 civilization,	 its	 streets	 mostly	 mud	 tracks	 that	 oftendisappeared	from	view	into	fetid	swamps.	In	fact,	the	city	was	agigantic	marsh,	perforated	by	islands	of	reclaimed	land	toppedwith	 shabby	 boardinghouses,	 inns,	 taverns,	 stables,	 and,occasionally,	 government	 buildings—most	 of	 them	 still	 underconstruction.	There	was	no	church,	hospital,	museum,	or	park.Snakes	 slithered	 in	 and	 out	 of	 low-lying	 houses;	 a	 heavy	 rainturned	 muddy	 streets	 into	 raging	 torrents,	 and	 rats	 competedwith	pigs	for	footing	and	food	on	the	few	slime-coated	islets	ofhigh	ground.	Clouds	of	insects	surged	through	the	air;	diseasewas	 rampant;	 influenza	 reached	 epidemic	 proportions	 everywinter.	 Clots	 of	 shacks—largely	 slave	 quarters—added	 to	 thehorror.	 As	 John	 Quincy’s	 grandson	 Henry	 would	 put	 it	 yearslater	 after	 visiting	 his	 grandmother	 Louisa	 in	 Washington	 forthe	first	time,	“Slavery	.	.	.	was	a	nightmare,	a	horror,	a	crime,the	 sum	 of	 all	 wickedness.	 .	 .	 .	 Slave	 states	 were	 dirty,unkempt,	poverty-stricken,	ignorant,	vicious!”The	 two	 wings	 of	 the	 Washington	 Capitol	 stood	 all	 butisolated	 on	 a	 hill	 above	 the	 city’s	 mire,	 connected	 by	 a	 long,unpainted	 wooden	 shed	 and	 devoid	 of	 the	 domed	 centralstructure	 that	 would	 one	 day	 tie	 them	 together.	 According	 toone	 New	 England	 visitor,	 Pennsylvania	 Avenue	 was	 a	 mile	 of“rough	 road,	 bordered	 here	 and	 there	 by	 Congressionalboardinghouses,	with	veritable	swamps	between”	that	led	fromthe	Capitol	to	the	President’s	house,	which	stood	“in	the	midstof	 rough,	 unornamented	 grounds.	 Then	 another	 stretch	 ofcomparative	wilderness	till	you	came	to	Georgetown.”1“We	 want	 nothing	 here,”	 the	 witty	 Senator	 GouverneurMorris	 liked	 to	 tell	 visitors,	 “nothing	 but	 houses,	 cellars,kitchens,	 well-informed	 men,	 amiable	 women,	 and	 other	 littletrifles	of	the	kind,	to	make	our	city	perfect.”2British	 minister	 Anthony	 Merry	 lacked	 Morris’s	 sense	 ofhumor:I	 cannot	 describe	 .	 .	 .	 the	 difficulty	 and	 expense	 which	 Ihave	to	encounter	in	fixing	myself	in	a	habitation.	By	dintof	 money	 I	 have	 just	 secured	 two	 small	 houses	 on	 thecommon	 which	 is	 meant	 to	 become	 in	 time	 the	 city	 ofWashington.	 They	 are	 mere	 shells	 of	 homes,	 with	 barewalls,	 and	 without	 fixtures	 of	 any	 kind,	 even	 withoutpump	 or	 well.	 .	 .	 .	 Provisions	 of	 any	 kind,	 especiallyvegetables,	 are	 frequently	 hardly	 to	 be	 obtained	 at	 anyprice.	So	miserable	is	our	situation.3A	French	diplomat	was	no	kinder	in	his	appraisal:	“My	God!”he	lamented.	“What	have	I	done	to	be	condemned	to	reside	insuch	a	city?”4Washington	 had	 only	 about	 seven	 hundred	 houses,	 of	 whichtolive	 as	 bachelorsone-third	 were	 brick	 and	 the	 rest	 wood.	 Paid	 only	 $6	 a	 day	 inthe	 House	 and	 $7	 in	 the	 Senate,	 members	 of	 Congress	 oftenhadin	 squalid,	 cheaply	 builtboardinghouses—usually,	 if	 they	 could,	 with	 friends	 from	 thesame	 state	 or	 political	 party.	 Affluent	 government	 officialsavoided	 the	 city	 as	 much	 as	 possible,	 preferring	 to	 live	 withtheir	families	in	more	substantial	homes	in	nearby	Georgetown,where	Louisa	Adams’s	brother-in-law	Walter	Hellen,	a	wealthy—and	 generous—tobacco	 merchant	 and	 speculator,	 owned	 anenormous	 mansion.	 Hellen,	 who	 had	 married	 Louisa’s	 oldersister	 Nancy,	 had	 housed	 his	 mother-in-law	 and	 her	 offspringafter	 Joshua	 Johnson’s	 death,	 and	 he	 now	 invited	 John	 QuincyAdams,	 Louisa,	 and	 their	 two	 children	 to	 fill	 a	 nest	 of	 unusedrooms	 in	 his	 spacious	 home,	 even	 giving	 John	 Quincy	 a	 quietcorner	of	his	own	for	reading.Senate	life	put	no	constraints	on	the	family	at	first.	It	sat	forless	 than	 three	 hours	 on	 weekdays—from	 noon	 until	 2	 or	 3p.m.,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 enjoyed	 the	 forty-five-minute	 walk—about	 two	 and	 a	 half	 miles—to	 and	 from	 the	 Capitol,	 alwaysgetting	 home	 for	 the	 family’s	 4	 p.m.	 dinner.	 “At	 eleven	 thismorning,”	John	Quincy	wrote	in	his	diary	on	his	first	day	in	theSenate,	“I	took	my	seat	.	.	.	after	delivering	my	credentials	.	.	.and	 being	 sworn	 to	 support	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 UnitedStates.	 .	 .	 .	 There	 was	 little	 business	 done,	 and	 the	 Senateadjourned	soon	after	twelve.”5When	 the	 Senate	 adjourned	 early	 enough,	 he	 often	 stoppedto	hear	debates	in	the	House	of	Representatives	before	walkinghome.	 With	 no	 churches	 in	 Washington,	 John	 Quincy	 made	 dowith	the	two	nondenominational	services	in	the	Capitol	and	atthe	 Treasury—the	 first	 on	 Sunday	 morning,	 the	 second	 in	 theafternoon.	 Already	 well	 known	 by	 the	 city’s	 leading	 figures,John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa	 were	 instant	 favorites	 on	 the	 socialscene,	attending	dinners	and	balls	at	the	President’s	House,	asthe	future	White	House	was	then	called.	When	Louisa	was	notwith	 him,	 John	 Quincy	 often	 retired	 to	 a	 quiet	 corner	 withSecretary	 of	 State	 James	 Madison	 to	 play	 chess.	 The	 two	 hadnot	 liked	 each	 other	 when	 they	 first	 met,	 but	 their	 deepinterest	in	history	drew	them	closer,	and	their	encounters	overthe	 chessboard	 cemented	 their	 friendship.	 Unlike	 othersouthern	 politicalleaders,	 Madison	 had	 gone	 north	 toPrinceton	 for	 his	 higher	 education	 and	 shared	 much	 of	 thesame	academic	background	as	John	Quincy.The	easy	Senate	routine	allowed	John	Quincy	to	enjoy	life	athome	as	he	had	seldom	done	before,	drawing	closer	to	Louisa,who	grew	so	robust	she	learned	to	ride	and	joined	her	husbandon	horseback	excursions.	The	short	Senate	days	left	him	ampletime	 to	 resume	 his	 voracious	 reading	 and	 to	 read	 to	 his	 sons.Occasionally,	he	simply	“passed	the	evening	idly	with	George	.	..	or	with	the	ladies.”6	 During	 his	 first	 days	 in	 Washington,	 histime	 on	 the	 Senate	 floor	 produced	 nothing	 but	 bonhomie	 withhis	 thirty-three	 colleagues,	 including	 the	 other	 senator	 fromMassachusetts,	 former	 secretary	 of	 war	 and	 secretary	 of	 stateTimothy	Pickering.As	 envisaged	 at	 the	 Constitutional	 Convention,	 the	 Senatewas	 “to	 consist	 of	 the	 most	 distinguished	 characters,distinguished	for	their	rank	in	life	and	their	weight	of	property,and	bearing	as	strong	a	likeness	to	the	British	House	of	Lordsas	 possible.”7	 For	 this	 reason	 the	 framers	 of	 the	 Constitutiongave	 state	 legislatures,	 rather	 than	 the	 people,	 the	 power	 toelect	senators.It	 was	 not	 long,	 however,	 before	 John	 Quincy	 found	 himselfdisagreeing	 with	 most	 of	 his	 colleagues—Federalist	 as	 well	 asRepublican.	 Several	 weeks	 after	 he	 first	 took	 his	 seat,	 theSenate	considered	the	Louisiana	Purchase.	Comprising	an	areaof	 about	 1	 million	 square	 miles,	 Louisiana	 was	 the	 largestterritory	any	nation	had	ever	acquired	peacefully	from	anotherin	 recorded	 history—larger	 than	 Great	 Britain,	 France,Germany,	Spain,	and	Portugal	combined.	The	United	States	hadagreed	 to	 pay	 about	 $15	 million—or	 about	 four	 cents	 an	 acre,compared	 with	 the	 average	 price	 of	 $2	 an	 acre	 for	 which	 theU.S.	 government	 then	 sold	 federal	 lands	 to	 settlers.	 Theacquisition	would	offer	prospects	of	untold	wealth	to	hundredsof	 thousands	 of	 Americans	 waiting	 to	 claim	 lands	 in	 thewestern	wilderness.Until	 his	 military	 setbacks	 in	 Egypt,	 western	 Europe,	 andSanto	Domingo,	Napoléon	had	intended	sending	20,000	Frenchtroops	to	organize	new	French	settlements	in	Louisiana,	but	ablast	 of	 Arctic	 air	 late	 in	 1801	 froze	 the	 fleet	 of	 trooptransports	in	thick	ice	that	prevented	its	departure.	Frustratedby	 his	 incredible	 streak	 of	 misfortune,	 Napoléon	 exploded	 inuncontrollable	rage:Senator	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 championed	 Senate	 approval	 ofthe	Louisiana	Purchase,	an	area	of	about	1million	square	milesthat	 offered	 prospects	 of	 untold	 wealth	 to	 hundreds	 ofthousands	of	Americans	waiting	to	claim	lands	in	the	West.“Damn	 sugar,”	 he	 shouted	 at	 his	 god.	 “Damn	 coffee,	 damncolonies.	.	.	.	I	shall	cede	Louisiana	to	the	United	States.”Although	 New	 England	 Federalists	 called	 the	 LouisianaPurchase	 too	 costly	 for	 the	 nation,	 their	 opposition	 actuallystemmed	 from	 regional	 political,	 social,	 and	 economic	 issues.Virginia	 had	 emerged	 from	 the	 Revolutionary	 War	 as	 thelargest,	 most	 powerful	 state	 in	 the	 Union,	 with	 the	 mostterritory,	 the	 most	 people,	 and	 the	 richest	 economy.	 WithThomas	 Jefferson	 as	 President	 and	 Madison	 likely	 to	 succeedhim,	Virginia	had	drained	New	England	of	much	of	its	politicalpower	 and	 influence;	 many	 New	 Englanders	 feared	 that	 thenew	 states	 emerging	 from	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase	 would	 allythemselves	 with	 Virginia	 and	 leave	 New	 England	 little	 morethan	 an	 impotent	 commercial	 backwater.	 Adding	 Louisiana	 tothe	nation	would	extend	slavery	across	the	entire	West,	end	allhopes	 of	 abolishing	 slavery	 in	 America,	 and	 allow	 westernsettlers	to	use	slave	labor	to	create	vast	new	farms	that	wouldundersell	 and	 bankrupt	 small	 New	 England	 farms.	 TheMississippi	 River	 valley	 to	 New	 Orleans	 would	 become	 theprimary	 artery	 for	 American	 international	 trade	 and	 destroyNew	England’s	banking	and	shipping	industries.Boston’s	 Columbian	 Centinel	 led	 New	 England	 opposition,calling	 the	 Louisiana	 Territory	 “a	 great	 waste,	 a	 wildernessunpeopled	 with	 any	 beings	 except	 wolves	 and	 wanderingIndians.	 .	 .	 .	 We	 are	 to	 give	 money	 of	 which	 we	 have	 too	 littlefor	 land	 of	 which	 we	 already	 have	 too	 much.”	 But	 a	 euphoricTennessean	wrote	to	President	Jefferson,	“You	have	secured	tous	the	free	navigation	of	the	Mississippi.	You	have	procured	animmense	 fertile	 country:	 and	 all	 those	 blessings	 are	 obtainedwithout	war	and	bloodshed.”8Initially,	 Jefferson	 was	 equally	 elated,	 saying	 the	 LouisianaPurchase	 had	 ensured	 “the	 tranquility,	 security	 and	 prosperityof	 all	 the	 Western	 country”	 and	 had	 permanently	 united	 Eastand	 West.	 But	 the	 President’s	 enthusiasm	 had	 limits.	 A	 strictconstructionist,	 he	 knew	 the	 Constitution	 did	 not	 grant	 thegovernment	authority	to	buy	foreign	territory,	let	alone	governit,	 and	 that	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase	 required	 a	 constitutionalamendment.	Federalists	immediately	grasped	at	the	President’sreservations	 as	 a	 mechanism	 for	 rejecting	 the	 purchase.	 ThePresident’s	 reservations	 appalled	 expansionists,	 who	 warnedthat	the	acquisition	would	be	null	and	void	if	the	Americans	didnot	sign	it	within	six	months.“Be	 persuaded,”	 American	 minister	 to	 France	 RobertLivingston	warned	Jefferson	from	Paris,	“that	France	is	sick	ofthe	 bargain,	 that	 Spain	 is	 much	 dissatisfied,	 and	 that	 theslightest	pretext	will	lose	you	the	treaty.”9With	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase	 facing	 rejection,	 John	 QuincyAdams,	alone	among	Federalists	to	favor	the	acquisition,	actedto	 save	 it.	 As	 he	 told	 his	 parents,	 he	 believed	 deeply	 that	 theUnited	States	wasdestined	 by	 God	 and	 nature	 to	 be	 coextensive	 with	 theNorth	 American	 continent	 .	 .	 .	 and	 become	 the	 mostpopulous	 and	 powerful	 people	 ever	 combined	 under	 onesocial	 compact	 .	 .	 .	 speaking	 one	 language,	 professingone	 general	 system	 of	 religious	 and	 political	 principles,and	accustomed	to	one	general	tenor	of	social	usages	andcustoms.10To	ensure	what	others	called	the	nation’s	“manifest	destiny,”he	 studied	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase	 agreement,	 then	 moved	 forthe	addition	of	a	simple	phrase:	“with	the	assent	of	the	Frenchgovernment.”	 John	 Quincy	 argued	 that	 the	 phrase	 convertedthe	 document	 from	 an	 unconstitutional	 purchase	 agreementinto	a	formal—and	constitutionally	sanctioned—treaty.	Whetheror	not	his	assertion	had	any	legal	or	constitutional	justification,he	 was	 so	 eloquent	 a	 lawyer	 that	 he	 convinced	 the	 Senate	 itdid.	 Despite	 fierce	 opposition	 from	 Federalists,	 the	 Senateapproved	 his	 motion	 and	 ended	 the	 furor	 (and	 Jefferson’smisgivings)	 over	 whether	 the	 government	 could	 acquireLouisiana.nbeA	 Republican	 newspaper	 predicted	 that	 “the	 Hon.	 JohnandcertainlyQuincy	 Adams	 willexcommunicated	 by	 his	 party,”11	 and,thedenunciations	 came	 like	 cannon	 shots.	 “Like	 a	 kite	 without	 atail,”	one	Boston	Federalist	leader	snapped	at	John	Quincy.	“Hewill	 pitch	 on	 one	 side	 and	 the	 other,	 as	 the	 popular	 currentsmay	 happen	 to	 strike.”	 A	 Federalist	 newspaper	 charged	 JohnQuincy	 with	 “political	 patricide”	 for	 supporting	 PresidentJefferson,	 who	 had	 unseated	 John	 Quincy’s	 father	 from	 thedenouncedindeed,presidency.	 But	 Aurora	 editor	 Benjamin	 Franklin	 Bache,	 theavowed	 political	 enemy	 of	 the	 Adamses,	 called	 John	 Quincy’spolitical	courage	“gratifying,	coming	from	a	high	New	EnglandFederalist.”12President	 Thomas	 Jefferson	 found	 Senator	 John	 Quincy	 Adamsa	valuable	ally	in	consummating	the	Louisiana	Purchase,	but	animplacable	foe	in	efforts	to	pack	the	Supreme	Court.	(LIBRARYOF	CONGRESS)John	Quincy	was	quite	prepared	for	the	attacks,	writing	in	hisdiary	that	he	had	fully	expected	“the	danger	of	adhering	to	myown	principles.The	 country	 is	 so	 totally	 given	 up	 to	 the	 spirit	 of	 partythat	 not	 to	 follow	 blindfold	 one	 or	 the	 other	 is	 aninexpiable	 offense.	 .	 .	 .	 Between	 both,	 I	 see	 theimpossibility	 of	 pursuing	 the	 dictates	 of	 my	 ownconscience	without	sacrificing	every	prospect	not	merelyof	advancement,	but	even	of	retaining	that	character	andreputation	I	have	enjoyed.	Yet	my	choice	is	made,	and,	if	Icannot	 hope	 to	 give	 satisfaction	 to	 my	 country,	 I	 am	 atleast	 determined	 to	 have	 the	 approbation	 of	 my	 ownreflections.13Federalist	 Timothy	 Pickering,	 the	 other	 Massachusettssenator,	 responded	 to	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase	 by	 stepping	 upefforts	 to	 unite	 New	 England	 states	 with	 New	 York—andperhaps	 Nova	 Scotia—in	 a	 Northern	 Confederacy	 that	 wouldsecede	from	the	Union	under	the	aegis	of	the	British	Empire.	“Igave	the	first	warning	to	Mr.	Jefferson,”	John	Quincy	asserted,“to	 be	 upon	 his	 guard	 against	 the	 intrigues	 of	 the	 Britishgovernment	 through	 the	 governor	 of	 Nova	 Scotia	 with	 thedisaffected	party	in	New	England.”14John	Quincy’s	father	also	learned	of	the	Pickering	conspiracy.“Mr.	 P[ickering],”	 John	 Adams	 wrote	 to	 his	 former	 politicalopponent	Thomas	Jefferson,carried	with	him	from	his	friends	in	Boston	a	project	of	adivision	 by	 the	 Potomac,	 the	 Delaware,	 or	 the	 Hudson,i.e.,	as	far	as	they	could	succeed,	and	communicated	it	toGen.	Hamilton.	There	can	be	little	doubt	.	.	.	that	there	isa	party	in	New	England	.	.	.	who	wish	to	urge	the	nationto	 war	 with	 France	 and	 to	 shelter	 themselves	 and	 theircommerce	 under	 the	 wings	 of	 the	 British	 navy.	 I	 havelong	opposed	these	people	in	all	such	projects	.	.	.	and	theconsequence	 will	 soon	 be,	 if	 it	 is	 not	 already,	 that	 I	 andmy	sons	and	all	my	friends	will	be	hated	throughout	NewEngland.15John	 Quincy	 compounded	 Federalist	 outrage	 by	 attendingwith	 Louisa	 President	 Jefferson’s	 private	 family	 dinners	 at	 thepresidential	 mansion—and	 then	 joining	 seventy	 congressionalRepublicans	 at	 a	 dinner	 the	 President	 hosted	 with	 his	 cabinetto	 celebrate	 the	 Louisiana	 Purchase.	 “Scarcely	 any	 of	 theFederalist	 members	 were	 there,”	 John	 Quincy	 noted.	 “Thedinner	was	bad	and	the	toasts	too	numerous.”16But	 just	 as	 Jefferson	 thought	 he	 had	 lured	 John	 Quincy	 intothe	 Republican	 fold,	 the	 New	 Englander	 proved	 him	 wrong	 byvoting	 with	 Federalists	 against	 giving	 the	 President	 power	 totax	 the	 people	 of	 Louisiana	 and	 appoint	 territorial	 officials.John	Quincy	argued	that	both	bills	violated	the	Constitution	bydepriving	 the	 people	 of	 Louisiana	 of	 their	 right	 to	 self-determination,	 and	 he	 introduced	 three	 resolutions—“whichproduced	a	storm	as	violent	as	I	expected”:Resolved,	 That	 the	 people	 of	 the	 United	 States	 havenever	.	.	.	delegated	to	this	Senate	the	power	of	imposingtaxes	 upon	 the	 inhabitants	 of	 Louisiana	 without	 theirconsent.Resolved,	That	by	concurring	in	any	act	of	legislation	forimposing	taxes	upon	the	inhabitants	of	Louisiana	withouttheir	 consent,	 the	 Senate	 would	 assume	 a	 powerunwarranted	 by	 the	 Constitution	 and	 dangerous	 to	 theliberties	of	the	United	States.Resolved,	 That	 the	 power	 of	 originating	 bills	 for	 raisingrevenues	 being	 exclusively	 vested	 in	 the	 House	 ofRepresentatives,	these	resolutions	be	carried	to	them	bythe	secretary	of	the	Senate.“After	a	debate	of	about	three	hours,”	John	Quincy	shook	hishead	sadly,	“the	resolutions	were	rejected.”17Despite	 his	 defeats	 on	 the	 Senate	 floor,	 John	 Quincyremained	 a	 consummate	 constitutional	 scholar	 and	 applied	 tobecome,	and	was	sworn	in	as,	an	attorney	and	counselor	in	theU.S.	 Supreme	 Court.	 He	 made	 a	 point	 of	 spending	 an	 hour	 ortwo	a	day	listening	to	court	proceedings,	and,	a	week	after	hisswearing	in,	on	February	16,	1804,	it	was	his	turn	to	stand	andargue	his	first	case—and	lose.Notwithstanding	 his	 status	 as	 a	 constitutional	 lawyer,	 JohnQuincy	 continued	 outraging	 both	 Republicans	 and	 Federalistsat	 every	 turn.	 He	 even	 opposed	 an	 inoffensive	 resolution	 forsenators	 to	 wear	 black	 crepe	 arm	 bands	 for	 a	 month	 tomemorialize	the	deaths	of	three	patriots,	including	his	father’scousin	 Samuel	 Adams,	 a	 signer	 of	 the	 Declaration	 ofIndependence.it	 asimproper“I	 asked	 for	 the	 constitutional	 authority	 of	 the	 Senate	 toenjoin	 upon	 its	 members	 this	 act,”	 Adams	 wrote	 in	 his	 diary.Told	 it	 was	 not	 binding	 upon	 its	 members,	 “I	 then	 objectedagainstitself,	 tending	 to	 unsuitablediscussions	of	character	and	to	an	employment	of	the	Senate’stime	 in	 debates	 altogether	 foreign	 to	 the	 subjects	 whichproperly	 belong	 to	 them.	 This	 led	 to	 a	 debate	 of	 three	 hours.”Adams	lost	not	only	the	debate	but	the	goodwill	of	most	of	hisSenate	 colleagues,	 who	 now	 viewed	 him	 as	 an	 unconscionableturncoat	and	chronic	malcontent.in“The	 agency	 of	 party	 is	 so	 organized	 in	 our	 country,”	 hegroaned,	 “that	 the	 undertaking	 to	 pursue	 a	 course	 altogetherindependent	 of	 it	 as	 a	 public	 man	 is	 perhaps	 impracticable.However	this	may	be,	I	do	not	regret	having	made	the	attemptand,	 whether	 in	 public	 or	 private	 life,	 it	 is	 my	 unalterabledetermination	 to	 abide	 by	 the	 principles	 which	 have	 alwaysbeen	my	guides.18John	 Quincy	 even	 aroused	 the	 ire	 of	 his	 chess	 mate,Secretary	 of	 State	 Madison,	 by	 opposing	 a	 new	 treaty	 withBritain	 fixing	 the	 boundary	 between	 Canada	 and	 the	 UnitedStates	from	the	Great	Lakes	to	the	Pacific	Ocean.	Left	open	bythe	 1783	 treaty	 of	 peace	 ending	 the	 Revolutionary	 War,	 theline,	 by	 convention,	 had	 run	 along	 the	 Forty-ninth	 Parallel.Madison’s	 treaty	 would	 have	 dropped	 it	 southward	 and	 cededBritain	a	strip	of	land	about	150	miles	wide,	including	Lake	ofinthe	 Woodsnorthwestern	 Washington.	 Adams	 roared	 his	 opposition	 andcowed	the	Senate	into	rejecting	the	treaty,	leaving	the	lands	inthe	so-called	Adams	Strip	in	the	United	States.in	 northern	 Minnesota	 and	 Puget	 SoundDespite	the	friction	John	Quincy’s	unpredictably	independentvoting	 engendered,	 Senate	 membership	 was	 too	 small,	 thenumber	 of	 committees	 too	 large,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 Adams’sknowledge	 of	 the	 law	 and	 the	 foreign	 world	 too	 vast	 toostracize	 him.	 He	 soon	 found	 himself	 on	 more	 than	 a	 dozencommittees,	conducting	himself	on	each	with	total	disregard	toparty.	 On	 one	 he	 revised	 the	 articles	 of	 war,	 on	 another	 hehelped	 acquire	 books	 for	 the	 Library	 of	 Congress,	 and	 on	 athird	he	helped	revise	Senate	rules.	His	work	on	one	committeeincluded	writing	legislation	for	the	Louisiana	Territory	and	lawsfor	 the	 District	 of	 Columbia;	 on	 still	 another,	 he	 proposedbuilding	a	network	of	roads	across	the	Appalachian	Mountainsto	 connect	 Atlantic	 coast	 ports	 with	 the	 Ohio	 River	 valley—ascheme	 originally	 proposed	 by	 George	 Washington	 when	 thestates	were	still	a	confederation.John	Quincy	Adams	ensured	the	inclusion	of	the	150-mile-wide“Adams	Strip”	on	the	American	side	of	the	Canadian-Americanborder.Resolved,	 That	 the	 secretary	 of	 the	 treasury	 be	 directedto	prepare	.	.	.	a	plan	for	.	.	.	opening	roads,	for	removingobstructions	 and	 making	 canals	 .	 .	 .	 which,	 as	 objects	 ofpublic	 improvement,	 may	 require	 and	 deserve	 the	 aid	 ofgovernment.	19Washington’s—and	 Adams’s—scheme	 would	 have	 allowedwestern	crops,	pelts,	furs,	and	ores	to	travel	directly	to	Atlanticsea-lanes	 to	 Europe	 instead	 of	 following	 the	 circuitous	 routedown	the	Mississippi	River	and	across	the	Gulf	of	Mexico.Deemed	 by	 most	 senators	 to	 be	 an	 unconstitutional	 federalintrusion	 in	 state	 prerogatives,	 Adams’s	 proposal	 for	 domesticimprovements	 went	 down	 to	 defeat	 without	 even	 a	 word	 ofdebate.	 “I	 have	 already	 seen	 enough,”	 he	 responded,	 “toascertain	 that	 no	 amendments	 of	 my	 proposing	 will	 obtain	 inthe	Senate	as	now	filled.”20	He	believed	Senator	Pickering	andother	 Federalists	 “hate	 me	 rather	 more	 than	 they	 love	 anyprinciple.”21John	 Quincy	 proved	 far	 more	 popular	 at	 the	 President’sHouse	 than	 he	 did	 in	 the	 Senate.	 His	 language	 skills	 andoverseas	 travels	 as	 a	 diplomat	 combined	 with	 his	 erudition	 tomake	him	a	favorite	among	diplomats	who	dined	with	Jefferson.And	whenever	ladies	attended	such	functions,	Louisa	attractedas	 much	 attention	 as	 her	 husband	 or	 more,	 being	 as	 fluent	 inFrench	as	he	but	far	more	extroverted.Despite	 her	 son’s	 status	 in	 Washington,	 Abigail	 Adams	 wasfar	less	able	than	her	husband	to	accept	him	as	other	than	herlittle	 boy.	 “You	 must	 not	 let	 the	 mind	 wear	 so	 much	 upon	 thebody,”	 she	 warned	 her	 thirty-seven-year-old	 senator-son	 asChristmas	approached	in	1804.	“You	eat	too	little	and	study	toomuch.”22	And	fully	two	years	later,	as	he	approached	his	thirty-ninth	birthday,	she	cautioned,I	 hope	 you	 never	 appear	 in	 the	 Senate	 with	 a	 beard	 twodays	 old	 or	 otherwise	 make	 what	 is	 called	 a	 shabbyappearance.	 Seriously,	 I	 think	 a	 man’s	 usefulness	 insociety	depends	much	upon	his	personal	appearance.	I	donot	wish	a	senator	to	dress	like	a	beau,	but	I	want	him	toconform	 so	 far	 to	 the	 fashion	 as	 not	 to	 incur	 thecharacter	 of	 singularity	 nor	 give	 the	 occasion	 to	 theworld	to	ask	what	kind	of	mother	he	had.23Over	 the	 winter,	 the	 Adamses	 learned	 of	 the	 failure	 of	 aLondon	bank	where	John	Quincy	had	placed	a	sizable	portion	ofhis	 father’s	 European	 accounts,	 and	 to	 prevent	 his	 parentsfrom	 sustaining	 any	 losses,	 John	 Quincy	 filled	 “the	 chasmcreated	by	this	circumstance.”24	To	compensate	for	his	loss,	helooked	 for	 ways	 to	 cut	 his	 own	 spending	 and	 decided	 thatmoving	 the	 family	 back	 and	 forth	 between	 Washington	 andQuincy	 twice	 a	 year	 had	 become	 a	 luxury	 he	 could	 no	 longerafford.	 In	 a	 bitter	 confrontation	 with	 Louisa,	 he	 told	 her	 sheand	the	boys	would	have	to	stay	put	the	year	around—either	inWashington	or	Quincy;	her	choice.	When	the	Senate	adjournedin	 the	 spring	 of	 1804,	 John	 Quincy	 was	 ready	 to	 leave	 for	 hisparents’	home	in	Quincy,	and	after	an	angry	exchange	with	herhusband,	Louisa	chose	to	stay	with	the	boys	in	Georgetown	atthe	 comfortable	 home	 of	 her	 sister	 and	 brother-in-law.	 If	 theywere	 to	 be	 separated	 half	 the	 year	 during	 each	 of	 the	 sixremaining	 years	 of	 his	 Senate	 term,	 she	 told	 John	 Quincy	 she“preferred	passing	the	summer	months	with	my	family	to	livingalone	in	Quincy	through	five	dreary	winters.”When	 John	 Quincy	 accused	 her	 of	 disloyalty,	 she	 snappedback,	 “I	 do	 not	 think,	 my	 beloved	 friend,	 you	 do	 me	 justice.	 Iprefer	a	separation	from	you	rather	than	separation	from	them.I	don’t	think	my	affection	for	you	admitted	of	doubt.”	To	add	tohis	guilt	after	he	had	left,	she	wrote	to	him	that	three-year-oldGeorge	“is	very	angry	with	you.	He	says	you	are	very	naughtyto	 go	 away	 and	 leave	 him.	 .	 .	 .	 John	 calls	 everybody	 Papa	 hesees.	 Poor	 little	 fellow	 was	 too	 young	 when	 you	 left	 us	 toremember	you.”Without	 his	 father,	 however,	 George,	 at	 three,	 becameungovernable,	 chasing	 the	 chickens	 and	 ducks	 unmercifullywhenever	 he	 was	 left	 to	 himself.	 And	 Louisa	 grew	 miserablewithout	her	husband.	“Life	is	not	worth	living	on	such	terms,”she	 admitted.	 She	 was	 wretched	 in	 Washington	 and	 realizedthat	without	him,	“I	must	be	wretched	everywhere.”25Their	 separation	 left	 him	 equally	 distressed.	 He	 missed	 hischildren	 and	 longed	 for	 the	 comfort	 of	 Louisa	 by	 his	 side	 atnight.	 True	 to	 form,	 he	 turned	 to	 poetry	 to	 effect	 areconciliation,	 sending	 her	 some	 playful	 eroticism	 from	 JohnDonne’s	To	His	Mistress	Going	to	Bed	(1669):Your	gown	going	off,	such	beauteous	state	reveals.Licence	my	roving	hands.Full	nakedness!	All	joys	are	due	to	thee.As	souls	unbodied,	bodies	uncloth’d	must	beTo	taste	whole	joys.26July	 11,	 1804,	 whileJohn	 Quincy	 was	 stillJohn	 Quincy	 promised	 to	 dip	 into	 capital	 if	 necessary	 to	 endtheir	 separation	 and	 prevent	 their	 ever	 again	 being	 apart.Before	he	returned	to	Washington,	Harvard’s	overseers	invitedhim	 to	 stand	 for	 the	 college	 presidency,	 but	 he	 was	 too	 intenton	 rejoining	 his	 wife	 and	 children	 and	 declined	 in	 favor	 ofreturning	to	Washington.	He	arrived	in	time	for	the	presidentialelection.OninMassachusetts	 copying	 Donne’s	 erotic	 verses	 for	 Louisa,Senate	 president	 Aaron	 Burr	 Jr.,	 the	 vice	 president,	 shot	 andkilled	former	Treasury	secretary	Alexander	Hamilton	in	a	duel.Fifteen	years	in	the	making,	their	enmity	had	reached	a	climaxearlier	in	the	year	during	the	New	York	gubernatorial	electioncampaign,	 when	 Burr	 called	 for	 “a	 union	 at	 the	 northward”between	 New	 York	 and	 the	 New	 England	 states	 to	 thwart	 theassumption	 of	 power	 by	 Jefferson,	 Madison,	 and	 Virginia’spolitical	 dynasty.	 Fearing	 civil	 war,	 Hamilton	 all	 but	 ensuredBurr’s	 defeat	 in	 the	 gubernatorial	 election	 by	 calling	 the	 vicepresident	 “a	 dangerous	 man	 who	 ought	 not	 to	 be	 trusted	 withthe	 reins	 of	 government.”	 27	 Jefferson	 had	 already	 rejectedBurr	as	a	potential	running	mate	in	1804,	and	Burr’s	defeat	inthe	gubernatorial	race	effectively	ended	his	political	career.	AsHamilton’s	 barbs	 struck,	 the	 editor	 of	 the	 American	 Citizenadded	 to	 their	 sting	 by	 calling	 Burr	 the	 “most	 mean	 anddespicable	bastard	in	the	universe	.	.	.	so	degraded	as	to	permiteven	 General	 Hamilton	 to	 slander	 him	 with	 impunity.”28	 Burrsued	 the	 editor,	 then	 challenged	 Hamilton	 to	 the	 fatalconfrontation.After	 the	 duel,	 outraged	 Hamilton	 supporters	 postedhandbills	bearing	the	words	“Hang	Burr!”	on	walls	across	NewYork	City.	A	grand	jury	indicted	Burr	for	murder,	but	he	fled	toa	 hideaway	 on	 a	 Georgia	 plantation.	 When	 the	 Senatereconvened	on	November	5,	however,	John	Quincy	joined	othermembers	in	a	collective	gasp	as	Burr	stepped	through	the	doorand	strode	down	the	aisle	to	his	accustomed	chair	as	presidentof	the	Senate.“The	 coroner’s	 inquest,”	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 in	 disbelief,“found	a	verdict	of	willful	murder	by	Aaron	Burr,	vice	presidentof	 the	 United	 States.	 The	 grand	 jury	 .	 .	 .	 found	 a	 bill	 againsthim	 for	 murder.	 Under	 all	 these	 circumstances	 Mr.	 Burrappears	 and	 takes	 his	 seat	 as	 president	 of	 the	 Senate	 of	 theUnited	States.”29John	Quincy	grew	even	more	annoyed	when	the	Senate	votedto	 go	 into	 executive	 session—and	 promptly	 left	 the	 Capitol	 togo	 to	 the	 horse	 races.	 And	 they	 repeated	 the	 exercise	 for	 thenext	 ten	 days.	 “The	 consideration	 of	 executive	 business,”	 JohnQuincy	 fumed,	 was	 “merely	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 having	 on	 theprinted	journals	an	appearance	of	doing	business	though	therewas	really	none	to	do.	This	vote	passed.	.	.	.	Mine	was	the	onlyvoice	heard	against	it.”30Earlier	 in	 the	 year,	 an	 effort	 by	 President	 Jefferson	 to	 alterthe	Federalist	bias	of	the	Supreme	Court	came	to	fruition	whenhe	coaxed	his	political	allies	in	the	House	of	Representatives	toimpeach	 Associate	 Justice	 Samuel	 Chase.	 A	 signer	 of	 theDeclaration	 of	 Independence	 and	 appointee	 of	 PresidentWashington,	Chase	had,	at	times,	displayed	outrageous	politicalbias	 in	 his	 rulings,	 but	 he	 crossed	 a	 particularly	 dangerouspolitical	 line	 by	 attacking	 the	 adoption	 of	 universal	 whitemanhood	 suffrage	 in	 his	 native	 state	 of	 Maryland.	 Until	 then,only	property	owners	had	been	able	to	vote.	Chase	argued	thatthe	 “constitution	 will	 sink	 into	 a	 mobocracy,	 the	 worst	 of	 allpossible	government,”	and	he	cited	as	“a	mighty	mischief	”	thedoctrine	“that	all	men	in	a	state	of	society	are	entitled	to	enjoyequal	liberty	and	equal	rights.”31Calling	 his	 words	 an	 improper	 political	 address	 in	 a	 judicialtreason—both	 ofthe	 American	 republicproceeding,	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives	 charged	 him	 withsedition	 andthem	 “high	 crimes	 andmisdemeanors”	 and	 a	 basis	 for	 impeachment	 under	 theConstitution	 and	 removal	 from	 office.	 With	 John	 Quincyhowling	 his	 objections,	 Chase	 went	 on	 trial	 before	 the	 Senatethe	 following	 February.	 In	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important	 trials	 inAmerican	 history,	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives	 threatened	 toconvertinto	 an	 autocracy	 bycriminalizing	 political	 dissent.	 Although	 John	 Quincy	 did	 notlike	 Chase,	 he	 argued	 that	 the	 constitutional	 phrase	 “highcrimes	and	misdemeanors”	referred	to	indictable	criminal	acts—not	 political	 statements—and	 he	 convinced	 the	 Senate	 tosupport	 him.	 On	 March	 1,	 1805,	 after	 the	 Senate	 had	 voted,Vice	 President	 Burr	 announced,	 “There	 not	 being	 aconstitutional	 majority	 who	 answer	 ‘guilty’	 to	 any	 one	 charge,it	 becomes	 my	 duty	 to	 declare	 that	 Samuel	 Chase	 is	 acquittedupon	 all	 the	 articles	 of	 impeachment	 brought	 against	 him	 bythe	 House	 of	 Representatives.”32	 In	 what	 was	 then	 the	 mostsignificant	defense	of	the	First	Amendment	ever	mounted,	JohnQuincy	had	prevented	the	American	President	and	the	House	ofRepresentatives	from	criminalizing	free	speech.“This	 was	 a	 party	 prosecution,”	 John	 Quincy	 reflectedafterwards,	“and	has	issued	in	the	.	.	.	total	disappointment	ofthose	by	whom	it	was	brought	forward.”It	has	exhibited	the	Senate	of	the	United	States	fulfillingthe	most	important	purpose	of	its	institution,	by	putting	acheck	 upon	 the	 impetuous	 violence	 of	 the	 House	 ofRepresentatives.	 It	 has	 proved	 that	 a	 sense	 of	 justice	 isyet	strong	enough	to	overpower	the	furies	of	faction.	.	.	.The	 attack	 on	 Mr.	 Chase	 was	 a	 systematic	 attempt	 uponthe	independence	and	powers	of	the	Judicial	Departmentand,	 at	 the	 same	 time,	 an	 attempt	 to	 prostrate	 theauthority	of	the	National	Government	before	those	of	theindividual	states.33Just	 before	 the	 Chase	 trial,	 the	 Electoral	 College	 hadannounced	 the	 results	 of	 the	 presidential	 elections,	 withThomas	Jefferson	the	overwhelming	victor	over	South	CarolinaFederalist	Charles	Cotesworth	Pinckney,	winning	162–14.	WithAaron	 Burr	 out	 of	 the	 picture,	 former	 New	 York	 governorGeorge	 Clinton,	 an	 ardent	 Republican,	 easily	 won	 the	 vicepresidency.	 Republicans	 gained	 control	 of	 both	 houses	 ofCongress.	With	their	own	seats	secure	until	1809,	John	Quincyand	one-third	of	his	colleagues	had	not	faced	reelection,	but	henow	 stood	 alone	 in	 the	 Senate,	 shunned	 by	 Federalists	 andRepublicans	alike	because	he	invariably	put	preservation	of	theunion	 and	 the	 nation’s	 independence	 from	 foreign	 influenceahead	of	party	interests.The	day	after	the	Chase	trial,	Vice	President	Burr	announcedhis	 retirement	 from	 the	 Senate,	 and	 with	 his	 resignation,	 theEighth	 Congress	 adjourned.	 The	 following	 day	 saw	 thePresident	 return	 to	 the	 Capitol	 for	 his	 second	 inauguration,and,	 perhaps	 chastened	 by	 his	 setback	 in	 the	 Chase	 case,	 he“delivered	 an	 inaugural	 address	 in	 so	 low	 a	 voice	 that,”according	to	John	Quincy,	“not	half	of	it	was	heard	by	any	partof	the	crowded	auditory.”34After	 theinauguration,	 John	 Quincy’s	 sons	 contractedchicken	 pox,	 but	 the	 Adamses	 nonetheless	 managed	 to	 go	 toQuincy	for	the	summer,	where	 they	 took	 up	 residence	 in	 whatnow	seemed	the	somewhat	crude	old	farmhouse	in	which	JohnQuincy	had	been	born.It	 stood	 at	 a	 distance	 from,	 but	 on	 the	 same	 land	 as,	 thenewer,	 more	 luxurious	 retirement	 “mansion”	 where	 John	 andAbigail	had	installed	themselves	and	where	John	Quincy	spentevenings	 discussing	 politics	 with	 his	 father.	 After	 renovatingthe	 old	 house	 into	 a	 comfortable	 summer	 retreat,	 John	 Quincytook	 up	 gardening	 as	 a	 new	 hobby	 that	 allowed	 him	 to	 spendmore	time	in	the	fresh	air.Early	 in	 June,	 Harvard	 named	 John	 Quincy	 professor	 oforatory	and	rhetoric,	a	chair	created	by	a	bequest	in	1771	fromNicholas	Boylston,	a	first	cousin	of	John	Quincy’s	grandmother.John	Quincy	worked	out	terms	that	would	allow	him	to	lecturewhen	the	Senate	was	out	of	session,	with	payment	of	$348	perquarter.	 Although	 he	 would	 not	 begin	 until	 the	 following	 year,in	 June	 1806,	 he	 snapped	 up	 copies	 of	 Cicero’s	 Orations	 ,Thomas	 Leland’s	 Demosthenes,	 and	 works	 by	 Aristotle	 toprepare	his	first	lectures.During	 the	 next	 session	 of	 Congress,	 John	 Quincy	 dinedfrequently	 at	 the	 President’s	 House	 with	 Jefferson	 andSecretary	 of	 State	 Madison,	 and	 after	 an	 uneventful	 wintersession,	 he	 returned	 to	 Massachusetts	 to	 prepare	 his	 Harvardlectures	 and	 open	 his	 Boston	 law	 office.	 Too	 far	 along	 withanother	 pregnancy,	 Louisa	 again	 remained	 with	 her	 family	 inWashington	 and,	 in	 early	 July,	 lost	 another	 child.	 John	 Quincywrote	to	her,	repeating	his	thanks	to	God	“for	having	preservedyou	to	me	through	the	dangers	of	that	heavy	trial	both	of	bodyand	mind	which	it	has	called	you	to	endure.”35In	 1806,	 the	 endless	 Anglo-French	 conflict	 spilled	 into	 theAtlantic	 again.	 The	 British	 reversed	 course	 and	 seizedAmerican	 ships,	 confiscated	 cargoes,	 and	 impressed	 hundredsof	 seamen.	 Early	 in	 1807,	 John	 Quincy	 proposed—and	 theSenate	passed—three	resolutions,	two	of	which	assailed	Britishactions	as	“unprovoked	aggression”	and	“a	violation	of	neutralrights.”	 The	 third	 resolution	 authorized	 the	 President	 toembargo	all	U.S.	exports.	Jefferson,	Madison,	and	John	Quincybelieved	 that	 ending	 the	 flow	 of	 essential	 American	 goods	 toboth	 England	 and	 France	 would	 force	 those	 countries	 to	 endtheir	war	with	each	other	and	their	depredations	on	Americanships.	 The	 embargo	 would	 not	 prevent	 imports	 from	 enteringAmerican	 ports,	 but	 ships	 carrying	 such	 goods	 would	 have	 toleave	 port	 empty,	 and	 few	 shipowners	 could	 afford	 such	 one-way	trade.	John	Quincy	was	the	only	Federalist	in	either	houseof	 Congress	 to	 vote	 for	 the	 embargo,	 which	 he	 believed	 was	 amiddle	 ground	 between	 a	 suicidal	 naval	 war	 with	 Britain	 andpassive	 acquiescence	 to	 British	 rule	 over	 international	 sea-lanes.John	 Adams	 built	 this	 lavish	 “mansion”	 as	 a	 retirement	 homefor	himself	and	his	wife,	Abigail.	See	illustration	no.	2,	page	10,to	 view	 the	 entire	 Adams	 family	 farm.	 (PAINTING	 BY	 G.FRANKENSTEIN,	 1849;	 NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,	 ADAMSNATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)Political	 isolation	 in	 Congress	 only	 intensified	 his	 loneliness.After	 the	 Christmas	 holidays,	 Louisa	 had	 remained	 in	 Bostonwith	 John	 II	 to	 be	 near	 George’s	 boarding	 school	 and	 see	 himon	Sundays.	Though	surrounded	by	in-laws,	John	Quincy	longedfor	 his	 wife	 and	 children.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 a	 particularly	 coldwinter	 day	 in	 Washington,	 he	 wrote	 to	 Louisa	 before	 going	 tobed,	“I	will	not	say	I	can	neither	live	with	you	nor	without	you;but	 in	 this	 cold	 weather	 I	 should	 be	 very	 glad	 to	 live	 withyou.”36Increasingly	 obsessed	 by	 thoughts	 of	 his	 wife,	 he	 spent	 hislonely	 evenings	 writing	 poems,	 dedicating	 A	 Winter’s	 Day	 “ToLouisa”:Friend	of	My	Bosom!	would’st	thou	knowHow,	far	from	thee,	the	days	I	spend.37In	another	poem,	he	pleaded	with	Louisa	toFling	the	last	fig	leaf	to	the	windAnd	snatch	me	to	thy	arms!38She	 replied	 playfully,	 calling	 his	 words	 “the	 sauciest	 lines	 Iever	perused”	and	asking	whether	he	would	like	her	to	publishthem.39When	Congress	adjourned	in	the	spring	of	1807,	John	Quincyreturned	 to	 Massachusetts	 to	 find	 Louisa	 pregnant	 again,	 andin	 mid-August,	 she	 gave	 birth	 to	 their	 third	 son,	 CharlesFrancis	Adams,	whom	John	Quincy	named	for	his	dead	brotherCharles	 and	 for	 Francis	 Dana,	 the	 diplomat	 John	 Quincy	 hadserved	as	an	adolescent	in	Russia.As	 Boston	 Federalists	 demanded	 reconciliation	 with	 Britain,the	British	stepped	up	their	outrages	against	American	vesselson	 the	 high	 seas,	 with	 the	 worst	 occurring	 on	 June	 22,	 1807,when	 the	 British	 frigate	 Leopard	 hailed	 the	 USS	 Chesapeakejust	outside	the	three-mile	territorial	limit	off	Virginia’s	NorfolkRoads.	 As	 the	 American	 ship	 slowed,	 the	 British	 commanderdemanded	 permission	 to	 search	 the	 Chesapeake	 for	 four	 menhe	 claimed	 were	 British	 deserters.	 When	 the	 Americancommander	refused,	the	Leopard	fired	without	warning,	killingthree	 Americans	 and	 wounding	 eighteen.	 The	 British	 boardedand,	 stepping	 over	 the	 dead	 and	 wounded	 on	 the	 deck,	 seizedfour	 men	 they	 claimed	 were	 British	 deserters.	 They	 hung	 oneof	 the	 men	 from	 the	 yardarm	 and	 impressed	 the	 three	 others.The	attack	convinced	President	Jefferson	and	John	Quincy	that,short	 of	 war,	 the	 only	 effective	 way	 to	 prevent	 British	 attackswas	 to	 withdraw	 American	 ships	 from	 the	 oceans,	 impose	 thecongressionally	sanctioned	embargo,	and	try	to	undermine	theBritish	economy.When	 Britain	 refused	 to	 pay	 reparations	 for	 the	 Leopardattack,	 Congress	 converted	 John	 Quincy’s	 resolution	 into	 theNon-Importation	 Act,	 which	 effectively	 ended	 all	 Americanforeign	 trade	 in	 December	 1807.	 Although	 aimed	 at	 punishingBritain,	 the	 act	 punished	 Americans	 more.	 Within	 weeks,	 theembargo	 had	 shut	 New	 England’s	 shipbuilding	 industry,	 itsshipping	trade,	and	its	fishing	fleet.	With	export	outlets	closed,farmers—north	 and	 south—found	 their	 produce	 a	 glut	 on	 themarket.	By	spring,	a	wave	of	bankruptcies	had	shut	businessesand	 farms	 across	 New	 England	 and	 New	 York—quite	 theopposite	 of	 what	 Jefferson,	 Madison,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 hadexpected.	All	three	believed	the	United	States	could	survive	asa	self-sufficient	economy,	abandoning	imports	in	favor	of	homemanufactures	 and	 mitigating	 the	 effects	 of	 the	 embargo	 whilethe	 U.S.	 government	 built	 a	 larger	 navy	 and	 armed	 her	 cargoships.	 The	 huge	 farm	 surpluses	 overwhelmed	 the	 internaleconomy,	 however,	 and	 plunged	 the	 nation	 into	 economiccatastrophe.Although	 most	 of	 the	 nation	 blamed	 Jefferson	 for	 thecountry’s	 economic	 plight,	 Federalists	 and,	 it	 seemed,	 all	 ofBoston	blamed	John	Quincy	Adams.	“I	would	not	sit	at	the	sametable	with	that	renegade,”	declared	one	Federalist.40“Most	completely	was	I	deserted	by	my	friends	in	Boston	andin	the	state	legislature,”	John	Quincy	admitted.	“I	can	never	besufficiently	 grateful	 to	 Providence	 that	 my	 father	 and	 mymother	did	not	join	this	general	desertion.”41In	 January	 1808,	 he	 added	 to	 Federalist	 anger	 by	 attendingthe	 Republican	 caucus	 in	 Congress	 to	 witness	 the	 nominationof	 his	 good	 friend	 from	 across	 the	 chessboard,	 Secretary	 ofState	Madison,	to	succeed	President	Jefferson.	In	the	ballotingfor	 vice	 president,	 John	 Quincy	 received	 one	 vote,	 whicheffectively	 ended	 his	 ties	 to	 the	 Federalist	 Party.	 John	 Quincy,however,	 now	 viewed	 Federalists	 as	 the	 party	 of	 secession,disunion,	 subservience	 to	 Britain,	 and	 the	 end	 of	 Americanindependence.	 “To	 resist	 this,”	 he	 declared,	 “I	 was	 ready,	 ifnecessary,	 to	 sacrifice	 everything	 I	 have	 in	 life,	 and	 even	 lifeitself.”42In	May	1808,	Massachusetts	Federalists	met	in	Boston,	their“principal	 object,”	 according	 to	 Republican	 governor	 JamesSullivan,	being	“the	political	and	even	the	personal	destructionof	 John	 Quincy	 Adams.”43	 Then	 and	 there—nine	 months	 priorto	the	expiration	of	John	Quincy’s	term—the	Federalists	electedinstructing	 theirhis	 successor,	 then	 passed	 resolutionssenators—Pickering	and	Adams—to	vote	to	repeal	the	embargo.On	 June	 8,	 1808,	 John	 Quincy	 “immediately	 resigned	 whatremained	of	my	Senate	term.”They	had	passed	resolutions	in	the	nature	of	instructions.	 .	 .	 which	 I	 disapproved.	 I	 chose	 neither	 to	 act	 inconformity	 with	 those	 resolutions	 nor	 to	 representconstituents	 who	 had	 no	 confidence	 in	 me.	 .	 .	 .	 [They]required	 me	 to	 aid	 them	 in	 promoting	 measures	 tendingto	dissolve	the	union	and	to	sacrifice	the	independence	ofthe	nation.	I	was	no	representative	for	them.	44As	usual	in	times	of	distress,	John	Quincy	turned	to	his	fatherfor	 advice	 and	 consolation.	 “Your	 situation	 you	 think	 critical,”the	former	President	counseled	his	son.You	 are	 supported	 by	 no	 party;	 you	 have	 too	 honest	 aheart,	too	independent	a	mind,	and	too	brilliant	talents	tobe	sincerely	and	confidentially	trusted	by	any	man	who	isunder	the	dominion	of	party	maxims	or	party	feelings.	.	.	.In	the	next	Congress	.	.	.	you	will	be	numbered	among	thedead,	 like	 .	 .	 .	 the	 brightest	 geniuses	 of	 the	 country.	 .	 .	 .Return	to	your	professorship,	but	above	all	to	your	officeas	a	lawyer.	Devote	yourself	to	your	profession	and	to	theeducation	of	your	children.45His	father	had	made	it	clear:	John	Quincy	Adams’s	career	inpublic	 service	 had	 come	 to	 an	 end,	 his	 dream—and	 the	 dreamof	his	parents—to	ascend	to	national	leadership	shattered.