CHAPTER 	14Freedom	Is	the	PrizeWashington’s	 oppressive	 summer	 heat	 forced	 Congress	 torecess	 before	 proceeding	 against	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 in	 1839,and	 he	 was	 able	 to	 return	 home	 to	 the	 cool	 breezes	 of	 QuincyBay	 with	 Louisa	 and	 their	 two	 “angelic”	 granddaughters,	 thechildren	of	their	son	John	II.	What	should	have	been	a	summerof	joy,	however,	proved	a	season	of	heartbreak,	when	the	oldergirl,	 nine-year-old	 Fanny,	 contracted	 diphtheria.	 Oftenshrieking	from	the	pain	gripping	her	throat,	she	spent	weeks	inagony	 before	 dying	 in	 the	 fall.	 Her	 death	 devastated	 JohnQuincy	 and	 left	 him	 pessimistic	 about	 his	 own	 future,	 as	 hefaced	expulsion	from	the	House.	“I	fear	I	have	done	little	goodin	 the	 world,”	 he	 moaned,	 “and	 myindisappointment	 of	 the	 good	 I	 would	 have	 done	 had	 I	 beenpermitted.”1life	 will	 endAfter	 burying	 Fanny,	 the	 Adamses	 returned	 to	 Washingtonand	 brought	 their	 surviving	 granddaughter	 and	 her	 mother	 tolive	in	their	house	on	F	Street.	Their	presence	brought	new	joyinto	 Louisa’s	 otherwise	 drab	 life	 and	 even	 sparked	 a	 smile	 ortwo	 on	 John	 Quincy’s	 often	 dour	 face—especially	 when	 MaryLouisa	 turned	 to	 her	 “Grandpappa”	 for	 help	 in	 algebra	 andlogarithms.	 He	 often	 encouraged	 her	 to	 copy	 poems—one	 ofthem	 a	 favorite	 of	 his	 by	 Scottish	 poet	 William	 Russell,	 whose“Ode	 to	 Fortitude”2	 asked,	 “Can	 noble	 things	 from	 baseproceed?”“Not	 so	 the	 lion	 springs,”	 John	 Quincy	 often	 answered	 hisgrandchild,	 “not	 so	 the	 steed;	 Nor	 from	 the	 vulgar	 tenants	 ofthe	grove,	sublimed	with	pageant-fire,	the	strong-pounced	birdof	Jove.”3In	 addition	 to	 Mary	 Louisa,	 the	 Adamses	 had	 grandsons	 tofuss	 over.	 One	 of	 them,	 Charles	 Francis	 Adams	 II,	 would	 longremember	 his	 grandfather’sthegrandchildren	through	a	canyon	of	books	into	his	study,	and	hisyounger	 brother	 Henry	 Adams	 wouldremember	 hisgrandfather	 as	 “an	 old	 man	 of	 seventy-five	 or	 eighty	 who	 wasalways	 friendly	 and	 gentle,	 but	 .	 .	 .	 always	 called	 ‘thePresident,’”	while	Louisa	was	“the	Madam.”continually	 herdingAuthor	 of	 the	 renowned	 autobiography	 The	 Education	 ofHenry	 Adams,	 Henry	 Adams	 passed	 summers	 with	 hisgrandparents	 at	 Quincy	 until	 he	 was	 twelve	 years	 old	 andwould	 remember	 throughout	 his	 life	 “the	 effect	 of	 the	 back	 ofthe	President’s	head	as	he	sat	in	his	pew	on	Sundays.”It	 was	 unusual	 for	 boys	 to	 sit	 behind	 a	 Presidentgrandfather	 and	 to	 read	 over	 his	 head	 the	 tablet	 inmemory	 of	 a	 President	 great-grandfather	 who	 hadpledged	 “his	 life,	 his	 fortune,	 and	 his	 sacred	 honor”	 tosecure	the	independence	of	his	country	and	so	forth.	.	.	.The	Irish	gardener	once	said,	“You’ll	be	thinkin’	you’ll	bePresident	too.”4When	Congress	reconvened	in	December	1839,	elections	haddivided	the	House	evenly,	and	disorder	attended	every	effort	toestablish	 committee	 memberships.	 Deadlocked	 and	 facinglegislative	 paralysis,	 Congress	 turned	 to	 the	 only	 man	 everymember	trusted,	regardless	of	what	they	felt	about	his	politicsor	 him	 personally—and	 some	 genuinely	 hated	 him.	 But	 JohnQuincy	Adams	was	the	man	who	represented	the	whole	nation,and	 above	 all	 else,	 they	 knew	 him	 to	 be	 that	 rarest	 ofcolleagues:	 an	 honest	 man	 and	 patriot.	 Astonished	 by	 thesudden—and	almost	universal—embrace,	John	Quincy	acceptedthe	 invitation	 and	 served	 as	 Speaker	 pro	 tem	 long	 enough	 towork	 out	 committee	 memberships.	 When	 he	 suc-ceeded	 toeveryone’s	 satisfaction	 and	 stepped	 down	 from	 his	 leadershiprole,	they	immediately	turned	on	him	again,	reimposed	the	GagRule,	and	overrode	his	angry	demands	to	repeal	it.John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa	 Catherine	 Adams’s	 grandson	 HenryAdams,	 seen	 here	 as	 a	 Harvard	 undergraduate,	 had	 warmmemories	 of	 his	 grandparents	 that	 he	 relatedin	 hisautobiography,	 The	 Education	 of	 Henry	 Adams.	 (NATIONALPARKS	SERVICE,	ADAMS	NATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)Just	then,	however,	his	friend	Ellis	Gray	Loring,	a	prominentMassachusetts	 attorney	 and	 outspoken	 opponent	 of	 slavery,drew	 John	 Quincy’s	 attention	 away	 from	 the	 turmoil	 inCongress	 with	 some	 startling	 legal	 documents.	 In	 January1840,	 a	 federal	 district	 court	 in	 New	 Haven,	 Connecticut,	 wasabout	 to	 hear	 the	 case	 of	 thirty-six	 Africans	 who	 had	 beenprisoners	on	the	slave	ship	Amistad	off	the	coast	of	Cuba.	Ledby	 a	 Congolese	 chief	 named	 Cinque,	 they	 had	 broken	 theirchains,	killed	the	captain	and	three	crewmen,	and	overpoweredthe	 white	 crew.	 Knowing	 nothing	 of	 navigation,	 they	 orderedthe	 white	 crew	 to	 sail	 them	 to	 Africa,	 and	 by	 day	 the	 crewcomplied.	At	night,	however,	the	crewmen	reversed	course	andeventually	 sailed	 into	 American	 waters,	 where	 an	 Americanfrigate	seized	the	ship	and	took	it	to	New	London,	Connecticut.Officials	 there	 arrested	 the	 Africans	 and	 charged	 them	 withpiracy	 and	 murder,	 but	 a	 number	 oflegal	 questionscomplicated	 the	 case:	 Were	 the	 Africans	 property—that	 is,slaves—to	be	returned	to	their	owners?	Or	were	they	people,	tobe	 released	 on	 habeas	 corpus	 and	 later	 tried	 for	 piracy	 andmurder?	And	finally,	did	the	United	States	have	jurisdiction?	Orshould	 U.S.	 authorities	 release	 the	 prisoners	 to	 Spanishauthorities	to	do	with	as	they	wished	under	Spanish	law?Killing	of	the	captain	of	the	Amistad	by	a	band	of	free	Africanskidnapped	 by	 slavers	 and	 transported	 to	 Cuba	 to	 be	 sold	 asslaves.	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 pleaded	 for	 their	 freedom	 beforethe	U.S.	Supreme	Court.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)The	district	court	pronounced	the	Negroes	to	have	been	freemen,	 whom	 slavers	 had	 kidnapped	 and	 transported	 to	 Cubaillegally—under	Spanish	as	well	as	American	law.	It	deemed	thekillings	 justified	 as	 legitimate	 acts	 of	 self-defense	 against	 thekidnappers	 and	 ordered	 the	 Africans	 turned	 over	 to	 thePresident	of	the	United	States	for	transport	back	to	their	nativeland	at	American	government	expense.Having	 already	 alienated	 southerners	 by	 rejecting	 Texasannexation,	 President	 Van	 Buren	 was	 unwilling	 to	 provoke	 hissouthern	constituency	further	and	ordered	the	district	attorneyto	appeal	the	lower	court	order	to	the	circuit	court.	The	circuitcourt	 upheld	 the	 district	 court	 and	 forced	 governmentprosecutors	 to	 take	 the	 case	 still	 higher	 to	 the	 U.S.	 SupremeCourt.	 By	 then,	 however,	 abolitionists	 who	 had	 paid	 for	 thelegal	defense	of	the	Amistad	Africans	ran	out	of	funds,	and	allbut	 two	 attorneys	 quit.	 Only	 Loring	 and	 Roger	 ShermanBaldwin,	grandson	of	Revolutionary	War	hero	 Roger	 Sherman,agreed	 to	 remain	 on	 the	 case	 pro	 bono.	 They	 turned	 to	 JohnQuincy	to	join	their	appeal	to	the	Supreme	Court—also	withouta	fee—and	he	agreed.“Gracious	 heavens,	 my	 dear	 Sir,”	 an	 outraged	 Virginianexclaimed	in	reaction	to	John	Quincy’s	embrace	of	the	Africans’defense.	“Your	mind	is	diseased	on	the	subject	of	slavery.	Praywhat	had	you	to	do	with	the	captured	ship?	.	.	.	You	are	great	ineverything	else,	but	here	you	show	your	weakness.	Your	namewill	 descend	 to	 the	 latest	 posterity	 with	 this	 blot	 on	 it:	 Mr.Adams	loves	the	Negroes	too	much,	unconstitutionally.”5Before	 the	 case	 reached	 the	 Supreme	 Court,	 seventy-three-year-old	John	Quincy	won	reelection	to	the	House	by	a	two-to-one	 majority,	 while	 sixty-eight-year-old	 General	 William	 HenryHarrison,	 hero	 of	 the	 Indian	 wars,	 defeated	 President	 MartinVan	Buren	in	the	presidential	election.“The	 life	 I	 lead,”	 John	 Quincy	 grumbled	 to	 his	 diary	 as	 hereturned	to	Washington	for	double	duty	in	Congress	and	beforethe	Supreme	Court,	“is	trying	to	my	constitution	and	cannot	belong	continued.”My	 eyes	 are	 threatening	 to	 fail	 me.	 My	 hands	 tremblelike	 an	 aspen	 leaf.	 My	 memory	 daily	 deserts	 me.	 Myimagination	is	fallen	into	the	sear	and	yellow	leaf	and	myjudgment	 sinking	 into	 dotage.	 .	 .	 .	 Should	 my	 life	 andhealth	be	spared	to	perform	this	service	.	.	.	then	will	be	aproper	time	for	me	to	withdraw	and	take	my	last	leave	ofthe	public	service.6Before	 the	 Amistad	 appeal	 began,	 John	 Quincy	 received	 aletter	 from	 one	 of	 his	 new	 African	 clients,	 a	 member	 of	 anobscure	tribe,	the	Mendi.	He	had	had	no	knowledge	of	Englishbefore	languishing	in	Connecticut	jails	for	two	years:“Dear	Friend	Mr.	Adams,”	the	letter	began.I	 want	 to	 write	 a	 letter	 to	 you	 because	 you	 love	 Mendipeople	 and	 you	 talk	 to	 the	 Great	 Court.	 We	 want	 you	 toask	 the	 court	 what	 we	 have	 done	 wrong.	 What	 forAmericans	 keep	 us	 in	 prison.	 Some	 people	 say	 Mendipeople	 crazy	 dolts	 because	 we	 no	 talk	 Americanlanguage.	 Americans	 no	 talk	 Mendi.	 Americans	 crazydolts?	.	.	.	Dear	friend	Mr.	Adams	you	have	children	andfriends	you	love	them	you	feel	very	sorry	if	Mendi	peoplecome	 and	 take	 all	 to	 Africa.	 .	 .	 .	 All	 we	 want	 is	 make	 usfree.7Congolese	 chief	 Cinque	 masterminded	 the	 killing	 of	 theAmistad	captain	but	knew	too	little	about	navigation	to	preventthe	crew	from	sailing	into	American	waters,	where	the	Africanson	board	were	captured	and	brought	to	trial	as	escaped	slaves.(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)On	February	22,	1841,	John	Quincy	walked	from	his	house	tothe	 Supreme	 Court,	 which	 sat	 in	 the	 east	 wing	 of	 the	 Capitolbeneath	the	Senate	floor.	It	was	George	Washington’s	birthday—the	 Founding	 Father	 whom	 John	 Quincy	 most	 revered	 afterhis	 own	 father	 and	 who	 had	 launched	 John	 Quincy’s	 career	 inpublic	 service.	 Uncompromising	 southern	 slaveholders	 madeup	the	majority	of	the	nine	judges,	and	John	Quincy	knew	themall.	 In	 the	 minority	 were	 Joseph	 Story	 of	 Massachusetts,	 aformer	 Harvard	 law	 professor,	 and	 Chief	 Justice	 Roger	 B.Taney,	a	Maryland	slaveholder	who	would	later	free	his	slaves.After	 the	 prosecution	 demanded	 that	 the	 government	 returnthe	Amistad	Negroes	to	the	Spanish	minister	for	restoration	totheir	 “owners,”	 Roger	 Baldwin	 argued	 for	 the	 defense:	 “TheAmerican	 people,”	 he	 declared,	 “have	 never	 imposed	 it	 as	 aduty	 upon	 the	 government	 of	 the	 United	 States	 to	 becomeactors	in	an	attempt	to	reduce	to	slavery	men	found	in	a	stateof	 freedom	 by	 giving	 extraterritorial	 force	 to	 a	 foreign	 slavelaw.”	 The	 prosecuting	 attorney	 replied	 that	 slaves	 “releasedfrom	 slavery	 by	 acts	 of	 aggression”	 do	 not	 lose	 their	 status	 asthe	 property	 of	 their	 rightful	 owners	 “any	 more	 than	 a	 slavebecomes	 free	 in	 Pennsylvania	 who	 forcibly	 escapes	 fromVirginia.”8The	 next	 day,	 February	 24,	 John	 Quincy	 rose	 to	 address	 thecourt.	 “The	 courtroom	 was	 full,	 but	 not	 crowded,”	 he	 noted,“and	there	were	not	many	ladies.	I	had	been	deeply	distressedand	 agitated	 till	 the	 moment	 when	 I	 rose,	 and	 then	 my	 spiritdid	not	sink	within	me.	With	grateful	heart	for	aid	from	above	..	 .	 I	 spoke	 four	 hours	 and	 a	 half,	 with	 sufficient	 method	 andorder	to	witness	little	flagging	of	attention	by	the	judges.”9“Justice,”	he	began,	“as	defined	in	the	Institutes	of	Justiniannearly	2,000	years	ago	.	.	.	is	the	constant	and	perpetual	will	tosecure	every	one	his	own	right.”I	 appear	 here	 on	 behalf	 of	 thirty-six	 individuals,	 the	 lifeand	liberty	of	every	one	of	whom	depend	on	the	decisionof	this	court.	.	.	.	Thirty-two	or	three	have	been	chargedwith	 the	 crime	 of	 murder.	 Three	 or	 four	 of	 them	 arefemale	 children,	 incapable,	 in	 the	 judgment	 of	 our	 laws,of	the	crime	of	murder	or	piracy	or,	perhaps,	of	any	othercrime.	.	.	.	Yet	they	have	all	been	held	as	close	prisonersnow	for	the	period	of	eighteen	long	months.	10John	 Quincy	 told	 the	 justices	 of	 his	 distress	 in	 prosecutingthe	 government	 of	 his	 own	 nation	 before	 the	 nation’s	 highestcourt	and,	indeed,	“before	the	civilized	world.”	But,	he	said,	itwas	his	duty.	“I	must	do	it.”in	 allThe	 government	 is	 still	 in	 power.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 lives	 andliberties	of	all	my	clients	are	in	its	hands.	.	.	.	The	chargeI	 make	 against	 the	 present	 executive	 administration	 isthattheseunfortunates,	 instead	 of	 that	 justice	 which	 they	 werebound	not	less	than	this	honorable	court	itself	to	observe,they	 have	 substituted	 sympathy!—sympathy	 with	 one	 ofthe	 parties	 in	 this	 conflict	 and	 antipathy	 to	 the	 other.their	 proceedings	 relatingtoSympathy	 with	 the	 white;	 antipathy	 to	 the	 black—and	 inproof	 of	 this	 charge,	 I	 adduce	 the	 admission	 and	 avowalof	the	secretary	of	state	himself.11John	 Quincy	 went	 on	 to	 read	 the	 letter	 from	 Secretary	 ofState	 John	 Forsyth	 of	 Georgia	 to	 the	 Spanish	 minister	 inAmerica,	citing	the	owners	of	the	Amistad	as	“the	only	partiesaggrieved”—that	 all	 the	 right	 was	 on	 their	 side	 and	 all	 thewrong	on	the	side	of	their	surviving,	self-emancipated	victims.“I	ask	your	honors,	was	this	justice?”12Far	from	any	“flagging	of	attention,”	the	judges	sat	transfixedfor	 more	 than	 four	 hours—until	 other	 needs	 forced	 them	 toadjourn	 until	 the	 next	 day.	 That	 night,	 however,	 one	 of	 thejustices	died,	and	Chief	Justice	Taney	postponed	resumption	ofJohn	Quincy’s	argument	for	a	week.The	 court	 reconvened	 on	 March	 1,	 with	 John	 Quincysummarizing	 his	 previous	 argument,	 then	 standing	 for	 threemore	hours,	reiterating	the	argument	that	the	Amistad	Negroeshad	been	free	men,	seized	against	their	will	on	their	native	soil,abducted	onto	a	ship,	where	they	defended	themselves	and,	indoing	 so,	 killed	 their	 kidnappers.	 “What	 .	 .	 .	 would	 have	 beenthe	 tenure	 by	 which	 every	 human	 being	 in	 this	 Union,	 man,woman,	 and	 child,	 would	 have	 held	 the	 blessing	 of	 personalfreedom?	 Would	 it	 not	 have	 been	 by	 the	 tenure	 of	 executivediscretion,	caprice,	or	tyranny	.	.	.	at	the	discretion	of	a	foreignminister,	would	it	not	have	disabled	forever	the	effective	powerof	habeas	corpus?”Then	 he	 came	 to	 the	 end	 of	 his	 presentation.	 Eschewingsecular,	legalistic	appeals,	“Old	Man	Eloquent”	reached	into	hisrhetorical	 reservoir	 for	 spiritual	 principles	 he	 believed	 heshared	 with	 every	 decent	 human	 being.	 In	 a	 moment	 thatensured	 his	 standing	 in	 the	 history	 of	 Congress	 and	 theSupreme	 Court,	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 told	 the	 court	 that	 “morethan	 thirty-seven	 years	 past,	 my	 name	 was	 entered	 and	 yetstands	 recorded	 on	 both	 the	 rolls	 as	 one	 of	 the	 attorneys	 andcounselors	of	this	court.”I	 appear	 again	 to	 plead	 the	 cause	 of	 justice,	 and	 now	 ofliberty	and	life,	in	behalf	of	many	of	my	fellow	men.	.	.	.	Istand	 before	 the	 same	 court,	 but	 not	 before	 the	 samejudges.	.	.	.	As	I	cast	my	eyes	along	those	seats	of	honorand	 of	 public	 trust,	 now	 occupied	 by	 you,	 they	 seek	 invain	 for	 one	 of	 those	 honored	 and	 honorable	 personswhose	indulgence	listened	then	to	my	voice.13After	 a	 dramatic	 pause,	 John	 Quincy	 turned	 his	 eyes	 towardthe	heavens,	calling	out	the	hallowed	names	of	the	court’s	earlyjustices—John	 Marshall,	 Bushrod	 Washington,	 and	 ThomasTodd	of	Virginia,	William	Cushing	of	Massachusetts	and	SamuelChase	 of	 Maryland,	 William	 Johnson	 of	 South	 Carolina,	 andHenry	Livingston	of	New	York.	“Where	are	they?”	he	cried	out,turning	to	focus	on	the	faces	of	each	of	the	justices.	“Where?”he	paused	before	lowering	his	voice	to	a	near	whisper.Gone!	Gone!	All	Gone!	Gone	from	the	services	which	.	.	.they	 faithfully	 rendered	 to	 their	 country.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 humblyhope,	and	fondly	trust,	that	they	have	gone	to	receive	therewards	 of	 blessedness	 on	 high.	 In	 taking	 leave	 of	 thisbar	 and	 of	 this	 honorable	 court,	 I	 can	 only	 .	 .	 .	 petitionheaven	that	every	member	of	it	may	.	.	.	after	a	long	andillustrious	career	in	this	world,	be	received	at	the	portalsof	the	next	with	the	approving	sentence,	“Well	done,	goodand	 faithful	 servant;	 enter	 thou	 into	 the	 joy	 of	 theLord.”14As	 tears	 flowed	 down	 spectators’	 faces,	 the	 prosecutingattorney	shook	his	head	in	disbelief.	He	had	no	idea	what	JohnQuincy’s	 closing	 had	 to	 do	 with	 the	 facts	 of	 the	 case,	 butmembers	 of	 the	 court	 understood	 that	 by	 recalling	 the	 namesof	the	legendary	justices	who	had	helped	establish	the	nation’sfederal	judiciary	and,	indeed,	the	nation	itself,	John	Quincy	wasasking	 them	 to	 abide	 by	 standards	 higher	 than	 man’s	 law.Accordingly,	 the	 court	 voted	 unanimously	 to	 give	 its	 seniormember,	 Joseph	 Story,	 the	 honor	 of	 reading	 their	 monumentaldecision	on	March	9:“There	 does	 not	 seem	 to	 us	 to	 be	 any	 ground	 for	 doubt	 thatthese	Negroes	ought	to	be	free.”15“Glorious!”	 Roger	 Sherman	 Baldwin	 congratulated	 JohnQuincy.	 “Glorious	 not	 only	 as	 a	 triumph	 of	 humanity	 andjustice,	 but	 as	 a	 vindication	 of	 our	 national	 character	 fromreproach	and	dishonor.”16John	 Quincy	 was	 equally	 elated	 and	 wrote	 to	 his	 lastsurviving	 son,	 describing	 his	 courtroom	 triumph	 as	 one	 of	 themost	 notable	 events	 in	 the	 family’s	 illustrious	 history:	 “Thesignature	and	seal	of	Saer	de	Quincy	to	the	old	parchment	[theMagna	Carta],”	John	Quincy	told	his	son,	“were	.	.	.	almost	myonly	 support	 and	 encouragement,	 under	 the	 pressure	 of	 aburden	 upon	 my	 thought	 that	 I	 was	 to	 plead	 for	 more,	 muchmore	than	my	own	life.”17	John	Quincy’s	plea	for	the	freedomof	the	Amistad	captives	marked	more	than	six	centuries	duringwhich	 he	 and	 his	 forbears	 had	 led	 man’s	 quest	 for	 freedom.“Well	done,	good	and	faithful	servant,”	he	said	to	himself.A	flood	of	anonymous	hate	mail	awaited	John	Quincy	when	hereturned	 home.	 “Is	 your	 pride	 of	 abolition	 oratory	 not	 yetglutted?”	asked	a	Virginian.	“Are	you	to	spend	the	remainder	ofyour	 days	 endeavoring	 to	 produce	 a	 civil	 and	 servile	 war?	 Doyou	 .	 .	 .	 wish	 to	 ruin	 your	 country	 because	 you	 failed	 in	 yourelection	to	the	Presidency?	May	the	lightening	of	heaven	blastyou	.	.	.	and	direct	you	.	.	.	to	the	lowest	regions	of	Hell!”18While	 John	 Quincy	 continued	 his	 daily	 walks	 and	 publicswims	 unmolested,	 abolitionists	 paid	 the	 price	 for	 sending	 theAmistad	 captives	 back	 to	 their	 homeland.	 After	 they	 left,	 ashipload	of	135	slaves	mutinied	aboard	the	ship	Creole,	boundfrom	 Hampton	 Roads,	 Virginia,	 to	 New	 Orleans.	 After	 killingone	 of	 the	 owners,	 they	 directed	 the	 crew	 to	 sail	 to	 Nassau,where	British	authorities	hanged	those	identified	as	murderersand	freed	the	rest.Although	 John	 Quincy	 had	 promised	 himself	 that	 if	 his	 lifeand	 health	 were	 spared	 to	 defend	 the	 men	 of	 the	 Amistad,	 hewould	 “take	 my	 last	 leave	 of	 the	 public	 service,”	 his	 SupremeCourt	 triumph	 so	 elated	 him	 that	 he	 decided	 the	 time	 had	 notyet	 come	 to	 keep	 his	 promise.	 “Fifty	 years	 of	 incessant	 activeintercourse	with	the	world,”	he	now	said	to	himself,has	made	political	movement	to	me	as	much	a	necessaryof	 life	 as	 atmospheric	 air.	 This	 is	 the	 weakness	 of	 mynature,	which	I	have	intellect	enough	left	to	perceive,	butnot	 energy	 to	 control.	 And	 thus,	 while	 a	 remnant	 ofphysical	power	is	left	to	me	to	write	and	speak,	the	worldwill	retire	from	me	before	I	retire	from	the	world.19President	 John	 Tyler	 of	 Virginia	 was	 a	 slaveholder	 whodefended	 slavery	 as	 a	 quintessential	 American	 institution	 andsupported	 efforts	 in	 the	 House	 to	 censure	 and	 expel	 JohnQuincy	Adams.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)A	 few	 days	 later,	 on	 April	 4,	 1841,	 President	 William	 HenryHarrison	 died	 of	 pneumonia	 after	 only	 a	 month	 in	 office.	 VicePresident	 John	 Tyler,	 a	 fervent	 defender	 of	 states’	 rights	 fromVirginia	and	champion	of	slavery,	succeeded	to	the	presidency.With	 Tyler’s	 warm	 approval,	 slaveholdersin	 the	 Houseprepared	to	censure	and	expel	John	Quincy	Adams.the	 Smithson	 bequestToo	 elated	 by	 his	 Supreme	 Court	 triumph	 to	 notice	 thepuerile	 antics	 of	 his	 congressional	 enemies,	 John	 Quincypursued	his	interests	in	the	sciences,	using	his	chairmanship	ofto	 promotethe	 committee	 onestablishment	 of	 astronomical	 observatories—hisfamous“lighthouses	 of	 the	 sky.”	 He	 not	 only	 ignored	 the	 ridicule	 ofpolitical	foes	but	gave	his	alma	mater,	Harvard,	$1,000	to	helpbuild	its	own	observatory	and	loaned	$13,000	of	his	own	moneyto	Columbian	College,	the	institution	“for	the	general	diffusionof	 knowledge”	 that	 George	 Washington	 had	 helped	 found	 witha	 bequest	 in	 his	 will.	 It	 would	 grow	 to	 become	 GeorgeWashington	University.His	 constant	 glorification	 of	 the	 benefits	 of	 astronomicalobservatories	 to	 expand	 man’s	 knowledge	 encouraged	 theNavy	 Department,	 the	 University	 of	 North	 Carolina,	 WilliamsCollege,	 Western	 Reserve	 College,	 Miami	 College	 (Ohio),	 andthe	 United	 States	 Military	 Academy	 to	 build	 observatories.Even	 Philadelphia’s	 high	 schools	 built	 one—the	 PhiladelphiaHigh	 School	 Observatory,	 which	 opened	 a	 John	 Quincy	 Adams“Lighthouse	 of	 the	 Sky”	 to	 the	 citizens	 of	 the	 city.	 Ridiculingthose	 who	 had	 scoffed	 at	 John	 Quincy’s	 advocacy	 of	 suchobservatories,	 enlightened	 communities	 across	 the	 nationturned	his	vision	into	reality.John	 Quincy’s	 broad	 interest	 in	 science	 included	 insatiablecuriosity	about	every	new	invention.	As	a	boy,	he	had	witnessedthe	 first	 balloon	 flights	 in	 Paris	 and	 public	 demonstrations	 ofFranz	Mesmer’s	then	new	technique,	mesmerism,	later	knownas	hypnotism.	In	1839,	another	French	inventor,	Louis-Jacques-Mandé	 Daguerre,	 a	 scene	 painter	 for	 the	 Paris	 opera,developed	 a	 process	 that	 used	 sunlight	 to	 make	 permanentpictures	 on	 metal	 plates.	 By	 1842,	 John	 Plumbe	 Jr.,	 a	 civileverto	 be	 photographedengineer,	had	opened	the	Daguerrian	Gallery	in	Boston,	whichJohn	 Quincy	 visited	 in	 September	 1842,	 becoming	 the	 firstAmerican	 Presidentlive.Unfortunately,	 the	 Plumbe	 photos	 of	 John	 Quincy	 were	 lost,with	 much	 of	 that	 pioneering	 photographer’s	 works,	 but	 thefollowing	 year,	 engraver	 Philip	 Haas	 opened	 anotherdaguerreotype	 studio,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 asked	 him	 totake	another	photograph.	By	then,	sixteen	portrait	artists,	fivesculptors,	 and	 one	 medalist	 had	 captured	 John	 Quincy’slikeness.	Haas	produced	the	first	surviving	photograph.20intofirmlyThe	Amistad	case	touched	John	Quincy	in	ways	different	fromtheany	 previous	 experience,	 pushing	 himabolitionist	 camp.	 Although	 they	 had	 failed	 to	 organize	 a	 full-fledged	 political	 party,	 northern	 abolitionists	 had	 nonethelessformed	 a	 powerful	 Select	 Committee	 on	 Slavery	 and	 rejoicedwhen	 John	 Quincy	 accepted	 their	 long-standing	 invitation	 tojoin.	 He	 did	 so	 on	 condition	 that	 they	 accept	 his	 leadership	 inmatters	concerning	the	House	of	Representatives,	and	the	firstthing	 he	 made	 them	 do	 was	 change	 their	 name	 to	 theCommittee	 of	 Friends	 of	 the	 Right	 of	 Petition.	 The	 changecloaked	 their	 divisive	 abolitionist	 goal	 in	 the	 mantle	 ofconstitutional	 rights	 and	 broadened	 their	 appeal	 to	 defendersof	 the	 Bill	 of	 Rights	 by	 calls	 to	 defend	 the	 rights	 of	 allAmericans	to	petition	and	to	free	speech.Daguerreotype	of	John	Quincy	Adams	is	the	first	surviving	livephotograph	of	an	American	President.	Taken	by	Philip	Haas,	apioneer	in	the	process.When	 Congress	 convened	 in	 January	 1842,	 John	 Quincyhoped	 his	 Supreme	 Court	 victory	 had	 covered	 him—and	 theConstitution—with	 enough	 laurels	 to	 convince	 the	 House	 torepeal	 the	 Gag	 Rule.	 As	 he	 had	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 everysession	 since	 its	 imposition	 six	 years	 earlier,	 he	 opened	 theJanuary	1842	session	of	Congress	by	assailing	the	Gag	Rule	asa	 clear	 violation	 of	 his	 own	 constitutional	 right	 to	 free	 speechand	 the	 right	 of	 his	 constituents	 to	 petition	 government	 forredress	 of	 grievances.	 To	 these,	 he	 added	 the	 questionableconstitutional	right	of	uninterrupted	free	debate	in	Congress.In	 renewing	 the	 Gag	 Rule,	 each	 session	 of	 Congress	 hadextended	 its	 scope,	 so	 that	 instead	 of	 simply	 banning	 themention	 of	 the	 word	 “slavery,”	 the	 rule	 now	 stated,	 “Nopetition,	 memorial,	 resolution	 or	 other	 paper,	 praying	 for	 theabolition	 of	 slavery	 in	 the	 District	 of	 Columbia,	 or	 any	 otherstate	 or	 territory,	 or	 the	 slave	 trade	 between	 the	 states	 andterritories	of	the	United	States	where	it	exists	shall	be	receivedby	 this	 House,	 or	 entertained	 in	 any	 way	 whatsoever.”	 Theincreased	strictures	offended	many	congressmen	unopposed	toslavery	 in	 the	 South	 but	 concerned	 only	 with	 its	 spread	 intoother	 states	 and	 territories.	 The	 new	 Gag	 Rule	 seemed	 toorestrictive.	 Far	 from	 the	 overwhelming	 majority	 that	 hadinstituted	the	rule	in	1836,	it	passed	by	only	four	votes	in	1841,and	John	Quincy	sensed	victory	near	as	he	honed	his	rhetoricalweapons	for	1842.	He	picked	what	he	knew	“would	set	them	ina	 blaze”—a	 petition	 from	 “the	 citizens	 of	 Haverhill,	 in	 theCommonwealth	of	Massachusetts	.	.	.	that	you	will	immediatelyadopt	 measures	 peaceably	 to	 dissolve	 the	 Union	 of	 theseStates.”21As	 he	 knew	 it	 would,	 the	 parliamentary	 lynch	 mob	 from	 theSouth	 gathered	 about	 him,	 with	 cries	 of	 “Order!”	 “Stop	 him!”He	raised	his	voice	and	continued	above	the	din.“Old	 Nestor,”	 said	 an	 eyewitness	 at	 the	 scene,	 “lifted	 up	 hisvoice	 like	 a	 trumpet,	 till	 slaveholding,	 slave	 trading,	 and	 slavebreeding	 absolutely	 quailed	 and	 howled.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 old	 manbreasted	 the	 storm	 and	 dealt	 blows	 upon	 the	 head	 of	 themonster.	Scores	.	.	.	of	slaveholders	[strove]	constantly	to	stophim	by	.	.	.	screaming	at	the	top	of	their	voices,	‘That	is	false!’	..	.	‘I	demand	that	you	shut	the	mouth	of	that	old	harlequin.’”22Kentucky	 congressman	 Thomas	 Marshall,	 a	 nephew	 of	 thedeceased	 chief	 justice	 John	 Marshall,	 moved	 to	 censure	 JohnQuincy	for	having	“committed	high	treason	when	he	submitteda	petition	for	the	dissolution	of	the	Union.”“Sir,”	 John	 Quincy	 shot	 back,	 “what	 is	 high	 treason?	 TheConstitution	of	the	United	States	says	what	high	treason	is.	.	.	.It	is	not	for	the	gentleman	from	Kentucky,	or	his	puny	mind,	todefine	 what	 high	 treason	 is	 and	 confound	 it	 with	 what	 I	 havedone.”	 John	 Quincy	 then	 ordered	 the	 clerk	 to	 read	 the	 firstparagraph	of	the	Declaration	of	Independence.	When	the	clerkhesitated,	 John	 Quincy	 repeated	 his	 demand,	 shouting,	 “Thefirst	paragraph!”“When	 in	 the	 course	 of	 human	 events	 it	 becomes	 necessaryfor	 one	 people	 to	 dissolve	 the	 political	 bands	 which	 haveconnected	them	with	another	and	to	assume	among	the	powersof	the	earth,	the	separate	and	equal	station	to	which	the	Lawsof	Nature	and	of	Nature’s	God	entitle	them,	a	decent	respect	tothe	 opinions	 of	 mankind	 requires	 that	 they	 should	 declare	 thecauses	which	impel	them	to	the	separation—”“Proceed!”	John	Quincy	thundered.	“Proceed!	Down	to	‘right’and	‘duty’!”The	clerk	continued:	“It	is	their	right,	it	is	their	duty,	to	throwoff	such	government.”“Now,	 Sir,	 if	 there	 is	 a	 principle	 sacred	 on	 earth	 andestablished	 by	 the	 instrument	 just	 read,	 it	 is	 the	 right	 of	 thepeople	 to	 alter,	 to	 change,	 to	 destroy,	 the	 government	 if	 itbecomes	 oppressive	 to	 them.	 There	 would	 be	 no	 such	 rightexisting	 if	 the	 people	 had	 not	 the	 power	 in	 pursuance	 of	 it	 topetition	for	it.	.	.	.“I	 rest	 that	 petition	 on	 the	 Declaration	 of	 Independence!”John	Quincy	boomed.When	 the	 House	 had	 quieted	 down,	 he	 then	 challenged	 itsright	 to	 charge	 him	 with	 high	 treason,	 a	 crime	 for	 which,	 hesaid,	 “I	 could	 only	 be	 tried	 by	 a	 regular	 circuit	 court,	 by	 animpartial	jury.”23Virginia’s	 Henry	 Wise	 stood	 to	 contradict	 John	 Quincy	 butmade	 the	 tactical	 mistake	 of	 talking	 too	 much	 and	 digressinginto	 a	 defense	 of	 “the	 principle	 of	 slavery”	 as	 “a	 levelingprinciple	 .	 .	 .	 friendly	 to	 equality.	 Break	 down	 slavery	 and	 youwould	 with	 the	 same	 blow	 destroy	 the	 great	 democraticprinciple	 of	 equality	 among	 men.”	 Wise	 had	 built	 a	 reputationas	 a	 staunch	 defender	 of	 slavery,	 which	 he	 said	 was“interwoven	 in	 our	 political	 existence	 .	 .	 .	 guaranteed	 by	 ourConstitution	.	.	.	resulting	from	our	system	of	government.”24After	catcalls	from	northern	congressman	subsided,	Wise	gotback	 on	 track,	 pretending	 to	 mourn	 John	 Quincy’s	 having“outlived	 his	 fame.	 .	 .	 .	 To	 think	 of	 the	 veneration,	 the	 honor,the	 reverence	 with	 which	 he	 might	 have	 been	 loved	 andcherished.	.	.	.	I	thank	God	that	the	gentleman,	great	as	he	was,neither	has	nor	is	likely	to	have	sufficient	influence	to	excite	aspirit	 of	 disunion	 throughout	 the	 land.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 gentleman	 ispolitically	dead.”25Far	 from	 politically	 dead,	 John	 Quincy	 found	 new	 life	 acrossthe	 nation,	 as	 tens	 of	 thousands	 in	 the	 North	 and	 parts	 of	 theWest	rallied	to	his	side.	“When	they	talk	about	his	old	age	andvenerableness	 and	 nearness	 to	 the	 grave,”	 Ralph	 WaldoEmerson	responded,	“he	is	like	one	of	those	old	cardinals	who,as	 quick	 as	 he	 is	 chosen	 Pope,	 throws	 away	 his	 crutches	 andhis	crookedness	and	is	as	straight	as	a	boy.	He	is	an	old	roué,who	 cannot	 live	 on	 slops,	 but	 must	 have	 sulphuric	 acid	 in	 histea.”26When	 the	 time	 came	 for	 John	 Quincy’s	 final	 defense	 againstthe	 attempt	 to	 quiet	 him,	 he	 challenged	 the	 southernparliamentary	lynch	mob,	daring	them	to	punish	him	for	havingpresented	 the	 Haverhill	 petition.	 “If	 they	 say	 that	 they	 willpunish	me,	they	must	punish	me.	If	they	say	that	in	grace	andmercy	 they	 will	 spare	 my	 expulsion,	 I	 disdain	 and	 cast	 theirmercy	away.	.	.	.	I	defy	them.	I	have	constituents	to	go	to	whowill	have	something	to	say	if	this	House	expels	me.	Nor	will	itbe	long	before	gentlemen	will	see	me	here	again.”27John	 Quincy	 then	 turned	 and	 pointed	 to	 Virginia’s	 HenryWise,	 whom	 the	 House	 had	 blandly	 readmitted	 after	 hisparticipation	 in	 a	 duel	 that	 was	 tantamount	 to	 murder.	 Crackshots	 and	 swordsmen	 from	 the	 South	 had	 used	 dueling	 as	 aweapon	 to	 silence	 political	 opponents	 who	 lacked	 shootingskills	 and	 feared	 uttering	 even	 the	 slightest	 criticism	 that	 asoutherner	might	interpret	as	an	insult	and	thus	grounds	for	achallenge.	 John	 Quincy’s	 son	 had	 faced	 just	 such	 a	 challenge,and	Wise	had	been	a	second	in	such	a	duel	between	two	othercongressmen.	 When	 both	 had	 survived	 the	 first	 round	 andwould	normally	have	left	the	field	with	their	honor—and	bodies—intact,	 Wise	 insisted	 that	 they	 keep	 firing,	 until	 the	 thirdround	 left	 one	 duelist	 dead.	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 was	 sooutraged	 at	 the	 spectacle	 that	 he	 sponsored	 a	 landmark	 bill—the	 Prentiss-Adams	 Law—to	 ban	 dueling	 in	 the	 District	 ofColumbia.	 In	 proposing	 the	 ban,	 John	 Quincy	 called	 dueling	 aform	of	slavery	that	allowed	trained	killers	to	blackmail	the	lessskilled	marksman	or	swordsman	into	suicidal	combat	or	face	aloss	of	honor.“That	 far	 more	 guilty	 man,”	 John	 Quincy	 pointed	 at	 Wise,“came	 into	 this	 House	 with	 his	 hands	 and	 face	 dripping	 .	 .	 .reeking	with	the	blood	of	murder.”	Turning,	he	then	pointed	atKentucky’s	 Thomas	 Marshall,	 urging	 him	 to	 “go	 to	 some	 lawschool	 and	 learn	 a	 little	 of	 the	 rights	 of	 the	 citizens	 of	 thesestates	and	the	members	of	this	House.”28	John	Quincy’s	publicscolding	sent	Marshall	scurrying	back	to	Kentucky	humiliated,with	his	intellectual	tail	between	his	legs,	never	again	to	returnto	national	politics.With	 John	 Quincy	 luring	 more	 House	 members	 to	 his	 side,one	 southerner	 offered	 to	 withdraw	 the	 petition	 of	 censure	 ifJohn	 Quincy	 would	 withdraw	 the	 Haverhill	 petition	 fordisunion.“No!	 No!	 I	 cannot	 do	 that,”	 John	 Quincy	 replied	 in	 thedeepest	tones	he	could	find	to	add	to	the	drama	of	the	moment.“That	 proposition	 comes	 to	 the	 point	 and	 issue	 of	 this	 wholequestion	.	.	.	the	total	suppression	of	the	right	of	petition	to	thewhole	 people	 of	 this	 Union.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 I	 withdraw	 this	 petition,	 Iwould	consider	myself	as	having	sacrificed	.	.	.	every	element	ofliberty	that	was	enjoyed	by	my	fellow	citizens.	.	.	.	Never	morewould	 the	 House	 see	 a	 petition	 presented	 from	 the	 people	 ofthe	 Union	 expressing	 their	 grievances	 in	 a	 manner	 that	 mightnot	 be	 pleasing	 to	 the	 members.	 .	 .	 .	 There	 is	 the	 deadlycharacter	of	the	attempt	to	put	me	down.”29The	 debate	 continued	 for	 two	 weeks,	 with	 John	 Quincy’seloquence	 stirring	 the	 nation	 to	 petition	 Congress.	 Day	 afterday,	 he	 held	 the	 floor,	 as	 petitions	 flew	 through	 the	 doorprotesting	congressional	attempts	to	censure	him.	On	February7,	 he	 tried	 holding	 back	 a	 smile	 as	 he	 announced	 he	 wouldneed	another	week	to	complete	his	defense,	to	which	a	memberof	 the	 Virginia	 delegation	 moved	 to	 table	 the	 censure	 motionand	 end	 the	 matter.	 When	 the	 House	 agreed,	 John	 Quincyresponded	 by	 presenting	 two	 hundred	 more	 petitions	 andaddressing	 the	 House	 with	 one	 of	 the	 most	 momentousspeeches	he	would	ever	deliver.	Indeed,	his	words	would	laterserve	 as	 the	 constitutional	 basis	 for	 Abraham	 Lincoln’sEmancipation	Proclamation.“Under	 this	 state	 of	 things,”	 he	 spoke,	 staring	 at	 thesoutherners,	 “so	 far	 from	 its	 being	 true	 that	 the	 states	 whereslavery	 exists	 have	 the	 exclusive	 management	 of	 the	 subject,not	only	the	President	of	the	United	States	but	the	commanderof	 the	 army	 has	 power	 to	 order	 the	 universal	 emancipation	 ofthe	slaves.”30Years	 later,	 Henry	 Wise	 would	 characterize	 John	 Quincy	 asthe	 “acutest,	 astutest,	 archest	 enemy	 of	 southern	 slavery	 thatever	existed	.	.	.	and	his	prophecies	have	been	fulfilled	.	.	.	farfaster	and	more	fearfully	.	.	.	than	ever	he	anticipated.”31John	Quincy’s	triumph	in	the	House	provoked	the	usual	hatemail,	 but	 the	 number	 of	 his	 supporters	 swelled	 across	 thenation,	 with	 one	 Pennsylvanian	 writing,	 “You	 are	 honored,	 oldman—the	 hearts	 of	 a	 hundred	 thousand	 Pennsylvanians	 arewith	you.”	Another	called	him	“the	only	public	man	in	the	landwho	 possesses	 the	 union	 of	 courage	 with	 virtue.”	 Poet	 JohnGreenleaf	 Whittier	 prayed,	 “God	 bless	 thee,	 and	 preservethee.”32	Even	those	who	had	opposed	the	aggressive	tactics	ofabolitionists	now	wrote,	“I	am	no	abolitionist,	yet	I	am	in	favorof	the	emancipation	of	the	colored	race.”33His	 popularity	 exceeded	 that	 of	 the	 President,	 and	 had	 hedefended	his	beliefs	as	aggressively	when	he	was	President,	hewould	certainly	never	have	suffered	the	humiliation	of	defeat	inhis	run	for	reelection.	Few	Americans	knew	or	understood	himas	President;	almost	every	American	now	knew	and	understoodhim—indeed,	 revered	 him—after	 his	 battle	 in	 Congress,	 andmillions	 now	 listened	 to	 every	 word	 of	 the	 Sage	 of	 Quincy.Hundreds	lined	up	to	see	him,	to	hear	his	words,	to	try	to	talkto	him	as	he	walked	about	Washington,	striding	to	and	from	theCapitol	 each	 day.	 Luminaries	 from	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 UnitedStates,	Britain,	and	Europe	called	at	his	home.	Charles	Dickensand	 his	 wife	 stopped	 for	 lunch,	 and	 Dickens	 asked	 for	 JohnQuincy’s	 autograph	 before	 leaving.	 John	 Quincy	 had	 emergedas	 one	 of	 the	 most	 celebrated	 and	 beloved	 personages	 in	 theWestern	world.In	 1843,	 his	 son	 Charles	 Francis,	 by	 then	 a	 member	 of	 theMassachusetts	state	legislature,	introduced	a	resolution	callingfor	 a	 constitutional	 amendment	 abolishing	 the	 right	 of	 slavestates	 to	 count	 five	 slaves	 as	 equal	 to	 three	 white	 men	 indetermining	 representation	 in	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives.With	 deep	 pride,	 John	 Quincy	 in	 turn	 introduced	 his	 son’samendment	 in	 the	 House—which	 ignored	 it.	 After	 he	 wonreelection	 in	 1844,	 however,	 the	 House	 could	 not	 ignore	 hisresolution	 abolishing	 the	 Gag	 Rule.	 Indeed,	 it	 passed	 itimmediately,	105–80,	ending	the	great	battle	he	had	fought	forfreedom	 of	 debate	 in	 Congress,	 freedom	 of	 speech	 generally,and	 the	 right	 of	 citizens	 to	 petition	 their	 government.	 It	 wasthe	first	victory	the	North	would	win	against	the	South	and	theslaveocracy.“Blessed,	 ever	 blessed	 be	 the	 name	 of	 God,”	 John	 Quincyexulted	afterwards.34Riding	 his	 wave	 of	 popularity,	 he	 set	 off	 to	 promote	 nationalinterest	in	science	and	education	by	accepting	an	invitation	tospeak	 at	 ceremonies	 laying	 the	 cornerstone	 of	 the	 CincinnatiAstronomical	 Society’s	 observatory.	 It	 was	 an	 arduous	 trip	 foran	 old	 man,	 but	 one	 with	 opportunities	 to	 promote	 scienceeducation—especially	 his	 “lighthouses	 of	 the	 sky”—across	 abroad	territory.long-anticipated	 completion	 ofHe	 had	 no	 sooner	 received	 his	 invitation	 to	 speak	 inCincinnati	 when	 another	 invitation	 arrived—this	 one	 to	 attendthethe	 Bunker’s	 HillMonument,	 commemorating	 the	 battle	 he	 had	 witnessed	 as	 aseven-year-old	 with	 his	 mother	 in	 1775.	 When,	 however,	 helearned	 that	 President	 John	 Tyler	 “and	 his	 cabinet	 of	 slave-drivers”	would	also	attend,	he	refused.	“How,”	he	asked,	“couldI	 have	 witnessed	 this	 without	 an	 unbecoming	 burst	 ofindignation	or	of	laughter?	John	Tyler	is	a	slave-monger.”With	 the	 association	 of	 the	 thundering	 cannon,	 which	 Iheard,	 and	 the	 smoke	 of	 burning	 Charlestown,	 which	 Isaw	 on	 that	 awful	 day,	 combined	 with	 this	 pyramid	 ofQuincy	 granite	 and	 John	 Tyler’s	 nose,	 with	 a	 shadowoutstretching	that	of	the	monumental	column,	I	stayed	athome	 and	 visited	 my	 seedling	 trees	 and	 heard	 thecannonades,	rather	than	watch	the	President	at	dinner	inFaneuil	Hall	swill	like	swine	and	grunt	about	the	rights	ofman.	35Celebration	at	the	completion	of	the	Bunker’s	Hill	Monument	inCharlestown	 in	 June	 1843.	 Invited	 to	 be	 the	 principal	 orator,John	Quincy	Adams	refused	to	attend	because	of	the	presenceof	 President	 John	 Tyler,	 a	 Virginia	 slaveholder	 and	 fierceopponent	of	abolition.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)Shortly	 after	 the	 Bunker’s	 Hill	 ceremonies,	 John	 Quincy	 leftfor	 Cincinnati,	 fulfilling	 his	 every	 lust	 to	 experience	 the	 latestscientific	 advances	 in	 transportation—steam-driven	 trains	 toAlbany,	 New	 York,	 and	 across	 New	 York	 State	 to	 Buffalo,	 thensteamboats	 across	 Lake	 Erie	 to	 Cleveland	 and	 down	 the	 OhioCanal	 to	 Columbus.	 At	 every	 stop,	 cheering	 crowds	 welcomedhim	 as	 a	 hero.	 The	 “firing	 of	 cannon,	 ringing	 of	 bells	 .	 .	 .	 andmany	 thousand	 citizens”	 greeted	 him	 in	 Schenectady,	 NewYork;	 thousands	 more—and	 the	 governor—waited	 in	 Albany.	 Atorchlight	 parade	 led	 his	 way	 through	 Utica,	 New	 York,climaxing	 with	 a	 photographer	 taking	 a	 daguerreotype	 of	 himwith	 General	 Tom	 Thumb.	 “Multitudes	 of	 citizens”	 cheered	 inCleveland,	 and	 in	 Columbus,	 he	 confessed,	 he	 had	 neverwitnessed	 “so	 much	 humanity.”	 In	 Dayton,	 two	 militarycompanies	awaited	to	escort	him,	along	with	“an	elegant	openbarouche	 in	 which	 I	 took	 a	 seat	 and	 thus	 in	 triumphalprocession	 we	 entered	 the	 city,”	 where	 “a	 vast	 multitude”awaited.	 He	 reached	 Cincinnati	 on	 November	 8	 and,	 to	 hisenormous	satisfaction,	learned	that	the	city	had	named	the	hillon	which	its	new	observatory	would	stand	Mount	Adams.His	 last	 major	 stop	 was	 in	 Pittsburgh,	 which	 gave	 him	 a“magnificent	 reception”	 before	 he	 helped	 lay	 the	 cornerstonefor	 still	 another	 astronomical	 observatory	 “to	 promote	 thecause	 of	 science.”	 He	 returned	 to	 Washington	 in	 November,after	 traveling	 across	 Pennsylvania,	 with	 brass	 bands,	 publicin	 everyofficials,	 and	 huge	 crowds	 cheering	 his	 visitcommunity.	 Speaking	 at	 every	 stop,	 however,	 took	 its	 toll,	 andhe	 contracted	 a	 debilitating	 cold,	 complete	 with	 sore	 throat,cough,	and	other	symptoms.“My	 strength	 is	 prostrated	 beyond	 anything	 that	 I	 everexperienced	 before,”	 he	 moaned.	 It	 was,	 after	 all,	 his	 first“campaign.”	 He	 had	 refused	 to	 campaign	 in	 1824	 and	 1828when	he	ran	for	the	presidency,	and	now	that	he	was	not	evencontemplating	that	office,	he	finally	learned	what	campaigningwas	like—and	he	rather	enjoyed	it.After	 President	 Tyler	 declined	 to	 run	 for	 a	 second	 term,former	 Speaker	 James	 K.	 Polk	 of	 Tennessee	 won	 thein	 1844	 and	 theDemocratic	 nominationpresidency	 itself,	 defeating	 the	 perennially	 ambitious	 HenryClay.	As	loser,	Clay	nonetheless	shared	one	distinction	with	hiswinning	 opponent:	 news	 of	 the	 presidential	 election	 resultshad,	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 history,	 traveled	 over	 the	 wires	 of	 anew	invention,	the	telegraph.for	 PresidentDuring	 his	 last	 month	 in	 office,	 President	 Tyler	 askedCongress	 again	 to	 approve	 annexation	 of	 Texas,	 and	 althoughJohn	 Quincy	 had	 blocked	 two	 earlier	 attempts,	 the	 Housefinally	 approved	 it	 in	 February	 1846.	 As	 John	 Quincy	 hadpredicted,	 war	 with	 Mexico	 followed	 Polk’s	 assumption	 ofpower.	 Only	 ten	 members	 of	 the	 House	 joined	 John	 Quincy	 invoting	against	the	war.In	 November	 1846,	 John	 Quincy	 suffered	 a	 stroke	 whilevisiting	his	son	Charles	Francis	in	Boston.	Rendered	speechlessand	 confused,	 his	 right	 side	 paralyzed,	 he	 seemed	 close	 todeath;	 his	 doctors	 gave	 Louisa	 little	 hope	 for	 her	 husband’srecovery.	 As	 she	 kept	 vigil	 in	 his	 room	 each	 day,	 however,	 hegradually	recovered	his	speech,	then	his	mind	and	memory,	andby	 early	 December,	 he	 laughed	 off	 his	 illness,	 snapping	 at	 hisfriends	that	he	had	suffered	only	vertigo.	But	when	he	tried	tostand	and	walk,	he	fell;	he	could	no	longer	support	himself.By	 Christmas,	 however,	 he	 was	 talking	 about	 returning	 toCongress,	 and	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Day,	 he	 set	 out	 for	 a	 ride	 in	 hiscarriage.	 A	 monthlater,	 on	 Sunday,	 February	 7,	 sheerwillpower	 held	 him	 upright	 as	 he	 walked	 from	 his	 son’s	 houseto	 both	 morning	 and	 afternoon	 church	 services	 to	 takecommunion.	 Despite	 protests	 from	 his	 wife	 and	 son,	 he	 andthey,	 and	 a	 nurse,	 left	 for	 Washington	 the	 next	 day,	 reachingthe	 Adamses’	 F	 Street	 home	 in	 February	 1847,	 in	 time	 tocelebrate	 Louisa’s	 seventy-second	 birthday.	 The	 followingmorning	 he	 walked	 slowly,	 but	 magisterially,	 onto	 the	 floor	 ofthe	House,	and	as	he	took	his	seat,	the	members	rose	as	one—North,	 South,	 East,	 and	 West—to	 cheer	 him.	 Among	 thosecelebrating	 his	 return	 was	 a	 tall,	 lanky,	 unkempt	 freshmancongressmanfrom	 Springfield,	 Illinois—Abraham	 Lincoln.During	his	short	tenure	in	the	House,	Lincoln	would	prove	oneof	John	Quincy’s	strongest	supporters—not	just	in	the	cause	ofabolition	 but	 regarding	 Adams’s	 proposalsfederalinitiatives	 in	 highway	 and	 canal	 construction	 and	 other	 formsof	national	expansion.	Echoing	the	words	of	James	Monroe	andJohn	 Quincy	 Adams,	 Lincoln	 asserted	 that	 “Congress	 has	 aconstitutional	 authority	 .	 .	 .	 to	 apply	 the	 power	 to	 regulatecommerce	.	.	.	to	make	improvements.”36forAfter	 Congress	 recessed	 in	 1847,	 John	 Quincy	 insisted	 onreturning	 to	 Quincy	 for	 the	 summer.	 Friends	 and	 relativesstaged	 a	 gala	 eightieth	 birthday	 party	 for	 him	 on	 July	 11,	 andtwo	 weeks	 later,	 they	 feted	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa’s	 goldenwedding	 anniversary.	 John	 Quincy	 overwhelmed	 Louisa	 bygiving	her	a	beautiful	bracelet	that	his	son	Charles	Francis	hadpurchased	for	him.Congressman	 Abraham	 Lincoln	 won	 election	 to	 the	 House	 ofRepresentatives	 in	 1847	 and	 served	 during	 John	 QuincyAdams’s	 last	 days	 in	 Congress.	 He	 is	 seen	 here	 in	 adaguerreotype	 probably	 taken	 in	 Springfield,	 Illinois,	 in	 1847.(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)On	 November	 1,	 Louisa	 and	 Charles	 Francis	 took	 JohnQuincy	 back	 to	 Washington,	 but	 the	 trip	 exhausted	 him—lefthim	palsied,	his	entire	body	shaking.	Too	weak	to	speak	audiblyor	 to	 write,	 he	 walked	 unsteadily;	 he	 was	 nearly	 blind.	 Henonetheless	 insisted	 on	 taking	 his	 seat	 at	 the	 opening	 of	 theHouse	on	December	6,	and	Louisa	conceded,	“The	House	is	hisonly	remedy.”37Although	he	gave	up	all	but	one	of	his	committee	obligationsand	 rode	 instead	 of	 walking	 to	 the	 House,	 he	 appeared	 forevery	 roll	 call	 every	 day	 thereafter.	 He	 cast	 one	 of	 only	 fourvotes	 in	 favor	 of	 a	 resolution	 to	 withdraw	 U.S.	 troops	 fromMexico.	 Even	 Lincoln	 voted	 against	 it.	 And	 his	 face,	 if	 not	 hisbody,	 came	 to	 life	 when	 he	 heard	 a	 resolution	 supporting	 aSpanish	 government	 demand	 that	 the	 United	 States	 pay	 theAmistad	 ’s	 owners	 $50,000	 for	 the	 loss	 of	 their	 ship	 and	 its“cargo,”	which	the	Spanish	minister	characterized	as	a	band	ofassassins.	Although	he	lacked	the	spring	that	once	shot	him	tohis	 feet,	 he	 nonetheless	 accomplished	 the	 same	 result	 andassailed	 the	 Spanish	 minister	 for	 having	 wanted	 the	 Amistadcaptives	“tried	and	executed	for	liberating	themselves.”“There	is	not	even	the	shadow	of	a	pretense	for	the	Spanishdemand,”	 John	 Quincy	 growled	 after	 the	 laughter	 subsided.“The	 demand,	 if	 successful,	 would	 be	 a	 perfect	 robberycommitted	 on	 the	 people	 of	 the	 United	 States.	 Neither	 theseslave	dealers,	nor	the	Spanish	government	on	their	behalf,	hasany	 claim	 to	 this	 money	 whatever.”38	 The	 House	 agreed	 andrejected	 the	 proposal.	 He	 then	 presented	 two	 petitions	 forpeace	with	Mexico,	and	the	House	rejected	them	both.By	mid-December,	he	had	grown	too	weak	to	continue	writingin	 the	 diary	 he	 had	 kept	 for	 sixty-eight	 years,	 and,	 indeed,	 hehad	to	refuse	a	treasured	invitation	to	speak	at	the	laying	of	thecornerstone	of	the	Washington	Monument	on	December	10.On	 New	 Year’s	 Day,	 he	 wrote	 to	 his	 only	 surviving	 son,Charles	 Francis,	 and,	 with	 an	 unsteady	 hand,	 wished	 him	 “astout	 heart	 and	 a	 clear	 conscience,	 and	 never	 despair.”39	 OnFebruary	 21,	 1848,	 President	 Polk	 sent	 the	 Senate	 a	 treaty	 ofpeace	with	Mexico	for	ratification.	In	the	House,	supporters	ofthe	 war	 proposed	 sending	 the	 thanks	 of	 Congress	 to	 theAmerican	generals	for	their	victory.	When	the	echoes	from	theroar	 of	 “ayes”	 had	 faded,	 a	 single,	 shrill	 voice	 startled	 theCongress.	In	a	last,	desperate	effort	to	punish	those	engaged	inwhat	 he	 called	 that	 “most	 unrighteous	 war,”40	 John	 QuincyAdams	sounded	a	firm,	unmistakable	“No!”	It	was	his	last	wordto	the	Congress	he	cherished.When	the	clerk	read	the	next	resolution	and	called	his	name—his	 was	 third	 on	 the	 alphabetical	 roll—he	 tried	 to	 stand,	 hisright	hand	gripping	his	desk	as	he	rose.	Then	he	slumped	to	hisleft—fortunately,	 into	 the	 arms	 of	 a	 fellow	 congressman	 whohad	been	watching	him.The	death	of	John	Quincy	Adams	in	the	Capitol	he	loved,	with,presumably,	 his	 former	 secretary	 of	 state	 Henry	 Clay	 holdinghis	right	hand.	(FROM	A	NATHANIEL	CURRIER	LITHOGRAPH,LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)“Mr.	 Adams	 is	 dying,”	 cried	 a	 congressman	 nearby.	 “Mr.Adams	 is	 dying.”	 The	 words	 passed	 from	 member	 to	 member.Other	 members	 found	 a	 couch	 that	 they	 brought	 onto	 theHouse	 floor	 and	 helped	 their	 stricken	 colleague	 stretch	 out.Someone	 thought	 to	 ask	 for	 a	 formal	 adjournment.	 Both	 theSenate	and	Supreme	Court	followed	suit	when	they	learned	ofJohn	 Quincy’s	 collapse.	 A	 group	 of	 congressmen	 carried	 thesofa	 and	 its	 occupant	 into	 the	 rotunda	 to	 give	 John	 Quincymore	air,	but	they	eventually	moved	it	into	the	Speaker’s	office,where	 they	 barred	 every	 one	 but	 physicians,	 family,	 and	 closefriends.	John	Quincy	revived	enough	to	thank	those	around	himand	to	ask	for	Henry	Clay,	who	arrived	weeping.	He	clasped	hisold	President’s	hand,	unable	to	say	a	word	before	he	finally	left,inconsolable.“This	 is	 the	 end	 of	 earth,	 but	 I	 am	 composed,”	 John	 Quincywhispered,	 then	 lapsed	 into	 a	 coma.	 Louisa	 arrived	 with	 afriend	and	looked	down	at	her	husband,	but	his	eyes	showed	nosign	 of	 consciousness.	 Eighty-year-old	 John	 Quincy	 lay	 in	 acoma	for	the	next	two	days,	and	at	7:20	p.m.,	on	February	23,1848,	he	died	in	the	Capitol	he	adored.The	 next	 day,	 House	 members	 appointed	 a	 committee	 withone	 member	 from	 each	 state	 to	 escort	 John	 Quincy	 home	 toMassachusetts	 for	 burial.	 In	 the	 Senate,	 one	 of	 his	 bitterpolitical	 foes,	 Thomas	 Hart	 Benton,	 stood	 to	 proclaim,“Whenever	 his	 presence	 could	 give	 aid	 and	 countenance	 towhat	 was	 useful	 and	 honorable	 to	 man,	 there	 he	 was.	 .	 .	 .Where	could	death	have	found	him	but	at	the	post	of	duty?”41The	nation	mourned	as	it	had	not	since	the	deaths	of	GeorgeWashington	and	Benjamin	Franklin.	John	Quincy	lay	in	state	ina	 committee	 room	 in	 Congress	 for	 two	 days	 after	 his	 death;thousands	 filed	 by	 silently,	 often	 not	 knowing	 why	 exactly,	 butsomehow	 realizing	 they	 had	 lost	 a	 champion	 of	 their	 rights—arepresentative	of	no	single	constituency,	state,	or	region	but	ofall	Americans	and	of	the	whole	nation.	He	was	an	aristocrat	ofan	earlier	generation,	raised	in	an	age	of	deference,	who	spokea	rich	language	that	ordinary	people	could	seldom	fathom,	butin	 the	 end,	 they	 sensed	 that	 he	 spoke	 for	 their	 greater	 goodand	to	protect	their	rights	and	freedoms.A	 single	 cannon	 blast	 awakened	 Washington	 on	 Saturdaymorning,	 February	 25;	 another	 boom	 shook	 the	 city	 a	 minutelater	 and	 every	 minute	 until	 noon.	 Again,	 the	 multitudereappeared,	 filling	 the	 streets	 like	 a	 great	 river	 flowing	 to	 theCapitol.	At	11:50,	the	bell	on	Capitol	Hill	began	to	toll,	and	thePresident	of	the	United	States	led	the	justices	of	the	SupremeCourt,	 high-ranking	 members	 of	 the	 military,	 the	 diplomaticcorps,	 and	 members	 of	 the	 Senate	 into	 the	 House	 chamber.John	 Quincy	 lay	 in	 a	 silver-framed	 coffin	 on	 an	 elevatedplatform	in	front	of	the	rostrum,	his	eloquence	still	resoundingin	the	silent	chamber:My	cause	is	the	cause	of	my	country	and	of	human	liberty.	.	.	the	fulfillment	of	prophesies	that	the	day	shall	comewhen	slavery	and	war	shall	be	banished	from	the	face	ofthe	earth.42With	 the	 President	 seated	 at	 the	 Speaker’s	 right,	 the	 vicepresident	 at	 his	 left,	 and	 the	 portraits	 of	 Washington	 andLafayette	looking	down	on	them	all,	the	chaplain	of	the	Houseprayed	and	set	off	what	Charles	Francis	Adams	called	“as	greata	pageant	as	was	ever	conducted	in	the	United	States.”	Choirssang	 to	 the	 gods,	 and	 orators	 lifted	 their	 voices	 to	 men,repeating	the	appeal	for	John	Quincy’s	precious	“Union.”	Whenthe	 assembly	 had	 intoned	 its	 final	 hymn,	 pallbearers	 carriedthe	 former	 President	 out	 of	 the	 Capitol	 to	 a	 silent	 multitudethat	stretched	to	the	edge	of	the	city.	The	great	casket	emergedfrom	the	Capitol,	surrounded	by	an	official	committee	of	escortand	followed	by	Charles	Francis	Adams	and	his	wife,	then	JohnQuincy’s	closest	friends	from	the	legislature.	In	the	processionthat	 followed,	 the	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House	 led	 members	 of	 thatbody,	the	Senate,	then	President	Polk,	justices	of	the	SupremeCourt,	 the	 diplomatic	 corps,	 and	 an	 interminable	 line	 ofmilitary	 officials,	 state	 officials,	 college	 students,	 firemen,	 andmembers	of	craftsmen’s	organizations	and	literary	societies.	.	..	It	was	endless—a	collective	outpouring	of	love	and	venerationthe	nation	had	rarely	seen.John	 Quincy	 lay	 in	 rest	 at	 the	 Congressional	 Cemetery	 for	 aweek	before	the	congressional	committee	of	escort—a	memberfrom	 each	 state—came	 to	 take	 him	 aboard	 a	 train	 to	 Boston.Thousands	 lined	 the	 tracks	 northward	 to	 bow	 their	 heads	 asthe	 train	 passed	 slowly,	 one	 car	 draped	 in	 black	 bearing	 JohnQuincy’s	 coffin.	 The	 train	 stopped	 at	 various	 stations	 andcrossings	to	allow	citizens	to	climb	aboard	and	say	their	good-byes	 as	 they	 filed	 past	 him.	 Churches	 sang	 his	 praises;newspapers	 expounded	 his	 glory	 and	 cited	 and	 published	 hisoratory	 and	 poetry.	 Thousands	 awaited	 his	 arrival	 in	 Boston,filling	the	streets	and	all	but	blocking	passage	for	his	coffin	toFaneuil	Hall	for	a	massive	funeral	ceremony	before	members	ofthe	state	legislature	and	other	prominent	citizens.	With	the	endof	 the	 eulogy	 and	 last	 prayer,	 the	 congressional	 committeedelivered	 the	 body	 of	 their	 colleague,	 John	 Quincy	 Adams,	 toMayor	 Josiah	 Quincy,	 John	 Quincy’s	 cousin	 and	 formerpresident	 of	 Harvard,	 for	 transport	 to	 the	 family	 vault	 inQuincy.	 A	 lifetime	 of	 friends	 and	 neighbors	 had	 gathered	 withhis	relatives	and	family	to	place	John	Quincy	beside	his	father.As	they	 laid	 John	 Quincy	 to	 rest,	 a	 small	 troop	 fired	 rifles	 in	 alast	salute	from	nearby	Penn’s	Hill,	where	John	Quincy	and	hismother,	 Abigail,	 had	 watched	 the	 Battle	 of	 Bunker’s	 Hill	 andthe	beginning	of	the	Revolution	that	spawned	a	new	nation.Day	of	my	father’s	birth,	I	hail	thee	yet.What	though	his	body	moulders	in	the	grave,Yet	shall	not	Death	th’	immortal	soul	enslave;The	sun	is	not	extinct—his	orb	has	set.And	Where	on	earth’s	wide	ball	shall	man	be	met,While	time	shall	run,	but	from	thy	spirit	braveShall	learn	to	grasp	the	boom	his	Maker	gave,And	spurn	the	terror	of	a	tyrant’s	threat?Who	but	shall	learn	that	freedom	is	the	prizeMan	still	is	bound	to	rescue	or	maintain;That	nature’s	God	commands	the	slave	to	rise,And	on	the	oppressor’s	head	to	break	his	chain.Roll,	years	of	promise,	rapidly	roll	round,Till	not	a	slave	shall	on	this	earth	be	found.—JOHN	QUINCY	ADAMS,THE	WHITE	HOUSE,	1827.43A	 little	 more	 than	 twelve	 years	 after	 John	 Quincy	 died—onDecember	 24,	 1860—South	 Carolina’s	 legislature	 proclaimedwithout	 dissent	 that	 “the	 union	 now	 subsisting	 between	 SouthCarolina	 and	 the	 other	 States,	 under	 the	 name	 of	 the	 ‘UnitedStates	 of	 America,’	 is	 hereby	 dissolved.”	 Early	 in	 1861,	 tenother	states	followed	suit,	and	in	April	1861,	the	civil	war	thatJohn	 Quincy	 Adams	 had	 predicted	 was	 under	 way,	 eventuallycosting	the	lives	of	more	than	275,000	Americans.Louisa	 Adams	 died	 four	 years	 after	 John	 Quincy,	 on	 May	 15,1852,	in	Washington,	DC.She	 and	 her	 husband	 now	 lie	 together	 next	 to	 John	 andAbigail	 Adams	 in	 a	 granite	 crypt	 in	 the	 church	 in	 Quincy,Massachusetts,	where	Charles	Francis	had	them	all	transferredafter	escorting	his	mother’s	body	from	the	capital.	Although	nosubsequent	members	of	the	Adams	family	ever	followed	John	orJohn	Quincy	Adams	to	the	presidency,	no	American	family	eversurpassed	the	Adamses	in	accession	to	national	prominence	inso	many	fields.	Beginning	with	his	son	Charles	Francis	Adams,who	 served	 as	 American	 ambassador	 to	 Britain	 and	 twice	 ranunsuccessfully	for	vice	president,	John	Quincy	Adams	spawnedan	 august	 line	 of	 American	 scholars,	 teachers,	 historians,lawyers,	 doctors,authors,business	 leaders,	 and	 other	 professionals	 who	 upheld—anduphold—the	principle	of	their	distinguished	ancestor:jurists,	 diplomats,legislators,You	 must	 have	 one	 great	 purpose	 of	 existence	 .	 .	 .	 tomake	your	talents	and	your	knowledge	most	beneficial	toyour	country	and	most	useful	to	mankind.—JOHN	QUINCY	ADAMS,	“TO	MY	CHILDREN.”44NotesExplanatory	 note:	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 kept	 his	 diary	 fromNovember	 1779	 to	 December	 1847,	 accumulating	 a	 total	 of14,000	 pages.	 The	 early	 diaries,	 from	 November	 1779	 toDecember	1788,	were	published	in	book	form	as	Diary	of	JohnQuincy	 Adams	 (Cambridge,	 MA:	 Belknap	 Press	 of	 HarvardUniversity	 Press,	 1981).	 The	 rest	 of	 the	 diary—fifty-onevolumes	in	all—is	only	available	digitally,	over	the	Internet,	bylogging	 on	 to	 “The	 Diaries	 of	 John	 Quincy	 Adams:	 A	 DigitalCollection,”	 on	 the	 website	 of	 the	 Massachusetts	 HistoricalSociety	 (www.masshist.org/jqadiaries).	 In	 this	 book,	 notesreferring	 to	 extracts	 from	 the	 first	 two	 published	 volumes	 ofthe	diary	will	show	the	appropriate	volume	and	page	numbers.When	 extracted	 from	 the	 Internet,	 the	 notes	 will	 simply	 showthe	 appropriate	 date	 and	 the	 initials	 MHS	 (MassachusettsHistorical	Society).Abbreviations:AAAPAbigail	AdamsAdams	PapersAFC Adams	Family	CorrespondenceJAJMJohn	AdamsJames	MonroeJQAJohn	Quincy	AdamsLCALouisa	Catherine	AdamsMHS Massachusetts	Historical	SocietyEPIGRAPH1	Charles	Francis	Adams,	ed.,	Memoirs	of	John	Quincy	Adams,Comprising	Portions	of	His	Diary	from	1795	to	1848,	12	vols.(Philadelphia:	J.	B.	Lippincott,	1874),	7:164	(hereafterMemoirs).	Mistakenly	published	in	his	Memoirs	as	written	onOctober	30,	1826.	In	his	old	age,	JQA	had	slipped	the	undatedpoem	at	random	between	pages	of	his	diary	bearing	the	1826date,	and	his	son,	Charles	Francis,	in	compiling	his	father’sMemoirs	for	publication,	assumed	that	was	the	date	on	whichhis	father	had	written	it.