CHAPTER 	13A	New	BeginningAfter	 his	 1828	 defeat,	 President	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 preparedto	 return	 to	 his	 father’s	 house	 in	 Quincy,	 Massachusetts,resigned	to	a	life	of	semiretirement,	puttering	about	the	farm	abit,	 but	 focused	 on	 writing	 a	 biography	 of	 his	 father	 andpracticing	law	part	time.	John	Quincy	and	Louisa	were	waitingfor	 George	 Washington	 Adams	 to	 arrive	 from	 Boston	 to	 helpthem	 move	 back	 to	 Quincy,	 when	 a	 messenger	 delivered	 athunderbolt:Their	firstborn	son	was	dead	at	twenty-eight.George	Washington	Adams	had	been	en	route	to	Washingtonon	a	steamboat	from	Providence	to	New	York.	On	April	30,	at	3a.m.,	 after	 a	 night	 of	 heavy	 drinking,	 he	 turned	 irrational,demanding	 that	 the	 captain	 stop	 the	 ship	 to	 let	 him	 off.	 Whenthe	 captain	 refused,	 he	 went	 topside	 by	 himself	 and	 eitherjumped	 or	 fell	 overboard,	 leaving	 only	 his	 cloak	 and	 hat	 onboard—and	no	note.	In	the	weeks	before	his	death,	his	drinkingand	 gambling	 had	 not	 abated,	 and	 his	 work	 had	 suffered.	 Stillworse,	 a	 maid	 working	 for	 the	 family	 where	 he	 was	 living	 hadgiven	birth	to	his	child	and	was	blackmailing	him.wAfter	learning	of	her	son’s	death,	Louisa	decided	to	remain	inWashington	 apart	 from	 her	 husband.	 She	 was	 too	 despondentto	 cope	 with	 her	 husband’s	 moodiness	 and	 his	 brother’sdrunkenness.	 John	 Quincy	 bought	 a	 home	 two	 miles	 from	 theCapitol	and	left	her	there.“The	parting	from	my	wife	was	distressing	to	her	and	to	me,”he	 confided	 to	 his	 diary.	 “The	 afflictions	 with	 which	 we	 havebeen	 visited—especially	 the	 last—has	 so	 weakened	 us	 in	 bodyand	 mind	 that	 our	 dejection	 of	 spirit	 seems	 irrecoverable.	 Weparted	with	anguish	that	I	cannot	describe.”1Early	 in	 September,	 John	 Quincy’s	 youngest	 son,	 CharlesFrancis—by	 then	 his	 and	 Louisa’s	 brightest	 hope—marriedAbigail	 Brooks,	 whose	 sister	 had	 married	 Massachusettscongressman	 Edward	 Everett.x	 Everett’s	 brother	 Alexanderhad	 trained	 in	 the	 law	 with	 John	 Quincy	 and	 served	 in	 his	 St.Petersburg	legation	for	a	year.	Although	John	Quincy	attendedhis	 son’s	 wedding,	 Louisa	 was	 still	 too	 distraught	 from	 thedeath	of	her	oldest	son	to	travel	to	Boston.Later	 that	 fall,	 John	 Quincy	 rejoined	 Louisa	 in	 Washington,spending	 his	 time	 on	 walks,	 swimming	 in	 the	 Potomac,	 andwriting	 articles	 on	 international	 affairs	 that	 found	 their	 wayinto	 scholarly	 journals.	 In	 the	 spring	 of	 1830,	 he	 returned	 toQuincy,	this	time	with	Louisa,	leaving	John	II	in	Washington	totry	to	extract	profits	from	the	Columbian	Mills	flour	business.As	the	summer	progressed,	however,	John	Quincy	fell	deeperinto	 depression,	 finding	 his	 only	 pleasures	 in	 walking	 andswimming,	 reading	 the	 Bible	 and	 Cicero’s	 Orations,	 plantingfruit	 trees,	 and	 tending	 a	 garden	 of	 peas,	 beans,	 corn,	 andother	 vegetables.	 He	 made	 halfhearted	 attempts	 at	 organizinghis	 father’s	 papers,	 rummaging	 through	 boxes	 and	 findingsome	 mementos	 of	 his	 youth—largely	 books,	 such	 as	 a	 fondlyremembered	edition	of	Arabian	Nights.	“The	more	there	was	inthem	 of	 invention,	 the	 more	 pleasing	 they	 were,”	 he	 recalled.“My	 imagination	 pictured	 them	 all	 as	 realities,	 and	 I	 dreamedof	 enchantments	 as	 if	 there	 was	 a	 world	 in	 which	 theyexisted.”2	 Charles	 Francis	 and	 his	 wife	 visited	 regularly	 forfamily	 clambakes,	 John	 II	 came	 up	 from	 Washington	 for	 twoshort	visits,	and	the	summer	slipped	away.As	 ill	 disposed	 as	 he	 was	 to	 public	 functions,	 he	 agreed	 toattend	 the	 bicentennial	 celebration	 of	 the	 founding	 of	 Bostonon	 September	 17,	 and	 to	 his	 surprise,	 two	 honorary	 marshalsescorted	 him	 from	 the	 State	 House	 to	 the	 Old	 South	 Church.Well-wishers	 hailed	 him	 as	 he	 passed,	 and	 even	 formerFederalist	 adversaries	 approached	 with	 warm	 salutations.	 Atthe	 end	 of	 the	 day,	 he	 attended	 a	 reception	 at	 the	 lieutenantgovernor’s	 residence,	 where	 his	 friends,	 the	 Everett	 brothersand	the	editor	of	the	Boston	Patriot,	were	huddling	with	Quincycongressman	 Reverend	 Joseph	 Richardson.	 After	 greeting	 theformer	 President,	 they	 asked	 if	 they	 could	 visit	 him	 thefollowing	 day.	 He	 agreed,	 and	 at	 the	 appointed	 time,	 theyinformed	him	that	Richardson’s	parishioners	had	pleaded	withhim	 to	 retire	 from	 Congress	 to	 devote	 himself	 full	 time	 to	 hischurch,	 and	 he	 had	 agreed.	 The	 Everetts	 then	 asked	 JohnQuincy	 to	 run	 for	 Richardson’s	 seat,	 assuring	 him	 that	 hewould	 win	 without	 opposition	 and	 flattering	 him	 with	 thenotion	 of	 “ennobling”	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives	 with	 thepresence	of	a	former	President.Always	 in	 character,	 John	 Quincy	 feigned	 disinterest,	 sayinghe	 would	 do	 nothing	 to	 support	 his	 own	 candidacy.	 Explaininghis	familiar	position	on	political	campaigns,	he	asserted	that	ifthe	people	called	on	him	of	their	own	volition,	he	“might	deemit	 my	 duty	 to	 serve..	 I	 want	 the	 people	 to	 actspontaneously.”3	 He	 made	 it	 clear,	 however,	 that	 he	 wouldremain	 independent	 of	 party	 affiliations	 and	 represent	 thewhole	 nation,	 with	 his	 only	 political	 loyalty	 tied	 to	 nationalindependence	from	all	foreign	entanglements	and	preservationof	the	Union...Both	 Louisa	 and	 Charles	 Francis	 were	 appalled	 that	 JohnQuincy	 would	 even	 consider	 returning	 to	 politics	 after	 thehumiliation	 he	 had	 suffered.	 Louisa	 threatened	 not	 toaccompany	 him	 if	 he	 returned	 to	 Washington—to	 no	 avail.Quincy	 voted	 overwhelmingly	 to	 return	 their	 former	 Presidentto	 Washington,	 giving	 him	 1,817	 votes,	 while	 the	 two	 othercandidates	garnered	a	combined	total	of	only	552	votes.“I	 am	 a	 member-elect	 of	 the	 Twenty-Second	 Congress,”	 hewrote	 in	 joyful	 disbelief	 that	 night,	 and	 nothing	 Louisa	 couldsay	could	detract	from	his	satisfaction.	“My	return	to	public	life.	 .	 .	 is	 disagreeable	 to	 my	 family,”	 he	 admitted,	 “yet	 I	 can	 notwithhold	 my	 grateful	 acknowledgment	 to	 the	 Disposer	 ofhuman	 events	 and	 to	 the	 people	 of	 my	 native	 region	 for	 thisunexpected	testimonial	of	their	continued	confidence.”It	seemed	as	if	I	was	deserted	by	all	mankind.	.	.	.	In	theFrench	 opera	 of	 Richard	 Coeur-de-Lion,	 the	 minstrelBlondel	 sings	 under	 the	 walls	 of	 his	 prison	 a	 song,beginning:O,	Richard!	O,	mon	Roi!L’univers	t’abandonne.yWhen	I	first	heard	this	song,	forty-five	years	ago	.	.	.	itmade	 an	 indelible	 impression	 upon	 my	 memory,	 withoutimagining	that	I	should	ever	feel	its	force	so	much	closerto	 home.	 But	 this	 call	 upon	 me	 by	 the	 people	 of	 thedistrict	in	which	I	reside,	to	represent	them	in	Congress,has	 been	 spontaneous.	 .	 .	 .	 My	 election	 as	 President	 ofthe	United	States	was	not	half	so	gratifying	to	my	inmostsoul.	No	election	or	appointment	conferred	upon	me	evergave	me	so	much	pleasure.4As	his	spirits	revived,	he	finally	coaxed	Louisa	into	returningto	Washington,	and	the	two	left	in	December.	Along	the	way,	heshowed	 himself	 still	 a	 champion	 of	 public	 improvements	 bybeing	 among	 the	 first	 to	 ride	 on	 the	 new	 steam-driven	 trainbetween	 Baltimore	 and	 Washington.	 And	 to	 his	 delight	 andLouisa’s	 amazement,	 a	 crowd	 awaited	 to	 greet	 them	 on	 theirreturn.	 Although	 he	 would	 not	 take	 his	 seat	 until	 1832,	 threehundred	 callers	 came	 to	 their	 house	 on	 New	 Year’s	 Day	 1831,buoying	his	spirits	still	more	and	spurring	him	to	seek	out	andmeet	 members	 of	 Congress	 to	 determine	 their	 political	 views.He	 attended	 the	 House	 of	 Representatives	 to	 learn	 the	 rulesand	 study	 member	 quirks	 and	 tics,	 and	 as	 he	 soaked	 up	 thethinking	of	his	future	colleagues,	the	joy	of	his	return	to	politicsspurred	 a	 renewed	 interest	 in	 scholarly	 pursuits,	 includingpoetry.	 By	 spring,	 when	 the	 time	 came	 to	 return	 to	 Quincy,	 hehad	 reread	 Childe	Harold,	Don	Juan,	 and	 other	 works	 of	 LordByron—and	written	his	own	epic,	2,000-line	poem	titled	DermotMacMorrogh,	on	Henry	II’s	conquest	of	Ireland.	He	consideredit	his	finest	work	and	at	least	one	publisher	agreed,	producingthree	successive	editions.z	On	the	way	north,	he	stopped	to	seeformer	 President	 James	 Monroe,	 who	 was	 gravely	 ill	 in	 NewYork	 and	 destitute,	 living	 off	 the	 charity	 of	 his	 daughter	 andson-in-law	at	their	New	York	City	home.After	 his	 return	 to	 Quincy,	 town	 officials	 invited	 him	 to	 givethe	July	4	oration,	and	he	set	to	work	drafting	a	fierce	attack	onthe	doctrine	of	“nullification,”	which	had	regained	currency	inthe	 South	 in	 response	 to	 high	 federal	 tariffs	 on	 cotton	 goods.Thomas	 Jefferson	 had	 fathered	 the	 concept	 in	 1798,	 when	 hewas	vice	president	and	opposed	the	Alien	and	Sedition	Acts	ofPresident	 John	 Adams.	 Declaring	 the	 Constitution	 only	 “acompact”	 among	 sovereign	 states,	 Jefferson	 insisted	 that	 thestates	 retained	 authority	 to	 restrain	 actions	 by	 the	 federalgovernment	that	exceeded	its	constitutional	mandate.	Jeffersonpersuaded	 the	 Kentucky	 legislature	 to	 approve	 a	 resolutionallowing	it	to	declare	unconstitutional	any	federal	governmentexercise	 of	 powers	 not	 specifically	 delegated	 bytheConstitution.	His	protégé,	James	Madison,	marched	in	lockstepand	 convinced	 the	 Virginia	 legislature	 “to	 interpose”	 itsauthority	 to	 prevent	 federal	 “exercise	 of	 .	 .	 .	 powers”	 notgranted	 by	 the	 Constitution.5	 Federalist	 legislatures	 in	 otherstates,	however,	declared	the	Virginia	and	Kentucky	resolutions“mad	 and	 rebellious”	 and	 rejected	 them	 by	 declaring	 U.S.courts	to	be	the	sole	judges	of	constitutionality.Vice	 President	 John	 C.	 Calhoun	 subsequently	 revivedsouthern	interest	in	the	concept	with	an	essay	he	called	“SouthCarolina	 Exposition	 and	 Protest.”	 In	 it,	 he	 insisted	 that	 theTenth	Amendment	gave	every	state	the	right	to	nullify	a	federalact	that	it	deemed	a	violation	of	the	Constitution.	In	his	July	4oration	 in	 Quincy,	 John	 Quincy	 countered	 by	 labeling	 theconcept	of	state	sovereignty	a	“hallucination”	and	nothing	“lessthan	 treason”—a	 fierce	 charge	 that	 resounded	 across	 thecountry	 after	 an	 enterprising	 printer	 distributed	 more	 than4,000	copies	of	his	speech	nationwide.As	 John	 Quincy	 delivered	 his	 oration,	 the	 President	 he	 hadserved	 for	 eight	 years	 died	 in	 New	 York—joining	 John	 Adamsand	Thomas	Jefferson	as	the	third	of	the	first	five	Presidents	todie	on	July	4.	Asked	to	deliver	a	eulogy	for	Monroe	at	Boston’sOld	South	Church,	John	Quincy	produced	a	stirring	reminder	ofMonroe’s	 courage	 as	 an	 officer	 during	 the	 Revolution,“weltering	in	his	blood	on	the	field	of	Trenton	for	the	cause	ofhis	 country.”	 Then	 John	 Quincy	 turned	 to	 his	 own—andMonroe’s—favorite	 subject:	 public	 improvements.	 He	 urgedmourners	 to	 “look	 at	 the	 map	 of	 United	 North	 America,	 as	 itwas	.	.	.	in	1783.	Compare	it	with	the	map	of	that	same	Empireas	it	is	now.	.	.	.	The	change,	more	than	of	any	other	man,	livingor	dead,	was	the	work	of	James	Monroe.”	John	Quincy	recalledhow	 Monroe	 had	 scoffed	 at	 Congress	 for	 denying	 it	 had	 “thepower	of	appropriating	money	for	the	construction	of	a	canal	toconnect	 the	 waters	 of	 Chesapeake	 Bay	 with	 the	 Ohio.”6	 Heportrayed	 the	 “unspeakable	 blessings”	 of	 Monroe’s	 vision	 of	 atransnational	 network	 of	 roads	 and	 canals.	 “Sink	 down,	 yemountains!”	John	Quincy	called	out.	“And	ye	valleys—rise!”Exult	 and	 shout	 for	 joy!	 Rejoice!	 that	 .	 .	 .	 there	 areneither	 Rocky	 Mountains	 nor	 oases	 of	 the	 desert,	 fromthe	rivers	of	the	Southern	[Pacific]	Ocean	to	the	shores	ofthe	 Atlantic	 Sea;	 Rejoice!	 that	 .	 .	 .	 the	 waters	 of	 theColumbia	 mingle	 in	 union	 with	 the	 streams	 of	 theDelaware,	the	Lakes	of	the	 St.	 Lawrence	 with	 the	 floodsof	the	Mississippi;	Rejoice!	that	.	.	.	the	distant	have	beendrawn	 near	 .	 .	 .	 that	 the	 North	 American	 continentswarms	 with	 hearts	 beating	 as	 if	 from	 one	 bosom,	 ofvoices	 speaking	 with	 but	 one	 tongue,	 of	 freemenconstituting	 one	 confederated	 and	 united	 republic	 ofbrethren,	never	to	rise	.	.	.	in	hostile	arms	.	.	.	to	fulfill	theblessed	 prophecy	 of	 ancient	 times,	 that	 war	 shall	 be	 nomore.7Charles	 Francis	 Adams	 was	 the	 youngest	 child	 of	 John	 Quincyand	Louisa	Catherine	Adams.	Like	his	father,	he	was	a	Harvardgraduate	 and	 lawyer.	 (NATIONAL	 PARKS	 SERVICE,	 ADAMSNATIONAL	HISTORICAL	PARK)After	 he	 had	 delivered	 his	 eulogy,	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisalearned	 to	 their	 delight	 that	 Charles	 Francis’s	 wife,	 Abby,	 hadgiven	 birth	 to	 their	 first	 child,	 a	 girl	 they	 named	 LouisaCatherine	 Adams.	 With	 John	 II’s	 two	 daughters,	 John	 Quincyand	 Louisa	 now	 had	 three	 granddaughters,	 but	 they	 stillawaited	 the	 birth	 of	 a	 grandson	 to	 carry	 the	 family	 name	 intothe	future.By	 the	 time	 John	 Quincy	 and	 Louisa	 began	 their	 return	 toWashington	for	the	opening	of	Congress	in	December	1831,	hiseloquence	had	resounded	across	the	nation,	with	both	his	July4	oration	and	eulogy	to	Monroe	having	been	published	in	mostAmerican	newspapers.	Old	political	friends	greeted	him	in	NewYork.	 In	 Philadelphia,	 Albert	 Gallatin,	 his	 associate	 in	 Ghent,asked	him	to	preside	at	the	Literary	Convention	then	in	sessionand	won	his	appointment	to	a	committee	drawing	up	plans	fora	 National	 Library	 and	 Scientific	 Institution.	 By	 the	 time	 hereached	 Washington,	 his	 political	 enemies	 in	 Congress	 fearedhe	 was	 mounting	 a	 surreptitious	 campaign	 to	 recapture	 thepresidency,	 and	 to	 prevent	 that	 possibility,	 they	 shunted	 himonto	the	least	important	committees.	Instead	of	the	Committeeon	Foreign	Affairs—“the	line	of	occupation	in	which	all	my	lifehas	 been	 passed”—hetheCommittee	on	Manufactures,	“for	which	I	feel	myself	not	to	bewell	qualified.	I	know	not	even	enough	of	it	to	form	an	estimateof	its	difficulties.”8found	 himself	 chairman	 ofAlthough	 any	 member	 of	 the	 House	 could	 introduce	 a	 billrelating	 to	 anything	 he	 chose,	 by	 tradition,	 members	 limitedthe	 bills	 they	 proposed	 to	 matters	 within	 the	 purview	 of	 theirown	 committees.	 To	 escape	 what	 he	 considered	 a	 proceduralstraitjacket,	John	Quincy	decided	to	flaunt	House	tradition	anduse	 the	 right	 of	 every	 committee	 chairman	 to	 read	 citizenpetitions	on	the	House	floor—regardless	of	their	content.On	 his	 first	 day	 in	 Congress,	 therefore,	 he	 hurled	 his	 firstthunderbolt	 on	 the	 floor	 of	 the	 House,	 shocking	 both	 sides	 ofthe	 aisle	 with	 not	 one	 but	 fifteen	 petitions	 from	 PennsylvaniaQuakers	 “praying	 for	 the	 abolition	 of	 slavery	 and	 the	 slavetrade	in	the	District	of	Columbia.”	Under	rules	adopted	by	theFirst	Congress	in	1790,	the	House	had	agreed	to	remain	silenton	 the	 question	 of	 abolition—largely	 because	 of	 SouthCarolina’s	 threat	 to	 walk	 out	 at	 the	 mention	 of	 abolition	 orslavery.	 The	 Capitol	 all	 but	 imploded	 under	 the	 tension	 of	 hiswords.	“I	was	not	more	than	five	minutes	on	my	feet	but	I	waslistened	 to	 with	 great	 attention,	 and	 when	 I	 sat	 down,	 itseemed	to	myself	as	if	I	had	performed	an	achievement.”9He	had	indeed	performed	an	achievement.	Although	most	ofthe	House	rose	as	one	to	roar	its	disapproval,	former	PresidentJohn	 Quincy	 Adams	 had	 burst	 open	 the	 doors	 of	 Congress	 toabolitionist	 voices	 for	 the	 first	 time	 in	 decades—voices	 thatother	 congressmen	 had	 routinely	 ignored	 for	 years	 and	 wouldnever	be	able	to	ignore	again.	Although	Pennsylvania	Quakerswere	 not	 his	 constituents,	 he	 had	 proclaimed	 himself	 arepresentative	 of	 the	 whole	 nation,	 and	 the	 whole	 nation	 nowtook	him	at	his	word,	inundating	him	with	petitions	they	knewtheir	own	representatives	would	never	accept.It	 was	 not	 a	 good	 time	 to	 be	 a	 proponent	 of	 abolition	 inAmerica,	 however.	 Only	 months	 before,	 a	 black	 preacher,	 NatTurner,	 had	 led	 an	 insurrection	 in	 Virginia,	 killing	 fifty-sevenwhite	 people,	 including	 eighteen	 women	 and	 twenty-fourchildren.	 Only	 swift	 retaliation	 by	 U.S.	 marines	 prevented	 theinsurrection	from	spreading	into	North	Carolina.	Although	onehundred	 blacks	 had	 been	 killed	 and	 twenty	 were	 laterexecuted,	 the	 specter	 of	 future	 black	 uprisings	 terrifiedsoutherners—and	many	northerners—and	southern	states	weretightening	 their	 slave	 codes	 to	 curb	 black	 mobility.	 Somerequired	 blacks	 to	 carry	 special	 passes	 for	 travel;	 othersbanned	 all	 travel	 by	 blacks	 except	 to	 church	 meetings.	 Tenstates	were	considering	or	had	proposed	changes	in	their	stateconstitutions	 to	 ban	 voluntary	 emancipation	 of	 slaves	 byslaveholders.Most	 House	 members	 responded	 to	 John	 Quincy’s	 petitionsfor	 abolition	 with	 such	 hostility	 that	 he	 feared	 for	 the	 veryfuture	of	the	nation.	He	had	entered	Congress	convinced	“thatthis	 federative	 Union	 was	 to	 last	 for	 ages,”	 but	 after	 hispresentation,	 “I	 now	 disbelieve	 its	 duration	 for	 twenty	 yearsand	doubt	its	continuance	for	five.”10In	 his	 self-appointed	 role	 as	 representative	 of	 the	 entirenation,	 John	 Quincy	 was	 determined	 to	 fulfill	 his	 obligation	 tohis	huge	constituency	by	attending	every	session	of	Congress—from	 its	 first	 day	 on	 December	 5,	 1831,	 to	 its	 last,	 in	 March1833—regardless	 of	 the	 weather	 or	 his	 own	 health.	 He	 threwhis	 mind	 and	 soul	 into	 his	 new	 work,	 studying	 rules	 andproceedings	 of	 previous	 Congresses	 and	 reviewing	 his	 lawtexts	and	the	language	of	laws.	His	work	brought	new	joy	intohis	 life—and	 misery	 into	 Louisa’s.	 Unlike	 his	 presidency,	 JohnQuincy’s	 role	 as	 a	 congressman	 did	 not	 generate	 the	 need	 toentertain	at	home,	thus	leaving	Louisa	with	so	little	to	do	thatshe	 took	 up	 fishing—and	 poetry	 writing.	 Even	 when	 JohnQuincy	returned	home,	his	mind,	his	heart,	his	soul	remained	inCongress.	The	only	joy	in	her	life	came	from	caring	for	her	twogranddaughters.As	much	as,	and	even	more	than,	anything	he	had	ever	donein	 his	 life,	 John	 Quincy’s	 work	 in	 Congress	 seemed	 to	 him	 theultimate	 patriotic	 service	 he	 could	 perform	 for	 his	 country.“The	forms	and	proceedings	of	the	House,”	he	exulted,	were	“avery	 striking	 exemplification	 of	 the	 magnificent	 grandeur	 ofthis	 nation	 and	 the	 sublime	 principles	 upon	 which	 ourgovernment	is	founded.”The	 colossal	 emblem	 of	 the	 Union	 over	 the	 Speaker’schair,	 the	 historic	 muse	 at	 the	 clock,	 the	 echoing	 pillarsof	the	hall	.	.	.	the	resolutions	and	amendments	betweenthe	 members	 and	 the	 chair,	 the	 calls	 of	 ayes	 and	 noes,with	 the	 different	 intonations	 .	 .	 .	 from	 the	 differentvoices,	the	gobbling	manner	of	the	clerk	in	reading	overthe	 names,	 the	 tone	 of	 the	 Speaker	 in	 announcing	 thevote,	 and	 the	 varied	 shades	 of	 pleasure	 and	 pain	 in	 thecountenances	of	the	members	on	hearing	it,	would	form	afine	subject	for	a	descriptive	poem.11As	 it	 had	 throughout	 his	 life,	 tragedy	 forced	 its	 way	 into	 hissublime	 existence	 when	 he	 returned	 to	 his	 home	 on	 F	 Streetone	 evening	 to	 find	 John	 II	 in	 a	 drunken	 stupor,	 still	 anotherinheritor	of	the	disease	that	had	plagued	his	maternal	forbearsfor	generations.	And	then,	on	March	12,	John	Quincy’s	belovedyounger	brother,	Thomas	Boylston,	died	of	the	family	affliction,leaving	 John	 Quincy	 the	 only	 surviving	 son	 of	 an	 AmericanFounding	 Father.	 Thomas’s	 death	 left	 John	 Quincy	 the	 solesupporttheirdysfunctional	children.aafor	 his	 brother’s	 spendthrift	 wife	 andBefore	 long,	 John	 Quincy	 realized	 that	 Congress	 had	 nottransduced	his	petitions	for	abolition	into	legislative	proposals;although	he	kept	presenting	them,	he	knew	he	would	need	hiscommittee’s	support	to	produce	actual	bills	for	enactment	intolaws.	 He	 soon	 mastered	 all	 the	 intricacies	 of	 Americaneconomics	 and	 manufacturing—especially	 cotton	 and	 woolentiesgoods	 manufacturing—and	 discoveredbetween	 manufacturing	 and	 a	 broad	 range	 of	 other	 issues,including	foreign	affairs,	tariffs,	and	slavery.	He	now	knew	theway	to	broaden	the	scope	of	his	committee	proceedings,	usingthe	most	obvious	issue	first:	tariffs.intricatetheFor	 a	 while,	 high	 tariffs	 on	 imported	 English	 cotton	 goodshad	 protected	 small	 New	 England	 manufacturers	 againstcompetition	from	British	imports,	but	the	tariffs	that	protectedNew	 England	 mills	 against	 British	 competition	 hurt	 southerncotton	 growers,	 who	 shipped	 more	 of	 their	 crop	 to	 the	 bigBritish	cotton	mills	than	they	did	to	New	England.	As	high	U.S.tariffs	cut	British	textile	sales	to	America,	British	mills	boughtless	cotton	from	the	American	South	and	left	planters	with	toomany	slaves	to	support	for	the	amount	of	cotton	they	picked.John	 Quincyproposed—and	 Congressapproved—acompromise	tariff	bill	that	reduced	duties	on	British	goods	witha	high	content	of	southern	cotton,	but	the	British	mills	resentedthe	selective	tariffs,	saying	they	would	not	submit	to	a	foreigngovernment’s	dictating	their	sales	policies.	Responding	to	theirBritish	 clients,	 southern	 planters	 demanded	 an	 end	 to	 thetariffs,	 and	 South	 Carolina’s	 governor	 called	 a	 specialNullification	 Convention	 in	 November	 1832,	 which	 declaredfederal	 tariff	 laws	 null	 and	 void	 in	 South	 Carolina,	 prohibitedcollection	 of	 federal	 tariffs	 in	 the	 state,	 and	 threatened	 SouthCarolina’s	 secession	 from	 the	 Union	 if	 federal	 officials	 triedusing	 force	 to	 collect	 tariffs.	 A	 week	 later,	 the	 South	 Carolinalegislature	authorized	raising	a	military	force	and	appropriatedfunds	for	arms.	Civil	war	seemed	imminent.The	 state’s	 declaration	 and	 mobilization	 shocked	 the	 nationand	left	even	President	Andrew	Jackson,	a	champion	of	states’rights,	 aghast.	 “The	 nation	 will	 be	 preserved,”	 he	 declaredangrily.	 “Perpetuity	 is	 stamped	 upon	 the	 Constitution	 by	 theblood	of	our	fathers.	Nullification	therefore	means	insurrectionand	war,	and	the	other	states	have	a	right	to	put	it	down.”12South	 Carolinians	 responded	 with	 huge	 demonstrations	 inCharleston.	 South	 Carolina	 senator	 Robert	 Hayne	 resignedfrom	 the	 Senate	 to	 run	 for	 governor	 of	 his	 state	 and	 lead	 thefight	for	nullification.	Vice	President	Calhoun	resigned	his	postand	 won	 election	 as	 Hayne’s	 replacement	 in	 the	 Senate,although	 rumors	 swept	 through	 Charleston	 that	 he	 intendedreturning	to	become	first	president	of	a	Southern	Confederacy.On	 December	 5,	 1832,	 Jackson	 overwhelmed	 John	 Quincy’sformer	 secretary	 of	 state,	 Henry	 Clay,	 in	 the	 presidentialelection,	 with	 New	 York’s	 Martin	 Van	 Buren	 winning	 the	 vicepresidency.	Former	vice	president	Calhoun	from	South	Carolinawon	 reelection	 to	 the	 Senate.	 Five	 days	 after	 his	 reelection,Jackson	 issued	 a	 presidential	 proclamation	 declaring	 “thepower	 to	 annul	 a	 law	 of	 the	 United	 States,	 assumed	 by	 onestate,	 incompatible	 with	 the	 existence	 of	 the	 Union”	 andwarning	of	“dreadful	consequence”	for	the	“instigators”	of	theSouth	 Carolina	 Nullification	 Act.	 “Disunion	 .	 .	 .	 is	 treason,”	 hetold	the	people	of	South	Carolina.	“On	your	unhappy	heads	willinevitably	 fall	 all	 raw	 evils	 of	 the	 conflict	 you	 force	 upon	 thegovernment	of	your	country.”13The	 summer	 recess	 postponed	 further	 congressional	 debateover	 nullification	 until	 fall,	 and	 during	 that	 time,	 HarvardUniversity	 voted	 to	 grant	 President	 Jackson	 an	 honorarydegree.	Although	firmly	on	Jackson’s	side	in	the	battle	againstnullification,	 John	 Quincy	 refused	 to	 attend	 the	 ceremonieshonoring	the	President.	“As	myself	an	affectionate	child	of	ourAlma	Mater,”	he	explained,	“I	would	not	be	present	to	witnessher	 disgrace	 in	 presenting	 her	 highest	 literary	 honors	 upon	 abarbarian	 who	 could	 not	 write	 a	 sentence	 of	 grammar	 andhardly	could	spell	his	own	name.”14Although	 the	 summer	 began	 disagreeably,	 it	 ended	 in	 joy,when	 Charles	 Francis	 and	 his	 wife	 realized	 what	 had	 becomeone	 of	 John	 Quincy’s	 cherished	 dreams—the	 birth	 of	 his	 firstgrandson.	They	named	him	John	Quincy	Adams	II	and	ensuredthe	 preservation	 of	 the	 legendary	 Adams	 name	 in	 the	 UnitedStates	 for	 at	 least	 another	 generation.	 “There	 is	 no	 passionmore	 deeply	 seated	 in	 my	 bosom,”	 John	 Quincy	 exulted,	 “thanthe	 longing	 for	 posterity	 worthily	 to	 support	 my	 own	 and	 myfather’s	 name.	 .	 .	 .	 There	 is	 now	 one	 son	 of	 the	 nextgeneration.”15John	 Quincy	 returned	 to	 Congress	 refreshed	 and	 ready	 tobattle	 nullification,	 even	 if	 it	 meant	 strengthening	 ties	 toPresident	 Jackson.	 On	 January	 16,	 1833,	 with	 civil	 warthreatening,	Jackson	asked	Congress	to	grant	him	authority	touse	 military	 force	 if	 necessary	 to	 crush	 the	 nullifiers	 andenforce	revenue-	and	tariff-collection	laws.	Congress	complied,with	John	Quincy	voting	in	favor.	Jackson	signed	the	Force	Billlaw	 on	 March	 2	 and	 frightened	 South	 Carolina’sintolegislature	into	rescinding	its	Nullification	Act.After	John	Quincy	had	supported	the	President	by	voting	forthe	 Force	 Bill,	 he	 leaped	 back	 across	 the	 political	 fence	 tooppose	efforts	by	Jacksonian	Democrats	to	mollify	the	South	byeliminating	tariffs.“Our	 slaves,”	 explained	 Georgia’s	 Democratic	 congressmanAugustus	 Smith	 Clayton	 in	 arguing	 for	 tariff	 cuts,	 “are	 ourmachinery,	and	we	have	as	good	a	right	to	profit	by	them	as	dothe	northern	men	to	profit	by	the	machinery	they	employ.”16John	 Quincy	 listened	 to	 Clayton’s	 appeal	 in	 disbelief,	 thephrase	 “our	 machinery”	 resounding	 in	 his	 head	 until	 heexploded	in	outrage.“That	 machinery,”John	 Quincy	 roaredin	 response,“sometimes	exerts	self-moving	power!	”17With	 Nat	 Turner’s	 insurrection	 still	 fresh	 in	 the	 minds	 ofmany	northern	as	well	as	southern	congressmen,	the	House	allbut	 shouted	 John	 Quincy	 down,	 while	 another	 South	 Carolinamember,	 William	 Drayton,	 cried	 out,	 “The	 member	 fromMassachusetts	has	thrown	a	firebrand	into	the	hall.”“It	 is	 not	 I	 who	 have	 thrown	 the	 firebrand,”	 John	 Quincyshouted	 back.	 “The	 Nullification	 Ordinance	 is	 the	 firebrand.”18In	the	end,	northerners	capitulated	by	voting	for	further	tariffcuts,	as	did	Henry	Clay,	who	had	originally	based	his	AmericanSystem	on	high	tariffs	but	was	now	licking	his	wounds	from	thepresidential	 race	 and	 seeking	 to	 court	 southern	 votes	 for	 thenext	election.Before	 the	 presidential	 election	 of	 1834,	 tragedy	 struck	 theAdams	family	again.	In	the	autumn	of	that	year,	John	II	suffereda	 series	 of	 seizures—a	 consequence	 of	 alcoholism—and	 lapsedinto	a	coma.	By	the	time	his	father	reached	his	bedside,	he	wasclose	 to	 death,	 and	 indeed,	 he	 died	 the	 next	 day,	 October	 22,without	 recognizing	 his	 father.	 Besides	 his	 wife	 and	 twodaughters,	 he	 left	 debts	 of	 $15,000	 (which	 John	 Quincy	 paid).John	Quincy	and	Louisa	turned	to	each	other	for	comfort,	withJohn	 Quincy	 calling	 his	 wife	 “the	 dearest	 partner	 of	 my	 life.”Both	doted	on	their	granddaughters,	with	John	Quincy	stoppingat	 his	 dead	 son’s	 house	 each	 day	 on	 the	 way	 to	 the	 Capitol	 tohelp	 the	 older	 girl	 learn	 her	 arithmetic.	 John	 Quincy	 wouldsupport	 his	 granddaughters	 and	 their	 mother	 as	 long	 as	 helived.In	 December	 1835,	 President	 Jackson	 sent	 Congress	 acurious	 and	 unexpected	 message:	 an	 Englishman,	 JamesSmithson,	 had	 left	 a	 bequest	 of	 about	 $500,000	 to	 the	 UnitedStates	 “to	 found	 at	 Washington,	 under	 the	 name	 of	 theSmithsonian	Institution,	an	Establishment	for	the	increase	anddiffusion	of	knowledge	among	men.”19	Son	of	the	first	Duke	ofNorthumberland,	 Smithson	 had,	 ironically,	 been	 the	 half-brother	of	General	Hugh	Lord	Percy,	the	British	commander	atthe	 Battle	 of	 Lexington	 in	 1775.	 Although	 both	 houses	 ofCongress	 licked	 their	 collective	 chops	 at	 the	 possibilities	 forpersonal	 profits,	 the	 House	 acceded	 to	 John	 Quincy’s	 fierceinterest	 in	 science	 and	 named	 him	 chairman	 of	 the	 committeeto	determine	how	to	disburse	the	money.generated.	 HeBesieged	 by	 schools	 and	 colleges	 for	 shares	 of	 the	 money,John	 Quincy	 ruled	 out	 disbursement	 of	 any	 of	 the	 principal,reserving	it	entirely	to	the	government	and	limiting	spending	tointerestcombining	 GeorgeWashington’s	 vision	 of	 creating	 “institutions	 for	 the	 generaldiffusion	 of	 knowledge”	 with	 his	 own	 vision	 of	 nationalastronomical	 observatories—the	 “lighthouses	 in	 the	 sky”	 thathis	 political	 opponents	 had	 ridiculed	 when	 he	 was	 President.He	called	“the	link	between	earth	and	heaven	.	.	.	the	means	ofacquiring	knowledge	.	.	.	therefore	the	greatest	benefit	that	canintendedbe	conferred	upon	mankind.”20	He	was	now	prepared	to	fighthis	 opponents	 in	 ways	 that	 had	 eluded	 him	 when	 he	 wasPresident.South	 Carolina	 senator	 John	 Calhoun,	 the	 former	 vicepresident,	assailed	John	Quincy’s	proposal	as	federal	intrusionin	 an	 area	 the	 Tenth	 Amendment	 reserved	 for	 the	 states.	 Hepointed	 out	 correctly	 that	 the	 Constitutional	 Convention	 hadtwice	 rejected	 efforts	 to	 give	 the	 government	 powers	 toestablish	 a	 national	 university.	 John	 Quincy	 countered,however,	 that	 there	 were	 no	 constitutional	 restrictions	 onestablishing	research	institutions—nor	did	the	framers	restrictthe	 national	 government	 from	 establishing	 any	 kind	 ofinstitution	in	the	District	of	Columbia.	John	Quincy	won	the	day,with	both	houses	deferring	to	his	constitutional	scholarship	andapproving	 his	 bill	 to	 establish	 the	 Smithsonian	 Institution	 as	 apublic	 institution	 that	 remains	 in	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 Americanpeople	to	this	day.Despite	 President	 Jackson’s	 proclamation	 that	 nullificationwas	 tantamount	 to	 treason,	 nullification	 fervor	 continuedspreading	 in	 the	 South,	 and	 northerners	 responded	 withstepped-up	demands	for	abolition.	Peering	into	the	future,	JohnQuincy	warned	that	“a	dissolution	of	the	Union	for	the	cause	ofslavery	 would	 be	 followed	 by	 .	 .	 .	 a	 war	 between	 the	 twosevered	 portions	 of	 the	 Union.	 It	 seems	 to	 me	 that	 its	 resultmust	 be	 the	 extirpation	 of	 slavery	 from	 this	 whole	 continentand	desolating	as	this	course	of	events	.	.	.	must	be,	so	gloriouswould	be	its	final	issue,	that,	as	God	shall	judge	me,	I	dare	notsay	that	it	is	not	to	be	desired.”21As	petitions	demanding	an	end	to	slavery	increased,	he	foundabolitionists	as	prepared	as	slavery	proponents	to	dissolve	theUnion	 to	 further	 their	 cause.	 For	 several	 years,	 therefore,beginning	 with	 the	 debate	 over	 the	 Missouri	 Compromise,	 hehad	 argued	 that	 the	 Constitution	 failed	 to	 give	 Congress	 anypowers	 to	 interfere	 with	 slavery	 in	 any	 state	 or	 territory	 inwhich	 it	 already	 existed.	 It	 could	 prevent	 its	 establishment	 instates	 and	 territories	 where	 it	 did	 not	 exist	 but	 could	 notabolish	 it	 where	 it	 already	 did	 exist.	 Abolitionists	 argued,however,	 that	 Congress	 could	 at	 least	 eliminate	 slavery	 in	 theDistrict	 of	 Columbia,	 where	 it	 had	 powers	 to	 legislate	 andgovern,	unrestricted	by	the	Constitution.In	 the	 wake	 of	 three	 House	 resolutions	 in	 1836,	 however,John	 Quincy	 completely	 changed	 his	 stance	 on	 abolition.	 Thefirst	 two	 resolutions	 declared	 Congress	 without	 constitutionalpowers	to	interfere	in	any	way	with	slavery	in	any	of	the	statesand	 that	 it	 “ought	 not”	 do	 so	 in	 the	 District	 of	 Columbia.	 JohnQuincy	voted	for	both,	conceding	that	the	Constitution	offeredno	clear	guidance	on	abolition	in	the	District	of	Columbia.	Thethird	 resolution,	 however,	 stepped	 beyond	 the	 abolition	 issueby	 clearly	 abridging	 free	 speech,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 all	 butexploded	with	rage	as	he	listened:All	petitions,	memorials,	propositions,	or	papers,	relatingin	any	way,	or	to	any	extent	whatsoever,	to	the	subject	ofslavery	 or	 the	 abolition	 of	 slavery	 shall,	 without	 beingeither	 printed	 or	 referred,	 be	 laid	 on	 the	 table,	 and	 thatno	further	action	whatever	shall	be	had	thereon	.22Although	 John	 Quincy	 shot	 to	 his	 feet	 for	 recognition,Speaker	 James	 K.	 Polk,	 a	 Tennessee	 slaveholder,	 ignored	 himand	 recognized	 only	 southern	 congressmen.	 John	 Quincyhowled	for	recognition,	but	Polk	looked	the	other	way,	and	aftersoutherners	 had	 finished	 their	 presentations,	 he	 put	 the	 thirdresolution	 to	 a	 vote.	 The	 House	 approved	 it	 95–82,	 and	 theSpeaker	 shut	 off	 all	 further	 debate,	 preventing	 John	 Quincyfrom	saying	a	word.“Am	I	gagged	or	am	I	not,”	John	Quincy	shouted	in	disbelief,inadvertently	 giving	 the	 new	 rule	 its	 historic	 name—the	 GagRule.	 Southerners	 tried	 shouting	 him	 down	 with	 cries	 of“Order!	.	.	.	Order!!”	The	Speaker	called	out	over	the	din,	“Themotion	 is	 not	 debatable,”	 and	 when	 John	 Quincy	 appealed	 tothe	 House	 to	 overrule	 the	 Speaker,	 it	 sustained	 the	 Speaker109–89.	 When	 the	 clerk	 called	 the	 Adams	 name,	 he	 stood:	 “Ifthe	House	will	allow	me	five	minutes	in	time—”“Order!”	shouted	southerners.	“Order!”“I	hold	the	resolution—”	John	Quincy	shouted	above	the	roar,“I	 hold	 the	 resolution	 to	 be	 in	 direct	 violation	 of	 theConstitution	 of	 the	 United	 States,	 of	 the	 rules	 of	 this	 House,and	of	the	rights	of	my	constituents.”23fortwelve	 yearsThe	 enmity	 he	 encountered	 in	 the	 House	 grew	 vicious—spiteful	 at	 times.	 When	 he	 asked	 the	 House	 to	 recognize	 thedeath	 of	 William	 Wirt,	 who	 had	 served	 the	 nation	 as	 attorneygeneralthe	 Monroe	 and	 Adamsinadministrations,	 the	 House	 refused.	 John	 Quincy	 called	 therefusal	 mean-spirited.	 “I	 place	 in	 perpetual	 opposition	 to	 meand	 to	 everything	 that	 I	 propose	 or	 support,”	 he	 growled,“twenty-nine	members	of	the	House	and	six	of	the	Senate;	andfor	 all	 this	 and	 its	 consequences	 I	 have	 no	 compensation	 .	 .	 .but	the	bare	consciousness	of	having	done	my	duty.”24As	 Speaker	 of	 the	 House,	 James	 K.	 Polk	 of	 Tennessee	 tried	 tosilence	 John	 Quincy	 Adams	 with	 the	 Gag	 Rule,	 which	 bannedmention	 of	 the	 word	 “slavery”	 and	 presentation	 of	 citizenpetitions	to	abolish	the	institution.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)When	 he	 opposed	 Ohio’s	 forcible	 takeover	 of	 disputedterritory	in	Michigan,	John	Quincy	reported	that	“the	people	inthe	 territory	 of	 Michigan	 were	 grateful	 to	 me,”	 but	 hepredicted	 that	 “the	 people	 of	 Ohio,	 Indiana,	 and	 Illinois	 willhate	me	with	perfect	hatred	for	crossing	their	interests.”	Of	hisefforts	 in	 the	 House,	 he	 concluded,	 “Never	 in	 my	 life	 have	 Itaken	 in	 public	 controversies	 a	 part	 more	 suicidal	 to	 my	 ownpopularity.”25The	 Gag	 Rule	 infuriated	 Americans	 across	 the	 North	 andparts	of	the	West	as	much	as	it	did	John	Quincy,	however,	andhundreds	of	thousands	of	petitioners	rallied	to	his	side,	arguingthat	 if	 the	 House	 could	 gag	 the	 reading	 of	 petitions	 againstslavery,	it	could	gag	petitions	against	or	for	anything.	Women’srights	groups	joined	the	protests	and	added	their	own	petitionsto	 the	 flood	 already	 inundating	 Congress.	 When	 Maryland’sBenjamin	 Chew	 Howard	 objected	 to	 the	 “unseemliness”	 ofwomen	 presenting	 a	 petition,	 John	 Quincy	 sharpened	 histongue	and	leaped	for	the	rhetorical	kill:“Why,	does	it	follow,”	he	boomed,	“that	women	are	fitted	fornothing	but	the	cares	of	domestic	life,	for	bearing	children	andcooking	 the	 food	 of	 a	 family,	 devoting	 all	 their	 time	 to	 thedomestic	circle—to	promoting	the	immediate	personal	comfortof	 their	 husbands,	 brothers,	 and	 sons?”	 Louisa	 had	 apparentlytaught	 her	 husband	 to	 alter	 his	 thinking	 if	 not	 his	 ways.	 “Themere	 departure	 of	 woman	 from	 the	 duties	 of	 the	 domesticcircle,	 far	 from	 being	 a	 reproach	 to	 her,	 is	 a	 virtue	 of	 thehighest	 order,	 when	 it	 is	 done	 from	 purity	 of	 motive,	 byappropriate	 means,	 and	 the	 purpose	 of	 good.”	 He	 went	 on	 toin	 hisread	 a	 petition	 opposing	 slaveryconstituencythisdiscreditable?”	 he	 asked,	 before	 thundering	 his	 oft-repeatedconviction:	“I	do	believe	slavery	to	be	a	sin	before	the	sight	ofGod.”26Plymouth,	 Massachusetts.from	 women“IsofRecognized	 by	 then	 as	 an	 authority	 on	 parliamentary	 rules,John	 Quincy	 kept	 finding	 ways	 around	 the	 Gag	 Rule,	 at	 onepoint	 asking	 for	 recognition	 to	 read	 the	 prayers	 of	 a	 group	 ofMassachusetts	 women.	 When	 a	 House	 member	 objected,	 JohnQuincy	 responded	 by	 explaining	 that	 the	 women	 were	 notpetitioning	 but	 simply	 praying	 for	 “the	 greatest	 improvementthat	can	possibly	be	effected	in	the	condition	of	the	human	race—the	abolition	of	slavery.	”27	The	House	exploded	in	collectiveanger	 at	 his	 flagrant	 violation	 of	 the	 ban	 on	 reading	 petitionsagainst	 slavery	 and	 even	 uttering	 the	 word	 “slavery”	 incongressional	 debates.	 John	 Quincy	 smiled	 wryly,	 reiteratingthat	 he	 had	 not	 read	 a	 petition	 containing	 the	 word	 “slavery”(once	more	uttering	the	word)	but	a	prayer	of	women	who,	likethe	members’	own	mothers,	were	offended	by	“the	sinfulness	ofslavery	 [again,	 the	 forbidden	 word!]	 and	 keenly	 aggrieved	 byits	existence	in	a	part	of	our	country	over	which—”Choking	 with	 anger	 by	 then,	 South	 Carolina’s	 ThomasPinckney	 interrupted	 to	 charge	 John	 Quincy	 with	 reading	 apetition.	“Point	of	order!”	Pinckney	bellowed.“—keenly	 aggrieved	 by	 its	 existence	 in	 a	 part	 of	 the	 countryover	 which	 Congress	 possesses	 exclusive	 jurisdiction	 in	 allcases	whatever—”“Order!	Order!”“—do	most	earnestly	petition	your	honorable	body—”“Mr.	Speaker!	I	rise	on	a	point	order!”“—immediately	to	abolish	slavery	in	the	District	of	Columbia—”“Mr.	Speaker!	A	call	to	order!”“Order!	Order!”“Take	your	seat!”	the	Speaker	ordered	John	Quincy.“—and,”	 John	 Quincy	 began	 to	 sit,	 accelerating	 his	 words	 ashe	 did,	 “to-declare-every-human-being-free-who-sets-foot-upon-its-soil.”28Increasingly	stifled	by	the	Gag	Rule	and	its	proponents,	JohnQuincy	finally	ran	out	of	parliamentary	maneuvers	and	resortedto	 rhetorical	 trickery	 to	 confuse,	 embarrass,	 and	 essentiallyin	 February,	 heemasculate	 his	 political	 enemies.	 Earlypresented	 two	 petitions,	 one	 from	 nine	 unnamed	 women	 andthe	 other	 from	 actual	 slaves.	 As	 he	 knew	 they	 would,	 thesoutherners	 erupted	 in	 collective	 fury,	 with	 one	 of	 themresolving	that	“infamous	women	.	.	.	[and]	slaves	do	not	possessthe	right	of	petition	secured	to	the	people	of	the	United	Statesby	the	Constitution.”	The	same	congressman	resolved,	as	well,that	any	member	who	presents	a	petition	from	slaves	should	beconsidered	“unfriendly	to	the	Union,”	and	his	third	resolution—its	content	almost	comical—cited	“the	Hon.	John	Q.	Adams”	ashaving	“disclaimed	all	design	of	doing	anything	disrespectful	tothis	House.”	In	effect,	it	accepted	an	apology	from	John	Quincythat	he	had	never	offered.	To	prolong	the	charade,	John	Quincyasked	“for	an	opportunity	for	a	full	hearing	in	my	defense.”	Heinsisted	 he	 had	 never	 apologized	 and	 resented	 the	 accusationof	having	done	so.	After	the	laughter	subsided,	even	Gag	Rulesponsors	relented,	recognizing	that	refusal	to	hear	one	of	theirown	 colleagues	 might	 prevent	 each	 of	 them	 from	 defendingthemselves	in	the	future.Focusing	 on	 the	 constitutional	 right	 of	 petition	 rather	 thanabolition,	 John	 Quincy	 asked,	 “Will	 you	 put	 the	 right	 ofpetitioning,	of	craving	for	help	and	mercy	and	protection	on	thefooting	of	political	privileges?	.	.	.	No	despot	of	any	age	or	climehas	 ever	 denied	 this	 humble	 privilege	 to	 the	 poorest	 ormeanest	of	human	creatures.	.	.	.	That	would	be	a	sad	day,	Sir	..	.	when	a	vote	should	pass	this	House	that	would	not	receive	apetition	 from	 slaves.	 .	 .	 .	 When	 the	 principle	 is	 once	 begun	 oflimiting	the	right	of	petition,	where	would	it	stop?”John	 Quincy	 then	 accused	 the	 sponsor	 of	 the	 resolutions	 ofhaving	accused	the	nine	unnamed	women	of	prostitution.“I	 did	 not	 say	 they	 were	 prostitutes,”	 the	 congressmanprotested	in	his	southern	drawl.	“I	have	not	said	I	know	thosewomen!”“I	 am	 glad	 to	 hear	 the	 honorable	 gentleman	 disclaim	 anyknowledge	 of	 them,”	 John	 Quincy	 smirked,	 “for	 I	 had	 beengoing	to	ask,	if	they	were	infamous	women,	who	it	was	that	hadmade	 them	 infamous.	 Not	 their	 color,	 I	 believe,	 but	 theirmasters!	I	have	heard	it	said	in	proof	of	that	fact	.	.	.	that	in	theSouth	 there	 existed	 great	 resemblances	 between	 the	 progenyof	the	colored	people	and	the	white	men	who	claim	possessionof	 them.	 Thus,	 perhaps	 the	 charge	 of	 infamous	 might	 beretorted	on	those	who	made	it,	as	reflecting	on	themselves.”As	 southerners	 exploded	 with	 rage,	 “Old	 Man	 Eloquent,”	 asthe	press	now	called	John	Quincy,	could	shout	touché.	It	was	arhetorical	triumph	like	no	other	in	congressional	history	at	thetime.	Even	the	Register	of	Debates	saw	fit	to	note	the	responseto	John	Quincy’s	words:	“Great	agitation	in	the	House.”29Although	 the	 House	 voted	 down	 resolutions	 to	 censure	 JohnQuincy,	 it	 nonetheless	 voted	 to	 deprive	 slaves	 of	 the	 right	 topetition,	 thus	 eroding	 the	 sanctity	 of	 the	 Constitution	 anddepriving	 most	 African	 Americans	 of	 the	 privileges	 andprotections	of	the	Bill	of	Rights.“Vengeance	is	mine,	say	the	South!”	warned	a	printed	sheetsomeone	slipped	under	John	Quincy’s	door.	Beneath	a	drawingof	a	whip	were	the	words,	“Flog	and	Spare	Not!”	Another	letteraddressed	 him	 as	 “Sir”	 but	 warned	 that	 “your	 conduct	 .	 .	 .	 issuch	as	to	draw	upon	you	the	indignation	of	the	South.	.	.	.	Therod	is	cut	that	will	make	your	old	hide	smart	for	your	insidiousattempt	 on	 southern	 rights.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 ever	 you	 dare	 to	 vindicateabolition	again	you	will	be	lynched	.	.	.	drawing	you	from	yourseat	in	the	House	by	force.	So	be	on	your	guard.”30Thousands	 of	 northerners,	 however,	 wrote	 to	 support	 him,calling	 him	 the	 “Sage	 of	 Quincy”	 and	 urging	 him	 to	 “fear	 notsouthern	insolence.	.	.	.	We	will	defend	and	sustain	you.”31The	death	threats	terrified	Louisa,	and	she,	Charles	Francis,and	Charles	Francis’s	wife,	Abby,	pleaded	with	John	Quincy	toretreat	 from	 his	 war	 with	 what	 he	 called	 the	 “slaveocracy.”They	could	do	nothing	to	dissuade	him.	At	sixty-nine,	he	was	onfire,	breathing	the	flames	of	freedom	his	father	had	lit	and	thathe	 believed	 he	 had	 to	 maintain.	 As	 they	 approached	 theirfortieth	 wedding	 anniversary,	 it	 was	 Louisa,	 not	 John	 Quincy,who	turned	to	poetry	and	prayer	for	solace:Grant,	grant!	O	God	a	helping	handAnd	save	us	when	we	call;Protect	us	’gainst	the	murderer’s	hand;Support	us	lest	we	fall.32“I	walk	on	the	edge	of	a	precipice	in	every	step	I	take,”	JohnQuincy	 admitted,	 but	 defying	 age,	 aching	 joints,	 and	 thedeterioration	of	his	body,	he	found	renewed	strength	in	battle.He	 had	 never	 been	 to	 war	 and	 had	 always	 personified	 theperfect	 diplomat,	 but	 he	 now	 seemed	 fearless,	 felt	 fearless—like	a	knight	charging	into	battle.He	pursued	his	daily	routine	of	walking	vigorously—defiantly—to	 and	 from	 his	 house	 and	 the	 Capitol—and	 swimming	 thePotomac	nude.	Occasionally,	he	misjudged	his	physical	strengthand	agility	and	tripped	and	fell,	suffering	cuts	and	bruises	andeven	 dislocating	 his	 shoulder	 once—but	 he	 never	 missed	 asession	of	Congress.	He	believed	the	future	of	the	nation	was	atstake,	 and	 he	 returned	 day	 after	 day	 to	 fight	 his	 war	 againstthe	 “slaveocracy.”	 And	 Quincy	 voters	 sent	 him	 back	 toCongress	again	and	again.	Louisa	fretted	about	his	health	andsafety,	 but	 she	 had	 lost	 all	 influence	 over	 him	 and	 could	 donothing	 to	 restrain	 him.	 He	 was	 unstoppable—a	 meteorspiraling	 out	 of	 control	 in	 the	 political	 firmament.	 By	 1836,Charles	Francis	and	Abigail	had	given	John	Quincy	and	Louisaa	 second	 grandson,	 Charles	 Francis	 Jr.,	 whose	 presence	 onlyadded	to	his	grandfather’s	determination	to	defeat	injustice	inthe	nation	his	grandchildren	would	inherit.With	 each	 session,	 his	 opponents	 renewed	 the	 Gag	 Rule	 totry	 to	 silence	 his	 assault	 on	 slavery,	 but	 he	 sidestepped	 theirobstructions	 and	 found	 another	 target:	 the	 admission	 of	 slavestates	into	the	Union.	A	fierce	advocate	of	westward	expansionwhen	 he	 was	 President—indeed,	 he	 had	 offered	 to	 buy	 Texasfrom	 Mexico—he	 now	 led	 the	 fight	 to	 block	 Texan	 appeals	 tojoin	 the	 Union.	 With	 a	 population	 of	 30,000	 Americanfrontiersmen	 and	 5,000	 slaves,	 Texas	 had	 always	 stood	 apartfrom	 the	 rest	 of	 Mexico,	 and	 when	 the	 Mexican	 governmentabolished	 slavery	 in	 all	 Mexican	 territory	 including	 Texas,Texans	 declared	 independence	 and	 recruited	 an	 army	 thatdefeated	Mexican	forces.	They	then	formed	a	government	thatrestored	slavery	and	applied	for	U.S.	recognition	as	a	first	steptoward	 joining	 the	 United	 States.	 With	 Mexico	 still	 claimingsovereignty	 over	 the	 territory,	 U.S.	 recognition	 of	 Texanindependence	 would	 have	 meant	 war—not	 only	 with	 Mexicobut	with	England	and	France,	which	had	both	outlawed	slaveryand	 the	 slave	 trade	 and	 pledged	 to	 stand	 by	 Mexico	 inenforcing	the	ban	on	slavery.John	 Quincy	 shot	 out	 of	 his	 seat	 to	 oppose	 recognition	 ofTexan	 independence,	 knowing	 it	 was	 a	 prelude	 to	 annexationand,	 therefore,	 an	 end	 to	 the	 slave-state/free-state	 balanceworked	 out	 in	 the	 Missouri	 Compromise.	 Annexation	 of	 Texas,he	 knew,	 would	 give	 slave	 states	 a	 majority	 in	 both	 houses	 ofCongress	 and	 end	 all	 hopes	 for	 emancipation	 in	 the	 UnitedStates.Inrecognition	 of	 Texanindependence,	he	also	found	a	perfect	weapon	against	the	GagRule:	 “Mr.	 Chairman,”	 he	 thundered.	 “Are	 you	 ready	 for	 allthese	 wars?	 A	 Mexican	 war?	 A	 war	 with	 Britain,	 if	 not	 withFrance?	 A	 general	 Indian	 war?	 A	 servile	 war?	 And,	 as	 anfight	 againstleadingtheinevitable	consequence	of	them	all,	a	civil	war?”	The	South	andSouth-west,	 he	 warned,	 would	 be	 “the	 battlefield	 upon	 whichthe	 last	 great	 conflict	 must	 be	 fought	 between	 slavery	 andemancipation.”I	 avow	 it	 as	 my	 solemn	 belief	 that	 the	 annexation	 of	 anindependent	 foreign	 power	 to	 this	 government	 would	 beipso	facto	a	dissolution	of	this	Union.	.	.	.	The	question	iswhether	a	foreign	nation	[Texas]	.	.	.	a	nation	damned	toeverlasting	 fame	 by	 the	 reinstitution	 of	 that	 detestedsystem	 of	 slavery,	 after	 it	 had	 been	 abolished	 within	 itsborders,	 should	 be	 admitted	 into	 union	 with	 a	 nation	 offreemen.	For,	Sir,	that	name,	thank	God,	is	still	ours!33“Take	 your	 seat!”	 the	 Speaker	 ordered,	 trying	 to	 apply	 theGag	 Rule,	 but	 John	 Quincy	 shouted	 back,	 “Am	 I	 gagged?	 Am	 Igagged?”	 He	 then	 appealed	 to	 the	 House	 membership,	 and	 itoverruled	 the	 Speaker	 to	 ensure	 open	 debate	 on	 the	 Texasquestion—and	 once	 they	 opened	 the	 debate	 on	 Texas,	 theyautomatically	reopened	the	debate	on	slavery.	“The	annexationof	 Texas,”	 John	 Quincy	 thundered	 in	 response,	 “and	 theproposed	war	with	Mexico	are	all	one	and	the	same	thing.”34Humiliated	 by	 John	 Quincy’s	 rhetorical	 tactics,	 southernersbegan	to	shout,	“Expel	him!”	whenever	he	spoke.	“Expel	him!”they	 repeated,	 as	 he	 continued—sometimes	 prolonging	 hisdiatribes	 against	 slavery	 for	 hours	 and,	 in	 one	 instance,	 forparts	of	fifteen	days.John	 Quincy	 went	 beyond	 the	 halls	 of	 Congress	 to	 theAmerican	 people	 and	 became	 a	 national	 presence,	 a	 force	 forjustice	 and	 progress	 that	 he	 had	 never	 been	 before—even	 asPresident	of	the	United	States.	Invited	to	speak	throughout	theNortheast	 and	 parts	 of	 the	 West,	 he	 used	 traditional	 July	 4orations,	 along	 with	 eulogies	 on	 the	 deaths	 of	 the	 Marquis	 deLafayette	 and	 James	 Madison,	 to	 echo	 the	 words	 of	 GeorgeWashington	 and	 other	 Founding	 Fathers.	 Although	 silent	 onslavery,	all	had	inveighed	against	involvement	in	foreign	wars,and	 John	 Quincy	 now	 connected	 the	 two	 issues.	 John	 Quincyappealed	 to	 church	 leaders,	 calling	 slavery	 “a	 sin	 before	 thelegislaturessight	 of	 God,”	 and	 they,	 in	 turn,	 formed	 peace	 societies	 thatinundated	Congress	and	the	White	House	with	petitions	signedby	tens	of	thousands	of	Americans	opposed	to	war	with	Mexico.in	 Vermont,	 Michigan,	 Ohio,	 andStateMassachusetts	 passed	 resolutions	 supporting	 John	 Quincy’srecognition	 of	 Texas.war	 against	 war—and	 againstSoutherners	in	Congress,	however,	proved	too	strong,	and	afterboth	houses	voted	in	favor	of	recognizing	Texan	independence,President	Jackson	agreed	and	appointed	a	chargé	d’affaires.	AsJohn	 Quincy	 had	 predicted,	 a	 petition	 for	 U.S.	 annexation	 ofTexas	 followed	 recognition,	 but,	 in	 the	 face	 of	 the	 growingantiwar	movement,	Jackson,	nearing	the	end	of	his	presidency,rejected	it,	refusing	to	risk	certain	war	with	Mexico.By	then,	Andrew	Jackson	had	decided	to	follow	the	precedentof	 earlier	 Presidents	 and	 cede	 his	 office	 after	 two	 terms,	 andthe	 Democratic	 Party	 nominated	 Vice	 President	 Van	 Buren	 ofNew	York	as	their	candidate	to	succeed	Jackson.	Van	Buren	hadused	 his	 presidency	 of	 the	 Senate	 to	 court	 antiabolitionsentiment	 in	 Congress,	 and	 in	 December	 1736,	 he	 scored	 anoverwhelming	 victory	 over	 three	 other	 candidates,	 includingDaniel	Webster.	John	Quincy—by	then	towering	over	his	Housecolleagues	 as	 champion	 of	 national	 interests—easily	 wonreelection	 to	 the	 House	 without	 a	 party	 designation	 andwithout	 campaigning.	 Approaching	 seventy	 and	 feeling	 theeffects	of	his	age,	he	returned	to	Congress	in	1737	determinedto	save	his	nation	from	destruction.Having	 pledged	 to	 “tread	 .	 .	 .	 in	 the	 footsteps	 of	 PresidentJackson,”	President	Van	Buren	confirmed	Jackson’s	rejection	ofTexas’s	 annexation,	 thus	 temporarily	 setting	 aside	 one	 of	 themajor	controversies	facing	the	new	Congress	but	ceding	centerstage	 to	 abolition	 again.	 The	 House	 immediately	 reinstitutedthe	 Gag	 Rule,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 struck	 back,	 presenting	 morethan	two	hundred	petitions	remonstrating	against	the	Gag	Ruleas	 a	 violation	 of	 the	 Constitution,	 of	 the	 rights	 of	 hisconstituents,	 “and	 of	 my	 right	 of	 freedom	 of	 speech	 as	 amember	 of	 this	 House.”	 The	 House	 responded	 with	 what	 hedescribed	as	“war	whoops	of	‘Order!’”35Day	after	day,	the	struggle	continued.	During	the	1837–1838session	alone,	the	American	Antislavery	Society	sent	the	House130,200	 petitions,	 with	 untold	 thousands	 of	 names,	 to	 abolishslavery	in	the	District	of	Columbia;	32,000	petitions	to	abolishthe	 Gag	 Rule;	 21,200	 to	 forbid	 slavery	 in	 U.S.	 territories;22,160	 against	 admitting	 any	 new	 slave	 states;	 and	 23,160	 toabolish	 the	 slave	 trade	 between	 states.36	 Whenever	 JohnQuincy	 tried	 to	 comment	 on	 a	 resolution,	 the	 Speakerinterrupted:	“The	gentleman	from	Massachusetts,”	he	shouted,“must	answer	aye	or	no	and	nothing	else!	Order!”“I	 refuse	 to	 answer,”	 John	 Quincy	 fired	 back,	 “because	 Iconsider	all	proceedings	of	the	House—”Again,	 the	 Speaker	 interrupted	 him	 with	 shouts	 of	 “Order!Order!”John	Quincy	slumped	into	his	seat	in	response,	but	his	voicepersisted:	“—a	direct	violation	of	the	Constitution!”37Around	 him	 came	 the	 cries,	 “Expel	 him!	 Expel	 him!”	 fromsoutherners,	 whose	 numbers	 grew	 ever	 greater	 with	 theexpansion	of	the	slave	population,	which	could	not	vote.	Slaveshad	 increased	 the	 number	 of	 southern	 members	 of	 the	 Houseby	 35	 percent—enough	 to	 expel	 John	 Quincy,	 and	 they	 nowprepared	to	do	just	that.