CHAPTER 	4“He	Grows	.	.	.	Very	Fat	”Harvard	president	Joseph	Willard	so	infuriated	and	humiliatedJohn	Quincy	Adams	that	the	boy	would	not	even	write	about	theinterview	 in	 his	 diary,	 noting	 only	 that	 Willard	 “advised	 me	 towait	 till	 next	 spring.”	 In	 fact,	 Willard	 had	 arbitrarily	 declaredthe	boy	unprepared	for	Harvard	and	urged	him	to	study	with	atutor	 over	 autumn	 and	 winter	 and	 to	 reapply	 in	 the	 spring.if	 he	 then	 passed	 theWillard	 told	 John	 Quincy	 thatexaminations,	he	could	join	the	junior	class	in	time	for	the	lasttrimester	of	the	academic	year	in	April	1786.John	 Quincy	 had	 never	 confronted	 arbitrary	 power	 before.Willard’s	was	not	the	face	of	evil	as	much	as	it	was	the	face	ofunbridled	 authority	 over	 men’s	 lives,	 and	 John	 Quincy	 Adamsdespised	it,	would	never	forget	it,	and	would	fight	it	for	the	restof	 his	 life.	 “Few	 men	 live	 long	 in	 the	 world,”	 he	 concluded,“without	 having	 suffered	 from	 baseness	 and	 wickedness	 inothers.”1Recognizing	 his	 impotence,	 Adams	 knew	 he	 had	 no	 choicebut	 to	 obey	 Willard’s	 directive	 if	 he	 wanted	 to	 study	 atHarvard,	 and	 he	 went	 to	 live	 and	 study	 with	 his	 uncle,Reverend	John	Shaw,	the	Congregational	minister	in	Haverhill,Massachusetts.	Married	to	another	of	Abigail’s	younger	sisters,Shaw	 was	 a	 recognized	 scholar	 and	 approved	 tutor	 who	 hadprepared	many	students	for	Harvard.Harvard	 College,	 the	 “school	 of	 the	 prophets,”	 where	 JohnQuincy	 Adams,	 his	 father,	 grandfather,	 brothers,	 and	 sonsreceived	their	higher	education.	Founded	in	1636	as	America’sfirst	 college,	 the	 original	 buildings	 burned	 and	 were	 replacedby	Harvard	Hall	in	1675	(left),	Stoughton	Hall	in	1699	(center),and	Massachusetts	Hall	in	1720.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)“My	 journal	 till	 now,”	 John	 Quincy	 realized,	 “has	 almostentirely	consisted	in	an	account	of	my	peregrinations.	.	.	.	Theevents	for	the	future	will	probably	be	a	continual	repetition	.	.	.and	 will	 contain	 nothing	 that	 even	 I	 myself	 may	 desire	 toremember,	 but	 I	 shall	 surely	 have	 observations	 to	 make	 upondiverse	 subjects	 which	 it	 may	 be	 proper	 to	 commit	 to	 paper.And	I	can	again	employ	the	resource	of	sketching	characters.”2After	 years	 in	 Europe’s	 marbled	 halls,	 John	 Quincy	 foundsmall-town	New	England	social	life	unimpressive.	“The	way	wehave	 here	 of	 killing	 time	 in	 large	 companies	 appears	 to	 memost	absurd	and	ridiculous,”	he	scrawled	in	his	diary.	“All	mustbe	 fixed	 down	 in	 chairs,	 looking	 at	 one	 another	 like	 a	 puppetshow	 and	 talking	 some	 common-place	 phrases	 to	 oneanother.”3	After	dinner	one	day,	the	shallow	conversations	lefthim	particularly	annoyed:I	 wonder	 how	 it	 happens	 that	 almost	 every	 kind	 ofconversation	 that	 may	 be	 of	 any	 use	 to	 persons	 isexcluded	 from	 polite	 company	 everywhere.	 Is	 it	 becausethe	 children	 of	 ignorance	 and	 folly	 are	 so	 much	 morenumerous	 than	 those	 of	 thought	 and	 science	 that	 thesemust	submit	to	imitate	them?“By	 the	 tyrannical	 law	 of	 custom,”	 he	 concluded,	 otherwiseintelligent	people	“were	obliged	to	talk	nonsense.”4John	 Quincy	 divided	 his	 time	 during	 the	 six	 months	 thatfollowed	 between	 making	 notes	 in	 his	 diary	 about	 the	 girls	 hemet	 and	 rereading	 Latin	 and	 Greek	 classics	 he	 had	 alreadystudied	in	Europe.	“I	began	this	day	to	translate	the	Ecologuesof	 Virgil,”	 he	 noted	 one	 evening—then	 added,	 “Peggy	 is	 about20	years	old	and	is	called	a	beauty.	Her	face	has	a	great	deal	ofdignity	 .	 .	 .	 but	 when	 adorned	 with	 a	 smile	 is	 extremelypleasant.”	5	A	few	days	later:	“Miss	Williams	is	tall	and	pretty	..	.	,”	and	“Nancy	is	only	17.	.	.	.	Her	shape	is	uncommonly	fineand	 her	 eye	 seems	 to	 have	 magic	 in	 it.	 .	 .	 .	 Her	 heart	 is	 kind,tender	 and	 benevolent,	 and	 was	 she	 sensible	 of	 the	 pain	 shecauses	 she	 would	 be	 the	 first	 to	 condemn	 herself.”	 Heapparently	 dismissed	 all	 thoughts	 about	 girls	 the	 next	 day,spending	 “the	 whole	 day	 at	 my	 studies.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 read	 Watt’sLogic.”	 There	 was	 little	 in	 the	 curriculum—Latin,	 Greek,English,	 or	 French—that	 he	 did	 not	 absorb:	 all	 the	 availableworks	 of	 Homer,	 Plato,	 Virgil,	 Cicero,	 Horace,	 Juvenal,	 andTerence,	 as	 well	 as	 John	 Locke	 and	 Alexander	 Pope—and	 theBible.As	 the	 end	 of	 his	 stay	 in	 Haverhill	 approached,	 he	 plungedinto	 his	 first	 political	 controversy,	 confronting	 a	 group	 ofBaptists	 and	 their	 minister	 who	 sought	 to	 end	 the	 town’sassemblies,	 or	 dances.	 “Superstition	 of	 some	 kind	 will	 prevailwith	mankind	everywhere,”	John	Quincy	raged.Mr.	 Smith,	 the	 minister	 of	 the	 Baptist	 Society	 in	 thistown,	is	violently	opposed	to	dancing.	It	is	in	his	mind	ofitself	a	heinous	sin	.	.	.	and	there	are	many	people	here	sowarped	 in	 prejudice	 that	 they	 are	 really	 persuaded	 theyshould	 incur	 the	 divine	 displeasure,	 as	 much	 by	 dancingas	 by	 stealing	 or	 perhaps	 committing	 murder.	 .	 .	 .	 Howone	 of	 the	 more	 innocent	 and	 rational	 amusements	 thatwas	 everissomewhat	 mysterious.	 .	 .	 .	 There	 are	 many	 who	 areenvious	to	see	others	amusing	themselves.	.	.	.	However,the	subscribers	wisely	take	no	notice	.	.	.	but	go	on	theirown	way	and	despise	all	these	senseless	clamors.6invented	 can	 find	 so	 many	 opposersSeveral	days	later,	he	made	a	point	of	attending	an	assemblyof	more	than	twenty	couples,	all	but	daring	the	Baptist	ministerto	 interfere.	 “I	 might	 make	 a	 number	 of	 sarcastic	 reflectionsupon	the	manner	of	dancing,”	John	Quincy	reflected,	“but	I	donot	think	it	a	matter	of	sufficient	importance	.	.	.	to	laugh	at	aperson	who	cannot	show	the	elegance	of	a	dancing	master.”7On	 March	 14,	 1786,	 John	 Quincy	 left	 Haverhill	 to	 take	 hisentrance	 examinations	 at	 Harvard.	 Three	 professors,	 fourtutors,	 and	 the	 librarian—the	 entire	 Harvard	 faculty—joinedPresident	Willard	in	examining	Adams	to	eliminate	presidentialprejudice	 as	 a	 factor.	 After	 he	 displayed	 his	 skills	 in	 Latin,Greek,	 mathematics,	 and	 philosophy,	 the	 frowning	 Willardconceded,	“You	are	admitted,	Adams.”John	Quincy	Adams	spent	the	next	fifteen	months	at	Harvardlearning	little	he	did	not	already	know	from	a	faculty	he	foundhaughty	and	“hard	for	me	to	submit	to.”It	 seems	 almost	 a	 maxim	 among	 the	 governors	 of	 thecollege	 to	 treat	 students	 pretty	 much	 like	 brute	 beasts.There	 is	 an	 important	 air	 and	 haughty	 look	 that	 everyperson	 belonging	 to	 the	 government	 assumes,	 which,indeed,	it	is	hard	for	me	to	submit	to.	But	it	may	be	of	useto	 me,	 as	 it	 mortifies	 my	 vanity	 and,	 if	 anything	 in	 theworld	 can	 teach	 me	 humility,	 it	 will	 be	 to	 see	 myselfsubjected	 to	 the	 commands	 of	 a	 person	 that	 I	 mostdespise.8His	 father	 had	 a	 much	 different	 perspective	 on	 Harvard:“Give	 me	 leave,	 my	 dear	 son,	 to	 congratulate	 you	 on	 youradmission	 into	 the	 Seat	 of	 the	 Muses,	 our	 dear	 Alma	 Mater,where	I	hope	you	will	find	a	pleasure	and	improvements	equalto	 your	 expectations.	 You	 are	 now	 among	 magistrates	 andministers,	legislators	and	heroes,	ambassadors	and	generals;	Imean	 among	 persons	 who	 will	 live	 to	 act	 in	 all	 thesecharacters.	 If	 you	 pursue	 your	 studies	 and	 preserve	 yourhealth,	you	will	have	as	good	a	chance	as	most	of	them,	and	Ihope	you	will	take	care	to	do	nothing	now	which	you	will	in	anyfuture	period	have	reason	to	recollect	with	shame	or	pain.”9Harvard	students	did	not	impress	John	Quincy,	however.	Oneafternoon,	 he	 watched	 a	 group	 of	 sophomores	 turn	 wild	 fromdrink,	 then	 smash	 their	 tutors’	 windows.	 “After	 this	 sublimemaneuver,”	 he	 remarked,	 “they	 staggered	 to	 their	 chambers.Such	 are	 the	 great	 achievements	 of	 many	 of	 the	 sons	 ofHarvard.	.	.	.	About	two-thirds	of	the	class	are	behind	hand,	andthe	rest	are	obliged	to	wait	for	them	till	they	come	up.”10fewHarvard	 presented	 John	 Quincy	 withintellectualchallenges,	and	he	graduated	second	in	his	class	in	July	1787,often	 skipping	 lectures	 to	 go	 fishing	 and	 occasionally	 dancingso	 late	 with	 Cambridge	 girls	 that	 he	 overslept	 and	 missedclasses	 the	 next	 morning.	 He	 made	 friends	 with	 a	 few	 of	 themost	 academically	 advanced	 members	 of	 his	 class,	 learned	 toplay	 the	 flute,	 joined	 the	 Handel	 Sodality,	 and	 oversaw	 theprogress	 of	 his	 two	 younger	 brothers,	 Charles,	 a	 sophomore,and	Thomas	Boylston,	a	freshman.In	 London,	 meanwhile,	 his	 older	 sister	 Nabby	 had	 married,and	 to	 John	 Quincy’s	 pleasant	 surprise,	 his	 mother	 reacted	 tothe	absence	of	small	children	in	her	household	with	newfoundwarmth	and	empathy	for	her	adult	offspring.	“It	is	not	in	yourpower	 to	 remedy	 the	 evils	 you	 complain	 of,”	 she	 said	 inresponse	 to	 her	 son’s	 irritation	 with	 the	 Harvard	 faculty.“Whilst	 the	 salaries	 are	 so	 small,	 it	 cannot	 be	 expected	 thatgentlemen	 of	 the	 first	 abilities	 will	 devote	 their	 lives	 to	 thepreceptorship.”Get	 all	 the	 good	 you	 can,	 and	 beware	 you	 do	 no	 ill	 toothers.	You	must	be	conscious	of	how	great	importance	itis	 to	 youth	 that	 they	 respect	 their	 teachers.	 Thereforewhatever	 tends	 to	 lessen	 them	 is	 an	 injury	 to	 the	 wholesociety.	 .	 .	 .	 If	 you	 are	 conscious	 to	 yourself	 that	 youpossess	more	knowledge	upon	some	subjects	than	othersof	 your	 standing,	 reflect	 that	 you	 have	 had	 greateropportunities	 of	 seeing	 the	 world	 and	 obtaining	 aknowledge	 of	 mankind	 than	 any	 of	 your	 contemporaries,that	 you	 have	 never	 wanted	 a	 book,	 but	 it	 has	 beensupplied	 to	 you;	 that	 your	 whole	 time	 has	 been	 spent	 inthe	 company	 of	 men	 of	 literature	 and	 science.	 My	 paperwill	 allow	 me	 room	 only	 to	 add	 my	 blessing	 to	 you	 andyour	brothers	from	your	ever	affectionate	A.	Adams.11As	 a	 principal	 speaker	 at	 his	 class	 graduation,	 John	 Quincyearned	 plaudits	 from	 alumni	 as	 well	 as	 classmates;	 evenPresident	Willard	conceded	in	a	letter	to	John	Quincy’s	parents,“I	think	he	bids	fair	to	become	a	distinguished	character.”12Although	 college	 life	 had	 isolated	 him,	 news	 of	 Shays’sRebellion	 in	 Springfield,	 Massachusetts,	 permeated	 everycorner	 of	 the	 land	 and	 awakened	 John	 Quincy	 to	 the	 woesfacing	 American	 society.	 “The	 people	 are	 saidto	 bediscontented	 and	 to	 complain	 of	 taxation,	 of	 the	 salaries	 ofpublic	officers,	and	of	debts	public	and	private,”	he	wrote	to	hismother.	“I	suspect	that	the	present	form	of	government	will	notcontinue	long.	.	.	.	The	poor	complain	of	its	being	oppressive.	.	..	 The	 men	 of	 property	 think	 the	 Constitution	 gives	 too	 muchliberty	to	the	unprincipled	citizen.”13The	“Constitution,”	as	John	Quincy	called	it,	was,	in	fact,	theArticles	 of	 Confederation,	 which	 the	 states	 had	 signed	 duringthe	 Revolutionary	 War.	 The	 Articles	 recognized	 each	 state	 assovereign	 and	 independent	 and	 left	 the	 Continental	 Congressimpotent,	 with	 no	 power	 to	 levy	 taxes—even	 to	 pay	 its	 troops.Still	unpaid	at	war’s	end	and	beset	by	property	taxes,	farmersin	western	Massachusetts	had	rebelled.	A	former	captain	in	thewar,	 Daniel	 Shays,	 a	 farmer	 struggling	 to	 keep	 his	 property,convinced	 neighbors	 that	 Boston	 legislators	 were	 colludingwith	 judges	 and	 lawyers	 to	 raise	 property	 taxes	 and	 foreclosewhen	farmers	found	it	impossible	to	pay.	With	that,	he	exhortedfarmers,	 “Close	 down	 the	 courts!	 ”—and	 they	 did.	 Farmersmarched	 across	 the	 state	 and	 shut	 courthouses	 in	 Concord,Worcester,	 Northampton,	 Taunton,	 Great	 Barrington,	 and,finally,	 Cambridge,	 where	 John	 Quincy	 and	 other	 Harvardstudents	watched	from	the	safety	of	their	classroom	buildings.Hailed	 by	 farmers	 across	 the	 nation,	 the	 shutdowns	 endedforeclosures	 in	 most	 of	 Massachusetts.	 Determined	 to	 expandhis	success	and	seize	control	of	state	government,	Shays	led	aforce	 of	 five	 hundred	 men	 to	 Springfield	 to	 raid	 the	 federalarmory.	 About	 1,000	 more	 farmers	 joined	 him,	 but	 as	 theyapproached	 the	 arsenal,	 soldiers	 unleashed	 a	 few	 artilleryblasts	 thatfarmers	 butfell	 short	 of	 the	 approachingdemonstrated	the	advantages	of	cannonballs	over	pitchforks.	Amilitia	from	Boston	then	chased	the	farmers	to	their	homes	andcaptured	most	of	their	leaders,	although	Shays	fled	to	safety	inwhat	was	then	the	independent	republic	of	Vermont.As	 John	 Quincy	 had	 predicted,	 fears	 that	 Shays’s	 Rebellionwould	 ignite	 a	 national	 uprising	 spurred	 Congress	 to	 urgerevisions	in	the	Articles	of	Confederation	to	strengthen	federalgovernment	 powers.	 On	 May	 25,	 1787,	 delegates	 from	 twelveof	 the	 thirteen	 states	 met	 in	 Philadelphia	 and	 began	 writing	 anew	 constitution	 that	 created	 a	 new,	 more	 powerful	 federalgovernment.In	 the	 meantime,	 John	 Quincy	 went	 to	 Newburyport,	 aboutforty	miles	northeast	of	Boston,	to	study	law	with	the	renownedNew	 England	 attorney	 Theophilus	 Parsons,	 who	 would	 laterbecome	chief	justice	of	the	Massachusetts	Supreme	Court.	Oneof	 five	 Harvard	 men	 under	 Parsons’s	 tutelage,	 John	 Quincyenthused	 at	 first	 about	 “frolicks”	 with	 his	 friends,	 oftenserenading	 as	 “the	 bottle	 went	 round	 with	 unusual	 rapidity,until	 a	 round	 dozen	 had	 disappeared.”	 Nor	 did	 women	 escapehis	attention,	although	he	rebelled	at	the	popular	pastime	of	so-called	 kissing	 games.	 “Tis	 a	 profanation	 of	 one	 of	 the	 mostendearing	 demonstrations	 of	 love,”	 he	 railed	 in	 his	 diary.	 “Akiss	 unless	 warmed	 by	 sentiment	 and	 enlivened	 by	 affectionmay	just	as	well	be	given	to	the	air	as	to	the	most	beautiful	orthe	 most	 accomplished	 object	 in	 the	 universe.”14	 He	 said	 hemuch	preferred	singing	“good,	jovial,	expressive	songs	such	aswe	sang	at	college.”15While	 studying	 law	 he	 began	 writing	 poetry,	 a	 pastime	 thatquickly	 became	 a	 passion—indeed,	 one	 so	 serious	 that	 heconsidered	 abandoning	 his	 studies	 and	 returning	 to	 Paris	 tostudy	literature	and	become	a	full-time	poet.“Around	her	face	no	wanton	Cupids	play,”	he	wrote	in	a	poemhe	called	“A	Vision”—part	of	a	collection	of	satirical	portraits	ofnine	of	his	women	friends.Her	tawny	skin	defies	the	God	of	Day.Loud	was	her	laugh,	undaunted	was	her	look,And	folly	seemed	to	dictate	what	she	spoke.16He	 did,	 of	 course,	 study	 some	 law,	 but	 a	 prodigious	 readerlike	 John	 Quincy	 consumed	 so	 much	 law	 so	 quickly	 that	 hefilled	the	rest	of	his	time	reading	history,	including	“about	fiftypages	 a	 day”	 of	 Edward	 Gibbon’s	 six-volume	 epic	 The	 Historyof	 the	 Decline	 and	 Fall	 of	 the	 Roman	 Empire.	 Although	 hisstudies	 of	 law	 proved	 satisfying,	 ordinary	 practice—wills,deeds,	 and	 bankruptcies—bored	 him	 to	 distraction.	 “God	 ofheavens!”	he	complained	poetically.	“If	those	are	the	only	termsupon	 which	 life	 can	 be	 granted	 to	 me,	 Oh!	 Take	 me	 from	 thisearth	before	I	curse	the	day	of	my	birth.”17After	 John	 Quincy’s	 parents	 learned	 of	 their	 son’s	 growingdisenchantment,	 John	 Adams	 felt	 it	 was	 time	 for	 him	 andAbigail	 to	 resume	 their	 roles	 as	 parents,	 and	 he	 wrote	 toSecretary	of	State	John	Jay	to	end	his	assignment	in	Britain.	Infact,	both	Adamses	were	homesick	and	missed	their	boys.	Theyhad	not	seen	John	Quincy	in	three	years.	Four	years	had	passedsince	John	Adams	had	last	seen	Charles—then	a	boy	of	fourteen—and	nine	years	since	he	had	seen	Thomas,	who	was	seven	atthe	time.	Charles	was	now	eighteen,	Thomas	sixteen,	and	bothwere	in	trouble	for	participating	in	student	riots	at	Harvard.On	June	17,	1788,	John	and	Abigail	Adams	landed	in	Boston.John	 Adams	 had	 not	 set	 foot	 in	 America	 for	 nine	 years,	 andGovernor	 John	 Hancock	 led	 Boston—indeed	 all	 of	 America—inwelcoming	 him.	 Next	 to	 George	 Washington	 himself,	 andperhaps	 Benjamin	 Franklin,	 Americans	 held	 John	 Adams	 inhighest	 esteem.	 Hancock	 invited	 him	 and	 Abigail	 to	 stay	 atHancock	 House,	 his	 lavish	 mansion	 on	 the	 summit	 of	 BeaconHill	 overlooking	 the	 Common	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 Boston.	 Charlesand	 Thomas	 rushed	 over	 from	 Harvard	 to	 join	 them,	 and	 JohnQuincy	arrived	from	Newburyport	for	their	first	family	reunionin	nearly	a	decade.Offered	 every	 public	 office	 but	 the	 presidency	 itself—alongwith	 many	 lucrative	 opportunities	 in	 private	 practice—JohnAdams	 made	 it	 clear	 he	 wanted	 to	 serve	 as	 the	 nation’s	 firstvice	 president	 under	 George	 Washington.	 Accordingly,	 onJanuary	 7,	 1789,	 the	 Electoral	 College	 elected	 GeorgeWashington	 first	 President	 of	 the	 United	 States	 and	 JohnAdams	as	the	nation’s	first	vice	president.	Three	months	later,on	 April	 20,	 1789,	 Adams	 climaxed	 a	 weeklong	 trip	 fromMassachusetts	and	crossed	the	bridge	onto	the	northern	end	ofManhattan	 Island,	 where	 throngs	 of	 well-wishers	 lined	 theroads	 to	 welcome	 him	 to	 New	 York,	 the	 nation’s	 temporarycapital.	 A	 troop	 of	 New	 York	 cavalry	 awaited	 with	 ForeignAffairs	 Secretary	 John	 Jay	 and	 congressional	 leaders	 to	 escorthim	 southward	 to	 the	 city	 and	 his	 temporary	 lodgings	 at	 Jay’smagnificent	mansion.	The	next	morning,	the	Senate’s	presidentpro	tempore	greeted	him	at	Federal	Hall	and	showed	him	to	hischair	in	the	Senate	chamber,	where	he	assumed	the	presidencyof	 that	 body.	 A	 week	 later,	 on	 April	 29,	 Adams	 witnessed	 thefirstpresidential	 swearinginaugural	address.in	 and	 George	 Washington’sA	year	after	his	father’s	inauguration,	John	Quincy	passed	hisbar	 exams,	 and	 on	 August	 9,	 1790,	 he	 opened	 a	 law	 office	 inBoston	 and	 waited	 for	 his	 family’s	 name	 and	 fame	 to	 draw	 astream	of	clients	to	his	door.He	waited	in	vain.“Very	 busy	 with	 nothing	 to	 do,”	 he	 wrote	 in	 his	 diary.	 “Longwalk,	but	solitary,”	he	wrote	a	day	later.	“Little	to	do.	ReadingCicero.”18More	 than	 a	 month	 later,	 he	 found	 a	 few	 clients	 at	 thecourthouse—all	indigent	petty	criminals	who	paid	him	nothing.By	 mid-November,	 he	 had	 handled	 fewer	 than	 a	 dozen	 cases,none	 of	 which	 had	 yielded	 a	 penny,	 leaving	 him	 completelydependent	 on	 the	 £9-per-month	 allowance	 that	 his	 father	 hadbeen	sending	him	since	his	days	at	Harvard.“I	have	a	profession	without	employment,”	he	lamented	to	hissister	 Nabby.	 “The	 hope	 of	 supporting	 myself	 [is]	 probablysomewhat	 distant.”19	 A	 month	 later,	 he	 wrote	 to	 his	 mother,saying	 that	 “there	 would	 not	 be	 a	 happier	 being	 in	 the	 UnitedStates	 .	 .	 .	 could	 I	 have	 just	 enough	 business	 to	 support	 myexpenses,	so	as	to	relieve	me	from	the	mortification	of	being,	atmy	time	of	life,	a	burden	to	my	parents.”20His	 father	 tried	 to	 cheer	 him	 up:	 “It	 is	 accident	 commonlywhich	furnishes	the	first	occasions	to	a	young	lawyer	to	spreadhis	reputation.”I	remember	it	was	neither	my	friends	nor	patrons	amongthe	 great	 and	 learned:	 it	 was	 Joseph	 Tirrel	 the	 horsejockey	 who	 first	 raised	 me	 to	 fame.	 .	 .	 .	 Some	 oddincident,	altogether	unforeseen	and	unexpected,	will	veryprobably	 bring	 you	 into	 some	 popular	 cause	 and	 spreadyour	character	with	a	thousand	trumpets	at	a	time.	Sucha	 thing	 may	 not	 happen	 in	 several	 years.	 Meantime,patience,	courage.21John	Adams	tried	lifting	his	son’s	spirits	by	giving	him	powerof	 attorney	 and	 control	 of	 the	 family’s	 financial	 affairs	 inBraintree	 and	 Boston,including	 management	 of	 severalincome-yielding	properties,	with	a	retainer	of	£25	per	quarter.Early	 in	 1791,	 John	 Adams	 and	 Abigail	 gave	 their	 son	 anothermorale	 booster	 by	 inviting	 him	 to	 the	 national	 government’snew	seat	in	Philadelphia.	The	visit	threw	John	Quincy	back	intothe	 midst	 of	 the	 powerful	 and	 famous	 and	 restored	 hisconviction	that	he	was	bound	for	greatness.	He	heard	debatesin	 Congress,	 attended	 Supreme	 Court	 proceedings,	 and	 dinedwith	such	illustrious	figures	as	Elbridge	Gerry.	He	climaxed	hisvisit	 by	 joining	 his	 parents	 at	 dinner	 with	 George	 and	 MarthaWashington	at	the	presidential	mansion.John	 Quincy	 returned	 to	 Boston	 with	 a	 new	 sense	 ofexcitement.	 Although	 his	 law	 practice	 showed	 no	 signs	 ofimprovement,	life	in	the	federal	capital	had	enthralled	him,	andhe	 decided	 to	 force	 his	 way	 into	 the	 national	 political	 picture.Early	 in	 June,	 he	 wrote	 the	 first	 of	 eleven	 essays	 he	 calledLetters	 of	 Publicola,	 assailing	 two	 icons	 of	 the	 AmericanRevolution—Thomas	 Paine	 and,	 of	 all	 people,	 his	 friendSecretary	of	State	Thomas	Jefferson,	author	of	the	Declarationof	 Independence.	 Paine’s	 pamphlets	 Common	 Sense	 and	 TheCrisis	 had	 roused	 Americans	 to	 fight	 for	 independence	 fromBritain,	 and	 to	 these	 he	 had	 just	 added	 another	 work,	 TheRights	of	Man,	which	called	for	a	similar	uprising	in	England	tooverthrow	 the	 monarchy.	 After	 Jefferson	 endorsed	 it,	 TheRights	of	Man	received	widespread	distribution	in	America.“Hisintention,”John	 Quincy	 complainedto	 Boston’sColumbian	Centinel	 ,	 “appears	 evidently	 to	 be	 to	 convince	 thepeople	 of	 Great	 Britain	 that	 they	 have	 neither	 liberty	 nor	 aconstitution—that	 their	 only	 possible	 means	 to	 produce	 theseblessings	 to	 themselves	 is	 to	 ‘topple	 down	 headlong’	 theirpresent	 government	 and	 follow	 implicitly	 the	 example	 of	 theFrench.”	 John	 Quincy	 blasted	 Paine’s	 assumption	 that	 themajority	 of	 the	 English	 people	 opposed	 monarchy.	 “It	 issomewhat	 remarkable	 that,	 in	 speaking	 of	 the	 particular	 rightof	forming	a	constitution,	Mr.	Paine	denies	to	a	nation	.	.	.	[the]right	 to	 establish	 a	 government	 of	 hereditary	succession	 .	 .	 .	 .He	 supposes	 the	 essence	 of	 a	 free	 government	 to	 be	 thesubmission	of	the	minority	to	the	will	of	the	majority,	[but]	in	afree	government	the	minority	never	can	be	under	an	obligationto	sacrifice	their	rights	to	the	will	of	the	majority.”22John	 Quincy’s	 attack	 on	 Paine	 caused	 a	 furor—in	 Europe	 aswell	as	America,	coming	as	it	did	when	the	French	Revolutionwas	 reaching	 a	 peak	 of	 savagery	 that	 sent	 emotional	 tremorsacross	 the	 United	 States.	 Radicals	 had	 seized	 control	 of	 theNational	 Assembly	 and	 imprisoned	 King	 Louis	 XVI	 and	 hisfamily	 in	 their	 own	 palace.	 Two	 years	 earlier,	 most	 Americanshad	hailed	the	French	Revolution	as	an	extension	of	America’sown	revolution	and	the	spread	of	democracy	to	the	Old	World.Jefferson,	 the	 American	 minister	 to	 France	 at	 the	 start	 of	 therevolution	in	July	1789,	called	it	“an	illumination	of	the	humanmind.”23	 In	 the	 two	 years	 that	 followed,	 however,	 widespreaddrought	combined	with	national	bankruptcy	to	produce	famine,mass	 unemployment—and	 mob	 action.	 Rioters	 raged	 throughcities,	 towns,	 and	 villages,	 looting	 and	 burning	 manors,châteaus,	and	any	other	structure	that	smacked	of	aristocraticplenty.	 Although	 Jefferson	 dismissed	 the	 violence	 as	 anunfortunate	 consequence	 of	 social	 progress,	 Vice	 PresidentAdams	 said	 the	 French	 revolutionaries	 “make	 murder	 itself	 asindifferent	as	shooting	a	plover.”24The	 slaughter	 appalled	 President	 Washington	 and	 otherAmerican	 statesmen.	 Secretary	 of	 Treasury	 AlexanderHamilton	 condemned	 radical	 leaders	 of	 the	 French	 Revolutionas	 “assassins	 reeking	 with	 the	 blood	 of	 murdered	 fellowcitizens.”25The	 American	 press	 reflected	 the	 divisions	 in	 the	 cabinet.Philadelphia’s	Gazette	of	the	United	States	condemned	Frenchatheism,	 anarchy,	 and	 mass	 slaughter,	 while	 its	 rival,	 theNational	 Gazette,	 reminded	 readers	 how	 France	 had	 ensuredAmerica’s	 victory	 over	 British	 tyranny	 in	 the	 struggle	 forliberty	 andindependence.	 As	 groups	 gathered	 outsidenewspaper	offices	to	read	the	papers,	the	French	Revolution—and	Paine’s	defense—divided	the	American	people.“Perhaps	 the	 strongly	 excited	 passions	 of	 the	 hour	 .	 .	 .contributed	 to	 the	 result,”	 John	 Quincy	 concluded,	 but	 thePublicola	essays	“at	once	attracted	great	attention,	not	less	inEurope	 than	 in	 America.	 They	 were	 reprinted	 in	 the	 papers	 ofNew	York	and	Philadelphia	.	.	.	and	elicited	numerous	replies.	..	.	The	reputation	of	Publicola	spread	far	beyond	the	confines	ofthe	United	States.	No	sooner	did	the	papers	arrive	in	Englandthan	they	were	collected	and	published	in	London.	.	.	.	Anotheredition	 was	 .	 .	 .	 published	 in	 Glasgow	 .	 .	 .	 and	 still	 a	 third	 atDublin.”26As	 he	 had	 hoped,	 fame	 thrust	 John	 Quincy	 onto	 Boston’spolitical	 stage,	 giving	 him	 more	 than	 enough	 to	 do	 to	 occupyhis	time.	Although	his	law	practice	did	not	expand,	governmentofficials	across	the	region	appointed	him	to	citizen	committeesimprove	 Boston’s	 police	 procedures,	 to	 recommend—toredistricting,	 and	 to	 look	 at	 so-called	 blue	 laws.	 Braintreeasked	 him	 to	 convert	 its	 legal	 status	 from	 a	 parish	 to	 a	 town,which	he	promptly	renamed	Quincy,	after	his	great-grandfatherColonel	 John	 Quincy.	 He	 thrust	 himself	 into	 every	 majorpolitical	 controversy.	 After	 Boston	 voted	 to	 permit	 theaters	 toopen	and	perform	plays,	the	state	legislature	defied	Bostoniansand	 banned	 theatrical	 productions.	 After	 police	 arrested	 anactor,	“a	mob	of	about	two	hundred	people	collected	together	..	 .	 to	 pull	 down	 the	 theater,”	 and	 John	 Quincy	 wrote	 threenewspaper	essays	that	heaped	scorn	on	the	legislative	majorityand	 opponents	 of	 theater.	 In	 contrast	 to	 his	 previous	 standagainst	 anarchy,	 he	 called	 on	 supporters	 of	 theater	 to	 commitcivil	 disobedience—urging	 actors	 to	 continue	 to	 perform	 andaudiencesto	 anunconstitutional	 act	 of	 the	 legislature,”	 he	 declared—in	 effect,espousing	a	concept	of	nullification	of	laws	that	he	would	laterdespise.to	 attend.	 “No	 obedienceis	 dueJohn	Quincy’s	essays	put	his	name	before	Boston’s	public	justas	 a	 banking	 collapse	 was	 producing	 a	 windfall	 of	 legal	 workfrom	 investors	 trying	 to	 recoup	 their	 losses.	 “The	 bubble	 ofbanking	 is	 breaking,”	 he	 wrote	 to	 his	 father.	 “Seven	 or	 eightfailures	 have	 happened	 within	 these	 three	 days,	 and	 manymore	 are	 inevitable	 in	 the	 course	 of	 the	 ensuing	 week.	 Thepernicious	practice	of	mutual	endorsements	upon	each	other’snotes	has	been	carried	.	.	.	to	an	extravagant	length	and	is	nowfound	 to	 have	 involved	 not	 only	 the	 principals,	 who	 have	 beenconverting	 their	 loans	 from	 the	 bank	 into	 a	 regular	 tradingstock,	 but	 many	 others	 who	 have	 undertaken	 to	 be	 theirsecurity.”27“The	late	failures	in	Boston,”	Abigail	beamed	as	she	wrote	toher	 husband	 after	 visiting	 John	 Quincy,	 “have	 thrown	 somebusiness	 into	 the	 hands	 of	 our	 son.	 He	 is	 well	 and	 grows	 veryfat.”28John	Quincy	Adams	grew	fatter	in	the	days	that	followed.	Byearly	 1793,	 events	 overseas—and	 their	 repercussionsinAmerica—had	intensified	the	divisions	between	Americans	whosupported	 the	 French	 Revolution	 and	 its	 opponents.	 PresidentGeorge	 Washington	 pleaded	 for	 national	 unity,	 saying	 it	 wouldbe	 “unwise	 in	 the	 extreme	 .	 .	 .	 to	 involve	 ourselves	 in	 thecontests	 of	 European	 nations.”29	 When	 newspapers	 ignoredhis	 pleas,	 Washington	 considered	 a	 formal	 proclamation	 ofneutrality	to	ensure	American	independence	from	both	Englishand	French	influence.In	France,	Jacobin	extremists	had	seized	control	of	the	four-year-old	 revolution,	 overturned	 the	 monarchy,	 sent	 King	 LouisXVI	 to	 his	 death	 on	 the	 guillotine,	 and	 discarded	 theconstitution.	 On	 February	 1,	 1793,	 France	 declared	 war	 onBritain,	 Holland,	 and	 Spain.	 Under	 the	 Franco-Americanalliance	 of	 1778,	 each	 nation	 had	 pledged	 to	 aid	 the	 other	 inthe	 event	 of	 an	 attack	 by	 foreign	 enemies,	 and	 France	 nowdemanded	 that	 the	 United	 States	 join	 her	 war	 against	 Britain.In	 April,	 Edmond	 Genet,	 the	 new	 minister	 plenipotentiary	 tothe	 United	 States,	 bypassed	 normal	 diplomatic	 protocol	 andappealed	to	the	American	people	to	pressure	the	President	andCongress	to	join	the	French	war	against	England.French	ambassador	Edmond	Genet	arrived	in	the	United	Stateswith	 secret	 plans	 to	 incite	 rebellion	 against	 the	 Washingtonadministration	and	install	a	government	that	would	join	Francein	 war	 against	 Britain.	 (FROM	 A	 NINETEENTH-CENTURYENGRAVING)“In	 the	 United	 States,”	 the	 French	 minister	 cried	 out,	 “menstill	 exist	 who	 can	 say,‘Here	 a	 ferocious	 Englishmanslaughtered	 my	 father;	 there	 my	 wife	 tore	 her	 bleedingdaughter	 from	 the	 hands	 of	 an	 unbridled	 Englishman,’	 andthose	 same	 men	 can	 say,	 ‘Here	 a	 brave	 Frenchman	 diedfighting	 for	 American	 liberty;	 here	 French	 naval	 and	 militarypower	humbled	the	might	of	Britain.’”30Secretary	 of	 State	 Jefferson	 hailed	 Genet’s	 arrival.	 “Theliberty	of	the	whole	earth	depends	on	the	success	of	the	FrenchRevolution,”	 Jefferson	 exulted	 as	 he	 urged	 Washington	 tosupport	 the	 French.	 “Nothing	 should	 be	 spared	 on	 our	 part	 toattach	 France	 to	 us.	 Failure	 to	 do	 so	 would	 gratify	 thecombination	 of	 kings	 with	 the	 spectacle	 of	 the	 only	 tworepublics	on	earth	destroying	each	other.”31Outraged	 by	 Jefferson’s	 embrace	 of	 French	 revolutionaries“wading	 through	 seas	 of	 blood,”	 Treasury	 Secretary	 Hamiltonit	 self-argued	 against	 American	 participation,	 callingdestructive.	 He	 reminded	 the	 President	 that	 Britain	 remainedAmerica’s	most	important	trading	partner,	buying	the	majorityof	 her	 exports,	 producing	 the	 majority	 of	 her	 imports,	 andyielding	 most	 of	 the	 government’s	 revenues	 through	 importduties.	 To	 war	 beside	 France	 against	 Britain,	 Hamiltonasserted,	 was	 not	 only	 economically	 suicidal	 but	 morallyindefensible.	 Riding	 a	 wave	 of	 popularity	 in	 Boston,	 JohnQuincy	 marched	 into	 the	 fray	 to	 support	 the	 President:	 “Toadvise	us	to	engage	voluntarily	in	the	war,”	he	declared,	“is	toaim	a	dagger	at	the	heart	of	this	country.”We	have	a	seacoast	of	twelve	hundred	miles	everywhereopen	 to	 invasion,	 and	 where	 is	 the	 power	 to	 protect	 it?We	have	a	flourishing	commerce	expanding	to	every	partof	 the	 globe,	 and	 where	 will	 it	 turn	 when	 excluded	 fromevery	 market	 on	 earth?	 We	 depend	 upon	 the	 returns	 ofthat	 commerce	 for	 many	 necessaries	 of	 life,	 and	 whenthose	returns	shall	be	cut	off,	where	shall	we	look	for	thesupply?	 We	 are	 in	 a	 great	 measure	 destitute	 of	 thedefensive	apparatus	of	war,	and	who	will	provide	us	withthe	arms	and	ammunition	that	will	be	indispensable?	Wefeel	 severely	 at	 this	 moment	 the	 burden	 of	 our	 publicdebt,	 and	 where	 are	 the	 funds	 to	 support	 us	 in	 thedreadful	 extremity	 to	 which	 our	 madness	 and	 iniquitywould	reduce	us?32John	Quincy’s	words	anticipated	those	of	the	President.	Withthe	United	States	all	but	defenseless,	without	a	navy	and	only	aminuscule	 army	 in	 the	 West	 fighting	 Indians,	 the	 Presidentknew	he	could	not	risk	war	with	England—or	any	other	nation,for	that	matter.	As	John	Quincy	had	noted,	the	powerful	Britishnavy	 could	 easily	 blockade	 American	 ports	 and	 shut	 coastaltrade,	while	the	British	military	in	Canada	could	combine	withSpanish	 forces	 in	 Florida	 and	 Louisiana	 to	 sweep	 across	 theWest	 and	 divide	 it	 up	 between	 them.	 Washington	 agreed	 withHamilton	 that	 France	 had	 embarked	 on	 an	 offensive,	 not	 adefensive,	war	and	that	the	Franco-American	treaty	of	1778	didnot	 apply.	 He	 also	 saw	 the	 economic	 good	 sense	 of	 seeking	 arapprochement	 with	 England	 andproclamation	he	had	been	considering.issued	 the	 neutrality“It	 behooves	 the	 government	 of	 this	 country,”	 the	 Presidenttold	Congress,	“to	use	every	means	in	its	power	to	prevent	thecitizens	 .	 .	 .	 from	 embroiling	 us	 with	 either	 of	 these	 powers[England	 or	 France]	 by	 endeavoring	 to	 maintain	 a	 strictneutrality.	 I	 therefore	 require	 that	 you	 will	 .	 .	 .	 [take]	 suchmeasures	as	shall	be	deemed	most	likely	to	effect	this	desirablepurpose	.	.	.	without	delay.”33John	 Quincy	 seconded	 the	 President,	 stating	 that	 “animpartial	and	unequivocal	neutrality	.	.	.	is	prescribed	to	us	as	aduty.”34Genet,	 however,	 responded	 differently,	 buying	 boldfacednewspaper	 advertisements	 that	 called	 on	 “Friends	 of	 France”to	 ignore	 Washington’s	 Neutrality	 Proclamation	 and	 enlist	 inthe	French	service	to	fight	the	British.	“Does	not	patriotism	callupon	us	to	assist	France?”	his	advertisements	asked.	“As	Sonsof	 Freedom,	 would	 it	 not	 become	 our	 character	 to	 lend	 someassistance	to	a	nation	combating	to	secure	their	liberty?”35Francophiles	across	the	United	States	rushed	into	the	streetsto	 protest	 the	 President’s	 stance	 and	 demand	 that	 Congressdeclare	 war	 against	 Britain.	 An	 estimated	 5,000	 supportersrallied	outside	Genet’s	hotel	in	Philadelphia	and	set	off	endlessdemonstrations	that	raged	through	the	night	into	the	next	day—and	the	next.	Vice	President	Adams	described	“the	terrorismexcited	 by	 Genet	 .	 .	 .	 when	 10,000	 people	 in	 the	 streets	 ofPhiladelphia,	day	after	day,	threatened	to	drag	Washington	outof	 his	 house	 and	 effect	 a	 revolution	 in	 the	 government	 orcompel	it	to	declare	war	in	favor	of	the	French	Revolution	andagainst	 England.”	 Adams	 “judged	 it	 prudent	 and	 necessary	 toorder	 chests	 of	 arms	 from	 the	 war	 office”	 to	 protect	 hishouse.36	 Fearing	 for	 the	 safety	 of	 his	 wife	 and	 grandchildren,Washington	 made	 plans	 to	 send	 them	 to	 the	 safety	 of	 MountVernon.Adding	 to	 the	 turmoil	 was	 the	 sudden	 arrival	 of	 the	 Frenchfleet	 from	 the	 Antilles.	 Genet	 ordered	 gangways	 lowered	 andsent	 French	 seamen	 to	 join	 Jacobin	 mobs	 in	 the	 crowdedstreets.	“The	town	is	one	continuous	scene	of	riot,”	the	Britishconsul	 wrote	 in	 panic	 to	 his	 foreign	 minister	 in	 London.	 “TheFrench	 seamen	 range	 the	 streets	 by	 night	 and	 by	 day,	 armedwith	 cutlasses	 and	 commit	 the	 most	 daring	 outrages.	 Genetseems	 ready	 to	 raise	 the	 tricolor	 and	 proclaim	 himselfproconsul.	 President	 Washington	 is	 unable	 to	 enforce	 anymeasures	in	opposition.”37As	 pro-French	 mobs	 formed	 on	 street	 corners	 demandingWashington’s	head,	Genet	sent	the	President	an	ultimatum	“inthe	 name	 of	 France”	 to	 call	 Congress	 into	 special	 session	 tochoose	between	neutrality	and	war.	Genet	warned	Washingtonthat	 if	 he	 refused	 to	 declare	 war	 against	 Britain,	 Genet	 would“appeal	to	the	people”	to	overthrow	the	government	and	unitewith	France.	“I	have	acquired	the	esteem	and	the	good	wishesof	 all	 republican	 Americans	 by	 tightening	 the	 bonds	 offraternity	 between	 them	 and	 ourselves,”	 Genet	 ranted.	 Hepredicted	 that	 Americans	 would	 “rally	 from	 all	 sides”	 tosupport	 him	 and	 “demonstrate	 with	 cries	 of	 joy	 .	 .	 .	 that	 thedemocrats	 of	 America	 realize	 perfectly	 that	 their	 future	 isultimately	bound	with	France.”38Infuriated	by	the	Frenchman’s	behavior,	John	Quincy	assailedGenet’s	“political	villainy.”	In	a	series	of	articles,	he	condemnedthe	 Frenchman’s	 activities	 in	 America;	 he	 labeled	 as	 “piracy”and	 “highway	 robbery”	 the	 attacks	 on	 British	 ships	 byprivateers	 sponsored	 by	 Genet.	 Writing	 under	 the	 pseudonym“Columbus,”	 John	 Quincy	 called	 Genet	 “the	 most	 implacableand	 dangerous	 enemy	 to	 the	 peace	 and	 happiness	 of	 mycountry.”	He	called	Genet’s	conduct	“obnoxious”	and	urged	thePresident	 to	 demand	 his	 recall.	 “In	 a	 country	 where	 genuinefreedomisunquestionably	 the	 right	 of	 every	 individual	 citizen	 to	 expresswithout	 control	 his	 sentiments	 upon	 public	 measures	 and	 theconduct	of	public	men.	.	.	.	The	privilege	ought	not,	however	.	..	to	be	extended	to	the	conduct	of	foreign	ministers.”39John	 Quincy	 declared,is	 enjoyed,”“itJohn	 Quincy’s	 articles	 “attracted	 much	 attention	 in	 theprincipal	 cities	 of	 the	 continent	 and	 drew	 forth	 manycomments,”	he	recalled	in	his	memoirs.	“It	fell	under	the	eye	ofWashington,	then	.	.	.	anxiously	considering	the	very	same	classof	questions	in	a	cabinet	almost	equally	divided	in	opinion.	Heseems	 to	 have	 been	 impressed	 by	 the	 proof	 of	 Mr.	 Adams’spowers	 to	 such	 an	 extent	 as	 to	 mark	 him	 out	 for	 the	 publicservice	at	an	early	opportunity.”40John	 Quincy’s	 articles	 generated	 national	 and	 internationalcomment,	 with	 Boston	 Federalists	 embracing	 him—and	 evennaming	 him	 the	 city’s	 official	 July	 4	 orator,	 the	 highestnonelective	 honor	 Bostonians	 conferred	 on	 one	 of	 their	 owneach	 year.	 With	 his	 oratory,	 John	 Quincy	 pleased	 Federalistsand	 Antifederalists	 alike	 by	 predicting	 that	 American	 libertywould	 soon	 inspire	 oppressed	 peoples	 in	 Europe	 to	 mirror	 theAmerican	Revolution.In	 the	 weeks	 that	 followed,	 President	 Washington	 reactedfiercelyto	 Edmond	 Genet’s	 activities,	 demanding—andobtaining—his	 recall	 by	 the	 French	 government.	 Washingtonalso	accepted	Jefferson’s	resignation.	To	Washington’s	relief,	anew	 French	 ambassador,	 Jean-Antoine-Joseph	 Fauchet,	 arrivedin	 Philadelphia	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 1794—with	 a	 warrant	 forGenet’s	 arrest	 and	 a	 guillotine	 aboard	 ship	 to	 punish	 him	 forhis	 indiscretions	 as	 French	 minister.	 Genet	 pleaded	 with	 thenew	 secretary	 of	 state,	 Edmund	 Randolph,	 not	 to	 enforce	 thewarrant,	 all	 but	 sobbing	 that	 a	 former	 Paris	 police	 chief	 waswaiting	 below	 deck	 on	 Fauchet’s	 ship,	 sharpening	 a	 blade	 tosever	 his	 neck.	 A	 former	 Virginia	 governor	 and	 close	 friend	 ofWashington,	Randolph	turned	to	the	President	for	guidance.“We	ought	not	to	wish	his	punishment,”	Washington	decidedgenerously,	 granting	 the	 Frenchman	 political	 asylum	 and	 theprotection	 of	 the	 government	 he	 had	 tried	 to	 overthrow.41Fearing	Fauchet’s	agents	would	kidnap	him,	Genet	sneaked	outof	 Philadelphia	 during	 the	 night	 and	 found	 his	 way	 to	 asecluded	 hideaway	 on	 a	 friend’s	 farm	 in	 Bristol,	 Connecticut,where	 he	 temporarily	 disappeared	 from	 public	 view.	 WithGenet’s	 disappearance,	 the	 Francophile	 press	 in	 the	 Eastended	 its	 provocations,	 and	 rioters	 all	 but	 vanished	 from	 thestreets	of	eastern	cities.AlthoughJohn	 Quincy’s	 articles	 attacking	 Genet	 hadimpressed	 President	 Washington,	 they	 apparently	 did	 notplease	 John	 Adams.	 Worried	 that	 his	 son	 was	 focusing	 less	 onbuilding	 his	 law	 practice	 than	 writing	 newspaper	 essayswithout	recompense,	John	Adams	admonished	John	Quincy	andreiterated	his	ambitions	for	his	son’s	rise	to	national	leadershipand	the	presidency.	“The	mediocrity	of	fortune	that	you	professought	 not	 to	 content	 you.	 You	 come	 into	 life	 with	 advantageswhich	will	disgrace	you	if	your	success	is	mediocre.	And	if	youdo	not	rise	to	the	head	not	only	of	your	profession	but	of	yourcountry	it	will	be	owing	to	your	own	Laziness,	Slovenliness	andObstinacy”	(his	italics	and	caps).42President	 George	 Washington	 appointed	 John	 Quincy	 AdamsAmerican	 minister	 to	 Holland	 and	 set	 the	 young	 man	 on	 thepath	to	a	life	of	public	service.	(LIBRARY	OF	CONGRESS)John	 Adams	 had	 no	 sooner	 posted	 his	 letter	 when	 newsarrived	 that	 made	 him	 regret	 having	 written	 it,	 and	 tremblingwith	excitement,	he	quickly	scratched	out	a	second	letter	to	hisson:President	 Washington	 is	 determined	 to	 nominate	 you	 togo	to	Holland	as	Resident	Minister.	.	.	.The	salary	is	4500	dollars	a	year.	.	.	.	Your	knowledge	ofDutch	 and	 French,	 your	 education	 in	 that	 country,	 youracquaintance	 with	 my	 old	 friends	 there	 will	 give	 youmany	 advantages.	 .	 .	 .	 It	 will	 require	 all	 your	 prudenceand	 all	 your	 other	 virtues	 as	 well	 as	 all	 your	 talents.	 Itwill	be	expected	that	you	come	here	to	see	the	Presidentand	 secretary	 of	 state	 before	 you	 embark.	 I	 shall	 writeyou	as	soon	as	the	nomination	is	made	and	advised	by	theSenate.	 Be	 secret.	 Don’t	 open	 your	 mouth	 to	 any	 humanbeing	on	the	subject	except	your	Mother.43Impressed	 by	 young	 Adams’s	 writings,	 Washington	 had	 firstconsidered	naming	him	U.S.	District	Attorney	for	New	England,but	after	reviewing	the	young	man’s	early	experiences	with	hisfather	 and	 Francis	 Dana	 in	 Europe	 and	 recognizing	 hiscommand	 of	 French,	 Dutch,	 and	 German	 as	 assets	 possessedby	 few	 Americans	 in	 government,	 he	 decided	 to	 send	 JohnQuincy	 to	 Holland.	 The	 assignment	 would	 not	 require	 criticaldecisions,	but	it	would	put	John	Quincy	in	a	key	listening	postin	 Europe’s	 swirling	 diplomatic	 cosmos—a	 perfect	 assignmentfor	a	young	diplomat	with	John	Quincy’s	credentials.At	 first,	 John	 Quincy	 believed	 that	 his	 father	 had	 arrangedthe	 appointment,	 and	 he	 writhed	 with	 anger,	 disgust,	 andshame.	 He	 soon	 learned,	 however,	 that	 his	 appointment	 “hadbeen	as	unexpected	to	him	[his	father]	as	to	myself	and	that	hehad	never	uttered	a	word	upon	which	a	wish	on	his	part	couldbe	presumed	that	a	public	office	should	be	conferred	upon	me.”Indeed,	 the	 elder	 Adams	 knew	 nothing	 of	 Washington’sdecision	 until	 notified	 by	 Secretary	 of	 State	 Randolph	 threedays	 before	 the	 Senate	 confirmation.	 After	 reassuring	 himselfthat	 Washington	 had	 appointed	 his	 son	 solely	 on	 the	 basis	 ofthe	 young	 man’s	 qualifications,	 John	 Adams	 let	 his	 pride	 pouronto	 the	 pages	 of	 a	 letter	 to	 his	 son,	 saying	 that	 theappointment	 was	 “the	 result	 ofthe	 President’s	 ownobservations	and	reflections	.	.	.	as	proof	that	sound	principlesin	morals	and	government	are	cherished	by	the	executive	of	theUnited	 States	 and	 that	 study,	 science	 and	 literature	 arerecommendations	which	will	not	be	overlooked.”It	 will	 be	 a	 serious	 trust.	 .	 .	 .	 It	 ought	 to	 make	 a	 deepimpression.	 .	 .	 .	 Such	 trusts	 are	 sacred.	 .	 .	 .	 The	 law	 ofnations	 and	 diplomatic	 researches	 should	 engage	 hisearly	 attention	 as	 well	 as	 the	 Dutch	 language,	 butespecially	every	thing	relative	to	the	interests	of	the	U.S.A	 few	 years	 spent	 in	 the	 present	 grade	 will	 recommendhim	to	advancement	to	higher	stages	and	larger	spheres.The	 interests,	 views	 and	 motions	 of	 the	 belligerentpowers	will	engage	his	constant	attention	and	employ	allhis	sagacity.	He	must	consult	with	the	President.	.	.	.	Hemust	attend	a	little	to	his	dress	and	person.	No	man	aliveis	more	attentive	to	these	things	than	the	President.	.	.	.	Ishall	drop	hints	from	time	to	time	for	I	have	many	thingsto	say.	44When	 he	 had	 emptied	 his	 mind,	 heart,	 and	 soul	 of	 advice,Adams	concluded,It	is	a	serious	trust	that	is	about	to	be	committed	to	you.	Ihope	 you	 will	 reflect	 upon	 it	 with	 due	 attention,	 collectyourself,	 let	 no	 little	 weakness	 escape	 you,	 and	 devoteyourself	 to	 the	 service	 of	 your	 country.	 And	 may	 theblessing	of	heaven	attend	you.So	prays	your	affectionate	father,	John	Adams.	45Her	 son’s	 appointment	 moved	 Abigail	 as	 much	 as	 it	 had	 herhusband,	 and,	 unable	 to	 contain	 her	 excitement,	 she	 wrote	 toMartha	Washington	“acknowledging	the	honor	conferred	.	.	.	bythe	President.”I	 have	 the	 satisfaction	 to	 say	 to	 you,	 Madam,	 perhapswith	the	fond	partiality	of	a	parent,	that	I	do	not	know	inany	one	instance	of	his	conduct	either	at	home	or	abroadthat	 he	 has	 given	 me	 any	 occasion	 of	 regret,	 and	 I	 hopefrom	 his	 prudence,	 honor,	 integrity	 and	 fidelity	 that	 hewill	never	discredit	the	character	so	honorably	conferredupon	 him.	 Painful	 as	 the	 circumstance	 of	 a	 separationfrom	 him	 will	 be	 to	 me,	 Madam,	 I	 derive	 a	 satisfactionfrom	 the	 hope	 of	 his	 becoming	 eminently	 useful	 to	 hiscountry.46John	 Quincy	 Adams	 closed	 his	 law	 office	 and	 plungedheadlong	 into	 the	 world	 of	 diplomacy	 and	 government.	 To	 hisdelight,	 he	 found	 himself	 mixing,	 as	 he	 had	 in	 his	 youth,	 withsome	 of	 the	 world’s	 most	 celebrated	 political	 figures,	 at	 onemoment	 engaged	 in	 discussions	 with	 the	 President	 of	 theUnited	 States	 and	 the	 secretary	 of	 state;	 at	 another,	 meetingwith	 Treasury	 Secretary	 Hamilton	 or	 Secretary	 of	 War	 HenryKnox;	 then	 sharing	 tea	 with	 such	 visiting	 dignitaries	 as	 theenigmatic	 Charles-Maurice	 de	 Talleyrand-Perigord,	 or	 moresimply	Talleyrand.Born	 an	 aristocrat,	 Talleyrand	 had	 been	 a	 French	 Catholicbishop	before	discarding	his	clerical	robes	and	renouncing	thechurch	in	favor	of	secularism	and	revolution.	A	member	of	therevolutionary	 National	 Assembly,	 he	 went	 to	 England	 as	 aspecial	emissary	of	the	Jacobins	but	paid	a	few	too	many	visitsto	 the	 lavish	 London	 quarters	 of	 the	 Duc	 d’Orléans,	 pretenderto	 the	 French	 throne.	 When	 Talleyrand	 returned	 to	 France,Jacobins	accused	him	of	royalist	collaboration,	and	he	fled	theguillotine	 for	 America,	 having	 only	 just	 arrived	 when	 he	 metJohn	 Quincy.	 Although	 he	 fully	 expected	 a	 presidentialreception	 worthy	 of	 his	 aristocraticlineage,	 Washingtonrefused	 to	 see	 him	 because	 reception	 of	 exiled	 aristocratsmight	 be	 seen	 as	 a	 public	 rebuff	 of	 the	 French	 revolutionarygovernment.	Talleyrand	twisted	the	President’s	rejection	into	adeep	hatred	of	all	things	American—even	the	women,	whom	hedescribed	as	“adorable	at	fifteen,	faded	at	twenty-three,	old	atthirty-five,	 decrepit	 at	 forty	 or	 forty-five,	 losing	 their	 shape,their	teeth	and	their	hair.”	He	would	soon	direct	his	hatred	forAmerica	toward	John	Quincy’s	father.47John	 Quincy	 spent	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 summer	 of	 1794	 studyingState	 Department	 documents	 and	 meeting	 with	 Secretary	 ofState	 Randolph.	 Randolph	 told	 John	 Quincy	 to	 stop	 in	 Londonon	his	way	to	The	Hague	and	deliver	a	trunk	load	of	documentsfor	former	chief	justice	John	Jay,	the	former	secretary	of	state,who	 was	 negotiating	 a	 new	 treaty	 with	 Britain.	 Relationsbetween	the	two	nations	had	soured	since	they	had	signed	the1783	 peace	 treaty,	 whose	 terms	 both	 Britain	 and	 the	 UnitedStates	had	openly	violated.	American	state	courts	were	first	toviolate	 them	 by	 blocking	 collection	 of	 prerevolution	 debts	 byBritish	merchants	and	payment	of	compensation	to	loyalists	forconfiscation	 of	 their	 properties	 and	 estates.	 The	 British,	 inturn,	 retaliated	 by	 refusing	 to	 abandon	 military	 posts	 in	 theNorthwest	 Territory	 in	 Ohio,	 Indiana,	 and	 Illinois	 and,	 worse,inciting	 Indian	 attacks	 on	 American	 settlers	 in	 the	 area.Relations	between	the	two	nations	deteriorated	still	more	afterthe	outbreak	of	war	between	England	and	France	provoked	theBritish	navy	to	seize	neutral	ships	trading	with	France	and	theFrench	West	Indies.	By	April	1794,	when	Washington	sent	JohnJay	to	England,	the	British	had	seized	more	than	250	Americanships	 and	 impressed	 hundreds	 of	 American	 sailors	 into	 theBritish	navy.Unnerved	 by	 the	 prospect	 of	 being	 alone	 and	 all	 butfriendless	 in	 Holland	 for	 three	 years,	 John	 Quincy	 asked	 hisbrother	 Thomas	 Boylston—the	 youngest	 of	 the	 three	 Adamsboys—to	 come	 to	 Europe	 with	 him	 as	 an	 aide.	 Thomas	 hadgraduated	 from	 Harvard,	 studied	 law,	 and	 passed	 his	 barexams	 in	 Philadelphia,	 where	 he	 had	 planned	 to	 open	 a	 lawoffice.	 Their	 mother	 Abigail	 was	 delighted	 with	 John	 Quincy’soffer	 to	 his	 younger	 brother.	 “I	 have	 always	 wished	 that	 yourbrother	might	have	an	opportunity	of	going	abroad,”	she	wroteto	 John	 Quincy,	 “and	 as	 you	 are	 inclined	 to	 have	 himaccompany	 you,	 I	 think	 .	 .	 .	 you	 may	 be	 mutually	 beneficial	 toeach	other,	and	it	will	not	be	so	solitary	to	you.	I	will	not	takemy	 own	 personal	 feelings	 into	 the	 question.	 Whatever	 may	 befor	the	benefit	of	my	children	I	acquiesce	to.”	Abigail	began	tocry	 as	 she	 pleaded,	 “Let	 me	 hear	 from	 you	 by	 every	 .	 .	 .	 “Shethen	 crossed	 out	 the	 word	 “every”	 and	 wrote	 “post”—“Let	 mehear	from	you	by	the	post.”Shaken	 by	 the	 prospect	 of	 losing	 her	 oldest	 and	 youngestsons,	 she	 added,	 “I	 have	 a	 request	 to	 make	 of	 you	 and	 yourbrother.	 If	 there	 is	 a	 miniature	 painter	 .	 .	 .	 sit	 for	 yourlikenesses	.	.	.	and	give	them	to	Mr.	Anthony	to	set	with	a	lockof	each	of	your	hairs	to	be	put	on	the	back	together	with	yournames.	.	.	.	You	must	spare	time	for	it	if	possible.”48John	 Quincy	 attended	 to	 every	 detail	 but	 the	 portraits	 as	 heprepared	 to	 leave	 for	 Europe.	 His	 father	 sent	 him	 one	 lastmessage	of	advice.	“The	post	at	the	Hague,”	he	enthused	to	hisson,	“is	an	important	diplomatic	station	which	may	afford	manyinformation	 and	 ofopportunities	 of	 acquiring	 politicalpenetrating	the	designs	of	many	cabinets	in	Europe.”In	three	or	four	years	you	may	be	promoted	to	the	rank	ofminister	 plenipotentiary—possibly	 in	 less	 time	 if	 youdiscover	 to	 the	 President	 talents	 and	 principles	 for	 sohigh	 a	 trust.	 .	 .	 .	 I	 would	 not	 advise	 you	 to	 fix	 anyunalterable	 resolutions	 except	 in	 favor	 of	 virtue	 andintegrity	 and	 unchangeable	 love	 to	 your	 country.	 .	 .	 .Endeavor	to	obtain	correspondences	with	able	men	in	thesouthern	 and	 middle	 states	 as	 well	 as	 the	 northern	 onesand	these	will	inform	and	advise	you.	If	my	life	should	bespared,	 I	 hope	 to	 be	 one	 of	 them	 and	 will	 give	 you	 mybest	 opinions	 and	 advice	 as	 circumstances	 occur.	 I	 wishyou	 a	 pleasant	 voyage	 and	 much	 honor,	 satisfaction	 andsuccess	 in	 your	 mission.	 I	 am	 with	 constant	 affection,your	friend	and	father,	John	Adams.49On	 September	 17,	 1794,	 twenty-seven-year-old	 John	 QuincyAdams,	 an	 independent	 man	 at	 last,	 departed	 for	 Europe.	 Hisfather	sent	him	and	Thomas	a	farewell	note:I	 once	 more	 wish	 you	 a	 prosperous	 voyage	 and	 a	 happylife.	 Remember	 your	 characters	 as	 men	 of	 business	 aswell	as	men	of	virtue,	and	always	depend	on	the	affectionand	friendship	of	your	father.50Strengthened	by	his	father’s	blessing,	John	Quincy	sailed	offto	help	guide	his	nation’s	destiny	as	one	of	the	first	ministers	ofits	embryonic	foreign	service,	but	the	storms	of	war	blackenedthe	 seas	 ahead	 and	 seemed	 to	 bode	 ill	 for	 his	 mission	 to	 keepAmerica	free	of	foreign	intrigues	and	war.