CHAPTER TENTHE SHOOTING OP LYTE GREGORY BEFORE THECONVENTIONTHEexecutive board had met and were havinga pretty stormy time, and James Murphyfrom Butte would not sign the emergency billthat is, for the expenditures out of the emergencyfund. During one of their sessions it was reportedby Foster Milburn, a Federation man from Idahowho had been a de-Springs, that Lyte Gregorytective in the Idaho Springs labor troubles, andhad been a deputy and a leader of the deputies ina strike down in the Southern coal-fields, severalwas in the city,depredations being laid at his doorand that Milburn met him the morning he arrivedin Denver. Milburn told Pettibone about him, andPettibone went over to the Federation headquarters,where the executive board was in session, and toldthem about Gregory, and they said there ought tobe something done with him. That afternoon Petti-bone saw Adams, and wanted him to go out withhim that night, and take Gregory and mutilate him,THE SHOOTING OF LYTE GREGORYas they claimed he had helped do that to an old mandown in the coal-fields. And a little later they sawme and told me about it, and wanted to know if Iwould go along, and we fixed up to go.We threePettibone, Adams, and myselfallwent over on Curtis Street, where Gregory, Milburn,and another man were in the back part of a saloontalking, and we went in and got a drink, and sawthem, so we would know them. Then we came outand stood across the street in front of the St. JamesHotel, where we could see them when they came out.Milburn understood what we were going to do, andstayed with them to find out where they were going,and while we stood there watching for them, Petti-bone made an excuse to go some place, and said hewould be back in a few minutes. But while he wasgone they all three came out, and Gregory and thisother man took a street-car. Adams and I took thesame car, and followed them when they got off. Theywent down to a saloon on Santa Fe, near TenthStreet South, and Milburn came out on the nextcar. He had been up to see some men in the GraniteBlock, where a good many men we knew were, sohe could establish an alibi. The man that came withGregory was also from Idaho Springs, and ran apoker game in the saloon they went to. After Mil-burn came he told us all about this. Gregory and123CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDsome others sat down in the main saloon and wentto playing cards, and we thought we would give upour former plan and kill him outright.It was now about ten o'clock at night. I wentout to our room two or three miles away, and leftthe rest watching him. We were going to shoot himthrough the window of the saloon as he sat at thetable. I got a sawed-off shot-gun, and brought itback in pieces under my coat. But when I got backwith the gun, they had moved into a little room inthe back part of the saloon, and we could not seethem, though we could hear them from the streetthrough a window. But this window had the blindsso closely drawn that we could not see them. I wentin once and bought a bottle of beer, to see if I couldsee where they were, but the door was closed, and Icould see nothing, and we concluded to wait untilGregory came out.A little after twelve o'clock he came out andstarted up the street alone, and we three followedhim. We had to cross the street to get on the sameside he was on. In doing this we ran into some wiresstretched on the outside of the sidewalk to protectthe lawns, and when we stumbled into these we at-tracted his attention, and he started to reach forhis gun and back up toward the fence. When he didthis, I shot him three times in quick succession be-THE SHOOTING OF LYTE GREGORYfore he fell, and then ran down the alley, as we werejust opposite it. We separated as soon as we gotout of the alley. I discharged another shell acciden-tally, before we got out of the alley, in taking theshells out of the gun. All the shooting, includingthis, took place within a minute or so, and we sawno one and no one seemed to be following us.I took the gun down and put it under my coat,and we made our way to Pettibone's housethat is,Adams and I. Milburn went by himself. We left theshot-gun at Pettibone's in the place that had beenpreviously arranged while we were working on thegovernor, and we went on to our room on DowningAvenue. Adams and I put some turpentine on ourshoes, so they couldn't follow us with dogs. Theydid try to follow us the next day with some blood-hounds they got from Pueblo, but they went justthe opposite direction from the way we went.The next morning the papers had the account ofthe murder in them. We did not go down-town untilthe afternoon, and then went to the Granite Blockto Jack Simpkins's and Kirwan's room, they bothbeing members of the executive board. This wasSunday and the board was not in session. Haywoodand Pettibone came up there a little while later, andHaywood, Pettibone, Simpkins, Adams, and myselftalked over the murder, and they told us that we125CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDdid a fine job. Haywood said he had run across Arm-strong, the sheriff and chief of police in Denver,and he said Armstrong said that whoever "bumpedGregory had done a good job, and that his menoffwould not look very much for any one. Haywoodsaid the detectives had had Milburn over and had"questioned him, but did not arrest him, though theytold him they wanted to see him again. He said Mil-burn was a cool, level-headed fellow, and that he hadgiven an account of where he went after leavingGregory at the saloon on Curtis Street, and theyhad gone and seen these parties that he was with,and they had told the same story. I don't know, butI think this had been previously arranged. They hadMilburn up a time or two afterward and questionedhim, but did not arrest him. There was a lot of news-paper talk about this, but that was all; there wasnever any one arrested for it.Haywood told me some time afterward that someof the members of the executive board were up atthe office the next morning after this happened, andSimpkins took the paper with an account of thismurder in and handed it to Murphy, and that Mur-phy looked at the head-lines, and put the paperbehind him and would not read it. I don't knowwhether it was before or after thisbut I think itthat they handed Murphy the emergencywas after126THE SHOOTING OF LYTE GREGORYbill and told him to sign his name the first one. Ithink at first he refused, and Haywood told him thathe (Murphy) would sign it, and say that he liked it.This was the bill that Murphy had refused to sign,but Haywood told me that he signed it and they hadno more trouble with him; Haywood said if he hadnot signed it he would not have left the room alive,and he said he guessed he thought of Gregory.A short time after this Adams got on a drunk,and some of his friends sent him back to CrippleCreek. Then the annual Federation convention met.I attended this most of the time, and they had apretty stormy session. Many of the delegates weredissatisfied with the strikes that had been called andthe large amount of money that had been spentand they were talkingnearly half a million dollarsof electing new officers. James Murphy, the repre-sentative on the executive board from Butte, hadbeen down to Telluride and had seen Moyer in the"there, and it was said that Moyer hadmade some deal with Butte and was going to turnHaywood down, and it was thought there was goingto be a split and some of the districts would with-draw from the Federation.bull-pen"Moyer always seemed to be jealous of Haywood,and he had some reason to be, as Haywood alwaysseemed to run the office. And when Moyer was in127CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDjail at Telluride their relations became more strainedthan ever. Moyer used to send what letters or otherbusiness he had connected with the Federation to hiswife, and had her get Copley of the executive boardto attend to them. This made Haywood prettyangry. It was also reported that Moyer had shownthe military officers at Telluride great respect. Thisalso made Haywood angry, and when Murphy wentdown to see Moyer, Haywood and Pettibone thoughtthere was some job being worked up by Moyer andMurphy to oust Haywood ; and Pettibone and Hay-wood thought Moyer was weakening, and we talkedof putting him out of the way. After Moyer got out,he explained that the reason he was so friendly tothe militia officers was that he was sick and thoughtthey would use him better. But he and Haywoodwere not very good friends afterward. Moyer wasin jail over three months, and when he came backto the office again after he was released from the"bull-pen," Haywood and he just spoke to eachother, as if he had only been out a day.128