CHAPTER SEVENTHE EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINE"ITHOUGHT at first I would not have anythingto do with the strike, and I had taken no partin it up to the time the militia came. I had beenhigh-grading," and had a little money saved up,and had not asked for any relief from the union.A few days after the militia arrived, Johnnie Nevilleand myself went to Denver, and went from thereover to Routt County hunting, and were gone abouta month.There had nothing unusual occurred then. Butsoon after we left, the militia made several arrestsof men active in the unionmost of them from theBull Hill end of the district. Some of these men,whose names I remember, were Sherman Parker, W.F. Davis, W. B. Easterly, H. H. McKinney, TomCampbell, and Vic-Foster, Paddy Mulaney,tor Poole. The militia established a "atGoldfield. This was nothing like the "the Co3ur d'Alenes. It was a small affair. I do notthink they ever had had more than twenty arrested" Slim "bull-penbull-penin""EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEat once up to that time. They used a small jail atfirst, and afterward they built a special house. Thiswas not over twelve by twenty feet, I should say.We thought perhaps the strike would be settledby the time we came back from hunting, but wefound out when we came out from the hills that itwas far from settled, and was getting worse all theIf I had not been married there, I would nottime.have gone back, but I went back about the middleof October.While we had been gone, the civil courts and themilitia officers had been fighting over the unionleaders they had in the "bull-pen." The judge ofthe district court had issued habeas corpus papersto compel the militia officers to bring these men intocourt and show cause for holding them. The officerswere satisfied they ought to hold these men, but theyknew they could not prove anything against them anddid not want to take them into court. But they werefinally brought into court, and the judge ordered themreleased or turned over to the civil authorities. Theofficers refused at first to do this, and the unionleaders wanted the judge to have the sheriff enforcehis order, and the sheriff to deputize enough menand arm them to carry it out. This would have meantmuch bloodshed, as it would not have been muchtrouble to get men to fight the militia, and the minersCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhad a good many arms and plenty of ammunition.But the lawyers advised the judge not to do this.Now, nothing could have happened to suit thehead officers of the union any better than this, un-less it would have been for the judge to direct thesheriff to enforce his order. This looked to the pub-lic like persecution, and as if these militia officerswanted to hold these men in thejustbecause they were union men and leaders. But finallythe governor ordered the union men released, andthere was no more trouble then.bull-pen""After this first clash between the civil officers andthe militia, things went along pretty quiet for atime. The militia released the men, and after thatthey and the civil officers worked more in harmony.I did not take any active part. I attended the unionmeetings and felt more in sympathy with them, asI, like 'most every one else, thought they were per-secuting these men because they were active unionmen, and I hated the militia more than I did thenon-union men. But I hated them all, and felt morebitter against them all the time. Some of the militiawere camped at first not more than a hundred yardsfrom our house. There were some kids among themthat did not look to be more than fifteen years old.They would be peddling ham and anything else theyhad to the saloons for whisky, and the better ac-70EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEquainted they got with the people, the more officiousthey got. I am speaking of these things to showthe reader how such bitter feelings get worked upbetween men at such times. There were some of themilitia that lived, or had lived, in the district, andthey sometimes had some old score to settle withthe union men, as none of the union belonged to themilitia.During the quiet time I went to "high-grading"high-gradingagain in the Vindicator mine. This was a little risky,as the shaft we had to go down was only about ahundred feet from the shaft house, where some ofthe militia were camped ; but as this shaft had noshaft house over it, we could get out of sight pretty" was no easy job, asquick. This "we had to climb down an old man-way 900 feet,where the ladders were out in some places, and thengo through old stopes and drifts 2,000 or 3,000feet, dig out our load, and pack it back. Thiswould take us nearly all night. We would pack allthe way from forty to eighty pounds. Sometimesthis would not be very high grade ; we got from fiftycents to a dollar a pound for it. When it got belowthat, we quit.During our trip into this mine, we discovered theyhad stored about a car-load of dynamite in a cross-cut on the eighth level of the mine. I met Davis, the71CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDpresident of the Altman union, right after that, and,more as a joke than anything else, I said there wasa car-load of powder down in the mine, and if theywanted to do anything, they could go down andblow that up. But he seemed to take it seriously,and talked about how we could do it. A few daysafterward they started this mine up, as they werestarting the mines as fast as they could get men.The strike leaders would report to the unions everyweek that the mines had only a few men, and wouldsoon have to settle with the unions, but it was veryevident that, while the mine owners might not begetting first-class men, they were getting all themen they wanted, and that they had no intentionof yielding to the demands of the union.Davis came to me a few days afterward andwanted to know if I would go down and set thatpowder off when the shift was at work. He said hewould get "Slim" Campbell to go with me, andgive me $200. After he had talked a while, he saidhe would have to go and get this money at Federa-tion headquarters, and it might take him three or fourdays after we did the job, but he would be sure toget it. He said we would have to do something toaway, and scare our men andscare these" scabs "keep them in line, or the strike was lost.Now, when Davis talked this way to me, it was72EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEthe first time I ever knew that the head officers ofthe Federation were responsible for the many dep-redations that had been laid to the Western Fed-eration of Miners. I did always believe that thesecrimes were caused by union men, as the victim wasinvariably some one opposed to the union, but Ialways supposed some hot-headed union man didthese things of his own accord, and 'most all of theunion men believed this, for if it had been knownthe strike leaders were responsible for any suchviolence, the union would not have tolerated it fora minute. But after Davis proposed to me to blow upthe Vindicator mine, and said he would have to go toDenver to get the money for me, I then began to real-ize that the head officers must be behind these things.Now, only looking at one side of the question, andhaving no moneyas the little I did have I depos-ited in the First National Bank of Victor, and thatinstitution had failed and left me without a centthe resentful feeling I had against thesescabs,"who were taking our places, together with the offerof money, influenced me. I told Davis I would godown and set off the dynamite, but I would rathergo alone than with " Slim "Campbell. He said ifI would he would give me $200. Of course, if weset this car-load of powder off, it would blow out thewhole mine and kill everybody in it."73CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARD"high-gradingI afterward thought I would go and ask Joe"Schultz, who had been down therewith me, and see what he thought about it. He alsoknew the powder was there, as we had gotten twofifty-pound boxes of it, and carried it up and soldit to some leasers we knew. After I told him aboutit and about the money, he said he thought we wouldbe justified in doing it. He was a quiet, conservativefellow, but this strike had made him feel just as Idid. So we got our things ready, and went downin the mine, and waited until we thought the night-shift had gone up to lunch at twelve o'clock. Wehad to go by the station on the shaft in the eighthlevel to go where the powder was. We went outpretty close to the station, and waited about tenminutes, and thought sure they had all gone up,and we knew we had to hurry, as they took only ahalf-hour for lunch."We started out to the station, which was alllighted up with electric lights, and as we got closeto it there was a eager there, who said,Hurry up,boys, this is the last cage." He thought we were someof the miners at work, and had been late getting out.This so surprised us that we began to back up inthe dark, as we were not masked and he might knowus. But he got his light and began to follow us, andas we had our light out, we could not go very fast74EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEin the dark, and we had to make him go back. Wetook a couple of shots at him, as we both had six-shooters. We did not hurt him, but he went backin a hurry, and we knew we had to get out of themine as quick as possible, and we did not botherto look for the powder. We told, or at least I told,Davis afterward it was not there. I told him we wenton across to where it was after we shot at this fellow,and they had moved itwhich proved to be true,as we found out afterward they had moved it up intothe magazine the first day they began work. Weknew nothing about this when I told Davis, but Iwanted to make out how brave we were, and they,of course, believed us, after they learned it had beenmoved.But, to tell the truth about myself, I was prettybadly scared, and I think my partner was in thesame fix. We had to go up a hundred feet to thestope, and then go a couple of thousand feet or sothrough a drift, and then go down through anotherold stope on the timbers, and crawl on our stomachsin some places through a narrow passage we had dugout when we were "high-grading," and climb aboutnine hundred feet up an old, wet man-way, wherethe ladders were out in some places. The militia werecamped out over a hundred feet from where we cameup, and the place was well lighted up with electric75CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDlights. We came up as fast as we possibly could,and made good headway, as we knew the way welland were used to climbing out of there with a load,but still it took us about half an hour. My partnerwanted me to tell them, if we were caught, that wewere down counting how many machines there wererunning; but I told him he could do as he pleased,I was going to shoot my way out and take a chanceif the shaft was guarded, as we expected it wouldbe. I knew this was our best chance to get out, forif we waited until the next day, and we were missed,they would surely guard every possible place, al-though there were a dozen or more places we couldget out. Although they had a half-hour to setguards, there were no guards at this shaft, and wecame out unnoticed. After we got away so we wereout of danger, the world never looked quite so large tome before, and surely kind Providence was with us, forthey had every other entrance guarded, and keptthem all guarded for some days, thinking we werestill somewhere in the mine. I reported our experi-ence to Davis and Parker the next day.This caused no little excitement at the mine, asthe eager reported it, and none of the men wouldgo down to work again, but all went home, and theyhad the sheriff and some of his men over there andkept the soldiers down in the mines for guards. After76EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEthe excitement subsided a little, the officials reportedthey believed the eager was lying and just made uphis report, and they fired him. Whether the officialsbelieved this or not, I do not know, or whether theyjust told it so the men would not be afraid to workin the mine, for a good many were quitting. Butit soon died out, and many believed it was only astory gotten up by the mine operators to keep thesoldiers there.I went to Davis after this and wanted him to letme have $35. I wanted this to pay some taxes formy wife (Mrs. Toney), on some mining propertyshe had in South Park. He said first he would seeif he could get it, but he said no more about it.I then asked Sherman Parker, the secretary of theAltman union, about it, and he said he was goingto Denver in a short time to get some money fromthe Federation headquarters, as he had to pay someothers for some work they were on. He said hesupposed he would have a hard time to make themdig up, as nothing had been done. He spoke ofthe failure they had made in blowing up the pow-der plant at Colorado Springs, and he said all theattempts they had made to pull off something hadfailed, and luck seemed to be against them. Hesaid he hated to ask headquarters for more moneyuntil we pulled off something. He said if we could77CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARD"scabs "have killed that fellow we shot at in the mine wecould easily have gotten all the money we wanted,so I said nothing more at that time. Parker andDavis talked to me again about blowing up the Vin-dicator or the Findley mine, and wondered if we couldnot get some kind of a trap by the shaft, so whenthe cage came down with theit would setoff a bomb. But I thought this was not a good idea,for if the cage was to set it off, they might run thecage down emptyand sowe would not get anybody. Parker came to me andtold me he would give me $500 if I would fix some-thing in either mine to kill some of them so as to scarethe rest and make them quit, and keep our men fromgoing back to work, and scare outside men from com-ing in there to work. I thought this looked easy. Iknew I could go down after the shift went off atnight and set this, if they did not have guards inthe mine.for they often did thisI got Easterly, who knew all about these things,and we went up in an old vacant building, and shota six-shooter into some giant caps to see if thiswould set them off, and it did. So we conceived theidea of fastening a six-shooter on the timber of theshaft at the station, and fastening a wire to thetrigger of the six-shooter and to the guard rail,so that when they raised the guard rail it would pull78EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEthe trigger; we would have the powder under thisburied in the dirt, and a box of giant caps rightclose to the muzzle of the gun. These guard railsare always raised by the men as they get out of thecage, and then lowered again to prevent any oneor anything from falling into the shaft. Easterlydid not go with me, because none of these activelabor leaders did anything themselves, if they couldhelp it. They always managed to be in some con-spicuous place when anything was likely to happen.I went to Schultz, who had been with me whenwe started to blow up the powder, and asked himif he wanted to try it again. He said no, he did notcare to take another chance when there was nothingin it if it failed, and besides he was working thenfor some leasers. I told him I did not think I wantedanything to do with it either. I said this so he wouldnot think I did it if it happened. I told Parker hedid not want to go, and he spoke of Billy Aikman,and said he was not afraid of a little blood either.I knew this man, and asked him if he wanted to helpdo a little job, and he said yes, he did. I think Parkerhad spoken to him in the mean time. So I went andrustled some powder from Joe Craig, Mrs. Toney'sbrother, who was a leaser, and he thawed it out forme. I thought we ought to have a man to stay atthe mouth of the shaft, or a little down in it, while79CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwe went down and set this. So I got Billy Gaffney,and also got some more powder from him, and wewent to his house, which was not far from the shaft,and got everything ready.When the shift went off, about 2.30 in the morn-ing, we took about fifty pounds of dynamite, andwent down the shaft of the Vindicator mine, andacross in a drift to the main shaft No. 1. We wereon the fourth level then, and we climbed down themain shaft to the sixth level, and we looked aroundand thought this was the seventh level. I had notworked on the seventh level of this mine, and hadbeen off there only a time or so, and it looked to melike the seventh level. We hurried to set this as Ihave described, and I used my own six-shooter. Thenwe got out as soon as we could. This was not thesame way we usually came in, but Aikman said thiswas the best way, and besides we thought they mightbe guarding our former passage or have closed itup, as it came from another property. When wecame to the surface, we could not find our watcher,and we suspicioned there was something wrong, butwe could not hear or see anything, and we came outunmolested. We found Gaffney later, and he saidhe got to coughing, and thought he had better leave.We had some turpentine which we poured along inour tracks after we started away from the mine,80EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEso they couldn't follow us with dogs, and got homeall right.Davis came to my house the next morning beforeI was up and wanted to know if we had set the bomb.I told him we had, and he said there was no excite-ment about the mine. I got up about noon and wentdown to the house of Billy Aikman, and he had heardnothing, so we thought it must be another failure,and we watched around the mine to see if we couldfind out anything, but we could not see anythingunusual, nor did we hear anything for a week.During the time that elapsed between our settingthe bomb and the explosion, I tried again to getsome money from Davis and Parker, and the lattertold me he was going to Denver in a day or two, andhe would try to get some from the Federation head-quarters, but he also told me they were trying topull something off, and if it came off it would beno trouble for him to get money. He told me theyhad made an attempt a night or two before to ditchthe Florence and Cripple Creek train that left Mid-way for Cripple Creek at 2.30 A. M. He said theirtools broke, and they had to leave the job partlyfinished, and that H. H. McKinney, one of the menthat had made the attempt, had walked along bythe place that day, and there were two men standinglooking at what they had done. Parker told me they81CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwere going to work at a different place, on one ofthe high banks between Victor and Cripple Creek.This early morning train carried the night-shifts ofnon-union miners that lived on Cripple Creek andworked on Bull Hill to and from their work. Mostall of these non-union men that worked there thenlived in Cripple Creek or Victor, because it was saferthere for them than anywhere else.There were a good many union men working inthe Portland mine. The reader will remember thatthis mine was not affected at this time by the strike,and there were five or six hundred men workingthere, and all supposed to be union men. Some thirtyor forty of these union men that were working onthe night-shift lived in Cripple Creek and rode onthis night train, and if they ditched this train theywould be likely to kill the union men also. But afew days before they were going to ditch this train,they made arrangements for a car with the electricroad, and the union miners of the Portland weresupposed to ride on the electric car. Whether thisarrangement was made to protect them and keepthem off the steam train they were going to wreck,I do not know, as none of them ever told me and Inever asked them, but I supposed that was what itwas for.When Parker told me this, we were in the union00cEXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEhall at Victor. He told me how they intended towork the job, and said he had gotten the men somegood tools in place of the ones they had broken,so he thought it would be a go all right this time,and he said,If it comes off to-night, there willbe martial law here to-morrow.""After he told me this, I felt somewhat jealous andangry. I hate to write this, but I cannot tell any-thing but the truth, and I must not try to favormyself. Yes, I was jealous to think they would goand get some one else to do an easy job like that,after I had taken such chances down in the mine,and right under the very noses of the soldiers. Thislooked like an easy thing to me beside what theywanted me to do, and I was angry because, afterI had gone through all the worst part and takenall the chances, they should go and get some oneelse to do an easy job like that, and would not give mea pleasant look, or at least would not give me a fewdollars. I had used my own six-shooter and rustledfifty pounds of powder, and they knew I did not havea cent. I felt pretty sore, and made up my mind rightthere to go to Cripple Creek and notify the railroadauthorities and block their game, and quit the out-fit and expose them. I also meant to tell them aboutputting that trap in the Vindicator mine, for I feltsure they had found it by that time. But when we83CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDstarted to go home from Victor that night, it wassnowing pretty hard, and Parker said they wouldnot be able to pull that off to-night, and he said,It'smore hard luck, everything seems to be against us."I felt sure they would not attempt it, as they couldbe easily tracked in the snow, and so I did not goto Cripple Creek that night, because I thought thenext day would do just as well."The next afternoon I went to Cripple Creek. Iknew one of the conductors on that road, and Italked to him on the way over and asked him whothe proper authorities would be to go to, and, infact, I told him there might be some plot to wreckthe train. He said,They did try to do somethinglast night, did they not? " And I said I did notknow but I thought not. He said he thought theydid, but he told me to go to D. C. Scott, who wastheir secret-service agent, and I think he introducedme to Scott. Scott's office was over the depot atCripple Creek."I talked with Mr. Scott and told him all the de-tails I knew, and when I had told him everything,he said he believed me. He said he was one of thetwo men standing by the rail when McKinney wentby, and he also told me that McKinney was nowunder arrest, and they were looking for his partner.He also told me they had made a second attempt the84EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEnight before, and had taken the outside rail clearout; this was over between Elkton and Victor. Iwas surprised at this, for that was the first timeI knew they had made the attempt, as I thought thesnow would hinder them; but they figured on get-ting to Victor, and they could not track them inthe city, as the snow would all be tracked up there.I told him I would not tell him how I knew this,at this time, at least; I told him I just happenedto find it out by accident through a friend of mine.He thanked me and wanted me to come over andsee him again, and I told him I would, and I intendedto tell them more and quit the gang.I will have to say that this was not from any re-morse of conscience I had. I would to God I couldsay it was, but I cannot, for I had no conscience,or, if any, it was seared so with sin it would not act.No, I was prompted to do this from purely a selfishand jealous standpoint, although much good mighthave come out of it. I would have no doubt exposedthose two men as soon as I had been assured of pro-tection, if it had not been for the following incident :I went home that night and told Mr. Scott Iwould come back over and see him again in a dayor so, but a day or two after, I think about noon,as I was going to Victor, I heard that the Vindica-tor mine was blown up and a lot of men killed. I85CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwent on to Victor, and in a little while word camethat Charlie McCormic and "Mel" Beck, the su-perintendent and shift boss, were killed and thestation on the sixth level was wrecked. Then we soonfigured how the trap had been there for so long andnot set off. I have before told you we intended toput this on the seventh level and thought we haduntil now, as we knew they were not working abovethe seventh level, but we made the mistake and gotthis on the sixth level instead of the seventh, and ithappened no one got off the cage on this particularlevel during the time since we had set this bomb.But it seemed the superintendent and shift boss weregoing in on the sixth level to see about starting upsome work, and they were the first to raise theguard rail, and both got killed and blown to piecesright there.Now, when I heard this I was very sorry that Ihad told Scott what I had, for I thought I had tostand pat then, and I was afraid to see Scott forfear he would suspect me of knowing more than Itold him, and I was afraid I would act nervous ifhe sent for me, which I felt sure he would, and I wasnervous at first when I heard these men were killed.I had no thought of killing them ; I thought it wouldkill a cage-load of non-union men, as the men alwayswent down first going on shift. I knew both McCor-EXPLOSION IN THE VINDICATOR MINEmick and Beck, and they were good fellows, andgood men to work for. As I expected, Mr. Scottsent me a letter to come over to Cripple Creek, hewanted to see me right away. I felt nervous and wasafraid to go for fear he would notice it. This wasthe first of anything like that I had been mixed upin, and I was afraid it would haunt me, and I ratherwished I had not done it at first. I saw them whenthey took the bodies to the coroner. But I saw Davisand Parker, and they braced me up and said it wasall right.87