CHAPTER SEVENTEENMY EXPERIENCE IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYIWAS arrested and taken to jail at Caldwell theevening of the 1st day of January, 1906. I hadnever before been arrested. I now began to thinkover my past life and what it had brought me to,and, oh, how I regretted that I had allowed myselfto be arrested, and had not sold my life as dearly asI could have done, and ended all, as I felt the lifeI had lived for the past few years was not worthliving and that I would rather be dead than alive,and felt there was nothing left for me worth living for,and why suffer the humiliation in prison. I knew itmeant a long siege at best, and I knew if I succeededin clearing myself of this, that I probably would haveto go to Colorado and face other charges there.I thought of ending all, and that when my dearmother taught me many long years before about Godand the future life came up to me, and I could notget these thoughts out of my mind, although I haddenied them for years and tried to forget them^ andsaid many times that the hereafter did not trouble224IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYme, and that I did not believe in any hereafter, butthat the grave ended all. But now when this staredme in the face, and the thought came of taking myown life, and taking the desperate leap into the greatbeyond, from whence there is no return, I knew thenthat down deep in my heart I did believe there wasa God and a hereafter, and that I had only been try-ing to deceive myself all these years, because it an-swered my wicked purpose better. Now, although Ihad read the Bible some when I was young, I hadnever read it with enough interest to understand it,and remembered very little of it, but I thought itsaid that no murderer could enter the kingdom ofheaven, or would not be forgiven. This troubled me,for I felt great remorse of conscience and felt re-pentant. I tried to keep up the bravado spirit, andappear unconcerned and deny the charges against me,but still I thought, if acquitted, the old life was notworth living, and I wanted to be sure whether therewas hope for me, or forgiveness, or if I had com-mitted the unpardonable sin. If I had been fully con-vinced of this and that there was no forgiveness forme, then I would never have undergone any tortureor imprisonment, as I would have had nothing tolive for.Haywood and Pettibone had always told me if Iever got arrested not to wire or write to them, but225CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthat they would see that I had an attorney to defendme as soon as it was possible, and when Simpkins leftme he had said, if I got into trouble and had to havean attorney, he would send Miller or Robinson, ofSpokane. A day or two after I was arrested I gota telegram from Spokane stating that Attorney FredMiller would leave next morning for Caldwell to rep-resent me. This telegram was not signed, but I un-derstood it. I waited for three or four days and heardno word of him, but in the mean time James J. Sul-livan, an attorney that I knew from Denver and apersonal friend of Pettibone's, came to see me, butthey would not let me talk to him alone. He said hewas going to Baker City on some business, andstopped off to see if it was me they had arrested. Ifelt sure they had sent him to me from headquarters.I told him I had thought of wiring him, and askedhim if I could engage him to defend me, but he shookhis head, and said it was a long way from home, andthat he would advise me to employ a local attorney,and said if I wished he would look around and getme one. I told him I had expected Mr. Miller fromSpokane, and had had a telegram from Spokane a fewdays before stating that he would leave the nextmorning for Caldwell, but had heard nothing morefrom him, and Sullivan said he would wire him andsee if he was coming.226rHARRY ORCHARDFrom a photograph taken in January, 1906, shortly after his arrestfor the murder of ex-Governor Steunenberg.IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYHe sent Mr. Miller the telegram, and he answeredhe would leave for Caldwell on the next train, andhe arrived there the next day or so. They let Mr.Miller see me alone, and he told me that Jack Simp-kins had sent him, and that he had started when I gotthe first telegram. I think he said he got as far asWalla Walla, and they called him back, as the paperscame out with big head-lines charging the WesternFederation of Miners with the assassination of ex-Governor Steunenberg, and they did not want it toappear that any one had been sent by them to de-fend me, but thought they would wait until I wiredthem, because we must make it appear that I wasputting up my own defense, and keep the Federationout of it. He also said that Robinson had told himbefore he left that they might make it appear thatthey were engaged by me to sue Dan Cordonia torecover the interest I had sold him in the Herculesmine or a part of it, so as to have it look as if theywere my regular attorneys. I spoke about them beingengaged by me before to collect damages from therailroad company for holding my trunk, but he saidthat was too small a matter.I did not know Mr. Miller very well, having onlymet him once, and I told him I was going to put upmy own defense, and had upward of $2,000, and hadfriends that would see me through, if this was not227CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDsufficient. He asked me if I did not have some miningproperty, or some friends I could refer him to thathe could make it appear were putting up money formy defense. I told him I would give him an orderto get the money all right. He said Jack had onlygiven him $100, and asked me if I did not haveany money there. I told Miller I had only a few dol-lars there and he said to never mind, he would getsome money from home. I gave him an order, andtold him to see J. J. Sullivan and have him sendthe money when he got to Denver. I told him Sullivanknew Pettibone and would get the money all right.I also gave him an order, or told him to see LewisCutler, of Salt Lake City, and he would turn himover a sixth interest in some mining claims he hadat Goldfield, Nev. I had loaned Mr. Cutler a littlemoney at different times, and he made this proposi-tion himself the last time I saw him in Salt Lake City.Mr. Miller stayed until after my preliminary hear-ing, and I was bound over to the district court with-out bail. Mr. Miller then left for Spokane, and saidhe would be back in a few days, and stay there andwork on the case.Mr. Swain, of the Thiel detective agency, fromSpokane, came to the sheriff's office at Caldwell, andthey took me out in the office, and he asked me somequestions, and I answered some of them. I told him228IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYI had been in the Coeur d'Alenes, and had been outhunting with Jack Simpkins just before I came downhere. He asked me if I knew Haywood and Moyer,and I told him I had seen them and was slightly ac-quainted with them. I think I also told him that myname was not Hogan, but Orchard, and that I hada good reason for going under an assumed name, andwould give the reason at the proper time. I knew Ineed not answer any questions, but I thought thesethings could be easily proved, and that it would lookbetter for me to answer them. Later he wanted toquestion me further, but I told him I had told himall I had to say, and he did not trouble me anymore.I was in Caldwell jail eighteen days and they re-Amoved me to the State penitentiary at Boise. Mr.Miller wrote me two or three letters and stated he waswaiting for some mail, and would be down as soon asit arrived. I think I had been at the penitentiary aboutten days or two weeks, and the warden took me outinto the secretary's office and introduced me to an oldman I have forgotten the name he used. He thenwent out and left us alone. I do not remember the firstpart of our conversation, but he said he had seen apaper with my picture in and got permission to comeup and have a talk with me. I asked him who hewas and what he wanted to talk to me for. He told me289CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhe was a detective, and went on and said perhaps ifhe had kept the same kind of company I had, thatperhaps he would have found himself in the sameposition I myself was in, but he said he had chosenthe right course. He said he would like to give mesome good advice if I would take it. I told him I didnot object talking to him, but I did not need anyof his advice, and protested my innocence, and said Iwas being wrongfully persecuted. He said if I was in-nocent I was the victim of very unfortunate circum-stances, and that he thought I had left a bad trailbehind me, and he further said it looked bad for megoing in and out of Denver so much and visiting Fed-eration headquarters. He further said he did not be-lieve I did this of my own accord, and that he be-lieved I was in a position to be of great benefit to theState. I told him I knew nothing about the assassina-tion of Mr. Steunenberg whatever, and that I did notknow what he was trying to get at.He asked me if I had heard of the Mollie Maguires.I told him I had heard of them, but did not knowmuch of their history. He started to tell me aboutthem, and it struck me right away that he was Mc-Parland, as Haywood had given me a description ofhim some time before. I asked him if his name was notMcParland, and he said it was. He then went on andtold me a lot of the history of the Mollie Maguires,230DETECTIVE JAMES McPARLANDIN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYand some of the parts he had played. I listened to himand said nothing much. I think at first he asked meabout my people and if I believed in a hereafter anda God. I think I told him I believed in a supreme be-ing or something like that. He also told me he believedI had been used as a tool. I think that was about thesubstance of what he said to me the first time he cameup, and he asked me to think these things over whenI went back to my cell. I protested my innocence allthrough, and told him I had nothing to think over.He told me I would be convicted of that crime, andthat I would think of the words he had told me after-ward. I told him I had no fear of being convicted.When he left he said that perhaps he would comeup and see me again. I told him that it helped to passaway the time, and was a little more comfortable, orwas a change.I think it was two or three days when he came backagain, and I think he started in on my belief in thehereafter, and spoke of what an awful thing it wasto live and die a sinful life, and that every man oughtto repent of his sins, and that there was no sin thatGod would not forgive. He spoke of King David beinga murderer, and also the Apostle Paul. This inter-ested me very much, but I did not let on to him. Ithink I asked him a little about this, and he told meabout King David falling in love with Uriah's wife,231CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand ordering Joab, the general of his army, to putUriah in the thick of the battle, and then orderingthe rest to retreat, so he would be killed ; and of St.Paul, who was then called Saul, consenting to thedeath of Stephen, and holding the young men's coatswhile they stoned him to death. I wanted to ask moreabout these things, but did not want to let on thatthey interested me. He also told me of some caseswhere men had turned State's evidence, and that whenthe State had used them for a witness, they did notor could not prosecute them. He said, further, thatmen might be thousands of miles from where a mur-der took place and be guilty of the murder, and becharged with conspiracy, and that the man that com-mitted the murder was not as guilty as the conspira-tors, and, to say in a word, he led me to believe thatthere was a chance for me, even if I were guilty ofthe assassination of Mr. Steunenberg, if I would tellthe truth, and he also urged me to think of the here-after and the awful consequences of a man dyingin his sins. He further said he was satisfied I had onlybeen used as a tool, and he was sure the WesternFederation of Miners were behind this, and that theywere about to their limit, and had carried their workon with a high hand, but that their foundation hadbegun to crumble, as all such must that followed apolicy that they had. He said further that they hadIN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYhad a gang of murderers at their head ever since theirorganization. He told me plainly he could not makeme any promises, and if he did he could not fulfilthem, but he said he would have the prosecuting at-torney come up and have a talk with me. I toldhim that he need not trouble, I had not told himanything nor had I promised to at this time, but Itold him to come up again the next day and I wouldlet him know if I had anything to tell him.I went back to my cell that night and tried to pray,and thought I would do almost anything if God wouldforgive my sins. But my past life would come upbefore me like a mountain, and I feared there was nochance for me. I thought, though the authorities inIdaho would let me go clear if I gave evidence andtold the real men responsible for the murder of Mr.Steunenberg, that there were so many other crimesthat I was guilty of that there would never be anychance for me. The only real hope I could see for mewas to make a clean breast of all, and ask God toforgive me, but I felt very uncertain about this andprayed to God in a half-hearted way, and I felt alittle hope at times, and then I would doubt, and thinkof self. I knew well the methods of detectives, and didnot believe many things Mr. McParland told me;but my mind was in such a state, as I have before toldyou, I cared little what did become of me, and did233CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDnot want to live any longer the old life, and when Iwould think of doing away with myself, the awfulhereafter would stare me in the face, and somethingseemed to say to me that there was still hope. ButI could not bear the thought of being locked up andevery hour seemed like a month to me.Now I had thought before I ever saw Mr. Mc-Parland of making a clean breast of all, but I wouldrather have him get the evidence than any one Iknew, for the reason I knew his reputation, and knewthere would be nothing left undone to run down every-thing I gave him. Then there came a doubt in mymind that this might not be Mr. McParland. I toldhim this when he came up the next day, and as hewore an Elk charm and I knew the Elks always car-ried a card that they used to make themselves knownto a brother Elk, I asked him if he would mind let-ting me look at his Elk's card to satisfy myself thathe was Mr. McParland, and he handed me his card,as he said no Elk was ashamed to show his card.After I was satisfied of this, I told him I was goingto tell him all, and that he need not send the prose-cuting attorney up ; that I would not ask any pledges,but would tell the truth, and felt I did not deserveany consideration, and cared very little what becameof me.I told him I would tell him my life's history, and234IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYwe talked over a part of my career that day, butnothing in connection with this case, and the nextday Mr. McParland came up, and the clerk in thepenitentiary took down my statement. I began at thefirst of my early life, and finished with the assassina-tion of Mr. Steunenberg, but I kept a few things backthat I thought too horrible to tell. We were threedays at this. There were some things that no one inthis country knew anything of, but I told them andin a way felt somewhat relieved. I felt that I hadtaken the right step, but when I thought of the awfulordeal I would have to go through to carry this out,and that I must face these men and give evidencethat perhaps would send us all to the gallows, itseemed terrible to me. Sometimes I would think per-haps they would only send me to the penitentiary forlife, and this I thought would be worse than beinghanged, and that I would prefer the latter. I triedto pray and ask forgiveness, but this only in a half-hearted way. Sometimes I felt a little relieved, butother times I doubted, and I was very much in doubtwhether God would forgive such a sinner, and Ithought I would have to go through some longlamentation, and the greater the sinner the greaterthe sacrifice would have to be on my part. I wanteda Bible, but would not ask for it, and I did notwant it known that I wanted to repent of my sins.235CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDI longed to read the Bible, but did not want anyone to see me doing so, and every day seemed al-most like a year.During this time, or about the 20th of February,1906, they brought Haywood, Moyer, and Pettiboneto the penitentiary and a day or so later they broughtSteve Adams. I had told them about Adams beingmixed up in other things besides what he was mixedup with me. The warden asked me before he broughtAdams in if I thought best to put him in my cell,and for me to have a talk with him and persuade himto tell the truth. I told him I would do the best Icould, and that I would tell him that I had told every-thing, but not at first, until I found out how he feltabout it.When Adams first came into the cell he did notlet on that he knew me, or while the warden or guardswere there, but after they left he began to talk to meand he spoke about my having made a confession. Ilaughed it off and partly denied it, but said I thoughtof doing so, and told him I thought it would be bet-ter for us to tell the truth and clear everything upand be done with it, as it was bound to come out sometime, as so many knew about the crimes that we hadbeen mixed up in, and that somebody was bound totell of them some timeif not while they were upand around, some one would make a death-bed con-IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYfession ; and I told him I was tired of such a life andwanted to reform and ask God's forgiveness.He said at first that he could not think of such athing and spoke of the disgrace it would bring uponhis people, and that there would be no chance for usat all, and he wanted me to go on through the trialsand then we would tell those fellows to cut that kindof work out. I wanted him to lead a better life, andtold him I could not rest, and that my consciencetroubled me so that I did not want to live unless Icould repent and be forgiven, and that I did not feelas though I could repent of my wrong-doing unlessI told all, and made all the earthly restitution thatwas within my power to society, and clear my ownconscience. He thought I would not feel any betterafter I had confessed all. I also told him there mightbe a chance for us to save our lives, as we had onlybeen used as tools.I talked to him, I think, two days on about the samelines, and he did not change his mind much, if any,and finally I told him that I had made a statementand told about all, and he asked me if I had told themabout him. At first I told him that I had not, andhe asked me to promise him that I would not, and Ithink at first I told him I would, but I finally told himthat I had made a clean breast of everything, andtold them all about the things he had been implicatedCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDin and wanted him to tell the truth. He said at firsthe did not see how he could go that kind of a route,and asked me if they had promised me anything. Itold him I did not ask them to, but I told him theparty that I had made my confession to had citedsimilar cases, and that those that had been used astools, as we had been, had not been prosecuted. I alsotold him that I did not know if this were true or not.After I had told him all, I said to him to do as hepleased, but that I had told the truth and was goingto stand by it, let the consequences be what theywould to myself or any one else.I told him the warden wanted to have a talk withhim, and to go out and have a talk with him, anda few minutes afterward the warden came in andasked him to go out in the office, and he did. Whenhe came back in he said the warden was a pretty goodI think that same afternoon Mr. Moore,talker.Adams's attorney from Baker City, Ore., came up tosee him. He did not tell me what he said to him, buta friend and neighbor of his named Bond, fromHaines, came with Mr. Moore, and Steve told me thatBond had advised him, if he knew anything or hadbeen used as a tool to commit any crimes, to tell theor that would be his advice to him. Adamstruthtold me after that Moore had told him the Statehardly ever prosecuted any one they used as a witness,IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYand he said he thought he would do as I had doneand tell the truth. He said that Moore had gone toColorado to see the governor and find out if theywould take Steve back there if he became a witnessin this trial.Mr. McParland came here the next afternoon andI had a talk with him and told him I thought Adamswould make a confession, but perhaps not until afterMoore had come back from Colorado ; so Adams wentout in the office and had a talk with Mr. McParland,and he told him he would make a confession and tellthe truth in everything, and the next day Mr. Mc-Parland and his private secretary came up and tookdown his confession. I do not think there were anythreats or promises of any kind used. Adams nevertold me if there were.I was taken sick a little after this and they movedme over in the hospital, and a day or two later theymoved Adams over there, too, and we had a roomtogether. My mind was in an awful condition aboutthis time. I felt that I did not want to live, and wasafraid to die. A little before Haywood, Moyer, andPettibone were arrested, Miller, my attorney, cameback and came to see me, and I never let on to himI had made any confession. He told me he had beento Denver, that he had waited several days in Spo-kane and they did not send him the money, and heCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthought best to go and see them. He said Jack Simp-kins was keeping close, that they were hard on histrail. I asked him where he was, but he did not tellme, if he knew. He said he got $1,500 from Pettibone,and he said they were all scared, and he said Pettibonetold him if he could use his deposition, all right, butthat he would not go to Idaho as a witness.Miller further said he stopped in Salt Lake Cityand saw Lewis Cutler about the interest in the min-ing claims at Goldfield, Nev., and Cutler told himhe would turn it over to me any time. Miller got mea suit of clothes and some other little articles, andcame to see me two or three times before Haywood,Moyer, and Pettibone were arrested, and then he puta piece in the paper that he would withdraw frommy case and defend the Federation officials. I sent hima letter that that would suit me all right, but hecame up to see me after. I did not see him the firsttime. But he came again and the warden brought himin the hospital to see me, and he said the newspaperreport was false, that he had not stated he wouldwithdraw from my case. I told him that I had madeother arrangements, and would not require his servicesany longer.Mr. McParland came up a few days later and saidthey wanted me to go to Caldwell before the GrandJury and give some evidence. So I went to Caldwell240IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYbefore the Grand Jury, and told them the conversa-tion I had had with Moyer, Haywood, and Pettibonein regard to assassinating Mr. Steunenberg, andhow I carried out the assassination. I came backthen, and about a week later Mr. McParland cameup again, and told me I would have to go to Cald-well again and plead to the indictment, or at leastto go before the court. He said he would make ar-rangements and have an attorney there to repre-sent me.The next day I went to Caldwell, and no one saidanything more to me, and when I went into courtthey read the indictment to me, and I expected Mr.McParland had made arrangements for an attorneyto represent me, and that he would answer for me,but no one answered for me, and the judge then askedme if I had counsel, and no one said anything. Heasked me then if I wished an attorney, and I told himno, and he said I was entitled to one, and he wouldappoint Bryant and Cox to represent me, and thatI could take the statutory time to plead. Mr. Bryantand I went down in the sheriff's office, but I told himnothing of what I had done. I thought after the con-fession, as I intended to tell the truth, I was goingto plead guilty, but Mr. Bryant told me there werethree pleas I could enter, guilty, not guilty, or notplead at all. I told him I would make no plea then,241CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand we went up before the court then, and I told thejudge I had no plea to make and he instructed theclerk to enter a plea of not guilty.I came back to the penitentiary that night, and feltpretty blue, and felt as though I did not have a friendin the world, after Mr. McParland not keeping hisword in regard to getting me an attorney, and takingme into court like a dummy, and I not knowing whatto say or do. I came back feeling more blue than ever,and, to finish up everything, when I came back thatnight to the penitentiary, they had my things movedback out of the hospital into a cell, and, as it waspretty cold there, and I was not feeling very wellphysically and worse mentally, I just broke downagain and felt like giving up entirely.I did not get up the next day, and really con-templated putting myself out of the way, and wrotea letter to my brother and put it between the liningof my vest, and I told Adams if anything happenedto me to send this letter to my brother, and that hewould find the address on the letter. I think I told himI had something there to put myself out of the waywith, but I had nothing in particular only my watchcrystal. I was thinking of pounding this or the elec-tric globe up and swallowing it, but I hardly knewwhat effect it would have. I had heard of peoplepounding up glass and killing dogs with it, and IIN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYhad not made up my mind definitely. I was onlythinking about it. When I would think of the here-after, something seemed to say to me not to do it,but there was hope for me, and I would pray, butoh, I had no heart to pray. But I am sure now, thatI had dear ones praying for me and God heard theirprayers, and kept me from making the last desperateleap into the Great Beyond. I was not very well andthe cells were very cold and the warden moved us backin the hospital.Shortly after this Steve told his wife about my writ-ing this letter, and she told the warden, and Mr. Mc-Parland and Governor Gooding came up to see me,and Mr. McParland asked me about it, and told mehe understood I had the means of destruction on myperson, and that he wanted me to give it to him. Itold him what I had thought of, but that I had notthought seriously of it, and that he need have nofear, as I felt better. He talked to me about the here-after, and that to do or to think of such a thingwas awful, and that there was no possible hope then ;but said if I would truly and sincerely repent andpray for forgiveness that there was no sin that Godwould not forgive. He told me he had been prayingnearly all day, as he had had word that his nephew,whom he thought a great deal of, had been killedin a wreck near Florence, Col., and had been virtu-243CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDally burned alive. His talk helped me a great deal,and I felt ashamed of myself, and also felt provokedat Adams for telling such a thing ; and I don't thinkthat I ever would have carried it out, as I was notsure that it would have killed me, and I had not fullydecided to do it. If I had had a gun I believe therewere times when I would have ended all.Soon after this some missionary society in Chicagosent me a Bible, and the deputy brought it in to me,and I felt mean and told him to take it out, as I didnot want it, and at the same time I longed for it, butdid not want any one to know or see me reading it.I had been trying to pray and ask forgiveness of mymany sins, but in a very half-hearted way, and I feltmore miserable than ever then, and resolved I wouldask for this Bible, but kept putting it off from dayto day. At last I asked the warden to bring it into me, and I began to read it. I was not long read-ing it through, and I could not find anything in itthat said no murderer could enter the kingdom ofheaven, and I prayed earnestly for forgiveness, andread and reread the glorious promises, and deter-mined not to give up before I found peace and par-don. True, I was long weeks and months before Ifound the light or even the dawn, but I kept prayingand persevering. I had no thought of turning back ;I never doubted God's word and promises, I only1*4IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYdoubted because of my own weakness. This peacecrept in a little at a time, and I can hardly tell whenor how, but I at last began to realize the change, andtook great delight in reading the Bible and pray-ing earnestly to God several times a day. I had itin my head I was such a sinner that I had to gothrough some long lamentation, and the greater thesin, the more God would require of us before Hewould forgive us.Mr. McParland had asked me if I would like tohave a minister come up and see me, and I told himI would. He asked me if I would like to have Rev.Dean Hinks of the Episcopal Church. He said hehad met him, and thought he was a good man, andhe came up to see me, and has come occasionally eversince, and has been a great comfort and help to mespiritually. He also brought me several good booksthat have enlightened me very much, and thank Godto-day that I know I am a sinner saved by grace,through no good merits of mine, but all throughthe blood of Jesus Christ, our blessed Saviour andRedeemer. I do not mean to say that I have all clearsailing, far from it. I have one continual battle toovercome my wicked and deceitful heart, but I praiseGod that His grace is sufficient.I thought at first that this was not right, and thatGod had not forgiven me. These thoughts would arise245CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDin my mind, and I thought this had not ought tobe. I had no desire to do them, but I would think ofthem often and try to get them out of my mind, andI praise God they don't arise as much as they usedto. But I have found as I read the experience of manynoble, good men in the books, in which they give theirexperience, that Jesus Christ is the only way that wecan approach God's throne and plead His mercy, asJesus is our mediator and redeemer, who took uponHimself our sins. It all seems clear to me now.I only give this as my experience, hoping that itmay help some one if they have or should have asimilar struggle. I would not go through such re-morse and torment again for all the world. This mayseem an exaggeration to some, but it is true, never-theless. Any one that has had such a struggle andprevailed can readily grasp the truth of my state-ment.I will now tell you what I believe saved me. It wasthe prayers of a dear loving wife, whom I had shame-fully and disgracefully left many years before witha darling little baby girl about six months old. As Ihave related how this came about, I need not repeathere, only to say that when God took away the bit-terness out of my heart and let His love shine in, thenthe former love I had for my wife returned, strongerthan ever, if that were possible, and I longed to know246IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYif she was alive, or what had become of her and ourlittle baby girl, as my mind was made up then to tellthe whole truth regardless of the consequences to my-self or anybody else.I knew I would have to tell my true name, and thenall would come out, and I asked Mr. McParland towrite to Road Macklon, Brighton, Ontario, Canada,and ask him if he knew anything about Albert E.Horsley or his wife. Mr. McParland wrote to Mr.Macklon, but he was dead, but Mrs. Macklon an-swered and said that nothing was known of me. I wassupposed to have gone West several years before,but that Mrs. Horsley and her daughter lived atWooler. I then wrote my dear wife and told her thetrouble I was in, and asked her to forgive me. I alsotold her that I had accepted Jesus Christ as mySaviour and found peace at last. I got a letter fromher that broke my heart, but only made me cling closerto the Crucified One. She said that she had forgivenme years ago, and had never ceased to pray for meand never would. I will leave the reader to imaginethe rest she said to me. I will only say further thatthere never was a harsh word written in any of herletters, and her dear letters and those of our darlinglittle girl from time to time have been a great sourceof comfort to me, and they make me cling closer toJesus, knowing if I never am permitted to meet them247CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhere below again, I can meet them up yonder wheremeeting and parting will be no more, if I am faithfuluntil death, and this makes heaven seem dearer thanever to me.After I had read my Bible a good deal and feltmy sins forgiven, I tried to talk to Steve Adams andhis wife to reform and lead a new life, and, althoughI hardly knew what to say to them as yet, I was some-what in doubt myself. They had the same answer thatso many have, that they intended to, as soon as theygot out of that trouble they were going to join thechurch and live better lives. Steve and his wife livedover in a house in the woman's ward, and I went overthere for a time and had my meals with them, and Italked some to them of my experience and determina-tion to lead a new life from this time, and tried topersuade them to do the same. After Steve went toTelluride, Col., with the officers, to locate the bodiesof two men who had been murdered there by theFederation leaders, and which Steve had helped tobury, they brought my meals in to me from thattime, and I saw Steve only on Saturdays after this,except a time or two when I went over there on Sun-day. He came to the men's department on Saturdayforenoon while the women took a bath. I never havegone around among the men here much. I usuallystayed in my room, or was out walking by myself.248IN JAIL AND PENITENTIARYWhen Steve came in the yard on Saturday, at firsthe always came up where I was, and we talked to-gether, but all at once he stopped coming aroundwhere I was at all, and when he came over in the men'syard, he would stay down in the yard and talk tosome of the men. I asked Mr. Whitney if he knewwhat Steve was offended at, and he said he did not.He had always told me that he was glad that he hadtold all, and believed we would come out all right,and his wife expressed herself that way, too; but Iknew from little things they would say from time totime that they blamed me for telling all and gettingthem into this trouble, and Mrs. Adams said if shehad been here she would have stopped Steve from tell-ing anything, and without them they could never con-vict Haywood, Moyer, and Pettibone. I never saidmuch back to them at such times, and other timesthey would say they were glad to have it over with.Mrs. Adams knew about a great many of these crimes,as Steve told her everything.Steve's brother Joe came later, and also MaryMahoney, a woman from Telluride, Col., and they sentletters to Steve, and Joe would slip them to Stevewhen he was visiting him. Steve would show these tothe officials here and laugh about them. They weretrying to get him to see the Federation lawyers, andtold him in these notes that it made no difference what249CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhe had told, that they could not use it against him,and that they were his friends and would stand byhim. Steve paid no attention to these things at first,but his uncle, Mr. Lillard, who had been here severaltimes to see him, came up and had dinner with them,and the next day or so the Federation lawyers gotout a writ of habeas corpus for Steve, and he was re-leased, but immediately arrested and afterward takento Wallace, Idaho, and charged with the murderof a man by the name of Tyler. He had told me allabout killing Tyler and Boule and the others thatwere with him. Simpkins also told me the same story,and showed me where they killed Boule, when I wasup there hunting with him. I know Steve Adams andhis wife told the truth in everything that I knewabout, though there were many things that he hadtold me that he had done of which I did not have per-sonal knowledge, but he told them in his confessionjust the same as he had told me, and I have not theleast doubt but what he told the whole truth, andwould have stood by it if they had not brought somepressure to bear upon him. What this was I do notknow.250