CHAPTER FIFTEENHOW I STARTED AFTER GOVERNOR STEUNENBERGtime in August, 1905, Mover came backfrom California where he had been on a vaca-SOMEtion. Nearly ever since the Industrial Workers'convention at Chicago, I saw him on the street and heasked me what I was doing, and I told him we wereafter General Bell. He said we would have to cut thatout in Denver while he was there, as he could not standany more torture from being thrown into prison, as hewas half dead now. He said they had some work to doon the outside, and for me to come down to the officeand we would talk it over. The next day I went downand I think Pettibone went with me, or came a littlelater, and Moyer said he would not take any morechances of being thrown in jail, and said further thatthe way his health was, he could not stand anothersiege like they had given him at Telluride, and thatwould be the first thing that would happen if webumped Sherman Bell off. He said they had somework on the outside to do, and then he said he wantedme to go down to Goldfield, Nev., and do away with196HOW I STARTED AFTER STEUNENBERGJohnnie Neville. He said he could not get him out ofhis mind and could not sleep nights thinking abouthim, and that he knew too much and was liable to getthem in trouble any time and especially so if he gothard up.Moyer called Haywood and Pettibone into his office,and he explained his condition to them, and said wehad some work on the outside that they had wanteddone for a long time and that we had better do thatnow. Pettibone said he would like to get some of thesefellows in Denver while we were fixed for it, and Hay-wood said he was willing to take his chances, butMoyer absolutely refused to have anything done inDenver while he was there. Then Haywood said hewanted to get ex-Governor Steunenberg before he leftthe office, and further said he had sent two or threemen down there to get him, but they had all failed.These men they had down there at different timeswere Steve Adams and Ed Minster and Art Baston,and a man named McCarty from the Creur d'Alenes.Moyer said that he thought it would have a goodeffect if we could bump Steunenberg off and then writeletters to Peabody, Sherman Bell, and some others thathad been prominent in trying to crush the Federation,and tell them that they, too, would get what GovernorSteunenberg got ; that we had not forgotten them, andnever would forget them, and the only way they197CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwould escape would be to die, and they need notthink because we had overlooked them for a whilethat we had forgotten them. Haywood said we wouldgo back to Paterson, N. J., and send these lettersfrom there and write them in such a way that theywould think it was some of those foreign anarchiststhat had sent them, as that is the American head-quarters for the anarchists. He said he did not knowwhat would be worse than to know some one was onyour trail to kill you, and not to know who it wasor when to expect it, and that it would be like a livingdeath and that these fellows would be afraid of theirshadows, and if we got Steunenberg, after letting himgo so long, then they would think sure that we neverforgot any one that had persecuted us.We talked a whole lot more on this, and Pettibonesaid this would be all right, but he would like to do alittle work at home, and he further said he was afraidit would be a hard proposition to get Steunenbergdown in a little country town, like Caldwell, Idaho,where he lived. Haywood said he had been told thatSteunenberg was in the sheep business and got in abuckboard and drove out to his sheep camps in themountains, and paid no attention or even thought hislife was in danger, and that it had been so long sincethe Coeur d'Alene trouble that he likely had forgottenit. They said I could make the round tripeither198HOW I STARTED AFTER STEUNENBERGgo to Nevada for Neville, and then to Caldwell, orto Caldwell first. I told them I would go to Caldwellfirst. Mover wanted me to go to Nevada first or to getaround there as soon as I could. Their plan was forme to go down to Goldfield and get in with Neville andpretend to get drunk with him, and put some cyanideof potassium in his whisky or whatever he was drink-ing. This they thought would be easy, as he kept asaloon, they wanted this done as quietly as possible,and thought there would be no suspicion attached toit if he did die suddenly, and no notice would be paidto it in a new place like Goldfield. Moyer was the onlyone that was very anxious to have Johnnie killed. Itold him I would do it, but I did not intend to at thetime.Moyer told me to get what money I would needfrom Haywood ; he asked me how much I would need,and I told him $300. Haywood had given me $60 afew days before this and he gave me $240 more, andsaid he hoped I would succeed in getting Steunenberg,as he had already cost them a lot of money. I told himI would do the best I could. I did not see him againbefore I left. Moyer went out that afternoon fishingup Platte Canon, and Pettibone wanted me to go withhim that night, and make one more attempt on GeneralBell, and I did, but did not try much to see him. Thenext day I got everything ready, and packed the big199CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDclock bomb that I had brought up from Canon Cityin my trunk, and bought a return ticket to Portland,Ore., good for ninety days with stop-overs any placeon the route, good also to return via Seattle andSpokane, Wash.We had talked over the proposition and Pettibonewanted me to look over the country around Seattleand Puget Sound, and see if I could not find a smallplace on the Sound close to the British line. We hadletters from Arthur Parker, a Cripple Creek miner,who had gone up there and got a place, and he liked itvery much. Pettibone and Haywood said if I found aplace that I thought would suit us to write them andthey would dig up the money to buy it, and I told themI would hunt up a place somewhere, as I thought I hadtaken chances enough and was entitled to the price ofa small place. Pettibone and I were going to live there,but we were going to make it a headquarters whereHaywood and Moyer could send men they wanted tokeep out of sight. We also thought that, being nearthe British line, we could do some smuggling there.I left Denver between the 25th and 30th of August,1905, over the Rio Grande Railroad. I stopped at SaltLake City a few days and met some of my old friends,among whom were Charlie Shoddy and Lewis Cutler.The latter lived in Salt Lake, but Shoddy came fromthe Coeur d'Alenes, Idaho, with me shortly after the200HOW I STARTED AFTER STEUNENBERGtrouble in 1899. We had worked together in Arizonaand Nevada since, but I had not seen him since leavingUtah for Colorado, and we talked over old times. Hesaid it had been coming pretty tough for him, and saidI looked pretty prosperous, and asked me what I hadbeen doing. I told him I had found a new way ofmaking a living without working so hard, and he saidhe wished I would tell him how. I told him to keep meposted where he was and I would write to him if I hadsomething on.I then left Salt Lake and came on to Nampa, Idaho,which is about nine miles from Caldwell, and stoppedoff there and stayed a few days at the CommercialHotel. I met a man named Wilcox from Coloradothere, and I talked with him a good deal, and he toldall about the country, as he had been here before.I asked him if he knew Mr. Steunenberg, and hetold me he did, well, and was talking to him just aday or two ago at the depot, when the governor waswaiting for a train. Mr. Wilcox spoke of the troublein Colorado and said Mr. Steunenberg said that Gov-ernor Peabody did not act quick enough in thattrouble. I think I stayed in Nampa three days andMr. Wilcox left.Then I went down to Caldwell and stopped at thePacific Hotel, and told Mr. Dempsey, the proprietor,I would stay a few days, and that a friend of mine201CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDin Colorado wanted me to stop off there and see whatthe chances were to buy some lambs. He told me thenames of some sheep-men there, and among otherthings he mentioned Governor Steunenberg's name.He further told me that he was not at home much, butwas in Boise and Mountain Home most of the timeand was engaged in buying and selling sheep.I took a walk around and located where GovernorSteunenberg lived, and then took the train in the after-noon and went to Boise and stopped at the CapitolHotel one night. This was in the early part of Sep-tember. I looked over the register, but did not findMr. Steunenberg's name. The next morning I wentover to the Idan-ha and took a look over the register,and found his name there. I went back to the Capitol,and paid my bill, and got my grip and went over to theIdan-ha and got a room. My room was on the samefloor that Mr. Steunenberg's was, and that noon, whenthe chambermaids were off the floor, I tried a skeletonkey I had to see if it would open his room, and it didall right.I got to talking to a man down in the hotel lobbythat afternoon and he asked me my business and I toldhim I was going to Portland to the fair, but I stoppedoff here for a friend of mine in Colorado to make someinquiry what the chances would be to buy a few thou-sand lambs for feeding purposes. He said that was his202HOW I STARTED AFTER STEUNENBERGbusiness and that he was working for a stock com-pany from Wyoming, and he took me across the streetfrom the Idan-ha Hotel and introduced me to a Mr.Johnson and his son, who were commission men. Mr.Johnson named over some of the big sheep-men and Itold him I thought I heard my friend say that hebought some the year before from a man by the nameof Steunenberg. Yes, he said, probably so, as ex-Gov-ernor Steunenberg was in the sheep business. ThenBy the way, that's him over there in front ofhe said,the Idan-ha now," and he pointed him out. That wasthe first time I had ever seen Governor Steunenbergto know him."In a little while we went down and went back to thehotel, and I thought I would get my grip and go toNampa, and get the big bomb I had made for Gover-nor Peabody in Canon City out of my trunk in thedepot, and come back, and either set it with the alarm-clock and leave it in the grip and set it under his bed,or set it like the Bradley bomb with a string on hisbedroom door, so it would go off when he went to hisroom.While on my way from Boise to Nampa I got tothinking what this would do, and that they would lookpretty close after all strangers, and that my comingthere and going away so quick would look pretty sus-picious. This bomb had twenty-five pounds of dyna-203CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDmite in it, and I knew it would blow that part of thehotel all to pieces, and probably kill a lot of people.But that was not the reason I stopped, for I had noheart at that time and thought very little of how manyI killed, as long as Mr. Steunenberg was one of them.I was only thinking what the chances of myself werein being discovered. I knew I could get the bomb inhis room, and get away from the hotel, and if I usedan alarm-clock, I might be half-way to Portland andnot be discovered. The only danger of this was thathe might look under the bed and find it, and if I set itat his door, the time he would be killed would dependon what time he went to bed. I knew this latter wasthe surest way to catch him, but I did not know howfar I might get away before he might go to his room,and I did not want to set this at the door until aboutdark for fear some of the chambermaids might go inthe room.As I had my ticket and money enough, I made upmy mind all at once I would go on to Portland andSeattle, and look around Seattle and the sound for thelittle ranch we had spoken of and then go up to Wal-lace and look after a proposition D. C. Coates hadspoken of when he was in Denver the month before. Ialways dreaded to do these murders, and usually putthem off as long as I could or rather as long as I hadmoney.204HOW I STARTED AFTER STEUNENBERGSo I took the train and went on to Portland thatsame night, and stayed there a few days, and took inthe fair, and then went on to Seattle and stayed therea week or so. This was about the middle of September.Pettibone had given me the address of an old partnerof his at Seattle, named William Barrett, and I huntedhim up and he showed me around the city. This wasmy first time there. I told Barrett I wanted to get asmall place up on the sound somewhere close to theBritish line. He took me down and introduced me tosome real estate men and I went out and looked atsome places near Seattle, but I did not like them, andI did not like the weather there, as it was cold andraining there then. I got Barrett to send Pettibone agood map of the sound country, and I left there forSpokane, stayed there one night, and started for Wal-lace, Idaho. I stopped off at Wardner to seek JackSimpkins and I found him and told him where I hadbeen, and what I went to Caldwell for, and what I wasin Wallace to look up.205