CHAPTER SIXTEENTHE ASSASSINATION OF GOVERNOR STEUNENBERGJACKand I left Wallace for Spokane, aboutOctober 20th, and Jack wanted to go over toMarble Creek to his claims, and I was going withhim for a litle hunt, as he said there were deer and elkup there. We got tickets to Harrison and from thereto Spokane by boat and electric line. My trunk gotchecked wrong on this trip and I waited a few daysin Spokane for it. Then finally we started for theMarble Creek country. We went up to the head ofnavigation on the St. Joe River. On our way up wefound the trunk at Harrison. Jack and I went overtwenty-five miles or so from the head of the St. Joe,over to Marble Creek; we were gone about a week.During the time we were over there Jack showed mewhere he and Adams and the others killed Boule, theyear before, and his horse and dog, and where the otherclaim-jumper that was with him ran as they wereshooting at him.The last part of October we came to Spokane againand had planned to come to Caldwell, as Jack wanted206THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGto have a hand in the killing of Governor Steunenberg.Jack said he could make it as an excuse that he wantedto visit the unions at Silver City and vicinity, and thenhe could charge the Federation with his time andexpenses. I made up my mind I would sue the rail-road company for damages for holding my trunk.Jack had ordered ten pounds of No. 1 dynamite theday before at a hardware store, and after we wentover and got this we went up to Robinson, Miller &Rosenthal's law office, to see about lodging a claimagainst the railroad for damages for holding mytrunk. We met Miller on the elevator and he wentup with us. This was the first time I ever saw him,and Jack introduced me to him, he being the onlymember of the firm there then. I told him about thetrunk, and he asked me how much a day my timewas worth and what my business was. I told him Iwas a mining promoter, and my time was worth $10per day. I think he figured up $60 and drew up apaper, and I made an affidavit to it, and he said hewould sue them right away and send me half of whathe got. I gave him no money, as he was to get halfof what he collected. Jack had this little box of dyna-mite with him, and Miller asked him what he hadin the box, and he told him dynamite. I don't thinkMiller thought it was dynamite, as Jack said it asthough it was a joke, but it was a common thing forCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDany one that knew us fellows to call us dynamitersin a joking way, and I must say that we felt somewhatproud of the name. Miller told me some time afterthat he settled my claim with the railroad companyfor $25, and sent me a check for $12.50. He sent thischeck to Denver to Pettibone's store, as I had my mailgo there, and then Pettibone would forward it to mewherever I was, but I never got this check.Jack and I got ready in a few days and came toCaldwell, Idaho, and stopped at the Pacific Hotel. Itwas now about the 1st of November. We lookedaround to see if we could see Mr. Steunenberg forthree or four days, and as we did not see him, wethought we would take a run up to Nampa, and tele-as he had a phonephone to his residence from thereand make some excuse to find out wherein his househe was. I telephoned to his residence at Caldwell, andthey said he was home, but was down-town. I toldthem I would call him later.We then left Nampa and went back to Caldwell;this was on a Saturday evening. We registered bothat Caldwell and at the Commercial Hotel, Nampa;I as Thomas Hogan and Jack as Simmons. We wentaround Mr. Steunenberg's residence that night, butdid not go close to the window and, as his housestood back quite a little from the street, and it beingbright moonlight, we could not tell him for sure,208THE TWO STEUNENBERG BOMBSFrom models made by Orchard. The lower of these failed to ex-plode. The ex-Governor was killed by the upper one; the clockon this was not used, the cork of the bottle of acid being pulledout by a string fastened to a gate.THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGalthough the window shades were clear up and wehad a good pair of French opera-glasses. The nextday we fixed a bomb and thought, if we caught Mr.Steunenberg down-town we would watch him, and,if he stayed until after dark, we would place thisalong the pathway leading to his residence and tiea cord or fine wire across the pathway so that whenhe walked into it he would explode the bomb.We did locate him on Sunday afternoon sitting inthe office of the Saratoga Hotel, and we watched him,and he remained until after dark, and as soon asit was dark we took the bomb up on the street lead-ing to his residence and placed it close to the pathwhere he would be most apt to pass, and laid itclose to the path, and put some weeds over it, andstretched a fine wire across the path, and fastened iton the opposite side. Mr. Steunenberg's residence wasthe only one up this street and we thought he wouldbe the only one likely to be going up there that night,or would be apt to be going home and be the firstone along. This bomb was just the ten-pound box ofdynamite we bought at Spokane, with some giant-caps in it, and a little vial of sulphuric acid in a wind-lass that would turn over and spill the acid on thecaps.After we placed this, we hurried back to the PacificHotel so we could prove where we were if necessary.209CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDWe waited an hour or two, and as we did not hearany explosion, we went down by the Saratoga Hotelto see if he had gone from there. He had gone andwe went up where we had placed the bomb, and foundhe or some one had passed and broken the fine wireacross the path, and had turned the little windlasswith the bottle of acid in it over so quick that noneof the acid had spilled out, though the bottle hadturned clear over, and was nearly right side up again.It was turned over enough so that the acid was aboutdripping out, and it was very ticklish business tohandle it, and I thought at first I would leave it whereit was, but finally I put my finger over the mouthof the vial, and took it out, and took the bomb upand carried it over by the railroad track, and cov-ered it up with some weeds, and went back to thehotel. We looked for Mr. Steunenberg again the nextday, but could not see him, nor did we see him forsome days after.Jack got afraid to stay there, and began to think itwould look bad for him, and make it worse for meif we did kill Mr. Steunenberg, and he was foundthere and knownand he had seen some people therethat he knew, so he decided to go over to Silver Cityand Delamar and visit the unions there, and he wantedme to stay and see if I could not get a chance tofinish the job.210THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGWhen Jack went, I left the Pacific Hotel and renteda room over on the Boulevard at W. H. Schenck'sa private house. This was on a street that Mr. Steu-nenberg would be apt to go up and down to andfrom his residence when he came down-town, and Ihad a front room and could see up and down thesidewalk. I stayed there two weeks, but Mr. Steunen-berg was away most of the time. I think he usuallycame home Saturdays and stayed over Sunday. Inoticed in the papers that Governor Gooding had ap-pointed Mr. Steunenberg on some committee to meetin Boise about this time, and I thought I would goto Boise again, and see if I could not catch himat the hotel. I went out and got the bomb where I hadit cached by the railroad track.I had two letters from Jack, and he told me Moyerhad been up to Silver City, and Easterly had toldhim we were at Caldwell, as I had written to Easterly,and Jack said that Moyer flew right away from there.Jack went up to Hailey from Silver City. I wasin Nampa the night he came back from Hailey, andhe stopped off at Nampa, too. But he got up andleft the next morning for Caldwell before I was upand I did not see him. He went up to the house whereI was, and they told him I went away the day before,and did not come back that night, but my things werethere. I went back to Caldwell that afternoon and met211CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDJack at the depot, as he was going to take the train,and he said he had left a letter for me. I told himhe had better wait and take the midnight train, andhe did. We went over to my room, and in going overhe said he had a good saddle spotted, and that hewould get it now that he had waited and take ithome with him. It was hanging up on the outsideof a little outbuilding by a house. We had pickedup a light lap-robe some time before, and wrappedit around our bomb. We got this lap-robe and Jackwent to a hardware store and got a ball of twineand a sack needle, and we made a sack out of the lap-robe in my room and, about half an hour before traintime, we went down and got this saddle and put itin the sack and I helped Jack carry it nearly over tothe depot. I had a railroad ticket good from Spokaneto Denver and I gave this to Jack, as he was goingto Denver to attend a meeting of the executive boardof the Western Federation of Miners, of which hewas a member.Simpkins said for me to be sure and not get dis-couraged and leave until I got the governor, and ifI got broke to let him know and he would see that Igot money, and he would fix it so that after the jobI would get a good bunch of moneyenough tobuy a ranch and quit this work and let somebodyelse do it, as I had done my share. He wanted me to212THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGbuy a ranch up on the St. Joe River, and I got sev-eral letters from himsome of them after he wentand he told me in one of these that heto Denverhad everything all fixed, and Pettibone would sendme the money as soon as the job was done.As I have before stated, I thought I might findMr. Steunenberg in Boise, and I left Caldwell forthere a day or two after Jack left. I stayed a fewdays in Boise, but saw nothing of Mr. Steunenberg,and I thought I would like to have some one to helpme, and I was lonesome and disgusted to have to waitso long. I telephoned to Silver City to Easterly andasked him if he wanted to take part in the contract,and he said he could not leave there just then, andI made up my mind to go to Salt Lake City andget Charlie Shoddy, the man I met in Salt Lake Citywhen on my way out to Caldwell the first time.I left Boise for Salt Lake City about November20th, and went up to Siegel Brothers' store there, asthey owned this mine where Shoddy was working, andI asked if Charlie was still out at their mine. Theysaid they thought he was, and I wrote him and ad-dressed the letter to Siegel post-office, but never gotan answer from it.I stayed in Salt Lake City about three weeks, andwhile there I got a letter from Pettibone stating thatmy friend Johnnie Neville had died quite suddenly213CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDin Goldfield, Nev., and a little later I saw the accountof it in the papers. Now I had written Moyer a let-ter some time before this and told him to send me$100, or to send it to Jack for me, and also toldhim in this letter that I had sent Shoddy to Gold-field, Nev., to do that job. This was a lie, of course,but when I saw the account of Johnnie's death, Ithought I would take advantage of it, and makeMoyer believe this man had done this, and I wrotehim to this effect, and also wrote Simpkins at Denverand told him to tell Moyer. He answered me thathe did, and would get some money for Charlie. I alsotold them that Charlie was there in Salt Lake Citywith me now, and we were going to Caldwell and thatI had money to take us there, but that they hadbetter send me $500 or so for Charlie to Nampa,as I told them Charlie was to stop there while Iwas looking after things in Caldwell. When I didnot hear anything from Charlie, and as my moneywas getting low again, I left for Caldwell. This wasabout the middle of December, 1905.I went to the Saratoga Hotel at Caldwell, and gotan answer to my letter that I sent Pettibone beforeleaving Salt Lake City, and he said he had sent myletter to Jack, and I supposed they had given himthe money for me to give Charlie. A while afterI got a letter from Jack, and he said he had stoppedTHE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGoff at Salt Lake City on his way home from Denverto see me, but could not find me and did not knowwhere I had gone. He sent me a piece of a type-written letter that he had received from Haywood,which stated that he thought if there were any moreremittances for assessment work that they had betterbe sent through him. This was the work they referredto that I was doing. But before he sent me any moneyI was arrested. I told them I was looking to buy aranch, and I saw a number of real estate men aboutthis. I had stayed at the Saratoga Hotel all thetime.as I supposed, for a Christmas dinnerOn Christmas Day which was Monday I sawMr. Steunenberg going to his brother's about noonand Iwatched for him to come home after dark, and hada pump shot-gun and was going to shoot him withbuck-shot. I had not been up by his residence longbefore I heard him coming, and started to put mygun together, as I had it down and one piece hungon each side of me with a cord around my neck undermy overcoat, but I had some trouble getting it to-gether, as this cord bothered me, and they got intothe house before I got it together. I went aroundthe house and waited to see if I could get a chanceto see him through the window, but I think he wentinto the bath-room shortly after coming home, and215CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwent from there to bed and had no light. I stoodbehind a tree close to the house and could see someone in the bath-room, but the steam was so thick Icould not be sure it was him. I waited there untilthey went to bed, but did not see him, and then wentback to the hotel. I buried some shot-gun shells underthe sidewalk loaded with buck-shot on my way up, asI had too many, and did not want any left in myroom if I should use them.There was a mask ball at the Saratoga that night,and I had thought if I shot Governor Steunenberg,I could easily go up-stairs and not be noticed, asthey could not tell me from anybody else in the crowd.I did not see Mr. Steunenberg again until the nextThursday. I did not know where he went when hewas away, and I saw his son on the street one day,and I spoke to him and asked him if they had anysheep to sell. I thought I would find out this waywhere his father went. He told me that he knew noth-ing about it, as his father attended to that, but hesaid I could find out by telephoning to his father atthe company ranch at Bliss. But he said he wouldbe home the next day, and I could see him if I wasthere. I told him I just wanted to find out where somesheep could be bought, as a friend of mine wantedthem to feed.The next day, Friday, I went to Nampa and216THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGthought I might get a chance to put the bomb underGovernor Steunenberg's seat, if I found him on thetrain, as the train usually stops fifteen to twentyminutes at Nampa. I had taken the powder out of thewooden box, and packed it in a little, light, sheet-ironbox with a lock on, and I had a hole cut in the topof this and a little clock on one side. Both this andthe bottle of acid were set in plaster-Paris on theother side of the hole from the clock with a wire fromthe key which winds the alarm to the cork in the bot-tle. The giant-caps were put in the powder under-neath this hole, and all I had to do was to wind upthe alarm and set it and, when it went off, it wouldwind up the fine wire on the key, and pull out thecork, and spill the acid on the caps. I had this fittedin a little grip and was going to set it, grip and all,under his seat in the coach, if I got a chance. I wentthrough the train when it arrived at Nampa, but didnot see Mr. Steunenberg, and the train was crowded,so I would not have had any chance, anyway. I sawMr. Steunenberg get off the train at Caldwell, butmissed him on the train.I saw him again around Caldwell Saturday after-noon. I was playing cards in the saloon at the Sara-toga, and came out in the hotel lobby at just dusk,and Mr. Steunenberg was sitting there talking. I wentover to the post-office and came right back, and he was217CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDstill there. I went up to my room and took this bombout of my grip and wrapped it up in a newspaperand put it under my arm and went down-stairs, andMr. Steunenberg was still there. I hurried as fast asI could up to his residence, and laid this bomb close tothe gate-post, and tied a cord into a screw-eye in thecork and around a picket of the gate, so when thegate was opened, it would jerk the cork out of thebottle and let the acid run out and set off the bomb.This was set in such a way, that if he did not openthe gate wide enough to pull it out, he would strikethe cord with his feet, as he went to pass in. I pulledsome snow over the bomb after laying the paper overit, and hurried back as fast as I could.I met Mr. Steunenberg about two and a half blocksfrom his residence. I then ran as fast as I could, to getback to the hotel if possible before he got to thegate. I was about a block and a half from the hotelon the foot-bridge when the explosion of the bomb oc-curred, and I hurried to the hotel as fast as I could. Iwent into the bar-room, and the bartender was alone,and asked me to help him tie up a little package, and Idid, and then went on up to my room, intending tocome right down to dinner, as nearly every one wasin at dinner.I was going to take some things out of my roomand throw them away, and I emptied some acid I had218FRANK STEUNENBERGEx-Governor of Idaho, for whose murder by a bornb Secretary -Treas-urer Haywood of the Western Federation of Miners was tried.THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGin a bottle into the sink, and put the bottle in mycoat pocket, intending to take it down and throw itaway, and a moment after doing this, there was aflash like a pistol-shot rang out. It almost unnervedme for a moment, but I soon understood what it was.I had taken a giant-cap out of a box I had in mygrip a few days before, to try it to see if they wereall right, as I had had them a good while, and I didnot try this and forgot to take it out of my pocket,and there must have been a little acid left in the bottleI put in my pocket, and this got into the cap and ex-ploded it. This tore my coat all up, but did not hurtme a bit, but it unnerved me, and I thought every-body in the house would hear it, as my room wasdirectly over the dining-room and everybody was inthere to dinner. I had another coat there and I slippedthat on and hurried down to dinner. Everybody wastalking about Mr. Steunenberg being blown to pieces,but I never heard a word about the explosion of thegiant-cap in my room. I think everybody was excitedabout the explosion and did not hear it, or did notpay any attention to it.Now, I cannot tell what came across me. I hadsome plaster-Paris and some chloride of potash andsome sugar in my room, also some little bottles, andscrew-eyes, and an electric flashlight, and I knewthere might be some little crumbs of dynamite scat-219CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtered around on the floor. I intended to clean thecarpet, and throw this stuff that might look suspiciousall away, and I had plenty of time. But after this capexploded in my pocket, something came across methat I cannot explain, and I seemed to lose my reason-ing power for the time, and left everything there justas they were, and at that time I had some letters andpapers in my pockets that would have looked bad andbeen hard for me to explain.I stood around there until about ten o'clock, as thehotel was jammed full, and in the mean time a specialhad come down from Boise, and they were sendingout men to surround the town and telephoning to thesurrounding towns. About twelve o'clock I went upto Mr. Steunenberg's residence with the hotel clerkand came back and went to bed, and did not get upuntil about eleven o'clock the next daySunday. Iwent down and read the papers, and was sure one ofthe suspects referred to was me. Then I destroyedsome letters and papers I had, and began to pull my-self together, but I thought they were watching meand I was afraid to start to clean my room or throwthose things away, and thought what a fool I hadbeen not to have cleaned every suspicious-lookingthing out of my room the night before. I cannot ac-count for what made me so stupid, as I well knew thesethings would look suspicious, and it would be hard220THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGfor me to explain what I had them for, if I was calledupon to do so.I just began to realize this and come to myself,and would have gotten rid of them then had I hada chance. I did go up to my room and took a fish-lineoff a reel I had there and threw it in the water-closet,as I noticed in the papers that they referred to a fish-line or cord on the gate at Governor Steunenberg's,and I had used a piece of this fish-line. I would havecleaned the room then if I had had time. I could notthrow all this other stuff in the toilet, and was excitedand left it all there, and even left the gun in my gripwhich I usually carried. I had always said that Iwould not be taken alive, but did not value my lifemuch anyway, and would sell it as dearly as I could,if ever suspected of anything and they tried to arrestme. I am sure they suspected me and I took a walkup to Mr. Steunenberg's residence with a Caldwellman, and he said every stranger in town would haveto give an account of himself.I was sitting in the saloon of the hotel in the after-noon and a stranger asked me to take a little walk,and pretended to be acquainted with me. I afterwardlearned this was Sheriff Brown, of Baker City, Ore.I told him he was mistaken, and he told me that theysuspected me of having something to do with the assas-sination, and he said he told them that he thoughtCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhe knew me. I told him I would go and see the sheriffat once, which I did and asked him if he wanted tosee me, and he asked me if I was going away, andI told him I was not at the present, and he said wewould have a talk after a while. I went over to thehotel and sat down and in a few minutes the sheriffcame over and said he would have to arrest me. I toldhim all right, and he went off and came back in afew minutes, and told me the governor had orderedhim to take charge of my things that were in myroom, and he said he would parole me and I was notto leave town or the hotel. I have forgotten which.Then I thought what a fool I had been to leave allthose things in the room, when I had all kinds ofchances to take them out, and had even let themget away with my gun. I would have made an attemptto get away that night, but I knew they were watch-ing me, and again if I had succeeded in gettingaway from the hotel, it was bitter cold and the groundwas covered with snow, and therefore I made no at-tempt to get away. I knew that they had organizeda committee to investigate, and thought they mighttake me before this committee, and ask me to explainwhat I had such stuff for, and I was thinking howI would answer them if they did.But they said nothing to me until the next dayMonday about four o'clock, when the deputy sheriff222THE ASSASSINATION OF STEUNENBERGasked me to go over to the district attorney's office,and when I went over there they said they would haveto search me. This is the time I would have used mygun had I had it. They searched me and the sheriffread the warrant to me, and they said they wanted meto go to Boise with them. We went over to the depotand waited for a while, and then they took me up tothe county jail at Caldwell.223