CHAPTER FIVETHE BIG STRIKE OP 1903IHAD never taken any particular interest inunions up to this time. I had never workedanywhere, since leaving Burke, Idaho, wherethere was a miners' union till I came to CrippleCreek. W. F. Davis and W. B. Easterly had cometo me when I first went to work in the district, andasked me to join the Altaian union. I knew Davisfrom the Cceur d'Alenes. He was the man that hadcommand of the union men when we blew up theBunker Hill and Sullivan mill. He was president ofthe Altman union now, and Easterly was secretary.So after I had a pay-day I went up and joined thisunion. Still, I never took much interest in it till thestrike.The Cripple Creek district was considered a uniondistrict, notwithstanding there were a good manymen working there that did not belong to the union,and part of the mines ran on the open-shop prin-ciple. The big mines on Bull Hill all recognized theunions, and this end practically controlled the unions55CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDof the district. There were eight unions in the dis-one miners' union at Victor, one at CrippletrictCreek, one at Anaconda, and one at Altman; oneengineers' union at Victor, one at Cripple Creek,and one at Independence; and a mill- and smelter-men's union at Victor. These unions each selectedone or two delegates, and the delegates composedthe district union.The Victor union was the largest and most con-servative. The men belonging to the Free Coinageunion at Altman, where I was a member, used to" the Bull Hill dynamiters." This wasoften be calledonly the third largest miners' union in the district,but they had always had very radical leaders. Dan Mc-Ginley had been a former leader. He had been lookedup to as a great man, and although dead they usedto keep his memory alive by having his picturehanging in the union hall.The Cripple Creek district was so large that theunions could not control it the same as they did theCoeur d'Alenes, and non-union men were pretty safein big towns like Victor and Cripple Creek, but theFree Coinage union had the vicinity of Bull Hillwell under their control, the same as in the Coeurd'Alenes, and there was hardly a man both workingand living on Bull Hill that did not belong to someof the unions. There had been a great many men56THE BIG STRIKE OF 1903beaten up and run away from there because theydid not join the unions, or pay their dues, or be-cause they were suspected of being spies. The FreeCoinage miners' union kept a " timber gang," asthey called them, to do this work. Easterly, whowas ex-secretary, and Sherman Parker, who was sec-retary when the strike came, had helped to do thiskind of work before they became officers of theunion. Steve Adams, Billy Aikman,Camp-bell, H. H. McKinney, Billy Gaffney, and Ed Min-ster and others were in the gang. These men hardlyever worked and always seemed to have plenty ofmoney, and Steve Adams has since told me they wereready for any old thing, from running men out ofthe district to killing them, as long as they got the" Slim "money.This strike in August, 1903, was called becausethe Standard mill in Colorado City discriminatedagainst union men, and the miners at Cripple Creekwere called out in order to cut off the ore supplyfrom the Standard mill and force a settlement. TheTelluride mill was also closed at Colorado City. ThePortland mine was the only big mine that was notcalled out, as it had its own mills and granted theunion's demand. There were a few smaller minesworking, but only a few. One strike against the millswas called in February, and some of the miners went57CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDout for a short time in March. Then there was asettlement for a while, but in July the mill-men werecalled out again, because it was claimed Mr. Mac-Neill, the manager of the Standard mill, was notkeeping his agreement; and on August 10th theCripple Creek miners went out again.slaughterI knew this whole thing had been arranged at theWestern Federation of Miners' convention at Den-ver in May and June of 1903. And while I do notthink the convention acted on it officially, the leaderson the executive board and some of the local leadersin Colorado agreed to make Colorado a "ground," as W. F. Davis later expressed it to methat is, to call out all the miners, mill-men, andsmelter-men in Colorado, and force all the manage-ments to give them all an eight-hour day and arecognition of the union. Most places in the minesand mills of Colorado had the eight-hour daythough the smelter-men and the Leadville miners andperhaps some others did not. But there were manyconditions which the Federation leaders did not like,and they meant to change them at this time. Hay-wood and Moyer and others of the labor leadershave told me that they took advantage of the legis-lature failing to pass an eight-hour bill after theState had voted for it the year before by such a largemajority, to make all the mines, mills, and smelters,58THE BIG STRIKE OF 1903where unions were organized, recognize the unionsand pay the union's scale of wages all over Colorado.At the same convention, they passed a resolutionallowing the head officers of the union to call a strikeif they thought best to, when they wanted to sup-port another strike.Mr. Moyer and Mr. Haywood have always deniedthat they had anything to do with calling this Crip-ple Creek strike, because this resolution did not takeeffect for six months, until after it was indorsed bythe local unions. They claimed that the districtunion of Cripple Creek called the strike there. Thisis true, they did call the strike, but they were actingon advice, and you might say orders, from Moyerand Haywood. The district union in Cripple Creekwas mostly composed of men that were controlledby Moyer and Haywood, and it appointed three menon the committee to see about calling the strike, andthey approved of it. Sherman Parker and W. F.Davis of the Altman union were on this, and CharlesKennison of Cripple Creek, all radical men ; and theVictor union, that was the largest miners' union inthe district, and was conservative, had no repre-sentative at all, while the most radical one and thenext to the smallest, at Altman, had two. If thissympathetic strike had been left to a referendumvote of the miners of the district, it never would59CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhave passed, and the men who favored this strikeknew this. I never will think it is wise to call outfour or five thousand men to enforce the demandsof a hundred and fifty or two hundred. And I knowthat many quit against their will when the ordercame.scabsSome will ask," What did they quit for?they didnot have to." There are several reasons why men quitagainst their will. In the first place, the unions werein the great majority, and had most of the localpeace officers on their side. Men had been run outof the district and beaten up because they wouldnot join the union, and they could not expect muchprotection from the local authorities, and again men"" and to have theirdid not like to be callednames, and in many instances their photographs,sent to every miners' union in the country, forminers travel around a good deal. The secretariesof the unions post up these names in the unionhalls, and also the photographs, if they have them.There is 'most always some one in every camp thatknows these men, and many men have disappearedin mysterious ways, and others have been killed invarious ways while working in the mines. These arealways reported as accidents, and some of them nodoubt are, but I know of some that were not, andhave been told by reliable sources that many are not,60THE BIG STRIKE OF 1903and I know there are many ways to get away witha man working in the mines and make it appearan accident. So, after taking all these things intoconsideration, one can readily understand why menquit work and go on a strike when ordered to do soby their officers.As I have said, it was the intention of the Fed-eration leaders to call the miners out all over theState, and tie up the mines, mills, reduction works,and smelters. They called out the smelter-men at theGlobe and Grant smelter works at Denver. Theyalso tried to call out all the miners in the San Juandistrict, as they were well organized there, but mostof the miners in this district had agreements withthe mine operators and would not break them. How-ever, at Telluride they found a way around this.Most of the men went on strike for an eight-hourday for a few mill-men there, although many of themill-men did not quit themselves, but were forcedto by the closing of the mines. The Smuggler-Unionminers did not strike, but they got the cooks andwaiters at their boarding-houses to leave, and thisgave the miners an excuse to quit, as they wouldnot board where there were non-union cooks andwaiters. Telluride was the only camp in the SanJuan district where they succeeded in getting theunionists to quit work. I think they had from ten61CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDto twelve hundred men in the miners' union at Tel-luride.C. H. Moyer, president of the Western Federa-tion, tried to get the miners out at Ouray, but theyfinally decided not to come out, after he had gotthem once to vote to do so. At Silverton the largestunion in the district absolutely refused to come out.Most of the coal-miners in Colorado went on strike,too, about this time.But, as I have stated, in Cripple Creek the menpractically all quit work when ordered to do so, andthere was a strike committee appointed, and therewas a circular sent out from headquarters to allkinds of unions throughout the country solicitingmoney for a fund which they called the "eight-hourfund." And they also sent men all over the countrysoliciting aid for the strikers. They got up greatpublic sympathy because the legislatures refused topass the eight-hour bill, as they should have donewhen the people of the State voted so strong for it.But, as I have explained, the big strike at CrippleCreek had nothing to do with the eight-hour law,and this was the case at Telluride, so far as theminers themselves were concerned.