CHAPTER NINEHOW WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE GOVERNOR PEABODYABOUTthis time a mob and the militia ransome more of the union men out of Telluride,Col., in the night, and forbade them to re-turn on pain of death. Moyer sent for me to cometo Denver, so I got ready and went. I met Moyer,Haywood, and Pettibone at Federation headquar-ters, and they wanted me to go down to the SanJuan district with Moyer. They had two pumpshot-guns, sawed off so they would go in our gripswhen they were taken down, and plenty of shellsloaded with buck-shot. The reason for this was someone had told Moyer or sent him word if they caughthim they would use him as they had the UnitedMine Workers' officers. Some of the latter had beentaken off a train and beaten up and nearly killed.They laid this to the deputies the mine operatorshad employed.The next night Moyer and I started for Mon-trose, where they had sent John Murphy, the Fed-eration attorney, to get an injunction from Judge110WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYStevens against the militia and citizens of Tellurideto compel them to let the union miners return totheir homes peaceably and not to interfere withthem. We had three six-shooters, and two shot-gunsin our grips, which we left unfastened in the seatsin front of us, and we sat near the middle of thecar ; but no one troubled us. We arrived at Montroseand met Mr. Murphy, and he had the injunctionall ready. We went on to Ouray, where most of themen were that had been deported, and the next dayMoyer sent a telegram to Governor Peabody in-forming him of the injunction, and wanted to knowif these men would have the protection of the militiaif they returned peaceably to their homes, and hegot an answer that all law-abiding citizens wouldbe protected. Moyer said when he sent his telegramto the governor, that he had promised himself thathe would never ask him for anything again, and hehated to do it, but this would be the last time. Moyersent a few men back on the train the next morning,but they were met at a station some distance fromTelluride, and forced off the train by militia andarmed men, and threatened with death if they at-tempted to come into town. Sherman Bell, the ad-jutant-general, had arrived in Telluride, and martiallaw was declared, and Bell disregarded the order ofthe court in regard to the injunction.IllCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDAfter these men were sent back from Telluride,Mr. Moyer was angrier than ever, and he began toadvise the men that they could not expect any pro-tection from the State, and the only way was to takethe law in their own hands, and go back to Telluridein a body and clean out the town. There were somemethods discussed as to the best way to proceed.The first thing that we thought necessary was toget concentrated at the most convenient place, andget what arms and ammunition and other materialwe would need. We also spoke of filling beer-kegswith dynamite, and attaching a time-fuse, and roll-ing them down the mountainside into Telluride, asthe town was in a canon with high mountains oneither side. Another plan spoken of by Mbyer wasto poison the reservoir where they got their waterfor Telluride with cyanide of potassium. This iseasy to get around the mills where they use thecyanide process, and of course it is deadly poisonand kills any one taking the least particle of it in-stantly. But Moyer only started to carry out thefirst of these plans when he was arrested.After Bell disregarded the injunction, Moyer sentover to Silverton, which is thirty miles from Ouray,for Frank Schmelzer, the president of the San Juandistrict union. He wanted to confer with him aboutwhat to do with these men who were deported, as112WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYthere were about a hundred of them stopping atthe hotel at Ouray, and paying about $1 a daythere, and he said the Federation could not affordthat. Mr. Schmelzer came over the next day, andthey talked the situation over. There were some moreof these deported men over at Silverton. The finaloutcome of the conference was that they decided tolease one or more of the idle mines up at Red Moun-tain. This is about half-way between Ouray and Sil-verton on the divide, and not far from Telluride,I think less than twenty miles. Another man camedown from Red Mountain with Schmelzer; his namewas Tom Taylor. He had a partner at Red Moun-tain, and he said there were some large boarding-and lodging-houses there, and he thought therewould be no trouble in renting them, as almost every-thing was silver mines around there and they wereclosed down on account of the low price of silver.The object of getting this out-of-the-way place wasto have some place to concentrate the men and keepthem together, and this place was just where theywanted them, and the lease was all a bluff. The realobject was to send these men up there and arm themall, get a car or two of provisions, and send all theoutlaws they could get hold of up there, too.They were going to try to get Vincent St. Johnto go up there and drill these men and be their113CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDleader, as they all knew him, and it was said theywould do anything he told them or follow him anyplace. These men were mostly all foreignersAus-trians, Finns, and Italians. They thought if theycould get enough men up here in this out-of-the-way place, and have them well armed, and keep themthere until the snow got settled in the spring sothey could walk on it, some night they could marchthem over the hill to Telluride and clean out thetown. This was the plan, but it was not told exceptto a very few, and they were well satisfied with it.If we had had another day these arrangements wouldhave been finished, and perhaps we would have beenaway from there.But the morning that we might have finished upand left later in the day, before we got up, thesheriff rapped at the door and wanted to see Moyer.I was sleeping with Moyer, and we got up anddressed, and when we went out the sheriff arrestedhim. He said they had wired him from Telluride tohold Moyer, and that the sheriff from San MiguelCounty was on his way with a warrant. Moyer wiredhis attorneys at Denver and wanted to know if thesheriff at Ouray had any right to hold him withouta warrant. I think they told him he had; anyway,he did hold him, and about noon the sheriff andtwo deputies arrived and took him to Telluride.WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYMoyer had given me some papers and his six-shooterbefore the sheriff from Telluride arrived, and thsOuray sheriff did not search him or lock him up,but let him stay in his office. The charge they ar~rested him on was desecration of the American flag.The Federation had sent out by the thousandsposters imitating the American flag, with advertis-ing on them. They only arrested Moyer on this asan excuse. They took him to Telluride, and he wasreleased on bail, but the militia rearrested him rightaway.I left Ouray that night and went to Silverton withSchmelzer to escape arrest, and Moyer telephonedme from Telluride in a day or so, and wanted me tofetch his things and meet him at Durango, but be-fore we got through talking they cut us off. He wastelephoning me just after he was let out on bonds,and while he was talking they cut off the connection,and the militia arrested him right afterward andheld him for over three months. That was the lastI saw of him for nearly a year.I stayed at Silverton a few days, and then wentback to Denver and reported to Haywood. Thelawyers from Denver had gone to Telluride in themean time, but they could not get Moyer out, as themilitia held him under military necessity. A few daysafter he was arrested, Sheriff Rutan of Telluride115CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDcame to Denver to arrest Haywood on the samecharge, but Haywood blocked his plans by gettinga friend in Denver to swear out a warrant on thesame charge, and a justice in Denver that wasfriendly to him put him in the custody of the deputysheriff, who stayed with him all the time ; and he hadhis case continued from time to time.Pettibone and Haywood decided we ought to teachthem a lesson for sending Rutan up there, and Pet-tibone and I were laying for Rutan the evening hewent to take the train in Denver for home. Wewaited in an alley off Seventeenth Street, just beforeyou got to the depot, and Pettibone was going tohit him with some brass knuckles, and we were goingto drag him into the alley and finish him. But he hadseven men with him on his way to the depot, and wecouldn't get him.Haywood and Pettibone were pretty warm underthe collar about this time. They said they could notget any justice in the courts, that Peabody was hold-ing Moyer down there under martial kw, and thathe had no right to, and the only way they knew ofto get any justice was to take the law into theirown hands and put Peabody out of business. So theydecided then they wanted me to get away with thegovernor. Pettibone told me where he lived, and theywanted me to take a look around his residence and116WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYsee what the chances would be to get away with him.I took a look around there, and told him I thoughta man could lay alongside a stone fence in a vacantlot that was on one side of his house, and shoot himwith buck-shot when he came home at night. I wentand sat around the capitol building and read untilI saw him, so I would know him and learn his habits,and I told Haywood I thought he could be gottenall right, but that I ought to have some one to helpme. It is better to have two men on a job of thiskind, so that one can watch, and of course two mencould hold up the police better than one, if you hadto. Besides, you get half crazy thinking of a jobof this kind, when one man is alone.Haywood said Steve Adams was the best man heknew of to go in a job of that kind, only he saidhe was so well known. But we thought if he camedown there in the city, and did not go around inthe daytime much, he might not be known. So I leftthere and went back to Cripple Creek, where Stevelived. I had never had anything to do with him atthis time, and was only slightly acquainted with him.I went and saw him, and told him what they wanted,and he said he was ready for any old thing.I made arrangements with Adams to come to Den-ver in a few days, and I went right back to Denver,and told Haywood and Pettibone that Adams would117CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDbe there soon. I kept a watch around the governor'splace, and learned all I could about his habits, andlearned he usually came home in a hack quite lateat night. Adams came down to Denver in a few days,and Haywood gave him money to get some newclothes and fix himself up some, and we got roomsout of the main part of the city a little, and eachgot a sawed-off shot-gun from Pettibone, and kept alookout for the governor. We had a place fixed inPettibone's lot back of the house to hide our shot-guns after we had shot the governor, if we got achance, as Pettibone lived only a short distance fromthe governor and there was a dark street we couldtake part of the way to get there, and Pettibonewas to take the guns and clean them up and putthem away.We worked on this for some time, and never hap-pened to catch the governor coming home at night,and we conceived the idea of planting a bomb underthe edge of the sidewalk, and stretching a fine wireacross some vacant lots that were there, and hidingit in the grass, and setting it off by pulling the corkout of a bottle filled with acid. When the acidtouched the giant-caps it would explode the bomb.We expected to pull this wire when Governor Pea-body came along there in the morning on his wayto the State-house. It was his habit to walk from his118JAMES H. PEABODYEx-Governor of Colorado, whom Orchard repeatedly attempted toassassinate.WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYresidence to the State-house every morning betweennine and ten o'clock. Adams went up to a little min-ing-camp not far from Denver to a friend he knew,and that knew about some of these outrages, andgot about fifty pounds of powder and brought itback in a grip. He took it over to Pettibone's store,made a box and put the powder into it, and fixed alid so we could bury it and leave a wire out of theground a little, so we could attach another wireto it.About the time we got this ready, and were goingto bury it under the sidewalk some dark night, theexecutive board of the Western Federation of Min-ers met to make arrangements for the annual con-vention. It was now some time in May. The boardwere gathered in Denver and were going over thebooks, as the custom is, just before the convention,and Haywood stopped us from using a bomb at thistime, as he thought it might be laid to some of theexecutive board.We had seen Mr. Peabody coming home late atnight in a hack, and one night we had our pumpshot-guns all ready, and waited across the streetopposite in a yard under some trees, and when wesaw his carriage coming, we got out on the street,and as the carriage slowed up we followed up behindit, and were only about thirty or forty feet behind119CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDit when they got out. We had our guns leveled atthem to shoot as soon as we saw the governor. Wehad watched so we could tell him, and it was alsoquite light there. But there were only three womengot out, and the carriage began to turn round, andwe put our guns down quick and got on the side-walk and started down the street. The carriagedriver let his horses walk and kept looking at us,and the women kept watching us too, and stood onthe porch as far as we could see them. We took thefirst cross street and got out of sight as quickly aspossible. We noticed the next day in the papers thatthe governor had gone out to Fort Logan withsome military men and did not return till the nextday.However, Haywood said he had been studyingup, and had come to the conclusion that Dave Moffatwas behind the whole thing, and that Governor Pea-body was often closeted with him in Moffat's privateoffice, and he said Mr. Moffat had been mixed upin the Leadville strike some years ago, and he wantedus to leave off Peabody and see if we could not getMoffat. We went to watching Mr. Moffat's habits,but we could not get much track of him. We knewwhere his residence was, but we could never see himcoming or going from it, and we worked along onthis for some time without ever being able to see120WE TRIED TO ASSASSINATE PEABODYMr. Moffat around his house. Haywood would tellus when he was in the city, as he did his bankingat Mr. Moffat's bank, and was there every day, andwhile he said he hardly ever saw Mr. Moffat, hecould always tell when he was there, as he alwayskept a guard at the door of his private office. Hay-wood furnished us with money all this time.121