CHAPTER THIRTEENOUR FIBST BOMB FOB GOVERNOR PEABODT, AND OTHERBOMBS FOB STREET WORKIKEPT pretty close for a time after arriving inDenver. I lived with Adams for a while, and Idid not go out much except at night. I wentover to Haywood's residence at night, and talked tohim once in a while. He said he was better pleasedto have Mr. Bradley maimed the way he was than tohave him killed outright, for he was a living example,and he said Bradley knew himself where this camefrom all right. I think he said he would write and tellhim sometime how it happened. I got money any timeI wanted it; Haywood gave it to Pettibone, and hegave it to me, and they wanted us to work on JudgeGabbert and see if we could not bump him off, asthey were very bitter against himespecially Moyer.Judge Gabbert was chief justice of the SupremeCourt, and had decided against Moyer when theybrought him to Denver from Telluride on a writ ofhabeas corpus, when he was in the hands of the militia.So Adams and I strolled around Judge Gabbert's167CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDresidence some at night. They kept the blinds of thewindows pretty close, and we could never see him atnight, but would often see him in the morning or atnoon while he was going or coming from the StateCapitol, as he usually walked back and forth. Theweather was cold and stormy part of the time, and wedid not make any great effort to get him. We hadplenty of money and lived good, and had plenty ofbeer to drink, and took things easy.Haywood also wanted us to watch Mr. Hearne,manager of the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company.He said they had sent him out there from Pennsyl-vania to fix the legislature, as he had done there, andthat he was a bitter enemy to organized labor. Adamsand I strolled around his residence some, but did notmake much of an effort to do anything to him. If wehad seen him at night when we were around there, wewould have shot him, no doubt, if it had looked favor-able for us to get away.This was the winter they had such a wrangle overthe governorship, and there was some doubt aboutthem seating Adams, the Democratic candidate, whowas elected by 12,000 majority for governor overPeabody, but the Republicans were crying fraud.Haywood told us then to keep quiet and not pull offanything until we got Adams seated as governor,for if we bumped Judge Gabbert off then, it might168FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODYhurt his chances for being seated. But when it lookedalmost sure that Peabody would be seated again, hewanted us to try and get him then. But they seatedAdams, and then Peabody began proceedings to ousthim, charging fraud in his election, and it came to alegislature investigation. When it looked like thelegislature was going to seat Peabody and throwAdams out, Pettibone came to us, and wanted usto go after Peabody again and try hard to get him,so we would not have him for governor again.We started in to watch Peabody nights, and car-ried our shot-guns part of the time, but we imaginedhe had guards around his residence at night, and onceor twice we were followed, and we concluded we wouldnot try it at night at his residence. We thought oflying up the street and waiting for his carriage, butit was too cold to lay around and wait long, and then,we had to be sure he was in it ; sometimes there wereonly women in it. But Peabody always walked up tothe Capitol in the morning while he was governor.There came about six inches of snow one night,and it drifted up against the curbstone in some places,and was deeper there than in the streets. We made abig bomb and put about twenty-five pounds of dy-namite in it, and we stretched a wire from GrantAvenue to Logan on Thirteenth Avenue. This bombwas shaped a good deal like the one I made for Brad-169CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDley in San Francisco, only it was a good deal bigger,and made in a lead case that Steve Adams got fixedat a plumber's, instead of a lead pipe. Mr. Peabodyusually walked up Grant Avenue to the Capitol be-tween nine and ten o'clock in the morning, and we laidthis wire in the evening before the streets were empty,and covered it up with snow, and then came back alittle before daybreak, and looked again to see if wehad it covered up well. There was a little space be-tween the curbstone and street for the water to runthrough at the crossings, and we dug the snow outof this enough to lay the bomb in.We had Billy Aikman get a horse and buggy anddrive Adams and me over there about eight o'clockin the morning. I got out a block or so away from theplace, and walked over there, and when there wereno people in sight I motioned to them, and they droveup close as though they were talking to me, and theyhanded me the bomb, which we had done up in a cloth.There was a bottle of acid on top of it, with a corkthat had a wire through it, with a hook on the end ;so all I had to do was to loop the other wire we hadlaid in the night over this hook, and kick a little snowover it. This only took a minute or so, and then Billydrove on and waited two or three blocks away withthe rig. We had two rifles and a shot-gun in the rig,and plenty of ammunition, and intended to fight it170FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODY"get-awayout as long as we lasted, if we got cornered; for, of"course, there is more danger in yourwith a bomb like this than there is with one that setsitself off like the one I had used with Bradley. Adamsand I stayed on the street where we could see thegovernor and his body-guard when they came along.We had seen them so often, we could tell them morethan a block away.When we saw them coming, we went to the otherend of the wire and waited until they were just step-ping over the bomb, and then we intended to jerkthis wire, and that would jerk the cork out of thelittle bottle of acid, when the bomb would explodeinstantly. There was an alley in the middle of theblock, and while we were at the end of the wire, alarge coal wagon came out of this and drove up to-ward us. This wagon was nearly opposite us whenanother came out, and there seemed to be about adozen people coming along right close, and I thinkthe last wagon was close behind the first, when thegovernor came over the bomb. So we did not dare topull the wire until he was too far beyond it to besure of getting him. We took the bomb up and car-ried it over to the rig, and drove back and got holdof one end of the wire, and pulled it in the buggy andcoiled it up. We thought we would try it again an-other morning, but it got warm and melted the snow,171CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand what was left was hard, so that we could notcover up our wire. We then tried digging into thesidewalk near his house, or at the edge of the walk ;but the ground was frozen too hard. One night wethought a watchman was after us, and I threw awaythe spade I was carrying wrapped up in a paper, andwent home.A little while after we made this attempt with thebomb, Mr. Peabody moved his offices down in theJackson Block, and did not walk up Grant Avenueas usual. Haywood said then that he thought we mightset a bomb in under his desk, so that when he openedthe desk it would explode it. He asked me what Ithought about it. I told him we could if we knew forsure his desk, and that no one would open it but him ;and he said he thought perhaps Peabody had a pri-vate desk, and that he would find out. He said theFederation wanted to move their offices, and he couldeasily go up in the Jackson Block looking for alocation, and find out where Peabody's office was. Buthe never did, and we never made any further attempton Mr. Peabody's life in Denver.As the legislature investigation proceeded, it wasthought until the very last that Adams would holdhis seat; but they made a compromise to seat Pea-body, with the understanding he was to resign intwenty-four hours, and the committee had his resig-172FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODYnation before they voted to seat him. Then the officewent to Jesse McDonald, the Republican lieutenant-governor, and Haywood said we need not bother withPeabody for the present; that we could go down toCanon City and get him any time.Then they wanted us to get some of the SupremeCourt justices. Judge Goddard had been appointedto the Supreme Court by Governor Peabody before heretired. They were very bitter against Judge God-dard, as they said he had written up most of theopinion in the Moyer habeas corpus case, and hadbeen instrumental in declaring unconstitutional theeight-hour law that had been passed by the legislaturea few years previous, when he was on the Supremebench before; and that he and Frank Hearne, theColorado Fuel and Iron Company manager, had influ-enced the Supreme Court in their decisions after hehad got out. Haywood wanted us to see if we couldnot make a bomb that we could throw or drop outof a window. He thought we could make one andcover it with a big rubber ball. He said that Mr.David Moffat stopped at the Denver Club a good deal,and walked between his bank and there, and Haywoodthought if we had a bomb we could drop or throwout of a window, that we could get a room along thestreet, and when Mr. Moffat came along, we coulddrop it out of a window close to him, and get away.173CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDWe had moved over near Globeville in January,1905, close to Max Malich, and Max wanted us toblow up the Globeville smelter boarding-house. Malichwas a leader among the Austrian workmen at thesmelter. He kept a grocery store and a saloon, andthey called him the King of Globeville. He had beenMayor of the town, and he was strong in politicsbecause 'most all the Austrians would do what hewanted them tothough after that they got on tohim, and he couldn't handle them so well. He belongedto the smelter-men's union, and they met in his hall,and, though he wasn't an officer, the Austrians andothers in the union did about what he said at thattime.There had been a strike at this Globeville smelterfor nearly two years then, and their union was affil-iated with the Western Federation of Miners. Thesmelters were working all non-union men, and I thinktwo or three hundred stopped in this boarding-house.Max said there was not much trouble to get in thecellar or up in the hall, as things had been quiet forsome time, and they did not guard it very close. Hehad a man there that had boarded there before thestrike, and knew the place well, and he said he wouldhelp us. We wanted some No. 1 powder, anyway,to make some bombs, or to experiment with makingthem. So we found out where the magazines were, and174FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODYconcluded to go out there and get what dynamite wewanted.Adams and I started a little before dark one Satur-day, and walked out to the magazines. There were anumber of magazines out there on the prairie, and assoon as it was dark, we pried off a lock from one ofthem, and carried 600 pounds of powder out a littleway from the magazine. Then we pried the lock offanother little magazine, and got about fifteen boxes ofgiant-caps. Then Joe Mehalich came with the rig, andwe loaded it all into the wagon, and brought it towhere we lived, near Globeville, and buried it in thecellar.When we told Haywood and Moyer that Maxwanted us to blow up this boarding-house, they saidnot to do it, and we thought no more about it. Butwe now had powder to practise making bombs tothrow. We made these bombs by taking plaster-Parisand making a little ball. We stuck this full of giant-caps, and let it get hard, and then stuck a wire nailin each of these caps, point inward; and shived thenail up with slivers of wood, so as not to let the nailpress upon the powder in the caps. But a little jar,like throwing it against anything, would drive thenail into the powder, which is in the bottom of thegiant-cap, and set it off. After we made this framewith the plaster-Paris, giant-caps, and nails, we took175CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDa large rubber ball, cut it open, and slipped it aroundthe outside of the nails. Then we filled it with dyna-mite, and sewed up the rubber. We tried two or threeof these throwing-bombs, and they exploded instantlywhen they were thrown and hit anything hard. Adamsand I took one of them out near Riverside Cemetery,and Steve threw it up against a big cottonwood treethat was there, and it exploded and tore out a bighole in the trunk. Steve was back of another tree whenhe threw it, but it shook him up badly when it wentoff, and the nails and caps flew everywhere. This onemust have weighed four or five pounds.We told Haywood and Pettibone then that we couldmake thsse work all right, but they did not want usto use them just then, but to see if we could not shootJudge Goddard through the window of his residence,as he lived pretty well out, and they said the policewere not often around there. We had long overcoats,and each carried a sawed-off pump shot-gun hungat our sides under our arms by a shoulder-strap. Weworked awhile, but never saw him but once, and thenwe thought we would wait until it was a little later,as it was Sunday night, and there were quite a num-ber of people on the street; but we could never seehim again ; we could see some of the rest of the family,as they hardly ever pulled the blinds clear down, andthe house was built up flush with the sidewalk on one176FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODYside, and only a few feet back on the other, for it wason the corner of the street. Mrs. Adams went withSteve and me sometimes for a bluff, as we thought thepolice were watching sometimes. There had been adrug store held up about this time not far from there,and there were extra police around, but we thoughtthey wouldn't be so likely to suspect us with a womanalong.Sometime the last of January, Adams had gonedown-town and got drunk, and was put in jail forstealing a bicycle. We did not know where he wasfor a week or more, and looked all over for him, andthought some one had killed him, for he had had afight with a man just before that. After he got outand came home, we gave him a good lecture, but itdid not do much good, as he got drunk again somelittle time after, and had to be helped home. Haywoodand Pettibone did not like the looks of this, and wedidn't know but we had better get rid of Adams, ashe knew too much to be around drunk that way.I left Adams's house about the last of March, andgot a room only two blocks from Judge Goddard'sresidence, so I could watch him. We could always seehim leave on the car in the morning and go down,but could never see him at night. Soon after I quitliving with Adams, he had some dispute with Hay-wood and Pettibone, and told me they would not give177CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhim money enough, or only a few dollars at a time,and he was angry at me and blamed me, too. I toldhim there must be some mistake about it, and thathe had no reason to blame me, and I told him I wasgoing away, and that he and Joe Mehalich couldwork together after that, as they chummed together,and the women visited back and forth. I told him Iwas going down to Canon City or Colorado Springsto get MacNeill or Peabody. He said all right, hewould go with me; but I didn't encourage this, as Iwanted to get rid of him.Steve went down to get some money, and Pettibonegave me a few dollars, and said that was all he hadleft out of the last Haywood gave him. Adams sentPettibone down to Haywood's office to get some more,and Haywood would not give it to him. He toldPettibone he had given Mrs. Adams, I think, $40the day before, and that ought to be enough for awhile. Adams went down and saw Haywood, and theyhad some words, and Haywood did not give him anymoney, and when I saw Adams he would hardly speakto me. I told him we were the last ones that ought tohave any trouble, and that he had no reason to feelhard at me. He said they had used him dirty mean,and that he was through with them. I told him it wasthat he had no business getting drunkhis faultso much, and that was the reason I quit him, and178FIRST BOMB FOR GOVERNOR PEABODYthat they were afraid to give him much money at atime for fear he would be drunk. He said they woulduse me the same when they got through with me. Itold him they wouldn't, for I wouldn't stand for itnot if I was where I could get to them.I would say that Haywood was always very closeand stingy with the money for this work, and wouldalways be putting you off and saying he would payyou next week, and we had to look to Pettibone to getit for us. But we could always get it from Pettiboneall right, as he would go down and tell Haywoodhe had got to have it, and Haywood would give itto him. But, of course, with Steve getting drunkthe way he did, none of us wanted to do any businesswith him, and, in fact, wanted to get him out of thecountry.Adams and Joe Mehalich got ready to go awaythen, and I went over to Globeville to see them theday they left, as I did not want them to leave feel-ing hard toward me, if I could help it. I did not askthem where they were going, as they did not tell me,but I called Adams to one side and had a little talkwith him, and told him I was not to blame, and he hadnot ought to have any hard feelings toward me. Hesaid he felt sore at everybody, and that perhaps hehad no reason to feel hard toward me, but that he hadthought I had run him down to Haywood. I told him179CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthat Haywood knew about him getting drunk withoutmy telling him.Adams said they were going to beat their way, asthey had no money to pay their fare. I only had alittle money with me, but I borrowed $20 from MaxMalich and gave it to him, and I told Max to givethe women what they wanted to live on from his gro-cery store, and send the bill to Haywood and makehim pay it. It was some time in April, 1905, 1 think,that they went away. I found out later they wentto Park City, Utah, and afterward went to easternOregon on a land claim. But that was the last timeI saw Steve until they arrested him in Oregon inFebruary, 1906, and brought him to Boise, Idaho. Ipaid Max Malich the $20 back the next day.180