CHAPTER EIGHTMY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUABTEUSVindicator explosion happened on a Sat-THEurday, when we were all over to Victor. Davisand I went home, and I intended to stay therethat night. But after supper Davis came to myhouse and wanted me to go over to Victor with himto the union meeting. Davis was on the strike com-mittee, and was going over to make the weekly re-port the committee had to give every union abouthow the strike was going. I told him I had betternot go, and that it would be better for me not tobe seen with him, as they might mistrust me. Hesaid there was no good of being afraid. He said tolook at Parker; that he was liable to be lynched forthe explosion. And that was right ; I knew they weretalking about it. Anyway, I got ready, and we wentto the meeting. After the meeting Parker and Davisand I walked home together as far as the lower endof Independence, and I told them I was not goingto be seen any more with them. I told Parker andDavis they ought to give me some money, so if I had88MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSto hike out I could. I told them they were likely tobe arrested, and I would not have a cent if I wantedto go away. Parker told me he would give me somethe next day. He said it would be no trouble to getmoney now from headquarters. So we parted, and Iwent up through Independence and on home.On Monday, the second day after, D. C. Scott,the railroad detective, sent for me to come to Crip-ple Creek, and, as much as I dreaded going, Ithought it best to go and play innocent and put ona bold front. So I braced up the best I could andwent over, and Scott said K. C. Sterling, the mineowners' detective, wanted to see me. Mr. Sterlingcame down to Scott's office, and I talked to him anhour or so, and he wanted to know if I knew any-thing about the Vindicator explosion, or if I mis-trusted any one. I told him I did not know a thingabout it, and that I did not mistrust any one. I fur-ther said that I thought it must be an accident.Sterling wanted me to tell him who told me aboutthe attempt to wreck the train, but I told him Iwould not.They kept sending for me every little while afterthe Vindicator explosion, and I wished many timesI had never said anything to them. But I knew Ihad to play the string through now, and I alwayswent over when they sent for me. Mr. Scott hadCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDgiven me $20 in money, and wanted me to go towork for them and they would pay me $100 a month.I told them I was a union man at heart, and did notlike to double-cross those men, and I did not believethey were responsible for this Vindicator outrage. ButI said I would tell them anything of importance Ifound out on the quiet. Of course, I never intendedto tell them the truth.There was a lot of wrangling about these menthey had arrested. The militia held some of them,and some were in the county jail. Those that themilitia held had no charges placed against them,and the civil courts would issue writs of habeas cor-pus, and the militia would take them into court, andwhen they were released would hold them; but,finally, they were all released but six of themParker, Davis, and Kennison, the members of thestrike committee, and Steve Adams, Foster, and Mc-Kinney.I kept pretty quiet all this time, but I was ratheruneasy, for it was reported that McKinney had madea confession and had implicated Parker and others,and, in fact, Scott told me he had. I knew McKin-ney, but had never had anything to do with him,but I was afraid Parker might have told him whoset the bomb in the Vindicator. I had tried to getinto jail to see Parker and Davis, but the sheriff90MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSwould not let me in, and I asked Mr. Scott if hewould arrange for me to get in and see the boys.He asked me what I wanted to see them for, and Itold him I just wanted to say hello and give thema bottle of whisky and some cigars. So he telephonedup to the sheriff, and I went up, and he let me in ;but I could not get a chance to ask Parker or Davisanything about McKinney, because a guard was withus all the time.I found out from Scott that Easterly had beento Denver and Pueblo, and that Frank Hangs, oneof the Federation attorneys, had been in and seenMcKinney and got him to make a statement. Theyalso had a detective in to see him, and Scott wantedme to go to Denver with him and see Billy Easterly,and find out, if I could, what they got out of Mc-Kinney. This just suited me, as I thought Easterlyknew Moyer and Haywood, the president and secre-tary of the Federation, and could get me some moneyfrom them. Mr. Scott got me transportation, andgave me some money to pay my expenses, and wewent to Denver the next afternoon. We were notto be seen together, and we did not stop at the samehotel.I went up to the Federation headquarters the nextmorning, and introduced myself, as I only knewthem by sight. They said they knew me by reputa-91CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtion, as Easterly had told them about me. I askedtHem where Easterly was, and they told me he wasin Pueblo, but would be back in a day or two. Theywanted me to wait until he came back, and told meif I wanted any money they would give me some. Itold them I had a little, and Moyer gave me $20.We did not go into any details about what had hap-pened in Cripple Creek, but only spoke of it in ageneral way at that time.I went and met Mr. Scott over at his hotel, andreported to him that Easterly was in Pueblo, butthey expected him back in a day or so, and he saidwe would wait for him. I forgot what I told himthey said to me ; I made up something and told him,and I cannot remember a falsehood like I can thetruth. However, Mr. Scott had to go home beforeEasterly came back, and he wanted me to stay untilhe came, and I think he gave me some more money.In all, I got not to exceed $40 from Scott, and Inever got any money at all from Sterling.Easterly came in a day or two, and we were therea few days longer together, and Moyer, Haywood,Easterly, and myself discussed the strike and thechances of the boys who were in jail. Haywood andMoyer said that was a fine job we did at the Vin-dicator. Haywood said we got two good ones, andthey were the kind to get, and said a few like them"MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSand we would have everything our own way. He saidthey would rather have one of the bosses than ascabs," for when you took away thecar-load ofcause you had it all. They wanted me to stay inDenver a few days and enjoy myself, and to go backand tear something loose. They said we could notget too fierce to suit them, and Haywood said hewould like to have some of the tin soldiers made anexample of, as none of them had been hurt. He saidwe could get all the money we wanted if we wouldkeep up the night-work. They asked me how muchmoney I wanted, and said not to take too much, asI could get more any time I needed it. I told themI wanted $300 when I went home, and in a day orso afterward Haywood gave me the $300, and I wentback. He told me to be careful and not to make anyshow of the money. So I left them and returned tothe district.I had never said anything to the men that wentwith me at the Vindicator about getting any money,or at least any amount. I think I told Billy Aikman,the man that went down in the mine with me, thatwe would make them put up a piece of money forthe job. When I got back I gave him $50, and in afew days I gave him $25 more, and in all I thinkI gave him $100 or more. I did not tell him howmuch I got or where I got it. I used to give Billy93CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDGaffney, the fellow we left at the mouth of the shaft,a dollar or two once in a while. I was afraid to givehim any money to speak of, as he was drunk all thetime when he had the price. He did not know I gotany money at all. I gave most of this money to mywife to keep.After I got back from Denver I went over toCripple Creek and saw Mr. Scott, and told him Icould not get much out of Easterly. I told himEasterly told me about seeing Mrs. McKinney atPueblo, and some other stuff I made up. I have for-gotten just what I did tell him, but I did not tellhim the truth, and after that he did not bother memuch more. The fact was, Easterly was sent downto see McKinney and his wife, to brace him up andget him to go back on his confession.I did not try to do anything for a while. Then,some time in January, I got some roofing-pitch andmelted it, and took a dozen sticks of giant-powder,and tied them up in some burlap, and wound themtight with twine, and put them in a bucket, and ranthis melted pitch around it, and let it get cold, andhacked it up a little, so it looked like a chunk ofcoal. I made a black-powder fuse and filled it fullof giant-caps and bored a hole into the powder, andput this fuse in it and sealed it over so it would notbe noticed. I made a couple of these Owney Barnes94MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSand I got a man to throw onehelped me do thisof them into the coal-bunkers of the Vindicator mine.This was an old man named Dempsey. He was anold-timer, and the soldiers did not pay any attentionto him, but let him go in and out as he pleased. ButBilly Aikman said he was all right; he was a thor-oughbred; and that he was one of the men thatshot the deputies in 1894. So Billy Aikman gave himone of these bombs, and he promised to throw it intothe coal-bunkers. I don't know personally what he diddo, except he called me up later that night over thetelephone, when I was in Aikman's saloon, and saidhe had delivered those goods. He was drunk at thetime, and I shut him off quick for fear he would getto talking, and I felt sore at Aikman for gettingthat sort of a man to do the job.A short time after this all the men in the jail werereleased on bail of from $15,000 to $20,000 each,and we dared not do anything then on their account.I should say all but McKinney ; he was not releasedthen.Foster, Parker, and Davis went on trial together.Davis was released soon after the opening for lackof sufficient evidence, but Parker's and Foster's trialswent on jointly. Foster was charged with the firstattempt to wreck the train near Anaconda. McKin-ney was a witness against them, he having turned95CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDstate's evidence, and he swore that he and Fosterhad been hired by Parker to wreck the train, andthey had made the attempt, but failed on accountof breaking their tools. The prosecution had thesetools, as McKinney and his wife had told them wherethey had been thrown, down an old shaft and intoan outhouse at Foster's home.The defense that they put up was an alibi. I don'tI think a dozen or soknow how many peopleswore Foster was in a saloon in Altman all the nightin question, and that he was carried home drunkabout seven or eight o'clock in the morning. Now,there is no doubt Foster was drunk this morningwe speak of, and some of his friends had to helphim home from this saloon; but there is no doubt,either, that he wasn't in the saloon all night, butcame in there after they had tried to wreck the train,and they made up a fake alibi for him. I know thisbecause I helped to make it. While I was not a wit-ness myself, I helped to get the witnesses, and wewould take them up to Frank Hangs's office in Crip-ple Creek. He and Mr. Hawkins were Parker's andFoster's attorneys. These witnesses were told whatthey were wanted to swear to before we took themup there, and Mr. Hangs and Mr. Hawkins wentover their testimony. There were women that weretold what to swear to.96MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSThat alibi was made out of whole cloth, and theymade it stick, as they usually have for twelve or fif-I was to be a witness once in a caseteen years.of this kind, but I didn't have to, because the casewas dismissed against the man. I have often heardthe union leaders laugh and tell how easy it was toget out of such things, and, as the judges in thesecamps are usually elected by the miners, they favoris seldom that a manthem all they can, and itcharged with an offense connected with the unionsuch as beating up a man or even murderconvicted. I have often talked with Haywood aboutthese things, and he has told me the more they ar-rested the union leadersas long as they could clearthem in the courtsthe better it suited them, asthis would make the public and the rank and file ofthe unions believe it was persecution. And the systemwas to get men to swear to whatever best fitted thecase.is everNow, after they had failed to wreck the trainand Foster got drunk, McKinney reported this toParker, and Parker suggested another man to helpI have forgotten which.him, or McKinney didAnyway, this was a man called Beckman, who wasreally a detective in the employ of the mine opera-" with Parker,tors, and he had been in the "McKinney, and others when they were first thrown97bull-penCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDin there. This man Beckman was a German, andhad joined the Federation at Murray, Utah, and hadhis card, and after coming to Cripple Creek he wentinto the Victor union. Parker called him a foolDutchman, but he had the wool pulled over theireyes all right, and they thought he was an anarchist.I guess he proposed some of these outrages to them ;anyway, he got into their confidence, and his wifebelonged to the ladies' auxiliary. So McKinney andBeckman made it up to make the second attempt,and I know Parker got McKinney a spike-puller andwrench, because he told me so after the trial.McKinney told his story at the trial, and Beck-man told all his connection with the thing, andalso some things Parker had told him and sug-gested to him, and also of Parker's giving himmoney to leave the district just after this, and prom-ising him more. But McKinney had sworn to twostatements, the one just the opposite to the other.When he was first arrested, they took him to CanonCity and kept him at the penitentiary awhile, andthen took him to Pueblo and kept him in jail there.During this time they did not let any one see him,and he made a confession to Scott and Sterling, andtold them all, and connected Parker, Foster, andBeckman. But afterward Frank Hangs and a de-tective in the employ of James Burns, manager of98MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSthe Portland mine, got into jail to see McKinney,and induced him to deny what he had told Scott andSterling, and Hangs dictated another statement re-futing the former confession, and he swore to thatalso. The reason they took Mr. Burns's detective inwas that Mr. Burns had the only big mine that wasopen to union men, and the Federation leaders hadto convince Mr. Burns that McKinney was lyingand that the union did not try to wreck the train.When the trials came up, McKinney swore on thewitness-stand that his first confession was right, andthat the statement Hangs had dictated and he hadsworn to was false.But I have told you the methods used, and thatboth men and women swore that black was whiteand white was black, and the lawyers for the defensemade it seem plain that it was a detective's job fromstart to finish*. They killed McKinney's evidence toa certain extent by his having sworn to two state-ments, and they brought such strong evidence thatFoster had not been connected with the first attempt,and the last one looked so much like a detective'sjob, that the jury was out only about twenty min-utes, and brought in a verdict of not guilty, and allthe men that had charges against them were dis-missed.I used to go in every day and listen to this trial,CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand Mr. Moyer was there, too, and I got to knowhim a good deal better, and I learned more aboutthe way he felt about the strike. Now, there are agreat many people who will claim that Moyer andHaywood just started this strike so they could getto handle a lot of money and take out some of itfor themselves, and that they stirred up all thistrouble to do that. But I do not think so myself. Iknow that both Moyer and Haywood were talkingto the rank and file of the union to be quiet and notcommit any outrages when the strike began, and Iknow Haywood was mad at that time because EdMinster and " SlimCampbell got loose and beatup Hawkins and Stewart, and gave the mine ownersa chance to call in the militia. And it is only reason-able to believe this, because the mine owners wantedto get in the militia. They couldn't get non-unionmen to come in and work for them any other way,for if the militia did not come in, all the union menhad to do was to sit there and wait, because notmany of the non-union men would dare to go towork in the mines while they were therefor it wasknown all over the United States what the unionswould do to " scabs "in these mining-camps. Butafter the militia came in the non-union men got towork, and then the only way to get them out ofthe district was to commit secret outrages; and as100"MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERStime went on and the strike kept going against them,they kept growing stronger and stronger, until theydidn't care whom they killed.Mr. Moyer was a good deal worried during theMcKinney trial, and particularly once when Mc-Kinney was giving his testimony, and told aboutParker telling him about a fluid that would burnlike fire when thrown upon or against anybody oranything. Mr. Moyer said he expected every minuteto hear his name brought into it then, but for somereason the lawyers for the prosecution did not askMcKinney anything about this ; and, of course, wetold our lawyers not to ask anything, and it wasonly referred to slightly in the direct examination.But Moyer was very much provoked at Parker fortalking and telling so much to people he did notknow, and said he did not know but we ought toput him out of the way. I had asked Parker beforeif he had told McKinney anything about my beingconnected with the Vindicator explosion. He said hehad not, and I was pretty sure he had not, as Scottand Sterling had told me before they knew nothingabout who caused it.Now, I did not want to do any of this busi-ness with Davis and Parker, myself, after this. AndI knew, besides, that they used to hire men to com-mit these outrages, and keep about half the money101CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthey collected from headquarters and not give itover to the men that did the job. Steve Adams hastold me since they did this with him. So I told Mr.Moyer that whatever I did after this would be withhim and Haywood, and he said he would not haveanything more to do with Parker in that line himself.So after that I did business with headquarters direct.Moyer had given me $150 while he was at CrippleCreek.Some little time before this trial there had beena convention called to meet in Denver by the StateFederation of Labor. They sent out a call to everybranch of the labor-unions. The real object of thiswas a political move, although it was not so statedat the time. I was elected one of the delegates fromthe Altman union to this convention, and I thinknearly every branch of labor in the State was repre-sented. We met in Denver and talked over our griev-ances, especially those of the Western Federationof Miners and the United Mine Workers, the latterbeing coal-miners, who were also on strike. The twominers' organizations were by far the largest, andthey reminded the other organizations very forciblythat it was their interest to support the miners. Butthe real object of the convention was to raise moneyfor a campaign fund, and to support the strikers,and form organizations all over the State to take102MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSin every branch of labor, and levy assessments onthe members, so much a week or month, and getso well organized that we would be strong enough" If you don'tto say to one of the political parties,recognize us and let us name the head of the ticket,we will run an independent ticket."I was elected on the Ways and Means Committee,and there were men chosen to organize these clubsin every town and district in the State. We wererequested to attend a meeting one night during thisconvention over at Western Federation headquar-ters. Mostly all that were there were Western Fed-eration men, I think about twenty. It was discussedthere which would be the best policy, to try to unitewith one of the old political parties or run an inde-pendent ticket. The Repubh'can Party seemed im-possible and the Democratic was the only possibleparty. Some thought the latter would give us recog-nition if we got well organized, and others thoughtwe could elect an independent labor ticket. Mr. Hay-wood said he did not think it would be advisable torun an independent ticket, but that it would be bet-ter to fuse with the Democratic Party. John M.O'Neill, the editor of the Miners' Magazine, thoughtthe same, and said if we ran an independent ticket itwould be sure to elect Governor Peabody again. Mr.Moyer said if we did not run an independent ticket103CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhe would vote the Socialist ticket, as he did not be-lieve there was much difference between the Demo-cratic and Republican parties, as they were bothagainst organized labor. But there was not any talkto speak of for the support of the Socialist ticket.The meeting was pretty evenly divided when a votewas taken, and we thought the best thing to do wasto go ahead and get organized, and not let it beknown at present that this was purely a politicalmove, or at least not give it out in the conventionthis way, as many would object to the assessmentif they knew it was going to be used for a politicalpurpose. The convention broke up harmonious, andall these committees went to work, and most of theunions levied an assessment on their members of fromtwenty-five cents to a dollar a month.After the meeting we had at the Western Federa-tion headquarters, during this convention, I metGeorge A. Pettibone. This was the first time I hadmet him to know him, although I knew of him. Italked freely to him and he did to me, and he toldme about the Grecian fire Moyer told me about, andsome other things, and wanted me to come over tohis store the next day, and said he would show mesomething that would beat a revolver for settingoff a bomb. Moyer said yes, I had better go overand see the "devil," as he called him. He used to call104MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSPettibone this because he was always making ex-periments with chemicals, and Moyer said he wasnever so happy as when he was doing something ofthat kind."So I went over, and Pettibone showed me how tomix chloride of potash and sugar together, and setit on fire with sulphuric acid, and this would setoff giant-caps. He also told me about thishell-fire," as he called it. This is made up of the follow-ing mixture : Stick phosphorus, bisulphid of carbon,benzine, alcohol, and spirits of turpentine. Afterthis is mixed together properly, when thrown onanything with force so as to break the bottle, itwill immediately be a flame of fire. I don't thinkthey knew about this very long before this time, andHaywood told me they got the receipt out of a littlebook he had that was gotten out by an Irish chemistwho was an anarchist. You can mix this so that itwill be a longer or shorter time in taking fire.hell-fireThis "" has to be handled with care whenbeing mixed. If it gets on your clothes or handsit will burn, and it seems to go right through cloth.Pettibone told me about getting it on his shoes, andwhen he began to scrub them on the floor of hiscellar it started to burn all over. He told about howMarion Moor, who was on the executive board, wentout on the prairie with him to learn how to mix it,105CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand got some of it on his coat. They soaked thecoat in water and thought that would put it out,but when it got dry a little it began to burn again,and they had to soak it in water again, and even thenit began to smoke before they got it home.Mr. Moyer told me while I was in Denver thistime that things had been pretty quiet for a while,and that we had got to get busy up in the districtand tear something loose, as there was no moneycoming in to the Federation. I asked him if thatmade any difference, and he said it did, and thatas soon as things got quiet up there the money be-gan to drop off, and as soon as something was pulledoff so they got some advertising, the money pickedup again. And he said they had to have money tocarry on the strike. I have thought that many ofthese horrible depredations were committed for thatpurpose, as well as to terrorize the mine owners andnon-union men and make them afraid of their lives.I do not mean that Moyer and Haywood figuredthis out before the strike, but that it grew on themand they found it out while the strike was going on."They wanted me to take a lot of thishell-fire"up to the Cripple Creek district with me, and throwit through the car-windows at night when they werefull of non-union men, and throw it down the shaftsand set them on fire. So Pettibone got me enough106MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSmaterial to mix several gallons of it, and I took ithome with me. He would not buy this all together,but sent different men to buy it, for fear the peoplewould mistrust and wonder what he was going todo with it, as a chemist would be likely to know whatthis would do when mixed. You have to have bottleswith glass stoppers to keep it in, as it would burncork. I took this home with me, and Pettibone cameup in a day or so to show me how to mix it. We didnot mix any, but he told me how, and we hunted upSteve Adams, and he said he knew how to mix it.I took the materials out and buried them back of myhouse, as they smelled very bad in the house.Haywood gave me $110 this time when I came awayfrom Denver. I gave Billy Aikman $50 of this. Buthell-fire," Moyer camebefore I used any of thisup to the district and told me I had better notuse any of it, as they might have an idea where itcame from and what it was by what McKinney hadsaid, and so I did not try to use it."I went to work and appointed committees in mypart of the district, and started to organize theselabor political clubs, and we got them pretty wellorganized. About this time, or a little before, themilitia got busy and issued an order for every onethat had firearms to turn them over to the militiaofficers, and they would give a receipt for the same107CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand return them after the strike was over. I don'tknow how many were turned over. They publishedin the papers that there was a great number, butI think this was only a bluff. I never heard of anyone that gave up his firearms, but they began tosearch houses again for them, and this made peoplevery indignant.There were a good many of the old miners in thedistrict then, and we all were feeling pretty ugly.After the union miners had been deported from Tel-luride we organized in Cripple Creek, and especiallyon Bull Hill, and planned so we wouldn't be takenby surprise. We were going to blow a whistle onone of the mines for a signal, so we would not betaken by surprise. We were well armed, and theunions had quite a number of rifles shipped in. TheAltman union got about forty rifles up from theTelluride union at the beginning of the strike, anda lot more from Denver. In all there must have beennot less than a hundred of these anyway, mostlythirty-thirty and thirty-forty Winchesters. Theydistributed these arms among the men who didn'thave any of their own. I know I got a rifle and asix-shooter. And there was a password, where youwould sayField."And if they had tried to run the union men out atthat time, there would have been more trouble than108Gold," and the answer would be ""MY FIRST VISIT TO HEADQUARTERSthere was when they did run them out. This was notuntil some months after, and at a time when mostof the union leaders were out of the district attend-ing the Federation convention at Denver.Mojer was in Victor about this time, and themilitia made an attempt to arrest him, but he wassecreted away at night. I did not attempt to do any-thing, as I did not want anything to do with Parker,and he said if we did anything and did not tell himthere would be trouble.109