CHAPTER FOURTEENOUR FURTHER PLANS FOR GOVERNOR PEABODY ANDHOW I SET BOMBS FOR JUDGES GODDARD ANDGABBERTIWAS down in Pettibone's store a few days afterthis, and a man came in that had worked for hima good deal, and said he had a better graft nowthat he had been out writing life-insurance, and hadmade about $800 in a month. Pettibone wanted me togo and get a contract, and that would be a good bluffif I wanted to go to any small place. As they wantedme to go to Canon City and get Peabody, I thoughtthe insurance scheme would be good, and then Ithought I could make good at it, too. So I went downto the Mutual Life office and had a talk with John L.Stearns, the manager for Colorado.He wanted me to give him some references, and Igave him Pettibone, Horace Hawkins, of the law firmof Richardson & Hawkins, James J. Sullivan andHenry Cohen, the law firm, and John Sullivan, presi-dent of the State Federation of Labor. I knew HoraceHawkins pretty well, as he was the attorney that de-181CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDfended the boys at Cripple Creek. I went and saw him,and told him I wanted to get a contract with theMutual Life-Insurance Company to write insurance,but did not want to give them my own name. I told himmy name was Thomas Hogan, and I said I had givenhim as reference, and would like him to give me asend-off, and he said he would. I saw John Sullivanand told him, and Pettibone saw James J. Sullivanand Henry Cohen. I was only slightly acquainted withthe latter two, and that through Pettibone, as theywere great friends of his. Mr. Stearns wrote to thesein regard to me, and in a couple of days after he wroteme to come down to his office. I went down, and hesaid my references could not be better, and he wouldmake a contract with me, and he fixed it up rightthere and advanced me $25 then, and a little later$25 more. I told him I would go to the southern partof the State, and would start in at Canon City andFlorence.A few days later I went to Canon City, and didstart in to talk life-insurance, and canvassed some.But I could no more get my mind on insurance thanI could fly. I had located Mr. Peabody's residence,and noticed he had no guard around it at night, butwent around the same as any private citizen, andI discovered he usually sat near a window on oneside of his house next to an open lot at night, and182OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYdid not pull the blind clear down. At first I stopped atthe hotel, but later I got a room only about a blockaway from Mr. Peabody's residence, on the samestreet, so I could watch him. Then I figured out aplan to make a big bomb, and fix it to go off withan alarm-clock. I thought I could lay this on thewindow-sill where he sat, and set the alarm-clock togo off in a few minutes, and I could have time to goto a saloon, and be there when the bomb exploded,and take a chance of Mr. Peabody moving away fromthe window in the mean time.I think I stayed there about a week, and on Satur-day I told the old lady where I roomed that I wasgoing to Denver to stay over Sunday, but would keepmy room and would be back the first of the week.I took the train and went to Denver, and told themwhat I was going to do, and I went over to MaxMalich, and got fifty pounds of No. 1 powder anda box of giant-caps. This was the powder we tookfrom the magazine, and Adams and Mehalich sold itor gave it to Max, and he had it buried in his drive-shed. I put this in a suit-case and brought it over toPettibone's store. I went to a plumbing shop in Den-ver, and told them I wanted a lead bucket made abouteight or nine inches across by fourteen inches high.I told the plumber I wanted it for a cactus-plant, soI could bore holes in it to let the flowers come through.183CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDHe made this for me, and put a bottom in one endof it, and I hammered it flat on one side, so it wouldlay on a window-sill, and packed this as full of powderas I could, and fitted a wooden end on the top, andhammered the lead over it, so it would not come out.I cut a hole in the top side of it and took out a littlepowder, and filled this space full of giant-caps, andwired an alarm-clock on the end of the bomb, andtook off the alarm-bell. Then I had a little bottle ofacid, so I could wire it over the giant-caps, and setthe alarm, and had a fine wire so it would wind uparound the key which wound up the alarm, so thatwhen the alarm went off, and this key started turning,it would pull the cork out of the bottle and let theacid run on the giant-caps. I fixed this up later, afterI went back to Canon City. Except for the clock, itwasn't fixed much different from the bomb I usedwhen I was after Bradley in San Francisco, only itwas a great deal bigger, and was made in this leadcase instead of a pipe. There was about twenty-fivepounds of dynamite in this, and if it had gone off, Isuppose it would have blown that side of the houseall to pieces, as Pettibone and I figured we ought notto take any chances of missing Peabody when I setthis off.When I was in Denver this time, I stopped at theBelmont Hotel. I was well acquainted there, and they184OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYwanted to know what I was doing, etc. I told them Iwas writing life-insurance. Some of them wanted toknow how I was making it, and I told them I wasmaking all kinds of money ; and a man that I had metthere a great deal, and a great friend of Pettibone's,said he thought he would try that, too, as he hadwritten insurance before. His name was William J.Vaughan. He went right down and saw Mr. Stearns,and got a contract in a day or two. I left in the meantime, and took my bomb and went back to CanonCity. I told Vaughan he could come down there, ifhe liked ; that there was room enough for both of us.After I got back to Canon City, Mr. Peabodystarted to repair his house, and I could not see himat the window ; and Vaughan came there in the meantime, and I thought if he did room with me that wouldmake it all the better for me, for, if I could see Mr.Peabody at this window, I could make an excuse togo out, and not be gone over five minutes, andVaughan would not notice it. I used to keep the littlealarm-clock running, and he asked me one day wherethat clock was ticking. I told him it was a bomb Ihad in my grip, and he half believed it. Mr. Peabodyhad his house all torn up, and I could not see him,and Vaughan did not write any insurance, and alsoknew that I did not either, and he felt pretty well dis-couraged and his money got short. I gave him some185CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDmoney and told him to brace up. He wanted me to godown in the Arkansas Valley with him, and probablywe would do better down there among the farmers,and I thought that would be a good way to get ridof him and I could come back again. We got ready,and I left my suit-case with the old lady, and set itaway under a table where she said she would have nooccasion to move it. I told her I had it full of insurancepapers for advertising. I thought I would be goneonly a few days, and it was so heavy I did not take itwith me. It must have weighed close to fifty pounds.Vaughan and I left and went to Rocky Ford, about100 miles or so away in Arkansas Valley, and got arig and started out to canvass insurance. We hadbeen out only a day or so before we met a man writingthat is, insuring a farmer's crophail-insuranceagainst hail. A man named Peterson, who was generalagent of the company, was in Rocky Ford, and offeredus a good thing to go to work for him, and we tookhim up. We went down to Las Animas, which is aboutthirty miles from Rocky Ford, and we worked thereabout a week and did a fine business. I got quite in-terested in this, I guess because it was crooked. Wemade from about $20 to $30 a day at the start, andlater made as high as $100, but the latter only acouple of times.I had promised Max Malich to be in Denver on a186OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYcertain day to help him on a job he had, and so Iwent up to Denver one Saturday afternoon the lastpart of May to do this. But Max Malich said he wasnot ready to have this job done. I saw Pettibone, andhe said they wanted something pulled off before theWestern Federation convention met at Salt Lake.Haywood had told me this before ; he said it wouldlook bad for the executive board if we didn't do some-thing, as we had used so much money during the win-ter, and not a thing to show for it. He said after heand Moyer left for Salt Lake he did not care whatwe blew up, so long as we made some showing.Haywood and Moyer had been gone to Salt Lakesome little time now to get ready for the convention,and Pettibone said he was going to the convention,too, but he wanted to pull off something first. I toldhim I did not like to do anything with Peabody justthen; that Vaughan mistrusted something, and thatI might not be able to do it in a hurry.He said he would rather get Judge Gabbert thanany one else. We had watched Judge Gabbert, and,as I have before stated, he usually walked back andforth to the Capitol, and when he went down in themorning, he walked down Emerson Street to ColfaxAvenue. There is a vacant lot in one corner on Em-erson Street and Colfax Avenue, and a foot-pathacross the same, and Mr. Gabbert usually took this187CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDcut-off. We made a bomb and buried it in this path.We had it fixed with a little windlass, with a finewire wound around this with a loop on the end of it.We left this loop just enough above the ground so wecould see it, and had a stiff wire run through thelittle windlass, so it would not turn over until we tookthis out, and we fixed this wire so we could just seeit above the ground. We made this in a two-quart tinmolasses-can, so the little windlass and the acid inthe giant-caps were all protected from the dirt, andwe made little holes to run the wires through. We putthis a little to the edge of the path, and were carefulin digging so it would not be noticed by any onewalking across there, but we knew just where to find it.The next morning Pettibone was going to watch,and I was going to walk around on this corner, or sitdown there and pretend to be reading, and when JudgeGabbert came out of his house, which was only a blockaway, Pettibone was going to give me the signal, andI was to walk along this path and hitch a lady's hand-satchel or large pocket-book to the wire on the bomb.We had a hook all ready fixed in this pocket-book, andall we had to do was to hitch it in the little wire thatwas wound around the windlass, and pull out the otherwire which held the windlass upright. We tried thisthe next morning, but some one cut in between JudgeGabbert and us, and he was too close for me to fix the188OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYpocket-book after they passed. I think we watchedtwo or three mornings, and I was afraid to touch thebomb after it had stood that long, for the little wind-lass swung very easily, and if anything had touchedthe wire at all before we came there, the least touchmight turn it over. Pettibone had to go to this con-vention at Salt Lake then, and he wanted me to workon this job until I caught a morning when there wasno one coming on the sidewalk but the judge. I couldtell him as soon as he came out of his house from thiscorner.As I was afraid to touch this old bomb, I made an-other one. I went to Pettibone's store, and in the base-ment he had some old eight-day clocks. I took thespring of one of these, and practised with it to see ifI could get it so it would break those little vials thatI had with sulphuric acid in for the bombs. I had trieda few vials with it, and it broke them every time. ThenI made this new bomb in a wooden box, and fixed itwith this spring. I fastened the spring along the un-der side of the cover, and bent the spring back, andheld it there with a piece of stiff wire that went downthrough the box. I had a little eye in the top of thewire to hook the pocket-book on, and left this so Icould see it. When this wire was pulled out, it let thespring hit a couple of half-dram vials that were filledwith acid, and broke them, and the giant-caps were189CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDright under these. This wire pulled out very easily,and I knew the spring was sure to break the bottles.I buried this second bomb as close to the first as Idared, and not touch it. The next morning I found thesidewalk clear when the judge was coming, and hadPettibone's bicycle, and rode along, and stopped at thebomb and hooked on the pocket-book, and rode away.I listened, and knew that something had happened toit, or else he did not see it, for I did not hear it go, andI did not have time to get more than a block away bythe time he would be there. However, I was afraid togo back there for fear some one had been watching me,or for fear something might have happened that it didnot go, and they had discovered the bomb. Anyway,I was too big a coward to go back, and made up mymind I would let it go. I did not think the judge wouldwalk over it and not notice the pocket-book.I went on down-town, and about an hour afterwardI heard the bomb go off ; but it was not the judge thatgot it, but another poor unfortunate man by the nameof Merritt W. Walley. There were about ten poundsof dynamite in each of these bombs, and they both wentoff. It blew this poor fellow to pieces and broke theglass in the windows for many blocks around. Therewere many theories advanced in regard to the causeof this explosion, but not any of them came anywherenear the truth. Some thought that a yeggman had190OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYburied nitroglycerin there and Walley stubbed againstit. I have been told since that Judge Gabbert saw afriend on the corner and followed the walk aroundinstead of going across the vacant lot that morning.I thought when this failed I was out of luck sure, andthat there would not be any chance to work there anymore, as I did not suppose Judge Gabbert would goacross there for the present. So I gave up trying todo him any harm for the present at least, but Ithought I would make one more attempt, nearly onthe same line, with Judge Goddard.I made a little square wooden box that would holdabout ten pounds of dynamite, and fixed this out witha little bottle and a cork which would pull out and spillthe acid on the giant-caps, like the one did on the bombI made for Bradley. I told Max Malich about this, andtook it over to his place in Globeville, and stayed thereall night. And just a little before daybreak the nextmorning, he sent his rig with a man to drive me overthere. As I have told you, Max had a lot of theseAustrians around him that would do anything he said,and this man did not ask me any questions, but drovewhere I told him. So we drove over to Judge God-dard's place just before it was light, and I got out anddug a square hole with a sharp spade I had for thepurpose, and was careful to take the sod off so I couldreplace it again, and it would not be noticed. I made191CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthis hole right up against the gate-post, but on theoutside. The gate opened both ways, but it looked asthough they usually opened it on the inside. I put alittle screw-eye in the bottom of the gate, and spread itenough so I could slip a loop of a small cord in theeye. I buried this bomb, and fixed the sod back care-fully, and pulled some green grass over it, and had thecord long enough so I could hook it in the little screw-eye later. This cord was attached to the cork in thelittle bottle at the other end. This cord was a greenishcolor like the grass, and I scattered a little grass overthe loose end of it. Then I went back to Malich's placeand got breakfast.After breakfast I came back on the street-car fromGlobeville, and about half past eight I walked alongin front of Judge Goddard's place, dropped a news-paper carelessly, and stooped down to pick it up, andhooked this cord with the loop into the screw-eye in thegate. I took a car and went down-town, and I expectedto hear this go before I got down-town, as I waitedwithin about fifteen minutes of the usual time that thejudge came out and took the car to go down-town. Idid this so there would not be so much danger of someone else opening the gate first. But I never heard any-thing from it, and did not know what had become of it.I thought perhaps they had noticed me when I hookedin the cord, although I was only a moment and the192OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYgate is right close to the sidewalk, so I did not goalong there for a good while afterward ; but when Idid I noticed the grass was dead over this bomb, andthen I figured out what had happened.I had fastened the cord to the bottle by a pin whichI put through the cork, and made into a hook on theoutside. I had put this pin in two or three days before,and left the bottle full of acid, and evidently the headof the pin on the inside had been eaten off, and allowedthe pin to pull through the cork, and so none of theacid had come out, as the rubber cork would close upafter it. Then afterward, as they were watering thelawn all the time, the water had soaked through andspoiled the giant-caps, for these are no good whenthey are wet. And after this the acid would have noeffect on the caps if it did eat the cork out, and socould not set the bomb off. This was the only reason Ican give for its not going off.Well, I thought at the time that I was clear out ofluck and everything was against me, and I left Denverand went down to the San Luis Valley, where Vaughanwas writing hail-insurance, and went to work againwith him. We worked there about two weeks and madegood money. They all came back from the Federationconvention at Salt Lake about the 1st of July, 1905,Haywood and Moyer both being elected again, and Itold Haywood the hard luck I had had, and he thought193CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDI had better lay off for a while. Hajwood and Moyerleft right away again for Chicago, where they wentto form a new organization which they called the In-dustrial Workers of the World.I did not do anything for a timenot until Hay-wood came back from Chicago in July. I left thisgrip down at Canon City with the bomb in it so longthat I was afraid to go after it, for fear they hadfound out what was in it and might arrest me ; but wehad concluded to let Peabody alone for the time being,and do some work in Denver, so I went down to CanonCity one day and got the grip all right; and the oldlady said it had never been moved. I told the old ladysome yarn about leaving the grip there so long, andcame away and brought the bomb to Pettibone' s house,and put it in his cellar, but a little later took it outand buried it.Pettibone and I told Haywood if we had a goodhorse and buggy we would do some work in Denver.Pettibone wanted to get Judge Gabbert, Judge God-dard, or Sherman Bell, and Haywood sent up to Crip-ple Creek and had them bring a team and wagon downfrom those the Federation had at their stores there,and we tried these horses, but they were all used up andwere no good for drivers. He sent them back again,and then bought a horse and buggy from a coloredman. I had a barn rented about a block and a half194OUR FURTHER PLANS FOR PEABODYfrom Pettibone's residence^ and Pettibone and I tookthe rig there and started in to assassinate ShermanBell. This was in August, 1905.We drove around there nights, and I would go byhis place in the daytime and see if I could see him. Helived right on the edge of Congress Park, and theshrubbery came right close up to his back yard, and Iwas going to crawl up as close as I could and see if Icould not see him through the window. I tried thisseveral times, but they had some little dogs that usedto bark when they heard a noise, and I never got anycloser than the back-yard fence. I was trying to getbetween his house and the one next to it ; the house nextto his was empty, and they did not pull the blindsdown at the windows on this side of Bell's house. I wasworking to get in between these houses, but these dogsalways made a racket. Some one would come out, butI could not tell in the dark who it was. I had a pumpshot-gun loaded with buck-shot, and could have shotthis man ; but I was not sure whether it was ShermanBell or not, as I had seen another man there. Pettibonekept the rig and waited for me out in Congress Park,a little way behind the house.195