CHAPTER TWELVEHOW I WENT TO SAN FRANCISCO AND BLEW UP FEEDBRADLEYWHEN I had been gone about six weeksfrom Denver after the Independence depotexplosion, I went back there, and met Hay-wood and Pettibone at the latter's residence. I toldthem of my trip through Wyoming. I did not tellthem I had lost my money gambling, but said that Ihad invested it in some real estate at Cody, Wyo.,and that I needed some more money, because JohnnieNeville and I were going into the saloon businessthere. I got some money from Pettibone then. Butwe decided that it would not be safe for me to goback to Cody, as Haywood and Pettibone said therewas no doubt about the authorities at Cripple Creekbeing after me.They told me they had Art Baston working onGovernor Peabody, but that he seemed to be slow,and Haywood told me that he was married, and thatthey did not seem to work so good after they weremarried. They told me about Andy Mayberry, super-149CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDintendent of the Highland Boy mine at Bingham,Utah, discharging 150 union men because they laidoff to take part in some labor demonstration, andHaywood said he wanted me to see Art Baston, andthought he would like to send us up there and putMayberry out of the way, as he said they couldnot allow a man to do that kind of thing with theunion men, or the union men there would think theyhad no protection from the union.Pettibone made an appointment with Baston, andI met him at Pettibone's store one evening. He saidhe had been around Governor Peabody's place some,but that Adams had told him about us being thereclose to his carriage with the shot-guns, and thewomen seeing us, and Baston said he was a little learyabout hanging around there, for fear Peabody hadguards.Right after thatsome time in August, 1904Imet Haywood and Pettibone on a Sunday afternoon,and we had a long talk in Pettibone's back yard.They told me that Adams had gone up to Wardner,Idaho, to help Jack Simpkins get rid of some claim-jumpers that had jumped his and some other claims,and that after that Steve was going down to Caldwell,Idaho, and get ex-Governor Steunenberg of Idaho.They asked me if I knew where Gordon Post-Office wasup there, as they wanted to send Jack some money150STEVE ADAMSWho confessed in writing to being Orchard's partner and co-workerAdams subsequently re-in the field of professional murder.pudiated his confession.HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYthere to give to Steve, to come down to Caldwell onwhen he got through with this job for Simpkins.I told them I did not know where Gordon Post-Officewas, but if Jack told them to send it there, likelyit was all right. But they said they would send it toEd Boyce at Wallace, and he would give it to Jack.They also said Adams was going to stop atGranger, Wyo., on the way up to Idaho, and Haywoodsaid that he had given Adams instructions to lookup where the gang of train-robbers and bank-robbersand hold-ups called the Hole-in-the-Wall gang were.Haywood was going to get this gang to kidnapCharles MacNeill of Colorado Springs, manager ofthe United States Reduction and Refining Company,who was the chief man that fought the union in theColorado City Mill and Smeltermen's union strike.Haywood said if he could get this gang in with him,and kidnap MacNeill and hold him for ransom, theywould get as much money as the strike would costthem. This gang had headquarters in the Big HornMountains, where you could look out for miles overthe level and see anybody coming. They said the onlyway you could get up where they were was througha very narrow box canon, and they had that fixed sothat a regiment of soldiers couldn't get through therewithout being killed off.But the man they sent Adams to told him there151CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwas none of the gang there then ; that they were all" theSouth ; Adams wrote Pettibone a letter, and saidbirds had all flown South."We talked over our going to Bingham, Utah, andI told Haywood I was well acquainted there, and wasalso acquainted with Andy Mayberry. He said if Iwas I had better not go there. He said they had somework in California, and thought I had better go downthere, and he said they had some of this old workthat they had wanted done a long time, and that thiswas the best time he knew of, as they had plenty ofmoney, and could get it out easier now and it wouldnot be noticed so much. They received more moneythe next month after the convention than any monthduring the trouble ; I think they received between $40,-000 and $50,000 for the strike or eight-hour fund, asit was called.Haywood, he, and IWe held this latter conversation one Sunday inandPettibone's back yardHaywood finally asked me if I would go to Californiaalone and see if I could put Fred Bradley out ofthe way. Mr. Bradley was manager of the BunkerHill and Sullivan mine at the time of the trouble inthe Cceur d'Alenes, Idaho, in 1899, when they blew uptheir mill, and Haywood said he was at the head ofthe mine operators' association of California, and hesaid they were raising an immense fund to drive the152HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYFederation out of the State, or words to that effect.He said they wanted to show those fellows that theynever forgot them. He also said he had sent SteveAdams and Ed Minster to California to get Bradley,but they did not accomplish it. I told them I would godown and try it.The next day, I think, Haywood gave Pettibone$150 more, and he got me a ticket and a new grip,and I took the early train the next morning for SanFrancisco. Pettibone told me any time I wanted anymoney just to wire him and he would send it to me.I went by the name of John Dempsey. I arrived inSan Francisco in a few days, and stopped at theGolden West Hotel. I looked around in the city di-rectory and the telephone guide, and located Mr.Bradley's office and also his residence, and called uphis office by phone, and they told me Mr. Bradley hadgone on a trip to Alaska and would not be back forthree months. I wrote a letter to Pettibone and toldhim this. We had a sort of a cipher to write by, so noone could tell anything about it if it fell into theirhands. I also told him in this letter to send me $100.During the time I was waiting for an answer Inoticed in the paper where Johnnie Neville had beenarrested at Thermopolis and was being taken backto Cripple Creek, and that they also expected to ar-rest me soon and take me back there, too ; so I thought153CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDI had better leave the hotel and get a private room,and not go around much in the daytime. But I hadtold Pettibone to address me at the Golden WestHotel, and had not received his letter yet, but had" Business bad,gotten a telegram from him stating,Johnnie on the way, wrote you to-day." I did not wantto stay at the hotel any longer, but I wanted to getthis letter, so I went and hunted the secretary of thebartenders' union, named Peter L. Hoff, and arrangedwith him to get the letter for me at the hotel. I toldhim I was a union miner from Colorado. I left thehotel then and got a private room a little way out.Hoff sent a man down to inquire for the letter, andhe said as soon as he asked the clerk at the hotel ifthere was any mail for Dempsey he touched a button.He thought he did this to call an officer, and he saidthe mail-carrier also happened to be there, and hespoke up and asked where Dempsey was, and he be-came more suspicious then, and said I was a travelingman and had gone to Stockton, Cal. The mail-car-rier asked him my address, and he told him Stock-ton, Cal., general delivery. There was nothing inthese maneuversbut this man thought it looked suspicious, and so itdid. I would say that when you are on work of thiskind you soon become suspicious of everybody andeverything, and, in a word, of your own shadow.they just happened that way151HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYSo Hoff wrote to Stockton, and told them to for-ward the letter to him at 211 Taylor Street, SanFrancisco, and he got a card in a day or so from thepost-office on Mission Street, and there was a regis-tered letter there for John Dempsey. I gave him anorder to get it, but they would not let him have it.I did not want to trouble him any more, and he saidhe did not believe there was any one watching for methere, and that if I went down there he would identifyme, so I went down with him later and got the letterwithout any trouble.Pettibone told me to lay pretty low and not let thempick me up the first thing, and be careful, if I wroteto him, what I wrote, and to destroy his letters im-mediately. He also told me to go a little slow onmoney, as it was hard to dig up. I got the hundreddollars I sent for in this letter. I got the Denverpapers there all the time, and knew pretty well whatwas going on in Colorado, and kept pretty quiet fora while, staying in most of the time during the day.But I got tired of this, and thought I would go outto some little summer resort and stay there a while,and I went up to Caliente Springs and stayed thereabout a month. I then came back to the city and gota room out near the Presidio. I noticed by the papersthat they held Johnnie Neville in jail, and would notgive him bail, and I noticed the names of several155CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDothers I knew who were arrested. I used to send for$100 to Pettibone about once a month, and hewired it to me. He used to send this to HarryGreen, in care of Peter L. Hoff. He sent this as com-ing from Pat Bone, or Bowen, and sometimes as fromWolff. I had some little trouble getting the first draft,as I was not sure what name he gave when he sent it,but I got it all right. Mr. Hoff was acquainted withthem down at the postal telegraph office, and afterthe first time he identified me they used to give it tome without any fuss.They held Johnnie Neville between two and threemonths, and then released him on his own recogniz-ance, and also released all the others, only placingcharges against two, and releasing these on bail. I feltmore easy then and went around more, and Johnnieand his boy went back to Thermopolis and got theteam and wagon, and drove back to Denver. I noticedthese things in the papers.I had bought ten pounds of dynamite to make abomb with, and got a room only a few doors fromMr. Bradley's flat. This room was on WashingtonStreet about a quarter of a block away, but on higherground, and my windows were about on a level withthe Bradley flat, and I could look right over into it.There was a little grocery store and a saloon on the op-posite corner from Mr. Bradley's residence, and they156HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYused to buy their groceries there, or part of them. Iused to loaf there in the saloon a good deal, and spentquite a bit of money with this man. He was an Italianor a Swiss. The girls that worked for Mr. Bradleyused to be over at the store every day, and Guibinni,the proprietor, gave me an introduction to them. SoI got to talk to them, and took one of them to thetheater once, and found out from them when they ex-pected Mr. Bradley home, etc. I stayed there untilhe did come home. I went by the name of Berry there.After Mr. Bradley came home, some time in October,I noticed his movements, and learned his habits prettywell. He used to leave his residence about eight o'clockin the morning. They lived on the corner of Leaven-worth and Washington streets, in a big three-storyresidence flat that had six families living in it. Therewas a big archway at the entrance, and the flat wasbuilt out flush with the sidewalk. They all went inat this archway, but each family had a private en-trance to their apartment. I had figured a good manyways how to get away with Mr. Bradley the easiest andnot get caught. I had stood across the street in frontof the entrance to his residence, with a shot-gun loadedwith buck-shot, and tried to catch him coming homeat night ; but it was not light enough to tell him fromthe rest, as they all went into this archway. I wasgetting sick of staying there, and Pettibone had sent157CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDan answer to my last letter, asking him to send me$500, to .call it off, and did not send the money.My money was getting low, and I was getting des-perate, for I thought they just took advantage ofme, not sending me money because they thought Idared not come back to Denver, and I made up mymind to go back and show them. I knew Haywood,Moyer, or Pettibone dare not refuse me money if Iasked them personally.The desperate and horrible means I conceived atthis time to carry out my plan to kill Mr. BradleyI would gladly withhold and let die in my breast.But I feel that perhaps I owe some one a duty thatmay have been blamed for this, and wrongfully ac-cused ; and I feel it my duty to make this known, asI have promised God I will write the whole truth ofmy wicked and sinful life, and not try to favor myself.I have made this attempt several times, and it hasrequired no small effort on my part to write someof these things.I knew this place well, and there was an emptyhouse with a flat roof just behind the apartment whereMr. Bradley lived, and there were stairs up from theback way on the outside of the apartment. I went upthese stairs and got on the roof of this vacant houseand waited therefor it was right close to the stairsuntil the milkman brought the Bradleys' milk, which158HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYwas a little before daylight. I knew he left this milkthere in bottles, as I had watched him before. I hada little powder of strychnine made for each bottle,and raised the paper cover and emptied one of thesein each bottle of the milk and cream, and stirred itup a little, and pressed the paper cover back again,and left and went back to my room. I figured the girlswould serve Mr. and Mrs. Bradley's breakfast first,and they would get the poison first. I could see theirkitchen plainly from the window of my room, but Icould not see anything unusual there that morning.I did not get up until ten and sometimes later, andthen I usually went down to the little saloon bar atGuibinni's and got a drink, and sat there and read themorning paper. This morning I did the same, and Inoticed a bottle of milk standing on the back bar,and asked Guibinni if he was selling milk, or drew hisattention to the bottle in some way like that. He beganto tell me about this milk, and wanted me to taste ofit. He said he tasted of it, and could feel it in histhroat yet. He told me the girls over at Mr. Bradley'shad brought that bottle over, and wanted him to takeit down and have it analyzed, as they believed therewas poison in it. He said it was bitter as gall. NowI never knew before that strychnine was bitter, butit seems the cook had tasted of some of this, foundit was bitter, and told Mrs. Bradley, and then they159CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDcame over to Guibinni's place to get some more milkand cream for breakfast.After this failed, I got a bomb ready. I boughta piece of five-inch lead pipe about a foot long at aplumber's, and put wooden ends in it. Then I ham-mered one side of it flat, so it would lie straight with-out turning over, and I cut a piece out of the otherside, and turned back the flap, and fastened a littlevial on this, so that when you filled it with sulphuricacid, and you pulled out the cork, the acid would runout into the hole in the pipe. Then I filled up the leadpipe with about five or six pounds of No. 1 gelatin,and put some caps and sugar and potash on top ofthis and opposite the hole in the lead pipe, so theacid would fall on them. Then I planned to hitcha little string to the cork of the bottle, and fastenthe other end of the string in a screw-eye in a door,so when you opened the door it would pull out thecork and set off" the bomb.I practised with this while I was making it in myroom, so as to see if the cork would come out of thebottle instead of moving the bomb. I had the dyna-mite in, but not the caps or acid, and I tried it byfastening a screw-eye and string on my closet door,and it worked all right. But one day I left the screw-eye and the string and the cork on my door, and wentdown-town, and forgot about it ; and when I got home160HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYI thought that was a nice trick to leave that thingthere, for I thought the woman that kept the housemust have seen it when she cleaned up mj room. Butshe never gave any sign she noticed it.After that I watched what time Mr. Bradley usu-ally came down-stairs in the morning, and how soonafter he ate his breakfast. As I was on a level, or aboutso, with their dining-room in my room, I could lookout of the window and see them when they were attheir meals. I noticed Mr. Bradley came down-stairssoon after he had finished breakfast, and I had toguess that he would be the first one down-stairs, soas not to catch any one else. In order to be sure hewould be at home, I called him up one night on aphone at his residence, and told him I was from Gold-field, Nev., and had some good mining property upthere, and wanted to raise some money, or get someone with money interested, so I could develop it ; andthat I had been recommended to him, and would liketo make an appointment to meet him. He said he wouldbe pleased to meet me and talk the matter over atleast, and could meet me the next morning at his office.I asked him if he could as well make it the morningafter that, and he said he couldat nine o'clock, Iand I told him all right. I did not want tothinktry the bomb the next morning, as I was not ready.The next night I went and fastened a little screw-161CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDeye in the door of his residence, where it opened outof the stairway into the archway, and the morningafter I watched him from my room when he went intobreakfast, and waited until I thought he was abouthalf through. Then I took the bomb that I had allready, walked up to his door in the archway, laid itdown, and hooked a little cord over the screw-eye Ihad screwed in the door, and laid the mat over thebomb. This looked like a small parcel, as I had it doneup in a paper.I had told the lady where I was rooming, the nightbefore, that I was going away for a while, and I hadalso taken my grip down-town the night before andleft it at a saloon. After I left this bomb, I took acar and went down-town, and got another room downon Taylor Street. After I rented this, I thought Iwould lie down and sleep a while, as I had not sleptmuch during the night. A little while afterward Iwas awakened by some one rapping at my door, and,on asking what they wanted, was told to open thedoor and I would see. I told them they had better getaway from there, and a little while after they cameback. I asked them who they were and what theywanted, and was told it was the sheriff and to openthe door. I told them to wait until I dressed. I thoughtI had been seen putting the bomb at Mr. Bradley'sdoor and had been followed. I dressed and took my162HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYgun in my hand and opened the door, intending toshoot if they wanted to arrest me. But the landladywas there when I opened the door, and explained tome that the sheriff had seized her furniture and wasremoving it. This was such a happy surprise to methat I left the house, and never said a word aboutthe room-rent I had paid her, nor the annoyance theycaused me. This always seemed a little peculiar to me,that I should happen in a place of this kind at such atime.I think it was about four o'clock in the afternoonwhen I left there. I bought the Evening Bulletin tosee if there was any account of anything about thebomb, and there was not a thing. I felt pretty uneasy,as I knew if it had not been exploded it would besure to be discovered, and I thought I might havebeen seen there, and leaving that neighborhood thatsame morning I would be apt to be suspected. Ithought, too, that when they found the way that bombwas set, the lady where I boarded would be sure toremember the screw-eye and string that I had leftfastened to my closet door.I took a walk over on the west side, a little out ofthe busy part of the city. I did not have moneyenough to leave the city, and felt pretty miserable,and the world looked more desolate to me than it everhad before. I could not see much for me to live for,163CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand I thought everything was working against me.I could not settle my mind on anything or do any-thing. I was strong and able to work, but could not setmyself about it, as my mind was in such a state, and Icame nearer ending all then than I ever had before.I went into a restaurant to get something to eat,as I had not eaten anything all that day. I picked upanother evening newspaper, the Evening Post, andthere was the picture of the explosion and a full ac-count of it. This paper stated that Mr. Bradley wouldprobably die, or at least lose his hearing and eyesight.They gave as the cause of the explosion leaking gas-pipes and fixtures, and said the gas had escaped andfilled the hall and the stairway entrance to Mr. Brad-ley's apartment, and as he lit his cigar coming downthe stairway the gas exploded. When Mr. Bradleyopened the door, practically the whole stairway andentrance into the archway was blown out, and Mr.Bradley was thrown out onto the sidewalk with thedebris, and the flat was more or less shattered fromone end to the other, and the glass was broken acrossthe street and for some distance away. It seems nowto me a horrible thing to say, but I felt better afterreading this, for I knew I could now get a good pieceof money without any trouble, as Haywood and Pet-tibone would be so well pleased.I sent Pettibone a copy of this paper and told him164HOW I BLEW UP FRED BRADLEYto wire me some money at once, and he did so in afew days. After about a week I went up and lookedat Mr. Bradley's place, and saw Mr. Guibinni, thegrocer and saloon-man. He told me they thought Mr.Bradley would lose his eyesight. He said he did nothebelieve that gas caused the explosion, himselfthought it was a bomb; but he said Mrs. Bradleywould not hear to such a thing, and said she hadsmelled gas escaping for some time. The owners of theproperty sued the gas company, and were awarded$10,000 damages, and when this was carried to theSupreme Court, they affirmed the lower court.I stayed in San Francisco two or three weeks afterthe explosion, and thought I would take a trip backto Denver. I went and got a suit of soldier's uniform,and wore that to Denver as a disguise. I set off thebomb at Mr. Bradley's house November 17th, and Igot back to Denver about the first part of December,1904. I went to a rooming-house, and got a rooma little way from Pettibone's store, and then tele-phoned him to come over, and a few minutes afterhe and Steve Adams came. We talked a little whilethere, and I told them if Mr. Bradley did not die,he was at least maimed for life, and would be deafand blind. Pettibone was well pleased with this news,but said it was hard luck that it did not kill him.Really, Mr. Bradley got well after a while, and is165CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDneither deaf nor blind; but I thought then he wasvery badly hurt.Adams had come back in September, and he and hiswife were keeping house in Denver then, and Steveasked me to go home with him. I went with him, andBilly Aikman was stopping with them, and BillyEasterly had been there some. I asked Pettibone whyhe did not send me the money when I asked for it,and what he meant by saying to call it off. He thentold me the time they had had with Johnnie Nevilleafter he had been released from jail in Cripple Creek.He came to Denver and told them he knew all abouttheir work, and especially the Independence depot,and that I had told him they hired me to do it, andif they did not give him $1,200 he was going to ex-pose them. Pettibone said for a while he had themall up a tree, and they had it all planned to kill himif he kept on. He said that Moyer was especially ex-cited over it. But finally they scared Neville off byspringing on him how he set fire to his saloon, andsaying they would tell the police, and then he quitand left the country and went to Goldfield, Nev.166