CHAPTER THREEWE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLON the morning of April 29, 1899, I got upat six o'clock, as usual, expecting to goto work in the mine. As I was going to theplace where I took breakfast I was told that therewould be no work at any of the mines that day, andthat there was going to be a meeting at the Miners'Union Hall at seven o'clock, and that every one mustattend. The first notice that anybody had of themeeting was that morning. I think the central uniondid not dare to give it out before, because if theyhad, a great many of the conservative men wouldhave left town before they took part in what theydid that day.After breakfast I went over to the hall, and itwas crowded, and in a few minutes Paul Corcoran,the secretary of the Burke union, called the meet-ing to order and began to explain the object ofholding the meeting at that unusual time. He toldthe men that the central union had held a meetingthe night before at Gem, and had decided that the30WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLunions should go to Wardner on that day and blowup the Bunker Hill-Sullivan mine, and I think hesaid hang the superintendent. I am not sure whetherhe spoke openly of the latter, but I know that itwas generally discussed in the crowd. He told aboutthe trouble the miners' union had always had withthis mine, and said that the union men at Wardnerwere breaking away from the union and going towork there, and that scabs who had been drivenout of the camp from time to time were comingback there. So the central union had decided theonly thing to do was to go down and blow up themill and end the strike once and for all. Then heexplained to us about the plans for taking posses-sion of the Northern Pacific train and going downto Wardner that morning.While he was doing this, Mike Devy, the presi-dent of the union, came in very angry and wantedto know why he had not been notified of the meet-ing, and what it was all about. When Corcoran hadexplained it to him, he talked strong against it.After he had done this a good many of the conserva-tive men backed him up. Corcoran answered thatthey had nothing to fear. He said the governorwould not do anything, because they owned him, asthe district had voted solid for him. The only thingto be afraid of was the Federal Government, and that31CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthe only thing that could make it do anything wasto interfere with the United States mail, and theyhad plans so as not to interfere with that.They took a vote after a while. They did this bydividing the men on either side of the hall and count-ing them, and it was very close. If it had been takenin the usual way, by raising hands, I don't thinkit would have been carried. A great many of theconservative men were bitter against it, and saidit was a shame; yet, after they voted to go, therewas not anybody who wanted to stay at home.Everybody went right out of the hall and began toget ready. We were all supposed to get a piece ofwhite cotton and tie it around our arm, as this wasthe mark of the Burke union, and each one was alsosupposed to get some sort of a mask.It is a peculiar thing to say, but when they wereonce started nobody seemed to think anything seri-ous was to be done. It was more like going on anexcursion. I do not even remember myself which wayI voted in the hall. When the Northern Pacific trainleft Wallace that morning at eight o'clock, all thetelegraph wires had been cut, and when it left Burke,five or six masked men with rifles boarded the en-gine and directed the trainmen to put on extra cars.Paul Corcoran was in charge of the men who didthis. The train was made up of box-cars and flat-32WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLcars, one or two passenger-cars and a baggage-car.The men got on board here, and we started downthe canon. I was in one of the passenger-coaches.The train stopped at the Frisco Magazine, a milefrom Gem, and about forty or fifty boxes of dyna-mite, each one of which weighed fifty pounds, wereloaded in one of the box-cars, and the train thenwent down to Gem and stopped in front of theminers' union hall. A number of Burke men got offthe train and went into the hall, where some newrifles and ammunition were distributed to them.Then they thought we would not have enough dy-namite, and they brought the train up again to themagazine, and put on forty or fifty more boxes.Then we ran back to Gem and stopped at the unionhall again, and the men from Gem got on the trainand we ran down to Wallace. The union men fromMullan had walked down to Wallace, which is aboutten miles, and they got on the train there. We lostsome time at Wallace, and then switched over on tothe Oregon Railroad & Navigation track and ranon down to Wardner. They had no permission torun this train over another railroad's track, butthe men in the engine compelled the engineer to dothis.The train was crowded, men sitting on top of thebox-cars and crowding inside of them. While they33CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwere going down from Gem a good many of themen put on masks, and still more after we left Wal-lace, but a great many of them did not mask at all.At Wallace Jim Young, the sheriff, and Tom Heney,former sheriff and then a deputy sheriff, got on thetrain at Wallace, and though I did not hear them,I was told they were advising the men on the waydown to Wardner how best to do the work and notget into trouble over it. The sheriff got off in frontof the crowd at Wardner and demanded that themob should disperse and go home. Everybody knewthis was a bluff, and that he really would make noattempt whatever to stop them, and they werelaughing and joking about it.When we reached the Wardner depot, where theBunker Hill mill was, the men all jumped out ofthe train and got ready to attack the mill. W. F.Davis, who was a leader in the Gem union, hadcharge of them. The mill was about a half mile fromthe depot, and we got ready to attack it. Everybodysupposed it was full of armed guards or militia,and Davis and the other leaders planned the attackon it.In fact Paul Corcoran had told us in themeeting that morning that there would be perhapsas many as four hundred militia at the mine, buthe said we could easily whip them. The way theyattacked this mill was foolish. They sent twelve men34WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLwith rifles up on the side hill to the south of themill to fire at it and draw the fire of the guards,if there were any. Then they formed the men inline. All the unions were marked in a particular way,a piece of cotton cloth on their arms or in theirbuttonholes, etc. Davis and the other men startedlining them up ; the men with Winchesters went first.They called out each union in turn for this ; the" All men from Burke with longBurke union firstguns this way," and so on. There must have beenabout four hundred men with long guns. Then theylined up the men with revolvers after them. I sup-pose there were twelve hundred men in the crowd.Then they marched them right straight up to themill, two by two. If there had been anybody in themill they could have killed half a dozen at a time,shooting down through the line.I didn't get into the line myself, as I waited atthe depot restaurant to get something to eat. I hadonly a small revolver anyway and wouldn't have beenany particular use. Pretty soon I heard them letloose shooting, and some of the fellows that werethere with me said,They've started at it," and weall ran out. It seems that Davis and the other menhad sent the twelve men round above the mill with-out telling all of the crowd, and these men had be-gun shooting at the mill, and the crowd, thinking35"CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthey were scabs, began shooting at them. It was aqueer thing to see the crowd break up and run andget behind cover when nobody had shot at themat all. The twelve men stood about three hundredyards away from the crowd, and about half thecrowd began shooting at them. I could see, fromwhere I stood at the depot, the stones and dirt fly-ing up all around them; but although there wereprobably two hundred people firing at them, theyonly hit one man named Smith. They shot himthrough the body, and he died right off. All he saidwas " I'm hurt," and fell over on his face, and theother fellows held up their hands, and the leaderstold the crowd who they were, and they stoppedfiring.The crowd caught a young Scotchman namedJohn Cheyne, who was a watchman at the mill, andanother man, and they told them that there was no-body in the mill. So they got ready and began totake the powder up and put it in under the mill toblow it up. About eighty or ninety of us who wereat the depot, each took one of the fifty-pound boxesof the dynamite and carried it on our shouldersdown to the mill. I remember even then I didn't un-derstand who those fellows on the hill were, and Isaid to Gus Peterson, who was carrying a box of" What do they let those scabsdynamite beside me,36WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLstay there for? They will be shooting at us and blow-ing up this dynamite before we know it." Then weleft the dynamite down there and I stayed aroundnear the mill.While we were doing this the crowd that had cap-tured the two men shot Cheyne. I didn't see this, butas I heard it, somebody told them to hike and getout of the country, and they started to run away,and then somebody else began to holler,Scab," and a lot of the fellows somewhere else hol-scab !Where, where, where? " and began shooting"lered,at them. One of these men shot Cheyne in the hip,and grazed the lip of Rogers, the other man. Rogersran and got away, and a woman came out and helpedCheyne and kept the men from killing him, but hedied a day or two later in the hospital."All this time the men were putting the powderinto the mill, with Davis in charge. There was aboutforty-five hundred pounds of this, and they plannedit all out, where would be the best place to put it.There was a charge on top, underneath the ore bin,where the ore comes into the mill, then there wasanother charge down under the tables in the middle,and then at the bottom, in the boiler room, there wasthe charge like what they call a lifter in a mine.Then when they got these all set they fired themwith fuses so that the top would go first and the37CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDmiddle next, and the bottom one last, so this wouldfinish the job from the ground up.When they got the powder in the mill, they wantedvolunteers to set off the fuses, and, though I was onlya new hand in the mines, I was near by at the time,and I said I would set off one of them. So I wentdown in the boiler-room with another man, and aftera while Davis came and put his head down througha trap-door, and called out to us to light our fuses,and we lighted them, and ran out of the building.We tried to go up a stairway first, but the door waslocked, so we had to hurry and get out of a window,and run across a switch track, where some freight-cars were standing. Then the powder exploded andthe building was blown all to pieces.They also set fire to a big company boarding-house and the house of the superintendent and someothers about the mill. I looked into the superin-tendent's house just before they set it going, and itwas furnished up fine. They had thrown kerosene allover the inside and had set it off.The men began to shout and shoot off their riflesafter the mill blew up. A little while later we got onthe train and started back to Wallace. I sat on theoutside of a box-car. The men were all feeling prettyhappy and still kept shooting their rifles. There wasa big flume up the hill that carried the water to the38WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLBunker Hill concentrator, and they would shootinto this so as to see the water squirt out where theballs broke through into the wooden flume.By and by there was the whistle of a locomotivedown below, and the leaders stopped our train andmade everybody stop firing. They said there mightbe troops on that train coming in from Spokane,and anyway they would very likely need the car-tridges if there was going to be any fight. This wasabout the only thing I heard that day about any-body coming in to trouble us. As I said, it was morelike going on an excursion than anything else, andnobody seemed to be afraid of the consequences. Westopped at Wallace on the way back, but I don'tremember much about that except that some of themen were drunk, though I think they had closed upthe saloons before we got there. That evening I wentback home and went to bed as usual without think-ing much about it.I worked in the mine three or four days after this.There were all kinds of stories, and finally we knewthe Federal troops were coming in. The men beganto get out of town, most of them going over thetrail to Thompson Falls, Mont.I went down in the mine to work the morning thetroops came, but I saw so few left that I had noheart to stay, so I quit and got my time. I could39CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDnot get my pay that day, so I went up on the hillon the north side of the town, as most of the snowwas off there, and it was warm. There were a goodmany up there in the same fix I was.About three or four o'clock the train came creep-ing up the canon loaded with Federal troops. Wehad made arrangements with a business man to giveus a signal from his house, if it was safe for us tocome down. But we got no signal, and we could seefor ourselves what they were doing. They wererounding up men like a bunch of cattle, and loadingthem into box-cars. We sent two men down after itgot dark to find out what we could. The town wasall picketed with soldiers, but they managed to reachsome of the houses, and learned from the womenthat they had arrested every man in the place, busi-ness men and all, even to the postmaster.About fifteen or twenty of us slept in a miner'scabin that night, and part of us made up our mindswe would leave the next morning for ThompsonFalls. In the morning they all backed out, exceptPat Dennison and myself, so he and I started aboutfive o'clock. It was forty miles over there, and thesnow was still deep. We made good headway forthree or four hours, and then the sun had thawedthe snow so that we would sink away down into it.But we were going down hill then, as we had crossed40WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLthe summit, and after we got down a ways thesnow was all gone. We got to Thompson Falls aboutten o'clock that night. We left the next morningo'clock train for Missoula, Mont.on the threeWhen we arrived there, we found others there weknew, but we soon had to scatter from there, and wefound out we had left Thompson Falls just in time,as they had sent soldiers over there to head any offthat came across the range from the Coeur d'Alenes,and they did arrest some there. The soldiers thathad been sent to Missoula had scab deputies withthem that knew nearly everybody from that coun-try, and we left there and went up the Bitter RootValley, and stopped there with a friend of some ofthe boys that were with us. There were about tenor twelve of us. We stayed there a few days, andone of the boys and myself went on up the valleyabout ten miles farther, as I knew a man up therewho drove the milk wagon for Markwell Brothersbefore I took it and was running a farm there. Wegot him to go over to the Coeur d'Alenes, as he wasacquainted there, and get our trunks and collectwhat money we had coming, and we worked in hisplace while he was gone. He told us how things wereover there; that they had several hundred in thebull-pen, and were still looking for others.We left there after he came back, and returned41CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwhere we left the other boys, and later came to Mis-soula, where we stayed a few days, as the soldiersleft, and from there we went to Butte,had allMont. This was the headquarters of the Western Fed-eration of Miners, and we found hundreds of theminers there from the Coeur d'Alenes. I was takensick going from Missoula to Butte, was sick sev-eral days after arriving there, and did not feel wellall the time I was there.I went up to the Western Federation of Minersheadquarters and got a withdrawal card, so I couldgo into another union any time. The president, EdBoyce, told us he wanted us all to come back to theCoeur d'Alenes as soon as the soldiers left, by allmeans. He said the trouble would soon blow over.I stayed in Butte about a month, and the troublein the Coeur d'Alenes looked as though it had hardlystarted. They had about a thousand in the bull-pen,and about five thousand Federal troops scatteredover the district, and had patrols day and night.The bull-pen was at Wardner, and they took themthere from other parts of the district.They were starting up the mines again, and hadinaugurated a card system and an employment office,and all men looking for work at the mines had to goto this employment office and get a permit beforethey could get a job at the mines. The mine owners42WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLof the Standard and Mammoth mines sent two rep-resentatives to Butte to hire 600 men and offeredto pay the same scale of wages that had previ-ously been paid up the canon, which was the unionscale. They also wanted the Butte union to get themthese men, and they would pay their fares over thereand guarantee them all work. They wanted them toall have union cards and be in good standing. I wasin the union hall at Butte the night this was broughtbefore the union, and they would not have anythingto do with it. They thought perhaps there mightbe some trick in it to get them in trouble throughthe permit system they had put in force in the Coeurd'Alenes, as they required every one taking out oneof these permits to renounce all allegiance to theWestern Federation of Miners, and make an affi-davit to that effect. Some wanted them to do thatand to go, but others did not like it, as they thoughtthere might be some catch in it. These men thatcame to hire them said there was no catch, but theywould rather have union miners, as they had beeninstructed to come to Butte first, and they knewthat practically all the miners in Butte belonged tothe union. They said if they could not get themthere they were instructed to go to Joplin, Mo.,which was a non-union camp. As the Butte unionwould have nothing to do with the proposition, they43CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDleft for Joplin, and the next I heard from there theywere sending men from there by the car-load.I left Butte and went to Salt Lake City, stayedthere a few days, and went out to Bingham, Utah,and went to work in the mines. I met a good manymen that I knew from the Coeur d'Alenes, most ofthem going under an assumed name, for if it becameknown that a man was from the Coeur d'Alenes, hewould have a hard time to get a job, as the MineOwners' Association had sent out a black-list of themen that had worked in the Coeur d'Alenes the timethe Bunker Hill mill was blown up and left thereafterward. One of the mine superintendents that Iknew in Bingham told me if it was known a manwas from the Coeur d'Alenes he would have a hardtime to get a job in any of the mining-camps. Thatwas the chief reason for men changing their names.Some, no doubt, were afraid of being taken back,but it was soon known that the authorities were notlooking for any one.I worked in Bingham until the Fourth of July,and went from there to Salt Lake to spend theFourth, as it is only twenty-four miles. There wasno miners' union at Bingham at that time. I wentout to the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canon towork for some contractors that were sinking a shaftthere, worked a couple of months, and then got inWE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLon the contract. I worked there until Christmas,and then went back to Bingham and worked thatwinter. I worked in and around Salt Lake City untilthe next fall, and then went to San Francisco. Iwent up to Lake County, California, stayed thatwinter, took a trip from there to Los Angeles, andthen went back to Salt Lake City. I drove a milkwagon there the next summer for the KeystoneDairy, went to Arizona the next winter, and workedin a mine there until about March, when I returnedto Salt Lake City. I then went to Nevada and workedin the mines a short time at State line, then cameback to Salt Lake again and took a short trip upinto southern Idaho with a party to look at someprospects, but only stayed a short time.During all this time I did not save any money,though I worked nearly all the time and always gotthe highest wages, and contracted some and madegood money. I made many good resolutions, andoften saved up a few hundred dollars and thoughtI would get into some little business for myself.When I would get away from town, as I often did,in some out-of-the-way place, I would save my moneyand make good resolutions ; but how soon I wouldforget them when I would strike town and see afaro game running, or a game of poker; my moneywould burn my pocket. There were many other at-45CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtractions, and money always soon got away. I al-ways bought plenty of good clothes and lived well.I will now relate the results of the Coeur d'Alenestrike. There was martial law there for the bestpart of a year. I think there was only one tried,that was Paul Corcoran, secretary of the Burkeunion. He was sent to the penitentiary for seventeenyears, and was pardoned in about that many monthsby a new governor.The fact is clear that the head officials of theWestern Federation of Miners did not have the bestinterests of the union men in the Coeur d'Alenes atheart. They surely must have known they could notforcibly take possession of a railroad train, andtwelve or fifteen armed men run that train twentymiles and take dynamite from a magazine and de-stroy a quarter of a million dollars' worth of prop-erty in broad daylight in a civilized country likethis, and nothing be done about it. This was one ofthe best organized districts, with the exception ofWardner, that there was in the country. Mullen,(Jem, and Burke, and all the mines close to thesetowns paid the union scale of wages and recognizedthe union, and all the secretary had to do to stopanybody from working that did not belong to theunion was to tell the foreman at the mine, and if hewent to work they would fire him; but there was46WE BLOW UP THE BUNKER HILL MILLhardly anybody that attempted to go to work if hedid not belong to the union. If he did not have themoney to join, the secretary would take an orderfrom him, and the company would hold the moneyfor him and pay him pay-day. To be brief, they hadeverything they asked except at this one mine atWardner, and they took this course to make themcome to terms, and thus for revenge on this onemine they disrupted the best organized camps in thecountry; for they could not be more thoroughlyorganized. This strike broke up every union in thedistrict for a good while. They have some unionsorganized there again now, but there is only onemine in the district, the Hercules, where a union mandare say he is a union man or attend a meeting, andhardly any of the old miners ever got work thereagain, except at the Hercules mine, and the man-ager of this mine was mixed up in this strike.47