CHAPTER FOURI GO TO UVE IN CRIPPLE CREEKABOUTthe middle of July, 1902, I left SaltLake City with Arthur Dulan for CrippleCreek, Col. On arriving in the districtIstopped at Victor first. I only stayed there a fewdays, and then went over to Independence, and Mr.Dulan introduced me to Johnnie Neville, who ran asaloon. He was an old miner, and got hurt by aman falling on him in a stope, and so had to stopwork, and went into the saloon business. Mr. Nevillewas a liberal and good-hearted fellow. He and I gotto be quite good friends, and I boarded with himquite a while.I will give a little account of the Cripple Creekdistrict and its surroundings. This was then thegreatest gold-producing camp in the world. It isabout one hundred miles from Denver, and aboutthirty miles from Colorado Springs. It has threedifferent railroads running to it, one from Flor-ence and two from Colorado Springs. The altitudeis about ten thousand feet above sea level. The cli-48I GO TO LIVE IN CRIPPLE CREEKmate is mild, and there is very little snow in winter.The country is not rough like most mining-camps.in some places nearlyIt is a long way to bed-rocka hundred feetso it is a pretty hard place toprospect. I think the district has a population ofabout thirty thousand.Cripple Creek is the largest town, and Victornext, and there are several other smaller towns.Goldfield, Independence, Altman, and Midway areon Bull Hill. Then Elkton and Anaconda lie betweenVictor and Cripple Creek, and Cameron lies on thenorth side, at the foot of Bull Hill. There is anelectric-car system all over the district, and you canride from Cripple Creek to Victor for ten cents, andthe cars run every half-hour. The steam roads alsorun suburban trains, so you can ride practically allover the district. It is more like living in a city thana mining-camp. They have a fine opera-house atVictor, and also one at Cripple Creek, and nearly allthe good plays come there. There are good hotels.There are no company boarding-houses or stores.All work at the mines is eight hours. The wagesrun from $3 to $4 per day, and without an exceptionthis is the finest mining-camp to work at that thereis in the country, if not in the world. I think theyemploy about six thousand miners. There are hardlyany foreigners there, and no Chinamen at all.49CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDMr. Neville introduced me to some of the minemanagers, and I got a job in a few days in theTrachyte mine. I had learned to mine pretty wellby this time, and ran a machine drill. I worked atthe Trachyte about four months, and then had alittle trouble with the engineer and quit. I got ajob right away at the Hull City mine. I worked inthe Hull City altogether three or four months. ThenI went over to the Vindicator No. 1 with Mr. War-ren, the contractor I was working for at the HullCity. I worked for them till the strike in August,1903.""high gradeglommingsWhen I was working here at the Vindicator I gotto "high grading." Most of the miners were look-ing for high-grade ore or "" some-thing good for the vest pocket," they called it. Thecompany ore." 'Most all theother ore they called""paying mines there had more or lessin bunches. Some places in the ore chutes you wouldfind sylvanite that was almost pure gold. There wasplenty of ore that would run $2 or $3 a pound.There were two of us working alone in the stope whenI started. We would put high-grade screenings be-tween our underclothes and pants legs, down wherethey were tucked into our shoes. I remember onceof carrying out a little over fifty pounds stored awayin my clothes. My partner said to me, if I fell down,50I GO TO LIVE IN CRIPPLE CREEKI would not be able to get up again. Still, altogether,I did not get so much as many did. In all I must have" while I wasmade not to exceed $500in Cripple Creek.high-grading"I believe there have been hundreds of thousandsof dollars taken out of these mines this way. Iknow of one man that it was said made about$20,000 in two years, and smaller amounts areaccredited to others. There was a superintendentat Independence that some of the miners have toldme they stood in with, and had to divide up with.He was a gambling fiend, and used to lose twice asmuch as his salary was every month gambling. Therewere plenty of assayers that made a business ofbuying stolen ore. There were four assay shops inthe little town of Independence, and besides the pro-ducing mines had their own assayers. These outsideassayers were mostly all there to buy high-gradeore from the miners. The miner would steal it fromthe mine, and when he took it to the assayer to sellit, the assayer would steal about half of it from theminer, and the miner could not say anything, andthe assayer knew this. The only thing he could dowas to take it to another assayer, but I never foundalike, and had anany difference. They were allunderstanding with each other, and they would allgive about the same returns. They would buy any-51CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthing that would run fifty cents or over a pound,and some would buy a lower grade. There were sev-eral of these assay offices blown up in Cripple Creekonce, I think, seven in one night. This was laidto the mine owners, and no doubt they had it done,thinking this would scare the assayers out, andthe miners would have no place to sell the ore andwould not steal it. The mine owners used to watchpretty close, and in some mines made the minerschange their clothes down to their underclothes atthe mines, but there was always some way to get"high gradeI worked around the mines on Bull Hill about aout.""year before the strike, spending my money as fastas I earned it. I worked pretty steadily and got$4 per day of eight hours most ofgood wages" on the side. Stillthe time, and thehigh gradeI was a very unhappy man, and seemingly had nomind of my own and no purpose in life, and oftenwished I was dead, and often thought to end my mis-erable existence. I tried to be cheerful, and thinkperhaps I made a good showing on the outside, butif any human mortal could have read my innerthoughts as God can, they would have had a dif-ferent story to tell.I often drank to stop and deaden my thoughts,for sometimes my past life would rise up before me52I GO TO LIVE IN CRIPPLE CREEKas fresh as though it was but a day ago, and, tryas hard as I could, I could not get it out of mymind. I would think of my dear wife and little girl,and wonder if they were still living and how theywere getting along. At such times I would go tothe saloon and drink to drown the sorrow, as Ithought I must forget that they were anything tome. I often thought I would take a trip back thereand disguise myself and see what had become ofthem, but I never got started. I used to go out incompany some, but never enjoyed myself.I met a lady in Cripple Creek and kept companywith her a short time that spring, and asked her tomarry me, and she consented. She was a widow andwas keeping house; her husband was killed in themines there a few years before. Her name was IdaToney. I saved up a little money, and we were mar-ried. I think this was in June. I did not mean any-thing wrong to her, and thought the past dead tome, and thought if I had some place I could callhome I would be more contented. I was going underan assumed name, and it was about seven years sinceI had heard from home. I had never met any oneI knew, and as I had changed a great deal duringthat time, I did not think any one would recognizeme.This was a good, true little woman, and while I53CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDmight not have loved her as a man ought to lovethe woman he is going to make his wife, still I lovedher as much as I could love any one, and thoughtenough of her to be good to her, and intended totake care of her well. I had worked about twomonths after we were married when the strike wascalled in August, 1903. In that short time after wewere married, I had saved up a little money andbought some furniture, and had it almost paid for,and fixed up the house some. Mrs. Toney owned thehouse herself.