CHAPTER ELEVENHOW WE BLEW UP THE INDEPENDENCE DEPOT DURINGTHE CONVENTIONTHENW. F. Davis, Parker, and Pettibonewanted me to go to Cripple Creek and pulloff something, and stir up the delegates, sothey would quit this quarreling, and be united, andfinish up their business and go home. The differentfactions were having their little meetings nights.During this wrangle Pettibone, Davis, and Parkersaid I had better go to Cripple Creek and blow upsomething, as that would not only unite the conven-tion, but if it happened when all the union leaderswere out of the district, they would not know whoto lay it to. I told them it would not be much troubleto blow up the Independence depot. We had talkedof this before. The idea was to get the night shiftsof non-union miners that got on the 2.30 trainthere every morning. They said that would be allright. Haywood said he did not want me to getmixed up in a job like that, and wanted me to getsome one else to do it, as he said he had some heavier129CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwork for me to do. He said as I had never had myname mixed up with the Federation, and they hadnever suspected me, I could do this work better thansome one that had been written up in the papers inconnection with some of this work. I told him I wouldnot get mixed up; that I would get some one elseto do it, or I would set it off with an alarm-clock.Pettibone was doorkeeper at the convention hall,and Parker, Davis, Pettibone, and myself were talkingthis over, and they wanted me to go up to the districtthat afternoon. The convention had just assembledafter lunch, and Haywood came in while we were talk-ing, and we asked him about it, and he said no doubtit would be a good thing, and that anything wentwith him. He gave me some money, and told me to besure and not get mixed up myself.I bought an alarm-clock and went to Cripple Creekthat afternoon.I went and asked Billy Aikman if he wanted tohelp do a little job. He told me he did not see howhe could get away, as he had bought a half-interest ina saloon at Independence and was tending bar nights,and he thought he might be missed if he wasn't there.I did not tell him what we were going to do. ThenI went and told Adams they wanted a little job done,and he said all right, he was ready for any old thing,or words to that effect. I told Billy Easterly what130WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTwe were going to do, and he said all right, if wewanted any help he would help us. I went and sawFloyd Miller, where he was working on a lease, andasked him if he would get me a hundred pounds ofpowder and two boxes of giant-caps. He said hewould, and I gave him the money to get them.I got Adams and went over that night after thepowder, where Miller said he would leave it, but itwas not there. Adams and I went over to see Millerthe next day, and Miller said they did not deliverit, but that he had ordered it and thought it would beup sure that day. We went over that night, and car-ried it over to Independence, and hid it in an oldcellar in the back of a cabin that Adams had a keyto. I think this was on Thursday evening, and weintended to use the powder on Saturday night.A good while before this, Johnnie Neville and my-self had planned to go out on a camping and huntingtrip, and as his saloon had not paid him since thestrike, he said he would close it up, and I said tohim that he had better burn it up. So he got the sa-loon insured after this, and we took out some of theliquor and buried it in a dump. So when I went toCripple Creek to get Steve Adams to go after Gov-ernor Peabody, we set the saloon on fire. I took fivebottles of the Grecian fire and poured it round in theupper rooms of the saloon, and shut the doors and131CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwent away. I got these bottles in the dump by Eas-terly's cabin. He told me where they were when I sawhim in Denver. The saloon was all in flames a shorttime later, and no one could get near it, and it burnedup completely.Now, after Adams and I had fixed up everythingto blow up the depot, I thought it would be a goodplan to go off with Johnnie Neville on this campingtrip. I figured it would be a good thing for me to goaway from there in the daytime with him, and thencome back at night on horseback and do the job; andas Neville had a good reputation and was well thoughtof, I took advantage of the saloon fire and thoughthe dare not go back on me. Neville wanted to go withme, and we looked around for a team and wagon, aswe intended to drive through the country. We boughta team and wagon from Joe Adams, Steve's brother.We got all ready and intended to leave on Saturday,and I intended to come back on horseback Saturdaynight and blow up the depot and ride back to wherewe camped.But Friday evening Billy Easterly came to myhouse and told me Parker was up from Denver andwanted to see me. I went down to Parker's house inIndependence, and he told me the convention had ap-pointed a committee to come up and investigate thestrike, and to see the mine operators' representativeWE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTand get both sides of the story. The Haywood factiondid not want this committee appointed, and after itwas appointed Parker said they did not want them tocome up alone, and they decided to have him comewith them. I told them we were all ready, and intendedto finish the job Saturday night, but he wanted us towait until they got away. He said they would hanghim if anything like that happened when he was there,but he said if it was going to make any particulardifference to go ahead, and he would take his chances,and would rather like to catch this committee up there,so they would get a touch of high life. I told him wewould wait until they left, so Parker and this com-mittee went and had a conference with the secretaryof the mine operators, and the committee were favor-able to some kind of a settlement.Now, Haywood and the strike committee and some,if not all, of the executive board did not want thiscommittee to make any settlement or interfere withthe strike, and Haywood said they had spent too muchmoney to let them settle with any one else, and thatwhen they wanted to settle they would have to cometo them. Malcolm Gillis from Butte was on this com-mittee, one man from Wyoming, and one from BritishColumbia. The Haywood faction were sore at Gillis,and said he was chairman of the Republican StateCentral Committee of Montana and stood in with133CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthe mine operators. The fact was that Gillis was abright and, I think, reasonable man, and they wereafraid he would open the way for settlement, and theywould have no hand in it, and lose the glory.After the conference with the secretary of the mineoperators, the committee made some further inquiryabout the district, and visited the union at VictorSaturday evening, and left Sunday for Denver. Sun-day evening, Neville and I and his little boy Charlieleft Independence with a team and wagon, and drovedown the road toward Colorado Springs a few milesand camped for thenight. I told Neville I intended to go back and doa little work that night. I told him I would makesome excuse before Charlie, and if anything happenedthat I was ever mistrusted, I was supposed to be thereall night with them. I had gotten a saddle from TomFoster before I left, and had made arrangements withAdams to meet me where we left the dynamite.I think six or eight milesA little after dark, I saddled one of the horses androde back within a mile of the depot, and tied my horsein some bushes, and walked the rest of the way to thecabin, and found Adams already there. This wasabout ten o'clock. He had a candle, and we stayedin there about an hour, making a little wooden wind-lass to set off the dynamite with. We fastened twolittle vials on the cross-piece of this with a strip ofWE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTleather, so when you pulled on the windlass these bot-tles would turn over and spill sulphuric acid on thegiant-caps we had put in the powder.About eleven o'clock, when 'most everybody aroundthere had gone to bed, we took the two fifty-poundboxes of powder with us and went over to the depot.This depot had been closed for some time, and theykept no operator there, though the train stopped therefor people to get on and off. The depot was builton a side-hill, with a long platform in front of it.We walked under this platform, and I crawled underwhere the plank came right close to the ground. Idug away a little place in there, and buried the twoboxes of dynamite in the ground close up to theplanks, put in the giant-caps and set up the wind-lass on one of the boxes, and filled the two little bot-tles with sulphuric acid from another bottle I had itin. This was ticklish business, as it was very dark inthere, and I had to fill these little bottles without see-ing them; and though I kept a pasteboard over thegiant-caps and the dynamite while I was filling this,yet a drop of the acid would have set the whole thingoff. We had a mixture of sugar and potash on thecaps, too, that the acid would set fire to immediately.Then we stretched a wire out from the windlassabout two hundred feet on to a spur track, and tieda chair-rung to the end of it. We went back to an135CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDItold ore-house beside the spur track, and waited.had been dark and lowery that night, but about twoo'clock it began to lighten up. We were a good dealput out by this, as there was a small moon and itgot quite light. The train we were waiting for came inevery evening about 2.30, and it generally wason the dot. We heard the men come on the platformtalking, and finally we heard the train. Then we gotdown to the end of our wire and took hold of thechair-rung, and when the train was within about ahundred feet of the depot, we each had a hold of oneend of this chair-rung which the wire was attachedto, and pulled it and kept right on going. Weintended to take the wire with us, but forgot thatpart, as the rocks and debris were falling aroundus pretty thick, although neither of us got hurt.I do not know how many men were on the platformat the time, but I think there were thirteen killedoutright and some others were maimed and crippledfor life.We ran as fast as we could, and soon got up onthe railroad and followed it around nearly to the oldVictor mine on the north side of Bull Hill, and thenseparated. Adams went on around to Midway, wherehe lived, and I went down to where I left my horse, onthe Colorado Springs road, and rode back to our campas fast as possible, and got there just at daybreak.136WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTMr. Neville and Charlie were awake, and I crawled upin the wagon and went to sleep for a while, or at leasttried to sleep.Mr. Neville asked me what we had blown up. I toldhim nothing at first, or put him off with some evasiveanswer. He said there were two reports and they shookthe ground there. He then asked me if it was the Find-lay mine ; I told him I was not there, and this was rea-sonable enough for him to believe, for the explosionwas at 2.30 and it was only a few minutes after threewhen I got to the camp. But it was all down gradeand my horse was cold standing so longfor it was aandcold night for that time of year, with a frostI ran him most of the way at full speed, only slackinga couple of times close to two houses, so they wouldnot hear the horse running.We got our breakfast and started on down theroad toward Colorado Springs about eight o'clock.We did not meet or see any one who said anythingto us until about four o'clock in the afternoon, whenwe got close to Colorado Springs, and a man askedus if we were from Cripple Creek. We told him wewere, and he asked when we left, and we told himthe day before, and he began to tell us about theexplosion, and said there were sixty men killed andseveral hurt, and the depot was blown to atoms, andsome of the people living close by were thrown from137CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtheir beds. This startled Mr. Neville and Charlie, asNeville's house was only about a hundred yards fromthe depot, and I had to tell him I knew his folks werenot hurt. I did not let Charlie hear me tell his fatherthis, but I told him I was not more than a hundredfeet from it when the explosion occurred, and thissomewhat pacified him. When we got to ColoradoSprings we got some later papers and found that thefirst reports were exaggerated and that none of thepeople living around the depot were seriously hurt,and we bought some things in the city that we needed,and went on about four miles beyond the Springs andcamped that night. The next morning I walked backa ways until I reached a street-car line, and went intothe city and got the morning papers and came back.We found in the paper where a piece of plank hadgone through the roof of Mr. Neville's house, and asliver had struck Mrs. Neville on the breast while shewas in bed, but had not seriously hurt her. This re-lieved me a whole lot, for I realized my position if anyof his family had been hurt.We started on again, and drove a few miles beyondPalmer Lake, and camped the next night, and thenext afternoon we reached the suburbs of Denver andgot a little barn to put our horses and wagon in. Itwas only a little way from the end of the street-carline, and after we put our horses up, we took the car138WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTand went into the city. We got there a little beforedark.I left Mr. Neville and started to go to Jack Simp-kins's room in the Granite Block. I met Simpkins onthe street, and we went up to this room together, andKirwan was there, and a little later Haywood andPettibone came in, and while we were talking SteveAdams came in. Kirwan did not take any part in theconversation; I think he left the room soon afterSimpkins and I came up. They were all greatlypleased with the job, and they said it was the onlything that ever saved the Federation from being splitup. They said every delegate there wanted to getthrough as soon as possible, and there was no morekicking and no more new candidates for office, as noone wanted the offices, but wanted to get away as soonas possible for fear something would fall. They toldus everything was on fire up in the district, or wordsto that effect, and they had declared martial law andhad established a "bull-pen," and were deportingmen, but still they did not think anything of this.They were well pleased to think they had all beenelected again, except one member of the board, andthey did not want him. They said the dogs had fol-lowed my trail several miles down the canon, butHaywood said he did not think they were on to any-thing. Adams had stayed home and the next day went139CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDover to Cripple Creek, and his friends advised himto leave the district, and Monday night after dark hestarted to walk to South Park, and he caught the trainthere and came in to Denver. He did not leaveany too soon, for that night or the next day, Ihave forgotten which, there was a mob of abouta hundred men came to his house, and if they hadfound him there is no doubt but they would havelynched him, as he had the name of being a dyna-miter.Haywood and the others asked us what we intendedto do, and I told him I was going up through Wy-oming on a prospecting and pleasure trip. He askedus how much money we wanted, and said it would bebetter for us not to take it all now or all we expected.Adams told him he wanted $200 now, and he saidhe was going to send for his wife, and I don'tthink he said what he intended to doif he knew.I told Haywood I wanted $300 anyway then. Nextday I got the $300 from Pettibone, and Mr. Nevilleand I bought a tent and some other things we needed,and I think after we were there three or four days wegot our team and started for Cheyenne, Wyo. I thinkwe were four or five days going to Cheyenne. We putour horses up there and intended to let them rest aday or so.We went to Pat Moran's saloon, as he was an old140WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTfriend of Pettibone's, and he told me he was all rightand to go to see him if we stopped at Cheyenne. Thefirst night we got in Cheyenne we were at his saloon,and he handed us a paper with our names and gooddescription of us, stating we were wanted in connectionwith the Independence explosion. I showed it toJohnnie, and he wanted to go and put a piece inthe paper telling them where we were, if they wantedus. I told him to wait a while and we would think itover. This piece also stated we were either going toWyoming or New Mexico, and would probably en-gage in stock-raising, and that we had taken a goodsupply of provisions, and were heavily armed withthe latest improved firearms. I thought the proposi-tion over that night, and W. F. Davis and D. C.Copley came into Cheyenne that night on a late train,and said they were making their get-away, as theCripple Creek authorities were hunting them, andthey told me how they were throwing all suspects inthe "bull-pen," and deporting all the union men, andhad closed up all the union stores, and forbade anyof the grocers from selling anything to the unionmen's families. I did not know hardly what to do.Mr. Neville still wanted me to go on with him, andsaid he would see me through, and that they couldnot prove anything against us. I was sure they couldnot prove anything if he stood pat, but I was afraid141CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDthey might arrest us and get at little Charlie, whowas only fourteen years old, and make him tell thatI was away nearly all night the first night we campedout after leaving Cripple Creek.We had a good outfit, and I wanted to go on thistrip, and we were going to try to get into a saloonsomewhere in a good lively town ; we thought of Cody.I knew I could get money enough from Haywood tostart up, and Neville was a good saloon man, and alsohad some money. I thought he would stay by meon account of what happened between us, for I knewhe would not have it known about setting his saloonafire for the world, and he told me it was the firstcrime he had ever committed in his life. I feel thatI ought not to write this now, that is, I hate to men-tion his name, as he is dead and gone, poor fellow,and I want to say that I do not think Neville wouldever have thought of doing what he did with hissaloon if I had not set him up to it, and agreed tohelp him; and if it had not been for that I wouldnever have taken him into my confidence. I knew hehad a good reputation, and his word would be taken,and I was sure he would die before he would haveit known that we burned up his saloon. I have nodoubt but this sent him to an early graveif he dieda natural death.Davis urged me to quit the wagon and Neville, and142WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTfor him and I to go to the coast for a while, and hesaid this would soon blow over. I did not like Davismuch, and then I knew he was well known, and hadbeen mixed up in so many strikes that he looked likebad company for me to be traveling with, and he hadused me pretty small when I was broke in CrippleCreek. Now I had or could get a little money, andhe had only about $100, and I thought I would haveto keep him, and he would not have much left afterhe paid his fare to the coast. I asked Pat Moran ifhe would go to Denver for me and take a letter toPettibone, and he said he would, as he wanted to goto Denver anyway. I gave him a letter to Pettibone,and gave him $10 to pay his expenses. I told Petti-bone in the letter to see Haywood and get me $500and send it to me by Pat Moran. I told him I thoughtI would go to Los Angeles, and while there wouldgo out and look at the ranch that Johnnie Neville hadnear San Diego. We had talked this over before, andPettibone, Haywood, and Moyer said they would putup the money to buy his ranch, if it suited, and ifit did not to get one that did.Pettibone sent me the $500, and wrote me a let-ter to go down to Los Angeles and San Diego andlook over that country and hunt up a small placenear the Mexican line, and he would see that Igot the money to buy it, and he said we would have143CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDit for a rendezvous and a hiding-place to send anyone we wanted to. He said if we were close to theMexican line we could do a little smuggling, andalso get across the line quick. I had told him in theletter that Davis was there and wanted to go with me,but he told me to go alone, and if I wanted any onehe would be a pretty good one for me himself. Moranreturned the same night and gave me Pettibone'sletter and the package with the money in it. I thinkhe stated that the newspapers said they were lookingfor me, but, as he thought I was going to Los An-geles, he did not warn me to keep out of the way,and I did intend to go there when I wrote him. I toldJohnnie Neville where I intended to go, and he wantedme to recommend them to buy his ranch down thereif I went.I thought this all over, and thought if his ranchdid not suit, which I had reason to believe it wouldand wenot, as it was in that dry belt and no waterbut we got a place anywhere arounddid not buy itthat country, so that he would know where we were,he would not perhaps feel very friendly toward usand might divulge our whereabouts. As he wanted meto stay with him for the time, and said he would goto California with me later on, I thought it mightbe better for me to stay with him and keep on theright side of him ; and so I decided not to go to Cali-144WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTfornia for the present, but to go on with him on ourtrip.We left Cheyenne and drove up on Crow Creek,and camped there two or three days, and Pat Moranand Davis came up there and stopped a day or sowith us and fished, and Davis wanted to go withus on the trip, but I told him there was no roomin the wagon, as we were already crowded. They leftus and we went on to Laramie. We just stopped therea little while and got shaved, and got a few littlethings we needed, and inquired the way to Casper.There are no towns to speak of between Laramie andCasper, and we drove along leisurely, and stoppedand camped on some creeks where there was goodfishing, and finally reached Casper. I think we wereabout two weeks on the road from Laramie to Casper,and had not seen a paper during this time. Mr.Neville had written to his family from Cheyenne, andtold them to address him there in care of Pat Moran,and we made arrangements with Moran to forward thesame to Casper. We went to the post-office when wearrived at Casper and inquired, but there was nomail; and I went and called Pat Moran up on thephone, and he told me no mail had arrived there forany of us. Neville wrote to his family from Casper,and told them to address him at Cody.We stayed in Casper a few days and rested our145CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDhorses, and then started for Cody. There is no rail-road between Casper and Cody, or at least there werenone at that time, and most of the way it is a dry andbarren country. I think we were about a week on theroad, and about thirty miles from Thermopolis, Wyo.,when one of the wheels of our wagon broke. I tookone of the horses and saddled him and rode on intoThermopolis, got a new wheel and sent it out on thestage, and rode back. We came on into Thermopolisthen, and I think we got into Thermopolis about the10th of July, 1904.Thermopolis is a flourishing town situated on theBig Horn River in Wyoming, and is noted for its hotsprings. Although there was not a railroad within135 miles at that time, still there were people therefrom all over the country taking the hot baths. Inoticed many monuments built upon the mountainsabout the springs, and was told they had been builtby people that came there as a last resort, and hadbeen cured, and built or had these monuments builtas a memorial. We camped there by one of thesesprings, and, as it was a nice place to stop, wethought we would stay a few days, and used to goin bathing every day. Neville had some kind of a ring-worm coming on his face, and they told him theythought these baths would help him, as they had seenskin diseases cured there before. I think we had been146WE BLOW UP INDEPENDENCE DEPOTthere nearly a week, and could not get much wordhow things were going, and had telephoned to Codyto see if there was any mail there for Neville, andwas told there was not. As Neville wanted to staythere and take these baths a while longer, I proposedto him to take one of the horses and saddle and rideon to Cody, and have a look around and see whatthe prospects were for starting or buying out a saloon,and then come back again, and perhaps he would beready to start again by that time.Neville was agreeable to that, and so I started andwent to Cody and sent the horse back by the stagefrom Meeteetse. This is a live little town situated onthe Gray Bull River, Wyoming. I took the stage fromthere to Cody, and got some mail for Mr. Neville,and a letter for myself from Pettibone. I called Nevilleup on the phone and told him I had forwarded himsome letters, and had sent the horse and saddle back,and was going to leave there for the present, and wasgoing to Montana, as things did not look good, andwould write to him. I told him things looked good inCody, and for him to come on through, and I wouldwrite to him. What caused me to take this course wasPettibone's letter; he told me they were hot on mytrail, and that I had better get in the tall timber. Atfirst I could not think they were looking for us, forif they had been they would have found us before,147CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDas we had not tried to conceal our whereabouts, andhad been through all the principal cities and townsin Colorado and Wyoming.I was undecided at first what to do, but had madeup my mind to leave there for the present. That nightI got in a poker game and won between $100 and $200,and went to bed about nine o'clock the next morningand got up in the afternoon. I think they had a gamealready fixed up for me. I started to play some moreand lost a couple of hundred dollars pretty quick.I saw the poker game was too strong a combinationfor me and I quit it and went over to buck a BlackJack game, and got to betting $50 at a turn, andI lasted only a few turns. I said to Mr. Hall, the" Lend me $50 to get to Denver, andproprietor,I will pay you when I come back." I had beentalking of buying a place there, and told them mypartner was at Thermopolis. Mr. Hall handed me$50 without a moment's hesitation; he was onlyloaning me my own money, but not many wouldhave done that, especially me being a total stranger.I think I went then under the name of Despasy orHogan. I had made up my mind, now that I wasbroke, to go back to Denver.148