CHAPTER ONEMY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOIWAS born in Northumberland County, Ontario,Canada, on the 18th of March, 1866. My realname is Albert E. Horsley. My father was bornof English parents, and my mother of Irish. I wasbrought up on a farm and received a common-schooleducation, but as my parents were poor, I had towork as soon as I was old enough. I never advancedfarther than the third grade. I was one of a familyof eight children, consisting of six daughters andtwo sons.While we were poor and had to work for a living,we always had plenty and dressed respectably. Thecountry was prosperous, and poverty was a thingalmost unheard of in the country at that time. Mosteverybody worked there at that time, either forthemselves or for some one else, as the chief industrythere was farming; and the people were happy andcontented. The cost of living there then was muchless than it is to-day, and the people dressed andlived much plainer then than now.3CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDI was brought up to love and fear God and tobelieve in a hereafter. My parents usually attendedchurch, and I was sent to Sunday-school and church,and always had to observe the Sabbath, as there wasno manner of work practised there on the Sabbathexcept chores about the farms that were necessaryto be done. Most of the people in that section ofthe country belonged to some church and usuallyattended it on Sunday.I was next to the oldest of our family, and mybrother next to the youngest. We bought a smallfarm when I was about ten years old, and I and mysisters used to work and help father all we could,as we used to raise garden truck for market. I usedto work on the farm summers and go to school win-ters. As soon as I was old enough, I used to workout for some close neighbor, sometimes by the dayand sometimes by the month, but my parents alwaysgot the benefit of my work until I was past twentyyears old. When working away from home, I alwayslooked forward to Sunday, as I would have a chanceto go home and spend the Sabbath with my folks,and they always looked for us on that day if we wereaway from home. It makes me feel sad now when Ilook back over those happy days and think espe-cially of our dear loving mother and the anxiety shehad for our welfare, and the many hard, weary days4MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOshe toiled and worked and underwent many priva-tions for us, as a loving mother will do for her fam-ily. We may not have had as nice clothes as someof our neighbors, but they were always clean andneatly mended. I always loved my mother very muchand thought I was good to her, but I can look backnow and see that I did not love her half as much asshe did me, and I might have been much better toher. My dear mother is dead and gone many yearsago, and I am glad in my heart on her account thatshe never lived to see me where I am to-day. Myfather also died since I left home.When I was about twenty-one years old, Ithought I ought to keep whatever money I earnedmyself, as my parents were not able to give me any-thing, and they did not object, so I worked awayfrom home all the time then and saved all I earned.I had never been very far away from home and al-ways worked on a farm. When I was twenty-two, Ithink, I went to Saginaw, Mich., to work in thelumber woods, as wages were much more there.I had been keeping company with a young ladyat home and was engaged to be married. I went backhome and went to work for a farmer I had workedfor previous to going to Michigan. I had saved upa little money by this time and got married the nextsummer and went to keeping house a little time after.5CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDMy wife had worked in a cheese factory beforewe were married and learned how to make cheese,and as that was a great industry there and paidpretty well, we thought we would try to get a fac-tory and try cheese-making. We had no money tobuy a factory, but that winter we succeeded in rent-ing one and moved there in the spring. The cheese-making was carried on only during the summermonths, about six or seven months. We did nothave any money left to start with, but got creditfor what we needed and started out pretty well.It was an old factory we rented and pretty wellrun down, but we worked up a pretty good tradeand had some good friends that helped us. Com-petition was keen, and a person had to under-stand the business perfectly to make a success. Mywife understood it thoroughly, as she had learnedwith a man that was very successful, but I knewpractically nothing about it. We did our own workat first and got along well, but I soon discoveredthere were many little tricks in the buying andmany ways for the buyer to job the maker.I will explain briefly how the cheese was mostlysold at that time. There would be a salesman forevery factory, and they would meet at the most cen-tral city and had a regular cheese board of trade.The board met every week during the early sum-6MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOmer, and after they had bought the cheese theywould send out their inspectors to the factories theybought from. This would sometimes be several daysafter they had been sold, and often the market fluc-tuated a good deal, and if it happened to fall duringthe time the inspector was inspecting the cheese,he often culled them and would leave some of themon your hands or would take them at a reducedprice. A maker did not like to have it get out thathis cheese had been culled. That would give him abad reputation and hurt his trade. I did not knowwhat to do at first when an inspector culled some ofour cheese, but he told me if I would weigh thecheese and knock off a pound or so on a cheese andmake out two invoices, give our treasurer the shortone and send him the correct one and also a copyof the short one, that he would accept them and noone would be any the wiser. I at first thought therewas no harm in this, but I kept it to myself; I donot think I even told my wife.It takes lots of patience to make cheese, and espe-cially if a person is not particular in taking themilk. The patrons will not all take good care oftheir milk, and it often comes to the factory taintedwith some bad smell, either from the cows eatingsomething or drinking bad water, and it often comesfrom the milk being kept in some filthy place, and it7CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtakes a lot of work and time to get this out of thecurd, often all day and part of the night; whereas,if you had all good, pure milk you could get throughin eight or nine hours ; and I think after I had workedat the cheese-making a while I was not as particu-lar as my wife and often hurried it up to get doneearly. While we were bound to make a first-classcheese, we also had patrons bound to furnish first-class milk, but we did not have them bound to sendany at all if they did not see fit, and as I have stated,competition was very keen, and a good many of thepatrons were so situated that they could send theirmilk to different factories, and if we would send ithome and tell them it was not good, they would oftendo it, and we had to take a chance on lots of milkthat we ought not, especially in hot weather.This throwing in a few pounds of cheese to thebuyer by making the short invoices would seem allright, but if you did much of this you would run theaverage away up, and it would take too much milkto make a pound of cheese. As it takes about tenpounds of milk to make a pound of cheese, we hadto keep pretty close to this to compete with otherfactories, and thus the only way to do this was toweigh the milk short. Still another difficulty con-fronted us, as a great many patrons weighed theirmilk at home, and if there was too much difference8MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOthey would kick, and so the man that did not weighhis milk at home suffered the most. We could usu-ally find this out through the man that hauled themilk. Our salesman and treasurer was on to all this,as he had been in the business a good while, and hesaid it was all right, and a maker hadn't ought tomake up any deficiency at the price he got for mak-ing, and that they did not pay enough anyway.This man was a good friend of mine and helped mein many ways.They used to most always contract the last twoor three months' make about the middle of the sea-son, and often the market would fall, and this workeda great hardship on the maker, as the buyers weremore particular. The first year we made cheese theycontracted the last three months' make, and the mar-ket fell afterward, and they left several hundreddollars' worth of cheese on our hands, and I soldthem to the man I rented the factory from. Hefailed to pay all for them, and I had to borrow about$400 to make up this, and I never got it from him,as he had sold the factory and was not worth it.I never did get it. We bought the factory after thatand stayed there four years.I just want to relate these circumstances to showthe reader where I first fell and began to be dishon-est. This was the first business I had done for myself,9CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDand I was handling quite a lot of money, and it wasquite a change from working for somebody on afarm sixteen or seventeen hours a day for $12 to$15 a month. As long as I stayed home with mywife and worked in the factory, I was all right,but I thought I would keep a team of horses andhaul a milk route and haul away the cheese tothe depot, and hire a man or girl to work in thefactory to help my wife when I was not there. ThenI got to buying the whey at the factory and keep-ing hogs there and feeding them, and all this tookme away from home more and more all the time, andtook me to the city a good deal, where I met a dif-ferent class of people from those I had been usedto. I got to drinking some and spending a good dealof money and staying away from home longer thanmy business required, and I got mixed up in politicssome, and to make a long story short, I got to liv-ing beyond my means and going in company thatI was not able to keep up my end with. The patronsof our factory noticed this and talked a good dealabout it, and I kept living a little faster all the time.My credit was good, and if I wanted money I couldgo to the bank and borrow it.My wife did not like my being away from homeso much, but she made no serious objection, butlooked after things the best she could when I was10MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOnot there. For that part, she would do it better thanI, because she understood it better and was moreparticular, and if I had attended to my business anddone my work and saved the money, we would havebeen all right and could have saved some money. ButI could not stand prosperity, and kept good horsesand rigs, and lived a pretty fast life and did not dealvery honestly with the patrons.Where I made the greatest mistake of my life wasin not telling my wife anything about my businesstransactions, or very little, and I think this was thecause of our first estrangement. I did not keep thisfrom my dear wife because I did not love her, but Iknew if she knew about how I was doing the businessshe would not stand for it, and would wonder whatI was doing with the money. If she asked me aboutsomething I did not want to tell her, I would eithertell her a falsehood or put her off some other way,and I think the truth began to dawn upon her, andshe got so she did not ask me anything much aboutbusiness matters at all. I thought at the time I wasonly saving her pain. I knew I was doing wrong,but still kept doing more to cover up what I haddone, and so it was I kept on. I did not drink toexcess, nor did I seem to spend any great amount ofmoney. We made pretty good money through thesummer, but nothing in the winter, and as I kept11CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDtwo or three horses all the time and had to buyeverything, the money got away, and after workingthere four years and selling the factory for about$400 more than we gave for it, I think I was somein debt yet, although most folks thought we hadsome money.The way we came to sell the factory was like this :The patrons began to get dissatisfied, and the treas-urer and salesman advised me to sell, and found abuyer for me, and no doubt it was a good thingfor me.We moved from Cramahe the spring of 1892, andwent to make cheese for a company at Wooler nearmy home. There was not as much money in this aswe had been making. We had more work to do in thefactory, as there was more milk to handle. I was athome more here, and as we were among my own folksI tried to lead a better life. We had an uncle whowas a preacher, and we were close to his church andusually went to church. I had many good Christianfriends there that gave me good advice and triedto get me to lead a better life, and I did try, butto no purpose. I only tried to keep my wicked lifeaway from my Christian friends, and I would makesome excuse to get away from home as often as pos-sible to the city or away hunting and fishing, anyplace to get away from home and have a little time,12MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOas we called it. We stayed there three years, but thepeople did not like the way I lived, as most all thepatrons were Christians, and my actions would getout.I had some good friends that managed to keep thefactory for me three years, but at the end of thattime I lost it, and a friend of mine put up the moneyto buy a factory at Hilton, and I was to manageit and pay him back. That winter I started to buildanother factory a few miles from the one we bought,and this kept me away from home a good deal thatwinter. I stopped in a town called Brighton nearwhere I was building the new factory. This was thebeginning of my downfall. I boarded there with aman and became infatuated with his wife and shewith me.I finished this factory and moved there about theopening of the cheese-making season. There was adear little girl born to us this spring, and thus mydear wife was no longer able to look after the cheese-making as she had formerly done, and I had to de-pend altogether on hired help. I rented a nice housein town shortly after our dear little girl was born,and lived there. I was away from home most all thetime now, and when I was not at the factory I wasdown-town. Our once happy home had lost all at-tractions for me now, and my dear wife would often13CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDcomplain and plead with me to stay at home, or atleast to come home early. To make a long storyshort, I lived away beyond my means and was somein debt, and my credit was not so good, and as I neg-lected to look after the making of the cheese anddepended all on hired help, they did not turn outany too good, and my chief prop was not able tolook after this as she had formerly done.But I managed all right until we had to settleup in the fall of 1896, and this woman and I hadplanned to run away together, and I had to havemoney to do this. I was all right at Hilton ; but atBrighton I had overdrawn my account several hun-dred dollars and was still in debt, and to cover upsome other misrepresentations on the books,Iburned the factory I had built and got the insur-ance. I had taken from $500 to $600 worth ofcheese from the storehouse at Brighton and soldit and kept the money. The factory was insuredin my name and the cheese in the name of thecompany. In the fire everything was destroyed,and the account books of the company were de-stroyed, with the record of my debt in them. I paidup my debts with the insurance money, and hadabout $400 left, and I left there a month or soafterward, and this woman followed me a shorttime later and met me in Detroit, Mich., and we14MY EARLY LIFE IN ONTARIOwent to Nelson, British Columbia. We stayed thereand at Pilot Bay, about twenty miles away fromthere, for three months or so, and I found out thatshe had written home and her folks knew where shewas, and I bought her a ticket, and she went home,and I left there and went to Spokane, Wash.I did not hear from her after that, only in an in-direct way. I wrote to a friend of mine about sixmonths afterward. He told me she was living withher husband again and everything was all fixed up.He also told me my wife had written to him andwanted to know if he knew where I was. He said shesaid some pretty hard things and said he thoughtit would not be best for me to come back there. Ihad no notion of going back, and did not let himknow where I was.I was a very miserable man and began to see thegreat mistake I had made, but did not know how torepair it. I thought my wife would never forgiveme, and I made up my mind to begin life over againand forget the past, but alas, that was not so easyto do, but I thought that was all there was left forme to do, and I started in to do it.15