CHAPTER SIXTHE MILITIA COME TO CRIPPLE CREEKAT first, after the strike was called at CrippleCreek, things went on pretty orderly for twoor three weeks. The sheriff was a union man be-fore he was elected, and the union men expected himto protect them. There were some non-union menbrought in, and some of them were deputized, andthe union men were after the sheriff to make himarrest the non-union men for carrying concealedweapons, and the mine operators were after him todisarm the union men. 'Most every one went armed,and there were several arrested on each side. If anon-union man was brought up before a justice ofthe peace that was a union sympathizer, he wouldbe fined the limit, and if a union man was broughtbefore a non-union sympathizer, he would be finedthe limit. The justices were nearly all either unionmen or sympathizers, and they would let the unionmen go as light as possible, but the non-unionjustices did the same for their men. The mine opera-tors were after the sheriff to call upon GovernorCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDPeabody for the militia, and the union men wereafter him not to, but to deputize all the men hewanted, and they would furnish them, and he wasbetween two fires. There had been no depredationscommitted this time, and the strike committee as-sured the sheriff there would be none.The last of the month there was a non-union manbrought before a justice of the peace in Anaconda,named Hawkins, for carrying concealed weapons,and he was let off with a light fine or none at all, Ihave forgotten which. A few days afterward thisjustice was over at Altman one afternoon, and EdMinster and " Slim "Campbell, of the Altman " tim-ber gang," slugged and beat him up some, and thiswas the real beginning of hostilities. Right afterthis there was an old non-union carpenter namedStewart taken out of his house at Independence atnight, beaten up and shot and left for dead. Thiswas done by the Altman " timber gang." The strikecommittee and union leaders were always advisingthe rank and file of the unions publicly to be quietand not commit any acts of violence, but secretlythey were having these things done. I did not knowthat then, of course. The mine operators appealedto the sheriff to call on the governor for troops, buthe said he would not, as he said he was able to handlethe situation.64THE MILITIA COME TO CRIPPLE CREEKSo the Mayor of Victor and some of the leadingcitizens of Victor and Cripple Creek petitioned thegovernor for troops, and he sent a committee toinvestigate, and the troops followed the next day.This was on September 4th, I think. The troopswere in charge of Sherman Bell, adjutant-general ofColorado. I think there were between a thousandand twelve hundred of the State militia. They didnot declare martial law at first, but the troops actedwith the civil authorities.I just want to say a word in regard to the Statemilitia, and especially when they are mustered inon short notice. Every place I have seen them,there has always been a low, hobo element amongthem, and while there is, no doubt, plenty of goodmen, this low rowdy element always take advantageof their position and commit many disgracefulthings, and the whole body are blamed for them. Itis not my purpose to wrongfully criticize eitherparty, but I want to give the facts as they occurred.There were several deputies there, working with themilitia, that were men who had just recently beenparoled or pardoned from the State penitentiary,and had come almost direct to Cripple Creek andbeen deputized. Some of these men were well knownin the district, and had been sent to the penitentiaryfrom there, and they were considered all-round bad65CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDmen, and showed no signs of reform. When I sawsome of these miltia and ex-convicts going aroundsometimesto men's houses searching for firearmsat night after men had retired ; and I knew some ofthem had no respect for the privacy of the wives andit made me angry. This, of course, did notfamilieshappen much, but it happened enough to create avery bitter feeling.In this strike, as in most others, the real issueat stake was soon lost sight of. Especially if themilitia is called upon, a strike soon narrows downto a personal enmity between the militia and the non-union men on one side, and the union men on theother. As frictions arise, as they surely will, mostof the strikers forget the real cause of the strike,and although a man at first might not have beenin sympathy with the strike, and might have knownit was wrong, as he sees the non-union men beingshipped in and herded by the militia like cattle, heforgets all about this, and he hates these men andhates the militia, and they become more and morebitter toward each other. The union men call the"scabs " and "scab herders," and the militiamilitiacall the union men anarchists and dynamiters, andthe breach widens as the strike proceeds, and it ismore like two hostile armiesonly the strikers knowthey cannot fight in the open. After they are prod-66THE MILITIA COME TO CRIPPLE CREEKded around with a rifle and bayonet a while, theybegin to think up some way to get even, and menwill do things at such times, and feel justified in,that they would not think of at ordinary times.When the militia first arrived in the Cripple Creekonedistrict, they were divided into three campsnear Anaconda, one between Victor and Goldfield,and the other on Bull Hill between Independenceand Altman. There had been no disturbance theresince Stewart had been beaten up and shot, and therewasn't much for the militia to do that way at first.Their first work was to guard the mines, as fast asthey got non-union men to start them up. DuringAugust there were union pickets armed with six-shooters around the mines, but there were no unionpickets placed at the mines after the militia arrived.The militia patrolled the district day and night withcavalry, and there were guards stationed at all thenon-union mines.67