CHAPTER TWOWHENI had been in Spokane a few weeksI had only $50 left, and I saw that Iwould have to go to work. One day Inoticed a card in the window of an employmentagency. It was for a man to drive a milk wagon inthe Coeur d'Alene mining country for a firm of thename of Markwell Brothers. I wrote them first andthen went over there the next week and got theplace. This was in April, 1897.two miles west of WallaceThe Markwell Brothers had a milk ranch aboutthe principal town therea place of about two thousand people. Above thisthe valley that all the towns were located in split,and one branch of the Coeur d'Alene River went up toMullan on the right, and one branch on the left, thatthey called Canon Creek, went up to Gem and Burke.There were big lead and silver mines at all theseplaces but Wallace, which was a kind of market-place for the district ; and down below it about ten16UNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENESmiles there was another big mining-camp calledWardner. Gem, Burke, and Mullan each had fromseven to nine hundred people living in them, andthere were probably fifteen hundred in Wardner.My work was to deliver milk at Burke, the town upat the end of Canon Creek.The country seemed to me at first a kind ofgloomy place to live in, especially Canon Creek andBurke. In the first place the canon was very narrow,and the mountains on both sides were very high andsteep. They went up at an angle of maybe fortyper cent, and they were about a thousand feet high,so that the days in there were very short. In thesummer-time the sun would go down at about fouro'clock, and in the winter there wasn't more thanfive hours of sunlight. Of course you would see thesun on the sides of the mountains long before itcame up and after it went down; but I mean realsunlight. There was very little wind there, it wasso deep and narrow; and in the winter-time, when itsnowed, you would notice the snow came straightdown, and not on a slant as it naturally does in otherplaces.The first impression you got of Burke was thatit never stopped. It was going day and night andSunday. The mines worked all the time, and it wasthe same with the saloons and such places. They17CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDused to say that the only way you could tell it wasSunday in Burke was that you had a chicken dinnerthen.The canon was only about one hundred and fiftyfeet wide at the bottom, so it was hard work tosqueeze in the town. There was only one street, andthe two railroad companies' tracks ran up throughthe middle of that to the Tiger-Poorman mill. Thestores sat on the south side, and had to be built outover the creek, which they had to run through aflume. On the north side they had to cut away thehills to set the buildings in. There were maybe adozen stores, barber shops, etc., but more saloonsthan anything else. There were six of these, andthey had all kinds of gambling lay-outs in the backsuch as roulette, faro, and black-jack androomsstud poker. Beyond the stores there came the mill,and then the sporting-houses. There were about tenof these, with a dance hall in the center, and thencame the residence section, without any break. Theschool-house was only about a hundred feet awayfrom the red-light district, so that the childrencould hear the women singing and cursing downthere. There wasn't any church in the town, norany library or theater.As I had been brought up and lived all my lifein a farming country this place struck me at first18UNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENESas pretty peculiar. But of course when you get toliving in a place you get used to it.Almost the first thing that Fred Markwell askedme when I applied for the job with him was if I hadever had any trouble with labor-unions. I told himno, and I didn't know anything about unions at thattime. Then he warned me whatever I might see orhear about their going not to criticize them. Hesaid they had driven his father out of business be-cause he talked against them.I soon found out that nobody could live in thedistrict, and especially Canon Creek, and do any-thing or say anything against the unions. Therewere two unions there. The men who worked aboveground in the mines belonged to the Knights ofLabor, and all the miners belonged to the WesternFederation of Miners. This last union they saidreally started from this section, and this was theone that ran the district. They had all the miningtowns but Wardner under their control, and if any" ran him down the canon."man opposed them theyThe way they did this would seem peculiar toa stranger who was not acquainted with the country.There was a miners' union in every town, and eachunion had a gang of men who ran the non-unionmen out of the district. Every miner who would notjoin the union was warned to get out, and if he19CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDdidn't, he was " run down the canon "; that is, thisgang of men, with masks and Winchesters, wouldgo up to his room some night and take him downon the railroad track and march him out of thecanon. When they got him out, they warned himif he came back again they would kill him. Theygenerally marched them out in front of them withguns. Sometimes it was claimed they put a halteron their necks and led them out. Several men whowouldn't leave were killed.The unions were so strong that they weren't sat-isfied with only driving out the "scabs," but they didthe same thing with bosses or superintendents theydid not like. For instance, there was the case of Mr.Whitney, who was foreman of the Frisco mill. Theysent a letter to him and told him to leave the campor he would suffer the consequences; but he didnot leave. Awhile after this a gang of masked menwith Winchesters went to Mr. Whitney's room inGem one night a little before midnight and startedto drive him down the canon.I talked with a woman who saw them taking himout. They came marching down the street at Gemunder the bright electric lights, and when peoplebegan sticking their heads out of the windows, shesaid these men with guns told them to go back inagain or they would shoot them. They took Whit-20UNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENESney down the railroad, and as he was a young manand rather spirited, he tried to get away from themdown a little way below Gem. There were some box-cars down there, and he thought if he could runback of these in the dark he could escape. But theyshot him in the hip and left him there, and somebodyelse got him and took him down to the hospital atWallace, and he died there a few days afterward whenthey were operating on him. Mr. Whitney's rela-tives were wealthy people, and they and the Stateoffered $17,000 reward for the men who shot him;but nothing ever came of it, and nobody was everarrested, though a great many people must haveknown who did it. Nobody in Canon Creek everdared to testify about a thing like this. They knewif they did they would be killed themselves.It might seem a strange thing about that coun-try that nobody was ever punished for assaults ormurder like this. But after you were acquaintedthere it was easy to see why this was. The fact wasthe sheriff and constablesthat all the peace officersand deputies of the peacewere elected by theunions and were in with them. The miners made uptheir minds whom they were going to nominate andvote for, and when they did this, they voted almostsolid for their men. The peace officers, of course,always sided with the unions. And whenever a non-21CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDunion man got into the camp and got beaten upand they took him before the justices of the peace,they would fine him or send him to jail. George A.Pettibone was justice of the peace at Gem back in1892, and used to tell how he did this.In fact, it was difficult to convict anybody whohad friends in the canon of anything, even murder.It was strange how little account they took of mur-der in that country. I think for one thing the peo-ple got used to seeing men killed in the mines. Theywould get blown up in blasting, so that they hadto be gathered up in a sack or basket, or sometimesthey would get badly hurt. The men who were killedwould be taken down to Wallace and buried, andthe men who were hurt would be put onto a push-car on the railroad and slid down to the Wallacehospital. When they saw them being carried out,It was too bad," and thenthe miners would say,everything would go on as if nothing had hap-pened. All this seemed to make human life cheap,and, of course, almost everybody had a six-shooter,although they didn't always carry them, and therewas more or less shooting. I remember there weretwo murders besides Whitney that I knew of whileI was there. One man was acquitted, and the otherone was given a year in jail."I worked steadily on my milk route and savedUNION RULE IN THE CGEUR D'ALENESsome money during 1897, and that fall I bought asixteenth interest in the Hercules mine near Burkethe mine that has made Ed Boyce, the formerpresident of the Western Federation of Miners, andhis wife so wealthy. They are said to be worth nearly$1,000,000 now, and my share, if I had kept it,would be worth over $500,000. It was only a pros-pect then, and I paid $500 for my share, a partdown and the rest with a note, which I was to payoff in instalments.I became tired of my milk route, and I gave it upon Christmas, 1897. Then I went to Burke andbought a wood and coal business there.I hadto borrow $150 to do this. The business was agood one, and I would have made a big livingif I had attended to it, but I soonout of it,got into bad habits. There didn't seem to be muchelse to do for amusement. A single man board-ing in that country would have a small room, gen-erally without a stove, which was very cold in thewinter, and very close and hot in the summer. Soeverybody went into the saloons, where it was com-fortable. I have often thought that these million-aires who were giving libraries and such thingsmight do a good thing if they would give a littleto the mining-camps just to give the men some placeto go to. It was the same with me as with hundredsCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDof others. I got started going into saloons, andfinally I got to gambling.I lost so much money at this that it kept me con-tinually broke, and in the spring of 1898 I had tosell my interest in the Hercules mine in order topay my debts. Dan Cordonia bought it of me forabout $700.In the summer of 1898 I had to take in a partner.This was a Scotchman named James McAlpin. Wewere in partnership until about March, 1899. Istopped gambling and tried to straighten up. ButI used up so much money paying off my old debtsthat when we made a settlement I found I had over-drawn my account several hundred dollars, andfinally I offered to sell my share of the business toMcAlpin for $100 in cash. He accepted this offer,and in this way I went out of business for myself.The last of March, 1899, I got a job throughas aLewis Strow, a shift boss" mucker "in the Tiger-Poor-man mine at Burke. I had to join the miners' unionright away, and then for the first time I becameacquainted with the workings of this union.that is, a shovelerI knew well,When I first came to the Creur d'Alenes I thoughtas everybody outside seems to think about the Fed-that the whole union was respon-sible for the outrages that were committed there.eration of MinersUNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENESBut that is a mistake, as a great part of the menknew no more about it than I did, and I did notknow anything then. This is the case everywhere,as I have found since. The miners get the creditfor all the leaders do. I can count the men who werereally responsible for the troubles at Burke on thefingers of my hands, and the membership of thatunion must have been over four hundred.It was common talk almost from the first in the"Coeur d'Alenes that there was an " inner circlewhich ran the district. There were unions at Gem,Burke, Mullan, and Wardner. All these sent dele-that is, a board that wasgates to a central unionsupposed to govern the whole district. But the" was supposed to be a few men that" inner circlewere really back of the central union, and plannedall the rough work, as they did later in the Federa-tion. George Pettibone was one of these when he wasthere in 1892, and later Ed Boyce and L. J. Simp-kins and Marion W. Moor, who later were in the"" of the Federation. I have no doubtthey got this idea for the Federation from the Coeurd'Alenes, for the Federation started just after thefirst fight there, and a good many of the men inthe Federation " inner circle" came from there.inner circleEd Boyce, who was president of the Federationfor a long while in its early years, had more to do25Boyce policyCONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDwith getting it started than any other man. He be-gan the "" soon after he was elected ;that is, he advised that every union man should armhimself with a rifle, because they all might have togo out and fight the capitalists before long; andthat nobody in the union should join the militia.The leaders of the different unions took this up,and I have heard it advised in unions time and timeagain by the officers that every union man shouldbuy a good rifle and plenty of ammunition, for thetime was coming when they would need it. And no-body would join the militia. It was considered a" scab "organization run by the mine owners.When the leaders would give this radical talk,there would always be a number who would get upand applaud very loud. A great many of these radi-cal fellows were what we calledthat is, the men who only worked part time and layaround the saloons the rest. A good many of thesemen were regular saloon "bums." The conservativemen, who worked hard and had homes, did not likethis policy. I have often heard them talk against itprivately. But these men did not attend the meetingsthe way the radical ones did, and generally theycould not express their thoughts very well in public ;and if they started to talk against such an idea,they would hardly get on their feet before the radi-26ten-day men ""UNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENEScal element would begin to hollerSit down," or" Put him out," and they would get rattled and stoptalking. Then nobody else would dare get up andsupport them after seeing what happened."But it is true that after a while even the conserva-tive ones got to thinking that what the leaders saidwas probably all right. In a town like Burke youheard nothing else and had no chance to. Youcouldn't even read anything else. I remember theunions boycotted the Spokane Spokesman, and theypassed a rule so that you had to pay $5 fine tothe union if you were caught reading it. We wereall anxious to, too, especially when the SpanishWar was on, as this was the only daily newspaperwhich came into the district the same day it wasprinted. Now anybody gets to feeling the same waywhen he hears nothing about the labor question ex-cept from people wh.o talk about the millionaire mineowners, and how pretty soon we will all get to belike the cheap laborers of Europe, and peons, andhow we must defend the unions by arms if necessary,because that is the only defense we have. It wasjust one thing they talked, and that was war.When you look back at it all, the trouble did startin a kind of warthat is, the fight of July 11, 1892,when the miners blew up the Gem mill and droveout the "scabs," and hired deputies, and the United27CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDStates troops came in and put the miners in the"bull pen." They always celebrated the anniver-sary of the day every year at the union cemeteryat Wallace, around the graves of the miners whowere killed then. This celebration really took theplace of the Fourth of July in that country. Themines would all close, and the union men would godown on special trains to Wallace and march outto the cemetery. A stranger might expect some sol-emn memorial service; but if they did they wouldbe much mistaken; for there was only talk of themost radical kind by Boyce or speakers like him.They would start by reminding the miners howcruelly and cowardly their brothers had been mur-dered. Then they would go on to say that they, too,did not know how soon such a death might come tothem, if they did not prepare themselves to resistit; and the only way to prepare was to get a goodgun and plenty of ammunition and be ready to fight,and not wait until the other fellow shot you downas they had your brother.selvesA great many of the men really did arm them-with rifles when they could. I think therewas quite a number of guns left over from the fightof 1892, and I know there were some shipped in.George Pettibone has told me that he sent in riflesfrom Denver in 1899 for the union men. He sent28UNION RULE IN THE CCEUR D'ALENESa hundred of them in piano boxes, and ten thousandrounds of ammunition, and addressed it to JimYoung, who was sheriff at that time, and was in deepwith the unions. Then in 1898, the guns which be-longed to the militia, that had disbanded at Mul-lan, were stolen one night by masked men. The uniondenied having done this, but a good many of theguns showed up in the hands of union men whenwe made our raid on the Bunker Hill and Sullivanmill in Wardner, on April 29, 1899. All these gunswhich the union men used were cached in placesknown to the union leaders, so that when the timecame to use them they could be dug up and givento the men.29