CHAPTER EIGHTEENMY REASON FOR WRITING THIS BOOKIHAVE been severely criticized by a certain classfor writing this awful story of mine, and I wantto make a little explanation here why I do so.I have not written it through any malice or prejudiceagainst any individual or organization, but knowingall that I did through my connection with the WesternFederation of Miners, after I had been brought intothe light in and through the tender mercies of ourLord and Saviour Jesus Christ I felt it a duty thatI owed to God and humanity to do all that laid inmy power to expose and stop these crimes and out-rages. I hope I will be excused for these broken words,but let the reader remember that my education is verylimited. By the help of God I have undertaken toput these facts before the public, that it may enlightenthe great masses of the laboring class, and especiallythe members of the Western Federation of Miners,so that the rank and file of this organization mayknow just what sort of leaders they have been fol-251CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDlowing all these years, and also what a great amountof their money has been spent for. I know that theseoutrages and crimes look too horrible to be believed,and most of them would appear to do more harm thangood to the organization, but this is the very point,for this helped them to get out of many of the chargesthat have been laid at their door, and they alwayshave succeeded in making it appear that the mineoperators had hired men to commit these outrages soas to persecute them.I believe that a very small percentage of the Fed-eration know or believe these crimes have been com-mitted from time to time with the sanction and at therequest of the head officers of their organization.These leaders were always very particular to get menon the executive board that favored this work, andif they were not active they favored it by their silence.I have no doubt but some of them kept silent out offear for their lives, but many were very active in ad-vancing this work. You may say that the books werealways audited at every convention, but the executiveboard had gone over them first, and they had themfixed so no auditing committee could find out any-thing about this emergency fund, and it would takemonths to go over these accounts during some of thetime when there were strikes. A half a million dollarsor thereabouts have been handled during a year, and252MY REASON FOR WRITING THIS BOOKseveral stores run, and relief dealt out to thousandsin small amountsso you must see at a glance howimpossible it is for any auditing committee to auditthese accounts in a few days. As the delegates areall miners and not experts at this work, they couldnot find out much about the accounts, and would runover the accounts in three or four days and hand intheir reports, which were more a form than real au-diting. The leaders in these conventions had no troublein running the convention, and the local unions usu-ally sent their leaders to these conventions as dele-gates.Now I know during the last four years that therehas been a vast amount of money spent for this work.I have received about $4,000 myself, besides $1,600paid to Miller by Pettibone and Simpkins to defendme; but what has been paid to us tools to actuallydo the work has been only a small amount of it. Thebills of the attorneys that have been employed to de-fend the men engaged in this work, and also the offi-cers from time to time, will run up perhaps in thehundreds of thousands.Now I have told my story on the witness-stand inthe trial of Haywood not because I wanted>to takehim or any of these men down with me, but becauseI could see no other way for me to do what I believedwas my solemn duty. I never felt that I would be253CONFESSIONS OF HARRY ORCHARDforgiven by God until I fully decided on this course.I know many men that were marked for death, andhad every reason to believe that sooner or later theplan to kill them would be carried out, and perhapssome other man would find himself in the same posi-tion that I am in to-day. This work had been goingon before Haywood and Moyer were at the head of theWestern Federation of Miners, and before I knewanything about it, and I had every reason to believethat it would continue. I could see no other way thatI could make earthly restitution to society for mywrong-doing, except to publicly confess all, regard-less of the consequences of myself or any one else.My sympathy is with all those that were connectedwith me in these horrible outrages against God'screatures. I pray continually for them that they maysee the error of their way before it is eternally toolate.I have told the truth in this awful trial. God alonehas given me strength to openly confess to thosecrimes. My conscience is clear. I know I have donewhat was right and made all the earthly restitutionthat is within my power. Mr. Haywood has been ac-quitted. I can truthfully say I would far rather seehim acquitted than hanged. I believe the trial will domuch good, as I do not believe these leaders of theFederation will take a chance again with any one254MY REASON FOR WRITING THIS BOOKfor the sake of revenge upon those that oppose thisorganization. My earnest prayer is in closing thisawful tale, that it will be the means of stopping thiskind of work forever.THE END255CENTRAL UNIVERSITY LIBRARYUniversity of California, San DiegoDATE DUEJU1M 1Z iyUL|BRARY FACILITY000714085 8